M599 12112411 54233
THE General HISTORY OF SPAIN. FROM The first Peopling of it by Tubal, till the Death of King Ferdinand, Who United the Crowns of CASTILE and ARAGON. WITH A CONTINUATION TO THE Death of KING PHILIP III. Written in Spanish, By the R. F. F. John de Mariana. To which are added, Two SUPPLEMENTS, THE FIRST By F. Ferdinand Camargo y Salcedo, the other by F. Basil Varen de Soto, bringing it down to the present Reign. The whole Translated from the Spanish By Capt JOHN STEVENS. LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, Francis Saunders in the New-Exchange in the Strand, and Thomas Bennet at the Half-Moon in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1699.
TO THE Right Honourable CHARLES, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, &c. MY LORD, MAriana's History of Spain has been an Offering worthy the Acceptance of two Kings. Its first appearance in the World was in Latin, in the Reign, and under the Patronage of the Mighty Monarch Philip II. of Spain, from whom it met with so favourable a Reception, as encourag'd it, when made Spanish by the same hand, to aspire to no less Protection than the same great Prince's Son, Philip III. then Sovereign, not only of all Spain, but of the East and West-Indies. This same History now first brought to speak English, I presume to present your Lordship, as the worthiest Patron I could make choice of, for a Work, that has hitherto been thought, deserving the Acceptance of Kings. Nor do I think my choice inferiour to my Au∣thors, not that I mean to bring the Dignity of Crown'd Heads into a Parallel with other Honours, but because Kings, tho' they are above all other Men, as to their Character; yet they may be, and are of∣ten inferior to many in the Beauties and Accomplishments, both of Body and Mind. Philip II. was more a Politician than an Historian, and Philip III. had more of the Saint than of the Scholler; the Fa∣ther made it his only Study to over-reach other Princes, and gain some Advantage upon them, the Son rather aim'd at Heavenly than Worldly Learning. Thus it appears neither of them had those parts your Lordship is possess'd of, to render you, if not so powerful, yet a more worthy Patron. Their Power might shade their Ignorance, but your Lordships Judgment and Learning will exert it self even a∣bove their Power. They might receive the fawning Flatteries of their Subjects; but your Lordship is so far above being Flatter'd, that it would be a very difficult Task to give a true Estimate of your real Abilities. I will refrain enlarging upon this Subject, lest Malice or Envy, should interpret that a Reflection upon others, which is only a faint Expression of what is your Lordships due. I must desist from all that looks like Praise, as well, because I can't in a small compass express so much as is known to the World, as because it is an under∣taking much above my reach to give a Character of your Lordship, or to express the worth of your Noble Ancestors. Persons so truly Great, are above all Flattery, and mean Objects are rather expos'd to scorn than extoll'd by it. Your Lordship stands highly visible among the first, among those I mean, who having attain'd to the utmost pitch of Honour, can receive no Addition of Glory from the best of
Pens. This makes my Task in approaching so able a Judge, the more easie, which others, perhaps, may think the greatest difficul∣ty. Much Study and Accurate Language, they say is requisite to ex∣press our selves duly to Persons of eminent Parts, who are able to discover the least Imperfections, and expect to be treated according to their Merit. I confess, the ablest Pen can never exceed where there's true worth; but at the same time, it must be allow'd, that those who deserve most, are generally contented with least. Thus we see the Greatest and Best of Men are nothing pleas'd to hear their own Commendations, because, tho' never so real, Modesty makes them look like Flattery in their Eyes, and they easily connive at Faults, which are not willful, because the sweetness of their Temper makes them rather commiserate then expose the Failings of others. This is a Generosity, without which, no Man can be call'd truly Good, and he that is not Good, can never be truly Great. Tyrants, and others, rais'd by infamous means to mighty Titles, may according to the mistaken vulgar Sense of the World, be call'd, and look'd upon as Great, in respect of their Power or Riches; but only those are really so, and will transmit that Name to Posterity, who either rise by Noble and Vertuous Actions, or being Nobly Born, preserve that Nobility un∣blemish'd. Your Lordship has Worth to be above Flattery, Gene∣rosity not to be puff'd up with due Praises, and Goodness to over∣look Faults. I am too sensible of my own weakness, not to think so able a Judge may discover many in this Work, for of this Epistle I do not speak, it being only design'd to beg Pardon for the rest. The Work I own deserv'd an abler Undertaker; but there is something of Glory, even in attempting great things, tho' the Success don't an∣swer, and it is Honourable to favour and encourage such Attempts. Sci∣pio deserv'd no less Commendation for favouring Ennius, than August∣us did for encouraging Virgil, and Your Lordship in Patronizing this Translation, tho' it prove inferior in value, will do no less than the two great Monarchs I mention'd at first, in giving their Protection to the Originals. The less my Merit appears, the greater will be the Demon∣stration of his Goodness, who supports my Weakness. The Mighty Ar∣taxerxes accepted of Water a Country-man brought him in his Hands, and stoop'd to drink of it. History ought to be pure as Water, without any Partiality to disturb, or discolour it, such has my Author been gene∣rally accounted, if the course way of presenting of it in the hands of my unpolish'd Stile make it appear the less valuable, Your Lordship will be pleas'd to consider it was the best Vessel I had to serve it up in, and to look upon it as the best mark I was able to give of the profound Respect I owe, as My Lord, Your Lordships Most Faithful and most Devoted humble Servant, JOHN STEVENS.
THE PREFACE. THE Learned part of the World is so well acquainted with the value of this History, that it will seem superfluous to give any Character of it; so that what∣soever I can say in its behalf, must fall short of what it deserves in the Opini∣on of those who are Judges of its worth, and sach as have no knowledge of it, may be apt to think me Partial, as a Translator, should I offer any thing in commendation of it. Mariana needs no Apology, having establish'd an unblemish'd Reputation; and that particularly, as to the best of Qualifications requir'd in an Historian, which is, being Impartial. I will not go about to prove him so in the strictest Sense, for that were to make him more than Man, since we know there is none absolutely such, because Nature in∣clines all Mortals to affect one Party more than another, and we should look upon him as stupid and insensible, that had not some love for his Country above another. For this reason, I do not pretend to affirm, that my Author is absolutely Impartial, being a Spaniard; but I dare confidently aver, he is so, far beyond all that have undertaken to write History in that Nation, and perhaps, should I say in any other, it might be no more than he deserves. Our English Histories are very well known to carry too much Byass; those of France are no more exempt from it, nor do I think any other Nation free from the va∣nity of extolling its own Actions. If all the World be guilty of the Crime, he that has least of it, must doubtless, be accounted the most Vertuous, and such I look upon Mariana to be, which I think as great a Commendation as can be given an Author. The Fabulous Stories of Antiquity he lightly runs over, being unwilling, as he says, wholly to omit that which others have treated of at large, or to impose Fictions upon his Reader as Truth. This, as to what hap'ned in Spain before the coming of the Romans and Cathaginians; for of their times we have good Lights in Latin Authors, and there is as much said here, as can well be made out of them, peculiarly relating to the Country, without straying too much into Foreign Affairs, of which, still there are sufficient hints, as far as they are re∣quisite for making those of Spain the more plain and intelligible, and even at times, they are enlarg'd for the Instruction of the Reader, who has not seen them in other Authors. The Gothish times are again dark, because the Barbarous Nations breaking into Spain, so oppress'd the Natives, that all Learning was almost lost, as may appear by the profound Ignorance that reign'd for many Years. This continu'd till the Conversion of the Goths, when receiving the Faith, they began to be Civiliz'd, and by degrees, apply'd themselves to profitable Studies. But being Conquerors of so great a Nation, and having no Body left to oppose them, they gave themselves wholly up to Pride and Luxury. God, as may well be believ'd, permitting them to fall into such heinous Sins, that he might at once punish their Nation for the inhumane Barbarities their Forefathers had committed throughout the greatest part of Europe. And indeed so heavy a Judgment fell upon them, that the very Name of them was almost Obliterated by the Invasion of the Moors, who in about eight Months space over-ran the greatest part of so vast a Dominion as Spain is, leaving the distressed Natives nothing they could call their own, but the barren, uncoth Mountains in the Northern parts, where they liv'd in Caves and Dens, like wild Beasts, rather, because the Infidels contemned, than that they wanted Power to subdue them. Yet this handful of Men, breaking out by degrees from those wild places, when God's Mercy be∣gan to take place of his Justice, in time grew formidable to the Moors, and erecting se∣veral petty Kingdoms, went on, enlarging their Borders almost insensibly, till in near 800. Years they recover'd that, which, as was said before, they lost in 8 Months. This second Inundation of Barbarians again bore down all that had been set up towards restoring of Learning, and no remains of Literature seem'd for many Years to be left among the Christians, those who were subject to the Moors, groaning under the heavy Yoke of Oppression, and those that had asserted their Liberty making it their only study to handle the Sword, with∣out finding leasure to think of the Pen. For this reason, doubtless, many considerable Actions have been bury'd in Oblivion, and others, which in part were true, have been de∣liver'd to us with such a mixture of Fables, that there's no possibility of separating the Wheat from the Tares, tho' I believe, F. Mariana has labour'd as much, and perhaps more successfully, than any other in this particular, as being intent upon discovering the truth,
and not fond of the Vanity of Honouring his Country with Fictions. The latter Ages, which draw near to us, furnish much Matter for History, as well because the Kings of Spain, extended their Dominions, and carry'd their Arms beyond the Limits of their ownCoun∣try, as because there were able Men, whose care it was to transmit to Posterity the Actions of their Princes. This may suffice as to the History. As to the Author, I think something ought to be said of him, tho' I say the less of his History, because it will speak for it self; and having consider'd what account to give of him in few words, I have found none so succinct and full, as that he gives of himself in ten Lines, at the end of his Latin Supplement to his History, which are these. Elbora me genuit, Compluti Mystica cepi, Romae & Lutetiae dogmata, quae docui. Sed fractus Caelo duro, atque labore, Toletum, Conscripsi Hesperiae tempora prisca, redux, Pondera, de Rege, & Scaena, de Morte, Jacobo, Pascha, Egira, Nummis, inque libros Biblicos. Est Mariana Domus, Jesu inter Vita sodales, Multiplicis Sophiae Cultus, amica Quies. An dabis extinctus tarda ut post fata quiescam, Octo Novemque Deus quem fere Lustra premunt. These are his own words, which for the satisfaction of the English Reader, who is not acquainted with Latin, I had put into English Verse by an ingenious Friend, who in com∣pliance to my desire, has Translated them almost Verbatim, and confin'd himself to a nar∣row compass, in these words. Elbora gave me Birth, Complutum fraught, My Mind with Sacred Knowledge, which I taught At Rome and Paris, till th' inclement Air, And broken Health constrain'd me to repair Back to Toledo, where I first Compos'd Spain's History, from ancient times disclos'd Weights, Coins, t' Hegira did my Pen engage, Kings, Death, St. James, the Paschal Feast, the Stage, And Books of Sacred Writ, my Dwelling wears The Virgins Holy Name, where free from Cares Among the Tribe of Jesus, in the Chase Of various Truth, I pass my quiet Days, Give me, good God! at length to sleep in Peace, Whom more than fourscore Years with weighty Age oppress. Elbora, where he says he was Born, is a Town now call'd Talavera, upon the River Ta∣gus, in Castile; Complutum, where he Study'd, is the Ʋniversity of Alcala de Henares, betwixt Madrid and Toledo. He taught Divinity some Years at Rome and Paris, and then, as appears by his own Words, return'd into Spain, and setled at Toledo, where he Compos'd all those Works he mentions, which are, his Weights and Measures; that is, those of the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, reduc'd to those then us'd in Spain; a Treatise concerning the Stage, another Pious, upon Death and Immortality; one to prove the coming of St. James the Apostle into Spain; one of the Day on which Christ dy'd, which is that he calls Pascha, as being the Rule of keeping Easter; one of the Hegira, or Moorish Com∣putation of Years from Mahomet; one about the Change of Coins; and one in defence of the Vulgate Edition of the Bible. But that which has made most noise in the World, and par∣ticularly in England, is his Book de Rege & Regis Institutione; for some Years since, there was scarce a Cobler, tho' he knew not so much as the Title of the Work, but quoted Mariana's Treasonable Doctrines to Authorize Otes's Narrative, insomuch, that had it not been for the former, the Reputation of the latter had been in some danger. However, this Book, tho' so much talk'd of, is known but to few, being very scarce, and one Reason of it may be, that as it contains many Treasonable Propositions, most Monarchical Governments have doubtless endeavour'd to suppress it, because destructive to Kings. And yet tho' so much rail'd at once, even by those who never saw, or were capable of understanding it, of late, it finds good Approbation among many, who keep and read it with Satisfaction, but such it is, as well deserves the Sentence past and executed upon it, at its first coming into
the World, for both at Rome and at Paris, it was publickly burnt by the hand of the Com∣mon Hangman, a sufficient Testimony of the Abhorrence these Places had of the Opinions it teaches. And perhaps, had the Author been at either of them at that time, he had not found much better Quarter then his Book did; but he came not off Scotfree, for by express Command from Rome, he was kept a close Prisoner for above 20 Years, and only releas'd by Death. I have made so much mention of this Book, because that Impri∣sonment, which was the Consequence of it, was improv'd by Mariana for Composing of this present History, which now I present the World with in English. In that Consinement, as Sir Walter Rauleigh, is said to have Compos'd his History of the World, in the Tower, did Mariana Compile his History of Spain. He writ it first in Latin, and then, as he says himself, fearing lest some unskilful Pen Translating it into Spanish, should fully its Reputation, he undertook the work himself, not as a Translator, but as he says, with the liberty of an Author, altering and adding, as he found convenient, upon further search into Records and Ancient Authors. Yet neither the Latin nor the Spanish, came lower than the end of the Reign of King Ferdinand, Grandfather to the Emperor Charles V. where Mariana concluded his 30 Books, being affraid to come down nearer to his own time, and this, because he could not speak with that Freedom and Impartiality, which he had us'd throughout this Work, by reason, that either the Persons themselves, or else the Children of those who had acted in those latter Reigns being living, it took away that liberty of laying-open ill Actions, and exposing the Crimes of those, who in themselves, or their Off-spring, were still in being. This made him rather chose to give over at that distance, that by pro∣ceeding, to oblige himself to swerve from that Ingenuity he had us'd till en, and deviate from Truth. However, at the Instigation of Friend, lest his History should seem an im∣perfect Work, he writ a Supplement to it, short, for fear of offending; but bringing it down to the Year 1621. when King Philip III. dy'd, and Philip IV. came to the Crown. Thus far went F. Mariana, after whose Death, F. Ferdinand Camargo y Salcedo, of the Order of St. Augustin, carry'd on another Supplement, from the Year 1621. where Mariana left off, till 1649. inclusive, where F. Basil Varen de Soto, of the Regular Clergy, took it up, and went on till the Year 1669. being the 5th of the Reign of this pre∣sent King of Spain, Charles II. Having said as much, as I think, requisite, in relation to the Author and his Work, it only remains now, that I add a few words as to the Translation, wherein, I will be as brief as possible, because I don't affect swelling a Volume with my own Notions, and this being my own Labour, as no Man will imagine I can say any thing to lessen it; so neither am I so vain as to commend it. If bad, the World is not so Charitable, as to connive at my faults, and if it has any thing good, it will recommend it self. There are in the Original many Fi∣ctions, which Mariana mentions after other Authors, and these being allow'd of by him as Fables, I have inserted, with as much Brevity as I could, thinking it needless to insist much upon those things, which no Reader could be pleas'd with, as being rather Romantick than Historical, as he that writes them sufficiently proves. In the next place, as there is no Spa∣nish History but swarms with Lives of Saints and Miracles, so this could not but have its share of them among the rest. Now this sort of Legend, tho' very acceptable to Spa∣niards, is not at all taking among us, nor to say the truth, any way pertinent in Profane Hi∣story; therefore, these things I have much retrench'd, not that I have wholly omitted them, for that I would not do, for fear of being thought Ʋnfaithful; but I have reduc'd them into a narrow compass, that the Reader may have a taste of, and not be cloy'd with them. This, and the irregular Method of Mariana in his Chapters, has forc'd me not to make so great a number of them as he has done; but I have put two or three into one, as I found most con∣venient; yet so, as the Reader, who shall have a mind to compare the Translation with the Original, may easily do it, because every Break in the English, is a Chapter in the Spanish; by which they are easily to be found. The reason of Translating it from the Spanish rather than from the Latin, is because the former, as was hinted above, is the perfecter Work; being compos'd after the other by Author, and much improv'd. The Names of Persons I have kept as they are in the Spanish, where they are such, as can't be found in English, such as Ordon̄o, Nun̄o, Sancho, and the like. These I say, we have not in English, and therefore I would not alter them at all, as some have done, turning them into Latin, which is as odd to us as the Spanish, and calling them Ordonius, Nunius, Sanctius, and so forth. Others there are, which the Spaniards have corrupted, being Names us'd in other Nations, tho' perhaps, not among us, these generally, I write after the manner of Spain, but upon the first coming to mention them, do explain and setthem down, as they are call'd where
they are in use, an instance of these, are Ramon, in English, Raymund, Brunechilda, whom the French call Brunchault; Pelayo, in Latin Pelagius, Bermudo, more pro∣perly Veremundo, or Veremundus. Those Names which are commonly in use with us, I generally call as we do, tho' I have seen the contrary practis'd; yet I know no reason why, since the History speaks English, the Names of those it treats of, should not be made as intel∣ligible to us as their Actions. For Example, the Wife of King Ferdinand, who united Castile and Aragon, is generally call'd Queen Isabel, which is no other than Elizabeth in Spanish, and I think there is no more reason for us to call her Isabel, when we speak En∣glish, than there would be in writing of Queen Elizabeth of England, to call her Elizabeth in Spanish. The same happens when generally we write of any Spaniard, whose Name was Peter, we call him D. Pedro, as if Peter were not the true English of Pedro, and Eliza∣beth of Isabel. Those Names that in Spanish have an n with a dash over, as in Ordo∣n̄o; Nun̄o, and many more, I have caus'd to be so Printed, to give the Reader them as true as possible, which was never done before, for some write Ordonno and Nunno, others Or∣donio and Nunio, which are both false, for tho' a dash seems to imply an n, yet it does not so absolutely in these cases, because a doubleth n among us will only put a strong Emphasis upon that part of the Word, which the Spanish has not; and if we substitute an i, then it makes two Syllables of one, for no 'or n̄a is but one Syliable, and adding an i, either of them makes two; but the way to pronounce it is, to suppose it a Dipthong, where retaining something of the i, the a makes the greatest sound, and both but one Syllable. It is true, the thing being wholly new and Cast on purpose for this Work, they are not to be found of all sorts, for they are only  the Italick; the Printers having yet got none in the Roman Letter. The next thing to be observ'd, is the o's, which have a dash at the bottom, as thus ç, for such a c in all places, whatever Vowel follows it, is pronounc'd like an s, only rather somewhat softer, as Zarago ça, there the Syllable ça is pronounc'd as if it were sa; but this they that are vers'd in French are not unacquainted with; yet it is not impertinent to mention it, because 'tis suppos'd, that many may read this History who have no knowledge of that Tongue. One word more, as to another error in pronouncing of Sancho, Sancha, and other Names ending in that manner, which are universally by Learned and Ʋnlearned spoken as if they were written Sanco and Sanca, a thing never known in Spanish, where every Letter has its full sound, and so it has in these words, and all that end in cho, which is to be pronounc'd as we do those three Letters in the word chosen. I must also inform the Reader, that Mariana has been no∣thing curious in dividing his Books, which has made me in some few of them take: the liber∣ty of borrowing a little from one to add to another, to bring things to a more compleat period, as they ought to be at the end of a Book. As for instance, to my first Book I have added the first Chapter of the second, as it is in the Spanish, because that breaks off in the middle of the Relation of Hanno and Himilco's Travels, and begins again with their return home, which I thought more proper to put together, and finish the Book with the conclusion of their Labours. So in the 27th and 29th Books, I have borrow'd somewhat from the 28th and 30th because they did not come to so good a conclusion in the Original. These are small things which I hope none will find cause to blame me for, nor will it be any Argument against me to say so great a Man as Mariana, was not to be Corrected by me, for the greatest Men are guilty of oversights, and its visible, he rather labour'd to deliver a good History to Posteri∣ty, than to seek the Embellishment and Forms that might set it off. I think I have said enough, both as to the Author and my self; for I am not ambitious of a gaudy Preface, it will be more satisfaction that the History be approv'd of, tho' the Preface pass unregarded, than that the latter should prove the only thing good in the Book. Since they come into the World, I don't doubt, but they will find enough to censure, and perhaps, but few to defend them; yet the best Judges are usually most favourable, and don't delight to make Faults where they don't find them, and for those that do, their Reflections at the long run, may light on themselves, such may be the fate of all that read, only to carp and rail at what they don't understand. A great deal of Care has been taken to Correct the Press; yet in so great a Work, some few Errata's have likely escap'd, which if they have, I hope they are in∣considerable, and only litteral. I had almost forgot to let the Reader understand that D. stands as well for Don̄a, as for Don, according as the Name it is prefixt to, is ei∣ther a Man's, or a Womans, tho' in some few places the Woman is distinguish'd thus, Da, but I could not get it so carry'd on throughout the whole Work.
TABLE of Chapters to MARIANA. The First BOOK. Chap. I. OF the first Peopling of Spain by Tubal, of the Fruitfulness of the Soil, its Situation and Cir∣cumference, and of its principal Mountains and Rivers. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Ancient and Modern Division of Spain, of the Languages used there, and of the Cu∣stoms of the Spaniards. p. 3 Chap. III. Of the Fabulous Kings of Spain, of the Gery∣ons, of King Hispalus; and the death of Hercules and of Hesperus, Atlas and Siculus, Kings of Spain. p. 6 Chap. IV. Of the coming of several Nations into Spain, as the Celtes, Rhodians, Carthaginians and Phe∣nicians, also of Abides, and a wonderful Dearth. p. 8 Chap. V. Of the Age of Argantonius. The Pheni∣cians attempt to subdue all Spain, but being repul∣sed, send for Aid to the Carthaginians, who Ra∣vage the Country, but sustain great loss from the Natives. p. 11 Chap. VI. The Carthaginians make War upon the Phenicians; Peace made, in which, the latter be∣come subject to the former. Sappho comes into Spain. Discoveries made by Himilco and Han∣no. p. 13 Second BOOK. Chap. I. THE Actions of the Spaniards in Sici∣ly. The Government of Hanno. An Embassy sent to Alexander the Great. The first Roman and Carthaginian War. p. 15 Chap. II. The second coming of Hamilcar. Asdru∣bal succeeds him. His Preparations for the Ro∣man War, and Death. p. 17 Chap. III. The Beginning, Progress and End of the Saguntine War, with the utter Extirpation of that City. p. 19 Chap. IV. The beginning of the second Roman and Carthaginian War. Hannibal marches thro' France into Italy. Some of his Actions there, and of the Scipio's in Spain. p. 21 Chap. V. Asdrubal designing to march thro' France into Italy, is defeated by the two Scipio's, who af∣ter that overthrow Mago, and rout the Carthagi∣nians a third time at Bigerra; but are at last them∣selves vanquish'd and slain. p. 23 Chap. VI. Lucius Marcius checks the Progress of the Carthaginians, and gives them a great Overthrow. First Nero, then Publius Scipio comes into Spain, and takes Carthagena. p. 26 Chap. VII. Publius Scipio Routs Asdrubal, and drives the Carthaginians quite out of Spain, other notable Actions of his there. Cornelius Lentulus and Lucius Manlius, succeed him, and overthrow the Spaniards that had Revolted. p. 28 Chap. VIII. The Spaniards Revolting, are again Subdu'd by the Romans. Cato being Consul, comes into Spain. Several Pretors succeed him. Their Government and Actions. p. 30 The Third BOOK. Chap. I. THE first War of Numantia, and Peace concluded with that City. The War in Lusitania, and other parts; and Treachery of the Pretor Sergius Galba. p. 33 Chap. II. Viriatus's Original and Actions against the Romans. The Government of several Roman Generals, and among them, of Metellus and Pom∣pey, and Death of Viriatus. p. 35 Chap. III. The second War betwixt Rome and Nu∣mantia. The Consul Mancinus, concludes a dishon∣ourable Peace with that People, and is therefore de∣livered up to them. Scipio Africanus sent against them. The City destroy'd. p. 38 Chap. IV. Other Occurrences in Spain after the War of Numantia. The beginning of the War of Ser∣torius. His Actions, Defeat and Death. p. 40 Chap. V. Pompey appeases the Tumults in Spain. Julius Caesar comes into Spain. The beginning of the Civil Wars there. Pompey's General defeated, the whole Country reduc'd by Julius Caesar, who re∣turns to Rome. p. 44 Chap. VI. Longinus Governs Spain. His Actions. The War betwixt Caesar and Pompey's Sons. The famous Battle of Munda. Caesar returns Victori∣ous to Rome. p. 46 Chap. VII. Other Commotions in Spain after the Death of Caesar. The beginning of the Empire of Augustus, and War of Cantabria. p. 48 The Fourth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Birth of Christ our Lord. The Death of Augustus, and Reigns of the Emperors, Tiberius, Caligula and Claudius, With an Account of the coming of St. James the Apostle into Spain, and first Preaching of the Gos∣pel. p. 51. Chap. II. The Reigns of the Emperors Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian and Titus. With an Account of the Colonies, Free-Towns, and Courts of Judicature then in Spain. p. 53 Chap. III. The Reigns of the Emperors Domitian, Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus Verus, Marcus Aurelius and Commodus; the Persecuti∣ons under them. The building of the City Leon, and rise of the Heresie of the Gnosticks. p. 55 Chap. IV. The Reigns of the Emperors Pertinax, Se∣verus, Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, A∣lexander Severus, Maximinus, Gordianus, Phi∣lip, Decius, Tribonianus Gallus, and Aemilia∣nus. p. 57 Chap. V. The Reigns of the Emperors Valerianus, Galienus, Flavius Aurelianus, Tacitus, Flavia∣nus, Probus, Carinus, Dioclesian and Maximi∣an, Constantius and Galerius, Maximinus and Licinius. p. 58 Chap. VI. The Reign of the Glorious Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor. The Arian Heresie. The first General Council of Nice. p. 60 Chap. VII. The Reigns of the Emperors Constantine, Constantius, and Constans, Julian the Apostate, Jovianus, Valentinian and Valens. p. 62 Chap. VIII. The Reigns of the Emperors Gratianus, Valentinian, Theodosius, Arcadius and Hono∣rius. p. 64
The Fifth BOOK. Chap. I. THE coming of several Barbarous Na∣tions into Spain, as the Vandals, Alans, Suevians, Silingians and Goths. Their Original, and where they setled. p. 67 Chap. II. The Goths vanquish and subdue all the o∣ther Barbarous Nations in Spain. The Vandals after this, Successful, go over into Africk. The rise of the Kingdom of the Suevians. p. 69 Chap. III. The Reigns of the Kings Theodoredus, Torismund and Theodorick. Attila, King of the Huns, twice routed. The General Council of Chalcedon. p. 71 Chap. IV. The Death of King Theodorick, and Reigns of Euricus and Alaricus. The Goths twice overthrown by the Franks. p. 73 Chap. V. The Reigns of the Kings Gesaleycus, Theo∣dorick and Amalaricus. Several Spanish Synods. Defeat of the Franks. And Tryal by Ordeal. p. 74 Chap. VI. The Reigns of Theudiselus, Agila and Athanagildus. A great Plague. The 5th Gene∣ral Council: An Interregnum. And the Con∣version of the Suevians. p. 76 Chap. VII. Of the two Sisters Galsuinda and Brune∣childa. The Reigns of the Kings Liuva and Leu∣vigildus. This last, makes his two Sons his Compa∣nions in the Throne. p. 77 Chap. VIII. Ermenegildus, Son to Leuvigildus, Marries the Lady Ingundis, is Converted to the Catholick Faith; is Besieg'd by his Father in Sevil, and put to Death by him. p. 79 Chap. IX. The remaining part of the Reign of King Leuvigildus. He Persecutes the Catholicks. Sub∣dues the Suevians, his Death, and causes of his Conversion. p. 81 Chap. X. The Reign of Recaredus, his and Peoples Conversion. Conspiracies against him detected and punish'd. He overthrows the Franks. The third Council of Toledo. p. 82 The Sixth BOOK. Chap. I. THE remaining Actions of King Recaredus, He Marries Clodosinda, Sister to Childebert King of Lorrain. His Death. Original of Dukes and Counts. p. 84 Chap. II. The Reigns of the Kings Liuva, Witeri∣cus, Gundemarus, Sisebutus and Recaredus II. Several Synods; the Jews banish'd Spain. p. 86 Chap. III. The Reigns of the Kings Suinthula, Re∣chimirus, Sisenandus and Chintila. The Romans quite expell'd Spain. Three Synods at Toledo. p. 87 Chap. IV. The Reigns of the Kings Tulga, Chinda∣suinthus and Recesuinthus. Several Synods of Toledo. Increase of the Mahometan Power. The Election and Coronation of King Wamba. p. 89 Chap. V. The War with the Rebels in Gallia Gothica, Paul, Wamba's General joyns with them. The King marches against them, and reduces all the Country to his Obedience. p. 91 Chap. VI. Wamba returns into Spain. Punishes the Heads of the Rebels. His Publick Works. Eleventh Council of Toledo. A great Fleet of Sarazens de∣stroy'd. Wamba depos'd. Ervigius Ʋsurps the Crown. p. 93 Chap. VII. The Reigns of the Kings Ervigius and Egica. p. 94 Chap. VIII. The Reign of King Witiza, Roderick ascends the Throne, Ravishes Count Julian's Daugh∣ter, and breaks open an old Castle at Toledo, said to be Inchanted. p. 96 Chap. IX. The first coming of the Moors into Spain. They prove successful, and flock over in great Mul∣titudes. King Roderick overthrown in a great Bat∣tle. His Death. The Moors over-run the greatest part of Spain. p. 98 Chap. X. The Moor Muza comes over with Supplies. His Actions. The Moorish Computation of Years, call'd Hegira. Abdalasis, Son to Muza, his Acti∣ons. End of Count Julian and his Family. De∣plorable state of Spain. p. 100 The Seventh BOOK. Chap. I. PRince Pelayus, or Pelagius, takes up Arms against the Moors. Is declar'd King, and Miraculously Vanquishes the Infidels. The Death of Muza. Alahor Governs Spain. p. 102 Chap. II. Pelayus's Power increases, he takes several Towns. His Death. The short Reign and Death of Favila. Several Moorish Governours in Spain. Actions of the Infidels in France. p. 104 Chap. III. The Reign of D. Alonso the Catholick. His Conquests and Death. Several Moorish Go∣vernours in Spain. Affairs of the Mahometans both in Spain and Africk. p. 105 Chap. IV. The Reigns of the Kings Froyla, Aure∣lius, Silon, Alonso, Mauregatus and Veremun∣dus, or Bermudo. Monarchy of the Moors erect∣ed in Spain by Abderhaman. His Death, and Wars among his Sons. p. 107 Chap. V. The Reign of D. Alonso the Chast. The Nestorian Heresie reviv'd. The Kings Sister de∣bauch'd, he takes Lisbon. Wars among the Moors. Invention of the Body of S. James the Apostle, and defeat of Charlemaine. p. 109 Chap. VI. The remaining part of the Reign of King Alonso. Rebellion among the Moors. Alhaca, the Moor dies, and Abderhaman succeeds him. The Reign of King Ramiro, he overthrows the Moors in a great Battle. His Death and Invasion of the Normans. p. 110 Chap. VII. The Persecution rais'd by the Moors at Cordova. The Reign of D. Ordonno over the Christians, and Mahomet over the Moors. p. 112 Chap. VIII. The Reign of King Alonso the Great. He is expell'd, and restor'd. His Brothers Conspire against him, and are punish'd. The Church of St. James the Apostle made an Archbishoprick. Ma∣homet the Moorish King dies. p. 114 Chap. IX. The Death of King Alonso the Great. The Reigns of D. Garcia and D. Ordonno II. of Oviedo; and of Almundar, Abdalla and Ab∣derhaman of Cordova. p. 116 The Eighth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Original of the Kingdoms of Na∣varre and Aragon, and Earls of Barcelona, with their Succession and Actions, down to the time of King Ordonno II. of Leon. p. 118 Chap. II. Of the Earls of Castile. The Reigns of D. Fruela II. King of Leon. Fictions concerning the Kings of Navarre. The Reign of their King D. Sancho Abarca. p. 120 Chap. III. The Reigns of Alonso IV. and Ramiro II. Kings of Leon. Sancho Abarca, King of Na∣varre slain by Fernan Gonzalez, Earl of Castile. Several Defeats of the Moors. Agreat Eclypse. p. 121
Chap. IV. The Reigns of D. Ordonno III. D. San∣cho the Gross, Kings, of Leon, and of Garcia Sanchez, King of Navarre; and Actions of Fer∣nan Gonzalez, Earl of Castile. p. 123 Chap. V. The Reign of Ramiro III. King of Leon. Death of Earl Fernan Gonzalez. Normans in∣fest the Coasts of Spain. Divisions among the Moors. Rebellion against the King of Leon, and his Death. p. 126 Chap. VI. The Reign of Bermudo II. call'd the Gou∣ty, King of Leon. Discord betwixt him and the Earl of Castile. Leon and Barcelona taken by the Infidels. Garcia, King of Navarre, dies. His Son Garci Sanchez, succeeds him. p. 127 Chap. VII. The Death of King Bermudo the Gouty, and beginning of the Reign of D. Alonso V. King of Leon. Many troubles among the Moors. The Earl of Castile slain by the Infidels. p. 130 Chap. VIII. Continues the mighty Revolutions among the Infidels; with the dismembring of the Mighty Kingdom of Cordova, and erecting of several o∣ther little Sovereignties in the chief Cities of Spain. p. 132 Chap. IX. The last Actions of D. Alonso, King of Leon, and his Death. The Reign of D. Bermudo III. His Son Sancho, Earl of Castile, Poisons his Mother. His Son Garcia Murder'd. p. 133 Chap. X. The remaining part of the Reign of Sancho the Greater, King of Navarre. Wicked Contri∣vance of his Sons against their Mother. He settles Religious Affairs; Rebuilds Palencia, and is Mur∣der'd. p. 135 The Ninth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Posture of Affairs in Spain. Acti∣ons of D. Berenguel, Earl of Barce∣lona. Kingdoms of the Moors. Wars betwixt the Kings of Castile and Leon. Ferdinand Crown'd King of Leon. p. 137 Chap. II. Ferdinand, King of Castile and Leon, the most Powerful King of Spain, overthrows the Moors, takes several Towns, and ravages the Territories of the Infidels. Ramiro, King of Aragon, Wars on his Brother of Navarre. p. 138 Chap. III. S. Isidorus's Body translated to Leon. Con∣version of two Moorish Princesses. Garcia, King of Navarre, kill'd by his Brother Ferdinand. Rami∣ro, King of Aragon, recovers his Dominions. p. 140 Chap. IV. The manner how Spain came to be exempt∣ed from the Roman Empire. The famous Rode∣rick Diaz de Bivar, commonly call'd Cid. His Extraction, and first Actions. Three Synods held in Spain. p. 141 Chap. V. The remaining part of the Reign of Ferdi∣nand, King of Castile and Leon. His Dominions divided amongst his Children. Of D. Ramiro, King of Aragon. Perpignan built. p. 143 Chap. VI. The Progress of the War D. Sancho made upon his two Brothers. He expels Alonso, King of Leon, first, and then Garcia, King of Galicia, lays Siege to the City Zamora, and is there mur∣der'd. p. 144 Chap. VII. King Alonso returns from among the Moors, and recovers his Brothers Kingdoms. The first part of his Reign. Actions of Roderick de Bi∣var. King Sancho of Navarre, murder'd by his own Brother. p. 146 Chap. VIII. The Death of Almenon, King of Tole∣do, and of D. Ramon, Earl of Barcelona. The Conquests of the Moors in Italy. The Conquest of Toledo resolv'd upon. Ramon, Earl of Barcelo∣na, murder'd. p. 148 Chap. IX. The famous City Toledo closely Besieg'd and Surrendred; many other Places taken. King Alonso stiles himself Emperor. p. 150 Chap. X. The Election of the new Archbishop of To∣ledo. The abolishing the old Missal and Breviary. The Original of the Archbishop of Toledo. His Spiritual Jurisdiction over all Spain. King Al∣phonso's Wives and Children. New Wars break out in Spain. p. 151 The Tenth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Moorish Family of the Almora∣vides comes into Spain. King A∣lonso twice overthrown by them. Several Strangers come out of France to serve under him, he bestows three of his Daughters on them. The Holy War in the East. p. 153. Chap. II. The great Actions of D. Sancho Ramirez, King of Aragon. He is kill'd at the Siege of Hu∣esca. His Sons continue the Siege, rout a great Ar∣my of the Moors and Christians that come to raise it, and take the Place. p. 155 Chap. III. Great Preparations thro' Christendom for the Holy War. Valencia taken by Roderick de Bivar, other Actions of his, suspected to be Fabu∣lous. His Death, and that of Joseph, the Moorish Monarch. p. 156 Chap. IV. The Death of Sancho, Prince of Castile, and of the two Kings, Peter I. of Aragon, and Alonso IV. of Castile. The Moorish King of Za∣ragoça. Of two Holy Men. p. 158 Chap. V. The Reign of Queen Urraca. Her Lewd∣ness. She is Divorc'd from her Husband, Depos'd from the Government. Her Son Alonso Proclaim'd King of Castile. p. 160 Chap. VI. The Wars of Majorca and Zaragoça. The Schism of Burdinus. Peace concluded betwixt the Crowns of Castile and Aragon. The Original of the Kingdom of Portugal. p. 162 Chap. VII. A Schism in the Church, on account of the Antipope. Peace betwixt Castile and Aragon. War with the Moors. Original of the Kingdom of Portugal. p. 163 Chap. VIII. The War betwixt the King of Castile and the Moors. The Death of King Alonso of A∣ragon, and Revolutions of that Kingdom, and Navarre. The former choses Ramiro, a Monk, the latter, Garcia for their King. p. 165 Chap. IX. The King of Castile aspires to the Crowns of Aragon and Navarre. Stiles himself Emperor. Ramiro, King of Aragon resigns, and his Son-in-law, Raymund, Earl of Barcelona, assumes the Crown. p. 167 Chap. X. D. Alonso of Portugal, takes the Title of King. His Wars with the Moors. War betwixt the Christian Princes, and Peace concluded. Baeça and Almeria taken by the King of Castile, and Lisbon by him of Portugal. p. 169 The Eleventh BOOK. Chap. I. THE coming into Spain of the Moors, call'd Almohades. The Death of D. Garcia, King of Navarre, by a fall from his
Horse, his Son Sancho succeeds him. King Alon∣so and his Daughter both Marry'd. Many Places taken from the Moors. p. 171 Chap. II. King Luis the Younger of France, comes in∣to Spain. Alonso of Castile and Leon, call'd the Emperor, dies. His Sons Sancho and Ferdinand, inherit the Crowns of Castile and Leon. Original of the Knights of Calatrava. p. 174 Chap. III. The Death of Sancho, King of Castile. The great Commotions that ensu'd. The Death of Raymund, Prince of Aragon, his Issue. Alonso, his eldest Son succeeds in his Dominions. p. 176 Chap. IV. Alonso, the young King of Castile, takes upon him the Government, recovers most of his Do∣minions, joyns in League with the Aragonian, and Marries Ellenor, the Daughter to Henry II. King of England. Some Actions of Ferdinand King of Leon. p. 178 Chap. V. The League made against Peter Ruiz de Açagra. The Original of the Knights of Santiago. The taking of Cuenca by the Christians. Increase of the Knights of Santiago, or S. James the Apostle. Several Places in Navarre taken by the Castilians. p. 180 Chap. VI. Rebellion in the Kingdom of Leon suppress'd. Alonso, King of Portugal, taken by Ferdinard of Leon, and set at liberty. Being Besieg'd in Santa∣rem, by the Moors, is reliev'd by him. He Van∣quishes the Infidels. Actions of his Son Sancho. p. 182 Chap. VII. The Death of the Kings of Leon and Por∣tugal. Alliances betwixt the Kings of Spain. The Defeat of the Christians at Alarcos. Sancho the Wise, King of Navarre, dies. Sancho I. King of Portugal. Alonso IX. of Leon. p. 183 Chap. VIII. King Alonso of Aragon dies, and his Son Peter succeeds him. The King of Leon Di∣vorc'd. Castilians and Aragonians over-run Na∣varre. Alonso, King of Castile's two Daughters Marry'd to the Kings of England and Leon. Plague and Famine in Spain. p. 186 Chap. IX. The Marriage of the King of Aragon, and Death of some Persons of Note. Peace concluded, and Alliance betwixt all the Christian Kings of Spain. The beginning of the War with the Moors. A vast Multitude of Foreigners comes to the Assi∣stance of the Christian Kings of Spain. p. 187 Chap. X. The further Progress of the Christian Army, which obtains a most signal Victory over the Infidels, of whom 200000 are slain, and this call'd the Bat∣tle of Navas de Tolosa. Many Towns taken af∣ter this Success. p. 189 The Twelfth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Original and Growth of the Here∣sie of the Albigenses, which spread all over France, and some part of Spain. Preaching a∣gainst them unsuccessful, War is resolv'd upon. p. 191 Chap. II. The Death of Peter, King of Aragon, and of Alonso, King of Castile. Simon, Earl of Montfort, General of the Catholicks. Overthrows the Hereticks, and takes the Towns they had possessed themselves of. p. 193 Chap. III. Disorders in Castile and Aragon, under the two Infant Kings. Sancho, King of Navarre, altogether decripid. The Lateran General Coun∣cil. Honours done there to the Archbishop of Tole∣do. p. 195 Chap. IV. The Family of Lara take the Government of Castile into their Hands. They commit many Insolencies, and oppress the Nobility. Young King Henry Marry'd and Divorc'd. The King of A∣ragon escapes from his Keepers. p. 197 Chap. V. Great Disorders in Castile rais'd by the Family of Lara. Young King Henry kill'd by the fall of a Tile. Ferdinand, Prince of Leon, succeeds his Mother Berengaria, renouncing her Right. Or∣ders of S. Dominick, S. Francis and La Merced Instituted. p. 198 Chap. VI. The Marriages of two Kings, Ferdinand of Castile, and Jayme of Aragon. King Ferdi∣nand quells many Commotions. Death of the Kings of France and Portugal. p. 200 Chap. VII. King Ferdinand of Castile's great Success against the Moors. King Jayme of Aragon seiz'd by some Rebellious Nobles, makes his escapes, and commences War against the Rebels. p. 202 Chap. VIII. The War with the Moors renew'd. The Island of Majorca Conquer'd by the Aragonians. The Popes Legate disanuls the Marriage of King Jayme, on account of Consanguinity. Raymund, Earl of Toulouze, a Heretick, reduc'd. p. 204 Chap. IX. Alonso, King of Leon, defeats the Moors, takes Merida and Badajoz, and dies. Crowns of Castile and Leon united under Ferdinand. San∣cho, King of Navarre, dies, Theobald succeeds him. Interviews of several Kings. p. 205 Chap. X. The beginning, progress and end of the War against Cordova, with the Conquest of that Noble City. p. 206 Chap. XI. A Moorish King Baptiz'd. Description of Valencia, its Siege, and Surrender to the King of Aragon, who is wounded before it. Theobald, King of Navarre, goes with others to the Holy-War. p. 207 The Thirteenth BOOK. Chap. I. THE taking of many Towns by the Christians. The Kingdom of Mur∣cia surrendred to King Ferdinand. His Marriage. Salamanca made an Ʋniversity. 20000 Moors de∣feated by the Christians. p. 208 Chap. II. A defeat of the Christians, who recover, and are successful, take Jaen, and many other Places. The King of Granada made Tributary. King Sancho II. of Portugal expell'd by his Rebellious Subjects. p. 209 Chap. III. The beginning of the War against Sevil. A∣ragon under a General Interdict. The Siege and Surrender of Sevil. Carmona and several other Places. p. 210 Chap. IV. S. Luis, King of France, sends Presents to the Church of Toledo, and makes an unfortunate Expedition to the Holy-Land. Aragon embroyl'd King Ferdinand of Castile, after gaining much from the Moors, dies p. 211 Chap. V. The beginning of the Reign of King Alon∣so, he is chosen Emperor by part of the Electors, and Richard, Duke of Cornwal, by the rest. Theo∣bald I. King of Navarre, dies; his Son Theo∣bald II. succeeds him. p. 212 Chap. VI. Aragon and Castile at variance, and reconcil'd. Sancho, King of Portugal, dies in Ex∣ile. Death of the Queen and Prince of Aragon. Por∣tugal under an Interdict. Marriages of the King of of Navarre, and Prince of Aragon. p. 213 Chap. VII. The Family of the Merines obtains the
Empire of Africk. The War against the Moors renew'd in Spain. Cuidad Rodrigo built. Trou∣bles in Aragon. The City Murcia taken, and the King of Granada made Tributary. p. 214 Chap. VIII. The Kingdom of the Normans in Sicily, extinguish'd by the French. The Empress of Con∣stantinople comes into Spain, and Jayme, King of Aragon, to Toledo. p. 215 Chap. IX. The King of Aragon's Expedition for the Holy-Land. The Kings of France and Navarre, and the eldest Son of the King of England, move upon the same Enterprize. The Nobles of Castile revolt. Troubles in Aragon. p. 216 Chap. X. Rodulphus of Ausburg, chosen Emperor. Henry, King of Navarre, dies. His Daughter Joanna Inherits. Alonso, King of Castile, agrees with his Nobles, then goes into France to plead for the Empire, before the Pope, and returns re infecta. p. 216 The Fourteenth BOOK. Chap. I. THE King of Morocco passes over into spain. The War with the Moors. The Christians twice defeated. Death of Prince Fer∣dinand, the Heir of Castile. Troubles in Navarre betwixt the Natives and the French. p. 217 Chap. II. Three Popes die in one Year. Prince San∣cho of Castile contrives to Ʋsurp that Crown from his Nephews. The Death of Jayme, King of Ara∣gon, and of Alonso of Portugal. Peter succeeds the first, and Denis, the latter. p. 218 Chap. III. The Practices of Prince Sancho. He Re∣bels against his Father. The King of Morocco comes to aid King Alonso; returns home, leaving 1000 Horse to serve under him. King Alonso dis∣inherits, and curses his Son Prince Sancho. p. 221 Chap. IV. The Conspiracy of John Prochita, in Sicily, against the French, and slaughter of them, call'd the Sicilian Vespers. Kings of France and Aragon at War about Sicily. Castile and Aragon under an Interdict at the same time. p. 222 Chap. V. The Death of Alonso, King of Castile. The beginning of the Reign of King Sancho IV. The defeat of the French Fleet on the Coast of Italy. Albarazin taken by the King of Aragon. p. 224 Chap. VI. The French Invade Catalonia, take Gi∣rona, and retire back to France with loss. The King of Morocco Besieges Xeres, and is repuls'd. The Death of the four Kings of France, Aragon, Naples and Morocco. p. 226 Chap. VII. The Kings of Castile and Portugal meet D. Lope de Haro flies to Navarre. A Treaty in order to release the two Princes of Castile. Charles, Prince of Salerno, set at liberty. France and Ca∣stile joyn against Aragon. Denis, King of Por∣tugal's Issue. p. 228 Chap. VIII. Troubles in Castile. The rightful Heirs to that Crown, before Prisoners in Aragon, set at liberty. Wars on that account betwixt the two Crowns. Badajoz Mutinies, and is reduc'd. An Interview betwixt the Kings of France and Castile. p. 230 Chap. IX. The Revolt of D. John Nun̄ez de Lara. The Death of the King of Aragon. His Brother Jayme Succeeds him. Matches betwixt the three Kings of Spain. Defeat of the Moors at Sea. Ori∣ginal of the Dukes of Medina Sidonia. p 232 Chap. X. Alcala de Henares made an Ʋniversity. Tarifa Besieg'd by the Moors. A brave Action of the Governour. Sancho, King of Castile, dies. Ferdinand IV. succeeds. Peace betwixt France and Aragon. p. 234 The Fifteenth BOOK. Chap. I. NEW Troubles and Wars in Castile, where Prince Henry takes the Go∣vernment from the Queen. Prince John Proclaim∣ed King of Leon and Galicia. Castile invaded by the Moors, Portugueses and Aragonians. p. 236 Chap. II. Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal setled by means of the double Alliances betwixt those Princes. The Progress of the Wars in Sicily. The Jubilee first Instituted. Bilbao built; and Prince John reconcil'd to the King. p. 238 Chap. III. Of Raymundus Lullus, and the Master of Calatrava. The Marriage of King Ferdinand. Peace concluded betwixt the Kings of Sicily and Naples. A Synod of Bishops. Troubles in Castile. Pope Boniface dies. Benedict XI. succeeds him. p. 240 Chap. IV. The Differences betwixt the Kings of Ca∣stile and Aragon reconcil'd. After which, they joyn in league against the Moors, but to no consi∣derable effect. Death of Roger Lauria, the great Admiral of Aragon; and Divisions among the Moors. p. 241 Chap. V. The King of Granada depos'd. The King of Castile's Sister Marry'd to the Duke of Britany. The Extirpation of the Knights Templers. The Death of Ferdinand IV. King of Castile. p. 244 Chap. VI. The beginning of the Reign of Alonso XI. King of Castile. The many Confusions in that Kingdom, by reason of his Infancy. The Moors of Granada expell their King. The Turks, their Original and Growth. p. 246 Chap. VII. The Actions of the Catalonians in Greece. The War in Andaluzia. Death of Luis Hutin, King of France. Philip the Long, succeeds him. John XX. chosen Pope. Defeat of the Moors by Prince Peter of Castile. p. 248 Chap. VIII. Institution of two new Orders of Knight∣hood in Aragon and Portugal. Peter and John, Princes of Castile, kill'd by the Moors. The Go∣vernment of that Kingdom in Confusion. A great Overthrow given the Navarrois, by the Biscainers. p. 249 Chap. IX. King Alonso. XI. of Castile, takes upon him the Government. The Conquest of Sardinia by the Aragonians. The Death of King Denis of Por∣tugal. His Son Alonso succeeds him. Jayme II. King of Aragon, is succeeded by his Son Alonso IV. p. 251 Chap. X. The Wars betwixt the Christians and Infi∣dels. Rebellions in Castile. Aragon, Castile and Portugal joyn in League. The King and Queen of Navarre, come into that Country, and return a∣gain to France. p. 253 The Sixteenth BOOK. Chap. I. THE King of Granada goes into Africk. Abomelique passes over into Spain. The War with the Moors. A Truce concluded. A∣lonso de la Cerda rightful King of Castile, sub∣mits to King Alonso the Possessor. p. 256 Chap. II. The Moors of Granada murder Mahomet, their King. Wars among all the Christian Kings of Spain. Alonso, King of Aragon, dies. Fresh
Rebellions in Castile. The Portuguese Fleet beat∣en by the Castilians. p. 257 Chap. III. The Death of Frederick, King of Sicily. A Truce betwixt Castile and Portugal. The Death of Abomelique, and defeat of his Army. Peace betwixt Castile and Aragon. A Synod at Barce∣lona. p. 259 Chap. IV. A new Invasion of Spain by Albohacen, King of Morocco, with 470000 Moors; he Be∣sieges Tarifa, is there routed with the loss of 200000 Men, by the Kings of Castile and Por∣tugal. Three defeats of the Infidels at Sea. p. 261 Chap. V. The Siege and Surrender of Algezira. The Infidels attempt to murder King Alonso of Castile. The Earls of Derby and Salisbury, come to his assistance out of England, and the Earl of Faux out of France. Robert, King of Naples dies. p. 263 Chap. VI. The King of Aragon Conquers Majorca, and all its Dominions. Great Troubles in Aragon. The Rebels suppress'd. An Ʋniversal Plague. The Knights of Calatrava at variance, at length re∣concil'd. p. 265 Chap. VII. The Siege of Gibraltar; the King dies, and the Siege is rais'd. King Peter succeeds him. The Lady Ellenor de Guzman kill'd. Some Nobles Rebel, and are subdu'd. Biscay annexed to the Crown of Castile. Interviews of Kings. p. 267 Chap. VIII. Embassadors sent by King Peter into France, to obtain for his Wife, Blanch, Daughter to the Duke of Bourbon, who is brought into Spain, and Marry'd to the King; but he being before in Love with the Lady Mary de Padilla, slights and forsakes his Queen. p. 269 Chap. IX. King Peter of Castile, removes his Offi∣cers, punishes some Rebels, and reduces several Towns. The War of Sardinia, where Diseases rage∣ing in the Aragonian Army, that King claps up a dishonourable Peace, and returns to Aragon. p. 270 Chap. X. The Nobility of Castile, particularly the King's Bastard Brothers in Rebellion; they treat with the King without success, the Queen Mother joyns them; the King gets the better, and Exe∣cutes many of them. p. 272 The Seventeenth BOOK. Chap. I. THE beginning of the War in Aragon. many Rebellious Nobles in Castile put to Death. The War betwixt Castile and Ara∣gon carry'd on by Sea and Land. p. 275 Chap. II. The Kings of Castile and Aragon, both call the Moors to their assistance. The War is car∣ry'd on vigorously on both sides. The Castilians treacherous to their King. He punishes many of them. The Computation of Time in Aragon alter∣ed. p. 277 Chap. III. The Death of Queen Blanch, and D. Maria de Padilla. Peace betwixt Castile and A∣ragon. The War with the Moors, and Death of their King. The King of Aragon's Daughter Marry'd to the King of Sicily. p. 278 Chap. IV. Castile and Navarre joyn in League. The War is carry'd on successfully against Aragon, by King Peter of Castile, who declares the Lady Mary de Padilla, to have been his lawful Wife. The Death of John, King of France, and Con∣stance Queen of Aragon. p. 281 Chap. V. Count Henry Proclaim'd King of Castile. King Peter expell'd the Kingdom▪ Refus'd En∣tertainment in Portugal, gathers a Fleet in Gali∣cia, and flyes into France to the Protection of the English. p. 282 Chap. VI. The War betwixt France, Navarre and Aragon. King Peter of Castile, supported by the English in France, is brought into Spain by the Prince of Wales, with an Army. Overthrows Henry, the Ʋsurper, and recovers his Kingdom. p. 284 Chap. VII. King Peter Excommunicated and Ab∣solv'd. Count Henry returns into Spain, is again receiv'd by many Places. Toledo opposes him, and is Besieg'd. King Peter comes to its relief, is overthrown, betray'd to, and murder'd by Henry the Bastard. p. 286 Chap. VIII. Several Foreign Princes pretenders to the Crown of Castile. War with Aragon, Portugal and Granada. Affairs of Aragon, Sardinia and Navarre. The League betwixt Portugal and Ara∣gon. p. 288 Chap. IX. The Siege of Carmona. The King of Por∣tugal Marries the Lady Ellenor de Meneses. Peace betwixt Castile, Portugal and Navarre. p. 289 Chap. X. Peace concluded betwixt Castile and Ara∣gon. Several Matches of Princes. French and Spaniards Besiege Bayonne in vain. The Papal Chair restored to Rome. Death of Frederick, King of Sicily. p. 292 The Eighteenth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Wars of Navarre. Matches of some of King Henry's Children. The Schism in the Church, caused by the Election of the two Popes, Urban and Clement. The Death of the King of Castile, and of Mahomet, the Moorish King of Granada. p. 294 Chap. II. King John succeeds his Father in the Throne of Castile. Charles, King of France, dies. Charles VI. succeeds him. Pope Clement own'd in Spain thro' the French Interest. p. 296. Chap. III. Charles, Duke of Durazzo, Crown'd King of Naples. The War with Portugal. Peace concluded. The King of Portugal dies. Actions of the Aragonians and Catalonians in Greece, and of the former in Sardinia. p. 297 Chap. IV. Portugal full of Divisions about the Suc∣cession to the Crown. King John of Castile, hav∣ing been Proclaim'd at Lisbon, enters that King∣dom, has many places deliver'd to him. Besieges Lisbon, but is forced to raise the Siege, and return to Castile. p. 299 Chap. V. John, the Bastard, Master of Avis, Pro∣claim'd King of Portugal. King John of Castile, sends his Fleet, then enters Portugal himself with an Army. The famous Battle of Aljubarrota, and rout of the Castilians. p. 301 Chap. VI. The Portugueses make an Inroad into Ca∣stile, and defeat a Body of Castilians. The Duke of Lancaster lands at Corun̄a, and takes several Towns. The Death of the Kings of Naples, Ara∣gon and Navarre. p. 303 Chap. VII. Peace concluded with the English. The Heir of Castile in imitation of the Prince of Wales in England, is created Prince of Asturias. A Truce with Portugal, and the Moors. King John of Castile, kill'd by a Fall from his Horse. p. 304
Chap. VIII. John, King of Aragon, upon complaint of his Subjects, complies with their demands. Ir∣ruptions of the French into Aragon. Henry III. Proclaim'd King of Castile. The Form of Govern∣ment appointed there, during his Minority. p. 307 Chap. IX. The Contentions betwixt the Nobility of Castile about the Government. They agree on a Settlement, then alter it. The Affairs of the Moors at Granada. War renew'd with Portugal. King Charles VI. of France, runs distracted. p. 308 Chap. X. The Divisions among the Nobility of Ca∣stile, continue. A Truce betwixt Castile and Por∣tugal for 15 Years. The Nobility at length pacify'd. Sicily brought under the Aragonian Yoke. p. 310 The Nineteenth BOOK. Chap. I. KIng Henry takes upon him the Govern∣ment. The Cortes at Madrid. Dis∣contents among the Nobility. The Death of the Master of Alcantara. The Biscainers invade the Canary-Islands. The Plague at Madrid. p. 313 Chap. II. Another Rebellion in Castile quell'd by the King. Pope Clement dies, and Benedict XIII. is Elected, which continues the Schism. The strange Death of John, King of Aragon. p. 315 Chap. III. The Queen of Navarre, returns to her Husband. The Earl of Faux invades Aragon. The War betwixt Castile and Portugal renew'd. Jo∣seph, King of Granada dies. Mahomet his second Son Ʋsurps. The Turks come over into Europe. p. 317 Chap. IV. Two Franciscans Preaching to the Moors of Granada, suffer Martyrdom. The Truce with Portugal renew'd. Two great Plagues in Spain and France. The Year of Jubilee 1400. p. 319 Chap. V. The Death of the Queen of Sicily. Of Tamerlan and Bajazet. Pope Benedict again re∣ceiv'd in Castile. The King of Castile has a Son born. Pope Boniface dies. Innocent VIII. chosen at Rome. p. 321 Chap. VI. Great Tumults in Aragon appeas'd by the Cortes. A Battle betwixt the Castilians and the Moors. The Cortes of Castile meet at Toledo, and King Henry dies there. A Notable Action of his. p. 322 Chap. VII. The Crown offer'd to Prince Ferdinand, be refuses it. John II. Proclaim'd King of Castile. The Death of the Queen of Aragon. The War of Granada. Several Places taken by the Christians, who also obtain a Victory at Sea p. 324 Chap. VIII. The Murder of the Duke of Orleans, by him of Burgundy. The War carry'd on with the Moors, and a Truce concluded. Original of D. Alvaro de Luna. Continuation of the Schism. p. 326 Chap. IX. The Death of Martin, King of Sicily. Several Pretenders to the Crown of Aragon. Their several Claims. Martin, King of Aragon, pre∣fers that of his Nephew Prince Ferdinand of Castile, tho' unjust. p. 328 Chap. X. The Moors having done much harm in the Christian Territories, Prince Ferdinand marches a∣gainst them, defeats them, and takes Antequera, and other Places. Martin, King of Aragon dies. A Love Adventure. p. 329 The Twentieth BOOK. Chap. I. THE State of Christendom. Nine Judges appointed in Aragon to decide the dispute about the Succession. Arguments us'd by each of the Candidates. The Government of King John of Portugal. p. 332 Chap. II. Ferdinand, Prince of Castile, declar'd King of Aragon by the Judges, and afterwards Pro∣claim'd at Zaragoa. He settles the Kingdom, Be∣sieges and takes the Earl of Urgel, who aspir'd to the Grown. p. 333 Chap. III. The Christian Princes all Combine with the Emperor to put an end to the Schism in the Church. In order to it, King Ferdinand of Aragon, has a Conference with Pope Benedict. The Council of Constance. The two Popes, John, and Gregory, Abdicate. p. 335 Chap. IV. The Portugueses pass over into Africk, and take Ceuta. All endeavours us'd to move Pope Benedict to resign the Papacy prove vain. Ferdi∣nand, King of Aragon's Death. The Council of Constance puts an end to the Schism in the Church. p. 337 Chap. V. The Death of the Queen of Castile. Mar∣riages of Princes. Prince Henry of Aragon, seizes the King of Castile. Tumults in that Kingdom. Strange Prodigies. Many Colleges built in Castile. p. 339 Chap. VI. Original of the Portuguese Discoveries. King Alonso of Aragon, adopted Heir to the Crown of Naples. The King of Castile escapes from his Confinement, and suppresses many of the Rebels. D. Alvaro de Luna made an Earl. p. 341 Chap. VII. The Death of the Moorish King of Gra∣nada. A Truce betwixt Castile and Portugal. The Interest of the Aragonians decays at Naples. The Death of the pretended Pope Benedict. p. 343 Chap. VIII. The pretended Pope Benedict dying, a∣nother is supported by the King of Aragon, who plunders Marseilles, prepares to make War upon Castile; but comes to an Accommodation, yet loses all his Interest at Naples. p. 344 Chap. IX. The Death of King Charles of Navarre. King John Proclaim'd. D. Alvaro de Luna Ba∣nish'd the Court of Castile. Villanous Practices of the Nobility. The King of Granada depos'd. p. 347 Chap. X. D. Alvaro de Luna returns to Court great∣er in the Kings favour than ever. The banish'd King of Granada restor'd. Some Affairs of France, and final end of the Schism in the Church. p. 348 The Twenty First BOOK. Chap. I. THE War betwixt Aragon and Na∣varre on the one side, and Castile on the other. The King of Navarre Crown'd. John, King of Castile, breaks into Aragon with a power∣ful Army, and does much harm there. p. 351 Chap. II. Actions of the Aragonians against Castile. Several Assemblies of the Cortes. The Estates of the Princes of Aragon in Castile, Confiscated. A Truce concluded with that Crown for 5 Years. War with the Moors. p. 353 Chap. III. The Death of Pope Martin V. Eugenius IV. succeeds him. The Moors of Granada over∣thrown in Battle. Peace concluded with Portugal. A Truce with the Moors. Prince Peter of Ara∣gon made Prisoner. p. 354 Chap. IV. The declining posture of the Aragonians at Naples. Yet that King is again invited thither, and adopted anew by the Queen. He agrees with Castile. King John of Portugal dies. Edward, succeeds. p. 356
Chap. V. The Council of Basil. The Affairs of Na∣ples. And Death of the Duke of Anjou, and Queen of Naples. The Nobility of that Kingdom incline to favour the Aragonians. The Pope ex∣pell'd Rome, and restor'd. p. 358 Chap. VI. Mighty Inundations throughout Spain. A great Victory over the Moors. The further Acti∣ons of the Aragonians at Naples. The Kings of Aragon and Navarre, taken by the Genoeses, and set at liberty by the Duke of Milan. p. 360 Chap. VII. The Affairs of Italy, after the King of Aragon, was releas'd. Peace concluded betwixt Ca∣stile and Aragon. The Prince of Castile Marries the Princess of Navarre. The Portugues loss in Africk. p. 362 Chap. VIII. The State of Spain, and of the Catholick Church, under great apprehensions of Troubles. A∣ctions of the Argonians at Naples. King Edward of Portugal dies. The Rebellion in Castile. p. 364 Chap. IX. The King of Castile and the Rebels agree. The Rebellion breaks out again. The King taken Prisoner. Blanch, Queen of Navarre dies. Her Son Charles succeeds. The Council at Basil deposes Pope Eugenius, and choses Felix. p. 365 Chap. X. The Progress of the Aragonians in Naples. That City taken by them. New Disorders in Spain. The Archbishop of Toledo dies. Of some Men fa∣mous for Learning p. 368 The Twenty Second BOOK. Chap. I. THE success of the Aragonians in Ita∣ly. The Rebellion in Castile. The Death of the Queens of Portugal and Castile. The Battle of Olmedo; and Death of Prince Henry of Aragon. p. 369 Chap. II. The Marriage of Ferdinand, Bastard Son to the King of Aragon, and appointed Heir to the Kingdom of Naples. Mahomet, King of Grana∣da, depos'd. D. Alvaro de Luna, chosen Master of the Order of Santiago. p. 371 Chap. III. Disorders continue in Spain. The Flo∣rentine War. Pope Eugenius dies. Nicholas V. succeeds him. The Breach betwixt Castile and A∣ragon continu'd. Several Noblemen of Castile apprehended. Others fly. p. 373 Chap. IV. The Earl of Benavente escaping, raises new Tumults. The Affairs of Portugal. The Mu∣tiny of Toledo. Fresh Tumults among the Nobili∣ty of Castile. The Mutiniers of Toledo punish'd. p. 374 Chap. V. The Mutiny of Segovia. The Affairs of the Crown of Aragon. The Civil War in Navarre. The Factions of the Agramonteses and Biamonte∣ses there. The Emperor Frederick Marries Elle∣nor, Sister to the King of Portugal. The Moors twice defeated by the Christians. p. 376 Chap. VI. D. Alvaro de Luna, the King of Castile's great Favourite's Character, and fatal end. Ma∣met the Turk, takes Constantinople. Mahomet, King of Granada, depos'd. Cruzadoes coin'd in Portugal. p. 378 Chap. VII. The Designs, and Death of King John of Castile. Discoveries of the Portugueses along the Coast of Africk. Prince Henry Proclaim'd King of Castile. Peace concluded betwixt Castile, Ara∣gon and Navarre. The Character of Henry the new King of Castile. p. 380 Chap VIII. The great League made in Italy. The Death of Pope Nicholas. Calixtus succeeds him. War of Granada. King Henry of Castile Mar∣ries Joanna, Sister to the King of Portugal. Earthquakes in Italy. p. 382 Chap. IX. The Prince of Viana flies to Naples. The Kings of Castile and Navarre meet, and conclude a Peace. The War with the Moors. The Death of Alonso, King of Aragon. His Character and Will. John King of Navarre, Inherits the Crown of Aragon. p. 384 Chap. X. The new War at Naples, upon the Death of King Alonso, and Succession of his Bastard Son Ferdinand. Pope Calixtus dies Pius II. succeeds him. Alcazar on the Coast of Africk taken by the King of Portugal. Prodigies in Spain. p. 386 The Twenty Third BOOK. Chap. I. THE Council of Mantua. Beginnings of Tumults in Castile. War at Na∣ples, betwixt the Aragonians and House of Anjou. Scanderberg, Prince of Epirus, comes to the assi∣stance of Ferdinand, King of Naples. p. 401 Chap. II. War renew'd with the Moors of Granada. The Prince of Viana Imprison'd and Releas'd. His Death. The Rebellion of Catalonia; also in Na∣varre. The Kings of France and Castile meet. p. 402 Chap. III. The Catalonians send for Peter, Consta∣ble of Portugal, and Proclaim him Earl of Barce∣lona. The Kings of Castile and Portugal meet. The Rebellion in Castile. D. Beltran de la Cueva, great Favourite to King Henry of Castile, Created a Duke. p. 404 Chap. IV. Proceedings and Defeat of the Rebels in Catalonia. Death of Ismael, King of Granada. Progress of the Rebellion in Castile, and most Villanous Action of the Rebels, who Proclaim Prince Alonso, King. The King and they Disband. p. 406 Chap. V. Peter, Constable of Portugal dies. The Rebels in Catalonia chose the Duke of Anjou for their King. The Battle of Olmedo. The Death of the Queen of Aragon, and Prince Alonso of Castile. The King recovers Toledo. The Rebels of Castile affront the Pope's Legate, and are Ex∣communicated. p. 408 Chap. VI. John, Duke of Lorrain, supports and heads the Rebels in Catalonia for his Father. Ferdinand, Prince of Aragon, declar'd King of Sicily. The Crown of Castile offer'd to the Princess Elizabeth, she refuses it. Peace betwixt the King and Nobles. p. 410 Chap. VII. The Marriage of Ferdinand, King of Si∣cily, with the Princess Elizabeth of Castile, and of the Duke of Guienne with the Princess Joanna, who is sworn Heiress of Castile. Differences betwixt the Knights of Alcantara and their Master, and Troubles in Biscay. The Portugueses take Arzila and Tangier in Africk. p. 412 Chap. VIII. The Tumults and Confusions in Aragon, Sardinia and Navarre. The King of Castile la∣bours to reduce his Rebels. Pope Paul II. dies. Six∣tus IV. chosen. King Alonso of Portugal, takes Arzila and Tangier in Africk. p. 414 Chap. IX. Catalonia reduc'd. Charles, Duke of Guienne dies. Cardinal Borgia, the Pope's Le∣gate, comes into Spain. Interview of the Kings of Castile and Portugal. The Master of Santiago strengthens himself against his Enemies. Barcelona
surrendred to the King of Aragon. p. 416 Chap. X. The Pope's Legate's Practices against King Henry of Castile. Massacre of the Jews. Signal Loyalty of Peter de Peralta. Traiterous Practices of Elizabeth, Sister to King Henry of Castile. A Synod at Aranda. p. 417 The Twenty Fourth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Princess Elizabeth pretends to be reconcil'd to her Brother, and openly aspires to the Crown upon his Indisposition. D. John Pacheco, Master of Santiago, dies. Differences betwixt the French and Aragonians. King Ferdinand goes to Barcelona. Jews Massacred in Sicily. Ferdinand and Elizabeth Proclaim'd King and Queen of Castile. The King of Portugal undertakes the Protection of the Princess Joanna, his Niece. p. 420 Chap. II. The Death of Henry, King of Castile. Ferdinand and Elizabeth Ʋsurps the Crown of Castile from Joanna, the Rightful Heiress, and are Proclaim'd King and Queen. The King of Portugal undertakes the Protection of the Rightful Heiress his Niece. p. 422 Chap. III. The King of Portugal calls himself King of Castile, and is assisted by many of the Nobility; being contracted to Joanna the Rightful Heiress. He takes several Places in Ca∣stile. The French make Peace with England, and engage to assist Portugal against Ferdinand. p. 424 Chap. IV. Prince John of Portugal comes into Castile with Forces to his Father's assistance. The Battle of Toro, betwixt King. Ferdinand and him of Portugal. The latter defeated. The Castilian Nobility forsake him, and he returns home. p. 426 Chap. V. The Tumults of Navarre. The King of Portugal's Zoyage into France. Toro recover'd by the Castiliano from the Portugueses. Several other Places retaken. Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, and Galcazzo, Duke of Milan, murdred. p. 428 Chap. VI. King Ferdinand possesses himself of the Mastership of Santiago in trust, which has ever since continued in the Kings of Spain. War with the Moors of Andaluzia. The King of Portugal, after having Abdicated his Crown, returns home, and is restor'd by his Son. p. 429 Chap. VII. Sardinia entirely reduc'd. The Birth of John, Prince of Castile. The Inquisition first setled in Spain. Peace concluded betwixt France and Castile. The Death of King John of A∣ragon. p. 431 Chap. VIII. Ellenor, Queen of Navarre. The Troubles of that Kingdom, and her Death. The Countess of Medellin raises Tumults in Castile. Portugueses overthrown by the Castilians. Heretical Opinions started, and condemned in Spain. King Fer∣dinand goes into Aragon. p. 434 Chap. IX. Peace concluded betwixt Castile and Portugal. The Turks get footing in Italy, and are again expell'd. King Alon∣so of Portugal dies. Henry, the late King of Castile's Grants vacated by the Cortes, Prince John, Son to King Ferdinand, Sworn Heir of Castile. p. 435 Chap. X. Francis, King of Navarre, comes out of France, is Crowned, and soon after dies. A Conspiracy against the King of Portugal punished, and the Conspirators punished. Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal ratified. Luis XI. King of France dies. p. 437 The Twenty Fifth BOOK. Chap. I. THE beginning of the War with Granada. King Albahazen surprizes Zahara. Alhama taken from the Infidels, and in vain besieged by them again. p. 440 Chap. II. Preparations for carrying on the War against the Moors. Loxa in vain besieged, and that War laid aside for some time. Some Tumults in Galicia. A great slaughter of Christians on the Mountains of Malaga. p. 441 Chap. III. The Moors defeated, and Boabdill, their King taken, and afterwards released. The Affairs of Navarre. Pope Six∣tus dies. Innocent VIII. succeeds him. Marquess del Gasto and Pescara, from whom descended. p. 444 Chap. IV. Alora, and other Places taken from the Moors. Al∣bohardil Ʋsurps the Crown of Granada, and defeats the Earl of Cabra. The Rebellion in Naples. Birth of the Princess Ka∣therine of Castile, afterwards Wife to Henry VIII. King of England. p. 446 Chap. V. The Tumults in Aragon and Catalonia. Several Towns taken from the Moors. A Sedition in Galicia. King Albohar∣dil attacks the Castle, called Albayzin in Granada, and is re∣pulsed. Azamor on the Coast of Africk delivered to the Por∣tugueses. p. 448 Chap. VI. King Ferdinand takes Malaga, and other Places from the Moors. Albohardil, King of Granada, having been de∣feated by the Christians, is expelled by his Subjects, and Boab∣dil Proclaimed King. Mighty Discoveries made by the Portu∣gueses in the East. p. 450 Chap. VII. Tumults in Aragon; the Cities Associate there. The War with the Moors renewed, and several Places taken from them, which they with the same facility recover. Maximilian, King of the Romans, aims to Marry the Princess Elizabeth of Castile. p. 452 Chap. VIII. The Masterships of all the Military Orders in Spain, annexed to the Crown for ever. Three Cities, and other Places ta∣ken from the Moors. Elizabeth, Princess of Castile, Married to Alonso, Prince of Portugal. His, and his Father's Death. p. 453 Chap. IX. The War with the Moors now effectually renewed. The Description of the City of Granada. King Ferdinand lays Siege to it, and Builds a Town for his Army to Quarter in during the Siege, to shew his Resolution not to depart without being Master of that City. p. 456 Chap. X. A mighty Mutiny raised in Granada by a Phanatick Moor. The City surrendred to King Ferdinand. The Cha∣racter of King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth. Their Triumphal Entry into Granada, and Ʋniversal Joy for their Success. p. 457 The Twenty Sixth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Affairs of Britany. The Jews expelled Spain. Pope Innocent VIII. dies. Alexander VI. succeeds him. Navarre pacified. Roussillon and Cerdagne restored to King Ferdinand. p. 460 Chap. II Discoveries and Conquests of the Spaniards in the West-Indies. Controversies arise betwixt the Crowns of Spain and Portugal, concerning their Discoveries. Roussillon and Cer∣dagne restored to King Ferdinand. p. 461 Chap. III. Palma, one of the Canary-Islands Conquered. The Mastership of the three Military Orders annexed to the Crown of Castile. The Original of the Neapolitan War. The Death of Ferdinand, King of Naples. p. 464 Chap. IV. The French invade the Kingdom of Naples. An Ac∣count of Luis Sforcia, Duke of Milan. The French King at Rome. Alonso, King of Naples Abdicates. The French possess themselves of the Kingdom of Naples. p. 465 Chap. V. The League against the French carried on with wonder∣full secrecy. The French King returns home. The Venetians overthrown by the French. King Ferdinand of Naples, suc∣cessful against them, and recovers that Noble City. p. 468 Chap. VI The Death of John II. King of Portugal. The French quite expell'd the Kingdom of Naples. Ferdinand, King of Spain honoured by the Pope with the Title of Catholick King. The posture of Affairs in Portugal under Emanuel, the new King. p. 469 Chap. VII. The Death of Ferdinand, King of Naples. The Em∣peror passes into Italy. The Popes Forces defeated by the Ursini. The Death of the Duke of Gandia. The Marriage of Prince John of Spain. Proposals concerning setling the Kingdom of Naples. p. 472 Chap. VIII. Progress of the Portugueses Discoveries in the East. Peter Covillam, and Alonso de Paira sent to India by Land. Vasca de Gama sent to discover India by Sea with four Ships. His Voyage till he came to Calicut. p. 474 Chap. IX. A short, but particular Account of India, what hap∣pened to Vasco de Gama at Calicut. His bold Enterprize there, and a Relation of his return to Portugal. p. 476 Chap. X. An Account of the Navigation of Vasco de Gama, and of all the Coasts of Africk, as they lay in his way. Of the Island of Zocotora, and of all the Coast of Asia, as far as China; and the Method observed by the Portugueses in Sailing thither. p. 478 The Twenty Seventh BOOK. Chap. I. THE Death of the Prince of Castile. Of Charles VIII. King of France. Matches of two Daugh∣ters of Spain. The Prince of Salerno expelled Naples. France and Spain agree. Hierom Savonorola burnt at Florence. p. 480 Chap. II. The King of Portugal sworn Heir to the Crown of Castile. Elizabeth his Queen, delivered of a Son, dies. The Duke of Milan expelled his Dominions. Ʋniversity of Alcala founded. Rebellion of the Mountain Moors. p. 481 Chap. III. The Birth of the Emperor Charles V. The French possess themselves of the State of Milan, and take the Duke, and his Brother, the Cardinal. The great Year of Jubelee 1500. The League betwixt France and Spain. Cefalonia taken from the Turks. p. 484 Chap. IV. King Ferdinand's double dealing. The Princess Ma∣ry of Castile, Marry'd to the King of Portugal. The French
and Spaniards jointly subdue the Kingdom of Naples. Actions of the Great Captain. p. 486 Chap. V. The French and Spaniards fall at variance about divide∣ing their Conquest. The Description of the Kingdom of Naples. Frederick, King of Naples, puts himself into the French King's hands. French perish by Pestilence and stress of Weather. The coming of the Arch-Duke into Spain. p. 488 Chap. VI. Further Actions of the Great Captain at Naples. The Duke of Calabria, contrary to Articles, sent into Spain. The French and Spanish Generals consult their Kings, and have a Conference to adjust Differences in the division of Naples. The beginning of the War betwixt them. p. 490 Chap. VII. The Arch-Duke of Austria, and Princess his Wife, sworn Heirs of Aragon. He goes away for Flanders. The Spaniards offer Battle to the French; several small Actions betwixt them. The Spaniards decline in Calabria, are defeat∣ed. p. 492 Chap VIII. Great Booty taken by the Spaniards; as also the Sieur de la Palisse. A Combat betwixt, 13 French and as many Itali∣ans. Several losses of the French. The Marques del Gasto comes over to the Spaniards. p. 494 Chap. IX. The Peace concluded by the Arch-Duke with France. It takes no effect. Succours from Spain arrive at Naples. The Lord Aubigni defeated and taken. p. 496 Chap. X. The Battle of Cirinola, and great overthrow of the French. Almost all the Kingdom of Naples subdued by the Great Captain. His Reception into that Noble City. p. 497 The Twenty Eight BOOK. Chap. I. THE Siege of Gaeta. The Death of Pope Alexan∣der VI. Pius III. chosen. Practices of the Spaniards. The French invade Roussillion. p. 501 Chap. II. The French Besiege Saulses, or as the Spaniards call it, Salsas. The Siege raised. Nineteen Sail of Infidels destroyed. Pope Pius III. dies. Julius II. chosen. The French Army marches thro' Italy. Two Defeats given them. p. 502 Chap. III. The City Gaeta surrendred. A Truce betwixt France and Spain. The Prefect of Rome submits to Spain. The Nobi∣lity of Naples swear Allegiance to Spain, and several Cities of Italy sue for its Protection. Truce for 3 years betwixt France and Spain p. 505 Chap. VI. Perfidiousness of Duke Valentine, who is as perfidiously sent into Spain by the Great Captain, contrary to his Promise, and he ill represented to the King. Projects of Peace betwixt France and Spain come to nothing. p. 507 Chap. V. The League betwixt the Emperor, the Arch-Duke, and King of France. The League against the Venetians. The Death of King Frederick of Naples, and Queen Elizabeth of Castile. Contention about the Government of Castile, betwixt King Ferdinand, and King Philip. Treaties with France. p. 509 Chap. VI. King Ferdinand becomes odious to his People. The posture of Affairs in Italy. The Emperor, and King Philip of Castile, Ratifie the Peace with France. King Ferdinand a∣grees with the French King. p. 511 Chap. VII. Mazalquivir in Africk taken from the Moors. The Nobility of Spain divided, for and against King Philip. The Agreement made betwixt the two Kings, Ferdinand and Phi∣lip. The latter in England. p. 513 Chap. VIII. The Affairs of Portugal. A bloody Mutiny at Lis∣bon. King Ferdinand Marries Queen Germana, King Phi∣lip comes into Spain, and declares against the Treaty with King Ferdinand. Death of Christopher Columbus. p. 515 Chap. IX. The Spaniards and Flemings at variance upon their first Meeting. King Ferdinand raises Forces, pretending to rescue his Daughter. Many forsake him, and he is forced to quit Castile. An Interview of the two Kings. p. 517 Chap. X. The two Kings of Spain agree, and join in League. Joanna, King Philip's Queen, Distracted thro' Jealousie. Trou∣bles in Castile. King Ferdinand and his Queen go to Zaragoca. Jealeusie started against the Great Captain. King Philip dies. p. 519 The Twenty Ninth BOOK. Chap. I. THE Settlement made by the Nobility of Castile after the Death of King Philip. The Catholick King goes over to Naples. His Reception in that City. No set∣tlement in the Government of Castile. Amidst their Confusions, Duke Valentine makes his escape. p. 522 Chap. II. Queen Joanna departs from Burgos. Is wholly inca∣pable of having any part in the Government. The Affairs of Naples. Queen Joanna brought to Bed of a Daughter at Tor∣quemada. Great Disorders in Castile. p. 524 Chap. III. The Death of Duke Valentine, and Troubles in Na∣varre. The Treaty betwixt the Emperor, and King Ferdi∣nand. The Great Captain courted to Command the Venetian and Pope's Forces. King Ferdinand settles the Affairs of Na∣ples. p. 526 Chap. IV. The King of France enters Italy with an Army to re∣duce Genoa, has an Interview with King Ferdinand, who returns to Castile. The Spaniards defeated in Africk. The Emperor offended at King Ferdinand. p. 528 Chap. V. The Designs of bringing Prince Charles into Spain. King Ferdinand in Andaluzia to settle that Country. Penon in Africk, taken by the Spaniards. The Portugueses loosers at Azamor, in that part of the World, yet relieve Arzila. p. 530 Chap. VI. Discovery of Conspiracies in Spain. The Soldan's Fleet worsted in India. Death of Henry VII. of England, Henry VIII. succeeds him. p. 532 Chap. VII. The Cardinal of Spain takes Oran in Africk. The War against the Venetians, and their losses. They recover Pa∣dua, and other places. p. 534 Chap. VIII. The accord betwixt the Emperor and King Ferdi∣nand. Bugia and Tripoly, in Barbary, taken by the Spani∣ards; and Goa in India, by the Portugueses. p. 536 Chap. IX. The War in Italy. The Pope grants the Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples to King Ferdinand. D. Garcia de Toledo defeated and kill'd at Gelves. p. 538 Chap. X. Some Cardinals revolt from the Pope. Bolonia taken by the French. The revolted Cardinals Summon a General Council. p. 540 The Thirtieth BOOK. Chap. I. AFFAIRS of India. The Pope Summons a Council to meet at S. John Lateran. The League betwixt the Pope, King of Aragon, and the Venetians. The War in Italy. p. 543 Chap. II. The Siege of Bologna. The King and Queen of Na∣varre Excommunicated. The Venetians recover Bergamo and Bressa, and are overthrown by the French. p. 545 Chap. III. The famous Battle of Ravenna. That City surren∣dred to the French. Scandalous Proceedings of the Mutinous Cardinals, and opening of the Lateran Council. p. 547 Chap. IV. The War in Navarre. King Ferdinand possesses him∣self of that Kingdom. The Affairs of Italy, The Great Cap∣tain stopp'd from going thither. p. 549 Chap. V. The Siege of Pamplona. The Viceroy of Naples takes the City Bressa. Duke Maximilian Sforcia recovers Mi∣lan. King Ferdinand falls Sick. p. 551 Chap. VI. Pope Julius dies. Leo X. succeeds him. The Truce betwixt Spain and France. The War in Navarre, and Revo∣lutions at Genoa. p. 553 Chap. VII. The defeat given the French by the Swisse, near No∣vara. The Viceroy vanquishes the Venetians, near Vincenza. Actions of the English and Portugueses. Venice Canonaded. p. 555 Chap. VIII. The Death of the Queen of France. Truce betwixt France and Spain prolong'd. The Affairs of Portugal. p. 557 Chap. IX. The Kingdom of Navarre united to that of Castile. The Affairs of the Portugueses in India. Their defeat on the Coast of Africk. p. 559 Chap. X. The King of France recovers Milan. The Swiss overthrown. Death of the Great Captain, and of Ferdinand, King of Spain. p. 561
THE HISTORY OF SPAIN. The First BOOK. CHAP. I. Of the first Peopling of Spain by Tubal, of the Fruitfulness of the Soil, its Situation and Circumference; and of its principal Mountains and Rivers. TƲbal, the Son of Japheth, was the first Man that Peopled Spain after the Flood. Many Tubal in Spain. grave Authors testify that he planted several Colonies in this part of the World, and governed Spain with Piety and Justice. The motive of his coming was this. In the Year 131. (according to the best computation) after the Deluge, the Sons of Adam, having, at the instigation of the haughty Nimrod, attempted to build the famous Tower of Babel in contempt of God's Omnipotence, were dispersed and scattered over the Face of the Earth. One Language being before common to all, through the just Judgment of the Almighty, there arose among them such a Confusion of Tongues, that not able longer to converse or understand one another, they were obliged to part Companies, and spread abroad into several Countries. The World was divided among the three Sons of Noah, after this manner. To Shem was allotted all Asia beyond Euphrates Eastward, as also the Country of Syria and Palestine. To Ham was assigned from Babylon Westward, the three Arabia's, Egypt, and all Africk. The Portion of Japheth, and his Posterity, was that part of Asia which lies North of the Mountains Taurus and Amanus, and all Europe. The Earth being thus divided, the Children of Japheth setled themselves in several Provinces, and Tubal who was his Fifth Son, was sent to the farthest Regions Westward, that is, to Spain, where he founded the Spanish Monarchy, which continues to this time. This is that Empire which in all Ages has afforded Men Famous, both in Peace and War, which has been blessed with Plenty and Pro∣sperity, and which has always furnished extraordinary matter to imploy the greatest Pens: and yet it has ever wanted Writers to celebrate the great actions and heroick atchieve∣ments performed by its People. This defect has given many the boldness to write Romances and Poetical Fictions rather than true Histories; and has moved me with that little Learning, and small talent I have attained, to attempt this great Work, rather for the sake of truth than in hopes of any honour or reward, which I expect not from Man, nor can any be proportion∣ed to the labour of this Undertaking. I will not fill a Volume with Preambles; but fall to the real matter I have in hand; and in order thereunto, it will be convenient in the first place to give some account of the Soil and Product of Spain, of its Situation, Extent, Division, Mountains and Rivers, as also of the Language and Customs of the Inhabitants. The Country of Spain is no way inferiour to any of the best in the World, either in regard of Descrip∣tion of Spain. the Climate, or of the Plenty of all things necessary for Life, which it abundantly produces; or of the great quantity of Gold and Silver, and other Metals, and precious Stones; which are found in it. It is not scorched with the violent heat of the Sun as Africk, nor so subject to stormy Winds, Frost, and Damps as France, but being seated between both enjoys a greater tempe∣rature
than either, so that the heat of the Summer and Winter, Frosts and Rain, renderit so fruitful, that it not only abundantly supplies the Natives, but also furnishes other Coun∣tries; its Product being whatever is necessary for the support of human Life, and satisfaction of Man's Pride and Ambition. The Fruit is most delicious to the tast, the Vines exuberant, and the Wines generous. The Plenty of Corn, Honey, Oyl, Cattle, Sugar and Silk, is ex∣traordinary; but the quantity of Wooll is beyond measure. There are Mines of Gold and Silver, and Veins of Iron; transparent Stones like Looking-Glasses, as also many Quarries of rich Marble of several Colours. No Country yields more Vermillion, especially about Ama∣den, a Town antiently called Sisapone, among the People formerly known by the Name of Oretani. The Soil in several places varies, some produces Woods, some Corn, and some is bare; for the most there are but few Rivers and Springs, but the ground is of that goodness it commonly yields twenty or thirty for one increase, some good years eighty for one; yet this is but very rare. In many parts of Spain, there are barren Mountains, and some bare and stony Hills, which have something of deformity. This is mostly in the Northern Parts, for the Southern are fruitful and pleasant. Along the Sea-Coast there is plenty of Fish, which is very scarce in the Inland, by reason there are but few Rivers, and fewer Lakes. Never∣theless there is no part of the Country that is wholly fruitless. Where no Corn grows there is plenty of Grass to feed Cattle, of small Rushes whereof Cordage is made for Shipping; and of large Rushes to make Mats, and for other uses. The Horses are so fleet, that it gave oc∣casion to the Poets to feign they were ingendred by the Wind. In fine Pliny himself testifies, that all near the Sea-Coast, Spain is the best and most fruitful of all Countries, except Italy, which it exceeds in the temperature and pleasantness of its air, and doubtless were there not want of rain some Summers, it were far beyond all the Provinces of Europe and Africk. Now in our Age, that the Spaniards have made their way to the East and West-Indies, it abounds in all manner of Riches, and may be said to exceed all other Nations. The quantity of Gold, Silver, precious Stones, and other things of great value, that have been brought hither is so great, if related, it would seem incredible; yet which is much to the honour and advantage of our Nation, and the no small benefit of others who are partakers of our Riches and Plenty. Spain is the most Western part of Europe, it is divided from France by the Pyrenean Hills Its Situa∣tion and Form. and from Africk by the narrow Streights of Gibraltar. The form of it is that of an Oxes Hide extended (as represented by Geographers) encompassed on all sides by the Sea, except on the side of the Pyrenean Mountains which run from Sea to Sea, and expire in two Promontories, one upon the Ocean, or Bay of Biscay, called Olarso, near Fuenterabia, the other in the Me∣diterranean, formerly called Veneris Promontorium, from a Temple of that Goddess that stood there; now the Christian Name is Cabo de Cruces, or Cape Crosses. From this Cape, which is the limit of Gallia Narbonensis, the Coast runs South-West along the Mediterranean, and makes one of the sides of Spain, the length whereof is 270. Leagues Coasting, for taken in a streight line it is less. Note that I allow four Italian Miles to each Spanish League. On this side of Spain is Colibre, an ancient City of Gallia, at present more noted for its antiquity and the conveniency of its Harbour, than for the number of its Inhabitants, which is but incon∣siderable, or for its value being extreamly poor. After Cape Venus, or Cruces, which is near Colibre, follow the two Capes, called formerly Lunarium, and Ferrarium, or Tenebrium; making the Mouth of the River Ebro. In this interval is the Mouth of the River Lobregat, which runs red into the Sea, and thence was called by the ancients Rubricatus, that is ruddy. On this same side stand the Cities Bercelona, Tarragona, Tortosa, and Monviedro, the formerly famous Saguntum: the Goths, by reason of its ruins, called it Murvetrum, that is Old Wall, a place well known for its fidelity to the Romans, and for its destruction. After Monviedro follows Valencia, the mouth of the River Xucar, Denia, and Cape Gatas, so called from the many Agates there found. The Greeks called it Promontorium Charidemum, which signifies gracious, believing those Stones did win the good will of men, and made them Friends. Next is Almeria, which some believe to be built out of the ruins of the ancient Abdera, others are of opinion it is the ancient Ʋrci, seated among the Bastetani in the Territory of Baça Still running along that Coast there follows Malaga, and then the Mouth of the Streights, for∣merly called Heraclea, or Calpe, now Gibraltar. Peter Mantuanus in his Annotations upon the History of Mariana, proves out of Strabo and other Authors, that Tarifa was not called Tartessum, but that this name was given to Cadiz the City of Carteia, and another City that stood in an Island made by the Mouths of the River Betis. Next is Tartessum, (commonly known by the name of Tarifa) whence once the whole Streight was called Tartessiacum. This Streight was also called Herculeum from Hercules, who is reported to have endeavoured to stop it up, and join the two Continents. It is also called Gaditanum from Cadiz, in Latin Gades, an Island on the right hand coming out of the Streights. This name was given to Cadiz from a Carthaginean word, signifying a Fence (as does the Hebrew word Gheder) because it stands as a Bank to bear off the swelling Waves of the Sea. This Island was formerly 700. paces distant from the Coast of Spain, and had 200. Leagues in Circumference; at present it is but Three Leagues in length, and is joined to the Continent by a Bridge, so little is the distance. From the Mouth of the Streights to Cape Finisterre (formerly Nerium Promontorium) Sailers reckon 226. Leagues, because Cape St. Vincent (formerly Promontorium Sacrum) which is
opposite to the Pyrenean Mountains, and makes the greatest distance in Spain, running far out into the Sea stretches out the extent of that Coast much longer than if it could be gone in a strait line. On this Coast facing the Ocean are seated Sevil upon the Banks of the River Gua∣dalquivir, and Lisbon on the Tagus, Cities not inferiour to many of the best of Europe for Greatness, Populousness and Trade. The third side of Spain lying East and West, con∣tains 134. Leagues, not in a strait Line, as Pomponius Mela thought, but full of Creeks and Bays. The chief Ports in that Part are Corun̄a, Bilbao, Laredo and Santander. The length of the Pyrenean Mountains which form the fourth side of Spain, bending in towards it, and running from the Ocean to the Mediterranean N. W. and S. E. is 80 Leagues. Such as have passed over the highest Mountain of Cantabria called St. Adrian, report that from thence both Seas may be seen, but they may take their own Fancies and Imaginations for Truth. Between Biscay and Navarre at the Place called Roncesvalles, (famous for the great Slaughter Rivers and Mountains of Spain. of the Nobility of France made there when Charlemaign Invaded Spain) a ridge of Hills spring∣ing from the Pyreneans runs to the Westward, and leaves on the Right Hand the Cantabri and Province of Asturias, then cuts Gallicia in the middle, and forms Cape Finisterre butting out far into the Sea. By this Mountain are divided the Ʋltramontani from the Citramontani, or those beyond from those on this side the Mountains. From these Mountains springs that formerly called Idubeda, now Oca, taking the Name of the ancient City Auca, whose Ruins are to be seen near Villafranca, about 5 Leagues from Burgos. This Mountain rising near the Spring of the River Ebro, on the Borders of Asturias, where is a Town called Fontibre, or the Fountains of Ebro, and running down by Bribiesca and the Arevaci, near Mount Orbion and Moncayo passes along between Calatayud and Daroca, and ends in the Mediterranean not far from Tortosa, from which City, that part of these Mountains takes Name. From this Mountain Idubeda or Oca, begins that of Orospeda, which at first rises so leasurely it is scarce perceivable, but further on lifts its Head, and forms the Mountains of Molina, then those of Cuenca, where on the Left-Hand are the Springs of the River Xucar? and on the Right those of Tagus, both noted Streams. Next follow the Mountains of Consuegra, near which in the Plains, formerly called Laminitani, now of Montiel are the Fountains of Guadiana. Hence it goes on to Alcaraz and Segura, where in different places spring the Rivers of Segura, (for∣merly Tader) Guadalquivir running towards different Seas. At Caçorla this Mountain Orospeda divides it self into two Branches, one of them opposite to Murcia, expires in the Sea near Muxacra, or Murgis; on the Right-Hand whereof are the Bastetani, so called from the City Basta, now Baça, on the Left are the Contestani, ancient People of Spain, whose Metropolis now is Murcia. The other stretches it self towards Malaga, and joyning to the Mountains of Granada, runs beyond Gibraltar and Tarifa as if it designed to pass the Streight into Africk. From Orospeda near Alcaraz, rise the Mountains Mariani, vulgarly called Sierra Morcna, the foot whereof all along almost as far as the Ocean, is washed by the River Guadalquivir, which at Anduxar cuts Andaluzia in the middle, runs by Cordova, Italica, and Sevil, and falls into the Ocean near the Place formerly called Templum Luciferi, now to St. Lucar. At present this River has but one Mouth, in ancient Times it is said to have had two; for Nebrixa and Asta which the Ancients placed on the Island of Guadalquivir, are now two Leagues from the Mouth of it. Not far from the rise of Orospeda, and near Moncayo, in the midst of a great Plain other Mountains lift up their Heads, which no doubt are Branches of the Pyreneans, as all others that cross Spain are. The rise of this is scarce perceivable at first, but for the fall of several Waters, and because the River Duero, whose Source is in the Pelendones, and whose Course is Southward as far as Soria, it is there by them turned away to the Westward. A∣mong ancient Authors I find no mention of these Mounts, at present they have several Names, taken for the most part from the Neighbouring Cities, as of Soria, Segovia, and Avila. Ca∣stile the greatest Province of Spain, is by these Mountains divided into the Old and the New. Hence they run on near Coma and Placentia, are watered on the Left by the River Tagus, and passing on, part Portugal into two almost equal Portions. They expire at Sintra, which is on Mount Tagrus, seven Leagues to the Northward of Lisbon, where they form in the Ocean the Cape called by Solinus, Promontorium Artabrum. CHAP. II. Of the Ancient and Modern Division of Spain, of the Languages used there, and of the Customs of the Spaniards. SPain was divided by the Romans into three Parts, Lusitania, Betica, and Tarraconensis. The Ancient and Mo∣dern divisi∣on of Spain. Lusitani Inhabited the farthest parts of Spain Westward; their Limits were the Rivers Duero on the North, and Guddiana on the South, and a Line drawn from that part of Du∣ero which is opposite to Simancas to Puente del Arçobispo, and thence through the Oretani, which was that part where Almagro now stands, to the Banks of Guadiana; which Line parted
them from the Province Tarraconensis in such manner, that within Lusitania was compre∣hended the Country about Avila, Salamanca, Soria, and other Places now belonging to Ca∣stile. Betica or Andalusia, is shut in on three sides by the River Guadiana and the Sea, as far as Murgis or Muxacra, a Town near the Promontory Charidemum, or Cape Gatas, from whence a Line drawn to Castulon and the Oretani, where stands the rich Town of Almagro makes the fourth side towards the East. All the remaining part of Spain was included in the Province Tarraconensis, so called from the noble City Tarragona a Colony of the Scipio's, which for many Years was the Metropolis of the Roman Empire in Spain, where they kept their Courts, and the Majesty of their Government resided. St. Isidorus following the division made by Constantine the great, which is to be seen in Sextus Rufus, subdivides this Province in∣to Tarraconensis, Carthaginensis and Gallicia; but does not assign the Limits of each; and it is no wonder, for these Provinces were often lessened or enlarged, according to the will of those who Commanded. All this Province Tarraconensis is also known by the Name of Hispania Citerior, that is the hither Spain, as also Lusitania and Betica, are comprehended within the Ʋlterior or further; for Pliny and other learned Men oppose that Opinion which assigns the River Ebro for the Bounds of the two Spains, tho' doubtless once it was so. Both these Pro∣vinces at present have several new Names, which it would be troublesome to reduce to any certainty, but may all be comprehended under five Kingdoms, which were Erected as the Moors were driven out of Spain. The Kingdom of Portugal was Founded by the French, and their Chief Henry, who was of the House of Lorrain, tho' Born at Besançon in Burgundy. Peter Mantuanus says he was of the House of Burgundy. His Father-in-law, King Alonso the VI. of Castile, gave him in Dower with his Daughter Teresa, the City of Porto at the Mouth of the River Duero, and some other Towns. And some Authors are of Opinion, that the Name of Portugal was then compounded of Porto and Gallia; others, and those more Learn∣ed, say it came from the Place called Cale, now Caya, and Porta. Portugal reaches farther in length than the ancient Lusitania, for taking in the River Duero, it contains the fruitful Fields as far as the River Minho, and its length along the Sea-coasts is no less than 117 Leagues; but it is less in breadth than the ancient Lusitania, and beginning towards the East a little above Bragança, in the North it reaches to the City Beja on the Banks of Guadiana, which River shuts it in on the South. To the N. E. part of Portugal joyns the Kingdom of Leon, the second of the six Provinces spoken of. This Kingdom takes its Name from the City Leon the Head and Metropolis thereof; it contains all Galicia and Asturias de Oviedo, which reach from the River Mearo, and Town of Ribadeo, to the Port of Llanes. More∣over, there belongs to the Kingdom of Leon all that part of Old Castile, which lies between the Wood of Pernia, and the River Carrion till it comes to Pisuerga, and falls into Duero, then passing Duero, another River called Hera and Regamon, that falls into it make the Bounds of this Kingdom. Lastly, a Line drawn betwixt Salamanca and Avila over the tops of the Mountains to the Borders of Portugal. These were formerly the Limits of the Kingdom of Leon. In process of time there was added to it all the Province of Estremadura, so called, because for many Years it was the extream or farthest part of what the Christians possessed. Sometime this Kingdom reached as far as Merida in Lusitania, and Badajoz in Betica. The Kingdom of Navarre, the third of the five in order, is among the People formerly called Vascones. This Kingdom on one side is Bounded by the Pyrenean Hills, and part of that which runs to Cape Finisterre, on the other sides by the River Aragon, or Arga towards the South, and on the West, by another small River that falls into Ebro below Calahorra, and by part of the River Ebro; this is to be understood of that part beyond Ebro, for the Kings of Navarre Possessed by way of Dower, the Town of Tudela of Navarre, and other Places adjacent. Tho' this Kingdom be small, and so ill Peopled, that at present it contains not a∣bove 40000 Families, I thought fit to name it among the principal Parts of Spain, because the ancient Vascones, Inhabitants thereof, by their own Valour, without any Assistance, recovered that Country from the Moors, and erected a Kingdom, which lasted till the me∣mory of our Fathers, and often so enlarged their Territories, that Sepulchres of their Kings are still seen in the City Najara, and in many Places far distant from Navarre are still the Monuments of their Sovereignty. Some derive this Word Navarre, from another like it, which is Navaerria, which being made up of the Biscain and Spanish Languages, signifies, a Plain Country. The Castilians call Plains, Navas; the Cantabri call the Land, Erria, which put together, signifies, Plain Land; this is a witty, and not contemptible Fancy. We in this History call the People and Kingdom of Navarre, Vascones in Latin. It is divided into six Parts or Liberties, which are that of Pamplona, of Estela, of Tudela, of Olite, and of Sangu∣essa. The first called Ʋltrapuertos, the chief Town whereof is called St. John de Pie de Puer∣to, is the only one that remains united to the Lordship of Bearn. The Kingdom of Aragon is divided into Catalonia, Valencia and Aragon, properly so called; on the South, East, and North, it is encompassed by the Mediterranean Sea, that part of the Pyrenean Mountains where formerly inhabited the Ceretani, now Cerdania, and the Borders of Navarre. On the West it is divided from Navarre by the River Ebro, and from thence forward, by a crooked Line drawn by Tarraçona, Daroca, Hariça, Tiruel, Xativa, and Origuela, to the Mouth of the River Segura, which is between Alicant and Carthagena, where it reaches to the Sea, and parts the Dominion of Aragon from the rest of Spain. The People of Aragon enjoy Privi∣leges,
and are Governed by Laws far different from the other People of Spain, most tend∣ing to Curb the excessive Power of their Kings. The Name of Aragon is derived from Tarraco, which is Tarragona, or what is most likely, from the River Aragon, now Arga, which runs through that part whence first the Borders of this Kingdom began to be enlarged. Under the Kingdom of Castile, (so called from its many Castles, and which is not only the largest, but most Fertile and Beautiful of all Spain, and inferiour to no other Province) is comprehended that part of Asturias, called de Santillana, and all Cantabria, formerly a small Province, as not reaching to the Pyreneans, but afterwards inlarged, as appears by the City called Cantabria, which its supposed was betwixt Logron̄o and Viana, on the Banks of Ebro, upon a high Clift, to this day called Cantabria. Besides, St. Eulogius Martyr, speaks of the River Cantaber, which is believed to be Ega or Ebro, into which falls the River Aragon, which proves that Cantabria was once larger than Ptolemy makes it, and than that part we now call Biscay is. The Lordship of Biscay is divided into Biscay, Guipuscoa, Alaba, and the Moun∣tains, in Biscay which stretches along the Sea from Portugalete to Hondarroa, are the Towns of Bilbao and Bermeo. The Sea-coast of Guipuscoa reaches from Biscay to Fuenterabia, within its Liberties, besides St. Sebastian, and the Port of Guetaria are Salinas, Tolosa, the City Vitoria, and Mondragon, Towns of Alaba. In Castile, we call all that are of that Lordship and use that Language, Biscainers, as we do all the Subjects of the House of Austria in Gallia Belgica, Flemings, though Flanders be but a small part of that Dominion. Besides this, the Kingdom of Castile comprehends many Cities of Old Castile, among them Burgos, Segovia, Avila, So∣ria and Osma. The Kingdom of Toledo is also part of it, and is now called New Castile, for∣merly Carpetania; through it runs the River Tagus, the most noted of Spain for its golden Sands: the sweetness of the Water, fruitfulness and beauty of the Fields it washes, it runs towards the West, but turns somewhat Southward, as do also the Rivers Duero, Guadiana and Guadalquivir; Tagus runs by Toledo, a City seated in the midst of Spain, the Ornament and Fortress of it, strong by Nature, remarkable for its Beauty, and the Wit of its Inha∣bitants, famous for its Zeal in Religion, and Learning, and happy for the Serenity of its Air. And tho' the Ground it stands on be Barren and Rocky, it is abundantly provided from the Neighbouring Country; the River almost girds it about, being penned in betwixt two high Mountains, which is a wonderful Work of Nature; only on the North side there is left open a steep and rough way into the City. Beyond Toledo; on the Bank of the same Ri∣ver is Talavera, by Ptolemy called Libora, a populous and plentiful Town; then running on Tagus cuts Lusitania in two, and being increased by many Rivers falls into the Sea near the City of Lisbon. Within this same part of Spain is included the Province Carthaginensis, in which are Carthago Spartaria, (now called Carthagena) Murcia, Cuenca and the Celti∣beri, whose Metropolis was Numantia, besides the Mancha of Aragon, or the Contestani. Moreover, to the Kingdom of Castile belongs the Province Betica, now Andaluzia, in which are Sevil, Cordova and Granada, formerly Iliberis, or at least Iliberis was very near it, as appears by one of the Gates of Granada, to this day called Elvira, and a Mountain hard by of the same Name. All the Spaniards at present use one Language, which we call Castillian, and is compounded of many other Tongues, especially the Latin, which appears by the Name it bears, being Language of Spain. called Romance, and its so great affinity, beyond the Italian, for that Latin and Spanish either in Prose or Verse, agree in the very words and manner of Composition. The Portugeses have a Language peculiar to themselves, being a mixture of the French and Castillian. The People of Catalonia and Valencia, use a distinct Language, very like that of Languedoc. On∣ly the Biscainers still retain their mother and barbarous Tongue, void of all Elegancy, total∣ly different from any other in Spain; but the Ancientest, and that which was formerly used throughout the Kingdoms before the coming of the Romans, who spread their Language where-ever they Conquered. Others affirm the Language of Biscay was always peculiar to that Province, and Strabo says, it was not one Tongue, or one sort of Character that was used throughout Spain. It is not material to dispute which of these Opinions is best grounded. The Manners and Customs of the Spaniards in former Ages were Rude and Barbarous, Customs of the Spaniards. their Nature seemed to have more of wild Beasts than Men. They were remarkable for Se∣crecy, no Rack being of force to draw a Secret from them; their Inclinations were restless and propense to Novelty, of Body they were Active and Nimble, given to Superstition, and the Worship of their false Deities, averse to Learning, tho' of sharp Wits; so that when improved by seeing other Countries, they made appear they were inferiour to none for clear Judgments, excellent Memories, or Elegancy and Copiousness of Words. In War they were more Couragious than Politick, their Habit plain and course, their Diet much in quantity, but free from Delicacy; they commonly drank Water, and but little Wine; they were rigorous with Malefactors, kind and loving to Strangers; this was in former Ages, for at present there is as great an increase of Vices as Vertues. Learning flourishes as much as in any part of the World; no Country affords greater Rewards of Vertue. The Spaniards are great lovers of Justice, the Magistrates supported by the Power of the Laws, bind together, and unite the greatest, and the meanest and middle Sort, by a certain Tem∣perature of Justice, which has put a stop to Thefts and Robberies, and restrains Men from
Murder, and offering Violence; for none is allowed to Transgress the Divine Laws, or Oppress the Meanest of the People. What is most Glorious, is that it has always preserved the true Religion against all Heresy and Error. The Spaniards after expelling the Moors, have Discovered and Conquered a great part of the World, with incredible Valour and La∣bour; they are naturally very patient of Hardship and Hunger, which has carried them through great Difficulties by Sea and Land. It must be allowed in our Days they are dege∣nerated, and grown more Effeminate, through excess of Plenty, and costly Eating, Drink∣ing, Cloathing, and all other Extravagancies; our vast Commerce with other Nations, who resort on account of our Riches, is the cause of this Mischief, our Strength being decayed, and our Manners deprav'd by the Communication of Foreigners, and the Connivance of Princes, and Dissoluteness of the People; so that many live to the height of Luxury with∣out putting any measure to their Profuseness. Hence we may expect a great change of Fortune, and a mighty Fall of our Grandeur, which ever threatens all great Empires, and ours more especially, as having provok'd many by the Pride and Arrogancy of our Governours. CHAP. III. Of the Fabulous Kings of Spain, of the Geryons, of King Hispa∣lus, and the Death of Hercules, and of Hesperus, Atlas, and Siculus, Kings of Spain. IT is agreed on of all Hands, and beyond dispute, as was said before, that Tubal came to Spain, but it is hard to guess, much more to decide what part of Spain he first Fabulous Kings of Spain. Planted, or where he made his Abode; some say his first Footing was in Lusitania; others, that among the Vascones, now Navarre. The Portugeses bring Setubal, the Vascones, Tu∣dela, as Arguments of his coming into their Countries, from the likeness o the Names of those Places with his. But these are ridiculous and shameless Impositions, as if Setubal could take Name from Coetus and Tubal, whereas Coetus is a Latin word, never heard in Portugal till the time of the Romans, many hundreds of Years after Tubal. Others say, Tarragona and Saguntum were Built by Tubal, but this is no better than the other, and Authors knowing nothing of these Antiquities, have pleased themselves by imposing their Fictions on their Posterity for History; some have done this to honour their Country with such reverend Antiquity; but these Fictions only serve to take off the Credit of the real Chronicles, which would much more illustrate those Places than all their Dreams and Chi∣mera's. The Fables of Noah's coming into Spain, and Founding the Cities Noela and Noega, and his Son Iberus giving his Name to the River Ebro, and the Province of Iberia, are Pleasant, but not Credible; that River and Province, it is more likely, took their Names from the Iberi, a People about Pontus Euxinus, who came into Spain, and after mixing with the Celtae of France, that part of the Country came to be called Celtiberia. There are many more Inventions of this sort, as that the Mountain Idubeda was so called from a Son of Iberus. That Brigus Son of Idubeda, sent Colonies into several Parts, one whereof was Brigia, afterwards called Phrygia in Asia, that his Son Tagus gave his Name to that River; as did, say they, his Successor Betus to the Province Betica, now Andaluzia. Doubtless, the Province took the Name from the River, and the River, I believe, had it from the Hebrew word Beth, which signifies a House, because of the many Buildings that were upon the Banks of it. Thus much may suffice for the fabulous Kings, of whom no Au∣thor of Credit has made mention; but as I have rejected these Fictions, so I will not whol∣ly forbear making some mention of others, which, though scarce credible, some grave Au∣thors have spoken of. Geryon was the first that may be accounted King of Spain, of whom much mention is Geryon the first known King. made by the Greek and Latin Authors. He was no Native, for Geryon in the Chaldean Language, signifies a Stranger; he was the first that discovered the value of Gold there, which before lay about unregarded, and heaped great Treasures, as also he kept great Herds and Flocks of Cattle; for which reasons, he was by the Greeks called Chryseas, that is Golden. He was the first that Lorded it over that People, who before lived dispersed without any Governours, in the manner of wild Beasts; being settled in his Dominion, he is said to have built a Fort near Cadiz, called Gerunda, and a City of the same Name in Catalonia, now Gïrona; this in order to secure himself in his Government, his Power lasted till Osiris the Egyptian, by some called Bacchus, and Dionysius, after Traversing Ethiopia, India, and all Asia, Osiris the Egyptian kills Geryon. where he taught the planting of Vines, and sowing of Corn, came into Spain, and in a bloody Fight defeated Geryon's Forces, and slew him. Geryon was Buried near the Mouth of the Streights, and after worshipped as a God, as appears by the Temple of Osiris, Built in Sicily by Hercules, and his famous Oracle at Padua, which Princes often visited, as
Suetonius affirms. Osiris having thus rescued Spain from the Tyranny of Geryon, thought not fit to punish the Crimes of the Father in the Children, which were three beautiful Sons; to these therefore he gave the Kingdom, appointing who should Govern during their Minority, and then returned into Egypt. These Geryons being come to Age, did not only Tyranize over their Subjects, but meditating Revenge for the Death of their Father, in∣duced Typhon to Murder his Brother Osiris, which he performed, and seated himself in the Throne of Egypt. Orus the Son of Osiris who then Governed Scythia, understanding what had passed, hasts into Egypt, and in revenge of his Fathers Murder slew Typhon; then ga∣thering a great Army, he passed into Spain, and drove the Geryons into the Island of Ca∣diz, where they Fortified themselves. Fearing lest so great an Army should suffer want, if the War were protracted, and desiring to avoid the great Bloodshed that must ensue if they came to a Battle, he offered to decide the Quarrel by his own Person, and sight the three Brothers; They accepted of the Challenge, and were all Slain by him. Their Bodies were buried in the Island, and from thence forward it was called Erithrea, of some People that came Orus, or Hercules, kills the three Sons of Gerion. with Orus, or Hercules from the Red Sea, who, with the Approbation of their General, planted there. This done, Hercules caused vast Stones and other Materials to be cast into the Sea, at the mouth of the Streights, and raised the two Mounts, so famous by the name of Hercules's Pillers; that on the West of Spain is called Calpe, the other in Africk, Abyla. All things being settled to his Mind, he chose Hispalus, one of his Companions, of whose good Conduct he was fully satisfied, to Govern and Reign in Spain, and then went over by Sea to Italy. It is agreed on all Hands, that Hispalus Reigned in Spain. From him Justin affirms, it took the Name of Hispania, only one Letter being changed. Others say, he built Sevil, in Hispalus King. Latin Hispalis. St. Isidorus says it was built by Julius Caesar, and called Julia Romana; per∣haps it was then enlarged and beautified. Plutarch affirms, Spain took its Name from Pan, a Follower of the second Hercules; and was first called Pania, then Spania, others say it was from Hispanus the Son of Hispalus. These are all bare surmises; our Historians write many things of this Hispalus of their own Invention to beautifie their Works; but their be∣ing no certain Account of such Antiquity, it is better to pass it by in Silence than Impose upon the Readers. Authors do not agree about the time of the Death of Hispalus; but after his Days Hercules returned into Spain, where having Governed with Moderation, and Built (as some will have it) the Towns of Julia Lybica, Ʋrgel, Barcelona, and Tarragona; he de∣parted this Life, being of a very great Age. The Spaniards Consecrated him a God, and payed him Divine Honours, raising a Temple where his Body was Buried, and placing Priests therein. Hispalus and Hercules dying without Issue, the latter before his Death, appointed Hesperus, Brother to Atlas, and one of his Compauions, to succeed him. The Fame of this Hesperus's Hesperus. Valour and Vertue gained him such Credit among the People, that of him some Greek and Latin Authors say, Spain was afterwards called Hesperia: tho' others are of Opinion it was from Hesperus the Evening Star. The good Fortune of this King was not lasting; for his Brother Atlas offended that he should be preferred before him, came over into Spain, and having gained the good Will of the Soldiers, soon possessed himself of the Kingdom. Atlas ex∣pells He∣sperus, and Reigns. Hesperus thus forsaken, fled into Italy, where he was Friendly entertained, and soon after constituted Tutor to the young King Coritus, called by others Janus, or Jupiter; wherein he behaved himself so well, that having gained the Affections of that People, he gave his Name to Italy as he had done to Spain, and it was called Hesperia. Atlas jealous of his Bro∣ther's greatness, and fearing he might in time recover his Kingdom, resolved to prevent him. In order hereunto, he raised a mighty Army, and under colour of Honouring them, took the Chief Men of Spain along with him into Italy; but his design was to keep them as Hostages, lest the People in his Absence, should endeavour to cast off a foreign Yoke. At Sea a violent Storm scattered his Fleet, and instead of Landing in Italy, he was forced into Sicily; that Island being exceeding Rich and Fruitful, he left a considerable Number of Spa∣niards to Plant there. This done, he put to Sea again, and arrived in Italy, where he found his Brother Hesperus was Dead; so that there was no difficulty in seizng Coritus King of Tus∣cany, and making himself Master of the Country. Atlas had two Daughters; one of them called Electra, was Married to Coritus, and had Issue Jasius and Dardanus, of whom more hereafter. That his other Daughter called Rome, Built the City Rome, looks more like a Fiction of our Historians than a true History; therefore I will make no further mention of it, no more than of Sicorus, Sicanus, Sicceleus and Lusus, whom our modern Writers reckon a∣mong the Kings of Spain; whereas among the Ancients there is not the least Account of them, nor of Morgetes the Son of Atlas giving his Name to the People of Italy, called Mor∣getes, for which there is no other Authority but framed likeness of Words. Philistius Siracusanus's Authority is sufficient to believe that Siculus, the Son of Atlas, Siculus Son of Atlas Inherits the Crown Governed Spain in his Father's absence, and succeeded him in the Kingdom after his Death. In his time the two Brothers Jasius and Dardanus being at Variance about the Kingdom of Tuscany, by reason of the Death of their Father Coritus, Siculus their Uncle went over with an Army to pacifie them, and by the way Landing in Sicily, is said to have given his
Name to that Island, till then called Trinacria, of the three great Promontories that run out into the Sea. Thence passing over into Tuscany, he endeavoured to reconcile the Bro∣thers; but Dardanus dealing Treacherously, Murdered Jasius, and Siculus in Revenge drove him out of Italy: Dardanus with a great Number of the Aborigines who followed his Fortunes, fled into Asia, where he Built the famous City of Troy. Siculus having settled the Affairs of Italy, and Seated the Son of Jasius on the Throne of Tuscany, returned into Spain; and from this time we find no Account of any other Actions of his, unless we should write the Dreams and Ravings of modern Authors, who also Forge other Kings of Spain up∣en as vain grounds as the former. One of these is Testa, who, they say, built a Town of his own Name, and from him the People of that part of Spain were called Contestani. A∣nother is Romus, to whom is assigned the building of Valencia. The third is Palatuus, from him they write the Palatui, and the City Palencia took their Names. Such another is Eri∣thrus, feigned to have come from beyond the Red Sea. Lastly, among these is Melicola, called also Gargoris, of whom, Justin makes mention. I would not wholly omit the Names of these Kings, such as they are, because learned Men as well as the Ignorant, have stumbled upon them, tho' they are to be looked upon no better than old Women's Tales. I suppose, Justin calls Siculus, Sicorus, which I note, that none may be deceived and imagine, they are two distinct Kings. CHAP. IV. Of the coming of several Nations into Spain, as the Celts, Rhodians, Carthaginians, and Phenicians, also of Abides, and a wonderful Dearth. IT is impossible particularly to assign the Time that each of the above-mentioned Kings Reigned, or in what Year of the World. The nearest we can guess, is, that the Geryons lived about the 4th or 5th Century after the Deluge, and Siculus above 200 Years before the Destruction of Troy. In his Time, or not long after, a great Fleet sailed from Zant, an Island in the Ionian Sea on the West of Peloponnesus, or Morea, and Landing in Spain, they built a strong Town, which they called Zazynthus of their own Country, afterwards, Saguntum, now Monviedro, These People in process of time gathering Strength, spread Saguntum built by the Greeks. farther along the Coast, and at length built the most famous Temple of Diana, from which the Promontory Diaium, now Denia, took Name. In this Temple they placed Idols and Priests, and offered great Sacrifice, to the Admiration of the ignorant Natives, who looked upon them as something more than Men. All the Timber-work was of Juniper, a sort of Wood sweet and incorruptible, in so much, that Pliny affirms it was standing in his Time without the least sign of Decay. After the coming of the Zazynthians, Authors say there came ano∣ther Dionysius, or Bacchus, who was the Son of Semele, about 150 Years before the Trojan War, and in the farthest parts of Spain, betwixt the two Mouths of Guadalquivir, Founded Nebrixa, so called from Nebridae, which in Greek, signifies, Deer-skins, worn by Dionysius and his Followers, especially when they offered Sacrifice. The Name Veneria was afterwards Bachus builds Ne∣brixa. given to Nebrixa. Diodorus Siculus Writes, there were three Dionysii or Bacchi. The first Son of Deucalion or Noah, the same, above called Ostris; the second, Son of Proserpine or Ceres, who was Painted with Horns, to show he was the first that yoak'd Oxen to Plow the Land; the third, the Son of Semele, Bornin Adultery in the City Meros, which signifies, a Thigh; whence the Poets feign that Jupiter bread him in his Thigh. Of him 'tis said, in imi∣tation of the first Dionysius, he Travelled the World, gained many Victories, and delivered Spain from Tyranny and Oppression. About this same time Milico, the Son of Mirica, is said to have had great Power and Authority among the Spaniards; and that his Successors not far from the Place where Baeça now stands, built Castulon among the Oretani, formerly one of the noblest Cities in Spain, now no other Memory of it is remaining but in the Cottages of Gazlona. Dionysius at his departure, left two of his Companions behind, the one Lusus, of whom the Lusitani took Name; the other Pan, whom the ignorant People worshiped as a God, and from him (as Varro and Plutarch will have it) the Country was first called Pania, Lusitani so call'd from Lusus. and after by the addition of one Letter, Spania; Jason the Thessalian desiring to gain Ho∣nour, and Enrich himself, built a great Ship, and taking into it Hercules the Thèban, Orphe∣us, Linus, Castor, and Pollux, and many more, after Pillaging all the Coasts of Asia, came Argonauts in Spain. as far as the Mouth of the Streights, where Hercules built a Fort called Heraclea, now Gibral∣tar; whence they made Incursions, Robbing the Country, and had several Encounters with the Natives; thence they Sailed about to Saguntum, and were well received, as being all Greeks. From Saguntum they went over to Majorca, and took Bocorris the King of that Island; but understanding there was no Gold there, having taken in Provision, and some
large Oxen, they passed into Italy, where Hercules slew Cacus, and then returned into Greece. Hecateus denies that ever this Hercules came into Spain; but Diodorus, and all other Au∣thors testifie the contrary. To him it is that Virgil attributes the Killing of the Geryons; but this is a Poetical Licence, and great mistake of Times. After the coming of Hercules, and Death of Milico, Gargoris Reigned in Spain, and was called Mellicola, being the first that found out the taking of Honey. In this King's time hap'ned the famous Trojan War; which ended, the remainders of the Greeks and Trojans spread themselves, and Planted in several Parts of the World, and among the rest, in Spain. The first reckoned among those that came, is Teucrus, the Brother of Ajax, who not being permitted by his Father Telamon to Trojaus come into Spain. return home alone, went first to Cyprus, where he built the City Salamina, now Famagosta, and thence passed into Spain, and is there said to have erected another City called Teucria, in the place where Carthagena now stands. Justin and St. Isidorus, both mention his coming to Spain, but not his building any City. But all agree that he passed out of the Streights, and sailing along the Coast, landed in Galicia, where he Founded the City Helene, now Ponteve∣dra; and add that he erected another called Amphilochia, by the Romans called Aquae Calidae, by the Suevi, Auria, now Orense. Next, Tydeus is said to have attempted several parts of the Spanish Coast, but that meeting Opposition, he sailed on to the Northern Coast of Portugal, where betwixt the Rivers Minho and Lima, he Founded the City Tuy, in Latin, Tude or Tyde. Strabo writes, that Mnesteus the Athenian with a Fleet came to the Mouth of the River Be∣lon, now Guadalete, where he built a City of his own Name, and is the same that is now Port St. Mary; and besides, a Temple between the two branches of Guadalquivir, which was cal∣led Oraculum Mnesteum. To conclude, Strabo and Solinus affirm, that Ʋlysses came into Spain, and built the City of Lisbon, from him in Latin called Ʋlysippo; but others reject this Opi∣nion, in regard the ancient Name was Olysippo, not Ʋlysippo, and because there are no Grounds to believe that ever Ʋlysses was there. About this time (according to Justin) Gargoris Reigned over the Curetes, and resided in the Gargoris, or Melli∣cola. Forest of the Tarresii, where Ancients feigned the Titans waged War with the Gods. This King stained all the Virtues with which he was endowed, with the Cruelty he used towards his Grandson Abides. This Child was Born of his Daughter out of Wedlock; the Grand-Father to hide this shame, caused him to be exposed to wild Beasts, who forgetting their Abides's Birth and Educa∣tion. Fierceness, Nursed him with their Milk. Gargoris no way Mollified, caused him to be laid in a Path where Cattle was to pass, to be trod to Death; and having escaped this danger, cast him to Dogs that had been kept Hungry on purpose that they might Devour him; in fine, he was thrown into the Sea, which laid him again on the Shore, where he was Suckled by a Doe. Being grown up, Abides of the nature of his Nurse, became so nimble, that he out ran the swiftest Beasts, and withall so wild, that he lived on the Mountains by Rapine. The neighbouring People having suffered much laid a Toil, into which he fell, and was by them carried to his Grandfather; Gargoris by some natural Instinct, as also by Marks that had been observed in the Body of him when a Child, discovered who he was, and changing his Severity into Love, named him Abides; kept him as long as he lived as became his Grandson, and at his Death appointed him his Heir. Abides being seated on the Throne, sur∣passed His Reign. all his Predecessors in the Administration of the Government; he persuaded his Sub∣jects who before lived dispersed, to gather themselves into Towns and Cities, whereby the Wildness of those People was much Polished, he restored the use of Wine, and manner of Tilling the Ground, which had been long forgot; the People living upon such things as Nature produced. He instituted Laws, erected Tribunals, and named Judges and Ma∣gistrates. By these means he gained the good Will of his Subjects, and purchased great re∣nown among Strangers; and having lived to a great Age, departed this Life, leaving behind an immortal Fame. He was Contemporary with King David; but Justin will have it, that he lived at the same time with the Geryons, and was King only of some part of Spain. It is said his Progeny Reigned for many Years after him, but none of their Actions, or so much as their Names can be found, nor any other remarkable Occurrence for a long Tract of Time; only a most wonderful Dearth that hap'ned, which lasted 26 Years, so that all the Rivers, except Ebro and Guadalquivir were dryed up, and the Earth gaping, the rich People A won∣derful Dearth. who stay'd longest, were deprived of means to fly to other Countries, the Poor having at first withdrawn themselves to the neighbouring Provinces. Thus the greatest part of Spain, especially the Inland was not only strip'd of all manner of Trees, but totally unpeopled, and left Desart. This season being past, and the Land again moistened with Rain, the Na∣tives that had escaped, mixed with other Nations, returned, and restored the Spanish Race, almost extinct. Most of our Authors agree in this Account, but others, and those very Learned, will no way allow of it, and the Reasons they give, are, that no Greek nor Latin Author makes any mention of it, and so remarkable a Transmigration could not have escap∣ed their Knowledge; that it is impossible Ebro and Guadalquivir could have preserved any moisture during so many Years, if we consider how many great Rivers are almost dryed up in one hot Summer; that such a Drought would not cause the Ground to open, but rather fall away all to Dust; as may be seen in Libya, and other parts of Africk, because Moisture unites, and Driness dissipates Bodies. This is what our Historians write; my Opinion is,
that as things at a great distance, are always represented greater than really they are, so it hap'ned in this Dearth, which doubtless, was much less than it is made; and it is probable it Rained sometimes, and so much as might unite the Earth, and preserve the Rivers, yet not enough to produce any sort of Grain or Fruit. The Fame of this Desolation being spread, moved many of the neighbouring People once it was past, to come over with their Stocks and Families to re-people the Country; every one possessed himself of that Part he liked best, and Multitudes resorting from all Parts, thro' their Industry and the great Number of their Off-spring, the Beauty of Spain was again soon restored, the Land improv'd, and many Towns and Cities built. The Celtae, a People of France passing the Pyrenean Mountains, possest themselves of all that part of France which lies on the North The Celtae, a People of France, come into Spain. of Ebro, and East of the River Idubeda, a fertile and pleasant Country, where is now the City Tarracona, and formerly those of Netobriga and Arcobriga. From these Celtae, and the Native Iberi, great part of Spain was called Celtiberia. These People increased and spread far Southward, as appears by Segobriga, Belsino, Ʋrcesia and other Towns, reckoned among the Celtiberi; on the Northern Borders of the Celtiberi were the Arevaci, where are now Osma, and Agreda, the Duraci, Neritae, Pelendones, Presamarci and Cileni, all included under the ge∣neral Name of Celtiberi, and joyned to them by Affinity. It is a received Opinion, that the Rhodians, who were great Sailers, built Rhodope or Rhoda, now Roses, upon a large Bay near the Coming of the Rho∣dians. Foot of the Pyreneans, which in the time of the Goths, was a great City and Bishoprick, tho' now small and inconsiderable. The Rhodians are said to be the first who taught the Spaniards to make Cables, and Weave Rushes for many uses, and also to make Horse-mills to grind their Corn; they were also the first that taught them the use of Copper Coin, which then appeared very ridiculous to the Spaniards. In process of Time, they built a Temple to Di∣ana, and another to Hercules. About 12 Miles from Roses, is Empurias, at the Foot of the Pyreneans, at which Place, about this same time, the Mountain was Fired, whether acciden∣tally or by design, is not known; but certain it is, these Hills by the Greeks were called Pyr, that is, Fire, either by reason of this Accident, or for the great Lightning that is often on the Tops of them. This great Fire melted the Veins of Gold and Silver, which were very plentiful there, and in many other Parts of Spain, in such manner, that those Metals ran down the sides of the Mountain, to the great surprise of the Inhabitants, who admired the Beauty, but understood not the Value of them. But the Fame hereof being spread Abroad, induc'd Foreigners to flock thither, in hopes to gather that neglected Treasure, or to purchase it of the Natives for things of small value. The Phenicians are esteemed the first that durst venture out with great Fleets into the Phenicians build Towns and settled in Spain. open Sea, and steer their Course by the North Star. These having gained the Sovereignty of the Seas from the Rhodians, and Phrygians, are said to have set out from the famous City of Tyre, in quest of the Riches of Spain. What part of Spain they first landed in, Authors do not agree. Aristotle says, the Phenicians were the first, who coming to the Streights∣mouth, purchased of the People of Tartesso, or Tarifa, for Oil, more Silver than their Ships could carry away. It is more likely, this was about the Pyreneans, as being nearer to them, and the Silver, to be some of that melted by the great Conflagration abovementioned. Our Historians relate, that Sicheus commanded one of their Fleets, and got here, those great Riches, which tempted his Brother-in-law Pygmalion, to murther him. This Voyage being for some time laid aside, by reason of the Death of Sicheus, Pygmalion set out with a Fleet from Tyre, and landed among the Turduli, that is, in Andaluzia, at the Place where now stands Almun̄ecar; he built a Town for the security of Trade, calling it Axis, or Exis; and returning home with much Treasure, made afterwards several Voyages, till he came as far as Cadiz; which Island before called Erythrea, from that time was known by the Name of Gadira, that is, a Bulwark, either in respect it is the Bulwark of Spain against the swelling Sea, or in regard of the Fortifications raised by the Phenicians. They also built a Temple to Hercules, on that point of Land which is opposite to the Continent, and is thence called Promontorium Herculeum. The Phenicians grown Rich with the Trade of Spain, and having built Malaga and Abdera, thought of nothing less than possessing themselves of the whole Country. At this same time the Foundation of the City of Rome was laid; Heze∣kiah Reigned in Jerusalem, after Salmanasar King of the Assyrians had extirpated the Kingdom of Israel. This is the same Salamanasor, who laid Siege to Jerusalem, and design∣ing to Conquer the whole World, went with a mighty Army into Egypt, where he was o∣verthrown by Taracho, King of Egypt and AEthiopia. Taracho after that Victory, subdu'd many Kingdoms; Strabo testifies, he passed over into Europe; and our Historians say he came into Spain, where not far from the River Ebro, he built the City Tarragona, which the Scipio's long after rebuilt, and made the Metropolis of the Roman Empire in Spain; which gave occasion not only to the Ignorant, but to learned Authors, and among them, Pliny and Solinus, to attribute the Foundation of it to them. After the Death of Queen Dido, the Power of the Carthaginians increased by Sea and Land. Their chief aim was to extend their Empire in Europe, to this end, they attempt∣ed Carthigi∣nians their undertak∣ings. Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica; but being repulsed by the Natives, thought fit to try their Fortune upon lesser Islands; in order hereunto, directing their Course towards Spain, they
possessed themselves of Iviça, which is an Island girt with Rocks, and difficult of Access, unless toward the South, where is a large and spacious Harbour. This Island is opposite to Cape Denia, about 100 Miles distant from the Coast of Spain; it is small, being not above 20 Miles in Circumference, at that time it was Wild, and covered with Woods of Pine-trees, whence the Greeks called it Pytuissa. It produces great plenty of Salt, the Air is temperate. and the nature of the Soil such, it does not only breed no Vermin or venomous Creatures, but if any are brought thither, they presently die. This is the more wonderful, for that as ancient Cosmographers affirm, near it was another Island, not Habitable, by reason of the Multitudes of Snakes and poisonous Animals, whence it was called Ophiusa, that is, Island of Snakes. We cannot certainly determine which Island this should be, at present; some say it is Formentera, because but two Miles from Iviça; others will have it to be Dragonera, by reason of the likeness of the Names. The most Learned are of Opinion, that a Mountain called Colubre, joyning to the Continent, and opposite to Pen̄iscola, was called in Greek Ophiusa, and in Latin Colubraria; notwithstanding, ancient Geographers place their Ophiusa near to Iviça. The Carthaginians being possessed of Iviça, and having built there a City of the same Name, resolved next to attempt Majorca, and Minorca, distant 30 Miles from one another, and 60 from the Coast of Spain. The Greeks sometime called them Gynesiae, by reason the Inhabitants went Naked, and other whiles, Baleares, for their skill in casting Stones with Slings; but in particular, the greatest was called Clumba, and the lesser, Nura, as An∣toninus testifies, and from him Florian. Before they would attempt to Land, the Carthaginians went round these Islands to view all their Creeks and Harbours, and being terrified by the Beleares Islands. fierceness of the Inhabitants, having lost some of their forwardest Men that durst go a Shore, they despaired of Success there, and stoodover for the Coast of Spain, with a design to make Discoveries, and gain some Footing there. But with little Success, for the People of Saguntum foreseing the danger of such Neighbours, persuaded the Natives to have no Com∣merce with them; which together, with the Distress of their own Country, at that time labouring under Civil Broils, and set upon by the Neighbouring Africans, obliged the Car∣thaginians to return home. Where to appease their Gods, they Instituted an inhuman Sacri∣fice of Young-men, which was afterwards used in Spain, with such Rigour, that in their greatest Distress, they thought none a sufficient Sacrifice, but the King's eldest Son; a Custom taken from the Moabites, and sometimes practised by the Idolatrous Jews. CHAP. V. Of the Age of Argantonius, the Phenicians Attempt to Sub∣due all Spain, but being Repuls'd, sent for Aid to the Car∣thaginians, who Ravage the Country, but sustain great loss from the Natives. ABout the Year 620 before the Birth of Christ, and 132 after the Building of Rome, was the Age of Argantonius, King of the Tartessi, who, according to Silius Italicus's Account, 132. Argantoni∣us's great Age. lived 300 Years. Pliny out of Anacreon, assigns him 150. To him, for his great Skill in War, and long Experience, the People committed the Government, hoping by his Courage and Conduct, to be able to oppose the Designs of the Phenicians, who had now laid aside their Mask, and openly aimed at the Sovereignty of all Spain; having to this effect, passed over from Cadiz to the Continent. They used Policy as well as Strength, sowing Dissention among the Natives, and by that means, had possessed themselves of several Places. The Natives gathering under the Conduct of their King Argantonius, not only check'd the Pheni∣cians, but, as some will have it, drove them out of all the Province of Betica, or Andaluzia, and even out of the Island of Cadiz; a thing the more likely, for that many were gone be∣fore to the relief of their own Country, the City of Tyre being then Besieged by the migh∣ty King Nebuchadnezzar, after he had Taken Jerusalem. This Relief that went from Cadiz, getting into Tyre, was the cause it held out four Years, and Nebuchadnezzar being called away into Egypt, rais'd the Siege; and having subdu'd the greatest part of Africk, resolved Nebuchad∣nezzar said to Con∣quer Spain. to pass over into Spain, as well to possess himself of the Riches of that Country, as to take Revenge for the Relief sent thence to Tyre; he landed his Army near the Pyreneans, and from thence, without any Opposition, rang'd all the Country over till he came to Cadiz. Jo∣sephus says, he Conquered all Spain. The Natives taking Courage, began to make Head; the King fearing to tempt Fortune, and satisfied that he had stretched his Empire to the ut∣most limits of the Earth, loaded with Riches, returned Home, in the Year 171. after the Building of Rome. This comming of Nebuchadnezzar, is much spoken of in the Hebrew Books,
and this gave occasion to affirm, that many Towns in Andaluzia, and the Kingdom of Toledo, which have Hebrew Names, were then Built by the Jews that were in his Army. Among those Places are reckoned Toledo, Escalona, Noves, Maqueda, Yepes, and others of less note; which they say, took their Names from Ascalon, Nobe, Mageddo, and Joppe, Cities of Pale∣stine. Toledo and other Towns whence so call'd. Toledo, they say, is derived from Toledoth, which in Hebrew, signifies Families, that gathered to Build that Place. I will not approve or reject these Opinions, but only note that no ancient Author makes mention of any such thing. Our Historians add, that after the expulsion of the Phenicians, and return of the Babylonians, the Phocenses, Inhabitants of a City so called, in Ionia of the Lesser Asia, tired with the Cruelties of Harpalus Cyrus's Lieutenant in those Parts, sailed to Italy, France, and Spain, in a Fleet of Galleys, whereof, they were the first Inventers. These People landed first in Italy, in the farthest part of Lucania, now called Basilicata, opposite to Sicily, where they built a City called Velia, and thought to settle, but the Air being unwholsom, the Land barren, and the Natives opposing them, part put to Sea again to find a more convenient Habitation. Having toucht at Corsica, they pass'd into France, where they built the City of Marseilles. Another part of them continued their Course along Spain, and beyond the mouth of the Streights, planted in certain Islands, called Aphrodisiae, opposite to Tarifa, where they Built after the manner of Greece; but all these Islands are lost, except one, that was called Junonia. After this, followed the Death of Ar∣gantonius, much about the Year 200. after the Building of Rome. For his greater Honour, they raised a Magnificent Sepulcher with as many Pyramids about it, as Enemies he had Slain with his own Hand; for this, Aristotle says, was the manner of the Spaniards Burying their Dead. Great Revolutions hap'ned after the Death of Argantonius, and Spain like a Ship without Carthagi∣nians their first com∣ing into Spain. a Rudder, or Pilot, was tossed by every Wave. The Fortune of War at first variable, afterwards wholly averse to the Spaniards, deprived them of their Liberty. The coming of the Carthaginians to Spain was the cause of all these Mischiefs, the occasion of their coming shall be related. The Phenicians being increased in Power and Riches, returned to Spain, and repossessed themselves of the Island of Cadiz, designing upon the first Opportu∣nity that should offer, to pass over into the Continent. They wanted a Pretence, and thought none so good, as that of Religion. They asked leave of the Natives, to erect a Temple to Hercules, feigning, he had appear'd and order'd them so to do. Having by this Fraud obtained their desires, they built a Temple in the nature of a Fort; many under co∣lour of Devotion resorting thither, in a small time it grew to the Grandeur of a City; which is supposed to have stood, where now Medina Sidonia is; which the Name Sidon, seems to confirm, and the small distance of only 16 Miles from the Coast of Cadiz. Besides this, they became Masters of other smaller Towns, some Built by themselves, others taken by Force from their Neighbours. From these Places, they made In-roads into the Country, carry∣ing away Men and Cattle, and in a short time possest themselves of the City Turdetum, which stood between Xcres and Arcos. Of this City, the Turdetani, an ancient People of Betica, that extended from the River Guadiana to the Ocean, took Name. The Bastuli reach'd from Tarifa, along the Coast of the Mediterranean to a Town then called Barea, now sup∣posed to be Vera. The Turduli began at the Port of, Mnesteus, now Port St. Mary, and ran North and East, as far as Sierra Morena, and the farthest part of the Province Betica. Livy and Polybius, make the Turduli and Turdetani the same; and most Authors confound the Limits of these People, therefore it will be needless to labour to fix their Bounds, no more than those of the Massieni, Selbisii, Curenses, Lignii, and others, whose Names are found in approv'd Authors: but what Places particularly they Inhabited, can not be assigned. But to return to the Matter in hand, the Natives provok'd by the wrongs they receiv'd from the Phenicians, and growing jealous of the Increase of their new City, held a great Consultation, in which they treated of the Injuries they had received, and Dangers that might ensue from the growing Power of those Stranges. Baucius Capetus, Prince of the Turdetani, was there present, he took upon him with wise Words to raise their drooping Spirits, and did it so Baucius Ca∣petus, Ge∣neral of the Spani∣ards. effectually, that they all presently Voted the War against the Phenicians. They appointed Officers, and gave them Power to raise Men, withal, recommending to all, to be private, that so they might Surprize their Enemies. To Baucius for his great Experience, and the love all the People bore him, they assigned the whole Management of the War. Thus ha∣ving gathered a mighty Army, they fell upon the Phenicians, who where wholly unprovided, and in a short time, took all the Cities they had Built, and those they had Conquered, giving the plunder of all their Riches to the Soldiers. The City Medina Sidonia, whither the re∣mainder of the Phenicians fled, confiding in the strength of the Temple, soon follow'd the fate Phenicians driven in∣to the I∣sland of Cadiz. of the rest, and all within it were put to the Sword. Such was their desire of Revenge, that laying aside all thoughts of Compassion, and Zeal of Religion, they fir'd and laid the Temple level with the Ground. Thus all the Riches they had been many Years heaping, and the stately Buildings they had with great Cost erected, were destroy'd, and nothing left the Phenicians on the Continent, except some few small Towns, which escap'd unregarded, and not because they could make any Opposition. Those of Cadiz, despairing of accommoda∣tion with the Natives, found they must either resolve to quit Spain, or send for Succours
from Abroad. To expect Relief from Tyre in that Distress, was too tedious, therefore, they agreed to call to their Assistance, the Carthaginians, to whom, they were Allied, as De∣scended from the same Original, and otherwise united by continual Commerce and Amity. The Embassadors being admitted to Audience in the Senate, laid before them the extream Dan∣ger those of Cadiz were in, that they sought not to recover what they had lost, but to pre∣serve They crave Aid of the Carthagi∣nians. their Liberty and Lives; that the Opportunity they had so long desired of entring into Spain, now offered it self very Honourable, in Defence of their Allies, and in re∣venge of the Religion Profaned, in the Destruction of the Temple of Hercules, whom they chiefly Worshiped. The Senate of Carthage bid them be of good Heart, and make good their Ground, till a sufficient Fleet could be fitted out to be sent to their Relief. The Car∣thaginians at this time, were Masters of the Sea, had great Fleets abroad, as well of Mer∣chants, as Ships of War, and were possest not only of all the Coast of Africk, but of seve∣ral Islands in the Mediterranean. Till this time, they could never get footing in Spain, which made them the more eager to fit out this Fleet, the command whereof, they gave to Maherbal; who passing along by the Islands Baleares, and touching at Iviça, arrived at length at Cadiz, in the Year after the building of Rome, 236. Others say, it was but a small time before their first War with the Romans; whensoever it was, from that time for∣ward, they ravaged the Coast of Spain, taking the Spainish Ships, plundering along the Shore, and raising Forts in several parts. The Spaniards provoked by these Injuries, met again in the City Turdetum, and again appointed Baucius their General. He getting toge∣ther what Men he could, by Night surpriz'd one of their Forts that was nearest to Turdetum, Baucius a∣gain Ge∣neral a∣gainst the Carthagi∣nians. and put all that were in it to the Sword, except Maherbal, and some few that escaped pri∣vately a By-way. This done, Baucius pursu'd his good Fortune, and Vanquish'd, and made great Slaughter of the Enemies, in several Places. The Carthaginians perceiving they were not like to prevail by open Force, had recourse to Policy and Artifice, they proposed an Ac∣commodation with the Spaniards, with great shows of Amity, and the better to convince them of their Sincerity, offered to withdraw their Garrisons out of all the Forts they still held. To this the Turdetani gave a resolute answer, concluding, they should give credit to the Carthaginians, when their Actions were suitable to their Words. Still the Carthaginians under shadows of a Truce, Fortify'd themselves on the Coast, and sometimes made In∣roads, which, when any Danger appear'd, they excused, blaming the Insolency of the Sol∣diers, and so deceiving that ignorant People; they continued their Robberies in other parts. Those of Cadiz, were pleased with this Success of their Allies; the Spaniards made no great account of it, for Men little value publick Losses, in which they are not particularly concerned; and the Carthaginians daily increased in Power, which was the more advanc'd by the Death of Baucius, which hap'ned about this time; but whether he left any Successor, is not known. CHAP. VI. The Carthaginians make War upon the Phenicians; Peace made, in which, the latter become Subject to the former. Sappho comes into Spain; Discoveries made by Himilco and Hanno. AFter the Death of Baucius, the Carthaginians aiming at the Sovereignty of all Spain and forgetting that the Phenicians were their Friends and Allies, and had invited them into Spain, resolved to Expel them the Island of Cadiz. To compass their Design, it was requisite to make use of Fraud and Deceit; therefore, they began to sow Discord be∣twixt Carthagi∣nians make War upon the Pheni∣cians. the Phenicians and the Natives, and by cunning Insinuations, gain'd the Love of the latter, and made the others Odious. The Phenicians complained of the unjust Proceedings of the Carthaginians; but Words being of no effect, they had recourse to Arms, and falling unexpectedly upon them, slew many, and obliged the rest to fly for shelter, to a Fort they had built in the farthest part of the Island, opposite to the Cape called Cronium. This done, they turned all their Fury against the Houses and Lands of the Carthaginians, which they Burnt and Plundred; these Losses no way grieved the Carthaginians, but they rather rejoiced they had now the Opportunity they had so long sought after. Having gathered Forces from all their Garrisons, they took the Field; and because the Phenicians refused to come to a Battle, sate down before the City, of which, after a Siege of some Months, they made themselves Masters. At this Siege, some Authors will have it, that one Pephasmenus a Tyri∣an, invented the Engine called Aries, or the Battering-Ram. This Injury done to the Phe∣nicians, rendred the Carthaginians odious to all the neighbouring People; but more especi∣ally, those of the Port of Mnesteus, who were great Friends to the Phenicians, and threatned
that so great Wickedness should not pass unpunished. From Words they passed to Action, and great Numbers were drawn together on both sides, but before they came to Blows, some Accommodation was endeavour'd, and chiefly, by the Carthaginians, who fear'd to commit the fate of their acquired Dominion to the fortune of a Battle, and therefore, were the first at offering Conditions of Peace; which was concluded without any difficulty. It was agreed, that Trade should be re-establish'd, Prisoners restor'd, and reparation made of Damages, and a general Amnesty passed. Hence it is believed, the River Guadalete that falls into the Sea, at the Port of Mnesteus, had the Name Lethe signifying, Forgetfulness, given it. I do not believe all I Write, but will not reject what others Relate, nor confirm what they say. Great Joy was at Carthage at this Treaty, because they were not in a Con∣dition to relievé Cadiz; and the Phenicians, tho' they lost the Sovereignty, were content with the Trade, which brought them great Riches. About this time, being 252 Years from 252. the building of Rome, hap'ned a great Drought and Famine in Spain, and many Earthquakes, Famine and Earth-quakes. which occasioning the Earth to open discover'd vast Treasures of Gold and Silver; and thence follow'd a great Resort thither of sundry Nations. After this, a Fleet was set out of Car∣thage, for Spain, under the Command of Asdrubal and Amilcar, but Asdrubal being Killed in a Descent they made by the way, in Sardinia, and other Dangers pressing Carthage, the De∣sign was then laid aside. In the Year of Rome 271. those Dangers being blown over, the 271. Senate of Carthage sent 900 Men, drawn out of the Garrisons of Sicily, in four Ships, to the Relief of Cadiz, with a Promise of greater Succours. By the way they touch'd at Ma∣jorca, and Minorca, but were repulsed by the Natives, with the Slings they made use of, and forc'd to put to Sea in great Confusion; and at length, arriv'd at Cadiz. At this time, 'tis reported, a Colony was sent from Tarifa, under the Command of Capion, to Plant in the Island made by the two Mouths of the River Guadalquivir. Certain it is, that those of Tar∣tessum built near the Oracle of Mnesteus, a City call'd the Mouth of the Cartesii, to distin∣guish it from other Cities in Spain that formerly bore the same Name, for even Tartessum, was formerly named Carteia; and on the Mouth of the Guadalquivir, was built a Tower nam'd Capion. When this hap'ned, is not certainly known; but this is the time, some Wits have allotted it. All Africk now joyn'd in a League against the Carthaginians. and among them, the Mau∣ritanians, who endeavoured to draw the Spaniards into the Confederacy. The Senate of Carthage, foreseeing the Storm that threatned them, sent Sappho, the Son of Asdrubal, to Sappho the Carthagi∣nian. Govern what they held in Spain, that he might at once encourage their People against all that might happen, and endeavour to disswade the Spaniards from joyning with their Enemies. He play'd his part so dexterously, that the Spaniards were not only diverted from assist∣ing the Africans, but gave him leave to raise 3000 Men, with this Proviso, he should make use of them only to oppose the Enemies of Carthage, but not to Invade the Mauritanians, their ancient Friends and Allies. Sappho kept these Spaniards at the Mouth of the Streights, in hopes the Mauritanians would forbear Assisting the other People of Africk; but perceiv∣ing they did not, he passed over, burning and destroying all the Towns and Country, plundering the Houses, and carrying away Slaves all the People that came within his reach; Complaint hereof, being made by the Mauritanians, the Spaniards sent Embassadors to Car∣thage; where it was agreed, that Sappho should withdraw his Forces out of Africk, and the Mauritanians theirs, giving Aid against the Carthaginians. Notwithstanding this A∣greement, the Mauritanians continued their Hostilities, whereupon, Sappho, who had re∣turn'd into Spain, repassed the Streights again, doing much greater Damage than the first time; till the Spaniards again interposing, with much difficulty obtain'd, sending him fresh Supplies of Men, that he should pass farther into Africk, beyond the Limits of the Mau∣ritanians, against the other Enemies of Carthage. By these means, the Africans being inclosed by those that came out of Carthage, and those that passed out of Spain, were entirely De∣feated, and so that War ended, the Year of Rome 283. Seven Years after, Sappho having settled the Affairs of Spain, was recalled Home, and Himilco, Hanno, and Gisgo, his three Cousins, sent in his place. Himilco and Hanno set sail with a Fleet for their new Government, and touching by the Way at Majorca, and Minorca, obtain'd leave of the Natives to raise Forts there, which Himilco and Hanno after, served as steps to the inslaving those People. In Minorca, they are said to have built three Towns, Jama, Magon, and Labon. Hanno no sooner arrived at Cadiz, but being ambitious of Glory, and desirous to discover something New, he sailed along those Coasts as far as Promontorium sacrum, or Cape St. Vincent, and sent Notes of all he had observ'd, to the Senate, promising great Advantages if two Fleets were fitted out, the one to discover the Coast of Africk, the other those of Spain and France. It was ordered by the Senate, that Himilco should undertake the Discovery of Europe, and Hanno, that of Africk; leaving Gisgo to Govern in Spain. All things being provided, about the Year of Rome 307. the two Brothers set out several Ways. Himilco kept close to the Coast of Spain, 307. and passing Cape Finisterre, ran to the Eastward till he came to the Gallick Shore; and so is Himilco sails along the Coast of Spain. said, to have gone thro' the British Sea, and even as far as the Baltick, and having spent two Years in his Voyage, returned. Hanno with a Fleet of 60 great Galleys, in which were
30000 Men and Women to Plant where he thought convenient, sailed from Cadiz, and Hanno's Voyage to the South∣ward. having passed Hercules's Pillars, on a great Plain, built a City, which he called Thymiateri∣on. Arrianus says, he discover'd as far as certain Islands, which are supposed to lie under the Equinoctial, and then return'd; but Pliny affirms, he passed the Cape of Good Hope, and even into the Red Sea, whence he sent an Account of all he had done, to Carthage. All agree that he was five Years abroad, and return'd home in the Year of Rome 312. Hanno and Himilco being return'd into Spain after these long Voyages, hasted away to 312. Hanno and Himilco return to Carthage. Carthage, where they were receiv'd with great Honour. Gisgo, who had been left to Go∣vern Spain, soon after obtain'd leave to follow them. Hannibal and Mago were next appointed to Command in Spain. Mago made some stay on the Islands Baleares; and is therefore supposed to have built the Town of his Name in the Island Minorca: but this is only a bare surmise, without any Authority to back it. Hannibal being arrived at Cadiz, Hannibal the Elder, sent to Govern Spain. Gisgo loaded his Fleet with the Treasure he and his Brother had heaped, during his Government; and in his return home, was cast away with all his Riches, in the Year after the building of Rome 315. Hannibal is said to have built a Town not far from Cape St: Vincent upon a good Port, which was formerly call'd Portus Hannibalis, now Al∣bor, 315. near Lagos, once Lacobriga. The Tartesii built a Fort at the Mouth of Guadalquivir, and a Temple to Venus; and because that Star is also called Lucifer, it was named Tem∣plum Luciferi, now St. Lucar, a most noted Town for the Trade of the West Indies. About this same time, our Historians say, began a bloody War betwixt those of the Province Betica, and the Lusitani, Nations divided by the River Guadiana. This War, they say, had its beginning from small Quarrels betwixt the Shepherds; the Carthaginians sided with the Lusitani, a great neighbouring City, supposed to be Iberia, assisted those of Betica; their Rage on both sides was so great, that the very Women are said to have taken Arms. They came to a Battle, which was very Bloody, and lasted the whole Day, till Night parted them. In A bloody Battle be∣twixt Spa∣niards. it 80000 Men were Slain, and among them, the Commander in chief of the Carthagi∣nians, supposed (if this Matter be true) to be Hannibal. Mago hearing the news of this Battle, came from the Islands Baleares to the Assistance of his Country-Men, and oblig'd the People of the City, who had sustain'd great loss in the Fight, to fire it, and seek new Places to Inhabit. The same Year, a great Revolution hap'ned in Carthage; for As∣drubal, and Sappho, Hannibal's Brothers, being Dead, Hanno's Authority after his Defeat in Spain was wholly overthrown by his Enemies, the whole Power of the Government, was put into the Hands of an Hundred Men, who were to inspect into the Actions of all Ge∣nerals, when they return'd from the War. By them, Hanno was Try'd, and Condemn'd to perpetual Banishment. The principal Crime laid to his Charge, was, that he was a Man of too great Parts and Ability, to live in a Free-City, being the first that had ever tamed a Lion, and therefore might be likely to prove dangerous to the Liberty of Men, since he could overcome the savage Nature of Beasts. But it is the Fate of Common-Wealths to hate the best of Men. THE History of SPAIN. The Second BOOK. CHAP. 1. Actions of the Spaniards in Sicily. The Government of Hanno. An Embassy sent to Alexander the Great. The first Roman and Carthaginian War. WE have no Account of any thing remarkable that hap'ned in Spain, for some time, till the Year of Rome 327. which was the time of the Peloponnesian War. 327. An uni∣versal Plague. In the second Year whereof, a terrible Plague rag'd all over the World; it began in Aethiopia, and thence running thro' several Countries, at last came into Spain, where it swept away vast Multitudes of Men and Cattle. Thucydides, Li∣vy, and Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, make mention of this Plague; and our Authors say, it proceeded from the great dryness of the Air; but Hippocrates, who lived at that time, says, that to free Thessaly, his Country, from it, he caused all the Woods and Forests to
be Fired. In Sicily, at this time, the Carthaginians were possest of some Towns near the Promontory Libybaeum, not far from Trepana, which was a great Eye-sore to the People of Agrigentum, now Gergento. It hap'ned, the Carthaginians went out into a Wood, near the City Minoa, to offer Sacrifice, which the Agrigentines, who watch'd their Opportu∣nity, laying hold of, fell upon, and slaughter'd all, but some few that fled, and lurk'd a∣bout the Woods. This News being come to Carthage, the People resolving to take Re∣venge, Wars in Sicily. sent over 2000 Carthaginians, a like Number of Spaniards, and 500 Mallorquines with Slings. With these Supplies the Carthaginians took the Field, and coming to a Battle, not only Vanquished their Enemies, but Besieged them in the City Agrigentum, whither they were fled; and after a Siege of two Years, made themselves Masters of it, in the Year af∣ter the building of Rome 346. The end of this War, was the beginning of a greater; for Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, taking into his Protection those that fled from Agri∣gentum; 346. and on the other side, the Carthaginians having to do with so powerful an Enemy, raised an Army of 15000 African Foot, and 5000 Horse, besides 10000 Spaniards; to oblige whom, they restor'd Cadiz, and withdrew all their Garrisons, except from the Temple of Hercules, and some other small Forts. Himilco Cipo, was appointed General of these Forces, who, at his first Landing in Sicily, took the City Camarina, which he Burnt, and put all the Inhabitants to the Sword. The People of Gela terrifi'd at this Cruelty, abandon'd the Town. Dionysius was not idle, but having gather'd a great Force, meets the Carthaginians, and at first put them so hard to it, that their Horse began to give way, till Himilco coming up with a Reserve of 2000 fresh Men, obliged the Sicilians to betake themselves to Flight. Night prevented the Pursuit; but Morning being come, Himilco At∣tacks the Enemy in their Camp, and after a great slaughter, makes himself Master of it, Dionysius saving himself by flight. But to see how uncertain Humane Prosperities are, af∣ter all this Success, so violent a Plague rag'd among the Carthaginian Forces, that Himilco returned Home with a very small Number, where, for Grief of this Loss, he Slew him∣self. After this, some will have it, that Dionysius endeavour'd by his Embassadors to with∣draw the Spaniards from siding with the Carthaginians; but they with Kindness, and all manner of Courtesie, kept them in their Friendship. About the same time, certain Cartha∣ginians sailing from Spain, whether designedly, or forced by bad Weather, is not known; Carthagi∣nians di∣scover a new Island. having travers'd the vast Ocean, discover'd a large, rich, and beautiful Island, which being Uninhabited, some of those People stay'd, and Planted there; the rest return'd, and gave an Account of what they had seen, to the Senate; where, as Aristotle says, it was agreed, this Discovery ought to be Conceal'd; and to that purpose, the Discoverers put to Death, lest the Citizens allur'd by the Riches of the Island, and weary of War, should abandon the City. Some are of Opinion, this Island was one of the Canaries, others, that it was Hispaniola, or some part of the Continent of America. The Carthaginians burning with the desire of renewing the War in Sicily, raised Men in Spain and Africk; but the Spaniards were averse to the War, by reason of the distance, because of the two great Losses sustain'd there, and for that, as they said they, had received no wrong from the Sicilians. This oblig'd the Carthaginians to lay aside that de∣sign till a fitter Opportunity, which was soon offered; for a great Famine hap'ned in Spain, and after it, as usual, a Plague; the Spaniards became more inclinable to take up Arms, to fly from the Miseries of their own Country. 20000 Spanish Foot, 1000 Horse, and 300 Sling Men of Majorca were raised. Hanno was appointed General for this War, Hanno in Sicily with 21000 Spa∣niards, and 1000 A∣fricans. who with these Forces; and 10000 Africans sailed over into Sicily. Dionysius, who was then in Italy, at the Siege of Cotron, a Greek City, having received Intelligence of the Storm that threatned him, was forced to haste back, to secure his own. His Fleet which served to Transport his Army from Rhegio into Sicily, was Defeated by the Carthagians, and several Ships taken, in which was his own Equipage. Among the other things taken, were found some Letters, written in Greek, by one Sunniatus, a Carthaginian; giving Dionysius an Account of the Preparations made against him; which he did in Revenge, for that he had not been appointed General; but it cost him his Life, and it was Enacted, that for the future, no Carthaginian should ever learn the Greek Language, that they might not have the opportunity of Conversing with an Enemy, without an Interpreter. After this Victo∣ry at Sea, many Places submitted themselves to Hanno; and the War was continu'd with various Success, till the sixteenth Year thereof; which, according to Eusebius, was from the Foundation of Rome 336. or rather, according to others, the second of the 99th Olym∣piad, 336. which was of Rome 371. Then Dionysius the Elder dying, Dio, who Govern'd the 371. Young Dionysius, made a Truce with the Carthaginians; yet the Quiet of Sicily lasted not long; but it is time to return to Spain. It has been already said, how the Carthaginians at the beginning of the War of Sici∣ly, in part, restored those of Cadiz to their Liberty. This War being ended, they sent Bostar to Govern the Balearick Islands, with Orders to endeavour to gain the Good Will of the People of Saguntum; but they fearing all his fair Words tended to deprive them of their Liberty, would never entertain any Correspondence with him. Hanno was sent to Hanno's Actions in Spain. Govern Cadiz, but he being Covetous, oppress'd the Natives, and by violent means seiz'd upon all the Treasure as well of private Persons, as what belong'd to the Publick, which
provok'd the Spaniards to Conspire against the Carthaginians. All on a sudden, they ap∣pear'd in Arms, slew many of their Enemies, and Plundred their Goods. Hanno having lost many of his Men, and being forsaken by his Allies in Spain, sent into Africk for Suc∣cour. These Auxiliaries committed great Cruelties, and made Havock in that part of Spain, now called Andaluzia. What had hap'ned, being known at Carthage, they sent a∣nother to succeed Hanno; but we have no account of his Name, or any thing, he did in that Government, his coming, was about the Year of Rome 398. The War which em∣ployed the Carthaginians in Sicily, gave Peace to Spain for some time; but the joy and 398. satisfaction of this Tranquility, was allayed by great Floods, which destroyed infinite Floods. Earth∣quakes. Numbers of Cattle, and bore down many Buildings. The Year following, the Earth∣quakes were so violent, that many Cities on the Coast of the Mediterranean, suffered extreamly, more especially Saguntum, by how much it exceeded all the others in Beauty and Grandeur. The third Year, which was 405. after the building of Rome, was noted for mighty Storms at Sea, which caused extraordinary Shipwracks. 405. The Governour that succeeded Hanno, Dying, one Boodes was sent in his place, and Storms. after him, Maherbal, but no Account can be had of any Actions of theirs, or what Go∣vernour followed. It is agreed by all, as certain, that the Inhabitants of Marseilles in France, being grown too numerous, in the Year of Rome 419. sent a Colony into Spain, A Colony from Mar∣seilles builds Em∣purias. and Inhabited that part of the City Empurias, which was next the Sea, at the Foot of the Pyreneans, opposite to Roses, in Latin called Emporia. Tho' small, it was divided from the rest of the City by a Wall; whence in Greek it was formerly call'd Palaeopolis, that is, Old Town, signifying the oldest part of it, and also Diospolis, that is two Towns. Another 419. part of the Fleet from Marseilles, passed Cape Denia, and built a Town near the Temple of Diana. Three remarkable things were made known in Spain by the coming of this Three re∣markable things. Fleet, the first, the great Power of the Romans, and how Religiously they Assisted and Supported their Allies; the second, that the Syracusans after recovering their Liberty, con∣triv'd to expel the Carthaginians out of Sicily; and the third, that Alexander of Macedon, Sirnam'd, the Great, had Vanquished Darius, Conquered the Empire of the Persians, and Subdu'd more Countries than another Man in that time could have Travelled through. This An Em∣bassy to Alexander the Great. mov'd the Spaniards Inhabiting along the Coast of the Mediterranean, to send an Embassy to him, to desire his Protection against the Carthaginians, who aim'd at the enslaving of all that Province. Paulus Orosius says, Maurinus was Chief of this Embassy, who joyning by the way with the Embassadors of France, went in their Company to Babylon, where they found those of all other Provinces, that were there by Alexander's appointment, expecting his coming. Alexander being come to Babylon, they gave him an ample Account of their Commission, received a favourable Answer, with promise of his Protection; and having been richly presented, returned Home well satisfi'd. No doubt, but this Embassy was very displeasing to the Carthaginians, but it was no time to take notice of it, they being then employed in the War in Sicily, whence they were totally Expell'd by Agathocles. Not long after, ensu'd the first War betwixt Rome and Carthage; and at the same time, The first Roman and Carthagi∣nian War. our Authors say, Spain suffered by Civil War, without naming the Parties or Places, only ex∣press that it was carried on with the greatest Cruelty, Killing, Plundering, and Burning on all Hands, without Mercy. Much about this time, which was the Year of Rome 502. the Mallorquines Revolted from the Carthaginians, and having put their Garrisons to the Sword, 502. oblig'd the Fleet that lay in the Harbour with Showers of Stones, to put to Sea; and at last, there being no hopes of appeasing those People, to return to Carthage. To retrieve this loss, the Senate sent Hamilcar Barchinus, who with great Prudence, by Courtesie and Address, re∣duc'd those Islanders to Obedience without using any Force or Violence. The Year 507, of Rome, and last of the first Punick War, was fatal to Spain, for a great Drought and violent 507. Earth∣quakes. Earthquakes, by which, part of the Island of Cadiz was broken off, and sunk in the Sea. CHAP. II. The second coming of Hamilcar. Asdrubal succeeds him. His Preparations for the Roman War, and Death. NO sooner did the Carthaginians begin to breath after their unfortunate War with Rome, and other Disasters which followed it, but they cast their Eyes upon Spain as the most proper place to make up their Losses. Hamilcar was appointed to Command there with an Hamilcar sent to Conquer Spain. absolute Power. He at his setting out from Carthage, according to Custom, Sacrific'd and Offered up his Vows. His Son Hannibal then but nine Years of Age, being present, he caus∣ed him to touch the Altar, and Swear, that when he was of Age he would revenge his Country against the Romans. Besides him, Hamilcar had three younger Sons, Asdrubal, Mago, and Hanno. Being arriv'd at Cadiz, he receiv'd Embassadors from the Turdetani, who had always continued in Amity with Carthage, offering their Forces, if he had occasion for their service. With their assistance Hamilcar not only recover'd that part which had been
lost, but possest himself of all the Province of Betica, either by Force, or the Submission of the Natives, and this was the Year of Rome 516. Strabo says, the Spaniards at that time were 516. so Rich, that their Mangers and Water Troughs were made of Silver. Hamilcar Coast∣ing along the Mediterranean, ran up the River Ebro, where he built a Town formerly call'd Old Carthage, supposed to be now Cantavecha, distant ten Leagues from Tortosa to the North-West, among the People then called Ilercaones. The following Year he subdu'd the Coasts of the Bastetani and Contestani, where, now are the Cities Baça and Murcia, and not far from where Saguntum once stood, and whence Embassadors came to Hamilcar, bringing Presents, and Congratulating his Success; but not with any intention of submitting themselves to him, Hamilcar receiv'd and dismiss'd them with Kindness, yet he earnestly desir'd to be Master of that City. It was requisite to have some Colour or Pretence for that Undertaking, in order to it, he persuaded the Turdetani to build a Town upon the Lands of the Saguntins, which was call'd Turdetuni, and some will have it to be Terud, 20 Leagues distant from Saguntum. This bred a Difference betwixt those two Cities, which was it Hamilcar aim'd at, and they understanding his Design, resolv'd not to move, or take up Arms against the Turdetani. At the Mouth of the River Ebro, the Carthaginians celebrated Feasts for the Victories they had obtain'd, as also for the Marriage of Himilce, Daughter of Hamilcar, with his Kinsman Asdrubal, this was the Year of Rome 521. While these Feasts were kept, Ha∣milcar 521. was not Idle, but sent Embassadors into France to gain the good Will of the Prin∣cipal Men there, believing their Friendship might be advantageous towards carrying on the War he design'd against Rome, when he had once subdu'd Spain. He won them with Gold, of which, they were Covetous, and Spain yielded Plenty. The Year following he advan∣ced to the Pyreneans, Conquering all from Tortosa to the River Lobregat, then call'd Rubri∣catus. Now it was that he built the famous City Barcelona, Capital of Catalonia, and gave it that Name from that of his Family, to wit, the Barzini. His Designs were laid against Roses and Empurias, which he thought obstructed him, as being Confederates with Saguntum, when Death surprized him among the Edetani, whither he was returned in order to pacifie some Disturbances in the Province of Betica. He was Slain in a Battle against the Natives a∣bout the ninth Year after this his second coming into Spain. This Fight was so Bloody, that of above 40000 Men he had in his Army, two thirds were Slaughtered, the rest of them under the favour of the Night escaped to the neighbouring Towns that held for them. Livy says, this Battle was fought near a place called Castrum Altum. After this signal Defeat, the Carthaginian Forces were turned against the Province Betica, or Andaluzia, where they totally Subverted a Colony of the Phocencians, the Name of it is not known, but it was the first that raised the Commotions in that Province, as also the first that suffered for them. At Carthage, upon the news of the Death of Hamilcar, the Ci∣ty was divided betwixt the Edi and Barcini, about Naming him a Successor; but at last, by the Interest of Hannibal, Asdrubal was appointed for that Command, in the Year of Rome 524. Asdrubal having settled the Affairs of Spain, the Year following returned to Carthage, 524. hoping to get the whole Government of the Common-Wealth into his own hands; but be∣ing Asdrubal succeeds Hamilcar. disappointed, was glad to reassume his Command in Spain. He found the Province in Peace, and therefore resolved to Build in the Province of the Contestani on the Sea-coast, a City which was called New Carthage, to distinguish it from that Founded by Hamilcar, on the River Ebro. This City has a good Harbour, secured from all Winds by high Hills which encompass it round, leaving only a narrow Channel to pass into it; opposite to which, is a small Island, first called Herculea, then by the Latins Scombraria, of a certain sort of Fish, whereof there is great plenty thereabouts; formerly the City was inferiour to none for the strength of its Walls, beauty of the Buildings, Nobility and Riches of the Citizens; at present, it is reduc'd to a small Number of Inhabitants, yet retains some Footsteps of its Grandeur, and is called Carthagena. The Romans understanding what was doing in Spain, and being Jealous of the Carthaginians, endeavour'd by means of the People of Marseilles, to settle some Alliances in Spain. It was no difficult Task for them to compass their Design, all the People being Jealous of the Proceedings of the Carthaginians; Ampurias was the first City that made a League with the Romans, it is seated among the People then called Indegetes, that Bordered on the Laletani on the one side, and the Ceretani on the other, and reached from the River, then Sameroca, now Sambucha, to the Ryrenean Hills. At the In∣stance of those of Ampurias, Saguntum, and Denia came into the League, which gave oc∣casion to the bloody War that soon after ensued between the Romans and Carthaginians. Asdrubal was not ignorant of these Proceedings, but he thought fit to wink at them, till all things were ready for the War he designed, in order to which, tho' with much difficul∣ty, he obtain'd of the Senate to send Hannibal into Spain. At his Arrival, the Soldiers and his Friends received him with great Demonstrations of Joy, and Asdrubal declared him his Lieutenant, in the Year after the building of Rome 528. At this time came into Spain Embassadors from Rome, who proposed, That whereas the Romans and Carthagini∣ans 528. were Friends and Confederates, and that there was of late Alliances between the said Romans and some of the People of Hispania Citerior, therefore to prevent all Misunderstand∣ings, and that neither might incroach upon the Territories of the other, the River Ebro should be the Bounds of the Carthaginian Province, and that notwithstanding Saguntum was
on the other side of that River, they should not intrude upon their Liberties. In fine, that none should offer any wrong to the Friends and Allies of the other. This Embassy was very ungrateful to the Carthaginians, thinking it too great a Presumption in the Romans to give Laws to the Conquerors in their own Province. However, they thought fit to sub∣mit to the Necessity of Times, till they were better provided to carry on a War, and therefore agreed to all the Embassadors demanded, and the more, because they understood the Gauls had been Defeated by the Romans, and 40000 of them Slain in the Battle, besides 10000 taken. The Embassadors being gone, Asdrubal spent three Years in providing all Necessaries for the War he designed. But Death put a stop to his Proceedings, for he was Kill'd by a Slave (in Revenge of the Death of his Master, whose Name was Tagus, a Noble Asdrubal's Death. 532. Spaniard that had been slain by Asdrubal) the second Year of the 139 Olympiad, and 532. of the building of Rome. So great was the satisfaction this Slave receiv'd in Killing of Asdrubal at the Altar as he was offering Sacrifice, that tho' he was taken, and put to exquisite Torments, he never expressed the least sense of Pain, but bore all with a chearful and smil∣ing Countenance. CHAP. III. The beginning, progress, and end of the Saguntine War, with the utter Extirpation of that City. ASdrubal being Slain, as above, the Government of Spain by the general Consent of the Soldiers, and Approbation of the Senate and People, was Conferred upon his Bro∣ther-in-law Hannibal Governs in Spain. Hannibal. He was then in the Prime of his Youth, being 26 Years of Age, of great Courage and Resolution, endow'd with excellent Natural Parts, but no less inclin'd to Vice, of Body hardy, as inur'd to Labour, his Mind generous, and more covetous of Honour than Ease, his Boldness was extraordinary, his Prudence and Secrecy nothing infe∣riour. All these Virtues were darkned by his Treachery, Cruelty, and Irreligion, yet was he Esteemed, and generally Beloved by all. Being possess'd of the Government, and fearing lest Death should cut him off as had hap'ned to Asdrubal, his only Study was how to carry on a War against the Romans. It was requisite to find some Colour and Pretence; and therefore he resolv'd first to break with Saguntum, to revenge some Injuries done to his Al∣lies. Before he entred upon this great Undertaking, he thought fit to Celebrate his Nupti∣als with Himilce, a Native of Castulon, then a Noble City, where now stand the poor Cotta∣ges of Cazlona, not far from the City Baeza, where are still some footsteps of its Great∣ness. This Lady was of the Race of Milico, an ancient King of Spain; and it was said, that Cyrrheus the Phocensian, from whom also she was Descended, had Founded that City, and given it the Name of his Mother Castulona. Her Dower was very great, and the Power of Hannibal hereby much increased, because the People look'd upon him as their Country-man and Friend. In his time also, and by his order, were discover'd several Mines of Gold and Silver, which were call'd Hannibal's Wells. We may guess at the Treasure these Mines yielded, by one of them call'd Bebelus, out of which it is Recorded, there was Day∣ly taken 300 pound Weight of pure Silver. Hannibal's first War was against the Carpe∣tani, that is, the Kingdom of Toledo, a Fierce and Warlike Nation, and which in Number of Men, exceeded any other in Spain. Of these the Olcades, where now Ocan̄a stands, (tho' Stephanus places them near the River Ebro) were the first Subdu'd. Then near unto Tagus was Fought a bloody Battle, in which, the Natives were Defeated. At the same time there arose Differences among the People of Saguntum, which serv'd to make way for their Ene∣my, who let slip no Opportunity. To quell these Tumults, the wiser Sort had recourse to Rome, whence at their Request, Embassadors were sent, who Appeasing some, Threatning others, and Punishing the most Faulty, quieted those Disturbances; by which it was fear'd, the weakest Party would have call'd Hannibal to their Assistance. He grown proud with Success, having Subdu'd all the Country on that side the River Ebro, thought of nothing but carrying on the War against Saguntum. To give a colour to this Breach, he persuaded the Turdetani to fall out with those of Saguntum about the Bounds of their Lands, and to make War upon them; hoping this would be ground sufficient for him to undertake what he desir'd, and begin the War with the Romans. The Saguntines having more Confidence in the Friendship of the Romans, than in their own Strength, which was but small, dispatch∣ed their Embassadors to the Senate, who represented the Danger that threatned them from the Malice of Hannibal, the small hopes they had, unless in the Roman Protection, their Resolution to stand firm to their Alliance, the danger of Delays, and Dishonour of Expo∣sing them to the Fury of the Enemy. This Affair being debated in the Senate, some were for declaring War immediately; however, the more moderate Counsels prevail'd, and Em∣bassadors were immediately sent to Hannibal. They landing at Carthagena about the end of the Summer, deliver'd their Message from the Senate, requiring him not to Infringe the Peace, nor offer any Violence to the Saguntines, or other Confederates of Rome, nor to pass the River Ebro; which in case he did, the People of Rome would Stand by, and Protect
their Friends and Allies. Hannibal answer'd, That the Romans did no Justice, having Mur∣dered many of the chief of their Friends at Saguntum, and now conniving at the Injuries they had offer'd to the Turdetani; That as it was but reasonable the Romans should stand by their Allies, so it was equitable he should support his Confederates. Having thus dispatch'd the Embassadours, to gain the forehand of the Romans, he immediately march'd, and sate down before Saguntum with 150000 Men, in the Month of September, and first Year of the 140 Olym∣piad. Saguntum Besieged. He Ravaged all the Country, Plundring many neighbouring Towns, only Denia was spared, on pretence of respect to the Temple of Diana. Saguntum was seated among the Editani, four Miles from the Sea, in a plentiful Country, the Town Rich, by reason of its Trade by Sea and Land, well Fortified with Ramparts and Bulwarks. No sooner had Han∣nibal Intrench'd himself, but he began to make ready his Engins, and to Batter the lowest part of the Wall, which lay in a Valley, and seem'd the weakest with his Rams. This place prov'd stronger than was expected, and the Townsmen defended themselves with much Courage and Resolution, so that Hannibal coming near to view the Wall, was struck thro' the Thigh with an Arrow from the Works. So great was the Consternation among his Men, by reason of this Wound, that they were near quitting all their Engins, and the Bat∣tery ceased for some Days whilst he was in Cure. The Saguntines having taken an account of what Stores were in the Town which could last but a few Months, sent again Embassa∣dours to Rome to press the Senate for speedy Relief, before Necessity cast them into the Hands of their mortal Enemies; and as soon as they had dispatched these Messengers, they fell to work to strengthen such places as were weakest, or had received most Damage. No sooner was Hannibal recovered of his Wound, but he apply'd his Engines, and beat down three Towers, with all that part of the Wall that lay between them. Things being in this readiness, the Assault was given with great Fury, and with no less Resolution su∣stain'd by the Besieged, who seeing, that beyond their own Hopes they were not Vanquish'd, fell on with such fresh Vigour, they not only drove the Assailants from the Breach, but pursu'd them to their own Works, which they had difficulty to maintain, so great was their Consternation. This Success was fatal to Saguntum, for Hannibal in a Rage resolv'd to leave no way unattempted that might make him Master of the Town; and therefore re∣fused to give Audience to the Roman Embassadours that came to Treat about that Affair; the Romans being resolved to use the utmost means of Accommodation before they would break out into open War. From Spain, the Embassadours, as they had it in their Instru∣ctions, passed over into Africk, where, in the Senate of Carthage, they complain'd of the Wrongs done by their Army in Spain, and demanded that Hannibal should be delivered to them to be Punish'd as he deserv'd, that being the only means to preserve the Peace. When the Embassadours had made their Demands, Hanno said, They desired nothing but Justice, and that Hannibal ought to be Banish'd to the farthest part of the World as a common Di∣sturber. But the Faction of the Barchini prevailing, the Senate answered, That the Saguntines, and not Hannibal, were too blame for the War, and the Romans much in the wrong to side with them. Hannibal in the mean while gave some rest to his Soldiers, wearied out with continual Labour, and at the same time, his Wife Himilce was brought to Bed of a Son, call∣ed Aspar, to the great joy of him and all his Army. Whilst they were employ'd in Sports and Pastimes upon this Occasion, the Besieged lost no time, but provided all Necessaries for their Defence, and Repair'd that part of the Wall which had been beaten down. This Precaution prov'd fruitless, for the Enemy from a Wooden Tower which they had ap∣ply'd to the Wall, beat off all the Defendants with Showers of Darts and Arrows. Besides, 500 Africans with Pick-axes cast down a great part of the Wall; which was the easier, because it was not built with Lime, but Clay. This done, the Soldiers encourag'd with the promise of the Plunder, entred the City by force of Arms, whilst the Besieg'd not able to withstand that Force, retir'd to the further part of the Town, which they joyn'd to the Castle with a Wall they cast up in that little time; this was but a weak De∣fence, and all their hopes lay in the Relief they expected from the Romans. Some breath∣ing time they gain'd by the departure of Hannibal, who was call'd away to Appease the Carpetani and Oretani, that were in Arms, by reason of the too much Severity of the Car∣thaginians, in raising Men among them. Maherbal, the Son of Himilco, was left to com∣mand the Siege as Hannibal's Lieutenant. He very much streightned the Besieged, pre∣venting their Excursions, and gain'd another part of the City, so that they were reduc'd to the utmost Extremity. Hannibal having quell'd those Commotions, return'd to the Siege, and possess'd himself of part of the Castle; so that those miserable People had no hopes of Defence left them; Despair only supported them, an Evil incapable of receiving Advice, and the Inlet to utter Destruction. Halcon, a Citizen of Saguntum, taking com∣passion on his People, stole out of the Town, and of himself set on foot a Treaty. But no other Condition being granted, only that the Townsmen might depart with their wearing Apparel, and build a Town where the Conqueror should appoint; he return'd, not despairing that such hard Terms would be admitted by the Besieged. Alorcus, a Spaniard, that serv'd in Hannibal's Army, taking Compassion of the Saguntines, by whom he had be∣fore been well entertain'd, got into the Town, and taking aside some of the Principal Men, began to advise them to make a Virtue of Necessity, and accept of hard Terms, rather
than expose themselves to certain Destruction. This Discourse of Alorcus was received with great Indignation of the Commonalty, which gathered to hear what he had to offer; and many of them bringing out their Gold, Silver, and other Riches into the Market-place, set Fire to it, and then cast their Wives, Children, and lastly themselves into the Flames. At the same time, a Tower which had long sustain'd Battering, fell down, and gave an open way for the Enemy to enter the City, then all on fire, kindled by the Citizens them∣selves, Saguntum destroy'd. whilst the Soldiers endeavour'd to Quench it. Such is the chance of War, that it Inverts the very Laws of Nature: all the Inhabitants, without any regard of Sex or Age, were put to the Sword, many of them to avoid Captivity, ran upon their Enemies Wea∣pons, others setting fire to their Houses, were burnt in them; Few were taken, and those, the best part of the Soldiers Booty, tho' some Plunder was sent to Carthage; for the Townsmen could not burn all. This siege lasted Eight Months, and that most noble City was destroy'd in May, and the 536th Year of Rome, some say 534; but all agree it was when Publius Cor∣nelius, 536. and Titus Sempronius were Consuls. CHAP. IV. The beginning of the second Roman, and Carthaginian War. Hannibal Marches through France into Italy. Some of his Actions there, and of the Scipio's in Spain. THE news of the destruction of Saguntum, and the Embassadors that had been sent to Hannibal, and went from him to Carthage came to Rome at the same time, to the un∣speakable The Ro∣mans de∣clare War the second time a∣gainst Car∣thage. grief of the Senate and People. Hereupon War was immediately declared against Carthage, and all things with diligence provided for the carrying of it on. Nevertheless Five Embassadors were sent to Carthage, to know whether Saguntum, had been destroyed by Au∣thority of that Senate, but receiving no satisfactory answer, they passed over into Spain, where they drew to their side the Bargusii, a People in the utmost part of Spain, near the Ceretani; but were rejected by the Volciani, and upbraided with their neglect of Saguntum. These Vol∣ciani, were doubtless near about that same part of the Country, tho' some will have them to be about Villadolce not far from the Springs of the River Guerva, which Town they say was formerly called Volce. This answer being spread abroad, all the other Cities thereabout, dismiss'd them with the like scorn. Thence they pass'd over into Gallia Narbonensis, where, in a great assembly, they de∣manded of those People in the name of the Senate of Rome, that they should not give Passage to Hannibal, into Italy, thro' their Country, but were no better received here, than they had been in Spain. Thus without any success in their Negotiation, they return'd by the way of Mar∣seilles to Rome. Hannibal was not idle, but having dismiss'd his Soldiers, with leave to re∣turn to their Houses; provided, they all met again the beginning of the Spring at Carthagena, he himself went to Cadiz, to offer his Vows to Hercules, sending away his Wife and Son into Africk, or to Castulon. Next he gathered 13000 Spanish Foot, called Cetrati, of the Tar∣gets they us'd, 1500 Horse, and 800 Mallorquins, whom he sent to Carthage, and in re∣turn, in the same Fleet, came from thence 11000 Africans, to which he joyned 800 Liguri∣ans, and gave them to his Brother Asdrubal, for defence of Spain. Besides, he left him a sufficient Fleet to secure the Sovereignty of the Sea. All the Hostages given by the Cities, which were Sons of the Principal Men were left in the Castle of Saguntum, under the care of a Noble Carthaginian, called Bostar. When all things were disposed according to his Mind, he set forward with an Army composed of several Nations, in which were 90000 Foot, and 12000 Horse, Polybius assigns a much less number. Having pass'd the River Ebro, he gained the good will of a Spaniard, of the greatest note in those Parts, called Andubal, with him he Hannibal marches through France to∣wards Rome left all the heavy Baggage of the Army, that they might be the fitter for so long a March, and Hanno was appointed with a good Body of Men, to stay and secure that Country. Be∣ing entred upon the Pyreneans, 3000 of the Carpetani, or Kingdom of Toledo deserted him, which he not daring to Punish for fear of offending the others, voluntarily dismissed 7000 more that seemed to go against their wills. By this Policy, the rest of the Soldiers were perswaded the first had been also freely dismiss'd, and that they might all have leave to return home, whensoever they pleased. Thus he passed on through all France, but what he did there and in Italy, does not appertain to this History. This same Year Spain was very Prodigies. plentiful of Corn and all Provisions, but very sickly, there was Plague, Earthquakes, Storms at Sea, and Apparitions of Armies Fighting in the Sky, certain Omens of the evils that follow∣ed this War. Hannibal being Marched into Italy, there overthrew the Romans in two Battles at Ticinus, and at Trebia. Mean while Gneius Scipio, passed through France into Spain, where at his first coming he subdu'd all that part of the Province that lies upon the Sea, from the Lacetani, and Gn. Scipio passes into Spain. Cape Creus, to the River Ebro, those People easily submitting by reason of the ill will they bore the Carthaginians. The Roman Fleet Winter'd near Tarragona, I suppose in the Port of Salu, which Rufus Festus calls Solorius four Miles West of that City. Scipio still advancing, met Hanno, whom, as was said, Hannibal had left to govern the Province. Both sides being
eager to Fight they came to a Battle, near a Town then called Cysso, supposed to be now Sisso or Salde, the Victory fell to the Romans, who slew 6000 of their Enemies, took 2000 He over∣throws the Car∣thaginians. Prisoners, and among them Hanno and Anubal, who as was said had taken part with the Carthaginians, but so wounded, that in a few days he Dyed. Asdrubal who was Marching to joyn Hanno, hearing of this defeat, turned off short towards the Sea, where he slew ma∣ny of the Roman Seamen by surprize, and then with the same Celerity, for fear of meeting the Roman Army, that was in pursuit of him, repassed the River Ebro, and Marched his Army, consisting of 8000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, into Places of safety. From Ampurdan, whither he was gone after the Flight of the Carthaginians, Scipio was forced to return back upon the Ilergetes, or People about Lerida, for that after his departure, they were revolted to the Car∣thaginians. Being come among them he pardon'd all, except the Town of Athanagia, which he fin'd, and obliged to increase the number of their Hostages. Thence he mov'd towards the Accitani, inhabiting near the River Ebro; who still continued firm to the Carthaginians. Others say they were the Ausetani, where now Vique and Girona stand. Certain it is that, having besig'd Acete, the Capital of that Country, the Lacetani (where now Jaca stands) coming by Night to the relief of the besieged, and hoping to get into the Town, they fell into an Ambush, that was laid for them, where 12000 were slain, and the rest put to flight. The besieged being destitute of all hopes, especially for that Amusitus, their chief stole away to Asdrubal, after they had held out thirty days surrendred. The Town was fined 20 Ta∣lents of Silver, and then the Romans took up their Winter quarters at Tarragona, sending the Spaniards that serv'd under them to their own homes. Great Prodigies are said to have been Prodigies in several Countries now seen in the Skyes in Italy, Africk, and Spain, for which reason extraordinary Sacrifices were used to appease the wrath of Heaven. Especially at Carthage, they returned to the old Cu∣stom of the Phenicians, of offering the Sons of the Principal Men, among which it is reported, the Senate appointed Aspar the Son of Hannibal should die. But this sounds more like an invention of our Historians, than a true Relation. Winter being pass'd, Hannibal, after recruiting his Army in the Country about Genoa, March'd over the Appennine, with better success than he had done before. Yet in his passage Hannibal's Progress in Italy. over the Lakes, made by the swelling of the River Arnus, he lost one of his Eyes, through the excessive cold and Moistness: Besides many Men and Beasts dy'd, and almost all his Elephants. Notwithstanding all these difficulties he advanc'd, and near the Lake Thrasimenus, which is in Tuscany, near the City Perousa, of which now it takes name, defeated the Consul Flaminius, killing 5000 of his Men, and this done never ceased spoiling and ravaging all the Country about, till a stop was put to him, by the Dictator Q. Fabius Maximus. In Spain, Asdrubal sent Himilco with a good Fleet, to scour the Coast, and at the same time March'd forward himself with an Army of 20000 Men. Scipio being in no Condition to oppose both these Powers at once, resolv'd to preserve the Sovereignty of the Sea, and fitting out 30 The Ro∣mans suc∣cess in Spain. Ships at Tarragona, surprized the Carthaginian Fleet, which lay at the Mouth of the River Ebro, took 25 Sail in the Face of their Commander, the rest were either sunk or stranded, most of the Men being ashore, as little thinking of any such accident. To make this success the Compleater, they took 14 great Ships at Sea, entred and plundered the City Honosca, Pil∣laged the Country about Carthagena, and burnt the Suburbs. Asdrubal followed the track of the Romans as far as Cadiz, rather as a witness, than revenger of the harm they did. After these fortunate Atchievements the Romans attempted the Island Iviça, and above 120 Towns in Spain, submitted to them, among which were the Celtiberi, a Powerful and great People, in whose Territories were the Towns now called, Segorve, Calatayud, and Medina Celi, as also Veles, Cuenca, Huete, Agreda, and the Ancient Numantia, as far as the tops of the Mountain Moncayo. This addition of strength rendered the Roman General much more formidable; who gathering a great Army, Marched as far as the Woods of Castulon, but was forced to re∣turn and repass the River Ebro, without having perform'd any Memorable Action, being in∣form'd that Mandonius a great Man, rais'd Commotions among the Ilergetes, which occasion∣ed a lasting War. Asdrubal was sent for by the Mutiniers, to oppose a body of the Romans, that coming to appease, had put many of them to the Sword. At the same time the Celtiberi mov'd thereto by Scipio, took three Cities belonging to the Carthaginians, which oblig'd Asdrubal to leave the Ilergetes, to be able to stop that growing evil. The Armies met, and the Celtiberi in two Battles slew 15000 of the Carthaginians, towards the end of Autumn. This same Year was very remarkable in Spain, for the great abundance of Corn, and all sorts of Provisions. The Affairs of Spain, being in this posture, Gneius Scipio writ to the Senate, for Recruits P. Corn. Scipio, sent to assist his Bro∣ther. 538. of Men and supplies of Provision and other Necessaries. P. Cornelius Scipio, was sent by the Senate to the Assistance of his Brother. He landed near Tarragona, the beginning of the Year following, which was 538. from the building of Rome. His Fleet consisted of 30 Gal∣leys, his Army 8000 Men; with great store of Provision, and Power equal with his Brother. The Brothers being joyn'd at the request of the Saguntines, that were dispersed and banish'd, and desir'd to return to their Country, and revenge the injuries done them, they sate down with their Armies before Saguntum. Bostar the Governour kept in this City the Spanish Hostages, with but a small Garrison, and this hindred many Cities from joining with the Romans, least their revolt should cost them their Lives. Acedux, a Noble Man among the
Saguntines, and a Friend to the Romans, desir'd to gain their good will, by some signal Ser∣vice, to this effect he spoke in private to Bostar, and perswaded him, it would oblige the Spaniards if he restor'd their Hostages and rely'd on their Fidelity to him. Bostar suspecting no fraud was easily perswaded, and Acedux undertook to conduct and deliver the Hostages. He gave an Account of his design to the Romans, and setting out at Mid-night carry'd them to their Camp. Thus the Romans restoring the Hostages, gain'd the affections of all the Na∣tives. The joy of all these Prosperities, was much abated by the News of the Fatal Battle at Canna, in which were slain 42000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, as also the Consul Aemilius, and 12000 taken Prisoners. This loss was so great that had Hannibal pursu'd his Victory, the The Bat∣tle of Cannae. Roman Empire had then been Extirpated, the principal Romans being about to fly out of Italy, all the Cities thereabout submitting to the Victor, and many in Spain that were well inclin'd, deferred declaring themselves. However through the care and vigilance of the Scipio's, no disturbance ensu'd, but on the contrary, at the same time they beautify'd the Ci∣ty Tarragona, rebuilt and enlarg'd its Walls, and made it a Roman Colony. At Carthage, notwithstanding the instances of Hanno, who advis'd to make Peace with the Romans, now they had a good Opportunity, least their joy should be turned into sorrow, the Senate re∣solv'd to send Succours to Hannibal, and Asdrubal of Men, Money, and Ships, 40000 Africans, and Arabs were rais'd, of these 5000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, were first sent to Asdrubal, where the danger was most pressing. Mago who Commanded these Succours, had orders to raise both Horse and Foot in Spain, to maintain and enlarge that Province. CHAP. V. Asdrubal designing to March through France, into Italy, is defeated by the two Scipio's, who after that overthrow Mago, and rout the Carthaginians a third time at Biger∣ra, but are at last themselves vanquish'd and slain. ABout the same time the Tartessii, upon the streight of Gibraltar, a fierce and resolute People, taking Arms, chose one Galbo for their Leader, and seized the City Asena, Commoti∣tions a∣mong the Spaniards. where the Carthaginians had laid up much Corn and Provisions. Asdrubal, soon quelled these commotions, and understood by Letters from Carthage, that he was ordered to pass over in∣to Italy, to the assistance of his Brother Hannibal. This Command was no way pleasing to him, and gave occasion to many to take part with the Romans, but it was absolutely necessa∣ry to obey. Himilco the Son of Bomilcar, was appointed his Successor; to him he disclos'd the secrets of the Province, advised him in what manner he was to carry on the War, and ha∣ving made great Levies of Men, and gathered much Money to pay them, he set forward with his Army, in the Year of Rome, 539. The two Scipios, foreseeing the danger their Country would be in, if Asdrubal pass'd into Italy, (which would be oppress'd with two Armies, and 539. was not in a Condition to oppose one) resolv'd to stop, or at least divert him, by falling upon those People that sided with the Carthaginians. To this purpose they laid siege to Iberia, a City near the River Iberus, or Ebro, from which it took name, but Asdrubal, had timely fortify'd it, and then sate down before another Town, that was in Alliance with the Romans, which oblig'd them to quit their Enterprize, and come to the relief of their Friends. Both Armies drawing together, there happen'd several Skirmishes, till at last the Signal being given, the main Bodies met with great Fury and resolution. They fought as if the Empire of the whole World, had depended upon the success of that Battle, but the Romans, in par∣cular The two Scipio's defeat Asdrubal in Spain. signalized themselves, as if they had stood under the Wall, and before the Gates of Rome, in such manner that they forced their Enemies to give way, and gain'd an absolute Victory. The first that fled were the Spainards, who for the hatred they bore the Cartha∣ginians, who would force them upon an expedition so far from their Country, were more inclinable to the Romans. The Carthaginians, and Africans, thus forsaken, were slaughtered and put to flight, the Horses and Elephants escap'd best, and Asdrubal, with a very few got into Carthagena. The news of this Victory was received with great joy at Rome, not so much for the Victory it self, as because it hindred Asdrubal from passing into Italy. This Year was fatal to Spain, for Scarcity, and a Plague, which destroyed Multitudes, and a∣mong Famine & Plague. them (as some will have it) the Wife and Son of Hannibal. For this reason, the Ro∣man Senate sent Provisions to their Army in Spain, and for this purpose borrow'd Money of the Merchants, because the Treasury was exhausted. Asdrubal's defeat being known at Car∣thage, Mago the Brother of Hannibal, was order'd for Spain, with the Fleet he had in readiness, to have passed into Italy. He arrived at Carthagena, with 60 Galleys, and 12000 Men in them, where he found Himilco, who came not long before with Succours from Car∣thage. Mago's arrival caus'd a great alteration of affairs, for they who after their defeat had scarce any place of safety durst now take the field. They laid seige to the City Illitur∣gum, which had before belonged to them, and was revolted to the Enemy, placing their Army of 60000 Men, about it in three Bodies. The two Scipio's desiring to relieve it, mov'd thither with a convoy of Provisions guarded by 16000 Men. On the other side the Carthaginians
advanc'd, to prevent their design, and the Romans not flinching, they came to a Battle, in which not only Asdrubal, but Mago, and Himilco, who came to his Aid, were defeated. The slaughter was greater than the Number of the Conquerors, 3000 Horse were taken, and 1000 Horses more in the Camp; besides, five Elephants killed; After this the Carthaginians, ha∣ving gathered and recruited their Forces, attack'd a Town called Incibile, 7 Miles West of Tortosa, which the Romans coming to relieve there ensued another Fight, in which 3000 of the Car∣thaginians were slain, and as many taken; besides, that among the dead was Himilco, an Of∣ficer Carthagi∣nians a∣gain rout∣ed. of great esteem. Some will have it, that Incibile, is that which is now called Cheloa, in the Kingdom of Valencia. Iliturgum is supposed to be Andujar in Andaluzia, or Lietor, a Town not far from Alcaraz. This happen'd in Autumn, when the News that came from Rome, added no small joy to the Success in Spain, it was that Hannibal had been defeated, at Nola, by Marcus Marcellus, that 2000 Spaniards had deserted him, that Asdrubal, sirnamed, the Bald, passing from Italy into Africk, was routed and taken by T. Manlius Torquatus, in Sardinia, and that Hierom the Grandson of Hieron, had succeeded him in the Kingdom of Syracuse. The two Scipio's encouraged by these News, resolved to take the Field as soon as the Weather would permit; and therefore, presently put their Soldiers into Quarters, re∣solving to Winter themselves at Tarragona, during which time, the Wall of that City was finished; as appears by an Inscription on a Stone which was preserved in the time of King Alon∣so XI. King of Castile, as may be seen in his History. Tarragona is seated on a small Plain, which is on the top of a round Hillock, steep of ascent, the Sea within a Stones throw of the Foot of it; that side of it towards the East, very Rocky and Uncouth. On the West, runs a fruitful Plain, above 40 Miles in length, covered with Vines, Olive, and Quince∣trees, abounding in Cattle and Corn enough to maintain the Inhabitants. A Mile from this City, thro' the midst of those Fields, runs a River, now called Francolin, formerly Tulcis, whose Water is more useful for working of Hemp and Flax, whereof there is plenty, than for drinking. Now, whereas before that time there was great scarcity of sweet Water in this City; the Scipio's after the Roman manner, made a high Aqueduct, which conveys part of the River Gaya into it, tho' 16 Miles distant. This Aqueduct was Demolished (as Florian says) by the People of Germany, that made War in Spain, in the Year of our Lord 266. And the City suffered much again for want of Water, till in the time of our Grandfathers, they dug a deep Well, which plentifully supplies the Natives; who in our days, amount to the number of about 700 Families; the space within the Walls, being capable of containing about 2000 Houses, and no more. No sooner was the Winter over, in the Year of Rome 540. then the two Brothers, 540. Mago and Asdrubal, gathering all the Forces they could, of Strangers and Natives, took the Field, with a resolution to use their utmost endeavours to drive the Romans out of all the Pro∣vince of Spain, called Ʋlterior, or the farther, whereof they possest, a great part. Publius Scipio, the better to oppose their Designs, passing the River Ebro, broke in upon the Vectones, and plant∣ed his Camp near a Town called Castrum Altum, a place Ominous to the Carthaginians; for that Hamilcar, the Father of Hannibal, was there slain. 2000 Roman Soldiers were here killed about the Country, which caused them to remove into another Part that was at Peace with them. Scipio Fortified his Camp on the Mount Victoria, supposed to be Moncia, near the Sea, some few Miles beyond Ebro, thither resorted Gneius Scipio to strengthen his Bro∣ther, and Asdrubal, the Son of Gisgo, to attack him. This General was newly come over out of Africk with a Recruit of 5000 Men. Both Camps lying very near, Publius Scipio went out to take a View of the Enemy, and was beset by such a number of them, that he had certainly been lost, but that his Brother came in and rescued him. Nothing else of note was done here, but both Armies marched into Hispania Ʋlterior, and into Andaluzia, where the City Castulon was revolted from the Carthaginians, and had forced out their Gar∣rison. The Carthaginians upon the first advice hereof, marched to suppress this Commotion in the beginning, and by the way, laid Siege to Illiturgum, designing to chastize that City first, as the cause of the revolt of the other; Gneius Scipio also advanced to succour the Besieged, and with only one Legion, broke thro' the Enemies, who were divided in two parts, and making a great Slaughter, got safe into the Place. Next two following days he made such vigorous Sallies, that 2000 of the Enemy were slain, and 3000 taken, with 13 Carthagi∣nians for∣ced from the Siege of Illitur∣gum. Colours. Thus the Carthaginians were obliged to raise the Siege; but sate down again before Bigerra, a City of the Bastetani; whither being pursued, they retired to Aurigis, supposed to be Jaen, or Arjona, the Romans still pursuing at their Heels. Here again they came to a Battle, and the Carthaginians, were again put to the Rout, 5000 of them killed, and 3000 taken, besides 50 Colours, and 30 Elephants that were cut in pieces; Gneius, tho' he had su∣stained Carthagi∣nian Army routed. some loss, and was himself run thro' the Thigh with a Spear, yet he pursued the E∣nemy in a Litter as far as Monda, where the Fight was renewed with the same Success as be∣fore, tho' not above half the slaughter, the Woods and Mountains affording shelter to those that fled. The Affairs of the Carthaginians in Spain, being brought to the worst con∣dition they had ever been in, Mago was sent into Gallia, to induce Menicatus and Civis∣matus, two great Men, with whom Hannibal had settled an Alliance, to pass into Spain to their Assistance. They consented without any difficulty, and 9000 of those People came by Sea to Carthagend, where Asdrubal was providing to renew the War. Gneius tho' joyful
with his Victories, Wintered in Betica, or Andaluzia with great caution and vigilance. At the very beginning of the Year of Rome 541. both Armies took the Field, and came to a 541. Battle in Andaluzia, with the same Courage and Resolution as before. The Success was still the same, the Execution greater; for of the Carthaginians 8000, of the Gauls almost the whole Number, with their Commanders Civismarus and Menicatus perished. After this Fight, the Romans brought their Army before Saguntum, and at length took it by force, the sixth Year since it was taken and destroyed by the Carthaginians. Some of those that had been banished, and fled from thence, being still alive, they were restored to their Coun∣try; the City Turdetum, which had caused all that mischief, was demolished, and laid le∣vel with the Ground, their Lands were given to the Saguntines, and their People were sold in open Market; which was some Comfort and Revenge to the Saguntines, for the Losses they had sustained. Now also came News into Spain, that the City Arpos in Apulia, that had revolted to Hannibal, was taken by the Consul Quintus Fabius, and 1000 Spaniards had de∣serted to the Romans, which gave them no small hopes of greater Advantages; and there∣fore the Senate ordered the two Scipio's to send some Spaniards of Note to Rome, who might induce their Country-men to forsake the Service of the Carthaginians. Winter drawing on, the Carthaginians resolved against the next Year to draw over to Spaniards honour'd to incline them to serve the Romans. their Party the Celtiberi, a fierce, and warlike People, by offering them great Pay; but the two Scipio's understanding their design, prevented them, by bidding more, and by way of Ho∣nour permitting them to serve under the Roman Standards, not in distinct Bodies, as was used before. Moreover, to oblige all the Spaniards to forsake Hannibal, they sent 300 of them to Rome, who arriv'd there the beginning of the Year of Rome 542. Four Ships sent 542. from Rome with Provisions and Money, relieved their Army that began to suffer want; but their Joy was much greater when they understood that Hanno, sent to the Relief of Hannibal, with great Forces from Carthage, and others raised in Gaul and Liguria, was De∣feated before he could joyn him. At the same time, the City of Syracusa in Sicily, which after the Death of Hierom, and his Grandson Hierome, had sided with the Carthaginians, af∣ter a Siege, which lasted three Years, was taken by Marcus Marcellus. In Africk, Syphax, King of the Numidians, and Confederate with the Romans, had been Syphax routed by Massinissa. twice Routed by Massinissa, whose Kingdom lay between that of Syphax and Carthage, and who had entred into the Confederacy with Carthage. Massinissa having no Ene∣my left to oppose him in Africk, this same Summer landed at Carthagena with 7000 African Foot, and 700 Numidian Horse. Indibilis, also the Brother of Mandonius, had raised 5000 Men among the Suessetani, and was in a readiness to March and Joyn them upon the first Advice. Some are of Opinion, these Suessetani, were People of that part of Navarre, where now Synguessa stands, on the Banks of the River Aragon; a Town, as appears by Charters of Kings, once called Suessa, as is believed, from the Latin word Sues, because the Country thereabouts, has always abounded in excellent Swine. With these great Supplies, the Carthaginians being put in heart, were the first that took the Field, and marched into the Country in two Bodies; one was Commanded by Asdrubal Barchinus, the other, by Mago, Massinissa, and the other Asdrubal. The two Scipio's having likewise re∣ceived Supplies from Italy, and being increased by the Addition of 30000 Celtiberi, mov'd forward to fight that Enemy they had so often Defeated. Gneius with the Celteberi, and the third part of the Roman Soldiers undertook Asdrubal, and to this purpose, Encamp'd near the Enemy, and not far from the City Anatorgis, a River running betwixt the two Armies. Publius moved towards the other Carthaginian Generals, to the intent that Asdrubal being Defeated, (which he questioned not) the others might not save themselves in the Neighbour∣ing Woods and Forest, but be hemmed in on all sides, and all destroy'd. All this Design was disappointed, for Asdrubal being well acquainted with those People, easily prevail'd with the Celtiberi to forsake the Romans, and return home. The better to colour this Treachery, a Report was industriously spread abroad, that the Spaniards, who sided with the Carthaginians, were Plundering the Houses of those that follow'd the Romans; Gneius having lost so great a part of his Army, resolved to retire. Another Misfortune disap∣pointed this his Resolution; for Publius being streightned by Massinissa's Horse, which con∣tinually were Skirmishing before his Intrenchments, and fearing if Indibilis joyned the Enemy, he should not be able to withstand so great a Force, he resolv'd upon a dangerous Remedy, which was to meet Indibilis, and prevent his joyning the other Forces. He left a small Guard in the Trenches, and by Night marched out to put in execution what he had designed. This was not done so secretly but the Enemy having notice of it, Massinissa came up with Romans Over∣thrown. his Horse at such time as the Romans were Engaged with the Suessetani, and began to have the better, and by his unexpected arrival, putting them into Confusiom, obtained a perfect Victory. Many were slain in the Fight, and among them, Publius their General, many more in the Pursuit; some few under the shelter of the Night, retired to the neighbouring Roman Garrisons, others to the City Iliturgum, and the rest to their Camp. After this Victory, that part of the Carthaginian Army joyned Asdrubal; which made Gneius conclude his Bro∣ther was killed, for that he being safe, the Enemy durst not have joyned their Bodies; be∣sides, a sudden Sadness had seized him, which seem'd to forebode some great Misfortune, and therefore he quitted his Camp by Night, without the least noise. Morning discovering that the Romans were gone, Asdrubal order'd the Numidian Horse to pursue, and keep them in
play till the Body of his Army could come up. Gueius perceiving no Prayers nor Exhor∣tations, were of force to encourage his Men, resolved to gain the advantage of a Hill that was near him; which was easily performed, but the Ground being hard and stony, their was no conveniency for casting up a Trench. To supply this want in some measure, he caused the Carriages and Waggons, to be drawn up round his Men; a slight Defence, but that for a while put a stop to the Enemy, who admired the Valour and Industry of the Ro∣mans failed them not, even in that desperate Estate. The Carthaginian Generals coming up, blamed the backwardness of their Men, and thus at length the poor Fence being broke, they entred, and with their Multitude, soon slaughtered that small Number. Gneius himself, having played the part of a wise General, and valiant Soldier, was killed; a Person of Two Sei∣pio's slain. great worth, that had Governed Spain several Years, and was the first that by his Courte∣sie and Address, gained the Affections of the Natives. Some few, thro' the Woods escap∣ed to Publius's Camp, whom they supposed to be safe, but found it was kept by Titus Fontei∣us, his Lieutenant, with only a small Garrison. This Battle was fought near the River Segura, and a Town called Ilorcis, supposed to be Lorquin in the Kingdom of Murcia. The People of Tarragona hold, that a Tower which stands near that City, with two Statues of Marble on it, is the Sepulcher of the two Scipio's. CHAP. VI. Lucius Marcius checks the progress of the Carthaginians, and gives them a great Overthrow. First Nero, then Publius Scipio comes into Spain, and takes Car∣thagena. THE unfortunate end of the two Scipio's, caused a great Alteration, and the Power of the Romans in Spain, had been utterly overthrown, but that the Valour of Marcius at L. Marci∣us restor∣eth the Ro∣man Pow∣er in Spain. first stay'd, and the Courage of Scipio, after raised it up again. All Men forsake the Unfor∣tunate, so it hap'ned in Spain, for those of Castulon were the first that shut their Gates upon the Romans, those of Iliturgum did worse, first admitting, and then murdering them; and many other places revolted. Those that were left in the Camp with Titus Fonteius, and the others that had resorted to them, being surrounded with so many misfortunes, with all possi∣ble speed marched away, and re-passed the River Ebro. Lucius Marcius, the Son of Septimius, a Roman Knight, a Youth of much Courage, who had been a Tribune in Gneius Scipio's Ar∣my, gathering a good Body out of the Roman Garrisons, and of those who after the Rout had resorted to him, joyn'd, and gave new life to those under Fonteius. So great was the joy of the Soldiers for his coming, that they chose him their General; but their mirth was shortned, by reason of the news, that Asdrubal having passed the River Ebro, was marching to fall upon them, and Mago follow'd at his heels. So great was the Consternation among them at those Tidings, that they gave themselves over for lost, and took no notice of Marcius, who encouraged and persuaded them to re-assume their former Valour, and all would succeed according to their wishes. By this time the Enemy was not only in sight, but came up to Carthagi∣nians at∣tack the Roman Camp, and are repuls'd. their Trenches, then their Fear turning into Despair, they ran like Lions to the Works, and not satisfied with repulsing their Enemies, sallied out after them. The Carthaginians secu∣rity, as coming to a certain Victory, was the life of the Romans; for being now astonished at this unexpected boldness, they turned their backs and fled. Marcius would not suffer his Men to pursue, for fear of some Ambush, but being satisfied with that Success, sounded a Retreat; at which the Soldiers were so offended, they threatned they would not follow him upon another occasion. This Retreat of the Romans was wondred at by the Carthaginians, but attributing it to fear, they encamp'd without Intrenching. Marcius let not slip so good an opportunity as offer'd it self, but communicating his Intention to the Soldiers, and biding 'em take their rest, and be in a readiness, drew them out at the fourth Watch, much encouraged, because they saw a light about his Head, which was receiv'd as a good Omen. Asdrubal's Camp was but six Miles from the Roman's, and between them a Valley cover'd with Trees, where Marcius left three Companies of Foot and some Horse, as a reserve. The Romans marched silently, and there being no Guards upon the Carthaginian Camp, they were easily surpriz'd; great was the slaughter, all the Army being unarmed and asleep. Few escaped, for those that thought to save themselves in the other Camp, fell into the Am∣bush, and were put to the Sword. Asdrubal's Forces being thus destroyed, the Romans with the same resolution and celerity marched against Mago, who knew nothing of the Disaster that had befallen the others, just at Sun rising they fell in upon Mago's Camp, and entred it with the same ease and facility they had done the other, but the Fight held till the Carthagi∣nians perceiving by the blood on the Roman Armour, what had hap'ned to their Fellows, lost courage, and fled. In both these Rencounters 37000 were killed, near 2000 taken, Asdrubal and Mago routed, and 37000 of their Men kill'd. and a great Booty. All that made this Success inferiour to the former losses, was, that the Carthaginian Generals saved themselves by flight. Marcius sent an account of this Victory to the Senate, where many were offended that he called himself Propretor; but promised to
send Corn and Cloaths for the Soldiers. Claudius Nero was appointed as soon as the War of Capua was concluded, to go over into Spain with 11000 Foot, and 1100 Horse. Nero landed near Tarragona, and having joyned Marcius and Fonteius, marched with speed to∣wards Andaluzia, in quest of Asdrubal, who was incamped at a Wood between Illiturgum and Mentisa, supposed to be Montizon, or Cazorla, where he possest himself of the Passes, thro' which, of necessity the Enemy was to retire. Asdrubal had recourse to Policy, and feigning he would take Conditions, gained so much time, that his Army by Night stole a∣way over the Mountains, and the Roman General too late, discovering the cheat that had been put upon him, offered the Carthaginians Battle, which they cautiously avoided. At the same time in Rome, Publius Cornelius Scipio, a Youth of 24 Years of Age, but of P. Corn. Sci∣pio Procon∣sul of Spain. great hopes, was chosen to go Proconsul into Spain, with 10000 Foot, and 1000 Horse. Sil∣lanus was appointed Propretor in the place of Nero; and Scipio chose his Brother Lucius, and Caius Lelius for his Legats, or Lieutenants. This is that Lelius who was thought to go∣vern all the Actions of Scipio, and of whom it was commonly said, that he composed the Play, and Scipio acted it. He landed in Spain about the end of the Year; he commended the Soldiers for what they had done; honoured Marcius as he deserv'd, and ever after, made great account of him. At the beginning of the Spring, in the Year of Rome 544. Scipio 544. took the Field with his own, and the Forces of his Confederates, resolving to pass the Ri∣ver Ebro, and possess himself of Carthagena, a City opposite to Africk, the strongest the Enemy held, and where they kept the Spanish Hostages, and laid up their Magazines. His design was well grounded, for, that there was but a small Garrison in the Town, and the Carthaginian Generals were at a distance, Mago near Cadiz, Asdrubal the Son of Gisgo, at the mouth of Guadiana, and the other Asdrubal, in Carpetania, or the Kingdom of Toledo. To Lelius was given the command of the Fleet, with Orders, that he should steep near to the Land Army, which in all, consisted of 25000 Foot, 2500 Horse. In seven Days Scipio came be∣fore Carthagena, and resolv'd to Attack it the next day by Sea and Land. Mago, who com∣manded in the Town, was not idle, but provided all things for his defence. This City is seat∣ed on a rising Ground, over the Harbour, opposite to which, is an Island, which secures it against all Winds; it is encompassed by the Sea on three sides, and that which is on the Land side looking towards the North, is of difficult ascent, and was fortified with a good Wall. Scipio's Men attempted to scale this Wall, but the Spaniards that defended it, did not only make good their Post, but sallying, obliged them to retire in disorder, till fresh Sup∣plies coming to their relief, the Spaniards were forced to take to the shelter of the Wall. This caused so great a Consternation in the Town, that many quitted their Posts, and the Be∣siegers laying hold of the opportunity, laid their Ladders to the Wall by Sea and Land. The Besieged perceiving the danger that threatned them, took heart again, and throwing showers of Stones, and all other Weapons, again repulsed the Enemy. On the West side of the Town was a shallow, which the Fisher-men said a Man might walk over at low Wa∣ter. Tho' the Soldiers had taken no rest after the other Attacks, Scipio orders them to assault the Wall in two places, to the end that the Townsmen being all bent upon the de∣fence of those parts, his Men might enter at that third, which by reason of the Water was weaker, and unregarded. His Orders were punctually obeyed, and all things succeeded ac∣cording to his wishes; for the Soldiers entering on that side, open'd a Gate, and let in their Scipio takes Car∣thagena. Companions. Thus the Romans in a moment were possess'd of the City; and Mago having no hopes of maintaining himself, delivered the Citadel. The Booty was great, many En∣gines of War, 74 Colours, 63 great Ships that were in the Harbour laden with Provision and Ammunition, and 10000 Prisoners, besides Slaves, were taken. All the Citizens of Carthagena were set at liberty, and the more to oblige them, their Goods restored. Part of the Hostages were deliver'd to the Embassadors of their Cities, the rest honourably en∣tertain'd, and among them, the Wife of Mandonius, and the Children of Indibilis. More∣over, a beautiful young Maid being brought to Scipio by the Soldiers, he would scarce see her, to avoid Temptation and Suspicion, but commanded, her to be taken care of, and restor'd to Luceyus, a Noble Celtiberian, to whom she was Betroth'd, giving her in Dower the Gold her Parents offer'd for her Ransom. This goodness and liberality so highly oblig'd that Youth, that soon after, he return'd to serve the Romans with 1400 Horse, and continu'd in the service with great Zeal and Affection. The Soldiers that first entred the Town, were re∣warded according to their Merits; and because there arose a dispute betwixt Sextus Digitius, and Quintus Trebellius, about the Mural Crown, each pretending he was the first that mount∣ed the Wall; and the Army was divided about it, the General decreed that both should have it, which gave full satisfaction to all Men. To Lelius was given a Crown of Gold, and 30 Oxen for Sacrifice; and he was sent to carry the news to Rome, in a Galley of five Slaves to an Oar, and with him, Mago, and five Senators of Carthage. Next, the Walls of the City that had been damag'd were repair'd, all which being perfected, Scipio at the end of the Year, returned with great Honour and Reputation to Tarragona, where he had appointed an Assem∣bly of the Confederate Spaniards. Lelius being come to Rome, laid before the Senate the great advantage that had accru'd to them, by the taking of Carthagena. But their satisfacti∣on was much abated by the news brought them, that 5000 Numidian Horse, and other Afri∣can Forces were ready to be sent from Carthage into Spain; besides great Recruits that As∣drubal
Barchinus was bringing into Italy to reinforce Hannibal, who had lately in the Terri∣tory of the Samnites, now part of Abruzzo, routed the Roman Army, killing the Pretor Genius Fulvius, and twelve Tribunes, with 13000 Men, as some will have it, or 7000 accord∣ing to others. CHAP. VII. Publius Scipio Routs Asdrubal, and drives the Carthaginians quite out of Spain; other notable Actions of his there. Cornelius Lentulus, and Lucius Manlius suc∣ceed him, and Overthrow the Spaniards that had Revolted. THE taking of Carthagena changed the face of Affairs in Spain, and many inclined to the Roman Interest; for most Men follow the greater Power. Among the rest, Edeseus, a Man of great note, came over to the Romans, because they had restored his Wife and Chil∣dren that were among the Hostages. Mandonius, and Indibilis, Princes of the Celtiberi, ob∣tain'd Pardon for the late Miscarriages, and were receiv'd into Grace. Asdrubal Barchinus was quarter'd about Betulon, a City supposed to be in Andaluzia, where now are Vbeda, and Baeça., As soon as the season of the Year, which was of Rome 545. would permit, Scipio 545. advanced from Tarragona towards him; but he having notice of it, and suspecting the Courage of his Men, as well as the fidelity of the Spaniards that were with him; by Night mov'd his Camp to an Eminence, the greatest part of the foot whereof, was encompass'd by a River, supposed to be Guadalquivir. Upon this Hill were two Plains, on the lower, Asdru∣bal planted the Numidians, Africans, and Mallorquins; on the upper, he encamped with the gross of the Army. Neither the roughness of the way, nor the steepness of the ascent de∣terred Scipio from attacking the Enemy, who had more confidence in the strength of the place, than in the courage of his Men. All the difficulty was in mounting, and nothing that the Enemy cast down fell in vain; but as soon as they reached the first Plain, and came to their Swords, the Defendants fled to the upper. The ascent thither, was more craggy than the other; and therefore they were obliged to go about and divide the Army into two Asdrubal Barchinus Routed by Scipio. parts. Scipio marched towards the left, and Lelius towards the right; no sooner had they mounted, and fallen on, on both sides, but the Enemy fled; for they had neither room to draw out, nor time to place their Elephants in the Front, 8000 were slain, 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse taken, and among them, Massiva, a Youth, Nephew to Massinissa, lately come over from Africk. Scipio gave him a Horse, clad him richly, and sent him away without Ran∣som, to his Uncle. Asdrubal having sent the Money and Elephants before, made no stay till he came near to the Alps, where Asdrubal, the Son of Gisgo, and Mago joyn'd him. Having held a Consultation, it was resolv'd, that Asdrubal, the Son of Gisgo, should go into Lusita∣nia, and Massinissa with 3000 Horseshould infest the Province of HispaniaCiterior; but that both of them should by all means avoid coming to a Battle. Mago was sent to Majorca to raise sling Men in those Islands. Lastly, It was thought expedient, that Asdrubal Barchinus should march into Italy, as well in obedience to the Commands of the Senate, as to secure the Spanish Soldiers that began to be inclinable to the Romans, by removing them so far from home. Thus the Cartbaginians; on the other side, Scipio, because the Summer was almost spent, re∣turned to Tarragona thro' the Woods of Castulon, and part of Sierra Morena, where he spent all the next Year, which was 546. without doing any thing remarkable, the Forces of the Car∣thaginians being much broken. From Carthage, instead of Asdrubal Barchinus, came Hanno 546. to Govern Spain; by the way, he took up Mago in the Island of Majorca, and landed in Spain in the Year of Rome 547. and immediately went to raise Men among the Celtiberi. Scipio sent 547. Syllanus against him, who coming to a Battle, first Routed Mago, and then took Hanno, who was marching to relieve him. Next, Scipio resolved to move towards Asdrubal the Son of Gisgo, who was encamp'd near Cadiz; but he having notice of it, divided his Forces among the Garrisons, despairing of being able to keep the Field. This news coming to Scipio, he turned back, only sent his Brother Lucius to take Oringe, a City of the Milessi. Pliny places Oringe, in the Province of Betica, near where Jaen now stands. This Enterprize was succes∣ful, for the Town was entred by Storm, all the Carthaginians, and 300 of the Townsmen that shut the Gates against the Romans, were made Slaves, the rest were set free, and their Goods restored to them. Winter drawing on, the Army was sent into Quarters, and Luci∣us to Rome, with Hanno and other Prisoners, where he gave an account of what had been done in Spain. The Year following which was the 548 of Rome, Asdrubal the Son of Gisgo, gathered a 548. mighty Army which with the Auxiliary Spaniards amounted to 50000 Foot, and 4500 Horse, Asdrubal Son of Gis∣go, entire∣ly Defeat∣ed by Sci∣pio. and incamp'd in the Province Betica, or Andaluzia, near the City of Silia, Scipio having intelligence hereof, took only 3000 Spanish Foot, and 500 Horse, being warned by the fate of Father and Unkle not to place much Confidence in them; With these Auxiliaries, and the Romans Legions, he marched towards Asdrubal. Some day swere spent in Skirmishes, and then both Armies drew out in order of Battle, but neither car'd to give the first stroke. Between the
two Armies was a Valley, and each expected the other should pass it first, to keep the advantage of ground on which they stood; at length Scipio adventured early one Morning to attack the Enemy in their Camp. Asdrubal surpriz'd at this unexpected boldness, plac'd his Horse in Front to check the adverse Cavalry that gave the first charge; whilst he drew the rest of the Army into the field. The Horse stood to it so Couragiously, that the Fight a for long time was doubtful, Scipio withdrew back his Cavalry into the center of his Battle, and stretched out and advanced the Wings in which the Roman Legions fought. Thus before the main Bodies joyn'd, he made the Enemies Wings give way, as being compos'd of Mallorquins, and Spani∣ards, both raw and unexperienced Soldiers, and that came out fasting, whereas the Romans were better provided; tho' the Enemy at first retired in order and after fled outright; yet the Romans could not enter their Camp by reason of some Rain that fell. Asdrubal terri∣fy'd with this misfortune, and fearing least all his Allies should desert him, as some had alrea∣dy done, the following night quitted his Camp, designing to get away by long Marches. But in the Morning Scipio perceiving he was gone, sent the Horse to fall upon his rear, and keep them in play till the Legions coming up, put them all to the rout; great was the slaughter this day, for of all that vast Army scarce 7000 escaped with their General, who climbed a very craggy Mountain, a place naturally strong. Hence Asdrubal stole away privately to Ca∣diz, and Scipio with part of his Army return'd to Tarragona, leaving Syllanus with the rest to besiege them on the hill. Among the Carthaginians was Massinissa who perceiving the Affairs of Carthage totally declin'd, resolv'd to side with Fortune, and accordingly had a private in∣terview with Syllanus, in order to come over to the Romans, which is all that was remarkable in that Siege; this happen'd in the beginning of Summer, and so ended the power of the Carthaginians in Spain, which then fell into the hands of the Romans, in the 14th Year after Hannibal destroy'd Saguntum, and the 5th after Scipio, took upon him the Government of Spain. This tedious and dangerous War in Spain, being in a manner brought to a conclusion, Sci∣pio bent his designs against Africk, and Carthage, and in order to them, Treated with Massi∣nissa, Scipio gains the Africans. and sent him over into Africk, to dispose his People to leave the Friendship of the Car∣thaginians. This done he sent Lelius to Treat with Syphax King of the Masessali in Africk, who refusing to harken to any Proposals, unless made by the Roman General himself, Scipio went over himself to his City, then call'd Siga, suppos'd to be now Aresgol, because Pliny says, it was opposite to Malaga. Asdrubal came at the same time to secure the Friendship of that King; who made some overtures of Peace betwixt those two powerful Enemies; but Scipio saying, he had no instructions concerning that Affair, that project took no effect, and yet he compass'd what he came for, which was to gain the Friendship of that King. No sooner was Scipio return'd into Spain, but he possessed himself of Illiturgum, and Castulon, Cities that had held out for the Carthaginians, rather because they despair'd of Pardon, than for any affecti∣on; Illiturgum was destroy'd, Castulon was spar'd because least guilty, and also for that it submitted. After this Marcius was order'd to subdue some other places, and Scipio went to Carthagena, to Celebrate the Funeral rites, of his Father and Unkle; which were perform'd with great Pomp, and several sorts of Sports; particularly Gladiators. Among the rest that fought were two Brothers call'd Corbis, and Orsua, who were at Variance about the Sovereign∣ty of the City Iba, the Younger of them, who confiding in his great strength, had refus'd to stand to Judgment, was kill'd; Many Cities submitted themselves to Marcius, only Astapa having highly provok'd the Romans, and despairing of pardon, endur'd a tedious Siege, in which Memora∣ble Siege of Astapa. many of them Perished, as also in a Battle they ventured to Fight in open Field; At length there being no possibility of holding out, or hope of relief, they slew their Wives and Chil∣dren, burnt all their Goods in the Market-Place, and then kill'd themselves. The ruins of this City are still to be seen on the banks of the River Xenil, not far from Ecija, and Antequera. Lelius, and Marcius were sent to Cadiz, in hopes they might make themselves Masters of that Island, by means of intelligence they held with certain out-laws belonging to it, but were disap∣pointed, Mago having discover'd the contrivance, and taken the necessary measures to pre∣vent it. It happen'd also that Scipio fell dangerously ill, which gave occasion to many to think of raising Commotions. Particularly Mandonius, and Indibilis, revolted. It grieved them to be disappointed of their hopes, hauing flattered themselves with the thoughts of becoming Sovereigns of all Spain, if the Carthaginians were expelled. Moreover 8000 Romans, that were Quartered along the River Xucar, Mutinied for their Pay. Mago thinking he might make his advantage of these troubles, writ to the Senate of Carthage, desiring they would send him considerable supplies. All these designs were disappointed by the recovery of Scipio. The mutinous Soldiers having receiv'd a promise of pardon, and their pay, went to Carthagena, where they were severally reproved by Scipio, and only the Heads of the Mutiny Punish'd, Mandonius, and Indibilis, being among the Illergetes, were defeated and forced out of their In∣trenchments, the Fight lasted two Days, yet after all, upon their Submission were admitted to Grace, only a mulct laid upon them, to Pay the Soldiers. Massinissa was now again re∣turn'd out of Africk, to Cadiz, with a good Number of Numidian Horse, having not yet de∣clared for the Romans. Scipio sent Marcius before, and design'd to follow thither in Person, which Massinissa understanding, he came over to the Continent upon pretence of making an in∣road, Massinissa joyns with the Romans. but in reality to Treat with Scipio; where he settled that Friendship which lasted as long as
his Life, Mago despairing of any success in Spain, by Order of the Senate, Shipped all the Gold and Silver, belonging to the publick, and to private Persons, and sailed with it for Carthage. By the way, he fell upon the Mallorquins, because they had revolted to the Romans, and easily made himself Master of Minorca, whence he sent 2000 Sling Men, and Autumn be∣ing passed, stayed to Winter there. Cadiz was delivered up to Scipio, who about the same time founded Italica, a Roman Colony, in a place called before Sancii, afterwards the Coun∣try of three Emperors, Trajan, Adrian, and Theodosius the Great. This done, he returned to Rome in a Fleet of Ten Sail, after he had governed Spain five Years. The Senate receiv'd him in the Temple of Bellona; and tho' his Actions had deserv'd it, they granted him not the honour of a Triumph, because till then it had not been allow'd to any Proconsul. Scipio being gone, the following Year, which was of Rome 549, Mandonius and Indibilis, 549. either to deliver their Country from a Foreign Yoke, or in hopes to make themselves Kings, Mandonius and Indi∣bilis Re∣volt. revolted again. At first the War was carried on, not only among the Illergetes, where their Dominion was, but among the Ausetani, that is, the Country about Vique, and then passed on to the Neighbouring Parts, and the Sedetani, as Livy says; I rather believe it was the Ceretani, that reach to the Pyreneans. Those that had taken Arms amounted to 30000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. Lucius Cornelius Lentulus, and Lucius Manlius Acidinus, who had succeeded Scipio, as Proconsuls, marched against them. They came to a Battle in which 13000 of the Mutineers were kill'd, the rest fled to the Woods and Mountains. Indibilis was slain in the Fight, Man∣donius deliver'd up, by his Men, to purchase their own Pardon, because the Proconsuls had de∣clared, they would not hearken to Peace till the Authors of the Revolt were given up. The next Year, which was of Rome 550. the Spaniards were quiet, being spent, and worn out, with so many Years War. But the foregoing Year at Rome, Publius Cornelius Scipio, and P. 550. Licinius Crassus, were chosen Consuls. Scipio had Sicily for his Province, with Power, if he thought it convenient, to pass over into Africk; which he did, with a Powerful Army and Fleet. There he first overthrew Hanno the Son of Hamilcar; but made no other great Pro∣gress that year. In the beginning of the next, being strengthned with Recruits out of Italy, he twice routed Asdrubal and Syphax, killing 40000 of their Men. To conclude, Hannibal himself being call'd out of Italy, to defend his own Country, was defeated and drove out of Africk; whereupon ensu'd a Peace betwixt those two mighty contending Nations; much to the honour of the Romans, and dishonourable to the Carthaginians. Thus ended the second Punick War, in the Year of Rome 552. Scipio triumphed at Rome, and had the Title of Afri∣canus 552. confer'd on him. This succinct Relation may suffice of things so remote. CHAP. VIII. The Spaniards Revolting are again subdu'd by the Romans. Cato being Consul comes into Spain. Several Pretors succeed. Their Government and Actions. NOthing of note happen'd in Spain till the year 554. when L. Cornelius Lentulus, being gone to 554. Rome, C. Cornelius Cethegus succeeded him as Colleague to L. Manlius Accidinus. The Spaniards The Spa∣niards Re∣volt from the Romans who kill 15000 of them. now at length, to their great grief perceived, that the War the Romans had undertaken, was not upon account of restoring them to their liberty, but of enlarging their own Empire. This gave them occasion to conspire, and take up Arms among the Ceretani, but Cethegus coming upon them with speed, slew 15000, and so quelled that Commotion. The following year Cornelius Lentulus, and L. Stertinius, were sent to govern Spain, in the place of Cethegus and Acidinus. This and the following year there was no action of note in Spain, only that by 555. Order of the Senate, Spain was divided into two Provinces, or Governments, and distin∣guished 556. by the names of Citerior and Ʋlterior; the latter comprehending Lusitania and Betica, or Portugal and Andaluzia, and the former, all the other part to the Pyrenean Hills. In the year of Rome 557. Gneius Sempronius Tuditanus, obtain'd the Government of Hispania Citerior, 557. and M. Helvius of the Ʋlterior; against whom the Spaniards took up Arms in several parts. Another Revolt. The chief Heads of this Revolt were Colca and Luscinon; and the motive that encourag'd them to it was the dismissing of the old Souldiers, whereby they thought the Roman Forces so weakned, as not to be in a condition to withstand them. Acidinus adventuring to fight with part of them was defeated, and receiv'd some Wounds, of which soon after he dyed. This disaster being known at Rome, put the Senate into much fear, least it might produce a dan∣gerous War; the Forces of Spain being united. Therefore in the year 558. they sent Q. 558. Fabius Buteo into Hispania Ʋlterior, and Q. Minucius Thermus into the Citerior; but these du∣ring the year of their Government, did nothing remarkable, save that Thermus cut off 12000 Spaniards near the City Turba. This nothing abated the Senates care, and therefore they or∣der'd, that the succeeding Consuls should cast Lots for the Government of Spain, and the Let fell upon M. Porcius Cato, who accordingly Sailed thither in the year 559. with two Legions and twenty five Galleys. He was the first Consul sent into Spain, and nevertheless it was 559. Cato the first Con∣sulin Spain. order'd, that Publius Manlius should command in Hispania Citerior, and Appius Claudius Nero in the Ʋlterior, with the Title of Pretors. Cato landed near Roses, whence he drove the Spa∣nish
Garison, and then went on to Ampurias. That part of the City which the Greeks inha∣bited received him with joy, but this was the lesser, as not above 400 paces in Circumference, whereas the other in which were the Spaniards, divided from it by a Wall, was three Miles round. There was only one Gate in this Wall, which the third part of the Greeks always guarded, and by that means preserv'd their liberty till the coming of the Romans. The Spa∣niards abhor'd the Power of the Romans, and relying on their multitude, and hope of speedy relief, resolv'd to stand it out. Cato as soon as he Encamped before the City, dismissed all the Commissaries of Provisions, and sent the Galleys away to Marseilles, thereby to oblige the Souldiers to live upon the spoil of the Country, and take away all hopes of a retreat. At the same time Helvius came out of Hispania Ʋlterior, to attend the Consul, and by the way, re∣covered Helvius recovers Iliturgum, and fouts the Spani∣ards. Iliturgum, which had revolted, and overcame a great Body of Celtiberi that came up∣on him; both which actions he perform'd with only the Guard of Souldiers his Successor Nero had given him for the security of his Person. Beligastes, a Powerful Man among the Ilergetes sent Embassadors to the Consul, begging assistance against the revolted Spaniards, by whom, he was much streightned, only for his fidelity to the Romans, and showed that 5000. Men would be a sufficient relief. Cato excus'd himself to the Embassadors, representing the small num∣ber of his Forces, and great power of the Enemies that was advancing to relieve Ampurias, which he Besieg'd; withal incouraging them to hold out couragiously for some time and their reward should be the greater. At this Answer the Embassadors fell down before him, begging he would not forsake the Friends and Allies of Rome in so pressing a necessity. Cato mov'd at their intreaty, and considering, that in War Policy often goes as far as strength, promis'd the Embassadors the relief they demanded should be sent next day; and the more to perswade them, caus'd the third part of his Men to be Shipp'd in their sight, ordering them to go before to carry the News, and thereby encourage their People. No sooner were the Embassadors gone, but he Unships his Men, being resolv'd to give the Spaniards Battle, who were come in sight of the City. To this effect, at the third Watch of the Night, he caus∣ed all his Army to march, and come upon the back of the Enemies Intrenchments, which were vigorously, Attacked by three Cohorts by break of Day. The Spaniards, tho' surpriz'd that the Romans, who the day before Fronted them, should fall now upon their Rear, furiously fell on them without any order. Nevertheless, their Charge was so violent, that they broke the Roman Horse, and put the Foot into some confusion, but they soon Rallying, checked this fury of the Enemy. For some time the Success was dubious, till the Reserve of the Legions coming on fresh, made the Spaniards at first give way easily, and then to fly outright to their Works; 40000 of them, are said to have been slain. After the Romans had taken some rest, 40000 Spaniards killed by Cato. they went out, ravaged all the Country about Ampurias, which moved the Citizens, having now no hopes of Relief, to surrender. Cato treated them courteously, and dismissed the Garrison without any Ransom. All the Country from thence to the River Ebro, being secured by this Success, the Consul departed for Tarragona; but the Bergistani laying hold of this op∣portunity, revolted, and were as soon subdued, and still offering to Mutiny, they were all sold as Slaves; a severe punishment, but necessary example to terrifie others. Some place the Bergistani near the City Tiruel; others, near Huesca, where now is a Town called Ber∣gua. Cato designing to march towards the Turdetani, a People of Andaluzia, (as has been said) who, after they had been Defeated by Manlius and Nero, intended to renew the War, with the assistance of the Celtiberi, to secure the Province behind him; he resolved to dis∣arm all the People beyond Ebro. This was so grievous to many of them, that they slew themselves rather than deliver their Weapons; whereupon, the Consul altering his reso∣lution, sent his Orders to all parts, for demolishing the Walls of Towns, which was put in execution; and at the same time, news was brought, that Manlius the Pretor, had ap∣peased the Commotions among the Turdetani. Hereupon, the Consul marched up the Coun∣try, and having passed the River Ebro, stopped not till he came before Segoncia, now Si∣guença, where the Celtiberi confiding in the strength of the place, had laid up all their Riches. The Booty was great, but there being little hopes of taking the Town; he marched on to Numantia, as appears by Aulus Gellius. Nothing of note was done in those parts. About the Pyreneans, the Ceretani, Ausetani, and Suessetani, submitted themselves; the Lacetani, who lay farther off, were also brought under. Thus all things being quieted in Spain, the Roman Several Provinces submit. Revenues increased by the improvement of the Gold and Silver Mines; and new Pretors coming from Rome, Cato returned thither, and was received in Triumph, in which, he car∣ried 148000 pound of Silver, and 540 pounds of Gold. To each Foot Soldier, he gave se∣ven Cato re∣turns to Rome, and Triumphs Several Govern∣ors of Spain. Asses, and three times the sum to the Horse. After this, as long as he lived, he took Spain into his protection, and defended it against all wrongs. After this, many Pretors came from Rome to Govern Spain. The first were Lucius Digi∣cius, for Hispania Citerior, famous for the Mural Crown he gained at Carthagena; and Publius Scipio Nasica, the Son of Gneius, adjudged by the Senate, the holiest Man in Rome. These, were succeeded by Manius Fulvius Nobilior, who took Toledo, then a small, but a strong Town; and Caius Flaminius. This Flaminius was continued, and instead of Fulvius, L. Digici∣cius, and P. S. Nasica. M. Fulvius Nobilior. and Caius L. Aemilius Lepidus. Paulus Hypseus, and Bebius Dives. Flaminius. came L. Aemilius Lepidus, afterwards called Macedonicus, for overcoming Perseus King of Macedon. Next came L. Paulus Hypseus into Hispania Citerior, and L. Bebius Dives into the Ʋlterior; but the latter being killed in Liguria, Pub. Junius Brutus was sent in his place.
Lucius Manlius Acidinus Governed Hispania Citerior the space of two Years following, and Man. Aci∣dinus, add Caius Ca∣tinius. Caius Catinius, the Ʋlterior; during which time nothing of note hap'ned. Caius Calpurnius Piso, and Lucius Quintius Crispinus, succeeded them in the Year 568. Which same Year, Cati∣nius was killed in a Battle in Lusitania before his Successor arrived. Two Years after, Au∣lus Terentius Varro took upon him the Government of the Province Citerior, and Paulus Sem∣pronius 568. Calpurnius Piso, and Quintius Crispinus. Terentius Varro, and Paulus Sempronius Longus. Pub. Man∣lius, and F. Flaccus. Posthumius Albinus, and Sem∣pronius Gracchus. Longus, of the Ʋlterior. Publius Manlius, he that was Pretor in the time of Cato, suc∣ceeded the former of those two, and Q. Fulvius Flaccus the latter. This Flaccus overthrew a great multitude of the Celtiberi, in a Battle fought near a Town called Ebura, which I be∣lieve Ptolemy calls Libura, and is now Talavera. These Pretors governed Spain two Years, and then came in the stead of the first, L. Posthumius Albinus, and of the other, Tib. Sem∣pronius Gracchus. By the Valour of this Gracchus, many Victories were obtained, and Nu∣mantia became Confederate with Rome, as Plutarch tells us. Besides, he either built, or beautified the City, of him called Gracchurris, near Numantia, where now Agreda stands. There is a Coin to be seen in Spain with the name of Gracchiorris and Albinus, both toge∣ther. In the Year 576. M. Titinius Curvus, was chosen Pretor of Hispania Citerior, and Quintus Fonteius of the Ʋlterior. They continued three Years, and it is not known what Pretors suc∣ceeded them; but we have an account that in the Year 579. Appius Claudius Centho, had the Honour called Ovatio granted him, for a Victory obtained over the Celtiberi. In the Year 580. came Servilius Cepio to the Province Citerior, and Furius Philo to the Ʋlterior. Their 576. Successors were M. Marcienus, and Gneius Fabius Buteo. But because Buteo died by the way M. Titinius Curvus, and Quin∣tus Fon∣teius. at Marseilles, Furius continued his Command, till in the Year 582. Spurius Lucretius was sent to succeed him, and Marcus Junius the other. After this, the two Provinces were again In∣corporated, and the Government of all Spain committed to Lucius Canuleyus, as Pretor. Be∣fore he set out of Rome, he was constituted Judge between the Spanish Embassadors, and the 579. former Pretors, who were accused of receiving Bribes, and Defrauding the Country. The Ap. Clau∣dius Centho Servilius Cepio, and Furius Philo. M. Marci∣enus, and Gn. Fabi∣us Buteo. Pretors were cleared, because the Roman Senators used great Severity towards others, but winked at Faults among themselves, to the great dissatisfaction of the People, and loss of their own Reputation. However, to please the Natives, it was granted, that the Roman Governours should not sell Corn at rates set by themselves; and that the Spaniards should not be obliged to Farm the Imposition (called Vicesima) at the Pretor's will; and that there should be no Farmers of the Revenue, but that the care of receiving and improving it, should be committed to the Corporations. Another Embassy was sent from Spain, to know what should be done with the Bastards, called Hybridae, that were the Sons of Roman Soldiers, 582. and Spanish Mothers, desiring Lands might be assigned them. It was agreed to by the Se∣nate, Sp. Lucre∣cius, and M Junius. L. Canule∣yus. that Lands should be given to those whom Canuleyus the Pretor thought fit to deliver out of slavery; for they were sold as Slaves, and that he should carry them to Carteia, and that it should be deemed a Roman Colony, which was the first in Spain, and called Colo∣nia Libertinorum. Canuleyus having Governed two Years, Marcus Marcellus succeeded him in 585. the Year 585. Strabo says, he was the Founder of Cordova; but Silius Italicus, makes menti∣on M. Marcel∣lus. Fonteyus Balbus. Gn. Fulvi∣us, and C. Licinius Nerva. of it in the time of Hannibal; whence it may be concluded, he only inlarged and beautifi∣ed it, giving it the Name and Title of a Roman Free-Town. Fonteius Balbus succeeded Marcel∣lus. After him Spain was again divided into two Provinces, and so Governed by Gneius Ful∣vius and C. Licinius Nerva, in the time of Judas the Machabee, that most Renowned Gene∣ral of the Jews, who settled Friendship with the Romans. Thus I will conclude the Account of the Pretors, which would not be pleasing, if continued; nor is it easie to perform, or proper to fill up the breaches of the Spanish History with the Grandeur of the Roman. The End of Book II.
THE History of SPAIN. The Third BOOK. CHAP. I. The first War of Numantia, and Peace concluded with that City. The War in Lu∣sitania, and other Parts, and Treachery of the Pretor Sergius Galba. IN the Year of Rome 601. were sown the Seeds of a lasting and bloody War in Spain, which for a long time was carried on with various success, and at last proved fatal to Numantia. its Descri∣ption. the Spaniards. The first Beginners of this War, were the Inhabitants of Numantia, a fierce and warlike People, grown weary of the Roman Yoke, and provok'd by the Wrongs they sustain'd. The City Numantia, once the Terror of Rome, and Glory of Spain, was seated on the utmost Northern Border of Celtiberia, among the Arevaci, a League a∣bove Soria, on the Ground where now is the Bridge of Garay, not far from the Springs of the River Duero, where some footsteps of it are still to be seen. It was stronger by Na∣ture than Art, being built on a Hill not steep, but difficult of Access, by reason or the Mountains that encompass it on three sides. On the South side, is a beautiful and fertile Plain, which runs along the banks of the River Tera for the space of three Leagues, till it mixes with the River Duero. After the manner of the Lacedaemonians, it was neither girt with a Wall, nor strengthened with Bulwarks or Towers but for the conveniency of Cattle grazing, it stretched out farther than was convenient to encompass with a Wall. How∣ever, there was a Fort, or Citadel, capable of opposing any Enemy, where, in time of War, they used to secure all their Riches. The Number of the Citizens was small, not exceeding 4000 Men fit to bear Arms; others double this number. Their manner of life being con∣stantly inured to labour, made them hardy and bold; they were couragious in undertaking a War, and prudent in managing of it. Sempronius Gracchus, when he Govern'd Spain, made Peace with the Numantians, and other neighbouring People, upon these Articles, That they should neither found, nor fortifie only Towns, or erect Forts without Consent of the Peo∣ple The terms of Peace with Nu∣mantia by Sempronius Gracchus. of Rome; that they should pay their Tribute at such time, and place as should be appoint∣ed, and that they should repair to the Roman Standard whensoever call'd upon. Among the Are∣vaci, was also another City, call'd Segeda, 40 Furlongs in compass. Appianus places it in the extremity of Celtiberia, among the Beli; perhaps, where is now the City Osma. This City, and the neighbouring Places, privately made a League, and began to fortifie and provide themselves for War, Having received Commands from the Roman Senate to desist from those Preparations, to pay their Tribute, and repair to the Roman Camp; they still delay'd time upon several pretences, and framing excuses. Hence sprang that War in which Nu∣mantia, as being near, and Allied to them, was also involved; and the Romans fearing, un∣less speedily remedy'd, that evil might grow to a greater head, had immediately recourse to Arms. At the same time, the War was carried on against the Romans, in Lusitania, by Ce∣saro, who, by the consent of the People, had taken upon him to restore them to their Li∣berty, and was Successor to another Commander called Africanus, that was killed with a Stone at the Siege of a Town. These Commotions were looked upon at Rome to be of such dan∣gerous Consequence, that after Lucius Mummius had been appointed Pretor of Hispania Ʋlte∣rior, it was thought fit to send one of the Consuls with a Consular Army to the War against the Celtiberi. And, whereas the Consuls used to be chosen in December, and enter upon their Command in March, it was now anticipated, and they commenced from the first of Janua∣ry, which was afterwards continued. Into Spain, was sent the Consul Q. Fulvius Nobilior, with considerable Forces. The Segedani knowing all these Preparations tended to their ruin, Q. Fulvius Nobilior the Con∣sul comes into Spain. sent their Wives and Children to the Arevaci, and chose for their Commander one Carus, a Man of great Experience in warlike Affairs. This Man thinking to perform some remarka∣ble Act whereby he might at first gain Reputation, laid an Ambush for the Consul, who was marching with 30000 Men. His design succeeded so far, that he slew 6000 of the Enemy, and put the rest to flight; but pursuing his Victory too far, the Roman Horse, who were in the Rear, came up, killed him, and made great havock among his Men. This Battle was fought on the 29th of August, on the day the Romans celebrate the Feast of Vulcan, called Vul∣canalia. So great was the dread conceived on both sides, that for several Days they avoid∣ed meeting one another. On the same Night, the Arevaci met at Numantia, which was
near the Field of Battle; and there instead of Carus, chose Haraco and Leucon for their Lea∣ders; the Numantians named one Lintheus to command them. Three days after the Fight, Two En∣gage∣ments. the Consul encamped within four Miles of Numantia. In his Army, besides the other Forces, were 10 Elephants, and 500 Numidian Horse, sent not long before by Massinissa out of Africk. He provok'd the Enemy, and they again resolved to try their fortune; in the heat of the Battle the Romans opening their Ranks, the Elephants advanced thro', which struck such Terror into the Celtiberi and their Horses, that they fled into the City. The Romans pursu∣ing close, thought to have entred with them, and had done it, but that an Elephant being wounded on the Head with a Stone, grew enraged, and turned back upon his own Men, which the other Elephants seeing, did the like, disordering the Roman Battle, and killing all that stood in their way. At the same time the Numantians laying hold of this opportu∣nity, rallied, and drove the Romans into their Camp. Of the latter, 4000 were killed in two Engagements; of the former, 2000. Not far off was a City called Axenia, a place Fulvius Repulsed at Axenia. much frequented by Merchants. After the Battle, the Consul thought to have possessed himself of that City, but was Repulsed with great loss and shame. Upon the news of these Defeats, the City Ocile, where the Romans laid up Magazines, and left their Baggage, Re∣volted to the Celtiberi. The Consul terrified hereat, and fearing, left other Places might follow the Example, Fortifi'd his Camp near Numantia, and Wintered there with great loss of Men, thro' the violent Cold, and want of Provisions. This was what happened in His∣pania Citerior. In the Ʋlterior, at the same time, Mummius waged War with the Lusitani; at first with various Event, but in the conclusion with Success. In the first Fight the Romans pursuing the Enemy too violently, gave an opportunity to Cesaro to rally, and wrest the Victo∣ry out of their hands. Of the Romans 10000 were slain, their Camp taken; and the Lusi∣tanians shewed their Booty in all parts, as Trophies of their Valour. Success made them 10000 Ro∣mans slain by the Lusitanians. negligent, and Mummius, who was retired with about 5000 Men, taking the advantage, fell upon them as they were celebrating Feasts for Joy of their Victory, easily put them to the Rout, and recovered several Colours he had lost before. Cesaro it seems, died in this Ren∣counter; for in his stead was chose Cantheneus, who took Cunistorgis, a City belonging to the Romans, among the Cunii, in that part of Andaluzia, where now Niebla stands; thence he marched to Cadiz, and so with part of the Army over into Africk. That part which re∣mained, was in several Battles weakned by Mummius, and at last, a Body of them cut off so entirely, there was not one left to carry home the News. Thus the Lusitani were subdu'd, and brought under command; for which, the Year following, 602. Mummius obtain'd a 602. Triumph at Rome. M. Claudius Marcellus was sent with 8000 Foot, and 500 Horse to suc∣ceed Mummius triumphs over the Lusitanians Cl. Mar∣cellus suc∣ceeds Ful∣vius. Fulvius. The Government of Hispania Ʋlterior, was given to Marcus Atilius. The first thing Marcellus undertook, was to reduce the City Ocile, which having compassed, tho' their Crime was great, he would not destroy it, but caused them to give Hostages, and pay 30 Talents for the charge of the War. Not far from thence was Nertobriga, as may be gues∣ed by Ptolemy, little distant from Tarragona, and Calatayud. Embassadors came fromt hence, of∣fering up the Town to the Consul, he ordered them to send him 100 Horse. Afterwards, because some few of them fell upon the Baggage in the Rear of his Army; he would admit of no Excuse, but sold their Horse-men, destroyed the Country, and laid Siege to the City. They again sent Embassadors, excusing themselves, shewing they had been sufficiently punish∣ed, and praying they might not be forced to desperate courses. Still the Consul persited he would not hearken to Peace, unless the Arauci, Beli, and Tithii, who had began those Com∣motions, entred into the Treaty. Those People were willing to make Peace, provided, it were upon the same Articles they had made with Gracchus. Marcellus, would comply; but the Roman Allies withstood it, saying, It was not reasonable those who had done so much harm, should be admitted to the same Articles they had made before the Offence committed. Here∣upon, the Consul being doubtful what course to take, agreed both Parties should send Em∣bassadors to Rome to treat of their Affairs, and the mean while granted a Truce. Fulvius Nobilior being then at Rome, opposed the Embassadors of those that had revolted, exaggerat∣ing their Perfidiousness, and the harm they had done to the Romans. So they were sent back without concluding any thing, and were again referred to Marcellus for an Answer, which cut off all hopes of any Accommodation. About the same time, Marcus Atilius in Hispania Ʋlterior, subdu'd the Lusitani, and had many Towns surrendred to him. The following Year Sergius Galba was sent to succeed Ati∣lins, M. Atilius. Sergius Galba. Licinius Lucullus. P. Cornel. Scipio. Prosecuti∣on of the War with Numantia. and the Consul L. Licinius Lucullus in stead of Marcellus; with him came as Legate, or Lieutenant, Pub. Corn. Scipio, called the Lesser, who afterwards, destroyed Carthage. Before Lu∣cullus's arrival, Marcellus ambitious of the Honour of ending that War, drew his Men out of their Winter-quarters. Nertobriga to provide against this Storm, took 5000 Arevaci within the Walls. Numantia made no less preparation, against which, as the head of the War, Marcellus being bent, he march'd and encamp'd within five Miles of it. Nevertheless, at the instance of Lintheus, the Peace was concluded, upon condition the Numantians should for∣sake the Beli, the Tithii, and Arevaci. The design of the Consul, was, that those People be∣ing thus forsaken, should be obliged to submit, which accordingly fell out, and they were all received into Grace, giving Hostages, and paying 600 Talents, as Strabo tells us. Lucullus came into his Province with a desire and resolution of making Spoil; but finding the War
of Celtiberia was at an end, he marched towards the Carpetani, thence he passed Tagus, and came to the Vacei, now, part of Old Castile, where he designed to Attack the City Caucia, now Coca. To justifie this War, he pretended, it was upon Account of Wrongs done to the Celtiberi by those People; but in truth, it was Avarice that mov'd him, being a Man of a small Fortune. The Inhabitants of Coca met him in open Field, but were overcome, and drove into the Town; hereupon, they surrendred, delivered Hostages, were obliged to fur∣nish a certain number of Horse, and to pay 100 Talents of Silver. Upon these Conditions they admitted the Garrison that was appointed by the Consul, to enter the City, which was no sooner within, but the Signal being given with a Trumpet, all the Inhabitants were put to the Sword, without sparing Sex or Age. An inhumane Barbarity, which mov'd all the Lucullus the Con∣sul's bar∣barous cruelty. neighbouring People, no longer relying on the strength of their Walls, or the Roman Faith, to fly with their Families and Goods into the Woods and Mountains, burning all they could not carry with them. Lucullus, whom Poverty made Covetous, and Avarice, Cruel, de∣spairing of having any share in those Treasures, marched to Besiege the City Intercasia, which was formerly about the midway betwixt Valladolid and Astorga. First he summoned the Town, but they answered, in case they should surrender, he would keep his Word with them, as he had done at Coca. Then he drew out his Army to provoke them to a Battle, which they re∣fused, resolving to make good their Works. Some few Sallies they made, but nothing of note hap'ned, only that Scipio overcame a mighty Spaniard that challenged all the Romans, when no other durst encounter him. In the Army there was great scarcity of provisions; so that the Soldiers fed upon boil'd Wheat and Barly, which, together with the thinness of the Wa∣ter, caused many to fall Sick of the Flux. Yet still the hope of taking the Town, made 'em hold out. Having cut Wood, and made Engines, they cast down a great part of the Wall, and adventuring to give an Assault, in which Scipio first mounted the Breach, and gain'd a Mural Crown; they were repuls'd, and fled in such Confusion, that many were drown'd in a Lake that was hard by. At Night the Besieg'd repair'd the breach, and the Consul had been forc'd to raise the Siege, but that hunger oblig'd the Townsmen to Surrender. The condi∣tions were tolerable, that the Besieg'd should furnish 1000 Coats, a number of Beasts for Car∣riage, and give Hostages. No Money was demanded because they had none, as being a Moun∣tain Intercasia Surren∣dred. People, that only minded Tillage and Cattle. Hence the Consul marched to Palencia, but could not enter it. Some Authors say, that from old Castile he traversed all Andaluzia, as far as Cadiz; where was presented to him a monstrous head of a Fish. Sergius Galba, who as was said, commanded in Hispania Ʋlterior, was not idle, but oppos'd the Lusitani, who made Inroads into Andaluzia, and infested the Confederates of the Romans. He adventuring to fight the Enemy when his Men were tir'd, was put to the Rout; lost 7000 Men, and was forc'd, with the rest, to fly to Carmena, as Appianus calls it, I rather believe it to be Carmona, then the strongest Town in those parts. Here he Winter'd, using all possible diligence to recruit his Forces, and raise new Supplies. In the Spring, being desirous of Revenge, he broke into Lusitania, Plundering, burning, and destroying, all that came in his way. The People mov'd by these losses, sent Embassadors to him; he excused what they had done, say∣ing, it was the barrenness of their Country oblig'd them to intrude upon their Neighbours, in consideration whereof, he would assign them better Lands to inhabit. He appointed them a day to come to him in three Bodies; which they, suspecting no Falshood or Treachery, readily Galba's barbarous Treache∣ry. obeyed. But the Pretor was so far from keeping his word, that he put them all to the Sword, a Cruel Butchery and barbarous deceit. Part of the Booty was given to the Souldiers, the rest the General kept to himself; by which means it is believed, he became the richest Citi∣zen in Rome. CHAP. II. Viriatus his Original and actions against the Romans. The Government of several Roman Generals, and among them of Metellus and Pompey, and Death of Viriatus. THIS cruelty of Galba instead of Terrifying, so far incensed the People against the Romans, that it occasion'd the War of Viriatus, which lasted Fourteen Years, during Viriatus's Original and Rise. which time the Romans sustain'd many and very great losses. Viriatus was a Native Lusitania, of mean Parentage, as being in his youth a Shepheard. Leaving that course of Life he fell to Robbing, and having by degrees got together a good number of Men, made excursions into the Neighbouring Country Subject to the Romans, about the mouth of the River Guadiana. Marcus Vitellius, succeeded Galba, in his Command the Year of Rome 604. His first care was in time to suppress Viriatus, who leaving Lusitania pass'd the Streight of Cadiz, and kept himself in the fastnesses resolving not to come to a Battle. On the other side the Pretor, ha∣ving beset those Places, so streightned the Mutiniers, that they began underhand to Treat of submitting. Vitellius willingly gave ear to them, but Viriatus understanding what was in hand, disswaded his Men, and having brought them to his beck, drew out as if he intended to fight. He plac'd his Cavalry in the front, while the Foot stole away thro' the Woods, and
then they all made to Tribola, a City where Viriatus hoped to make good his ground, and protract the War. The Romans pursuing, near the City he laid an Ambush, where 4000 of them were killed together with the Pretor, the rest fled to Tarifa, whence offering again Vitellius's Army routed and he slain. to hazard a Battle, with the assistance of the Celtiberi, they were all cut off. In the Year 605. Caius Plaucius succeeded Vitellius, as Pretor of Hispania ulterior. At the time of his coming, Viriatus ravag'd the Lands of the Turdetani, and Carpetani. As soon as the Romans came in sight, he made show of flying, and they pursuing him without order, he fac'd, and cut 605. off 4000 of the foremost. The Pretor rather mov'd by desire of Revenge, than any hope of C. Plaucius twice De∣feated by Viriatus. Victory, still follow'd the Enemy, as far as the Mountain of Venus, whither Viriatus after passing the River Tagus, was retir'd. Here again they engag'd, and no less number of the Romans was slain than before, which so terrifi'd the Pretor, that tho' it was the midst of Sum∣mer, he shut himself up within the strong Towns, as if it had been in the dead of Winter. This Battle, is by some believ'd, to have been fought in Lusitania, near the City Ebora, by reason of a Tomb preserv'd there to this Day, with a Latin Inscription, to this effect. I Lucius Silo Sabinus, being struck thro' with many Darts and Arrows, in the War against Viria∣tus, An anci∣ent Inscri∣ption. in the Territory of Ebora, in the Province of Lusitania, and carry'd off upon the Soldiers shoul∣ders, ordered Caius Plaucius the Pretor, to build this Tomb, at my cost, and therein, would I have no other laid, whether Free, or a Slave. If the contrary should happen, I desire the Bones of any o∣ther to be taken out of my Tomb, if my Country be free. This is the ancientest Roman Inscripti∣on to be found in Spain. Mean while, Galba was Impeach'd at Rome, for his Perfidiousness towards the Lusitanians, and being the cause of all the Misfortunes that had befallen the Ro∣mans upon that account; but the great Riches he had gather'd in that Province, brought 606. him off, tho' Cato, and Scribonius the Tribune, accus'd him. After this, in the Year 606. Cl. Ʋni∣manus van∣quished, and killed by him. Claudius Ʋnimdnus was sent from Rome, to the War against Viriatus, and was by him Van∣quish'd, himself slain, great part of his Army slaughter'd, and the Fasces, which were En∣signs of his Dignity, set up as Trophies on the Mountains of Lusitania. This Battle was fought near the Town of Ʋrique, in Portugal, as appears by a Stone there, which is one of the most notable Roman Monuments in Spain; and Andrew Requesendius in his Antiquities of Por∣tugal, makes mention of it, the Inscription it bears, only supplying the defect of a few Let∣ters, is as follows. I Caius Minucius, Son to Caius Lemonia Lubatus, Tribune of the Legion Decima Gemina, whom the General Claudius Unimanus, left for dead, because senseless with my wounds, being preserv'd by the care of Ebutius, a Lusitanian Soldier, and dress'd, liv'd some days, and di∣ed with sorrow, for not gratifying after the Roman manner, him that had well deserv'd it. The following Year, which was 607. Caius Nigidius Pretor, was sent in stead of him that was 607. kill'd. He fought with Viriatus near the City Viseo, in Lusitania, or Portugal, and with the C. Nigidi∣us treated in the same manner. C. Lelius successful against Viriatus. like Success to the former. After Nigidius, C. Lelius, sirnam'd, the Wise, came into Spain, and was the first that broke the Forces of Viriatus, being a Man that rely'd more on Policy, than open Force, and hereby obtain'd great renown. In the Year 609. Q. Fabius Maxi∣mus Aemilianus, being Consul, came into Spain, and the Senate, there being a scarcity of old Soldiers, made new Levies, and raised 15000 Foot, and 2000 Horse. These Forces landed at Orsuna, supposed to be Ossuna in Andaluzia. Here the Consul kept his Army for some time, the better to Train and Exercise his new Soldiers. He himself in the mean time went 609. to Cadiz, to offer Sacrifice, and make his Vows in the Temple of Hercules. On the other Fab. Ma∣ximus over∣throws him. side, Viriatus having Intelligence of the Preparations made by the Romans, resolv'd to meet them. His coming was unexpected, so he surpriz'd, and slew the Roman Foragers, and their Guards. The Consul being return'd from Cadiz, notwithstanding, Viriatus offer'd him Bat∣tle, for some days refus'd it, only Skirmishing, to try his Men, and show them the Enemy was to be overcome. At length, he drew out, and in a pitch'd Battle put Viriatus to flight. Winter then drawing on, the Roman Army march'd to Cordova, where they Winter'd; but Vi∣riatus took up in the Mountains, his Men being more hardy, and inur'd to the cold. Thence he sent to all parts for Succours, but particularly, to the Arevaci, Beli, and Tithii, exhort∣ing them to take up Arms for their own Liberty, and the publick Good. Those People wil∣lingly gave ear to these Propositions, which gave occasion to the second War of Numantia; as shall be related, when we have done with Viriatus. Lucius Hostilius Mancinus was Consul with this Aemilianus, of whom, we have now spoken, and he might be believ'd to have come into Spain, and there to have overcome the People of Galicia, if Credit could be given to the Inscriptions of Anconitanus, which, he brings to this purpose. Others may judge of the Credit that is due to him; but by some learned Men, he is look'd upon, as no better than a meer Inventor of ill contriv'd Fables, and Lyes. At Rome in the Year 610. the two Consuls Servilius Sulpicius Galba, and L. Aurelius Cotta, 610. contended for the Government of Spain, the Senate could not agree about it; and Scipio being ask'd which of them he thought fittest, answer'd, Neither, for the one has nothing, the other ne∣ver has enough. Hereby shewing, that neither a poor, nor a covetous Man is fit to Govern. Whereupon the Pretor Popilius was sent. To him, Pliny says, Viriatus delivered the Towns that were in his Possession; which, if so, is a sign he was much streightned by him. After Popilius the Pretor sent into Spain. Popilius, in the Year 611. the Consul Q. Cecilius Metellus, sirnam'd, Macedonicus, came to Govern Hispania citerior, in order to quiet the Celtiberi, who, at the Instigation of Viriatus, were raising Commotions. There is an Account of one Quintius, who prosecuted the War against 611.
Viriatus, but whether as Pretor, or by Commission from the Consul, does not appear. Cer∣tain Viriatus's further Actions. Quincius defeats, and is a∣gain worsted by him. Metellus subdues the Celti∣beri. it is, that this Quintius, at the foot of Mount Venus, near Ebora, in Portugal, gave Viri∣atus a great Overthrow; but he gathering his Forces, returned upon him with such Vigour, that the Victors having receiv'd much damage, tho' it was the middle of Autumn, were glad to retire to Cordova, as if it had been Winter, where they Fortified themselves, without ta∣king any care of the Spaniards their Confederates, or the other Romans, who were in weak Gar∣risons, and left exposed to eminent Danger. Metellus subdu'd the Celtiberi. Pliny says he overcame the Arevaci; nevertheless, he was continued in his Command the Year 612. and the Consul Q. Fabius Servilius, was sent against Viriatus with 18000 Foot, and 1500 Horse. Besides those Forces Micipsa the Son of Massinissa sent him 10 Elephants, and 300 Horse out of Africk. Notwithstanding all this mighty Army joyn'd to what was before under the Ro∣man Pay, Viriatus who lay hid in the Mountains of Andaluzia, with frequent Excursions did 612. great Damage, and obtain'd many Advantages, till the Romans remov'd their Camp to Ʋtica, Q. Fabius Servilius the Consul streight∣ens Viria∣tus. formerly a City of Andaluzia. Then Viriatus for want of Provisions, retir'd with his Army into Lusitania. The Consul being rid of that danger, marched to the Cunei, where he over∣came two Captains of Robbers, call'd Curio, and Apuleyus, and carried some Towns by Force that were held for Viriatus, with strong Garrisons. A great Booty was taken, and a multitude of Prisoners, 500 whereof, that were found most Guilty, he put to Death, 10000 more were sold as Slaves. Metellus at the same time gain'd much Honour by entirely redu∣cing the Celtiberi, and taking the famous Cities Contrebia, Versobriga, and Centobriga. Then hearing that the Consul Quintus Pompeius was appointed to succeed him, he was so offended at it, that to weaken his Forces, he dismissed the Soldiers, neglected the Magazines, and star∣ved the Elephants; for which reason, the Triumph he had otherwise well deserv'd, was re∣fus'd him at Rome. Q. Pompeius came to Spain in the Year 613. Servilianus was continu'd by order of the Senate, in his Command, where he receiv'd into favour Canoba, a Captain of 613. Robbers, who submitted himself, and forced Viriatus, who lay before the City Vacia, to raise Pompey in Spain. his Siege, and fly away; whereupon many neighbouring Towns submitted themselves to him. As he was Active and Vigilant, so was he no less Severe, or rather Cruel; for he cut off the Hands of all Canoba's Men, and 500 other Prisoners, because they had deserted from his Camp. This Action in stead of terrifying the Natives, put them upon desperate Counsels. The Romans laid Siege to the City Erisana, Viriatus without being discovered, got in by Night, and the next Morning made such a furious Sally, that he put the Enemy to flight, killing ma∣ny of them; those that escaped, drew up in a place of no Strength, where they were in great Viriatus defeats the Ro∣mans; & makes Peace with 'em. danger of perishing; but Viriatus laid hold of this Opportunity to obtain an advantageous Peace, which was concluded, and by virtue thereof, the Romans sav'd their Lives; Viriatus was called a Friend of the People of Rome, and all that his Men had plunder'd, was allow'd them. A great shame and dishonour to the Majesty of the Roman Empire. Quintus Pompeius held the Government of Hispania citerior two Years; but because the Pro∣vince was in Peace, and Metellus had left all things in disorder, had not the opportunity of doing any Action of note. On the contrary, Servilius, who by order of the Senate had va∣cated the Peace he made before, near the City Arsa put Viriatus to the rout, and pursu'd him Servilius breaks the Peace, and routs Viriatus. into Carpetania, where, by a Stratagem, he got away. He drew out his Men, as if intend∣ing to give Battle, placing his Horse in the Front, and whilst the Romans were forming their Body, caused his Foot to slip away thro' the Woods that were near; that done, the Horse with the same swiftness, got off. The Consul despairing of taking so subtle an Enemy, march∣ed to the Vectones in Estremadura, and thence without stopping, into Galicia, where all was in Disorder, and full of Murders and Robberies. Viriatus tired with so lasting a War, and fearing his Men should make their Peace with the price of his Head, sent three Embassadors to Treat with the Consul. The means he chose to secure himself, prov'd his ruin; for Ser∣vilius corrupted the Embassadors, who, at their return, murder'd Viriatus as he lay sleeping. His Funeral was honour'd with the Tears of his Soldiers, afterwards with Sports, and the The Death of Viriatus. Sacrifice of much Cattle. The Murderers petitioning the Senate at Rome for a Reward of their Service, receiv'd answer, That the Senate and People of Rome, did not approve of Soldiers killing their General. To Viriatus, succeeded in the Command, one Tantalus; but he not being of equal Authority, Valour, and Conduct, soon submitted himself to the Consul, and was receiv'd to Grace. These, and the other Lusitani were disarm'd, and Lands allotted them, to the end, that being employ'd in Tilling, and the care of their Cattle, they might, be more inclinable to live in subjection, and want the Power of Revolting.
CHAP. III. The second War betwixt Rome, and Numantia. The Consul Mancinus, concludes a dishonourable Peace with that People, and is therefore deliver'd up to them. Sci∣pio Africanus sent against them. The City destroy'd. THE very Year that Viriatus was, murder'd by his own Men, which was of Rome 614. the Numantians again Revolted. The occasion of it was thus, Metellus having subdu'd the 614. Celtiberi, there remain'd only the Numantians, and Termestini, who by former Treaties were Numantia again Re∣volts. declar'd Friends, and Allies of the People of Rome, and consequently, preserv'd their Liberty. The Termestini, are suppos'd to be about nine Leagues from Numantia, where now stands a Chappel, call'd of our Lady of Tiermes. Pompey intending to bring them under Subjection, took for a Pretence to fall out with them, that they had receiv'd into their City the Segedani, who had sided with Viriatus. Segeda is reckoned to be among the Beli; and at this Day there is a Town betwixt Soria, and Osma, believ'd to be the Remnant of that City. This Crime was not great, yet the Numantians sent Embassadors to excuse it, whom, Pompey turn∣ed back with disgrace. Still the Numantians sent others, renouncing their Friendship with the Segedani, and desiring to renew the Peace, and Alliance they had made with Gracchus. Pompey reply'd, It was in vain to Treat of Peace, unless they laid down their Arms. All hopes of an Accommodation being thus out off, the Numantians provided for War, and to this effect, raised 8000 Foot, and 2000 Horse; a small number, but of great Courage and Resolution. Megara, a Man of great Experience, was appointed to command these Men. Pompey was not idle, but incamp'd near Numantia with 30000 Foot, and 2000 Horse. The Numantians kept them in continual alarm, yet so, that they always avoided coming to a Bat∣tle, which Pompey perceiving, sate down before Termancia, whence he was also forced to re∣tire in great disorder, by a Sally the Besieged made. Next day they came to a Battle, the event whereof, was dubious, but that Pompey marched away to the City Manlia, which was delivered to him, tho' there was a Numantian Garrison in it. There is at present in that Neighbourhood, a Town call'd Mallen, perhaps the Remains of that City. Then he return∣ed upon Termancia, and took it. Now, only Numantia remain'd; before Pompey mov'd to∣wards them, he slew Tanginus, a Captain of Robbers, with all his Men, in that part of the Country, where were formerly the Edetani, and now is Zaragoza. This done, he marched Is Besieg∣ed by Pom∣pey. again to Numantia; and because the Siege was like to last long, endeavour'd to turn away the River Duero, that no Provisions might be brought into the Town, but was forc'd to desist, having lost many Men by a Sally the Besieg'd made. Besides, they kill'd a Tribune, and all his Men, that Guarded the Victualers and Foragers. Pompey warn'd by these Losses, kept his Men within their Works, during the hardest Season of the Year, which caused many to die of Sickness, besides what were cut off by the Besieg'd. Hereupon, tho' the Winter was far spent, Pompey was forc'd to raize the Siege, and disperse his Army among the Neighbour∣ing 615. Towns. In the Year 615. the Consul M. Popilius Lenus was appointed to succeed Pompey. Pompey Treats with the People of Numantia fraudu∣lently. But he either for being blamed at Rome, or that his Successor might not reap the benefit of his Labours, in the beginning of Summer, concluded a Peace with the Numantians. This Treaty being dishonourable to the Romans, was manag'd in private, and Pompey to avoid Signing of it, feigned himself Sick. Popilius as soon as he came, began to examine that Af∣fair, Pompey deny'd he had consented to it, the Numantians call'd the Principal Romans in the Army to witness in their behalf. At last, the Business was referr'd to the Roman Senate, where Passion being more prevalent than Justice, it was decreed, the War against Numantia should be continu'd. Whilst these things were debated in Rome, Popilius made War upon the Lusones, a People near Numantia, but without Success, for, in the Year of Rome 616. the time of his Com∣mand 616. having been prolong'd, he was overthrown by the Numantians. In Hispania ulterior, Popilius the Consul defeated by the Nu∣mantians. the Government whereof fell to the Consul Decius Brutus. Viriatus's old Soldiers, who had Lands assign'd them, built the City Valencia. It is doubtful what Valencia this was, some say, it was Valencia de Alcantara, others, Valencia de Min̄o, and some will have it to be the great Valencia; but that cannot be, because it is in another Province. To return to what is more material, the Year following, which was of Rome 617. Brutus was continu'd in his Com∣mand, 617. and the Consul C. Hostilius Mancinus succeeded Popilius. No sooner did he take upon Mancinus succeeds Popilius. him the Command, but he sate down before Numantia, where, after receiving several Over∣throws, hearing that the Vacei, and Cantabri, were marching to relieve that place; he was so terrifi'd, that he stole away by Night, to that part of the Country which was not in Arms. His departure was not known at Numantia till two days after, the Townsmen being taken up in Sports and Pastimes, without any regard, or care of the War, It was discover'd by two young Men, who being at variance about marrying a Maid, agreed, that he, who first brought the Hand of a Roman, should carry her. They going out upon this design, and finding the Roman Camp abandon'd, return'd with the News. Hereupon, the Numantians following the Tract, overtook the Romans before they were well Fortifi'd, and hem'd in those,
who before Besieg'd them. The Consul despairing of his safety, set on foo and conclud∣ed Mancinus concludes a disho∣nourable Peace with Nu∣mantia. a Treaty with the Numantians; by which, they were restor'd to their Liberty, and Stil'd, Friends, and Confederates of the People of Rome. And this Peace he obtained by the means of Tib. Gracchus, who was belov'd in Spain, for the sake of his Father Sempronius. As soon as this shameful Peace was known at Rome, Mancinus was summoned to answer for himself; and the Consul Aemilius Lepidus was sent in his place, to revenge that disgrace. The Numan∣tians sent their Embassadors with the Articles to the Senate, that in case they did not Ratifie them, the Army might be deliver'd into their Hands, since they escaped under colour of Peace. The Senate resolving not to stand by so dishonourable a Peace, decreed, that Mancinus, who was the Author of it, should be delivered up to the Numantians. Gracchus, tho' concerned in the Treaty, escaped unpunished, because, what he did, was by command; but the Com∣monalty said, it was by the Interest of Scipio, who had married his Sister Cornelia. Marcus Lepidus without staying to hear what the Senate would decree, fell upon the Vacei, which is a part of Old Castile, upon pretence, that they had been assisting to the Numantians. After plundering and burning all that plentiful Country, he attempted to possess himself of the City Placencia, notwithstanding, he had received Orders from Rome to commence no new War with the Spaniards. Lepidus having been worsted by those of Placencia, and wanting M. Lepidus Consul is routed, with the loss of 6000 Ro∣mans. Provisions, marched away silently by Night, which those People perceiving, they pursu'd, and cut off no less than 6000 of the Romans. This was so highly resented at Rome, that Le∣pidus was summoned to appear, and answer for himself, as a private Man, and Condemned of Male-administration. These Losses were in some measure, made easie, by the Success in the other Province, under the good Conduct of Brutus, who quieted the Commotions in Lusitania, and Galicia, and subdu'd the Labricani. He ordered them to deliver up all Fugi∣tives, and themselves to appear before him without their Arms; which, when they per∣form'd, he drew his Army about them, and reprov'd them so severely, they thought they should all have been put to the Sword; but he only imposed a Fine, and took away their Arms. For this reason, Brutus had the Sirname of Gallaicus given him. The following Year, which was of Rome 618. Brutus was continu'd in his Command, and the new Consul P. Fu∣rius 618. Philo, had the Government of Hispania Citerior, and charge of delivering up Mancinus to P. Furius Philo the Consul governs Hispania Citerior. Mancinus delivered to the Nu∣mantians. the Numantians, assigned him. Q. Metellus, and Q. Pompeius, the most powerful Citizens of Rome, opposed Furius's going, as to a War where great Honour and Riches were to be pur∣chased; but he with a wonderful Resolution using his Authority, as Consul, commanded them both to go along with him, as his Legates, or Lieutenants. Being encamp'd before Numantia, he caused Mancinus, naked, and his Hands bound behind him, (according to the Roman Custom of delivering up their Generals) to be left early in the Morning at the Gate of Numantia. But he having stood there all the day, forsaken by the Romans, and not re∣garded by the Enemy, was again at night received into the Camp. We have no account of 619. any thing else done by Furius in Spain. The following Year, which was 619. Brutus was Piso suc∣ceeds Fu∣riu, and is worsted. again continued in his Command, and Q. Calpurnius Piso succeeding Furius, as Consul, fought with the Numantians, sustain'd a great loss, and was in imminent danger of having all his Army cut off. The Senate, and People of Rome being extreamly perplexed at this misfortune, chose P. Scipio Africanus to command in that part of Spain; and it is believed, still continued Brutus Scipio Af∣ricanus sent a∣gainst Nu∣mantia. in the other Province. 4000 Youths of the Roman Nobility, and others, that had been sent by several Princes to be brought up in Rome, follow'd Scipio, and all the rest had done the same, but that the Senate forbid them. The Army in Spain was quite debauch'd for want of Discipline. To remedy this Evil, Scipio left Marcus Buteo, his Legate, in Italy, to follow with the Recruits, and he himself with all possible speed passed over into Spain, where, with much Care and Industry, he soon Reform'd the Army. First, he turned out of the Camp 2000 Strumpets, then a great number of Sutlers, and others, that only served to make the Soldiers lewd and vicious. Besides, he caused every Soldier to carry upon his Back 30 days Provision of Corn, and 7 Stakes to drive into the Ground for making their Trenches, and of∣ten removed his Camp, still Fortifying every where, that the Soldiers might be inured to La∣bour. The Generals good example was of more force than any thing else; for Scipio was the first at the Work, and the last that went from it. Having spent a good part of the Year in this manner, Summer being come, Scipio advanced towards Numantia. He thought not fit at first to hazard a Battle, because his Soldiers were not yet fully returned to their former Courage; so he rang'd about, plundering and destroying all the Country. Thence he mov'd to the Vacei, designing to revenge the affront the Consul Lepidus received from the Palentini. Here Scipio had like to have been drawn to a Battle, thro' the rashness of Rutilius Rufus, who advancing too far to repress the Insolence of the Palentini, that kept them in continual alarm, was just falling into an Ambush, had not Scipio understanding the danger, commanded the whole Army to make up to him, and the Horse to surround the place of the Ambuscade, and skirmish with them, whilst the others drew off. In this march, Scipio saw the City Caucia destroyed by the Treachery of Lucullus, and being moved to compassion, made Procla∣mation, that all such as would Rebuild, and Inhabit it, should be free from all manner of Taxes. This is as much as was done that Summer. About the beginning of Winter the Roman Army encamped near Numantia, and continued all that Season, plundering and de∣stroying
the Country round about. Near to the Camp was a Village, for the most part en∣compassed with a Morass, not far from which, certain high Clifts lifted themselves up, very opportunely for to lay an Ambush. There a great number of Numantians lying in wait, had certainly cut off a Party of the Romans that were pillaging, but that Scipio perceiving the dan∣ger, gave the Signal for them to repair to their Colours. At the same time, he sent 1000 Horse to rescue them, whilst he followed with the gross of the Army. Whilst the Numan∣tians had to do with an equal number, they maintained their Ground, and pressed their Ene∣my; but when they saw the Standards of the Legions advance, they betook themselves to flight, to the great joy of the Romans, who a long time had not seen their backs before. Ju∣gurtha, the Grandson of Massinissa, was now sent by his Uncle Micipsa, to serve under Scipio, with 10 Elephants, and a good Body of Horse, and Foot. The following Year, which was of Rome 621. Scipio was continued in his Command, which 621. proved the ruin of Numantia. He as soon as the Winter was over, having by often Skir∣mishing, Destructi∣on of Nu∣mantia. encouraged his Men, divided his Army into two parts, Q. Fabius Maximas had the command of the one part, and the other, he kept to himself. Others say, he formed four se∣veral Bodies, and so as to the number of his Men, some write he had 60000, others, only 40000. The Numantians proud with their former Victories, tho' they exceeded not 8000, drew out, and offered Battle, resolving rather to die, than endure the miseries of a tedious Seige. On the other side, Scipio was positive to avoid fighting, and therefore designed to cast up a Trench round the City, to curb the boldness of the Besieged. He ordered the Ci∣ties that were in Amity with the Romans, to send Supplies of Men, Ammunition and Provi∣sion. A Trench was cast up about the City, with Towers, Parapets, and Loopholes; it was ten Foot high, and five Foot in thickness. No access was left to the City, but by the River Duero, and there were Roman Guards upon both the Banks; yet the Besieged could send out, by the means of their Divers, and brought some Provisions in light Boats, whose swiftness secured them from harm. But even this small Comfort was not lasting, for the Romans raised two Castles, one of each side the River, and fastned Beams across, in the nature of a Chain, with large Hooks fixed to them, so that nothing could pass. The Numantians were nothing dismayed at this, but often attacked the Roman Outguards; yet were still Repulsed, others coming to their relief, tho' few were killed, the Romans sparing them, that their Provisions might be the sooner consumed, and they thereby necessitated to Surrender. Being in this Condition, one Retogenes Caravinus with four others, broke thro' where the Roman Works were weakest, and made their way to the Arevaci. There having convened the principal Men, they used all their Rhetorick to perswade them to take up Arms, and relieve Nu∣mantia. All their endeavours proved successless, and it is not known what became afterwards of this Retogenes and his Fellows. Certain it is, that the People of Lucia, a Town a League distant from Numantia, attempted to relieve the Besieged, but were Repulsed by Scipio, who caused the Right Hands of 400 of them to be cut off, which terrified all others from being con∣cerned in the like rash Enterprize. Thus the Numantians having lost all hopes of Relief, and being reduced to great Extemities by Famine, sent Embassadors to Scipio to make their Sub∣mission, and sue for Peace. His answer was, That they must expect no Conditions, but Sur∣render upon Discretion. The Numantians having received this Answer, in a rage slew the Embassadors, and making themselves drunk with a Liquor made of Corn, called Celia, salli'd out, and assaulted the Roman Works, where they killed many, till fresh Supplies coming in, and their Drunkenness wearing off, they were drove back into the Town. After this, they are said to have fed some time upon the Bodies of their own Dead, and then again made an attempt to break thro' the Romans, and get away. Nothing succeeding according to their desire, mad with Rage and Despair, they slew their Wives and Children, set fire to all their Goods, and Houses, and then cast themselves into the Flames. Thus was Numantia destroy∣ed a Year and a quarter after the coming of Sciplo into Spain. Such Buildings as escaped the Fire, Scipio caused to be cast down; the Lands he divided among the neighbouring People; Scipio Triumphs over Nu∣mantia, and is called Numanti∣nus. and having settled all things according to his mind, returned to Rome, where he Triumphed as his great Actions had deserved; and to the rest of his Titles, added that of Numantinus. Not long before, Decius Brutus had Triumphed over the Gallaici, and as was beforesaid, ob∣tained the Name of Gallaicus. CHAP. IV. Other Occurrences in Spain after the War of Numantia. The beginning of the War of Sertorius. His Actions, Defeat, and Death. THE War of Numantia thus happily concluded, there ensued a lasting Peace, and Tran∣quility Peace in Spain. in Spain. For some time after, it was Governed by ten Legates; every one of which, had his particular Province. The Mallorquins were become Pirates, and committed Rapine all along the neighbouring Coasts. The Consul Q. Cecilius Metellus, subdued them in the Year 631. And thereby, gained the Sirname of Balearicus. Caius Marius, who at the 631.
same time governed Hispania Ʋlterior, mended and cleared the Roads, then much infested by Robbers. He also put the Laws in Execution, and supported the Authority of the Judges. Twelve Years after, that Province revolting, Calpurnius Piso first, and then Sulpicius Galba ap∣peased those Commotions. Much Coin is often found in Spain with the Name of Piso stampt 643. upon it. Peace being restored by the Conduct of Piso, and Galba, the Government was again The Cim∣bri enter Spain. committed to ten Legats, at the time that the Cimbri, a Northern People, like an impetuous Torrent, having spread themselves thro' many Provinces of the Roman Empire, passed over into Spain. Here by the Valour of the Romans, and Natives, they were obliged to turn back again into France, and Italy, in the Year 645. This same Year, Q. Servilius Cepio, gave the Lusitani a great Overthrow; in what quality he commanded, does not appear; but certain it 645. is, that three Years after, the same Cepio being Consul, the Lusitani were revenged of the Romans, giving them a greater Defeat than that they had received. Two Years after this, being 650. after the Building of Rome, the Cimbri, mixed with the Germans, broke into Spain a second time, and were again Repulsed by the Celtiberi, and drove back into France, Lucius 650. They re∣turn with the Ger∣mans, and are again repulsed. Cornelius Dolabella being Proconsul in that Province, quieted the Lusitani, in the Year 655. No sooner was that Province appeased, but the following Year another War broke out among the Celtiberi, the Consul Titus Didius was sent to command there. The Armies met, and came to a Battle, which lasted the whole Day, till Night parted them, without deciding the Suc∣cess, the loss being equal on both sides. The Consul made use of Policy, and caused all his 655. own Dead to be taken up, and buryed by Night. Next Day the Spaniards imagining all the A drawn Battle. loss had fallen on their side, despairing of Success, submitted themselves upon such Conditi∣ons as the Romans would impose. In that War 20000 of the Arevaci are said to have been slain; a great number, if Authors mistake not. Because the Termestini often revolted, con∣fiding in the strength of their City, it was ordered to be destroyed, and laid level with the Ground, and the Inhabitants to come down into the Plain, and live in Villages, without pre∣suming to Fortifie them. An entire Company of Robbers submitted themselves, and upon A barba∣rous Acti∣on of a Roman. promise of Pardon, delivered themselves up to the Consul, with their Wives, Children and Goods, all whom, nevertheless, he put to the Sword. A base Action, yet it seems not much disapproved of at Rome, since for his other Actions they allowed Didius to Triumph. Quin∣tus Sertorius served in this War as a Tribune, or Colonel, and gained great honour, by saving the Romans that were in Garrison at Castulon, from being all murdered, as was agreed be∣twixt those Citizens, and the Geriseni, supposed to be the People of Jaen. Sertorius hearing the uproar, for they had began to put their Design in execution, ran out, and gathering such as had escaped the slaughter, fell upon the Townsmen, and revenged the Death of those that had been slain. Thence he marched to the Geriseni, who being deceived, by the Cloaths of the People of Castulon, which he had caused his Soldiers to put on, received him with joy, a great number of them were killed, the rest sold as Slaves. All these things happened in Hispania Citerior, during the five Years Government of Didius. For in the Year 657. the Consul Pub∣lius Licinius Crassus came into Hispania Ʋlterior, and in the sixth Year of his command ob∣tained 657. a Triumph at Rome, for the Actions he had performed there. It is thought, there he gathered those Riches which made his Son Marcus Crassus the richest Citizen in Rome. Du∣ring the time that Crassus was in Spain, Fulvius Flaccus by his good conduct, quieted some stirs that happened among the Celtiberi, in the Year 660. At which time, Italy was all in a flame with the Civil Wars kindled by Marius and Cinna, against Sylla, and many of the Nobility 660. were by them put to Death. Marcus Crassus, whose Father and Mother had been put to Death, Marius and Cinna. fled into Spain, where he had many Friends, on account of Favours they had received from his Father; but most Towns being of Marius's Faction, he durst not appear in publick, and therefore hid himself in a Cave, which was in the Land of one Vibius Paciecus, an intimate Friend of his. Who being informed of his coming, lest his going to see him might cause some suspicion, ordered a Slave every day to leave such Provision as he would give him, up∣on a certain Rock, threatning him with Death, if he durst go to see who it was for, or dis∣close the secret. In this manner Crassus lived for some time, till the News was brought, that Marius and Cinna, were overthrown by Sylla. Then coming out of the Cave, by fair means, he drew to his Party, many Cities of Spain, and among them, Malaga, which, nevertheless, was plundered by the Soldiers, against his will, as he pretended, but perhaps, he only coun∣terfeited, and had permitted it to gain the good Will of the Army. The Cave where Cras∣sus lay hid is shown to this day, betwixt Ronda, and Gibraltar, near a Town, called Ximena, in which, 'tis said, are all the marks that Plutarch gives of it. From those Civil Wars at Rome, sprang another in Spain, which, tho' at first it appear'd inconsiderable, yet for the space of nine Years it withstood, and often foiled the Roman Pow∣er; but at last ended to their satisfaction. Quintus Sertorius was the Man that managed it, Sertorius's Actions. he was by Birth an Italian, of mean Parentage, at Narsium, a Town near Rome. His Valour was great, as has before been hinted. In the Civil Wars of Italy, he sided with Marius, lost an Eye, and was by Sylla Proscribed, which is the same as Outlawed. To save his Life, and believing, that in this confusion, every one would keep whatever he could possess himself of, he being well beloved, both by the Soldiers, and Natives, fled into Spain, resolving to make good his Party there. To this intent he secured the Ports, and left one Salinator with a sufficient Force to guard the Passes of the Pyrenean Mountains, whilst he himself went farther
into the Country, raised Men, and gathered store of Arms, and Provisions. All his De∣signs were nipt by Caius Annius, who routed the Guards upon the Pyreneans, and slew Salina∣tor, by means of one Calpurnius Lanarius, his intimate Friend, that basely murdered him. Ser∣torius was so dismayed at this Misfortune, that he fled from Carthagena into Africk, where Fortune being no kinder to him than before, he suffered much, yet passed over, and possessed himself of the Island Iviça. Thence also he was expelled, and designing to fly from his Ene∣mies to the Canary Islands, was called upon by the Lusitani, who being desirous of recover∣ing their lost Liberty, thought this a fit Opportunity. Sertorius readily embraced their offers, and as he was a Man no less versed in the Arts of Peace than War, by his affability and cour∣tesie, soon gained their Affections. For the greater show of Majesty, he erected a Senate of Spaniards like that of Rome, with all the Honours and Dignities belonging to it. He Honour∣ed all Men, but more especially the Romans, as his Country-men, and those he could best con∣fide in. The fame hereof being spread abroad, he not only became Sovereign of Hispania Ʋlterior, but gained the Love of the Citerior; all the Spaniards being persuaded by his means, they might cast off the Roman Yoke. To settle this affection the more, he caused Masters of all Arts and Sciences to come from Italy, and Founded an University at Osca, persuading the He founds an Univer∣sity at Osca. chief Men to send their Children thither to Study, upon pretence of Improving them; but in reality, to keep them there as Hostages, without giving Offence to their Parents. As the surest tye, he made use of Religion, feigning, that Diana had given him a Doe, which told him in his Ear all he was to do; and therefore had one bred to hand, that when he stooped, clapp'd her Mouth to his Ear, as if she spoke; by which means, the ignorant Na∣tives were persuaded he knew all that was done abroad, and received Directions from Heaven how to Act. There are Pieces of Coin to be seen in Spain, with the Effigies of Sertorius on the one side, and the Doe on the other; there are also two Stones at Ebora in Portugal, that show Sertorius resided long in that City. Besides, it appears by Pliny, and Ptolomy, that formerly there were two Towns in Spain, that bore the name of Osca, one among the Iler∣getes, betwixt Aragon and Catalonia, and the other in Andaluzia; but which of these was the University, is uncertain, some think it was Huesca in Aragon; but I rather think it was the other Huesca among the Bastetani. At his first coming out of Africk into Lusitania, Sertorius brought over with him 2600 Romans, and 700 Africans; besides these in Spain, he gathered 4000 Foot, and 700 Horse. With this small number, he first vanquished Cota, a Comman∣der of the Enemy, in a Sea Fight near Gibraltar. Afterwards on the Banks of Guadalquivir, he Defeated the Consul Didius, and slew 2000 of his Men. These Successes gained him much Credit among his own people, and struck a Terror into his Enemies. This moved Sylla, in the Year 674. and his second Consulship, to send Q. Metellus Pius, his Colleague into Spain. With him went the Pretor Lucius Domitius Toranius, who, at the 674. very entrance into Spain, and foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, was slain by Hirtuleyus, one Metellus sent by Sylla into Spain. Hirtuleyus General for Serto∣rius, twice routs the Romans. of Sertorius's Commanders, and his Army defeated, which misfortune moved Manilius the Proconsul of Gallia Narbonensis, to pass over into Spain; but he fared not much better than the other, only that he saved his Life, being overthrown, and forced to fly with pre∣cipitation to Lerida, by the same Commander. Metellus with his Army peirced thro' the Country as far as Andaluzia, where he was often worsted by Sertorius, and obliged to Fortifie himself in the strong Towns, trusting rather to their Walls, than his own strength. Yet he adventured to sit down before the City Lacobriga, now Lagos, near Cape St. Vincent, the Forces of Sertorius being at that time divided; but his attempt proved in vain, for Sertorius's Men, encouraged by the Reward he promised, put into the Town 2000 Skins of Water, which was the only thing they wanted, their Conduits being cut off, and a Well they had, not being enough to supply all. The Romans having but five Days Provision, and understanding this Relief was put in, were constrained to raise the Siege. As they drew off, Sertorius kept close in their Rear, cutting off many; for now the Spanish Soldiers were not inferior to the Romans for Discipline, but obeyed Command, and Fought in good Order; besides that, they had armed themselves with the Weapons of the Romans they had slain. Thus the fame of Sertorius was not only spread throughout Spain, but reached into Asia, whence Mithridates, then in War the second time with Rome, sent Embassadors to him, offering Supplies of Mo∣ney, Mithrida∣tes sends Embassa∣dors to Sertorius. and a Fleet, intending by that means to divide the Forces of the Romans, For the greater Granduer, Sertorius received the Embassadors in the Senate, and agreed to all they had to propose, granting that they should carry along with them, Marcus Marius, with a number of Soldiers to introduce the Roman Discipline among that King's Forces. But Serto∣rius was now streightned by the coming of Lucius Lelius out of France; who joyning with Me∣tellus, so encreased his Forces, that Sertorius durst not give them Battle, which before, he endeavoured, yet made frequent Excursions, and kept them in continual alarm. In this man∣ner, he kept himself for two Years, till Pompey the Great, at the request of Metellus, was Pompey the Great comes in∣to Spain. sent as his Colleague, to command with equal Power. For his Questor, or Pay-Master came L. Cassius Longinus, of whom, more will be said hereafter. Pompey made haste to joyn Me∣tellus, resolving not to fight the Enemy till all the Forces were come together. Sertorius at this time, lay before the City Laurona, with his own, and the Forces M. Perpenna brought him out of Sardinia after the Death of the Consul Aemilius Lepidus, who having revolted from the Senate, and being therefore driven out of Italy, had possessed himself of that Island,
where he died of Sickness, and therefore, those who had followed him, passed over into Spain. Perpenna thought to have Lorded it himself over that Province, but either because his Soldiers mutinied, or that he considered better of it, he joyned Sertorius. As soon as Pompey and Metellus had joyned their Forces, they marched towards the Enemy, to raise the Siege of Laurona, supposed by some to be the City Liria in the Kingdom of Valencia, four Leagues from the City of that Name, near the River Xucar. Their Design was disappointed, for 10000 Romans, who advanced to guard the Foragers, falling into an Ambush, were all cut off, and with them, Decius Lelius, Pompey's Legate, or Lieutenant. Thus the Besieged ha∣ving lost all hopes of Relief, were forced to surrender, upon Condition their Lives should be spared, and they might carry away their Goods. This being performed, the City was fired, rather in scorn to the Roman Generals, who looked on, than thro' malice Orosius says, Pompey was gone before Laurona was taken; that the Townsmen were either put to the Sword, or sold as Slaves, and the Town plundered. Moreover, it is said, the Roman Army con∣sisted of 30000 Foot, 1000 Horse, whereas, Sertorius had double the number of Foot, and 8000 Horse. Nothing more was done this Year. Metellus and Pompey went to Winter near the Pyrenean Mountains; Sertorius returned to Lusitania, where his greatest strength lay. As soon as the Season would allow it, in the Year 677. both Armies took the Field. The 677. Romans divided their Forces, Pompey took the City Segeda by storm; Metellus fought with Metellus kills 20000 of Sertori∣us's Men. Hirtuleyus, Sertorius's General, killed 20000 of his Men, and he himself escaped by flight. Metellus was so proud of this Success, that he wore Embroidery at Feasts, and at his en∣try into any City suffered Incense to be offered to him as a God. Some imagine, that one of the two Bulls at Guisando, that are cut in Stone, was set up in memory of this Victory, be∣cause it has this Inscription in Latin. To Q. Metellus Conqueror, twice Consul. Pompey, after taking Segeda, adventured to give the Enemy Battle, which was very bloody, and he had cer∣tainly been lost, but that Metellus, who was near at hand came in, and rescued him; so the Armies parted with equal loss on both sides, and no visible advantage, as to point of Honour. After this Battle, Sertorius for some time, was extreamly Melancholy for the loss of his Sertorius's last Ex∣ploits, and Death. Doe, which, he feared was taken by the Enemy, and he looked upon as an ill Omen; but she on a sudden again appearing, he resumed his usual Mirth, and applyed himself to the care of the War. Another Battle was fought about the same place, near the River Turia, which runs thro' the Country of Valencia, and is now called Guadalaviar. Both Parties fought with great Resolution, but Pompey got the day, and Sertorius's Army was entirely Defeated, Hir∣tuleyus, and his Brother, as also Caius Herennius, were killed. In the heat of this Fight, one of Pompey's Men slew his own Brother, that served on the other side, which, when he found, as he was about stripping of him, it so sensibly touched him, that after sheding many Tears, and laying the dead Body on the Funeral Pile, he fell upon his own Sword. Sertorius was at Ca∣lahorra, gathering new Forces, which, when Pompey understood, he marched to Besiege him in that place; but he broke thro', and escaped, tho' with the loss of 3000 Men; and having got together a mighty Army, offered his Enemy Battle, which he avoided, and marched into Winter Quarters. Metellus beyond the Pyreneans, and Pompey in Old Castile. Sertorius was naturally of a sweet Temper, had not Jealousies altered his good Inclinations, and pre∣vailed with him to slight the Romans, who were disobliged, for that he committed the Guard of his Person to the Celtiberi. Besides, he became Cruel, and killed several of his Friends, and some of those Youths he had sent to Osca to Study, the rest he sold as Slaves; and thus he alienated the Affections of the Natives, which, were his only support. Metellus in the Spring took in several Towns. On the contrary, Pompey was forced by Sertorius to raise the Siege he had laid to Valencia; but having increased his Forces, constrained the Enemy to re∣tire, and pursued him as far as Cape St. Martin, near Denia, formerly, called Prom. Hemero∣scopeum, where there happen'd a Skirmish betwixt them, and nothing else considerable, both Parties being unwilling to come to a Battle, by reason of the smallness of their Forces. In short, the affairs of Sertorius went to decay, till at length all fell to the Ground by his Death. He was killed at Osca, by one Anthony, a Man of note, who stab'd him as they sate together at a Feast. This Design was laid by Perpenna, and tho' in part discovered; for which, some were put to Death, yet that very thing hastned the others to put it in execution. This was the end of Sertorius, by the Spaniards, called the Roman Hannibal. He left no Children, and died in the Year 681. It is supposed, his Body was buried at Ebora, because a Tomb was found in 681. that City, as they were digging the Foundations of St. Lewis's Church, with an Inscription in Latin to that effect; but for this, we have no Authority, but that of Ambrose de Morales, our Spanish Antiquary, besides whom, no Author of Credit mentions any such thing, nor is any such Inscription to be heard of, tho' it was inserted in my Latin History, upon the bare Au∣thority of the aforesaid Morales.
CHAP. V. Pompey appeases the Troubles in Spain. Julius Caesar comes into Spain. The beginning of the Civil Wars there. Pompey's Generals defeated, and the whole Country reduced by Julius Caesar, who returns to Rome. THE Death of Sertorius being known, caused great Grief among his Men, and they were Perpenna succeeds Sertorius. highly Enraged, when they understood Perpenna had been the Author of it, and that he was by Sertorius's Will appointed one of his Heirs, and sole Successor in the Govern∣ment. Perpenna what with Gifts, and what with fair Promises, soon appeased them; which was the easier, because the fear of the Romans tyed the Hands of many that meditated Re∣venge. Perpenna being possessed of the Command, and still suspecting the Fidelity of his Sol∣diers, carefully avoided coming to a Battle with Pompey, who laboured to put an end to that War, Metellus being gone to Rome. But the conduct of Pompey, out-did the wariness of Perpenna, for he fell into an Ambush, where many of his Men were cut off, the rest put to flight, and he himself was taken out of the Bushes, where he had hid himself. He begged to Perpenna killed. be carried to Pompey, having still some hopes in the Roman mercy; but was deceived in his Expectation, for he caused him presently to be killed; as is thought, for fear he should make any Discoveries, whereby others might suffer; for which same reason, he burnt the Letters of those that invited Sertorius into Italy. Sertorius, and Perpenna, being dead, the Troubles of Spain were soon appeased. Huesca, Valencia, and the Termestini, presently submitted to the Conqueror. Osma offering to stand out, was taken by storm, and destroyed. Afranius kept such a streight Siege upon Calahorra, that the Townsmen lived for some time, upon the flesh of their Wives, and Children; which gave occasion to the Romans, to call any great Famine, Fames Calagurritana. In conclusion, it was entered by Assault, the Town Demolish∣ed, and the Inhabitants put to the Sword. All the other Towns terrified by this Example, The rea∣son of the Proverb Fames Ca∣lagurrita∣na. submitted themselves. The War being ended, Pompey raised many Trophies upon the Pyre∣nean Mountains, in memory of the Victories obtained, and Towns he had taken, which were above 800, as well in Spain, as that part of France he passed thro'. In the Valleys of Andorra, and Altavaca, betwixt the Pyrenean Mountains, towards Sobrarve, are to be seen to this day, certain Iron Rings fixed to the Rocks, with Lead above ten foot in Circumference each; which are supposed to be remains of Pompey's Trophies; because such used to be fixed to Triumphal Arches to fasten the Trophies to them, as is still to be seen in the City Me∣rida. Among the Vascones, in the Kingdom of Navarre, he Founded the City Pamplona, by some in Latin, call'd Pompeyopolis. Then returning to Rome, he Triumphed, together with Metellus, over Spain, in the Year 683. 683. About the Year 685. Julius Caesar came into Spain the first time, with the Pretor Antistius, 685. as his Questor, or Pay-Master; but having at the sight of Alexander the Great's Statue at Ca∣diz, Julius Cae∣sar in Spain the first time. conceived greater thoughts, he obtained leave to return to Rome, before his appointed time was expired. After his departure, Gneius Calpurnius Piso, who Governed Hispania Cite∣rior, was killed by certain Spaniards, in the Year 689. either in revenge of some Affront 689. offered them, or to oblige Pompey, who sought his ruin. Four Years after, which was in 693. Marcus Pupius Piso, and M. Valerius Messala being Consuls, Caesar came the second 693. time into Spain, with the Character of Pretor. His first Action was, to oblige the Inhabitants Caesar's se∣cond com∣ing. of the Mountains Herminii, which are betwixt Duero and Min̄o, to leave their Habitations, and come down to the Plains, in regard that many Companies of Robbers sheltered them∣selves in those Places, and from thence, infested the Provinces of Lusitania, and Betica. Some of the neighbouring People offended at it, designed to pass the River Duero, and seek new Seats, but were prevented by Caesar, who fell upon, and routed them, so they sub∣mitted themselves. The Herminij Revolted again, and being overthrown, fled to an Island that was upon that Coast. This perhaps, was one of those Islands that lye off of Bayona in Galicia, and are known by that name; formerly, they were called Cinciae, in particular, one was called Albiano, and another, Lacia. Caesar sent an Officer to subdue those People, his Name we have not, but Dio relates the Passage. He, by reason of the Ebb, could not land all his Men; so those that landed, were easily cut off by the Herminii. Publius Sceva Signa∣liz'd himself in this Action, who, tho' much wounded, swam away to the Ships. To re∣venge this loss, Caesar having gathered a greater Fleet, went over in Person, and easily made The Her∣minii en∣tirely sub∣dued. himself Master of the Island, the Herminii being out of heart, and wanting Provisions. Thence sailing over to the Coast of Galicia, he took the Port Brigantinum, now Corun̄a. Those People easily submitted, being frighted at the greatness of his Ships, as those who were only used to see, and use small Boats; the lower part whereof, was made of light Timber, the upper of Wicker covered over with Hides, to keep out the Water. This done, he pre∣scribed Laws to the Province; to those of Cadiz, he allowed such as they themselves had chosen, and enacted Laws against Usurers, in such manner, that the Debtor should enjoy the third part of his Estate, the rest to go to the Creditor till the Principal was paid. Then he returned to Rome without waiting for a Successor, and refused the Triumph the Senate of∣fered
him, for fear of slipping the opportunity of being chosen Consul▪ He carried out of Spain a Colt, whose Hoofs were cloven, which Diviners said, betokened to him the Sove∣reignty of the World. Only he could ride this Colt, and when it died, he caused a Statue to be Erected to it, in the Temple of Venus. Caesar after this, making War in France, sent Crassus to subdue the Gauls that bordered 38000. Spaniards slain by Julius Cae∣sar in Gaul. upon Spain, who called the Spaniards to their assistance; and Orosius says, 50000 of the Cantabri, or Biscainers, went over to them; but with bad Success, for 38000 Spaniards are said to have perished in that Service. Strabo adds, that Crassus sailed to the Islands , opposite to Prom. Cronium, or Cape Finisterre, and easily brought them under, the People being lovers of Peace, and their Ease. In the Year 699. the Proconsul Q. Cecilius, 699. came to Govern Spain, and continued two Years. He fought a Battle with the Vacel, near Q. Cecilius over∣thrown. by the Vacei. Clunia, the Ruins whereof, are to be seen not far from Osma, and was overthrown; where∣at, the Senate was so much concern'd, that they resolved to send Pompey into Spain, which was accordingly done, in the Year 701. giving him that Command for the Term for five Years, as well in regard he was well beloved there, as of the good service he had done be∣fore. 701. He came not himself, being kept back by the charms of Julia, Caesar's Daughter, to Three Le∣gates sent to Govern Spain. Petreyus Afranius, and Varro. whom, he was newly Married, but sent three Legates, or Lieutenants to Govern in his name; these were Petreyus, Afranius, and M. Varro. To Afranius, he committed Hispania Citior with three Legions; to Varro, that part which lies betwixt Sierra Morena, and Guadi now called Estremadura; and to Petreyus, all the rest of Lusitania, and Betica, and the Ve∣ctones, with two Legions. These Forces curbed the fierce Spirits of the Natives; so that Spain enjoy'd Peace, at least, there was no Trouble of moment. In Italy, began a furious and bloody War, which soon involv'd Spain. Julia, Caesar's Daughter, and Pompey's Wife, dy∣ing, that knot which held them together, was untied, and each strove for the Sovereignty of the World; whence ensued that Civil War, the effects whereof, were felt throughout the Roman Empire. It will be enough here, to relate so much as appertains to Spain. Pompey Civil War betvvixt Caesar and Pompey. being gone into Macedonia to gather the Forces of the East, sent Bibulius Rufus into Spain, with Orders to Petreyus, and Afranius, that they should joyn their Forces, and by all possi∣ble means, hinder Caesar from getting any footing there. They instantly obeyed, and leav∣ing Varro to command in Hispania Ʋlterior, with their united Forces, and 80 Companies they raised among the Celtiberi, incamp'd upon the River Segre, near to the City Lerida. This Town is seated on a high Ground, towards the North is another Hill that commands it; on the East it is watered by the River Segre, which, a little lower, mixes with Cin̄ga, and both a little farther fall into Ebro. Caesar having settled all things to his mind in Rome, resolved to pass over into Spain. By the way he was stopped at the Siege of Marseilles, which re∣fused to receive him, and theretore sent Caius Fabius with three Legions before. He having Defeated Pompey's Forces that guarded the Pyrenean Mountains, stopped not till he incamp∣ed in sight of the Enemy. There three Legions more, and 6000 Foot, with 3000 Horse out of France joyned him. All these Preparations were making, because it was reported, that Pompey would very speedily come into Spain, by the way of Africk. Caesar finding he could not so soon as he desired, put an end to the Siege of Marscilles, came Caesar re∣turns in∣to Spain, and ex∣pells Pom∣pey's Party. away to Lerida. At first, they spent their time in Skirmishes, which always proved ad∣vantageous to Caesar. Soon after, the Rains falling, and Snow melting, the Floods were so great, they carried away two Bridges Caesar had upon the River Segre, above Lerida, over which, his Foragers passed. On the other side there was no Relief, because the River Cinga ran no less impetuous, and swollen. The Army was reduced to great streights, and suffer'd much want of Provisions. Fame soon carried about this News, and the Letters of Pompey's Officers so heightned it, that in Rome they gave Caesar for lost; whereat there was great Rejoycing, and many, that till then had stood Neuters, went over to Pompey. But all their ill grounded hopes vanished like smoke, for Caesar with great diligence, laid a Bridge over the River 20 Miles above Lerida, by which, he was abundantly supplied with Provisions, and the Forces that came out of France, joyned him; so was he delivered from that danger. Be∣sides, many Towns declared for him, and among them, Calahorra, Huesca, Tarragona, the Ausetani, Lacetani, and Ilurgavonenses. For this reason, because Caesar cutting several Channels, had made the River Segre fordable; Pompey's Generals fearing Caesar's Horse, which was stronger than theirs, might cut off their Provisions, they passed the River Segre at Lerida, and the Ebro at Octogessa; supposed to be Mequinencia, with a design to retire farther into the Country. But they being forced to take a great compass about, Caesar was beforehand with them, and secured all the Passes of the Mountains, thro' which, of necessity they must make their way. Thus without a Stroke, or shedding one drop of Blood, they were forced to sub∣mit themselves. Caesar pardoned, and gave leave to the Soldiers to Disband, and return to their Homes; and the more to gain their Affections, restored to them, all that his Men had taken from them, paying for it with his own Money. Some would have it, that Pompey's Generals had sold Spain; and Cato, after his snarling manner, at Pharsalia, upbraided Afra∣nius with it. Varro in the farther Spain, at first, had seemed inclinable to Caesar's Party, but hearing what Streights he was reduced to at Lerida, cast off his Mask, and began to make all manner of Preparations against him, raising Men, bringing together Galleys at Cadiz, and Sevil, and gathering Money from the Natives, without sparing the Temple of Hercules,
which he robbed of all its. Treasure, tho' then esteemed one of the most Sacred Places in the Universe. Caesar, after he was delivered of Afranius, and Petreyus, with his usual ce∣lerity, put a stop to Varro's Proceedings. Besides, near Sevil, most of his Men deserted, and went over to Caesar; so that he was also constrained to surrender himself up, and had his Life granted him upon delivering to the Conqueror, his Ships, Money, Corn, and all other Stores. At Cordova, Caesar held an Assembly of the Chief of all that Country, restored the Treasures Varro took from the Temple, and made the People of Cadiz Free Denizons of Rome, for having sided with him, and expelled Pompey's Garrison. The Government of the farther Province, he gave to Q. Cassius Longinus, who was then Tribune of the People, and had been before Questor under Gneius Pompeyus, then went himself by Sea to Tarragona, thence by Land to France, and so to Rome. From Rome, he sent M. Lepidus to Govern Hispania Ci∣terior, in regard he being Pretor at Rome, had declared him Dictator. The following Year 706. was famous for the Victories obtained by Caesar at Pharsalia, over Pompey, and in Egypt 706. over Ptolomy, thence he returned to Rome, and Posted over into Africk, where he Vanquished King Juba, and the Romans that adhered to him. CHAP. VI. Longinus Governs Spain. His Actions. The War betwixt Caesar, and Pompey's Sons. The famous Battle of Munda. Caesar returns Victorius to Rome. AT the same time, there were great Commotions in the farther Spain, caused by the Longinus in danger of being murdered for his A∣varice and Cruelty. Avarice, and Cruelty of the Governour Longinus, who continued his wickedness, which in the time of Pompey, had like to have cost him his Life, insomuch, that he came off wound∣ed. Caesar had ordered him to go over into Africk, against King Juba, a Favourer of Pom∣pey's Party. Upon pretence of this Expedition, he gathered great Sums of Money, as well by new Impositions, as by selling Licences to those that were desirous to stay in Spain, and not go over to the War in Africk. These Extortions provoked the Natives to conspire his Death. Of these, the chief were Lucius Recilius and Annius Scapula. One Minucius Sylo, upon pre∣tence of delivering a Petition, was the first that wounded him, then the others coming on, threw him down, and struck at him, but the Guards coming to his rescue, took Sylo, and carried Longinus to his Bed. The Wounds were slight, so he escaped with Life. Sylo being put to the Rack, discovered his Accomplices, whereof, some were Executed, others fled, and others being Imprisoned, bought themselves off; Longinus's Avarice exceeding all his other Vices. By this time, he had an account of Caesar's Victory, and yet under colour of passing over into Africk, caused the Army to march before him to Cadiz, and being well re∣covered of his Wounds, went to see the Fleet. At Sevil he understood that the Army had Roman Ar∣my muti∣nies. Mutinied, and chosen one Titus Thorius for their Chief; therefore he sent M. Marcellus, his Questor to Cordova, to quiet those People, and defend the Town, supposing Thorius would march thither. Marcellus joyned with Thorius, who was content, that he as being in the greatest Post, should have the Supreme Command. Longinus finding every Body was against him, after Encamping in sight of his Enemy, suspecting his Men, retired to a Town, then called Ʋlia, now Montemayor, seated on a Hill five Leagues from Cordova. His Army lay at the foot of the Hill, the Enemy coming on, and he refusing to give Battle, they encompassed his Camp on all sides with Intrenchments. Longinus had before, sent to Bogud, King of Mau∣ritania, and to Marius Lepidus, who Governed Hispania Citerior, for Aid. Bogud came first, and having increased his Forces with others that joyned him in Spain, had some Ren-counters with Marcellus; but could never deliver Longinus from the Siege, till Lepidus coming quiet∣ed all things; for Marcellus referred the Determination of all their Differences to him, which Longinus refusing, he was permitted to go whither he would. Marcellus, and Lepidus, marched to Cordova. Longinus understanding Trebonius was come to succeed him, set sail from Mala∣ga Longinus cast away going to Italy. for Italy, and was cast away near the mouth of Ebro, with all the Money he had gather∣ed by Bribery, and Extortion. The following Year 708. Lepidus Triumphed at Rome, for having quieted the Commotions in Spain, and those raised against Longinus. Marcellus was Banished for having mutinied; but was soon pardoned thro' the Mercy of Caesar. Spain was divided into Factions betwixt Caesar, and Pompey; many Cities sent Embassadors into Africk, to Scipio, then Head of Pompey's Party, desiring to be received into his Protecti∣on. Spain di∣vided be∣twixt Cae∣sar, and Pompey. Gneius Pompey, the eldest Son of Pompey the Great, in his way to Spain, took the I∣slands of Majorca, and Minorca; but was forced by Sickness, to stay some time at Iviça. In the mean while, Annius Scapula, he that conspired against Longinus, and Q. Aponius, by force of Arms, drove the Proconsul Aulus Trebonius out of all the Province, and held it for Pompey, till he recovered, and came into Spain, as did his Brother Sextus, after being Defeated in Africk by Caesar, and with him, Accius Varro, and Titus Labienus, with the re∣mains Pompey's Sons in Spain. of their Army and Fleet. Gneius having taken many Towns, and among the rest, Cordova, left his Brother Sextus there, and went to Besiege Ʋlia, which held out for Cae∣sar. Quintus Pedius, and Quintus Fabius Maximus, Caesar's Lieutenants, resorted thither;
but refused coming to a Battle, and protracted the time till his coming. He being taken up in Celebrating four Triumphs at Rome, and settling the Common-wealth, delayed his com∣ing till the beginning of the Year 709. when setting out from Rome, he made such hast, that he came to Saguntum, now Monviedro, in 17 Days, and in 10 more to Obulio, now called 709. Caesar re∣turns to Spain. Porcuna, betwixt Cordova and Jaen; just at the time that a Battle was fought at Sea betwixt Didius, Caesar's Admiral, and Varro, who commanded for the Enemy. The loss was equal, but Varro show'd he had the worst; by putting into the Port of Tarifa, and drawing a Chain cross the mouth of it. The People of Cordova being inclined to Caesar, sent Embassadors to him, shewing they were forcibly, kept under by the Enemy, and advising, the Town might easily be surprized by Night. Those of Ʋlia also sent Embassadors, acquainting him, they were reduced to great Streights, and could not long hold out, unless relieved. Caesar being thus divided, sent Lucius Junius Paciecus with six Cohorts to assist Ʋlia. He got into the Town in a stormy Night, thro' the midst of the Enemies, saying, He was sent by Pompey. This, and the hopes of being relieved, incouraged the Besieged to hold out. This done, to give a diversion to those that lay before Ʋlia, Caesar having ordered his Lieutenants Pedius, and Folius to repair to him by a certain Day, himself encamped before Cordova. Sextus surpriz'd hereat, sent immediately to his Brother to quit Ʋlia, and come to his relief; which he ac∣cordingly did, and encamped near Caesar; but refused to give Battle, and some time being thus spent, on a sudden Caesar fell so Sick, that he marched away silently by Night to Atte∣gua. This Town was four Leagues from Cordova, where there still appear footsteps of an∣cient Buildings, by the Name of Teba the old. In this Town, the two Pompey's had laid up their Treasure and Stores, which moved Caesar to sit down before it; either to draw them to a Battle, or by taking the Town to weaken their Force, and lessen their Reputation. On the other side, Gneius being resolved not to fight, marched to two Towns, now called Ca∣stroelrio, and Espegio, formerly Castra Posthumiana, places of strength, where he might lie secure. Thence he passed over the River Guadaxoz, that ran down near Attegua. Having been there worsted in some Skirmishes, and no hopes left of relieving the Besieged, he re∣turned to Cordova. The Inhabitants of Attegua, sent Commissioners to Treat of a Surrender; but upon such haughty Terms, that nothing was concluded. This put the Garrison into a rage against the Townsmen, that favoured Caesar's Party; and such was the cruelty of Numantius Flaccus, their Governour, that he killed all the Inhabitants who bore any affection to Caesar, and threw them over the Walls, the same he did with their Wives and Children. Notwithstanding all this, the Townsmen surrendered on the 18th of February. After this, Cae∣sar burnt Attubi, and took many other Towns, and then sate down before Munda, a Town seated on a Hill, five Leagues from Malaga, and near a little River that waters a rich, and beautiful Plain. At that time, it was a considerable Place, now small, but still retains its Name. Near this place they came at last to a Battle, Caesar was stronger in number, and goodness of The fa∣mous Bat∣tle of Munda. Men; Gneius had the advantage of Ground, being encamped on the side of a Hill. The Battle was fought with great Courage and Resolution on both sides, both left Wings were overthrown, and put to flight, the main Battles stood long, without giving any tokens of yielding the Victory; much, blood was spilt, and the Fields covered with dead Bodies. At last, Caesar by his own Valour, purchased success, for alighting from his Horse, and taking a Target, he fought at the Head of his Men, and stopt several of them that were about to fly. On Pompey's side, 30000 Foot, and 3000 Horse were slain; among the rest Varro, and La∣bienus. Thirteen Eagles belonging to the Legions, which were their chief Standards, were taken. Of Caesar's Men 1000 were killed, and 500 wounded. Two African Kings served under Caesar, the one called Bochius, the other Bogud. The latter of these had the chief Ho∣nour of the Victory; for he in the heat of the Action breaking into the Enemies Camp, was the cause that Labienus hastily drew thither, and the rest of the Army thinking he had fled, and despairing of the Victory, turned their backs. This Battle was fought on the 17th of March, on which Day the Festival of the God Bacchus, was Celebrated at Rome. Caesar speak∣ing of this Action, used to say, He had often fought for Honour and Glory, but that Day he fought for his Life. Some will have it, that Gneius Pompeius being wounded in the Shoulder, fled to Tarifa, and Gneius Pompey's Death. endeavoured thence to escape by Sea, but was forced, by reason his wound festered, to land the fourth day, and being discovered in a Cave, was there slain. Florus says, He was killed fighting near Laurona, now Liria; or according to others, Laurigi. His Fleet was partly taken, and partly burnt by Didius. Sextus the Younger Brother, fled into Hispania citerior, where he had many Friends. Scapula after the Battle, returning to Cordova, made a Feast, at which all drank plentifully, and then he caused his own Slaves to kill him. Munda still holding out, Caesar left Fabius to carry on that Siege, with part of the Army, and went him∣self to Cordova, which being taken by Assault, he put to the Sword 20000 of those Citizens that had followed Pompey's Faction. Thence he marched to Sevil, by the way he had the Head of Gneius Pompey presented to him, and with his usual good fortune, possessed himself of the City, which again Revolting, was reduced the second time, on the 10th of August. O∣ther Towns in that Neighbourhood, following the example of Sevil, submitted themselves; Cordova reduced by Caesar. and among the rest, the City Asta, situate two Leagues from Xeres, now a desert place; but still retains the ancient name. Fabius on the other side, so streightened those of Munda,
that after a siege of some Months they surrendred, and then he took Ossuna, but whether by Force or upon Submission is not known. All things being settled with a wonderful Celerity, Caesar having gather'd vast sums of Money, to which effect he spared not the Temple of Her∣cules, Caesar re∣turns to Rome. Asinius Pol∣lio, and M. Lepidus govern Spain. departed for Rome, where he arrived in October. Asinius Pollio was left to govern Hispania Ʋlterior, and Marcus Lepidus the Citerior, together with Gallia Narbonensis. About this time some guess Cordova had the name of Colonia Patricia given it, and several other Towns, to flatter the Conqueror chang'd their Names, as Attubis, which was call'd Claritas Julia, Ebora in Portugal, Liberalitas Julia, Calahorra, also took the name of Julia, Sexi, that of Firmum Julium, Iliturgi which is Anduxar, that of Forum Julium. Those of Ampurias laying aside the distinction, there was betwixt Greeks, and Spaniards, receiv'd the Roman Custom, Language and Laws, with the Name of a Colony. There are many Monuments of this War remaining in Spain, and particularly at Talavera, a Town well known in the Kingdom of Toledo, on that part of the Wall which is opposite to St. Peter's Church, these words are to be seen cut in the stones. To Gneius Pompey, the Son of Pompey the Great. The remaining part is worn out, and not legible, but suppos'd to be set up in Memory of some great Action. CHAP. VII. Other Commotions in Spain after the Death of Caesar, the beginning of the Empire of Augustus, and War of Cantabria. THE power of Julius Caesar was at its greatest height, when the Senators Conspiring a∣gainst him as a Tyrant, slew him in the Senate on the 15 of March in the Year 710, giving him 23 Wounds. From that time some begin the Computation of the Years of Au∣gustus 710. his Reign, but the most Commence from the following Year, when on the 22 of Sep∣tember, Caesar Murdered in the Se∣nate. according to Dio, he was chosen Consul in the Place of C. Vibius Pansa, slain near Modena. In Spain Pollio attended to suppress the Robbers, that thro' the Confusion of the times were grown very Numerous about Sierra Morena. When the News of Julius Caesar's Death was brought to him, he Assembled the Principal Men at Cordova, and there protested be∣fore them that he would in all things submit to the Authority of the Senate of Rome. This seem'd to promise some settlement of Affairs, but it prov'd otherwise; for Sextus Pompey appear'd about Jaca, formerly the Lacetani, thinking to make his advantage of the times. He set up Sextus Pompey re∣news the War in Spian. his Standard, made Levies, and some Men resorting to him, form'd a Legion, with which he took a Town near Carthagena, call'd Vergi, now Vera, or as others will have it Verja. This small beginning chang'd the Face of Affairs, and Pompey's Party which seem'd to be quite for∣got was revived, and grew the more formidable, for that he having in a pitched Battle de∣feated Pollio, possess'd himself of all that Province of Betica, or Andaluzia. The upper Garment of Pollio falling, or being by him cast off, was a great cause of this Victory, for the Soldiers Defeats Pollio. imagining thereby, that their General was Kill'd, dismay'd and soon fled. Marcus Lepidus soon quieted these troubles, and perswaded Sextus with the Money he had got to go to Rome, whereby he might recover his Father's Inheritance. Italy was no less embroil'd in Civil Wars at the same time, the Senate setting up Octavian, Julius Caesar's Nephew, to oppose the designs of Marc Antony, whom he defeated at Modena, where he had besieged Decius Brutus Augustus. up in the place of Caesar. the Consul elect, for the ensuing Year. Marc Antony fled into Gaul, where he agreed with Lepidus, and both of them soon after with Augustus. This was the beginning of the Triumvirate, which divided the Roman Empire into three Parts. Lepidus had Gallia Narbonensis, and all Spain, Antony the rest of Gaul, and Augustus Italy, Africk, Siclly, and Sardinia. The Provinces of the East were not divided, because Brutus, and Cassius, the Murderers of Caesar, were possess'd of them. There follow'd a great Butchery of the Nobility, call'd the Proscription, The Pro∣scription. whereby many suffered, and among the rest, the Famous M. Tullius Cicero. Thus the City of Rome again lost its Liberty. There ensu'd other Wars, first with the Murderers of Caesar, then with Lucius Antonius, Brother to Marc Antony. After which fol∣low'd Civil Wars of Rome. a new distribution of Provinces, which was in the Year 714 after the building of Rome. In this division Spain fell to Octavian, and hence it is the common and much us'd Computati∣on 714. of Years, called Aera Caesaris takes its beginning. But the most usual now Commences from the Birth of Christ, which was the 39 of the other Computation, according to the best Era Caesais Accounts. In Spain that Computation continu'd till the Year of our Lord 1383, when King John, the first of Castile in an Assembly of the States, or Parliament, order'd that for the future all computation of Years should Commence from the Birth of Christ. The same had been done not long before at Valencia, and was follow'd soon after in Portugal. But to re∣turn to the Affairs of the Government. Domicius Calvinus, in the Year 35 before the Birth Domicius Calvinus Tirumphs over the Ceretani. of Christ govern'd Spain as Proconsul, and afterwards obtain'd a Triumph in Rome, for ha∣ving subdu'd the Ceretani, at the foot the Pyrenean Mountains, in that part where Cerdania now stands. New divisions hap'ned betwixt the Triumphirs, part of the evil consequences whereof fell upon Spain. Octavian being at Variance with Lepidus, soon made himself Master of Africk, which was his lot in the distribution of Provinces. Marc Antony who had the
Eastern Provinces, thought much that Octavian should seize upon all without allowing him any share. Hence sprang that War betwixt them, which ended in the ruin of Antony, and so consequently Octavian remain'd sole Lord of all the Roman Empire, in the 28th year before Augustus sole Lord of the World. the birth of Christ. He took the Name Octavius in Memory of his Father, and that of Caesar in Honour of his Unkle, that of Augustus was given him by the Senate, as to a Man sent from Heaven to Restore Peace to the World. During this last War, Bogud King of Mauritania, came over into Spain, in favour of Antony, but was defeated and sustain'd great loss. Not long after in the eighth Consulship of Augustus 25 Years before Christ, the great road in An∣daluzia, that ran from Cordova to Ezija, and thence to the Ocean was pav'd, as appears by a Marble Column that is in the Monastery of St. Francis at Cordova, on which is an inscription signifying it was set up in the eighth Consulship of Augustus, and that from the Temple of Janus on Guadalquivir, to the Ocean were reckoned 121 Miles. This Temple is suppos'd to have stood in or near Cordova. After this there ensued some Commotions among the Canta∣bri, Asturiani and Vacei, about Old Castile. Statilius Taurus appeas'd them, it is suppos'd as Lieutenent to Caius Norbanus, who about this time Triumph'd over Spain. About the Norbanus triumphs over Spain. same time, the form of the Government of Spain was chang'd, for instead of Pretors, and Proconsuls, it was under Legates with Consular Power, as began then to be us'd in other Provinces. Besides the Provinces of the Empire were divided betwixt Augustus and the Se∣nate, so that in Spain only Betica or Andaluzia fell to the Senate. Hereupon Hispania Ʋlterior had two Governous one over Betica appointed by the Senate, the other over Lusitania chosen by Augustus. Thus the greatest part of Spain being in Peace, many Roman Colonies were founded, which gave occasion to the Natives to change their Manners and Language for those of the Romans, as Strabo Witnesseth. In the heighth of this Prosperity, when Spain Flourish'd with Riches and Plenty, there broke out a New War, which proved more Fierce and Bloody than was imagin'd. This Cantabri, they were. War was begun by the Cantabri a fierce People, till then not intirely subduced by the Romans, as being the stubbornest Nation of Spain, and protected by the harshness of the Country they Inhabited. Ptolemy says, the Cantab. i border'd on the East upon the Antigones, on the West upon the Lungones, on the South they were bounded by the River Ebro, and on the North by the Cantabrian-Sea, or Bay of Biscay. Their principal Towns were Juliobriga, and Vel∣lica. Others, and with reason, extend the bounds of Cantabria, as far as the Pyrenean Mountains. At that time the Cantabri, were a rude and fierce People, and had no use of Gold or Silver. The Women as well as the Men were of large Stature, on their heads they wore a dress like a Turbant, and not unlike to what the Women of Biscay now use. The Women Tilled the Land, and when they were Deliver'd of their Children, the Men lay in and they tended A strange Custom. them, as is used now in Brasil. In their Dances they made a Noise with their Fingers and Castanets. The Men brought the Portion when they Married. They had always poison prepared to kill themselves rather than suffer any Violence. In order to Commence the War, they stirr'd up the People of Asturias, and Gallicia to take up Arms, and that done made incursions into the Neighbouring Country that was subject to the Romans. This did not only strike a Terror into the Natives, but perplex'd Augustus in Spain. the Emperor Augustus, fearing it might be the beginning of a more dangerous War than o∣thers expected. Augustus being come into Spain, forces resorted to him from all parts, so that he gather'd a formidable Army. They march'd towards Biscay, and incamp'd near Segisama. suppos'd to be that now call'd Brisama, in Guipuscoa, betwixt Aspeitia and Tolosa. Then being divided into three parts, they soon subdu'd all the Neighbouring Country. The Can∣tabri not trusting to their own strength to avoid coming to a Battle, withdrew with their Goods and Families unto the Mountains, which prolong'd the War, and made it be feared it would last long. Augustus what with vexation, and what with the unwholesomeness of the Air fell Sick, and was carry'd away to Tarragona. Caius Antistius, and Pub. Firmius, were left to prosecute the War in Galicia, Pub. Carisius in Asturias. M. Agrippa was left with the Supreme Command. He was then the Emperor's Favourite, and afterwards marry'd his Daughter Julia. Agrippa gathered a Fleet from Britain, to furnish him with Provisions, and at the same time to straiten the Cantabri by Sea. Hunger pressing the Cantabri, they resolv'd to try the For∣tune of a Battle, but being a rude People under no Command, and without Sense of Honour they Cantabri routed. were easily put to the rout. Upon the Coast of the Ocean near to Segisama, rises the Moun∣tain Hirmius, by the Latins called Vinius, of difficult ascent, where many of them that fled sav'd themselves. The Romans to avoid encountring with the strength of the place, and with Men that were desperate drew a Trench quite round and fortify'd it. So those miserable People were reduc'd to such extremity, they being obstinate, not to surrender, and the Ro∣mans not to quit them, that the greatest part Perished. A Town near Brisama, then called Aracil, now Arraxil, after a long siege was taken and destroyed by the Romans. Mean while Antistius and Firmius, were not idle in Gallicia, but drew a Trench about the Mountain Midu∣lia, 15 Leagues in Compass, where a great number of those People were retir'd, and after Galicians destroy'd. suffering the utmost extremities (like the Cantabri) part of them slew themselves with their Swords, and others Drank the poisonous juice of a Tree that grows there. In Asturias the War was carry'd on with the like success; for those People thinking to surprize Carisius, who had divided his Army into three parts, their design being discover'd by the Tregeceni
their Confederates, were themselves oppress'd by Carisius, who came upon them when they least expected it. Such as escaped, fled to the City Lancia, now Oviedo, where they Fortifi∣ed themselves, and held out a long Siege, but were at last forc'd to surrender, and submit Asturians forced to submit. to the Conqueror. Thus Galicia, Asturias, and Cantabria, were reduc'd into the form of a Province. Augustus, the War being ended, returned into Cantabria, where he pardoned the Multitude; but lest the roughness of the Mountains might again encourage them to Re∣bel, he caused them to come down, and live in the plain Country; and also to give a certain number of Hostages. Many of the most obstinate, were sold as Slaves. Great was the Joy at Rome at the News of this Success. It was decreed, that Augustus should Triumph, for ha∣ving intirely subdu'd Spain, in the 198th Year after their first entrance into it under the com∣mand Spain in∣tirely sub∣dued by Augustus. of Gneius Cepius Calvus, which was a longer time than they spent in conquering any o∣ther Province. Augustus would not accept of the Triumph, but Sports were Celebrated in the Camp; and the Temple of Janus at Rome, was now the fourth time shut. The Soldiers that had serv'd their appointed time, according to the Roman Laws, were discharg'd, and Lands given them, in that Country we now call Estremadura, then a part of Lusitania, where on the Banks of Guadiana, they founded a Colony, for that reason, call'd Emerita Au∣gusta, now Merida, in its time one of the principal Cities of Spain. Rasis the Arab, relates things almost incredible, of its Grandeur; and farther says, it was Many Roman Co∣lonies planted in Spain. destroyed by the Moors at their first coming into Spain. On the Banks of the River Ebro, where before stood a Town called Salduba, was founded a Colony, nam'd Caesar Augusta, now Zaragoça, the Capital of the Kingdom of Aragon. Another City was built on the Borders of Portugal, and called Pax Augusta, now corruptly, Badajoz. Braga, before known by the name of Bracara, had that of Augusta given it. At the same time, ano∣ther City was founded among the Celtiberi, by the name of Augustobriga, where now is a Vil∣lage, called Muro, a League from Agreda. Another of the same name, not far from Guadalupe, where is now Villar Pedroso, and many Monuments of Antiquity. Augustus returned to Tar∣ragona, where, he was the eighth and ninth time appointed Consul; there he received Embassa∣dors from India and Scythia; so far was the fame of his Actions spread. Thence he returned to Rome, in the fifth Year after that War was began. He carried some Spanish Soldiers of the Augustus returns to Rome. Cohort of Calagurris, for his Guard. No sooner was he gone, but the Cantabrians, and A∣sturians, were again in Arms; but these Efforts being without Strength, were ineffectual; for L. Aemilius, and Pub. Carisius first, and afterwards Caius Furnius, having slain many of the Revolters, appeased the rest. Many, rather than submit, killed themselves; others went singing, and full of joy to Execution. Some of those that were made Slaves, conspired to∣gether, and killing their Masters, fled to the Mountains; whence, they made Excursions into the neighbouring Country, inticing the People to take up Arms. To appease these Trou∣bles, M. Agrippa, then Son-in-law to Augustus, came out of France, and in some Ren∣counters he had with those obstinate People, was worsted, which moved him, as a punish∣ment to a Legion that had been the most faulty, to deprive it of the Title of Augusta, which before, it enjoy'd. This disgrace was a warning to the other Soldiers to behave themselves better; so that at last, Agrippa was Victorious. All that could bear Arms, were put to the Sword, the rest forced to come down, to live in the plain Country, and their Weapons ta∣ken from them. Some say, there were other Commotions after these among the Cantabri; and that the Embassadors sent to Rome to Treat, despairing of ever returning home, killed them∣selves. Among the illiterate and rude Spaniards, some about this time, were famous for their Learning, as Caius Julius Higinus, and Porcius Latro, a great Rhetorician, and Friend to Learned Spaniards. Seneca, the Father of the Philosopher. Those Books that are extant under the name of Hi∣ginus, are by most Men attributed to another of the same Name, a Native of Alexandria. But Suetonius seems to be of another Opinion, saying, Some called him an Alexandrian, o∣thers, a Spaniard; and he is of the Opinion of the latter; and adds, that he was Library-Keeper to Augustus, and familiar with Ovid. Besides, the Honour Spain received from these Men, it was illustrated by Cornelius Balbus, a Native of Cadiz, who having been Consul, Triumphed at Rome over the Garamantae, 16 Years before the Birth of Christ. He was the first Stranger that obtained that Honour, and the last of Subjects; for from that time for∣ward, only the Emperors, or at most, their nearest Kindred Triumphed. All others, were rewarded with the Triumphal Ornaments; which were a long costly Robe, a Garland of Laurel, a Chair called Curulis, and an Ivory Rod. Here let us conclude this Book, and the Computation of Time from the building of Rome; being to begin the next, with the Birth of a God incarnate, and from thence to date the following Years. The End of Book III.
THE History of SPAIN. The Fourth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Birth of Christ our Lord. The Death of Augustus, and Reigns of the Emperors Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius. With an Account of the coming of St. James the Apostle into Spain; and first Preaching of the Gospel. WE are now come to the most happy Times, when the Son of God, as was re∣quisite, Christ our Lord born 752 Years utter the Building or Rome, and in the 42th of the Reign of Augu∣stus. for fulfilling the promises of the Holy Prophets, appeared to Men, himself made Man, and with the new Light he brought into the World, show'd and made easie the way of Salvation to Mankind, till then wandring, and astray. He restored Justice, before fled from Earth, and obtaining by his Death, Remission of Sins, erected to his eternal Father a Holy Temple, after the Model of the Heavenly one, and Establish'd it for ever upon Earth, under the Name of the Church. Of this Church we are all Members, who, thro' the goodness of the same God, have through∣out the World, received the Christian Religion, and preserve it with a true and constant Faith. Now, for as much as Spain was one of the first that receiv'd this Divine Faith, and most firmly adhered to it; therefore it will be necessary to relate how much it suffered in those primitive Times on that account; and at the same time, to set down the new Form, and Method that was Establish'd in the Secular Government; as also the Lives and Actions of the Roman Emperors, as Sovereign Lords of Spain; the Combats and Strifes of the first Christians, and the Triumphs, and Victories of the Holy Martyrs, who, in defence of the Truth, spilt their Blood, and lost their Lives. Most happy and truely renowned Souls! Our brevity in this matter, shall be particular; for we shall rather hint at, than enlarge upon the Ecclesiastical Affairs, that this Work may not exceed bounds. May the Divine Light from Heaven guide and direct our Pen and Intention; may it change our Ignorance into a higher Wisdom, and cause our Words to equal the greatness of the Subject. The Birth of Christ, the Son of God into the World, was on the 25th of December, in the Year 752. after the building of Rome, and 42d of the Reign of Augustus; the Consuls then, being Octavian Augustus, the thireenth time, and Marcus Claudius Silvanus. From this number of Years some Authors deduct one, and others two; neither do they all agree, who were then Consuls; which disagreement, was in the time of St. Augustin, as he himself mentions. We have herein, after considering all Opinions, adhered to that which seem'd to us most likely, and which grave Authors follow; But laying aside this, and the like Debates, not to be cer∣tainly decided, we will return to the Affairs of Spain, tho' at this time, scarce any thing oc∣curs worthy the relating; besides, the matter of greatest moment, which is, that all the Provinces being reduc'd under the Power and Government of one Monarch, the Spaniards, as well as all other Nations, enjoy'd the happiness of a blessed Peace, and quiet Repose; being wearied out with such tedious Wars, which, like Links of a Chain, hanging one by another, continu'd for so many Years, that so the Author of eternal Peace, Christ, the Son of God, might either find Peace, or bring it into the World. For this reason, few things of note hap∣pen'd in Spain, during the Reigns of Augustus, and Tiberius. However, some few shall be re∣lated, rather to continue the Series of History, than for that they are remarkable in them∣selves. Dion alone, among all Historians, without fixing the time, or place, relates, that a Captain of Robbers, called Corocota, after whom, great search had been made, of his own ac∣cord, presented himself to the Emperor, who not only pardoned, but gave him the Reward that had been promised for taking of him. Augustus dy'd at Nola in Campania, on the 19th of Au∣gust, Augustus's Death. in the Year of Christ 15. at the Age of 76. He was the second of the Roman Emperors, and possest the Empire alone, for the space of 44 Years. He appointed Tiberius Nero, his 15. Son-in-law, to succeed him; being overcome by the importunities of his Wife Livia; whereas Germanicus, and his Children had the better Right. Tiberius Governed the Roman Empire 22 Years, 6 Months, and some Days. He was of double Inclinations; some Good, Tiberius C. Reign'd 22 Years, &c. but more Bad. At first, he gained Credit by his good Government, and soon lost it, by his excessive Luxury, Cruelty, and Avarice. In his time Germanicus waged War in the farthest part of France; and it being known in Spain that he suffered great want of all Necessaries,
they sent him Arms, Horses, and a great sum of Money, which last, he refused, but accept∣ed of the rest, returned thanks to the Spaniards for their Affection to the People of Rome. This hap'ned in the second Year of Tiberius, at which time also, leave was given to the Embassadors of Hispania citerior, to build a Temple in Honour of Augustus. Those of Hispania ulterior, that they might not be behind hand with the others in Flattery, begged leave to build a Temple in Honour of Tiberius, and his Mother Livia, a thing never used whilst Princes were living, and therefore it was denied them. The Cantabri at the same time Re∣volted, and infested the neighbouring Country, which oblig'd the Romans to place several Garrisons in that Province, whereby their Insolency was curbed; and those barbarous People, by Conversing with the Romans, grew more Civiliz'd. Gneius Piso, who had Govern'd Spain, and was suspected to have Poison'd Germanicus, kill'd himself at Rome. Vibius Serenus, who had been Proconsul of Hispania ulterior, accused his own Son of taking Bribes in that Province; and he being Convicted, was Banished to Amorga, one of the Islands in the Aegean Sea, reckon'd among the Cyclades. L. Piso, who was Pretor in Hispania citerior, by laying new Taxes and Impositions, so far incens'd the Natives, that they Conspired against him, and he was kill'd by a Country-man, among the Termistini. He endeavoured to make his escape, but having tir'd his Horse, was taken, and put to the Rack, to draw from him a discovery Wonder∣ful Fideli∣ty of a Country∣man. of the other Conspirators, but all in vain; for the Day after, being again brought out to be Tormented, he slipt from his Guards, and ran his Head against a Rock with such force, that he fell down dead. So great was the Fidelity, Secrecy, and Regard of Friendship in a Clown. This hap'ned in the Year of Christ 26. As Tiberius advanced in Years, so he grew in Ava∣rice, 26. and all manner of Wickedness, a just Judgment of Heaven, for that he did not punish the cruel Executioners of our Lord Christ, the Son of God, who suffered in his time. The Emperor Tiberius dy'd on the 16th of March, in the 78th Year of his Age, which 38. was of Christ 38. Gneius Acceronius Proculus, and C. Porcius Niger, being Consuls. Caius, the Son of Germanicus succeed him in the Empire; and of a certain sort of Buskin he wore, Tiberius his Death. Caligula succeeds, and reigns three Years, ten Months, and eight Days. called in Latin Caligae, he had the name of Caligula. He was only remarkable for Madness, which lasted all his Life, and for the manner of his Death, being killed by Cherea, one of the Captains of his Guards. Aemelius Regulus of Cordova had attempted the same before, but failed of the Execution, and suffered Death. His Power lasted but three Years, ten Months, and eight Days, which were spent in extravagant Vices, and Enormities. Caligula being dead, Caius Claudius, his Uncle by the Father, who lay hid for fear of being killed, was brought out, and Proclaimed Emperor, in the Year of Christ 42. This Emperor was wholly adicted to Vice, but above all, his carelesness was such, that his Wife Messalina durst presume publick∣ly, and almost in his sight, to Marry a young Noble Man, called Silius. It is true, she was at 42. length, tho' with much difficulty, Executed for it. This set him at liberty to commit ano∣ther Enormity, for he Marry'd Agrippina, his Niece, Daughter to his Brother Germanicus. Such Marriages were forbid among the Romans; but he made a Law which declared it Law∣ful for Uncles to Marry their Nieces. He held the Roman Empire almost 14 Years. In his time Drusilaus Rotundus Govern'd Hispania citerior, and Ʋmbonius Silus Betica. Now, also Claudius C. Reign∣ed almost fourteen Years. S. James the Apo∣stle in Spain. Christianity was first Preach'd, and began to take Root in Spain; for James, the Son of Zebedee, Sirnam'd the Greater, after Preaching in Judea, and Samaria, came into Spain, as Isidorus wit∣nesseth. He first spread the light of the Gospel, in Zaragoca; where at his Instance, was built a Church of the Invocation of the blessed Virgin, now called of the Pillar, as it is receiv'd by a constant Tradition among those People. Afterwards having suffered Martyrdom at Jerusalem, in the Year of Christ 42. his Body was taken up by his Disciples, and put into a Ship, and after Coasting about the greatest part of Spain, they landed it in the farthest parts 42. of Galicia, in the City Iria Flavia, now call'd El Padron; whence it was translated to Compo∣stela, His Mar∣tyrdom, his Body brought into Spain. a place held in Veneration throughout all the Christian World, on account of that Holy Body lying there. The Body of this Apostle, for several Ages was lost, and forgot, till in the Reign of King Alonso the Chast, about the Year of our Lord 800. it was miraculously di∣scovered, and a Church built in the same place, where it has been highly Reverenced. This Devotion was much increased, when D. Ramiro, who Reigned soon after Alonso, with the Assistance of this Saint, won the famous Battle of Claviso, fought against the Moors; whereby, he de∣livered the Christians of a most heavy Imposition, by which, they were oblig'd to deliver Yearly to those Infidels 100 chosen Maids. Hence the Custom used by the Spanish Soldiers, of calling upon St. James in Battle, had its Original. And from this time, the Spaniards oblig'd themselves by a Vow, to pay a certain Measure of Corn out of every Acre of Arable Land, Yearly, to the Church of St. James, which Custom having suffered many changes, has been renewed by several Popes, who have issued out their Bulls to that effect; and it is still pre∣served in a great part of Spain. St. James had but very few Followers in Spain, whereof, some reckon up nine chosen Disciples; which others say, were sent into Spain by the Apostles St. Peter, and St. Paul; which Controversie being altogether impossible to be decided, I think fit∣ter to pass it by, than to take up the Reader's Attention, with what is altogether uncertain.
CHAP. II. The Reigns of the Emperours Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, and Titus, with an Account of the Colonies, Free Towns, and Courts of Judicature then in Spain. CLaudius the Emperour was Poison'd by an Eunuch, or as others have it, by his Wife Agrippina, to the intent her Son Domitius Nero might obtain the Empire; which prov'd fatal to her. Certain it is, he dyed in the Year of Grace 55. Nero, his Son-in-Law, and 55. Successor, held the Empire 14 Years; the first 5 he govern'd well, as Trajan used to testify, Nero C. Reigned Fourteen Years. after that he sunk into all manner of Vice and Debauchery, like a wild Beast, that breaking loose from its Confinement, bears down all before it. To such a degree did his Cruelty rage that he kill'd his own Mother, of whom he would first have had Carnal Knowledge; he also slew his Aunt, his two Wives, Octavia and Popea, his Master Seneca, the Famous Poet Lucan, and a great number of Men of Quality. His Lust was so extravagant, that he publickly Mar∣ried a Young Man, and caused a Boy to be cut, that he might make use of him as a Woman. He used to sing in the Theatre like a Player; for his Sport set Fire to Rome, and then to ap∣pease the raging People, charg'd it upon the Christians, against whom, upon that score, he raised the first Persecution. On the one hand he profused the publick Revenue, and on the other, by all unlawful means, seiz'd the Riches of private Persons. In his time liv'd the fa∣mous Apollonius Thyaneus; and in his Travels came into Spain. The same is said of the Apo∣stle St. Paul, but other Authors dey his coming hither; and for St. Peter's ever being in Spain, as Metaphrastes affirms, there is but little ground to believe it. Servius Sulpicius Galba had go∣vern'd Galba go∣verns Spain. Spain the term of eight Years, he was very old, being above 70 years of Age, when Julius Vindex, who govern'd Gallia Narbonensis, astonish'd at the Cruelties, and other Bruta∣lities of Nero, by Letter invited him to put a stop to all those Evils, by accepting of the Em∣pire. But Galba excusing himself on account of his Age, and the danger of such an under∣taking, Vindex declared himself, and took up Arms against Nero. This news being brought into Spain, Galba in an Assembly of the chief Men of all the Country, whom he had called together to Carthagena, declar'd the cause, why all Men were oblig'd to put their hand to re∣dress so many grievances, and relieve the Commonwealth. He inveighed against the Cruelty and Vices of Nero, showing the mischiefs he had already done, and what they might expect from him. There happen'd to be there present a Child banished by Nero into Majorca, which so heightned the indignation of all there present, that with loud Acclamations they Proclaimed Galba, Augustus, and Emperour. He would not accept of that Title, but offered himself to be General of the Romans, and Lieutenant for the Senate against Nero, which was Is Pro∣claimed Emperor. Otho joins him. an extraordinary Token of his Modesty. Otho Silvius, then Governour of Lusitania, was a great Instrument in forwarding this Work, for he resolv'd to follow Galba, and to that purpose Coin'd a vast Quantity of Gold and Silver, he had gathered. Upon this Account Otho was prefer'd to the New Emperour's Favour, and had the first Place about him, which T. Junius his Lieutenant aimed at, but neither could he attain, or was he acceptable to the People, as one that sold the Favour of his Prince; whereas Otho espous'd the pretensions of the needy, without any prospect of advantage. Julius Vindex being betrayed in France, where he had declar'd against Nero, kill'd himself. Virginius Rufus who vanquished him, would not accept of the Empire, but left all to the disposal of the Senate, which was a singular Moderation. The misfortune of Vindex so startled Galba, that he retir'd almost in despair to the City Clu∣nia, but the News of Nero's Death being soon after brought to him, he reviv'd and took heart again. The manner of Nero's Death was thus. As soon as the Senate understood what Vindex had done in France, and Galba in Spain, they conceiv'd hopes of destroying the Ty∣rant, and in order to it, they declar'd him an Enemy to his Country. Immediately his Guards, and Servants forsook him, and he fled to the Country House of one Phaon, a freed Man of his own, where despairing of making his escape, he kill'd himself in the 32th Year of his Age. Thus ended the Crimes of this Prince, and in him the Family of the Caesars and Claudii. Nero kills himself. Galba understanding what had happen'd, resolv'd to march with all speed to Rome; for his Guard he carry'd with him a Legion of the choicest Soldiers in all Spain. With him also went Fabius Quintilianus, a Native of Calahorra, the Famous Rhetorician. When Nero dy'd Silius Italicus was Consul at Rome, which was the Year of Grace 69. Galba being come to Rome en∣joy'd 69. the Empire but 7 Months, and was then slain by the Pretorian Bands in a Mutiny they Galba but 7 Months, viz. slain. raised, because he gave them not the Donative he had promis'd, and kept a strict hand over them, which they being us'd to liberty, could not brook; as also because he was heard to say, he chose, but did not buy Soldiers. But the greatest Promoter of this Mutiny was Otho, who offended that Galba had adopted one Piso, a Youth, of great hopes, and thereby cut him off the reward he expected for the assistance he had given him; caus'd himself to be carry'd in a Chair to the Pretorian Bands, who saluted him Emperour, and Murder'd Galba; together with Piso, and Titus Junius. His ill gotten Power was not lasting, for he was Emperour only Otho only 95. days. the space of 95 days. The German Legions, in imitation of those of Spain, declar'd their
General Aulus Vitellius Emperour, and France join'd with them. Spain seem'd to stand Neu∣ter, therefore Otho to gain the Affections of that People, gave them Jurisdiction over Mau∣ritania Tingitana, whence is ensued that the People of that Province long after repaired to the Roman Courts at Cadiz, to determine their Law suits, and were subject to the Goths, as long as they held the Sovereignty of Spain. However Lucius Albinus Governour of Mau∣ritania, came over into Spain, the more to strengthen other parts, but was defeated by Clu∣vius Otho de∣feated kills him self. Rufus, left there by Galba, that had now declared for Vitellius. Otho being vanquished in Lombardy, killed himself, and Vitellius entred Rome armed, and beset with Soldiers, as if he had Triumphed over his Country. This, and the manner of his Government, not unlike to the beginning, made him odious to all Men, besides that, having spent the former part of his Vitellius enters Rome. Life in disorderly Vices, now, with the increase of Power, he gave himself the greater loose, and so became Contemptible, which gave occasion to the Legions that were in the East, to try their Fortune in choosing an Emperor, as they did with much better success than any of the others. Flavius Vespasianus the chief of the most Noble Family of the Favij, in the time of the Em∣peror Claudius, made War in Britain, and subdu'd the Isle of Wight. The many Victories Flavius Vespasianus chosen Emperor. gain'd there made him Famous, but by reason of the Confusion of those times he retir'd to a Pri∣vate Life, whence he was call'd the last Year but one of Nero's Reign, to Command the Army, that was sent against the Jews. He had almost subdu'd that Province, when his Soldiers declar'd him Emperor, and Mucianus who govern'd Siria on the one side, as also Tiberius Alexander, that Commanded in Aegypt, on the other, invited and perswaded him to accept of that Title. This being concluded and agreed upon, they caus'd their Legions to take an Oath of fidelity to him, their example was soon follow'd by the other Provinces. The par∣ticular account of their Actions belongs not to this History, but in Conclusion Vitellius was slain at Rome, in the ninth Month of his Reign, and 57th Year of his Age. Vespasian leaving his Vitellius only nine Months. Son Titus, to Command in Asia, came by the way of Alexandria into Italy, and so to Rome, in the Year of our Lord 72, and was receiv'd with the general applause and satisfaction of the Senate and People. He govern'd the Empire ten Years with such prudence and Virtue, that Vespasian Reigns ten Years. he seemed to want nothing but the knowledge of the Christian Faith. Titus having subdu'd the Jews, and destroy'd Hierusalem, Triumph'd with his Father at Rome, and having brought over with him a vast number of Captive Jews, part of them were sent into Spain, where they setled in the City Merida, as their Writers affirms. At his first coming to the Empire, Vespasian granted to the Spaniards the priviledges of Latium, or Italy, the more to incline them to his Party, they at that time favouring Vitellius. Licinius Larius, now governed Hi∣spania Licinius Larius governs Spain. Citerior as Pretor, a Man given to Learning, and great Friend to Pliny then Questor there, for whose natural History, and some other Works, he offered a great sum of Money. This Licinius is supposed to have built the Bridge of Segovia, a Work so lofty and wonderful, that the commonalty are perswaded, it was built by the Devil. Others Attribute the build∣ing of this Bridge to the Emperor Trajan, but there are no sufficient grounds to assert either Opinion. It is much more credible, that the Town in Galicia, now called Betanços, formerly Flavium Brigancium, the other now called Padron, then Iria Flavia, also the Town Municipium Flavium Axaritanum, now Lora, and other places of that name, were built by the Family of Vespasian, who were all called Flavij, or else they took those names in Honour of the Em∣peror, or one of his Sons. The Emperor Vespasian lived to be 70 Years of Age, and then dyed at Rome, on the 24th of June in the Year of our Lord 80. He was as happy in his Death, as his Life, for that he left behind his Son Titus, to succeed in the Empire, who e∣qual'd 80. Titus Reigns only two Years, 2 Months, and 20 Days. Decus & deliciae, humani ge∣neris. his Father in all his Virtues, and far exceeded him, in Affability, Sweetness of Tem∣per, and Liberality, to which he was so inclin'd, he was used to say, none ought to go from his Princes presence dissatisfyed, and remembring one Night that he had bestowed no fa∣vour that day, said to those about him; My Friends we have lost a day; These good quali∣ties gained him the Affections of all Men so intirely, that he was called, the Ornament and delight of Mankind. But Death cut him off very untimely, for he was not above 42 Year of Age, reigned only two Years, two Months, and twenty Days, and deceased on the 13th of September, in the Year of Christ 82. Nothing of note appears to have hap'ned during this time in Spain. It was Governed by three Pretors, in the three Provinces, Tarraconensis, 82. Betica, and Lusitania. In Betica there were eight Roman Colonies, and as many Municipiums, which enjoyed less priviledges than the others, and four Courts to determine Law suits, that were held at Cadiz, Sevil, Ezija, and Cordova. In Lusitania were Five Colonies, one Muni∣cipium, which was Lisbon, called by another name Felicitas Julia, and three Courts at Meri∣da, Spain how divided and go∣vern'd. Badajoz, and Santaren, then called Scalabis. In Hispania, Citerior, or Tarraconensis, there were Fourteen Colonies (some say more) Thirteen Municipiums, and Seven Courts at Carta∣gena, Tarragona, Zaragoça, Clunia, now Corun̄a, Astorga, Lugo, and Braga. The Pretors, now when the time of their Command was expired, and they waited for one to succed them, called themselves Legates, or Lieutenants, and not Propretors, as was used before.
CHAP. III. The Reigns of the Emperors, Domitian, Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus Verus, Marcus Aurelius, and Commodus, the Persecutions under them, the build∣ing of the City Leon, and rise of the Heresie of the Gnosticks. THE virtues and good qualities of Titus, were set off and received the greater Luster, by the disorders, and extravagancies of his Brother and Successor Domitian, a Man so vici∣ous he rather resembled the Neros, than the Flavij. His madness was such that he caused his Wife, to be called Augusta, which none of his predecessors had done, and himself to be stiled Lord and God. He persecuted the Christians, banished St. John the Evangelist to the Island Pathmos, killed Marcus Aelius Glabrio, and Flavius Clemens, who had both been Consuls, and banished Flavia Domicilla Wife to the latter, into the Island Ponza, without regard to the Kindred he with had both of them. This his cruelty to the Christians, is thought to have shortned his Days, his death being foretold by Flashes of Lightning, that continually fell for the space of eight Months. His Avarice made him the more odious, for he seized upon the Estates of the Martyrs, therefore some, to please him, accused Domicilla's Steward, that he had concealed her Riches. The Steward whose name was Stephanus, having notice of it to avoid that danger ventured upon a greater, for with some others he conspired to kill the Ty∣rant, Domitian. 15 Years 5 Months. which he put in Execution, within his own Palace on the eighth of September in the Year 97. He dyed at the Age of 45 having Reigned 15 Years and 5 Months, his Death was pleasing to all Men except the Soldiers, to whom he denyed nothing that they might 97. stand firm to him. In Spain he put out an Edict by which it was forbid to plant any more Domitian Murder∣ed. Vines. About the same time Eugenius, Disciple to Dionysius Areopagita, sent by him to Preach in Spain, and first Archbishop of Toledo, shed his blood in defence of the Faith of Jesus Christ, in France, whither he went to visit his Master. At this time three Famous Spanish Poets Flourished at Rome, viz. M. Valerius Martialis born at Bilbilis, now Calatayud, Caius Canius, at Cadiz, and Decianus at Merida. The Senate upon the Death of Domitian chose Caius Nerva Emperor. He was a Person of great Authority, but very Ancient, and therefore the more exposed to contempt, which he Nerva, on∣ly 16 Months. being sensible of adopted M. Ʋlpius Trajanus a Spaniard born at Italica near Sevil a Man much in Esteem and of great parts, and appointed him his Companion and Successor. He repeal'd all the Decrees and Edicts made by Domitian, whereupon many returned from bannishment, and among the rest St. John the Evangelist from the Island Pathmos, to his Church at Ephesus. Nerva was Emperor only sixteen Months, and then upon his Death, M. Ʋlpius Trajanus, his adopted Son undertook the Government in the Month of February, and the Year of Grace 99. His great virtues were answerable to the hopes had been conceived of him. His good na∣tural parts being much Cultivated by the instructions of so good a Master as was the great 99. Philosopher Plutarch. Trajan built two Bridges of wonderful structure; the one in Germany Trajan 19 Years and a half. over the Danube the greatest River in Europe; the other in that part of Spain, we call Estremadura, over the River Tagus, and is known by the name of the Bridge of Alcantara. By an inscription that is still to be seen on that Bridge, it appears that many Towns of the Neighbourhood contributed to the Charge. This is one of the most remarkable pieces of An∣tiquity in Spain. In a Town of Andaluzia, called Aragua, belonging to the Knights of the Order of St. James, on the Wall of the Palace, are two stones which were once the Pedestals of two Statues erected in Memory of Matidia, and Marcia Sisters to Trajan, as appears by the inscription upon them. At the same time the Soldiers of the seventh Legion called Gemina, quiting the City Sublancia in Asturias, because it was seated on the ridge of a hill, two Lea∣gues, below it founded a Town which from them was called Legio, now the City Leon, and The City Leon built. but slenderly peopled, yet was once the Court of the Kings of Leon, when after the destructi∣on of Spain, the Christians began to gather strength, Trajan governed the Empire the space of ninteen Years and a half. In the third year of his Reign, he raised a more cruel persecution 102. against the Christians, than could have been imagined from a Prince esteemed as he was, Mild Persecuti∣on under Trajan. and Prudent. This fury was in some measure abated five Years after, at the instance of Pliny the Younger, then Proconsul of Bithynia, who in a letter advised him, that the Christian Superstition (as they termed it) ought rather to be suppressed by Art than force, because it was spread abroad in the Country, as well as in Cities, and that the Christians could not be con∣victed of any Crimes, only that they had meetings before day, where they Sung Hymns in Honour of Christ. Upon this Trajan answered, that no search should be made after the Christians, but that if accused they should be punished. An infinite Number of Christians suffered in this persecution. Spain was not exempted from its share of blood. Among o∣thers Mantius first Bishop of Ebord was Martyred. There is a Rich Monastery within a League of Medina de Rio Seco of his invocation, and therefore called Villa Nueva de S. Mancio. At this time also Macarius, Justus, and Rufinus suffered; Trajan dyed in Cilicia, at a place then called Selinunte, afterwards Trajanopolis, or Trajans Town, in his return to Rome from the 118. His death. Parthian War; Nevertheless his Ashes were received into that City with Triumph for having
vanquished his Enemies. A thing never granted to any before or after him, that they should Triumph after death. Aelius Adrianus appointed by Trajan his Successor, as soon as he entred upon the Government, intending to visit all his Provinces, set out from Rome, and through Adrian 21 Years. Germany passed into Great Britain; thence he went over into Spain, so to Africk, and into the East, his head always bare and often afoot. In this long journey he is said to have narrowly e∣scaped an eminent danger at Tarragona, where a Slave ran at him with a drawn Sword, but being supposed to be mad, he delivered him up to the Physicians, to be cured without any o∣ther punishment. Sextus Aurelius Victor says, he divided Spain into six Provinces, viz. Betica, Lusitania, Carthaginensis, Tarraconensis, Galicia, and Mauritania's Tingitana. It appears by Division of Spain. some inscriptions of those days, as also by Justinians Laws, that the Governours of Betica, and Lusitania were Consular Legates, those of the other four Provinces were only Presidents. This Emperor having no Children chose Ceionius Commodus Verus for his Successor, and gave him the Title of Caesar, reserving to himself that of Augustus, and this was the Original of the Custom, of calling the Emperors Children, or Successors Caesars. In the Eleventh Year of his Reign, Adrian ordered that none should be punished meerly for being a Christian, un∣less he were Convicted of some crime, and was so well inclined towards the Christians, that he designed to place Christ among his other Gods, and caused Temples to be erected without any Idols. Fearing that the greateness of the Roman Empire might cause it to sink un∣der its own weight, he set bounds to it, to which purpose the Bridge built by Trajan on the Danube was demolished, and in the East he ordered the River Euphrates, should be the utmost Limit, quitting what was Conquered beyond it. He was very sickly, and being tired with the continual dependance on Physicians, at Bayae to avoid having more to do with them, he abstained from meat and dyed, having Reigned Twenty One Years. In the days of this Em∣peror, Basilides in Aegypt, and Saturninus in Syria spread the Sect of the Gnosticks, which con∣founded Heresie of the Gno∣sticks. the Divine persons, and subjected the free will and its Operations to the force of destiny, and the stars. Besides, they affirmed that Christian justification depends only upon Faith. A disciple of Basilides, called Marc, came into Spain, and there sowed his Wicked Doctrine. Among others there followed him a Woman called Agape, and the Rhetorician Helpidius. From these Ashes and Embers Priscillian afterwards raked a Fire which spread a mighty flame, as shall be observed in its place. Commodus Verus died soon after his adoption, and in his place was substituted Titus Aelius Antoninus, who succeeded Adrian in the Empire in the Year 139. During the Term of 139. Twenty Two Years and Seven Months, that his Reign lasted, he maintained all the Pro∣vinces Elius 22 Years. of the Empire in such Peace and tranquility, that he was compared to Numa. All Men strove to please and obey so good a Prince, and he laboured to gain the Affections of all Men. His most peculiar virtues were Clemency and Meekness, which gained him the Titles of Pious, and Pater Patriae. Under him the Christians suffered no persecution as under the other Emperors. It does not appear that he did any thing remarkable in Spain, but his name is to be seen in some Roman inscriptions. He dyed near Rome in the Year 162, and left M. Aurelius Antoninus, and Antoninus Verus to succeed him in the Empire. This was the first time 162. Aurelius Antoninus, Antoninus Verus 59 Years. that two Emperors were seen in Rome with equal Power and Authority. Verus lived but nine Years, he renewed the persecution against the Christians, quieted the East where the Persians had raised Commotions, and is believed to have been the first that gave the Title of Co∣mites, or Counts to the Governours of Provinces. By his death the whole charge of the Government was devolv'd upon M. Aurelius Antoninus, a Prince of great goodness, the sir∣name of Philosopher, given him is a sufficient Testimony of his Learning, as is the Learned Book of his still Extant. He Reigned nineteen Years and one Month, and dyed the 17th of March in the Year 181. Aelius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus, succeeding his Father, by the Vileness of his Actions much obscured the Glory of his Family. It was supposed one of his 181. Concubines named Marcia, had distempered his brain with some Potion she gave him; cer∣tain Aurelius Commodus 12 Years, and 8 Months. it is she was the cause of his Death, for finding her own Name in the List of those that were to be slain, she conspired with the Eunuch Narcissus, and they gave him a dose of Poison, but finding it did not Work fast enough, they stifled him. He lived but Thirty Two Years, whereof he Reign'd Twelve, Eight Months and Fifteen day. It is reported he kept Three hun∣dred Concubines, and a like number of the Beautifulest Youths, that could be found to satisfy his beastly Lust. Some Authors say, it was at this time, that the holy Martyrs Facundus, and Primitivus suffered at the Banks of Cea, a River that runs down from the Mountains of Astu∣rias, into Old Castile. Here the Christians built a Church in honour of them. In the time of the Moores, they were remov'd into Asturias, and thence returned to the same place, and a Monastery of Benedictine Monks built there, near that of Sahagun, and is one of the chief∣est places of Devotion in Spain.
CHAP. IV. The Reigns of the Emperors, Pertinax, Severus, Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander Severus, Maximinus, Gordianus, Philip, Decius, Trebonianus Gallus, and Aemilianus. THE Emperor Commodus was killed in the Year 193. Helvius Pertinax born of a Libertine, or which is all one, descended from Slaves, succeeded him, and ruled only two 193. Months and Twenty eight days. The Murderers of Commodus procur'd him the Crown, for his Helvius Pertinax, 2 months, 28 days. approved goodness, and the Pretorian Soldiers deprived him of it and his Life, within his own Palace. No sooner was Pertinax Murdered, but Sulpicianus, and Didius Julianus, repaired to the Pretorian bands, like Merchants to buy the Empire, as if it had been exposed to sale. Julianus carryed it, by promising each Soldier Twenty five Sestercies, which amounts to Julianus 6 months. 625 Crowns, an extravagant sum, and not being able afterwards to pay it, the Souldiers for∣sook him, and he was killed by the contrivance of Septimius Severus, Six Months after he un∣dertook the Government. For this good service Severus was declared Emperor, by the Le∣gions of Sclavonia. He was born at Leptis, or Tripoli, in Barbary, punished the Pretorian Severus 17 years, and 8 months. bands for the Murder of Pertinax, by disarming, and banishing them a Hundred Miles from Rome, vanquished Pescennius Niger, who called himself Emperor in the East, destroyed the City Bizantium, because it shut the Gates against him, defeated Albinus, that was revolted in France, then passed over into Great Britain, appeased the Commotions that were raised there, re∣solved to build a Wall betwixt England, and Scotland, to curb the incursions of the Scots, but was cut off by Death, which seized him in the City of York, when he had Reign'd Seventeen Years, and Eight Months and three days. In the Ninth Year of his Reign, he raised a per∣secution against the Christians, in which much blood was spilt. Severus, left two Sons by 283 two Wives. Aurelius Antoninus Caracalla the Eldest, at his first coming to the Crown, slew Persecuti∣on under Severus. his Brother Gela, by the Father's will, appointed his Companion in the Empire. This bloody Action made him odious to the People, and he increased their hatred by Marrying Julia, 212 Geta's Mother, and as some will have it, his own. He stopped not here, but put to Death Caracalla, 6 years, 2 months. all that were any ways inclined to his Brother. But his Barbarities could not be lasting, for he was stabbed by one Marcialis, a Soldier, as he sate easing his Body, when he had Reigned Six Years, Two Months, and five days. Opilius Macrinus, Commander of the Pretorian bands, by the free consent of Audentius a Noble Man, whom the Soldiers would have pre∣ferred, Opilius Macrinus, 3 months, 28 days. was declared Emperor. He did nothing of note, and his time was so short he can scare be counted in the Number of Emperors. Mesa, the Sister of Julia, prevailed with the Soldiers to kill him at Chaleedon, together with his Son Diadumenus, on the 7th of June 219. 219 His power lasted but Three Months and Twenty Eight Days. Aurelius Antoninus Varius, who was Priest of the Sun in Phaenicia, as is signifyed by the name Heliogabalus, and for the Beauty of his Person, and gracefulness which seemed to be the Tokens of a fair Soul, and above all by the help of his Mother Mesa, was by the unani∣mous Heliogalus. 3 years, 9 months. consent of the Soldiers saluted Emperor. His Life and manners were vicious beyond measure, so wholly addicted to Lust, that he acted and suffered things not to be named, and raved to that excess of brutality, that he endeavoured to change his Sex, to the shame and disgrace of the Roman Empire, and of all Mankind. The World could not endure such a Monster, his own Guards killed him, on the Tenth of March, in the Year of our Lord 223, 223 the Eighteenth of his Age, and when he had Reign'd Three Years, nine Months, and four days. Alexander Severus, Cousin-german to Heliogabalus, succeeded him in the Empire; his Virtues equalled the Vices of the other, and he had proved one of the most glorious Emperors, had Alexander Severus, 13 years. he not been cut off by Death. He was so far a favourer of Christians, as to cause the Image of Christ to be placed among those of his other Gods, he overcame the Parthians, and then waging War in Germany, was basely Murdered by Maximinus, in the Twenty Ninth Year of his Age, when he had Reigned Thirteen Years, and nine days equal to the best, for Justice, Clemency, Prudence, and Meekness. There is no Memory of any thing remarka∣ble that happen'd in Spain, in the days of these Emperors. At Guadix, is the Pedestal of a Statue erected in honour of Mammea, the Mother of Alexander the Emperor, the inscription of it is as follows. To Julia Mammea Augusta, Mother to the Emperor Caesar Marcus Aurelius Severus Alex∣ander, pious, happy, Augustus, Mother of the Army; the Colony Julia Gemina Accitana, devoted to her Deity and Majesty. This Lady is supposed to have been a Christian, at least she was Familiarly acquainted with Origen; About this time, Pope Anterus, who then governed the See of Rome, writ a Let∣ter to the Bishops of Andaluzia, and Kingdom of Toledo, in which among other things, he tells them that Bishops cannot lawfully be Translated, from one See to another, for their own ease, or advantage.
Julius Maximinus, born in Thracia of base Parentage, remarkable for his extraordinary Stature of Body, Strength and Swiftness, passed thro' all the Degrees from a private Soldier, till by Maximi∣nus. force he possessed himself of the Empire after the Death of Alexander Severus, in the Year of Grace 239. After quieting the Revolted Germans, he prepared to make War upon Samartia, 239. (now Poland) when News was brought him to the City Sirmo, that the Soldiers in Africk had saluted Gordianus, the Governour of that Province, Emperor, and the Senate approved of their choice. Inflamed with the desire of Revenge, he marched towards Rome; but stopp'd at Aquileia, that City having shut the Gates against him. Here he was inform'd, that Gor∣dianus, and his Son of the same Name, had been killed in Africk, and that the Senate had in his stead, chosen Balbinus and Pupienus. Great was the danger that threatned, had not the Soldiers weary of the Tyrant, killed him in his own Tent; which delivered Rome from slave∣ry, and the Christians from the fear of the Persecution he had raised against them. The Emperors Balbinus and Pupienus, were killed by their own Guards, within the first Year of Balbinus and Pu∣pienus not a Year. Gordianus not quite 6. their Reign. Gordianus, Grandson to the other of the same Name, was before saluted Caesar, and appointed their Successor; and notwithstanding, he was yet scarce 15 Years of age, without any opposition declared Emperor. After putting an end to the Persian War with the wish'd for Success, he was basely murdered by Philip, the Captain of his Guards, in the 6th Year of his Reign. The Empire was the Reward of Marcus Julius Philippus's Treason. He was by Birth an Arab, of mean Extraction; but a good Soldier, which raised him to se∣veral Julius Philippus above 5 Years. Commands; and at last to the Empire, in the Year 241. which he held above 5 Years. He made a dishonourable Peace with the Persians. The Goths at this time infesting the Pro∣vince of Thrace, one Marinus sent by him to oppose them, took upon him the Title of Em∣peror; but was vanquished, and slain by Decius, whom Philip had intrusted with an Army to 241. Decius 2 Years. suppress him. This done, the same Decius was saluted Emperor by his Legions: and Philip marching to oppose him, was killed in a Mutiny of his own Men at Verona. As soon as De∣cius was possessed of the Empire, which was in the Year 250. He Persecuted the Christians 250. with the utmost cruelty. He waged War with the Getae, and overthrew them in the first Persecuti∣on. Trebonia∣nus Gallus 18 Months. Battle; but in the second, by the Treachery of Trebonianus Gallus was vanquished and killed, together with his Son, when he had Ruled the space of two Years. This Traytor, according to the Custom of those Times, Usurped the Empire, and held it 18 Months. He made Peace with the Getae, and agreed to pay them a sum of Money Yearly; a thing very dishonourable to the Roman Empire, whereby he became contemptible to his Soldiers, and gave occasion to AEmilia∣nus 4 Months. Aemilianus, his own General, an African of Mauritania Tingitana, after having defeated those People in a great Battle, to Revolt; and Gallus being slain, to seize upon the Empire. His Power lasted but 4. Months, his own Soldiers killing him as soon as they heard of the Election of Valerianus; and therefore some do not reckon him in the number of the Emperors. CHAP. V. The Reigns of the Emperors Valerianus, Galienus, Flavius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Florianus, Probus, Carus, Carinus, Dioclesian, and Maximian, Constantius, and Galerius, Maximinus, and Licinius. LIcinius Valerianus, was 70 Years of Age when the Legions in Gallia saluted him Emperor, 254. in the Year of our Lord 254. Having Reigned 7 Years, he was taken Prisoner, in a Valerianus 7 Years. Galienus 15 Years. Battle he fought with the Persians, and liv'd above a Year in Slavery. His Son Galienus, thought of nothing less, than relieving his Father, and regaining the lost Honour of the Em∣pire; and indeed, he was Distracted on all sides by the Persians, Goths, and Germans, and by 30 Generals, who in several places, had taken upon them the Title of Emperors. It would be endless to relate what each of them did, it only makes for our purpose, that one Tetricus possessed himself of Spain, and had recourse to the Germans for Aid. They passed thither thro' France, and like a barbarous People, for the space of 12 Years, destroyed all that was in their way with Fire and Sword. It appears by some Stones found in Spain, that the Em∣peror Galienus's Wife was called Cornelia Salolina, and Decius's Empress Herennia. About this time, Pope Lucius Governed the Church, who in an Epistle to the Bishops of Spain, and France, exhorts them to hold frequent Synods, determines the Power of Metropolitans oer their Suffragan Bishops, forbids Communication with Hereticks, and encourages them to bear patiently with the lasting Calamities of the times. Lucius's Successor, was Stephanus, in whose time, the Bishops of Spain, in a Council they held, Degraded Martial, Bishop of Merida, and Basilides of Astorga, as Libellatici; so they called those that gave it under their Hands, they Renounc'd the Christian Religion; for those, who proceeded so far as to offer Sacrifice to Idols, were termed Sacrificati. Basilides had recourse to Rome, as to the Head, was absolved by Pope Stephen, and ordered to be restored to his Church and Dignity. The Bi∣shops of Spain offended at it, consulted with St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage; who taking the Advice of others, answer'd, That those, who forsake the Church, could not be restor'd to the Honours they before enjoy'd in the Church; that upon doing Pennance suitable to the
Crime, they might be again received into the number of the Faithful; but not Replaced in the Sacerdotal Dignity, as had been Determined by Pope Cornelius; and that if Pope Stephen had or∣dered otherwise, he had been imposed upon, as being so far off. Therefore Pope Sixtus II. suc∣cessor to Stephen, in his Epistle to the Bishops of Spain, tells them, the Decrees of the Fathers are not to be altered, nor Bishops depos'd without acquainting him of Rome. How this Dif∣ference ended, is not known; but certain it is, all these three Popes suffered Martyrdom un∣der Valerianus, as did St. Laurence, the Honour of Spain, born at Huesca, and also Orencius and Pacientia, both accounted Saints. The Emperor Galienus Besieging Milan, his Soldiers weary of the War, Mutinied, and Killed him, in the Year of Grace 269. when he had Go∣verned 269. 15 Years. The Empire being thus without a Head, Flavius Claudius, a Noble Man, Flavius Claudius 1 Year, 10 Months, and 15 Days. and great General, took upon him the Title of Emperor in the Year following. The begin∣ning of his Reign was fortunate, for he killed the Tyrant Aureolus, overcame the Goths and Germans; but as he was preparing to march, either against Tetricus in Spain, or Queen Zeno∣bia in the East, Death cut him off at Sirmo, a City of Hungary, when he had Reigned one Year, ten Months, and fifteen Days. His Death being known, the Senate in his place, chose Quintilianus, his Brother, a Man of so poor a Spirit, that he killed himself 17 Days after his Quintilia∣nus 17 Days. L. Domi∣tius Aure∣lianus 4 Years, 11 Months, and 7 Days. Election, upon the News that Claudius's Legions had saluted Lucius Domitius Aurelianus Em∣peror. This might have been counted among the best of Princes, had he not defac'd the Lu∣stre of his Martial Exploits with Moroseness, and the hatred he bore to Christianity. He Subdued Dacia, Vanquished all the Tyrants that had possessed themselves of several Provin∣ces, took Queen Zenobia Prisoner, and led her into Rome in Triumph, which was the last Celebrated in that City after the Ancient manner. Returning into the East, to make War upon the Persians, he was Treacherously Murdered by his Favourite Mnestheus, when he had Reigned 4 Years, 11 Months, and 7 Days. In his Days, Narcissus and Felix, suffered Martydom at Girona, on the Borders of Spain. After the Death of Aurelianus, a new and unusual Contention in point of Civility hap'ned betwixt the Senate and Army, each referring the choice of an Emperor to the other. Six Months were spent in agreeing the point, at length, the Senate overcome, by the mo∣desty of the Army, named Claudius Tacitus, a Man of great Ability, but 68 Years of Age. Claudius Tacitus 6 Months, and 20 Days. Florianus 3 Months. M. Aure∣lius Probus 5 Years; and 4 Months. So his Command prov'd but short lived; for he Governed only 6 Months, and 20 Days, and dy'd at Tharsus in Cilicia. Florianus, his Brother, who was there present, caused himself to be Proclaimed Emperor; but repenting, ordered his Veins to be open'd 3 Months after, and bled to Death. The reason was, he thought he had not Force enough to withstand the Legi∣ons of the East, which had nam'd M. Aurelius Probus Emperor. He, tho' by Birth a Scla∣vonian, was a Person so well versed in Civil, as well as Martial Affairs, and of such known Vertue, that had not the Name Probus belong'd to him by his Family, he had deserv'd it for his good Life and Behaviour. His Reign lasted but 5 Years, and 4 Months; at the end of which, he was killed by his own Soldiers, who, in his place, chose M. Aurelius Carus, in the Year of Grace 282. And he Named his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus, his Companions 282. in the Empire. Carus was killed by a Thunder-bolt, or flash of Lightning, near the River M. Aureli∣us Carus 2 Years. Tigris, in the second Year of his Reign; and Numerianus murdered in a Litter, in which he was carried, because of his sore Eyes, by his Father-in-law Aper, in hopes of making himself Emperor. Hereupon, the Army chose Dioclesian, who overthrew and killed Carinus, that 284. pretended to the whole Empire by Right of Succession. At this time, a Prefect, called M. Aurelius, Dioclesian and Maxi∣mian 20 Years. Governed Hispania citerior, as appears by certain Inscriptions upon Stones, still preserv'd in Spain; by which, it also appears, that the Emperors, besides all their other Ti∣tles, used the Name of Proconsul; as may be seen upon a Stone preserved to this Day in the Market-place of Monviedro. Dioclesian was a Native of Sclavonia, Descended from Slaves, and nevertheless, was made Emperor of Rome, in the Year of Christ 284. He was not inferior to the greatest Princes for Warlike Exploits; but blemished all the Actions of his Life with an insatiable thirst of Christian blood. In the second Year of his Reign, he declared Maximianus Herculeus his Companion in the Empire, and soon after, gave the Title of Caesars to Galerius Maximinus, and Constantius Clorus. Galerius was married to Valeria, Dioclesian's Daughter. Constantius by his cammand, was Devorced from Helena, the Daughter of a King of Britain, and Mo∣ther of Constantine the Great, and Married to Theodora, the Daughter-in-law of Maximian. During the whole Reign of these two Emperors, the Persecution against the Christians, was A bloody Persecuti∣on. so violent and bloody, as it never had been before, or was after in any part of the World. Many suffered in Spain; but especially after the coming of the President Dacianus, no corner of it was free from the Blood of Martyrs. Dioclesian grown weary of the Govenment, and despair∣ing of ever being able utterly to Extirpate the Christian Religion, as he had designed, re∣nounced the Empire at Milan, after he had held it 20 Years, and retired to a private Life. Maximian by his perswasion, did the same at Nicomedia; an example rarely to be seen. By this means, Constantius and Galerius, were left absolute, in the Year of Christ 304. Constan∣tius 304. for his part, chose France, Spain and Britain. He was a Prince of that Moderation, that Constantius 1 Year, and 10 Months. Galerius. the Service of his Table was Earthen Ware; a great Friend to the Christians, as appeared up∣on several occasions. The other Provinces of the Empire fell to Galerius, who, the more to strengthen himself, declared his two Nephews, Severus and Maximinus, Caesars. To Maxi∣minus,
he gave charge of the East, to Severus, of Italy and Africk; he himself took care of Sclavonia and Greece. Death put an end to the Actions of Constantius; for he dy'd at York, in the Year 306. having Reigned only 1 Year, 10 Months, and 8 Days. About this time 306. lived Prudentius, Bishop of Tarraçona, Born at Arnencia, a Town in Biscay; formerly an Episcopal See, now only a scattered Village, since the Collegiate Church was removed from thence to Vitoria, by the Bull of Pope Alexander VI. In these Days also, flourished Rufus Festus, the famous Writer of the Roman History, and a noted Poet. The Year after Con∣stantius dy'd, Maxentius, Son to Maximian, possessed himself of Rome, and assumed the Title of Emperor. Severus marched against him, but was Defeated and Slain by the Tyrant. Maxentius. Maximian hearing hereof, repaired to Rome, either to be assisting to his Son, or in hopes to recover the Empire. Ambition observes no respect of Persons, his Son turn'd him out of Rome, and he fled to the Protection of Constantine, then residing in France, who understand∣ing that Maximian without regard to their Kindred, or the Rites of Hospitality, contriv∣ed his Death, ordered him to be killed at Marseilles, where he then was. Galerius having constituted Licinius, Caesar, in stead of Severus, marched himself into Italy, to suppress the Tyrant; but fearing his Army would Mutiny, returned into Sclavonia without effecting any thing. There he began to vent his Rage upon the Christians; but Death put an end to his Designs, for he dy'd of an Imposthume in the Groin, 5 Years after he was raised to the Em∣pire. At that time Melchiades was Pope, who in an Epistle to Marinus, Leontius, Benedictus, and the other Bishops of Spain, aduises them to take warning from the shortness of Humane Life to Govern their Flocks with Moderation. That among the Apostles, tho' equal in the Vocation, there-was a difference in the Power, which St. Peter had above the rest. He also treats of the Sacrament of Confirmation. This Epistle is dated in the Consulship of Ru∣brius and Volusianus, which is in the Year of our Lord 314. CHAP. VI. The Reign of the Glorious Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor. The Arian Heresie. And first General Council of Nice. THE Romans weary of the Tyranny of Maxentius, and reposing no confidence in the Cae∣sars, Constantine the Great, 30 Years, 9 Months and 27 Days. Maximinus and Licinius, sent for Aid to Constantine, then residing in France. He readily condescended to their request, and marched with his Army to Milan, where to se∣cure Licinius, he gave him in Marriage his Sister Constantia. That done, he advanc'd towards the Tyrant. Being near Rome, his Thoughts fully bent upon the business in hand, in a bright Sunshine day, he saw the sign of the Cross in the Sky, with this Inscription, In hoc signo Vinces. Highly encourouraged by this Miracle, he ordered that the Imperial Standard, call'd Labarum, should be made in the figure of a Cross, in the manner as represented in the Mar∣gent. Hence some are of Opinion, sprang the Custom in Spain of wting the Name of Christ with X. P. which was the form of the Labarum. This is proved by a Stone found at Oreto, X P near Almago, of the time of the Emperor Valentinian II. where it appears, the Name of Christ was then writ in that manner. Constantine advanc'd, and in Vertue of the Cross, in sight of Rome, vanquished his Enemy, who flying over a Bridge of Boats he had made upon the River Tiber, fell in, and was Drowned. Thus Rome was delivered from Tyranny, and Constantine entred the City in Triumph that way, where now stands the most beautiful Triumphal Arch, erected in memory of this Victory. At the same time ceased the cruel Persecution raised a∣gainst the Christians by the Tyrant. It was then also, that Maximin in the East profusely spilt the Blood of Christians; and so great was his desire of extirpating Christianity, that he ordered throughout all the Provinces under his command, Children should be taught to read in, and get by heart a Book, in which, what passed betwixt Christ and Pontius Pilate, was falsely, and scandalously represented, on purpose to make the sacred Name of our Saviour odi∣ous and contemptible. It is true, not long before his Death, he Repealed all those Edicts; not so much of his own Inclination, as for fear of Constantine, whose Power daily encreased, also of Licinius, by whom, he had been lately overthrown in Battle. Licinius soon changing his mind, began to declare against the Christian Religion, which drew Constantine upon him. They came to a Battle, first in Hungary, where Licinius was vanquished; but pardoned at the intercession of his Wife Constantia; then again in Bithynia, and being again defeated, Constan∣tine spared his Life, yet reduced him to live as a private Person; but because afterwards, he endeavoured to Revolt, caused him at last to be killed. He was of such an extravagant Hu∣mour, that he used to say, Learning was the Poison of the Common-wealth; and no wonder, since he was so ignorant himself, he could not write his Name. Thus all Commotions and Broils, being appeased, as well at home, as Abroad, all the Empire was brought under one Head; who so far favoured Christianity, that it daily encreased, and still flourished more and more. The Emperor Constantine was Baptized in Rome, and by vertue of the Baptism deli∣vered of a Leprosie he languished under, as some Authors will have it; but the most re∣ceived Opinion is, that this must be understood of the Spiritual Leprosie of Paganism. A beautiful Font in the Church of St. John Lateran, of curious Workmanship, and adorned
with large Columns of Porphyry Stone, is a Testimony of his being Baptized at Rome. As soon as Baptized, he began to Cultivate the Religion he had embraced, building Churches in several places, Enacting many Holy Laws and stirring up all People with his good example. Great was the prosperity of the Christian Church. But all this Glory suffered some Eclipse The Arian Heresie. by the obstinacy of Arius of Alexandria, who taught and maintained, That Christ, the Son of God, and the eternal Word, was not of the same Substance with his Father. This was the Founder of the famous Sect and Heresie of the Arians. The holy Martyr St. Lucianus, was Master to Arius, but not in this madness; his fellow Disciples, Friends and Assertors, were the two Eusebii of Nicomedia, and Caesarea. Ambition was the principal Motive of his Fall, being offended that after the Death of St. Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, Alexander was promoted to that See, without any regard had of him. From hence sprang that Division betwixt Chri∣stians, which spread over almost all the World, and seemed to threaten Destruction. For many Men of Note, as well of the Clergy, as Laity, followed the new Opinion, without giving ear to the Advice and Persuasions of those that continued firm in the true Faith. The Emperor was highly concerned at this Schism, and sent Hosius, Bishop of Cordova, to Alex∣andria to compose those Differences, as being the most famous Man of that Age for Learning, Prudence and Authority. He handled that Affair with much Circumspection; and for the better reconciling the Matters in Dispute, is said to have been the first that invented the words Ousia, which signifies Essence, or Being, and Hypostasis, which is the Suppositum, or Per∣son. Nothing was of force to convince the obstinate Arius; whereupon, he was Banished Alexan∣dria; and afterwards being Summoned to appear at Constantinople, he there going to ease him∣self, voided his Entrails, and so made a miserable end; as St. Athanasius, who lived at that time, testifies. The evil still encreasing, and taking root, the Emperor resolved to have recourse The Council of Nice. to the last Remedy, which was to call a General Council. Nicea, a City in Bithynia, was the place appointed by Constantine for the Bishops to meet, and thither, by his order repaired 318 from all Parts. In this Council, Arius and his Doctrine were Condemned. Meletius was al∣so deprived of his Bishoprick, because he too hotly reproved the easiness of Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, in reconciling, and admitting to the Church such as had fallen from the Faith; and by this his Zealotry, had bred Divisions in the Churches of Egypt. There were great Disputes about the time of Celebrating the Feast of Easter; that also was settled, and or∣dered to be kept at one and the same time throughout the World. The Eastern Clergy were grown very Loose and Disorderly in their Lives; particularly, in what related to living Chastly; and it being thought hard to reduce them to the Rules observed before, therefore by the Advice of Paphnucius, the Fathers condescended to allow them to keep their Wives. All Persons were forbid keeping the Books of Arius, upon pain of Death; the said Books were all ordered to be burnt. Some say, the manner of reckoning by Indictions, was first brought up in this Council, and that it commenced in the Year of Grace 313. because in that Year, the Emperor Constantine saw the sign of the Cross in the Sky. The Great Hosius was present at this Council; and some will have it that he Presided in it for Pope Silvester, together with the two Priests, Vitus and Vincentius, sent from Rome to that purpose. At the same time, or soon after, was held in Spain, the Council called Iliberitanum, of the City Iliberis which stood in that part of the Province Betica, where now is Granada; as appears by a Gate of that Ci∣ty, still called Elvira, and a Hill near it of the same name. They mistake, who hold that this Council was held near the Pyreneans at Colibre, then called Eliberis; because the difference betwixt the Names of those two Cities, still continues, and no Bishop of France, or the adja∣cent Country, was present at this Synod, except Valerius, Bishop of Zaragoça. This is one of the ancientest Synods, and in which, several weighty Matters were handled. In it menti∣on is made of Virgins consecrated to God. The Bishops here dispensed with the Fasts of the Months of July and August, a Custom before received in France, tho' not in Spain, where there was more need of it, because of the great heat. They forbid Married Women writing and receiving Letters, without the knowledge of their Husbands; and also the painting of Saints on the Walls of Churches, that they might not be defaced by the decay of the Walls. They likewise mention Metropolitans, before called Bishops of the first Chair. To return to Constantine, he Rebuilt the City Bizantium, destroyed by the Emperor Severus, and removed the Imperial Court thither, calling it of his own Name, Constantinople. He instituted four Praefecti Pretorii, two to command in the East, and two in the West, one of these over Italy, the other over France and Spain; the Residence of the latter, was in France, and under him a Vicar Governed Spain. Constantine having settled all things to his mind, dy'd in the Year 337. of our Lord 337. having Reigned 30 Years, 9 Months, and 27 Day. His putting to Constan∣tine's Death. Death his Son Crispus, and Wife Fausta, gave occasion to some to slander this great Monarch, and many other Calumnies have been raised to deface the memory of his glorious Actions. But many Learned Pens have writ of him in particular, and it belongs not to us to enlarge upon this Subject.
CHAP. VII. The Reigns of the Emperors, Constantine, Constantius, and Constans, Julian the Apostate, Jovianus, Valentinian, and Valens. COnstantine left three Sons by his second Wife, to wit Constantine, Constantius, and Con∣stans, all three at several times during his Life named Caesars, and at his Death he di∣vided 337. the Empire among them in this manner. To Constantine the eldest, he assigned the Constantine, Constantius, and Constans. West beyond the Aples, to Constantius, the second Son the East, and to Constans, the young∣est Italy; Africk, and Sclavonia. The same he confirmed by his last Will and Testament, and ordered moreover that Dalmatius, Cousin-germain to the Emperors, should have the Ti∣tle of Caesar in the East. Him Constantius, caused tobe killed in a Mutiny of the Soldiers, in the first year of his Reign. Constantine, the Eldest of the three Brothers, the third year after the Death of his Father, was Treacherously slain near Aquileia, having marched so far Constantin Murder'd. in order to deprive his Brother Constans of the Empire, upon pretence it all belonged to him, and that he had been wronged in the distribution of the Provinces. Some have writ that Constantine was an Arian, but the contrary appears in that, through his means his Brother Constantius, recalled St. Athanasius from banishment. The Emperor Constans, was a great support to the Catholicks, and they soon found a great miss of him, for he ended his days Constans Murder∣ed. on the way to Spain, at the City Erna, in the county of Roussillon. He was killed by Mag∣nentius, who was in Rebellion, and possessed of France, and Spain. Constantius resolving to revenge the Death of his Brother, before he set out named Gallus, his Cousin, Caesar. Both Armies met near the City Murcia, in Sclavonia, where they came to a battle, which proved very bloody, for of the usurpers side 24000 Men were killed, and 30000 of Constantius, yet he got the day, but the forces of the Empire where much weakned by so great a slaughter. The Tyrant after the Fight fled to Lions, in France, there he and his Brother Decentius, by him appointed Caesar, despairing of making head again killed themselves. By this Victory, Constantius sole Mo∣narch. all the Provinces of the Empire were again brought under one Monarch. Nevertheless the Germans broke into France, doing great harm there. The Emperor, besides his other faults was jealous of all Men, and gave ear to Court-Whisperers, the Plague of all Courts, where∣by he had been prevailed upon some time before in the East, to kill his Cousin Gallus. Not∣withstanding that he might at once oppose the Persians, and quiet France, he took Gallus, his own Brother Julian, out of a Monastery, and declared him Caesar, and to bind him the faster to his interest, marryed him to his Sister Helen. Julian was sent into France, whilst the Julian the Apostate chosen Caesar. Emperor prepared for the War against the Persians. At this time St. Athanasius, for fear of being kill'd absented himself again, and lay hid till the death of Con∣stantius, which hap'ned in this manner. The event of the Persian War was unfor∣tunate, and met with several disasters, at which the Emperor was highly con∣cerned. At the same time the Soldiers in France pleased with the conduct of Julian, saluted him Emperor at Paris. This was a fresh cause of grief to Constantius, who resolved to march against him, but was prevented by death, which overtook him at Antioch. There he was baptized after the manner of the Arians, either that he had deferred it till then, or that he was rebaptiz'd at they also used. His death hap'ned on the 3d of November 361. In Spain Constantius his death. about the same time, certain Pages bringing Lights at night, came in saying, Let us Conquer, Let us Conquer; whence it may be supposed the Custom of saluting one another, 361. when lights are brought in, had its Original among us. A certain Roman that was present imagining this word had carryed some farther meaning, drew his Sword and kill'd the Master of the House with all his Family. This Ammianus Marcellinus relates without any other Cir∣cumstance. About this time also Flourished Clemens Prudentius, a Soldier, and Lawyer in his Youth, in his riper years a Poet, famous for the verses he writ in praise of the Holy Martyrs. Also Juvencus a Spanish Priest, writ the like of Christ in Heroick verse, and Pacianus, Bishop of Barcelona, employed his Talent in writning against the Novatians. The Emperor Constantius left never a Son, and therefore appointed him, he would have Julian the Apostate, 1 year, 7 Months, and 17 days. Persecuted whilst living, his Successor at his death, that is his Cousin Julian, a Man of Learning and good natural endowments, that might have been compared to the best of Em∣perors, had he still adhered to the true Religion, and not suffered himself to be perverted by his Master Libahus, so as to forsake Christianity, by which he got the name of Apostate. As soon as possest of the Empire to gain the good will of all Men, he gave full Liberty to every one to follow the Religion they pleased. He revoked the Sentence of banishment, that had passed Liberty of Consci∣ence. against Catholicks, excepting Athanasius, whom because after the death of Constantius, he return∣ed to his Church he ordered to be apprehended, and so forced him again to abscond. To the Jews he gave Liberty to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, but such Flames issued out of the foundations they were oblig'd to desist. The Gentiles were permitted to open their Temples, shut up since the time of Constantine. His hatred to the Christians was great, yet he thought better to weaken them by Policy than open force, and therefore forbid their being admitted to any places of honour or trust, or their Childrens to be taught in the Greek Schools, which stirred up many Christians to write Learnedly in Verse and Prose, particularly the
two Apollinarii, Father and Son, Persons of great Learning. This Emperors end was suitable to his beginning. He undertook the War against the Persians, was at first successful, but thereupon advanced so far, that all his Army was in danger of perishing, and he himself slain with a Dart, as some say accidentally, thrown by his own Men, or the Enemies, others say Julian killed. he was struck by the Martyr, St. Mercurius with a Spear, which was then found bloody upon his Tomb. He lived 32 Years, and Reign'd one year, 7 months, and 27 days. The whole Army upon his death offered the Empire to Flavius Jovianus, a Person of very Excellent parts, 364. who refused it saying, He was a Christian, and would not govern those wh owere not such, but they all Fl. Jovi∣anus, 7 Months, 2 days. declaring themselves to be Christians, he condescended to their request. Being invested in the Imperial dignity, he made peace with the Persians, tho' not advantageous, yet such as was requisite to deliver himself and Army, from the danger into which the rashness of Julian had run them. Catholicks were restored to their honours and dignities, the revenues to Churches, St. Athanasius, and others recalled from banishment, and all things seemed to be again in a flourishing. Condition, but this happiness was not to be lasting, for the Empe∣ror in his way to Rome, betwixt Galatia, and Bithynia, was stifled to death, by a pan of Coals that was left in the Room where he lay, which was newly whitened. He dyed at the Age of 40 Years, and Reigned only 7 months, and 22 days. By him it was made death to offer wrong to any Virgin consecrated to God, tho' upon pretence of Matrimony. Flavius Valentinianus, an Hungarian succeeded Jovianus. His first education had been mean, but being Wise and Valiant, he ran through all Commands in the Army, at length, Fl. Valen∣tinianus, 11 Years, 8 Months, and 22 days. attained to be prefect of the Pretorian Bands, was by the Army chosen Emperor, and proved always a zealous Christian, as appeared in the time of the Emperor Julian, when for refusing to deny his Religion, and giving a Box on the Ear to a Pagan Sexton, that sprinkled him with their Lustral, or cleansing Water, he quitted the ngulum, which was laying down his. Commission. As soon as elected, he appointed his Brother Valens, his Companion in the Valens Em∣peror of the East. Empire to govern the East, and went away himself to Italy, where with much zeal he quieted the City or Rome, than in an uproar, about choosing a Pope. For the Electors being divid∣ed upon the Death of Liberius, one party had named Ʋrsinus, but the more Numerous and better made Chose of Damasus a Spaniard; some will have him born at Egita, now Guimaraens in Portugal, betŵixt the Rivers Duero, and Min̄o, others at Tarragona, and others at Madrid. Certain it is he was a Spaniard, and a Person, excellently qualifyed. Upon this occasion there hap'ned so great a Mutiny that (as Ammianus Marcellinus, a Heathen Author who lived at that time relates it) 137 Men were killed one day, in the Church of Sicininum; and the same Mutiny in Rome, a∣bout e∣lecting a Pope. Author blames the Popes, for going in Coaches, and making more than Kingly Banquets. The Emperor quieted this Tumult, sending Ʋrsinus to be Bishop of Naples. Yet the con∣trary party desisted not, but accused Damasus of Adultery, and obliged him to call a Coun∣cil of Bishops to clear himself. He declared the Council of Ariminum, to be void and of no force, as gathered without the consent of the Pope, deposed Auxentius Bishop of Milan, as being an Arrian, ordered the Psalms of David, should be Song in Churches, with the verse Gloria patri, &c. at the end, instituted saying the Confiteor, at the beginning of Mass, built two Churches at Rome, the one in honour of St. Laurence, the other of St. Peter and Paul, ad Catacumbas, in the Via Ardeatina, where he buryed his Mother and Sister, and was a great Friend to St. Hierom, whom he much resembled in his Life and Learning. The Empire was not altogether in a peaceable Condition, for in the East one Procopius, a Kinsman of Julian, called himself Emperor, and raised new troubles. Valens presently moved towards and over∣came him in Phrygia, where he was deliver'd up to him by his own Men. At the same time Valentinian was succeessful in the War against the Germans, and Saxons, which is the first time, any mention is made of the latter in the Roman History. Besides, he drove the Goths Saxons first men∣tioned in Roman History. out of Thracia, and Persians out of Siria, checked the Scots, who made iucursions into Eng∣land; And the Sarmatians, who infested Pannonia; He was an excellent Emperor, had he not sullied his fame, by marrying Justina, a Lady belonging to his Wife Severa, she being still alive, and what is worse, made a Law by which all Men were permitted to have two Wives. Marcellinus says, he gave Liberty of Conscience to all Men, to live in what Religi∣gion the pleased. He dyed at Brigecium, a Town in Germany, where he was busy, making War upon the Quadi, having Reigned 11 Years, 8 Months, and 22 days, his Death was on Valentinian Death. the 17th of November 375. By his Wife Severa, he left Gratianus, and Valentinian, by Justi∣na. Valens, in the East persecuted the Catholicks, his Wife Dominica, and Eudoxus, Bishop 375. of Constantinople, by whom he was baptized, after the manner of the Arrians, distracted him Valens Per∣secutes the Ca∣tholicks. to such a degree, that he had resolved at the City Edessa, to enter the Church with Armed Men, to disturb the People that were there Celebrating the Divine Service. But, Modestus Governour of the City, diverted him from putting it in Execution, for he told him that upon the rumouring of this his intention, more People than ordinary were gathered in the Church, with such a resolution to suffer death for their Religion, that a Woman half un∣drest for hast, led a child, she had thither least, either herself, or he might miss the Oppor∣tunity of sheding their blood for the Faith. Hereupon Valens gave over that design, but banished many Priests, among others Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, in Cappadocia, as famous for his resolu∣tion and constancy, as the other of Caesarea, in Palestine, for his Learning and Writings; The great St. Basil, succeeded him of Cappadocia, in the Bishoprick, and had enough to do with
the Emperor. Jamblichus, the Master of Proclus, had great influence over Valens, he taught him the way to find out the name of him that was to succced in the Empire, which the Emperor much desired. The manner was thus, they writ all the Letters of the Alphabet upon the ground, and placed on every one a grain of Corn, then turning loose a Cock, whilst the di∣viner His super∣stitious practices. muttered some words, they observed which Letters the Cock eat the corn off first, and those they supposed to express the name sought for. Another way was to blind a Man and ob∣serve the Letters he pointed to. Foolish and vain inventions. However by those means they found out the name Theodosius, whence the Emperor Valens took occasion to Persecute, and kill all those whose names began with the same Letters, as Theodotus, Theodorus, and Theodu∣lus. Among the rest was slain Honorius Theodosius a Spaniard, born at Italica, of the Family of the Emperor Trajan. This Gentleman had appeased certain tumults in Africk, and was therefore raised to be General of Horse, and received Baptism before death. No human Policy is of force against the Divine decrees, so it hap'ned this great Man by his Wife Termancia, left two Sons, Theodosius the Great, and Honorius. At the same time vast Multitudes of the Goths broke into the Imperial Provinces, under the Command of Fridigernus, and Athanaricus. Discord arising betwixt them, as is usual among Persons in equal power, Valens made his Irruption of the Goths. use of one party to overcome the other. To those that follow'd Athanaricus, by contract he gave the Province of Mesia to plant in upon condition they should be baptized, which they did, but after the manner of the Arrians. Then it was that Ʋlfila, a Bishop among that Peo∣ple invented the Gothick Characters differing from the Latin, and Translated the holy Scri∣pture into their Language. This agreement, nor the late defeat were not of force to re∣strain that furious and Warlike people, but they broke into Thracia. Valens coming to op∣pose them was overthrown, and himself slain, for retiring into a cottage and refusing to surrender, they set fire to it, and he was burnt in it. This hap'ned four Years after the Death of his Brother Valentinidn. Valens left never a Son, and had well deserved this mis∣fortune for Persecuting the Catholicks, and refusing to wait for his Nephew Gratianus, who was marching to his Assistance. Fridigernus, was Commander of these Goths, who after his defeat had gathered New forces, with hopes of revenging the affront he and his Peo∣ple had received. CHAP. VIII. The Reighs of the Emperors, Gratianus, Valentinian, Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius. BEfore his Death the Emperor Valentinian, had declar'd his Son Gratianus Caesar, and ap∣pointed him his Heir and Successor in his last Will, which was punctually obeyed, only Gratianus and Valentinian the Army would have his Brother Valentinian, be his Companion in the Empire, and such he was declar'd tho' then but very Young. The Victory obtain'd by the Goths, over Valens made them so insolent, that all the East was in danger of being lost. It was requisite to find out some Person of extraordinary valour and conduct, to whom the charge of curbing them should be committed as General. Such was Theodosius, who after the death of his Fa∣ther liv'd retir'd at Italica, the place of his Birth in the farthest part of Spain. Thence as soon as called upon he came, and taking upon him the Command checked the forwardness of the Goths, and humbled their Pride, which had carryed them so far, as to lay siege to Con∣stantinople, then the head of the World. In conclusion he press'd them so hard, they were forced to sue for Peace, and had lands allotted them to plant in, delivering up Athanaricus, the Son of Fridigernus, as an Hostage for performance of Articles on their part. Great was the honour Theodosius gain'd by this action, and so great the satisfaction of Gratianus, that he thought as a reward of his good service; and for the security of the East, he could do no less than Constitute him a third Emperor. Besides, his worth and other good qualities in which he Theodosius, declared Emperor in't he East. surpassed all Men, he was very Religious, as appears by a Law by him Establish'd, in his first, and Gratianus his fifth Consulship, which Commands all Persons to follow the Doctrine of Pope Damasus, and Peter, Bishop of Alexandria. Three years after, which was of Christ 383, on the 16th of January, Theodosius, named Arcadius, his Eldest Son, his Companion in 383. the Empire. It hap'ned that Amphilochus, Bishop of Iconium, in Lycaonia, visited the Empe∣ror Theodosius, at such time as his Son and Companion in the Empire, was sitting by his side. The Bishop designedly made his obeysance to Theodosius, without taking notice of Arcadius. Being asked the cause of that oversight, or distrespect, he answer'd; Do not wonder at it, O Emperor, for you do the same with God, since you permit the Arrians to despise his Son. At the same time was also held a Council at Constantinople, reckoned the second of the General Councils. General council of Constanti∣nople. There Theodosius by his Face knew Meletius, Bishop of Antioch, tho' he had never seen him in his life, but only in a Dream thought he put a Crown upon his Head. Constantinople was then in Disorder, and without a Bishop, because Gregory Nazianzen, on account that some bore him ill-will, had of his own accord resigned that Church. The Emperor caused Nectarius, a Se∣nator, not yet Baptized, to be chosen Bishop. In this Council all Heresies were Condemned,
particularly that of Macedonius, who had been Bishop of Constantinople, and held a false Opi∣nion concerning the Holy Ghost; saying, He was a Creature. Pope Damasus approved all Heresie of Macedonius Condemn∣ed. the Decrees of this Council, and more especially their Creed; in which, as I find it in the Council Forojuliense; they expresly declare, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. Damasus ordained this Creed should be used in the Mass, in stead of the Nicene. He dy'd the Year after this Council was Celebrated, and Siricius Succeeded him. France and Spain were in Rebellion, for Clemens Maximus, by Birth a Spaniard, after stiling himself Em∣peror in Britany, had seized those Provinces; Gratian the Emperor marched against him. They came to a Battle near Paris, where the Tyrant got the Victory, and Gratian at Lions, whither he fled after the Fight, was murdered by the Treachery of Andragacius. He Reign∣ed Gratian the Empe∣ror mur∣dered, when he had Reign∣ed 7 Years, 9 Months, & 9 Days, Heresie of Priscillia∣nus. 7 Years, 9 Months, and 9 Days after the Death of his Father, left no Children, and was the first of the Roman Emperors that would not accept of the Pontifical Stole, which was offer∣ed to them as High-Priests by the Romans, when Pagans. Leta the Wife of Gratian, and Pi∣samena, his Mother-in-law, lived in Rome with the state of Queens, till that City was destroy∣ed, on Revenues assigned them by Theodosius, in acknowledgment of the Empire he had re∣ceived from Gratian. At the same time Spain suffered in point of Religion; for Priscillianus raked up the embers that had remained of the Gnosticks, since Mark, the Disciple of Basilides, as was said before, sowed his false Doctrine. Priscillian was a Noble and Powerful Man, Born in Galicia, had good Natural Parts, was watchful, and could endure Hunger and Thirst, but had other Vices, which blemished all; for he was proud, and unsettled, and his Learn∣ing made him bold. By these means, he drew over to his Party two Bishops, whose Names were Instancius and Salvianus. Idacius, Bishop of Merida, opposed them, at the instance of Algidinus, Bishop of Cordova. The harshness of these Men, caused the sore to rankle, which, if gently handled, might perhaps, have been healed. Recourse was had to the last Remedy; which was to Cite the Hereticks to appear before a Synod at Zaragoca, there to answer for themselves. They appeared not, whereupon, the Bishops Instancius and Salvianus, as also Elpidius and Priscillianus, who were Lay-men, and with them Algidinus, Bishop of Cor∣dova, who of an Enemy, was become an Asserter of their Doctrine, were all Excommunicated. Itacius Sostubensis, as Severus Sulpicius has it, but it should be Ossonovensis, that is, Bishop of Estombar in Portugal, had the charge of publishing and notifying this Sentence to them. St. Isi∣dorus only says, he was a Spanish Bishop, and Sigibertus, that he was of Lamego. He was a passionate and talkative Man, reproved those that fasted, and was much given to read the Holy Scripture. This Itacius and Idacius, obtained an Edict from the Emperor Gratian, then living, whereby those Hereticks were ordered to be expelled all Churches and Cities. In∣stancius, Salvianus, and Priscillian, then by the assistance of his Adherents made Bishop of Avila went to Rome to answer for themselves; but could not obtain Audience of Pope Damasus, They returned to Milan, where the Emperor Gratian was. St. Ambrose would not give ear to them, for all Men were offended at that new Doctrine. Yet they were no way dismayed, but Bribed Macedonius, the Emperor's Steward, and by his means the former Edict was va∣cated, and Priscillian, and Instancius restored to their Churches, for Salvianus dy'd at Rome, In this manner they returned to Spain so encouraged, that they accused Itacius as a Seditious Person. Volventius the Vicar, caused him to be Apprenhended; but he Appealed to France. Thence, being not well received by Gregory the Prefect, he went on to Treves to seek Fa∣vour with Clemens Maximus, who stil'd himself Emperor, with whom, he so far prevailed, that the business was again referred to a Council of Bishops, who, by his Command met at Bourdeaux. Priscillian and Instancius, appearing, the latter was Deposed, the other Appeal'd to Maximus. The Appeal was allowed of, so the Cause of the Hereticks was again put into the hands of Lay-men; a thing then very new. The Cause being try'd at Treves, and ma∣naged by Itacius, Priscillianus was Convicted of Sorcery, and of entertaining scandalous Meetings Priscillia∣nus, and his Ad∣herents Condem∣ned to Death. of Men and Women by Night, under colour of Religion; for which Crimes he received Sentence of Death, and was Executed; and with him Felicissimus, Armedius and Latronianus, who is reckoned among the Poets of that Age. Instancius submitting to the Judgment of the Bishops, was banished into an Island on the North of England. St. Martin, Bishop of Tours, opposed all these Proceedings, saying, That Hereticks ought not to be put to Death, especi∣ally at the instance of Bishops. A meekness perhaps, suitable to those times, but, which ex∣perience has taught is not at all agreeable with ours. These Evils did not cease by the Death of Priscillian, the dead Bodies were brought to Spain, and by the Followers of that Doctrine, honoured as Martyrs; among whom, it was held the most sacred Oath to swear by the Name of Priscillian. On the other side, Itacius, and Idacius, (Isidorus calls him Ʋrsacius) were ac∣cused of what they had done, and Condemned to Banishment. These Hereticks, not to speak of the corruptness of their Lives, confounded the Divine Persons, allowed of Divorces, held Priscilli∣anus's Er∣rors. it a Crime to eat Flesh, said that the Souls proceeded from the Divine Essence, and descend∣ed thro' seven Heavens by the help of certain Angels, as it were by steps to the combat of this Life, and there fell into the power of the Prince of Darkness, the maker of this World. They made Men wholly subject to the Stars, and taught they were governed by the 12 Signs. Pope Siricius, who succeeded Damasus in the Government of the Church, wrote a Letter to Himerius, Bishop of Tarragona, in answer to many Questions he had put to him concerning Baptism, Matrimony, Virgins and Men Consecrated to the Service of God and Holy Orders.
He commands him to communicate it to the Bishops of the Provinces Carthaginiensis, Betica, and Galicia. In the fifth Year after the Election of Siricius, Theodosius and Maximus came to a Battle near Aquileia. The Tyrant lost the day, and soon after was taken and killed. Thus Valentinian the younger, who was fled for fear into the East, again recovered the Empire of the West. The beginning of this War was good, and God prospered them accordingly; for on the 14th of June, Theodosius being Consul the second, and Cynegius the first time, in Stobis, a City of Macedonia, they enacted a Law, forbiding Hereticks to have Meetings, or Communicate out of the Church; and on the 27th of August the same Year, was gained that remarkable and important Victory. Thus far the Emperor Theodosius showed himself very Religious, but used great cruelty at the City Thessalonica, where, because in a Mutiny the Ci∣tizens had killed Butercius, an Officer in the Army, and some others, of the Emperor's Servants, he caused 6000 of them to be slain. Ambrose, Bp. of Milan, having notice of it, shut the Theodosius the Empe∣ror Ex∣communi∣cated for his cruel∣ty at Thes∣salonica. Church Doors upon Theodosius, Excommunicated and Reproved him severely for what he had done, and shewed him there was no way to appease God but by Penance. Theodosius took all with as great Patience, as Ambrose did it with Resolution. He returned home, and some Months after, thro' the persuasions of his Favourite Rufinus, returned to try if the Bp. would admit him, it being then the Feast of Christmas. Ambrose again received him at the Door with no less severe Language than before; but being sensible of his Repentance, ad∣mitted him, upon Condition, that for the future, none should be put to Death till 30 Days were passed after the Sentence. He also enjoyned him, whensoever he was Angry he should not speak one word till he had run over the Greek Alphabet; all this tended to gain time, that the heat of his Passion might cool. These Instructions were soon after of great use, for what hap'ned at Antioch. The Emperor's Officers had laid some new and heavy Tax on that Antioch in danger of destructi∣on. City, the People Mutinying, raged to such a degree, that they dragged a Statue of the Empress Placilla about the Streets. Theodosius resented this Affront in the highest degree, as well in regard his Wife was dead, as because she had been so Holy and Virtuous, that she used with her own Hands to feed the Sick in Hospitals; and put her Husband in mind of what he had been, that he might not grow proud. For these Reasons, he had inflicted a most exem∣plary Punishment on that City, had not the Advice of Ambrose softned his Heart, together with the coming of Embassadors from thence, who, whilst the Emperor was at Dinner, caused cer∣tain Children to sing a Song made for that purpose, set to a doleful Tune, whereby he was moved to compassion. Theodosius now returned into the East, which gave Arbogestes an oppor∣tunity to Drown the young Emperor Valentinian, at Vienne in France, and with his assistance, Eugenius of a School-master presumed to take upon him the Style of Emperor, in the Year 392. This looked rather like a Jest; yet was a great affront to the Empire, and so far was 392. Theodosius concerned, that he had recourse to the holy Hermits in the Desarts, to beg they Eugenius a School-Master, stiles him∣self Empe∣ror. would be mindful of him in their Prayers. One of those Fathers, called John, by Letter, gave him assurance of the Victory, and at the same time acquainted him he should never return from Italy. He marched towards the Enemy, who was not unprovided; at the foot of the Alps the two Armies met, the Battle was bloody, and obstinately fought. On a sudden there arose a Storm of Wind, Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, which drove so upon the Rebels, that they could not weild their Weapons, as Claudian, a famous Poet of those times relates it. 20000 Goths, who served under the Emperor's pay, since the death of Athanaricus, did great service, and thus at length, Theodosius having made a great slaughter, became Master of the Field. Eugenius after the Fight was killed by his own Men, and Arbogestes made away with himself. This Battle was fought on the 17th of September 394. The same Year Theodosius, named his Younger Son Honorius, his Companion in the Empire, and soon after, dy'd of 394. Theodosius dies at Milan. He Reign∣ed 16 Years, and two Days. a Dropsie, at Milan, on the 17th of January, in the following Year, at the Age of 50, having Reigned 16 Years, and 2 Days. He was twice Married: by Placilla his first Wife, he left the two Emperors Arcadius and Honorius; by Galla, the Daughter of Valentinian and Justina, he had only one Daughter, named Galla Placidia. St. Ambrose and St. Hierom, in particular Sermons to that purpose, spoke the Praises of this excellent Prince. Aurelius Victor says, he well deserved the Name Theodosius, which signifies, Given by God, for his great Actions and Virtues, tho' it had not been given him by his Father. It was a sufficient demonstration of his Zeal for Religion, that he caused the Pagan Temples which Constantine had shut up, to be utterly demolished. After the Death of the Great Theodosius, his Sons took upon them the Administration of the Government, Arcadius had the East, and Honorius the West. They were more Religious Arcadius and Hono∣rius. and Virtuous than Fortunate; for in their time the Majesty of the Roman Empire, which from a small beginning, was raised to such a height, that it laboured under its own weight, be∣gan to fall, and never more recovered it self. By the Death of Pope Siricius, Anastasius was promoted to the Government of the Church, in whose time, the first Council of Toledo was 398. First Council of Toledo. held in Spain, and commenced on the first of September, in the Year 400. This Synod con∣demned the Heresie of Priscillian, and reconciled to the Church the two Bps. Simphosius and Dutinius, and a Priest called Comasius, who all Abjured it. The Government of the Em∣pire 409. was divided in this manner. Gildus commanded in Africk, Rufinus in the East, and Sti∣lico in the West. This last, was a Person of greater Authority than the other two, as being Allied to the Emperors, for Serena his Wife, was Daughter to Honorius, the Brother of
Theodosius the Great, and he was Father-in-Law to Honorius the Emperor. Theodosius had thus ordered, that these three might be in the nature of Tutors to his Sons, and ease them of the burden of the Government, but they giving way to Ambition, and forgetting their duty, attempted to usurp the power and so destroy the Empire. Gildus was the first that rebelled in Africk. His own Brother Mazecel was sent to suppress him, who vanquished and slew him, and then himself usurped the name of Emperor, and came to the same end. Rufinus, by birth a Britain, or French-man, stirred up the Goths, and other barbarous Nations, but the Treason being discovered, lost his Head. These Examples were not of force enough to de∣terr Traytors, for Stilico intending to make his own Son Eucherius Emperor, and destroy the Children of Theodosius the Great, invited several Nations to invade the Empire, and particu∣larly, made a private agreement with the Alans, a fierce People, and the Vandals, of whose Alans, and Vandals, called by Stilico. Country he was. The Goths were the first that appeared in Arms, offended that their pay was kept from them, which was done designedly. After over-running all Thracia, and the Neighbouring Countries, they broke into Italy in two Bodies. Radagasius, one of their chiefs, without any opposition, pierced as far as Tuscany, and there, near Florence, was slain with all his Men by Stilico. He might have destroyed Alaricus, who commanded the other party, but would not, to keep the Emperor still in awe, but worsted him, and then assigned his Men places to inhabit in the farthest part of France.Stilico was unwilling they should leave Italy, and therefore sent one Saul a Jew, to fall upon them who was killed, and his forces routed, and the Goths provoked by this injury, returned into Italy, where they stayed some Years. The treachery of Stilico was not suspected at first, but being discovered soon after, his head was cut off in the Year 408. His Wife Serena, and Son Eucherius were also executed, and Honorius put away his Wife in hatred to her Father Stilico. Great was the mischief, the 408. Goths did throughout all Italy, and never ceased till they sate down before Rome the head of World, which after a long siege they entred, putting all within to Fire and Sword. Rome was taken in the Year 410 according to the best computations. Placidia, Sister to the two Em∣perors, In the year 401. Rome was taken Alarick King of the Viso-Goths. was there taken, and marryed to Ataulfus Brother-in-Law to Alaricus, and soon succeeded in the Kingdom, he dying at Cosencia, a City of the Brutij, now Calabria. By means of Placidia, Ataulfus, and Honorius agreed, and the Goths went to inhabit those parts of France, and Spain, which lie next the Pyrenean Mountains. Hence they took occasion to make themselves Masters of all Spain, and a good part of France, as will appear in the follow∣ing Book. THE History of SPAIN. The Fifth BOOK. CHAP. I. The coming of several Barbarous Nations into Spain, as the Vandals, Alans, Sue∣vians, Silingians, and Goths. Their Original, and where they settled. WE shall now Treat of a mighty power of sundry, fierce, and barbarous Na∣tions, which like an inundation, spread themselves through all parts of Who were the Vandals, Alans, Sùe∣vians, Silin∣gians, and Goths. Spain, these were the Vandals, Alans, Suevians, and Silingians. But above all the Goths, who having quitted their Ancient Seats and Habitations, after filling all from East to West, with the terror of their Name and Actions, and over-running all Italy, at last settled in Spain, and there having partly expell'd, and partly subdued the other Nations, for above 300 years maintained their Sovereignty. There is no doubt but all these People and others like them, at several times came from the North, and entred the Provinces of the Roman Empire, their own Native Countries, being overstocked with Mul∣titudes of People, and the barrenness of its soil obliging them to seek more plentiful and pleasant Seats. As this in general is certain, so is it no less doubtful from what particular parts or provinces each of these Nations came, there is great variety of Opinions, and the ignorance of those times gives us but little light to discover the Truth. Pliny places the Vandals in that part of Germany, about Pomerania, tho' Dio says, the springs of the River Albis, or Elbe, are in the Mountains of Vandalia. The Bur∣gundians, are to be reckoned among the Vandals, taking their name from Burgs, signifying Burgundi∣ans. Villages, in which they lived dispersed, and after settling among the Hedui, gave their name
to that part of France, now called Burgundy. Dionysius, who writ Geography in verse, places the Alans, near Dacia, and the Getes. Marcellinus places them in Scythia. The Silingi came into Spain with the Vandals, and settled in Andaluzia, without having any particular King of their own. It is uncertain what part of the North they came from, some believe them to have been part of Bavaria, where formerly was a Town called Salingostadium, near the Danube, three miles from Ingolstad. Grave Au∣thors affirm, the Suevians, had formerly their Seats near the River Elbe, but Strabo places them near the Springs of the Danube, about the City Ausburg. It remains to speak of the Goths, whose origin, because they gained and maintained the Sovereignty of Spain for many Goths who they were. years, we will look into more exactly. Some were of Opinion, the Goths where the same with the Getes, who Pliny, and Herodotus place about the Mouth of the Danube. Most and the best Authors are of Opinion, that the Goths came from the Province called Scandia, or Scandinavia, formerly Basilia, or Baltia, a large Country North of Germany, and Poland, joining on the East to Finland, and encompassed on all the other sides by the Baltick, and Frozen Sea. Scandia, altogether is a large Peninsula, longer than it is broad, and divided into Nor∣way, Sweden, Lapland, and Gothland. The South-East part of this great Peninsula forms, another lesser, which is called Gothia, or Gothland, and is subdivided into Ostrogothia, and Visogothia, or Westrogothia, that is the Eastern and Western Goths. Among the Visogoths, the Balti, which in their Language signifies bold, and among the Ostrogoths, the Amali, so called of a famous King, and leader of theirs, were the two most Noble and Kingly Families. The Goths, for the most part have red Hair and Beards, their Complexion fair, like the other People of Germany, their Language not unlike, nor much differing from those other Nations, that about this time broke into Spain. Only the Alans are said to have used the Language of Scythia, but this is rather a surmise than a known truth. As to Religion all these Nation had then, or soon after did imbrace Christianity, for before they were given to Idolatrous super∣stition. Religion of the Goths. Particularly the Goths, believed they should have no success in War, unless they Sa∣crificed human Blood, and therefore offered up the Prisoners of War to Mars, whom they chiefly honoured, and dedicated the best of their booty, hanging the skins of those they slew on Trees; Before the battle they sacrificed Horses, and carryed their heads on spears, with the mouths open before them. They believe the immortality of the Soul, and that there was reward and punishment after death. When it Thundered they cast Darts up towards Hea∣ven, thinking to assist God against those that endeavoured to force him out of Heaven. They Sung the praises of their Forefathers, to Musick, as is now used in Spain. Some say the Arms of the Goths were, Wavy a Lion Regardant; others will have them to be three Lions like those of England. But it is to no purpose to insist upon these uncertainties, let us see the occcasion that brought so many and so barbarous Nations into Spain. In the height of that confusion, into which the Roman Empire was fallen, and was related in the last Book, one Marcus, in Britany, Occasion of the Bar∣barous Na∣tions com∣ing into Spain. was saluted Emperor by the Legions, and soon after by them killed. In his place they chose Gracinus, whom also they slew within 4 Months. Next they Proclaimed Constan∣tine, for no other merit but the sake of his Name, which was looked upon as Fortunate. This hapned in the year 411, Theodosius the younger being then Emperor of the East, his Fa∣ther Arcadius being dead three years before. A great part of France, and Spain, declared 411 for Constantine, yet some adhered to the true Emperors. Among these Didimus, and Veri∣nianus, raising an army, indeavoured to secure the passes of the Pyrenean Mountains against Constantine, but were discomfited and slain by Constans the Tyrants Son, whom he had taken out of a Monastery, declared Caesar, and sent before into Spain. The Army of Con∣stans, was for the most part made up of those People that came out of Germany, into France, and by reason of an agreement they had made with Honorius, were called Honoriaci. These by consent of Constans, spoiled all the Country of Spain, as far as Palencia, for he designed to purchase the good will of those Barbarians, with the ruins of others. To these at his re∣turn into France, he committed the care of guarding the passes on the Pyrenean Mountains. The Spaniards were offended at it, and threatned some sudden change, which soon after hapned. For the Honoriaci invited the Vandals, Alans, Suevians, and Silingians to come in∣to Spain, and agreed to give them free passage. The occasion that moved them to quit France, 412 where they were settled, is supposed to be the fear they had conceived of the Goths, whom, Vandals, Alans, Su∣vians, and Silingians, came into Spain. being then joyned with Honorius, they thought they should be in no condition to resist. No less was their dread of Constantine, who having subdued great part of France, aspired to be Master of all the rest. Hermenericus was King of the Suevians, Ataces of the Alans, Gun∣dericus of the Vandals, and Silingians. The coming of these Barbarous Nations was the ruin of Spain, for they seized indifferently as well what belonged to Spaniards, as Romans, and destroyed the Towns and open Country, whereupon ensued such a Famine, that the Na∣tives fed upon human flesh, and the wild beasts ranged abroad to devour Men. Next followed Famin and Plague. a Plague, and raged to that degree, that betwixt both evils, great part of the Country was left wast, and so the Barbarians seated themselves where they best liked. The Sùevians, a part of the Vandals, possessed Galicia, then larger than it is now, as containing all Old Castile. The Alans planted in Lusitania, and the Province Carthaginensis, except the Kingdom of Toledo, and the Celtiberi, who continued in the Roman subjection. Betica, fell to the other Vandals, and Silingians. Having thus divided the Country, they agreed with the Romans, and then
began again to till the land, the Spainards looking upon this Slavery, as more tolerable than the Romans. Yet some few preserved their Liberty, especially in Galicia, among the Suevians. In Hispania Citerior, one Maximus was saluted Emperor, by the procurement of Geroncius a Count, who did it in hatred to the Tyrant Constantine, tho' he had once been of his party. His chief aim was under the shadow of the other to make himself absolute. Therefore leaving Maximus at Tarragona, he marched with an Army into France, took the City Vienne, and slew Constans the Caesar; but hearing Constantius was coming upon him, returned into Spain, where the Spaniards set fire to his House and burnt him. Maximus having lost Geron∣oius, who was his support, laying aside the Imperial Robes, fled, and led the rest of his life in misery, which lasted till the time of Paulus Orosius, as he himself testifies. Mean while the Ty∣rant Constantine, and his Son Julian, as also Jovius and Sebastianus, who had Rebelled in France, were killed by Constantius, and all France reduced under the obedience of Honorius, in the Year 413. Two Years after, by the Emperor's consent, the Goths possessed themselves of the 413. Country about the Pyrenean Mountains, and chose Narbonne for the Court of their Kings, in the Year 415. whence that part of the Country came afterwards to be called Gallia Gothica; 415. the Bounds whereof, were often changed, according to the various Success they had in their Wars with the neighbouring Franks and Romans. CHAP. II. The Goths Vanquish and Subdue all the other Barbarous Nations in Spain. The Vandals after this Successful, go over into Africk. The rise of the Kingdom of the Suevians. SPain was divided into several Kingdoms, differing in Laws, Customs, and Religion. The Romans and Spaniards, were Catholicks, the Goths, Arians, the other barbarous Nations had not yet embraced Christianity, but follow'd the Superstitions of their Fore-fathers. Each desiring to secure to themselves that part they had seized in the time of Confusion, la∣boured to settle Peace and Amity with the Romans. Godigisius, King of the Vandals, was the first Godigisius K. of the Vandals makes Peace with the Romans. Progress of the Alans. Ataulfus and Sige∣ricus, K. of the Goths murdred. that concluded an Agreement upon these Terms. That his People should live peaceably in Spain without wronging the Natives; and should at no time plead Prescription of 30 Years, to re∣tain what they had unjustly and violently taken from the Romans. The Alans being a more sierce People than the others, assaulted the Vandals and Silingians, obliged them to quit all the Province Betica, and retire into Galicia, that with the assistance of the Suevians, they might be inabled to recover their Lands from whence they were drove. But the Alans turn∣ed their fury against Celtiberia and Carpetania, and took many Towns from the Romans. The Goths also, the next Year after they had settled in France, passed over into Spain. Ataul∣fus their King, either weary of the War, or being better affected towards the Romans, as being the Emperor's Brother-in-law inclined to Peace. This no way suited with the fu∣rious Nature of the People, who hereupon Conspired and Murdered him at Barcelona, by the means of one Vernulfus, his Favourite. In the place of Ataulfus, they chose Sigericus, a Man of known Courage and Conduct; but he also following the Footsteps of Ataulfus in his inclination to Peace, was killed by his own People within the first Year of his Reign. Walia, a restless and turbulent Man succeeded him. He at the beginning of his Reign gathered a great Fleet, in order to pass over into Africk, which was so shattered by a Storm in the nar∣rowest Walia K. of the Goths a∣grees with the Romans part of the Streight, that he was forced to return into Spain, and come to an Agree∣ment with Constantius. The Conditions were, that he should deliver up Placidia, the Wid∣dow of Ataulfus, that by her Brother the Emperor, was promised to the said Constantius. And that the Goths should make War upon the other barbarous Nations in Spain, all that they gained to belong to the Roman Empire, and they to be content with what was assigned them upon the Borders of France and Spain. This was concluded in the Year 418. according to Paulus Orosius, Priest of Tarragona, well known for his Learning, who lived at this time, 418. and writ the Roman History, which he continued to the following Year. Honorius besides Marrying Constantius to his Sister, made him his Companion in the Empire. To Walia, he freely added the Dominion of Guienne; for having subdued, as was agreed, the barbarous Na∣tions. For the Goths having taken in hand that War, fell upon the Alans, who proud with their late Success, aspired to the Sovereignty of all Spain, slew their King Ataces, and a great number of them in Battle, and forced the rest to quit Lusitania, and fly into Galicia, where Alans and Silingi sub∣dued by the Goths. mixing with the Suevians, the Name of their Nation and Kingdom, was quite lost. The Si∣lingi were also defeated, in a Battle near Tarifa; and so entirely brought under, that they re∣ceived Gothish Governours. The Vandals and Suevians, terrified at this Success, submitted themselves to the Romans, in whose name the War was made, tho' at the expence, and dan∣ger Vandals and Sue∣vians sub∣mit. of the Goths. The Suevians offered to serve under the Romans, but they refused, lest be∣ing in Arms, they might have power to Mutiny. Walia having concluded so great a War, and pacified Spain, returned into France, where he dy'd, in the Year 419. Having Reigned 410. only 3 Years; in which small time he performed Actions that added much to his own, and
his Nations honour, and increased their Territories with the addition of Guienne. After the Death of Walia, two things fell out very fatal, one, that the new Emperor Constantius returning into Italy after quieting Spain and France, dy'd at Ravenna, in the Year 421. leaving by his Wife Placidia a Son, an Infant, named Valentinian, whom his Uncle Hono∣rius 421. took care to see Educated as his Successor in the Empire. The other was, that the bar∣barous Gundericus K. of the Vandals a∣spires to the Sove∣reignty of all Spain. Nations in Spain began again to Revolt, and resumed their former Authority, especially the Vandals, whose King Gundericus, designed to possess himself of all Spain. To this effect they fell upon the Suevians, and forced them to retire to the Mountains Ervasi, supposed by some, to be those now called Arvas, betwixt Leon and Oviedo. But because they refused to come to a Battle, the Vandals despairing of doing any good upon them, gathered a great Fleet, and passed over to the Islands Mallorca and Minorca, which they destroyed with Fire and Sword. Returning thence to the Continent, they utterly demolished Carthagena, some time before taken from the Alans, and restored to the Romans. It continued in Ruins a long time, till at length for the conveniency of the Port, it began to be Rebuilt, and in our days scarce contains 600 Families. This destruction hap'ned 600 Years after it was built by the Cartha∣ginians. Gundericus, King of the Vandals, after taking Carthagena, assaulted the Silingi, who were subject to the Romans, wasted the Country and having entred Sevil by force, and plun∣dred it, offered to Rob the Church of St. Vincent, a place of great Devotion and Riches; but was by a just Judgment of God, struck dead at the very Door. His Bastard Brother Gense∣ricus, by others called Guntharis, succeeded him. All this hap'ned the same Year the Em∣peror Constantius Gensericus succeeds Gundericus dy'd; at the same time also, Jovinus and Maximus, called themselves Empe∣rors in Spain, which obliged Honorius to send Castinus, an able Commander, with fresh Forces, as well to suppress those Usurpers, as to quell the Vandals. Jovinus and Maximus were soon taken, and put to Death; but to subdue the Vandals, was more difficult. Castinus therefore not confiding in his own strength, called over into Spain the Earl Bonifacius, a Man much known for his great Abilities in Peace and War, as also for his Friendship with St. Augustin. He came over from Africk, where he was Governour; but Divisions falling out among them, as is usual, where the Power is equal, returned again into Africk, and Castinus deprived of his Assistance, being in no condition to oppose the Vandals, went away into Italy, in the Year 423. This same Year, the Emperor Honorius dy'd, on the 15th of Aug. having reigned 28 Years, 11 Months, and 10 Days. He was no less famous for his Zeal in Religion, than for 423. the decay of the Roman Empire, which began in his Days. Valentinian III. Son of Constanti∣us, Honorius Reign'd above 28 Years. a Child, succeeded in the Empire; which gave occasion to Flavius Joannes to attempt to usurp the Empire, but two Years after, he was vanquished and slain. Placidia the Em∣press, Governed for her Son. Bonifacīus, who Governed Africk, thinking to make his ad∣vantage of the times, called over Genserius, King of the Vandals, into Africk, who resolved, not to slip so fair an opportunity of gaining so great a Dominion, and therefore immediately passed over with 80000 fighting Men. The Silingi staid in Spain, especially in that part of Gensericus King of the Vandals passes over into Africk the Province Betica about Sevil; upon which account, they being mixed with, and esteemed part of the Vandals, the Country losing its former name of Betica, was called Vandalosia, now Andaluzia; notwithstanding, the Bounds of Betica and Andaluzia, do not exactly agree. By reason of the departure of the Vandals, the Power of the Suevians began to grow Formi∣dable throughout all Spain. Hermenericus was their King, and he dying of a tedious Sickness, in the Year 440. and the 32d of his Reign, Rechila his Son, a hot and fiery Youth, following 440. his Father's Footsteps, near the River Xenil met Ardebotus, sent by the Emperor into Spain, overthrew and killed him in Battle. The Booty was such, as left him rich enough to sup∣port the charge of the War. After this Victory he Conquered all Betica, and took Sevil, a City then, by reason of the Wars, not so considerable as it was before, or is at present. Thence he turned into Lusitania, and took Merida, whereby, what remained of the Alans, was wholly brought under. It was no small help to the Suevians, that at that time the Coun∣try was naked, and without defence; for Sebastian the Roman General, was gone over into Africk, to oppose the Vandals, where he was by them slain, as Paulus Diaconus relates it. Where∣fore the Suevians went on, and subdued Carpetania, or the Kingdom of Toledo, and the Pro∣vince of Carthagena; but soon after agreeing with the Romans, they restored these two Pro∣vinces. Rechila dy'd in the Year 448. and left his Son Recciarius to succeed him, who was 448. the first of the Suevian Kings that received the Faith of Christ, and propagated the true Re∣ligion among his People in Spain. Thus much of the Suevians.
CHAP. III. The Reigns of the Kings Theodoredus, Torismund, and Theodorick. Attila King of the Huns, twice Routed. The General Council of Chalcedon. THE Goths and their King Theodoredus, Kinsman and Successor of Walia, possessed but a Theodore∣dus K. of the Goths. small part of Spain, to wit, only that which is now Catalonia; but in France they flourished both in Riches and Honour. For this reason, and because they were used to make the end of one War, the beginning of another, they broke the Peace with the Romans, and began to spread a Terror. Theodoredus's numerous Issue much encreased his Power; for he had six Sons, Torismundus, Theodoricus, Euricus, Fridericus, Reccinerus, and Himericus; as also two Daughters, one Married to Hunnericus the Vandal, Son of Gensericus, who Perse∣cuted the Catholicks in Africk, and upon a groundless Suspicion sent her home, after cutting off her Nose. The other, to Recciarius, King of the Suevians in Spain. About this time, the Huns, led by Attila, commonly called, The Scourge of God, had entred France, after burn∣ing Attila, K. of the Huns, in France. Rome, and laid Siege to Orleans, which moved the Romans, Franks, and Goths, to join in a League in order to oppose them. Theodoredus, King of the Goths, fearing that Barbarian might fall into Guienne, was the first that made head against the common Enemy, and oblig'd him to raise the Siege, and draw off into the Plains called Catalaunici, by others, Marochii, and Maurisii, near Toulouse. AEtius, Valentinian's General, and Meroveus, King of the Franks came up now, and joyned the Goths. The Forces being come together, they ordered their Battles. Theodoredus commanded the Right Wing, AEtius the Left, the Franks and Sanguiba∣nus, King of the Alans that Inhabited about Orleans, were placed in the Center. On the o∣ther side, Attila made up his Wings, which extended along those vast Plains, of his Auxili∣ary Forces, posting the Ostrogoths on the Left against the Visogoths, the Huns, where he was in Person, made the Main Battle. Betwixt both Armies was a rising Ground, very advanta∣geous to those that should possess themselves of it. Both Parties strove for it, but the Ro∣mans gained it. This somewhat dismay'd Attila's Men, but being encouraged by him, the Huns gave the Onset with great Fury, and were received with no less Resolution. The Bo∣dies closing, there was a great havock, both sides fighting obstinately for the Empire of the World, 180000 Men were killed in this Fight; which gave occasion to frame some Lyes, as that a Rivulet which ran hard by, overflowed with Blood, and that the noise of Arms was heard in that place three days after, as if the Ghosts of the Dead had continued the Action; meer Fables to express the greatness of the slaughter. King Theodoredus was killed at the be∣ginning of the Fight, being trod to Death by his own Men, by reason of his age and weak∣ness; tho' some will have it, that he was slain by an Ostrogoth, called Andages. What would have discouraged others inraged his Men, for Torismundus and Theodoricus, his Sons, with a strong Body furiously charged, and broke the Enemy, and forced their General to fly, after he had done all that could be expected from a wise Commander and brave Soldier. The two Brothers went so far in the Pursuit, that at Night they passed near the Enemies Camp, where they were in some danger, Torismundus was beat off his Horse, wounded in the Head, and brought off by the Valour of his Men. Attila who had before thought the World too little for his Conquest, retired to his Camp with a Resolution if he were pressed, to kill him∣self, having to this purpose, kindled a great Fire. The Carts he had drawn up about his Camp, and Night that came on, saved him, which he foresaw, and therefore began the Fight after Noon. AEtius spent the Night with no less fear under Arms, having made a Trench of the dead Horses and Armour. But the next day finding the Enemy refused to give Battle, he Besieged him in his Camp at first, and when he could with ease have destroyed him, suffered him to march out of France, and return into Pannonia. The Joy of this Victory was much abated by the escape of Attila, and Death of Theodoredus; yet it was believed, the Death of so Powerful a King was not displeasing to the Romans and Franks. This Battle was fought Ann. Dom. 154. was the great battle fought a∣gainst At∣tila, K. of the Huns, by the Ro∣mans, Franks, & Visogoths, wherein were 180000 Men slain. Torismund succeeds Theodore∣dus. in the Consulship of Martianus Augustus and Clodius Adelphius, in the Year of Christ 451. and the 31st of the Reign of Theodoredus. Some are of opinion that Recciarius, King of the Sue∣vians, was in this Battle, upon account of his Affinity with the King of the Goths. Certain it is, that after over-running the Vascones, who inhabited that part of Spain, now called Na∣varre, and still were subject to the Romans, he passed into France to visit his Father-in-law, and then assisted by the Goths, wasted the Country of Carthagena, and Carpetania. At last, having made Peace with the Romans, he returned into his own Dominions in Betica, Lusitania, and Galicia, still aspiring to the Sovereignty of all Spain. Theodoredus's Funeral Rites being perform'd by the Goths, and Torismund succeeding in the Kingdom, by the advice of AEtius, he forbore pursuing Attila, till he had settled his own Affairs, that his Brothers might not have the Power to raise any Commotions. This done, he marched after Attila, and overtaking him near the River Loire, where he was sub∣duing the Alans that had settled there, gave him a mighty Overthrow, whereby he was ob∣liged to quit all France. But he Recruiting himself in Pannonia, and marching towards Italy, the Emperor Valentinian caused AEtius to be killed, for having suffered him to escape at the
Catalaunian Plains. At this time St. Leo was Pope, he, who by the strength of his Eloquence per∣suaded Attila to turn back when he was marching to Rome, and Gensericus the Vandal from burn∣ing of it. Toribius, Bishop of Astorga, was familiar with Pope Leo, and by his Advice, gather'd a Synod of Spanish Bishops at Gelenis, in Galicia, where the Heresie of Priscillian, then again Revived, was Condemned. Let us return to Torismund, who, because he Governed with more Torismund Murde∣red. severity, and rigour than that fierce People could bear, was murdered by the contrivance of his two Brothers Theodoricus and Fridericus, and by the hand of Ascalernus, his great Fa∣vourite, as he lay sick in his Bed, in the first Year of his Reign. In the ensuing Year, which was of Christ 455. Thrasila, a Souldier of AEtius's, killed the Emperor Valentinian, in Re∣venge, 455. as some will have it, of his Generals Death; but in reality, at the Instigation of Maximus, who upon it Usurped the Empire, and the better to secure himself therein, Marry'd Eudoxia, Valentinian's Widow. By the Death of Valentinian, the Empire of the West fell quite to ruin, for nine Usurpers, or unhappy Emperors that succeeded one another afterwards, scarce deserve to be named. Marcianus, who succeeded Theodosius the Lesser, in the East, Assembled a General Council of Bishops at Chalcedon, in which, was double the General Council at Chalce∣don. number of Prelates that had been at Nice. They Condemned the wicked Opinions started by Dioscorus and Eutyches, concerning Christ. Theodoricus began his Reign over the Goths with singular Prudence and Moderation, and might have been reputed an excellent Prince, had he not been infected with Arianism, and blemish'd his Life with the Blood of his Brother. Si∣donius Theodorick, K. of the Goths. Apollinaris, Bp. of Arvernum, or Clermont, in an Epistle to Agricola, highly extols the Virtues of Theodoricus. Avitus resided at the Court of Theodoricus, as Embassador from Maximus Au∣gustus, him the King persuaded, upon the News of his Master's Death, to possess himself of the Empire of the West, and assisted him with his Counsel and Forces. In requital for his Service, it was agreed, the Goths should enjoy all they could gain of the Suevians in Spain, who incroached upon the Roman Territories, and aimed at the Sovereignty of the whole. It was convenient before the War was declared, to find some plausible colour for it. To this purpose, an Embassy was sent to Recciarius, advising him not to Invade his Neighbours, with∣out Provocation given, and withall threatning, in case he proceeded, that the Goths would not be wanting to assist their Friends and Confederates, the Romans. Recciarius haughty with his late Success, answered, He would soon be at Toulouse, where the Matter in Debate should be try'd in Battle. Theodoricus having received this answer, resolved to be beforehand with him, Theodorick, K. of the Goths in∣vades Spain. and having raised a great Army of his own, with Supplies of Franks and Burgundians, passed the Pyrenean Mountains, and near the River Ʋrbicus, which runs betwixt Iberia and Astorga, in Galicia, after a bloody Fight Overthrew and put to flight his Enemy. Great was the slaughter made of the Suevians. Recciarius himself was wounded, and not thinking himself safe in any part of Spain, attempted to pass over into Africk, but was forced back by a Storm to the City Porto in Por∣tugal, at the Mouth of the River Duero, where, by command of the Conqueror he was kill'd, in the Year 456. according to Ado Viennensis. Braga was plundred, but no Blood of the Citi∣zens spilt; the Booty was rich, by reason, as is supposed, it was the Seat of the Suevian Kings. 456. After the Battle, Theodoricus having subdued Galicia, placed one Acliulphus of the Family of the Varni, not of the Gothish Nobility, and a disloyal Person, Governour there. Next, he en∣tred Lusitania, where, at the request of S. Eulalia Protectress of Merida, he forbore plundring that City. This done, Ceurila with part of the Army was sent into Andaluzia, Nepocianus and Nericus to Galicia, against Acliulphus, who forgetting his Duty, had Rebelled, and kept that Province to himself. Theodoricus returning to France, took up Arms against the Romans and Majorianus, upon account that they had forced Avitus to renounce the Empire, and as was said before, Avitus and this King were Friends. He wasted the Country of France, plun∣dered the Towns, and passing on as far as the River Rhosne, sack'd and destroy'd Lions. Thus much in France. In Spain, Ceurila unexpectedly entred Andaluzia, the People sent Embassa∣dors to him, offering to submit themselves to the Goths, saying, They had not joined with the Suevians against the Romans, and were ready to give Hostages, and obey whatever other commands should be laid upon them. All Towns received him Peaceably, and furnished his Army with Corn, and all other Necessaries. Thus Andaluzia without any Bloodshed was brought under the Power of the Goths. In Galicia the War was carried on with more Vi∣gour; but at length Acliulphus, who stiled himself King, was in a Battle near Lugo, taken, and lost his Head. The Suevians sent Holy Men with the Vestments of Churches, and o∣ther Sacred things to Theodoricus, to implore mercy, and he not only forgave, but allowed them to gather the remains of their Nation, and choose a King. The Electors being divided, one Party elected Franta for their King, and the other, Masdra. This last, within two Years was killed by his own People. Remismundus, his Son and Successor, in the Year 460. 460. making a League with Franta, and joyning his Forces, entred Lusitania, putting all to Fire and Sword; yet could not wholly subdue it. Majorianus, who Deposed Avitus, and made himself Emperor, came over into Spain, and having settled Affairs, provided a Fleet at Car∣thagena to pass over into Africk to subdue the Vandals; but was disappointed, part of his Ships being burnt, and part taken by the Enemy. Hence he went into France, and recovered all the Goths had taken from the Roman Empire; but was at length killed at Detrona in Italy, in the Year 461. Vibius Severus with the assistance of Recimer the Murderer of Majorianus, and Im∣perial 461. General, succeeded in the Empire. During these Troubles, Theodorick recovered the
City Narbon deliver to him by Rabenius, whom, with mighty promises he withdrew from the Emperor Severus. Let us now return to Galicia. CHAP. IV. The Death of King Theodorick; and Reigns of Euricus, and Alaricus. The Goths twice Overthrown by the Franks. AT this time the Suevians were embroiled in War among themselves. For Franta dy∣ing, Broils' among the Sue∣vians. one of the Factions before mentioned, chose Frumarius to succeed him; but Re∣mismundus before the new King could be well settled, designed to make himself sole Sove∣reign of the Suevians, which he compassed the easier, Frumarius dying of Sickess. Neverthe∣less Iria Flavia, a City belonging to Remismundus, was destroyed by the other Faction, then not entirely subdued. All the Nations of the Suevians being thus brought under one head, great Levies were made, and Remismundus with a mighty Army entred Lusitania, where he took first Coimbra, and then Lisbon delivered to him by Lucidius the Governour. The Power of the Romans was not looked upon, but the Goths were feared. Therefore to appease Theodorick, the Suevians sent him an Embassy, promising to be faithful to him, and obey his Commands. The Goths gave ear to this Embassy, and to bind the Friendship the faster, Re∣mismundus Marryed Theodorick's Daughter, who was sent into Spain, and with her, Salanus, a Noble Man, to attend her, and Ajax a French Man, who to gain his King's Favour, was some time before turned Arian. This Man's business was to pervert the Suevians, that the differ∣ence of Religion being taken away, the Amity might be the firmer. He performed what he was sent for, being introduced to the King by the Queen. Salanus after the Marriage re∣turning into France, found Theodorick was killed by the Treachery of his Brother Euricus, in the Year of our Lord 467. and ther 3th after he in like manner had destroyed his Brother Toris∣mund. 467. The Kingdom of the Goths, as a Reward of his Treason fell to Euricus. He was Euricus King after Theodorick. Active and Resolute, only feared Remismund would revenge the murder of his Father-in-law, and desired to expel the Suevians out of Lusitania, and the Romans out of all Spain, to become absolute there himself. Spain then was divided into three parts, the Suevians possessed Gali∣cia, and part of Lusitania, the Goths, Betica and Catalonia, and the Romans all the rest of Spain. Euricus having made Peace with Leo, Emperor of the East, entred Spain with a Powerful Army, and over-running all to the farthest parts of it, subdued Lusitania. From thencce he sent part of his Forces to take Pamplona and Zaragoça, still subject to the Romans. He with the prime of the Army also marched towards Hispania citerior, and there, because the famous City Tarragona held out a long Siege, laid it level with the Ground. This was the end of the Roman Empire in Spain, which had lasted almost 700 Years; and thus all the Country, except Galicia, which the Suevians held, was brought under the Dominion of the Goths. All the Provinces of the Roman Empire were filled with Confusion, which Euricus making his advantage of, and being invited by Arvandus first, and next by Seronatus, who Governed France for the Emperors, he invaded that Province. Besides, Gensericus, King of the Vandals in Africk, to divert the Power of the Romans from himself, stirred up the Ostrogoths and Visogoths, to fall into their Provinces. Arvandus and Seronatus their Trea∣son being discovered, lost their Heads. Gensericus's Project succeeded better, for Theodemire King of the Ostrogoths in Pannonia, having recovered his Son Theodorick, who had been long a Hostage at Constantinople, and to whom Heaven had decreed the Empire of Italy, sent his Brother Vindemirus to carry on the War in Italy. He overcome by rich Presents sent him by Nepos Augustus, leaving Italy, passed into France, and joined his Forces with Euricus, to the great Terror and Destruction of that Province, the open Country being by them wasted, and the Towns put to Fire and Sword. Epiphanius, Bishop of Pavia, a Man then in great esteem, sent by Nepos Augustus to Treat with these People, had no success; but as soon as he was gone the Countries of Limoges, Quercy, and Roverge, were subdued by the Goths. Besides, Clermont, after a long Siege, was forced to surrender. To oppose the Goths, now possessed of a great part of France, the Emperor Nepos sent his General Orestes with a considerable Force. This Man was himself a Goth, and according to the use of those times turned the Power he was intrusted with, against his Master, whom he deposed, and raised his own Son, commonly known by the name of Augustulus to the Throne. Orestes's return left the Pro∣vince exposed to the Goths, who extended their Empire without any opposition. They took Marseilles, and many other Places along the River Rhosne. In conclusion, Euricus puffed up with Success, as if he had no Enemies left, placed his Royal Seat at Arles, and being an Arian, fell to Persecuting the Catholicks, Banished the Bishops, the Priests fled, and the Churches were left desolate. His Reign lasted 17 Years, after which, he dy'd at Arles, in the Year 483. Simplicius, Bishop of Rome departed this Life this same Year; there is still ex∣tant an Epistle of his to Zeno, Bishop of Sevil, commending his Zeal, and prudent Go∣vernment 483. in those times of Affliction, and constituting him his Vicar General in Spain. Fe∣lix was Successor to Simplicius; there is also an Epistle of his to the same Zeno, but nothing in it remarkable.
Euricus's Funeral Rites being performed, his Son Alaricus was Proclaimed King. During his Reign the Affairs of the Visogoths in Spain, continued in a settled and peaceable Condition. Alaricus Proclaim∣ed King. Not so in France, which being divided betwixt the Goths, Franks and Burgundians, could not be long quiet. The Franks, who not long before had embraced the Catholick Religion, with their King Clodoveus, hated the Visogoths, as being Arians, and each desiring to enlarge the Bounds of their Kingdoms, it was plain a dangerous War must ensue. Theodorick, King of the Ostrogoths in Italy, interposed his Authority to bring them to an Accommodation, but all in vain. The War was declared, both Parties took the Field, and advancing towards one a∣nother, met in the Country of Poictiers. Neither thought himself inferior to the other, ei∣ther in Conduct, Valour, or Experience; and therefore presently ordered their Battles with great resolution. For a long time the Fight continued very bloody, and the event dubious. Alaricus omitted not any thing that belonged to an expert Captain, or courageous Soldier; Two great O∣ver∣throws given the Goths by the Franks. but seeing his Men terrified with the great Slaughter turn their Backs, encouraged, called upon, and endeavoured to Rally them. He himself being distinguishable by his Horse and Ar∣mour fought among the foremost, and appeared where the greatest danger was. Exhortati∣ons and Examples were of no force, his Men all fled; he remained among the last, and se∣ing no hopes left, try'd to make his escape, when Clodoveus, or Clouis, who charged at the head of his Men, bore him down with a shock of his Lance. Alaricus striving to rise was killed by a French Foot Soldier. Two Noble Goths thinking to revenge their King, ran at Clouis, who was saved by the goodness of his Armour, and by the assistance of a Youth, cal∣led Clodoricus, that came in to his Rescue. Alaricus being dead, the Goths dispersed them∣selves into all the neighbouring Towns, in such manner, that no considerable Body remained to∣gether to oppose the Franks; whereupon, they presently possessed themselves of the City An∣gouleme. But those Goths who had not been in this Battle, assembling themselves, had the courage to try their Fortune near Bourdeaux. They proved no more successful than the o∣thers, and the slaughter of them was so great, that from that Day the Country they fought in, changed its name, and was called the Arian Fields, from the Religion of the Goths. Af∣ter these two mighty Victories, many Places submitted to the Franks, as Bourdeaux, the Ve∣sates, Cahors, Rhodes, and those of Albernia. Even the City of Toulouse, where the Goths kept their Court, was taken, and nothing considerable left them in France. Among the Treasures of the Gothish Kings, were found the Vessels and Instruments belonging to the Sacrifices at the Temple of Jerusalem, which had been taken by Alaricus, the first King of those Peo∣ple when he Sack'd Rome, left by him to his Successors, and now fell into the Hands of Clouis. Alaricus dy'd in the Year 506. His Reign, which lasted 23 Years, he supported by Falshood and Cruelty, which made his end the less pity'd, all People saying, He had well de∣served 506. it. Yet he was the first King of the Goths that made use of written Laws, and pub∣lish'd those of Theodosius the same Year he was slain. Before his time, the Goths, like other bar∣barous Nations, were Governed by the ancient Customs of their Forefathers. To these Laws of Alaricus, succeeding Kings added many others, of all which together, was composed that Volume the Spaniards call Fuero jusgo, whereof we shall speak in a more proper place. CHAP. V. The Reign of the Kings Gesaleycus, Theodorick, and Amalaricus. Several Spanish Synods. Defeat of the Franks. And Tryal by Ordeal. ALaricus left two Sons, one by his Wife Theudicoda, call'd Amalaricus, and one by ano∣ther Woman, nam'd Gesaleycus. The principal Men among the Goths chose the latter for Gesaleycus advanced to the Throne. their King, by reason the other was but five Years of Age. This offended the King of the Ostrogoths, who sent 80000 Men under the command of Ilba, as well to suppress the Franks, and restore the Kingdom of the Visogoths, then at the point of destruction, as to Re-inthrone his Grandson Amalaricus. Gesaleycus fearing so great a Power, as also because the King of the Burgundians had taken Narbonne, not thinking himself secure in any part of France, reti∣red to Barcelona. He was naturally a Coward, and consequently Cruel, which moved him with his own Hands, and in his Palace in that City to kill Goericus, a Man of Note. Ilba, Francs o∣ver∣thrown, & 20000 killed. in France, assisted by the Visogoths, overthrew the Franks, with the slaughter of 20000 of them. By this means the Visogoths recovered Guienne, the Ostrogoths possessed themselves of Provence, took Narbonne from the Burgundians, and were about passing the Pyrenean Moun∣tains. Hereupon Gesaleycus not trusting to his own People, knowing the hatred they bore him for his Cowardize and Cruelty, went over into Africk, Thrasimundus King of the Van∣dals, tho' Marry'd to the Sister of Theodorick, received him Friendly, and relieved him with Money. Having received this Aid, he returned into France, and after lying hid a Year, raised an Army, with which he durst venture to give a Battle near Barcelona, but was Van∣quished by Ilba, and flying into France, soon after dy'd with Grief, in the Year of Christ 510. when he had Reigned 4 Years. Authors do not agree who succeeded Gesaleycus, most of 510. them affirm, that Theodorick the Ostrogoth, from thence forward called himself King of the Gesaleycus his death. Visogoths. This Opinion is confirmed by the Synods then held in Spain, in which is seen the
Name of Theodorick, and Year of his Reign. Others say, Amalaricus succeeded, and Theodorick only Acted as his Tutor. I can no way give Credit to what Spanish Authors write, viz. That Theodorick came into Spain, Married a Wife of the old Spanish Race at Toledo, and at her request, restored them to their ancient Liberty, since no Foreign Writer makes men∣tion of any such Journey of his, especially Cassiodorus, and others, who writ his Actions very particularly. Certain it is, that Theudius, or Theudis, who had served Theodorick as his Esquire at Arms, was by his Favour appointed to Govern, during the Minority of the young King, which was the first step by which afterwards he ascended to the Throne. In the Year 516. a Council of Bishops was held at Tarragona; here we find the first mention of any Monks in Spain. Here it was Ordain'd, that (after the manner of the Jews Sabbath) 516. A Coun∣cil at Tar∣ragona. Sunday should begin to be observed on Saturday Evening, whence remains still the Custom a∣mong Spaniards of keeping Holyday, and rejoycing on the Saturday Night. Another Coun∣cil was held at Girona the following Year 517. Pope Hormisda about the same time, writ a Letter to John, Bishop of Tarragona, commanding him Yearly to hold Synods of Bishops; a 517. Three Sy∣nods. thing used in those Days for Reformation of Manners. After the death of Hormisda, in the time of his Successor, John I. who was Elected in the Year 523, two other Synods were ce∣lebrated, 523. one at Lerida, the other at Valencia. Theodorick the Ostrogoth, dying in Italy, Amalari∣cus's Reign Amalaricus began to take upon him the Government of the Visogoths in Spain, from which time, some begin to reckon the Years of his Reign. As soon as Amalaricus commenced his Reign, he made Peace with the Franks, and to bind it the faster, Marry'd Crotilda, their King's Sister, and Daughter to Clouis. In Dower with her, the Country of Toulouse was re∣stored to the Goths. Crotilda was a Person of singular Piety, and had been Religiously Edu∣cated in the true Faith by her Mother, who was of the same Name. This highly offended her Husband, who was an Arian. When she went to Church, the Rabble did not only Re∣vile, but would often throw Dirt at her. Her Husband did not only wink at it, but when she came home, frown'd, gave her ill Language, and at last proceeded to blows, insomuch, that several times he made the Blood gush from her. Long she endured, hoping with Patience and Meekness to soften his cruel Heart, but finding there was no hopes of mollifying him, at last she writ to her Brother Childebert, and together with the Letter, sent him a Handker∣chief dipt in her own Blood. She complained of her ill usage, and implored his Assistance to∣wards her Relief. The Kingdom of the Franks was then divided among the Sons of Clouis. Childebert had Paris; Clotarius, Soissons; Clodomirus, Orleans; and Theodoricus, Metz in Lorrain, who all called themselves Kings. They all inraged against the Visogoth, for the wrong he did their Sister Crotilda, joyn'd their Forces, and with much speed marched to∣wards him. Amalaricus was wholly unprovided, besides, his ill Conscience terrifying him, he resolved to fly. God, who had decreed his Punishment, blinded him; for, whereas he might have escaped, he returned to save part of his Treasure into the City, supposed to be Barcelona. In this Distress, he thought to have taken Sanctuary in a Catholick Church; but in the way was killed by a Soldier. St. Isidorus writes he was killed in a Battle, fought near His death. Narbonne. But I rather believe Gregory of Tours, who lived before him, and relates the passage in this manner. Ado Viennensis says, the Franks overran all Spain, destroy'd the City To∣ledo, after a long Siege, and took many other Places. Procopius says, They took from them all that the Goths possess'd in France; yet this, no other Author speaks of, and we find the Dominion of the Goths in the following Reigns extended as far as the River Rhosne. Besides, it ap∣pears that Amalasiuntha, after the Death of her Father Theodorick, gave Provence to K. Theodorick of Lorrain, that he might not be dissatisfied that the Ostrogoths possess'd some part of France, the rest she left to the Visogoths, contenting her self with the Dominion of Italy. Amalari∣cus dy'd in the Year 531. Having Reigned five Years, unless we commence from the Death of Gesaleycus, and then it will extend to 20 Years. His Wife Crotilda dy'd in her return to 531. France. In the 5th Year of his Reign, was held the second Council of Toledo. Montanus, Second Council of Toledo. Archbishop of Toledo, Presided in this Council, of whom, St. Ildefonsus writes, That being accused of Incontinency, to clear his Innocency, he held burning Coals of Fire in his Bo∣some all the time of Mass, and yet neither his Linen nor Flesh were damaged thereby, tho' they were taken out afterwards light as they were put in. Hence it is supposed, the Custom Tryal by Ordeal. afterwards received throughout all Spain of puring common Offenders to the tryal of red hot Iron, or boiling Water, took its Original. ide manner of it was thus. The Criminal ha∣ving confessed his Sins, they brought him a red hot Iron, or a Cup of boiling Water, which being blessed by a Priest after Mass; if the Party accused, handled the one, or drank the o∣ther, and escaped unhurt, he was acquited. This Custom was used in many places, till Pope Honorius III. forbid this way of Compurgation. About this time flourished in Spain four Bishops famous for their Learning, these were Justus Ʋrgelitanus, Justinianus Valentinus, Nebridius Agathensis, and Elpidius; besides these, Aprigius, Bishop of Beja in Portugal, Re∣nowned for his Commentaries upon the Revelation.
CHAP. VI. The Reigns of Theudis, and Theudiselus, Agila, and Athanagildus. A great Plague, The 5th General Council. An Interregnum. And the Conversion of the Suevians. A Malaricus dying without Issue, the whole Line of the Visogoth Kings was Extinct, and Theudis made K. by Electi∣on. the Crown devolved upon Theudis, by Descent an Ostrogoth. He was chosen by the unanimous Consent of the Nobility of the Visogoths, for his singular Prudence, Experience and Knowledge; besides that he had gained their good Will whilst he Governed during the Minority of Amalaricus. His Wife, who was of the prime Nobility of Spain, as a Portion, brought him an Estate able to raise 2000 fighting Men. All these Circumstances concurring, advanced him to the Throne. Theodorick, King of the Ostrogoths, had endeavoured to draw Theudis into Italy; but he still kept off. During the Reign of Theudis, in the Year 541. ended the Form of Government by Consuls in Rome, Basilius, Junior, without a Colleague 541. being the last Consul. In the following Year, Childebert, King of the Franks, and Clotarius, his Brother, not satisfied with what they had done before, again made War upon Spain, and after wasting all the Province of Tarragona, laid Siege to Zaragoca. The Citizens had Franks a∣gain in∣vade Spain. recourse to their Patron St. Vincent, whose Garment they carry'd in Procession about the Walls, imploring his Assistance, whereof Childebert being informed, he took Compassion, and desisted from doing 'em any farther harm. At his Request, the Citizens gave him that Garment, which he carry'd to Paris, and there built a Church in the Suburb, of the Invocation of this Saint, now called St. Germain. As he was to return into France he was in great danger; for Theudis not being able to meet him in open Field, had sent Theudiselus to secure the Passes of the Mountains, which he did so successfully, that the Franks were distressed, and forced to purchase their passage with Money. After the War followed a Plague, for the space of two A great Plague. Years, wherein, innumerable People dy'd in Spain. Theudis passed over into Africk, and laid Siege to Ceuta, but whilst he kept the Sunday, the Besieged sallying, put to the Sword all that were in the Trenches. The King, with part of his Army got aboard the Fleet, and re∣turned into Spain. This hap'ned at the same time that Belisarius, General for Justinian, Em∣peror of the East, subdu'd the Vandals in Africk, after they had been possess'd of it 100 Years. Justinian not only recovered Africk, but expelled the Goths out of all Italy, killing several of their Kings successively; and in great measure restored the Majesty of the Roman Empire. It was he also, that reduced the Civil Law into Method, and Composed that small, but most excellent Book, well known by the name of, The Emperor Justinian's Institutions. Not long after these things had hap'ned, follow'd the Death of Theudis, in the Year 548. when he had Reign'd 17 Years, and 5 Months. A certain Man, whose Name is not known, nor upon 548. Theudis's Death. what Provocation, resolved to kill this King, and to that purpose feigned himself Mad. Being permitted to come into his Presence, he furiously ran at, and struck him thro' the Bo∣dy with a Sword. In this his last Agony, the King confessed this was a just Judgment of God, for that he had formerly murdered a General under whom he served, and to whom, he had taken an Oath of Fidelity; and so great was his Repentance, that he charg'd all there present, they should do no harm to his Murderer. This is an example of Mercy much to be commended in this Prince, as also, that being himself an Arian, he permitted the Catholick Bishops to hold a Council at Toledo, Theudis being dead, Theudiselus was by the No∣bility chosen King, as well in regard of his Valour, whereof, he had given good proof in the Theudiselus Elected. K. War with the Franks, as of his high Birth, being Nephew by a Sister, to Totila, King of the Ostrogoths. The great hopes that had at first been conceived of him, were soon disappoint∣ed; for he entirely gave himself up to Sensuality. Many of his People were privately Murthered, and others upon forged Crimes, publickly Condemned and Executed, only that he might take their Wives to satisfie his Lust. Hereupon he grew so hateful to his People, that they Conspired, and killed him in his own Palace, as he sate at Dinner, when he had Is murder∣ed. Reigned 18 Months, and 13 Days. The Nobility upon the Death of Theudiselus an chose Agila for their King. At his first com∣ing to the Crown, he laid close Siege to Cordova, which refused to acknowledge him. The 549. Besieged making a furious Sally, put his Army to flight with much slaughter, killed his Agila Reigns. Son, and took the Baggage; whereby he was oblig'd to quit the Siege, and retire to Meri∣da. This was looked upon as a Judgment from Heaven, for his Profaning the Church of the Martyr Asciselus, into which, he had put his Horses. After this misfortune he began to be less looked upon by his People, and at length grew so much into contempt, that one Athana∣gildus openly Rebelled. He the more to secure and strengthen himself, sent Embassadors to the Emperor Justinian, offering to restore a considerable part of Spain to the Empire, if 554. he would assist him. In pursuance of this Embassy, Liberius was sent out of France to his aid, Is killed having Reign'd 5 Years, and 3 Months. and their Forces being joyn'd, the Battle was fought near Sevil, where the Rebellion is sup∣posed first to have broke out. Athanagildus obtained the Victory, and Agila was slain by his own Men, in the Year 554. when he had Reign'd 5 Years, and 3 Months. They killed him to put an end to the Civil Wars, fearing lest the Power and Riches of the Goths,
being weakned by their own Divisions, the Romans might again recover all Spain, as they had done Italy and Africk. In the same Year 554. by order of the Emperor Justinian, was held at Constantinople the 5th General Council, in which were 165 Bishops, who Condemned the The 5th. General Council. Athanagil∣dus as∣cends the Throne. Opinions of Origen. Jornandes, a Gothish Bishop, continued the History of that Nation, till the time that Athanagildus having killed his Enemy, was without farther Opposition acknowledg∣ed King of the Goths. This King had his hands full during his whole Life, being always in∣gaged in Wars, the Success whereof proved various. The great cause of these Troubles was, that forgetting his Promise, he endeavoured to expell the Romans all Spain. On the other side, they as well by Contract, as force of Arms, had possess'd themselves of so much, that their Dominions reached from Sea to Sea. By his Wife Gosuinda, he had two Daughters, the eld∣est, Galsuinda, Marry'd to Chilperick, King of Soissons in France, and Brunechilda the youngest, to Sigebert, King of Metz in Lorrain, the Brother of Chilperick. These two Ladies were by the French Bishops converted from the Sect of Arius, which they had been bred in; and some will have it, that Athanagildus was in private a Catholick, but durst not openly profess it, for fear of the People. He Reign'd 15 Years, and 6 Months, and dy'd at Toledo, in the Year 567. After his Death followed an Interregnum of five Months. D. Lucas de Tuy, says, It lasted five Years, and five Months. The reason of it was, that the Gothish Nobility could 567. An Inter∣regnum. not agree, or pitch upon any one Person capable of supporting the Kingdom of the Goths, then in danger of sinking, and none minded the publick Calamities, studying to indulge their private Humours. At this time, John III. Governed the See of Rome. It was now al∣so, that the Suevians, who possess'd Galicia, returned to the Catholick Church, renouncing Suevians Convert∣ed. the Heresie of Arius, which they had follow'd almost 100 Years, and grievously Persecuted the Catholicks. Martinus Dumiensis, was a great Instrument of their Conversion. He was an Hungarian, had Travelled throughout the East, and was a Person of singular Learning, at last he was Archbishop of Braga, and after his Death esteem'd as a Saint, in Galicia and Por∣tugal, where they Celebrate his Feast on the 20th of March. When the Suevians embraced the Catholick Religion, Theodemirus Reign'd over them. What Kings Reign'd betwixt Re∣mismundus, of whom we spoke before, and this Theodemirus, is not known, the Histories of those times being imperfect. The cause of the Conversion of the Suevians was this. Theo∣demirus's Son and Heir lay dangerously Sick, and the fame of the Miracles wrought by St. Martin Cause of the Sue∣vians Con∣version. of Tours, being spread throughout the World, his Father sent Embassadors to the Saints Tomb, with the Youths weight in Gold and Silver, to be offered for his Health. But the Success not answering, the King believed it proceeded from the difference of Reli∣gion, and his being an Arian. He sent again, and the Embassadors brought a piece of the Saints Cloak, and in the mean while the Prince recovered. Hereupon, the King in pursu∣ance of a Vow he had made, erected a Church in Honour of St. Martin; and caused the Suevians publickly to embrace the Catholick Religion. For the better confirming them in the Faith, and by the Advice of St. Martin Dumiensis, he caused a Synod of the Bishops of Galicia to be held at Braga, in the third Year of his Reign, and of our Lord, 563. This was the first Council of Braga, and Lucretius, Archbishop of that City, Presided in it. First Council of Braga. CHAP. VII. Of the two Sisters, Galsuinda and Brunechilda. The Reigns of the Kings Liuva and Leuvigildus. This last, makes his two Sons his Companions in the Throne. IT was said above, that Galsuinda and Brunechilda, the two Daughters of Athanagildus, were Marry'd in France, to two Kings; both which Matches in the end proved unfortunate. The one soon dy'd miserably, the other lived long, and always in trouble. Galsuinda the eldest, The French call this Brunechilda Brunehault. Wife to Chilperick, after suffering much, thro' the Insolence of Fredegunda, his Mistriss, was at last found dead in her Bed, and left no Issue. Sigebert, the Husband of Brunechilda, was murdered by two Ruffians, employed by the same Fredegunda, and she sent Prisoner to Roan, Unfortu∣nate Marriages of the two Daughters of Athana∣gildus. where Meroveus, the Son of Chilperick, admiring her Beauty, Marry'd her; but she having been Wife to his Uncle, the Marriage was void. He might have hoped for Pardon from his Father, in regard to his Youth, but by the procurement of Fredegunda, his Mother-in-law, he was first forced into a Religious Order, and then killed. Brunechilda having the Tuition of her two Grandsons, Theodebert, King of Metz, and Theodorick of Burgundy, made War upon Clotarius, as the French Historians have it, only to prefer Protadius, an Italian, for This Theo∣dorick the Franch call Thierri. whom she had, a more than lawful Affection. Besides, they add, that thro' her Instigation, the Brothers made War upon one another, that Theodebert was killed, and his two Sons and Daughter being taken, she murdered the Sons; and because Theodorick designed to Marry the Daughter, Poison'd him. After all these Cruelties, Brunechilda being taken by Clotarius, was four times whipped, and then dragged to Death by the hair of her Head at a Horses tail, without any Compassion shown by the People, in regard, they said ten Kings, and a vast num∣ber of Men had dy'd by her wicked Machinations. I'm apt to believe, this is all a Doubt∣less, it is Mariana that mistakes, for the French Authors are positive in the Crimes of Brunechilda, and that she committed them af∣ter the Death of Fredegunda. mistake
in those Authors, who have attributed the Crimes of Fredegunda to Brunechilda; for St. Gre∣gory writ a Letter to her, full of her Praises; besides, there are many Churches in France built by her, and many Captives were redeemed. Much more might be said, both for and against her; but it is not our business to reconcile the different Opinions of Historians, in a matter of so small moment to the History in hand. After the Death of Athanagildus, who deceased at Toledo, as was said before, Liuva, (so his Name is writ upon ancient Coins) a powerful Man, who, till then, had been Viceroy of Gallia Gothica, was Proclaimed King of Narbonne. This was in the second Year of the Em∣peror Justin, the Younger, who was the first that sent Longinus with the Title of Exarchus, to Govern Italy. Liuva, began his Reign in the Year 567. Nothing of Note is found in History, of this King, save, that in the second Year of his Reign, he declared Leuvigildus, his Brother, his Companion in the Kingdom, with equal Power to himself. He continued in Gallia Gothica, as being the place he had most been used to; and D. Lucas de Tuy, says, he Reigned in France 7 Years, before he was King of Spain. All the other Provinces that were under the Dominion of the Goths, he left to his Brother's charge, hoping by his care, they would be restored to their former Grandeur. For at that time, they were at War with the Romans, who possess'd a great part of Spain, and maintained it not only with their own Power, but the Assistance of many Goths, who put themselves under their Protection. Leu∣vigildus had two Sons by his Wife Theodosia, the Daughter of Severianus, Duke and Gover∣nour of the Province of Carthagena; their Names were Ermenegildus and Recaredus. Af∣ter the Death of Theodosia, Leuvigildus Marry'd Gosuinda, the Widow of Athanagildus, at the same time that he was called by his Brother to be his Associate in the Kingdom. As soon as he came to the Crown, being a Man of great Courage, he made War upon the Ro∣mans. They came to a Battle among the Bastetani, where now stands the City Baça; the Romans were Defeated, and by that means expelled the whole Province. The Country a∣bout Leuvigil∣dus drives the Romans out of Spain. Malaga, was laid waste with Fire and Sword. Medina Sidonia, near the Streights Mouth, was taken by Night, being betrayed by Framidancus. Cordova was in Rebellion, and would own no Superior, since the Defeat of King Agila. Thither Leuvigildus marched, and brought it under, with many other Places in the Neighbourhood, and great destruction of People, and the Country. The Neighbourhood of Sabaria, (not knowing in what part of Spain it lay) was also Ravaged and spoiled. Whilst Leuvigildus was thus employed, his Brother Liuva dy'd in France, in the Year 572. Having Reign'd but 5 Years, some say, only 3. 572. All the Province of Andaluzia being brought under, and the Romans totally expelled, Leu∣vigildus returned towards Biscay, where he took Amaya by Assault; others call it Aregia, and others, Varegia, a City as is supposed, betwixt Burgos and Leon. All the rest of that Country was pillaged and spoiled, and many that were in Arms killed. Hence he passed o∣ver into Aquitain, where he took Aspidius, who was Revolted in the City Agen, with his Wife, Children and Riches. The same Year that Liuva dy'd, Myrus, or as others call him Aria∣mirus, was King of the Suevians by Succession, his Father dying two Years before. At the Second Council of Braga. same time, was held the second Council of Braga, by which, the Suevians were confirmed in the Catholick Religion. Leuvigildus having quieted the Affairs of Aquitain, returned in∣to Spain, with a resolution to destroy the Kingdom of the Suevians, which had lasted so many Years. Mirus fearing the Power of the Goths, who began to break into Galicia, sent Embassadors to sue for Peace, but could only obtain a Cessation of Arms for some time. The Goth was the more willing to condescend, because he had no just Cause to make War upon the Suevians; unless their change of Religion for the better, as also, for that he was to op∣pose a Roman Army, sent by Justin the Emperor, upon the Frontiers of Spain. At first, Leuvigildus marching thro' the Mountains of Orospeda, which rise at the foot of Moncayo, and passing by Molina, Cuenca and Segura, end near Cadiz, subdued certain Mountain Peo∣ple, who confiding in the strength of the Country, refused to obey him. Thus the Power of the Goths was increased, and that of the Romans diminished; for they had left them only a small Tract of Land, near the Sea, as I suppose, the Mediterranean. Before Leuvigildus under∣took this War, to take away the Custom the great ones had instituted, of chusing their Kings, and to secure the Succession in his own Family, he declared his two Sons, Ermenegildus and Recaredus, his Companions in the Royal Authority, and to this purpose, divided the King∣dom Leuvigil∣dus choos∣es his two Sons Com∣panions in the throne into three parts. To Ermenegildus, he assigned Sevil, tho Gregory of Tours, says, It was Merida. To the City Reccopolis, he gave that Name, being the first Founder, in honour of his Son Recaredus: this was in that place, where the River Guadiela falls into Tagus, not far from Pastrana, as the Moor, Rasis testifies. This City was Founded in the Year 577. Others will have it, that Reccopolis was in Celtiberia, and is the same with Almonacir, com∣monly called Zorita. Leuvigildus chose the City Toledo for to keep his own Court in, and so did the Kings of the Goths, his Successors; whereas, till then, it had been kept at Sevil. From this beginning, that City by degrees, came to be the Metropolitan See of all Spain, as shall appear in its place. Pope Benedict, Successor of John III. now Governed the Church, and Tiberius II. the Roman Empire. About this same time, Mirus, King of the Suevians, made War upon the People of Rioja, upon what occasion is not known; but it appears that he overcame and subdued them. These People were formerly called Ruccones, at least, the
Archbishop D. Rodrigo calls them so. The Country is fruitful and pleasant, so proper to bear Corn, it often yields twenty for one. CHAP. VIII. Ermenegildus Son to Leuvigildus, Marries the Lady Ingundis, is Converted to the Catholick Faith, is Besieg'd by his Father in Sevil, taken Prisoner, and put to Death by him. INgundis, Daughter to Sigibert King of Lorrain, and Brunechilda his Queen, was Married to Ermenegildus in the Year 579. She was Grandchild to Athanagildus, and Gosuinda, by these means those two Royal Families were United, and Levuigildus thought thereby to secure the Kingdom to his Posterity. Ingundis came out of France with a great Retinue. Her Grandmother Gosuinda for some time used her with all possible kindness, in hopes to prevail Ingundis Wife to Ermene∣gildus, Per∣secuted for the Ca∣tholick Religion. with her to forsake the Catholick Religion, embrace the Sect of Arrius, and be Rebaptiz'd. She gave no Ear to these perswasions, but continued firm in the Faith, which so far provok'd Gosuinda, being a haughty and ill-natur'd Woman, that she gave her very despightful Lan∣guage, and at length one day, laid hands upon her, dragging her by the hair of the head, till the Blood ran from her; nay another time made her fall into a Fish-pond, with eminent danger of her Life. This cruel usage no way mov'd Ingundis to alter her resolution, but on the contrary it is believ'd, that through her means, Ermenegildus then began to think of becom∣ing a Catholick. St. Leander, Bishop of Sevil, was very instrumental in this good work, for finding him well inclin'd, he instructed him in all matters of Faith. They had the better op∣portunity to do this, because Leuvigildus was gone to Toledo. Ringundis the Daughter of Chilperick King of France, and Fredegunda, was about this time contracted to Recaredus; and was on her way to Spain to her Husband. Being come as far as Toulouse. She receiv'd the news of her Father's Death, who was Murder'd by Candricus his Constable, and thereupon she suddenly return'd home. Recaredus having lost this Match, afterwards Married the Lady Bada, whose Country and Family are not known. Some say she was of the noblest Blood of Bada Wife to Recare∣dus. the Goths, as being Daughter to Fontus Count of the Partimonii. Whilst Leuvigildus was busy making up these Matches, his Son Ermenegildus compleated the work of his Conversion. This Princes Conversion was the Cause of a tedious and bloody War, betwixt the Father and Ermene∣gildus the Kings Son Convert∣ed. the Son. Gosuinda, who ought to have appeas'd her Husbands Passion, and labour'd for an ac∣commodation, being her self naturally obstinate, and a Mother-in-law, blew the Coals, and stir'd up the King, who was sufficiently provok'd upon that score. Before they broke out into open War, the Father indeavour'd, by fair means, to bring his Son to complyance, and to this purpose, sent Embassadors, and writ a Letter to him, the substance whereof was to this effect. That he had rather have treated with him Face to Face than by Letter. That he had bred him with all the tenderness of a Father, and when grown up made him his Com∣panion in the Throne. That if he desir'd more, or resented his Brothers having a share in the Kingdom, he ought to have made his Complaint to him. That it was only Ambition Messages betwixt the Father and Son. which mov'd him to despise his Father, and forsake the Religion of his Ancestors. To conclude, perswades him to take wholsome advice, and submit himself to his Father, from whom, so doing, he might hope for Forgiveness, or if he persisted, expect to find no Mercy. Er∣menegildus was much troubl'd at this Letter, but being resolv'd not to alter his Opinion, he answer'd his Father, Acknowledging the Favours he had done him to be beyond his Merits, protesting he desir'd nothing more earnestly than to appear grateful, and express his utmost duty to him as a Father; but withal shewing how his first duty ought to be to God and his own Soul, in taking care of which he thought he had offended no body. He ends, praying to God to direct his Father for the common good of his Sons and People. The Kingdom was divided into two Factions. The Catholicks, who were numerous, but not in Power, either openly, or underhand, favour'd Ermenegildus, the Arrians, who were more powerful, fol∣lowed Leuvigildus. Gregory of Tours says, that Ermenegildus, when he was Confirm'd, and receiv'd into the Church by the Arrians, took the name of John. This seems to be contradicted by the Gold Coin stamp'd in the heat of that War, as is suppos'd, which on the one side bears the Name and Effigies of Ermenegildus, and on the Reverse the Image of Victory, with this Inscription, Man fly from the King. The Catholicks sought for aid from far Countries, Begin∣ing of the War be∣twixt Fa∣ther and Son. and to this purpose Leander was sent, by Sea, to Constantinople, where Tiberius Augustus resi∣ded. This Leander, of a Benedictine Monk, was preferred to the Bishoprick of Sevil; he was a Person of singular Learning, great Sanctity, a sweet Conversation, and much Elo∣quence, a wonderful thing in those days. His Embassy took no effect, but he was present at a Synod held in that City, and there contracted Friendship with St. Gregory Sirnam'd the Great, 580. who was then Legate at Constantinople, from Pope Pelagius the Second. The War in fine Mahomet the Foun∣der of Ma∣hometism Born Anno Dom. 580. broke out in the Year 580, a Year unfortunate to Christendom, for in it was born in Arabia the False Prophet Mahomet, afterwards the Founder and Head of all the Mahometan Sects. Ermenegildus Fortify'd Sevil and Cordova, laying in store of Corn and other necessaries, either
to hold out a Siege, or supply him if the War were portracted. He made a League with the Roman Commanders, and delivered up to them, his Wife, and Son, newly Born, that those he loved best, might be out of danger, in case things succeeded not according to his desire. On the other side, Leuvigildus finding no perswasions. or fair promises prevailed with his Son, made all necessary Preparations to reduce him by force. To this purpose, with much Gold, he drew over the Romans to his Party, as Men that without regard of Pro∣mises or Engagements, follow'd that side which was strongest, and where the greatest gain was; and therefore forsook his Son. This done, he endeavoured to reconcile the Differen∣ces betwixt the Catholicks and Arians; being sensible, that Division in point of Religion, was the chief cause of all those Mischiefs. To this purpose, he held a Synod of Arian Bishops at Toledo, where it was determined, the Custom of Re-baptizing such as fell from the Church into Arianism, should be abolished. It was also agreed, That the Person of the Son was e∣qual to the Father; but all this was only in outward appearance. Nevertheless, this Ficti∣on succeeded so well, that many left Ermenegildus, the difference of Religion, being as they thought, taken away; and others were not so Zealous as they had been in his Cause. The greatest part seeing how great the danger was like to be, thought better to stand Neuters, than expose their Lives and Fortunes to eminent Peril. Three Years being thus spent in preparing, Leuvigildus with mighty Forces he had raised, moved towards his Son. He marched to the farthest part of Andaluzia, and laid Siege to Sevil, a noted, large and rich City. There being no hopes that the Besieged would surrender, as those who were well inclined to Ermenegildus, and prepared by their Bishop Leander, he resolved to make use at once both of Strength and Policy. Guadalquivir runs thro' that City, carrying so much Water as suffices to bear great Ships. The King, to hinder carrying any Relief into the Sevil Be∣sieged by Leuvigil∣dus. Town, resolved to turn the River out of its Channel. This was a work that required much Time and Labour. For this reason, a League above Sevil, to secure their Camp, they re∣built the Walls of the ancient Italica, whose Magnificence, in the time of the Romans, was singular, as appears by the Ruins that still remain about the place, where now stands the Monastery of St. Isidorus. Myrus, King of the Suevians, tho' a Catholick, brought Forces to the assistance of Leuvigildus, but dyed during the Seige. Eboricus, his Son succeeded him; Gregory of Tours says otherwise, to wit, that he sided with Ermenegildus; that the War end∣ed, he made Peace with Leuvigildus, and returning home, dy'd of a Sickness he had contract∣ed during the Siege. The River was turned another way, which brought the Besieged into extreme want. Ermenegildus after holding out a Year, there being no hopes of withstanding any longer, fled to the Romans, not knowing they had forsaken his Interest, and joyn'd with his Enemies. Ermenegildus being gone, the City was delivered up to his Father, in the Year 586. 586. This did not satisfie Leuvigildus, nor did he desist, till he had got his Son into his power. Sevil ta∣ken. Authors do not agree in the manner of taking him. Some say, That being ill treated by the Romans, he went away to Cordova, and was by the People of that Town delivered up to his Father. Gregory of Tours says, He was taken at Ossetum, whither he had retired, the Place Eremene∣gildus taken. being strong, and the Inhabitants well affected towards him. Into the Town he took 300 Men, leaving the rest incamped hard by, intending, in case his Father attacked him, to fall on him in Front and Rear; he reckoned without his Host, and therefore was deceived. For Leuvigildus having intelligence of his design, countermined all his Contrivances, and falling furiously upon that Town, entred, and set Fire to it on all sides. Ermenegildus despairing of making his escape, took Sanctuary in a Church, hoping to appease his Pathers Anger. Reca∣redus, the younger Brother, a Person of great Generosityand Prudence, was with his Father Leuvigildus. He asked his Father's leave, and Brother's consent, to speak with him, and there advised him to have recourse to his Father's mercy, with assurance of Pardon, and all Friendly Offices from his own part. These promises were confirmed by Oath, Leuvigildus was called, and being come, Ermenegildus with a sorrowful Countenance cast himself at his Feet. He received him with exterior signs of Joy, and kiss'd him in token of Forgiveness; but he had other things in his Heart, for having caused him to go to the Camp, he soon after was stript of the Royal Robes, and sent Prisoner to Sevil. The Abbot Bicliarensis says, He was Banished to Valencia, and dy'd at Tarragona. At Sevil, near the Gate called of Cordova, Death of Ermenegil∣dus. there is still to be seen a Tower, well known upon account of Ermenegildus's Imprisonment, which is very high, narrow and dark. It is commonly received; that he lived there with Bolts on his Feet, and his Hands ty'd behind him, and that, not satisfied with those hard∣ships, he used great Austerity in his Dyet, lying upon Hair-cloth, and spending his time in Contemplation. In this manner he continued till the Feast of Easter, which fell upon the 14th of April, in the Year 586. Then Leuvigildus sent an Arian Bishop to him, to give him the Blessed Sacrament, after the manner of the Arians. Ermenegildus turned him away 586. with Contempt, which his Father took so hainously, that he caused his Head immediately to be cut off. Pope Sixtus I. Canoniz'd this Saint, and ordered his Feast to be kept throughout Spain on the 14th of April. His Prison was afterwards converted into a Chappel; and he was formerly held in great Veneration, so that from him many, as well Women as Men, are supposed to have taken the Names of Ermenegildus, Ermesinda, Ermenesinda, Ermegildez and Ermildez. Where his Body lies is not known, nor have we any account how he was Buryed. Gregory the Great relates the Death of Ermenegildus, lib. 3. dial. cap. 31. and
says Musick was heard near the Dead Body, and Lights were seen over it at Night. About this time Pelagius the second, governed the Catholick Church. St. Gregory the Great, was his Successor. CHAP. IX. The remaining part of the Reign of King Leuvilgildus. He Persecutes the Catholicks. Subdues the Suevians. His Death, and Causes of his Conversion. NO sooner hand Indegundis received Advice of her Husband's Imprisonment and Death; but she went over into Africk, overwhelmed with Sorrow and Tears; The Roman Officers, in whose Custody she was, designed to send her, and Theodorick her Son, to the Em∣peror Mauricius. On the other side the Kings of the Franks, Childebert Brother, and Gun∣trandus, Unkle to Indegundis, resolved to Revenge the wrong done her, and Death of Recaredus makes War in France. Ermenegildus. Recaredus having intelligence of it, and intending to be beforehand with them, broke into Frane, plundered and wasted all the Country, and took a strong Castle, in the Territory of Arles, called Ʋgernum. Great was the havock he committed, and greater the Terror he spread, whereupon a Treaty of Peace was set a foot, and Leuvigildus sent his Embassadors to assist at it. Nothing was concluded, for besides the former wrongs, the Goths at that time took certain French Ships, on the Coast of Galicia, with all the Men and Merchandize in them. This Action so far incensed the Franks, that tho another Embassy was sent, their Kings, and chiefly Guntrandus, would give no Ear to the Proposals of the Goths. Authors say, Recaredus the second time from Narbonne, made roads into the Coun∣try of the Franks, and did great harm. Childebert who was most exposed to the danger, and concerned for the injuries done to his Sister, and Brother-in-Law, the better to secure his revenge, invited Mauricius the Emperor (whose offers before he had slighted) to joyn his Forces with him, in order to oppose the Longobards, who had possessed themselves of Italy, and the Goths in Spain. This Alliance being concluded, he marched into Italy with a great Army. The Enemy at first avoided coming to a Battle, whereupon the Franks growing Franks over∣thrown in Italy. secure and despising them, they fell upon them by surprize, and put their whole Army to the rout, with the greatest Slaughter that had been known of that Nation. This disaster doubtless made Childebert more complying with the Goths, besides; that the Emperor being otherwise employed, assisted his Confederates, rather with his Name than Power, and In∣degundis, the cause of this War, was now dead, some say in Africk, others in Sicily, for Authors do not agree about it, neither is it known what became of her Son. There is an Account that he was carryed to the Emperor, and is supposed to have dyed soon after. Maximus says the Mother dyed at Palermo, and the Son was long after her at Constantinople. Leuvigildus Leuvigildus Persecutes the Catho∣licks. desiring to extirpate the Catholick Religion in Spain, for that as he thought it had been the cause of all past misfortunes, banished all the best and holyest Men, as those that supported and maintained it. Among the rest were Leander Bishop of Sevil, and Fulgencius of Ezija, and Mausona of Merida. The King seized upon the Revenues of the Churches, abolished all the Ecclesiastical Priviledges, and put to Death many Men of note, some on just causes, others upon false informations, and enriched the Crown with their Estates. His chief aim was so to weaken all other Families that none might aspire to the Crown. Many not only of the Com∣monalty, but even the Nobility Terrified with these proceedings, submitted themselves to the King's Will, and embraced the Arian Heresie. Among others, Vincencius Bishop of Zara∣goca, turning Arian, by his ill Example drew many into the same ruin. Severus Bishop of Malaga, and Licinianus of Carthagena, his Contemporaries writ against him. The Kingdom of the Goths, which by these practices seemed to increase in Power, was at the same time Augmented by the additions of the Dominions of the Suevians in Spain, which hap'ned in this manner, Suevians reduced under the Dominion of the Goths. King Eboricus, the Son of Myrus, was outed that Kingdom by Andeca, a Noble Man, who was Marryed to Sisegunda, Eboricus his Mother-in-Law. Not content with usurping the Crown, he forced him to enter into a Monastery, and change the Royal Robes of a Religious Habit. Eboricus was a Friend and Confederate of the Goths, for which reason Leuvigildus ap∣pear'd in Arms against the Tyrant. Him he overthrew in Battle, took Prisoner, and having stript him of the Regalia, shaved his Head, which according to the Custom of those times, was degrading, and making him incapable of being a King, and after all banished him to Beja, a City in Portugal. These disorders gave Opportunity to one Malaricus to Rebel, and being assisted by the People to take upon him the Title of King. Leuvigildus soon quieted this Re∣bellion, and made himself Master of all Galicia. Eboricus 'tis supposed, continued as a pri∣vate Man in the Monastery, and the Goth had no inclination to restore him. Thus the King∣dom Kingdom of the Sue∣viens abo∣lished. of the Suevians, that had long flourished and possessed a considerable part of Spain, for the space of 174 Years, was totally extinct in the Year 586. This same year Leuvigildus dyed at Toledo, in the 18th Year after he began to Reign, with his Brother. Many Au∣thors testify, that before he dyed, during his last Sickness, he abjured the Arian Heresie, and 586. Death of King Leu∣vigildus. recommended the Catholick Religion to his Son Recaredus. Our Historians relate, that
tho' Leuvigildus in his Heart was a Catholick, yet he did not publickly abjure Arianism, but temporized for fear of his Subjects. Maximus, says he, was present at the King's Death, and saw signs of his Repentance and Tears. He places his decease on the second of April in the Year 587. Leuvigildus his Conversion, is related to have been forwarded by several Mi∣racles. The Causes of his Con∣version. Among others it is said, that in the War against his Son, the Soldiers plundering a Monastery of the invocation of St. Martin near Carthagena, the Monks fled into an Island, and one of the Soldiers pursuing the Abbot fell down dead, whereupon the King caused all that had been taken from the Monastery to be restored. Another time in a dispute that was held about Religion, the Catholick, in testimony of the Truth he maintained, took a burning Ring out of the Fire, with his bare hand, and received no harm, which the Arian durst not do. These and other Miracles caused the King to waver in his Mind. He asked of an Arian Bi∣shop, why they did not work such wonders in defence of Faith. He replyed, he had often given sight to the blind, and restored their hearing to the deaf, but did it not publick∣ly to shun Ostentation, yet since it was requisite, he would do it in sight of the World. Soon after the King and Bishop being together, an Arian, who at his Instigation had feigned him∣self blind, called upon him earnestly to restore him his sight. All Men expected to see the Miracle which hap'ned, contrary to what they thought, for no sooner did the Bishop touch his Eyes but he was struck blind, which that wretch being sensible of, he openly Confessed the whole contrivance. These things caused the Arian Heresie to be much slighted, and the more, for that during four Years, continually all Spain, but especially the Kingdom of Toledo, was wasted by Locusts, which the Commonalty said, was a judgment of God for the Death of Ermenegildus, and for Persecuting the Catholicks. By the testimony of St. Isidorus, this commendation may be given to Leuvigildus, that he Corrected the Laws of the Goths, at that time much corrupted, abolishing some and enacting others. Paul Deacon of Merida, who then lived, writes, that Nunctus an Abbot of great Sanctity, coming out of Africk to Merida, to visit the Sepulcher of St. Olalia, went soon after into the desart, to shun the sight of Wo∣men, where he was maintained by the King, till the Country people of the Neighbourhood killed him; upon what account is not known. The King did not punish this Crime, but God Almighty did, for all the Murderers were possessed with Devils. To conclude with Luevi∣gildus, Leuvigildus the first Goth that used the regal Or∣nament. he was the first King of the Goths, that wore Garments different from the rest of the People, the first that took upon him the Grandeur of a King, and made use of a Crown and Scepter. CHAP. X. The Reign of Recaredus, his and his Peoples Conversion. Conspiracies against him detected and punished. He overthrows the Franks. The third Council of Toledo. THE Funeral Rites being performed to Leuvigildus, with that State and Magnificence that was requisite, Recaredus bent his Thoughts upon the setling his Court, and the The Reign of Recare∣dus. Government of his Kingdom. His first care was to appease the Kings of France, and in Order to it, his first Wife Bada, being Dead, he indeavoured to contract an Alliance with Childebert King of Lorrain, by Marrying his other Sister Clodosinda. The better to effect this, he sent to excuse himself of having had any hand in the Death of Ermenegildus, but that on the contrary it had grieved him to the Heart. The time of concluding so important an affair was not yet come, but it was near at hand. By the advice of the two Brothers, Leander and Fulgentius, he being already a Catholick in his Heart, began to think of establishing the true Religion in Spain, yet for the present was forced to dissemble, rather than mistime such an undertaking. He weighed the humour of the Commonalty, which in matters of Religion is better managed by art than force. Therefore he resolved to use his utmost industry, che∣rishing some, bearing with others, and bestowing great Favours upon others, to gain the affections of all Men. All things succeeded as he desired, for the King's Will being made known, as well the Nobility as Commonalty consented to it, and what at first appeared so difficult, was performed with more ease than could have been imagined. Thus all the Goths, and such of the Suevians, as had till then persisted in their former Errors, by a general consent Conversi∣on of the Goths. embraced the Catholick Religion, and at the same time hoped to gain the Favour of their Sovereign, who besides the good endowments of his mind, was of a Graceful Countenance and Stature, which conduced much to gain him the respect and Love of his Subjects, wherefore living, he was held in great Veneration, and when dead, his Memory was grateful to succeeding Ages. It is impossible but such a change in Religion should cause some Commotions, yet Recaredus, his good management, caused them not to be lasting, or dangerous during his Reign; besides, that the severity he used in punishing Offenders being absolutely necessary, was so far from being odious, that it met a general approbation from both great and small. The first that opposed the King's designs was the Bishop Athalocus, in Gallia Narbonensis, who was so Troubles on ac∣count of the change of Reli∣gion. addicted to the Arian Heresy, as to suffer himself commonly to be called Arius. In the same Province the two Earls, Granista and Bildigernus, joined with him. This storm was not last∣ing
for Athalocus soon dy'd with Grief to see his Party decay, and, for that the generality of the People being well inclined to the Catholick Religion, he could not persuade them to Revolt. The two Earls were overthrown in Battle by the Forces of Recaredus, and all the harms they had done to the Catholicks reveng'd on them. This Revolt hap'ned, and was queil'd in Gallia Narbonensis, in the 10th Month of the King's Reign, at such time as he publickly ab∣jured the Arian Heresie, and embraced the Catholick Religion. To the Churches, he re∣stored Recaredus restores the Church Possessi∣ons. all their Revenues and Possessions, whereof they had been deprived by his Father, and Built, and Endow'd many Churches and Monasteries with Royal Magnificence. Many Sub∣jects he restored to their Lands and Honours, of which, they had been stripp'd by his Fa∣ther, whose Severity, he out-did in Goodness. Thus the King was employed, and God prospered his Affairs. King Guntrandus had sent his General Desiderius with a great Army to revenge the harms done him by the Goths, on their Lands in France. Recaredus's Forces drew together, and gave them Battle near the City Carcassonne. At first, the Goths were worsted, and fled into that City, but rallying, and drawing up there, they Sallied out a fresh upon the Franks, who pursued in Disorder, with such resolution, that the Fortune of the Day was changed, their Enemies totally Routed, and they obtained a compleat Victory. He Over∣throws the Franks. The General of the Franks was killed, and more of his Men remained in the Field dead, than escaped. This was in the first Year of the Reign of Recaredus, which was of Christ 587. as appears by an Inscription on a Stone found lately in Toledo, and set up in the Cloister of the 587. Cathedral; the Words on it are these. In nomine Domini, consecrata ecclesia Sanctae Mariae in Catholico, die primo idus Aprilis, Anno feliciter primo Regni Domini nostri gloriosissimi Fl. Recaredi Regis, Era DCXXV. That is, In the Name of the Lord, the Church of St. Mary, in the Catholick quarter, (or after the Catholick manner) was Consecrated on the 13th of April, in the happy first Year of the Reign of our Lord, the most Glorious King Flavius Recaredus. Era 625, which is the Year of Grace 587. exactly. The Year following, was discovered a Conspiracy against the King, upon account Hereticks conspire against the King. of the change in Religion; in this manner Mausona, the Catholick Bishop, before Banished, upon this Revolution, returned to his Bishoprick of Merida. Sunna, the Arian Bishop, who was to fall from that Dignity, contriv'd with some of his own Party to Murder Mausona. The attempt was desperate, because, Duke Claudius, Governour of Lusitania, a Zealous Ca∣tholick, resided there with a strong Garrison. Whereupon, the Conspirators being sensi∣ble of their danger, resolved to kill Claudius, as well as Mausona. Witericus, a Noble Youth, who was bred in the House of Claudius, and came afterwards to be King of the Goths, was employ'd to put this in Execution. It was requisite to find some good opportunity to perform this wicked Act. In order to it, Sunna desired to have a time and place ap∣pointed, where he might visit Mausona, who suspecting the Arian, desired Claudius to be present at their meeting, thinking his Power and Authority might prevent any evil design. This, the Conspirators thought a proper opportunity to execute their Design in. The ap∣pointed time being come, after the first Salutations, the Plotters made a sign to Witericus, who stood behind Claudius: but notwithstanding, he endeavoured it, he could never draw his Sword. However, they were no ways dismay'd, but resolved at a publick Procession that was to be made to the Church of St. Eulalia, in the Suburbs, to kill the Bishop, and all that accompanied him. To this effect, they hid a great number of Swords in certain Carts they brought in loaded with Corn. Providence prevented the Execution, for Witeri∣cus altering his mind, discovered the whole Contrivance. Claudius immediately fell upon Sunna and his Party, killed such as made resistance, secured the rest, gave the King an ac∣count of what he had done, and by his order, Banished the Offenders, and Confiscated all their Goods. Sunna, tho' undeserving, having his choice given him, either to depart Spain, or abjure his Heresie; being obstinate, went over into Africk. Witericus was Pardon'd for discovering. Vacrila, one of the Conspirators having taken Sanctuary in the Church of St. Eulalia, Conspira∣tors puni∣shed. was Condemned to serve there as a Slave all his Life time. Count Paul Sega, ano∣ther of the Principals, had his Hands cut off, and was Banished to Galicia. These Examples quelled that Commotion, and tho' they were sufficient to terrifie others, yet a greater Storm ensued. Queen Gosuinda at first, in compliance with her Son-in-law, feigned she embraced the Catholick Religion, and proceeded so far, as to spit out the blessed Sacrament she receiv∣ed in the Church, the same was done by the Bishop Ʋldida, her great Favourite. This could not be long hid, therefore, they resolved to murder the King, which being discover∣ed, Ʋldida was Banished, and Gosuinda soon after, dy'd a natural Death. About the same time, being the Year of our Lord 588. King Guntrandus sent an Army of 60000 Men, un∣der the Command of his General Bosus, to break into Gallia Gothica, in revenge of the Death of Desiderius. Against him, Recaredus sent Duke Claudius, of ancient Roman Extraction, Franks de∣feated by the Goths. who passing by the Pyrenean Mountains, met the Enemy near Carcassonne. In that place he resolv'd to give Battle, as being of good Omen, for the late Victory obtained there. The Fight was bloody, but the Goths at last were Victorious, a vast number of Franks were slain, and their Camp taken. In the following Year, another Conspiracy against the King was discovered, contriv'd by Argimundus, his Chamberlain, the Accomplices were apprehended, and after being Rack'd, put to Death; the Principal had first his Hair shav'd off, which was a token of degrading him from the Nobility, then his right Hand being cut off, he was car∣ried
about the Streets of Toledo upon an Ass, a pleasing spectacle to all good People, who intirely loved the King. Some time after, his Head was chopt off. After Montanus, Julian, Bacauda, Peter, and Euphimius, were successively Archbishops of Toledo. The King desiring to settle the Catholick Religion he had embrac'd, and Re-establisht the The third Council of Toledo. Church Discipline, then much depraved, consulted with Leander, Archbishop of Sevil, and by his Advice, called a Council of all the Bishops under the Dominion of the Goths, to meet at Toledo, the Royal City, for so it was called, on account, that the Kings had there fix'd their Residence. This Council was opened, and held their first Session at the beginning of May in the Year 589. It consisted of 5 Archbishops, and 65 Bishops. At the second Session, the King presented the Prelates a Profession of the Faith, and Abjuration of the Arian Here∣sie 589. under his own, and Queen Bada's Hand, containing the Heads of the true Faith, and par∣ticularly, according to the Constantinopolitan Creed, a Confession that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and Son. After the King, 8 Bishops, and 5 Noblemen, presented a like Profession and Abjuration. This done, the Prelates proceeded to publish 23 Canons for Correcting, and Establishing the Ecclesiastical Discipline. Particularly, they Ordained, that none should receive the blessed Sacrament, unless they, with all that were present during the Mass, publickly repeated the Constantinopolitan Creed. Hence might proceed the Custom used in our Days, of repeating the Articles of Faith, and Apostles Creed, before the Holy Communion. The King by Edict, Confirmed all the Decrees of this Council, ordering them to be punctually observed in all points. The Abbot Biclarensis, who continued the Chronicon of his Times, till this Year, affirms, that Leander, Bishop of Sevil, and Eu∣tropius Abbas Servitanus, were the Principal Men that regulated all the Decrees of this Coun∣cil. D. Lucas de Tuy, adds, that Leander was Primate of Spain, and had here the Power of Legate Apostolick; but this agrees not with the Acts of the Council it self; by which it ap∣pears, he had the third place among those Prelates, Euphemius, Bishop of Toledo, the se∣cond; and Mausona of Merida, the first. Which places, I believe, were given by Seniority, and so Mausona, as the eldest Bishop, preceeded all the others. The King confirmed the Decrees of this Council, a thing new, and never before used; for the Roman Emperors, in General Councils, used to consent and agree to the Acts of the Fathers, but never Confirmed, or Determined any thing, as not extending their Power to Ecclesiastical Affairs. THE History of SPAIN. The Sixth BOOK. CHAP. I. The remaining Actions of King Recaredus. He Marries Clodosinda, Sister to Childebert, King of Lorrain. His Death. Original of Dukes and Counts. A New light of Glory seem'd to spread it self over all Spain, after dispersing the for∣mer darkness, perfect Peace was restor'd, the preceding Commotions and Trou∣bles True Re∣ligion flourishes in Spain. being appeased, and nothing but Mirth, and publick Rejoycing, was seen in all Parts. It was a Blessing to behold those, who were before divided, and di∣stracted by their various Opinions in Religion, so that they agreed in nothing but the Tongue, which was common to all, now again united into one Body, and reconcil'd, as to their Senti∣ments in the Holy Faith of the Church. This was a singular Mercy of God, not only in re∣spect to their present Felicity, but even in the assured hopes of a lasting Happiness. Forreign Princes Congratulated the King upon his great Success, and each offered his assistance to car∣ry on so good a Work. Pope Gregory the Great, Successor to Pelagius II. in the Year 590. 590. at the beginning of his Papacy, sent a Letter to Leander, Congratulating the King's Recon∣ciliation Gregory the Great, Pope. to the Church, and telling how happy he will be, if he perseveres to the end. The King also understanding that Gregory was Elected Pope, sent an Embassy to him, of which, Provinus the Priest was chief, and with him went some Abbots, with them he sent Presents of Gold, and 300 Suits of Cloaths for the Poor of St. Peter, in Rome; for then it seems, the Poor, and the Hospitals, were maintained upon the Revenues of the Church. One thing de∣signed by this Embassy, was to obtain of the Pope to Confirm and Ratifie the Decrees of the Council of Toledo. There are extant three Letters of Pope Gregory, dated the ninth Year
of his Papacy, by which it may be concluded, the Embassadors were forc'd back into Spain by Storms, and long detain'd there, as also that they made a long stay at Rome. The first Let∣ter Several Letters from him. is directed to Duke Claudius of Merida, the Principal Man in Spain, next to the King, re∣commending to him the Abbot Cyriacus, then going into Spain. The second to Leander, con∣doling his Sufferings, by the Gout. The third is to the King, encouraging him to continue firm in the Faith he had receiv'd, and commending his good actions. With this Letter he sent him a piece of the holy Cross, some Hairs of St. John Baptist, a Key touch'd to the Body of St. Peter; and some silings of the same Saints Chains. To Saint Leander he sent the Pall. For at that time the Jews having offer'd large summs of Money, that a Law pass'd against them might be Repeal'd, the King had refus'd to grant it. There is a common received Opinion among Spaniards, tho' no Author mentions any such thing, that the Spanish Em∣bassadors returning into Spain, among other Presents they had for the King, and the Bishop Leander, brought an Image of our B. Lady, Carv'd in Wood, sent by the Pope to the latter, and that it is the same which many Years after was found in a Cave; together with the Bodies of St. Fulgencius, Bishop of Ezija, and St. Florentina his Sister; and which at this time is held in great Veneration at Guadalupe, one of the chief Monasteries of the Order of St. Hierome in all Spain. Whilst the Embassadors resided at Rome, several Synods were held in Spain, according to a Decree of the late Council of Toledo, as is suppos'd, which Ordain'd there should be Yearly Provincial Synods held, for the reformation of Manners, and the good of the Church. One of these Synods was held by Leander at Sevil, another at Nar∣bonne, Several Synods. in Gallia Gothica, others at Zaragoça, Toledo, Huesca, and Barceiona; whose Acts are not here set down, as belonging more properly to the Ecclesiastical History. Let us return to the King, who after the Death of his Queen Bada, being desirous to conclude a Peace with the Kings of France; and in order to it, laying aside all former resentments, sent Em∣bassadors to Childebert King of Lorrain, to ask his Sister Clodosinda in Marriage, as was before hinted. This Marriage was at last concluded, Recaredus protesting to those Kings, he never Recaredus, Marries Clodosinda Sister to Childebert King of Lorrain. had any hand in the Death of Ermenegildus, but had been very sensibly touch'd with his Bro∣thers Misfortunes. Clodosinda was before promis'd to Anthari King of the Longobards, but Recaredus was prefer'd before him; both in regard of the pressing instances he made, as also because he was a Catholick, and the other a Pagan. Authors do not agree as to the time of the Celebration of the Nuptials; but it is certain, that the Alliance with the Franks was set∣led in the latter days of Recaredus. About the same time such of the Romans as had remain'd in Spain, were defeated upon several occasions, and brought under by the Coths. The Vas∣cones Romans defeated, and Va∣scones sub∣dued. likewise, that is Navarre being revolted, were pacify'd and subdu'd. For these, and the other glorious Actions perform'd during his Reign, the King gain'd Immortal Renown. He was endu'd with a singular greatness of Mind, much Wit, Prudence, and a pleasing Per∣son and Nature; but what most gloriously shin'd in him, was his great Zeal for the Catholick Religion. His Death was in the Year of Grace 610, having Reign'd 15 Years, one Month, and 10 Days. St. Isidorus says, that being near his Death, at Toledo, he did publick Pennance 610. for his Sins, as was us'd in those days. He left three Sons, the Eldest called Liuva, the King Reca∣redus dies. others Suinthila and Geila. The first is suppos'd to be by his first Wife, he being of Age to govern at his Fathers Decease, on whom the other two were got is not known. Certain it is, the present Kings of Spain are lineally descended from these Princes, and particularly from Recaredus their Father. For the better understanding whereof, it will not be amiss here to insert their Genealogy. Gosuinda the Wife of Athanagildus, had by him two Daughters, Gal∣suinda and Brunechilda. Also Clodoveus, or Clovis, King of the Franks, had Three Grand∣sons, Genealo∣gy of the Kings of Spain. which were Guntrandus, Chilperick, and Sigebert, all Sons of Clotarius the Son of Clovis. Gassuinda was Married to Chilperick, who perish'd by the Fraud of Fredegunda, as was hinted before. Sigebert Married Brunechilda, and by her had Childebert, Ingundis, and Clodosinda. Leuvigildus, Successor of Athanagildus, by his first Wife, Theodosia had Ermenegildus, and Recaredus, before he was King, and being come to the Crown Marry'd Gosuinda the Queen Dowager. Ermenegildus Married Ingundis, and Recaredus Clodosinda. It is to be observ'd in the History of Recaredus, and the ensuing Kings, that whereas mention is made of Dukes, and Counts, or Earls, those Names signify Offices and dignity of Command, and not bare Titles as at present; for Counts or Earls, were Governors of Provinces; the Dukes were Generals, and had the Power of Coining Money, for Payment of their Souldiers; and hence the Crown Piece in Spain came to be called Ducado, or a Ducate: Not only the Governours of Provinces were call'd Counts, but such as had any remarkable Office at Court, or Command in the Original of Dukes and Counts. Army; so in Military imployments, we find Comites Cataphractariorum, Clibanariorum, and Sagittariorum. At Court there was Comes Stabuli, now the Constable, and so others in imi∣tation of the Roman Emperors. From them also it is supposed Recaredus first took the sirname of Flavius, as did the ensuing Kings after him. Besides Toledo was stil'd a Royal City, which was the very Title the Greeks gave to Constantinople, the Seat of the Empire. Thus we see that in those days, Dukes, and Counts, or Earls, were Persons of Command; and those Names were not barely Titular, as at present, Kings having of later Years made them Here∣ditary, assigning them certain Revenues.
CHAP. II. The Reigns of the Kings Liuva, Witericus, Gundemarus, Sisebutus, and Recare∣dus the Second; several Synods, the Jews Banish'd Spain. LIuva being scarce Twenty Years of Age when his Father dy'd, was immediately Pro∣claim'd King, but by reason of his Youth, lay the more expos'd to the insolencies of Liuva suc∣ceeds his Father Re∣caredus. Is Mur∣dered. rebellious Spirits. Wherefore it followed that tho' he was a Prince of Excellent Qualities and like his Father, he was treacherously Murdered by Witericus, before spoken of, when he had Reigned only two Years, during which time he did nothing remarkable, save, that by the Beauty of his Person and gentle behaviour, he had gained the affections of all Men, and left his Subjects in extream grief for that he was cut off in the flower of his Years. There are Pieces of Gold found in Spain, with his name on the one side, and on the reverse, these words, HISP ALI PIƲS, that is, Pious at Sevil, which is a token of his goodness. These Medals cannot be Attri∣buted, to the other Liuva, because there is a Crown on them, which in the times of the for∣mer was not in use among the Goths. By this means the Traytor possessed himself of the Kingdom of the Goths, and held it six Years, and ten Months. He was Fortunate in War, Witericus the Mur∣derer of Liuva usurps the Crown. for tho' in some rencounters with the Romans, still remaining in Spain he had the worst, yet at last his forces gave them an entire overthrow in a pitched Battle fought near Siguença. Childebert King of Lorrain dying, his two Sons divided his Dominions, Theodobert was King of Lorrain, and Theodorick of Burgundy. Theodorick marryed the Daughter of Witericus, but she was sent back into Spain a Maid, some said that Theodorick was bound with Spels and Witchcraft by the Concubins he kept, so that he could not have carnal knowledge of her. Others are of Opi∣nion, it was done by the procurement of her Mother-in-law Brunechilda. However it was, Witericus stirred up Theodobert of Lorrain, King Clotarius, and Agilulphus of the Longobards to join in a League against Theodorick. He finding himself in no Condition to oppose such a Power, bought his Peace with his Brother Theodobert, whereupon the other two Princes desisted from attempting any thing against him. This disgrace made Witericus grow contemptible to his Subjects, and their hatred began to break out which had long lain hid. But what incensed the People most, was that it was rumoured he designed to restore the Arian Heresie. The People were so moved at this report, that taking up Arms, they broke in the Palace and killed the Tyrant as he sate at Dinner. Nor did this satisfy their Rage, so they dragged his Body about the Is killed and drag∣ed about the Streets Streets, and then buried it in an infamous place. This divine Vengeance, tho' late, overtook him for the Murder of King Liuva. Gundemarus was immediatly Proclaimed King, either for that he had been head of that mutiny, or by the choice of the Nobility, in regard of his great Wisdom and Abilities, both in civil and martial Affairs. He began his Reign in the Year of our Lord 610. and if it be Lawful to conjecture at History, I suppose the Franks assisted him in obtaining the Crown, for as appears by the Letters of Count Bulgaranus, 610. Governour of Gallia Gothica, which are still preserved among the Antiquities of the Universi∣ty of Alcala de Henares, and the Church of Oviedo, Gundemarus payed a certain yearly acknow∣ledgment Gundema∣rus his Reign. to the Franks. Those Letters also give us to understand, that Gundemarus his Em∣bassadors sent into France, were contrary to the Law of Nations, affronted by those Kings, and tho' he sent other Embassadors to complain of that (wrong) they could not be admitted to Audience. For this cause Bulgaranus would not suffer Theodorick his Embassadors to pass into Spain, and at length broke out into open War, and took two Forts called Jubinianum, and Corneliacum. Count Bulgaranus attacked these two places, upon account they had been given by King Recaredus to Brunechilda, who dying soon after, and her Sons, and Grandsons being also extinct, it is supposed for that cause the French Kings did not attempt to recover them. Thus much in France. In Spain, King Gundemarus made War with success upon the People of Navarre, who again had revolted, he had also some rancounters with the Ro∣mans, that maintained that part of Spain, which still acknowledged the Roman Empire; All which, and his Death, which fell out at Toledo, was in the Year 612. when he had Reigned one Year, ten Months, and thirteen Days, The Queen his Wife was called Hilduara, but 612. it is not known that he left any Issue. At the same time Heraclius who succeeded Phocas, was His Death. Emperor in the East, and Bonifacius the 14th, Governed the Catholick Church after Gregory the Great, Sabinianus, and Bonifacius the Third. Aurasius was Bishop of Toledo, his Prede∣cessors were Euphimius, Tonancius, and Adelphius. In his time a Synod of 25 Bishops from several parts of Spain was held at Toledo, upon account that several Bishops of the Province Fourth Synod at Toledo. of Carthagena, would not acknowledge the Superiority of the See of Toledo, for which this Synod unanimously gave judgment. About this time flourished the famous Poet Draconcius, who put the beginning of Genesis into Verse. Gundemarus was interr'd with great Pomp, and what made it the more remarkable, was the Sorrow and Tears of all the People for the loss of so Excellent a Prince. Next, the Nobility meeting made choice of Sisebutus to succeed him, who being a Person no less qualify'd than the other, very zealous of the Catholick Religion, and what in those days was rare, Learned, and skilled in the Latin Tongue, the grief conceived for the former loss was in some measure
allayed. The hopes conceived of Sisebutus proved not vain, for he soon quelled the Asturians Subdues the Astu∣rians. and People of Rioja, who relying upon the strength of their Mountainous Country, refused to acknowledge the New King. In this War he made use of Suinthila Son of the good King Re∣caredus, a Youth of great Courage, and that afterwards made this a step to ascend the Throne. That Country being subdued, the King increased Suinthila's Army, with Addition of many new Levies made throughout his Kingdom, in order to go himself in Person against the Ro∣mans, who still held some part of Spain about Cadiz, and along the Coast of the Ocean in An∣daluzia, and Portugal. Having entred that Country, he defeated the Enemy in two Battles, took from them many Towns, and scarce left the Romans a foot of Land in all Spain. What Over∣throw of Romans. was most commendable he made use of his success with great Moderation, setting at Liberty a great number of Captives taken by his Soldiers, in respect that they were Catholicks, and to take away all cause of discontent, paid their ransoms to the Owners out of his own Coffers. Caesarius, a Patrician, who governed for the Emperor in Spain, moved by the goodness of Si∣sebutus, and despairing of being able to withstand him, being so far from relief, was willing to set a Treaty of Peace on foot. A fit opportunity offered it self, for Cecilius Bishop of Metensa, being desirous of a more quiet Life, quitted his Bishoprick, and retired to a Mo∣nastery within the Precincts of the Romans. The King cited him to appear, and answer for what he had done. Caesarius, tho' some Persons opposed it, caused him to be delivered to the King by Ansemundus, whom he sent as his Ambassador with Orders, if he found a fit opportunity to Treat of Peace. This Embassy was pleasing to Sisebutus, being himself inclinable to an accommodation, and therefore he sent an Ambassador of his own called Theodorick to Cae∣sarius, Peace with the Romans who sent him with others to the Emperor Heraclius, to ratify the Conditions of the Treaty. The Emperor gave much credit to an Astrologer, who told him the Christian Em∣pire would be in great danger from the circumcised People, which being meant of the Moors and Saracens, he misapplyed to the Jews, and therefore used all possible Means to oppress them. Now he easily was prevailed upon to ratify the Peace the Ambassador had concluded; only earnestly recommending it to the King Sisebutus, that he would Banish the Jews out of all Jews Ba∣nished. his Dominions, which was granted, and such rigor was used towards them, that many against their Wills were forced to be baptized, a thing forbid among Christians. Among the An∣cient Laws of the Goths called Fuero jusgo, are two to be seen, to this effect, established by Sisebutus in the 4th Year of his Reign. Hereupon a great number of Jews went over into France, whence not long after they were also expelled together with the Native Jews, by Da∣gobert King of the Franks, at the request of the same Emperor Heraclius. King Sisebutus ta∣king, great Liberty in relation to the Ecclesiastical affairs, deposed Eusebius, Bishop of Barce∣lona, and gave that See to another, as appears by his own Letters. The pretence for so do∣ing was, that certain Actors had been permitted by the Bishop to represent some things re∣lating to the superstition of the Heathens, and offensive to Christian Ears. By the King's Or∣der Synod at Sevil. a Synod of 8 Bishops was held at Sevil, in which the Sect of the Acephali, formerly con∣demned in the East, and now brought into Spain, by a Bishop that came from Syria, was Anathematized, and he obliged to abjure it. The King being thus employed, was snatched away by Death, in the Year of Grace 621. having Reigned eight Years, six Months, and six∣teen 621. Days. Several stories have been spread abroad relating to his Death. Some said the Sisebutus his Death. Physicians gave him a Purge, good as to its quality, but that the quantity was too great; o∣thers that instead of a Purge they poisoned him. It is certain, many falshoods are always spread abroad upon the death of Princes. His Funeral was performed with great Pomp, and many Tears, expressing the great esteem he was held in by all Men. In the plain near Toledo, upon the Banks of Tagus, stands an Ancient Church dedicated to S. Leocadia, which threatens ruin, and is generally supposed to have been built by Sisebutus. It is also attribued to Sisebutus, that he extended the Dominion of the Goths upon the Seas, either to secure their Conquests on the Land, or with a design to extend them into Africk. Some of our Historians write, that Mahomet the Founder of that wicked Sect, after he had subdued part of Asia, and Af∣rick, came over into Spain, and fled from Cordova for fear of St. Isidorus. But this relation is wholly to be rejected as Fabulous, and not agreeing with Chronology and Foreign Histories. To Sisebutus succeeded his Son Recaredus, too young to take upon him so great a charge; Recaredus Reigned 3 Months. he Reigned but three Months, and then dyed, without leaving any Memory of what hap'ned in his time. CHAP. III. The Reigns of the Kings Suinthila, Rechimirus, Sisenandus, and Chintila. The Ro∣mans quite expell'd Spain. Three Synods at Toledo. UPon the Death of the two Kings, Father and Son, the Nobility made choice to suc∣ceed Suinthila chosen King. him, of Suinthila, a Person who had given good proofs of his Courage and Con∣ducts in the late Wars; besides, that the Memory of his Father, King Recaredus, gain'd him the Affections of all Men, and made him be thought worthy that Dignity. He was not on∣ly
Couragious and Prudent, but so bountiful towards the Needy, that he was commonly cal∣led, The Father of the Poor. The People of Navarre, again Rebelled upon this change of Go∣vernment, and over-ran the Province of Tarragona with Fire and Sword; but the new King appearing, quieted them, only with his Presence, and Pardoned them, only upon condition they should Build and Fortifie the City Ologito, which might serve as a Bridle to curb them, since they made such ill use of their Liberty. This City is supposed, to be that, now called Olite, rather for the likeness of the Names, than any other concluding Reason. At length, the Romans, after this War of Navarre was ended, were oblig'd to quit all Spain, after ha∣ving Romans quite ex∣pell'd Spain. for above 70 Years maintained themselves in part of Portugal and Andaluzid. There are Authors of Opinion, the Goths Fortify'd Ebora, to be a check upon the Romans, some Testimony whereof, are two Towers there, said to be Built by Sisebutus. The Romans had maintain'd themselves so long in those Parts by the nearness of Africk, whence they receiv∣ed Supplies, and being now cut off those Aids, the false Prophet Mahomet making War there, they were easily Expell'd. The Government of that Roman Province, was divided betwixt two Patricians, one of them the King Corrupted, the other, he subdued by Force; and thus they both were brought under. All these remarkable things were concluded by King Suinthila, in the 5th Year of his Reign which was of Christ 626. which same Year, he to 626. secure the Succession in his Family, declar'd his Son Rechimirus, tho' very Young, his Com∣panion in the Throne. Yet, tho' the Youth gave good hopes that he would imitate the Vir∣tues Causes of Suinthila's ruin. of his Father and Grandfather; the Goths were much dissatisfied, that the Crown should be made Hereditary, which before was Elective. From this time forwards, they were so far incens'd, that they never gave over till both Father and Son were cast down from the Re∣gal Dignity. What was most blameable in Suinthila, is, that after he had subdued his Ene∣mies, he suffer'd himself to become a Slave to his Vices. Theodora, his Wife, and Geyla, or Aguilanus, his Brother, who Govern'd him and the Kingdom, in a great measure, procur'd him the ill Will of his Subjects, and raised those Enemies, who at last wrought his downfall. At this time Helladius, Successor to Aurasius, was Archbishop of Toledo, and he dying, Justus was preferred to that See. The ruin of Suinthila was contrived and Executed by Sisenandus, a bold and powerful Man, who thinking, the hatred the King had incurr'd, offer'd him a fair opportunity of raising himself, prevailed with Dagobert, King of the Franks, to assist him. Having agreed upon Terms, Abundantius and Venerandus, the Burgundian Generals, entred Spain, and advanced with their Forces as far as Zaragoça. The Nobility, who before, He is ex∣pelled by his own Subjects and the Franks. durst not declare themselves, then taking Arms, did not desist till they had expelled Suin∣thila, his Wife, and Son Rechimirus. This is more certain than what others have written, viz. That Suinthila and his Son dy'd at Toledo. It appears by the French Histories, that the Goths gave a Sum of Gold (as supposed, toward the charge of the War) to King Dago∣bert, which he apply'd to build the Church of St. Denis, two Leagues from Paris, which was of his Foundation. Suinthila Reign'd 10 Years, and was Deposed in that of our Lord 631. 631. Sisenandus, having as he wished, ascended the Throne of the Goths, and being a prudent Sisenandus Usurps the Crown, having expelled Suinthila and his Son. Man, perceived he was not well fixed, especially in respect, many still adhered to the con∣trary Party; therefore, to secure himself, he thought nothing could be more Efficacious than Religion. Hereupon, under pretence of Reformation of Manners, he gathered a Coun∣cil of about 70 Bishops, at Toledo. But in reality, his chief design was, to obtain of those Prelates, that they would declare Suinthila incapable of the Crown; that so all those who were of his Party might desist. Their first Session was held in the Church of St. Leocadia, on the 5th of December, in the Year 634. and third of the Reign of Sisenandus, who appeared A Synod at Toledo. there in Tears, and full of hypocritical Words. They regulated the manner of holding the Pro∣vincial Yearly Synods, and made several other Acts relating to the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment. 634. But the strangest is, they Decreed, That none should seize the Crown, unless cho∣sen by the Nobility; that the Oath made to Sisenandus, should be valid, and Suinthila's Wife, Children and Brothers Excommunicated. A hard strained point for Bishops to dispose of Crowns. King Sisenandus departed this Life in the Year of our Lord 635. having Reign'd three Years, eleven Months, and sixteen Days. According to what had been Decreed in the Synod, 635, the Nobility and Prelates met, and by them, Chintila was elected King. In the place of Justus, Archbishop of Toledo, who dy'd about the same time, succeeded Eugenius, second of Chintila ascends the Throne by Election. the Name, a Man famous for his Learning and Virtue. Some Authors are of Opinion, that Chintila was Brother to Sisenandus, and both Sons to Suinthila; but this seems to be contra∣dicted by the fourth Council of Toledo, where many Reproaches were cast upon Suinthila, and it is to be supposed, the Sons would never suffer that to have been done in their presence. As soon as Chintila was chosen, he called a Council of Bishops to confirm his Election. It was tedious to stay for all the Bishops of the Kingdom, therefore 22, most of the Province of Carthagena, met, in the first Year of his Reign, and of Christ 636. The Prelates met in the Church of St. Leocadia; and among other things, confirmed the Election of the King, forbiding any, after his Death, to offer any wrong to his Children. They declar'd, 636. any Excommunicate, that Usurped the Crown, without being legally chosen, and prohibit any making of Voices before the King's Death. This was the 5th Council of Toledo, and The 5th Council of Toledo.
Eugenius, Archbishop of Toledo, Presided in it, and confirm'd its Acts. To make e De∣crees of this Synod the more binding, another of 50 Bishops, all within the  of the  5th  of  6th Council there. Goths, met the Year following, which was the 6th held at Toledo. In it were Ratifyed all the Acts of the former, particularly, in relation to the King and his Children; and they added, That their Crown should not be conferred on any Man, who did not before swear he would no way be favourable to the Jews, nor suffer any, that was not a Christian, to live with Freedom within the Kingdom. These Councils were all that is remarkable in the Reign of Chintila; it is supposed, the People being inclined to Peace, and all Foreign Ene∣mies remov'd, there hap'ned no War, at least none of note. The good Government of the King, and Authority of the Bishops, kept the Subjects from offering at any Revolt. Chintila dy'd in the Year of our Lord 639. when he had Reign'd three Years, eight Months, and nine Days. 639. CHAP. IV. The Reigns of the Kings Tulga, Chindasuinthus, and Recesuinthus. Several Synods of Toledo. Increase of the Mahometan Power. The Election and Coro∣nation of King Wamba. INstead of Chintila, by the unanimous consent of the Nobility, was chosen Tulga, young Tulga made King in Years, but old in Virtue, particularly Justice, Zeal for Religion, Prudence, Milita∣ry Experience, and Bounty towards the Needy; a quality most requisite in Kings, who ought to think they were intrusted with the Treasures of Kingdoms, to relieve the wants of such as are in distress. His Perfections seem'd still to be in their increase, when Death cut him off at Toledo, in the Year 641. when he had Reign'd only two Years, and four Months. Sigibertus Gemblacensis says, Tulga was a debauch'd Youth, and on that score, Deposed by his 641. own People; but it is more reasonable to believe St. Ildefonsus, who writes as an Eye Witness, than a Stranger, that either writ maliciously, or was imposed upon. After the Death of Chindasu∣inthus U∣surps with the assi∣stance of the Army. Tulga, Flavius Chindasuinthus, who being General of the Army, was before in Rebellion a∣gainst the King, with the assistance of the Soldiery, mounted the Throne, none of the Nobi∣lity daring to oppose him, that had all the standing Forces of the Kingdom on his side. It must be granted, that tho' he Usurp'd the Crown Tyrannically, yet afterwards, he Govern∣ed with great Moderation, as if he design'd that way to make good his bad Title to it. The first thing he did, was to settle the Common-wealth, by Establishing whol∣some Laws and Ordinances, for the better Administration of Justice, and the publick Good. In the 6th Year of his Reign, he called together to Toledo, all the Bishops in his Kingdom, 647. whereof, 30 met, on the 28th of October, and this is counted the 7th Council of Toledo. The 7th Council of Toledo. Before this time, the King had Banish'd Theodiselus, Archbishop of Sevil, for that he sow'd scandalous Doctrines, and to gain himself the greater Authority, had corrupted the Works of his Predecessor, St. Isidorus. Theodiselus went over into Africk, and there turn'd Mahometan; so blind is Man when once he strays from the right way. Those Authors that write in favour of the See of Toledo, and particularly, the Archbishop D. Rodrigo, will have it, that upon this occasion, King Chindasuinthus made Toledo the Metropolitan See of all Spain; whereas before, Sevil had enjoy'd that preheminence, but they have not the Te∣stimony of any ancient Writers to confirm their Opinion; and therefore, we shall not lay much stress upon it. About these times, Theodorus, and his Successor, Martin I. Govern'd the Catholick Church. Chindasuinthus being desirous to enrich Spain with good Books and Learning, sent Tajus, Bishop of Zaragoça, to Rome, to obtain of Theodorus, then Pope, St. Gregory's Books upon Job; which are full of Allegories, and excellent Morality, and to bring them into Spain. The King thought those Books would be useful to Propagate, and Confirm St. Grego∣ry's Books sent for to Rome. the Catholick Religion, and be a great Addition to the Ecclesiastical Library, as believing now he had Peace on all sides, nothing could add more to the Glory of his Kingdom, than the increase of Religion and Learning. Tajus having delivered his Embassy, the Pope was very willing to oblige the King. But those Books, thro' the Ignorance and Negligence of the times, were so hid among other Papers, that it was hard to find them. Much time was spent in searching, and the Bishop seeing little hope of Success, had recourse to God, and spent the Night in Prayer, begging of God not to suffer the good Intentions of the King to be frustrated. He fail'd not of Success, for that Night, God revealed, or as he says in a Letter, St. Gregory appear'd to him, and discover'd where those Books were. Now it was that Fructuosus began to be famous in Spain, he being of the Royal Blood of the Goths, left the World to go live in a Desart, and in time, at his own Expence, near Coplutica, at the Foot of the Mountain Irago, in the place now call'd Vierço, built a Monastery of Monks of the Invocation of the Martyrs, Justus and Pastor. The King was assisting to him in build∣ing Monaste∣ries Founded. of this Monastery; and afterwards, the number of Monks being too great, not far off, in a rough and uncouth place, Founded another, Dedicated to St. Peter. Fructuosus Founded a third Convent in the Island of Cadiz, and a fourth on the Continent, nine Leagues from the
Coast, besides many others, as well of Men as Women. This was the Posture of Affairs in Spain, in the latter Years of Chindasuinthus, at which time, he to secure the Succession of the Crown, he had obtained by force in his Family, chose his Son Flavius Recesuinthus his Com∣panion in the Throne, in the Year of our Lord 648. after he had Reigned alone 6 Years, 8 648. Months, and 20 Days. It is true he lived three Years after, but that time is allotted to the Reign of his Son, because by reason of his great Age, he left the whole charge of the Go∣vernment to him. Chindasuinthus dyed at Toledo, according to some, of Sickness, but as others will have it, was poisoned. His Body, and that of his Wife Riciberga, were buryed in the Monastery of S. Romanus, now called de Hormisda, betwixt Toro, and Tordesillas, on the Banks of the River Duero, founded by himself for his place of Burial, as was accordingly performed. In the Reign of Recesuinthus, Eugenius the Third, was Archbishop of Toledo, a Person of great Learning, as appears by many of his works still extant, and by some reckoned among Recesuin∣thus Ad∣vanced to the Throne by his Father. The 8th Council of Toledo. The 9th Council of Toledo. the Number of Saints. In his time, and by his procurement 52 Bishops met at Toledo, which is counted the eighth Council held in that City. This was rather a Parliament than Synod, all the Nobility of the Kingdom being present, at it, and signing to all the Decrees, which ra∣ther respected the Temporal than Spiritual Power. Two Years after, by the King's Order, there met 16 Bishops, who Celebrated the 9th Council, and published 17 Acts upon several Articles. The following Year 656. 20 Bishops met again in the same City, and this is reckon∣ed the tenth Council of Toledo. The Acts of all these Councils, as also the Lives of St. Isidorus, and St. Ildefonsus, whereof F. Mariana here Treats at large, I thought would not be so acceptable to most Readers, nor so pertinent in this, as the Ecclesiastical History, which I do not pretend to write, and have therefore purposely omitted them. 656. The 10th Council of Toledo. In the Year 660 Twelve Bishops of Portugal held a Synod at Merida, and published 23 De∣crees, most relating to the Celebration of Divine Service. At the same time the power of the Mahometans grew formidable in Africk, for Abdalla, Duke of Moabia, the fourth from the 660. false Prophet Mahomet; in a great Battle, overthrew Gregory the Roman General and Gover∣nour Increase of the Maho∣metan Power. of Africk, for the Romans, and by that means possest himself of all that vast Province. The Goths of old were Masters of Mauritania Tingitana, and particularly of Ceuta, and the Country about it. All the rest except this part fell into the hands of the Mahometans, who proud with success, from that time founded a new Empire in Africk, whose Kings, in whom, according to the Custom of those People, was the Spiritual, as well as Temporal Power, were called Miramamolines, which signifies Princes of the Faithful. As those of the same People in Asia, stiled themselves Caliphs. Spain is divided from Africk, only by the narrow streight of Gibraltar. Many were of Opinion, this rise of those People threatned Spain, and their fear was much increased by an extraordinary Eclipse of the Sun, which hap'ned in the Reign of Recesuinthus, so great that the day was totally darkned, as the Archbishop D. Rodrigo affirms, which they interpreted as an Omen of great mischiefs to ensue. Recesuinthus quelled the People of Navarre, who were in Arms and made incursions, wasting the Country about them. Besides he corrected the Laws of the Goths, abolishing some, and instituting many new ones, the Number whereof, as appears by the Book called Fuero jusgo, is no less than Recesuin∣thus his Actions, and Death. that of all the others published by the Kings his Predecessors. By these Actions the King was advanced to the highest pitch of Honour, respected by his People, and well esteemed abroad, when Death took him away, on the first of September in the Morning, and in the Year of our Lord 672. having Reigned, from the time his Father declared him his Companion in the Throne, 23 Years, 6 Months, and 11 Days, after the Death of his Father 21 Years, and 11 Months. 672. Two Leagues from Valladolid, (formerly, as some think, called Pincia) is a Town named Wamba, before called Gerticos; here the King dyed, having been removed from Toledo, to try it the change of Air would do him good. His Body was buryed in the Church of that Town, where his Tomb is still to be seen, but the Bones were removed by King Alonso, the Wise, to Toledo, and lay'd in the Church of St. Leocadia, according to a received Tradition in that City, near the high Altar, on the right side. Philip the Second of Spain, in the Year 1575. caused the said Tomb to be opened in his Presence, as also another on the left side of the Al∣tar, no Inscription was found within, only the Bones wrapped in Cotton, and laid in Wooden Chests, but Learned Men that were present, believed that on the right hand to be the Tomb of Recesuinthus, as being the Ancientest, and the other that of King Wamba, which was also Translated to Toledo, by the same King Alonso. Near Duen̄as, which is beyond Valladolid, on the Banks of the River Pisuerga, is an Ancient Church dedicated to St. John Bap∣tist, the workmanship Gothick, adorned with Marble and Jasper-stone. In it is an Inscription in six lines, which declares it was built by King Recesuinthus, and finished in the Year 661. whence some Learned Men infer the Patrimonial Estate of those two Kings, was near about that place. In the time of Recesuinthus, Constantine was Emperour of the East, and Adeodatus govern'd the Church of Rome. Upon the Kings Death there ensu'd a new and bloody War in that part of the Dominion of the Goths, that lay in Gallia Narbonnensis. Ambition was the cause of this evil, which bred great distractions in the Gothish Kingdom, when they were in fullness of Peace, after having vanquish'd all Foreign Enemies. King Recesuinthus leaving no Issue to succeed him; his Brothers, either for their Age, or some other reasons, were not thought
fit to inherit. Hereupon the Nobles met, and by common consent, made choice of Wamba, Wamba his accessi∣on to the Crown. a Man of Quality, who had been the Chief Favourite to the late Kings; besides, he was a good Soldier, very discreet, and so modest, that he refus'd to accept of that mighty honour, excusing himself on account of his great Age, and begging they would not lay so heavy a burden upon him. He persisting firm in refusing, an Officer of note, with his drawn Sword, threatn'd to kill him, unless he accepted of the Crown. Wamba submitted to these threats, but so, that he should not be Anointed, as the Custom was, before he came to Toledo, re∣serving this honour for that City, and by that means gaining time, that those who were for him might alter their resolution, or at least such as oppos'd him be brought over, and so no dis∣sention might ensue. He set out for Toledo, where he was Anointed on the 29th of September in the Church of St. Peter and Paul, near the Royal Palace. In express terms he swore to ob∣serve the Laws of the Kingdom, and procure the wellfare of the People. Quiricus Arch∣bishop of Toledo, Successor to St. Ildefonsus, perform'd the Ceremony. Julian Archbishop of Toledo writes, that when King Wamba was Crown'd, there rose from his Head a Cloud in the form of a Pillar; and a Bee was also seen to Mount on high from his Head. It may be said, that the People often fancy or imagine such things, but the Authority of the Author is of great force. All the Nobles did their Homage to the new King, and among them Paul, a Kinsman; as some imagine to the late Kings: but the name of Paul not used among the Goths, and his Disloyalty, make the Opinion of others more likely, who say he was a Grecian. Wamba was born in that part of Lusitania, formerly called Igeditania, where is now a Town known by the name of Idania la Vieja, or Old Idania; and near it a Farm, with a Fountain, which retains the name of Wamba. The People of those parts are perswaded, as having re∣ceiv'd it from their Forefathers, that this same Farm was part of Wamba's Estate, before he came to the Crown. CHAP. V. The War with the Rebels in Gallia Gothica. Paul Wamba's General joins with them. The King marches against them, and reduces all the Country to his Obedience. THE beginning of Wamba's Reign was full of Commotions and Troubles, the Subjects growing insolent, as believing him not well establish'd in the Throne. The People of Navarre, being of an unsetled temper, revolted. Wamba raised Men in Cantabria or Biscay, Navarre. revolts. to be the nearer to oppress those Rebels, when at the same time news was brought him of more dangerous tumults in Gallia Gothica. Many of that Country were dissatisfied at his be∣ing Elected, and refus'd to acknowledge him as their King. They conspir'd together, and resolv'd to have recourse to Arms. Hilperick Earl of Nismes in France, was the first that de∣clar'd Rebellion in Gallia Gothica. himself, confiding in the great distance he was at from the King, and his own extra∣ordinary Power. Gumildus, Bishop of Magalona, and an Abbot, whose name was Remigius, join'd with him. They labour'd to bring Aregius, Bishop of Nismes, to their Party; but not being able to prevail, banish'd him to the inward part of France, and set the Abbot Remi∣gius in his place. All things were carry'd on violently, and without regard to Equity or Ju∣stice; so they call'd out of France to their assistance, the Jews, who had before been Banish'd the Dominions of the Goths. Paul being a Man of great Wisdom and Experience, was ap∣pointed Paul Ge∣neral for the King, takes part with the Rebels. General to quell this Rebellion; with such Forces as were thought sufficient to op∣pose the Revolters. All fell out contrary to expectation, for Paul being false in his heart, march'd slowly, and gave the Rebels time to grow strong; and at the same time, he contriv'd how the chief of the Goths might fall off from the King. By the way he agreed with Ranosin∣dus Duke of Tarragona, and Hildigisus Gardingus, which was a dignity like to a Lord Lieu∣tenant of a County. Both of them were Men of note, and by their means he possess'd him∣self of Barcelona, Girona, and Vique, Cities in Catalonia. Their Forces being thus increas'd they resolv'd to march into France, and join Hilpericus, not doubting they should be then in a condition to make head against the King. Argebaudus Archbishop of Narbonne, thought to have kept the Rebels out of that City, but they were so quick upon him, that he was forc'd to temporize, and seemingly join with them, rather through fear than affection. Paul having enter'd the City, call'd together the Citizens and Souldiers, and after reproving the Arch∣bishop for having offer'd to keep him out; Condemn'd the Election of Wamba as illegal, and advis'd to proceed to a new one. Ranosindus, with a loud Voice, cry'd out, he knew none so fit, and deserving to be a King, as Paul himself. This was only executing in publick what they in private had before contriv'd. All that were of his Party being mix'd with the Croud, approv'd of what had been said, with great Acclamations, whilst the wiser sort were silent, not daring to gainsay. Thus Paul was declar'd King, and a Crown which King Reca∣redus had offer'd to St. Felix, put upon his Head. So far had the Spirit of Rebellion tran∣sported Paul de∣clar'd King them, that they seiz'd not only the Riches of the publick, but laid their Sacrilegious hands upon the Treasures of the Church. Hilperick Earl of Nismes, the first that rais'd this Rebellion, consented with the others, and so all the Cities of Gallia Gothica; besides a great
part of the Province Tarraconensis, which follow'd the Example of their Duke Rano∣sindus. Paul grown Proud with this Success, sent a Challenge to the King, full of bitter Invectives and Reproaches; upon which I believe that vulgar error was ground∣ed, which makes Wamba of base Parentage, as if he had been rais'd to the Throne from the Plough, which is certainly a great mistake, for he was of the Chief Nobility of the Goths, and one of the greatest Favourites in the Courts of those Kings. Wamba understanding what Paul had done, called a Council of his Nobles, to consult whether it were better immediately to advance with what force he had, or return to Toledo to increase his Power. The more resolute were for losing no time, but oppressing the Enemy before they were grown stronger; the more Cautious, advised to gather new Forces, and leave all things setled in Spain. The King having weighed the Arguments on both sides, resolved to make up by Celerity, what he wanted in number of Men, and having exhorted his Nobles to stand by him, and relieve their Friends in distress, his words were so Efficacious that all Men taking New Courage, the War of Navarre was concluded in seven days, which was a good Omen of future Success. The Army was impatient to meet their Enemies, so they Marched towards Calahorra, and Huesca, and came upon the Frontiers of Catalonia, with in∣credible speed. Here the Army was divided into three parts, one Marched to Castrolibya, Wamba marches against the Rebels. the chief Town of Cerdania, the second to Vique, and the Third to the Sea-Coast to wast that Country. The King himself followed with the flower of the Army. He punished many Soldiers, for Offering Violence to the Country People, and forcing of Women; for which Crimes he caused them to be Circumcised, as a punishment to them, and example to others. Being come to Barcelona, the Metropolis of Catalonia, he easily made himself Master of it, and secured the heads of the Rebels to be punished according to their Crimes. Thence he Marched to Girona, which was delivered to him by the Bishop called Amador, whom not long before Paul thought to have secured to his interest, by a Letter in which he directed him to deliver the City to the first that came. Here the Army rested two days, and passed Recovers many Towns. the Pyrenean Mountains without meeting any Opposition. Beyond the Mounts they took and plundered Three Towns, Caucoliberis, that is Colivre, Vultuaria, and Castrolibya, beside ano∣ther shutup betwixt the Hills, and therefore called Clausura, in this they took Ranosindus, and Hildigisus two heads of the Rebels. Witimirus was with a Garrison in a Town called Sosdonia, but not thinking himself safe fled to Narbonne, where Paul still lay contriving how to hinder the King from passing the Mountains. Finding his Forces too weak he left that City to Witimirus, and retired to Nismes, where he expected Succours, from France, and Germany. Wamba having passed the Mountains, and incamped in the plain, stayed there two Days, till his other Forces that were dispersed several ways came up, and thence sent Four Officers with a considerable Body of Men, to take Narbonne, a Noble City on the Frontiers of France. These Forces being come before the City sent in, to Summon it, they within answered with scorn, which so provoked the Soldiers, that they gave a furious Assault that lasted three hours, at the Narbonne taken. end of which, having drove the defendants off the Walls, they fired the Gates, apply'd scaling Ladders, and so entred the City. Witimirus took Sanctuary in a Church, but was neverthe∣less drawn from our Ladies Altar and secured. Argebaudus the Archibishop, and Galtricia the Dean, were also taken and wounded by the Soldiers in their Fury. After the taking of Narbonne, Several o∣therplaces reduced. the Rebels began to go down the wind, and the Loyal party to increase. The Loyalists pur∣sued their success, and with the same ease took the Cities, Magalona, Agatha, and Beziers, where many chief of Rebels were taken, and among them, Remigius Bishop of Nismes. Gumildus the Bishop Magalona fled to Paul, at Nismes, a City in those days, for the Number of the In∣habitants, beauty of Buildings, and strength of Walls, inferior to none in Gallia Narbonensis. Against this City the King sent Four Resolute Generals, but they wanted Conduct and En∣gines for Battering the Walls. With them went 30000 Men. Being come in sight of the Town, they furiously charged the Enemy that came out to meet them. The fight was Bloody, and lasted all Day till Night parted them, each side boasting of the Victory, but the King's Men were the first that sounded the Retreat. It hap'ned that during the Ingagement, one of The Re∣bels every where worsted. the Rebels cryed out, Great Numbers of French and Germans, will soon come to our Aid, and cut you all to Pieces. The King, with the rest of the Army, was not far off, therefore Advice was given him of what that Soldier had said, and he sent 10000 Men under the Command of Wandemirus to reinforce the others. These were so eager to ingage, that Marching all Night, they reached the Town by break of Day, before the Assault began. At the sight of such a Multitude Paul was dismayed, yet endeavoured to hide it, and putting the best Countenance upon it, he incouraged his Men. The Assault was given, and lasted most part of the Day, till the besieged, being quite spent with Labour, and over-powered, gave way, and suffered the Nismes carryed by Assault. King's Men to come up to the Wall. Then some fired the Gates, others with Crows, and other Instruments, beat down the Works. Having made a breach, they entred the Town, killing and destroying all that stood in their way. The Citizens and French Soldiers fancying that the Spaniards, who were in the Town, in hopes of obtaining their Pardon, had let in the Enemy, in a rage fell upon, and slew a great Number of them, and among the rest, one of Paul's Servants by his own side. It was a miserable sight to behold the Rebels attacked on all sides, and put to the Sword by their own party, as well as by the Enemy, and all the Streets A misera∣ble slaugh∣ter. strewed with dead Bodies, and running down with Blood. Paul himself seeing all lost, con∣fessed
he had erred in every thing he had undertaken, and taking off his Royal Helmet, re∣tired with his Family and Guards to the Theater, which being very strong, he hoped tho' it could not be maintained, he might there obtain Conditions. Some observed that Paul stript himself of the Ensigns of Royalty on the same day Twelve-Months, on which Wamba had ascended the Throne, which was the first of September. The King's Army was possessed of all the City, except the Theater and another small part, and therefore lay still, that and the following day, reserving the honour of ending the War to the King, and perhaps in hopes he would pardon the Offenders, they being all of one Nation, and some of their Kindred. To this purpose they made choice of Argebaudus Bishop of Narbonne, to send to the King, who coming to his Presence, about four Miles from the Town, alighted off his Horse, and kneeling with Tears in his Eyes, begged for the Rebels. The King who was no less merciful than brave, promised a General Pardon to all, except the heads, of whom alone he designed to make an example. But Argebaudus still pressing that there might be no exceptions, Wamba with an angry Countenance, bid him be satisfyed with what was granted, and think all was favour that extended not to the Lives of the least Offenders. CHAP. VI. Wamba returns into Spain. Punishes the Heads of the Rebels. His publick Works. Eleventh Council of Toledo. A great Fleet of Sarazens Destroyed. Wamba deposed, Ervigius Ʋsurps the Crown. THE King Marched to the City with the strength of his Army. At his Arrival all that Paul taken held out before submitted, and Paul delivered up the Theater, where were with him Gumildus the Bishop, and other Heads of the Conspirators, who were all secured, and Paul him∣self led by the Hair of the Head, betwixt two Officers, to the King's Presence. All the Criminals cast themselves at the King's Feet, who giving Thanks to Almighty God, gave them their lives, yet so that they should remain in Custody till he determined what should be done with them. Some French and Saxons, that were found in the Town, part as Hostages, and others who came to serve, were well Treated and sent home. This was the end of those great Commo∣tions which threatened destruction to the Dominions of the Goths. Many thought this a Judgment of God upon those People, for Robbing the Churches, and Wamba, after making a strict Search, caused all that could be found to be restored. He ordered the City Walls to be repaired, the dead Bodies to be Bury'd, which took up three Days. Then the Rebels were brought into the King's Presence, and Sentence passed upon them. After the King had set his Foot upon their Necks, and other Formalities, Paul and all his Adherents were Con∣demned to Death, and to forfeit their Estates, yet in case the King should Pardon their Lives, at least they should have their Eyes put out. The Hair was a Mark of Nobility, therefore Wamba to be thought merciful, was content only to have their Heads Shorn. Now news was brought that Chilperick, the second King of France, drew near with his Army in Battalia. Wamba having taking the Field, and waited four days, thought he had done enough, as unwilling to break into the Territories of France, and make himself the Aggressor, and therefore resolved to return into Spain. At the same time he was informed, that Lupus, a French Gene∣ral, wasted and destroyed all the Country of Beziers. He moved towards him, but the French∣man thinking himself too weak to withstand, retired to the Neighbouring Mountains, leav∣ing all the Baggage, behind, so that it looked more like flight than a Retreat. With this and the other Booty got in France, the King's Army was enriched, and returned to Narbonne, whence the greatest part was dispersed into the Neighbouring Garrisons in France. Others at Canaba, a Town in the Country of Narbonne, had leave given them to return home and enjoy the Fruits of their Labours. A great number stayed with the King, who from thence returned into Spain. At Toledo he was received in manner of a Triumph, as was due for having performed Wamba return∣into Spain. such great Actions in only six Months, which was the time since he set out from that City. The order of it was thus. In the first place went the Rebels upon Camels, their heads and beards shorn, barefooted, and ill Cloathed. Paul, in derision, had on his Head a Crown of black Leather. Then followed the Soldiers in their best attire. Last of all came the King, whose venerable Gray hairs, and the Memory of his exploits, added to the Majesty of his Countenance and Person. All the City went out to meet him, withloud Acclamations, wish∣ing him long Life and Prosperity. To conclude, the Criminals were confined to perpetual Imprisonment. Thus Spain, by the Valour of Wamba, began to flourish with a lasting Peace at Home, and recover'd its ancient Honour Abroad. Next, the King apply'd himself to Adorn and Beauti∣fie his Kingdom. In particular, he enlarged the City Toledo, and for its security, raised a new Wall, with Towers, Parapets and Battlements, reaching from one Bridge to the other, Wamba his publick works. along the Suburb of St. Isidorus. Three parts in four of Toledo, are encompassed by the Ri∣ver Tagus, which coup'd up betwixt high Banks, runs in very narrow Chanels among the Rocks. The other part, which is upon a high and steep Ascent, was enclosed by an ancient
Roman Wall, not so large as that of Wamba; the Ruins of it still are to be seen in the Mar∣ket-place of Zocodover, and at the Gate del Hierro. Wamba, the more to strengthen the Toledo, a new Wall raised a∣bout it. Place, and bring the Suburbs within the City, added a Wall lower. Stones were brought for the Work from all Parts, and particularly, as is supposed, from an old Roman Fabrick, like a Circus, which they had formerly raised there, with Marble Stones in it, and Figures like Roses, or Wheels carved on them. The common Sort are persuaded, those were the Arms of Wamba; but those very Stones prove the contrary, because, they are laid without any Order or Method; but just as they were brought, so they were placed by the Work-Men. Grave Authors affirm, That in Memory hereof, he caused two Verses to be Carv'd on the principal Towers, in unpolished Latin, such as was used in that Age, the Sense of them, is, With the help of God, the mighty King Wamba raised the beautiful Wall to his City, for the Honour of his Nation. Besides, on the upper part of the Towers, he placed the Statues of those Saints held in greatest Veneration in the Town, of white Marble, and under them, o∣ther two Verses, to this effect, Ye Saints, who are Honour'd here, keep this City and People, and avert, as you can, all Sickness. These Statues being fallen, and the Inscriptions worn out by time, King Philip II. caused them to be restored anew. In the fourth Year of Wamba's Reign, which was of our Lord 675. he caused a Synod of 17 Bishops, and 7 Abbots, to be held at 675. Toledo. This is counted the 11th Council of Toledo. About the same time, another Synod was Ce∣lebrated The 11th Council of Toledo. Third Council of Braga. at Braga, and was the third of that City. We have no account of any other Coun∣cils in the Reign of Wamba; but it's supposed, there were more, both in regard that the former Councils had Ordained the keeping of yearly Provincial Synods, and, because grave Authors affirm, that by a Council held at Toledo, in his time, the Bounds of each Bishoprick were assigned; and this could not be done without the Concurrence of all the Bishops of Spain. Wamba Instituted many Laws for the better Administration of Justice, whereof, there was great defect. In particular, he corrected the Military Discipline. He Ordained, that when Laws Esta∣blish'd by Wamba. Forces were raised, all should repair to the Standard that were not over or under Age, or hindred by Sickness. Also, that every one should send to the Army the twelfth Slave, with such Weapons, as are there specify'd, differing from the rest. Even the Bishops and Priests, were commanded to march with their People 100 Miles, in case of Invasions, or Inroads made by the Enemy. By the prudent Conduct and Management of King Wamba, the Goths obtain'd a memorable Victory at Sea. The Saracens were possess'd of all Africk, along the Coast of the Mediterranean, from the Mouth of the Streights, to that of the River Nile, and designing to pass over into Europe, had set out a Fleet of 170 Sail, with which, they ran a∣long the Coast of Spain, putting all to Fire and Sword. The Goths fitted out another great A great Fleet of the Sara∣cens, de∣stroy'd by the Goths. Fleet, and coming to a Battle, utterly destroy'd the Enemy, burning and taking most of their Fleet. There are Authors that say, The Fleet of the Saracens came into Spain at the Instiga∣tion of Ervigius, who being a Man in great Power, of the Family of King Recesuinthus, aspir∣ed to the Crown; but being disappointed this way, found means to give the King a poiso∣nous Potion, with which he presently Sickned, and on a sudden, lost all his Senses, in such manner, that it was thought, he could not live beyond the first Hour of the Night. They shav'd his Beard, shore his Head like a Priest, and put him on a Monks Habit, as was used in those Days. All this was done, as supposed by the contrivance of Ervigius, that in case he recovered, he should be incapable of Reigning, as was Decreed by the 6th Council of Toledo. Being, as was thought, at the last Gasp, tho' he was not in his Senses, they caused him to declare Ervigius, his Successor; and having drawn a Form of Renunciation, forc'd him to Sign it. All this hap'ned on Sunday the 14 of October, as is supposed, in the Year 680. 680. Notwithstanding, Wamba the Day following, came to himself, yet he would not recall Wamba de∣posed. Ervigius Usurps the Crown. what he had done. Thus a mighty King was on a sudden made a Monk and resolving to forsake the World (for Ervigius the same Day had caused himself to be Crown'd, and taken upon him the Government, tho' the Anointing was deferred till next Sunday) immediately went to the Monastery of Pampliega, seated, according to some Opinions, in the Valley of Mu∣non, where he spent the residue of his Life; which, according to some, was 7 Years, and 3 Months, and more, according to others. He Reign'd 8 Years, 1 Month, and 14 Days, Wamba Reign'd 8 Years, 1 Month, & 14 Days. was Buried in that Monastery, and thence, by King Alonso the Wise, Translated to Toledo, and Bury'd in the Church of St. Leocadia; where lies also King Recesuinthus. Julian, Arch-Bishop of Toledo, Anointed the new King, whence it is inferred, that Quiricus, his Prede∣cessor dy'd about that time, if it was not that he Renounc'd the Dignity, seeing the wrong that was done the good King Wamba. CHAP. VII. The Reigns of the Kings, Ervigius, and Egica. FLavius Ervigius by wicked means ascended the Throne, as has been said, yet he govern∣ed Ervigius the Usurp∣er, Go∣verns well. well. The better to secure himself in his ill gotten Power, he made use of the show of Religion, calling together all the Bishops of the Kingdom. Thirty five met at Toledo, on
the 9th of January 681. and this is counted the 12th Council of that City. Many Acts were passed in this Synod, but the two most remarkable were. The first approving the Election 681. of Ervigius, because they durst do no otherwise, and declaring the Subjects free from their The 12th Council of Toledo. Oath of Allegiance, on account of Wamba's Resignation. The second, was giving the Arch-Bishop of Toledo Power to create Bishops throughout Spain, in the King's Absence, and of Confirming those made by him. Two Years after this, there met in the same City, by the King's Order, 38 Bishops, 26 Vicars of absent Bishops, and 9 Abbots, who, together, with 683. The 13th Council of Toledo. many of the Nobles, then present, Celebrated the 13th Council of Toledo, on the 4th of No∣vember 683. and the 4th Year of the Reign of Ervigius. In this Council, the chief Acts were, a Pardon to those that had followed Paul's Party, Abatement of Taxes, and a Law to protect Queen Leubigotona, and her Children, in case of the King's Death. The following Year, by command of Pope Leo II. was held the 14th Council of Toledo, in order to their re∣ceiving 684. the Decrees of a Council, celebrated not long before at Constantinople, at which, were The 14th Council of Toledo Many of these were rather Par∣liaments than Councils. 6th Gene∣ral Coun∣cil at Con∣stantinople. 290 Prelates, and it is reckon'd the 6th of the General Councils. Only 17 Bishops, and 10 Deputies assisted at this Synod, and approv'd, and receiv'd the Council of Constantinople, Condemning, as that had done, the Monothelites and Apollinarians, who ascrib'd to Christ but one Will; this Council they counted the 5th, and placed it next to that of Chalcedon; for it was a common Error thro' Spain, Africk and Illyricum, not to admit of the 5th General Council, held in the time of the Emperor Justinian. Ervigius, notwithstanding all the means he had used to secure himself, and please the People, was much perplexed, fearing, their Hatred did not abate, and might in time, light upon his Children. To prevent any such Disaster, he Marry'd his Daughter Cixilona, to a powerful Man of Wamba's Family, called Egica, making him swear he would Protect and Defend his Mother and Brothers-in-law. After this, having Repealed some of Wamba's Laws, too severe for that corrupt Age, and particularly, that relating to Soldiers; he dy'd at Toledo, upon Friday, the 15th of Novem∣ber 687. having Reign'd 7 Years, and 25 Days. In this King's Reign there hap'ned a great Fa∣mine 687. in Spain, and the Bridge and Walls of Merida, were Repair'd with great Magnificence. Ervigius the Day before he dy'd, nam'd his Son-in-law Egica, to succeed him, and that Egica A∣nointed King. the Nobility might without any scruple, swear Allegiance to him, he absolv'd them from the Oath they had taken to him. The Ceremony of Anointing, was performed 9 Days af∣ter, at Toledo, in the Church of St. Peter and Paul. This King soon made it appear that the memory of Injuries is more lasting than that of Benefits; for, at the very beginning of his Reign, in hatred to his Father-in-law, he put away his Wife Cixilona, notwithstanding, he, had by her a Son, called Witiza. Some are of Opinion, he did it by persuasion of Wamba, who, under the Cloak of Religion, concealed his hatred to Ervigius, to the end of his Life. Besides, he punished some of the Nobles, who had a hand in the Deposing of Wamba. This is what some blame in Egica; for the rest, he was not inferior to the best Kings, in Justice, Piety, Meekness and Prudence in Governing. He Convened the 15th Council of Toledo, at The 15th Council of Toledo. which, were present 66 Bishops, who held their first Session on the 15th of May, 688. One of the principal Points decided in this Council, was, that the Oath Egica, and the Nobility had taken, to protect the Widow and Children of Ervigius, did not extend to maintain 'em 688. in the Possession of what they had wrongfully taken from others. Here also, Julian, the Archbishop, composed a new Apology in Vindication of that sent by the last Council to Pope Benedict; in which, he found fault, that they had said, the Will proceeded from the Will, and the Wisdom from the Wisdom. Pope Benedict was dead, when this second Apo∣logy came to Rome, and Sergius, his Successor, approved and highly commended it. This Julian is reckoned in the number of Saints. The faults of his Successor, made him the more admired. Sisbertus was the Man, who after presuming to put on the Vestment which was brought to St. Ildefonsus, from Heaven, ran from one Crime to another, till he raised a Re∣bellion against the King, and, as is believed, stirred up Strangers to Invade the Country. Three Battles were fought with the Franks, in all which, the Goths were defeated; yet we have no Particulars of any of these Actions. The King by his Prudence, quell'd the Rebelli∣on Goths thrice de∣feated. in its first rise. Sisbertus, the Causer of all these Mischiefs, was first Banished by the King, afterwards, he was Deposed and Excommunicated by the Bishops, who to the number of 66, Ce∣lebrated the 16th Council of Toledo, 693. Here was made a Confession of Faith, which expresses, that in God, the Will proceeds from the Will, the Wisdom from the Wisdom, the Essence from 693. the Essence, and, that Christ our Lord descended into Hell. Such Jews as should sincerely embrace The 16th Council of Toledo. Christianity, were declared Noble, and free from all Taxes. The Laws of the Goths were Cor∣rected, and it was Ordained, that Prayers should be daily offered for the Health of the King, his Children, and Grandchildren, which Custom, still continues in Spain, in the Mass, only some few Words altered. The following Year, on the 7th of November, was Celebrated the last Council of Toledo. The number of Bishops, is not know; but very few came from 17th and last Coun∣cil of Tole∣do. Gallia Gothica, as well, because the Plague raged there, as for that the Country was infested by the neighbouring French. The Bishops, in order to root out the Jews, who, it was said, had held Correspondence with the Moors in Africk, inviting them over into Spain, Condemn∣ed them all to be Slaves, all their Goods confiscate, and their Children ordered to be taken from them at 7 Years of Age, and bred Christians. A Law was also made to protect the Queen
Cixilona, and her Children, after the King's Death, notwithstanding as was said, he was Divor∣ced from her. Three Years before this, in a Council held at Zaragoça, it was Enacted in general, that every Queen, after the Death of her Husband, should become a Nun, that so none might offend her. Egica having Reign'd alone 10 Years, made his Son Witiza, whom he had by the Queen Cixilona, his Companion in the Throne, as appears by the Coin of Witiza made his Father's Compa∣nion in the Throne. those times, on which, are the Names of both those Princes. Near the City Tuy, in a plea∣sant Valley adorned with Springs and Trees, are to be seen to this Day old Walls, the Ruins of a House built by Witiza, to divert himself, whilst he Resided in that City; for his Father, to prevent Tumults and Disorders, sent him to Galicia, where the Kingdom of the Suevians had been. Egica dy'd at Toledo, 5 Years after, which was the Year of our Lord 701. about the Month of November. His Son coming from Galicia, was Proclaimed King, without any 701. opposition, and Anointed, according to the Custom of the Goths, on the 15th of the same Egica dies. Month of November. CHAP. VIII. The Reign of King Witiza. Roderick ascends the Throne, ravishes Count Julian's Daughter, and breaks open an old Castle at Toledo, said to be Inchanted. WItiza's Reign was Disorderly and Infamous, in all respects, but particularly, noted for Cruelty, Impiety, and Contempt of the Church. True it is, at first he gave Witiza's Reign. hopes he would prove a good Prince, and protect the Innocent; for he recalled those, who had been Banished by his Father, and restored all their Estates. Besides, he caused all the Records to be burnt, that there might remain no memory of the Crimes that had been false∣ly charged upon them. These were good beginnings, had they been follow'd; but it is hard to curb extravagant Youth and great Power. His first false step was, giving Ear to Flatterers, at whose Instigation, he fell into all manner of Lewdness; a thing natural to him, His disor∣derly Life. but which he had concealed, for fear of his Father. He kept a great number of Concubines, with the same State, as if they had been Queens; and the better to colour this Impiety, committed a greater, giving leave to all Men to do the like, and particularly, to Ecclesiasti∣cal Persons to Marry. Another Law was also Established, disowning the Pope. To give the greater force to these Laws, a Council of Bishops met at Toledo, but the Decrees of it, are not placed among those of the other Councils, as being contrary to the Canons of the Church. From this time, all things began to fall into confusion; for tho' many were plea∣sed with Libertinism, yet some were Zealous for the Observation of the Laws and ancient Customs, and began to think of restoring the Family of King Chindasuinthus, as the only Re∣medy against so many evils. Witiza was not ignorant of it, and from it took occasion to prosecute what he had began in his Father's days, which was to embrue his Hands in the Blood of that Family. There were living two Sons of Chindasuinthus, Brothers to K. Recesuin∣thus, the one called Theodofredus, the other Favila. Thedofredus was Duke of Cordova, where he built a Palace, then, and long after, very famous. He had resolved not to go to Court, as being jealous of the King. Favila, was Duke of Cantabria, or Biscay; and whilst Witiza in his Father's time resided in Galicia, had bore him Company, with the charge of Captain of his Guards, which the Goths, then called Protospatarius. Witiza slew him with a stroke of a Club, as some think, on account of his Wife. These were the first Works of his Murders Favila. Cruelty, and Hatred to that Noble Family, before he came to the Crown. Favila left a Son, called Pelayus, or Pelagius, who afterwards, began to restore Spain after its general Deso∣lation, and at that time, was Lieutenant to his Father, but upon his Death, retired to his Estate in Cantabria; and Count Julian Marry'd to Witiza's Sister, had the charge of Protospa∣tarius. Witiza being come to the Crown, turned his Rage against Pelagius, and his Uncle Theodofredus. The latter, he caused to have his Eyes put out. Pelagius escaped out of his reach, as did Roderick, Son to Theodofredus, who was afterwards King. It is said, Pelagius went in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, as a Testimony whereof, the Staves used by him and his Companion, were shown long after at Arraria, a Town in Biscay. These Cruelties, and his other Vices, made Witiza odious to his People, he despairing of gaining their Affecti∣ons, resolved to keep them under by Terror, and to this end, caused the Walls of almost all the Cities in Spain to be Demolished. I say almost all, because some were exempted, as Toledo, Leon and Astorga. Besides, he destroy'd all the Arms of the Kingdom, pretending it was to secure the Peace. He Persecuted Gundericus, the Archbishop of Toledo, and some Priests, that still preserved their Innocence, and would not approve of his Enormities. Sinderedus, Successor to Gundericus, overcome by Witiza's cruelty, comply'd with him, and consented that Oppas, his Brother, or as some will have it, his Son, should be Translated from the Archbi∣shoprick of Sevil, to that of Toledo. The Death of Witiza was suitable to his Life. yet Au∣thors differ in the manner of it. D. Roderick, the Archbishop says, He was killed by the Death of Witiza. contrivance of Roderick, whose Father ended his Days at Cordova, in perpetual Imprisonment
and Darkness. Other good Authors affirm, Witiza dy'd a natural Death, at Toledo, in the 12th Year of his Reign, which was of Christ 711. He left two Sons, whose Names were Eba and Sisebutus. Some People favouring these two Youths, and others their Adversary, 711. there arose great Contests and Confusions, which ended in a greater Destruction than could have been imagined. Since the Division of the Goths, about these two Families, brought on their total Desolation, it will not be amiss to declare the Descent of them both. Chindasuinthus, by his Wife Riesber∣ga, Original of the di∣vision of the Goths. left Recesuinthus, who succeeded him in the Crown, Theodofredus, Favila, and one Daugh∣ter, whose Name is not known. Recesuinthus dy'd without Issue, therefore the Nobles chose Wamba to succeed him. Chindasuinthus's Daughter was Marry'd to Ardebastus, who tho' a Greek, for his Valour and Birth, merited the King's Daughter, and had by her Ervi∣gius, he that was the Beginner of all those Calamities, Usurping the Kingdom, and Depo∣sing Wamba by wicked means. Ervigius by his Wife Liubigotona, had a Daughter, called Cixilona, Marry'd to King Egica, a Kinsman of Wamba; this Marriage being designed to cut off all Animosities, by uniting these two Houses. Of this Marriage, were born Witiza that was King, Oppas, Bishop of Sevil, and a Daughter, as grave Authors say, Marry'd to Count Julian. Witiza, as was said above, had two Sons, Eba and Sisebutus. Theodofredus, the second Son of Chindasuinthus, by his Wife Ricilona, a noble Lady, had Roderick, the Plague and Ruin of Spain. Favila, the third Son of Chindasuinthus, had Pelayus, no way like his Cousin, for by his Valour, the Christians in Spain began to make Head, after they had been cast down, and oppress'd thro' the madness of Roderick. Spain being in this condition, Roderick excluding the Sons of Witiza, ascended the Throne of the Goths, by choice, as is believed, of the Nobles. The Kingdom was full of Distracti∣ons, Roderick ascends the Throne. by reason of the several Interests, the People were grown Effeminate, giving themselves up to Feasting, Drink, and Lewdness; the Military Discipline was quite lost, and the King∣dom of the Goths was now running headlong to Destruction. The new King had good natu∣ral Parts, and seemed to be well inclined. He was hardy, resolute, bountiful, and had ex∣cellent ways of gaining of Men. Such he was before his Accession to the Crown, but no sooner put into possession of it, than he sullied all these Vertues with no less Vices. Above all, he was implacable when offended, wholly given up to Lust, and had no Discretion in his Undertakings; and in fine, was more like to Witiza, than to his Father, or Grandfather. There are Pieces of Money of his to be seen, with his Name, and Effigies armed, and with a stern Countenance, on the reverse, these Words, Igeditania Pius, a Motto he merited not; but was given to Flatter him. King Roderick enlarged, and beautified the Palace built by his Fa∣ther near Cordova, which the Moors afterwards, called Roderick's Palace. He called home his Cousin Pelayus, and made him Captain of the Guards, the greatest Trust at Court. Wi∣tiza's sons he treated so ill, that they, for fear of worse Consequences, fled into that part of The fa∣mous Count Ju∣lian, who betrayed Spain to the Moors. Barbary that was subject to the Goths, called Mauritania Tingitana. At that time, Count Re∣quila Governed that Province as Lieutenant, I believe to Count Julian, a Man in such Power, that besides it, he had the Government of that part of Spain about the Streight of Gibraltar, whence, is a short cut into Africk. Besides all this, he held a great Estate of his own, about Consuegra, inferior to none in the Kingdom. Hence sprung all the Mischiefs that ensued, for Witiza's Sons before they went over into Africk, had sowed the Seeds of a Rebellion, and were assisted by Oppas the Bishop, who was of the Blood Royal, and very Powerful. These Beginnings, which ought to have been suppressed, were heightned by another Accident. It was the Custom of Spain, for the Sons of the Nobility to be bred up at Court, and attend upon the King, and their Daughters upon the Queen: Among the latter, was a Daughter of Count Julian, called Cava, of singular Beauty. As she played with her Equals, it fell out she discovered some part of her Body, which the King from a Window perceiving, was so taken with her, he could think of nothing else. The continual sight of her, blew the Coals, and having used all possible means to gain her Consent, without any success, at last he Ra∣vished her; and by that Act, cast himself, and his Kingdom, headlong into Destruction, as Roderick Ravishes Count Julian's Daughter. a dissolute Man, and one wholly abandoned by God. Count Julian was at that time in Africk, his Daughter in a Rage, wrote to him, lamenting her Misfortune, and stirring him up to Revenge. The Count having received this News, resolved to hasten the Execution of the Treason he had till then been hatching. Therefore putting an end to his Affairs in Africk, he came over into Spain, being well skill'd in the Art of Dissimulation. Being come to Court, both in regard of his good Service, and for the sake of his Daughter, he was highly Ho∣nour'd and Intrusted. The better to carry on his Design, he persuaded the King, since Spain was at Peace, to send all the Forces he had towards the Frontiers, to oppose the Moors and French, who committed some Hostilities on the Borders, by this means to leave the King∣dom naked and defenceless. This done, he gave the King to understand, that his Wife be∣ing Sick in Africk, nothing could be so great a Comfort to her as the sight of her dear Daugh∣ter. The request was so reasonable, and he urged it so, that the King could not deny it. At Malaga there is a Gate called De la Cava, at which, there is a Tradition, she went out to take Shipping for Africk. At the same time, the King is said to have committed another great Error, which was, that he caused to be broke open an old Castle at Toledo, said to be Enchanted, locked up with many Locks and Bolts, it being a received Opinion, that when∣sover
it was opened the ruin of Spain was at hand. This the King imagined, was only a report spread abroad, to conceal some Treasures hid there, but being within found none, only a Chest, and in it a Picture, on which were drawn Men of strange Faces and Habit, with a Latin Inscription to this effect, By these People Spain shall soon be destroyed. The Coun∣tenances and Habit were like the Moors, whence it was inferred all the mischief would come from Africk. The King too late repented his rashness. Some look upon this as a meer Ficti∣on, I will give no judgment upon it, the Reader has his Liberty to believe, or disbelieve. I would not totally omit it, because grave Authors relate it, tho' not all in the same man∣ner. CHAP. IX. The first coming of the Moors into Spain. They prove successful, and flock over in great multitudes. King Roderick overthrown in a great Battle. His Death. The Moors over-run the greatest part of Spain. THE Power of the Saracens, was at this time grown to a wonderful height, from the small and deceitful beginning of Mahomet their False Prophet, for they had not only subdued and Conquered, a great part of Asia, but had over-run all Africk, from AEgypt, along the Me∣diterranean to the Ocean. Ʋlit was sole Sovereign of all those People, and called himself Miramamolin, a Title denoting absolute Sovereignty. Muza, a Man of great Courage and Conduct, governed Africk as his Lieutenant. Count Julian, in his way to Africk, had a meeting with the Heads of the Conspirators, on a Mountain near Consuegra, called Calderino, which in Arabick signifies, Mountain of Treason, there it was agreed, to invite the Moors into Spain. Being come into Africk, he repaired to Muza, complained of the wrongs King Count Ju∣lian invites the Moors into Spain. Roderick did his Subjects, shewed how easy it would be to Conquer Spain, and the Probability there was from thence of spreading over all Europe. Muza did not mislike the Proposal, but doubted of the Counts sincerity, and therefore resolved to do nothing without Consulting his Master. The result was, that a small Body should first be sent, to make Tryal of the Force of Spain, and see whether the Counts actions were suitable to his words. Muza being a Cautious Man, at first sent but 100 Horse, and 400 Foot, in four Ships, who Landing on the Islands, and along the Coast, about the Streights Mouth, many Christians came over to them. This encouraged him, to send 12000 Men under the Command of Tarif Abenzarca, 12000. Moors pass over into Spain. a Man of great note, but blind of one Eye. The better to keep the design private, no Fleet of War was provided, but they passed over in Merchant Ships. First they possessed them∣selves of Mount Calpe, and the City Heraclea, afterwards called Gibraltar, from Gebal, in Arabick signifing a Mountain, and Tarif the General, from whom also Tarifa, is supposed to take Name. King Roderick, having advice of what was doing, sent a Cousin of his own, called Sancho, or according to others In̄igo, to oppose the Moors. His Army consisted of raw and undisciplined Men, bad Horses, and worse Arms, so after several Skirmishes, in which they always had the worst, coming to a Battle, they were totally routed, and the Ge∣neral killed. The Barbarians encouraged, by this success advanced into the Country, wasted part of Andaluzia and Lusitania, and took Sevil, it being then Open and Ungarrison∣ed. This first disaster hap'ned in the Year 713. All things having succeeded according to their wishes, Tarif and Count Julian returned 713. into Africk, to obtain of Muza, more Forces for carrying on what they had so well begun. Second coming of the Moors. Count Requila was left with him, as a Hostage, and a greater number of Horse and Foot was sent to the new Conquest. The Moors encouraged by their success, and the addition of these fresh Forces, resolved to offer the King Battle. He on the other side had set up his Royal Standard, commanding all Persons of Age to repair to it upon severe Penalties. A great number was by this means gather'd, they who speak least say 100000 fighting Men. But they were quite unfit for Service, being Effeminate, undisciplined, cowardly and ill Armed; the most part having only Clubs and Slings. With this Army the King Marched into An∣daluzia, and came as far as Xeres, where the Enemy lay. He Incamped and Fortified himself in a Valley near the River Guadalete. Both sides were eager to come to a Battle, yet the Goths felt a heaviness, that seemed to Presage the misfortune was like to fall upon them. The King himself was perplexed with heavy Thoughts in the Day, and terrified with Dreams at Night. Eight days continually they fought in the same Place, the seven, as I suppose were A Battle that lasted 8 Days. spent in Skirmishing to try their Men, and make them more Expert. There is no account of the success of each day, likely it was various, for on the Eighth Day they resolved to give a general Battle, which was upon Sunday, the 9th of the Month, the Moors call Xavel, or Sceval, that is about June, according to the reckoning of the Arabs, as the Archbishop D. Roderick will have it. But I rather believe it was on St. Martins Day, being the 11th of November, in the Year of our Lord 714. as may be gathered from the Chronicon Alveldense. Both Armies being drawn up, the King according to the Custom of the Gothish Kings, when they went to 714. Battle, appeared in an Ivory Chariot, Cloathed in Cloth of Gold, encouraging his Men.
Tarif on the other side did the same. The Armies thus prepared, waited only for the Signal to fall on, the Goths gave the charge, their Drums and Trumpets Sounding, and the Moors re∣ceived it with the Noise of Kettle-drums. Such were the Shouts and Cries on both sides, the Mountains and Valleys seemed to meet. First they began with Slings, Darts, Javelins and Lances, then came to the Swords. A long time the Battle was Dubious, but the Moors seemed to have the worst, till D. Oppas the Archbishop, having to that time concealed his Treachery, in the heat of the fight, with a great Body of his Followers went over to the Infidels. He Horrid Treason of a Bishop. joyned Count Julian, with whom was a great Number of Goths, and both together fell upon the Flank of our Army. Our Men Terrified with that  parallelled Treachery, and tired with fighting could no longer sustain that Charge, but where easily put to flight. The King performed the part not only of a Wise General, but of a resolute Soldier relieving the weak∣est, bringing on fresh Men in place of those that were tired, and stopping those that turned their Backs. At length seeing no hopes left, he alighted out of his Chariot, for fear of being taking, and mounting on a Horse, called Orelia, he withdrew out of the Battle. The Goths The Chri∣stians o∣verthrown who still stood, missing him, were most part put to the Sword, the rest betook themselves to flight. The Camp was immediately entred and Baggage taken. What Number was killed is not known, I suppose they were so many it was hard to count them, for this only Battle robbed Spain of all its Glory, and in it perished the Renowned Name of the Goths. The King's Horse, upper Garment and Buskins, covered with Pearls and Precious Stones, were found on the banks of the River Guadelete, and there being no News of him afterwards, it was supposed he was drowned passing that River. But 200 Years after, in a Church of the City Viseo in Portugal, there was found a Stone with a Latin inscription to this Effect; Here reposeth Roderick the last King of the Goths: Whence it is believed, he fled into Portugal. Those Soldiers that escaped, dispersed themselves throughout the Neighbouring Towns. Pelayus or Pe∣lagius, who some think, was in this Battle, retired to his own Estate in the farthest part of Biscay. Pelayus flies into Biscay. This Victory cost the Moors almost 16000 Men. Spain for some Years before, had suffered much by Plague and Famine, which had weakned, and laid them the more open to their Ene∣mies, but above all the Vengeance of God, for their Vices brought on these Calamities. A great number of those that escaped, out of the late unhappy Fight, repaired to Ezija, and there joyning with the Citizens, had the Courage to take the Field, and give the Enemy Battle, but with no better success than before. The City being left Defenceless, was The Infi∣dels divide and over∣run the Country. taken by the Moors and Destroyed. After this, by the advice of Count Julian, the Infidels di∣vided themselves into two Bodies. One under the Command of Magued a Renegado, march∣ed towards Cordova, and surprized it by Night. But the Governour defended himself Three Months in the Church of S. George, and then endeavouring to escape was taken, the Church entred by Force, and all in it put to the Sword. Tarif with the other Body, destroyed the rest of Andaluzia, and took Mentesa, Malaga, Illiberis and Granada. Murcia surrendred upon Articles, by the industry of the Governour, who being defeated, in the Field, made the Wo∣men stand upon the Walls, in Mens Apparel, so the Moors thinking, there was a great Gar∣rison within, granted their Conditions. Toledo remained a City placed in the heart of Spain, and by Situation Impregnable, yet Ʋrban the Archbishop, was retired to Asturias, carrying with him all the Holy relicks, least they should be burnt, or profaned by the Indels. With him, as grave Authors testify, went Pelayus, and for the more security hid those Holy things in a Cave, in the farthest part of Spain, two Leagues from the place where the City Oviedo was after∣wards Built, and from that time, that Hill is called the Holy Mountain. With Pelayus, and the Archbishop, went the Principal Men of Toledo. The Moors joyning their Forces again, easily made themselves Masters of that City. Authors do not agree about the manner. The Toledo ta∣ken. Archbishop D. Roderick says, it was at first, betrayed by the Jews. D. Lucas de Tuy affirms, it held out several Months, before it was betrayed by them. I am more apt to believe, those who write, it was surrendred upon Articles after a long Siege. Toledo being taken, the other Cities of Spain either submited, or were carried by Force. Leon surrendred for want of Provision, Guadalaxara was taken. At Medina Celi, formerly called Segoncia, was found a Table of Emeraud, as I believe of green Marble, of inestimable value, for which reason the Moors called that Town Medina Talmeyda, that is the City of the Table. The Booty taken at Amaya in Old Castile, forced by hunger to surrender, exceeded that of all other places, Progress of the Moors. because many confiding in its strength, had fled thither with all their Riches. That part of Castile was then called Campos de los Godos, or the Fields of the Goths, and still retains the name of Campos. Astorga in Galicia was Burnt, Gijon a strong place in Asturias taken. Tarif having placed Garrisons in most Convenient places, returned with the rest of the Army to Toledo, to reap the Fruits of his Victories. All this hap'ned in the Year 715. which same Year, I find they also took Narbonne, vast numbers of Moors flocking out of Africk, at the Fame of their success. The Natives dispersed and terrified, could not relieve their Country, ha∣ving no Army to make Head against their Enemies, but every City that held out chose a Go∣vernour, whose Power being absolute, as depending of none, some Historians have given them the Title of Kings.
CHAP. X. The Moor Muza comes over with Supplies. His Actions. The Moorish Computation of Years, called Hegira. Abdalasis Son to Muza, his Actions. End of Count Julian, and his Family. Deplorable state of Spain. WHilst these things were acti in Spain, Muza was much perplex'd; on the one side he rejoyc'd that so noble a Province as Spain was subdu'd, and on the other it griev'd him that Tarif had gain'd all the honour and profit of that Expedition. He pass'd over into Spain with 12000 Men, and tho' some advis'd to join his Forces with Tarif, in order to sub∣due Muza comes in∣to Spain. what still remain'd, he took the Councel of those wicked Christians, who held their in∣terest in more esteem than Conscience, and promis'd to assist him in reducing such places as held out. Count Julian, either in hope of greater rewards, or disgusted at Tarif, repair'd to Muza. From Algezira, where these Infidels landed, they march'd to Medina Sidonia; Takes se∣veral Towns. which after a Siege of some days they took by Assault. Next Carmona having made a good defence was entred by Stratagem; some of Count Julian's Souldiers either feigning to Desart, or being receiv'd as Merchants; for in this Authors vary, having possess'd themselves of one of the Gates. Many of the Goths resorted to Sevil, but upon the approach of the Enemy fled, and the Moors gave liberty to the Jews to inhabit it, mixt with their own People. Beja in Portugal had the same Fortune, but the People of Merida, tho' much weakned before, had the Courage to try their Fortune in the Field, and being over-power'd, having lost and killed many, were forc'd to take the shelter of the Walls. Muza taking a view of the City, said, It look'd as if People had been gather'd from all parts of the World to build it; that he would Merida re∣duc'd. be a happy Man that were Master of it. Inflam'd with this desire, he sought means to possess him∣self of that place. Not far from the City was a Quarry, in which he laid an Ambush that night. Next day the Townsmen sallying were hemm'd in, and only a few fought their way back, the rest perish'd. This made them cautious for the future, and they resolv'd only to defend their Walls. Muza seeing the Siege was like to be tedious, apply'd all Engines then in use for battering the Walls, which the Besieg'd us'd all diligence to oppose; but they were few in number, and spent with labour. Whereupon they offer'd to treat, but upon such high terms, that Muza rejected them, and the Commissioners believing him so old he could not outlive the Siege, would abate nothing. The Moor finding in what they grounded their An odd Project, if true. Confidence, black'd his grey Hairs, and sending for them again, they were so surpriz'd, not understanding the reason of his sudden change, that they immediately submitted to such Ar∣ticles as he would allow. At the same time the People of Beja and Ilipula, surpriz'd Sevil, and put to the Sword the Garrison the Moors had in that City; yet this avail'd them little, for soon after the Enemy came upon them, and again brought them into subjection. The manner of it was thus. Abdalasis, the Son of Muza, who came over into Spain with him, Abdalasis Son to Muza, his Actions. complain'd to his Father, that he had not given him an opportunity of signalizing himself. His Father finding he was in the right, gave him the Command of a strong Body of Moors, with whom he broke into the Country of Valencia, had several Encounters with those People, and took the Cities of Denia, Alicant, and Huerta, upon Articles, which were, That he should not profane the Churches, That the People might live peaceably in the Christian Re∣ligion, and only pay certain Taxes agreed upon. These things being perform'd in the Year 716. he return'd to Sevil, slew those that had revolted, then took Ilipula, and it may be ima∣gin'd destroy'd it: for whereas it was then a populous City, it is now only a small Town 716. called Pen̄aflor, situate betwixt Cordova and Sevil. From Merida Muza, went away for To∣ledo; Tarif, for the more honour, came out as far as Talavera to meet him. They met with great demonstrations of Friendship and Affection, but all counterfeit. Tarif was fearful of being call'd to an account, and Muza envious of what he had done. Being come to Toledo, Tarif his accounts were call'd for, as well in regard to the charge of the War, as to the trea∣sure Muza and Tarif at Variance. that had been taken. He endeavour'd with submission and Friendly Offices, to appease the Old Man. At length being reconcil'd, they set forwards together towards Zaragoça, which City, and many others, too tedious to relate, they took without any trouble, they all Surrendring themselves. Thus all Spain seem'd to be subdu'd the third Year after the first Army of Moors came over out of Africk. True it is, the farthest parts could not be brought under without much difficulty, as being defended by high, and almost inaccessible Mountains. Ʋlit the Miramamolin, understanding the success of his Arms, and the differences that were be∣twixt his Generals, Order'd them both to appear before him. Muza being about to depart, appointed his Son Abdalasis to govern in his absence; having first oblig'd the Moors to swear they would be Obedient to him. This done, Muza and Tarif, the two Famous Generals, The Ma∣hometan computa∣tion of time call'd He∣gira us'd in Spain. prepar'd to Imbark; carrying with them all the Treasures the Goths, in so many Years, had heap'd up. From this time forward, the old Computation of Years used in Spain, beginning at the Birth of Christ, or the Julian Account, was quite laid aside, and that used by the Moors, and called Hegira, that is, an Expedition, was taken up, which begins from the time that Ma∣homet
first took upon him the Title of King at Damascus. In what Year of our Lord this hap'ned, Authors do not agree, and this difference arises from that betwixt the Years of the Arabs and ours, theirs being 11 Days and 6 Hours less than ours, as consisting of only 354 Days. In my Opinion, the Account of the Arabs ought to commence in the Years of our Lord 722. on the 15th of July, as appears by the Annals of Toledo, composed above 300 Years ago. Abdalasis for some time Governed the Province he had received of his Father, with Pru∣dence and Wisdom. Great Multitudes resorted out of Africk, to Plant and People that vast Country, left almost waste by the late Wars. They had Lands assigned them, and Sevil was appointed to be the Metropolis of the new Empire, in respect to its greatness, strength and commodious Situation. Egilona, King Roderick's Queen was among the other Prisoners, she was Young, Beautiful and Comely. The Governour caused her to be brought to his Pre∣sence, Abdalasis the Moor, Marries the Wi∣dow of K. Rhoderick. and at first sight fell in love with her to such a degree, that he took her to Wife, without debarring her the Exercise of the Christian Religion. He held her in great Esteem all his Life-time; for besides her Beauty, she was Discreet, and in all his Affairs he was di∣rected by her, to that degree, that by her persuasion, he took upon him the State of a King, and was Crowned. In the Country of Antequera, where it Borders upon Malaga, there is a Mountain, called Abdalasis, perhaps, it took the Name from this Prince. Some also be∣lieve, that Almaguera, a Town belonging to the Knights of St. James, had the Name of Ma∣gued the Moorish General, who, 'tis said, used to drink the Water of a Fountain hard by it; and in the Arabick, Alma, is Water, from which Word and Magued, they suppose the Name Almaguer was compounded. At present, there are no Fountains in that Town, but all the People make use of Wells. There is no doubt but there has been as great a change in the Names of Places, as in other things, which causes great Confusion; for the Moorish Ge∣nerals, to perpetuate their Memory, gave their own Names and Sirnames, to Towns. There End of Count Ju∣lian and his Fami∣ly. is no certainty of what became of Count Julian, but it is a received Opinion, without the Testimony of any Author to back it, that his Wife was Stoned to Death, a Son of his cast Headlong from a Tower at Ceuta, and that himself was Condemned to perpetual Imprison∣ment by the Moors, he so much laboured to serve. In a Castle called Loharri, near the City Huesca, is shown a Stone Tomb without the Church of the Castle, where it is reported he was Bury'd. The Archbishop D. Roderick, and D. Lucas de Tuy, affirm, That both he, and the Sons of King Witiza, were deprived of all they possessed, and he put to Death. Certain it is, Spain was now in a deplorable condition, almost all brought under the Dominion of the Moors. There was no sort of Misery but the Christians endured, Women were Ravished from their Husbands, Children from their Parents, and all they possessed, taken from them, with∣out Deplora∣ble State of Spain. any Redress to be hoped for. The Country yielded not its usual Product, both in regard of the unseasonableness of the Weather, and for want of Labourers. The Churches were Pro∣phaned and Burnt, dead Bodies lay about the Streets and High-ways, and nothing was to be seen or heard, but Sighs and Tears. Nor was there any Calamity, but what Spain groaned under, God permitting the Innocent to suffer with the Guilty, to punish the horrid Wicked∣ness of those Times. Nevertheless, in some part of Biscay, Navarre, Galicia and Asturias, the Christians still held out, rather, because the Places were almost inaccessible; and the Moors sleighted them, than that they had any sufficient Force to make head. Those who were subject to, and mixed with the Moors, began to be called Mixti Arabes, and afterwards, cor∣ruptly Mozarabes. They had the free Exercise of Christian Religion, with Churches, and Monasteries of Men and Women, as before. The Bishops, lest they should be scornfully treated, retired with many of the Clergy into Galicia, and the Bishop of Iria Flavia, that is, el Padron, assigned many of them Tyths, and other Ecclesiastical Revenues to live upon. Thus Spain was destroy'd, and thus ended the Kingdom of the Goths. The Kingdom and Nation of the Goths were thus Subverted, in my Opinion, by a peculiar Providence, that out of their Ashes might rise a New and Holy Spain, greater in Strength and Dominions, to be the Defence and Bulwark of the Catholick Religion. This was the Opinion of F. Mariana, and not without reason; for he writ when Philip II. of Spain was Lord of the East and West-Indies, by the Addition of the Kingdom of Portugal, as he mentions in this place. To what a low Ebb the Affairs of Spain are reduced since, will appear by the Sequel of the History, when we draw near our Times. Let us conclude this Book, to begin another with the Resurrection of Spain after these mor∣tal Calamities. The End of Book VI.
THE History of SPAIN. The Seventh BOOK. CHAP. I. Prince Pelayus or Pelagius takes up Arms against the Moors. Is declared King, and miraculousty Vanquishes the Insidels. The Death of Muza. Alahor Governs Spain. TWO Years were not quite elapsed since the Africans had commenced the War, Irruption of the Moors into France. and Desolation of Spain, when a numerous Army of Moors passed over the Pyre∣nean Mountains, which pàrt France and Spain, and broke into that Province, with a resolution to Conquer all that was subject to the Goths in France. The miserable Remains of the Goths that had escaped into Asturias Galicia and Biscay, and re∣posed more confidence in the natural Strength of those Places, than in any Force they had; the Infidels being employed in the War in France, had now time to Consult about recover∣ing their lost Liberty. Nothing was wanting but a General, who with the hazard of his Life, and good Example, would stir up the Christians that remained in Spain, to attempt so great an Enterprise. Most of the Nobility of the Goths had perished in the War, only Prince Pelayus, as descended of the Royal Family, was known and applauded for his great Pelayus, of the Blood Royal, un∣dertakes to oppose the Infidels Valour and Magnanimity, and looked upon by all Men as the only Person capable of such an Enterprize. It fell out opportunely that he came out of Biscay, whither he withdrew, after the loss of the Kingdom to Asturias. Whether he was called, or came voluntarily, to be ready upon any occasion that should offer for the publick Good, is not known. Per∣haps there was some Dispute about the Lordship of Biscay, for I find three Dukes of that Province mentioned in the Records of those Times, which were Eudo, Peter, and Pelayus. No sooner was he come to Asturias, but all Men cast their Eyes upon him, as the only Man that could Relieve them in that Distress, if he would take upon him to be their Chief and Protector. Many weighing the greatness of the Danger, and their own Weakness, were terrified; but what fear disswaded, an accident forced them to attempt. Pelayus had a Sister in the prime of her Age, and of an extraordinary Beauty. Munuza, who, tho' a Christi∣stian, Cause of Pelayus's taking Arms. was Governor of Gijon for the Moors, passionately loved that Lady, and desired to obtain her for his Wife; but being too mean, could not so much as hope to gain the Consent of Pelayus. Therefore under colour of Friendship, he sent him to Treat about important Affairs with the Moorish General Tarif, who was not then gone into Africk, and during his absence, easily compassed his ends. Pelayus returning, and understanding how his Family was disgraced, was incensed to a high degree; but nothing so much afflicted him as the diffi∣culty of compassing his revenge against a Man in so great Power. He thought it the best way for the present, to dissemble, and seem pleased at what was done. By this means he found an opportunity of recovering his Sister, and fled with her to the neighbouring parts of Asturias, where he had many Friends, and the generality were well Affected towards him. Munuza frighted at this accident, and fearing the Consequences might prove more dangerous than as yet appeared, gave advice to Tarif of what had hap'ned. Tarif sent a Party from Cordova, who had infallibly taken Pelayus, then wholly unprovided, if he, understanding the danger, had not fled in haste, and clapping Spurs to his Horse, forced him to take the River Pionia, at that time much swollen, and very rapid, which sav'd his Life; for they that pur∣sued him at the Heels durst not, or thought it not worth while to expose themselves to such eminent danger to Apprehend him. In the Valley now called Cangas, then Canica, he set up his Standard, and beat a Drum. Poor banished People resorted to him from all Parts, many Voluntarily took up Arms for the love of their Country, others for fear of the Ene∣mies, and even of their own People, who threatned them, if they forsook the common Cause. The Asturians in general, all appeared. Pelayus calling together the Heads of them, made a Speech, exhorting and encouraging them to behave themselves Manfully, and Repulse their cruel Enemy. Whilst he spoke, the Sighs of his Auditory were so loud, they often interrupt∣ed him; but being somewhat animated with his Words, they all swore to stand by one ano∣ther, and expose themselves to all dangers in opposing of the Moors. Then they consulted Pelayus declared King. of choosing a Chief, and by the unanimous Consent of all, Pelayus was pitched upon, and Proclaimed King of Spain, in the Year 716. some to this Number add 2 Years. Thus at 716.
the time that Impiety and Tyranny were predominant in Spain, a new and lasting Kingdom was erected, and a Standard was set up for Relief of the oppressed Natives. The People of Galicia and Biscay, who like those of Asturias, in some measure, preserved their Liberty, were invited to joyn in this Enterprize. The same was done underhand to the neighbour∣ing Towns that were subject to the Moors. Some People resorted to Pelayus, but many de∣spising the new King, would not leave their Houses, nor expose themselves to such eminent danger. Pelayus understanding how necessary it is to settle a good Reputation at first, wa∣sted the Frontiers of the Moors, destroying all that stood in his way. He visited the Towns of Asturias, encouraging the Fearful, and commending the Resolute. Besides, he laid up Stores of all things necessary for his Defence, with great Labour and Industry, as knowing it would not be long before the Insidels would be upon him. He was Active and Courageous, his Age fit to endure hardship, his Presence not gay, but such as became a Soldier. One of the most noted Commanders that came out of Africk, with Tarif, was Alcama, who was in the nature of a Major General. This Man understanding what passed in Asturias, speedily repaired thither, from Cordova, with a good Army of Moors and Christians, and car∣ried 1000 Christians miracu∣lously overcame a great Power of the Infi∣dels. along also D. Oppas, the Bishop of Sevil, hoping he might be instrumental in persuading Pelayus, and his Party, to desist from what they had undertaken. At the News of Alcama's coming, the Christians dismay'd, and it was thought, they would never sustain so much as the sight of the Enemy. In this confusion, nothing, but the special Hand of God, and the Valour and Prudence of Pelayus, could have protected those People, wholly for saken by them∣selves. It were a madness to oppose a handful of unarmed, heartless Men, against a disciplin'd and furious Enemy. Therefore Pelayus having dispersed most of his Men into the neighbour∣ing Towns, he, with 1000 of the choicest, betook himself to a large Cave, on the Mountain Ausena, now called the Cave of St. Mary de Cobadonga. He laid in Provision for a long time, and furnished Arms offensive and defensive, either to make good his Ground, if Attack'd, or Sally out, if occasion offered. The Moors pursued him to the very mouth of the Cave, and being desirous to prevent Bloodshed, for they must expect in those narrow places to re∣ceive much damage, resolved to try whether Persuasions and fair Promises could prevail to reduce those People. D. Oppas took this Employment upon him, and having obtained liber∣ty to Speak with Pelayus, used all his Rhetorick to bring him to an Accommodation, but un∣derstanding by his Answer, he and all his Men were resolved to die in defence of their Li∣berty, the Event was remitted to the decision of the Sword. The Insidels attack'd the mouth of the Cave, powring in a Shower of Stones and Darts. Here the Hand of God ap∣peared in defence of the Christians; for all the Weapons cast against them, flew back upon the Moors, with great slaughter of them. At this Miracle the Insidels stood astonished, and the Christians taking heart, rusht out upon them, the Fight was Disorderly, but the Enemy amazed at what they had seen, turned their Backs and fled. 20000 were killed in the Battle and Pursuit, the rest, after halting upon the top of Mount Fusena, fled to the Field Libanen∣sis, thro' which runs the River Deva. There another Miracle was wrought, which was, that near a Farm, called Causegadia, part of a Mountain, with all that were upon it, fell into A Moun∣tain falls, the River, by which a great number of Barbarians perished. For many Years after, Bones and pieces of Armour were dug out of that place, especially when the Floods wash away the Banks. Few of all that Army escaped, Alcama was killed in the Fight; D. Oppas, the Bi∣shop being taken, it is supposed, was put to Death, tho' Historians do not relate it; for they make no farther mention of him. Munuza not thinking himself safe in Gijon, attempted to make his escape, but was killed by the Country People, near the Village Oralie. This Battle was fought in the Year of our Lord 718. At the same time, Muza in Africk, was Impeached before the Miramaniolin, by Tarif his Enemy, and being called to account, could 718. not well clear himself: whereupon, a great Fine was laid upon him, for grief of which Disgrace, Muza's Death. he soon after dy'd. His Son Abdalasis having Governed Spain three Years, became Odious as well to the Natives as his own People, for that he ravished their Daughters, and was therefore killed in a Mosque, in the Year 719. Some say, he was killed by procurement of his Wite Egilona, on account that he was kinder to other Women than to her; others say, 719. the cause of his Death, was his Pride, and his taking upon him the Regal Authority by her persuasion. The chief of the Murderers was his Kinsman Ajub, who took upon him, and held the Government of Spain the space of 1 Month. D. Roderick the Archbishop, says, it was he that built Calatayud, a noted Town a little beyond the Borders of Aragon. Ʋlit dying, his Brother Zuleyman succeeded him in the Empire of the Moors. By him, instead of Abdalasis, the Government of Spain was given to Alabor, a Man fierce and cruel, no less to the Moors than Christians, for he took their Goods from the Inhabitants of Cordova only to satiate his Avarice. He proceeded against all the Moors that came first into Spain, only upon pretence they had wrongfully taken to themselves all the Riches of the Country. This is he that translated the Seat of the Moorish Empire in Spain, from Sevil to Cordova, and is said to have put to Death Count Julian, and the Sons of Witiza, imagining, the Disaster that hap'ned in Asturias, had been contrived by them. A just Judgment of God, that Traitors to their Coun∣try should be thus used by those they served, and had called to their assistance.
CHAP. II. Pelayus his Power increases, he takes several Towns. His Death. The short Reign and Death of Favila. Several Moorish Governours in Spain. Actions of the Infi∣dels in France. PElayus having obtained that glorious Victory, did not only fix himself in his new King∣dom Pelayus his Power in∣creases. of Asturias, but descended into the plain, wasting all that belonged to the Moors. His Forces dayly increased with the Fame of his Actions, so that he took the City Leon, at the Foot of the Mountains, that part Galicia and Asturias, in the Year of our Lord 722. Some will have it, that from this time Pelayus stiled himself King of Leon, but it appears 722. none of his Successors called themselves by any other Title than Kings of Oviedo, till the time of Ordonius the second, who first called himself King of Leon, yet it is to be believed, that upon the taking of that City, the Ancient Arms of the Gothish Kings, were changed into Ar∣gent, Leon taken by him. a Lion Rampant Gules, which continues to this day. And the reason of it, doubtless was because the word Leon in Spanish, is the name of that City, and signifies a Lion. The Valour of D. Alonso, he who, when King was called the Catholick, contributed much to∣wards advancing the Affairs of the Christians. He was Son to Peter Duke of Biscay, descend∣ed of the Royal Family of King Recaredus. In his Youth he bore great Commands under the Kings Egica and Witiza, and now desiring to promote the Common good left his Coun∣try and Parents. A good number of Biscainers followed him, which much encouraged the Asturians, and was a great addition to their strength. To bind him the faster he was Mar∣ryed to Ormisinda, the Daughter of Pelayus: From these Princes, the succeeding Kings of Spain are descended. With the Assistance of D. Alonso, Gijon, Astorga, Mansilla, Tineo, Several Towns ta∣ken from the Moors. and other Towns in Galicia, and Asturias were taken from the Moors. It was easie to expel the Moors out of these Towns, by reason the Inhabitants being Christians, killed their Gar∣risons, and submitted themselves to Pelayus. Besides, that the Infidels were diverted by Wars, that broke out, one upon the Neck of another in several parts of Spain. Zuleyman, the Mi∣ramamolin dying, left his two Nephews Homar and Izit the Sons of Ʋlit, his Successors in that Empire. Homar dy'd in the first Year of his Reign, and thus Izit remained sole Lord of all. He gave the Government of Spain to Zama, a Wise Man and a good Soldier, but no less covetous than the others, for he imposed new Taxes, upon all that were Zama Go∣verns Spain under his Command. He put a Garrison into Narbonne, and laid Siege to Toulouse. Eudo Duke of Aquitain coming to the relief of the besieged, overthrew and slew the Barbarian, with most of his Army. Those who escaped the Slaughter, made choice of Abderhaman to Govern till another were sent out of Africk. The news of this defeat being carryed into Africk. Izit sent. Aza, (whom some call Adham) to the Government of Spain. Aza, or Adham Go∣verns. This Man reduced the Province, already wasted with so many Calamities, into a worse Con∣dition, imposing new Taxes, obliging the Towns that had been taken by Force, to pay the 5th part of their income, and those that had surrendred, the Tenth. On these Terms the Chri∣stians enjoy'd their Lands, rather as Farmers than Proprietors. The Moor Rasis says, he obliged the Moors to pay the 5th part of what they were worth, on pretence of relieving the Poor, but indeed to keep them under, that they might not have Courage to mutiny. He caused the Bridge of Cordova, over Guadalquivir to be Built, and took some Cities that held out, at the Foot of the Mountain Moncayo, and among them Taraçona, which was laid Level with the Ground. Having performed these great Actions, in two Years, and a half, that his Government lasted, he was Murdered by his own People at Tortosa. His Successors were Ambiza, Odra and Jahea, according to D. Roderick the ArchBishop; I judge the Government was divided into three parts, or else each of them held it but a few Months. In Asia the Em∣peror Several Gover∣nours. Izit dying, left the Crown to his Brother, Ischam upon Condition he should adopt his Son Alulit, which he performed. Ischam began his Reign, in the Year 724. and held it 19 Years. In his time Spain was governed by Odayfa, Himen, Autuma, Alhaytan, and Maho∣met, 724. each of these held it not a Year entire, especially the last continued but two Months. For we find that in the Year 731 Abderhaman, doubtless the same we mentioned above, had the Government of Spain. The Actions of this Governour were remarkable, and the end of 731. them Fortunate to the Christians, therefore it will be Convenient to speak of them in parti∣cular. The Severity and Rigor Abderhaman used towards the Moors made him odious. Upon this Muniz, a Powerful Man, who governed Gallia Gothica, revolted, and the Province of Cerdania in Spain joyned with him. Besides Eudo Duke of Aquitain, made a League, and gave him, his own Daughter in Marriage. Abderhaman having advice of what was doing, Marched with his Army to the Frontiers of Spain, and besieged the City Cerdania. Muniz having lost all hopes of holding out, escaping, or obtaining Pardon, threw himself down a Precipice. His Wife and Head were sent into Africk to the Emperor of the Moors. Abder∣haman, The Moors from Spain again in∣vade France proud with this success, broke into France, marched along the Coast of the Mediter∣rean without Opposition, as far as the River Rhosne, and besieged the City Arles. Eudo com∣ing to the relief of it was vanquished, and so great a Slaughter made of his Army, as had not
been seen that Age. Hence the Conqueror turned towards the left Hand, and Traversing a great part of France fell into Aquitain, passed the River Garonne, destroyed the Noble City Bourdeaux, and Ravaged all the Country. Here Eudo again trying the Fortune of Battle, had the same Fate as before. Angoulesme, Perigeux, Xantonge, and Poictiers soft the fury of this War. Charles Martel, at that time great Seneschal of France, moved by the Pub∣lick Calamities and general danger, raised a mighty Army, and advanced with it, as far as Tours. He intrenched himself on the farther side of the River Loire, on which that City is built, that the Enemy with their Multitude might not surround him. Here Eudo, laying aside former Animosities, joyned him with the Forces he could gather. The Infidels advanced with great boldness, as to a certain Victory, and were received with no less Resolution, where∣upon ensued one of the Bloodiest and most Obstinate Fights, that has been seen in the World. Of the Moors there were 400000, with their Wives and Children, as designing to Plant in France, the number of the Christians was much less, but they were Superior in Valour, Discipline, and the Justice of their Cause. It was a long time before the Victory seemed to incline, to either side, but at length true Valour prevailed against the Multitude. The Slaughter was incredible, 370000 Moors were killed, and among them Abderhaman. Of the Christians on∣ly 1500 were missing, but many of them of Note. By the Confession of Martel, Eudo Sig∣nalized Anno Dom. 734. was fought the great Battle be∣tween Charles Martel, and the Moors, that came out of Spain and Africk. Pelayus his Death. himself particularly in this Battle; for in the heat of it, as had been before agreed, he took a great compass, with the Light-Horse, and before he could be discovered, fell up∣on the Enemy in the rear, which put them all into Confusion. This Fortunate Battle was fought in the Year of our Lord 734. one and twenty after the destruction of Spain. Abdelmelich succeeded Abderhaman, and Governed the Moors in Spain, and its dependencies, the space of four Years, without being remarkable for any thing, but his Cruelty and Avarice. He had Orders to invade France, but was forced to turn back after losing many Men, in attempt∣ing to pass the Pyrenean Mountains. At the same time, which was in the Year of our Lord 737. Pelayus the first King of Spain, after its Desolation, being of a great Age, and renown∣ed for his Exploits, departed this Life at Cangas. His Body was Buryed in the Church of Saint Eulalia Velaniensis, which he himself had founded in the Country of Cangas. There al∣so his Wife, Queen Gaudiosa was interred. His Son Favila, by Consent of all the People succeeded him, and Reigned two Years, being more famed for his Unfortunate Death, Favila suc∣ceeds him. and dissolute Life, than for any good Actions he performed. For notwithstanding, the mighty War he had in hand, and that his Kingdom was still tottering, as subsisting rather by the Confusion of the times, than the strength of the Christians, yet he apply'd himself, not to the cares of the Government, but was wholly devoted to his Pleasures, neglecting the Pub∣lick good. Particularly he was addicted to Hunting, and at this Sport pursuing a Bear, was Is killed by a Bear. killed by it; inglorious both in his Life and Death. His Body was interred, in the Church of the Holy Cross, built by himself in the Territory of Cangas, in which formerly was to be seen the Tomb of his Wife Froleud. About this time one Julian a Grecian and Deacon, Learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues, wrote the Antiquities of Spain, and Actions of Pelayus at Toledo. Ʋrban Bishop of Toledo, Evancius Archdeacon of the same Church, and Fredoarius Bishop of Men Fa∣mous for Learning and San∣cting. Guadix, Men of singular Sanctity, and Learning flourishing in those Days, of darkness and igno∣rance. John Archbishop of Sevil, was their Contemporary, he Translated the Bible into Arabick, for the good of the Christians and Moors, because Latin was then little used, some Copies of that Translation are to be seen to this Day in Spain. CHAP. III. The Reign of D. Alonso the Catholick. His Conquests and Death. Several Moorish Governours in Spain. Affairs of the Mahometans, both in Spain and Africk. FAvila dying without Issue, D. Alonso and Ormisinda his Wife, (as Pelayus had ordained in his Will) were Proclaimed King and Queen, with great Satisfaction of the People, and to the great good of the Kingdom. D. Alonso was equally qualified in the Arts of Peace Recaredus and D. A∣lonso, the first Kings had the Title of Catholick Kings in Spain, and then it lay Dormant until Fer∣dinand of Aragons time, and was then revived by gift of Alexander the sixth, Pope. and War, of a wonderful Constancy in Adversity, fortunate in all his Undertakings, and so very Religious, that on that account the Title of Catholick was given to him, as had been be∣fore to King Recaredus, by the Third Council of Toledo, when renouncing the Heresie of Arius, he was reconciled to the Church. This Title was afterwards laid aside, till Pope Alexander the sixth, bestowed it on Ferdinand of Aragon King of Spain, to be perpetuated in his Successors. Spain at that time enjoyed the Fruits of Peace, Africk and France were con∣sumed with Civil Wars. Charles Martel, upon the Death of Eudo, seized all his Dominions in France. Eudo's three Sons, Aznar, Hunnoldus, and Vayferus, sought to, maintain their right by Arms. Aznar in that part of Spain, which lies near Navarre, took from the Moors, the City Jaca, with many other Towns and Castles, and became the Founder of the Kingdom of Aragon, a name taken from the River Aragon, which runs through that Country, and to∣gether
with the River Ega falls into Ebro. Hunnoldus and Vayferus did great harm, and spread their terror throughout France. The Moors desiring Revenge for their late Over∣throw, and being invited by Maurice, Earl of Marseilles, and Hunnoldus and Vayferus renew∣ed the War in France. At this time Aucupa Governed Spain; at his first coming, he put Aucupa Governs pain. Abdelmelich upon his Tryal, and pretending, he could not clear himself, laid him in Prison. Aucupa was of Noble Extraction, and so Zealous in his Superstition, that he punished no Crimes so severely as those that related to it. Having agreed with Maurice, Earl of Mar∣seilles, and the Sons of Eudo, with their assistance, and his own Forces, he pierced so far in∣to France, as to take Avignon, a noble City upon the River Rhosne, burning and pillaging all the Country about. All this hap'ned five Years after the famous Battle of Tours, that is, in the Year 739. which was the first of the Reign of D. Alonso. But the Valour of Martel re∣lieved 739. France, for he drove the Enemy over the Pyrenean Hills, and took Avignon, and Nar∣bonne, so that nothing was left either the Goths or Moors in all France. In Africk, the War Affairs of the Infi∣dels. continued more obstinate; for Belgius, Abenbexius, a famous Commander among the Moors, Rebelled against the Emperor Ischam. Several Battles were fought, for the most part with Success to the Rebels; whereupon Belgius resolved to pass over into Spain. Abdelmelich was then again possessed of the Government, for Aucupa dying, ordered he should be taken out of Prison, and restored to his Command. This was his Ruin, for Abderhaman sent before by Belgius with a great Army, took him in Cordova and put him to Death with all manner of Torments, in the Year of our Lord 743. The 743. same Year dy'd the Emperor Ischam, and Alulit the Son of Izit, succeeded in the Empire, as had been agreed. We must not run too far into the Affairs of Africk. Alulit at his Accessi∣on to the Crown, sent Albuelcatar, a Noble and Wise Man to Govern Spain, who by his good Management, and sending the Mutinous to the War in Africk, appeased the Tumults in Spain. Soon after, he was killed by the contrivance of Zimael and Roba, Zimael's Compani∣on, and the head Conspirator took upon him the Government, and Usurp'd the Crown of Spain without any opposition, for the Emperor Alulit dy'd in the second Year of his Reign, which was of our Lord 744. Ibrahim his Brother, succeeded him, and was no longer liv'd nor fortunate; for Matoan, tho' his Kinsman, and of the most Noble Family of the Humey∣as, 744. killed him in his Palace the second Year of his Reign, and made himself absolute Lord of all. In this Emperor's time, Roba being killed in a Battle, Toba Governed Spain, and he al∣so dying within a Year, Juseph, a Man of great Parts, was sent out of Africk to succeed both. Tho' of a great Age, he was much addicted to Women, but made some amends for this Fault, by his great Valour, and the fame of his Exploits, Whilst he Governed Spain, Juseph Go∣verns Spain. Abdalla, of the Noble Family of the Alavecines, killed Matoan in Africk, in the Year 750, Usurp'd the Crown, and the better to secure himself, destroyed most of the Family of the 750. Humeyas. In Spain, in the Year 753. at Cordova, three Suns were seen at once, and Peo∣ple 753. with the fright, imagined they saw several Apparitions of Men going in Procession with lighted Torches. The terror was the more encreased, by a great Famine which ensued, caused by the Drought Spain is subject to. Mean while King Alonso laying hold of the op∣portunity that offered of enlarging the Bounds of his Kingdom, now the Moors were at variance among themselves, gathered the greatest Force he could, and broke into the Ene∣mies Country with mighty Success. For in Galicia, he took Lugo, Tuy and Astorga; in Lusitania, the King Alon∣so takes many Towns. City Porto, at the mouth of the River Duero, Beja, Braga, Viseo, Flavia, Bletisa and Sentica. Besides, he recovered Simancas, Duenas, Miranda, Segovia, Avila, and Sepulveda at the foot of the Mountain Orospeda, on the banks of the River Duraton, a place naturally Strong, for∣merly called Segobriga, and after, Sepulveda. Then he turned his Victorious Arms to the Country of Bribiesca and Rioja, and possessed himself of those Territories. Rioja lies on one side of the Mountain Idubeda, about the River Ogia, which falling from that Mount, runs in∣to the River Ebro. The Country is pleasant and fruitful. He also took Pamplona in Na∣varre, and that part of Biscay, now called Alava. It is true, many of these Places were afterwards lost, the Power of the Moorish Kings of Cordova daily encreasing, to the great Detriment of the Christians. King Alonso placed Bishops in the Cities he gain'd, to instruct the Christians, and restore Religion, he built Churches, and caused those that were prophan∣ed to be reconciled, providing them with Vestments, and other Necessaries, the best the Po∣verty of that Age would permit. After performing these great Actions, he dy'd at Can∣gas, in the 74th Year of his Age, and of Grace 757. He was a Prince of great Renown, 757. Reign'd 19 Years, some say but 18, and left 5 Sons, 4 by his Wife Ormisinda, which were His death. Froyla, Bimaranus, Aurelius and Ʋsenda. By a Slave he had Mauregatus. His Funeral was not so remarkable for the greatness of the Expence, as for the Tears and Grief of his Subjects, and the Voices of Angels said to be then heard, singing these words of the Scripture, Ecce quomodo moritur justus & nemo percipit corde, à facie iniquitatis sublatus est justus, & erit in pace memoria ejus. This King and his Queen were Buried at Cangas, in St. Mary's Monastery. D. Alonso had a Brother called Froyla, more known by his two Sons, Aurelius and Veremundus, or Bermudus, than for any action of his own. Let us return to the affairs of the Moors, which being so in∣termixt with our own, ought not to be forgotten. It will not therefore be amiss to say something of the great discord that about this time hapned among those People; on which were laid the foundations of a mighty Kingdom of theirs in Spain.
Mahomet the Founder of the Sarraçen Empire, at his Death left never a Son, but three Affairs of the Maho∣metans. Daughters, Fatima, Zeinebis, and Imicultis, all Married to Principal Men. Upon the Death of Mahomet, first Abubacar, and after him Homar, whose Daughters he had Married, suc∣ceeded in the Empire. After them, Autuman, Husband to Fatima, the Eldest Daughter, ascended the Throne; and of them descended the mighty Family of the Alavecines. Mohabia, Husband to the other Sister Zeinebis, succeeded Autuman, and of him came another powerful Family called the Humeyas. His Successors were Izit his Son, and Maula his Grandson; after whose Death, the Moors were divided, some following Maroan, and others Abdalla, who dy∣ing, all was again reduc'd under Abdelmelich the Son of Maula; then Ʋlit Son of Abdelmelich, next Zuleyman, Brother to Ʋlit, and after him Homar and Izit the Sons of Ʋlit. Their Suc∣cessor was Iscam, a third Brother, and his was Alulit the Son of Izit, then Ibrahim his Bro∣ther. Maroan, though of the same Family of the Humeyas, slew Ibrahim, and Usurp'd the Crown. Abdalla, a wise and resolute Man, of the Family of the Alavecines, descended from Fatima, kill'd Maroan, and step'd into the Throne, the better to secure himself in which, he indeavour'd to extirpate the whole Race of the Humeyas. Abderbaman, who was of that Fa∣mily, for his own Safety, was forc'd to fly into Spain; where the Moors being all well affect∣ed to the Benhumeyas, with their assistance, he erected a new Kingdom, independent of the Miramamolins of Africk, or Caliphs of Asia. He chose the City Cordova for the Metropolis of his new acquir'd Dominion, as will further appear hereafter. CHAP. IV. The Reigns of the Kings, Froyla, Aurelius, Silon, Alonso, Mauregatus, and Ve∣remundus, or Bermudo. Monarchy of the Moors, erected in Spain, by Abderrha∣man, his Death, and Wars among his Sons. UPon the Death of King Alonso, his Eldest Son, called Froyla, or Fruela, succeeded in the Throne of the Christians in Spain, in the Year of Grace 757. He Reigned eleven Years, and three Months, his Government was a mixture of Good and Evil, being of a harsh Temper, rather inclined to Cruelty than Mercy. Some Actions of a good Prince he did, for he Built the City Oviedo in Asturias, and made it a Bishoprick. Besides, he forbid Priests Marrying, a Custom introduced by Witiza, and confirmed by the Example of the Greeks, which in the Opinion of the Wiser sort, had provoked God's Wrath, and brought so many misfortunes upon Spain. This Action, as it gained him the Esteem of the better sort, so it drew on him the hatred of the Commonalty and Priests, by which his Memory was stained more than he deserved. Besides, his other good qualities, he follow'd the Example of his Father, in ma∣king War upon the Moors, and in the second Year of his Reign overthrew Juzeph, who then governed Spain for the Infidels, and had entred Galicia, killing 54000 of his Men. This 54000. In∣fidels slain. loss was the ruin of Juzeph, who for the space of four Years had opposed Abderhaman, and now being oppressed by the Humeyas, he fled from Cordova, but was taken by his Enemies at Granada, and making his escape thence to Toledo, was there killed by his own People. From this time, which was the Year of our Lord 759. and according to the account of the 759. Arabs, 142 all the Moors in Spain were again United under one Head. Abderhaman Abenbu∣meya, Abderha∣man, the first abso∣lute Morish King in Spain. who after took the Sirname of Adahil, founded a new Kingdom of his own Nation, independent of the Moors in Africk or Asia, as has been hinted before. Only the City Valencia held out some time, but after a long Siege was forced to submit and joyn with the rest. Such was the hatred this Prince bore the Christian Religion, that the Christians of that City were forced to depart thence, and setled in the farthest part of Lusitania, about Promontorium Sacrum, carry∣ing with them the Body of St. Vencent, from which that Cape now takes its Name: A Moor of Fez, some time after, Hunting about that place, slaughtered these People, and carryed over their Children into Africk, from whom the place was afterwards known, where the Holy Body had been buryed. Abderhaman, proud with his great Success, made War upon Galicia, and at the same time besieged Beja in Portugal; but was repulsed in both places, by the Valour of King Fruela, who with the same Felicity, not only defended his Dominions against the Infidels, but subdued his Rebellious Subjects of Galicia and Navarre, in the Year of our Lord 761. In this expedition he Marryed Menina, or Momerana, Daughter of Eudo, Duke of Aqui∣tain, 761. according to F. Mariana, but the Bishop Sebastian, who lived 100 Years after, and wrote the A Note of the Transla∣tor. History of those times, only says, she was a Captive taken there, the Archbishop D. Roderick, and D. Lucas de Tuy say, she was of the Blood Royal of Navarre. By her the King had D. Alonso, who was afterwards King, and Sirnamed the Chast, and Da. Ximena, well known for her in∣continency, and for being Mother to Bernard del Carpio. King Fruela might have been reckoned among the best Princes, had he not Blemished his Reputation, by killing, with his own Hands, his Brother Bimaranus, doubtless upon suspition, that he designed to Rebel, yet the Act was no way justifiable. However to allay the hatred, he had incurred by this Action, he adopted and named for his Successor, Bermudo, the Son of Bimaranus, which availed him King Fru∣ela Mur∣der'd. not, for his Brother Aurelius, and other Conspirators, Murdered him at Cangas. The King
and his Queen Menina, were buryed in the Cathedral of Oviedo. The Murderer of Fruela, and Revenger of Bimaranus, Brother to both, tho' some will have him to be their Cousin-German, and Son to Fruela, the Brother of King Alonso, was inthroned in the Year 768. 768. D. Alonso the Son of Fruela, was not regarded, as being a Child, and by reason of the Gene∣ral hatred conceived against his Father. Aurelius Reigned six Years and a half, during which Aurelius, during his Reign does no∣thing ho∣nourable. time he did not any thing worthy of Commendation, unless it were the quelling a Rebellion, raised by the Slaves in hopes of recovering their Liberty. But the honour gained by this Action was quite blotted out, by the dishonourable agreement he came to with the Moors, ob∣liging himself every Year, to deliver to them a certain Number of Young Maids, as an ac∣knowledgment. The Christians were jealous of the mighty Power of Abderhaman, and fear∣ed he might oppress their new Kingdom. Therefore Aurelius to provide against that storm, Marryed his Sister Adosinda, to Silon, a Man in great esteem, that he might be assisting to him while living, and succeed in the Throne after his Death, for that he had never a Son, nor does it appear that he was Marryed. King Alonso the Great, his Chronicon says, Aurelius was interred in the Church of St. Martin, in the Valley of Jagueya. D. Lucas de Tuy writes it was at Cangas. It is hard to reconcile these differences, some will have Jagueya and Cangas to be the same, others that Jagueya is the Town now called Yanguas, and that under the Church of St. Michael, in it there is a Vault dedicated to St. Andrew, where are two Tombs, which those People affirm to be of the Kings Favila and Aurelius. After the Death of Aureli∣us, Silon and his Wife Adosinda, were Proclaimed King and Queen at Paiva, and Reigned nine Silon, and Adosinda, King and Queen. Years, one Month, and one Day. At the beginning of his Reign he subdued the People of Galicia, that had revolted about the Mountain Ciperius, now called Cebreros. Silon being of a great Age, and naturally given to his ease, resolved to lay aside all care by parting with the Government, and accordingly, by the advice of his Queen, named D. Alonso the Son of Fruela his Companion in the Throne, and gave him the absolute Power of Peace and War. It was the misfortune of those times, that when there was most need of Active, and He∣roick Kings, they proved Soft and Effeminate. From this time D. Alonso had the Title of King, as appears by a Grant of his, the Antientest now extant in Spain, of several Lands to the Church of St. Mary de Valpuesta, then a Monastery of Nuns, now Collegiate. This Grant bears Date according to the Julian account the Year 812. which is of our Lord 774. Au∣thors vary about the burying place of Silon, some say it is at Oviedo, where there is a long 774. Inscription at the entrance of the Church of S. Saviour, with his Name in the nature of a Cypher, and it is repeated 270 times, that he built the Church, besides under that Inscripti∣on is another signifying, Here lies Sylon, may the Earth be easie to him. Others say, he lies at Paiva, in the Church of St. John the Evangelist, which he built from the Ground, and where without doubt is the Body of his Wife Adosinda. Silon's Funeral Rites being honourably performed, D. Alonso, who had been his Compani∣on, King A∣lonso. to the great satisfaction of the Nobles, remained sole Monarch, in the Year 783. The hatred conceived again his Father was forgot, and the Virtues that shined in him reconciled 783. the Subjects affection. Only his Uncle Mauregatus, tho' Illegitimate, pretended a right to succeed Maurega∣tus the Ba∣stard as∣pires to the Crown assisted by the Moors. his Brothers, and was put upon it by some Turbulent Persons, but finding little help in the Christians, he begged the Assistance of the Moors, and obtained it, upon Condition he should every Year deliver them 50 Maids of the Nobility, and 50 of the Commonalty, an infamous Ar∣ticle, yet nothing can Curb the inordinate Ambition of a Crown. The Moors above all Men are given to Venery. This allurement, and the Commands of Abderhaman, prevailed with many to follow Mauregatus. King Alonso being unprovided to meet this storm, retired into Biscay, where he had many Powerful Allies. He was only 25 Years of Age, when he was deposed in the beginning of his Reign. Mauregatus Reigned 5 Years, and 6 Months, and was re∣markable Alonso flies, and Maurega∣tus Reigns. for nothing but his Cowardise, Baseness, and Falshood to his Country. He dyed in the Year 788 and was buryed in the Church of St. John at Pavia. This same Year dyed 788. Abderhaman, the King of the Moors, having Reigned 29 Years, he deceased at Cordova, where he had fixed his residence, and adorned that City with many Royal Works, as the Gardens then Succession of the Moorish Monarchs. called Rizapha, now Arriçafa, and the now Cathedral, one of the Sumptuousest Buildings in Spain. He left 9 Daughters, and 11 Son; and appointed Zuleman the Eldest, then Gover∣nour of Toledo, his Successor. Issem the second Son, taking the advantage of his Brother's absence, and being well beloved, Usurped the Crown, and coming to a Battle with Zuleman, drove him to Murcia, where upon payment of 60000 Crowns, he renounced his right, and went over into Africk. Next Abdalla, another Brother, raised some Tumults, but was forced to Compound and quit Spain. Bermudo, Sirnamed the Deacon, as having received that Order, succeeded Mauregatus. Historians do not agree whose Son he was, nor is it easie to recon∣cile Bermudo succeeds Maurega∣tus. them. Some say he was Son to Bimaranus, others to D. Fruela, Brother to King Alonso. He Reigned about 2 Years alone, according to Garibay his Account, for F. Mariana is not in∣telligible in this Place, and had two Sons, D. Ramiro, and D. Garcia, by his Wife Ninilon, or Ʋrsen∣da, to whom he was unlawfully Married, tho' afterwards he left her, and lived Chast the rest of his Life. In other respects, he was Modest, and Temperate, a Lover of his ease, and a∣verse to Business, yet did one thing very pleasing and commendable, which was, declaring of D. Alonso, who had been depos'd by Mauregatus, his Companion in the Throne, which ac∣cording to Isidorus Pacensis, who then liv'd, was in the Year 791. After this Bermudo reign'd 791.
Four Years and Six Months. This Prince was very remarkable for his continual Prosperity, good Conduct, Liberality, Piety, the Love of his People, and Terror of his Enemies. By his Valour the affairs of the Christians, almost sunk, were re-established; for in the third Year of his Reign, Alonso his Companion, vanquish'd Mugayo, General of the Moors, who had broke into Asturias, upon the Account that the King refus'd to pay the Tribute of the young Maids. The Battle was fought near a Town call'd Ledas, the Victory one of the greatest A great Fight, in which 70000 In∣fidels are slain. obtain'd in Spain, for 70000. Infidels were kill'd, by which the Christians were deliver'd from a great Oppression, and the Moors diverted with other Wars, could not revenge this loss. About the same time, many Towns about the Pyrenean Mountains were taken from the Moors, by the Kings of Navarre and Charlemaigne, the Famous King of France and Emperour. Here again I am forced to follow the authority of Garibay, my Author being ill Printed, the fate of many Books Printed in Spain. Issem, King of Cordova, sent a good Army, under the Command of his General Abdelmelich, to put a stop to these Proceedings, who retook Girona in Catalonia, and Narbonne on the Borders of France. From hence the Bishop D. Roderick says, the Moors caus'd Christians to bring Earth on their Shoulders, (which I suppose was Sand to bind their Mortar) for to finish the great Mosque at Cordova. This King also built another Bridge at Cordova, near the Pallace, and was the first of the Moorish Kings that took a Guard of Stran∣gers, which were 3000. Renegado Christians, besides, he entertain'd 2000. Eunuchs, as his Menial Servants. He dy'd in the Year 795. having Reign'd 26 Years, 10 Months, and 15 days; and leaving behind the name of a Wise, Just, and Bountiful Prince, and his Son Alhaca to succeed him. CHAP. V. The Reign of D. Alonso the Chast. The Nestorian Heresy reviv'd. The King's Sister debauch'd, he takes Lisbon, Wars among the Moors. Invention of the Body of St. James the Apostle, and Defeat of Charlemaigne. DUring these last Reigns, Felix, Bishop of Ʋrgel, and his Disciple Elipandus, Archbishop of Toledo, reviv'd the false Doctrine of Nestorius, Condemn'd at the Council of Ephesus. They affirm'd, that Christ our Lord, as Man, was only the adoptive Son of the Father; and The He∣resy of Nestorius reviv'd. endeavour'd to spread these their Opinions, but were Condemn'd by Councils held at Regi∣num of Bavaria, now Ratisbon, and at Francfort. Felix, dy'd obstinate at Lions in France. What became of Elipandus is not known. Some Years after Claudius, a Spaniard, Disciple of Felix, and Bishop of Turin, who lived in the Emperour Ludovicus Pius his Court, with great Opi∣nion of Learning, among other things, to the Opinions of the others, added a new extrava∣gancy, saying, that holy Images ought to be cast out of the Churches. Jonas Aurelianensis, his Contemporary, wrote Learnedly against him. King Bermudo was Bury'd at Oviedo, where formerly his and his Wives Tombs were to be seen. Thus D. Alonso was left to govern by himself. It is a receiv'd Opinion, that he aiming at Alonso re∣stored. a greater Purity of Life, never had Carnal Knowledge of his Wife Berta. He is said to have built the Cathedral of Oviedo, but others write it was D. Bermudo who began it, and the Inscription at the entrance, as was said above, attribute it to King Sylon. Perhaps all three had a hand in the work, and he who finish'd, had all the honour of it. Certain it is, King Alonso enrich'd it with many Gifts, and particularly with a curious gold Cross set with Stones, made by the hands of Angels, as the People imagin'd, because after it was done they were never seen more. The glorious beginnings of this Princes Reign were somewhat Eclyps'd by a Misfor∣tune that hapned in the Royal Family, which was, that Da. Ximena, the Kings Sister, (was privately Marry'd, according to our Author, but that had been no such mighty disaster; and all other Historians write, she) was debauch'd by Sandia, or Sancho Earl of Saldan̄a, and The King's Si∣ster de∣bauch'd by a Count by him had Bernard, call'd Carpensis, or del Carpio, much fam'd for his Exploits in Spanish History. The Earl being Convicted, had his Eyes put out, and was Condemn'd to perpetual Imprisonment, which he accordingly suffer'd, in the Castle of Luna. Da. Ximena was shut up in a Monastery of Nuns, and yet care was taken to have the Child bred up in Asturias, as if he had been the King's own. The Moors at this time were not idle, for Zulema, and Ab∣dalla, the new King's Unkles, who till then had liv'd in Africk, came over into Spain. Ab∣dalla, who was the boldest, came first and possess'd himself of the City Valencia, deliver'd to Wars a∣mong the Moors. him by the Inhabitants. Zulema, who was ready at the first call, pass'd over to his Brothers assistance, and both together, after wasting all the Country, adventur'd to give King Alhaca Battle. It was fought obstinately on both sides, and much Blood spilt, but at last Zulema, and many more being kill'd, Abdalla fled to Valencia, where he came to accommodation with the King, and had a Revenue assign'd him, to live upon, according to his Quality, delivering up his Sons as Hostages, whom the Moorish King treated, as became his Cousin-Germans; and Marry'd his own Sister to one of them. This discord among the Moors was advantagious to King Alonso, for he took the City of Lisbon (as many Foreign Authors write, tho' ours make Lisbon ta∣ken by King A∣lonso. no mention of it,) and sent a solemn Embassy to Charlemaigne, to whom Fruella and Basilicus,
the Principal Embassadors, of the Booty taken in that City, carried a rich Present from the King, of Arms, Horses, and Captives; besides a Moorish Tent of wonderful Greatness and Workmanship. After this there ensu'd so great a Rebellion in his Kingdom, that he was forc'd to retire for safety to the Monastery Abeliense, situate in the most uncouth part of Ga∣licia. Thence, by the help of Theudius, a Man of great Power, he recover'd all his Domini∣ons with more honour than if that Misfortune had not befallen him. But in my Opinion, nothing was more honourable, in the Reign of this King, than the invention of the Body of the Holy Apostle St. James. Which as is generally related, happen'd in this manner. Theo∣domirus Bishop of Iria Flavia, hearing great Lights were seen in a wild part of a Mountain, went thither, and causing the Bushes and Briars to be cut down, and digging up a heap of Earth, found the holy Body in a Marble Sepulcher. Overjoy'd at this, he went to Court to acquaint the King, who in Person repair'd thither, and caus'd a Church to be Erected in that place, dedicated to St. James, but mean, as having only mud Walls. He also instituted Benefices belonging to it, and assign'd them Revenues. The Fame of it being spread abroad, brought People from all parts of Christendom; and to this day it is one of the most frequent∣ed Pilgrimages in the World. Some grave and Learned Persons have made a doubt, whe∣ther St. James the Apostle ever was in Spain, and consequently of the Invention of his Body. I will not undertake to discuss the point, but must confess, I think the general consent of all Christendom, in this behalf, appears to me more convincing than all the Arguments they can bring to oppose it. All Historians agree, that Charlemaigne was in Spain, and some will have it, he came more than Charle∣maigne in Spain. The Transla∣tor's note. once; among the rest, our Author, F. Mariana, is of this Opinion, and relates his coming twice; but both times with the very same circumstances, which makes me of the Opinion be mistook, and made two Expeditions of one; for the best, as well Spanish as French Authors, make mention of no more. The Histories of these two Nations absolutely disagree in their account of the famous Battle of Roncesvalles, and even the Spaniards themselves vary much in their relations, many of which are very fabulous; for which reason, I am more inclinable to give credit to the French, as the most pro∣bable. I will therefore, in a thing so dubious, not spend much time, but in few words set down what our Author says of it, and then briefly touch upon the more likely account given by the French. F. Mariana says, that the Emperor Charlemaigne was invited into Spain, by King Alonso, to assist him in driving the Moors out of all that Kingdom. As a recompence for this service, he was to Inherit the Crown. This Treaty being made known in Spain, the Nobility would no ways consent to be brought under the Dominion of the French, and Bernard del Carpio, a hot Youth, offer'd to head those that would oppose them. King Alonso himself repented, and Marsilius the Morish King of Zaragoca join'd with him, as fearing the Emperor, whom he had offend∣ed, by Usurping the Dominions of Ibnabala his Confederate. All these Forces possess'd the Passes of the Pyrenean Mountains, and at the place called Roncesvalles, the two Armies met. Rutlandus, commonly called Orlando, Earl of Britany, Anselmus and Eginardus led the Van, the Spaniards falling Furiously on them, before they could put themselves into Order of Bat∣tle, slew Rutlandus, of whom so many Fables are Written, both by the Spaniards and French. The Emperor seeing the great Slaughter of his Men, indeavoured to bring up the rest of the Army to their relief, but finding no hopes of success, was himself forced to make away. This is in short the account F. Mariana gives, but Einhardus Chancellor to Charlemaigne, and his Son-in-Law, in the Life of that Emperor, which he writ, says, That Charlemaigne came to restore Ibnabala, expelled by Marsiluis, that he passed the Mountains and subdued all that part of the Country, but in his return, the Vascones fell upon the rear in the narrow passes of the Mountains, slew all that were parted from the main Body, among them Eghartus, Anselmus and Rutlandus, and that this could not be revenged, because the Vascones on a sudden were all dispersed and not to be found. All the French Authors agree in this account. Besides it appears (if ever there was such a Man as Ber∣nard del Carpio, which is doubtful) that he could not then, according to the time assigned for his Birth, be above 13 Years of Age, and therefore unfit for such great undertakings. Much more might be said to this purpose, but I rather choose to adhere to certainties, than fill Paper with not only doubtful but Romantick stories, framed to swell Volumes, and please the ignorant. Let us therefore return to King Alonso. CHAP. VI. The remaining part of the Reign of King Alonso. Rebellion among the Moors, Alhaca the Moor dies, and Abderhamen succeeds him. The Reign of King Ra∣miro, he overthrows the Moors in a great Battle, his Death and Invasion of the Normans. ALL things during King Alonso's Reign, succeeded Fortunately for the Christians, and he not only applyed himself to the Business of the War, but Laboured to improve the Civil Government, and above all, was zealous for Propagating Religion. As soon as the Cathe∣dral of Oviedo was finished, to increase the Devotion of the place, he caused it to be Conse∣crated
by seven Bishops, in the Year of our Lord 802. He also Erected, in the same City, 802. another Church, dedicated to our Blessed Lady, with a Cloister for the Interment of Kings, be∣cause then they were not bury'd in the Church; besides this, a third Church to St. Thyrsus Martyr, and a fourth to St. Julian; as likewise a Royal Palace. Thus contenting himself with indifferent Dyet, and Rayment, all his care was to beautify and adorn that City, by him first made the Capital of the Kingdom. The Moors were now in Rebellion against their King, and particularly those of Toledo. Plenty and Ease were the cause of these distractions. The Moors in Rebel∣lion at To∣ledo. King Alhaca being a Person subtle and deceitful, sent Ambroz, the Governour of Huesca, a Friend to the People of Toledo, to them, with fawning Letters, laying all the blame upon the Magistrates, and courting the Citizens to be pacify'd. The People of Toledo are naturally open-hearted; therefore suspecting nothing, they admitted him into the Town. Not long after Ambroz feigning some discontent, perswades the People to Mutiny again, and builds a strong Castle, where now stands the Church of St. Christopher, into which he puts a good Gar∣rison. Abderhaman, the King's Son, came to quell this Rebellion, and deceiving the People, as the other had done, was admitted. Therefore the better to put his design in Execution, he invites the best of the Town into the Castle, and there Massacred 5000. of them in the Year of our Lord 805. This Cruel Execution quieted Toledo, but not so at Cordova, where 805. the Inhabitants of the Suburbs Mutinying, Abdelcarin, who had gain'd Fame at the Siege of The same at Cordova. Calahorra, reduc'd them, and hang'd 300 along the River. By the Christians two Armies of Infidels, that broke into Galicia, were overthrown, and forc'd to withdraw with great loss in the Year 810. Ores, Governour of Merida, laid Siege to Benavente, but upon the ap∣proach 810. of King Alonso, was forc'd to quit it and retire. In the same manner, Alcama, Go∣vernour of Badajoz, was drove from before Camora. Soon after, Mahomet a Noble Moor, upon some discontent, put himself, with a good Body of Men, under the Protection of King Alonso, and had a place assign'd him in Galicia to inhabit. The Moor desiring to regain his Princes Favour, seizes upon a Town call'd St. Christina, two Leagues from Lugo. King Alonso was immediately upon him, and coming to a Battle, slew him and 50000 of his Men. In the mean while dy'd Alhaca, King of Cordova, in the Year of our Lord 821, of the Arabs 206, of his Reign 27. He left 19 Sons, and 21 Daughters. His Son Abderhaman succeeded Alhaca the Moor dies. Abderha∣man the second succeeds him. him, being 41 Years of Age, and Reigned 31. About this time, says Zonaras, the Moors of Spain pass'd into Candia, and Planted there. Much is now spoke of the Prowess of Bernard del Carpio, and his Rebellion; but these are things more like Romance than History, and therefore I pass them by. The King being very old, and upon his Death-bed, appointed D Ramiro, the Son of D. Bermudo, to succeed him, and dy'd Aged 85. years, having Reign'd 52 Years, five Months, and thirteen Days, and in the Year of our Lord 843. according to the Chronicle of King Alonso the Great, and the most ancient Records. He deceas'd at Oviedo, 843. and was Buried in the Church of St. Mary, in that City. The Reign of King Ramiro, as to time, was short, but glorious, and full of honourable Exploits. For to him, under God, is due the honour of restoring the Spanish Monarchy to Reign of King Ra∣miro. its former lustre. His Government, in all respects, was excellent, but above all in Martial Exploits. Wizards and Conjurers he caus'd to be burnt, and Robbers, that then were in great numbers, to have their Eyes put out. At the time of King Alonso his Death, D. Ra∣miro was among the Varduli, a part of Old Castile, or Biscay. His absence gave an opportu∣nity to Count Nepotianus, to possess himself of Asturias, and assume the Title of King. All A Rebel∣lion sup∣pressed. mutinous and turbulent Persons follow'd him, and he rais'd a considerable Army. King Ra∣miro was not idle, but met him with an equal force; the Battle was fought in Galicia, near the River Narceya, where Nepotianus being forsaken by his Army, was forc'd to fly, but in the flight taken by two of his own Chief Officers, called Somna and Scipio, and deliver'd up to the King. After these civil dissentions ensu'd the War with the Moors, at first terri∣ble, but in the conclusion most fortunate to the Christians. Abderhaman was King of the Moors, a Prince fierce by nature, and haughty with his continual success; for he had not on∣ly expell'd his Uncle Abdalla, who endeavour'd to recover the Kingdom, but had taken the City Barcelona. This done, he resolv'd upon the War against King Ramiro, and upon this ac∣count, sent to demand of him the Tribute of 100 young Maids Mauregatus had formerly consented to pay. His Embassadors were dismissed with scorn, and protected only by the Law of Na∣tions from suffering for their presumption. Next, all that were of Age in the Kingdom, ex∣cept some few left to till the ground, for fear of a Famine, were listed; the very Bishops, and Persons Consecrated to God, follow'd the Christian Camp. To gain a reputation, and be thought the Aggressors, they broke into the Territory of Rioja, then possess'd by the Moors. Abder∣haman on the other side having made mighty preparations of all things necessary, advanc'd towards the Christians. The two Armies met near Alvelda, or Albayda, a Town then of strength, now almost unpeopled, but famous once for a Monastery built there by Sancho King of Navarre, of the Invocation of S. Martin, the Revenue and Library whereof was afterwards translated to the Church of St. Mary the Round, in the City Logron̄o, two Leagues distant A memo∣rable Bat∣tle be∣twixt the Christians and the Infidels. from Alvelda. In that place the Battle was fought, and prov'd one of the bloodyest of that Age. Our Army being compos'd of Men gather'd in hast was no way to compare to the Enemy for Discipline. All must have been lost had not the Commanders still appear'd where the danger call'd, encouraging the Men, not only with words but their Example. Night
put an end to the Battle. The smallest Accidents in War, often prove of the greatest Consequence, so now the approach of the Night saved the Christians from utter Destruction. The King retired to a rising ground, that was near with his broken Forces, fortified himself the best the time would permit, and caused the wounded to be taken care of, whilst all the Ar∣my almost despairing of their safety, offered their Vows and Tears to Heaven. Sorrow and Care so oppressed King Ramiro his Thoughts, that he fell into a slumber, in which he thought he saw the Apostle St. James, bidding him be of good Heart, and assuring him of the Victory. This vision or dream so revived him, that he started up, and calling into his Presence all the Pre∣lates and Chief Men of the Army, related at large what he had seen, and exhorted them, to put their Confidence in God, and not doubt of the Victory. This done he, Ordered his Battle and gave the Signal to fall on. Our Men Encouraged with what they had heard, attack the Ene∣my The Bat∣tle renew∣ed. furiously, calling upon S. James, whence sprang the Custom to this Day, in use among Spaniards, of invoking that Saint, when they Charge. The Infidels surprized at the bold∣ness of our Men, whom they thought vanquished, and struck with terror from Heaven, could not bear the brunt of that Charge, but fled, and were so sharply pursued, that 60000 of them were killed. It was said, the Apostle St. James, was seen in the heat of the Fight, leading our Men, upon a White Horse, in his hand a White Banner with a Red Cross in the middle. After this Victory, the Christians regained many Towns, among them Clavijo, from which this Battle took Name, Alvelda and Calahorra. This Memorable Battle was fought, in the And takes name from the Town of Clavijo. Year 844. being the second of the Reign of King Ramiro. Having returned Thanks to Al∣mightly God, the Victorious Army, by vow obliged all Spain, tho' the greatest part was subject then to the Moors, to pay for ever yearly a certain Measure of Wine or Corn for every Akre of Land, as also that whensoever any Booty was divided, St. James should have 844. his share as a Horse Man. Of the spoils taken this War, the King caused a Stately Church to be Built, in honour of our Blessed Lady, which is to be seen to this day, half a League from Oviedo, on the side of Mount Naurancius, and near it was Built another Dedicated to St. Michael. The Queen, whom some call Ʋrraca, others Paterna, Mother to D. Ordon̄o and D. Garcia, furnished those Churches with all things necessary, for she used to spare all that was possible of her own Expence, and lay it out upon Churches, especially that of the Apostle St. James. The joy and advantage of this great Victory, was not lasting or considerable, as might have been expected, by reason of another War that ensued. Our Nation had scarce began to shake off the Yoke, laid upon them by the Moors, who came from the South, when it Laboured under another Plague, sent from the North. Such Invasions of the Nor∣mans. were the Normans, who drove by necessity, or rather, the desire of doing mischief, now ranged the Seas under the Command of their General Rollo. At first they had wasted and de∣stroyed all the Coasts of France, till the Emperors Ludovicus Pius, and Carolus Crassus, gave them the Province of Neustria, from them afterwards called Normandy, to hold in Feof of them. These same People gathering a vast Fleet in France, now grew very Obnoxious to the Christians of Spain. They over-ran and Pillaged all the Coast of Galicia, till near Corun̄a, King Ramirus overthrew and put to Flight all that had Landed of them. Besides, in a Sea Fight 70 of their Ships were either taken or sunk by ours. Those that escaped turning Cape Finisterre, came to the Mouth of the River Tagus, and distressed Lisbon at that time, in the hands of the Moors. The Year following, which was of our Lord 847. having gathered news Forces, they laid Siege to Sevil, plundered the Territories of Cadiz, and Medina Sido∣nia, 847. taking great numbers of Men and Cattle, and putting many Moors to the Sword. In fine, after spending much time in that Neighbourhood, understanding that Abderhaman, was fit∣ting out a powerful Fleet against them, they left Spain, having gained much Honour and great Riches. Now followed other Commotions among the Christians. Count Alderedus and Piniolus, two powerful Men, one after another revolted, but were soon defeated, Alderedus had his Eyes put out, Piniolus, and Seven Sons he had, were Executed by the King's Command, in the 5th Year of his Reign. Two Years after he dyed at Oviedo, having Reigned 7. he and his Wife Paterna, were buryed in St. Maries Church of that City, where the King's King Ra∣miro his Death. Tomb is still to be seen, with an Inscription to this effect, Ramiro of happy memory dy'd on the first of February, I desire all that shall Read this, to pray for his rest. D. Ordono Son to D. Ramiro the late King, succeeded his Father, in the Year of our Lord 850. CHAP. VII. The Persecution raised by the Moors at Cordova. The Reign of D. Ordonno over the Christians, and Mahomet over the Moors. A Mighty Persecution was now raised against the Christians, and much Blood shed at Cor∣dova. Persecuti∣on at Cor∣dova. When first the Moors over-ran Spain, they allowed the Christians the free Exer∣cise of their Religion, whereupon in all Cities, and especially at Cordova, as the Metropolis, there were Priests, Nuns and Monks, publickly in their Habits. They had also their Churches and Monasteries, and the People were called to Divine Service by Ringing of Bells, as formerly,
without receiving the least Affront or Molestation. All the restraint laid upon them, was, that they should not offer to Revile Mahomet, nor enter into the Mosques. By degrees the Moors began to lay new Taxes upon the Christians, to revile them, and by all means find out ways to Extirpate their Name. This made the Christians uneasie, so that first they com∣plained, then fell to railing, and inveighing against the Moors, and their Superstition. Hereupon, King Abderhaman, many Christians siding with him in Condemning their Bre∣thren, as was done by a Synod of Bishops that met at Cordova, put to Death, during the space of 10 Years, great numbers of Christians, who are reckoned as Martyrs, for that their greatest Crime, was the Profession of the true Faith, and their Perseverance in the same. In the Year 852. dy'd King Abderhaman. The Christians said, It was a just Judgment of 852. God for the Blood he had spilt, and it was the more likely, because he fell down, and dy'd Abderha∣man's Death. suddenly, without speaking one word, as he stood looking upon the Bodies of the Martyrs that hung rotting on Gibbets. This hap'ned the beginning of the 32d Year of his Reign. He left 44 Sons, and 42 Daughters. In his time the Streets of Cordova were Paved, and Water brought to the City from the Mountains in Leaden Pipes. By him it was first Esta∣blished as Law, that the Sons should inherit, without any regard of the other Kindred, which was not till then, punctually observed. In pursuance of this Law, his Son Mahomet succeeded him, and Reign'd 35 Years and an half. In the first Year of his Reign, he Banish∣ed all the Christians from Court, and not so satisfied, the second Year raged against their Lives, which he continued to the end of the 10 Years above-mentioned. After the Solemnity of the Interment of D. Ramiro the late King, his Son D. Ordon̄o en∣tered King Or∣donno's Reign. upon the Government. He was Mild, Affable and Modest, which gain'd him the Af∣fections of all Men; but being very Zealous for Justice, some ill-designing Men made of this Vertue, a Bait to draw him into some Miscarriages. Four Slaves belonging to the Church of Compostella, accused their Bishop Athaulphus, of a grievous Sin; the History of Compostella says, it was Sodomy. Being sent for to Court to answer for himself, he first said Mass, and went to the King in his Pontifical Robes. At which instead of being appeased, the King was so incensed, that he caused a wild Bull, anger'd by the Dogs, to be let lose at him. The Miracu∣lous Tryal of a Bi∣shop. Bishop making the sign of the Cross, the Bull came tamely, and suffered him to lay hold of his Horns, which dropt off into his Hands. At this sight, the King and Nobles were so a∣stonished, that they fell down at his Feet, begging Pardon for the wrong they had done him, which he most readily granted. Some write, he Excommunicated his Accusers, and retired to Asturias, where he led a most holy Life, having resigned his Bishoprick. The Horns hung for many Years on the roof of the Church of Oviedo, as a Memorial of this Miracle. This F. Mariana says, Was at the beginning of the Reign of King Ordonno. Others will have it to have hap'ned above 100 Years after, in the time of King Bermudo II. It is hard to decide which is in the right, as to point of Time; for since they vary in that point, it is no good Authority to ob∣lige us to believe there ever was any such Passage. In the second Year of this King's Reign, one Division among the Infidels. Muza, of the Blood of the Goths, but by Profession a Moor, well skilled in Warlike Affairs, stirred up against himself the Arms of both Christians and Infidels, for he openly Rebelled a∣gainst the King of Cordova, and with incredible Celerity possessed himself of Toledo, Zarago∣ça, Huesca, Valencia, and Tudela. Then he over-ran the Frontiers of France, where he took two Generals that offered to oppose him. This struck such a terror in that Country, that the King of France, Charles the Bald, thought fit to gain his Friendship with Presents. Proud with Success, he turns his Force against King Ordon̄o, with whom, and the King of Cordova, he called himself the third King of Spain. Breaking into the Territory of Rioja, he took Alvelda, and Fortify'd it. King Alonso's Chronicle says, he built and called it Al∣bayda. D. Ordon̄o gathering his Forces, left a part before that Town, and with the rest marched towards the Enemy, who, he was informed, lay upon Mount Latursus. At the first sight the two Armies Encountred, casting their Darts and Javelins, and that done, fell to their Swords. The Christians fought resolutely for their Country and Religion, and tho' the Battle was obstinately maintained, they remained Victorious, killing 10000 of the Great overthrow of the Moors. Enemies, among them many of note, and particularly, one Garcia, Son-in-law to the Ty∣rant. Muza escaped with difficulty, being much wounded, whereof, I suppose, he after∣wards dy'd. All the Camp of the Moors, with a rich Booty, fell into the hands of the Chri∣stians. At the same time, Mahomet, King of Cordova, was making Preparations against the common Enemy, and resolved first to attack Toledo, as being the first that had Revolted, and might be a means to reduce the rest. Lupus, the Son of Muza, held that City for his Fa∣ther, and understanding the Defeat of his Army, to prevent farther mischief, entred into a League with King Ordono, to the end to be supported by his Forces. The King sent him a number of Soldiers of Navarre and Asturias, under the command of his Brother D. Garçia. Mahomet not relying on open Force, had recourse to Stratagem. He lay Encamp'd near the City, and therefore lays an Ambush at Guadacelete, a Brook near Villaminaya. This done, he in Person, with a small Party, came up to view the City. The Besieged seeing that small number, rushed out as if they went to a certain Booty, not to Fight; and so were easily drawn into the Ambush, where being charged in Front and Rear, many of them were lost, the rest fought their way thro' to the Town. 12000 Moors, and 8000 Christians were slain Slaughter of Moors and Chri∣stians. in that Action. Only the natural Strength of the place sav'd it from falling into the Hands
of the Victors, after such a loss. For two Years after, the Enemy wasted the Country about Toledo, and burnt all the Corn upon the Ground. The Townsmen desirous of Revenge, marched as far as Talavera, but were worsted by the Commander there, and drove back with loss. At length, tired with so many Sufferings, they submitted to Mahomet, in the Year of our Lord 857. This same Year, the Normans with a Fleet of 60 Sail, ran round the whole Coast of Spain, doing much harm; but particularly, the Islands of Majorca and Minor∣ca, 857. Normans Infest the Coast of Spain. they destroy'd with Fire and Sword, in hatred of the Moors, for they were better affected towards Christians, by being continually among them, tho' they were Heathens themselves. Thence they sailed over into Africk, and did no less harm there. In Spain, Mahomet made an Incursion into Navarre, towards Pamplona, and that part of Biscay called Alava, but no∣thing was done worth relating. Merida in Estremadura, Rebelled against the King of Cor∣dova, for which fault, by his Order, it was Dismantled. In the mean while, King Ordon̄o Several Towns re∣built. enjoying Peace, without sparing any cost or trouble, Rebuilt several Cities, ruined and de∣stroyed by the Wars, such were Tuy, Astorga, Leon and Ainaya. The Moors after the late Civil Wars, were divided into Factions, whereupon, many Governours of Towns presumed to Revolt, and stile themselves Kings; which was of great advantage to the Christians, who could not so well have dealt with the Power of the Infidels, if united. Reith had possessed himself of Coria, Mozara of Talamanca, or as others say, Salamanca, both of them were Vanquished by King Ordon̄o, their Cities taken, the Garrisons put to the Sword, and all the Inhabitants sold for Slaves. This great Success was check'd by the King's Death, which hap∣pened in the 11th Year of his Reign; some Authors add 6 Years to this number. He dy'd at Oviedo, of the Gout, and was Bury'd in St. Mary's Church, then the Burial place for the Kings. This King was Successful in all his undertakings, except the loss of his Men at Tole∣do. By his Queen Munia, a Person of high Birth, he left D. Alonso, the eldest Son, D. Ber∣mudo, D. Nun̄o, D. Odoario, and D. Fruela. Some write, his Death was on the 27th of May, there is no doubt it was in the Year 862. as appears by the Inscription of a beautiful Cross, which his Son D. Alonso, presented to the Church of Oviedo, the Words of it, are 862. these. May this Gift be acceptable to the honour of God. Given by the Prince Alonso, Servant of Christ, and his Wife Ximena. May any that presumes to take away these our Gifts, perish by God's lightning. By this sign the Religious is defended, by this sign the Enemy is overcome. This Work was finished, and delivered to S. Saviour, the Cathedral of Oviedo. It was made in the Ca∣stle of Guazon, in the 17th Year of our Reign, and of the AEra of Augustus, 916. Thus it appears, the Year 878. was the 7th after the Death of King Ordon̄o. The same D. Alonso being at Compostella, confirmed a Grant made by his Father, by a new one, which extends the Terri∣tory of Santiago to 6 Miles about, whereas before it was but three. Let us go on to his o∣ther Actions. CHAP. VIII. The Reign of King Alonso the Great. He is Expell'd and Restor'd. His Bro∣thers Conspire against him, and are Punish'd. The Church of St. James the Apo∣stle, made an Archbishoprick. Mahomet the Moorish King dies. D. Alonso who for his excellent Natural Parts, and the many Victories he obtained over his Enemies, was called The Great, immediately upon the news of his Father's death, King A∣lonso the Great. for he was then absent, repaired to Oviedo to perform the Funeral Rites, and take Possessi∣on of the Kingdom. For good Inclinations, he was inferior to none of his Predecessors; of 862. Body tall, his Countenance pleasing, very Affable, Merciful, Valourous and Meek. In Warlike Exploits, he was Singular, and very Liberal to the Poor, spending upon them not only what his Father left him, but what he got himself. He was Zealous of Religion, and beautified Churches, but particularly, that of St. James the Apostle, which had only Mud Walls, he built from the Ground of Free-stone, with Marble Pillars, a thing in those days wonderful, as well for the want of curious Workmen, as of Money. He Reign'd 48 Years, according to Sampyrus Asturicensis. The beginning of his Reign was somewhat troublesome, for D. Fruela, Son to King Bermudo, Usurped the Title of King in Galicia. D. Alonso be∣ing as yet wholly unprovided to withstand him, thought fit to retire to that part of Biscay, He is ex∣pelled, and recovers his King∣dom. called Alava; but the Usurper making use of the Power he had to oppress the People, was killed by the Citizens of Oviedo. Hereupon, D. Alonso returns to Asturias, is received with the good liking of all the People, settles his Affairs, and punishes the Guilty. That part of Biscay, called Alava, was subject to the Kings of Oviedo, the rest to Zenon, the chief of the Family of Eudo, late Duke of Aquitain. Eylon, a Kinsman of Zenon, governed Alava for the King. He relying upon the Confusion of the times, or the Assistance of Zenon, Revolted a∣gainst his Master, who came in Person from Leon, to appease those Commotions, which he did without Bloodshed, took Eylon, and kept him Prisoner at Oviedo as long as he lived. Not long after, he overthrew, and took Zenon also, and put him into the same Prison. This Zenon, is said to have left two Daughters, one called Toda, was Wife to Yn̄igo Arista, King
of Navarre, the other Married Zuria, who was afterwards Lord of Biscay, from whom, some will have it, the following Lords of that Country descended till it was Incorporate in the Crown of Castile. The Punishment of these two, was an Example to terrifie others from attempting the like. After this, Alava was given to a Nobleman, called Count Vigi∣la, or Vela. The Lordship of Castile was in the Possession of the Count D. James Porcellos; all this was in the first Year of the Reign of D. Alonso. The following Year began more hot, for Imundarus and Alcama, Moorish Generals, sate down before Leon, but the King obliged them to raise the Siege, with great slaughter of their Men. To strengthen himself the more against the Infidels, he made a League with the French and Navarrois, and the more to bind this Alliance, Married a Lady of the Blood Royal of France, called then, Amelina, after∣wards Da. Ximena. By her he had D. Garçia, D. Ordon̄o, and D. Fruela, all three succes∣sively Kings, and D. Gonçalo, Archdeacon of Oviedo. The Broils among the Moors offered A Rebel∣lion a∣mong the Moors. the Christians a fair opportunity of carrying on some Enterprize. The People of Toledo provoked by the Cruelty of the Kings of Cordova, and relying on the strength of their City, Rebelled, and chose Mahomet Avenlope for their King; but were soon subdued, and Aven∣lope, with his Brothers, fled to the Protection of King Alonso, who received and entertained them favourably, believing they might be useful to him in his Wars against the Moors. Soon after, taking these along, and aided by French, Navarrois and Biscainers, he entred the Coun∣try of the Moors, Plundering and destroying all he met, and without doing any thing more considerable, dismissed his Army, rich with the Booty they had taken. In the following Year, which was 874 the People of Toledo, as is supposed, to oblige their King, made an Inroad into the Lands of the Christians, as far as the River Duero; but the King unexpected∣ly 874. coming upon them, near a Town called Pulviraria, upon the River Ʋrbicus, now Orbigo, Great slaughter of Infi∣dels. killed 12000 of them, and soon after, destroyed an Army that followed the others from Cordova, in such manner, that only 10 of them were found alive among the Dead. Almu∣dar, Son of the King of Cordova, followed with the main Body of the Moorish Forces, but understanding the great slaughter of his People, durst not advance to Sublancia, where the King was, and therefore marched back again by Night. A Treaty was now set on foot, by means of Abubalit, who had been taken in Galicia, and was well affected towards the Christi∣ans, the conclusion was a Truce for three Years. This time being expired, the King broke A Truce for 3 Years. into the Country of the Moors, and passing the River Tagus, advanced as far as Merida, and thence returned loaden with Spoils, having met no opposition. Bernard del Carpio, is said to have had a great share in all these Actions, and that as a Reward of his Services, he begged his Father's liberty, which the King refusing, he rose in Rebellion, and built the Ca∣stle of Carpio, from which, he took Name. Besides, the Moors at his Instigation, infested the Lands of the Christians. After this, he delivered up his Castle upon Condition his Father should be released; but the King not performing, he fled to France and Navarre, and there dy'd in Banishment. All these Transactions have no good Authority to back them, and have much of Romance in them, therefore it is better be succinct in Relations of that nature. D. Fruela the King's Brother, on what account, is not known, conspired to kill him, but being disco∣vered, A Con∣spiracy detected, and pu∣nished. was Condemned to lose both his Eyes, and live in perpetual Imprisonment, the same punishment was inflicted on D. Nun̄o, D. Bermudo, and D. Odoario, all his Brothers, for conspiring with D. Fruela. This punishment being thought too Cruel, caused some new Broils. For D. Bermudo escaping out of Prison, took Astorga, and Fortified it, then coming to a Battle with the King, was overthrown, and fled to the Moors. This moved the King to make the greater havock on the Lands of the Infidels, particularly, he so harrassed the Country of Toledo, that some Years after, they were forced with great Sums of Money to purchase a Truce for three Years, to the great Honour of the Christians, and Disgrace of the Moors. About this time dy'd Athaulfus Bishop of Compostella and Sisenandus, a Person of great Piety and Learning, succeeded him. In his time the Church of St. James was made an Archiepi∣scopal The Church of S. James made an Archiepi∣scopal See. See; and the said Church then newly finish'd, Consecrated by certain Bishops that held a Synod there. It was not lawful, without the consent of the Pope, to call a Council of Bishops, therefore Severus and Desiderius, were sent Embassadors to Rome, and obtain'd the consent of Pope John the Eighth, and his Bull, Constituting the Church of Oviedo a Metro∣politan See. Together with the Kings Embassadors the Pope sent one called Reginald. There met at Compostella 14 Bishops, who Consecrated the Church of St. James the Apostle with great Solemnity, on the 7th of May in the Year 876. Eleven Months after this the same Bi∣shops, by the King's Command, met at Oviedo, and decreed in pursuance of the Pope's Order, that 876. that See for the future should be Archiepiscopal, and Ermenegildus was chosen for that dignity. For some Years the Moors were quiet, and nothing hapned worthy of memory. Only in the Year 881. there were Earthquakes throughout all Spain, which destroy'd many Buildings. 881. Great Earth∣quakes. King Mahomet being at his Devotions, a flash of Lightning kill'd two that stood next to him in the Mosque, to the great terror of the rest. The Year following Abdalla the Son of Lope, forgetting the favours he had receiv'd from the King of Leon, and envying his Uncles, in whom the said King repos'd so much Confidence, that he entrusted them to breed his Son D. Ordon̄o, was reconcil'd to the King of Cordova, and gathering Forces broke into the Lands of
the Christians, doing great harm, till King Alonso met, and worsted him at Cillorico; then drove him from Pancorvo, whence passing by Leon, and through Portugal, he return'd to Cordova. Next Winter Abdalla overthrew the two Zimaels, his Brother and Uncle, and sent them in Fetters to the Castle of Recaria. This action brought upon him the Forces of both the Kings, as well of the Christians as Moors, though at the same he endeavour'd to ex∣cuse himself to both. D. Vela, and D. James, the two Earls of Biscay and Castile, also en∣tred into a League against him, as the common Enemy. Almudar, Son to the King of Cor∣dova, and Abuhalit were sent to Besiege Zaragoça, but to no effect, by reason it was strong, Zaragoca Besieg'd in vain. and well provided with necessaries. In their return they made an Inroad into the Territo∣ries of Biscay and Castile; but were by the Earls drove out again. King Alonso waited for them at Sublancia, which they understanding return'd home, only destroying by the way the Famous Monastery of Sabagun. Nevertheless, Abuhalit sent underhand to treat of Peace, and Dulcidius was sent by the King on the same score to Cordova, about the end of the Year 883. 883. In the mean while a great Fleet of Moors was gather'd at Sevil, to destroy the Coast of Ga∣licia, Moorish Fleet pe∣rishes by Storms. the greatest part whereof perish'd by Storms. A Truce was concluded with the Moors by Dulcidius for Six Years. Presently after follow'd the Death of Mahomet in the Year 886. He left 30 Sons, and 20 Daughters. 886. CHAP. IX. The Death of King Alonso the Great. The Reigns of D. Garcia, and D. Ordonno, the second of Oviedo, and of Almundar, Abdalla, and Abderhaman of Cordova. A Lmundar, the Son of Mahomet, succeeded his Father. He was generous and mild, and Kings of the Moors. therefore at his Accession to the Crown, abolish'd an imposition of the tenths, the Peo∣ple of Cordova used to pay. They forgetting his favour Mutiny'd, and he being about to suppress them, dy'd before he had Reign'd full two Years, leaving behind him Six Sons, and Seven Daughters. Nevertheless Abdalla his Brother was chosen King by the Souldiers in the Year 888, and Reign'd 25 Years. The beginning of his Reign was full of trouble, by reason 888. that Homar, a turbulent Moor, revolted, and drew to his Party Lisbon, Astapa, Sevil, and other Towns. Yet this was soon over, for Homar, of his own accord, submitted, and was reconcil'd to the King. This Ease in obtaining Pardon encourag'd him to rebel again, and the Moors being divided into Factions, betwixt the Families of the Humeyas and Alavecins, there never wanted some to side with any turbulent Spirit. Abdalla pursu'd Homar so close he was forc'd to fly to the Christians, and there receiv'd Baptism; tho' not with a good intention as afterwards appear'd. The Biscainers, under the Conduct of Zuria, thought to be of the Blood Royal of Scotland, and Son-in-law of Zenore, before-mention'd, revolted from King Biscay Re∣bels. Alonso. D. Ordon̄o, sent by his Father to reduce them, was overcome in Battle, whereupon Zuria was declar'd Lord of Biscay. This Battle was fought hear a place then call'd Padura, but afterwards Ariogorriaga, which in the Language of Biscay signifies Bloody Stone. The na∣tural strength of that Country hindred the King from taking Revenge, besides his great Age, which made him now study to govern in Peace; building Churches, Forts and Cities, for the safe∣ty and conveniency of his Subjects. At the beginning of his Reign he rebuilt Sublancia and Cea, near Leon, and the Castle Guazon, on the Sea Coast, betwixt Oviedo and Gijon. Afterwards King A∣lonso's publick Works. the Cities Porto, Viseo, Chaves, Oca, and Zamora: To his Son D. Garcia he recommended the Building of Toro. He took from the Moors Coimbra, Simancas, Duen̄as, and all the Territory of Campos. Besides, he rebuilt the Monastery of Sahagun, destroy'd by the Moors, one of the greatest in all Spain. His Revenues were too small for these mighty Expences, he was therefore obliged to raise new Taxes, at which the Subjects being disgusted, the Queen persuaded her Son, D. Garcia, to lay hold of that opportunity, and Rebel against his Father. D. Alonso, tho' Old and Decay'd, presently repaired to Zamora, took his Son, and The King's Son Rebels. caused him to be confined in the Castle Guazon. This did not put an end to the Troubles, for Nun̄o Hernandez, Earl of Castile, a Powerful Man, and Father-in-law to D. Garcia, made War upon the King, which lasted two Years, at the end of which, the Rebels prevailed, and the King weary of trouble, and coveting repose, resigned the Crown to his Son D. Garcia, and to his other Son D. Ordon̄o, gave the Lordship of Galicia, in the Year 910. The following He re∣signs the Crown. Year, D. Alonso, after going in Pilgrimage to Santiago, and making an Incursion into the Country of the Moors, with the consent of his Son, dy'd at Zamora. His Body, and that 910. of his Queen, were first Buried at Astorga, and thence Translated to Oviedo. At the same His Death. time dy'd at Cordova, Abdalla, King of the Moors, aged 72 Years, leaving 12 Sons and 13 Daughters. Abderhaman, the Grandson of Abdalla, and Son of Mahomet, succeeded his Grandfather; a thing not usual, for the Grandson to be preferred before the Sons of the Abdalla dies, Ab∣derhaman succeeds. Deceased. At his accession to the Crown he was 23 Years of Age, and enjoy'd it 50 Years. To his Name was added the Title of Almanzor Ledin Alla, that is, Defender of the Law of God; as also that of Miramamolin, or Prince of those that believe. Abderhaman may be count∣ed
among the greatest of the Moorish Kings. He spent all his Life in reconciling the diffe∣rences betwixt his People, adminstred Justice impartially, built a Castle near Cordova, took Ceuta in Africk, and Beautified many Cities of his Kingdom. Power ill gotten, for the most part is not lasting. So D. Garcia enjoyed the Kingdom, he took by Force from his Father only Three Years. During that time, he made War upon the Moors, wasted their Country, plundred their Towns, overthrew and took Prisoner Ayola, a Noble Moor, that offered to oppose him, yet through the neglect of his Keeper, he made his escape, near to a Town called Tremulo. The King dy'd at Zamora, in the Year 913. He left no Children, whereupon D. Ordon̄o his Brother succeeded him, and had been reckon∣ed 913. King Or∣donno suc∣ceeds his his Bro∣ther. a good Prince, had he not imbrued his Hands in the Blood of the Earls of Castile. His Reign lasted 9 Years and a half. At first to gain reputation and humble the Moors, he broke into the Kingdom of Toledo, and laid Siege to Talavera, a pleasant and strong City. An Army was sent by the King of Cordova, to relieve the Place, but it was defeated, the Town taken, plundred and burnt, because it could not be maintained, being encompassed on all sides with Garrisons of the Moors. The Governour and many more were taken, and the Christian Ar∣my returned home Victorious, and loaded with spoils. The King of Cordova fearing this beginning might be an Introduction to worse Consequences, sent to desire Assistance of the King of Mauritania, who sent him a considerable Body of Men, under the Command of his General Almotaraf. To these was joyned the Army of the Moors in Spain, Commanded by Avolalpaz, and thus they overran the Lands of the Christians, as far as the River Duero. Here the King met and gave them Battle, near to the Town of Santistevan de Gormaz, which was A great Victory obtained by Christi∣ans. very Bloody, and for a long time the event seemed dubious, till the two Moorish Generals, and a great number of their Men being killed, the rest fled. That the advantage of this Victory might be the greater, they wasted all the Country of Lusitania, as far as Guadiana, but above all the Territories of Merida and Badajoz suffered. This struck such a Terror into those People, that they bought a Peace. It happened in the fifth Year of D. Ordon̄o, which was of Christ 918. After these great exploits, the King returning was received in manner of Tri∣umph into the City Leon, which he designed for the Seat of the Kings, and therefore en∣larged 918. and beautified it, removing the Cathedral, which before was without the Walls, to his own Palace, formerly built with much Magnificence by the Moors for Baths. To add to the honour of the new Church, he caused himself to be Crowned in it by the Bishop, a thing not used before, and thus those Kings before called of Oviedo, came afterwards to be called of Leon. From henceforward the City Oviedo fell so much to decay, that it not only lost the Title of an Archbishoprick, but in our days it has no Vote in the States General or Parlia∣ment. Mean while Abderhaman Almanzor King of Cordova, meditating revenge for the losses sustained, through Lusitania broke into Galicia, and came as far as a Town called Ron∣donia, Sampyrus names it Mindonia. There the Armies of Christians and Moors met, and A Battle undecided. fought resolutely with great loss on both sides, till Night parted them, without any visible advantage on either side, tho' both boasted of the Victory, our side as having drove the Infi∣dels out of Galicia, they, for that they had sustained the Fight till Day, left them. Not long after the King of Cordova, having received supplies from Africk, wasted the Lands of Na∣varre and Biscay. The King of Leon, marched to the Assistance of D. Sancho Abarca King of Navarre. They came to a Battle in the Valley Juncaria, now Junquera, in the Year 921. It was disperately fought on both sides, yet the Moors got the Day, for the Count of Aragon 921. The Chri∣stians de∣feated. was killed, two Bishops Dulcidius of Salamanca, and Hormogius of Tuy taken Prisoners, and that part of Biscay called Alava, was possess'd by the Moors. The ransom of the Bishops being agreed upon, they were set at Liberty, giving Hostages for the payment. Pelayus a Beautiful Youth, and Nephew to Hermogius was left for him. His Beauty and Modesty were equal, for the barbarous King lusting after him, used all possible means to bring him to consent to his beastly Appetite, first by kindness, and then by force, at which the Youth being provoked, struck him on the Face. Lust turning into rage upon this disappointment, the Youth was torn to Pieces, and cast into the River Guadalquivir, in the Year 925. In the Reign of D. Ordon̄o came to Spain, a Priest called Zanelus, sent by Pope John the 10th as his Nuncio (some 925. Zanelus the Pope's Nu∣nico in Spain say he was a Cardinal) to enquire into matters of Religion, and particularly the Ceremonies of the Mass, the Romans being persuaded that the Divine Office, according to the Gothish Form, was Erroneous and that false Doctrines were taught. Zanelus found all things confor∣mable to the Truth, only some small difference in the Ceremony, not the Essential part of the Mass, which he reported to the Pope in a great Congregation of Prelates, who all gave Thanks to Almighty God. To return to the King, the Fortune of War, seemed wholly changed after the Battle of Junquera. Nevertheless the two Kings of Leon and Navarre, made an incursion into the Country of the Moors, and wasted the Territory of Rioja, after which D. Ordon̄o returned to Zamora. In the midst of this joy dy'd the Queen Munina El∣vira, a Lady of great worth, and left these Sons, D. Sancho, D. Alonso, D. Ramiro, and D. Gracia, and one Daughter Da. Ximena. After her Death, the King Marryed the Lady An∣gonta, a Woman of high Birth in Galicia, and in a little time put her away wrongfully, as appeared afterwards. Instead of her, he took Santiva Daughter of D. Garci In̄iguez, King of Navarre, with the consent of King Sancho her Brother. The two Kings joyning their Forces, broke into Rioja again, where they took Najara, and another Town called Vicaria. Thus far there
was more to praise in King Ordon̄o, than to discommend, the untimely Death he brought the Earls of Castile to, darkened all his Glory. But before we enter upon the Relation of that Affair, I will give a short Account of the rise and increase of some of the Chief Sovereign∣ties of Spain. THE History of SPAIN. The Eighth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Original of the Kingdoms of Navarre, and Aragon, and of the Earls of Bar∣celona, with their Succession and Actions, down to the time of King Ordonno the Second of Leon. AFter that Memorable disaster brought so Fatal to Spain, which the greatest part of it under the Subjection of the Moors, out of the ruins of the Gothish Empire were raised The Ori∣nal of the several Kingdoms in Spain. several Sovereignties, at first small and inconsiderable, yet such as in time recovered the Liberty of the Country, and re-established the Common-wealth. To Treat of them all would be endless, yet it is necessary to give an Account of the Original of the Chief, whose Affairs are often intermixed with those of the Kings of Leon, such are the Principali∣ties of Navarre, Aragon, Barcelona, and Castile. Part of the Spaniards that escaped the gene∣ral ruin of their Country, retired to Asturias, whence the Kingdom of Leon, hitherto spoken of, had its beginning. Another parcel shut themselves up in the Pyrenean Mountains, along the Borders of Biscay and Navarre, about those parts now called Sobrarve, Ʋrgel, and Cerda∣nia. These not content with preserving their own Liberty, attempted to relieve the rest of Spain. The motive that induced them at first to attempt so great an Action, was but small. A certain Religious Hermit, called John, on Mount Ʋruela, built a small Chappel of the Invo∣cation of St. John the Baptist. The fame of his Sanctity brought him Four Companions, and many came dayly to visit him. He dying, all the Inhabitans far and near came to his Fune∣ral, in great Numbers, and among them 600 of the chief of the People. The Solitariness of the place, gave them opportunity to consult how to shake off the Yoke of the Moors, the natural strength of the Country encouraged them, and they doubted not of assistance from France, besides, the example of the Asturians egged them on. After a long Consultation it was re∣solved to choose a Head, and by consent of all, the choice fell upon Garci Ximenez, a Man of Original of the Kings of Navarre. a Noble Spanish Family, Lord of Amescua and Aberfusa. His Wife was D. Iniga, of no less Noble descent. Authors do not agree about the Title given the new King, or time of his E∣lection, his Arms were only a red Shield without any bearing, he took some Towns from the Moors, and among them Infa the Capital of Sobrarve. The Hermits Chappel enlarged, be∣came a Royal Structure, and the Burial place of Kings. This King dyed in the Year 758. His Son Garci Iniguez succeeded him, a Prince very Fortunate, for by him Navarre, that lay in dispute betwixt the French and Moors was subdued, and left in perpetual Possession to his Heirs, and he carryed his Victorious Arms, as far as that part of Biscay called Alava. In this King's time, were erected the Earldoms of Aragon and Barcelona. That of Aragon thus. Aznar, Son of Eudo the Great, coming to that part of the Country, through which run the Rivers Aragon, or Arga, and Subordan, and having gained some Towns from the Earldom of Aragon. Moors, by consent of King Gracia called himself Earl of Aragon, and was then Subject to the Kings of Navarre, afterwards independent, as shall appear in its Place. This first Earls Son was also called Aznar, his Grandson Galindo, of whom there is nothing Memorable. After Ga∣lindo succeeded Ximeno Aznar. Ludovicus Pius, during the Life of his Father Charlemaigne, took Bercelond, and left one Bernard a Frenchman to govern there, in the Year 801. whence sprang the Earls of Barcelona. In the following year dyed Garci Iniguez King of Navarre. Earls of Barcelona. His Successor was his Son Fortun Garcia, of whose exploits the Historians of Navarre, relate things incredible. It is not doubted, he was in the Famous Battle of Roncesvalles, before spoken of, in which Ximeno Aznar Earl of Aragon was slain, whose Sister Teuda was Married to King Fortun. Ximeno Aznar's Successor, was his Unkle Ximeno Garcia, or Garces. King Fortun dyed in the Year 815. Sancho Garcia his Son succeeded him. By this King the People
of Valderroncal were exempted from all Taxes, for their good Service against the Moors, as appears by his Grant still extant, Bernard, Earl of Barcelona, being accused of Treason, for having to do with the Empress, Wife to Ludovicus Pius, for shame of this Slander, re∣turned to Spain, where he had many Friends, and dy'd in the Year 839. After his Death, Ludovicus Pius bestowed that Earldom on Wifridus, for it was not Hereditary, but the free Gift of the Emperor, during pleasure. Garcia Aznar, Son of Ximeno Aznar, was now Earl of Arragon. At the same time, D. Sancho Garcia infested the People of Navarre beyond the Pyrenean Hills, that were subject to the French, and never desisted till they swore to maintain perpetual Amity, with the Kings of Sobrarve. This King is said to have been slain in the War against that Muza, who, as was said, Rebelled against the King of Cordova, that is a∣bout the Year 853. Next to this King, a certain Author, names Ximeno Garcia, no other History makes mention of him; but here the Royal Line expired, whereupon, there ensued an Interregnum for four Years. During which time, the Historians of Navarre say, they Consulted the Pope, the French, and the Lombards, by whose advice, they took the best of the Laws of those Nations, (called The Charter of Sobrarve) towards preserving their Liber∣ty. All their aim was to tye up the King's hands, and to this effect, they Instituted a Magi∣strate in the nature of the Roman Tribunes, commonly called The Justice of Arragon. Many of these Innigo Ari∣sta chosen King of Navarre. Privileges, and others, granted by K. Alonso III. were Repealed by the States-General, or Parlia∣ment, in the Reign of D. Peter, the last of Aragon. All things being thus setled, In̄igo Sanchez, Earl of Bigorre in Aquitain, for his swiftness Sirnamed, Arista, was chosen King, by the Vote of 300 Nobles, and having Sworn in the Church of S. Victorianus of Pamplona to maintain the Laws, the Power of Government was put into his Hands. All these, and many other, the like Relations, are by many esteemed Fabulous, and they believe that King Arista succeeded his Father in the Throne. Certain it is, that In̄igo Arista about this time, Reign'd near the Pyrenean Mountains, and was Married to D. In̄iga, Daughter to the Earl Gonzalo, of the Blood Royal of Oviedo. He also Married Teuda, the Daughter of Zenon, Lord of Biscay, and had only one Son, (not known by which of the two) called Garci Iniguez, who inherited the Kingdom. The Monastery of S. Salvador de Leite, seated among the Pyrenean Mountains, and remarkable for the beauty of its Structure, and greatness of Revenue, is supposed to have been Founded by King Arista. This Prince ex∣tended the Bounds of his Kingdom, adding to what he had before, the Plains of Navarre; whereas the former Kings had contented themselves to live within the Mountains. Pamplo∣na and Alava, fallen again into the hands of the Moors, were by him recovered; whereupon, he stiled himself King of Pamplona, as appears by Grants of those Kings. At the same time, Earldom of Barcelo∣na Heredi∣tary. Wifredus the Son of the other Wifredus, obtained of the Emperor Charles the Gross, the Earl∣dom of Barcelona Hereditary, only reserving the Right of Appeals to be made to the Empe∣ror; this was in the Year 884. Afterwards, on account of Wifredus's tender Age, by or∣der of the Emperor Lewis II. Solomon, Count of Cerdania, Governed that Principality the space of 19 Years, Wifredus, among other Sons, left Myrus Earl of Barcelona, and Seniofredus Earl of Ʋrgel, after their Father's decease. Near the same time dy'd Garcia Aznar, Earl of Aragon, and his Son Ximeno Garcia succeeded him. It is not to be found in what Year King Arista dy'd, the most probable Opinion is, it was about the Year 888. Garci Ximenes, his Son, succeeded him at the age of 17, but was not inferior, either for warlike Exploits, or civil Government to any of his Predecessors. For being come to riper Years, he gained much Reputation by many Victories he obtained, too tedious to be here inserted. His Wife's name was Da. Ʋrraça, Sister to Fortun Ximenez, Earl of Aragon, or as some will have it, his Kinswoman, Grandchild of Galindo, and Daughter of Endregotus, from whom, his Uncle Ximeno Garcia Usurped the Earldom of Aragon. This King had two Sons, Fortun and Sancho Abarca, and a Daughter called Sanctiva, Married to D. Ordon̄o, King of Leon, when he was Old, and had had two Wives, as has been said before. He was killed by the Moors, in a Battle he fought with them in the Valley of Ayuar, the Archbishop D. Roderick calls it Larumbe, for he often made Inroads into the Country of the Moors, being desirous to enlarge his Kingdom, and Extirpate all the Race of the Moors in Spain. His Death was in the Year 905. as appears by the Chronicon Alveldense. His two Sons succeeded him, first Fortun, and then Sancho, in whose time, as is before related, the Christians lost the great Battle of Jun∣quera The Monastery of S. Salvador de Leite, pretends the Body of King Garci Iniguez lies there, that of S. John de la Pen̄a contradicts it; because there is to be seen there, among the Tombs of the Kings one with the Name of King Garci Iniguez upon it. These Disputes are not to be decided, but I suppose, the reason of them is, that many Tombs were erected to the memory of Kings in several places, by those that had received Favours from them, tho' they had not their Bodies, as is used even in our times. Thus, much at present of the Ori∣ginal of the Kingdom of Navarre, and Earldoms of Arragon, and Barcelona may suffice.
CHAP. II. Of the Earls of Castile. The Reign of D. Fruela the Second, King of Leon. Fictions concerning the Kings of Navarre. The Reign of their King D. San∣cho Abarca. MOst part of that Province, which we call Old Castile, the Romans named the Vacei, it is divided from Leon by the Rivers Carrion, Pisuerga, Heva and Regamon; on the o∣ther Of the Earls of Castile. side it borders on Asturias, Biscay and Rioja, on the South, its Bounds are the Mountains of Segovia and Avila, which, about the same time we are speaking of, were the limits of the Dominions of the Moors and Christians. The Country is plentiful of Corn and Wine, but scarce of Oil, and better Watered than other parts of Spain. In this Province, tho' at first they did not possess it all, some powerful Men began to defend themselves against the Moors, and enlarge their Territories. They took the Stile of Counts or Earls, by consent of the Kings of Oviedo, whom they were obliged to assist in their Wars, and to come, when called to their General-Assemblies, or Parliaments. In former times, as we have before more particularly related, Counts or Earls were only Governours of Provinces for a time, after∣wards they were made so for Life, and at last, the Title became Hereditary. Yet even to this Day, many Dukes, Marquesses and Earls in Spain, after the Death of their Fathers, do not take upon them the Title till they have obtained the King's leave. It is not known for what term the first Earls of Castile enjoyed that Honour: but it may be imagined, they had the same beginning as all others in Christendom. The first of these Counts, is D. Roderick, who lived in the time of King Alonso the Chast. Next to him, the best Authors place D. James Porcellos, his Son, as the Chronicon Alveldense has it. This Earl lived in the time of Alonso the Great, King of Oviedo. He Married his Daughter Sulla Bella, to Nun̄o Belchi∣des, a German, that came in Pilgrimage to S. James. This Gentleman being thus Allied to D. James, together with him, built the City Burgos, that the People, who before, lived dispersed in Villages, might form one Body of a City, and it took the Name from Burg, the German word for a Town. Besides D. James, there were at the same time other Earls of Castile, for the Province was divided, as were Ferdinand Anzules Almondar, and his Son D. James. But the greatest of them all, was Nun̄ez Fernandez, who had for his Son-in-law, D. Garcia, Brother to D. Ordon̄o II. King of Leon, afterwards King himself. Upon this ac∣count, and because he had forced King Alonso the Great to resign the Kingdom, he was grown more insolent than D. Ordon̄o cared to bear; besides, many underhand, blew the Coals they saw begin to take Fire. The King thus incensed, sent for the Earls to Court, Earls of Castile Executed. upon pretence of Consulting with them about most important Affairs. The place appointed for the meeting, was a Town called Regular, upon the mid-way, on the Borders of Castile and Leon. The Earls came without any Guard, and were Apprehended by the King's Order, and sent Prisoners to Leon. Soon after, they were also put to Death, to the great Grief of the People of Castile, who had been concerned at their Imprisonment. King Ordon̄o was making all necessary Preparations for War, as fearing the Revolt of that Province, when Death took him off. He dy'd at Zamora, in the Year 923. and was buryed at Leon, in the Church of our blessed Lady, which he had caused to be Consecrated. His Funeral was per∣formed with great Solemnity. Nun̄o Belchides, by his Wife Sulla Bella, had two Sons, Nun̄o Rasura, and Gustio Gonzalez. Nun̄o Rasura was Grandfather to the Earl Fernan Gonzalez, whom, our Historians extol, and raise to the Skies for his great Exploits. The Infants, or Princes of Lara, were Grandsons to Gustio. Thus the Blood of D. James Porcellos mixed with the Royal Family, is derived to many Noble Houses, in Spain and Abroad, and its Suc∣cession has not fail'd even to our Days. D. Fruela II. Succeeded his Brother D. Ordon̄o in the Throne of Leon, not by Right, but Force. Such as the beginning was the end, and his Power lasted not long; for he Reign'd Fruela II. King of Leon. only 14 Months. He was remarkable only for Baseness and Cruelty, and therefore was called The Cruel. The Sons of a Nobleman, called Osmundus, were by him put to Death, and his Brother Fruminius, Bishop of Leon, Banished; for that he durst not lay violent hands upon him, being an Ecclesiastical Person. By his Wife Munia, he had D. Alonso, D. Ordon̄o and D. Ramiro; and out of Wedlock, D. Fruela, Father of D. Pelayus, called the Deacon. To whom was afterwards Marry'd Da. Aldonca, or Alfonsa, Grandchild to King Bermudo, Sirnamed the Gouty. D. Fruela was buryed in Leon; his Fame and Memory are stained, not so much for his dying of the Leprosie, as for his Cowardize, and the Rebellion that in his time cut off Castile from the Crown of Leon. The People there were offended at the Death of the Earls killed by D. Ordon̄o's Command, this disgust was heightned by forcing them to come to Leon, to all Law Suits, and the Parliament. They had no fair opportunity of Re∣volting before, and therefore did it in the time of D. Fruela. For their Governors they chose two Nobles, with only the Title of Judges. The first named, was Nun̄o Rasura, and Lain Calvo, Men in great Power at that time. Lain was the youngest, and Married to Nun̄a Bella, his Colleague's Daughter. To him for his Valour, was given the charge of Martial
Affairs. Nun̄o Rasura, being a Person of known Prudence and Experience, was to take care of the Civil Government, and Admistration of Justice, which he commonly performed at Burgos, and sometimes in other parts of the Province. Two Leagues from Medina de Pomar, is a Town called Bijudico, and in it an ancient Judgment Seat, on which, the People there have a Tradition these two Judges used to sit and hear Causes. They were Governed by the ancient Laws of Castile, which continued till King Alonso the Wise abrogated them, and In∣stituted those called Las Partidas. It is not known how long these two Judges lived, or what Acts they performed. From them descended very notable and brave Men, for Lain Calvo was 5th Grandfather to the famous Cid Ruy Diaz. Gonzalo Nun̄o, was Son to Nun̄o Rasura, and held the same Employ with no less Honour. His Wife was Da. Ximena, Daugh∣ter to the Earl Nun̄o Fernandez, who was put to Death among the other Earls of Castile, by Kind Ordon̄o. Of her was born the Earl Fernan Gonzalez, a Person inferior to none of the ancient Heroes, for Virtue, Valour and Constancy; we shall speak of him in its proper place. Let us return to the Kings. It is most certain, that the Histories of Navarre, are full of Fables, and Lies, insomuch Of the King of Navarre. Fictions concern∣ing them. that they look more like Romances invented to divert idle Persons, than true Relations, and Records of Antiquity. This appears plainly throughout all Ages, but particularly in this we now write of. They say that King Garci In̄iguez, being slain in a Battle by the Moors, his Wife Da. Ʋrraca, then great with Child, was also killed, that D. Sancho de Guevara, passing by where she lay, saw the Child put out its Arm at one of the Wounds, the Mother had re∣ceived, and therefore ripping her open, took out the Infant, and bred him privately, till he came to Age. That after an Interregnum of 19 Years, this Child was brought to the Parlia∣ment, and being there made known, was Proclaimed King. It is needless to show how in∣congruous and ridiculous the story is, the weakness of the fiction is too obvious. The Re∣cords of the Monastery of S. Salvador de Leyte, tell us, that Fortun the elder Brother of D. Sancho, Reigned for some time, and then being weary of the World, took the Religious Ha∣bit in that Convent. This we are assured of, that D. Sancho, by his Wife Teuda, had four Uncer∣tainties concern∣ing that Country abridged. Sons, Garci Sanchez, Ramiro, Gonzalo, and Ferdinand, and Five Daughters, Ʋrraca, Teresa, Mary, Sancha, and Blanche. The last of these, some Authors say, was Marryed to D. Nun̄o Lord of Biscay, but no Lord of that name can be found to have been about that time. This Prince was Fortunate, not only for the many Children he had, but for his Success in War. By his Valour, all that had been lost in Sobrarve and Ribagorza, was recovered from the Moors, and not content with that, he added Biscay to his Dominions, and all the Country along the Ri∣ver Duero, till the Fountains thereof, and the Mountain Doca, and as far as Tudela and Hu∣esca. Nay, that he came as far as Zaragoça, appears by a Castle seated near that City called of Sancho Abarca. Besides he passed the Pyrenean Mountains, and subdued that of part Navarre lying on the other side those Hills. Whilst he was busie in this War, the Moors thinking he could not pass the Mounts in Winter, laid Siege to Pamplona. D. Sancho having notice of it, furnished all his Army with Buskins, to endure the cold, and this is the true reason he was King San∣cho Abarca why so called. called Abarca, signifying a Buskin. It was easie for him that had Conquered Nature, to over∣come his Enemies, they were Forced to raise their Siege. Much mention is made in these Wars, of one Centullo, an Officer of great Courage and Conduct. D. Sancho by these actions had gained Immortal Glory, but he cast a blemish upon it, by making War against Castile, which besides, the disgrace turned to his loss, as will appear hereafter. CHAP. III. The Reigns of Alonso the Fourth, and Ramiro the Second, Kings of Leon. Sancho Abarca King of Navarre slain by Ferman Goncalez Earl of Castile. Several de∣feats of the Moors. A great Eclypse. D. Alonso the Fourth, called the Monk, by the Death of D. Fruela, recovered the Alonso the Fourth King of Leon. Kingdom, which had been wrongfully taken from him, in the Year 924. John Arch∣bishop of Toledo dying, the Moors would not suffer any to be chosen in his place, therefore the Clergy to prevent all disputes, gave the Supreme Authority to the Curate of St. Justa, 924. and obeyed him as Bishop, which Custom was observ'd till Toledo was regained by the Chri∣stians. Fernan Gonzalez Earl of Castile. At this same time the Fame of Fernan Gonzalez Earl of Castile, spread through all Spain. Whether he had the Title of Earl from the King of Leon, or took it by consent of the People is not known. The Virtues that made him Famous, were Justice, Meekness, Zeal of Religion, and his great Experience in Warlike Affairs. By which means, he not only De∣fended his own Territories, but reduced those of the Kingdom of Leon, to the farther side of the River Pisuerga. From the Moors he took several Towns, and curbed the insolency of the Navarrois killing their King D. Sancho Abarca. The People of Navarre did much harm on the Frontiers of Castile, and not content with that, affronted the Embassadors, sent to demand satisfaction, so the matter came to be decided by Arms. The Earl broke into the Country of Navarre, driving all before him, the Enemies Army met him near a Town called Gollanda. Great was the Slaughter on both sides, before it could be decided who had
the better, till in the heat of the Action, the Generals Challenged one another. They met so Violently with their Lances, that both fell off their Horses, the King mortally Wounded, He over∣throws and kills the King of Navarre the Earl hurt, but not dangerously. This put such Life into the Soldiers of Castile, that giving a fresh Charge, they soon became Masters of the Field. At this time the Count of Toulouse, came in with fresh supplies to assist the Navarrois, who thereupon renewed the Fight, but with the same success; for the two Earls meeting, he of Toulouse was killed, and the Navarrois totally defeated. The Bodies of the King and Earl were carryed home, and honourably buryed. There is a dispute betwixt the Monasteries of S. Salvador de Leyte, and S. John de la Pen̄a, both pretending they have the Kings Body. He dyed about the beginning of the Reign of Alonso the Great, in the Year of our Lord 926 and the 26 of his Reign. His Son Garci San∣chez 926. succeeded him, and took the Name of King of Pamplona and Najara. He Reigned  King  and Najara. Forty Years, his Wife's Name was Da. Teresa. Thus much of Navarre. D. Alonso King of Leon, was more like his Predecessor, D. Fruela, than to his own Father. We have no account of any Vertue he was endued with, or any Action he perform'd, or Vi∣ctory he gain'd. For this cause he became so odious to his People, that in the Year 931, having 931. Reigned six and a half, he sent for his Brother D. Ramiro, and resigned the Scepter to him, King A∣lonso be∣comes a Monk, and leaves a Crown to his Bro∣ther Ra∣miro. resolving to retire, and become a Monk. He took the Habit in the Monastery of Sahagun, upon the River Cea, without any regard to his Reputation, or Provision made for his Son D. Ordon̄o, got upon his Wife Da. Ʋrraca Ximenez, Daughter to D. Sancho Abarca, King of Navarre, whom he left in his Infancy exposed to all Misfortunes. Da. Teresa, Sister to Queen Ʋrraca, was Married to the new King D. Ramiro, by her he had D. Bermudo, D. Or∣don̄o, D. Sancho and Da. Elvira. D. Ramiro being seated on the Throne, soon apply'd him∣self to renew the War upon the Moors; but the Inconstancy of D. Alonso put a stop to his good Designs; for the same Inconstancy that led him to take up that course of Life, made him quit it, and call himself King again. D. Ramiro to prevent the ill Consequences that might follow, immediately repaired to Leon, where his Brother then was, and obliged him, pressed with Famine, and want of all Necessaries to Surrender, and kept him Prisoner in that City. The Sons of D. Fruela were in Arms at that time in Asturias, which obliged D. Ra∣miro to repair thither. D. Fruela's Sons pretended to be offended because they had not been cal∣led Rebellion in Asturias. to Parliament when D. Alonso resigned the Crown; the People revolted because he had done so, and chose those Sons of D. Fruela to head them. Yet understanding their danger, they sent to offer all submission, provided, he would come without an Army, which he looking upon as an Insolence that they should prescribe Rules to their Sovereign, entred with a po∣werful Army, and vanquished his Enemies. The Multitude was pardoned, only the Heads punished. D. Fruela's Sons, as soon as taken, had their Eyes put out, the same was done to D. Alonso the King's Brother. Not far from the City Leon, is the Monastery of St. Julian, there they were all kept as long as they liv'd, and bury'd when dead, as was Da. Ʋrraca, the Wife of D. Alonso. These troubles being thus over, the King bent his Force against the Moors, and entring the Kingdom of Toledo, took the great Town of Madrid, plundred and Madrid taken and ruin'd. burnt, and then threw down the Walls. At the same time, the Moors desirous of Revenge, breke into the Country of the Christians, and first entred into Castile. The Earl being weakned by the late War of Navarre, sent a submissive Embassy to D. Ramiro, begging his Assistance, and excusing himself for what was past. It was easie to appease the King in that time of danger, therefore he marched and joyned the Earl. Near Osma they came to a Bat∣tle, many of the Moors were kill'd, the rest put to flight; and the Christian Army returned Moors over∣thrown. home loaded with precious Spoils. From this time, some are of Opinion, the Earls of Ca∣stile became again Feudataries to the Kings of Leon; for it is thought D. Ramiro would not have pardoned past Injuries upon other terms. D. Ramiro ardently desiring to extirpate the Moors, marched towards Zaragoça. Abenbaya held that City of Abderhaman, King of Cordova. With the King went the Earl Fernan Gonzalez. The Moor finding himself unable to oppose so great a Power, submitted himself to the King, with a promise of Tribute. No Faith is observed by Moors longer than they are forc'd, so this Infidel, as soon as our Army was departed, joyning with Abderhaman, broke into the Christian Borders, and advanced as far as Simancas. The King marched towards the Enemy, and gave them Battle, which was one of the bloodiest of those days, for 30000 Moors were kill'd, others say 60000. Fer∣nan Gonzalez, who had not been in the Fight, falling upon those that fled, made no less 30000 Moors kil∣led in a Battle. slaughter, as appears by an ancient Grant in the Monastery of St. Millan de la Cogulla, in the Mountains of Oca, in which all the Neighbourhood are commanded to supply that Monastery with all Necessaries, as the Earl had vowed when he went to this War. All the Army was persuaded that two Angels on white Horses fought at the head of them, and obtained this Victory. The chief Alfaqui, who is like a Bishop among the Moors, was taken, and thus the Province was deliver'd from the terror they had conceiv'd, on account of those mighty Pre∣parations. In the Year 934. which was the same in which this Battle was fought, on the 19th of July, there hap'ned so great an Eclypse of the Sun, that for the space of an hour the day 934. was turned into perfect darkness. Again on the 15th of October, the light of the Sun be∣came A great Eclipse of the Sun. Of the Earls of Barcelona. came yellow, a great opening appear'd in the Sky, wonderful Comets were seen towards the South, and all the Fruits of the Earth were blasted; besides other Tokens of God's Wrath. These Prodigies perplexed the People, but after the Battle, it was supposed, they threatned the Infidels. About this time dyed Miron, Earl of Barcelona, leaving 3 Sons under Age.
Seniofredus who succeeded him, Oliva Sirnamed Cabreta, who was Lord of Basalu and Cerda∣nia, and Miron, afterwards Bishop, and Earl of Girona. By reason of the Young Princes infan∣cy, the Government was long in the hands of his Unkle Seniofredus, Earl of Ʋrgel, which was a step for his Heirs to possess themselves of that Principality. Whilst this Seniofredus governed, a Synod of Bishops was held at a Town called Fuentecubierta in the Territory of Narbonne. Seniofredus, Earl of Barcelona, dying without Issue, tho' Marryed to Mary, the Daughter of King Sancho Abarca, Borello, Earl of Ʋrgel, Son to the other Seniofredus, by Force possessed himself of the Principality of Barcelona, for he could have no right to exclude Oliva, Brother to the deceased. King Ramiro growing Ancient, began to give his Mind to Peace, and apply him∣self to Religious Exercises, therefore with the spoils of the Moors, he Built a Monastery for Religious Works of King Ra∣miro. Nuns at Leon, of the invocation of S. Saviour, where he caused his Daughter Da. Elvira to take the Habit. Besides this, he Built Four other Convents, and when he was busied about these Affairs, Civil broils obliged him again to unsheath the Sword. Fernan Gonçalez, and James Nunez, two Men of Note, Rebelled, and finding themselves too weak, called the Moors, and their General Accipha to their Aid. First they destroyed the Territory of Salamanca, upon the River Tormes, then the Country of Aamya, and part of Asturias were wasted. D. Ramiro drove the Moors out of all the Country, took the Promoters of this Sedition, yet soon after set them at Liberty, only upon taking the Oath of Allegiance over again, a great Demonstration of the King's Mercy. Fernan Gonzalez, Earl of Castile, by his Wife Da. Ʋr∣raca, had a Daughter of the same Name, whom he Marryed to D. Ordon̄o, Son to the King of Leon. After this the King, tho' Aged, being an Enemy to Idleness, made another incur∣sion into the Enemies Country, as far as Talavera in the Kingdom of Toledo, and overthrew an Army of Moors that came to oppose him, killing 12000. and taking 7000 Prisoners. A great overthrow given the Moors. This Victory supported his Reputation, which often decays as Kings grow Old. Being re∣turned home, he dismissed his Army, loaded with the spoils of the Enemy, and went himself in Pilgrimage to Oviedo, to visit the many Bodies of Saints, that were there, and give Thanks to Almighty God for so many Blessings. At Oviedo, which is an unhealthy place, he fell Sick, yet returned to Leon, and there resigned up the Crown to his Son. Then having King Ra∣miro re∣signs the Crown and Dies. received the Sacraments of Penance, and the Holy Eucharist, at the hands of the Bishops, and Abbots there present, he dyed in the Year of our Lord 950. on the 5th Day of January, and was Buried in the Monastery of S. Saviour, which himself had Built. This Year was very remarkable, for the many Towns that in it were either Built or Repaired, which were Osma, 950. Roa, Riaça, and Clunia among the Arebaci, now called Corun̄a. Fernan Gonzalez, Earl of Ca∣stile, Many Towns built and repaired. much about this time, also Built Sepulveda in a place naturally strong, and by his Valour, the Christian cause was not only kept from decaying, but was daily advanced, and increased in honour. CHAP. IV. The Reigns of D. Ordonno the Third, D. Sancho the Gross, Kings of Leon, and of Garci Sanchez, King of Navarre, and actions of Fernan Gonzalez, Earl of Castile. BY the Death of D. Ramiro, his Son D. Ordon̄o inherited the Crown of Leon. He was a Ordonno the Third inherits the Crown of Leon. Man of great Courage, expert in Warlike affairs, and had Prudence to govern, but the shortness of his Reign which last but 5 Years, and 7 Months, gave him not time to Exercise his many Virtues. At his first Accession to the Crown, D. Sancho his Brother stirred up D. Garci Sanchez his Unkle King of Navarre, and the Earl Fernan Gonzalez against him. The Forces of both those Nations, at once entred the Territories of Leon, and the King being unpro∣vided, and not yet secure of the affection of his Subjects, resolved to Fortify himself, and not come to a Battle. His Enemies reaping no benefit by this attempt, returned home to their own Countries. But he to be revenged of the Earl, for joyning with his Brother and Un∣kle, without any Provocation given him, presently was divorced from Da. Ʋrraca the Is divorc'd from his Wife, and Marries another. Earls Daughter, and Marryed Da. Elvira, such was the Practice of that Age. By this Wife he had D. Bermudo, who in process of time, after many changes came to be King of Leon. The tumults raised in Galicia, for the Love that People bore D. Sancho, were soon appeased by the King, who to make the greater advantage of this success, entred that part of Lusita∣nia Subject to the Moors, plundering all the Country as far as Lisbon, whence he returned home. About the same time the Earl of Castile, took from the Moors the Castle of Carranço. Abderhaman King of Cordova, tho' now very Aged, gathered a mighty Army to the number of 80000 Fighting Men, the Command of them he gave to Almanzor Alhagib (that is Viceroy) a General of great Note, with orders furiously to over-run the Lands of the Christians. Such extraordinary preparations startled the Earl, he Listed all that were of Age to bear Arms, and finding his Army yet too small for so great a danger, held a Council of War at Mun̄on, Castile in∣vaded by the Infi∣dels. to consult what was best to be done, Opinions, as is usual in such Cases varyed, some were for putting all to the hazard of Battle, others for gathering up all Provisions into Places of
strength, that so the first fury of the Barbarians might be quelled before they came to Blows. Gonzalo Diaz, a Man of Quality, without respect to Honour, was for buying a Truce of the Moors. The Earl knew well that many there spoke by the Mouth of Gunzalo Diaz, but honour pre∣vailed, therefore he Gravely Discoursed them upon the Subject, extolling the Valour of his People, advising to rely on the Assistance of the Almighty, and not to Blemish their good Name with the Infamy of Cowardice. All agreed to him, and having offer'd up their Vows to God, moved towards the Enemy, who lay incamped near Lara. They came not immediately to a Battle, and the Earl the mean while going out a hunting, pursued a Wild Boor, up a difficult ascent to a little Hermitage, where a Holy Man called Pelagius, had a small Chap∣pel Dedicated to St. Peter. The Earl moved to devotion spared the Beast, and fell to his Prayers, and Pelagius coming, he stayed there all Night. In the Morning Pelagius told him, he should be Victorious, and that in token thereof a Prodigy would hap∣pen before the Fight. Then the Earl return'd to his People who were in care for him, and gave an Account of what had befallen him. The Souldiers took heart, and the Army being drawn up, before they engag'd, a Gentleman, by some call'd Pero Gonzalez de la Puente de Fitero, rode out before the rest, and the Earth opening swallow'd him, so that he was ne∣ver seen more. This terrify'd the Army, but the Earl told them it was the sign of Victory, the Hermit had spoken of, and since the Earth was not able to bear them, much less would the Enemy. At these words all reviv'd, the onset was given, and that vast multitude van∣quish'd The Ca∣stilians vanquish the Moors. by a handful of Christians. This Victory re-establish'd the tottering affairs of the Christians, and the Souldiers return'd home loaded with spoils of their Enemies. Part of the Booty was given to the holy Man Pelagius, and afterwards the Earl built a Monastery, dedi∣cated to St. Peter, upon the River Arlançd, where were interr'd the Bones of D. Gonzalo, his Father. In our days the Cell of Pelagius is shown on a Rock, near that Monastery. The Moors nothing daunted at this loss, prepar'd again to fall upon Castile, and on the other side King Ordon̄o, after the Incursion he made into Portugal, desirous of revenge, resolv'd to make War upon the Earl. A mighty danger threatned, but the King was easily appeas'd, by an Embassy the Earl sent, begging Pardon for what was past, and that he would not prefer his The Earl of Castile reconcil'd to the King of Leon. Another Victory of the Castilians. private animosities before the publick good of the Christians, when they were threatned with the extraordinary preparations made by the Moors. Therefore the King not only forgave, but sent him sufficient supplies to make head against the Moors, who were advanc'd as far as Santistevan de Gormaz, ravaging the Country. As soon as the two Armies met the Battle was given and well fought on both sides, but ours obtain'd the Victory, with a mighty slaugh∣ter of the Enemies. King Ordono joyful for this success, provided to fall upon the Moors again, when Death prevented him at Zamora in the Year 955. His Body was buried with great Pomp and Solemnity in the Monastery of St. Saviour at Leon, where his Father also had 955. been Interr'd. Our Historians do not mention where D. Sancho the King's Brother was during his Brothers Life, or whether ever they were reconcil'd; but all agree, that after the Kings Death, he was by the unanimous consent of all Men, Proclaim'd King. He was call'd the Gross, for his mighty bulk of Body, unfit to endure fatigue; yet he was good condition'd, show'd much Sancho Proclaim∣ed King. Constancy in Adversity, and had a generous disposition. In the second Year of his Reign, which was of our Lord 956, by reason of a Mutiny in the Army, not being well assur'd of the affections of his People, because many were inclinable to D. Ordon̄o, Son to D. Alonso the 956. Monk, he left his Kingdom, and fled for refuge to his Uncle, the King of Navarre. D. Or∣don̄o, easily stept into the Throne, and the more to secure himself, Married Da. Ʋrraca, that Ordonno expels Sancho. had been Divorc'd from his Cousin King Ordon̄o, with the consent of the Earl her Father. This D. Ordon̄o, was so perversly inclin'd, that he was call'd the Wicked, and giving way to his base temper, became odious and contemptible to the people. D. Sancho watch'd all op∣portunities, and mean while went to Cordova, where it was reported there were very able Physicians that could bring down his fat. Abderhaman receiv'd him with Courtesy, and be∣ing undertaken by the Doctors, his bulk was reduc'd to a moderate size. To make his favours the more compleat, Abderhaman gave him considerable supplies of Men to recover his King∣dom. At his first approach D. Ordon̄o his Adversary fled to Asturias, and thence to his Father-in-law Sancho re∣stored Ordonno. flies to the Moors. the Earl, who despising him for his Cowardice, took away his Wife. Thence he put himself into the hands of the Moors, among whom he liv'd poor and banish'd; and at last dy'd in Cordova. At the same time Castile was divided with Civil Broils. D. Vela, Grandson to the other D. Vela, who we said was Lord of Alava, had great Power there, and in the ad∣joining part of Castile; and being a hot Youth, took up Arms against the Earl Fernan Gonza∣lez. The Earl lost no time, but put him and his Allies to the rout, pursuing them so close they were forc'd to take into the Country of the Moors, which was the occasion of great trou∣bles and Misfortunes. Almanzor Alhagib, either at the instigation of these Outlaws, or to revenge the affront he had receiv'd, rais'd a powerful Army, and furiously invaded Castile. The Earl marching to meet him, by the way went to visit Pelagius the Hermit, but finding he was dead, and being troubled in mind, the said Pelagius appear'd to him in his sleep, as∣suring him of the Victory. The two Armies ingag'd near Piedrabita, and the dispute was hotter than ever it had been before; tho' the multitude of Enemies was great, and the Chri∣stian Army exceeded not 450 Horse and 15000 Foot. It is said the Fight lasted three days,
only ceasing at Night, upon the last day St. James the Apostle was seen at the head of the A great over∣throw of the Infi∣dels. Christians, and gained them the Victory. A greater number of the Infidels was slain than in any other Battle, our Forces pursuing them two days. After this Victory Embassadors came from all the Cities of Castile, and the neighbouring parts, to Congratulate with the Earl. Above all, D. Sancho, King of Leon, sent a splendid Embassy, enviting the Earl to be pre∣sent at the Cortes, or Parliament, he designed to hold in Leon. This a little perplex'd him, fearing some design was hid under that show of Friendship; but having no lawful Excuse to absent himself, he came on the day appointed, accompanied with the Nobility. The King went out to meet him, and the Parliament was held in the Year 958. but what their Business was, is not known. Authors relate, that the Earl sold the King a stately Horse and a Hawk, for a great Sum, upon condition, if not paid at the time perfixed the price should be doub∣led every day after. Besides, by the policy of Da. Teresa, the Queen Dowager, who de∣sired to revenge her Father's Death, it was contriv'd, that Da. Sancha, her Sister, should Practices against the Earl of Castile. be Marry'd to the Earl; she was then with her Brother D. Garcia, King of Navarre, and Da. Ʋrraca, the Earl's first Wife, was dead. It was resolv'd to lay a snare against the Earl, because down right force would not prevail, and K. Sancho was unwilling to break his word openly, therefore it was agreed to work underhand, and make use of the perfidiousness of the Navarrois. Garci Sanchez was ignorant of D. Sancho's designs, and therefore to revenge past wrongs, continually infested the Frontiers of Castile. After the Earl had complained by his Embas∣sdors, they broke out into open War, and came to a Battle, in which the Earl obtained the Victory. Our Historians write, that Lope Diaz, Lord of Biscay, assisted the Earl upon this occasion, and say he was Son to In̄igo Ezquerra, great Grandson to Zuria, formerly Lord of that Country. After this Victory, a Peace being concluded, the Earl in pursuance to the Ar∣ticles thereof, went to Navarre with a good Retinue unarmed, as to a Wedding; however, he was taken Prisoner by the King, who was at the place appointed, with armed Men. Hence he was delivered by the love of Da. Sancha, for whose sake he fell into that misfor∣tune, and with her escaped to his own Country. On the Frontiers of Castile, about Rioja, he was met by the Forces of Castile, that had vow'd, not to return till he were set at liberty. Great was the Joy on both sides. At Burgos the Nuptials were celebrated. The King of Na∣varre, deceived by his Sister, prepared for War, and the Earl not being backward, they En∣gaged on the Frontiers of Castile and Navarre, the King was overthrown, and taken Priso∣ner, The King of Navarre defeated, and taken by the Earl of Castile. in the Year 959. The same Year dy'd Abderhaman, King of Cordova, being of a great Age. Not long before his Death, the King of Leon sent him a solemn Embassy, desiring the Body of the Martyr Pelayus, which was not granted by him, but was soon after, by his Son and Successor Alhaca, who Reign'd 17 Years and 2 Months, and being inclinable to Peace, endeavoured to oblige all the neighbouring Kings. D. Garcia King of Navarre, was set at liberty, after he had been 13 Months a Prisoner at Burgos, the Tears of Da. Sancha, and 959. the Intreaties of other Princes having appeased the Earl. Queen Teresa, a Woman of a fierce and restless Spirit, being so far disappointed in her design against the Earl, laid other snares for him. She persuaded her Son, the King of Leon, to call him to the Parliament. He went, tho' with a Jealousie, the King came not out to meet him as before, but when he came to kiss his Hand, ordered him to be cast into Prison. This was a great Affliction to the Earl's People, Da. Sancha, his Wife, a Lady of a Masculine Temper, and ready wit, de∣signing to rescue him, feigned she would go in Pilgrimage to the Church of St. James the Apostle. Her way was thro' the City Leon, the King went out to meet and entertain her The Earl of Castile imprison∣ed in Leon and e∣scapes by the con∣trivance of his Wife. Friendly, as became a Person of her Quality, and his Aunt. With much intreaty, she ob∣tained leave to visit her Husband, and having stay'd all Night together, he went out in the Morning in her Cloaths, and got safe to his Country. The King understanding the Fraud, was somewhat concerned, but thinking better of it, sent her home Honourably to her Hus∣band, who over-joy'd at her coming, would not make War upon the King, but demanded what was due to him for the Horse and the Hawk he had sold him. No Payment was made, for the Sum, by reason of the delay, was greater than the King could pay, and the Earl made waste upon the Lands of the Kingdom of Leon. Whereupon, they agreed, that in sa∣tisfaction for the Debt, Castile for the future, should owe no Subjection to the Crown of Leon. This Agreement, they say, was made in the Year of our Lord 965. The same Year a powerful Army of Moors breaking thro' the Kingdom, laid Siege to the City Leon, but by the Valour of the Garrlson and Townsmen, were Repulsed with great loss. Vast flames of Fire rising out of the Sea, spread over the Country, destroying many Towns, even as far as Fire rises out of the Sea, and does great harm. Zamora, which beside the present loss, was look'd upon as an Omen of future Ills. D. Gar∣ci Sanchez, King of Navarre, dy'd the ensuing Year of 966, leaving by his Queen two Sons, D. Sancho and D. Ramiro, and three Daughters, Da. Ʋrraca, Da. Ermenesilda and Da. Te∣resa. 966. His Son D. Sancho inherited the Crown, joyntly with his Brother D. Ramiro. The lat∣ter Sancho in∣herits the Crown of Navarre. Reign'd 10 Years, and it is thought, dy'd without Issue. D. Sancho, who, as appears by his Grants, Rul'd 27 Years, Stiled himself King of Pamplona, Najara and Alava. He in∣creased his Dominions by the addition of the Lordship of Biscay, and City of Najara, the chief of that Principality. His Piety and Liberality appears by the Lands he gave to the Mo∣nastery of S. Salvadot de Leyte, S. Millan de Najara, S. John de la Pen̄a. His Wife was Da. Ʋrraca, by whom, he had D. Garci Sanchez, called the Trembler, because he used to quake at
the beginning of a Battle, for which defect, he made amends by his great Courage and Con∣duct, when heated in fight. Thro' the neglect of the Historians of that Age, nothing else of note appears in the Life of D. Sancho. In Galicia, there broke out new Commotions, that Country being full of Factions at a very unseasonable time, when they had enough to do against the Moors. The cause of these Tumults is not known, but it appears, they were soon appeased by the King's good Management. Some of the Mutiniers were Executed, others Banished to that part of Portugal which was under the King, upon the Frontiers of the Moors. That Province was govern'd by an Earl, called Gonzalo, a Man of wicked Principles, who, in defence of those Banished Persons, they being of his Faction, Rebelled, and broke in as far as the River Duero. There not confiding in his strength, he had recourse to Fraud, and with much entreaty, obtain'd pardon. He had formerly been in great Esteem and Favour with the King, and was now restored to the same Honour, whereby he found means to give the King a poisoned Apple. As soon as he had eaten it, the violence of the Poison spred it self King San∣cho Poison∣ed. thro' all his Veins, and seized the Vitals; he ordered himself to be carried to Leon, tho' gi∣ven over by the Physicians, but dy'd before he could reach the City, the third day after he was Poisoned, in the 967. having Reign'd 12 Years. His Body was bury'd in the Church 967. of St. Saviour at Leon. CHAP. V. The Reign of Ramiro the Third, King of Leon. Death of Earl Fernan Gon∣zalez. Normans infest the Coasts of Spain. Divisions among the Moors. Rebellion against the King of Leon, and his Death. IT is a thing beyond all dispute, that King Sancho was Marry'd to Da. Teresa, and that D. Ramiro was but 5 Years old when his Father dy'd. He Reign'd 15 Years; but by reason King Ra∣miro un∣der the Tuition of his Mo∣ther and Aunt. of his tender Age, the Government was in the hands of his Mother, and of Da. Elvira, his Aunt, whom others call Geloyra, both Ladies of singular Prudence, and extraordinary Qualities; yet because the King was little, and they Women, there hap'ned many Broils. Sisnandus, the Successor of Ermenegildus, Bishop of Compostella, and Son to the Earl Menendus, was Deposed and Imprisoned by King Sancho, for that he lived a dissolute Life, and spent the Revenue of the Church profusely, and in his stead was chosen Rodesindus, who was first Bishop, and after a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, in the Monastery of Celanova; he was besides of the Blood Royal, as Son to the Earl Gutierre Arias, and his Wife Aldara. Sisnandus up∣on the Death of the King, being set at liberty, took possession of the Bishoprick of Compostella, forcing Rodesindus, for fear of Death, to resign, and return to his Monastery, where he spent the rest of his Life, well pleased to be rid of that charge. There was Peace betwixt the Peace be∣twixt the Moors & King of Leon. Kingdoms of Leon and Cordova; for Alhaca, King of Cordova, to gain the good will of the new King, sent him the Body of the Martyr Pelayus, which was laid in the Monastery built at Leon by King Sancho, who desired to Enrich it with those Reliques. This Monastery was formerly called of S. John Baptist, afterwards of St. Pelagius, or Pelayus, now of St. Isidorus. The cause of changing the Names, was the Translation of the Bodies of those Saints at several times. The Peace was now disturbed at the persuasion of that D. Vela, who we said above fled to Cordova, and at his instigation, the Moors inclined to make War upon Castile, to re∣venge the great losses they had sustained by means of that Earl, King Alhaca tho' of himself more addicted to Peace than War; yet overcome by the importunity of his People, he gather∣ed a Powerful Army, and breaking into Castile possessed himself of Sepulveda, Gormaz, Si∣mancas The Peace broken by the Infi∣dels. Count Fernan Gonzalez dies. and Duen̄as. Encouraged with this Success, he broke the Peace that was between him, and the King of Leon, and invading his Dominions, took Zamora, and levelled it with the Ground. The great Grief the Earl Fernan Gonzalez, conceived for these Losses, was the cause of his Death, which hap'ned the ensuing Year 968. He dy'd at Burgos, and was bu∣ry'd near the River Arlança, in the Monastery of S. Peter, near the High Altar, where are to be seen his and his Wife's Tombs, with inscriptions, declaring whose they are. His Funeral was no less remarkable for the Tears of the People, lamenting the loss of so 968. good a Prince, by whose Valour, the Christian cause had been so long supported, than for the Grandeur and Magnificence of the Ceremony. By two Wives he had these Sons D. Gon∣zalo, D. Sancho, D. Garci Fernandez; others add Peter and Baldwin. He had also one Daugh∣ter, called Da. Ʋrraca, of whom, we have spoken before. Garci Fernandez succeeded his Fa∣ther, either because the others were dead, or if alive, he was preferred before them for his good Inclinations, and the early hopes he gave of his future Vertues, which soon increased, and grew to a mighty head. At the same time the Normans Inhabiting that part of France, formerly called Neustria, now Normandy, who, some Years before, were Converted Normans infest the Coast of Spain. to the Christian Faith, by Herveus, Bishop of Rheims, being accustomed to Rob upon the Coast of Spain, gathered a numerous Fleet, and wasted all the Coast of Galicia, burnt Villages, Castles and Towns, took the Men, and carried away all that was in their way. This Plague lasted 2 Years. The King by reason of his tender Years, could not defend his Peo∣ple.
Sisnandus Bishop of Compostella, a Man fitter to be a Souldier than a Prelate, gathering a number of the Natives, and charging the Enemy near a Town call'd Fornellas, was kill'd with a Dart, on the 20th of March 979. What was commendable in him is, that he indeavour'd to Wall the Town of Compostella, that so holy a place might not be expos'd to the insolency of the Enemy. 979. The Earl Garci Sanchez, being chosen to Command on that side behaved himself better, for surprizing the Normans near the Sea, as they marched loaded with plunder, and out of or∣der he made a great slaughter of them. This Captain Gunderedus was killed, the Booty and Prisoners recovered, and of their Ships not one escaped being taken or burnt. Thus Spain after long suffering by those Cruel and Barbarous People, was at length delivered from that Calamity, by so total an overthrow of them, as they had scarce received the like in any other Country. Let us now see what was doing among the Infidels, whom Ambition often di∣stracted to the advantage of the Christians. In the Year 976 dyed Alhaca King of the Moors at Cordova. The same Year, the Moor Rasis sent his Commentaries, writ in Arabick, of the affairs , to Balharab Miramamolin of Africk, by whose order they were composed. Alhaca left Eight Sons, all very Young, and the Moors not agreeing which of them should succeed, referred it to the Miramamolin of Africk, who appointed Hissem, tho' not above Divisions among the Moors. ten Years of Age. He Reigned 34 Years, only in show, for all the Power was in the hands of Mahomet Alhagib, that is the Viceroy, who took the name of Almanzor for the many Victo∣ries he obtained. Hence sprang civil Wars among those People, as is usual when Kings give themselves up to their ease, and so far they went, that Hissem lost the Crown. Our affairs were in no better Posture, for the King being bred among Women, was effeminate, besides that his Queen Da. Ʋrraca managed him as she pleased, without any regard to the prudent advice of his Mother, or his Aunt. He seldom gave ear to his Subjects, and for the most part returned harsh Answers, which highly offended the Nobility of Galicia, a People natu∣rally fierce, who finding all the Commonalty dissatisfied rebelled. D. Bermudo the Kings Cousin, and Son to D. Ordon̄o the third, headed the Rebels, in hopes to recover his Fathers Kingdom, which he pretended was wrongfully kept from him. This danger awaked the King out of his Lethargy. The War was begun, and lasted two Years, with various success, Rebellion against the King of Leon. the People being divided betwixt the two parties. At length a Battle was fought, near a Town called Portela Arenaria, many were killed on both sides, and they parted upon equal Terms. After this Fight D. Bermudo, remained Master of Galicia, and placed his Court at Compostella. Pelayo, the Son of Earl Roderick, was made Bishop of Compostella, but for his Wicked Life deposed, and Peter Mansorius a Monk, and Abbot of approved Vertue, put in his place. Earl Roderick to restore his Son, brought in the Moors, who took the City Compostella, and threw down one side of the Church of S. James. This Sacrilege went not unpunished, for the greatest part of that Army perished by the Flux. Almançor himself, asking the cause of this distemper, and being told by a Moor, that one of the Disciples, of the Son of Mary was there buryed, resolved to desist from that enterprize, but dyed in his return home at Medina Celi, upon the Borders of Aragon. On the other side also, the Moors took many Towns, as Guzman, Atiença, and Simancas, where D. Ramiro who came to relieve it was defeated. Never was Spain in a more desperated Condition. After the departure of the Moors, by the indu∣stry of the King and Archbishop, the Wall of S. James his Church was repaired, and the Church reconciled, for it had been profaned by the Infidels. Pelayo, a wicked Prelate suc∣ceeded Peter, and he for his Scandalous Life being depos'd, his Brother Wimara was substi∣tuted, who prov'd no better, and was drown'd in the River Min̄o. In those days the Clergy was very debauch'd, not only in Spain, but most parts of Christendom. In Rome there was a Schism, Boniface, Benedict and John striving for the Chair. Let us return to D. Ramiro, who spent his Life in Ease and Idleness. Thus Death seiz'd him at Leon in the Year 982. His Body was Interr'd in the Monastery of Destriana, built by his Grandfather D. Ramiro, in the 982. Valley Ornensis, by the Invocation of St. Michael. Thence 200 Years after, by Order of King Ferdinand the Second, he was Translated to the Cathedral of Astorga. Sampyrus, Bi∣shop of Astorga, of whom we have made much use hitherto, ended his History in this place. Pelagius Bishop of Oviedo goes on, he lived in the time of D. Alonso the Emperor. The Cre∣dit of both these Authors is great, because they write of things they were Eye Witnesses to, but Sampyrus is most Esteemed, and looked upon as the Gravest Author. CHAP. VI. The Reign of Bermudo the Second, called the Gouty, King of Leon. Discord betwixt him and the Earl of Castile. Leon and Barcelona, taken by the Infidels. Garcia King of Navarre dies. His Son Garci Sanchez succeeds him. UPon the Death of D. Ramiro, the Crown fell to D. Bermudo, as well in regard to his right, being the King's Cousin-German, as that he possessed himself of it by Force of Bermudo the second King of Leon. Arms. He Reigned 17 Years, was sickly, and Subject to the Gout, for which reason he was called the Gouty. By him the Laws of the Goths, were confirmed, and the Canons, and
Decrees of the Popes ordered to be of Force in secular Causes. Before we Treat of this King, Garci San∣choz Earl of Castile. it is requisite to speak of the Earl Garci Sanchez of Castile. At his first Accession to the Go∣vernment, he Fought a Battle with the Moors near Santistevean de Gormaz, on the Banks of the River Duero, and killed a great Number of them, putting the rest to Flight. In this Battle there hap'ned a wonderful Accident. Fernan Antolinez was hearing of Mass when the Fight began, and being loath to leave his Devotions, stayed it out. Then fearing to be shamed as a Coward, kept close in his House. But whilst he was in the Church, one like him, doubtless, his good Angel, was seen in the heat of the Battle, behaving himself so brave∣ly, A won∣derful Pro∣vidence. that it was believed, through his means the Victory was obtained. To confirm this, fresh bruises and spots of Blood were seen upon his Horse and Armour, by which his Credit was miraculously saved. Authors say, the Earl Garci Fernandez had two Wives, the one called Argentina, a Frenchwoman, with whom he fell in Love, as she went in Pilgrimage to Com∣postella. Six Years after she ran away with a Frenchman, whilst her Husband,  Sick, but he recovering, followed her into France, and being admitted into the House by a Sister-in-Law of hers called Sancha, in hopes to Marry the Earl, he killed Argentina and her Gallant in Bed, and then returning with Sancha into Spain, was Marryed to her, with great Pomp and Solem∣nity at Burgos. Many look upon this story as Romantick, and affirm the Earls Wife was called On̄a, and that the Monastery of S. Salvador de On̄a, Built by him, had the Name of her. Others say her Name was Abba, as appears by their Tombs, at Arlança and Carden̄a. There is also another relation, which says, that during the Earls absence in France, the Moors pierced as far as Burgos, and destroyed the Monastery of S. Peter of Carden̄a, killing all the Monks, which others say was 100 Years before this time, unless the same thing hap'ned twice. At this time the Moors, put to Death many for the Faith; and there wanted not some Examples of Divine Justice on them for their Cruelty, whereof Alcortexi King of Sevil was Christians suffer un∣der the Moors. one. He in the time of D. Burmudo, breaking into Galicia, destroyed the City Compostella, but his impiety passed not unpunished, for such a violent Plague raged in his Army, that few of them returned home to carry the News, and be Witnesses of the Divine Vengeance. This danger being over, other new troubles hap'ned in Spain, as great as any had been since it began to lift up its Head. These were caused by the discord betwixt the King of Leon, and the Earl D. Garcia, who ought to have joyned their Power for the Publick good. Ma∣homet Discord betwixt the King of Ieon, and Earl of Castile. governed the Kingdom of the Moors, in the Name of Hissem the King, his greatest Aim was to destroy the Christians. D. Vela, he that we said, in the time of the Earl Fer∣nan Gonzalez, fled to the Moors, now blew these Coals. The Moors joyning their Forces with a Body of Christians that followed D. Vela, entred the Territories of the Christians, and passing the River Duero, which for many Years had parted the two Nations, incamped on the Banks of the River Astura, or Estola, that runs by Leon. King Bermudo, tho' inferior to the Enemy, gathering what Forces he could, surprized them and entered their Camp, where they Fought in disorder, all in confusion. Many of the Infidels were killed at the first on-set, some gathering in small Bodies defended themselves, other fled, till the Moorish General get∣ting together all he could, drew them up without the Camp, then charged the Christians, who being but few in number, and tired, could not stand that shock. In an instant the Fortune of the Day was changed, the Victors were over-come, and being closely pursued, few of them got unhurt to Leon, but many wounded. The Town had been taken, but that the Winter coming on, obliged the Enemy to depart, having gained much honour and plunder, and re∣solving to return as soon as the Season would permit. D. Bermudo, because the City was weak, caused the Bodies of the Saints and Kings, to be translated to Oviedo, and removed thither himself. The care of fortifying and defending of Leon, was committed to the Earl Guilien Gonzalez. This disaster hap'ned in the Year 984. in which Miron Bishop of Girona, 984. Son to Miron Earl of Barcelona dyed. In that Country a Body of Moors, near the Castle of Moncada, overthrew Borello, Cousin to the Bishop Miron. Above 500 Christians were slain, the rest, with the Earl Borello, fled to Barcelona. The following Year 985 was remark∣able 985. for destruction of the two Famous Cities, Leon and Barcelona. On the first of Day of July, the Moors laid Siege to Bercelona, and took it on the 6th day of the same Month, many of the Barcelona taken by the Moors. Citizens were carryed away into Slavery to Cordova, but the City was soon recovered by the Christians. Before it was taken, Borcello got out to gather Forces to relieve it, and ha∣ving Mustered a good Body at Maresa, and other Neighbouring Places, regained the City. The Earl Borello dyed eight Years after, leaving by his two Wives, Ledgardi and Aymcrudi, two Sons, Raymund and Armengauds, the Eldest Earl of Barcelona, the other of Ʋrgel, and was head of the Noble Family of the Armengauds, or Armengols in Catalonia, of which in process of time, there were many brave Commanders. In the other part of Spain, Mahomet, proud with his last success, gathering a powerful Army, besieged Leon. The City held out almost a Year, tho' continually battered with all sorts of Engines. Earl Guillen Gonzalez made it appear, of how great Consequence it is to have a brave Commander. Being sick in The Roy∣al City of Leon, and other Places; ta∣ken by the Infidels. Bed, with the continual Fatigue of so many Months, he was told the Town was in great danger, by reason of a furious Assault that was then given, he then caused himself to be carryed in a Chair, to the place where the greatest danger was, and so effectually encouraged his Soldiers, that they made good their Ground for Three Days. Then seeing the Town was entred, he cast himself into the midst of the Infidels, and dyed with his Sword in his hand. The Barbarians
inraged for the loss they had sustained, put to the Sword all Sexes, and Ages indifferently, Men, Women, and Children, and after plundering the City, cast down the Walls, and all other Works about it. The same disaster befell Astorga, Valencia del Campo, the Monastery of Sahagun, Gordon, Alva, Luna, and other Towns, and Villages which were taken, plundered and burnt to the Ground. Next breaking into Castile, they took, plundered and burnt Os∣ma, Berlanga, and Atiença, without meeting any Opposition. Nevertheless such was the madness of the Christians, that not regarding the publick Calamities, they destroyed one another upon Private Feuds and Animosities. For the Year following, Seven most Noble Bro∣thers, The Mur∣der of Se∣ven Bro∣thers cal∣led three Infants de Lara. called the Infantes de Lara, were slain by the Treachery of their Unkle Ruy Velasquez, without any regard of Consanguinity, they being the Sons of his Sister Da. Sancha, and by the Fathers side, descended from D. James Porcellos, Earl of Castile. These 7 Brothers have been very famous, no less for their Noble Actions than Unfortunate Death. It fell out that Ruy Velasquez Lord of Barcelona, Solemnizing his Marriage with Da. Lambra, Cou∣sin to the Earl Garci Fernandez at Burgos. A great concourse of People was at the Wed∣ding, and among the rest the Earl Garci Fernandez, and the seven Brothers with their Father. A dispute arose betwixt Gonzalo the Youngest of the Brothers, and Alvar Sanchez, a Kinsman of Da Lambra, yet so that no harm was then done, yet Da. Lambra taking it upon herself, to wreak her revenge in the Town of Barbadillo, whither the Brothers out of respect went to accompany her, she caused a Slave to throw a wet Cowcomber at Gonçalo, which according to the Custom of Spain was a hainous affront. The Slave fled for shelter to Da. Lambra, but it availed him not, for in her very Arms they killed him. Ruy Velasquez who was then absent, as soon as he came, in a rage for the affront given his Wife, studyed how to re∣venge himself upon the Seven Brothers. He thought it best to ensnare those he design'd to destroy with the show of Friendship, and therefore contrived that Gonzalo Gustio, should be sent to Barbarous treachery Cordova, upon pretence of receiving some Money of that King, but in reality to have him destroyed, to which effect he had writ a Letter in Arabick to the King, who pitying the No∣ble Persons Grey-Hairs, only caused him to be imprisoned. His confinement was not so close but the King's Sister could come at him, and on her 'tis said, he got Mudarra Gonzalez, the Founder of the most Noble Family of Manriquez. Ruy Velasquez his rage was not appeased with the harm done to Gonzalo Gustio. Near to Almenara, in the Territory of Arausana, at the Foot of the Mountain Moncayo, he laid the Seven Brothers in Ambush, pretending to make an incursion into the Country of the Moors. The Brothers suspected no harm, but Nun̄o Salido their Tutor, endeavoured to disswade them, as fearing some Treachery, yet his words were in vain. With them were 200 Horse, a small number for the Multitude of Moors, that fell on him. The Treason being discovered, the Brothers fought desperately, not so much for any hopes of Victory, as to revenge their own Deaths. They were all killed, and with them their Tutor Salido, the Heads being sent to Cordova, afforded a pleasant Specta∣cle to the King, but a sad one to their Father, to whom, tho' wounded and disfigured, they were shown. This misfortune moving the King to Compassion, he freely dismiss'd Gonzalo Gustio. Mudarra begoten on the King's Sister, being 14 Years of Age, was by her sent to his Father, and afterwards revenged the Death of his Brothers, killing Ruy Velasquez. Da. Lumbra his Wife, the cause of all these mischiefs, was stoned to Death and burnt. Mudarra by revenging his Brothers, gained the Love of his Mother-in-Law, and all the Family, to that degree that he inherited his Fathers Estate. Besides, Da. Sancha adopted him, after this strange, yet remarkable Manner. The same day he was Baptized and Knighted, by the Earl Garci Sanchez, his Mother-in-Law resolving to adopt him, put over him the Sleeve of a A strange way of Ad∣option. very large Smock, and his Head coming out at the top of it, she Kissed him, and thus he was received into the Family, and looked upon as her Son, Ordon̄o was Son of Mudarra, his Grandson was James Ordon̄ez de Lara, he that fought the Sons of Arias Gonzala, who de∣fended their Country from the infamy of having killed King Sancho, slain by Vellido Dolphos, as shall be related in its place. This James Ordon̄ez was Father to Earl Peter, well known for the Love Queen Ʋrraca showed him, and Grandfather to Amalaricus de Lara, Lord of Molina, from whom is descended the Family of Manriquez, and even that of the Kings of Portugal, by the Mother's side, for Mafalda Daughter of Amalaricus, was Marryed to D. A∣lonso the first of the name, and first King of Portugal, tho' some will have it, that Mafalda was of the House of Savoy. But, more shall be said of this hereafter. The Tomb of Mudar∣ra is to be seen in the Cloister of the Monastery of S. Peter de Arlanza. That Monastery and the other of S. Millan de la Cogulla, are at Variance about which of them has the seven Bro∣thers. Spain was now at Peace, after so many Combustions, and there rather wanted the Power, than the will to raise new ones. This quiet lasted till the 7th Year after the Death of the seven Brothers, which was the Year of our Lord 993. when the Moors wasted the 993. Country of Portugal, and breaking a new into Galicia, again took and burnt the City Compo∣stella. Miracle at St. James his Tomb. Nor had they spared the Apostles Sepulcher, but that a sudden Light which appeared over it terrifyed them. The Bells, as a Trophy of their Victory, they caused to be carryed on the Backs of Christians to Cordova, where for many Years they served instead of Lamps in the Mosque. Divine Vengeance pursued them, many dyed of the Flux, many of the Plague, and many at the hands of the Christians, the King keeping close in their rear, and doing them great harm. Few returned home. One of them was Mahomet the General. This same Year dyed D. Garcia King of Navarre, his Son Garci Sanchez called the Trembler, as was said before, Garci San∣chez King of Navarre
succeeded him. He Reigned 7 Years, was very Famous for many Victories obtained, Libe∣ral, or rather Prodigal, which drained his Treasures, and obliged him to lay new Taxes. In the Monastery of S. Millan̄, there are Grants of this King; let every one judge what credit is to be given to them. In them 'tis specified, that he had a Brother called Gonzalo, and that he with his Mother Ʋrraca, had the Kingdom of Aragon; which, if true, either that Dominion lasted not long, or he dying without Issue, it fell again to his Brother. King Bermudo joyful with his success against the Moors, began to consider, that if the Forces of the Christians were united, it were easie to gain upon the Infidels, and keep them under. Here∣upon, he sent Embassadors to the King of Navarre, and Earl of Castile, to invite them, lay∣ing aside all Animosities, to enter into a League with him, for the common Good. Those Princes readily agreed to such advantageous Proposals, and a powerful Army was formed of the three Nations. The King of Navarre came not in Person, being, as is supposed, busie in setling his new acquired Kingdom. King Bermudo, tho' Sick of the Gout, was carried in Christian Princes unite, and defeat the Infidels. a Litter, and with the Earl of Castile, moved towards the Moors, of whom, they were in∣formed, that having raised new Forces, and plunder'd great part of Galicia, they now march∣ed towards Castile. Near a Town called Calacanaçor, on the Frontiers of Castile and Leon, the two Armies met, and came to a Battle, which was obstinately fought till Night parted them, without discerning which side had the better, only, that the Moors marched away in silence by Night, which show'd they had got the worst of it. Besides, it was more like a Flight than Retreat, for they left much of their Baggage in the Camp, and for haste drop∣ed no less along the way they marched. It is said, this misfortune went so much to the heart of the Moorish General Mahomet, that he dy'd in the Valley of Begalcorax, refusing to take any Sustenance, in the Year of our Lord 998. This Man managed the Government of the Moors 25 Years for his King, who minded nothing but his ease. He was a Man of great 998. Courage, an Enemy to Idleness, and entred the Territories of the Christians 52 several times, coming off very often Victorious. The same day the Battle was fought at Calacanaçor, one in the Habit of a Fisherman was seen at Cordova, on the Bank of the River Guadalquivir, sing∣ing in Arabick and Spanish Metre, At Calacanacor, Almanzor lost the drum. It was believ'd the Devil in Humane Shape proclaimed their Defeat, because the People of Cordova endea∣vouring to lay hold of him, he vanished like a Shadow. The dead General's Body was car∣ried to Medinaçeli. CHAP. VII. The Death of King Bermudo the Gouty, and beginning of the Reign of D. Alonso the Fifth, King of Leon. Many Troubles among the Moors. The Earl of Castile slain by the Infidels. AFter the Death of Mahomet, his Son Abdelmelic took upon him the Government of that Kingdom, the same Year his Father dy'd, and continued in that command 6 Decay of the Moor∣ish King∣dom. Years, and 8 Months. From this time forward, the Kingdom of the Moors, which had been supported by the Valour of Mahomet, began visibly to decline. Civil Discord, the Bane of all Empires, and bad Government, were the cause of its decay. Abdelmelic who was more inclinable to Peace than War, took little notice of the first Eruptions of those Tumults, which ought to have been suppressed in their first rise. True it is, immediately after his Father's Death, he entred the Teritories of the Christians, spreading a great Terror, and threw down to the Ground all that had been built since the City Leon was last destroyed. Yet the beginning of this War was more successful to the Moors than the end, for the Earl of Castile falling upon them, put them to flight, and but a small number returned home. This struck so great a terror into those People, that they never attempted to make War again as long as Abdelmelic Ruled. The Joy of this Victory was drowned in the scarcity of Provi∣sions, caused by a great Drought. Gudésteus, Bishop of Oviedo, had been kept three Years Famine look'd up∣on as a Judgment for impri∣sonment of a Bi∣shop. in Prison by the King, who was subject to give ear to the whispers of wicked Men. The People, and among them, some of Note said, the Famine was a Judgment of God for the wrong done the Bishop, and that unless Reparation were made him, there was cause to fear a heavy Plague might follow. There was danger of a Mutiny, for the Multitude when they take Religion for their Pretence, sooner obey the Priest than the King, therefore Gudesteus was discharged out of Prison. This same Year of our Lord 999, in which hap'ned the Fa∣mine, was remarkable for the death of King Bermudo, who dy'd of the Gout, with which 999. King Ber∣mudo's death. he had been long troubled, in a Town called Berit. His Body was Interred at Villabuena, or Valbuena, whence 23 Years after, it was translated to the Church of S. John Baptist in Leon. He had two Wives, one called Velasquita, the other Da. Elvira. From the first he was Divorced, rather thro' the Corruption of those times, than for that it was Lawful. By His Wives and Issue. her he had a Daughter, called Christina. By Da. Elvira, he had D. Alonso, and Da. Teresa. Besides, on two Sisters he had to do with in his Youth, he got D. Ordon̄o, Da. Elvira, and Da. Sancha. Christina, the King's eldest Daughter, was Married to D. Ordon̄o, called the Blind,
who was of the Blood Royal; they had Issue, D. Alonso, D. Ordon̄o, D. Pelayo, and Da. Al∣donza, Marry'd to D. Pelayo, called the Deacon, Grandson to King Fruela, by D. Fruela, his Bastard Son. D. Pelayo, and Da. Aldonça, had Issue, Peter, Ordon̄o, Pelayo, Nun̄o and Tere∣sa, from whom descended the Earls of Carrion, Men of great Wisdom and Valour, as will appear in its place. Pelayus Ovetensis, and D. Lucas de Tuy, attribute to King Ber∣mudo that passage of Ataulphus, Bishop of Compostella, and the wild Bull that was let lose a∣gainst him, which was spoken of before. In this particular, I give more Credit to the Hi∣story of Compostella, which relates it as I have done, and it is a sufficient proof of their mi∣staking the time, that about this, there is no Bishop of Compostella, called Ataulphus, to be heard of. King Bermudo appointed Melendo Gonzalez, Earl of Galicia, and his Wife Da. Mayor, to be Tutors to his Son D. Alonso, the young King, during his Minority. These, because D. King A∣lonso un∣der the Tuition of the Earl of Galicia & his Wife. Alonso was but 5 Years of Age, by the consent of the Cortes, or Assembly of States, and in pursuance to the Will of the Deceased, Governed the Kingdom with great Prudence and Integrity. The King being of Age, as a Reward of their Fidelity, and to make their Au∣thority the greater, Married their Daughter Da. Elvira, by whom he had D. Bermudo, and Da. Sancha. He Reign'd 29 Years. In the second Year of his Reign, which was of our Lord just 1000. D. Garci Sanchez, the Trembler, King of Navarre, dying, his Son D. Sancho, whom he had by his Wife Da. Ximena, (not Elvira, or Constantia, or Estephania, as some 1000. Sancho, K. of Navarre will have it) succeeded in the Throne. This Prince in his Youth was under the Care and Tuition of Sancho, Abbot of S. Salvador de Leyte, who bred him Vertuously, and taught him all that is fit for a Prince to know. He Reigned 34 Years, was so remarkable for his Vertue, that he gained the name of the Greater; and so fortunate, that he got under his Dominion almost all that the Christians possessed in Spain. But it was no good advice to divide it, as he did among his Children, thereby weakning the Forces of the Kingdom. As the two Chri∣stian Kingdoms about this time enjoy'd Peace; so Castile first, and then the Moors fell to War among themselves, both of them by their Civil Broils hast'ning their ruin. D. Sancho Garcia Rebelled against his Father, the Earl D. Garci Fernandez; perhaps, thinking he lived The Earl of Castile's Son re∣bells a∣gainst his Father. too long, and being impatient to wait the few Years he had to live. Both sides had recourse to Arms, and the Subjects being divided, the strength of that Principality was weakned. The Moors were not ignorant of these Distractions, and therefore resolved to make their ad∣vantage of them. Accordingly they destroyed Avila, that had been Rebuilt not long before. Corun̄a, and Santistevan de Gormaz, in the Territory of Osma, suffered the same fate. The Affairs of the Christians were in great danger, and yet the foreign Danger did not appease their domestick Tumults, only kept them from coming to Blows. Earl Garci Fernandez be∣ing much concerned at the harm the Moors did, with what Force he could gather, went out to meet them. The Fight was bloody, but the Earl having but a small number of Men, was defeated, and himself taken so desperately wounded, that he dy'd in a few days. He Earl of Castile kil∣led by the Moors. Governed Castile about 38 Years, some say 49. was nothing inferior to his Father, and tho' the Enemy had power to take away his Life, the fame of his Actions will last for ever. His Body being Ransom'd for a great Sum of Money, was bury'd in the Monastery of S. Peter de Carden̄a. This unhappy Battle was fought in the Year 1006. The Earl left a Daughter, called Da. Ʋrraca, who was a Nun, in the Monastery of S. Cosmus and Damianus, in the 1006. Town of Covarravias. This Monastery was built by the Earl her Father, and endowed with great Revenues, besides many rich Gifts, upon condition, that if any Maid of his Family would not Marry, she should be maintained with the Revenue of that Monastery. D. San∣cho succeeded his Father in the Earldom of Castile, much blemished for Rebelling against him, Sancho suc∣ceeds in the Earl∣dom of Castile. and having thereby been the cause of his death. In all other respects he was good and ver∣tuous, and had very commendable parts. About the same time dy'd at Cordova, the Alhagib, or Viceroy Abdelmelic. Abderhaman, a base, and cowardly Fellow, in scorn, called Sanci∣olo, succeeded him. But he dying within 5 Months, Mohomet Almahudi, who, I suppose, was of the Race of the Abenhumeyas, by force of Arms possessed himself of King Hissem, who being given wholly to his pleasure, was only supported by others. Mahomet gave out he had killed the King, Beheading one like him, and keeping him privately, to make use of him, if Mahomet usurps & shuts up Hissem. needful. A Kinsman of Hissem's, called Zulema, came over out of Africk, who gathering what Forces he could, and joyning with those of D. Sancho, Earl of Castile, overthrew the Tyrant in Battle, near Cordova. In this Battle were slain 35000 Moors, which was the very Flower and Strength of that Kingdom; so that for the future, they decayed the more sen∣sibly. Is over∣thrown, and 35000 of his Men slain. D. Sancho gave great Tokens of his Courage and Conduct, and was the principal In∣strument of gaining the Battle. After the Fight, Mahomet shut himself up in the City, and as he had designed, against the greatest danger, took out Hissem from the place where he had kept him Prisoner. Being brought out to the People, he advised them to prefer their own natural Lord before a Stranger. But the People for fear of the Victor, giving no ear to his words, he was forced to fly to Toledo, carrying Hissem with him, or else hiding him again. Almario was Alhagib, or Viceroy to Mahomet, who to strengthen his Party against the Ene∣my, and obtain aid of the Christians, went into Catalonia, where he made great offers, and proposed mighty advantages to those Princes, if they would assist him. D. Ramon, Earl of Roman Earl of Barcelo∣no. Barcelona, and Armengol of Ʋrgel, at the persuasion of this Infidel, joyned their Forces to
those Mahomet had gather'd in and about Toledo. They all made up 9000 Christians, and 34000 Moors. Near Acanatalbacar the two Armies met, and ingag'd with such fury, that both left Wings were Victorious, and both the right put to flight. The Bishops Arnulphus of Vique, Aecius of Barcelona, and Otho of Girona, were here kill'd; a shame that such Men should be seen in Arms for the Moors. Besides, the Earl of Ʋrgel was slain. Mahomet, by his own Valour, retriev'd the Victory. Zulema seeing himself thus vanquish'd fled first to Açafra, and not thinking that place secure, went farther off. All this was in the Year of our Lord 1010. 1010. CHAP. VIII. Continues the mighty Revolutions among the Infidels, with the dismembring of the mighty Kingdom of Cordova, and Erecting of several other little Sovereignties in the Chief Cities of Spain. ZƲlema being overthrown, as was said in the last Chapter, Mahomet Almahudi, the Con∣queror, 1010. remained sole Monarch, but according to the Custom of those deprav'd times, Dissenti▪ among the Moors. his Viceroy govern'd all, insomuch, that after the departure of D. Ramon, he Murder'd his Master; and thus Hissem the true King, was restor'd to the Crown. Mahomet's head was sent to Zulema, who stayed at a Town call'd Citavan, to see what would be the end of all those mighty Revolutions. It was the design of the Moors to bring Zulema to submit himself to Hissem, as his lawful Prince, and for whom at first he seem'd to have taken up Arms; but he gathering what Forces he could, wasted the Neighbouring Country. The Faction of the Abenhumeyas, which was still in Cordova, was inclin'd to Zulema, and for his sake design'd to Murder Hissem, but he having notice of it, was upon his Guard. Zulema being disap∣pointed this way, sollicited the Earl of Castile D. Sancho, on account of their late Friendship to assist him again. D. Sancbo considering better of it, made a League with Hissem, more to his own advantage; for by it six Castles, taken from the Christians by Mahomet Alhagib, were restor'd to him. Mean while Obeydalla the Son of Mahomet Almahudie, with the assistance of his Friends, made himself King of Toledo. Other Authors call him Abdalla, and affirm he Obeydalla calls him∣self King of Toledo. took to Wife Da Teresa, the Sister of D. Alonso King of Leon, with the consent of her Bro∣ther. This Alliance tended to secure both Kingdoms, and there was a farther prospect of Converting the Moor. The Maid being thus deceiv'd was carry'd to Toledo, where the Wed∣ding was kept with great Solemnity, and the Supper was protracted till a great part of the Night was spent. After Supper the Lady was conducted to take her rest, and the Moor coming hot with desire, she bid him forbear her unless he were Baptiz'd, but his Passion gave him not leisure to consider, so by force he had his will. Divine Vengeance soon overtook him, for he fell dangerously ill, and understanding the cause of his Sickness, sent Da Teresa to her Brother with rich Presents. She spent the rest of her Life in the Monastery of St. Pelagius in Leon. Obeydalla his Reign was but short, being vanquish'd and taken Prisoner by the For∣ces of Hissem. The troubles and confusion among the Moors in all parts of the Kingdom con∣tinu'd, and offer'd the Christians a fair opportunity of making their advantage; but that pri∣vate grudges always are fatal to the publick. Not only discord, but Famine also, raged among the Moors, by reason they had neglected tilling. Zulema finding the Earl of Castile would not assist him, Confederated himself with the Moorish Kings of Zaragoça and Guadala∣jara. Famine among the Moors. With their aid he took Cordova and Hissem flying into Africk, he was left sole Lord of that Kingdom. Among those that follow'd Hissem, there was a principal Man call'd Haytan. This Man possess'd himself of Origuela, a City on the Mediterranean Sea, and invited Hali Abenhamir, Governour of Ceuta, for Hissem into Spain, upon pretence of making him King. Zulema being inferior in strength to them both, was overthrown near Cordova, deliver'd up to the Conquerour by the Citizens, and kill'd with Hali's own hand, after he had upbraided him with being the first that Rebelled against his natural Lord Hissem. There is no Faith betwixt Companions in Sovereignty. Hayton complain'd that the new King did not perform what he had Covenanted with him, and therefore joyning with Mundar the Son of Hiaya King of Zaragoça, they gathered Forces on both sides, and came to a Battle near Zaragoça, in which Haytan was vanquished. Hali pursuing Haytan came to Guadix, and was there killed by his own Eunuchs as he was Bathing. By the Votes of the Soldiers Cazin, Brother to Hali was brought from Sevil, and made King of Cordova. He Reigned Three Years, Four Months, and Twenty Six Days, in much trouble, for Ab∣derhaman Almortada, with the Assistance of Haytan, possessed himself of Murcia, and took the Abderha∣man calls himself King of Murcia. Title of King. Almortada was a haughty Man, and by his Pride so far disobliged the People, that he was killed by them at Granada. Cazin thought himself secure in his Kingdom, by the Death of Almortada, and the more for that the People of Granada, sent him the spoils of his dead Enemy, but he was soon undeceived. For the People of Cordova, Cazin being gone to Sevil, enthroned Hiaya his Nephew, Son to his Brother Hali, a meek and bountiful Man, which is very pleasing to the Multitude. This Man going to Malaga, whereof he was Lord
before, Cazin again by Force of Arms made himself Master of Cordova. His re-establishment was not lasting, for the insolency of the Soldiers having caused a mutiny in the City, he was forced to fly to Sevil, at the end of only Seven Months, and three days. Neither could he stay long there, his adversary having gained the Affections of the People, so was obliged to wander like a Vagabond, till taken by Hiaya, and put in Prison. Most of these King were of the Race of the Alavecines, a Faction then in great Power. The other party of the Abenhumeyas taking Arms, chose for their King Abderhaman, Son of Mahomet (I suppose that Mahomet Almahu∣die, Abderha∣man in∣throned by the A∣benhameyus Then Ma∣homet. who first rebelled against Hissem) but with the same inconstancy killed him within two Months. His severity and the mutability of those People caused his ruin. One Mahomet was put into his place, and Reigned one Year, four Months, and twenty two Days, and then was killed by the Citizens. The same befell Hiaya, the Son of Hali, who was of the other Faction, and had been before Proclaimed King, he was in the same manner slain at Malaga, whither, as was said, he had retired, when he had Reigned in Cordova, only three Months, and twenty Days. After this Idric, Brother to Hali, and Unkle to Hiaya, was sent for out of Africk, where he was Lord of Ceuta, to take the Crown. This Man being come into Spain, what on account of his Kindred with the other two, and what by force of Arms, posses∣sed himself of the Kingdom of Granada, Sevil, Almeria, and other Neighbouring Cities. The inland continued under Hissem, for after the Death of Hiaya, the People of Cordova had Reinthroned him, unless it was another of the same name, those Citizens made Choice of, for these affairs are very dark. The extravagancies of Ministers, commonly turn to the ruin of their Masters, as hap'ned to Hissem, for his Alhagib, or Viceroy, being Cruel and Covetous, was killed, and the King expelled his City. In that confusion, a Youth, of the Family of the Humeyas, being assisted by a Company of wild Young Fellows entred the Palace, and de∣sired of the Soldiers to Proclaim him King. They excused themselves with the disloyalty of the Citizens, and advised him to take warning by so many as had perished before him, to this he Answered, Call me King to Day, and kill me to Morrow. Such is the inordinate de∣sire of Reigning. Nevertheless this Man, and Hissem with all the Abenhumeyas, as the causers of all these Confusions, were turned out of the Town by the Citizens. Hissem tired with so many changes of Fortune, at last came to Zaragoça, where he was well received by Zulema Abenbut King of that City, who gave him a Castle called Alçuela, where he spent the rest of his Life as a private Man. D. Roderick the Archbishop, who gives this account of the last Kings of Cordova, somewhat more obscure, than it is set down here, does not mention what became of Idric. How is it possible in such Confusion to be plain. We can only add, that from this time forwards the Kingdom of the Moors, which for so many Years had man∣tained it self, in great Power and Splendor in Spain, so visibly decayed that it was divided into many Sovereignties, for every one that could possess himself of a City, called himself The King∣dom of the Moors divided into many small Prin∣cipalities. King of it. Jahuar seized Cordova, Albudazin, Sevil. Haytan, he that at first assisted Hissem, and then became his Enemy, secured Toledo. Some will have the Kingdom of Toledo to be more Ancient, because that City often rebelled against the Kings of Cordova. Other Kingdoms, were erected in other Cities, too long and confused to insert here. It will suf∣fice to know that these Sovereignties continued, till the powerful Family of the Almoravides came into Spain, with their King Thesephin, which was in the Year of our Lord 1091. Let us turn back now to the affairs of the Christians, under the Earl D. Sancho, and King Alonso. CHAP. IX. The last Actions of D. Alonso King of Leon, and his Death. The Reign of D. Bermudo the Third. His Son Sancho Earl of Castile, Poisons his Mother. His Son Garcia Murdered. D. Sancho Earl of Castile, desiring to revenge the Death of his Father, with the Assist∣ance of the Kingdoms of Navarre, and Leon that were his Allies, entred the King∣dom The Chri∣stians spoil the Terri∣tories of the Moors. of Toledo, putting all that stood in his way to Fire and Sword. The same havock was made in the Territory of Cordova, whither our Forces advanced, incouraged with their suc∣cess. In both places a great Booty of Captives and Cattle was taken. Tho' the harm was great, much more was the Terror this struck into the Infidels, who being embroiled in Ci∣vil Wars, could not oppose the Enemy, so that they, who not long before kept the Christians The Moors buy Peace. in continual fear, were now forced to buy a Peace at a dear, Sepulveda a Town on the Frontiers, also Osma, Santistevan de Gormaz, and other Towns taken by the Moors, in the last War, were now recovered. From this time some Anthors write, the Nobility of Castile, were exempted from following the Wars, at their own cost, only upon the hopes of Booty, and it was ordained they should receive pay, as was used in all other Countries. D. Sancho in a great measure Blemished the Honour gained in this Expedition, by the Death he put his Mother The Earl of Castile, makes his Mother Drink the Poison, she had prepared for him. to. She fell in Love with a Lewd Brawny Moor, and durst not Marry him, not so much for
any Scruple of Conscience, as for fear of her Son, and therefore resolved to Murder him, by that means to make way to her infamous Wedding. The Dose was prepared to Poison him, but the Earl having intelligence of it, forced his Mother, by way of respect, to Drink first of the Cup she offered him. Hence some think, sprang the Custom used in some parts of Spain, to make the Women Drink before the Men. Other Authors write, that a Lady be∣longing to the Countess, having seen her prepare the Dose, gave Notice to her Husband (whom some call Sancho del Valle de Espinosa) and he to the Earl, and thereby obtained that Privilege, enjoyed to this day, by the Family of Monteros de Espinosa of Guarding the King's Person by Night. True it is, I find no good grounds to believe this Relation, but it is so recorded, and the People of that Town affirm it as a certain Truth. They add, that the Earl to atone for this fault, and allay the hatred the People had conceived against him, built a Monastery for Nuns, and in honour of his Mother gave it the Name of On̄a, which Monastery Sancho the Greater, King of Navarre, gave to the Monks of Cluni, and in our Days, is the chief in that Country. D. Sancho by his Wife Da. Ʋrraca, had D. Garcia, Da. Nun̄a, Da. Teresa, and Da. Trigida. The two eldest Daughters were marryed to great Men, Trigida was Abbess in the Monastery of On̄a. About the same time D. Sancho, made a New way for The Earls Issue. Strangers to travel to the Church of St. James the Apostle, through Navarre, Rioja, Brivies∣ca, and the Country of Burgos. Before this time the Christian Dominions being of a smaller extent, the Pilgrims that came out of France, used to Travel with much difficulty through Biscay, and the Mountains of Asturias, where the ways were uncouth, and there was a general want of all necessaries. King Alonso enjoying a perfect Peace, by reason of the Civil Wars among the Moors, and the League that was between the Christian Princes, gave his Mind wholly to the Civil Government, and held an Assembly of the States or Parliament at Oviedo, in the Year of our Lord 1020. In this Parliament the Ancient Laws of the Goths were Corrected. 1020. The King at his own cost and charges rebuilt the City Leon, that had been ruined by the Actions of Alonso King of Leon. Moors, and in it erected a Church Dedicated to S. John the Baptist. Thither the Bodies of his Father D. Bermudo, and the other Kings of Leon were translated, which before had been carry∣ed about for fear of the Moors. The Monastery of S. Pelagius was also rebuilt, in which Da. Constança the King's Sister who had Consecrated her Virginity to God, lived long. It has been above related how D. Vela studyed, and contrived his revenge upon the Earls of Castile for wrongs, and injuries he pretended to have received from them. D. Sancho the Earl, not only pardoned, but restored to their Father's Honours, three Sons of D. Vela, which were Roderick, James, and Inigo. Yet they soon fell to their wonted Treachery, and leaving the Earl, went over to D. Alonso the King of Leon, because there was little hope to be placed, in the Moors, by reason of their distractions, and the change of so many Princes a∣mong them. D. Alonso received them Friendly, and gave them a considerable Estate at the Foot of the Mountains. Thus they seemed to be setled and quiet, but they only waited an opportunity to make their disloyalty the more Notorious, as appeared soon after, and we shall shortly show. King Alonso desiring to extend his Dominions broke into Lusitania, and laid Siege to Viseo. It happ'ned, he went out without his Armour, and approaching too near the King Alon∣so killed at the Seige of Viseo. Town, they threw a Dart at him from the Wall, and killed him. Upon this misfortune his Army quitted the Siege, and the Bishops that went with him to the War, Accompanyed the Dead Body to Leon, where it was buryed in the Church of St. John, which he had built for to fix the Tombs of his Forefathers. His Death hap'ned in the Year of Grace 1028. He left one Son called D. Bermudo who succeeded in the Throne, and a Daughter Named Da. San∣cha. In his time flourished in Sanctity of Life, the Bishops Froylanus of Leon, and Atilanus of Zamora. Froylanus was born at Lugo, Atilanus at Tarragona, both Monks of St. Benedict, and taken out of their Monasteries to be prefered to those Bishopricks. A Son of D. Ramon, called D. Berenguel, and Sirnamed Borello from his Grandfather, was now Earl of Barcelona, Berenguel Earl of Barcelona. and better known for his Idle Life, than any Virtuous action. Bernard Tallaferre Earl of Be∣salu, made some amends for the neglect of that Prince, by Valiantly opposing the Moors. He being drowned in the River Rhosne in France, his place was supplyed by Wifredus Earl of Cerdagne, who so curbed the insolency of the Moors, that they ceased making any further in∣cursions into those parts. D. Berenguel at his Death, left three Sons, D. Ramon Earl of Bar∣celona, D. Guillen Earl of Manresa, by his Father's Will, and D. Sancho a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict. D. Bermudo the Third, tho' very young when his Father dyed, was Crown'd King in the presence of all the Nobility and Clergy, in the Year 1028. The same Year dy'd D. San∣cho Earl of Castile; having govern'd that Province 22 Years. In the Monastery of On̄a, which, 1028. as was said, he built from the ground, are still to be seen Three Tombs on the left hand of Bermudo the Third King of Leon. Garcia Earl of Castile. the High Altar, with Inscriptions, one of D. Sancho, another of his Wife, and the third of D. Garcia his Son; who succeeded him in that Earldom. His Virtues made all Men conceive early hopes of him, but all vanish'd, and was blasted in the Bud; for he was treacherously kill'd, in the very first Year of his Government, by those who had least reason so to do, and in the midst of his Marriage Solemnity. D. Garcia had two Sisters, D. Nun̄a, and Da Te∣resa. Da Nun̄a was Marry'd to D. Sancho King of Navarre, who had by her at this time, D. Garcia, D. Ferdinand, and D. Gonçalo. Da Teresa was Wife to D. Bermudo King of Leon, and of her was born D. Alonso, who dy'd a Child. D. Garcia Earl of Castile, tho' but 13 Years
of Age, was Contracted to Da Sancha, Sister to King Bermudo; by this means to bind their interests the faster together, and unite them against the common Enemy. The City Leon was the place appointed for Celebrating the Nuptials. D. Garcia went with a mighty train of People of note, as well his own Subjects as those of the King of Navarre. King Sancho him∣self, with his Sons D. Ferdinand, and D. Garcia, for the greater honour bore him Company; with such a Retinue as appear'd like a good Army. By the way they took Monçon, and some other Towns from the Earl Fernan Gutierrez, who despising the new Princes Youth was in Rebellion; yet because he submitted without making any considerable opposition he obtain'd Pardon. They made but small Journeys, by reason of the great number of People. D. Garcia desiring to see his Bride, left the King of Navarre at Sahagun, and he with a small Retinue not suspecting any thing put forward. This seemed a good opportunity, to the Sons of D. Vela, to revenge the wrongs they pretended had been done them, by the Earl D. Sancho. They were Men of Experience in mischief and subtle, and therefore communicated their design to other wicked Persons like themselves. Having laid their Plot, they went out to meet their Prince, who little suspected them, kneeling, they Kissed his Hand, as was usual, and show∣ing Tokens of Repentance, begged pardon of their Crimes. Who could have thought, that af∣ter obtaining Forgiveness, they would not have strove by fresh Services, to appear worthy of it? On the contrary they hastned to Murder that Innocent Prince. He went to hear Mass, at the Church of St. Saviour, and at the very Church door, the Traytors assaulted him, with their drawn Swords. Roderick the Eldest of the Brothers, notwithstanding he was A Cruel Murder. his Godfather, gave him the first wound, then the others seconded it, till he fell down Dead. Da. Sancha, now a Widow, before she was marryed, fainted away at this dismal News, and as soon as she came to herself, ran to the place, where imbracing the dead Body, she wasted herself in Sighs and Tears. The Body was deposited in the Church of S. John, and thence afterwards translated to the Monastery of On̄a. In both places his Sepulcher is to be seen to this Day. This accident changed the whole Face of affairs in Spain. D. Sancho the King of Navarre, who lay in the Suburbs of Leon, in Tents after the manner of a Camp, King San∣cho of Na∣varre, inhe∣rits Castile. inherited the Earldom of Castile, to which he gave the Title of a Kingdom, whereby his power began to be terrible to the King of Leon. The Traitors fled, and got into Monçon, hoping perhaps that Fernan Gutierrez, offended at the late Earl, and the King of Navarre, for the Towns they had taken from him, would joyn them. But by the industry of King Sancho, they were taken and burnt. King Bermudo, warned by his Father's Death, was incli∣nable to Peace, and being made sensible of the inconstancy of human Affairs, by the misfor∣tune of the Earl, applyed himself to the care of Religion, and the civil Government. In the first place, being desirous to reform the depraved manners of those times, he provided King Ber∣mudo his good Govern∣ment. that justice should be impartially administred to all, and to this effect established new Laws. Next with great Penalties, and using the utmost severity, he freed the Kingdom from Robbers. Thus he gained the affections of his People, and seemed to flourish under a setled Peace. No Prosperity is lasting, D. Sancho King of Navarre, led by Ambition disturbed his quiet. D. Bermudo had no Issue Male, and therefore the Crown must of Course fall to his Sister Da. Sancha. The Subjects feared by her means a Forreigner might be brought to Reign over them. Both the King and People, sought some remedy against this danger that Threatned. The King of Navarre being sensible of it, gathered a powerful Army, and entred the King∣dom of D. Bermudo doing great harm. He possessed himself of all the Country beyond the River Cea, and by his success it was likely, he would subdue all the Dominions of the King∣dom of Leon. D. Bermudo warned by these losses, with the consent of the Nobility, who were more inclinable to Peace than War, thought best to agree the difference, upon these Condi∣tions; That Da. Sancha, should be Marryed to D. Ferdinand, the King of Navarre's second Son, that she should receive in Dower for the present, all that had been taken during the Conditi of Peace betwixt the Kings of Leon, and Navarre. War, and he declared Heiress of the Kingdom. These were Terms disadvantageous to the Crown of Leon, but produced a firm Peace betwixt the Christians in Spain, and almost all they possessed fell into the Hands of one Family. Moreover it was remarkable, that at the same time both the Dominious of Castile and Leon, fell to Women, and consequently into the hands of Strangers, a thing odious to all People, but that had several times before, hap'ned to the Crown of Leon. It is not our task to decide, whether it be safe or otherwise. Some Nations have never allowed of Women to inherit. CHAP. X. The remaining part of the Reign of Sancho the Greater, King of Navarre. Wicked Contrivance of his Sons against their Mother. He settles Religious Affairs, Rebuilds Palencia, and is Murdered. KIng Sancho began to be in Years when he got for himself the Sovereignty of Castile, and made way for his Son Ferdinand to obtain the Crown of Leon. The Renowned Acti∣ons All the Christian Domi∣nions in Spain United under one Head. he performed, did not only purchase him the name of the Greater, but the Stile common∣ly
given him, of Emperor of Spain; a Custom of all People to flatter their Princes with mighty Titles. He setled his Court at Najara, as being on the Frontiers of Castile and Na∣varre, and there so managed the Civil Government, as never to neglect carrying on the War. Therefore taking the advantage of the Discord that reigned among the Moors, he marched a∣gainst them, well furnished with old Soldiers, and stores of Provisions, and wasted all their Lands, even as far as Cordova, whither he advanced without meeting any opposition. But at the same time that he was striking a Terror into his Enemy, plundering the Country, and taking Towns and Castles, a Disaster, that fell out in his Family, called him home; which was thus. When he went to the War, he particularly recommended to the Queen a Horse of great value he had. In those days the Spaniards valued no thing so much as their Horses Wicked contri∣vance of Sons a∣gainst their Mo∣ther. and Arms. D. Garcia, the King's eldest Son, asked that Horse of the Queen, and she was about granting his request, but that Peter Sesse, the Master of the Horse, told her, the King would be offended at it. D. Garcia in a rage for being deny'd, either that he believed the words of Peter Sesse, had too much force with the Queen, or only mov'd with the desire of revenge, resolved to accuse his Mother of Adultery. He carried it not on rashly, but with deliberation and cunning, drew his Brother Ferdinand to be of his side. At first, D. Ferdi∣nand thought that too wicked an undertaking, yet afterwards so far consented, as to swear The Q. of Navarre accused of Adultery by her own Sons. Is defend∣ed by a Bastard. he would stand Neuter, without inclining to either Party. The King was much surprized, when he heard of D. Garcia's accusing his Mother, and thereupon returned home. On the one side, the Queen's known Vertue and Integrity pleaded for her; and on the other, he could not be persuaded his Son could have taken such a matter in hand, without sufficient Grounds. D. Ferdinand being asked his Opinion, made the Case the more suspicious by his doubtful Answer. In fine, the Queen was secured in the Castle of Najara, and it was thought fit to have this Business debated by the Nobility. The Result was, that unless the Queen could find one to Combat in defence of her Honour, she should be burnt. The King had a Bastard Son, called Ramiro, by a Noble Woman of Navarre, some call her Ʋrraca, o∣thers, Caya. He taking compassion on the Queen, and having discovered the Falshood of D. Garcia, challenged him, as was then used among the Spaniards, and went out, to Combat in defence of the Queens Honour. Whatever Party should prove Victorious, it was a great Misfortune to the King. But God in the utmost extremity prevented the mischief, for a Holy Man, by his Persuasions, reduced the two Brothers to confess their Crime; and casting themselves at the King's Feet to beg his Pardon. The King having reproached them with the hainousness of their Guilt, turned them over to receive their doom from the Queen, to whom alone, he gave the power of passing Judgment on so hainous a Fact. She overcome by the intreaties of the Nobility, and submission of her Sons, pardoned them, upon conditi∣on D. Ramiro for his Loyalty and good Service, should have the Kingdom of Aragon secur∣ed to him. The defect in his Birth being sufficiently made amends for, by his Valour and Vertue. D. Garcia, the eldest Son, was hereby cut off the Inheritance due to him from his Mother. King Sancho consented to all that the Queen had ordain'd. Some Authors scruple the truth of this Relation, and say, the Kingdoms were divided by the last Will of D. San∣cho, King San∣cho divides the Domi∣nion of Spain a∣mong his Sons. whose Example, was afterwards followed by his Son D. Ferdinand, who also divided his Kingdoms among his Children. It is hard to determine who is in the right, but indeed, that Story about the Queen, has the air of a Romance. It is also said of D. Garcia, that either to obtain Pardon for that Fault, or upon account of some Vow, he went to Rome to visit the Holy Places there. King Sancho after all these Troubles were over, gave his mind to Religion. At that time, the Monastery of Cluni, in Burgundy, was famous for having reformed the Rules of S. Bene∣dict. King San∣cho setles matters of Religion. Thence he caused Monks to come to instruct the Monasteries of S. Salvador de Leyte, that of On̄a, and of S. John de la Pen̄a, and to reduce them to the rigour of their Foundati∣on. Besides, finding that Lay-men, had thro' the confusions of the times, possessed them∣selves of the Revenues of several Churches, he caused them to be all restored. To the Monks of the Monastery of St. Salvador de Leyte, he gave the Privilege of choosing the Bishop of Pamplona, as appears by his Grant, bearing date in the Year 1032. The continual Incursi∣ons of the Moors, had caused the Seat of the Bishoprick of Pamplona, to be removed from 1032. that City to the Monastery of Leyte, as the securer place, being seated on the top of the Py∣renean Mountains. Now Peace being established thro' the Valour of King Sancho, a Synod was held at Pamplona, at the request of Sancho, Abbot of Leyte, and Bishop of that City, in order to restore the See thither. For the present, it was deferred, but agreed to in the time of his Successor, D. Peter de Roda. In his last days, the King caused the City Palentia A Synod at Pamplo∣na. to be Rebuilt. The occasion that moved him it to, as related by some, if ever there was any such, was in this manner. That City, during the Wars was totally ruined, so Palentia rebuilt. that nothing remained but some old Walls, and a Church, dedicated to S. Antholin. Thither, the King being a Hunting, pursued a wild Boor, which took shelter in the very Church by the Altar, and the King lifting his Arm to strike in that Holy Place, found it became on a sudden numb'd, and without motion. Whereupon, invoking the Saint, the use of his Limb was again restored, and the King, as an acknowledgement of the relief received, cau∣sed the Town and Church to be rebuilt, making it an Episcopal See. Methinks I am writing Fables or Romances, but many of this nature are recounted in the Chronicles of Spain, which
I will neither Condemn, nor approve of; let the Reader judge of them as he shall think most agreeable to reason. Let us conclude with this King, who by his great Actions, both in Peace and War, gain'd to himself immortal Renown, and large Dominions to his Posterity. His Life was glorious, but his Death unfortunate; for on the way to Oviedo, whither he was going to visit the Bodies of the Saints that make that place famous, he was treacherously murdered by Assassines that way-laid him. Who the Contrivers of that base Action were, is not known, nor perhaps, was it then. It is suspected, some one of the Princes that envy'd King San∣cho Mur∣dered. his greatness, was the cause of taking him off. His Body was Buryed at Oviedo, with Royal Solemnity. Some Years after, his Son D. Ferdinand, King of Castile, caused him to be tran∣slated to Leon, and Interr'd in the Church of S. Isidorus, where, upon his Sepulcher is this Inscription. Here lieth Sancho, King of the Pyrenean Mountains, and of Toulouse, a Catholick Prince that stood by the Church. He was killed on the 18th of October 1035. To his Children, he left great cause of Debates, and much unhappiness to his Kingdoms, by dividing them as 1035. he did, without any occasion. Commonly the Subjects pay for the Sins and Extravagancies of their Princes. THE History of SPAIN. The Ninth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Posture of Affairs in Spain. Actions of D. Berenguel, Earl of Barcelona. Kingdoms of the Moors. Wars betwixt the Kings of Castile, and Leon. Fer∣dinand Crowned King of Leon. THE mighty Wars that hap'ned in Spain, the great Calamities and Desolation there∣of, Posture of affairs in Spain. and the irreconcilable Enmities betwixt near Relations, and even Brothers, may be a sufficient warning to Sovereigns not to divide their Dominions, especi∣ally when their Limits are but narrow. It is a certain Maxim, that Sovereignty admits of no Fellowship, and Ambition is not curbed by any ties, tho' never so Sacred. Hence may be inferred how much King's err, who misled by Fatherly Affection, rend their King∣doms to raise many Monarchies to their Children. D. Sancho, King of Castile and Navarre, whose Life was related in the last Book, has left us an example of that fatal Policy. The Christian Dominions, then well extended in Spain, were for the most part reduced under one head, as if Heaven had purposely contrived it for the Extirpation of the Moors, who thro' their own distractions, were evidently tending to ruin. But this King, by dividing his Do∣minions, caused that Opportunity to be lost. We now enter upon more variety of matter, and consequently shall not be so concise as hitherto. Therefore in the first place, it will be requisite to lay down the posture the Affairs of Spain were in, after the Death of King San∣cho. He divided his Kingdoms among his Sons, in this manner. D. Garcia, the eldest, had Navarre, and the Dominion of Biscay, with all the Country that lies betwixt the City Na∣jara, and Mountains Doca. D. Ferdinand, the second Son, during his Father and Mother's Life, was put in possession of Castile; the Title of Earl thereof, being changed into that of King. To D. Gonzalo, the youngest of the legitimate Sons, was given Sobrarve, and Riba∣gorça, with the Castles of Loharri, and S. Emeterius. D. Ramiro, the Bastard Son, had the Kingdom of Aragon given him by his Father, saving some Castles, which were adjudged to his Brother D. Garcia. They all Stiled themselves Kings, and assumed Regal Honours, whence ensued dangerous and bloody Wars. Each looking back upon his Father's Grandeur, aspir'd to equal it, and repined that his Dominions should be confined to such a narrow compass. At the same time D. Bermudo, Brother-in-law to Ferdinand, King of Castile, Reigned at Leon. Under the Crown of Leon were comprehended the Provinces of Galicia and Portugal, and part of old Castile, as far as the River Pisuerga. D. Ramon, called the old Earl of Barcelona dy'd the same Year as D. Sancho, which was of Grace 1035. D. Beren∣guel Ramon Earl of Barcelo∣na Dies. Borello, his Son succeeded him, who, tho' little in Body, was not inferior in Valour to any of his Ancestors. He recovered from the Moors, by force of Arms, Manresa, a place called Prados del Rey Galafre, Tarragona, Cervera, and other neighbouring Towns. Besides,
he subdued several Moors who possessed Lands thereabout, and obliged them to pay him Tribute. He had two Wives, called Ramalduri and Almadi. The first brought him two Sons, D. Peter and D. Berenguel; the second had only D. Ramon Berenguel, commonly nick∣named Cabeca de Estopa, that is, Flaxen Head, from the colour and softness of his Hair. This was the posture of the Affairs of the Christians in Spain. The Moors, as was said a∣bove, Kingdoms of the Moors. had as many Kingdoms as capital Cities. Nevertheless, the Kingdom of Cordova, as the ancientest, was still the most considerable, as to extent of Territory, but weak, thro' intestine Broils. The next, was that of Sevil, then Toledo, Zaragoça, Huesca, and several other inferior Kings, who might easily have been over-run, had the Christians been united. That Discord which hap'ned betwixt the Princes, tho' near Relations, and Brothers, pre∣vented the Execution of so holy an Undertaking. D. Garcia, King of Navarre, at the time of his Father's death, was gone to Rome to visit the Churches of St. Peter and Paul. D. Ramiro, his Brother, thought good to lay hold of the opportunity his absence offered for enlarging his Dominions. For the more security to his designs, he entred into League with the Kings of Zaragoça, Huesca, and Tudela, tho' Moors, and joyn'd his Forces with theirs. With them he broke into Navarre, and laid Siege to Tafalla, a Town of note. It hap'ned D. Garcia at the same time, returned from his Pilgrimage, and gathering what Strength he could on a sudden, fell upon his Brother with such fury, that he forced him to fly out of Aragon, without stopping till he came to Sobrarve. His flight was with such precipitation, that he was obliged to leap upon the next Horse that came to hand, without Saddle or Bridle. These were the beginnings of greater Troubles that ensued. The Nobility of Leon were offended at Wars be∣twixt the Kings of Castile and Leon. Ferdinand, King of Castile, and stirred up their King, D. Bermudo against him. D. Bermudo himself, was dissatisfied, for that the other had Marry'd his Sister against his will, and Con∣quered a considerable part of his Dominions, as was said in the last Book. There was a fair opportunity of taking revenge, the Brothers being at variance, and King Ferdinand's Force, but very small. Wherefore D. Bermudo gathers an Army, and enters Castile. D. Ferdinand called upon his Brother D. Garcia for Aid, who came speedily to his relief. Their Forces being joyn'd, they advance towards their Enemy, and Encamp'd in sight of him, on the Banks of the River Carrion, in the Valley of Tamaron, near a Town called Lantada. Both sides were eager to fight, so there was no time lost, but they presently came to a Battle, which proved very bloody, and great numbers were slain. In the heat of the Action D. Bermudo resolutely broke into the midst of the Enemies, designing to single out King Ferdi∣nand, but was wounded with a Spear, whereof he fell down dead. His Death put an end to the War, for King Ferdinand, after this Victory, entred the Kingdom of Leon, which then be∣longed to him of Right, and easily possessed himself of it, notwithstanding, some opposi∣tion was made only in hatred to the Government of a Stranger. But Courage without Strength, is useless. The City of Leon at first, shut its Gates against the Conqueror, but being wholly unprovided of all Necessaries to hold out a Siege, soon surrendered. The Ferdinand Crown'd King of Leon. Citizens conducted the King with great Joy to the Church of S. Mary de Regla, where he was Proclaimed and Crowned. Servandus, Bishop of Leon, performed the Ceremony, in the Year of Grace 1038. D. Ferdinand, Reign'd in Leon 28 Years, 6 Months, and 12 Days, and 12 Years more in Castile, part before, and part after the Death of his Father. 1038. CHAP. II. Ferdinand of Castile and Leon, the most powerful King of Spain. Overthrows the Moors, takes several Towns, and ravages the Territories of the Infidels. Ramiro, King of Aragon, Wars on his Brother of Navarre. BY the addition of this new Kingdom, D. Ferdinand became the most powerful King in Spain. His Zeal for Religion, and many Vertues, which were no way inferior to his Power Ferdinand the most powerful King in Spain. and Warlike Atchievements, caused him to be called the Great, and the Flattery of his Peo∣ple extended so far, as to stile him Emperor. Besides, he was fortunate in a numerous Issue. His first Child, before he came to the Crown, was D. Ʋrraca, next, D. Sancho, who succeeded him, then D. Elvira, who was Married to the Count de Cabra, after her, D. A∣lonso, who at last, became sole Sovereign of all those Dominions, and lastly, D. Garcia, the youngest, all of them by one Wife. These Children were educated with that care as became their Dignity. D. Ferdinand having setled his Government, enjoyed a perfect Peace; but thought nothing could gain him more Reputation among his People, or be more pleasing to God, than to make War upon the Moors. That part of the Country lying betwixt the Rivers Guadiana and Tagus, and along the River Duero, being then the Frontiers of the Moors, was called Estremadura, and still retains the name. Having raised a considerable Army, he Ferdinand over∣throws the Moors, and takes several Towns. marched towards those Borders, as being the nearest, and because the Moors then had made an Inroad into the Country of the Christians, and taken a great Booty. The King marched with such speed, that he put them to flight, and recovered all the Prey. Then encouraged with success, he marched into their Territories, wasting all the Country about Merida and
Badajoz, without sparing any thing that came in his way, but driving a vast number of Cat∣tle and Prisoners. Besides, he took two Towns, the one called Sena, and the other, Gani. In Portugal, after a long Siege, and vigorous Resistance made by the Moors, the City Viseo surrendered. The taking of this City was most grateful to the King, not only in regard of its great importance, but also because in it he found the Moor, who, as was said before, killed his Father-in-law D. Alonso, with a Dart he threw from the Wall. His death the King now revenged on the Infidel, putting out his Eyes, cutting off both his Hands, and one of his Feet. At this time also, were taken from the Moors the Castles of S. Martin and Ta∣ranço. Hence the King went to the Church of S. James the Apostle, to pay his Vows made, and offer new ones, to obtain that Saint's assistance for the future, as he had till then. This hap'ned the second Year after he was possessed of the Crown of Leon. The following Year, which was of our Lord 1040. he commenced the War with greater heat than before, by the Siege of Coimbra, which at length was surrendred to him upon Discretion. Want of all 1040. Coimbra taken from the Moors. Necessaries obliged the Besieged to submit, after enduring a Siege of seven Months, which some Authors mistake, and would make seven Years. At that time it was one of the most famous Cities in Portugal, now much more renown'd for Learning, having been made an University by King John III. of Portugal, who assigned great Revenues to it, and it is one of the chiefest in Spain. It is said, the Monks of a Monastery called Lormanus, (or rather Lorvao) were a great help towards carrying on the Siege, by relieving the King's Army with great store of Provision they had laid up unknown to the Moors. What return the King made, is not known. By the taking of this City, the Territories of the Kingdom of Leon were extended to the River Mondego, which runs thro' it, and is called in Latin, Monda. The King gave the Govern∣ment of this City, and adjacent Country, to one Sisnandus, a Man well skilled in the man∣ner of fighting with the Moors, having served Benabet, King of Sevil, in his Wars against the Christians; such was the corruption of that Age. After setling his Conquest, the King again returned to visit the Church of St. James, and offered part of the Spoil in acknowledgment for his Success past, and to beg a continuance for the future. This done, he took a Progress to King Fer∣dinand's Progress. the principal Cities of Castile and Leon, in manner of Triumph, administring Justice, and levying Money, in order to carry on the War the next Year against those Moors, who lived along the Banks of Ebro, in great security, being grown rich in Cattle they had taken from the Christians. That Conquest more properly appertained to the Crowns of Navarre and Aragon; but they being at War among themselves, had not leisure to think of any other business. D. Ramiro had encreased his Dominions with the addition of Sobrarve and Ribagor∣ça, which fell to him by the death of his Brother D. Gonzalo. Some Authors will have it, that D. Gonzalo dy'd before his Father; others say, he was treacherously killed by one Ra∣monette, of Gascogne, who way-laid him, near the Bridge of Montelus, as he returned from Hunting. Certain it is, his Body was buryed in the Church of S. Victorianus. King Ramiro, K. Ramiro of Aragon. Wars on his Bro∣ther of Navarre. being thus encreased in strength, made War upon him of Navarre, who with-held from him part of his Kingdom of Aragon. He was inferior in strength; but besides, being a very ex∣pert Soldier, he had Succours from France, being Married to Gisberga, or as others call her Hermesenda, Daughter to Bernard Roger, Earl of Bigorre, by his Wife Garsenda. By this Gisberga, or Hermesenda, the King had D. Ramiro, D. Sancho, D. Garcia, and D. Sancha, Married to the Earl of Toulouse, and D. Teresa, Wife to Beltran, Earl of Provence. Illegi∣timate, he had a Son called D. Sancho, to whom, he gave Ayvar, Xabier, Latres, and Riba∣gorça, all which, he dying without Issue, returned to the Crown of Aragon. D. Ramiro's Arms were Azure, a Cross Argent, afterwards changed by his Successors, as shall be told in its place. Let us return to King Ferdinand, who entring the Country of the Moors, took Santistevan de Gormaz, Vadoregio, Aguilar, and Valerancia, now called Berlanga, then de∣stroyed Territo∣ries of the Infidels ravaged. the Territory of Taraçona, and wasted the Country as far as Medina Celi, throwing down all the Beacons used by the Moors to raise the People against the Christians. Thence he turned back, and passing the Mountains, entred the Kingdom of Toledo, ravaging all a∣bout Salamanca, Ʋzeda, Guadalajara, Alcala, and even as far as Madrid. Almenon, King of Toledo, moved by these losses, and fearing greater, bought a Peace of King Ferdinand, for a great Sum of Money. The same was done by the Kings of Zaragoça, Portugal and Sevil, and they promised to pay Tribute yearly, to the great Honour of the Christians, and Shame of the Moors, who were now subject to those they had not long before Lord∣ed it over. These were special Blessings of God for the good Lives the Christians then led, following the example of their King, whereby, many Moors were Converted, and the Bodies of Saints held even by them in great Veneration.
CHAP. III. S. Isidorus his Body translated to Leon. Conversion of two Moorish Princesses. Garcia King of Navarre, kill'd by his Brother Ferdinand. Ramiro King of Aragon, reco∣vers his Dominions. THere was a Church Dedicated to St. John Baptist, the ancient burial place of the Kings of Leon, much decay'd, by reason of the Wars, and with Age. D. Sancha the Queen, S. Isidorus his Body translated to Leon from Sevil. perswaded her Husband to repair it; and Order'd himself and Posterity to be there Inter'd. The more to increase the Peoples Devotion towards this Church, the King thought good to enrich it with the Bodies of some Saints; and therefore made War upon the King of Sevil, to obtain that of S. Justa, which that Prince was willing to give to purchase Peace; but the People Mutinying at such time as it should have been carryed away, those that were sent for it, in place of it, took the Body of S. Isidorus, formerly Bishop of that City. This holy Body was Conducted in great state to Leon, and there plac'd in the Church of St. John Bap∣tist, which from thence forward lost that name, and was call'd of St. Isidorus. In the Year 1050. was held a Synod at Coyança, now Valencia, in the Country of Oviedo, at which were 1050. present the King, Queen, Nobility, and Nine Bishops. About the same time two Daughters A Synod at Coyanca. of Moorish Kings were Converted and Baptized; the one was Casilda, Daughter to Almenon King of Toledo, the other Zaida, Daughter to Benabet of Sevil. The Cause of their Conver∣sion was thus. Casilda was very Compassionate, and us'd to relieve the Captive Christians, Conversi∣on of two Moorish Princesses. which much offended her Father, who met her one day carrying meat to them, and asking what it was, she said, They were Roses, and uncovering found the Meat Converted into those Flowers. This Miracle mov'd her to embrace Christianity, and soon after being sick, she was advis'd to Bath her self in St. Vincent's Lake, which is in the Territory of Briviesca, where she soon recover'd her Health, was Baptiz'd, and continu'd in the same place the rest of her days, leading a very holy Life; insomuch, that she is reckoned in the number of Saints. Zaida, either by her Example, or some other motive, was inclin'd to become a Christian, and St. Isidorus appear'd to her in a Dream, perswading her to put in Execution so good a purpose. She acquainted her Father with it, and he being unwilling to oppose her, yet fear∣ing to displease the People if he consented, agreed with D. Alonso, King Ferdinand's Son, that he should force her away from a place where he would leave her, which was accordingly per∣form'd, and she carryed to Leon, there instructed and baptiz'd. Some say she was call'd Eli∣zabeth, others Mary, so many affirm, she was after Marry'd to D. Alonso, when he was King of Castile; yet Pelagius Bishop of Oviedo, says, she was not his Wife, but Mistress. These contradictions, and many other that occur in this History, are hard to be reconcil'd. In the Year of Grace 1053. D. Garcia, King of Navarre, was kill'd in the Wars, being a Couragious and Wise Prince, no less a Souldier than a General. Those Seeds of Discord that 1053. some Years before had been sow'd between the Brothers, now grew up to the ruin of D. Gar∣cia. Garcia King of Navarre imprison∣ed by his Brother Ferdinand. D. Ferdinand pretended a right to the Territory of Briviesca, and part of Rioja. On the other side D. Garcia complain'd, that wrong had been done him in the division of the Kingdom, and pleaded right of Inheritance against his Father's Will. D. Garcia fell sick at Najara, D. Ferdinand coming to visit him, he resolv'd to secure him; but D. Ferdinand ha∣ving notice of his design fled. D. Garcia to take off the hatred conceiv'd against him for that falshood, seem'd much concern'd that his Brother should suspect him, and hearing he was sick at Burgos, went thither to visit him. This satisfy'd not D. Ferdinand, for he seiz'd his Bro∣ther, and sent him, with a Guard, to the Castle of Ceya. He corrupting his Keepers, fled to He makes his escape. Navarre, with a resolution to take revenge. Having gather'd all his own, and the Forces of the Moors his Confederates, he entred Castile, and after passing the Mountains Doca, com∣mitted great havock. King Ferdinand was not idle, but mov'd with an Army of Experienc'd Souldiers towards his Brother. They came in sight of each other near a Town call'd Atapu∣erca, about four Leagues from Burgos; there Incamp'd, Intrench'd first, and then drew out in order of Battle. These two Brothers differ'd much in conditions. D. Ferdinand was affa∣ble, courteous, meek, and withal, the best Souldier of his time. D. Garcia was fierce, hasty and talkative, which made him odious to his Souldiers; besides, that he had wrongfully de∣priv'd many of their Estates, of which before the Battle he was desir'd to make restitution; but he refus'd to give Ear to so reasonable a request. Many fear'd God would punish him for this Unjustice, and chiefly an antient Man, whose name is not known; but that he had been his Tutor; he made some overtures for an accommodation. D. Ferdinand was willing, but D. Garcia could not be mov'd by any perswasions, or intreaties; his Sins making him Deaf to all wholesome advice. In fine, the Signal being given, both Armies met with great fury. D. Garcia, his Tutor, seeing his Party bore down, rush'd into the midst of the Enemy, and was there kill'd. The Navarrois could not withstand the fury of D. Ferdinand's Charge, and Ferdinand over∣throws, & kills his Brother Garcia of Navarre. two Souldiers that had feign'd to desert to them, breaking through the Guards, kill'd the King with their Spears; who being down, his Men soon fled. King Ferdinand being no less troubled for the Death of his Brother, than he was joyful for the Victory, order'd the Chri∣stians
that remain'd to be spared, which was perform'd, and in the pursuit only, the Moors were put to the Sword, and made Prisoners. The Body of D. Garcia, with the consent of the Victor, was carry'd by his Souldiers to Najara, and there buryed in the Church of S. Mary which he had built from the ground. By his Wife D. Stephania, a French-Woman, he K. Garcia's Issue. left four Sons, and as many Daughters, which were D. Sancho, who succeeded in the Crown, D. Ramiro, to whom he gave Calahorra, taken from the Moors, D. Ferdinand, and D. Ramon. The Daughters were, D. Ximena, D. Erriesinda, D. Mayor, and D. Ʋrraca; this last Mar∣ry'd to the Earl D. Garcia, of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter. The King being thus kill'd, his Dominions were wasted and divided among them by his Brothers. King Ferdinand, without any opposition, took to himself those places the dispute had been about, which were, Briviesca, Montes Doca, and part of Rioja, through which runs the River Oja, that gives its name to the Country. This River has its Springs in the Mountains of Santo Domingo de la Calçada, and falls into Ebro, near the Town of Haro. The other part of Rioja, Navarre, the Dukedom of Biscay, Najara, Logron̄o, and other places remain'd to D. Sancho the Son of D. Garcia. D. Ramiro laying hold of this Opportunity recovered Aragon, and was in hopes to make himself Master of Navarre, his deceased Brothers Kingdom, for it ap∣pears Ramiro King of Aragon re∣covers his Domini∣ons. by Ancient Records, that at this time he called himself King of Aragon, Sobrarve, Riba∣gorça, and Pamplona. Besides, he recovered from the Moors, who had entred Ribagorça, a Town called Benavario. At length, after much bickering, D. Sancho, and D. Ramiro conclud∣ed a Peace, each giving and receiving certain Castles for their security. D. Sancho had Ruesta and Pitilla, D. Ramiro Sanguessa, Lerda and Ondusio. Both Unkle and Nephew were jealous of King Ferdinand, and feared he might make his advantage of their discord, therefore they concluded a League defensive and offensive among themselves. CHAP. IV. The manner how Spain became exempted from the Roman Empire. The Famous Rode∣rick Diaz de Bivar, commonly called Cid. His Extraction and first Actions. Three Synods held in Spain. AT the time that Spain wasted it self with Intestine Wars, Henry the Second who tran∣slated the Empire out of France into Germany, was Emperor. The Church was go∣verned General Council of Florence. by Leo IX. and after him by Victor II. This last desiring to reform the Clergy grown very dissolute, called a Council to Florence, in the Year 1055. Thence he sent Hil∣debrand, a Monk of Cluni, who for his Learning and Ability, had been created Cardinal, 1055. to move the Emperor, to reduce the Clergy, to their Primitive Purity of Life, as also to A Roman∣tick relati∣on about Spain being exempted from the Roman Empire. suppress the Heresie of Berengarius, then breaking out at Tours in France. Our Historians add, that at his Councel there were Embassadors, from the same Emperor, who among o∣ther things complained to the Pope and Fathers, that Ferdinand King of Castile, had not only disowned the Emperors Authority, but proceeded so far in his Arrogancy and Pride, as to Usurp the Stile and Title of Emperor. Whereupon they exhorted the Council to stand up for the honour of the Empire, and in return the Emperor would Espouse the cause of the Church, otherwise if they refused, he should be obliged to take up Arms in defence of the Imperial Honour and Authority. The Fathers Answered, they would indeavour to give the Emperor content, and declared themselves for him, asserting the justice of his demands. Embas∣sadors were sent to King Ferdinand, to warn him in the Name of the Council, to submit him∣self to the Empire, and not presume for the future, to stile himself Emperor. They had Orders in case he refused, to Excommunicate him. The King having heard their Embassy, was perplexed, and knew not what Answer to return, and therefore resolved to convene his States or Parliament, that it might be there debated, what was best to be done. Opinions there varyed, the most Consciencious were for obeying the Pope, the bolder were positively a∣gainst submitting to that heavy Yoke. At that time Roderick de Bivar, afterwards called Cid, was Roderick de Bivar called Cid who he was. in the Prime of his Years, being not above 30, in high Esteem for his great Valour, Wisdom and Conduct. Not long before he had fought D. Gomez Earl of Gormaz, and killed him, whereup∣on he Marryed D. Ximena, Daughter and Heiress to the said Earl, at her request, she having moved it to the King, that he should either Marry her, or suffer according to Law. By the addition of her Estate, to that he had as his own, he became so rich and powerful, that he As many Fables are related of this Man, as ever were of King Ar∣thur. adventured with his own Forces, to make excursions into the Territories of the Infidels, and in Battle overthrew Five Moorish Kings, who having passed the Mountain Doca, infested the Lands of Rioja. He recovered the Booty, and took them Prisoners, but released them upon Condition, they should pay him a Yearly Tribute. At this time King Ferdinand was busie, in rebuilding the City Zamora, which had not been repaired since the Moors destroyed it, in the Reign of King Ramiro. He granted that such as would inhabit there should be governed according to the Ancient Laws of that City, which were those of the Goths. It hap'ned whilst the King was there, the Moors came to pay the Tribute, they had agreed upon to Rode∣rick Diaz, and called him Cid, which in Arabick signifies Lord. All this was done in the pre∣sence
of the King and his Courtiers, whence many took an occasion to envy and hate him. Yet the King admiring his worth, ordered that for the future he should be called Cid, which was done accordingly, so that his own name was almost forgot, the new Title being given him, as long as he lived. Our Historians add, that the Kings Ferdinand of Castile, and Ra∣miro of Aragon, being at variance about the right to the City Calahorra, they agreed to put the decision of that Controversy, to the Issue of a Combat to be fought by two Persons, one appointed by each King: He of Aragon chose Martin Gomez, and he of Castile took Roderick Diaz for his Champion, who slew Gomez, supposed by some to be the stock from which is descended, the Noble Family of Luna in Spain. The most learned look upon all this as Fabu∣lous, by reason that D. Garcia King of Navarre, took that City from the Moors, and there∣fore the King of Aragon could pretend no right to it. Roderick Diaz being newly Married, was not in the assembly of the States at such time, as the Emperor and Popes demands, touching the Kings submiting himself to the Empire, were heard and debated. The King was more incli∣nable to Peace, yet feared the ill consequences of condescending to own a Foreign Superiori∣ty. Therefore he would resolve upon nothing, till Roderick was called, and consulted about this affair. He being come, and asked his Opinion, replyed, It was no matter of dispute, Rod-rick's Opinion touching the sub∣jection to the Empire I fear the whole re∣lation is Fabulous. but that the Liberty of Spain, ought to be asserted by force of Arms, it being unreasonable that those who had not helped to relieve them, from the Tyranny of the Moors, should pretend to any power over them, that he was resolved to stand up for the honour of his Country, and would look upon all as Cowards and Traytors, that were not of the same Opinion. This reply of his, confirmed those who before were dubious and fearful, and a suitable Answer was sent to the Pope. In order to oppose the Emperor, Levies was made throughout the Kingdom, and 10000 Men raised, besides the Auxiliary Forces of the Moors, who were Subject to the Christians. Roderick Diaz was appointed their General, who to gain the greater reputation passed the Pyrenean Mountains, and marched as far as Toulouze, which City (I suppose) was then subject to Spain, as appears by the inscription on the Tomb of King Sancho the Greater above mentioned. Thence he sent Embassadors to the Pope, desir∣ing him to depute Commissioners, to hearthe reasons, the Spaniards had to offer in their own de∣fence. The Principal Men sent were Count Roderick, not he that was called Cid, and D. Alvar Yan̄ez Minaya, who prevailed with the Pope to send Rupertus Cardinalis Sabinensis his Legate, The dis∣pute de∣cided. and certain Embassadors from the Emperor, before whom the case might be argued and decided. Mean while King Ferdinand returned out of France into Spain. The Legate and Embassadors stayed at Toulouse, where the whole matter having been debated, judgment was given in behalf of Spain, and it was declared the Emperors for the future, ought not to pretend to any right over it. And from that time, it has ever been the Opinion of all Civilians, that Spain owed no acknowledgment to the Empire. Popes have also pretended to receive Tribute from Spain, as appears by a Bull of Gregory VII. directed to the King and Lords, in which he says, such Tribute used to be payed before the Moors possessed themselves of the Country. But this took no effect, and it appears that Spain has never since been Tributary to any Foreign Prince. Roderick Diaz was descended from Lain Calvo, who as we said above was judge of Castile, for this judge by his Wife D. Elvira Nun̄a Bella, The Fa∣mous Ro∣derick Diaz de Bivar commonly called Cid his Origi∣nal. had Fernan Nun̄o. This Nuno by his Wife D. Egilona, had Lain Nun̄o, who had a Son called James Laynez, the Husband of Teresa Nun̄a, and Father of Roderick Diaz, commonly called Cid. He by his Wife D. Ximena, had a Son called James Rodriguez de Bivar, killed whilst the Father was yet living, in the Wars with the Moors, and two Daughters, which were D. Elvira, and D. Sol, of whom we shall speak hereafter. About this time some Synods were held. The first at Compostella, in the Year 1056. Here it was ordained that Bishops and Priests 1056. should say Mass every Day, and that the Canons should wear Hair Cloth on the Fasting days, Synods held at Compostela, Jaca, and S. Jokn de la Penna. and at all times when the Litanies were said upon account of any publick necessity. Another Synod was held at Jaca, of the Dominions of Aragon, in the Year 1060. Two Years after this, another was Celebrated at S. John de la Pen̄a. Near this same time, tho' Authors do not agree upon the Year, Cardinal Hugo, the Popes Legate in Spain, in an Assembly of Nobi∣lity and Clergy, held by consent of Ramon Earl of Barcelona, in that City, Abrogated the 1060. Laws of the Goths, till then in use among the Catalonians, and instituted others, which are in Force to this Day. This Cardinal Hugo, I suppose is the same, that had the Sirname of Candidus, and came Legate into Spain, in the Year 1064. at such time as there were two pretenders to the Papacy, and both stiled themselves Popes. One called himself Alexander II. the other Honorius II. The Kings of Spain adhered to Alexander, whose Legate this was, and who seemed to have the better Title.
CHAP. V. The remaining part of the Reign of Ferdinand, King of Castile and Leon. His Dominions divided among his Children. Of D. Ramiro King of Aragon. Per∣pignan Built. THE late troubles caused by the Emperors pretensions, gave the Moors an opportunity of casting off the heavy Yoke King Ferdinand had laid on them. At the same time, as it The Moors rise against Ferdinand and are suppressed were by common consent, they all appeared in Arms, but chiefly in the Kingdom of Toledo, and among the Celtiberi, which is part of Aragon. The King was old, and tired with con∣tinual Wars, besides the revenues were exhausted, and the Subjects wasted with heavy Taxes. Queen Sancho, a Woman of a Masculine Spirit, being desirous to advance Christianity, offered towards the charge of the War, all the Money, Plate, and Jewels that belonged to her. This supply so incouraged the King, that raising a powerful Army, he attack'd the Moors about the River Ebro, and made a great slaughter of them. Thence he advanced as far as Catalo∣nia, and Valencia, and returned loaded with Booty. He had the same succeess against the Kingdom of Toledo, and obliged them all to swear, they would punctually pay the Tribute im∣posed on them. This done he returned home in Triumph. Some Authors write, that near Valencia, S. Isidorus, to whom he had always a particular devotion, appeared to him, bid∣ding him to prepare for he should soon die. His sickness, which presently followed, confirm∣ed this Opinion, wherefore having settled all things with the Moors, he returned towards Leon, being carryed in a Litter upon Mens Shoulders, the Soldiers and Officers striving who should carry him. On the first of January 1065. he entred the City of Leon, and as he was used, visited the Bodies of the Saints, prostrating himself on the ground, begging a happy 1065. death, and tho' the disease increased, stayed at Matins, heard Mass and received. The Day Ferdinand Dies. following he returned to the Church of S. Isidorus, and three days after Dyed. This is what the Archbishop D. Roderick, and D. Lucas de Tuy write, yet others say, he dyed at Cabeçon, a Town near Valladolid, neither do Authors agree in the time of his death. King Ferdi∣nand's Life was so holy, that his Feast is Celebrated at Leon as a Saint. He built many Churches, and repaired others. Queen Sancha was not inferior to her Husband in Vertue, she dyed two Years after him, and was buryed by the King, in the Church of S. Isidorus. Death of Queen Sancha. Garibay says, King Ferdinand dyed in the Year 1067, and quotes many Authors, who all vary in the time, as they do in the place of his death, so that these things are very un∣certain. King Ferdinand, by his last Will, divided his Kingdoms among his Three Sons. To D. Sancho Ferdinand by Will, leaves to each of his three Sons a King∣dom, and Towns to his Daugh∣ters. the Eldest, he left Castile, extending from the Rivèr Ebro, till that of Pisuerga, for all that was taken upon the death of D. Garcia was added to Castile. The Kingdom of Leon, fell to D. Alonso, with the Territory of Campos, and that part of Asturias, that reaches to the River Deva, running by Oviedo, as also some Towns in Galicia. D. Garcia the Youngest, had the remaining part of Galicia, and as much of Portugal, as had been recovered from the Moors. All three called themselves Kings. Besides, King Ferdinand left the City Zamora, to his Daughter D. Ʋrraca, and that of Toro to D. Elvira. These Cities were then called Infanta∣do, which is as much as the Principality, signifying thereby, the Estate left for support of the Younger Children. Spain being divided, it was impossible it should enjoy Peace, all Peo∣ple were in suspence, expecting great revolutions upon the King's death. To prevent these misfortunes, many of the Nobility had endeavoured to disswade him from this Resolution, and the matter had been handled in Parliament. Arias Gonzalo, an Ancient, Wise, and Expe∣rienced Man, had stirred most in this affair, but Fatherly Love, suffered not his Prudent advice to take place. D. Sancho, became the Throne, as being a Comely and Graceful Youth, better versed in War than in State affairs, and therefore called the Strong. Pelagius Ovetensis says, he was very Beautiful and Expert in Martial affairs. He was naturally Mild and Affable, if not provoked, or incensed by false Friends. Upon the death of his Father, he openly complained of the wrong had been done him, by dividing the Kingdom. Yet his Mother whilst she lived, restrained him from falling upon his Brothers, especially for that after the King's death, the Crown of Leon devolved upon her, as being her own Dower. D. Sancho Reigned 6 Years, 8 Months, and 25 Days. At the beginning of his Reign, he had War with the Moors, and soon after with the King of Aragon. King Ramiro of Aragon, desiring to enlarge his Territories, laboured successfully, to expel the remainder of the Moors out of that Kingdom. He obliged Almugdadi King of Zaragoça, and Almudafar King of Lerida, to become tributary, and overthrew the King of Huesca. Those about Zaragoça, having been subdued by King Ferdinand, were become tributary to him, but now upon the change of Kings, and relying on the assistance of D. Ramiro, they resolved to fall off. King Sancho having speedily gathered an Army, marched against them. Those of Toledo immediately submitted, but the Aragonians stood out. Hereupon having wasted all the Country, he lay∣ed Siege to Zaragoça, and press'd it so vigorously, it was surrendred to him upon Condition, he should be obliged to support the City against all Enemies, as well Christians as Moors.
This Capitulation seem'd directly levell'd against the King of Aragon. D. Sancho was offen∣ded that the King of Aragon join'd with the Navarrois, who often made Inroads upon the Dominions of Castile; and besides, that he receiv'd Tribute from those Aragonians that were his Subjects. The Aragonians had then laid Siege to the Castle of Grados, built by the Moors, on the Banks of the River Esera, to curb the Christians. King Sancho, in pursuance of his Capitulation with the Moors, marched to raise that Siege. The Army of Aragon being sur∣priz'd, and attack'd in Front and Rear by the Christians and Insidels, was easily routed; some fled, others were kill'd, amongst which number was the King himself. This was much about the Year 1067. D. Ramiro of Aragon had Reign'd 31 Years, his Body was Bury'd in 1067. the Church of St. John de la Pen̄a, where many of his Predecessors lay. D. Sancho Ramirez, his Son, succeeded in the Throne at the Age of 18. a Prince not unlike to his Father in Virtue. In this Princes time, and in the Year of Grace 1068. Guinard Earl of Russillon, built the Town 1068. of Perpignan, on the Borders of France, not far from the antient City Russillon; the name of Perpignan Built. Perpignan was taken from one Bernard Perpignan, who kept two Inns in that place. This King Sancho is said to have abrogated the Laws of the Goths, as the Catalonians had done before, and established the Imperial Civil Law. He was Married to D. Felicia, Daughter to Armen∣gaud Earl of Ʋrgel, by whom he had three Sons, D. Peter, D. Alonso, and D. Ramiro, who were all successively Kings of Aragon. A Bastard Son of his called D. Garcia, was afterwards Bishop of Jaca. At the same time there Reign'd in Spain three Kings, who were Cousin-Germans, tho' not The Kings alike in the man∣ner of their Death. equal in power, yet all alike in the manner of their Death. D. Sancho King of Castile was the greatest; he had blemish'd the beginning of his Reign, by killing his Uncle, King Ramiro, and growing fierce with Success, was daily driving at greater mischiefs; his strength being terrible to the others. D. Sancho, King of Navarre, maintain'd his small Kingdom, by ma∣king a League with him of Aragon, to secure both against Castile. He of Castile understand∣ing their design, thought to be beforehand with them, and broke into Navarre, without stop∣ing, till he came in sight of Viana. There the two Kings met him, and they came to a Battle, in which the Castilians were defeated; and their King having lost many Men, return'd into his own Country. The Victors resolving to make use of their Success, broke into the Terri∣tories of Rioja, and Briviesca, where they recovered all that King Ferdinand had taken. Thus were those three Princes destroying one another, without reflecting upon what they might ex∣pect from the Moors. The King of Castile could not at that time take revenge of his Cousins, being ingaged in a new War against his Brothers. He was ambitious, rash, and hot, and pretended a right to all that had been his Fathers, and did not want other grounds to raise a Quarrel upon. His Brothers, tho' weak, could not be perswaded to Unite their Forces a∣gainst their common Enemy. D. Sancho having gathered a powerful Army, resolved to carry on his designs. On the other side, D. Alonso, whom that storm threatned first, having sent Embassadors to procure assistance from his Brother and Cousins, gathered a number of good Soldiers, and marched toward the Enemy. Both Armies met near a Town called Piantaca, where was fought a Bloody Battle, both sides for a long time resolutely maintaining their Ground, but at length, D. Alonso was discomfited, his Army put to the rout, and he forced to fly to the City Leon. CHAP. VI. The Progress of the War D. Sancho made upon his two Brothers. He expels Alonso, King of Leon, first, and then Garcia, King of Galicia, lays Siege to the City Zamora, and is there murdered. KIng Alonso after the Defeat above-mentioned, having with all possible speed Recruit∣ed his Army, met the Enemy again near a Town called Golpelara, (according to Pela∣gius, King San∣cho Wars upon his Brothers. Bishop of Oviedo, the Archbishop D Roderick, calls it Vulpecularia) on the Banks of the River Carrion. Here the fortune of the day was changed, and the Castilians routed. Rode∣rick Dyaz, who accompanied. King Sancho in all his Wars, guessing that Success would pro∣duce security to the Victors, rally'd his scattered Soldiers, and by break of day fell upon the Enemy in their Camp, as they lay buried in Sleep and Wine. In this confusion some fled, others stood to their Arms, all commanded, and none obeyed. Thus in a short time were they overthrown; D. Alonso retired to the Church of Carrion, which he had Garisoned. There he was taken, and sent Prisoner to the Castle of Burgos. The Princess Ʋrraca, Sister to both Kings, who loved D. Alonso, and the Count D. Peranzules, who never forsook him, in∣terposing, King Sancho consented that his Brother should go to the Monastery of Sahagun, on the Banks of the River Cea, and there renouncing the World, took upon him the Religi∣ous Habit. He took the Habit in the Year 1071. but after some time, at the persuasion of 1071. those that brought him thither, fled, and put himself into the hands of Almenon, the Moor∣ish King Alon∣so flies to the Moors. King of Toledo, who had been a great Friend to his Father. The Moor received him with Joy and Affection, gave him a House near the Palace to live in, and assigned him a Pension. On
the other part, D. Alonso swore to be true and faithful to that King, and to be ready upon all occasions to serve him. He being of a graceful, comely Person, modest, discreet, liberal and affable, soon gained the affections of those People. D. Ʋrraca, his Sister, sollicited for him; she obtained leave of King Sancho, for Count Peranzules, and his two Brothers, Gonzalo and Ferdinand, to go wait upon D. Alonso. With those three went many others, all whom, the Moorish King received into pay, that they might not want Subsistance, and might be service∣able to him in his Wars against the neighbouring Moors. Thus that banished Prince spent his time, when the Wars ceased, he gave himself to Hunting; and for the greater conveniency, built a Country-house, whither others resorting, and building, it became a noted Place, now called Brihuega, a Town not obscure, in the Kingdom of Toledo. His ordinary Residence was in Toledo, where he often conversed with the K. who was very much taken with him. It hap'ned they went out one day to Recreate themselves to a Garden, near the City, now called the King's Garden, where D. Alonso fell asleep. The King and his Courtiers, who lay hard by, under a Tree, began to discourse of the great strength of Toledo. One a∣mong the rest, said there was but one way to take the City, which was by Famine, keeping it block'd up seven Years together. D. Alonso, who was not quite asleep, or else wakened, was pleased to hear this discourse, and charged his memory with it. Another day he being with the King, his Hair stood up an end, and tho' the King stroked it down two or three times, still it rose again. The Moors, who are very Superstitious, said that was an Omen he would possess himself of that Kingdom, if they did not prevent it by killing him. But who can prevent the Decrees of the Almighty? The King, who was compassionate, could not be persuaded to break the Laws of Hospitality; but was satisfied with D. Alonso's Oath, that he would ever be a true Friend to him. This is what hap'ned at Toledo. King Sancho grown haughty with Success, possessed himself of all the Kingdom of Leon, some places submitting, others being taken by force, as was the City Leon, after holding out a long Siege. All being reduced, he advanced into Galicia, against his other Brother, who was in a very weak condition, his Kingdom being all divided into Factions, and full of Mutinies, by reason K. Sancho expels his Brother Garcia. of the heavy Taxes he laid upon the People, as also, because he put the Government of himself and his Kingdoms into the hands of a Servant, who was his Favourite. The Nobility offended at this, killed that Servant in his presence, and not so satisfied, took up Arms, and put the whole Kingdom into an uproar. This was the condition of Galicia, when King Sancho invaded it. D. Garcia finding it impossible, his Subjects being in Rebellion, to withstand his Brother, fled with only 300 Men to the Moors in Portugal, and there endea∣voured to stir them up to espouse his Quarrel, and so to revenge their own; but all his per∣suasions were of no force, and he obtained nothing. Being disappointed in that part; yet he resolved to try his Fortune, with such as resorted to him, some of whom came out of hatred to King Sancho, others in hope of plunder, and were of both sorts, as well Moors as Christians. Thus entring his Kingdom, the Towns of Portugal easily submitted to him. King Sancho marched to quench this flame that began to blaze, before it could grow to a head. He marched as far as Santarem, formerly called Scalabis, there the two Armies met, and came to a Battle, in which, the Castilians were Victorious. Great slaughter were made of the Enemies, many of them were taken, and among the rest D. Garcia himself, who was kept Prisoner in the Castle of Luna, in Galicia, all the remaining part of his Life. He was naturally sloathful and negligent, talkative, and unsit to weather such great Storms as were raised against him. D. Sancho having striped his Brothers, and being now possess'd of all his Father's Domini∣ons, K. Sancho Besieges Zamora. grew more haughty, and made no reflection upon the inconstancy of Humane Felicities. Having despoiled his Brothers, nothing remained, but his Sisters, whom also he designed to deprive of the Lands their Father had left them. The City Zamora was well fortify'd, had a strong Garrison, and store of Arms and Provisions. The Inhabitants were faithful and re∣solute, always ready to oppose any that should assault them. Arias Gonçalo, an ancient, ex∣perienced, and discreet Gentleman, was their Commander, and by his advice, the Princess Ʋrraca was governed. The King seeing there was no hopes that they would submit to him by fair means, sate down with his Army before that City, with a resolution not to desist till he was Master of it. The Siege was carried on with Vigour, and all sorts of Engines then in use, apply'd against the Works; so that the Citizens being streightned, began to waver, and think of a Surrender. Such was the condition of the Town, when a treacherous Fellow, called Vellido Delphos, (whether of his own design, or by advice of others, is not known) re∣solved to Murder the King, and by that means, put an end to the Siege. He got admittance to the King, upon pretence of discovering the designs of the Besieged, and showing him the K. Sancho treacher∣ously Mur∣der'd be∣fore Za∣mora. weakest part of the Wall. Men easily believe what they desire, so the King went out with only that Man to view what he promised to show him; but when he least thought of it, Vel∣ledo Dolphos threw a Spear he had in his hand at him, which pierced thro' his Body. No sooner was this done, but the Murderer fled to the City, pursued by several of the King's Soldiers, who being at some distance, could not overtake him, the Guards letting him in at the Gate. This gave occasion to the Besiegers to believe, all, or most of the Townsmen had consented to the Murder. The Troops of Leon and Galicia, who were not well affected to the King, immediately quitted the Field, and returned home. Those of Castile, being the
ancienter Subjects, divided themselves, part went to carry his Body to the Monastery of On̄a, where it was Bury'd without any Pomp, the greater number stay'd to carry on the Siege, and revenge his death. They threatned to subvert the City, and put all the Inhabi∣tants to the Sword, as Traitors. Particularly, James Ordon̄ez, of the Family of Lara, a Youth of great strength and valour, appeared before the City, armed at all points, and a Horse-back, and standing on a high Ground, to be the better heard, rent the Skies with loud cries, threatning Ruin and Destructions. The Citizens between fear and shame, durst not open their Mouths Only Arias Gonzalo, tho' he might well have been excused by his great Age, offered himself, and his Sons to fight that Gentleman, for the Honour of his A single Combat upon the King's death. Country. It was the Custom of Castile, that whosoever charged a City with Treason, was obliged to fight five, one after another to make good his charge. The three Sons of Arias Gonzalo, Peter, James, and Roderick, entered the Lists one after another, and were all three killed by D. James Ordon̄ez. Yet the last, tho' mortally wounded, striking at his Enemy, wounded his Horse, and cut his Reins, so that the Horse affrighted, carryed D. James out of the Lists, which, according to the Law of Arms, was a token he was beaten. The Judges could not determine the case, one side Insisting upon the Custom and Law of Arms, and the other pleading, this was meer accident; and thus ended that much celebrated Dispute. CHAP. VII. King Alonso returns from among the Moors, and recovers his Brother's King∣doms. The first part of his Reign. Actions of Roderick de Bivar. King Sancho of Navarre Murdered by his own Brother. D. Ʋrraca being in care for her Brother D. Alonso, sent away a Messenger to him to Toledo, acquainting him with the unfortunate death of his Brother, and advising him K. Alonso returns from a∣mong the Moors, and receives the Crown to come away with all speed, and take possession of the Crown. The Moorish King wanted not Intelligence, having Spies in the Christian Army. At length, the Messenger from the Princess arrived, and gave D. Alonso an account of all that had hap'ned. Count Peranzules advi∣sed him to get away privately without acquainting the Moorish K. for fear he should stop him; yet D. Alonso acquainted the King with the news he had received, and desired his leave to go take possession of the Kingdom that was fallen to him. The Moor was pleased with this sin∣cere dealing, assured him the ways were laid, in case he had attempted to steal away, caused him to renew his Oath, to be a Friend to him and his Son Hissem; and that done, not only lent him Money for present use, but accompanied him a considerable space. This I look up∣on to be more likely than what D. Lucas de Tuy writes, that he was let down over the Walls, and made his escape, having Horses provided for that purpose. Being come to Zamora, he con∣sulted with the Princess what was best to be done, and dispatched Expresses to all Parts, to give notice of his being there. The People of Leon, without any difficulty, admitted and proclaimed him King. Galicia was dubious, D Garcia upon this Revolution having broke Prison, and endeavouring to recover his Crown. D. Alonso sent Persons of note to treat with him, and he being fair conditioned and easie, was easily prevailed upon, so that without any further security asked, he came away to his Brother, not doubting to obtain what he desir'd. But he was deceived, being presently seized, and sent back to Prison, where he continued the rest of his life with good usage, if any could be thought such, where a Crown and Liber∣ty He impri∣sons his Brother Garcia. were lost at once. Thus Galicia was brought under. The Nobility of Castile being as∣sembled at Burgos, agreed to admit D. Alonso for their King, if he would first swear he had no hand in the Murder of his Brother. D. Alonso hearing of it, went thither, and every Body fearing to tender him this Oath, Roderick Diaz, called Cid, undertook it. The Oath being solemnly taken, he was Proclaimed with great Joy. For the present, he connived at Takes an Oath for the Crown of Castile. this affront, but reserved a grudge in his Heart against Roderick Diaz. D. Alonso was 37 Years of Age when he returned to his Crown; and for his Military Exploits, was called the Brave. Besides, he was Prudent, Temperate, Modest, and Bountiful. The death of D. Sancho, and Restauration of D. Alonso, hap'ned in the Year 1073. At this time, Gregory VII. was Pope, and the same Year dy'd in Spain S. Dominick de Silos, a Monk of Cluni, famous for sanctity 1073. of Life. The beginning of D. Alonso's Reign was not free from some troubles, which were soon appea∣sed, and ended well. In the second Year of his Reign, which was 1074. the Kings of Cordova, 1074. and Toledo were at War, about the limits of their Kingdoms. D. Alonso, as being so much K. Alonso aids the Moorish K. of Toledo. obliged to him of Toledo, gathered a good Army to assist him. King Almenon, at first, fear∣ed this Preparations was against him, but being better informed, both Kings joyn'd their Forces, and in that manner entred the Territory of Cordova, where they wasted all the Country, and brought away great numbers of Cattle and Prisoners. No Battle was fought, because the King of Cordova shunned it. About this time dy'd the first Wife of D. Alonso, her Name was Agnes. He Married a French Lady, called Constantia, by whom he had one only Daughter, whose Name was Ʋrraca, and who afterwards inherited all her Father's Do∣minions,
as shall be seen in its place. At the instance of this Queen, (as I suppose,) an Em∣bassy was sent to Rome, to desire the Pope to send a Legate into Spain, with full Power to Reform the Clergy, grown very Dissolute. Richard, Cardinal and Abbot of S. Victor of Mar∣seilles, was the Legate, who, in the Year 1076. called a Council of all the Bishops in Spain, to Burgos. In this Council it was ordained, that the Roman Ministry should be in force, 1076. which (I believe to be) the forbiding of Priests to Marry. Here also, as had been done before A Synod at Burgos. in Aragon, the Gothick Breviary and Missal, were abolished, and the Roman ordered to be used. Thus much as to Ecclesiastical Affairs. Roderick Diaz, was now sent into Andaluzia, to oblige the Moorish Kings of Cordova and Sevil, to pay the usual Tribute. The Kings of Granada and Sevil were at War, and the former had the better, by reason some Christians served under him. Roderick Diaz endeavoured to bring them to an Accommodation, but he of Granada refusing, was overthrown, and forced to accept of the Conditions offered at first. In fine, Peace was established betwixt those Moors, and the Christian Army returned loaded with Booty, and carrying home the Tribute they had received. For the many Victories he gained the Soldiers and People, called Roderick Diaz, Cid Campeador, which is as much as, Lord of the Field. This raised the envy of the Nobility and Gentry, who used all means to lessen and destroy him. This was the easier to perform, because the King was before offended at him, and a new occasion of reflecting on him offered it self. The Moors of An∣daluzia Roderick de Bivar, ravages the Domi∣nions of the Moors. had Revolted, and the King went in Person to subdue them. At the same time, a number of Infidels out of Aragon, broke into Castile, wasting the Territory of Santistevan de Gormaz, Roderick Diaz, who lived retired upon his Estate, knowing the King was then ab∣sent with the Forces of the Kingdom, gathered what Men he could, and therewith not only expelled the Moors, but pursuing them, entred the Kingdom of Toledo, without stopping till he came in sight of that City, destroying all the Country, taking a great Booty, and 7000 Slaves, Men, Women and Children. His Enemies represented this to the King, as a breach of the Peace with the King of Toledo, and said, there was no reason to suffer a Mad-man to commit daily Extravagancies. This Affair being debated among the Nobility, it was resol∣ved he should be Banished, and only 9 days given him to depart the Kingdom. He not da∣ring to stand this shock, recommended his Wife and Children, to the care of the Abbot of He is Ba∣nished. S. Peter de Carden̄a, a Monastery he had a particular Devotion for, and then set out with a good Retinue, resolving not to be idle during his Exile, but to do all the harm he could to the Moors. The number of those that went with him, was not great; but they were chosen Men, with them he entred the Kingdom of Toledo, and going along up the River Henares, pierced into that part of Aragon, where is Alhama, and the River Xalon, that Waters much of the Country, being drawn out in small Chanels. He took from the Moors the strong Ca∣stle of Alcozer, seated on a Hill, and thence infested all the neighbouring Country, having defeated two Captains, sent by the King of Valencia, to oppose him. The Booty he took, was extraordinary rich, of which, he sent 30 Horses, led by as many Moors, and 30 Scymi∣ters of a Present to King Alonso, who received it with great signs of Satisfaction. All the People extolled his goodness and merit, comparing him to the Heroes, Antiquity has so much boasted of. King Alonso gave a courteous Answer to the Messengers that brought the Pre∣sent, but would not recall their Master, lest the Moors should be offended, if he for∣gave him so soon; but leave was given to all those who desired it, to follow and serve un∣der him. This was not done only to oblige him, but to rid the Country of many trouble∣some People, who being bred in Arms, knew not how to be idle. Tho' these things hap∣pened in several Years, we have put them together for the ease of the Memory. Let us now turn back to the Year 1076. D. Sancho, King of Navarre, had a Brother, called D. Ramon, these, tho' Sons of one Fa∣ther 1076. Sancho, K. of Navarre and Mother, differed much in Nature and Inclinations. D. Ramon was Turbulent, with∣out regard of Justice, and many like himself followed him, with whose assistance, he aimed at the Crown. The King was very Religious, and had by his Queen D. Placencia, a young Son, called D. Ramiro; some Authors say he had two other Sons. D. Ramon stiled the King's Bounty, Prodigality, and finding him old, and his Sons in their Infancy, with the help of his Friends, seized on some Strong-Holds, in order to carry on his wicked Designs, The King endeavoured to reclaim him, but seeing all fair means were of no force, caused him to be Impeached, and absent as he was, to be declared a publick Enemy, and Condemn∣ed to Death. Thus they became open Enemies, and each sought the Death of the other. Wicked Men are generally more cautious, and designing, whereas the Just, relying on a good Conscience, are more open. The King being in the Town of Rhoda, the Traytor sur∣priz'd and murder'd him there, D. Ramiro, the eldest Son of the Deceased, fled for Protecti∣on to Roderick Diaz, the two others to D. Alonso, King of Castile. The Nobility of the Kingdom meeting, resolved not to submit to the Murderer, but because the Princes were young and absent, offered the Crown to D. Sancho, King of Aragon, Cousin-German to the Deceased. He lost no time, but embracing the offer, secured the greatest part of the King∣dom. That part ich is about Bribiesca and Rioja, submitted to Alonso, King of Castile, who pretended a better Right to Navarre, in regard that D. Ramiro, Father to the King of Aragon, was a Bastard. Particularly, the City Najara was Surrendred to him, where, in the Church of S. Mary the Royal, were buried the Bodies of the dead King and his Wife.
The King of Aragon, rather than break with him of Castile, agreed to pay a certain acknow∣ledgment yearly for Navarre, as appears by ancient Records of D. Sancho, and D. Peter. The Murderer seeing how the new King was received, and having lost all hopes of being a∣ble to oppose him, fled to Zaragoça, where the Moorish King gave him a House, and certain Lands, to support the remainder of his miserable Life. CHAP. VIII. The Death of Almenon, King of Toledo, and of D. Ramon, Earl of Barcelo∣na. The Conquests of the Normans in Italy. The Conquest of Toledo re∣solved upon. Ramon, Earl of Barcelona, Murdered. IN the Year of Grace 1077. dy'd two famous Princes. These were Almenon, King of 1077. Toledo, and D. Ramon, Earl of Barcelona, Sirnam'd the Old, which was the most remarka∣ble Almenon, the Moor∣ish King of Toledo, and Ramon, Earl of Barcelona, dye. thing that happened that Year. Hissem, Son to the late King, succeeded his Father in the Throne of Toledo, and during the short time of his Reign, which was but one Year, kept up the Amity betwixt King Alonso of Castile, and himself, as he had been charged by his Father. After the death of Hissem, Reigned his Brother Hiaya Aldirbil, much unlike to his Father and Brother. He was a Coward, and unfit for Government, Lewd in his Life, and spar'd not the Wives and Daughters of his Subjects, whereby he became odious as well to the Moors as Christian Inhabitants of Toledo. Upon the death of Hissem, D. Alonso was dis∣charged Succession of the Moors. of the Oath he had taken at Toledo, to be Friend to the Father and Son. Both Moors and Christians, weary of the Tyranny of that new Prince, solicited King Alonso to free them from that Slavery, and possess himself of that City. These were the first inducements to undertake the Conquest of that most Noble City, the Metropolis of all that Kingdom. D. Ramon, Earl of Barcelona, dy'd in that City, and was bury'd in the Cathedral thereof, which he had built from the Ground, with all suitable Pomp and Grandeur. He divided his Dominions betwixt his two Sons, D. Berenguel, and D. Ramon, called Cabeça de Estopa, or Flaxen-Head. This last, (according to Mariana the Younger, but according to several Testi∣monies brought in Opposition to him by Peter Mantuanus, in his Animadversions on his History, the elder Brother) Marry'd a Vertuous Lady, Daughter to Robert Guiscard, a Norman, but then very Powerful in Italy, as Zurita, lib. 1. cap. 1. relates. At this time the Normans were possessed of the extreme parts of Italy and Sicily. This Lady built two Monasteries, one of Succession of the Earls of Barcelona. the Invocation of S. Daniel, in the Valley of S. Mary, in the Territory of Cabrera, the other near Girona, where, after the death of her Husband, she spent the remainder of her Life in much Sanctity. Both Monasteries were given to the Nuns of S. Benedict. D. Ramon Arnaldo, or Berenguel, who succeeded his Father in that Earldom, was Son to this Lady. About the same time Armengaud, Earl of Ʋrgel, made War upon the Moors in those Parts, and William Jor∣dan, Earl of Cerdagne, prosecuted the Arian Hereticks, who now began again to appear in those parts, after having been so long suppressed. He Banished them, Confiscated their Goods, made them Infamous, and put the Obstinate to death. Thro' the Valour of Armengaud, many Towns along the River Segre, were taken from the Moors, and particularly, the City Balaguer, the Metropolis of the Earldom of Ʋrgel. Since we have above mentioned the Normans, it will not be amiss to add a few Lines in rela∣tion to them, their Conquests in Italy being parts we shall have much occasion to speak of in this Actions of the Nor∣mans in Italy History. It has been already said, how they being a Northern People, possess'd themselves of that part of France, before called Neustria, and from them, Normandy. This they did under Rollo, their Chief, and General. The 7th Duke from him, was William, called the Conque∣ror; for that having defeated, and slain Harold, he made himself King of England. Ano∣ther Army of Normans went thro' France into Italy, which was then divided into several small Principalities, and much wasted with intestine Wars. Here, they first served in the Wars of Lombardy and Tuscany, then passing into the Kingdom of Naples, where they receiv∣ed Pay of the Prince of Capua, and soon after, for better Pay, went over to him of Salerno, who, with their assistance, obtained the Victory over his Enemy. This War being ended, thro' the persuasions of Maniacus, Governor of Apulia and Calabria, for the Grecian Emperor, they undertook the Conquests of Sicily, then possess'd by the Moors. Their success was such, that in a short time, they drove the Infidels out of the Island, then falling at variance with the Greeks, expelled them also. Thus they laid the Foundations of a mighty Monarchy in Italy and Sicily, for at the fame of their success, many more resorted to them out of Normandy. All that was taken, was divided among the Conquerors, but the others soon dying, all was devolved upon Robert Guiscard and Roger. Robert, called himself Duke of Apulia and Calabria, Roger was Earl of Sicily. Robert by two Wives, had these Children, Boamundus, Roger, and one Daughter, who (if what the Catalonians say, be true) was Married to D. Ramon, Earl of Bar∣celona, as has been above related. Roger had a Son also called Roger, wh hanged the Title of Earl, for that of King; and at last became sole Lord of all that the Normans held both in Norman Earls and Kings. Italy and Sicily. Besides, Italy and Greece, were Tributary to him. This is taken out of
Gaufridus, the Monk, who writ the Actions of the Normans, in Italy, at the request of the said Earl Roger. But let us leave Italy, and return to Spain. The Citizens of Toledo ceased not to Sollicite, the Christians to undertake the Conquest of that City, Exaggerating the Calamities they endured, begging relief, and protesting if they were not speedily delivered from the Tyranny of their King, they must have recourse to o∣ther Moors for Assistance. King Alonso was perplexed, and knew not what to do, fearing The Con∣quest o Toledo re∣solved up∣on. on the one hand, what might be said of him, and considering on the other, the great advan∣tage of gaining that City. Therefore he resolved to put it to the Votes of the Chief Nobility and Persons of most Understanding. Opinions, as is usual in such cases, were various. The most bold and daring, were for undertaking that War, shewing the great advantage that would Accrew to the King, and to Christianity in General. Others more wary, said there could be no reason to attempt such a Conquest, it being contrary to Conscience and Honour, to break the Peace Established with those Kings, where the King had received such Obligati∣ons. The King having heard all their Opinions, at length, yielded to the desire, he had of Conquering that Noble City, and having positively declared his intention to be such, the whole Council easily agreed to it, and it was unanimously decreed to make War upon the Moors. This being resolved, the King applyed himself to gather store of Arms, Provisions, Horses, and all other Necessaries. He made new Levies, and offered rewards to such of the Old Soldiers who were dispersed about the Kingdom as would serve. All things were furnished with the more speed, because News was brought that the Moors, having called the King of Badajoz to their Assistance, he was preparing to relieve them. Such was their expedition, that both Armies arrived together in sight of Toledo; but the Moors perceiving King Alonso had a Gallant Army, returned without attempting any thing. Yet the City could not be taken at that time, for that the King of it was well provided against a Siege, and the na∣tural strength of the place deterred all Men. The Christians wasted the Country, burnt the Corn, drove the Cattle and many Prisoners, and then returned home. This destruction was Country about To∣ledo wasted began in the Year 1079. and continued the next, and several Years afters. Canales and Olmos, two Towns near that City, were taken, well Garrisoned, and thence all the Country continually 1079. infested. Thus by degrees the City began to be straitned, and suffered much want. Toledo is for the most part furnished with Provisions brought from afar, because the Country about it is barren, being Sandy and Stony, there is also much scarcity of Springs, and it rains but seldom, it being very remote from the Sea, and the highest Land in Spain. Only along the Meadows, through which Tagus runs, the Land is Fruitful and Pleasant. At the same time the Conquest of Toledo was undertaken, Roderick Diaz continued the War in Aragon, with Roderick Diaz deBi∣var his fur∣ther Acti∣ons. great success, taking several strong holds from the Moors, and wanted nothing to perfect his happiness, but to be restored to his Prince's favour which he much desired. It fell out ve∣ry opportunely, that in the Year 1080. the Moors of Andaluzia fell at variance, for that a Man of note among them had seized the Castle of Grados. Adofir the rightful Owner, had recourse 1080. to King Alonso for Assistance to recover his Castle. The King finding it advantageous to himself, granted the Moors request, sent a Body of Troops before, and followed with a grea∣ter Force in Person, but the Enemy being subtle protracted the War, so that the King fear∣ed Slipping the Season of going to Toledo. This moved him to send for Roderick Diaz, who was then in Aragon, and to whom he gave that Command, having received him with great affection, and the more to oblige him, ordained that for the future, no Gentleman should be obliged to go into Banishment under Thirty days warning, whereas before they had but Nine. The King marched to Toledo, and Roderick Diaz put an end to the War in Andaluzia, recovering the Castle of Grados, and taking the Moor that had seized it, whom he sent to the King. Thus much in Andaluzia this Year. The next which was 1081. D. Garcia, the King's Bro∣ther departed this Life, having caused his Veins to be opened in the Prison, where he was 1081. D. Garcia the King's Brother Bleeds to Death in Prison. kept, so highly did he resent the loss of his Kingdom and Liberty. His Body was carryed to the City Leon, and there honourably buryed, in the Church of St. Isidorus, his two Sisters, many Bishops, and Nobles attending the Solemnity. He dyed ten Years after he had been a Prisoner, and fifteen after his first Accession to the Crown. Roderick Diaz having settled An∣daluzia, returned to the War in Aragon, where in Battle he overthrew the Moorish King of Denia, and D. Sancho, King of Aragon, who assisted him. This Victory was so considerable, that King Alonso sent for him, did him much honour, and gave to Him, and his Heirs, the Three An over∣throw gi∣ven the Infidels. Towns of Briviesca, Berlanga, and Arcejona. Alfagio, the Moorish King, having recruited his Forces after the defeat entred Castile, wasting the Country, as far as Consuegra. Tho' King Alonso was then busy before Toledo, he eedily marched to oppose the Infidel. Both Armies met, a great number of Moors was slash, and their King escaped by flight to a Castle. The joy of this Victory was much allayed, by the unfortunate Death of James Ro∣driguez de Bivar, Son to Roderick Diaz, a Youth of great hopes, who began to follow his Fa∣ther's Ramon Earl of Barcelo∣na Mur∣dred, his Son Ramon succeeds him. Footsteps. His Body was buryed in the Monastery of St. Peter de Carden̄a, where his Tomb is still to be seen. Alfagio the Moor, tho' twice defeated, gave not over, but still gathering a fresh Army, broke into Castile, without stopping till he came to Medina del Campo. Alvaryanez Minaya, a brave Man, related to Roderick Diaz, met, and defeated him the Third time. This hap'ned in the Year of our Lord 1082, at which time D. Ramon Earl of Barcelo∣na was basely Murdered, near a Town called Percha, betwixt Ostalric and Girond. His Bro∣ther 1082.
Berenguel was the contriver of his Death, and was therefore so hated by the People, that he went away to the holy War, and at Jerusalem is said to have lost his Speech, and there Dyed. His Body was buryed in the Cathedral of Girona. His Son D. Ramon Arnaldo succeed∣ed him, being not full a Year old, but famous for the time he enjoy'd that Principality; for the greatness of his Actions, inferior to none of his Predecessors, and for that he enlarged his Dominions, not only by the addition of Besalu and Ʋrgel, which for want of Heirs, devol∣ved to him, as Feifs of the Earldom of Barcelona, but also by Marrying D. Aldonça, whom others call Dulcis, Daughter and Heiress of Gilbert, Earl of Provence, with whom he had that large Province in Dower. By her he had two Sons, D. Ramon and D. Berenguel, and three Daughters, one called D. Berenguela, or Berengaria, Marry'd to D. Alonso, stiled the Empe∣ror. The Names of the others are not known, but both were Marry'd in France. This Prince was long at variance, and held War against Alonso, Earl of Toulouse, and after much contention, they agreed among themselves to adopt one another's Families; so that which∣soever was first Extinct, the other should Inherit. But this hap'ned long after the time we are now writing of. Let us return to the War of Toledo. CHAP. IX. The famous City Toledo closely Besieged, and Surrendred; Many other Places taken. King Alonso stiles himself Emperor. THE continual waste the Christians made in the Country about Toledo, burning, plun∣dering, and driving all before them, had reduc'd the Moors of that City to great Toledo closely Be∣sieged. streights. The Christian Inhabitants ceased not to press King Alonso to sit down before it, promising, they would soon open the Gates to him. That lasting War had exhausted the Subjects, yet the King's resolution overcame all difficulties. Great Levies were made, and all things provided with a full design never to desist till the City were taken. It is naturally strong, and so seated, that there was a necessity of dividing the Army into several Bodies, and consequently, a greater Force was requisite. It is a matter of great consequence to have the good Will of neighbouring Princes, as appeared in this War, for besides the King's own Subjects of Castile, Leon, Biscay, Galicia and Asturias. Sancho, King of Aragon and Navarre, brought a good Body of Men to the Siege, Supplies also came from Italy and Germany, and the French, as being nearer, came in greater numbers. Because the latter served well in this War, and upon other occasions, great Privileges were granted to such of them as would stay in Spain; whence, as I suppose, such as are free from Taxes are among us called Franc. Of all these Nations was formed a mighty Army, which marched without delay towards Toledo, full of hopes of speedy success. The Moorish King made all the necessary Preparations to endure a Siege, but most of all rely'd on the natural Strength of the Place, encompassed with high and craggy Rocks, thro' which the River Iagus in a wonderful manner breaks his way, and runs almost round the City, except on the North side, where is a steep and difficult ascent, defended by two strong Walls, one above the other. To Besiege this Place, the Army was divided into seven Brigades, which took up all the Avenues, so that no Relief The manner of en∣closing the City. could be carried in. The King, with the best of the Army, Encamp'd and Entrench'd himself in the Meadows, at the foot of the Hill on which the Town stands. Some Skirmishes hap'ned near the Wall, but nothing remarkable in them, except that it was observed the Christians were the better Foot, and the Moors the experter Horse. Towers of Wood were made, and all other sorts of Engines apply'd to the Wall, which, tho' they beat down part of it, yet it availed not, because the ascent was difficult, the Streets narrow, the Houses high and strong, and the Defendants numerous. Thus the Siege was protracted, Provisions were scarce, the Country about being wasted, the heat of the Summer came on; and the Army began to be sickly. All these things caused the Soldiers to wish for some Honourable Accommodation. At this time, Cyprianus, Bishop of Leon, acquainted the King that S. Isidorus had appeared to him, assuring the City would be taken in 15 Days. The Besieged suffered great want, hav∣ing spent all their Provisions. Whereupon, gathering in a Body, they repaired to the Pa∣lace with clamours, requiring the King to Capitulate. He having endeavoured to appease them, affirming they should be speedily relieved, and finding they persisted in their demands, sent out Commissioners to Treat. Some day seing spent in Expostulating, and debating the Matter, at length the Treaty was concluded upon these Articles. That the Palace, Articles of surren∣der. City Gates, Bridges, and King's-Garden, be delivered up to King Alonso. That the Moor∣ish King may go to Valencia, or where he shall think sit. The same liberty to be allowed the Moors that will bear him company, and they may carry their Goods and Moveables. Such as will stay in the City, shall not be molested in their Persons or Goods. The chief Mosque shall continue in their possession. No other Taxes shall be imposed on them, but such as they paid to their own Kings. They shall be Try'd by Judges of their own Nation, and no others. These Articles were solemnly Sworn to on both sides, and Hostages given Toledo sur∣rendered. for performance; which done, King Alonso, with great Joy, in the nature of a Triumph,
entred the City on the 25th of May, being the Feast of S. Ʋrban, Pope and Martyr, in the Year of our Lord 1085. Some Authors say 1083. That City was in the hands of the Moors about 369 Years, Julianus says 366. and that the Moors took it in the Year 719. on S. Ʋrban's Day, during which time, the Moors being nothing curious in building, it lost much of its former Beauty. The Streets were narrow and crooked, the Houses ill contrived, the very Palace was of Mud-walls, and stood where now is a great Hospital, Founded by D. Peter Gon∣zalez de Mendoza, Cardinal of Spain, and Archbishop of Toledo. In the midst of the City stood the chief Mosque, on a rising Ground, the Building at that time nothing sumptuous. Soon after, it was Consecrated, and in process of time built from the Ground, very large and beautiful. The fame of this Success was soon spread abroad, and Embassadors came to Con∣gratulate with the King from several Princes. The Moorish King, according to the Capitu∣lation, went away with a good Guard to Valencia, which was his own, where he preserv'd the Title of King. On the other side, many Brigades of Christians were dispersed through∣out the Kingdom of Toledo, to reduce all that remained in the possession of the Moors, which proved no difficult task, they being terrify'd at the loss of so great a City. Many Towns were taken, the most noted were, Maqueda, Escalona, Illescas, Talavera, Guadalajara, Mo∣ra, Many Towns ta∣ken. Consuegra, Madrid, Berlanga, Buytrago, Medinaceli, and Coria, many of them ancient Towns, not far distant from Toledo, strong and seated in a pleasant and fruitful Country. Some of the Moors of Toledo accompanied their King, but the most staid behind. Their number being great, there was danger they might upon the first opportunity Revolt. To prevent this evil, the King resolved to settle his Court there, till such time it was better Peopled with Christians, and new Fortifications raised to secure it. Houses and Lands, were by Proclamation offered to all such as would come and inhabit there, which drew a great number of People. Among the rest, we have an account of one Peter, a Grecian, of the Im∣perial Family of the Paleologi, of Constantinople, who is said, to have served during the Siege, and therefore the King, the Town being taken, gave him a House, and Lands of Inheritance. From this Gentleman, the great Family of Toledo pretend to be descended. From this time, 'tis said, the King's Quarter in Toledo, was so called, because the King gave that part of the City to the new Inhabitants that resorted thither. A new Palace was began to be built in the highest part of the City, all to the intent the better to curb the Moors. After this, we K. Alonso stiles himself Emperor find King Alonso began to stile himself Emperor, whether he had reason so to do, we will not dispute. He was puft up with the Conquests of that new Kingdom, and being Sove∣reign of the greatest part of Spain, and the King of Aragon, and Moorish Kings being his Tri∣butaries, he thought no Titles too great. His Joy was somewhat allay'd, by the death of his Sister D. Ʋrraoa, whom he respected as a Mother, and she deserved it for her singular Ver∣tues. His other Sister, D. Elvira, was Married to the Count de Cabra, to whom, he gave her to appease him, having provoked him by some rash words, as is related in the General History of D. Alonso the Wise. CHAP. X. The Election of the new Archbishop of Toledo. The abolishing the old Missal and Breviary. The Original of the Archbishop of Toledo. His Spiritual Jurisdicti∣on over all Spain. King Alphonso's Wives and Children. New Wars break out in Spain. IN the Year 1086. the City of Toledo, being well Inhabited with Christians, and the 1086. Moors kept under, the King convened a Synod of Bishops, at which, many of the No∣bility An Arch∣bishop of Toledo chosen. were present. The cause of their meeting was to chose an Archbishop of Toledo, and by the unanimous consent of all, Bernard, Abbot of Sahagun, was Elected. He was a Man of a vertuous Life, a ready Wit, sound Judgment, very Learned, and Upright, which good Qualities moved them to prefer him before all others, tho' a Stranger, as being a natural born French-man, of the City of Agen, in the Province of Aquitain, or Guienne. In his Youth he was a Soldier, at riper Years took the Habit of a Monk, at Aux, and was sent thence into Spain, by Hugo, the Abbot, at the request of King Alphonso, to reform the Bernard first Arch∣bishop. Monastery of Sahagun, which he design'd to be the head of all the Benedictines in Spain. Af∣ter he had been their Abbot some time, he was promoted to the high Dignity of Archbishop of Toledo. That his Honour and Authority might be the greater, the King freely gave to him, and his Successors, Archbishops of that See, many Towns, Lands, Mills, and Houses. In memory whereof, an Anniversary is Celebrated for King Alphonso, every Year in that Church in June. This done the Synod broke up. Having setled the Affairs of the City, the King went away to Leon, leaving Queen Constance, and the Archbishop there with a good Garrison. There was but a small number of Christians, in regard of the Moors; yet all things seemed to be well secured. However, the rashness of the new Prelate, put the City in danger of being lost. Our Ladies Church, which, as curious Persons have observ'd, is now a Monastery of Carmelites, was then the Cathedral, the great Church being in the Hands of the
Moors. It seemed not decent, that in a City taken from the Moors, they should possess the best Church, this might in time have been regulated, but the Archbishops hast, had like to have ruined all. He agreed with the Queen to take it forcibly, from them by Night, The great Church taken for∣cibly from the Moors contrary to Articles and accordingly breaking open the Doors, cast out all that belonged to the Mahometans, e∣rected Altars, and hanging a Bell in the Steeple, called together the Christians to assist at Divine Service. This Alarm'd the Infidels, so that they could scarce refrain from reveng∣ing themselves, and only forbore in hopes the King would do them Justice. When the News of what had been done was brought to the King, he was greatly inraged, and Posted away to Toledo, with full resolution to punish this breach of Articles, with the utmost severity. All the principal Inhabitants of Toledo, knowing his design, went out in Mourning to meet him, and the Clergy in Procession, and being come to his presence, Prostrate on the ground, begged Pardon. Their intreaties were of no force, for he persisted inflexible. God Al∣mighty in an unexpected manner, put a stop to the evil that was feared, for the chief of the Moors, their Passion being over, considered, if the King used any severity on their account, it might after his days turn to their Ruin, went out of the City, and meeting the King, begged he would forgive the Queen, and Archbishop, so they might for the future, be secured in their Possessions. This request, made by the Infidels, was so surprizing, that he not only par∣doned The Moors beg for the Queen and Arch∣bishop. those they begged for, but promised that he would ever remember that day, and be favourable to them for the Love they had shown him. All the City rejoiced, and it was ordained, that the Memory of this day, being the 24 of January, should be for ever preser∣ved, making it a Festival under the Name of Our Lady of Peace. It was said above that Richard Abbot of Marseilles, was sent by Pope Gregory VII. as his Le∣gate into Spain, and that in a Synod held at Burgos, he had Established the Roman Ceremonies, The Popes Legate his unjust proceed∣ings. and form of Prayer. This Legate abused his Power, committing many insolencies, without regard to any thing but gain, which scandaliz'd the People so, that they railed not only at him, but at the Pope himself. Bernard the Archbishop, was troubled at these miscarriages, but had not the Power to Redress them. It was then the Custom of Spain, in pursuance of a Decree, of the Eighth General Council, which was the last of Constantinople, that no Metro∣politans should be Consecrated, or exercise their Function, till their Election was confirmed by the Pope, and he had sent them the Pall. This process of time was extended to Bishops. Upon these two Motives the Archbishop resolved to go to Rome, but before his departure, with the King's Approbation, he gathered a Synod of Bishops, and Consecrated the Cathedral of Toledo, under the Invocation of St. Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Stephen, and the Holy-Cross. Ʋrban II. being Pope, in the Year 1088. Bernard the Archbishop being at Rome, obtained all he desired, to wit, the recalling of the Legate, and the confirming of himself Primate of all Spain, 1088. and that part of France called Gallia Gothica. By this Authority, being returned from Rome, he called a Synod of the neighbouring Bishops to Toulouze, where he prevailed to be received as their Archbi∣shop of Toledo made Pri∣mate of all spain. Metropolitan. Before the return of the Archbishops to Toledo, the Legate had attempted to Abrogate the Gotbick Missal, and Breviary, and introduce the Roman. This had been often en∣deavoured, but the People Tenacious of Old Customs still opposed it. Now the Queen, the Primate, and the Legate used such means that at length they prevailed, yet so that in the An∣cient Churches, the Ancient form should still be continued. Which is observed to this day; Roman Missal and Breviary intro∣duced. And that Service is still used on certain Festivals in those Churches; Besides, in the Cathedral there is a Chapel, to which belongs a number of Chaplains called Mocarabes, or more properly Mixtiar abes, who still use that Massal and Breviary. This name of Mixtiarabes, corruptly Moça∣rabes, was given to the Christians, that in the time of the Moors, lived under their Govern∣ment, and mixed with the Infidels. All the new Churches in Toledo, were ordered to say Mass, according to the Roman Liturgy. This debate being ended, the City began to flourish, beautiful new Buildings were erected, many of the Moors went away, and their places were filled by Christian inhabitants, to whom were granted Priviledges and Immunities, as appears by the Royal Charters, still preserved among the Records of Toledo. In the Year 1091. 1091. Bernard the Primate, who studyed nothing but the publick good, gathered a Synod at Leon, Synod at Leon. at which was present Cardinal Raynerius, the Pope's Legate, who succeeded Richard the Cardi∣nal. Many Decrees were here made for Reformation of the Clergy, at that time grownive∣ry corrupt. It was also ordained, that for the future, in all publick Writings the Gothick Character should be no longer used, but instead of it the French. It will not be amiss in this place briefly to show how the Archbishops of Toledo, came first to be Primates and Metropolitants of all Spain. Some will deduce it from the time of the How the Archbi∣shops of Toledo came to be to be Pri∣mates of all Spain. Apostles, and pretend, that S. Eugenius the Martyr came to Spain, and was the first Arch∣bishop of Toledo, but we have only the Authority of Modern Authors for it. By the Ancient Councils it appears, that their Authority is not so long a standing, since they sign not to any of them, in the first place. There were formerly in Spain 5 Archbishopricks, viz. Tarragona, Braga, Merida, Sevil, and Toledo, and none of these acknowledged any Superior but the Pope, and each took place in Councils according to the Seniority of his Consecration. Now the Goths, who at first possessed themselves of the Kingdom of Toledo, having subdued all o∣ther Barbarons Nations in Spain, and made themselves Masters of the whole Country, hence this City being the Court of those Kings, began to assume a Superiority over all the rest. This Authority took its first force in the Seventh Council of Toledo, which ordained, that all
the Neighbouring Bishops, should in their turns, being called by him their Primate, repair to that City, and there attend on the King and Archbishop for the space of a Month. The Archbishops Superiority being thus far established, was much advanced in the twelfth Council of that City, which decreed that the Election of all the Bishops in Spain, should be confirmed by him of Toledo, as had till then been done by the King, From that time forwards, all the other Bishops allowed him precedence, and he signed first to the Acts of Councils. This was all the Priviledge those Prelates then injoy'd above others. When Spain had fallen un∣der the slavery of the Moors, for a long time that City had no Bishops. At length when it was recovered by the Christians, the Archbishops were not only restored to their former Dignity, but made Primates of all Spain. Pope Ʋrban the Second, was the first that gave them this Pre∣rogative, and it was afterwards confirmed by Pasqualis Gelasius, Honorius Celestinus, Innocent, Lucius, Eugenius III. Adrian IV. Alexander III. Ʋrban III. Honorius III. Gregory IX. and many others, whose Bulls are preserved to this day, among the Records of the Cathedral of Toledo. Many Archbishops have had their Cross carryed before them, throughout all parts of Spain, yet at several times have met with some Opposition. At present they exercise no Jurisdiction, over the other Provinces, but only enjoy the Title, and have Precedence. It was said above, that King Alonso had two Wives, Agnes, and Constance, by the latter, K. Alonso his Wives and Issue. he had the Princess Ʋrraca. Constance dy'd, after the taking of Toledo, and at the same time, her Sister-in-Law D. Elvira, the King's Sister; she was bury'd at Leon, with her Sister D. Ʋrrdca. After the death of Constance, the King Marry'd the Daughter of Benabet the Moorish King of Sevil, she being converted, and changing her name of Zaida for that of Mary, or, as others will have it, Elizabeth. Of her was born D. Sancho, a Prince of great hopes had he lived. The King after this Marry'd a Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth time, with Berta of Tusca∣ny, Elizabeth of France, and Beatrix, whose Birth is not known. By Elizabeth, he had two Daughters, Sancha Marry'd to Earl Roderick, and Elvira Wife to Roger King of Sicily. King Alonso had besides, by a Mistriss called Ximena, two Daughters, Elvira Marryed to Raymund Earl of Toulouse, and Teresa, Wife of Henry of Lorrain. D. Ʋrraca the King's eldest Daugh∣ter was Marry'd to Raymund, Brother to the Earl of Burgundy, they had issue first D. Sancha, and then D. Alonso, who for the many Kingdoms he United, was called the Emperor. Thus much is Collected out of very Grave Authors, yet Pelagius Bishop of Oviedo, who lived about that time, and in the very close of his History says, King Alonso had but five Wives, and that Zaida, the Daughter of the Moorish King, was his Concubine. THE History of SPAIN. The Tenth BOOK. CHAP. 1. The Moorish Family of the Almoravides comes into Spain. King Alonso twice over∣thrown by them. Several Strangers come out of France, to serve under him, he be∣stows three of his Daughters on them. The holy War in the East. AMong the Moors the Family of the Almoravides having got the better of the Ala∣vecines, The Moor∣ish Family of the Al∣moravides comes into Spain. who till then held the Empire of Africk, settled their Kingdom at first in that part of Mauritania, which stretches along the Ocean, and Mediterranean Sea. Thence they pass'd over into Spain, and spread themselves through a great part of it. The occasion of their coming was thus: King Alonso had Marry'd the Daughter of the Moorish King of Sevil, and therefore at his request, sent to invite Joseph Tephin King of the Almoravides out of Africk, to assist his Father-in-Law, towards the reducing all that the Moors possessed in Spain under his Dominion. Joseph would not let slip so fair an opportuni∣ty of invading Spain, but not being able to go inPerson at that time, sent a good Army under the Command of Hali Abenaxa, a Famous Commander. Hali having join'd the King of Sevil, their Friend∣ship was not lasting, and their differences increasing, they came to a Battle, in which the King Hali sent to assist the King of Sevil o∣verthrows and kills him. was defeated, and killed by one Abdalla. This Victory made Hali Master of all the Dominions of the deceased, in the Year 1091. All the other Kings of the Moors were reduced, or submitted themselves to him. Hali, proud with this success, rebelled against his Master, and called himself Miramamolin of Spain, a name denoting Regal Authority among the Moors. 1091.
Now the Kings of the Moors, who were Subjects, and paid Tribute to King Alonso, thinking this a fit opportunity to recover their Liberty, cast off their Obedience, and refused to ac∣knowledge him. Never was Spain in greater danger, for those Barbarians grown fierce with so many Victories obtained over their own People, turned the course of their Arms a∣gainst the Christians. Their first attempt was against the Kingdom of Toledo, where they over ran the Country, putting all to Fire and Sword, and recovering some Towns given in Dower with his Daughter, by him of Sevil, which were Cuenca, Veles, and Huete. King Alonso sent an Army to oppose the Moors, under the Command of two Earls, D. Garcia, King Alon∣so's Forces over∣thrown by the Moors. A second defeat of the Chri∣stians. who had Married his Sister, and D. Roderick, who coming to a Battle with the Moors, were overthrown, near Rhoda, a Town between the River Guadalquivir, and the Ocean. This loss having shown the King the error he had committed in calling the Moors out of Africk, he made new Levies, gathered a mighty Army, and was again defeated near Caçalla, a Town not far from Badajoz, with the loss of a great number of Men. However he no way dismay'd, but recruiting his Army, broke in∣to the Enemies Country, as far as Cordova, destroying all that stood in his way. Hali mi∣strusting his own strength, fortify'd himself within Cordova, where some Skirmishes happen'd. Abdalla by Night made a Sally, and most of his Men being kill'd, was himself taken; and the Day following, in the sight of the Moors, who stood upon the Walls, torn to pieces and burnt, for the Murder of his Sovereign the King of Sevill. Hali, weary of the Seige, ac∣cepted of such conditions as were offer'd him, which were to pay down a great summ of Money, and a Yearly Tribute. Andaluzia being setled, the Army march'd into Aragon, where they Besieg'd Zaragoça. The Besieg'd offer'd to pay Tribute, and put themselves un∣der the King's Protection; but he hoping to become absolute Master of the City, lost both the one and the other. For Joseph having gather'd a mighty Army, pass'd over out of Africk, with a design to punish Hali for revolting, and then to invade the Christians. This being Joseph the Mirama∣molin, comes out of Africk. known in the City and Camp, the Besieg'd took heart, and the Besiegers for fear of what might happen, were forc'd to quit their Enterprize and depart. Joseph was so successful he entred Sevill, where he Beheaded Hali, then Cordova was surrendred to him, and soon after, all that the Moors held in Spain was brought under his Dominion, either by force, or their own voluntary submission, those that were subject to the Christians revolting from them. King Alonso thought not this a time to be idle, when the Moors of Africk were joyned with those of Spain, and therefore resolved to be before-hand with them. To this purpose, he made all necessary Preparations, gathering Arms, Horses, Provisions and Money. Not only the Lai∣ty, but the Clergy were obliged to take up Arms, old and now Soldiers raised, and Supplies sollicited from abroad. Many Strangers moved by the great danger Spain was in, and desi∣ring Several Strangers come to serve a∣gainst the Moors to serve in that War, came over, especially out of France. Among these, Raymund, Earl of Burgundy, and his Kinsman Henry, who was Born at Besançon, was of the House of Lorrain, and in process of time, the Founder of the Kingdom of Portugal. Besides these, there came Raymund, Earl of Toulouse. With them came a good number of Brave and Ex∣perienced French Soldiers. D. Sancho, King of Aragon, was not wanting, he tho' very ancient, yet had the Vivacity and Courage of Youth, and was an excellent Commander, having gain'd Experience in the continual Wars he had with the Moors. All these Forces made up so great an Army, that they resolved to invade the Enemies Country. They entred Anda∣luzia, plundring and wasting all where-ever they came. It was no time for the Moors to be idle, both Armies came in sight of one another, near a Town called Alagueto, but Joseph finding himself inferior to the Christians, shunn'd sighting. His retreat was more like to a disorderly Flight, for he lost great part of the Baggage. King Alonso thought it better to content himself with the Honour gained, than to tempt Fortune; besides, that his Army, being composed of so many different Nations could not long hold together. Thus he return∣ed home, his Army loaded with Spoils, and pleased with their Success. After this for some time, the Almoravides attempted nothing farther, for Joseph was forced to repair to Africk, to setle his new acquired Kingdom. Mean while, King Alonso slept not, expecting the War would soon break out again. Therefore he resolved to strengthen himself with fresh Allies abroad. In the first place, he gave three of his Daughters in Marriage to those three Lords King Alon∣so Marries 3 Daugh∣ters to Strangers. that came to his assistance out of France. Raymund, Earl of Toulouse, Marry'd D. Elvira, Henry, of Lorrain, D. Teresa, both Illigitimate, Raymund, of Burgundy, had D. Ʋrraca, got in Wedlock. This Prince is said to have rebuilt Salamanca, by the King's Order. More∣over, Sancha, the King's Daughter, was Marry'd to Earl Roderick. From him, some will have the Noble Family of Giron to be descended. To Henry was given in Dower, all that had been recovered from the Moors, in Portugal, with the Title of Earl, yet as a Subject of Ca∣stile, Original of the Kingdom of Portugal. to be obliged to come to the Parliament, and serve in the Wars. This was the Ori∣ginal of the new Kingdom of Portugal, which stile it afterwards assumed, and continued in the Line of this Prince above 400 Years. Raymund, of Burgundy, had the Government of Galicia, with the Title of Earl, then usually given to the Governors of Provinces, yet the best of his Portion, was the hopes of succeeding in the Throne, if Sancha, the King's Son dy'd. The Earl of Toulouse, received his Portion in Money and Jewels, but no Lands in Spain, because he resolved to return to France, where he had large Possessions of his own. There are Authors, who write, that the City of Lisbon was taken by King Alonso, in the
Year 1093. but this is doubtful, for it was often taken from the Moors, and lost again, till 1093. some time after this, it was gain'd by the Christians, and has ever since remained in their hands. Much about this time began the Holy-War in the East, carried on by most of the Christian Princes, for recovery of the Holy-Land. Peter, a Hermit, who Travel'd in∣to Palestine, was the first Promoter of it, for he making his Observations there, discoursed The Holy-War in the East. Simon, Bishop of Jerusalem, about it, and having received Letters from him, moved the same thing to the Pope. Ʋrban who then sate in S. Peter's-Chair, ordered a Council of Bishops to meet at Clermont, in France, to promote the carrying on of this War, and the mean while, by his Legates, stirred up all the Princes of Christendom to share in so Glorious an Undertaking. His Endeavours prov'd so successful, that all Countries sounded of nothing but Warlike Preparations, most Princes aimed to signalize themselves, by showing their Zeal in so Pious a War, and Thousands of private Persons voluntarily Enrolled themselves to serve upon their own cost. But we must not stray too far into Affairs so Foreign. Let us return to what hap'ned in Spain. CHAP. II. The great Actions of D. Sancho Ramirez, King of Aragon. He is killed at the Siege of Huesca, his Sons continue the Siege, Rout a great Army of Moors and Christians, that come to raise it, and take the Place. IN the Year 1094. was Born D. Alonso, Son to Henry of Lorrain, and his Wife Teresa, who by his Valour made the Name of Portugal famous, extended his Dominions, and was 1094. Birth of Alonso I. King of Portugal. Sancho I. King of Aragon. the first of those Princes that assumed the Title of King, which he maintained in opposition to the Kings of Castile. The same Year was unhappy for the unfortunate death of D. Sancho I. King of Aragon, who merited the esteem of his Subjects, not only for having governed and main∣tained his Kingdom as well as any of his Ancestors, but for enlarging and extending its Li∣mits. He was the first that came down from the high Mountains, where his Predecessors maintained themselves by the natural strength of those Places, into the Plains, where he took many Cities and Towns. He had continual Wars with the Moorish Kings of Balaguer, Lerida, Monçon, Barbastro, and Fraga, and obliged them to pay him Tribute. Then after a long and tedious Siege, took Barbastro, a Noble City on the Banks of the River Vero, in a de∣lightful Country. Tho' the strength of the Walls was great, yet the King's constancy and indefatigable Labour of his Men, overcame all Difficulties; so that it was entred by His actions against the Moors, Assault, and Plundered. From that time Barbastro was annexed to the Bishoprick of Rhoda. At this Siege Armengaud, Earl of Ʋrgel, was slain, and thence called Armengaud of Barbastro. He being the King's Father-in-law, and Father to his Queen Felicia, his death was revenged with great slaughter of the Townsmen. Bolea, a Town on the Borders of Navarre, upon the River Cinga, after a long resistance, was taken from the Moors. So also Monçon, a strong Town in that Territory, with many other Towns and Castles, too tedious to rehearse. Estela, then a small Town in Navarre, now a famous City, was built at this time. King Sancho having a design upon Zaragoça, raised a Castle, called Castellar, five Leagues beyond that City, on the Banks of the River Ebro, to bridle the Moors, and waste the Coun∣try about, in which, that Garrison was so successful, that the City was often reduced to such want, as if it had been besieged. In that part of the Country where were formerly the Va∣scetani, was built the Town of Luna, remarkable for nothing more than for being the Origi∣nal Town of Luna built. of the Noble Family of that Name, in Aragon. The King who was much given to Piety, obtained a Grant of Pope Alexander II. by which, the Monastery of St. John de la Pen̄a, and others in his Kingdom, were exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops. This was done under colour, that the Bishops thro' Covetousness took to themselves the Revenues of the Mona∣steries. Certain it is, in those times the Monks aspired after too much Liberty, which made their Abbots obtain the Privilege of using the Miter and Crosier, to betoken Episcopal Po∣wer, by which means they cast off the subjection due to their Ordinaries. The principal Vice the Monks cast off subject∣ion to the Bishop. King himself was taxed with, was Avarice; for he made use of the Ecclesiastical Revenues, and Treasures of the Churches. This seemed excusable, on account of the general Poverty, and extraordinary Charges of continual Wars. Besides that, he obtain'd a Bull from Pope Gregory VII. by which, he had full Authority given him absolutely to dispose of the Tenths of all such Churches as were erected of new, or regained from the Moors. Nevertheless, some Years before his Death, in the Church of St. Victorian of Rhoda, he publickly asked Pardon of that offence, promising amendment. Raymundus Dalmachius, Bishop of that City, was present, to whom, he caused Restitution to be made of all that had been taken from him. The King never ceased infesting the Moors, and was particularly bent against Abderhaman, King of Huesca. He had already possessed himself of all the neighbouring Towns, and For∣tify'd Montaragon, that it might curb that City. At length he sate down with his Army before it, secured all the Avenues, and placed his Head-quarters on a Hillock, which ever since, is called Poyo de Sancho. The City was very strong, and the chief Bulwark of the Moors
Dominions on that side, therefore the Siege was protracted, there being no possibility of forcing it. The Besieged sued to Alonso, King of Castile, for Relief. Kings for the most part have more regard to their particular Interest, than the publick Good. It was scanda∣lous, openly to side with the Moors, therefore he thought it a good expedient to Invade Navarre, by the way of Biscay, and so to give a diversion. Count Sancho was sent to put this in Execution, who being met by the Princes of Aragon, D. Peter and D. Alonso, sent by their Father to that purpose, was oblig'd to turn back without effecting what he came fo Every day the Siege was streightned, and King Sancho tir'd with lying there so long, was viewing the Walls, when finding a place he thought fit to be Attacked, he lifted his Arm K. Sancho killed. to show it to those that were with him, and an Arrow, shot from the Wall, hit him under that Arm, so that the Wound proved Mortal. He dy'd on the 4th of June, his Body was carried to Montaragon, and deposited in the Church of Jesus of Nazareth, which he had built. Thence it was translated to S. John de la Pen̄a, where is to be seen the Tomb of his Queen Felicia, who dy'd some time before. Nevertheless, his Sons, as had been ordain'd by their Father, continued the Siege, resolving not to stir till they had destroy'd the City. D. Peter, whilst his Father was yet living, called himself King of Ribagorça and Sobrarve, and had by His Son Peter suc∣ceeds him. his Wife Berta, or Agnes, a Son of his own Name, or as others will have it, called Sancho. This Peter inherited all his Father's Dominions. D. Alonso had some Lands assigned him, and the youngest Brother, called D. Ramiro, was a Monk. The Siege of Huesca lasted no less than 6 Months, others say above two Years. At length, the Besieged tired with want, called to their aid Almoçaben, King of Zaragoça, D. Garcia, Earl of Cabra, and another great Man, whose Name was D. Gonzalo, for in those confused times, it was held no shame for Christians to assist Infidels against Christians. D. Gonzalo went not himself, but a Body of Christians and Infi∣dels joyn to raise the Siege. Men sent by him and D. Garcia, joyn'd the Moorish King, who had raised a great Power, and they marched together from Zaragoça. Things being in this posture, D. Garcia, whe∣ther out of good will, or deceitfully, is not known, advised the new King Peter, to raise the Siege, and hast home. Honour, and the Promise made to their Father at the hour of his Death, prevailed with the Brothers. Near the City is a large Plain, called Alcoraz, famous for this Battle, where the Christians resolved to meet their Enemies. The Night before the Fight, the King in a Vision, saw a more than Humane Person that assured him of the Victo∣ry. Prince Alonso led the Van, the King brought up the Rear, the main Body was under the Conduct of two famous Commanders, Lisana, and Bacalla, Men of known Valour and Worth. The Horse were placed in the Front, and began the Battle, then the Foot fell in, the numbers of Infidels filled all the neighbouring Fields. Both Bodies being come to close, the Fight was desperately maintained. Nothing could be heard but dying groans, acclama∣tions of those that fought, and the noise of Arms. Night put an end to the Battle, without deciding which side had the better. Our side had the advantage in Valour and Conduct, the The Moors routed by the Chri∣stians. Enemy in number. All Night the Christians stood to their Arms, Morning discovered the Moors and their King Almozaben, retired with all speed to Zaragoça. Being closly pursu'd, 4000 of them were put to the Sword. Scarce 1000 Christians were lost, and none of Note. D. Garcia was taken, the Booty was great, and all the Fields were covered with Wea∣pons, Blood, and Dead Bodies. Some say, S. George was seen fighting, and by his help, the Victory was obtained. Others affirm, that a Gentleman of the Family of  who at that time was in the Holy Land, appeared a Horse-back in this Fight. It is  ∣crease the fame of a Victory to feign Miracles. Authors agree, That from  Arms of the Kings of Aragon, were Argent a Cross, the colour is not named,  the 4 Quarters of the Escutcheon, being the Heads of as many Kings, or Gener  Battle, which was fought on the 18th of November, and the 9th day after,  having lost all hopes of Relief, was Surrendred. On the 17th of December  great Mosque was Consecrated. In the Field of Battle the King built a Church o  ∣cation Huesca sur∣rendred. of St. George. At the same time, the Cathedral of Pamplona was Founded, some Foo steps whereof are still to be seen. It was ordained, That the Canons should observe the Rule of S. Augustin. CHAP. III. Great Preparations thro' Christendom for the Holy War. Valencia taken by Roderick de Bivar, Other Actions of his, suspected to be Fabulous. His Death, and that of Joseph, the Moorish Monarch. WHilst these things hap'ned in Spain, all the rest of Christendom sounded of nothing but Preparations for the Holy War. Pope Ʋrban, at the General Council he held Great Pre∣parations for the Ho∣ly-War. at Clermont, in France, and by his Legates at the Courts of all Christian Princes, stirred them up to undertake this Religious Work. Many Bishops, Princes, and Men of Note, Listed themselves, and wore the Cross, then the Mark of being engaged in that War. A∣mong the rest, Bernard, Archbishop of Toledo, having setled the Government of that Church,
and Constituted 30 Canons, and as many Half-Canons, taking up the Cross, departed to∣wards Bernard, Archbi∣shop of Toledo, sets out for the Holy-land the Holy Land. No sooner was he gone, but the Canons he had appointed, met, and chose another Archbishop, Expelling those that opposed this unlawful Proceeding. D. Ber∣nard understanding what had been done, returned to Toledo, and Expelling all that had a hand in that Disorder, put Monks of the Monastery of Sahagun, in their places. This done, he sets forward again, and being come to Rome, was obliged by the Pope to return home a∣gaine as believing his Presence was necessary at Toledo, being a place but lately recovered, and unsetled. He absolved him of the Vow he had made, to go to the Holy-Land, upon condition he should lay out the Money he had designed for that Expedition, in Rebuilding of Tarragona, a City then newly taken from the Moors, by the Earl of Barcelona. In the time Is sent back by the Pope. of the Romans, it was a Noble City, and the Seat of their Empire in Spain, since, reduced to a small number of poor Houses. D. Bernard Repaired it, and Translated Berengarius, Bi∣shop of Vique, thither, with the Dignity of Archbishop. Yet the new Archbishop forget∣ing this Favour, afterwards contended with Bernard about the Right of the Primacy. Pope Ʋrban put an end to the strife, assigning the Supremacy of all Spain, to Bernard, and his Suc∣cessors. Bernard, the Archbishop, in his way thro' France, brought along with him many Learned and Pious Men into Spain, who were afterwards promoted to great Dignities. A∣mong them also came Burdinus, not worthy to be named among them, for he afterwards made himself Anti-pope, and caused a Schism in the Church, as shall be hinted in its place. Roderick Diaz, Sirnamed Cid, or the Lord, was not idle all this while, but having obtain'd leave of the King, who was busie in Andaluzia, with a choice Band of his own Forces, fell upon the Moors that dwelt upon the Borders of Aragon and Castile. All the Moorish Princes strove to gain his Friendship. The first he agreed withal, was the Lord of Albarrazin. Then he went to visit the King of Zaragoça, who received him with great signs of Affection, hoping with his assistance to make himself Master of Valencia. This City is seated where formerly were the Editani, near the Sea, in a very pleasant Country, and has always been a Valencia, where seated, be∣sieged and relieved. place of great Trade, and very Rich. Hiaya, he that had been King of Toledo, was then in possession of it, having inherited it of his Father Almenon, to whom it belonged. The Lord of Denia, Xativa, and Tortosa, laid close Siege to it. The King of Zaragoça thought to raise himself upon the Ruins of others; for the Besieged having sent to him for Relief, he hoped under that colour to subdue both them, and the Besiegers. He agreed with Roderick Diaz, and both marched thither. The Lord of Denja knowing himself inferior to them, made Peace with Valencia, and raised the Siege. Nevertheless, the King of Zaragoça, would have possessed himself of Valencia, had not Roderick Diaz opposed him, for that it was un∣der the Protection of the King his Master. Hereupon, that King returned home. Roderick Diaz, under colour of assisting the King of Valencia, made his own advantage, obliging all the Moors thereabouts to pay him Tribute; with which, and the Booty, he maintained the charge of the War. King Hiaya, before grown odious to his Subjects, encreased their hatred, by being a Friend to the Christians, so that they called in the Almoravides, then grown Powerful, who killed Hiaya, and gave the Sovereignty of the City to Abenaxa, the Contriver of that Re∣volution. Roderick Diaz desiring to punish their Treachery, and rejoycing that an opportu∣nity was offered him of taking that Noble City, resolved to lay Siege to it. Valencia was well stored with Provisions, Warlike Ammunition, a good Garison, and a great number of resolute Citizens; yet his Constancy overcame all those Difficulties. He laid close Siege to it, which lasted a long time, till the Besieged wanting Provisions, and seeing no hopes of re∣lief, Roderick de Bivar takes Valencia. Surrendred. Not so satisfied, tho' it seemed a rashness, he resolved to main∣tain that City, and in order to it, made one Hierome, a Companion of the Archbishop of Toledo, Bishop of it. Moreover, he brought thither his Wife and Daughters, whom, as was said above, he had left in the Custody of the Abbot of S. Peter of Carden̄a. To the King, for that he had favoured his designs, he sent a Present of 200 choice Horses, with as many Scymiters hanging at the Saddles. Such was the posture of Roderick Diaz's Affairs, when two young Lords, called Earls of Carrion, their Names, James and Ferdinand, Men of great Birth, but mean degenerate Souls, having obtained the King's Recommendation, Marries his Daugh∣ters to the Earls of Carrion. Marry'd his two Daughters at Valencia. It hap'ned soon after, that a Lion breaking lose, they both hid themselves in an undecent place; and at another time, in a Skirmish with the Moors they fled. These things made them grow contemptible to their Father-in-law, who Reproached them, and they study'd Revenge. Suero, their Uncle, who ought to have given them better advice, heightned their malice. Having resolved upon the Villany they were to act, they prepared to return home. Their Father-in-law having accompanied them part of the way; returned to Valencia, and they prosecuted their Journey, till they came to a Wood, on the Frontiers of Castile, after they had passed the River Duero. There sending away most of their Retinue, they took the two Ladies into the Wood, and having strip'd them naked, whipped them till they lay for dead, wallowing in their blood. In this manner they were found by Ordonius, sent after them, by their Father, who suspected some ill design. He Cruel Action of those Earls carried them to the next Village, where they were dressed, and taken care of. This Villain∣ous Act brought upon the Husbands the hatred of all Men. Roderick Diaz seeking revenge, had recourse to the King at such time as a general Assembly of the States, or Parliament, was
held at Toledo. Judges were appointed to determine what was to be done, the chief where∣of, was Raymund of Burgundy, the King's Son-in-law. After a full hearing, it was decreed, that those two Lords should restore all that they had received with their Wives, and that they and their Uncle Suero, should Combat with three others, appointed on his part by Ro∣derick Diaz. Three Men of note, whose Names were Bermudo, Antolin, and Gustio, under∣took his Quarrel. The young Lords endeavoured to evade the Combat, by gaining time, so Roderick Diaz went away to Valencia, and they to their Estate. But the King not satisfied, obliged them to fight at Carrion, where they were all three overcome. Roderick Diaz's two Daughters were Marry'd again, D. Elvira to D. Ramiro, Son to D. Sancho Garcia, King of Navarre, who was killed by his Brother Raymund, as was said above, D. Sol, to D. Peter, Son to the King of Aragon, of the same Name; both which, sent to demand them in Marriage. D. Ramiro had by D. Elvira, Garci Ramirez, who was afterwards King of Navarre. D. Peter dy'd before his Father, and left no Issue. Two several times King Bucar, who came out of Africk, was overthrown in sight of Valencia, by Roderick Diaz and his Forces, who kept that City as long as he lived, which was five Years after the taking of it. He was near his Death when the same Bucar came again before the City, and perceiving it could not be maintained after his Death, ordered in his Will, that they should all in a Body quit the place, and return to Castile. The Moors believing it was a powerful Army, that designed to give them Battle, drew off. Those Christians marched without ceasing till they came to Castile, and Valencia Valencia abandoned by the Christians being left without any Garison, fell again into the hands of the Moors. They that came from Valencia, brought with them the Body of Roderick Diaz, which was Bury'd with great Mag∣nificence, in the Monastery of S. Peter of Carden̄a, near Burgos, K. Alonso, and Roderick Diaz's two Sons-in-law being present. Many look upon most of this Relation as Fabulous; and I write more than I believe, because I would not wholly omit what others affirm. In the Church of S. Peter of Carden̄a, are to be seen five Tombs, that of Roderick Diaz, that of his Wife, and those of his Son and Daughters. Perhaps, they are only empty Monuments, such as are called Cenotaphia, erected in Honour of such People. The Death of Roderick Diaz de Bivar, was a great loss to the Christians for his extraordi∣nary Valour, Conduct and Prosperity. Authors do not agree about the Year in which it Roderick de Bivar's Death. hap'ned, the most likely Opinion is, that it was in the Year of our Lord 1093. About this time, Pope Ʋrban translated the Bishoprick of Iria, to Compostella, at the request of Dalma∣chius, 1093. who was the first Bishop of that City, and made it independant of the See of Braga. King Alonso, tho' very ancient, never neglected the Affairs of War, but made several Incursi∣ons into Andaluzia, which was the more easie to be done, for that Joseph, the Moor, was re∣turned into Africk. This gave the Christians some time of breathing, which the King made use of to encrease the Religious Worship. He built a Monastery of Benedictines at Toledo, of the In∣vocation of S. Servandus and S. German, others say, he only repaired it. Besides, he erected K. Alonso's Works of Piety. two Monasteries of Nuns, the one Dedicated to S. Peter, the other to S. Dominick of Silos. At Burgos, without the Walls, he Founded another Convent, now called S. John of Burgos. The Year following, which was 1099. was remarkable for the Death of Pope Ʋrban, and the taking of Jerusalem by the Christians. Cardinal Raynerius, who had been Legate in Spain, a 1099. Person of great Worth and Experience, succeeded Ʋrban, by the Name of Pasqualis II. He Jerusalem taken by the Chri∣stians. in the time of his Papacy, granted a Privilege to the Church of S: James the Apostle, that after the manner of the Church of Rome, it might have seven Canons Cardinals, and that the Bishops of that See might use the Pall, an Ornament betokening greater Authority, than that of common Bishops. The next ensuing Year, which was 1100. proved no less pleasing to the Christians, by reason of the Death of Joseph, who was Sovereign of all the Moors in Spain, 1100. during the space of 12 Years, and of those in Africk, about 32, than it was at last unfortu∣nate Death of Joseph the Moorish Monarch. for the untimely end of D. Sancho, Prince of Castile, which will be seen in the next Chapter. CHAP. IV. The Death of Sancho Prince of Castile, and of the two Kings, Peter the first of Aragon, and Alonso VI. of Castile. The Moorish King of Zaragoza. Of two Holy Men. D. Garcia Earl of Cabra, was Tutor to D. Sancho, King Alonso's Son, and the Heir Ap∣parent of the Crown, but Death snatched him away, and with him, the great hopes Sancho, Prince of Castile, killed by the Moors. had been conceived of his Virtues. Hali, Successor to Joseph, desiring to Commence his Reign with some memorable Action, passed over into Spain with a powerful Army, and having en∣creased it there, entred the Kingdom of Toledo, wasting all the Country till he came in sight of the City. King Alonso, by reason of his great Age and Sickness, could not go out in Per∣son to oppose him. He gave the command of his Army to the Earl D. Garcia, and for the greater Honour, sent his Son D. Sancho, tho' very young, with him. Near Veles, the two Armies met and engaged. In the heat of the Fight, the Prince was struck down, D. Gar∣cia
covered him with his Shield, and with his Sword kept off the Moors that assailed him on all sides. Long he kept them at a distance, till being weakned by many wounds, he fell down dead upon him he defended. This disaster made the Infidels Victorious. It is need∣less to relate how grievous this loss was to the King; he asked what might be the reason of The Infi∣dels victo∣rious. being so often overthrown by the Moors, and a wise Man answered, That the Soldiers were debauched with Ease and Luxury, which made them unfit for Service. Hereupon, the King ordered all incentives of Luxury to be taken away, and among the rest, caused the Baths, then much used in Spain, after the manner of the Moors, to be destroy'd. Some hope re∣mained in D. Alonso, the King's Grandchild, by D. Ʋrraca, his Daughter, but he was very Young, and a Womans Government seem'd not seasonable. The continual good Fortune of the King of Aragon, diminished the Joy of the Moors for their success in Castile. Of late, the Infidels went down the wind in Aragon, for the Chri∣stians had taken from them the Castle of Calasanz, the Town of Pertusa, on the River Ca∣nadre, and the City Barbastro, whither the Bishoprick of Rhoda was Translated. Now the Aragonians bent all their Strength against the City Zaragoça, which the Almoravides had pos∣sessed themselves of, having expelled the ancient Kings. These that follow, were the Kings that had Reigned in that City. The first was Mudir, then Hiaya, next Almudafar, Moorish King's of Zaragoza. after him began another Race in Zulema, to whom succeeded Hamas, then Joseph, then Al∣mazazin, then Abdelmelich, and then Hamas, Sirnamed Almuçacayto, whom the Almoravides deprived of the Kingdom. At this time, in France, Atho, who after the Death of Raymund, Earl of Barcelona, Father of Arnaldus, had Usurped the Sovereignty of the City Carcassonne, where he had been Governour, was expelled the place by the Inhabitants, and it restored to its Lawful Prince, in the Year 1102. This same Year, Armengaud, Earl of Ʋrgel, was slain by the Moors in the Island of Majorca, whither he went to show his Valour, and was there∣fore 1102. called Balearicus. Armengaud, was Marry'd to a Daughter of Peranzules, a great Man in Castile, and Lord of Valladolid. By her he left a young Son, during whose Minority, the Grandfather governed, and afterwards Marry'd him to a Lady, called Arsenda. The Year of our Lord 1104. was unfortunate for the Death of three great Persons. Peter, Son to the 1104. King of Aragon, and his Sister Elizabeth dy'd upon the same day, and the King himself, whi∣ther The King of Aragon, his Son & Daughter all die. Alonso suc∣ceeds to the Crown of Aragon. for Grief, or thro' some other Distemper, is not known, departed this Life the Month following. He was Bury'd at S. John de la Pena. Pope Ʋrban, at the beginning of the War in the Holy-Land, granted to this King the Tenths of all Churches that should be new built, or taken from the Moors, excepting only Cathedrals. Alanso, Brother to the late King, suc∣ceeded him in the Throne. His Reign was long, and his Actions great, by which he much ex∣tended the Dominions left him by his Ancestors. In the second Year of his Reign, he Mar∣ried D. Ʋrraca, Daughter to King Alonso, of Castile. This Match was made by the King, contrary to the desires of all the Nobility, who would have had her Marry'd to D. Gomez, Earl of Candespina. None of them durst open this to the King; therefore they charged a Iew, who was the King's Doctor, upon the first opportunity to acquaint him with their Thoughts. This Jew, as the King was one day diverting himself, broke the business to him. It highly offended the King that the Nobles should presume to dispose of his Daughter, therefore he for ever forbid the Physician coming into his presence; and then hastned the Marriage of his Daughter, which was performed with great State at Toledo, in the Year 1106. 1106. King Alonso somewhat eased with the satisfaction of this Match, and desiring to revenge the death of his Son, tho' very ancient, took the Field again, and entring Andaluzia, destroy∣ed all the Province with Fire and Sword, sparing neither Man nor Beast. This done, he spent the remainder of his Days in quiet, not only forbearing from Martial Affairs, but easing himself of the Government as much as could be. Yet he took care that Salamanca, and Segovia, which had been ruined by the Wars, should be repaired, fortified and embelished. Peranzules, a Man at that time in great vogue, who had been Tutor to the Princess Ʋrraca in her Minority, and was now the King's Favourite, had the whole management of publick Affairs, and by his Prudence and Vertue, seem'd to support the Government. The King now quite spent with age, for he lived 79 Years, grew sickly, and was languishing a Year, and seven Months, yet by the advice of the Physicians, he rode out daily; but the natural warmth being decay'd, at length, he dy'd at Toledo, on Thursday, the first of July 1109. as Pelagius of Oviedo, who lived at that time testifies. He Reign'd 43 Years, was modest in Prosperity, and 1109. undaunted in Adversity. After the Death of King Alonso, the Inhabitants of Toledo, in a The death of Alonso, King of Castile. Consternation, were about abandoning the City. The King's Body was kept there 20 days, till this Pannick Fear was over, then it was carry'd to the Monastery of Sahagun, and there Bury'd with great Pomp; the greatest, that of the Tears of his Subjects, who lamented so great a loss, as they had in him. These Tears seemed to forbode those Calamities that en∣sued, and the very Stones at Leon, presaged this General Lamentation. At the foot of the Altar, where the Priest uses to stand at Mass, in the Church of S. Isidorus, in Leon, the Strange Prodigy. Stones shed water, not where they joyn'd, but in the very middle, for the space of three days continually, which were Thursday, Friday and Saturday, according to Pelagius, who then lived. This hap'ned 8 days before the King's death, and betokened the Tears of all Spain. The Bishops and Clergy, hereupon, made Processions, to appease God's Wrath. In this King's Reign, one Lesmes, a French-man, lived in great opinion of Sanctity at Burgos, his
chief business was entertaining of Pilgrims. His Memory is still Celebrated in that City, and his Feast Yearly kept in the Church of his Name. Four Leagues from Najara, lived ano∣ther Holy Man, a Spaniard, or as others say, an Italian, who used the same Charity, and Repaired the Ways thro' which the Pilgrims went to visit the Church of S. James the Apo∣stle; Two holy Men. and therefore, he is commonly called S. Dominick de la Calçada, that is, of the Cunsey. I suppose King Alonso made use of him, in building the Bridges that are between Logron̄o and Santiago. About the end of the Reign of King Alonso, one Moses, a learned Jew, and a great Linguist, was Converted, and writ against the Jews and Moors so effectually, that many of both Nations were Converted. CHAP. V. The Reign of Queen Urraca. Her Lewdness. She is Divorced from her Hus∣band, Deposed from the Government, her Son Alonso Proclaimed King of Castile. AT the time when King Alonso dy'd, his Daughter D. Ʋrraca, Heiress of the Kingdom was absent with her Husband. He had no great confidence in the Nobility of Castile, Ʋrraca, Queen of Castile, a dissolute Woman. who had opposed his Marriage, and therefore would not venture among them without a good Body of his own Subjects. This kept him back from taking possession of that large Kingdom. The Queens Lewdness, which was great for a Person of her Rank, was conceal∣ed and hid. Garrisons of Argonians were put into many Cities and Castles, to keep the Casti∣lians in subjection. Peranzules having great Alliances in both Kingdoms, was entrusted with the Government, and kept all things in good order. His Power lasted not long, for the Queen, a turbulent Woman, being sent before by her Husband, instead of Honouring him, as became his great Merit, treated him ill, not only removing him from the Govern∣ment, but seizing upon his Estate. All the pretence she had for this rash action, was because in his Letters, he stiled her Husband King of Castile. This is what was given out, but in reality, she was sorry she was Marry'd, because her Husband curb'd her Lewdness, and as I am apt to believe, that discreet Man reproved her scandalous Life. The King was concerned so great a Man should be so ill treated, and restored all his Estate. He fearing the Queen's dis∣pleasure, withdrew to the Earldom of Ʋrgel, whereof, as was said above, he had the charge. A new War now broke out in Andaluzia. Hali, King of the Moors, hearing King Alonso was dead, broke into the Christian Territories, and in sight of Toledo demolished the Castle of Hali the Moor, ra∣vages the Country, and lays Siege to Toledo. Azeca, and destroy'd the Monastery of S. Servandus, whilst all the Country about was in a flame. Not content with this, he laid Siege to the City, and for the space of 8 days batter∣ed it with all sorts of Engines. Its own natural strength, and a Wall built at the bottom of the City by King Alonso, saved it. Alvar Fan̄ez, a great Man in those days, by his Valour contributed much to the safety of the City. All hopes of prevailing being lost, the Moors raised the Siege, and in their way home plundered Madrid and Talavera, threw down their Walls, and departed with a mighty Booty. In Aragon, the King was successful against the Moors, and took Exea, a Town of note in Navarre, in the Year 1110. Near Valterra, he overthrew Abuhafalem, King of Zaragoça in Battle. After this, he assumed the Title of Em∣peror 1110. of Spain, as his Father-in-law had done before him. Having at length setled the Af∣fairs of Aragon, he came to Castile in the Year 1111. His principal Study was to gain the Affections of the People, and to that end, he Honoured the Nobility, Relieved the Distress'd, 1111. King Alon∣so of Ara∣gon belov∣ed of all Men. Protected the Weak, and was Affable to all People; insomuch, that he got the good will of all Men. Only the Queen's hard Heart was inflexible. He ordered Villorado, Berlanga, So∣ria, and Almaçan, Towns ruined by the Wars, to be Peopled, and then returned to Ara∣gon, resolving to carry on the War against the Moors. King Alonso, was third Cousin to the Queen, his Wife, for D. Sancho the Greater, was Great-Grandfather to them both. It was not then usual for the Pope to dispence in those Cases, and therefore many Princes had been Divorced. For this reason, I suppose, King Alonso is not reckoned among the Kings of Ca∣stile. Besides, the Queen for her dissolute Life was Imprisoned in the Castle called Castellar, whence she made her escape into Castile. She found not the Reception she expected, for the Nobility sent her back to her Husband, who again put her in Prison. Mean while, the No∣bles of Galicia, where D. Alonso, and D. Ʋrraca's Son was bred, held Consultation to oppose the Designs of the Argonians. They were glad they had found a flaw in that Match, which they had so much opposed, and therefore gave out, that the People were not obliged to own him that was not their lawful King. Hereupon, they sent an Embassy to Pope Pas∣qualis II. who committed the Examination of that Affair to James Gelmirek, Bishop of San∣tiago. What he determined, is not known; but it is certain, that from that time forwards King Alonso began to bear the Bishops ill will. Those of Burgos and Leon, were Expelled their Diocesses, he of Palencia imprisoned, the Abbot of Sahagun was deposed, and D. Ramiro, the King's Brother, put in his place. Bernard, the Archbishop of Toledo, was two Years Banished his Diocess, notwithstanding his Legantine Power, and his being Primate of all
Spain. During this time he held a Synod at Palencia, the Acts whereof are extant to this Two Sy∣nods. day. Another Synod he held at Leon, at which besides, many Bishops and Nobles, James Gelmires of Santiago was present. Their chief care was to establish Peace, for the Forces of Aragon and Navarre, marched against Galicia, and had taken the Castle of Monteroso by Storm. Yet the King of Aragon, at the instance of some Holy Men who interpos'd, desisted. All things were done disorderly, without regard to Justice, and both Parties sought to strengthen themselves, for carrying on of their designs. It seemed hard to the Castilians, and Galicians, to be governed by the Aragonians, the King of Aragon, right or wrong would keep the Kngdom he was possessed of. Such as opposed him were displaced, and their E∣states taken from them. The Galicians, being delivered of their first fear, made a League with Henry Earl of Portugal. This gave them Courage to Proclaim Prince Alonso King, tho' very Young. He was anointed in the Cathedral of Compostella, by James Gelmirez Bishop of that Anointing of Kings first used in Spain. See, a Coremony not used till then in Spain, but brought up to Authorize that Act the more. Peter Earl of Trava, Tutor to the Prince, was the chief contriver of all these proceedings. This Action offended the King of Aragon, he was divorced from the Queen, and set her at Liberty, she having been Prisoner in the Castle of Soria. Nevertheless he would not quit the Kingdom, that was her Dower. The Governours of places, tho' not absolved from the Oath they had taken to him, revolted to the Queen, and Swore Allegiance to her. Peran∣cules, a Man of unblemished reputation, did the same, yet having a scruple for that he had Sworn fidelity to the King of Aragon, he surrendred himself up to him, with a Halter about his Neck, that he might punish his breach of Faith. At first the King was surprized, but be∣ing perswaded that the Gentleman, had in all things Acted honourably, and that his Loyalty ought not to be hurtful to him, he forgave and Treated him very Courteously. All the Nobility of Castile, joyned to preserve the Liberty of their Country, resolving to undergo all hazards, rather than submit to the Government of the Aragonians. D. Gomez Earl of Candespina, who before had aimed at Marrying the Queen, and being then in the flower of his Youth, was greater with her, than became the Regal Dignity, and the Modesty of a Woman, seem'd the most zealous in defence of the Country, and for making War upon the Aragonians. D. Peter Earl of Lara, and his Rival, with the Queen, held the next place, in Power and Au∣thority. Commanders being divided among themselves, neither could Peace be setled, nor the War carryed on as it should be. D. Alonso King of Aragon, with a Powerful Army entred Castile, by the way of Soria, and Osma. The Nobles, with the Army of Castile, marched to oppose him. Both Armies encamped near Sepulveda, and there formed their Battles. Peter Earl of Lara, led the Van of the Castilians, Earl Gomez the rear, the main Body was Com∣manded by other Nobles. The King of Aragon, drew up all his Army into one square Body. The Signal being given, they fell on, in the Field called de la Espina, this was one of the most Famous Battles of that Age. Peter Earl of Lara, not able to stand the first charge fled to Burgos, where the Queen was in care for the event of that Action. D. Gomez stood his Ground better, till his Forces being vanquished; he dy'd honourably, without turning his The forces of Castile routed by the Ara∣gonians back. His Standard-Bearer, a Gentleman of the House of Olea, was not inferior to him, for his Horse being killed, and both his hands cut off, he fell down dead, embracing the Standard with his Arms, and often repeating Olea. Henry Earl of Portugal, made the Victory easier to the Aragonians, by going over to them rather in hatred, to the lewdness of the Queen, than any kindness he had for King Alonso. This success so encouraged the Aragonians, that passing the River Duero, they advanced as far as the City Leon, wasting all the Country. The No∣bility of Galicia, having recruited their Army, try'd their Fortune again, and had the same Another defeat of the Casti∣lians. success, being defeated by the Aragonians, between Leon and Astorga. In this Battle was taken Peter, Earl of Trava a powerful Man, who was Marry'd to D. Mayor, Daughter to Ar∣mengaud Earl of Ʋrgel. Young King Alonso, was not in the fight, after it he went to the Ca∣stle of Orsilon, where his Mother was. No Battle in that Age was so fatal to Castile, as this. The Cities of Najara, Burgos, Palencia, and Leon, submitted to the Conqueror. He wanting Money to pay his Army, laid hold of the Treasures of Churches, which proved his ruin, for the People generally exclaimed against him, and from that time forward his Fortune chang∣ed. After ransacking the Kingdom of Toledo, the Aragonians marched to Besiege the City Astorga, having received intelligence that the Queen resolved to make her last effort on that side. Martin Mun̄o, coming to the King of Aragon with 300 Horse, fell into an Ambush, where most of his Men being killed, and the rest put to flight, he was himself taken. King Alonso finding himself weakned by this loss, the many Men that had dy'd, and the Garrisons he had placed, retired to Carrion, confiding in the strength of that place. There he was be∣sieged by the Enemy for some time, till the Abbot Clusensis, sent by the Pope to compose those differences, came and obtained of the Queen a Truce for some time, and soon after prevailed to have the Siege raised. The Soldiers of Castile being raw and undisciplined, could not be long kept together. After this the Aragonians, bent their Forces against the Lands be∣longing to the House of Lara. On the other side the Queen, after a long Siege, recovered the Castle of Burgos. Peter Earl of Lara, thinking to Marry the Queen, carryed himself like a King, at which many were offended, and his Name, and the Queen's, were publickly in Lampoons and Ballads. At length, he was secured, and put in Prison, by Gutierre Fernandez de Castro, but escaped, and fled to Barcelona. He was the Son of that James Ordon̄ez,
who charged the City Zamora with Treason, and upon that account fought the three Sons of Arias Gonzalo. After this Prince, Alonso was Proclaimed King of Castile. His Mother D. Ʋrraca, Alomso VII. Proclaim∣ed King of Castile. fortified herself in the Castle of Leon, but he besieging it, they agreed, that she should resign the Crown to him, and have revenues assigned her for her maintenance. It is impossible exactly to reconcile the times, when all these things hap'ned, Authors varying so much, even in this, that is no considerable Antiquity. It is not known in what Year Queen Ʋrraca dy'd, the most say, she lived about 17 Years, after her Father. Certain it is she was very Lewd. Some say she dy'd in Child-Bed, at the Castle of Saldan̄a, others, that she burst at the Church Door of Leon, having taken away the Treasure of St. Isidorus. Grave Authors affirm, that the Earl of Candespina, had a Son by her, called Fernan Hurtado, which signifies stollen, because he was a Bastard, and that the Noble Family of that Name in Spain descends from him. They also say, that Peter Earl of Lara, had to do with her. CHAP. VI. The Wars of Majorca, and Zaragoca. The Schism of Burdinus. Peace Concluded betwixt the Crowns of Castile, and Aragon. The Original of the Kingdom of Portugal. WHilst what was said in the last Chapter hap'ned in Castile, the Moors of Majorca, and Za∣ragoça, were beset by the Power of several Nations, Conspiring against them. Gil∣bert The Wars of Majorca and Zaragoca. Earl of Provence, and Aimillan in France dying, his Dominions fell to his only Daugh∣ter, called Dulcis. Raymund Berengarius Earl of Barcelona, Husband to the said Dulcis, a Prince Powerful, as well in his own Dominions, as the great Addition of his Wife's, resolv'd with the United Forces of his Subjects, to possess himself of the Islands of Majorca and Minor∣ca, from whence the Moors infested the Coast of Spain and France. It was requisite to gather a great Fleet. He got together all he could of his own, which was the beginning of the great Power the Catalonians had afterwards by Sea. But his Fleet not being sufficient for this un∣dertaking, he went himself to Genoa and Pisa, Cities at that time Powerful by Sea, and pre∣vailed with those People to joyn with him in the Expedition. At the time appointed the Catalonians and Genoeses joyned, and passed over to the Islands. The War proved tedious Genoeses joyn the Catalonians and difficult, for the Moors misdoubting their own strength, would not hazard a Battle, but taking up all the Provisions in the Country, kept the passes of the Mountains, and Fortified themselves in the Towns and Castles. The resolution of the Christians overcame all difficul∣ties, and the chief City of Majorca, was taken by Assault, in the Year of our Lord 1115. Here dyed Raimund Bishop of Baroelona, to whom succeeded Oldegarius, who soon after 1115. was Translated to the Archbishoprick of Tarragona. After the taking of the City, the rest seemed easie, when on a sudden News was brought that the Moors, Landing on the Coast of Barce∣lona, had struck a general Terror into all the Country, and besieged the City. The Earl was forced to go over to the Continent, leaving the Genoeses charge to secure the Islands. At his first approach the Infidels raised the Siege, he pursued, and overthrew them near Morto∣rel. This Action was Tumultuary, and disorderly, the Battles not being formed. Two Accidents concurred to lessen the joy of this Victory. One was that the Genoeses Bribed by the Moors went away, and quitted the Islands, as the Writers of Catalonia affirm, for in the Hi∣stories of Genoa, there is no mention of this Expedition. The other was the loss of the City Carcassone in France. Atho, as was said before, possess'd himself of that City, and ruling Tyrannically, was expelled by the Citizens, who returned to their Lawful Sovereign, the Carcassone lost, and recovered by the Earl of Barcelona. Earl of Barcelona. With the assistance of William Earl of Poitiers, Atho recovered the City. Roger Atho's Eldest Son, caused all the Townsmen to deliver their Arms, and that done, or∣dered them to be put to the Sword. Many that escaped, fled to Barcelona. At their in∣stance, the Earl Raimund Arnaud Berengarius entred France with an Army. Some Religious Persons interposing, the matter was adjusted in this manner. That Atho should possess the City, but to hold it, of the Earl of Barcelona, whereas he had promised, to hold of the Earl of Poitiers. This William of Poitiers, was a Man that only studyed to enlarge his Dominions, tho' never so wrongfully. So when Raimund Earl of Toulouze, was gone to the Holy-Land, he seized upon all the Possessions of that Prince. Bertran the Son of Raymund, returning from the Holy-Land, where his Father was killed, and he had got the Lordship of Tripoli, found no hopes of doing any good, upon the Earl of Poitiers. He began to Treat with the Neigh∣bouring Earl of Toulouze routed by him of Poitiers. Princes about recovering his Patrimony, but to no effect, and therefore had recourse to D. Alonso, King of Aragon, who received him with Marks of Affection at Barbastro. Here it was agreed that the Earl of Toulouze, should do Homage to the King of Aragon, for his Dominions in France, in case he was restored to them by his means. This was done in the Year 1116. but it came to nothing, for the Earl was not restored, he of Poitiers be∣ing very powerful, and the Forces of Aragon, at that time divided against Castile, and the 1116. Moors. Yet some Years after D. Alonso Jordan, Brother to Bertrand, was taken out of the Castle of Toulouze, where he had been kept Prisoner, and the possession of that City, restored
to him by the Citizens, when they had expelled William Morelle, who held it for the Earl of Poitiers. D. Alonso his Heirs, kept that City till the Fourth Generation, and were all called Raimunds, the last of which left but one Daughter, Marry'd to the Earl of Poitiers, who had no Issue by her, whence it followed that the Earldoms of Poitiers and Toulouze, were annexed to the Crown of France, the Holy King S. Luis, Brother to that Earl, being the rightful Heir. The Territory of Zaragoça, a strong, rich, and populous City, extended to the Borders of the King of Aragon's Dominions. From thence the inhabitants used to make frequent incur∣sions into the Lands of the Christians, doing all the harm that can be imagined from such a Zaragoca besieged by the Christians Tahuste & other places ta∣ken. Barbarous People. King Alonso, notwithstanding the War with Castile, was not ended, re∣solved to overcome all difficulties, and ay Siege to that City, Tahuste, a Town of note, on the Banks of Ebro, was now taken by the Valour and Conduct of Bacalla, a great Man. Borgi, on the Borders of Navarre, Magalona, and other Towns, and Castles, were also taken. The Alniogaraves (so they called the Choice old Soldiers) were put into Castellar, a strong hold, on the Eminence above Zaragoça, as was said before. They were furnished with Provisions and all manner of stores, either to infest the Country, or endure a long Siege. These were preludes to the Conquest of Zaragoça, the same whereof brought thither many Persons of note, among the rest the Earls Gaston of Bearne, Rotron of Perche, and Gentulle of Bigorre. Thus having gathered a mighty Army, they sate before the City, in the Year 1118. On the eighth day they gained the Suburb, that lies beyond the River. Rotron, Earl of Perche, whilst 1118. the Siege went on, with a Body of 600 Horse, took Tudela, a considerable Town in Navarre, and kept it as a reward of his Valour. The Moors knowing of what Consequence Zaragoça was, gathered in great numbers to relieve the Besieg'd. Besides, Temin, a Famous Commander had joyned them, with a good number of Barbary Moors, he brought out of Africk. All these Encamped on an Advantagious Ground, on the Banks of the River Guerba, above Zarago∣ca, near the Castle of Mary, then held by the Moors, but perceiving the Christians exceed∣ed them in number and experience, they drew back. In the City, there began to be want of Provisions, and what was worst, no hope of relief. Delay was troublesome to the Be∣siegers. Things being in this Posture, advice was brought to the King, that a Nephew of Temin, others say, he was Son to the King of Cordova, was Marching with a Resolution, to force his Passage into the Town. King Alonso knowing if the Moors succeeded, he must be obliged to raise the Siege, marched out, and met him at Cutanda, near Daroca. A great number of the Moors was killed, the rest put to flight, and their General taken. The Be∣sieged having notice hereof, and despairing of any relief, surrendred upon Articles, on the 18th of September, after a Siege of eight Months. Our Men were so assured of success, that they had beforehand Consecrated Peter Librana Bishop of that City, and he Consecrated the Church. To the Earls Gaston of Bearne, and Rotron of Perche, the King gave for their good Service two quarters in that City for them, and their Heirs. On the Banks of Ebro, Nine Leagues from Zaragoça, was formerly a Colony of the Romans, called Julia Ceisa, now a de∣sert Zaragoca taken. place, but about a League from it, is a Town at present called Xelsa, the only remaining Monument of that piece of Antiquity. Thither the King marched, as soon as the Season would permit, wasting all the Country of the Moors about. Thence he advanced into the Province formerly called Celtiberia, where all things succeeded according to his desires, all places submitting to him. This season he took Taraçona, Alabona, Epila, Calatayud, Ariza, and Daroca. Beyond this last place, the King built a Town, to which he gave Name of Monreal, in a Convenient place, to check the Parties of Valencia, that used to ravage that Country. At this time the Carthusians and Cistercian Monks, newly instituted, grew Famous for Sanctity of Life. At Jerusalem, the Knights Templers, and Hospitalers, gained fame by their Carthusian and Cister∣cians Monks. Knights and Templers, Hospi∣talers. Actions, against the Insidels. The Templers wore a Red Cross on a White Garment. The Hospitalers called also of St. John, wore a White Cross on a Black Cloak. S. Bernard who lived at that time, was Founder of the Cistercians, and came into Spain where he perswaded the King to give the new Town of Monreal, to the Knights Templers, which was done accordingly, a Monastery was built, and revenues assigned them, particularly the Fifths of all Booties were given them, for their maintenance, that they might infest the Moors on that side. This was the first entrance of the Knights Templers into Spain, and this the Original of the vast revenues they afterwards possessed, which doubtless in the end proved their ruin. CHAP. VII. A Schism in the Church on account of an Antipope. Peace betwixt Castile and Aragon. War with the Moors. Original of the Kingdom of Portugal. IN the Year 1119 Guido, a Burgundian, Unkle to Alonso King of Castile, was Chosen Pope, 1119. and took the Name of Calixtus II. Henry IV. then Emperor, being Excommunicated, A Schism in the Church. caused Burdinus Archbishop of Braga, by the Name of Gregory VIII. to take upon him the Papal Dignity, which produced a Schism in the Church, that lasted three Years. At the
end of which the Lawful Pope prevailing, Burdinus was taken, and shut up in the Monastery of the Trinity of Cava, where he dy'd. The Promotion of Calixtus to the Papacy, was very pleasing to his Nephew, the King of Castile, and very advantagious to all Spain in general. At that time the chief Cities and Ca∣stles Peace con∣cluded be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon. of that Kingdom, were held by Garrisons of Aragonians, without any other right than that of Arms. The Castilians, either that they were Habituated to obey, or for kindnesses received of the Aragonians, were not concerned at the loss of their Liberty. Tho' Young, the King of Castile had a great Spirit, and could not put up the wrongs done him, by his Father-in-Law. Embassadors passed betwixt them, he of Aragon neither flatly refused, nor yet performed what was required, but still delay'd and framed excuses. At length, it came to the point that Heraulds, were sent to demand Restitution of the Places with-held, or if refused, to declare War. These threats made no impression upon the King of Aragon. Great Armies were rais'd on both sides, but the Aragonian being best furnish'd, took the Field first, breaking into the Territory of Rioja, on the side of Navarre. Great Mischiefs were like to ensue, whoever had the better, therefore several Godly Prelates of both Kingdoms interposed, labouring for an Accommodation. Their Success was better than had been hoped at first, for both Kings suffered themselves to be persuaded, and each Conditi∣ons of the Peace. yielding something, they agreed upon these Conditions. That all the Country betwixt Villorado and Calahorra, should remain to the Crown of Aragon; that King pleading a Right to it as a Dependance of the Kingdom of Navarre. That in Biscay, the King of Aragon should possess Guipuscoa and Alava, Provinces not long before taken by King Alonso VI. from the Crown of Navarre. That the King of Aragon should withdraw his Garisons from all o∣ther Cities and Castles belonging to Castile, and particularly, from Toledo. I know not which of these Princes deserves the greatest Commendation; both of them gave a great exam∣ple of Moderation. He of Aragon, in parting with what he had in possession, and he of Ca∣stile, in quitting his Title to part, that he might obtain the so much desired Peace. After this Agreement, which was in the Year 1122 (some Authors say later) these two Kings 1122. continued in real Amity, as if they had been Brothers, or Father and Son. All things The two Christian Kings make War upon the Moors. Success of the Arago∣nians. being thus setled between the Christians, they bent their Force against the Moors. The King of Aragon broke in upon that side which is encompassed by the Rivers Cinga and Segre, where the Town of Alcolea, which had been taken by the Moors, was Recovered. Thence he advanced into the Kingdom of Valencia, and passing the River Xucar, entred the Territory of Murcia, where he attempted the City Alcaraz, but was repulsed. Rising thence, he turn∣ed into Andaluzia, where all places submitted to pay Tribute, provided, the Country might not be wasted. Near a Town called Arenzon, he came to a Battle with the King of Cordova, and ten other great Men of the Moors, and overthrew them, in the Year of our Lord 1123. The following Year, he took Medina Celi, a Town seated on a Hill, betwixt the Confines of 1123. the Celtiberi and Carpetani. In this manner succeeded the Affairs of Aragon. On the other side, the King of Castile entred the Province of Estremadura. There he recovered the City Of the Ca∣stillians. Coria, which had been lost after the death of King Alonso, Grandfather of him then Reign∣ing. Thence the Army over-ran all the Country that lies between the Rivers Guadiana and Tagus, carrying away great numbers of Men and Cattle, and then they returned home, load∣en with Booty. These beginnings gained the King much Reputation, and gave proof of his Vertues. He bore great Affection to S. Bernard, then Abbot of Claravalle, by whose Ad∣vice, he erected many Monasteries of Cistercians, most of which, still flourish in that part of Spain, and enjoy great Revenues. At first, these Religious Men professing the Contempt of the World, were satisfied with little. Soon after, many bountifully heaping Charity upon them, they grew Rich. Besides these Foundations, the King very liberally encreased the Re∣venues of several Churches and Monasteries. He obtain'd of his Uncle, the Pope, the erecting of the City Zamora into a Bishoprick. At the same time, and at the King's instance, the Church of S. James the Apostle was made an Archiepiscopal See, the Privileges of the City Zamora made a Bi∣shoprick, and Com∣postella an Archbi∣shoprick. 1124. of Merida, then in the hands of the Moors, being translated thither. Twelve Bishopricks were assigned to the Province of this new Metropolitan, which were Salamanca, Avila, Za∣mora, Cuidad Rodrigo, Coria, Badajoz, Lugo, Astorga, Orense, Mondon̄edo, Tuy, and Placen∣cia, some time after. This was about the Year of our Lord 1124. That same Year dy'd Pope Calixtus, and Honorious II. succeeded him. The following Year, Alonso, Earl of Tou∣louze, and the Earl of Barcelona, made War upon each other, in France; the former pretending a Title to the Earldom of Provence, possessed by the latter, in Right of his Wife. After much strife, it was agreed between them, that Argence and Belicadre, two Towns, about which, the chief dispute lay, with that part of Provenee which lies between the Rivers Durence and Liserre, should remain to the Earl of Toulouse, all the other part, and Avignon, a City on the River Rhosne, was adjudged to the Earl of Barcelona. Moreover, they reciprocally Adopted one another, that if either dy'd without Issue, the other might be his Heir. A new Kingdom began at this time to be erected in that part of Spain, ow called Por∣tugal, small in extent, as to time, the last that took that Title in Spain; yet in great Ex∣ploits The Ori∣ginal of the King∣dom of Portugal. Portugal describ'd. fortunate, and renowned for Valour; since they not only drove the Moors out of all that Country; but in process of time, with extraordinary bravery, discovered ways to the unknown parts of the World, and conquered many Kingdoms and Provinces in Asia and Africk. This Province of Portugal lies along the Western Ocean from North to South, be∣tween
the Rivers Guadiana and Min̄o, above 100 Leagues in length, the breadth where most is, about 30 Leagues, the least 20. It is divided into three parts, on this side, and beyond Tagus, or Cistagana, and Transtagana, and that between the Rivers Duero and Min̄o, or In∣teramnensis, which is the most Fruitful, and where stands the City Braga. On the one side of Tagus is Lisbon, and on the other Ebora, all three Archiepiscopal Sees. For the most part, the Country is dry and barren, the People ambitious of Honour, and Brave. A small part of this Province, which the Kings of Castile had taken from the Moors, was given to Henry of Lorrain, in Dower with his Wife Teresa, Bastard Daughter to Alonso VI. By her, he had D. Alonso, D. Elvira, and D. Sancha. Henry, after he had these Children, went to the Ho∣ly-Land, to assist Baldwin, King of Jerusalem, but returned without doing any thing of note. At his return, he treated with Bernard, Archbishop of Toledo, and Primate of all Spain, a∣bout restoring the Cities of Braga, Viseo, Coimbra, Lamego and Porto, to their ancient Au∣thority, and placing Bishops in them. Henry dy'd at Astorga, a City of Galicia, whither he Henry, Earl of Portugal dies. Teresa the Countess Dowager governs. went to compose the Differences betwixt Castile and Aragon. His Body was bury'd at Braga, in a small Chappel; for the Grandeur, or rather Madness of erecting costly Tombs, now in use, was not then brought up. After his Death D. Teresa, his Wife, had no more regard to her Reputation than her Sister D. Ʋrraca. She Marry'd Fernan Paez, Earl of Trastamard, a Match much below her, if not altogether Unlawful, as being Clandestine. She is said be∣sides, to have had too much Familiarity with D. Bermudo, Brother to the Earl, and that never∣theless, she Marry'd him to her Daughter D. Elvira. Her other Daughter D. Sancha, was Wife to Ferdinand de Meneses. Perhaps, some of these things might be maliciously imputed to this Princess. Yet certain it is, that Ferdinand Paez, was very intimate with the Countess, and governed all things absolutly, according to his own will. He made War, and Ruled in time of Peace, without taking any notice of his Son-in-law. In his tender Years D. Alonso was forced to bear with this Affront, and wink at the disgrace of his Family; but afterwards, ma∣ny in hatred of his Mother's vicious Life, adhering to him, he resolved to take up Arms. His Father-in-law was not backward. Both levied Forces, and their Armies meeting, a Bat∣tle was fought in the Plains of Santivan̄ez, near Guimaraens, a Town seated at the Conflux of Alonso go∣verns as Earl of Portugal. the Rivers Avo and Visella. D. Alonso got the Day, and by that means his Mother, and Fernan Paez, fell into his Hands. His Father-in-law he released, upon promise he would de∣part Portugal, his Mother he kept close Prisoner. She in a rage for this usage, sent to beg the King of Castile's Assistance against her Son, promising to resign to him the Earldom of Portugal, which her Son had forfeited by his Disobedience. King Alonso of Castile, conde∣scended to the Intreaties of his Aunt, either for that he commiserated her condition, or that he desired to possess that Earldom. Having gathered an Army, he entred Portugal. His Cousin met him, and they came to a Battle in the Plain of Valdeves, betwixt Moncon and Ponte de Lima. The Fight was very bloody, and the Castillians being overthrown, were forced to fly to Leon. This Victory so puffed up the Portugeses, that without considering their own weakness, or the variety of Fortune, they vaunted they were no longer subject to Ca∣stile Portugeses over∣throws the Castillians. King Alonso studying Revenge, gathered a greater Power than before, and returned into Por∣tugal with double Fury. The Portugeses, not able to withstand him, retired into Guimaraens, where the Castilians Besieged them, with a resolution not to stir till they had revenged their late Affront. Egas Nun̄ez, the young Earl's Tutor, a Man of singular Prudence, by con∣sent of his Master, went out to treat with the King, and managed his business so well, that having pacified him, he raised the Siege. The Portuges Historians, from whom we have taken this Account, add, that some Years after, D. Alonso of Portugal, refusing to perform This fabu∣lous Story is apply'd to other Persons as well as this. the Articles concluded by his Tutor, the said Egas Nun̄ez, went to Toledo, and surrendred himself to the King of Castile, with a Haulter about his Neck, to be punished for the breach of those Articles he had made. King Alonso forgave, but would not employ him, least there might be some design lie hid under that specious pretence. CHAP. VIII. The War betwixt the King of Castile and the Moors. The Death of King Alonso of Aragon, and Revolutions of that Kingdom, and Navarre. The former choses Ramiro, a Monk, the latter, Garcia, for their King. IN the Year 1126, and much about the same time dy'd Queen Ʋrraca, and Bernard, Arch∣shop 1126. of Toledo. The Queen, as has been said, departed either in the Castle of Saldan̄a, Death of Queen Ʋr∣raca, and Bernard Archbi∣shop of To∣ledo. or burst at the Church of Leon. Her Body was Honourably Interred at Leon. Bernard, the Archbishop, dy'd at Toledo, of great Age, and famous for many memorable Actions. He was buried in the Cathedral of that City, with an Inscription on his Tomb, that begins with these words. Bernard was the first Venerable Primate here, True it is, the Archdeacon of Alcor says, he lies in the Monastery of Sahagun, near the Tomb of King Alonso VI. He was 40 Years Archbishop. Twelve Years before his Death (the Annals of Sevil say but eight) with Forces maintained at his own Expence, he took from the Moors the Town of Alcala,
seated at that time on a steep Hillock beyond the River Henares. The Archbishop incamped on another Hill that Commands it, now called Vera Cruz, and thence so awed the Moors, that they were forced to abandon the Town, tho' very strong. For this reason, from that time the Archbishop had the Temporal as well as Spiritual Jurisdiction thereof. After Bernard, Raymund, from the Bishoprick of Osma, was translated to Toledo. In his time, and in the Year 1129. was held a Council of Bishops at Palencia, in which James Gelmirez, Archbishop 1129. of Compostela, presided as Apostolick Legate. The King, Queen, and many of the Nobility, A Coun∣cil of Pa∣lencia. were present at it. Among others two remarkable Acts passed in this Synod. One that no Tyths or offering, should be received from Persons Excommunicate. The other that Lay-Men should not enjoy Benefices upon any pretence whatsover. Soon after Cardinal Humbertus, who came into Spain with the Legantine Power, assembled another Synod of Bishops at Leon, to consider of the Kings Marriage, which some pretended was null, King Alonso, a Year after his Mothers death, had Marry'd Berengaria, the Daugh∣ter of Raimund Berengarius, Earl of Barcelona. The Nuptials were Celebrated at Saldan̄a in November, and he had afterwards by her four Children, Sancho, Ferdinand, Elizabeth, and Sancha. It was well known, that the Queen Berengaria was related to her Husband, but the point being discussed, the Bishops declared it was not within the degrees of Consanquinity, which are forbid by the Church. Alonso was Great-Grand-son to King Ferdinand of Castile, Calatrava taken, and given to the Knights, Templers. Berengaria, third Grandchild to his Brother Ramiro, King of Aragon. After this the King bent his force against the Moors, entred their Territories adjoyning on the Kingdom of Toledo, and sate down before Calatrava, the Inhabitants of which place, used to do great harm in the Neigh∣bouring Country. It endured a long Siege, but was taken, and given by the King, to the Archbishop of Toledo. At this time the Fame of the Knights, Templers, was spread through the World, for which reason the Archbishop gave the Town to them. So say our Authors, yet some are of Opinion, that those Knights were not the Templers, but others who in imi∣tation of them, had taken the Cross to make War upon the Moors. Now also were taken the Towns of Alarcos, Caracuel, Mestança, Alcudia, Almodovar de Campo, and Pedroso on the Several other Towns Conquer'd Mountain Sierra Morena. What remained thereabouts might easily have been brought un∣der; such was the Consternation the Infidels were in, but the season of the Year would not permit any further Action. Winter being passed, the King ed his Army through the de∣serts of Cazlona, a part of Sierra Morena, into Andaluzia, burning and plundering all he came near. Jaen was close Besieged all the Winter, yet such was the strength of the Walls, and Valour of the Inhabitants, it could not be carryed. Albohali, the Son of Hali, and Grand∣son of Joseph, was Sovereign of the Almoravides, in Africk and Spain, his power inferior to his Predecessors, by reason of the Civil Wars among the Moors. This was therefore a fit opportunity to make War upon him. King Alonso's Father-in-Law, the Earl of Barcelona dy'd in the Year 1131. He left Bercelona in Spain, and Carcassonne, and Rodes in France, 1131. to the eldest Son Raimund. To Berengarius his second Son, he gave the Earldoms of Pro∣vence Raimund Earl of Barcelona. and Aymillan. His Daughter Cecily, was Marry'd to Bernard Earl of Faux, ano∣ther, whose name is not known, to Aimerick Earl of Narbonne. The other Daughters were left to the care of the Brother Berengarius, and Marry'd to the great Men in France. In the following Year there hap'ned nothing remarkable, save that King Alonso raised the Siege of Jaen, and returned home, where he Knighted D. Sancho his Son, Arming him at all points, and Girting on his Sword with great Ceremony, as was usual in those Days. By this was signified, that they so Knighted were at Age, and it was a means to spur them on to imitate the Virtues of their Forefathers. In this manner proceeded the affairs of Castile and Portugal, whilst in Aragon, all things succeeded with the Christians. All that part, formerly called Celtiberia, was brought under Success of the Arago∣nians a∣gainst the Moors. our Dominion. Molina, which before payed Tribute, surrendered; To the City Pamplona was added, the Suburb of S. Saturninus, which the French Peopled, and had all the Privi∣ledges of free Citizens granted them, and the immunities of Jaca, according to which they were constituted, a particular Government among themselves. The Moors possessed the Sea Coasts, about the Mouth of the River Ebro, and from thence did much harm in the Neigh∣bouring Country. There was need of a Fleet to curb them, therefore the King caused a great number of Vessels to be built at Zaragoça, and we read, that in the time of Vespasian the Emperor, that River was Navigable, as far as Logrono 65 Leagues from the Sea. Me∣quinencia, supposed to be the same Caesar calls Octogesa, a strong Town seated where the Rivers Cinga and Segre met, was now taken by the King of Aragon. All this joyful success was turned into sorrow, in this manner. Fraga, a Town among the Ilergetes (by Ptolomey, called Gallica Flavia) better known, by the disaster that now hap'ned, than any thing remarkable in it, is seated on a rising ground, which being washed away by the River Cinga, is difficult of access, and may be easily defended by a few against a greater number. On the back of the Town are Hillocks all filled, which lie so close to the place, that no Engines can be brought to batter it. After taking Mequinencia, the King resolving to carry on his Con∣quests, entered the Country that lies up the River Segre, which was very well fortified, and great numbers of Moors had fled thither for security. This concourse made the Kings of Fraga be∣besieged and quit∣ted. Lerida and Fraga grow Powerful. The King of Aragon, invested Fraga in the Year 1133. his Preparations were greater than the success, for Winter coming on, and the rains falling, 1133.
he was obliged to put his Army into Quarters, resolving to return early in the Spring. About February, the Siege began, and lasted all March and April, without any effect, the Besieged being Fraga a∣gain be∣siege. furnished with all things necessary to hold out a long time, and encouraged with the hopes of relief. Abengamia King of Lerida, came to raise the Siege with a good Army. The Battle was fought near Fraga, the Christians were but few in number, and those tired, many of them were killed. Nevertheless this loss did not oblige them to quit the Siege, because the loss sustain∣ed by the Moors was not inferor to theirs. However the King fearing what might follow, went away towards the Frontiers of Castile, to gather more Forces in the Territory of Soria. By the way he wasted the Enemies Country, as far as Monçon. The King with 300 Horse following the main Body, was on a sudden beset, by a great number of the Enemy. Seeing the danger, with few words, he encouraged his Men, who fell on, and fought as could be ex∣pected in such a desperate exigency. Above all the King signalized himself, being well known The King of Aragon slain. by his Garment, and bright Armour, so that all the Moors bending their fury against him, he was at length kill'd. Having lost their King, some of his Men dy'd bravely, others e∣scaped by flight. This is the truth of that King's unhappy end, tho' several other false ru∣mours have been spread among the ignorant People. Some would have it, that after this de∣feat, he went to Jerusalem, and dy'd there. Others write, that his Body was bought of the Moors, and bury'd at Montaragon. My. Opinion is, that his Body was not found, which gave occasion to invent many Fables about him. Certain it is, that misfortune hap'ned near the Town of Sarin̄ena, on the 7th of September, in the Year 1134. This Prince was a Per∣son of singular Valour and Conduct. An Ancient Author affirms, he fought 29. Battles, 1134. and was in most of them Victorious. He Reigned 30 Years. His Will was made three Years before his Death, when he Besieg'd Bayonne, which our Histories say he took, and that at that Siege Peter Earl of Lara, fought with Alonso Earl of Toulouze, and was by him slain. This Will was very remarkable, and caused great troubles and confusion. By it he The King leave his Domini∣ons to the Templers and other Knights. left many Towns and Castles, to several Churches in Spain, and because he had no Children, he made the Knights Templers, the Hospitalers, and those that kept the Sepulcher of Jeru∣salem, Heirs of all his Dominions. It concludes with many heavy Curses, upon such as shall presume to infringe any part of it. Yet the Aragonians, and Navarrois assembled at Bor∣gie, a place on the Frontiers of Navarre, in order to choose a King. Peter Atares, a Noble Man, as some imagine, rather than prove of the Blood Royal, held that Town by Gift of the deceased King. He was a Person of great merit, and had doubtless been declar'd King, had not his extraordinary Pride prevented it. Thus the assembly broke up, without coming to any Resolution. The Navarrois, hated the Government of the Aragonians, and thought it was lawful at all times when occasion offer'd, to cast off the Yoke that had been violently forced upon them. Hereupon they had a meeting apart, and at the perswasion of Sancho Rosa The Na∣varrois choose Garcia for their King. The Ara∣gons choose Ramiro a Monk. Bishop of Pamplona, Proclaimed D. Garcia King. He was descended of their Ancient Royal Family, for he was Son to D. Ramiro, and Grandson to D. Sancho, who as was said, was killed by his Brother Raimund. On the other side, the Aragonians assembling at Monçon, Proclaimed D. Ramiro, Brother to the late King, notwithstanding he was a Monk, Abbot of Sahagun, and elect Bishop of Burgos first, then of Pamplona, and lastly of Roda and Barbastro. There is yet extant an Original Instrument, dated at Barbastro in October, in which he stiles himself King and Priest. Nor was this all, for tho' he had been above 40. Years a Monk, they obliged him to Marry, having to that purpose, obtained a dispensation of. Pope Inno∣cent II. so that he was at once a Monk, a Priest, a Bishop, a Marry'd Man, and a King. He Marry'd Agnes, Sister to William Earl of Poitiers and Guienne, who dy'd two Years after at Santiago in Galicia, whither he went in Pilgrimage. His eldest Daughter Ellenor, was Mar∣ryed to Luis the Young King of France, from whom, after having two Daughters, she was Divorced by Command of Pope Eugenius III. on account of Consanguinity. After that Di∣vorce, the King of France Marry'd Elizabeth, the Daughter of Alonso VII. King of Castile. Ellenor was Marry'd to Henry Duke of Normandy, and Anjau, afterwards King of England, by this Match Poitiers, and Guienne, or Aquitain, were annex'd to the Crown of England, whence en∣su'd Bloody Wars betwixt those two Nations. CHAP. IX. The King of Castile aspires to the Crowns of Aragon and Navarre. Stiles him∣self Emperor. Ramiro King of Aragon resigns; and his Son-in-Law, Raimund Earl of Barcelona, assumes the Crown. THese Elections brought great troubles upon the Kingdoms of Aragon and Navarre, and The King of Castile, aspires to the Crowns of Aragon and Na∣varre. the more for that D. Garcia was weak, and D. Ramiro old. The King of Castile, pre∣tended to have a better right than either of them, as being descended from D. Sancho the Greater of Navarre, and he had the greatest Power on which King's ground their chiefest right. As for the Military Orders, appointed by the late King to inherit, no Body took notice of them. That he might not seem careless in seeking his advantage, the King of
Castile entred the Territory of Rioja, and recover'd all that his Father-in-law, King Alonso of Aragon, had taken from him by force at first, and afterwards upon Capitulation. Then he laid Siege to Victoria in Biscay, but could not carry it, tho' he had all the Towns about. Thus the River Ebro came to part the Dominions of Castile and Navarre. Many great Men, He in∣vades 'em. as well as of the Clergy, as Laity, follow'd and assisted the King, who had no sooner regain'd Rioja and Biscay, but he bent his Force against Aragon, so effectually, that by the Month of December, he was possess'd of all that part of the Kingdom which lies on this side Ebro. King Ramiro being wholly unprovided, and not well assur'd of the Affections of his People, retir'd to Sobrarve, hoping the natural strength of that Country might protect him till Fortune chang'd, or some Composition could be made. Oldegarius, Archbishop of Taragona, went betwixt both Parties, labouring to bring them to an Accommodation, but his endavours seemed Fruitless, neither Competitor contenting him∣self with part, as aspiring to the whole. Garcia King of Navarre, being resolved to conde∣scend to some Agreement upon safe Conduct given him, came to Castile, where in a General As∣sembly, or Parliament, at which were present, King Alonso of Castile, Berengaria, his Queen, Sancha, his Sister, and Garcia, King of Navarre, besides a great number of Nobles; it was resolved that the King of Castile should take the Title of Emperor. Accordingly, on Whit-Sunday in the Year 1135. (as an Author then living writes, and it appears by the Acts of that 1135. Assembly) he was Crowned in the City of Leon, by the Hands of the Archbishop of Toledo, The King of Castile stiles him∣self Empe∣ror. the King of Navarre standing on his right Hand, and the Bishop of Leon on his Left. Our Historians say, Pope Innocent II. consented to this Act, but it is scarce credible he would do that Affront to the Emperor of the Romans. After this, the new Emperor was again Crowned at Toledo. These two Coronations gave occasion to the dispute there is about the place where that Ceremony was performed. An Author then living says, he was Crown'd three times, in imitation of the German Emperors, first at Toledo, then at Leon, and lastly, at Compestella, with a Crown of Gold. The other Kings of Spain before this, assum'd the Title, only this preserv'd it, and is call'd Alonso the Emperor. Besides, it is manifest, that from his time, the City Toledo began to use the Arms it still retains, which are, An Emperor in his Robes on a Throne, the Globe in his left Hand, and a naked Sword in his Right. The Arms Arms of Toledo. of that City before, were first two Stars, and after that, a Lion rampant. Hence also it took the stile of the Imperial City. As soon as the new Emperor had taken upon him that Title, he nam'd his two Sons Kings, Sancho, the eldest, of Castile, and Ferdinand, the youngest, of Leon. The Nobility and Clergy labour'd to compose the differences above-mention'd. No good could be wrought upon Aragon; therefore the two Kings of Castile and Navarre, had another Conference at Paradilla, on the River Ebro. Here it was agreed, that D. Garcia should possess Navarre, and all that part of Aragon that had been Conquered; but should do Fealty and Homage to the Crown of Castile for the same; and also, that both Kings should joyn their Forces against him of Aragon. Thus the Argonians and Navarrois, were intangled in War, till some Bishops interposing, they appointed three Arbitrators on each side, by whom it was decreed, That the Bounds of Navarre and Aragon, should be the same they had been in the time of D. Sancho the Greater; but that the King of Navarre should hold his Do∣minions of the Crown of Aragon; which was the same thing he had promised to Castile. So little did they regard Promises. To ratifie this Contract, the two Kings met at Pamplona, but he of Aragon being inform'd the Navarrois design'd to kill him, fled, and thus the Breach was made wider than at first. D. Ramiro, for his great Age and Weakness, being grown contemptible to the Commonalty, as well as the Nobility, in revenge, call'd together all the great Men to Huesca, upon pretence of Consulting with them about weighty Affairs, and The King of Aragon puts to death 15 Noble∣men. there put to Death 15 of the chief of them, in the Year 1136. Many things are reported of his Insufficiency scarce credible; but there is no doubt, he was not fit for such a trouble∣some Government. He himself at length, growing weary of so many cares, and resolving to ease himself of them, having now a Daughter, call'd Petronilla, declar'd his intention at that meeting at Huesca, and admonish'd all there present, that their chief study ought to be 1136. to establish Friendship with D. Alonso the Emperor, without thinking of any revenge against the Navarrois. Raymund, Earl of Barcelona, was the chief Instrument in concerting matters betwixt Castile and Aragon, as being Ally'd to both those Princes, and having some intima∣tion that he should Marry the Princess Petronilla, and be declar'd King of Aragon. At Ala∣gon, a Town three Leagues above Zaragoça, on the River Ebro, the two Kings met, and a∣greed that Zaragoça should be restored to the Crown of Aragon; Calatayud, Alagon, and the rest on this side Ebro, should remain to Castile. King Ramiro's Daughter was given as an Hostage, for performance of Articles; but they could not agree about her Marrying D. San∣cho, the Emperor's eldest Son, for that she was promised to the Earl of Barcelona. So far Peace be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon. were both Parties from having any regard to their Alliances made with Navarre, that they Articl'd to joyn their Forces against that King. He having notice of it, and being a Man of great Spirit, provided to meet that Storm, and durst not only make good his own, but endeavour'd to enlarge the narrow bounds of his Dominions. He Marry'd Margaret, Daugh∣ter of Rotron, Earl of Perche, and had the City Tudela with her in Dower. The Records of those times mention, that he Reign'd over Pamplona, Najara, Alava, Biscay, and Guipus∣coa. He was supported by the French, Luis their King, looking upon it as a thing Honour∣ble
to protect this new Prince. The Armies of Castile and Navarre encamp'd near and Towns of Galur and Cortes, but came not to a Battle, both sides being unwilling to hazard all; for this is more likely than that they forbore in respect to the Feast of Easter. The Marriage betwixt the Earl of Barcelona, and the Princess Petronilla, was agreed upon on the 11th of August, that same Year 1137. This done D. Ramiro laying aside the care of the Go∣vernment, withdrew to the Church of St. Peter at Huesea, still retaining the Title of King 1137. The King of Aragon quits the govern∣ment, and Raymund, Earl of Barcelona, his Son-in-law enters upon it. and Power of resuming that Authority when he should think fit. All Officers were order'd to take the Oath of Fidelity to the Earl of Barcelona, and because the Nobles on account of Ser∣vice in that time of need, had obtain'd Grants of many Towns and Castles from the King, all such Grants were made void, especially those that passed since the King chose the Earl for his Son-in-law. As to Navarre, it was ordain'd, the Bounds of the Kingdoms should be the same that had been agreed upon at Pamplona and Valdoluengo. As soon as Raymund entred upon the Government, he had a Conference with the Emperor D. Alonso, at Carrion, where he obtain'd all the Lands that had been taken from the Crown of Aragon on this side Ebro, should be restor'd, but only to be held of the Crown of Castile. This done, he made his En∣try into Zaragoça, and was receiv'd with great applause, having establish'd Peace. William Raymund, Seneschal, or High-Steward of Catalonia, had a great hand in all these Affairs, and as a Reward, had the Town of Moncada given him; from him descends the Noble Family of Moncada in that Country. CHAP. X. D. Alonso of Portugal takes the Title of King. His Wars with the Moors. War betwixt Christian Princes and Peace concluded. Baeca and Almeria taken by the King of Castile, and Lisbon by him of Portugal. THese Confusions we have spoken of, gave the Portugueses an opportunity of enlarging their Dominions, and rendring their Name famous. D. Alonso, Prince, or as some Alonso of Portugal's Actions. call him, Duke of Portugal, being a Man no less renowned in Peace than War, ceased not en∣larging and beutifying his Dominions. At Coimbra he built the Monastery of Santacruz, a stately Structure, which he chose for his place of Burial, and endow'd it with the Town of Leyra, then taken from the Moors. This was but an Introduction to greater Exploits, for in the Year 1139. he broke into the Territories of the Infidels with a powerful Army, and passing the River Tagus, made War upon Ismar, the Moorish King in those parts. In this 1139. Expedition dy'd Egas Nun̄ez, D. Alonso's Tutor, by whose wise Councels he had till then been govern'd. In the City Porto, there is a Monastery of Benedictive Monks, founded by D. Egas, in which are to be seen, his and his Children Tombs. That of his Wife D. Teresa, is in the Monastery of Gereceda of Cistercians, built by her, two Leagues from Lamego. Ismar understanding of D. Alonso's design, gather'd all the Forces he could, and four other Moorish Kings joyning him, compos'd a Formidable Army. The two Bodies had sight of one ano∣ther in a Plain, then call'd Ʋrichio, now Cabeças de Ryes, or King's-head, a place fit to give Battle. That Country is water'd by the River Palma, which about Beja, where it springs, has little water, but other Streams falling into it, gathers such a Body, that near Alcaçar do Sal, where it falls into the Sea, it is Navigable. D. Alonso was surpriz'd to see so great a number of Enemies, but Honour prevailing above Fear, and the more, for that two days before, that is, on the 25th of July, being the Feast of S. James the Apostle, his Soldiers had saluted him King, he resolv'd to put all to the hazard of a Battle. Having in few Words, encourag'd his Men, he order'd to sound a Charge, the Enemy did the same, and there ensu'd a most ob∣stinate A great Over∣throw gi∣ven the Moors by the new Portuges King. Battle, both Parties fighting for Honour, for their Lives, and for the Dominion of all Portugal. After a sharp dispute the Multitude of Moors gave way to the Valour of the Christians, many of them were kill'd, and many made Prisoners. The Standards of the 5 Kings were taken, and from them the Portugue Arms, which are Azure, five Escutcheons. Others will have it, that they signifie the five Wounds of our Saviour; but I see no Authori∣ty for it. In the time of Sancho II. King of Portugal, there was added to the ancient Arms, an Orle of Castles, the number not fix'd then, now they use seven. This is the famous Battle, so much, and so justly extoll'd by the Portugues Writers, after which the strength of Portu∣gal increased in an extraordinary manner. All the Glory of the King's Actions was sully'd by the Imprisonment of his Mother, which Pope Innocent II. understanding, sent the Bishop of Coimbra to treat with him about restoring her to her Liberty. But the King was Deaf Portugal under an Interdict. to all Advice, therefore the Bishop leaving the City under an Interdict, departed out of Por∣tugal. A Cardinal being also sent from Rome upon the same account, had no better success, but was oblig'd by the King's Threats to take off the Interdict he had laid upon the whole Kingdome, King Alonso now Marry'd the Lady Malfada, some say she was Daughter to Amalaricus, Lord of Molina, others, to Amadeus, Earl of Savoy. By her he had D. Sancho, D. Ʋrraca, and D. Teresa. The last Marry'd afterwards to Philip, Earl of Flanders. Besides Alonso K. of Portugal Marries. these, the King had a Bastard Son, call'd Peter. After the Nuptial Solemnities, the Portu∣gueses
applyed themselves again to the War. Santaren, a Town of note, seated on the Banks of Tagus, was surprized and the Moors expell'd. With the Booty taken in this Action, the King founded the Monastery of Alcobaça, of the Order of St. Bernard, as he had vowed to do, if he took that Town. There was great strife betwixt Albohali, head of the Family of the Divisions among Moors and Christians Almoravides, and Abdelmon of the Almohades, a New rising Family among the Moors, about the Empire of Africk. This gave the Christians an opportunity of subduing the Moors in Spain, and indeed nothing supported them, but the Wars we had among our selves. Such was the Peace the Moors injoy'd in some places, that they gave themselves to study, and several Learned Men flourished among them, especially at Cordova. In this number some reckon Anicenne, tho' others affirm, he was never in Spain. Averroes, now  fit Com∣mentaries on Aristotle, and Avenzor was Famous in Mathematicks, especially Astrology. Thus much of Cordova. In Portugal the Christians took by force of Arms the Town of Sintra, seated near the Promonrtor, by the Ancients called Artabrum, and not far from the Mouth of Tagus. Sintra ta∣ken from the Moors. This was a Convement place to receive Foreign Succours, and Fleets arriv'd there from England, France and Flanders, bringing such considerable supplies; that the King resolved to lay Siege to Lisbon, the Metropolis of Portugal. But before we Treat of that Famous Siege, let us look back upon what we left behind. Whilst these things hap'ned in Portugal, the Aragonians and Navarrois were at War. Both War be∣twixt Na∣varre and Aragon. strove to bring D. Alonso of Castile to their part, but Raymund Earl of Barcelona, having got the Government of Aragon into his hands, prevailed and made a League with him, as we have already declared. In that Treaty, no mention was made of D. Garcia King of Navarre, notwithstanding he infested all the Country betwixt Tudela and Zaragoça. But two Years after, which was the Year of our Lord 1140. Raymund had another Conference with 1140. King Alonso at Garrion, where a League was concluded betwixt the Castilians, and Aragonians against Navatre, upon these Conditions; That such Towns as the Navarrois wrongfully held, and belong'd to the Crown of Aragon, should be restored; That such as they had apper∣taining Castile and Aragon. in League against Navarre. to Castile on this side Ebro, should return to the King's Possession; That one third of the Kingdom of Navarre should fall to the Emperor, the other two thirds to the Earl, to hold them of the Crown of Castile, They fold the Skin before they had killed the Bear. After this agreement, both parties provided for War. Earl Raymund had other things up∣on his hands. Therefore D. Alonso the Emperor was the first, who with a Powerfully Ar∣my broke into the Country of Navarre, by the way of the Mountains Doca. The Terror he spread was greater than the harm he did, for at the Sollicitation of Prelates, Peace was Con∣cluded betwixt those two Kings to which purpose they had an interview on the bank of Ebro, betwixt Calaborra and Haro. Here they not only concluded a Peace, but it was a∣greed, that D. Sancha, the Emperors eldest Son, should Marry Blanch, Daughter to the King of Navarre, and tho' was Young, she was delivered up then to her Father-in-Law. Earl Raymund, had no leasure to attend the War of Navarre, being encumbred with many trou∣bles at home. In the first place, he had much to do against the Moors, from whom the Com∣manders Troubles in Aragon. on the Frontiers of Aragon, took the Towns of Calamera and Alcolea, on the River Cinga. Besides this, the Knights of Jerusalem, still pretended right to the Kingdoms of Aragon, by the Will of the last King D. Alonso, and it was but reasonable to give them some satisfaction, Raymund the Gyeds Master of the Order of S. John, being come into Spain to that purpose. At length, by the Mediation of Pope Adrian  they agreed in this manner, that the Knights of Jerusalem, shall in Zaragoca, Calatayud, Huesca, Barbastro, Daroca, and such other Towns as shall be taken from the Moors, have a Townsman of each Nation, viz. a Christian, a Jew, and a Moor for their Subject, to pay them Tribute, and carry Arms under them, whensoever they shall Command, That they shall have Revenues assigned them throughout the Kingdom; That in Jaca, and other places, they shall have ground given them to build Monasteries. That the King dying without Issue, the Crown shall devolve to the Knights. Some Years were spent in concluding this agreement, which was sign'd by William, Patriarch of Jerusalem, and all the Knights concerned in the Year 1141. Earl Raymund, had a particular esteem for the Knights Templers, (who were included in this Treaty) be∣cause 1141. his Father had been of their Order, and therefore he honour'd them above the rest, and gave them the Town of Monçon, and other places, also the Tenth of the Revenue of the Crown, and a Fifth of all that was taken from the Moors. In fine, all the Knights were to be free from Taxes, and the King Swore, he would never make Peace with the Moors, with∣out their consent. This was concluded at Girona, in the presence of Cardinal Guido, the Popes Legate in the Year 1143. After this, there ensued a War in France, for Raymund Bauce, having Marry'd the Younger Daughter, of Gilbert Earl of Provence, pretended a right 1143. to part of that Earldom. Raymund Earl of Barcelona, seeing his Nephew Raymund Berenga∣rius Earl of Barcelona. makes War in France. Earl of Provence, was too Young to defend himself, undertook his Protection. He suc∣ceeded so well, that Raymund Bauce was expell'd all his own Dominions, and forc'd to come to Barcelona, and there submit himself to the Earl. They concluded a Peace, Bauce was restor'd to all he had lost, and had the Town of Trencataye given him, to hold of the Earl of Provence. These were the difficulties that intangled the Earl of Barcelona, so that the King of Navarre, had leasure to strengthen himself, and the more to bind the Emperor Alonso to his interest, his Wife Mergerina dying, he Marry'd, his Bastard Daughter called
Ʋrraca. The Nuptials were Celebrated at Leon, with great Pomp, in the Year 1144. D. 1144. Ʋrraca's Mother was called Gontroda, a Woman of a Noble Family in Asturias, her To is to be seen in a Monastery of Nuns, called of Vegua at Oviedo, which she built, and where she ended her days, King Garcia by D. Ʋrraca, had D. Sancha, who was twice Marry'd; first to Gaston Viscount of Bearne, and he dying without Issue, to Peter Earl of Molina, who had by her Aymerick, afterward Lord of Narbonne. Africk was now embroiled in Civil Wars. In Spain, the Moors, were divided into three Factions. Zedofala Lord of Rota, a Town at the Mouth of Guadalquivir, tho' of the Ancient Blood Royal of the Moors, for his Factions among the Moors. private interest, favour'd the Christians, who with his assistance made an inroad, till they came in sight of Sevil. Azuel, Governour of Cordova, and Abengamia of Valencia, were at variance, but Abengamia being more powerful, expel'd Azuel out of that City. Among the Christians only the Kings of Navarre and Aragon were at odds. At the instance of the Emperor Alonso, all these three Princes met at Santistevan de Gormaz, in the Year 1146. where tho' 1146 they could not settle a Peace, yet a Truce was concluded on, between those two Kings. It A Truce betwixt Aragon & Navarre. was also agreed, that the Emperor designing to carry on the War against the Moors, the King of Navarre should assist him by Land, and the Earl with a good Fleet of his own, and the Genoeses, by Sea. In the Spring, the three Kings began the War in Andulazia, burning and plundering all the Country, as far as Cordova, a Noble City, seated in a Plain, on the Banks of Guadalquivir. Abengamia Govern'd that place for the King of Morrocco, he not Cordova taken by the Chri∣stians, and revolts. daring to withstand so great a power, delivered up the City, offering Provisions and Money. Raymund Archbishop of Toledo, Consecrated the great Mosque, which was the most Beautiful structure in all Spain, but they were too forward in this Action, for they departed without leaving any Garrison in the place. It was large, and required a great number of Men, and the King durst not divide his Forces. He contented himself with making Abengamia Swear, he would hold that City for him, and behave himself as a true Subject. Scarce was the Ar∣my gone, when the Moor broke his Oath. The Christians marched to Baeça, whether the Moors had assembled all their Forces. By break of day, the Armies ingaged, the Moors were Baeca taken. vanquished, the City surrendred, and a Garrison was put into it, least like Cordova it should revolt. Roderick de Açagra, Lord of Estella in Navarre, signalized himself at the taking of this City, he was Father to Peter de Açagra, the first Lord of Albarazin of that Family. S. Isidorus is said, to have appeared to King Alonso before the fight, and assured him of success. Alme∣ria, Anciently called Abadera, a City seated on the Coast of the Mediterranean, between the borders of Andaluzia and Murcia, was then a place of great strength, and a receptable of Py∣rats. Thither the Christian Army marched, and encamped before it, at such time, as the The City Almeria taken. Fleets of Barcelona and Genoa, according to what had been agreed, having Coasted along, lay in sight of the Port. The City was attacked by Sea and Land, and having made a Breach, and possessed themselves of certain Towers, it was at last taken by storm, on the 17th of October, in the Year 1147. 20000 Moors, who had retired into the Castle, were forced to 1147. buy their Lives for a sum of Money. Thus was that Nest of Pyrats, that infested the Coasts of Spain, France, and Italy, taken away. The plunder was given to the Soldiers. To the Genoeses, was given a dish, made of an Emraud, which they valued above all the Booty, and preserve to this day, in their Treasury. Others say, that Jewel was found at the taking of Cesarea in Siria. Winter drawing on, the Army returned home, loaded with Riches. Ray∣mund Earl of Barcelona, not to let slip this opportunity of the Genoese Fleet, agreed with them to assist him in the expelling the Moors, from part of Aragon, and the Islands of Majorea and Minorca. In return they were to have the third part of all that was taken in that War. In all Towns recovered from the Moors, they should have a Church, and a Tribunal of of their own, and that all their Merchants should be free from Customs and Taxes. These conditions being accepted of, they stood along the Coast of Catalonia, and with their united Tortosa ta∣ken, as also Lerida and Fraga. Forces took the City Tortosa, seated at the Mouth of Ebro, and therefore a proper place for Traffick. This was done in the Year 1148. The following Year Lerida and Fraga, two Towns of note were taken by the Christians. Lerida, was given to the Earl of Ʋrgel, in re∣ward of his great Services during that War. William Peroz Bishop of Roda, was appointed to the See of Lerida, still retaining the Cities of Roda and Barbastro, to be included in that Diocess, and some Bishops of Lerida, long after this time, continued to stile themselves Bi∣shops of Roda and Barbastro. The affairs of the Moors in Spain, went very much down the wind, and the Christians grew daily stronger. Many Castles, Towns, and Cities, were taken from the Infidels. Al∣most Lisbon Be∣sieged and taken by the new King of Portugal. in the middle of Portugal, on the Coast of the Ocean, the River Tagus forms a Capaci∣ous Harbour, the entrance or bar is somewhat dangerous, but the Port within large and se∣cure. On the Northern shore of this Port, is seated the City Lisbon, the noblest and richest in Portugal. At the back of it are certain Hills of easie ascent, and the Tops of them covered with buildings. The breadth of the City is not so much as the length, the Ancient Circum∣ference of the Walls is not very great, but the Suburbs are large, and still increase. Most of the Streets are narrow, and crooked, and in some places very steep, but what is new built, much surpasses the old in Beauty. About it are many Villages, and good Country Houses, and a soil beautified with Vineyards and Orchard, of Orange and Lemmon Trees. D. Alon∣so, ardently desired to make himself Master of this important place, which served as a
Bulwark to all that the Moors held in those parts. His own Force was not sufficient for such an undertaking, and the Kings of Spain had their hands full in other places; for which reason, Foreign∣ers and K. Alonso of Portugal. as soon as he had taken Sintra, he made advantagious Proposals to the English, Flemings, and French, to induce them to assist him with their Fleets. These Fleets kept the Mouth of the Harbour, that no Relief might come to the City by Sea. The Forces of the Natives encamp'd where now is the Monastery of S. Vincent, the Foreigners in the place where that of S. Francis was since built; both places are now within the City. They batter'd the Walls for many days, and on the day of S. Crispin and Crispinian, gave a general Assault, the King himself standing by, and encouraging his Men. Here the Service was desperate, the Christians striving to gain the Breaches, and the Moors powring showers of Weapons and Stones upon them in such manner, that scarce any fell without doing execution, our Men thronging upon one ano∣ther. At length, having broke open the Gate call'd of Alfama, the City was entred, much Blood spilt, and all that submitted made Slaves. All the Plunder was given to the Soldiers, and prov'd greater than had been imagin'd. Gilbert, a Person of great Learning and Vertue, was chosen Bishop, tho' a Stranger, and Consecrated the principal Mosque. In the very place where the King had encamp'd, he built a Monastery of the Invocation of S. Vincent, and plac'd therein Canons Regulars. Many of the Foreigners being taken with the pleasant∣ness of the Country, resolv'd to stay, and inhabit there, and are said to have built Almada, Villaverde, Arruda, Zambruia, Castan̄eda, and other. Towns in that Neighbourhood. After King Alon∣so of Por∣tugal's fur∣ther Suc∣cess. this, the King following his good Fortune, with wonderful Success, took from the Moors Alanquer, Obidos, Ebora, Yelves, Mura, Serpa, Beja, and many other Towns and Castles in that part of the Country. All things submitting to his great Valour and Conduct. True it is, the greatest part of these Actions fell some Years later. Let us return to the Course of our History. At this time Eugenius III. govern'd the Church of Rome. The Affairs of the Christians in the Holy-Land went to decay. To remedy this misfortune, the Pope went into France, thence to excite all Christian Princes to the Relief of those Holy-Places, and to this purpose, he held a General Council at Rheimes, in the Year of our Lord 1148. Raymund, Archbishop of 1148. Toledo, going to this Council, is said by the way, to have visited the Church of S. Denis, two A General Council at Rheimes. Leagues from Paris, where on a Stone, he found this Inscription. Here lies Eugenius Mar∣tyr, first Archbishop of Toledo. At his return home, he endeavour'd to have the Relicks of that Saint translated to Toledo; but this design was prevented by his own, and Queen Beren∣garia's Death, which hap'ned near about the same time. The Queen dy'd in the Year 1149. and was bury'd in the Church of S. James the Apostle. This Year was very remarkable, for 1149. that it Rain'd Blood in part of Portugal, and the Dominions of the Moors. The following Year 1150. dy'd Raymund the Archbishop. John, Bishop of Segovia, a Man of singular Bloody Rain. Piety, succeeded him. This in Castile. On the other part, Pope Eugenius confirm'd the Title of King of Portugal to D. Alonso, afterwards Alexander III. did the same. For this 1150. Grace, they order'd him to pay a Yearly Acknowledgment to the Popes. Eugenius appoint∣ed The Title of King confirm'd upon Alon∣so I. of Portugal. four Pounds of Gold, Alexander two Marks. Whether the Kings of Portugal then paid it, is not known; of late Ages that Crown had deem'd it self free from any such Imposi∣tion. THE History of SPAIN. The Eleventh BOOK. CHAP. I. The coming into Spain of the Moors called Almohades. The Death of D. Gar∣cia, King of Navarre, by a fall from his Horse, his Son Sancho succeeds him. King Alonso, and his Daughter, both Marry'd. Many Places taken from the Moors. LET us being this Book with another Invasion of Spain, made by the cruel and bar∣barous Family of the Almohades, who about this time erected to themselves a Another Invasion of Spain, by the Moors cal∣led Almo∣hades. new Kingdom in Africk and Spain. Great Revolutions ensu'd, and great Calami∣ties threatn'd the Christians, till the Forces of the Moors were at last crush'd by one of the most famous Victories that has been heard of, obtain'd over them. Albohali, of
the Family of the Almoravides, was Emperor of the Moors, in Africk and Spain, at has been said before, in his time, a learned Man, and great Astrologer, call'd Tumerto, seeing a usty, proper Youth, whose Name was Abdelmon, the Son of a Potter, he Prognosticated to him, that he should be King of his Nation. At the same time, one Almohades, a Mahometan A Potter's Son set up King of the Moors. Preacher, held by the Multitude for a Saint, distracted the Multitude, ready to run a mad∣ing after every extravagant Novelty, with a new Interpretation of their Law. To him Tu∣merto discloses what he had found by his Science, and he either believing, or seeming to be∣lieve it, they both consulted how to over-turn the Government of the Kingdom. There is nothing so pernicious, as the pretence of Religion, when us'd to cover Rebellion. Almoha∣des making use of the Reputation he had gain'd, persuaded his Followers to take up Arms un∣der Abdelmon, and destroy the Race of the Almoravides, as Usurpers, that had wrongfuly possessed the Crown, by Extirpating the Alavecines, a Family descended from Fatima, Maho∣met's eldest Daughter. Besides that, they must cast off the Yoke of the Almoravides, to make way for those new Opinions in Religion, which they had embrac'd. Hereupon, the Multi∣tude took up Arms, but being unskill'd in the use of them, were easily overcome by Alboha∣li. Yet assembling in greater numbers, they never ceased till they had overthrown the Al∣moravides, and kill'd Albohali, the King. Abdelmon succeeded in the Throne, and then the Fol∣lowers of Almohades, who from him were also call'd Almohades; being possess'd of the Govern∣ment, chang'd the ancient Laws and Customs. Having setled Africk, they began to look to∣wards Spain. Tumerto was left to keep Africk under, whilst Abdelmon and Almohades, with a great Force pass'd over into Spain. At first they did no harm, hoping to attract the People by kindness, and they succeeded therein; for all the Moors in Spain, easily embrac'd their new Opinions, and their former Superstition became no less odious to them than Christiani∣ty. Being possess'd of all, they fell to Persecuting of the small remains of the Christians that liv'd mix'd with the Moors, putting 'em to all manner of Torments. Many fled to the Christi∣ans Persecu∣tion un∣der the Moors. Dominions, others were overcome, and yielded to the Infidels; so that from thence for∣ward, few Christians were left among the Moors. The Almohades contenting themselves with the Sovereignty of Africk, and so much of Spain as was under the Moors, thought not fit at that time to make War upon the Christians, who were Powerful both by Sea and Land, but return'd into Africk. Soon after, their Prophet Almohades dy'd, and the King caused a Magnificent Sepulchre to be erected for him, near Morocco, the Metropolis of that Kingdom, whither the ignorant Multitude began to go in Pilgrimage. The Almoha∣des entred Spain in the Year 1150. Roderick, the Archbishop, says 6 Years sooner. The same Year that Alonso, the Emperor took Cordova, which, I suppose to be after Ab∣delmon 1150. return'd into Africk. D. Garcia, King of Navarre, was kill'd by a fall off his Horse Garcia, K. of Navarre kill'd by a fall from his Horse. Sancho Crown'd King of Navarre. on a Rock, as he was Hunting, near Lorca, a Town in his Dominions. His Death was on the 21st of November. He was going from Estella to Pamplona, to punish that City for their Disobedience, but this misfortune prevented his designs. He Reign'd 16 Years, and left these Children, D. Sancho, who succeeded him, and was Crown'd in the Cathedral of Pamplona, where he bury'd his Father, Blanch, Marry'd to the Emperor Alonso's Son, and Marguerite, to William, King of Sicily, call'd the Wicked. Besides these, he had Alonso Ramirez, Lord of Castro Viejo, and Sancha Marry'd first to Gaston, Viscount of Bearn, and afterwards to Gon∣zalo, Earl of Molina. The Death of the King of Navarre produc'd new Troubles; for Alon∣so, the Emperor, and Raymund, Earl of Barcelona, had an Interview upon this occasion, at Castile and Aragon joyn in League against Navarre. Tudelin, a Town of Navarre, near the Baths, at which Sancho, now declar'd King of Ca∣stile, by the Emperor his Father, was present. Here they Articled, that all that part of the Dominions of Navarre, which had belong'd to Castile, should be restor'd to the Emperor; and what had appertain'd to Aragon, to the Earl, That the ancient Kingdom of Navarre should be equally divided betwixt them; the Earl to hold his part of the Crown of Castile. In regard of the Moors, they agreed, that when Valencia, and all that lies between Tortosa, and the River Xucar, as also Murcia were taken, they should be deliver'd to the Aragonians, so as they should do Homage for them to the Crown of Castile. Hereupon they shook hands, a Ceremony then used to confirm Promises, and resolv'd to commence the War against Na∣varre, when the Month of September was over. All this League fell to nothing, for the new King strengthen'd him self with Supplies from abroad, and gain'd the Love of his Sub∣jects, which his Father never had done. Other Cares diverted the Emperor and Earl, so that nothing was done, only some Inroads on both sides, which were not of moment. The Earl went into France, against Trencavelle, Viscount of Carcassonne, with whom, he at last agreed, that he should do him Homage for the Towns of Carcassonne and Rhodes. Alonso the Emperor, was taken up in concerting of Marriages; for Leuis, King of France, being Di∣vorc'd Alonso of Castile, and his Daugh∣ter both Marry'd. from Ellenor, Countess of Poitiers, after he had two Children by her, Marry'd the Emperor's Daughter, some call her Elizabeth, others Canstance. At the same time, the Emperor himself Marry'd Rica, the Daughter of Ʋladislaus, Duke of Poland. Amidst the Nuptial Joys the noise of Arms could not take place. Besides, Navarre was in League with France, which might, perhaps, appease the Emperor. Besides, Sancho, the King was generally belov'd, and the Emperor himself was a Lover of Justice, all which motives indu∣ced him to forbear from War. Of his Justice he gave a most pregnant Testimony in the An Act of Justice. following Action. A Man of Birth that had serv'd in the Wars, such as Spain call'd Infan∣zones,
living in Gallicia, took away by force all that a Farmer had. Being warn'd by the King and Governour, to make restitution, he did not obey. Hereupon the King in disguise, for the greater secrecy Travelled from Toledo, to the farthest part of Gallicia, and seizing that Soldier, caused him to be hang'd before his own door. This action gained him great reputa∣tion. In the Year 1152. he lay'd Siege to Jaen, and the following to Guadix in Andaluzia, 1152. but took neither. D. Petronila Queen of Aragon, was delivered of a Son, who during his Fa∣ther's Life, was called Raymund, and after his death Alonso. It is remarkable, that before her Labour, this Lady made her Will, by which, in case she were delivered of a Son, she left the Crown of Aragon to him, but if it proved a Daughter, she bequeath'd it to her Husband. All that the Moors possessed along the Rivers Segre and Cinga, was now taken from them by the Aragonians. Besides, that many Castles between Tarragona and Tortosa, in places natu∣rally Many places ta∣ken by the Arago∣nians from the Moors. strong, and almost inaccessible, were recovered, also the Town of Miravete, on the Banks of the River Ebro, which was given to the Knights Templers. The King bought the third part of Tortosa, which according to contract at the taking of it, belonged to the Geno∣eses, for a sum of ready Money. These actions made the name of the Earl Raymund Famous, not only in Spain but in Foreign Countries, yet such was his Modesty, tho' he would never take the Title of King, tho' he had a Crown in the right of his Wife, but stiled himself Prince of Aragon. From this time the Arms of Aragon, were chang'd for those of Catalonia, which Arms of Aragon. are Barry of eight Pieces, Or and Gules. Sancho, who afterwards succeeded his Father Alonso King of Portugal, was born on the 11th of November 1154. in the City Coimbra. The Birth of this Prince, and coming of Lewis King of France into Spain; were the most remark∣able 1154. things happ'ned this Year. CHAP. II. King Luis the Younger of France comes into Spain. Alonso of Castile and Leon call'd the Emperor Dies. His Sons Sancho and Ferdinand, inherit the Crowns of Castile and Leon. Original of the Knights of Calatrava. LƲis King of France, call'd the Younger, being suspicious, that the Empress his Wife, was not lawfully begotten, resolv'd to come into Spain, to be better inform'd, but that the de∣sign Luis the Younger King of France comes in∣to Spain. of his coming might not be known, pretended to go on Pilgrimage to the Church of S. James the Apostle in Galicia. His Father-in-Law, the Emperor Alonso, with his two Sons, and the King of Navarre, went as far as Burgos to meet him, and thither resorted all the Nobility, in their greatest Splendor, to shew the riches of Spain to the French. In this manner they Tra∣velled to Compostela, and having performed their devotions, returned to Toledo, where a Gene∣ral Assembly of the States, or Parliament, as well of the Moors Subject to the Emperor, as the Christians, was by him called, the more to manifest his Power and Grandeur. Among the rest, came Raymund Earl of Barcelona, with a very Splendid Retinue. King Luis considering the Grandeur of this Assembly, confessed he had not seen any to compare to it, and Praised God that he had to Wife, the Daughter of Alonso the Emperor, and Neice to the Prince of Aragon. All sorts of Sports were exhibited with great Magnificence, and rich presents of∣fered to the Stranger, but he would accept of nothing, save only a rich Carbuncle, and thus His Enter∣tainment. he returned home well pleased. Raymund of Aragon, bore him Company as far as Jaca, where they were received with much Grandeur. On the 28th of August dy'd the Earl of Ʋrgel, Grandson to Peranzules, for distinction sake, he was call'd Armengaud of Castile. Upon Friday the 11th of November 1155. Blanch, Wife to Sancho, King of Castile, was deliver'd of a Son, called Alonso, who came to inherit his Father and Grandfather's Dominions. It had 1155. been proposed in the Treaty of Tudelin, to have this Lady divorced as being under Age, but Justice, the Love her Husband bore her, and her own innocence, prevailed. Hugh Bauce, and his Brothers the Sons of Raymund, and Grandsons of Gilbert, grounding their right on a Privi∣ledge of the Emperors granted to them, strove to possess themselves of all Provence, but the Earl of Barcelona, marching with a powerful Army to protect his Nephew, they were soon reduced. At the same time Jacintus, the Popes Legate, settled the affairs of the Church in Spain, giving judgment for the Archbishop of Toledo, against those of Santiago, and Braga, who con∣tended Toledo de∣clared Me∣tropoiis of all Spain. for the Primacy. Luis King of France, at the instance of his Father-in-Law, now sent an Arm of S. Eugenius the Martyr, spoken of before, which was received without the City, by the Emperor, his Sons, and all the Clergy, and carry'd on their Shoulders, in Pro∣cession to the Cathedral, in the Year 1156. The rest of the Body was brought to Spain, in 1156. the time of Philip II. and placed in the same Church. Raymund Prince of Aragon, could not brook the cutting off the Kingdom of Navarre from that of Aragon. Hereupon he Solicited Alonso, the Emperor, to put in execution the League League betwixt Castile and Aragon re∣newed. concluded at Tudelin, and with joint Forces, to invade Navarre, and the more to strengthen this agreement, a Match was proposed betwixt Sancha, the Emperors Daughter, by his Wife Rica, and the Son of Raymund, but both being Infants, nothing more was done, but signing the Treaty. Sancho and Ferdinand, the Emperor's Sons, were included in this Alliance. Ne∣vertheless
the Emperor would rather have been Mediator for Peace, with the King of Na∣varre, hoping to Marry his Daughter Beatriz, whom he had by his Wife Berengaria, to that King. This took effect afterwards. In the mean while, he indeavoured to delay joyn∣ing with the Aragonians, under Colour of making War upon the Moors, before the Empire of the Almahodes, was quite setled in Spain. For now Abdelmon dying, his Son and Succes∣sor Jacob, or as others call him Joseph, a Warlike Man, was come over out of Africk with 60000 Horse, and much greater number of Foot. This perplexed the Emperor, who thereupon earnestly intreated the Prince of Aragon, now ready to enter Navarre, with a powerful Ar∣my, that he would not commence the War till after the Feast of S. Martin. That enter∣prize was accordingly put off, but the Confederacy renewed at Toledo, in February 1157. 1157. This delay was the more tolerable to Prince Raymund, for that he was obliged to repair to Narbonne. Hermengada, Viscountess of that City, was forced thence, and obliged to fly to his Protection. Berengarius the Archbishop, who gave her the advice, accompany'd her to Per∣pignan, where all things were setled. Alonso, the Emperor, with a mighty Army broke into Alonso, cal∣led the Emperor, breaks in∣to Andalu∣zia. His Death Andaluzia, burning and destroying all before him. He recovered Bacça, which had been lately lost, took Andujar and Quesada, and the heat of the Summer coming on, left his Son Sancho the greater part of the Army, to secure those Conquests. His Son Ferdinand and he returned with the rest of the Forces, but by the way at the Wood of Cazlona, in Sierra Morena, the Emperor fell sick, and near the Town of Fresneda, he dyed in a Tent, on the 21th of August, he lived 51 Years, 5 Months, and 21 Days, was King 35 Years, and had, the Title of Emperor 22 Years and a half. A Prince worthy of a longer Life, Pious in his Youth, Brave and Modest in his riper Years, always a pattern of Virtue, and Famous to Posterity, for his zeal to the Christian Religion. He had three Wives, Berengaria, Beatrix, and Rica. The second had no Children, the last was Mother of Sancha. Berengaria brought him Sancho and Ferdinand his Successors, also Elizabeth and Beatrix. Besides these, Alonso, and another Ferdinand, who dy'd Young, and was bury'd in a Monastery of Nuns, of the invocation of S. Clement, built by his Father, with this Inscription on his Tomb, Here lies the most Illustrious D. Ferdinand, Son to the Emperor; D. Alonso, who built this Monastery, he laid him here to Honour it. Sancho and Ferdinand, the Emperor's Sons, divided his Dominions as he had Ordered. Sancho has the Crown of Castile, and Fer∣dinand that of Leon. Ferdinand had the Kingdom of Leon and Galicia. Sancho the Elder Castile, with all it De∣pendencies. Both were good and virtuous Princes. Sancho was best beloved, as being the more affable, and dying soon, was called the Desired. Ferdinand was jealous, and gave ear to Court-Flatterers, therefore, before his Father's Funeral Rites were perform'd, he repaired to Leon, to take possession of his Kingdom. On the contrary, Sancho understanding his death, made hast to Frensneda, and thence conducted him, with all the Nobility to Toledo, where he was buryed with great Pomp, in the Cathedral of that City. Sancho King of Navarre, for his Learning, Age, and Exploits, called the Wise, saying hold of this opportunity, over ran all the Lands of Castile, as far as Burgos, and with the same celerity, return'd into his own Coun∣try. War be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Navarre. The Moors finding those places they had lost, forsaken by the New King, easily re∣covered them. It was requisite to check both those Enemies, but it was thought fit first to move against Navarre. It hap'ned that Ponze Earl of Minerva, one of the chief among the Nobili∣ty of Leon, being wronged by King Ferdinand, fled to Castile. He being a Person of known Valour and Conduct, was favourably received by King Sancho, and appointed General of the Expedition against Navarre. Having taken charge of the Army, by the way of Briviesca, he entred the Territory of Rioja, and incamped in a plain called Valpiedra, near the Town of Ban̄ares, where both Parties Ordered their Battles. D. Lope de Haro led the Van of the Na∣varrois, D. Ladron de Guevara the Rear, and the King the Main Body. The Castillians being the more numerous and resolute, were not backward. At the first charge the Castillians gave way, but recovering themselves, put the Navarrois to flight, but made no great slaugh∣ter; most saving themselves in the Neighbouring Castles and Towns. Supplies coming up now out of France, the King adventured a second time, to fight in the same place, but with The Na∣varrois twice de∣feated. no better success. Many of the Nobles being taken, were generously Treated by D. Ponze, and afterwards set at Liberty. After this Victory, he returned to Burgos, where the King having commended and rewarded the Soldiers, above all honoured D. Ponze, and that to such a degree, that he marched as far as the Monastery of Sahagun, resolving to make War upon his Brother, if he did not condescend to restore him to his Possessions. King Ferdinand perceiving the danger he was in, came to his Brother unarmed, where all differences were agreed, and he promised not only to restore D. Ponze, but to bestow fresh honours upon him. Besides, he offered to do Homage to his Brother, which King Sancho, with great courtesy, refused to accept of. Calatrava, a Town seated on the Banks of Guadiana, not far from Almagro, when taken from the Moors, was given to the Knights Templers, but they understanding the Infidels made Calatrava defended by two Monks, & given to their Or∣der. great preparations to Besiege it, and despairing of holding out, restored it to the King. No Body would undertake to defend it, only two Cistercian Monks, who came to Court upon business, offered themselves. These were Raymund Abbot of Fitero, near the River Pisuerga, and his Companion James Velazquez, who having been a Soldier, was become a Religious, but still had a great Spirit, and perswaded the Abbot to undertake the maintaining of that place. This offer was very grateful to the King, and to John Archbishop of Toledo, who were be∣fore
much concerned for the danger which threatned that place. The Archbishop, because Calatrava belonged to his Diocess, advanced a sum of Money, and in his Sermons, stirred up the People, to contribute towards the defence of that Town, either by adventuring their Persons, or laying out their Money, since they were all concerned in the preservation of it, as being the Bulwark of the Christian Borders, which once lost ruin and desolation, would soon come upon every particular Man's Estate. This was at the beginning of the Year 1158. 1158. The King freely gave the Town of Calatrava, to the Order of the Cistercians for ever. Fame, which commonly surpasses truth, is of great moment in all Worldly affairs, as it appeared now, for the Moors hearing of the mighty preparations, that were making to defend that City, came not before it. This was the Original of the Knights of Calatrava, for many Soldiers followed the Abbot, and took the habit he gave them. Being returned to Toledo, Original of the Knights of Calatrava. he brought a great number of Cattle from his Monastery, and from the Neighbourhood about 20000 people, to whom he gave the Lands about Calatrava, which before lay wast for want of Inhabitants. Thus the Town was secured against any danger. Abbot Raymund dy'd, some Years after at Ciruelas, a Village where he was also buried, and is honoured as a Saint. Thence in the Year 1471. he was translated to our Lady of Mount Sion, a Monastery of Ber∣nardines, near Toledo, James Velazquez lived many years after, and dy'd in the Monastery of S. Peter, at Gumiel, where he is buried. From this beginning the Military Order of Ca∣latrava rose to the greatness it is now arrived at. Pope Alexander III. confirmed it by his Bull, in the Year 1164 The Convent at first, setled in Calatrava, was thence removed to Ciruelos, then to Buxeda, to Corcoles, Salvatierra, and lastly, to Covos There are other lesser Convents of the Order in other places, but that is the Principal. This Order in pro∣cess of time grew rich, and had the Lordship of many Towns, for their good Services, and thro' the Bounty of Kings. Formerly, the Revenues of such Towns, were given to old Knights of that Order, for their Maintenance, during their own Lives only, and not for their Heirs. Now they serve only to support the Prodigality of Courtiers. Thus, for the most part, good Institutions are perverted. CHAP. III. The Death of Sancho, King of Castile, The great Commotions that ensued. The Death of Raymund, Prince of Aragon, his Issue. Alonso, his eldest Son succeeds in his Dominions. RAymund, Prince of Aragon, believing the Capitulation, in vertue of which, he held that part of Aragon which lies on this side Ebro, was void by the Death of the Em∣peror, League betwixt Castile and Aragon re∣new'd. had a Conference with King Sancho, at Naxama. There the business was debated, the Aragonian) pretending that Zaragoça, Calatayud, and other Towns, were now exempted from the Jurisdiction of Castile. This would not be allow'd, yet they agreed that the King of Castile should not be possess'd of any Towns, or Castles in that Country; but that the Kings of Aragon should do Homage to them for the same, and be oblig'd to come to the Cortes, or Parliament of Castile, when call'd. Moreover, the League against Navarre, was again renew'd, but to as little effect as at other times. After this Interview, the Argoni∣am commenc'd the War against Navarre; but the Forces of Castile could not do their part, being prevented by the Death of the King and Queen. The Queen dy'd on the 24th of June, in the Year 1158. and was bury'd at Najara, in the Royal Monastery of S. Mary, the Buri∣al Sancho, K. of Castile dies. Place of the Kings of Navarre. On the last of August following, the King being busie, preparing for the War against the Moors, departed this Life at Toledo, and was Interr'd in 1158. the Cathedral, near his Father. He Reign'd only 1 Year, and 11 Days; and had he liv'd longer, might have equall'd the Glory of any of his Ancestors. Notwithstanding the King's Death, his Army, in which, every Man wore the Cross, entred Andaluzia, and in Battle overthrew Jacob Miramamolin, who was marching towards Sevil. A great slaughter was made of the Moors; yet Jacob, their King, having recruited his Army, fell upon such Moorish Kings as refused to submit to him. His first attempt was upon the King of Valencia and Marcia, but it succeeded not, for Raymund, Prince of Aragon, defended him, as being his Ally. Then he bent his Force against Alhagius, King of Merida, whom he subdu'd, After this, Fadala and Omer, two Sons of Alhagius, joyning theirs with some of Jacob's, entred the Christian Territories as far as Placencia and Avila, and bending their course towards Ta∣lavera, were on their return to Merida with a great Booty. But the People of Avila, under the command of their Captains, Sancho and Gomez, overtaking them near Sietevados, totally routed Infidels twice de∣feated. them, and recover'd all the Prey. Four Years after this, the same Commanders breaking in∣to Estremadura, defeated the Moors that came to oppose them, and brought away a rich Booty of Cattle. From these Gentlemen, are descended the Lords of Villaroro, and Mar∣quesses of Velada. At the time of his Death, King Sancho, recommended his Son Alonso, then but four years of age, to the care of Gutierre Fernandez de Castro, who had been his Tutor. He order'd the rest of the Nobles should still keep in their Hands those places they were in
possession of, till the King was 15 years of Age, which prov'd very fatal, and gave ill Men an opportunity of disturbing the Peace of the Kingdom; the Nobility taking it ill, that the King and his Authority, should be put into the hands of one single Person. Among the Nobility of Castile, the two most powerful Families at this time, were those of Faction of the two great Houses of Castro and Lara. Castro and Lara. These for a considerable time, had the first Vote in the Cortes, or Parlia∣ment. D. Gutierre, who had the charge of breeding the young King, for his great Age and Experience, was highly esteem'd among the Castro's. He had no Children. His younger Brother Roderick, had four, viz. Ferdinand, Alvaro, Peter and Gutierre, and a Daughter, cal∣led Sancha, Marry'd to Alvaro de Gusman, so that her power was as great as her Brothers. The Family of Lara, consisted of three Brothers, Henry, Alvaro and Nun̄o, who had great Possessions along the River Duero, and were Sons of Earl Peter of Lara, kill'd at Bayonne, as has been said. Their Mother was a Lady, call'd Aba, who had been first Mar∣ry'd to D. Garcia, Earl of Cabra, by whom she had D. Garcia Acia, the Heir of that Estate, which added much to the power of the three Brothers. They resented that the House of Ca∣stro should be preferr'd before them, and carry'd it so high in their Discourses, it appear'd they would come to blows rather than quit their pretensions. D. Gutierre, to secure the pub∣lick Peace, was easily persuaded to put the King into the hands of D. Garcia Acia, a modest Man, but of too much sincerity for those times. In so much, that upon pretence of the Ex∣pence he was at with the King, the Revenues of the Crown being intangl'd, he deliver'd him up to D. Manrique de Lara, his. Brother by the Mother's side, which was all he had strugled for. D. Gutierre complained this was a breach of Faith, and would again have recovered the charge of Educating the King, but his Adversaries mock'd at him, and thus all things seem∣ed to tend to Confusion and War. Ferdinand, King of Leon, pretending most right to the breeding his Nephew, entred Castile with an Army, wasting the Lands of the Family of Lara, Ferdinand of Leon, enters Castile. who remov'd the King to Soria, from the danger of the War. At this time dy'd D. Gu∣tierre de Castro, and was bury'd in the Monastery of S. Christopher, at Encas. D. Manrique de Lara grown more Insolent, requir'd the Heirs of the Deceased, to resign such Towns and Forts as were in their hands. They excus'd themselves, pleading the late King's Will, by which, they were not to resign them till the young King were at Age. Hereupon D. Man∣rique caused the Body of D. Gutierre to be taken up, as if he had been guilty of Treason. The case being put to Tryal, Judgment was given for D. Gutierre, and his Body order'd to be bury'd. Mean while, King Ferdinand rang'd all the Country, there being no Army to make head against him. D. Manrique dispairing he should be able to resist, was forced to en∣gage himself to King Ferdinand, that he would deliver up the King and Government to him, to hold for 12 years. To this purpose, the Cortes, or Parliament was summoned to Soria, where the young King was. Here, one Nun̄o Almexar, seeing the King carried away to be Alonso the young K. of Castile, secured by some No∣bles. deliver'd to his Uncle, snatch'd him from those that led him, and carried him away to San∣tistevan de Gormaz. Thence with consent of the Brothers of Lara, he was carried to Atiença, and after many removals to Avila. There the Townsmen Loyally Defended him till the 11th Year of his Age, and were therefore commonly call'd the Faithful. King Ferdinand in a rage for being disappointed, accused Nun̄o and Manrique de Lara with breach of Faith, and thereupon, sent to challenge them; but they only answer'd, That whatsoever others thought, their Consciences were satisfy'd they had done their Duty to their King. All the Kingdom rejoiced the King was deliver'd from his Uncle, but their Joy was not lasting, for he wast∣ed all the Country, most of the Cities submitted to him, or were taken by force, and Tole∣do it self did not escape, for it appears, that City submitted to King Ferdinand, so that a very small part remain'd to the young King. On the other side, the King of Navarre, think∣ing this a good opportunity to recover his losses, having first made Peace with Aragon, broke into the Dominions of Castile, and possess'd himself of Logron̄o, Entren̄a, Briviesca, and o∣ther Towns. Thus all the Country was filled with confusion. Whilst Castile was thus rent with intestine Divisions, the Moors of Andaluzia enjoy'd per∣fect Peace. Only the Forces of Portugal and Aragon kept them in aw. Raymund, Prince of Raymund, Prince of Aragon suc∣cessful a∣gainst the French and Moors. Aragon, was in great renown for his perpetual good Fortune, which was such, that Lope, the Moorish King of Murcia, was subject to him, and in France, he had taken above 30 Strong-Holds, and the Town of Trencataye, which he destroy'd, from the Family of Beauce, who in∣vaded Provence. The Emperor Frederick, who had favoured his Enemies, sought his Friend∣ship, and a League was concluded betwixt them. Raymund had brought out of Castile, Ri∣ca, the Widow of the Emperor Alonso, and his Daughter Sancha, contracted to his own Son. At the instance of the Emperor Frederick, it was agreed, that Rica, who was his Kinswoman, should Marry Raymund Berengarius, Earl of Provence, who thereupon should possess all the said Earldom of Provence, and the City Arles, with its Territory. To ratifie this Agree∣ment, it was resolv'd both Raymunds should meet the Emperor at Turin, on the first of Au∣gust, in the Year 1162. On the way thither, at S. Dalmacius, a Town at the foot of the 1162. Alps, Raymund, Prince of Aragon, fell sick and dy'd the 6th day of the same Month. Not∣withstanding His Death: his Death, Raymund, Earl of Provence, obtained of the Emperor all he desired. Prince Raymund's Body was brought to his Country, and buried in the Monastery of Ripoli, as he had ordered. Cortes, or a Parliament, being held at Huesca, Raymund's last Will, left by word of Mouth, was repeated, whereby he declared his Son Raymund, his Successor, who
took possession of his Father's Principality, by the name of Alonso. To Peter, his second Son, Alonso suc∣ceeds Ray∣mund his Father, in the Domi∣nion of Aragon. he left Cerdagne, Carcassonne and Narbonne. Sancho, the youngest, was to succeed Peter, in case he died without Heirs. He made no mention of his Daughter Dulcis, who was after, Queen of Portugal, nor of his Bastard Son Berengarius, who was Bishop of Taraçona and Lerida, and Abbot of Montaragon. The King's Minority (he being but 11 years old) gave an opportunity to turbulent Spirits to raise Commotions. An Impostor now openly affirmed he was King Alonso, who, as has been said, was killed 28 years before, at the Battle of Fraga. He said he had been till then in Asia, serving against the Infidels in the Holy-Land. His Age and Features, but most of all, the Love the Multitude has for Novelties, gained him some Reputation. Great mischiefs might have ensued, had not the Impostor been taken at Zara∣goça, and put to Death in the very beginning of the Tumult. In the Year 1163. the As∣sembly 1163. of States, or Parliament of Aragon, was held at Barcelona. The Queen Petronilla, by the advice of the Nobility, resigned over the Crown of Aragon, to her Son, then 13 years of Age. Raymund, Earl of Provence, who had some time governed Catalonia for his Cou∣sin, returned home; and died in the Year 1166. King Alonso receiving the News at Girona, by advice of the Nobility, called himself Marquess of Provence; for they pretended by the 1166. Emperor's Grant, that Country was not only given to the late Earl of Provence, but to Ray∣mund, Prince of Aragon, and his Heirs, which occasioned Wars in France. CHAP. IV. Alonso, the young King of Castile takes upon him the Government, recovers most of his Dominions; joins in League with the Aragonian, and Marries Ellenor, Daughter to Henry II. King of England. Some Actions of Ferdi∣nand, King of Leon. IN Castile, the People growing weary of the King of Leon, invited their young King A∣lonso, to take upon him the Government, promising, all would declare for him. These Alonso re∣ceived as King of Castile. invitations, and the persuasions of the Nobility, prevailed, and he resolved to depart from Avila, and visit the principal places of the Kingdom. This was in the Year 1168. as some 1168. write, I rather believe two years sooner, by the computation of time; for when his Father died, he was 4 years of age, and at this time 11. He was not deceived, for many Cities received him with Joy, and furnished all Necessaries for him, and his Retinue, which at first, consisted of only a few Nobles, and a Guard of 150 Horse, furnished by the City Avila. This was a small Force to recover so many Places as the King of Leon held with strong Garisons. The King encouraged by Success, resolved to try Toledo, but feared Ferdinand Ruiz de Castro, who held it, would not be prevailed upon to deliver that City. Stephen Illan, a Citizen of note, had built the Church of S. Romanus, in the highest part of the City, and adjoyning to it a Tower, which served as well for Strength as an Ornament. He was an Enemy to Ferdinand de Castro, and therefore getting privately out of the City, he conveyed the King, disguised, into the Tower. Then setting up the Royal Standard, he gave no∣tice the King was there, whereupon the Citizens running to Arms, Ferdinand de Castro, fled to Huete, a Town then very strong, as lying upon the Frontiers, exposed to the Moors. The People of Toledo, as well those who had been against admitting the King, as the most Toledo de∣clares for him. Loyal, expressed great Joy, and nothing resounded but, God save the King. Stephen Illan, for his good Service was much honoured, and made Governour of the City. After his death, the Citizens caused his Picture on Horse-back to be drawn on the Roof of the Cathedral, be∣hind the High Altar, where it is still to be seen. The King entred Toledo, upon Friday the 26th of August. On Michaelmass-day following, died John, Archbishop of Toledo, when he had governed that Church with much applause 16 years. Cerebrunus, or Cenebrunus, suc∣ceeded him, a Man grateful to King Alonso, having taught him the first Rudiments of Learn∣ing. He had been Arch-deacon of Toledo, and Bishop of Siguença, and it is thought, was a Frenchman. The King, after securing Toledo, at the instigation of Manrique, Earl of Lara, his General, marched against Ferdinand de Castro, who refused not to meet him, being sup∣ported by the People of Huete, that stood firm to him. Two Leagues from that Town, at a place called Garcinaharro, they came to a Battle. Ferdinand de Castro, fought in a disguise, D. Manrique with all his might charged a Gentleman that was armed like a General, and killed him, believing it had been Ferdinand, but was himself soon after slain by one of the said Ferdinand's Followers. The General being killed, the King's Forces were put to flight. He is o∣verthrown by the Re∣bels. Nun̄o, Brother to Manrique, understanding the deceit used by Ferdinand de Castro, laid Treachery to his charge, and challenged him, as was then usual; but some Persons of Piety interposing the business was mitigated; yet the hatred betwixt those two Families, could not be rooted out. Many Towns and Places of strength, adhered to Ferdinand de Castro, therefore the King forbore for the present contending with him, and bending his Force ano∣ther way, recovered many places that were not Garrisoned. It was thought convenient to try the Castle of Zurita, seated on a Hill, at the foot whereof, runs the River Tagus, Lope Siege of the Castle Zurita.
Arenas held it as Lieutenant to Ferdinand de Castro. Being summoned, he excused himself, saying, The King was not yet at the age appointed by his Father's Will, and that he was but Lieute∣nant, and could not surrender without leave of his Lord. No hopes remaining of a surrender, it was resolved to use force. D. Lope de Haro came from the farthest part of Biscay, to serve at that Siege. Provisions growing scarce, the Besieged resolved to use Fraud; and therefore, upon pretence of Capitulating, getting D. Nun̄o, and Suero de Lara, into the Castle, kept them Prisoners, believing, the King to save them, would raise the Siege. There was one Dominick in the Camp, who had deserted from the Castle, this Man offer'd for a Reward, to make them Masters of the Fort. Upon promise of what he demanded, he wounded one Peter Ruiz, who was consenting to it, and flying, was admitted into the Castle, and to the Favour of the Lieutenant, whose Servant he had been. He watched his opportunity, and kill'd the Lieutenant; whereupon, the Castle was immediately Surrendred. The King caused Dominick's Just Re∣ward of of Trea∣chery. Eyes to be put out, as an example of Treachery, yet allowed him a Maintenance, which was afterwards taken away, and he put to Death, for that he boasted of his wickedness. The Army was dismissed, and D. Lope de Haro much commended, return'd home, having re∣fused Presents that were offer'd him, because the King's Treasury was exhausted. This Gen∣tleman is said to have built the Town of Haro, not far from the River Ebro. The King went to Toledo, whither he had summon'd the General Assembly, call'd Cortes, or Parlia∣ment, and there it was consulted how to settle the Kingdom, and recover those places that would not submit. This Year was remarkable for great Rains and Floods, particularly, at Toledo, the River Tagus swelled till it came to the Church of S. Isidorus. The following Year, Earth∣quake and Floods. on the 8th of February, there was an Earthquake in that City, a thing not usual, and there∣fore thought to presage more Troubles. Ferdinand, King of Leon, had Marry'd Ʋrraca, the Daughter of Alonso, King of Portugal, by whom he had Alonso, who succeeded him, notwithstanding he was Divorc'd from the Queen, on account of Consanguinity. This Divorce produc'd enmity betwixt the Kings, and much harm was done on both sides. King Ferdinand was busie, repairing the Towns ruin'd by the Wars, and building others. By the advice of a Banish'd Portugues, he built Cuidad Rodrigo, on the Borders of Portugal, to be a check to those People. Hence arose Disgusts, which ended Cuidad Ro∣drigo built. in open Enmity. King Ferdinand, tho' Affable and Courteous, was Brave and Resolute, and feared not at once to engage both the Kings of Castile and Portugal. King Alonso of Castile, in the beginning of the Year 1170. held the Cortes, or Parliament, at Burgos, where it was Enacted, That since he was at the age of 15, appointed by his Father's Will for delivering 1170. all Cities, Towns and Castles into his Hands, there should be War declared against all such K, Alonso assembles the Cortes, or Parlia∣ment. as withheld any from him, not excepting King Ferdinand, who still was possess'd of a consider∣able part of the Kingdom. That War, many difficulties intervening, was deferr'd for some time. The great Men, lest they should be reputed Traitors, now no excuse was left, obey∣ed. Among the first, was Ferdinand de Castro, who fearing his Enemies, and the King's Dis∣pleasure, renouncing his Country, as the Custom was then, went over to the Moors, whence he ceased not to do harm upon the Lands of the Christians. It was also proposed in the Cortes, or Parliament, to set on foot a Treaty of Marriage between the King, and the Lady Ellenor, Daughter to Henry II. King of England, and Duke of Normandy, and Aquitain. Af∣ter this, Alonso, King of Aragon, had an Interview with his Cousin, the King of Castile, at Sahagun, where a League was concluded between them. Thence the two Kings, about the beginning of July, went to Zaragoça. From thence an Embassy was sent to treat about the Meets the King of Aragon. King's Marriage. Cerebrunus, Archbishop of Toledo, was Principal of the Embassy, with him went Raymund, Bishop of Palencia, and other Prelates, and Noblemen. At Bourdeaux the Treaty was concluded, whence the Lady came into Spain, attended not only by those that went for her, but by Bernard, Bishop of that City, and many other Persons of Note. Mean while, the Kings of Castile and Aragon, had made a League Offensive and Defensive against all Princes, except the King of England, in respect to the Marriage in hand. For Concludes a League with him. Marries Ellenor, Daughter of Henry II. King of England. the more security, Cautionary Towns were given on both sides; the King of Aragon, had Najara and Biguerra, he of Castile, Ariza and Daroca. The Bride being come to Taraçona, there the Nuptials were Celebrated with great Pomp, in the Month of September. The King of Aragon gave her. Her Joynter was a great part of Castile, Burgos, Medina del Campo, and many other Towns, and half of all that should be taken from the Moors. For the King ravished with the beauty of his Bride, endeavour'd to exceed all his Predecessors in Liberali∣ty. Lope, the Moorish King of Murcia, was doubtless, in League with the King of Castile, for I find he went to Toledo about this time. King Alonso of Aragon, was about making War upon him, on account that he refused to pay the Tribute he paid to his Father; but they agreed, and he consented to pay, upon Condition, King Alonso should not uphold the Ma∣çemutes, his Enemies. All the Solemnities being perform'd at Taraçona, the two Christian Kings parted, and publick Rejoicings were again Celebrated at Burgos. After that, the Troop of Avila, which till then, had attended the King, was dismiss'd. Great Privileges were granted to the City Avila, for its Fidelity to the King in the worst of times. Then the King and Queen, set out for Toledo. At the same time, the King of Aragon, with the consent of the Bishop of Rhoda, had the Head of Valerius, Bishop of Zaragoça, transla∣ted to that City, from Rhoda, where it had been till then. Garsendis, Princess of Bearn, by
the Death of her Father and Brother, did Homage to the King of Aragon, and confirmed the contract made, that she should not Marry without his leave. Some are of Opinion, she was Marry'd to William of Moncada, a Nobleman, and Seneschal of Catalonia, of which there is no proof, and therefore I thought better to leave it dubious, than attempt to decide it on ei∣ther side. CHAP. V. The League made against Peter Ruiz de Azagra. The Original of the Knights of Santiago. The taking of Cuenca by the Christians. Increase of the Knights of Santiago, or St. James the Apostle. Several places in Navarre taken by the Castilians. THE Moors were so pressed by the Aragonians, that they had no place of safety. Along Aragonians success a∣gainst the Moors. the River Alga, the Towns of Favara, Maella, Fresneda, and others, were taken from them. On the River Ebro the strong Town of Caspe. A great number of them had retired to the Mountain Idubeda, thinking the natural strength of the place would secure them, but thence also they were driven by the Valour of the Christians. So that from this time, the Domi∣nion of the Moors extended no farther than the Borders of the Kingdom of Valoncia. At the same time Peter de Açagra, Son to Roderick de Açagra, before spoken of, and Lord of Estela, for some signal Service done to Lope King of Murcia, had the strong Town of Albarazin, seated on an uncoth Mountain, near the Springs of Tagus, given him. This place was soon after League against Peter Ruiz de Azagra. made a Bishoprick, and annexed to the Province of Toledo. Both the Kings of Castile and Aragon, were offended at Peter de Açagra, the latter pretending that City was within the limits of his Conquest, whereas Peter would do Homage for it to no Man. The other com∣plained he had taken some Castles belonging to him, and therefore both agreed with their joint Forces to destroy Albarazin. For the more strengthening of this League, cautionary Towns were given on both sides, the King of Aragon had Agreda, Cervera, and Aguilar, he of Castile, Aranda, Borgia, and Arguedo. It was also concluded that Hariza, and its Castle, should be delivered to the King of Castile, in pursuance of the former Capitulation. But be∣cause Nun̄o Sanchez delivered it without a Special Order, the two Kings fell at Variance, which yet went no further than Words. This discord gave Peter de Açagra time to strengthen himself, for neither of the Kings attack'd him. He of Aragon despising the Match that had been made by his Father, with the Daughter of Castile, sent Embassadors to Emanuel Commenus, Emperor of Constantinople, to desire his Daughter in Marriage. Some troubles were at this time in Aragon, on occasion that William Aguillon Lord of Tarragona, Two Arch∣bishops Murder'd. had killed Hugo Bishop of that City, for maintaining the Priviledges of his Church. The death of Hugo fell on the 22th of April, in the Year 1171. which Year was also remarkable, 1171. for the Death of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury in England, who was Murdered on the same score, afterwards Canonized by Pope Alexander III. and soon honoured as a Saint in Spain. Lope King of Murcia dy'd in the Year 1172. The King of Aragon thought this a fit 1172. opportunity to make his advantage of, and entring the Kingdom of Valencia, obliged that King to buy a Peace, and promise for the future to pay double the Tribute he had payed be∣fore. Thence the Aragonian pass'd into the Country of Murcia, and lay'd Siege to the City Xativa, War be∣twixt Ara∣gon, and Navarre. which he was forced to quit, when it was upon the point of surrendring, being called away to defend his own Country against the Navarrois, who made War upon him. Here∣upon a Truce was concluded with the King of Murcia, upon Condition he should pay the same Tribute his Father had agreed to. This done, the King marched towards Navarre in a rage, yet they came not to a Battle, but he wasted that Country on the side of Tudela, and took the Town of Argueda. This hap'ned towards the end of the Year. In the beginning of the next, being 1173. the War was continued, and the Aragonians utterly destroy'd the Town of Milagro, betwixt Calahorra and Alfaro, from whence much harm had been done in the Lands 1173. of Aragon. Petronilla, Mother to the King of Aragon, dy'd on the Third of October the same Year at Barcelona. On the 18th of January 1174. the Marriage was at last consumatted at Zaragoça, betwixt the King of Aragon and Sancha, Sister to him of Castile, as had been a∣greed 1174. long before by their Parents, the King of Aragon, now upon second Thoughts, perferring the Alliance of Castile before that of a Foreign and remote Emperor. At the same time the Grecian Emperor's Daughter, arrived at Montpellier in France, where understanding how she was disappointed, she Marry'd the Lord of that City. About this time the Order of the Knights of Santiago, or St. James the Apostle, began The Or∣der of Knight∣hood of Santiago, or St. James the Apostle. first to be taken notice of, and by degrees, from a small beginning, are now risen to a Regal Grandeur. When the Sepulcher of St. James the Apostle was first discovered, the devotion of the place drew many Pilgrims, and many were deterred by the badness of the ways, and danger of the Moors. For taking away these Obstacles, the Cannons of St. Eloy built many Hospitals on the road, and one to be the Chief of the rest at Leon. This at first mov'd many good People to bestow great Riches upon them. Afterwards some that had served in the
Wars joined their stocks, and lived under certain Rules, like Religious Men. These by the industry of Cardinal Jacintus, the Popes Legate, joyned with the Canons of St. Eloy, who had a Convent without the Town of Compostella, and sent Commissioners to Rome, to Pope Alexander, for the obtaining his approbation of their new institution, which was to be regulated, accord∣ing to the rule of St. Augustin, observed by those Canons. Pero Fernandez de Puente Encalada, was the chief of these Commissioners, who obtained the Pope's Bull, approving their design, and assigning them Rules to observe. The Bull bears date July the 5th 1175, Pero Fernandez him∣self 1175. was Constituted the first great Master of the Order. The Badge of the Knights is a White Cloak, with a red Cross, made in the manner of a Sword. The Hospital of St. Mark at Leon was assigned them for their Monastery. Their Possessions in Castile were very large, among others they had the Towns of Ʋcles, Mora, Estriana, Almodovar, Larunda, and Santa Cruz de la Zarça, near Ocen̄a. in the Year 1176. King Alonso of Castile being of Age, and 1176. resolving to be revenged on the Kings of Leon, and Navarre, for the wrongs they had done Alonso of Castile in∣vades Leon. him in his Minority, before he took the Field, made his Vows to God in Toledo, and gave the Towns of Illescas and Hazan̄a to that Church. This done he entred the Territory of Rioja, as far as Ebro, and having wasted the Borders of Navarre, turn'd back, and bent his Force a∣gainst the Kingdom of Leon, where he burnt and plundered all the Country, the King his Unkle being too weak to withstand him. The King of Leon vented his Anger upon the new Knights of St. James, supposing they favoured their old Master the King of Castile, and therefore drove them out of his Dominions, and obliged them to fly to Castile for protection. Soon after King Ferdinand repented, but it was too late, however by the Mediation of Pre∣lates, a Truce was concluded betwixt those two Crowns. Thus much concerning the Ori∣ginal of this Order of Knighthood. I know some will have King Alonso, the Chast, and others King Ramiro, to be the Founders of it, long belong this time, but they have no grounds for it. In France, after much trouble, Peace was concluded, betwixt the King of Aragon and Earl of Toulouze, who was dissatisfied, for that the King obstructed the Marriage of his Son, with the Daughter of the late Earl of Provence. The King gave him 3000 Marks of Silver, to quit his pretensions, and his Son Married the Sister of Trencavelle Viscount of Carcassonne, her name was Beatrix. Hugo, Great Master of the Templers, was very instrumental, in making this Accommodation. Castile, after a long Oppression, began now, through the Valour of its King D. Alonso, to lift up its head. At the same time the power of the Moors declined. The Almohades wholly The Con∣quest of Cuenca re∣solv'd up∣on. taken, up with the affairs of Africk, had not leasure to mind Spain. Besides, Aven Jacob Suc∣cessor to Abdelmon, tho' of sufficient Valour, yet equalled not his Father in good Fortune. The King of Castile being now at Age, resolved not to let slip so good an opportunity of inlarge∣ing his Territories. Having therefore taken his revenge on Navarre and Leon, he consulted with the King of Aragon, about carrying on the War against the Moors, and it was deter∣mined to begin by the Conquest of Cuenca. This City was built by the Moors, on a high and Craggy Hill, shut up on two sides, by the Rivers Xucar and Huecar, so that it is naturally im∣pregnable. The ascent is difficult, the Streets narrow, so steep that Horses cannot go in many of them. In those days it had no Spring, nor Wells at present, Water has been brought Its descri∣ption. to it from other Hills, so that it was easie to keep the Town from Water, but not practicable to assault it, by reason of the Cragginess of the Ground. Great preparations were made in both Kingdoms, and many Captains of note and Prelates attended the Kings in this Expedition. A∣mong them Peter de Açagrd, being now reconciled to the Kings, was the first that took his Post before the City. The Siege was begun with the Year, and there being no Possibility of Battering or Assaulting the Town, lasted long, the Moors defending themselves in hopes of re∣lief. The Siege Provisions grew as scarce in the Camp, as in the Town, and they lived only upon plunder. Besides, there was no Money to pay the Soldiers, and invite Vivandiers. These difficulties moved the King of Castile, to go to Burgos to raise Money. The Cortes, or Parliament being Assembled, it was proposed, that not only the Commonalty, but Nobility and Gentry, who used to be free from Taxes, should pay to the King five Maravedies of Gold a Head, for that the populace was before wasted with Taxes. This advice was given by D. James de Haro, Lord of Biscay, whose Sister was Marryed to the King of Leon, and brought him two Sons, Sancho and Garcia. Peter Earl of Lara opposed it, and a great number of Nobility joyning him, left the Assembly, resolving to maintain their Priviledges by force of Arms. The King mo∣ved by this danger gave over that Tax. It was agreed among the Nobles to make an Annual Feast to Peter of Lara, and his Successors, in Memory of this Mutinous exploit. Whilst these The Town taken. debates were at Burgos, the Siege having lasted Nine Months, Cuenca was at last taken, in the Month of September 1177. This same Year was Fortunate to Navarre, in the Birth of Fer∣dinand, of whom the Fruitful Queen Beatrix was delivered, after she had brought Sancho, Ray∣mund, 1177. Berengaria, Teresa, and Blanch. For the greater honour of the City Cuenca, it was by consent of the Pope made a Bishoprick, the Priviledges of Valera an Episcopal See in the time of the Goths, being translated thither. To the Citizens was granted the Priviledge of sending Representatives to the Cortes, or Parliament. In reward of their good Service, the Aragoni∣ans were freed from the Homage they ow'd to Castile. A League was concluded betwixt the two Kings, against all Princes; except him of Leon, who was exempted in respect to his Kindred. After Cuenca, the War continuing, Alarcon, a place of no less strength, was taken. Also the
Town of Iniesta, better known for its Salt-Pits, the Salt whereof is like Transparent Stone, than for the goodness of the soil. The Knights of St. James, that they might be nearer the Moors, were Ordered to settle their Monastery at Ʋcles, whence King Ferdinand of Leon re∣penting Increase of the Knights of Santiago what he had done, would have had them return to their first Habitation. After much debate, it was agreed that Four Priests of that Order, should be sent to Leon, who should still be Subject to the Monastery of Ʋcles, which they afterwards refused, and Pope Ʋrban I. Ordered the Monasteries should be independent of one another, only subject to the great Master of the Order. Not long after these Knights were admitted to Portugal, and had large Possessions given them. They for many Years obey'd the Great Master of the Or∣der, till King Denis assigning them a Head of their own, withdrew them from any depen∣dance on Castile. Tho' these things fell out in several Years, they are put together to ease the Memory. Let us return to the series of the History. The King of Castile now built the City Plasencia, on the Borders of his Kingdom, and made it a Bishoprick. The Walls of Toledo were repaired, and the Town of Alarcos rebuilt. All this hap'ned in the Year of our Lord 1178. At the same time, Alonso King of Aragon, upon the death of Giraldus Earl of Russillon, who dy'd without Issue, seized upon that Earldom, and from thence for∣ward 1178. stiled himself, King of Aragon, Earl of Barcelona, and Russillon, and Marquess of Pro∣vence. On the 20th of March 1179. he set out from Perpignan towards Cazola, where he 1179. was to have an interview with the King of Castile. Here it was agreed, that Valencia, Xativa, Denia, and their Dependancies, should belong to the Conquest of Aragon. All the other Towns in the Kingdom of Murcia were assigned to Castile. They also made a League against Sancho King of Navarre, to his great loss, for the Castillians took from him the Towns of Several Towns of Navarre taken by the Castil∣lians. Briviesca, Cerezo, Logron̄o, and all that lies between the Mountains Doca and Calahorra. To these Roderick the Archbishop adds Navarrete. Thence the Army of Castile marched towards Leon, where they plundered and wasted all the Country. The King of Leon being too weak to defend himself, Sollicited him of Aragon, putting him in mind, this was a breach of the Confederacy made at Cuenca. There only wanted a pretence for the Kingdom of Aragon to break with Castile, therefore he sent to demand Restitution of Hariza, and its Castle, and in case of refusal, to declare War. Great were the Apprehensions of a Bloody War, yet the King of Castile's modesty prevented it, for he restored Hariza, and forbore carrying on the War against Leon, thinking the wrongs done him had been sufficiently reveng'd. CHAP. VI. Rebellion in the Kingdom of Leon suppress'd. Alonso King of Portugal, taken by Ferdinand of Leon, and set at Liberty. Being Besieg'd in Santarem by the Moors, is relieved by him. He vanquishes the Infidels. Actions of his Son Sancho. THE People of Leon bore Ferdinand their King no Affection, some pretending heavy Taxes, others that he was Austere, and the City Salamanca complained that he had ta∣ken The King∣dom of Leon Re∣bels. part of their Territory to add it to Ledesma, which he rebuilt. Hereupon they rebelled under one Nun̄o Rabia, whom D. Lucas de Tuy says, they called King. The Town of Avila sent them supplies, but King Ferdinand coming upon them overthrew the Rebels, took their Captain, and caused him to be executed. Salamanca was easily reduced, and Zamora, before Mutinous, by this example, was pacified. These troubles being over, the King was perplexed how to relieve Cuidad Rodrigo, besieged by Ferdinand de Castro, with a great number of Moors. S. Isidorus Patron of Leon, is said to have assisted him in vanquishing them, as he did, and grown proud with this success, entred Portugal, and plundered the Frontiers. D. Ferdinand de Castro, was prevailed upon by the King, to quit the Service of the Moors, and ingage under him a∣gainst Castile, whose Territories he immediately entred with the Forces of Leon. Near Lu∣brical in the Country of Campos, he overthrew a Body of the Enemy that came to oppose him, took many Prisoners of note, and among them D. Nun̄o de Lara his Mortal Enemy. He Treated them all courteously, and gave them their Liberty, only exacting an Oath of them, that they would be his true Friends. Then putting away his first Wife, he Marryed D. Estephania, King Ferdinand's Sister, by whom he had Peter de Castro, of whom we shall speak hereafter. Alonso King of Portugal, tho' of a great Age, had Warlike Thoughts, and resented that Sancho Son to Alonso King of Portugal, sent to Be∣siege Cui∣dad Rodri∣go, de∣feated. Cuidad Rodrigo, was a curb and inlet to Portugal. Wherefore, having gather'd a powerful Army, he gave the Command of it to his Son Sancho, ordering him to Besiege that City, being persuaded, the King of Leon, now ingaged in War with Castile, could not have leisure to relieve it. King Ferdinand, with part of his Forces, met the Portugueses, and near the Town of Arraganal, overthrew them, taking many Prisoners, whom he presently set at li∣berty. King Alonso, after this loss, recruiting his Army, entred Galicia, where he took Limia, Turonia, and some other Towns. Then having encreased his Army, he attack'd Ba∣dojoz, which, tho' it belong'd to the Moors, was under the protection of King Ferdinand, who immediately came to its relief. The Portugues had already taken part of the City, but Portugal taken by King Ferdinand of Leon, and set at Liberty. Alonso King of
daring to give Battle, was vanquish'd, and forc'd to retire into the very Town. That was no place of safety, for the Moors press'd him on the one side; and the Christians on the other. Attempting to escape, he was struck down by the Bolt of the Gate, and so taken. King Ferdinand having entertain'd him with all manner of Civility, and caused his wound to be dressed, gave him his Liberty. This Courtesie so oblig'd the Portugues, that he offer'd to submit himself and Kingdom to King Ferdinand, which was refused, and nothing demanded of him, but the restitution of the Towns he had taken in Galicia. The following Year be∣ing 1180. on the first of October, dy'd Luis VII. King of France, and Philip Augustus suc∣ceeded 1180. him. About the same time Sancho King of Navarre, built the City Victoria, in that part of Biscay called Alava, it is the head of that Province, and stands where formerly was Victoria City built. Synod at Tarragona. a Village called Gasteiso. At Tarragona a Synod was held, where among other things it was decreed, that for the future the Catalonians, in the publick writings, should forbear naming the Kings of France, and the Year of their Reigns, as had been used till then. In the Year 1181. dy'd Cerebrunns Archbishop of Toledo. Gonzalo the first of this Name, a Man of great 1181. Piety and Learning succeeded him. Some name Peter de Cardona, before D. Gonçalo, some after him, perhaps he was Elect, and not Consecrated, most Authors make no mention of him. King Ferdinand of Leon, now made himself Master of Badajoz. That City was altogether Alonso of Portugal Besieged by the Moors, and delivered by the King of Leon. inhabited by Moors, and he could neither People it with Christians, nor leave a sufficient Garrison. Therefore he gave the Government of it to Abenabel, a Moor, who soon rebell'd, and called the Almohades to his assistance. Not content with this, he gathered an Army, wasted the Frontiers of Leon, and then marching into Portugal, Besieg'd King Alonso in San∣tarem. King Ferdinand assembling his Forces, marched with all speed to the relief of his Father-in-Law, but the Moors not daring to stand the Power of both Kings, fled. At first the King of Portugal was jealous of King Ferdinand's designs, being as much afraid of him, as of the Moors, but being better assured, took Courage. King Ferdinand returned home, with great honour and a rich Booty. This same Year 1181 Pope Lucius III. entred upon the 1181. Papacy. He sent a Legate into Spain, to settle Peace betwixt the Christian Princes, for the better prosecuting the War against the Moors. The King of Aragon, being resolv'd to go in Pilgrimage to the shrine of St. James, bore the Legate Company into Castile. By their A Legate makes Peace a∣mong Christians. Mediation Peace was Established, the Bounds of each Kingdom assigned, and how much of what the Moors possessed, should belong to the Conquest of each appointed, wherein the King of Aragon, gain'd great reputation for his modesty, having no further assign'd him than to Valencia, but afterwards his Son Peter being dissatisfy'd, had it extended to Alicant. Only the King of Navarre, could not be perswaded, to admit of this pacification, being highly offended at the King of Castile, for the great harm he had done him. However for some time Peace continued among the Christans, or at least no considerable Hostilities were committed. The War was carryed on against the Moors, chiefly by the King of Portugal, who in the Year 1183. caused the Bones of S. Vincent, to be brought from the Cape of his Name, to the Cathedral of Lisbon. He sent his Son Sancho, to the other side of Tagus, to 1183. secure the Frontiers, and observe the Moors. Sancho being Young, and Ambitious of Ho∣nour, with a good force entred Andaluzia, and ravag'd all the Country as far as Sevil. Those People daring to come out, and give him Battle, he overthrew them, and laid Siege to Ilipa, now called Niebla, but could not take it, being forc'd to raise the Siege, upon News brought him, that the Moors had attacked Beja, on the Frontiers of Portugal. Them also he put to flight, and entred Santarem in Triumph. At the same time intelligence was brought that the Almohades, with their King Abenjacob, gather'd mighty Forces against Portugal, but they were so quick, that before it was expected they sate down before Santarem. King Alonso, tho' very Aged, and Lame, since his hurt at Badajoz, in so much that he could Alonso King of Portugal vanquish∣eth the Moors. not ride, having assembled all the Force of his Kingdom, marched to Santarem. He charged the Moors in the Front, and his Son Sallying out of Town upon the rear, they were easily put to flight; Great Slaughter was made. The Moorish King Mortally wounded, endeavouring to pass the River Tagus, which is there deep and rapid, was drown'd. This Victory was obtained in the Year 1184. Abenjozeph, Brother to Abenjacob, succeeded him 1184. in the Empire of Africk and Spain. CHAP. VII. The Death of the Kings of Leon and Portugal. Alliances betwixt the Kings of Spain. The defeat of the Christians at Alarcos. Sancho, the Wise, King of Navarre dies. Sancho the first King of Portugal. Alonso the Ninth of Leon. THE Death of Armengaud Earl of Ʋrgel, somewhat abated the joy all Spain conceived for the Victory of the Portugueses over the Moors. He was Son of Armengaud of Castile, Armengaud Earl of Ʋr∣gel slain Earl of Barcelona, Marryed to a Sister of the King of Aragon, and had not only great Dominions in Catalonia, and Aragon, but was also Lord of Valladolid in Castile, as being great Grandson
to Peranzules, before spoken off. This Prince to advance the Christian Cause, with his own Forces broke into the Territory of Valencia, and after some successful Exploits, was killed in an Ambush laid by the Moors, near the Town of Requena. Others will have it, that he was slain by the Castilians, but that is not so probable. He left a Son of his own Name, who in∣herited his Dominions. On the other side, the King of Navarre entred Castile, plundering King of Navarre breaks into Castile. all the Country as far as Atapuerca, where the Abbot of S. Peter de Carden̄a, met him with the Standard of Roderick Diaz, Sirnam'd Cid, begging he would restore the Booty. The King not only condescended to his Request, but accompanied that Standard back to the place whence it was brought. These things hap'ned in the Year 1185. At the same time, the King of Portugal and his Son, went to Coimbra, and thence to Porto, where the Marriage be∣twixt 1185. Teresa, the King's Daughter, and Philip, Earl of Flanders, was Celebrated; the Flem∣ings call her Maud. After the Solemnity, they return'd to Coimbra, there the King, worn out with Age and Diseases, dy'd on the 6th of December, being 91 years old. His Body, as he had ordered, was bury'd in a mean Tomb in the Church of Santa Cruz, built by him, and Alonso the first King of Portugal dies. thence remov'd by King Emanuel, to a stately Sepulchre of Marble. He was a Man accom∣plish'd in all manner of Virtue, the Founder, and Conqueror of the Kingdom of Portugal. His Zeal for Religion, appears by the many Churches and Monasteries he Founded, in Lisbon, Ebora, and other places. His Queen Malfada, was not inferior to him in Piety, and per∣form'd many like Acts of Christian Generosity. Spain enjoy'd Peace after the late Agree∣ment among the Christian Princes, and Death of Abenjacob, the Moorish King. Peter Ruiz de Açagra, Lord of Albarazin, was willing to assist the Christian Kings in their Wars, but would not be Subject to any of them; and therefore stiled himself the Vassal of S. Mary. The strength of his City, and the Emulation of the Kings, each striving to draw him to himself, secur'd his Possession. In the Year 1186. in January, the Kings of Castile and Aragon, meet∣ing at Agreda, by mutual consent, Banish'd out of their Dominions all the Kindred of the said 1186. Peter de Açagra, that were of his party. No more was done at that time. At the begin∣ning of the Year following, Gaston, Viscount of Bearn, did Homage to the King of Aragon, 1187. at Huesca, as his Predecessors had done. This Year was unfortunate for the taking of Jeru∣salem, Jerusalem lost. Baldwin, King of that City, and the Great Master of the Templers, by Saladin. In Castile, King Alonso regulated the Order of Calatrava. In the Year 1188. dy'd Frederick, King of Leon, at Benavente, having Reign'd 31 Years, and was bury'd in the Royal Chappel 1188. at Santiago. He was judg'd more fit for War than Peace, immoderate in the desire of Ruling, but brave and generous. Martin, a Priest of Leon, at that time writ many Books, and is said to have attain'd all his Learning in a Vision, in which S. Isidorus appear'd to him, and gave him a Book to eat; whereas before he was very Ignorant. Sancho succeeded King Alonso, of Portugal, and Alonso IX. his Father Ferdinand, in the King∣dom of Leon. Upon the Death of his Father, Alonso turn'd back, being then on his way Sancho the first, suc∣ceeds to the Crown of Portugal Alonso 9th to that of Leon. to Portugal, whither he was going only to shun his Mother-in-law, who accounted him a Bastard, and could not endure that he should take place of her Children. Hence arose conti∣nual Disgusts, and tho' the new King allowed her the Joynter setled by his Father; yet at last she was oblig'd to retire to Najara, where she spent the remainder of her Days. In the Mo∣nastery of S. Mary Royal, in that City, are the Tombs of that Lady, and her Brothers, D. Lope, Bishop of Segovia, and D. Martin de Haro. Alonso, King of Leon, was twice Marry'd, first with Teresa, Daughter of King Sancho of Portugal, by whom he had three Children, Sancha, Ferdinand, who dy'd young, and Dulcis; then being Divorc'd, by reason of Con∣sanguinity, he Marry'd Berengaria, Daughter to Alonso, King of Castile, his Cousin-german. Sancho the first of the Name, King of Portugal, call'd the Peopler, and the Fat, was Marry'd to Aldonça Dulcis, Sister to the King of Aragon. By her he had many Children, which were Alonso, the eldest, Ferdinand, Peter, and Henry, who dy'd young, and 5 Daughters, Teresa, Malfada, Sancha, Blanch and Berengaria. After the Death of the Queen, he had many Children by two Mistresses; by the first, call'd Johanna, he had Ʋrraca and Martin; by the other, whose Name was Mary, Teresa, Egidius, Constance and Roderick. Teresa was Marry'd to Alonso Tello, who Founded the Town of Albuquerque. Alonso, King of Castile, by one Wife, had eleven Children, whereof Blanch was the happiest, for that being Marry'd to Luis VIII. King of France, she was Mother to S. Luis. After Blanch, follow'd Berengaria, Sancho, Ʋrraca, and Ferdinand, born in the Year 1189. then Malfada and Constance, then two or three Sisters, whose Names are not known, and lastly, Ellenor and Henry, the young∣est, 1189. who came to succeed his Father, as shall be shown in its place. The King of Castile was the greatest Potentate in Spain, and consequently, terrible to the others, which mov'd them A League against Castile. to joyn in a League Offensive and Defensive. They endeavour'd to draw the King of Leon into this Confederacy, but he was more inclinable to his Cousin, the King of Castile; and therefore as soon as setled in the possession of his Kingdom, he went of his own accord to Carrion, where the Cortes, or Parliament of Castile was held, in the Year 1188. There he was Knighted by the King, and kissed his Hand; a Submission misbecoming the Regal Autho∣rity. 1188. Conrad, Son to the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who was going a Pilgrimage, and Raymund, Earl of Toulouze, were present at that Assembly, and Knighted by the King, ac∣cording to the Custom of Spain. A Match was also agreed upon, betwixt Conrade and Beren∣garia, the King's Daughter; but at last it took no effect. The Kings of Aragon and Na∣varre,
in the Month of September 1190. had a Conference at Borgia, and there concluded 1190. a League against Castile. Afterwards Leon and Portugal, were drawn into the Confederacy at Huesca, where the Embassadors of those two Crowns met the King of Aragon. There to the former Articles, it was added, that none of those Princes should make Peace, or Truce, or declare War, without the consent of the others. The Treaty was signed in May 1191. This same Year Pope Clement III. departed this Life at Rome, and Celestin III. suc∣ceeded 1191. him, Gonzalo Archbishop of Toledo, dy'd in August the same Year. In his time, King Alonso gave the Towns of Talamanca and Esquivias to that Church. Martin Lopez, for his extraordinary Actions, and Generosity, call'd the Great, succeeded him. This same Year the River Tagus was Frozen at Toledo, a thing very rare in that Temperate Climate. James Lopez de Haro Lord of Biscay, the greatest among the Nobility of Castile, and Go∣vernour of Briviesca, Najara, and Soria, perswaded the King to assemble the Cortes, or Par∣liament at Carrion, in the Year 1192. for carrying on the War against the Moors. Least the Kings of Leon and Navarre, with whom Castile was at Variance, should take any advan∣tage, 1192. Castile Com∣mences War with the Moors. while the King was employ'd against the Infidels, a Peace was concluded with those Princes. Then Martin Archbishop of Toledo, was Ordered to Commence the War, as a prelude to what follow'd. In Aragon, the Earl of Ʋrgel, who since his Father's death, had been out of the Kingdom, upon account of the Enmity betwixt him, and Ponce de Cabrera, a Po∣werful Man, now at length came, and submitted himself to the King. Gaston Earl of Bearne, Marry'd a Daughter of Bernard Earl of Cominges, and with her had in Dower, the Lordship of Bigorre, in Feof of the King of Aragon. Berengarius Bishop of Tarragona, was kill'd on the 16th of February 1194. by Michael de Moncada, as is reported, but the cause of their Enmity is not known. On the 17th of June following dy'd at Pamplona, Sancho King of Navarre, for his 1194. more than Ordinary Learning, Sirnamed the Wise. His Body was bury'd with great Pomp in Sancho the Wise King of Navarre dies. the Cathedral of that City. He Reign'd 43 Years, 7 Months, and 6 Days. By his Wife Sancha, Aunt to the King of Castile, he left Ferdinand, Ramiro, Berengaria, Teresa, Blanch, and the eldest of them all that succeeded him, was Sancho VIII. King of Navarre, who for the greatness of his Spirit, and Warlike actions, obtained the Title of the Strong. He was also called The Confin'd, for that towards his end he was long shut up in the Castle of Tudela, by reason of a Cancer he had, and would suffer no Body to see him. There remain many Footsteps of his Magnificence, and particularly, he turned the Channel of the River Erbo, to bring it to Tudela, and built a Bridge over it. He founded two Monasteries of Cistercians, called Fitero and Oliva, and a Church of the invocation of St. Mary at Roncesvalles, for him∣self and his Successors to be Bury'd. His Wife was Clemencia, Daughter to Raymund IV. Earl of Toulouze, by her he had Ferdinand, who dy'd before his Father, of a fall he had from his Horse in hunting, and was bury'd in the Church of S. Mary at Tudela. At the time of D. Sancho's Accession to the Crown, all Spain was under the apprehension of a Bloody War. Martin Archbishop of Toledo, had broke into Andaluzia, and made great havock, putting all the Country to fire and Sword, and no Body attempting to oppose him, returned with a rich Booty. The Moors incensed at this loss, gathered all their Forces, and Abenjoseph Mazemute Miramamolin of Africk, came into Spain with a vast Multitude of Men, for not A vast Multitude of Infidels come into Spain. King Alon∣so over∣thrown by the In∣fidels. only the Almohades, but the Arabs and Ethiopians follow'd him. This Inundation pass'd over Sierra Morena, and incamped near Alarcos, a Town built not long before by the Christians. King Alonso was no ways daunted, but having sent to the Kings of Leon and Navarre for aid, advanced to Alarcos, and pitch'd his Camp near the Enemy, whose Multitude fill'd all those Hills and Plains. Some advised to wait the coming of the two Kings, others more hot, would not give them any share in the honour of that Action. The worst advice took place, both Armies drew out, and a Battle was fought near Alarcos, upon Wednesday the 19th of June 1195. Great Bravery was shown on both sides, but the Multitude of the Enemy prevailed, 1195. our Army was put to flight, great Numbers slain, and among them Martin Martinez Great Master of Calatrava. Some say, Martin Archbishop of Toledo was in this fight. James de Haro, the Principal Promoter of this War, behav'd himself ill, and withdrew at the begin∣nig of the Battle to Alarcos, either despairing of success, or as some will have it, being dis∣gusted with the King, for comparing the Gentry of Andaluzia to the Nobility of Castile in Bravery. The Moors after the Victory, not only took Alarcos, but entred the Kingdom of Toledo, as far as Yevenes, which is Six Leagues from that City, and then turned back. In our days there remain only some ruins of Alarcos, and a Church of Our Lady held in great Veneration, it is supposed the Infidels destroyed that place. This misfortune was deem'd a judgment of God on the King, for that Neglecting his Wife, he was fallen in Love with a Jewish Woman, whom the Nobility in scorn caused to be killed. The King being in a rage for the loss of her, an Angel appeared to him in the same form, he had one painted, and with threats oblig'd him to give over that fondness. In the Church of Illescas, on the right hand of the High-Altar, is a Chapel called the Angel, with an Inscription signifying that to be the place, where the Angel appear'd to King Alonso the Good, so he is stiled. The Kings of Leon and Navarre, hearing of the disaster befallen at Alarcos, drew back their Forces. He of Leon, visited King Alonso, but he of Navarre, returned without so much as Saluting him, which affront the King of Castile highly resented, and resolved to take revenge, not only of the Moors, but of the Navarrois.
CHAP. VIII. King Alonso of Aragon dies, and his Son Peter succeeds him. The King of Leon divorc'd. Castilians and Aragonians over-run Navarre. Alonso King of Castile's two Daughters Marry'd to the Kings of England and Leon. Plague and Famine in Spain. THE following Year being, 1196. dyed King Alonso of Aragon, the second of the Spanish 1196. Kings in Power, in Valour inferior to none. He breath'd his last at Perpignan, at a King Alon∣so of Ara∣gon dies, his Son Peter II. succeeds him. Famine & Plague. time his Kingdom enjoy'd Plenty and Peace. His Son Peter succeeded him, and was the se∣cond of the Name. To Alonso he left Provence and its Dependencies, to Ferdinand the Mona∣stery of Poblete of Cistercians, founded by his Father, and finished by himself, betwixt Tar∣ragona and Lerida. His three Daughters, Constance, Ellenor, and Dulcis, were appointed to succeed in the Throne, in case their Brothers dy'd without Heirs. This Year was also un∣fortunate for Plague and Famine, which raged most in Catalonia. The Moorish King also made an incursion, took Caceres and Plasencia, destroyed the Country of Talavera, but could not enter the Town, and demolished Santolalla and Escalona. Toledo was ten Days Besieged. In the Year ensuing which was 1197. there were great revolutions in Catalonia, the People being divided in Factions, some followed Armengaud Earl of Ʋrgel, other Roger Earl of Faux, 1197. who prevailed and subdued the other Party. Abenjoseph the Moor flushed with succeess marched again to Toledo, but despairing of taking that City, ravaged all the Country about Madrid and Alcala, then turning off to the left, did the same about Ocan̄a, Ʋcles, Huete, and Cuenca. King Alonso not able of himself to withstand so great a Power, thought of Foreign aids, there was no hopes in Leon and Navarre, who at the same time wasted his Domi∣nions, the one entred at Soria, the other the Country of Campos. No hopes remained, ex∣cept Peter called the Catholick King of Aragon, who readily condescended and they joyn'd their Forces. It was resolved first to take revenge on the King of Leon, from whom were easily taken the Towns of Bolanos, Castroverde, Valencia and Carpio. Navarre was designed to suffer next, but it was not effected, for that Abenjoseph prepared again to invade Castile, however the Christians again, in the Year 1198 turned their fury against Leon, ravaged all the Ter∣ritory 1198. A Truce with the Moors. of Salamanca, and took Alva and Monterey, with other lesser places. Such was the blind Passion of the two Kings, that to be at leasure to invade Navarre, they concluded a Truce for ten Years, with the Moor Abenjoseph. At this time Sancho King of Portugal, was busie re∣pairing many Towns as Valencia de Min̄o, Montemor O Novo, Vallelas, Penamacor, Sorrella, Penella, and others, which he gave some to the Knights of Santiago, some to those of Avis, who then first began to be known. With the assistance of a Fleet of English, French and Flemmings, he took the City Silves, near Cape S. Vincent. His Brother-in-Law Philip Earl of Flanders, sent 27 Ships, and a good Body of choice Soldiers. Authors do not agree about the time of this Action, some say it was the Year 1199. others 10 Years before. Many Pro∣digies 1199. seen about this time, Terrfied all Men, especially the Vulgar, who are more Supersti∣tious. In Portugal there was a raging Plague and Famine at once, which the Commonalty Plague & Famine in Portugal. attributed to Gods Vengeance, for that Alonso King of Leon, and Teresa Princess of Portugal, were not divorc'd, as the Pope had expresly Commanded, by reason of their Consanguinity, so that Portugal was under an interdict, and all Persons who opposed that Separation Excom∣municated. To add to these misfortunes, the City Silves was recover'd by Abenjoseph the Moor. At length in the Year 1200. the King of Leon was divorced, and immediately began to treat of Marrying Berengaria, Daughter to King Alonso of Castile, with whom he had as near 1200. King of Leon di∣vorced. Kindred as with the former; but state Policy bears down Conscience and Religion. It ap∣pears by an Epistle of Pope Innocent III. to the Archbishop of Compostella, that he refus'd to give a Dispensation for this Marriage. Alonso King of Castile, ardently desired to be reveng'd of Navarre, but the King of Aragon could not join him presently, as had been agreed, being then at variance with his Mother Queen Sancha, of whom he was suspicious, and therefore seiz'd upon her jointer Lands. The two Kings met at Hariza, and there matters were ad∣justed betwixt the Aragonian and his Mother. Peter Ruiz de Açagra, Lord of Albarazin, be∣ing reconcil'd to both Kings, was at this Congress; and here was concluded a stricter Alli∣ance on the 30th of November. This same Year, according to our Historians. Richard King of England Married Berengaria the Daughter of Sancho King of Navarre. English Authors say it was a Year sooner, and that he dy'd this same Year. King Alonso of Castile, by the benefit of the Truce with the Moors, repair'd all the places they had demolish'd; and at the same time ceas'd not to press the King of Aragon to join his Forces against Navarre, as had been agreed. At last both Armies entred Navarre. Sancho King of Navarre, despairing of any Succour from Christian Princes, and finding himself too weak to withstand so great a Power, went over into Africk, not doubting of assistance from Abenjoseph Miramamolin. He being gone, the Kings of Castile and Aragon rang'd that Country, without any opposition. Aivar, and the Country of Valderroncal, were given to the King of Aragon; he of Castile had
Miranda and Insula, and lay'd Siege to Vitoria, head of the Province Alaba. The Siege grow∣ing tedious, the King left James de Haro to Command there, and went himself to the Pro∣vince of Guipuscoa in Biscay, which submitted to him; the People being offended at the Go∣vernment of the Navarrois. Vitoria was also Surrendred, and after it all the Fortresses in Navarre over-run by them. Alaba. Yet they Capitulated, that the King should impose no new Laws or Governours on them, except in Vitoria and Trevin̄o, where he might place whom he pleas'd. Nothing could withstand the two Kings, the Country being altogether forsaken. A report was also spread, that King Sancho had an Incurable Cancer in one of his Legs, which proceeded from Melan∣choly for his Misfortunes. The Sea-Coasts of Biscay were now fortify'd, some Towns re∣pair'd, as S. Sebastian, Fuenterrabia, Guetaria, and Motrico; and other new ones built, which were Laredo, Santander, and St. Vincent. Mean while King Sancho having met with no suc∣cess, return'd home with shame, and found his Kingdom diminish'd on all sides. He sent sub∣missive Embassies to both the Kings, but they obtained nothing, for neither of them would part with what he had gained by the Sword, besides they had other pretensions of right to palliate their Ambition. Whilst these things hap'ned in Spain, John King of England, being hard pressed by PhilipAlonso K. of Castile's two Daughters Marry'd to the Kings of France and Leon. 1201. Augustus King of France, concluded a dishonourable Peace, by which he restored many Towns to the French, and the better to Colour this condescention gave them in the Nature of Dower, obliging the King of France, to Marry one of the Daughters of Alonso King of Castile, and Neices to John. King Alonso had Four Daughters, three of them marriageable, which were Berengaria, Ʋrraca, and Blanch. Berengaria, about the same time was Marryed to the King of Leon, the French had their choice of the other two, and pitched upon Blanch. She was Con∣tracted at Burgos, and thence convey'd to Guienne, then in the hands of the English, from whence the Nobility of France conducted her in great State, to her Husband. These things were done in the Year 1201. Much about the same time Berengaria, the King of Castile's other Daughter was Marry'd to Alonso King of Leon, at Valladolid, where the two Kings met to that purpose. Her Dower was only those Towns her Father had taken from her Husband. Alonso Earl of Provence, and William Earl of Focalquer, being at variance, the King of Aragon took a journey into France, and composed their differences. Thence he went by Sea to Rome, designing to make use of the interest of Pope Innocent III. for obtain∣ing the assistance of the Fleets of Genoa and Pisa, towards the Conquest of Majorca. The Pope received him with great Magnificence, caused him to be anointed, and himself put on his Crown, ordaining, that for the future, the Kings of Aragon should be Crown'd by the Arch∣bishop of Tarragona, as the Popes Vicar. In return, the King made his Kingdom Tributary to the Pope, which was highly resented by his Subjects. CHAP. IX. The Marriage of the King of Aragon, and Death of some Persons of Note. Peace concluded, and Alliance between all the Christian Kings of Spain. The begin∣ning of the War with the Moors. A vast Multitude of Foreigners comes to the assistance of the Christian Kings of Spain. KING Peter of Aragon, being returned home from Rome, incensed the Minds of his Marriages Subjects, by imposing a Tax called Monetal, from which even the Nobility were not exempted. Pope Innocent indeavoured to make a match betwixt the King, and the Lady Ma∣ry, Daughter to Elizabeth Queen of Jerusalem, by that means to ingage him in the Holy War. Conveniency prevailed, and he Marryed the Lady Mary, Daughter and Heiress to William Lord of Montpellier, Ʋrraca, the King of Castile's Youngest Daughter, was Marry'd to Alonso, the King of Portugal's eldest Son in the Year 1206. This Year there was so great an Eclipse 1206. of the Sun, that the Darkness lasted Six hours, as if it had been the Dead of Night. A great Eclipse of the Sun, & Floods. The Floods were so great, that the River Tagus swell'd the height of a Man above the Gate of Almofala at Toledo, as the Annals of that City inform us. It is likely this Gate of Almofala was the same, is now call'd of St. Isidorus. King Alonso made Martin Archbi∣shop of Toledo, High Chancellor of Castile. No hopes being left, the King of Navarre of recovering his losses, he had a Conference with him of Castile at Guadalaxara, where a Truce was concluded for five Years, and Cautionary Towns given on both sides, for security of performance. In the Year 1208. dy'd Martin Archbishop of Toledo, Roderick Ximenes, a Navarrios succeeded him. In November departed his Life, Sancha Mother to the King of 1208. Aragon. On the same day as the Archbishop, dy'd also Stephen Illan Governour of Toledo, who, as was said, recovered that City for the King. Also the Earl of Ʋrgel, leaving one only Daughter, who being oppress'd by Gerard de Cabrera, Son to Ponce, before mentioned, surrendred her Earldom to the King of Aragon, and put herself under his protection. Here ended the Dominion of the Heirs of the great Borello, formerly Earls of Barcèlona and Ʋrgel over that City, tho' her Father, by Will, left the half of his City of Valladolid, to Pope
Innocent, that he might protect his Daughter in the remaining part, but I do not find that ever the Pope had possession of this Legacy. The Truce with the Moors was near expiring, and great danger threatned, unless the Christian Princes would unite their Forces for the publick good. Alonzo, King of Leon, disturb∣ed the Peace, by seizing upon his Mother-in-law's Joynter-Lands. James de Haro, her Bro∣ther, opposing the King, drew upon himself the Forces of Leon and Castile, and not able to defend his own, was forc'd to fly to Navarre. Thence, he infested the Frontiers of Castile, but being defeated by the two Kings, retired to Estela, a strong Town. The four Kings of Castile, Leon, Aragon, and Navarre, met at Alfaro, and concluded a Peace. Hereupon Four Kings of Spain meet and con∣clude a Peace. James de Haro, forsaken by all, fled to Valencia to the Moors. Soon after, the King of Ara∣gon entring the Kingdom of Valencia, had his Horse kill'd under him in fight, and must cer∣tainly have been taken, but that James de Haro mounted him. This made him so odious to the Infidels, that he was oblig'd to go over to Africk to clear himself before the Miramamo∣lin. Afterwards, having made his Peace with the Christian Kings, he return'd to Castile. In the Year 1209. the two Kings of Aragon and Navarre, had another meeting, in a Plain, 1209. near a Town call'd Mallen. Here all Differences were adjusted, and the King of Navarre lent him of Aragon 20000 Daccats, for which, he was to deliver four Towns in pawn to D. Ximeno de Rada, who, if the Money was not repaid on the day appointed, was to sur∣render them up to the King of Navarre. King Alonso of Castile, hop'd to draw Succours out of France, but the Wars betwixt the French and English, hindred. Whereupon, he en∣tred Guienne, resolving to fall upon either of the two that should refuse to hearken to Peace. His labour was lost, for the enmity was irreconcileable, and the Preparations made by the Moors, oblig'd him to return into Spain. Whilst the Truce with the Moors lasted, an Univer∣sity was Founded at Palencia, at the King's charge, and by the persuasion of Roderick, Arch∣bishop of Toledo, and Professors of all Sciences brought out of France, upon promise of great Salaries. At Huelgas, near Burgos, the King also built a great Monastery for the burying of Kings, and an Hospital adjoyning to it. Constance, Sister to the King of Aragon, and Dow∣ager of Hungary, by whom she had a Son call'd Ladislaus, by persuasion of Pope Innocent III. Marry'd Frederick, King of Sicily. The Alliances establish'd betwixt the Christian Princes fill'd all People with hopes and joy. Yet at this time the King of Leon, by command of Pope Innocent, was Divorc'd from his Queen Berengaria, upon account of Consanguinity, and she sent to her Father. Mahomet, Several Exploits against the Moors. who had succeeded his Brother Abenjoseph, in the Empire of the Moors, made great Prepa∣rations to invade the Dominions of the Christians, who on their part, were not idle. Peter, King of Aragon, took Adamuz, and other Towns in the Kingdom of Valeneia. To the Knights Templers, he gave the Town of Tortosa for their good service perform'd in the late Wars. Ferdinand, Son to the King of Castile, entred Andaluzia, and plundred all the Coun∣try about Baeza, Anduxar and Jaen. About the same time, Mahomet, King of the Moors, call'd the Green, from the colour of his Turbant, took Salvatierra, part of the Inhabitants were put to the Sword, the rest made Slaves. It was Besieg'd in June 1210. and taken in 1210. September. King Alonso was marching to relieve it, but at Talavera his Son Ferdinand met, Prince Ferdinand of Castile's Death. and assur'd him there was need of a greater Army to engage the Enemy. Prince Ferdinand dying in October, the following Year, put a stop to the King's further Proceedings for the present. His Body was carried from Madrid, where he dy'd, to Huelgas, and there bury'd. However, the Cortes, or Parliament, was held to furnish Supplies for the War. Embassies were sent to obtain Succours of other Princes, and the Archbishop of Toledo, to Rome, to obtain the Croisade for all that should serve in that War. On the other side, the Moors dili∣gently fortified their Frontiers, and sent for Recruits out of Africk. Alonso, King of Castile, the more to terrifie the Enemy, broke into their Territories, and took some Towns along the River Xucar. Then returning to Cuenca, met the King of Aragon there, and had assurance of Assistance from the King of Navarre, by his Embassadors. The Archbishop of Toledo, stirr'd up all sorts of People in France and Italy, to take upon them the Croisade, and suc∣ceeded A vast Ar∣my of Fo∣reigners comes into Spain to the assi∣stance of the Chri∣stians. so well, that Authors affirm, there were got together 10000 Horse, and 100000 Foot of Foreigners. A great number, and scarce credible. However, by others, I find they amounted to 12000 Horse, and 50000 Foot. These Strangers were order'd to encamp in the King's Orchards, near Toledo. They began to repair thither in the Month of February, 1212. A Mutiny was raised in the City by the Soldiers and Rabble, against the Jews, and much mischief might have been done, had not the Nobility protected those unhappy People. Peter, King of Aragon, came to Toledo, and was received with great Joy; he brought with him 20000 Foot, and 3500 Horse. Sancho, King of Portugal, was prevented from coming 1212. by Death, which overtook him at Coimbra, where he was bury'd in a mean Tomb, and thence Sancho K. of Portugal dies, his Son Alonso II. succeeds him. remov'd to a better, by King Emanuel. His Son Alonso II. of the Name, succeeded him, and had already two Sons, call'd Sancho and Alonso, by his Wife Ʋrraca. Ferdinand, Uncle to the new King, and Brother to the Deceased, had the Year before Marry'd Joanna, Countess of Flanders, Daughter and Heiress to Baldwin, Emperor of Constantinople. Nevertheless, a good Body of Men came from Portugal. King Alonso assign'd pay to all that Multitude of Souldi∣ers, and made Presents to the great Men according to their Quality. All Necessaries were provided for so great an Army, insomuch, that there were 60000 Carts only to carry the
Baggage, as Roderick the Archbishop testifies, who was an Eye-Witness, and writ all the par∣ticulars of this Expedition. Yet others say, there was that number of Beasts for carriage. They marched from Toledo, on the 21th of June. James de Haro led the Van, which consist∣ed of the Strangers. In the Center was the King of Aragon, and he of Castile brought up the Rear. The Horse amounted to 14000, the Foot not to be number'd; for all that were A mighty Army of Christians in Castile. of Age in Castile, were oblig'd to carry Arms. On the 3d day they came to Malagon, a Town belonging to the Moors, 14 Leagues from Toledo. The Inhabitants quitted the place, and retired to the Castle, which was taken by the Strangers, and all the Infidels put to the Sword. Calatrava on the 1st of July surrendred, and was restor'd to the Knights of that Name, from whom the Moors had taken it. All the Booty was given to the Argonians and Foreigners, many of whom not able to endure the great Heat, and want of all Necessaries, were forc'd to return home. Then the Army advanc'd to Alarcos, which Town having the foregoing Years been ruin'd by the Moors, the few Inhabitants that were left, abandon'd to the Christians. Here D. Sancho, King of Navarre, with a good Body of Men joyn'd the Army, and made amends for the Strangers that were gone. Some Castles were taken by storm. Near Salvatierra, they made a general Muster, and then mov'd to the Foot of Sierra Morena. The Moorish King being inform'd hereof, marched to Baeza, resolving by carry∣ing away all Provisions, to secure the passage of those Mountains, and chiefly, to make good the Pass of Losa, which was the only way our Army could go. If our Army advanc'd, the Moor doubted not of the Victory; if they staid, they must perish for want; if they turn'd back it was a great loss of Reputation. A Council of War being held, many were of Opini∣on to turn back, and taking a greater compass, enter Andaluzia, a plainer way. But the King of Castile would not hearken to it, believing it would make the Enemy bolder, and discourage his own Men. Therefore it was resolv'd to advance. D. Lope, Son to James de Haro, sent before by his Father with a strong Party, possess'd himself of Ferral, on the top of the Mountains, and made the Moors give back. Yet he durst not attempt the Pass of Losa, thinking it a rashness at once to encounter the Enemy in such a difficult place. CHAP. X. The further progress of the Christian Army, which obtains a most signal Victory over the Infidels, of whom 200000 are slain, and this called the Battle of Navas de To∣losa. Many Towns taken after this Success. ALL Multitudes are subject to violent Motions, and sudden Apprehensions, as it hap'ned The Chri∣stian Ar∣my ad∣vances a∣gainst the Infidels. now, for the Soldiers were all ready to disperse, and shift for themselves, believing the danger equal either in advancing or retiring. God provided a Remedy in this Extremity. A Shepheard, who had long used those Mountains, and knew them throughly, (some say it was an Angel, for that after he had shown the way, he was never seen more) promised the Kings, if they would rely upon him, he would lead the whole Army thro' By-ways he well knew, to recover the tops of all those Mountains. It was not safe, wholly to trust to a Per∣son unknown, nor prudent to slight that proffer, in such an Exigency. James de Haro, and Garci Romero, were sent to view what the Shepheard said. The way seem'd to lead quite from the Enemy, so that the Moors thought they retir'd for want of Provisions. All the As∣cent was difficult and craggy, yet the Men refused no labour, being assur'd of the Victory, if once they gain'd the top of the Mountain. Their chief care was to lose no time, lest the Ene∣my should be before-hand with them. Having surmounted all difficulties, the Kings fortifi∣ed their Camp. The Enemy prepar'd for fight, and drew up their Forces in four Bodies. But the Christians tir'd with their March, would not give Battle that day, nor the next, A great Victory obtain'd by the Christians. which so puffed up the Moors, that their King sent Advice to several parts, that within three days, he should have the three Christian Kings Prisoners, having already got them in a toil. On Munday, the 16th of July, all the Army having confess'd and receiv'd, drew out in or∣der of Battle. James de Haro led the Van. Gonzalo Nun̄ez with some Templers, and Knights of other Orders, commanded the middle Battle. In the Rear was King Alonso, the Archbishop of Toledo, and other Prelates. The Kings of Aragon and Navarre upon the Wings, he of Navarre, on the Right, and he of Aragon, on the Left. On the other side, the Moors drew up in the same manner they had done before. That part of their Camp where the King's Tent stood, was hem'd in with Chains of Iron, and guarded by the Bravest and Noblest Moors. The number of the others was so great, that they cover'd all the Hills and Plains. On both sides, the Generals encourag'd their Men, and our Bishops went thro' the Batallions, stirring up the Soldiers to gain the Indulgence granted by the Pope. This done, both Parties charged with great Resolution. No signs of Victory appear'd on either side for a long time, every Man fought with such Resolution, as if he had contended for Empire. Our main Battle engaged first, then the Navarrois and Aragonian̄s, without gaining a foot of Ground, but rather after three Charges seem'd to give way. Then King Alonso would have cast himself into the heat of the Fight, but that Roderick the Archbishop stopp'd him.
The rear, or reserve, advancing the Fight, was renewed, and those that seemed to waver before, fell on with greater fury. At length the Moors tired with sustaining the brunt all day, and not able to withstand our reserve which Power'd in fresh upon them, fled, and a mighty slaughter of them was made. 200000 are said to have been slain, half of them Horse, others 200000 Infidels said to be kill'd in this Bat∣tle. write but half the number in all. It is more wonderful that of the Christians, only 25 were kill'd, as Roderick the Archbishop then present testifies. Others affirm 115 dy'd, both small Numbers for so great an Action. The Archbishop also asserts, that tho' so great a num∣ber of Moors was slain, there was not one drop of Blood to be seen in the Field. By the advice of Zeit his Brother, the Moorish King fled without stopping, only to change Horse, till he came the same Night to Jaen. About Sun-set their Camp was entred, and plundered by the Aragonians, for the others followed the chace. All the Moorish Kings Equipage which only was preserv'd, James de Haro, equally divided betwixt the Kings of Aragon and Navarre, particularly his Tent, which was of Red and Crimson-Silk, was by King Alonso's Special Command, given to the Aragonian. For King Alonso coveting nothing but honour, freely resigned all the Booty to his Companions. It was not thought fit to have the other prey equally divided, for fear of a mutiny, but every Man was allowed to keep what he had got. Some say, that a Cross seen in the Air, contributed much towards the gaining of this Victory, but neither the Arch∣bishop who was present in his History, nor the King in his Letter to the Pope, mention a∣ny such thing. Yet all agree, that Pascualis, then a Canon of Toledo, and who carry'd the Arch∣bishops Cross before him, broke twice through the Enemies Battle with it unhurt, tho' they all aim'd at him, and many darts thrown at him, stuck on the staff of the Cross. So great a number of Lances and Darts was found, that tho' the Christians during two days they stay'd there, used no other Fewel, they could not consume them all. Fame first, and then Mes∣sengers sent on purpose, soon spread the News of this Victory through all Parts. Great was the grief it brought to the Moors, and no less the joy, it spread through all Christendom. In Memory of the Action, this King of Navarre, to the Arms of his Ancestors, which were Arms of Navarre. only a red Shield, added Chains and an Emraud in the middle, as is used to this day, in To∣ken that he was the first who broke the Chains that defended the Enemies Camp. Some will have it, that King Alonso of Castile, now took the Castle for his Arms, but it appears to have been in use long before. From this time, there are those who write, the Spaniards took the Custom of abstaining from Flesh upon Saturdays, the contrary Custom having been intro∣duced by the Goths, who doubtless Learn'd it in Greece, when they were converted. This great Victory was doubtless obtained by the Prayers of the Christians, who in all parts, and particu∣larly in Rome, the Pope himself promoting it, made Processions, and offered up their Vows to Heaven for this purpose. Many Bishops, and a great number of Nobles, whose Names it is tedious and needless to repeat, were present at this Battle. But in fine, the Third day after the Fight, the Christi∣ans moved their Camp. They recovered Ferral, and took Bilche, Ban̄os and Tolosa, from Further actions of the Chri∣stian Ar∣my. This cal∣led the Battle of Navas de Tolosa and why. which last place this Action was nam'd. The Battle of Navas de Tolosa. Baeça was aban∣don'd by the Inhabitants, and entred by our Forces, which set Fire to, and burnt a number of Infidels, who thought to defend themselves in the great Mosque. Ʋbeda, the eighth Day after the Victory, was taken by assault, most of the Inhabitans put to the Sword, the rest made Slaves, which strook a Terror into the Moors, and the plunder being given to the Army, encouraged the Soldiers, almost spent with Labour. Sickness, and the badness of the Sea∣son, obliged the Kings to turn back to a more Temperate Country. On their return near Catratrava, they were met by the Duke of Austria, who brought 200 Horse to serve in that War. The King of Aragon being his Kinsman, accompany'd him back to the Borders of Spain. In recompense for his assistance, the King of Castile, restored to him of Navarre, 14 Towns he had before taken from him, and then having taken his leave of both Kings, en∣tred Toledo in Triumph. First he gave Thanks to God for this so signal Providence, and Order'd the 16th of July to be kept for ever as a Holy-Day in Memory of it, by the Name of the Triumph of the Holy-Cross. At the beginning of the following Year, the King pur∣suing his success, took from the Moors the Town of Duen̄as, which he gave to the Knights 1213. of Calatrava, and the Castle of Eznavejor, to those of Santiago. Alcaraz, a little Town in the Mountains Mariani, seated on a rising Craggy Hill, having endured a Siege of two Months, was taken on the 22th of May, so several other places of less Note. This done, King Alonso, loaded with honour, returned to Toledo, where he was receiv'd with great joy, by Ellenor his Queen, Berengaria his Daughter, his Son Henry, and all the Inhabitants. This was a very scarce Year of Provisions, for Authors affirm, it rain'd not in the Kingdom of Toledo, for the space of Nine Months, so that the Country People were forced to abandon their lands, and go to other places for Sustenance. The End of Book XI.
THE History of SPAIN. The Twelfth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Original and growth of the Heresie of the Albigenses, which spread all over France, and some part of Spain. Preaching against them being unsuccessful, War is resolv'd upon. AFter so notable a Victory gain'd over the Moors, the affairs of Spain were in a Prospe∣rous Condition, for the Almohades, oppress'd by so great a loss, stir'd not, and the Chri∣stians were encouraged to Conquer, all the Infidels were still possessed off. But at this same time the Kingdoms of France and Aragon, fell into great Confusions, Cause of the War betwixt France & Aragon. and suffered much detriment. These disorders had their beginning in Toulouze, a noted City of France, and not far from the Borders of Spain. The occasion of them was certain new O∣pinions, in Matters of Religon started in those Parts, which embroiled the French and Ara∣gonians, and cost them much Blood. In former times all Nations agreed in point of Faith, and all follow'd, and profess'd the same Doctrine. There was no difference betwixt the German and the Spaniard, the Frenchman and the Italian, the Englishman and the Sicilian, as to their belief touching God, the Immortality, and other Misteries, all of them had as it were one head, and spoke as with one Tongue. The Waldenses, a Wicked and Abominable People, began some Years before this, to disturb the Peace of the Church, teaching new and extra∣vagent Heresie of the Albi∣genses its Original. Opinions, and now the Albigenses or Albienses, a Sect no less Odious, and a Name hateful to the Ancients, follow'd their Footsteps, to the great desturbance of the Christian World. They taught that the Priests, Gods and the Churches Ministers, had no Power to forgive Sins. That the True Body of Jesus Christ, is not in the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar. That the Water of Baptism, has no Vertue to cleanse the Soul from Sin. That the Prayers used for the Dead do not avail them. All new and false Opinions, never heard of by the Ancients. They also utter'd Blasphemies, and reproaches against the Blessed Virgin, which are not set down, for fear of offending the Christian Reader. William Nangiaçus, a Frenchman, who liv'd not long after, has left them all in writ∣ing. Their madness extended even to reflect upon the Familiarity, that was be∣twixt Our Saviour and St. Mary Magdalen. So says Peter, a Cistercian Monk, in the History he writ of the Albigenses, dedicated to Pope Innocent the Third, where he speaks as an Eye-Witness of things that pass'd in his presence. It would be tedious to particularize all the ravings of this Sect and Heresy; for so it is, that falshood is manyfold, truth one and simple. In that part of France where is the famous City Cahors, is another call'd Albis, once known by the name of Alba Augusta, and it is suppos'd Descripti∣on of the City Albis. that Caesar in his Commentaries, call'd the Inhabitants of that Province Helvii. The River Tarris waters the Country, which is one of the fruitfullest in France, producing much Corn, Wine, Wood and Safforn; whereby the Bishop of that City has one of the best Revenues of France. The Cathedral which is large and beautiful, is adjoining to the Wall of the City, and dedicated to St. Cecilia. The Inhabitants of the City and Country, are open-hearted, peace∣able and quiet; Virtues that may prove dangerous, without the necessary circumspection; in avoiding being corrupted and perverted by wicked People. They generally live upon their own product. The Trade is but little, as lying in the Inland of France, and far from the Sea. From this City, where this new Sect and Madness were first broach'd, it took the name of Albigensis, and from thence spread it self through all France, and part of Spain. But this Flame blaz'd more in Toulouze than in any other place; and thence it was that some deduc'd the original of this Sect and Error from that City. Others say, it had its first rise in Provence, which is a part of Gallia Narbonensis. D. Lucas de Tuy, who for his devotion, and to improve himself in Learning, went to Rome, and thence to Constantinople and Hierusalem, returning to his Country; among other his no less Learned than Pious Writings, publish'd a large Dispu∣tation against all these Errors; wherein he sets down, as an Eye-Witness, what happen'd in the City of Leon, so well known in Spain, and Capital of the Kingdom of the same name. It will not be amiss, for the better understanding of it, to set down his own words; also the better to demonstrate the nature, contrivances, and inventions of Hereticks. After
the Death of the Reverend D. Roderick, Bishop of Leon, the Clergy could not agree about Disorders raised by the Here∣ticks in the City of Leon. chusing his Successor. Which opportunity, the Hereticks, who are Enemies to the truth, and delight in such discord, laid hold of, to get into that City, then without a Pastor, and to assail the Flock of Christ. That their designs might succeed, they arm'd themselves as they us'd to do with inventions. They gave out that Miracles were wrought in a certain filthy place, that serv'd as a Dunghil. In it were bury'd two Criminals, one of them a Heretick, another, who for Murdering his Uncle, was Sentenc'd to be bury'd alive. In that same place there was a Spring, which the Hereticks discolour'd with Blood; that the People might look upon it as a Miracle. The Fame hereof, as is usual upon light occasions, was spread abroad. They underhand had corrupted some Persons to counterfeit themselves Blind, Lame, possess'd and afflicted with several Diseases; and that having drank that Wa∣ter, they were healed. From these beginnings the cheat was carry'd on, till they dug up the Bones of the Heretick, whose name was Arnaldus; and he had been 16 Years bury'd in that place. They gave out those were the Bones of a most holy Martyr. Many of the ig∣norant Clergy, under the Cloak of Devotion, forwarded the Laity herein. The Fraud proceeded so far, as to raise over the Spring a strong House, and it was intended to place the Bones of the Infamous Murderer on a high place, that the People might worship them; it being given out that he had been a very holy Abbot. In short, when the Hereticks had brought things to this pass, they own'd the deceit among themselves, and so made a scoff at the Church, as if the other Miracles perform'd by holy Bodies were of the same stamp, and there were some that gave credit to them, and forsook the true belief. At length the Fraud came to the knowledge of the Fryars Preachers (that is, the Dominicans) who in Fryars Preachers & others oppose the Here∣ticks. their Sermons labour'd to undeceive the People. The Franciscans, and such of the Clergy as had not been drawn into that foul worship, join'd with them. But still the more the minds of the multitude were bent upon that diabolical superstition. Insomuch, that they call'd the Fryars Hereticks for opposing and contradicting them. The Enemies of truth rejoyc'd and triumph'd; they declar'd publickly, that the Miracles wrought in that Dung∣hill, were more certain than all the rest, perform'd in the Church by the Bodies of Saints, held in Veneration by Christians. The Neighbouring Bishop declared all those excommu∣nicate, who frequented that cursed Worship, but their care was of no use, for that the Devil had full possession of many, and had secur'd to himself, the disobedient Children. A Deacon who abhorr'd the Heresie heard at Rome, what happ'ned at Leon, at which he was much concern'd, and resolv'd to return speedily to his Country, to oppose that mighty Evil. Being come to Leon, he enquired further into the business, and begun passionately, both in publick and private, to Condemn so ill a thing, reproving his Townsmen, and A Deacon Zealous in this af∣fair. accusing them as favourers of Hereticks. Tho' his Friends advised him to to be more Moderate, he could not restrain himself, as believing the City was departing from the Law of God. He went to the Common-Council, and told them, That accident was an affront to all Spain, that where formerly, just Laws and Constitutions were enacted, as being the Head of a Kingdom, there at present unheard of Villanies and Heresies were invented. He added, God would not give them rain to Bless the Fruits of the Earth, till they had cast down that Church, and thrown away those Bones they Worship'd. For so it was, that ever since that superstition began, which was now ten Months, it never rain'd, and there was a Dearth in the Country. The Judge, in the presence of all the Assembly, said to the Deacon. Do you assure us, that the Church being cast down, God will give us Rain, and Water the Country. The Deacon, full of Faith, answer'd. Give me leave to demolish that House, and I promise in the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, upon forfeiture of Life Great Faith. and Goods, that within eight Days, Our Lord will send the necessary Rain in abundance. The Company gave Credit to his Words. He repair'd to the place with Labourers ap∣pointed, and many of the Citizens, levelled the Church, and scatter'd the Bones about the Dung-Hills. It hap'ned, to the great astonishment of them all, that as the Church was pulling down, among the Timber was heard a Noise, as it were of a Trumpet, to show the Devil forsook that place. The next Day, a great part of the City was burnt down, for the Wind being very high, the Fire could not soon be stop'd from spreading far. The Multitude mutiny'd, and ran to find out the Deacon, with a design to Murder him, saying. That instead of Rain, he had been the cause of that great Fire. The Hereticks appear'd, scoffing at the Clergy, and said. The Deacon deserv'd Death, and that what he had pro∣mised, would not come to pass. But the Almighty had Mercy on his People, for at the end of the Eight Days appointed, he sent abundant Rain, so that the Fruits of the Earth re∣cover'd, and there was a plentiful Harvest that Year. The Deacon encourag'd by this success, went on prosecuting the Hereticks, till he oblig'd them, to quit the City. Thus far are the Words of this Author. By which it appears, that this Pestilential Heresie spread Hereticks expell'd. in Spain, but its greatest fury fell upon Toulouze, whence ensu'd great mischiefs, and the unhappy Death of the King of Aragon, who would uphold it, as shall appear in the Sequel. The Sect of the Albigenses grew formidable, and daily gathered strength, not only by the number of the Commonalty that adhered to it, but also by Means of the Princes and Persons of note that supported it, without regarding the Pope's Authority, or their own reputation.
These were the Earls of Toulouze, Faux, Besiers and Cominges. In like manner, the King of Aragon supported them, because these Cities were Feofs depending on him, as has been said Favourers of the Al∣bigenses. before. Besides he was nearly Ally'd to the Earl of Toulouze, whose third Wife was the King of Aragon's Sister. And the Earl's Son and Heir, whose Name as well as his Father's, was Raymund, had taken to Wife another of the same King's Sisters, called Sancha. This was the true cause of his declaring for the Albigenses, and taking up Arms for them. Otherwise, he was a truely Catholick Prince, as may be inferred, by his delivering his Son D. Jaime, or James, to Simon, Earl of Monfort, to be bred up and instructed, which Simon was General of the Catholicks, and a Scourge to the Hereticks. Such was the posture of Affairs, that it much troubled the Catholicks of France; but above all, the Pope, who apprehended, lest that Evil, should daily take a deeper root, and gather strength by so many Favourers. The more for that the Multitude, who love Novelties, being deceived by the sleights of those Here∣ticks, easily forsook the Faith of their Ancestors, and embraced those extravagent Opinions. Some Remedy was sought to put a stop to this growing Evil. Mildness was thought at first most ex∣pedient, to try whether by the care of good Teachers those that had stray'd might be brought back. D. James, Bishop of Osma, in his way to Rome, whither he was sent by the King of Castile, went thro' that part of France, and seeing the condition of Affairs, and danger those Towns were in, unless some speedy remedy were apply'd, gave a full account to the Pope of the whole mischief, and where the greatest danger appeared. With him went the Glorious Father, S. Dominick, then a Canon Regular of the Order of S. Augustin, and afterwards on this ac∣count Founder of the Order of Preachers. He was Born at Calervega, in the Territory of Osma, of a Noble Family. The Pope understanding how the matter stood, resolved to give S. Domi∣nick Prea∣ches a∣gainst the Hereticks. a check to that spreading Evil. He dispatch'd the Bishop and his Companion, with full Commission to quench that flame. He also appointed one of the Cardinals, his Legate, with ample power. Being come into France, they chose 12 Abbots of the Order of S. Bernard, to be their Associates, that being Natives, they might by their Preaching and Example, bring back those that had gone astray. But whatever was gain'd by this means, many being convert∣ed from their Errors; chiefly by the Preaching of S. Dominick, and Miracles he wrought in several parts, no less was the number of those perverted by the Hereticks. For who can re∣duce an incens'd Rabble to reason? Who can restore to their Wits, Men lost and hardned in Error? A Limb that cannot be healed, must be cut off, and the safest method is, in such cases, to use Rigour in time. This moved the Pope and Catholick Princes to alter their me∣thods, and since no peaceable means were of force, to resolve upon War, and open Force, as we shall show in the following Chapter. CHAP. II. The Death of Peter, King of Aragon, and of Alonso, King of Castile. Si∣mon, Earl of Monfort, General of the Catholicks, Overthrows the Hereticks, and takes the Towns they had possess'd themselves of. IT being now resolved to decide these matters of Religion by Arms, a great number of Sol∣diers were assembled out of Italy, Germany and France, hoping to gain the Indulgence granted Proceed∣ings of the Catholicks against the Albigenses. by the Pope, to such as took up the Cross on such occasions. These first possess'd themselves of the City Besieres, and in it put to the Sword 7000 of the Mutiniers. This struck such a terror into the People of Carcassonne, that they surrendred the City to the Catholicks, and the Ringleaders were punish'd. These prosperous beginnings encourag'd the Catholicks, who wanting a General, made choice of Simon, Earl of Montfort, a Town of note in the Territo∣ry Simon, Earl of Montfort, General of the Catho∣licks. of Chartres, as being an experienced Soldier, and of known Zeal for the Catholick Religi∣on. He having taken upon him that charge, and gather'd his Forces, gain'd from the Here∣ticks the Castle of Minerva, the City Albis, a Town call'd Vaure, near Toulouze, and many other places. This done, he laid Siege to Toulouze, but could not enter it, by reason the Earls of Toulouze, Faux and Cominges, were within, and defended it with great resolution. Therefore raising the Siege, he bent his Force against the Earldom of Faux. The King of Aragon was in care for those his Friends and Allies, and fear'd, lest Simon of Montfort, un∣der the specious pretence of Religion, should endeavour to enlarge his own Dominions. There∣fore immediately after the famous Battle of Navas de Tolosa, he imploy'd his thoughts on the Affairs of France with so much application, that it appears, he was at Toulouze in the Month of January, in the Year 1213. In May following, he raised Men at Lerida, and other places, to carry on that War. Being returned to France, all those Princes joyn'd him with their 1213. Forces, which together, are said to have composed an Army of 100000 Men, a number scarce credible. Simon of Montfort, provided to oppose so powerful an Enemy, and in order to it, fortified the Castle Murelle, on the Banks of the River Garonne. The Confederates marched to Besiege it, and Montfort with a small number, but chosen Men to defend it. With him were seven Bishops, S. Dominick, and three Abbots. These endeavour'd to disswade the King from supporting the Hereticks, but he was deaf to their advice. The Catholicks were
not above 800 Horse, and 1000 Foot, a small number to the multitude of the Enemies. However relying on the Justice of their Cause, they engaged, and it was resolutely fought on both sides. At length, thro' the special Providence of God, and Valour of the Catholicks, A wonder∣ful defeat of Here∣ticks, the King of Aragon slain. the Enemy was put to flight, the Earls escap'd, but the King was kill'd upon the place, with several Argonians of note; yet the number of the Dead was not great. Every Body said the King had deserved that end for favouring of Hereticks, (tho' in other respects, he was so true a Son of the Church, that he got the name of Peter the Catholick) and also for his Lewdness, which transported him so far as to put away his Queen, a Woman of singular Virtue, upon pretence of Consanguinity, and that she had been Marry'd to the Earl of Cominges, tho' that Marriage had been declared invalid. This Lady was now at Rome, and daily expected Judgment should be given for her, when the news of the King's Death was brought. His Body was buried by the Knights of S. John, in the Monastery of Ximena, where Queen San∣cha his Mother lies. He left only one Son, called Jayme, or James, but four Years of Age. There were yet living, Ferdinand, Brother to the Deceased, and Abbot of Montaragon, and consequently, Jayme, or James suc∣ceeds to the Crown of Aragon. a professed Monk, and Sancho, Earl of Roussillon, his Uncle, of a great age, as being Uncle to the late King. These two, notwithstanding the Profession of the one, and the Age of the other, had thoughts of Usurping the Crown. To this purpose, they endeavoured to gain the Nobility and People, giving out that D. Jayme was a Bastard, and they consequent∣ly next Heirs. This design was no way pleasing to the Prelates and Nobles. Especially Pe∣ter Fernandez de Açagra, Lord of Albarazin, was concerned there should be any talk of Exclu∣ding the Child, and that he should be then as a Prisoner in the hands of Simon of Montfort. Having therefore consulted the other Nobles, they sent an Embassador to Pope Innocent, de∣siring he would command Montfort to deliver up the Child, whom all acknowledged as their King. The Pope readily condescended, and sent Orders to his Legate, the Cardinal of Be∣navente, then in the War against the Hereticks, to give all satisfaction to the Argonians, if what they demanded, were just. Mean while, Montfort had taken Toulouze, the Nest, and chief Recepticle of the Hereticks. The Legate gathered a Synod at Montpelier, where it was unanimously agreed to give all that had been taken in War, to Simon of Montfort, as a Reward for his good service. The Bishop of Embrun, was sent to the Pope, to obtain a Confirmation of this their Decree. This was the posture of Affairs in France. In Spain, a vio∣lent Famine rag'd, by reason of the Drought. After the Famine, as is usual, follow'd the A great Famine and Plague. Plague, caused by the unusual things eaten for want. Many Towns were quite Unpeopled, especially in the Kingdom of Toledo, where this Calamity was most destructive, as being the highest part of all Spain. Roderick, Archbishop of Toledo, was a great help to the Poor, gi∣ving extraordinary Alms, and stirring up others to do the like. Whereupon King Alonso, afterwards at Burgos, gave him 20 Villages, and the Chancellorship of Castile, the highest Archbi∣shops of Toledo, Chancel∣lors of Castile. Dignity next the King, to him, and his Successors, the Archbishops for ever. This Office, the Archbishops exercised by themselves, or their Deputies, till the time of the Archbishop Giles de Albornoz, when by reason of his absence, and the confusion of the times, it was gi∣ven to others; and now those Prelates retain nothing but the bare Title. King Alonso being at Burgos, desired to be reconciled to the King of Leon, with whom he had been offended ever since he put away his Daughter Berengaria. Both Kings met at Valladolid, where all differences were composed, and particularly, they agreed, that Carpio and Monterey, should be demolished, because there arose Debates about them. This done, the King of Leon returned to his Country, taking along with him, by the consent of the King of Castile, James Lopez de Haro, to employ him in his Wars against the Moors. James de Haro, was then in great Repute, so besides his Son, a good number of Men follow'd him, desiring to serve un∣der so experienced a General. The King of Castile, tho' old, would not slip the opportuni∣ty War with the Moors. of making his advantage of the Moors, under a consternation for their late losses. The King of Leon began the War in that part of old Lusitania, now called Estremadura, where having plundred and wasted all the Country, he took from the Moors, a Town of Alcantara, seated on the Banks of Tagus, which he gave to the Knights of Calatrava. This was the Ori∣ginal Original of the Knights of Alcantara. of the Knights of Alcantara, at first subject to the Order of Calatrava, now indepen∣dant of them, having obtained a Bull from Pope Julius II. to that effect. The Habit of Ca∣latrava formerly was a Scapular, with a Hood over their Cloths, like the Fryers; since Pope Benedict XIII. changed it, and instead of the Hood, they wear a red Cross Fleury. Those of Alantara wear the same form of Cross, but green on a white Cloak. Both observe the Rule of S. Bernard, and are subject to the Order of Cistercians. Alonso, King of Castile, advanced with his Forces as far as Baeça, which the Moors had again recovered, and laid Siege to that City, after ravaging all the open Country. Jame Lopez de Haro, the War of Estrema∣dura being ended, came thither. Tho' they made their utmost Efforts, yet could they not take that City, for want of Provisions. A Truce was therefore concluded with the Moors, and the Ar∣my drew off to furnish themselves with Necessaries. But for the scarcity which was that Year, it had been a good opportunity of subduing the Moors, they being then divided among themselves and distracted with intestine Wars. Mahomet, Sirnamed the Green, King of the Moors, after the loss of the memorable Battle of Nabas de Tolofa, went over into Africk, to recruit his Forces. In his absence, his Brother Zeit Abenzeit, possessed himself of Valencia and Monviedro, with all their
Dependencies. Mahomet Zeit, his Cousin, did the same with the Cities of Cordova and Bae∣ça. Abobali, another Moor, following their example, secured to himself, Sevil, Ecija and Xeres. Thus the Force of the Moors was divided, and consequently weakned. A fit oppor∣tunity of subduing them was offer'd, but King Alonso, the most powerful Prince in Spain, could not make use of it, by reason of the scarcity of Provisions, as also, because he was a∣bout to relieve the English, then too hard set in France. At the same time, Alonso II. King Alonso II. King of Portugal, at War with his Sisters. of Portugal, Sirnamed the Fat, was busie, taking away by force of Arms from his Sisters, the Towns left them by his Father. Princes never want pretences to put in execution their De∣signs. Those Ladies had recourse for Protection, to the King of Leon, their Kinsman, who went not in Person, but sent his Son Ferdinand, by whom many Towns were taken from the Portugueses, but afterwards restored, at the request of Pope Innocent, who interposed to ad∣just those Differences. The King of Castile desired to Commune with his Son-in-law, the King of Portugal; and to that purpose, sent Embassadors to invite him to Plasencia; but under∣standing his coming would not be so soon, went to Burgos, thence to send Supplies to the En∣glish. Death prevented all these Designs. In his return from Burgos, earnestly desiring to meet the King of Portugal, he fell sick at Garcimun̄os, where he was given over by the Phy∣sicians. Alonso the VIII. K. of Castile dies. Roderick, Archbishop of Toledo, Administred the Sacraments to him, and caused him to make a Will. That done, he expir'd upon Munday the 6th of October, in the Year 1214. This was the end of King Alonso, the most Renowned Prince of that Age, who did many 1214. great things by himself, yet the other Kings of Spain did nothing considerable without him. He lived 57 years, and 22 days, and thereof reign'd 55. I should think but 53, since at the beginning of his Reign, our Author says, he was 4 years old when his Father died. His Bo∣dy was bury'd at Huelgas, near Burgos. This same Year died Ellenor, Queen Dowager of Castile, Ferdinand, eldest Son to the King of Leon, by his first Wife; also James Lopes de Ha∣ro, and Peter de Castro, Son to Ferdinand de Castro, all Persons of great Note. The Queen Also Elle∣nor his Queen & others. departed this life on the last day of October, of Grief for the loss of her Husband, and was bury'd by him. Ferdinand of Leon, was a very hopeful Youth, had he not been un∣timely cut off by Death, he was Interr'd at Santiago, in Galicia. A Brother of his of the same Name survived, being born of Berengaria, his Father's second Wife, and inherited both the Crowns of Castile and Leon, as shall be shown in its place. Peter de Castro, ended his days at Morocco, the cause of his going thither, is not known. CHAP. III. Disorders in Castile and Aragon, under the two Infant Kings. Sancho, King of Navarre, altogether decrepid. The Lateran General-Council. Honours done there to the Archbishop of Toledo. AFter the Death of Peter, King of Aragon, and Alonso of Castile, there ensued great Trou∣bles Troubles in Castile and Ara∣gon upon the Accessi∣on of two Children Henry and Jayme, or James to those Crowns. Two Un∣cles strive to usurp the Crown of Aragon. Jayme the young K. comes into Spain. in both Kingdoms, by reason of the tender Age of the two Kings, Jaime and Henry, when they ascended those Thrones. All the Nobility was more intent upon their private, than the publick Interest. In Castile, many strove to possess themselves of the Government in the King's Name. Some in Aragon not so content, endeavoured to Usurp the Crown, these were Sancho and Ferdinand, before-mentioned. Both pleaded that the young King Jaime was not got in lawful Wedlock. Sancho urged against his Competitor, that he was a profess'd Monk, and therefore incapable of Reigning. Ferdinand brought Ramiro for a Precedent, who, tho' ancient, and a Monk, had inherited the Crown, and therefore that Impediment being removed, pretended most Right, as the next of the Collateral Line. Thus was the King∣dom divided into Factions. The least number, but most considerable for Power, stuck to the true King. The Multitude was for the fairest Bidder. Embassadors being sent, as was said above, to Pope Innocent, they were remitted to France, with Orders, that what had been taken from the Hereticks, should be delivered to Simon of Montfort, upon condition he should restore the young King of Aragon to his Subjects. These Commands were punctually obey'd, and the young King conveyed to Narbonne, together with Raymund, Earl of Provence, his Cousin-German, and a Child of the same age, to be bred in Aragon, whilst the Wars lasted in France. At Narbonne many of the Nobility of Aragon received their King with much Joy, and the People wherever he passed, offered up their Vows for his safety. The Child had a Graceful Presence, and was somewhat bigger than is usual at that Age. Montfort returned to prosecute the War. By the Legates procurement, the Cortes, or Parliament was assembled at Lerida, where all that were present, took the Oath of Allegiance to the new King, a thing not before used in Aragon, but continued ever since to this day. William Monredon, Superior of the Templars in that Kingdom, was appointed the King's Tutor, and the chief of the Embassadors that had been sent to the Pope, joyned in Commission with him. Mon∣çon was assigned for the King to keep his Court at, till the Troubles were over, and the King came to Age. At this time Commerce was restored betwixt Zaragoça and Navarre, which had been long interrupted, by reason of the Wars. Sancho, King of Navarre, lay in the Ca∣stle
of Tudela, without attending to the Government, by reason of his great Age and Sick∣ness. Sancho K. of Navarre decrepid. This same Year was fought the famous Battle of Bovines, near Tournay, in Flanders, betwixt Otho, the Emperor, and Philip, King of France. Ferdinand, Prince of Portugal, who had Married the Countess of Flanders, took the Emperor's part, and the Imperialists being defeated, was taken, and continued a long time Prisoner in France. In the Year 1215. the 1215. Aragonians endeavouring to settle the Kingdom, and satisfie Sancho, Earl of Russillon, com∣mitted to him the care of the Government; but he being ambitious of the Crown, made use of his power to raise greater Commotions, as shall be told hereafter. Castile was in no bet∣ter condition. Henry the new King, was but 11 years of age, when he inherited that Crown. Henry I. King of Ca∣stile 11 years of age. His Mother took upon her the Administration of Affairs, but that lasted not long, by reason of her Death. In her Will she appointed her Daughter Berengaria, Queen of Leon, tho' Di∣vorc'd from her Husband, to succeed in the Government, as being a Woman of a Manly Spi∣rit, and in great power, for that when she returned to Castile; her Father gave her the Towns of Valladolid, Munon, Curiel and Santistevan de Gormaz. This Lady not only bore this great Burden, but out of her own Revenue supply'd the wants of the Crown. Her Ver∣tues can never be too much extoll'd, her Prudence, Devotion, Justice, and Care of the Go∣vernment, were not to be parallell'd. Yet multitude of Business, and the love of Retirement, made her uneasie. Some who make their own ends by diving into the Affections of Princes, soon discovered this failing. Particularly, the three Brothers of the Family of Lara, Alva∣ro, Ferdinand and Gonzalo, Sons to D. Nun̄o, Earl of Lara, who being used to Rule, would The House of Lara con∣spires a∣gainst the young K. of Castile. not let slip this opportunity of seizing upon the Government. They valued not the King, as being an Infant, nor his Sister, because she was a Woman. Their resolution was to com∣pass their ends, tho' the means were never so foul. Two things concurred towards forward∣ing their purposes. One was, that a private Man, called Garci Lorenço, a Native of Pla∣sencia, had great Interest with the Lady Berengaria. He being a subtle Fellow, they promis'd him the Town of Tablada, which he much coveted, as a Reward of his good Service, in case he forwarded their Project. The other, was the absence of Roderick, Archbishop of Toledo, who only by his Prudence and Authority, was able to disappoint all these Contrivances. He was gone to Rome, to be present at the Lateran Council assembled by Pope Innocent. Thither Lateran General Council. resorted 412 Prelates, 71 of which were Archbishops, besides the Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople. Those of Antioch and Alexandria, came not themselves, but sent their De∣puties. The number of other Priests, is not to be reckon'd. Many matters of great moment were handled in this Council; but the chief were the renewing the War in the Holy-Land, and quieting France, then embroil'd by the Hereticks. This Council was open'd in the Month of November, and in the Church of S. John Lateran. Among all the Prelates, Roderick, Archbi∣shop of Toledo, signaliz'd himself, making a Latin Speech, so set off with variety of other Languages, that the Fathers in admiration, said, The like had not been heard since the time of the Apostles. Here the Jurisdiction of the Church of Toledo was debated, for that the Archbi∣shops of Taragona, Braga, Santiago and Narbonne, would not acknowledge its Supreme Au∣thority. On the behalf of Toledo were produced Bulls of former Popes, their Determina∣tions, Honours done the Archbi∣shop of Toledo. Decrees of Councils, and many Arguments deduc'd from Antiquity. Much also was said by the other Party, but the case was left undetermin'd, because some of the Parties con∣cern'd, were absent, and it was fit they should be heard. Yet the Pope granted to Roderick the Archbishop, the Legantine Power for ten years; and also, that in case the City Sevil were taken from the Moors, as was hop'd, by reason of the small Power of the Almohades, it should be subject to the Archbishop of Toledo, as its Primate, and no Appeal to lye from this Decree. Besides, he gave him power to Legitimate 300 Bastards, and to place Bishops in all such Towns as should be taken from the Moors. The Archbishop gain'd great Reputation, in that Council, not only for his knowledge in many Languages, but for his extraordinary Learning, not usual in that Age. He writ the History of Spain, another of the Moors, and a Treatise of the Jurisdiction of his Church of Toledo. Touching the Holy-War, it was de∣creed, that all Church-men should contribute towards it, part of their Revenues. With this Subsidy, Recruits were sent over, and the Town of Damiata, in Aegypt taken. As to the Affairs of France, the two Raymund's, Father and Son, Earl's of Toulouze, appear'd in the Council against Simon of Montfort, who had despoil'd them of their Dominions. The Result was, that they were Condemned as Hereticks, and Toulouze, with all other places he had taken, adjudg'd to Simon of Montfort. Whereupon, Montfort did Homage to the King of France for those places, and setled an Alliance with him. Yet not relying on the Fidelity of those People, he caused Toulouze, Carcassonne and Narbonne, to be dismantled, which, toge∣ther with the heavy Taxes he laid on the Subjects, rendred him so odious, that many Towns along the River Rhosne, revolted from him to Raymund the younger, and not long after, he lost the City of Toulouze. Notwithstanding the Decree of the Council, many Nobles of Simon of Montfort killed. France assisted the abandon'd Princes; yet Simon of Montfort had regain'd Toulouze, but that he was unfortunately kill'd before it, by a Stone shot from an Engine. A Man worthy of a longer life for his Valour, and Zeal for Religion. He left two Sons, Aymerick and Simon. Aymerick upon the Death of his Father, raised the Siege, and dispairing of being able to with∣stand all those Princes that joyn'd against him, resign'd his Right to all those Towns, to the King of France, who in return, made him Lord High-Constable. These things fell out three years later than this time. Let us return to the place whence we digress'd.
CHAP. IV. The Family of Lara, take the Government of Castile into their Hands, they commit many insolencies and oppress the Nobility. Young King Henry Marry'd and divorc'd. The King of Aragon escapes from his Keepers. THE Family of Lara, ceased not to Solicite Garci Lorenço as was said before, and he tempted with their promises, undertook to bring about their desires. He only waited The Fami∣ly of Lara seizes the Govern∣ment of Castile in∣to their hands. a fit opportunity, and at length having found one, when the Queen Regent, little thought of any such contrivance, he told her. The burden of the Government was too weighty for a Woman's Shoulders, and withal exaggerated, the difficulties of pleasing where Interests were so different, and affections so various. The Queen who coveted nothing more than her ease, ask'd on whom she might repose that great trust of ruling the Kingdom, and breeding up the King. Then he reply'd, none in the Kingdom so fit as the Family of Lara, being the most powerful, and therefore best able to awe such as should aim at any commotions. This ad∣vice was approved by the Queen, who thereupon assembling the Prelates and Nobles, ask'd their advice, and they either not understanding the drift, or being before secur'd, or else hating the Government of a Woman, agreed that the Queen should resign the Govern∣ment to the Three Brothers of the Family of Lara. Roderick the Archbishop, returning at this time from Rome, lik'd not these proceedings, but the thing was too far gone to be recalled. All he could do, was to oblige those Brothers, to take an Oath, that they would in all things study the interest of the People and Crown, that they would give no Commands Oath the Archbi∣shop ob∣liges 'em to take. without the Queen's Approbation, that they would not make War, nor impose new Taxes, and in fine, that they would bear the respect due to the Queen, as the Daughter, Sister, and Wife of King's. This seemed some security, for their Impartial Administration of the Go∣vernment, but no Bonds can contain Ambitious Spirits. As soon as they were put into Po∣wer, D. Alvaro the eldest of the three Brothers, departed from Burgos, where this Act of Renunciation was perform'd. The first thing he did, was to Banish certain Noblemen, then he seized upon all publick Revenues, and spar'd not those of the Church. From lay Patrons, who had the right of presenting to Benefices, he took that Priviledge, upon pretence of restoring the immunities of the Church. He did all things by open force, without any regard to the Laws, or good of the Publick. His Extravagancies were such, as oblig'd Roderick Dean of Toledo, and the Archbishop's Vicar to Excommunicate him. This check drew him back a little, Alvaro the elder Bro∣ther ex-communi∣cated. and he made some reparation of damages, yet his Mind was not alter'd. He summoned the Cortes, or Parliament to Valladolid, whether resorted for the most part, such as were of his Faction, who in the name of the whole Kingdom, only study'd to secure him the Government. Many of the Nobility were offended, that D. Alvaro should thus Usurp all the Power, Parti∣cularly Lope de Haro, Son to James de Haro, and D. Gonzalo Ruiz Giron, the Lord High-Steward, resented this disorderly proceeding, and having consulted together, had recourse to Queen Berengaria, complaining against her for resigning the Government, and advising to reassume it, before all things were brought to destruction. Their words mov'd the Queen, yet being a Woman, she durst not oppose so great a Power, as theirs was, who had the Command of all the Forces in the Kingdom. Therefore fearing least Violent Councils might produce greater mischiefs, she thought it the best expedient, to put the Three Brothers of Lara, in Mind of the Oath they had taken, when they entred upon the Goverment, which they had much infringed. This Admonition, only served the more to provoke D. Alvaro, who thereupon not only seiz'd upon the Queen's Lands, but Commanded her to depart the Kingdom. The Queen to prevent further mischief, with her Sister Ellenor, retired to the strong Castle of Otella near Palencia. Many of the Nobility declar'd for her, and continued firm, till the He seizes upon the Queens Lands, and Banishes her. Death of the King her Brother. All this tended to an open breach, and to increase the Di∣vision, the Office of High-Steward was taken from D. Gonçalo Giron, and given to Ferdi∣nand de Lara, D. Alvaro's Brother. The King, tho' young, lik'd not these proceedings, and studied how to make his escape to his Sister, but it was in vain, for D. Alvaro kept strict watch upon him. Besides, the more to gain his Favour, he allured him with pleasures, and talk'd of Marrying him. To this purpose, Embassadors were sent to conclude a Match for him, with Malfada, Sister to King Alonso of Portugal. The Nuptials were Celebrated at Palencia. Queen Berengaria, was much concern'd at it, because the King was so Young. Therefore she writ to the Pope, informing him, how near of Kin the Marry'd Couple were. The Pope Young K. Henry Married. upon this information, appointed Tello Bishop of Palencia, and Maurice of Burgos, Commis∣sioners to examine that affair, and in case they found it, as the Queen said, to disannul the Marriage. As soon as the Bishops received the Pope's Bull, they examined the affair, and Is parted from his Wife on account of Consan∣guinity. finding the Kindred to be as had been said, order'd them to be divorc'd. Thus the Bride, still a Virgin, as is believ'd, return'd to Portugal, where in the Monastery of Rucha, built by herself, she spent the rest of her Life, much afflicted, not only for that disgrace, but because D. Alvaro, had presumed to offer to Marry her himself. This in Castile, in the Year of Grace 1216. in which dy'd Pope Innocent III. inferior to few of his Predecessors, for Piety and 1216. Learning. Honorius III. a Native of Rome succeeded him, in whose time dy'd in that Ci∣ty
Mary Queen of Aragon, Mother to King Jaime. Her Body was bury'd in the Vatican, near the Tomb of St. Petronila. In her Will, she recommended her Son and Kingdom to the Pope, as Universal Father. That Kingdom being divided into Factions, and the King be∣ing so Young, stood in need of such Protection, which that Pope afforded it, as long as he liv'd. At this time, Raymund Earl of Provence, being invited by his Subjects, made his escape from the Castle of Monçon, where he was kept as a Prisoner, with the King of Aragon, and getting safe into his Country, appeased many differences that were among the Nobility for want of a Head, every one striving to have a hand in the Government. Thomas, Earl of Maurienne, of the House of Savoy, had a Daughter called Beatrix, who was Marry'd to this Raymund, Earl of Provence. By her he had Four Daughters, three of them Marry'd to Kings, and the fourth to an Emperor. Raymund's Escape was the cause the King of Aragon was set at Liberty. William Monredon, Master of the Templers, fear'd the King might in like man∣ner be taken from him, and then others would reap the benefit of setting him at Liberty, whilst he should undergo the blame of having kept him confin'd. He therefore consulted with Pe∣ter de Açagra Lord of Albaracin, and with Peter Ahones, both Men in great Power, who joyn'd with themselves Aspargus Archbishop of Tarragona, and William of Taraçona. These in the Month of September, resolved to set the King at Liberty, and commit the Government of the Kingdom to him, notwithstanding he was but Nine Year of Age, and took an Oath to bind themselves to the performance hereof. This was not done so privately, but that Sancho the King's Unkle, who then governed the Kingdom, had notice of it, and in a rage, threatned to wash the way the King was to go with Blood. With this resolution, he march'd with a good Body of Men to Selga, a Town on the road, the King was to take. This being The King of Aragon escapes from his Keepers. known affrighted the King, so that tho' in that tender Age, he put on a Coat of Mail, to fight if there were occasion. D. Sancho, tho' he could not have failed of success, there being so small a Number with the King, durst not attack them, and the King having escap'd that danger, went on to Huesca, and thence to Zaragoca. There, and in all places he was recei∣ved with great Joy, all Men hoping his Liberty, would put an end to the publick Calamities. For the establishing of good Order, it was requisite to raise Money, the Revenues being wasted in the late troubles. This want was supply'd by the Catalonians, who raised the Tax called Bovaticum, because it is laid on Oxen and other Cattle. It is rare that this Tax is laid, and notwithstanding King Peter had levy'd it three times, yet it was now granted to his Son Jaime, in the Year of Grace 1217. By these Means a sufficient Fund of Money was 1217. Furnished to supply the King's Wants, and raise Forces to quell any Insurrection. CHAP. V. Great disorders in Castile raised by the Family of Lara. Young King Henry killed by the fall of a Tile. Ferdinand Prince of Leon succeeds, his Mother Berengaria renouncing her right. Orders of S. Dominick, S. Francis, and La Merced instituted. THE Enmity betwixt D. Alvaro de Lara, and Queen Berengaria, put the Kingdom into Confusion, and was the cause that many Murders, Robberies, and other Villanies were Troubles of Castile. committed. D Alvaro added one fraud to the perfecting of all his Projects. The King be∣ing at Maqueda, a Town not far from Toledo, Queen Berengaria, sent a Man privately to ad∣vertise him how affairs stood. D. Alvaro having notice of it, seized the Messenger, and Counterfeiting the Queen's Hand and Seal, produced Letters as from her, directing the King to be Poisoned, and the more to credit his invention, caused the Messenger to be strangl'd. This imposture being known, incensed all Men against D. Alvaro, and the Inhabitants of Ma∣queda had slain him, but that he withdrew with the King to Huete. Thither the Queen again sent one Roderick Gonzales de Valverde, to consult with the King, how he might make his escape to her. This Man also was taken, and sent Prisoner to Alarcon, but was not put to Death, for fear of the People. All the storm fell upon such Nobles as adhered to the Queen. The King kept his Lent at Valladolid, thence D. Alvaro, sent Forces to Besiege Montalegre, where was D. Suero Tellez Giron, a Man of Note, well provided to defend himself. He had two Brothers Ferdiand Ruyz, and Alonso Tellez, that might have relieved him, but would not out of respect to the King. D. Suero, being summon'd in the King's name, tho' he could long have held out, surrendred the Fort. After this the Country was wasted, and the King in Person sate down before Carrion. Thence he moved to Villalva. D. Alonso de They break out into open War. Meneses who held it, being then out of the Town, was forced to make his way in with his Sword, not without danger, being himself wounded, and many of his Servants kill'd. Ne∣vertheless he held out so long, that the King was glad to quit that enterprize, and return to Palencia. At the same time the War was carry'd on against Roderick and Alvaro Cameros, who held the City Calaborra. The King going thither, soon made himself Master of that City, Garci Zapata the Governour, delivering up the Castle to him. After the taking of that City, they Marched against D. Lope de Haro, Lord of Biscay. That Country is Moun∣tainous,
and the People very true to their Lords, for which reason, the War was protract∣ed, and the King return'd home. As soon as the King was gone, D. Lope entred his Terri∣tories as far as Marcanda de Ebro, where Gonzalo, Brother to D. Alvaro, the Governour met him. They came not to a Battle, because Religious Persons interposed. Thus D. Gonzalo went away to the King, and D. Lope to Otella, where the Queen, was not without Apprehen∣sions that the King would Besiege her. There are those who write, that a Marriage was treated of betwixt the King of Castile, and Sancha, the King of Leon's Daughter, by his first Wife, upon condition she should inherit the Crown, excluding Ferdinand, the Son of Queen Berengaria. But it is hard to find out the truth of these Affairs; for the History of those times is no less confuss'd than were the times. In this, Historians agree, that the King be∣ing at play with others of his Age, in the Court of the Bishop's Palace, where he then lay, a Tile falling from the top of the House, broke his Head in such manner, that he dy'd 11 days after, on the 6th of June, in the Year 1217. His Body was afterwards bury'd near his Bro∣ther 1217. Ferdinand, at Huelgas, by Burgos. He liv'd not full 14 years, Reign'd 2, and 9 months. Henry I. the young King of Castile's Death. This same Year the Portugueses took from the Moors a considerable Town, call'd Alcazar de Sal. Matthew, Bishop of Lisbon, was the chief Contriver of this Enterprize, for he raised considerable Forces, and persuaded the Knights Templers to be assisting to him. But the chief Force consisted in 100 Sail of English, French and Flemings, who on their way to the Holy-Land touch'd at Lisbon, and were persuaded by that Bishop to put their hand to the reducing of that Town. A Multitude of Moors from Sevil, Cordova, and other parts, com∣ing to the Relief of that place, was overthrown, and 60000 of them were killed. The Bat∣tle was fought on the 25th of September, and the place taken on the 18th of October. 60000 Moors killed. Blanch and Berengaria Sisters to K. Henry of Castile. Henry, the late King, had two Sisters, both elder than he. These were Blanch, Marry'd to Luis, eldest Son of Philip Augustus, King of France, and Berengaria, who before she was parted from her Husband, Alonso, King of Leon, brought him four Children, to wit, Ferdi∣nand, Alonso. Constance and Berengaria. Blanch was the eldest Sister, and by Right, ought to inherit, had not force, and the hatred of a Stranger taken place of Justice. Many of the Nobility meeting where Queen Berengaria then was, declared, the Crown to apper∣tain to her. It was convenient that all things should be setled, before the King of Ca∣stile's Death came to the Ears of the King of Leon, lest he should pretend to that Crown, in Right of his Wife, tho' parted from her. Accordingly, Embassadors were sent to him, to request he would send his Son Ferdinand, to protect his Mother, which they obtain'd before Berengaria, Heiress to the Crown of Castile resigns her Right to her Son Ferdinand. ever that King had notice of the Death of King Henry. This was the easier to do, for that D. Alvaro de Lara, carry'd the dead Body with him to Tariego, giving out he was still living, and dispatching Business in his Name. Prince Ferdinand being come to Otella, where his Mo∣ther was, she made over her Right to the Crown to him. At Najara, under an Elm-tree, the Ceremony of Proclaiming him King, was perform'd, so little State was used in those times. From Najara, he went to Palencia, designing to take a Progress thro' the Kingdom. That City, at the persuasion of the Bishop, received him with great Joy and Magnificence. Then Ferdinand King of Castile. he went to Duenas, which shut the Gates against him, but the Town being small, and not strong, was entred by force. Here the Nobility began to treat of an Accommodation with the Family of Lara. D. Alvaro was not averse to it; but being used to Rule, he had the presumption to ask to be Tutor to the new King. King Ferdinand was at that time 18 years of age, tho' some say but 16. Thus the posture of Affairs seem'd to threaten a War. The King and Queen went to Valladolid, a great and plentiful Town in Castile, where the Cortes, or Parliament met, and determin'd that Berengaria was the rightful Heiress of the Crown, as had been twice declared whilst her Father lived. So Roderick the Archbishop, who says, she was the eldest Daughter, but other Authors are of another Opinion. The Queen here a∣gain resign'd her Right to the Crown, and her Son was the second time Proclaim'd King, in a great open place, in the Suburbs of that Town. Thence he was carry'd to the Cathedral to take the usual Oath of maintaining the Privileges of the Subjects, and receive Homage of the Nobility. The King of Leon, his Father, offended that he had been so imposed upon, sent before his Brother Sancho, to invade Castile, and followed himself soon after, doing much harm in The King of Leon makes war upon his Son the K. of Castile. the Territory of Campos. Queen Berengaria sent two Bishops to appease him, but to no pur∣pose. D. Alvaro de Laro, seem'd to side with him; whereupon, the King ravag'd the Coun∣try, and was in hopes to have taken Burgos, yet D. Lope de Haro, and others, made him draw back with more speed than he came. Segovia and Avila being before secured by D. Al∣varo, had not submitted to the new King; but now they sent Embassadors to the Queen, ex∣cusing themselves, and promising for the future a constant Fidelity, which they perform'd. Now D. Alvaro consented that the dead King's Body, which till then, he kept at Tarriego, should be bury'd. The Queen and some Bishops accompanied it to Huelgas, where it was interr'd, as was said before. King Ferdinand, at the same time, besieg'd and took Munon, a strong Town, and then went with his Mother to Burgos, to hold the Cortes, or Parliament they had summon∣ed thither. After this, they took Lerma and Lara, all things submitting to the new King, except the Family of Lara and their Party, who had the boldness to take up at Herreruela, a D. Alvaro de Lara ta∣ken by the King, and set at li∣berty. Town in the King's way as he was going to Palencia. Most of his Men quartered in the Town, and he in a Farm hard by. The King's Forces having Intilligence hereof, unexpected∣ly fell upon him, and tho' he endeavoured to defend himself, took him Prisoner. Here an
end might have been put to all the Troubles, but the King thought himself too secure. Thus D. Alvaro having delivered up to the King all the Towns that belong'd to the Crown, was not only set at Liberty, but received into Favour. His Brother Ferdinand refusing to deliver Castroxoriz and Orejon, was permitted to hold them as the King's Lieutenant. This Peace was not lasting, for those Men being used to Rule, could not be content with a private Life, but gathering Forces, spoiled the Country of Campos. King Ferdinand soon drove them out of his Dominions, and they fled to Leon, where they stirr'd up that King, who was prepa∣ring for it, to Invade Castile. Some Gentlemen of Castile broke into Leon, and that King coming down, Besieged them in Castellon, betwixt Salamanca and Medina del Campo. Men flocking on the one side to relieve, and on the other, to press the Besieged, at last a Treaty was set on foot, and a Truce concluded betwixt the Father and Son. D. Alvaro de Lara, D. Alvaro, D. Ferdi∣nand de La∣ra, their Death. being at that time sick, caused himself to be carry'd on Mens Shoulders to the City Toro, and there dy'd, having at the time of his Death taken the Habit of Santiago, as was then used, to obtain the Indulgencies granted to that Order. He was bury'd at Ʋcles, the head Monastery of that Order. His Brother Ferdinand, who had fled to Africk, liv'd in a Town called El∣bora, near Morocco, where he also ended his days, having taken the Habit of S. John. The Death of these turbulent Men raised the hopes of all Men, that a lasting Peace might now be concluded with Leon. Thus all were bent upon carrying on the Wars against the Moors; the Pope granted Indulgencies, great numbers of Men were raised, rather in hopes of Plunder, than to get any Pardon of their Sins. They ransack'd all Estremadura, and laid Siege to Ca∣çeres, but were forc'd to quit it, by reason of the great Rains, which oblig'd them to break up, and go into quarters, in the Year of our Lord 1218. Whilst these Confusions reigned in Spain, the neighbouring Countries were no less consum∣ed 1218. with intestine Broils. War is the Nursery of all sort of Vices, which now, consequently The Or∣der of S. Dominick and la Mar∣ced, for Re∣demption of Cap∣tives in∣stituted. were at their full growth. In the midst of this darkness, God enlightned the World with the example of many virtuous Men, who taught the way to Salvation. Neither wanted there many that followed them. Among them all, one of the chiefest, was the Holy Father S. Do∣minick, born at Caleruela, betwixt Osma and Aranda. He was first a Canon Regular, then la∣boured much to root out the Heresie of the Albigenses, as was said before, and Instituted the Holy Order of Preaching, confirmed by Pope Honorius. He Founded several Monasteries in Spain, and returning into Italy, dy'd at Bolonia. The same Year another Order was Institu∣ted in Spain, called de la Merced. It was first thought of by Jaime, King of Aragon, and perfected by Peter Nolascus, a Frenchman. This Order was Instituted for the Redemption of Captives. Their Habit is white, as also their Hood; on the former, the Arms of Aragon, and a Cross in a red Field. Next was S. Francis, born at Assis in Italy, Founder of the Or∣der of his Name, and S. Anthony of Padua, of the same Order. In Castile, the War was re∣newed S. Francis of Assis. against the Moors, at the instance of Roderick, Archbishop of Toledo. 200000 Men were gathered in the Year 1219. They plundred the Country, took some Places of no note, and laid Siege to Requena, but were forc'd to quit it. In fine, the Success was not answer∣able to the Preparations, for only a rich Booty was taken, and the Army dismiss'd. CHAP. VI. The Marriages of two Kings, Ferdinand of Castile, and Jayme of Aragon, King Ferdinand quells many Commotions. Death of the Kings of France and Portugal. THIS Year of our Lord 1219. there hap'ned a great Famine and Mortality in Spain. 1219. At the same time Jayme, King of Aragon, was about removing his Uncle Sancho from Civil Broils in Aragon. the Government, but upon his promise of acting better for the future, forgave him. The King, tho' but 11 Years of Age, began to give tokens of Valour, and take delight in Arms, and Martial Affairs. One Roderick de Lizana, a Man in great Power, was at variance with a Kinsman of his own, called Lope Albero, and of great Friends, they were become mortal Ene∣mies. Roderick watching his opportunity, seizes his Adversary, and carries him Prisoner to his Castle of Lizana. The King commanded him to use no further Violence, but be content with what he had done, but he refused to obey. This so offended the King, that gathering a Body of Men at Huesca, he marched to Albero, a Town Lizana had possess'd himself of, and in two days recover'd it. Thence he came before the Castle of Lizana, the Patrimony of that rebellious Gentleman; and because the Garison refused to surrender, caused a famous En∣gine to be brought from Huesca, which would cast 1500 Stones in 24 Hours. With this the Wall was shaken, many Men killed, and the Garison obliged to surrender. Albero was re∣stored to his liberty, and his Adversary having lost the Castle, fled to Albaracin, where Pe∣ter Fernandez de Açagra was his great Friend. Thence having according to the Custom of those times, in Writing, Renounced his Country and Allegiance, he infested the Borders of Aragon. The King flush'd with his former Success, marched to Albarazin, a small, but very strong Place, being encompassed with Rocks, and almost surrounded by the River Turia,
commonly called Guadalaviar. Two Months in the heat of Summer, the King lay before it, and was forced at last to raise the Siege. Nevertheless, Peter Fernandez de Açagra, was soon after restored to the Kings favour. All the Nobility interceded for him, his own Services were a great recommendation, and the King was willing to gain so considerable a Man. These things were done in Aragon, in the Year 1220. In Castile the same Year, on S. 1220. Andrew's Day, the Marriage of King Ferdinand, with Beatrix, Daughter to the late Empe∣ror Ferdinand of Castile Marries Beatrix Daughter to the Em∣peror Philip. Philip, was Celebrated. Embassadors had been sent to Treat of this match, to the Em∣peror, Frederick II. after four Months delay it was concluded. In France the Bride was en∣tertained by King Philip with great Liberality. Queen Berengaria, went as far as the Bor∣ders of Biscay, to receive her, and at the end of a whole Year spent in this Negotiation, they all arrived at Burgos, the place appointed for this Solemnity. Maurice Bishop of that City perform'd the Ceremony, and the day before had said Mass in his Pontificalibus, during which the King Knighted himself, there being none worthy to perform that Act, as was the Custom of those times. This match prov'd fortunate in a numerous Issue, for they had Se∣ven Children, viz. Alonso, Ferderick, Philip, Sancho, Emanuel, Ellenor who dy'd Young, and Berengaria who was a Nun, in the Monastery of Huelgas near Burgos. At the same time His Issue. the Aragonians, desiring to secure the Succession of the Crown, sent Embassadors to Queen Berengaria, to Treat of a match betwixt their King, and her Sister Ellenor. This Proposal being very advantagious to her, was easily accepted, and the Town of Agreda, on the Bor∣dors of Castile and Aragon, appointed to Celebrate the Nuptials. Queen Berengaria came first with her Sister, and soon after King Jaime, with a Noble retinue. The Marriage was Jaime K. of Aragon Marries Ellenor of Castile. Celebrated in the Year 1221. yet the Bride, the King being yet very young, continued a Maid a year and half after, as he himself relates in the History, he writ of his own Life. On the 20th of June, Roderick Archbishop of Toledo, consecrated the Church of S. Romanus, in the highest part of that City. Upon the 23d of November, was born King Ferdinand's Eldest 1221. Son, called Alonso. About the beginning of December, a great Earthquake shook many Build∣ings, and mighty Floods, and Winds following upon it, part of the Walls, and many Houses Earth∣quakes, Floods and Storms fell down. These things were the more terrible, because the City being high, and built upon Rocks, seem'd the safer against such disasters. Navarre, Portugal, and Leon, now enjoy'd Peace. The Moors wasted themselves with Civil Wars. In Castile and Aragon, there were some Commotions, but not considerable. Commo∣tions in Castile. Roderick Lord of Cameros, a Man in great Power, confiding in his strength, presum'd to pillage the Country about him. Being summon'd by the King, to Answer for himself, he Answer'd, he had taken the Cross, in Order to go to the War in the Holy-Land. This was a common excuse in those times, the Pope's among other priviledges, having granted, that such as wore the Cross, should not be Try'd before the Civil Magistrate, but in the Spiritual Courts. But that shift availed him nothing, for he was constrained to appear at Valladolid, whither the Court was remov'd from Burgos, and being accused of many Crimes, he fled. He was attainted, and his Estate Confiscated. Yet being a resolute Man, he fortified him∣self, in the strong holds he had, wherefore to prevent a War, he was not only Pardon'd, but 14000 Duccats given him, to quit those Towns he held for the King. After this follow'd Two seve∣ral Rebel∣lons quel'd another revolt. D. Gonzalo Nunez de Lara, who only remained of the Three Brothers, perswaded D. Gonçalo Perez Lord of Molina, to invade the Neighbouring Country about him, hoping by these troubles to be restor'd to his Country, for he was in Barbary, ever since the Death of his Brother Ferdinand, having gone thither with him. Some action there was, but not considerable, for the Lord of Molina, perceiving the danger he was in, begg'd par∣don, and obtain'd it, through the intercession of Queen Berengaria. Thus D. Gonzalo de Lara despairing of succeess, went into Andaluzia, where among the Moors, at Baeça he end∣ed his Days, neither Godly nor Honourably. Such was the end of those Three Brothers, from whom is descended the Family of Manriquez, well known in Spain. It was now the Year 1222. when the King of Leon, gathering a great Army, as well of Soldiers in pay, as those 1222. who taking the Cross, served upon their own expence, entred Estremadura, and laid Siege to Caceres. The Moors to raise the Siege, promised a great sum of Money, they expected out of Africk, but having obtained their ends, performed not, and we were not in a Con∣dition then to force them. About this time Maurice an Englishman, and Bishop of Burgos, laid the Foundation of the Cathedral of that City, and finish'd it. Many other Churches, Cathedral of Burgos built by an English∣man. Other structures. and Stately Buildings were erected in several parts of Spain. Eleven Years before this, we now write of Roderick Archbishop of Toledo, built the great Church of Talavera. D. John Chancellor to the King, erected two Churches, one at Valladolid, and the other at Osma, when he was Bishop of that See. D. Nun̄o Bishop of Astorga, raised the Bishop's Palace in that City. D. Laurence Bishop of Orense, built a Bridge over the River Min̄o, the Cathe∣dral and Episcopal Palace. Stephen Bishop of Tuy, and Martin of Zamora, spent their Re∣venues in such like works. The King and the Queen his Mother, Liberally adorned those Churches, and by their example stirred up the Prelates, to lay out the profits of their Bene∣fices in the Service of the Church. Let us return to the Course of the History. In July dy'd Roger Earl of Faux, his Son Roger Bernard succeeded him. In August following, Raymund Earl of Toulouze, departed this Life, both favourers of the Heresie of the Albigenses, and there∣fore excommunicated, for which reason the Son and Heir to the Earl of Toulouze, could never ob∣tain
leave to bury his Father's Body in hollow'd ground. In Aragon, the King on the 21th Affairs of Aragon. of December, pardoned Gerard Viscount Cabrera, who during the troubles, had possessed himself by force of the Earldom of Ʋrgel, spoiling Aurembiasse of the Patrimony left him, by his Father Armengaud. This was done upon Condition, he should stand to the Judgment, that should be given betwixt that Lady and him. Sancho Earl of Russillon, the King's Unkle, was still Living. His Son Nun̄o governed that Country, with whom William of Moncada, Lord of Bearn, tho' they were before great Friends, being offended, he entred the Lands of Russillon, doing great harm. Nun̄o not able to oppose him, had recourse to the King of Aragon, of∣fering to stand to Arbitration, and make reparation of any damage should be laid to his charge. The King warn'd Mancada to forbear violence, and stand to judgment, and he refusing, invaded his Lands so furiously, that he took from him 130 Towers and Castles, and the Town of Cervellon near Barcelona. The Castle of Moncada being strongly fortified, and William himself in it, could not be so easily carry'd. Thus much in the Year 1223. 1223. in which on the 15th of July dy'd Philip King of France at Medun. His Son Luis VIII. Hus∣band Death of the Kings of France and Portu∣gal. to Blanch of Castile, and Father to S. Luis succeeded him. The Year following, Alonso II. Sirnamed, the Fat King of Portugal, deceased at Coimbra, and was buryed in the Mona∣stery of Alcobaça, near his Wife D. Ʋrraca, in a mean Tomb, as was used in those days. He left Three Sons, Sancho, Sirnamed Capelo, his Successor, Alonso who Marry'd Maud Coun∣tess of Bologne in France, and Ferdinand Lord of Serpa, who Marry'd Sancha, the Daughter of Ferdinand de Lara. He also left one Daughter called Ellenor, Marryed to the King of Dacia, as the Histories of Portugal say, I will not dispute the truth of it. CHAP. VII. King Ferdinand of Castile, his great success against the Moors. King Jaime of Aragon seized, by some Rebellious Nobles, makes his escape, and Commences War against the Rebels. THE Tumults in Castile being over, King Ferdinand granted a general Pardon. He chose the Wisest and most Virtuous Persons, to commit the Government of the Cities Ferdinand of Castile makes War up∣on the Moors. to, and was a mortal Enemy to Hereticks, for some of the Albigenses, had crept into Spain. These good qualities had gained him the Love of his Subjects, and he to improve it, resolved to make War upon the Moors. The People of Cuenca, Huete, Moya, and Alarcon under∣standing his design, Assembl'd together, and entring the Kingdom of Valencia, brought thence a rich Booty. On the other side, the King marched towards Andaluzia, and when he had passed Sierra Morena Embassadors met him, from Mahomet King of Baeça, offering to surrender the City, and furnish Provisions, and Money. Having signed Articles, the Army moved to Quesada, a Town of note, now in the Government of Caçorla. At first the Inhabitants, relying on the strength of their Walls, defended themselves, but the place was taken by Assault, all that could bear Arms put to the Sword, and the rest to the number of 7000 made Slaves. This slaughter was a Terror to others. It were tedious to relate the particulars of this expedition. In short, many Towns were abandoned by the Moors, many A Prospe∣rous Ex∣pedition. surrended. Of them some were destroyed, others Garrisoned. D. Lope de Haro, and the Masters of the Military Orders, attacked a Town called Mivoras, and took it, notwithstanding it had a Garrison of 1500 Arabs, whereof part was slain, the rest fled. Thus the Summer and Autumn were spent, and in November the Season growing bad, they returned to To∣ledo, where the Queens waited the coming of the King, in the Year of our Lord 1224. Some days were spent in Publick Rejoycing and Thanksgiving, after which, as soon as the Wea∣ther 1224. would permit, the King Ordered the Army to march towards Cuenca, designing to in∣vade the Kingdom of Valenca. Zeit, the King of that place, terrified with his former losses, came to Cuenca, submitting himself to the Will of King Ferdinand. The Aragonians pretending Valencia, fell within the Limits of their Conquest, sent Embassadors to complain, and at the same time to show their resolution, made an inroad into Castile, by the way of Soria. New troubles arising in Aragon, they could not then push on that undertaking. William of A Conspi∣racy a∣gainst Jaime K. of Aragon. Moncada, Peter Ahones, and Ferdinand, the Kings Unkle, had a consultation at Tahuste, where it was resolved to seize the King's Person, on pretence of removing evil Councellors, but in reality to make their own advantage of him. Moncada was offended for the Lands he had lost, Ferdinand, tho' a Monk, still aspired to the Crown, and Ahones could not bear to be removed from the Government. To strengthen their party, they resolv'd to gain Nun̄o, Son to Prince Sancho Earl of Russillon. All things being thus. Order'd, they went to Aragon, where the King was, and coming together upon him, advised him to go to Zaragoca, there to settle the important affairs of the Kingdom. The King, tho' he saw into their drift, was ob∣liged to condescend. They conducted him to his Palace at Zaragoça, and plac'd Guards upon The King seized. him, that he might converse with, nor write to no Body. William Boy, and Peter Sanchez Martel, were Captains of this Guard, and for the greater security, lay at Night by the King's Bed-side. In this manner, they kept him 20 days, till he condescended to all their demands.
Particularly, he caused all that had been taken from William de Moncada, to be restored, and promised to pay him 20000 Ducats for Damages. Prince Ferdinand still kept the Govern∣ment in his hands, and the King had no hopes of Relief, but in God. In Castile all things succeeded prosperously. In the Year 1225. as soon as Summer came on, King Ferdinand hav∣ing 1225. recruited his Army, entred Andaluzia. The King of Baeça relieved them with Provisi∣ons, Success of the Casti∣lians. and received them into the City. Andujar and Martos were taken, the last was given to the Knights of Calatrava. Besides, the Town of Jodar was gain'd, and the Army return'd home loden with Plunder. The same was continued the following years. The Affairs of Aragon began to mend, and the King departed from Zaragoça towards Tortosa, a City at the Mouth of Ebro. He resolved to rid himself and the Kingdom of that Oppression; and The King of Aragon escapes, and in∣vades Va∣lencia. therefore privately made his escape to Huerta, a Town belonging to the Knights Templers. Thence he sent Circular Letters to summon the Nobility to the City Teruel, in order to In∣vade Valencia. They look'd upon this as a Childish heat; yet some few Aragonians, and more Catalonians, came at the day appointed. With this small Body he broke in on that side where were before the Ilergaones, and sate down before Peniscola, a strong place on a Rock, opposite to Majorca. Zeit, the King, was so terrified, that he sent to beg Peace, and agreed to pay the fifth part of the Revenues of Valencia and Murcia. This done, the Aragonians re∣turn'd to Tervel, and thence to Zaragoça. By the way, at a Village called Calamocha, they met D. Peter de Ahones, and his Brother the Bishop, leading a Party, raised at their own cost, to make an Incursion into Valencia. The King would not have him proceed, because of the Peace he had made with the Moors; but Ahones excused himself with the charge he had Kills the Rebel Pe∣ter Ahones. been at in raising those Men. Whereupon, the King endeavouring to have him apprehend∣ed, he was killed by the Soldiers. His death was so grievously resented, that except Cala∣tayud, which continued Loyal to the King, all the other Cities declared for his Uncle Ferdi∣nand. Fair means failing, the War broke out, and was continued in the Year 1226. This 1226. same Year Luis, King of France, made War upon the Albigenses, and having taken Avigron from them, dismantled it, that they might have no shelter there. He dy'd in November fol∣lowing, at Montpelier. The Dominion of the Moors in Spain was now going to decay, and King Ferdinand being Towns ta∣ken by the Castilians. sensible of it, resolved to push on its ruin. Therefore he invaded their Teritories, took some small places, and Besieged Jaen, but could not take it, because, besides a strong Garison of Infidels, Alvaro Perez de Castro, having renounced his Country and Allegiance, was within with 160 perfidious Christians that followed him. This Alvaro, was Son to Ferdinand de Castro, who dy'd at Morocco. Thence the King removed to Priego, a Town so strong, that the Moors had carried all their Goods thither for security. Yet it was taken by Assault, and all within put to the Sword, except a few, who retired to the Castle, and Capitulated to march away. Next, he sate down before Loxa, which was also taken by Storm, as was the Castle, all the Inhabitants slain, and the Walls demolished for a terror to other places. This had so good effect, that the People of Alhambra, a strong place, not far from Granada, aban∣doned it, and fled to that City, leaving much Provision, and part of their Goods behind 'em. These People were assigned the upper part of the City to inhabit, and from them it was cal∣led Alhambra, or as some will have it, from the red Earth so named in Arabick. Our Forces pursued then to the City, destroying all the Gardens and Orchards about it. This boldness so terrified the Town, that they sent to sue for Peace, which was granted them, they setting at liberty 1300 Christian Captives. D. Alvaro de Castro, who was one of their Embassadors, was here reconciled to the King. This done, the King took and raz'd Montejo, as not Te∣nable, being too remote. We also find Capilla, a Town in Estremadura, was now taken, but it soon after fell again into the hands of the Moors. Summer being spent, the King re∣turned to Toledo, leaving the guard of the Frontiers, to the Master of Calatrava, and Alvaro Perez de Castro. Those Soldiers that remain'd in the Garisons of Andaluzia, plundred and burnt all that Country even to the Walls of Sevil. Abuli, King of that City, marched out Defeat of the Moors. with a great Force to oppose them, but was routed, and 20000 of his Men killed. Neverthe∣less, the Moors took the Castle of Garces. When King Ferdinand, after the Winter was o∣ver, marched again into Andaluzia; the King of Baeça, met him with 3000 Horse, and a great Body of Foot, offering his Service. He granted that Christian Garisons should be put into Salvatierra, Capilla and Burgalhemar, and delivered up the Castle of Baeça, to be held by the Master of Calatrava. Capilla being a strong Town, the Inhabitants would not receive the Garison, and therefore King Ferdinand laid Siege to it. He had but a small Army, and there∣fore, leaving it there, went himself to raise more Forces. Being in doubt whether to carry on the War in Andaluzia, or march into France to the Relief of his Aunt, Queen Blanch, who was slighted by the Nobility because the King, her Son, was very young; two things hap∣pen'd that made him lay aside all thoughts of moving towards France. One, That his Army had taken Capilla, and it was requisite to secure it. The other, That his own People killed the King of Baeça, because he was so great a Friend to the Christians, and thereby the Gari∣son in that Castle was in danger. All these things were acting in the Year 1227. in which 1227. the Foundation of the Cathedral of Toledo was also laid. Other Churches may exceed this in Grandeur of Building, but none in Christendom can equal it in costly Ornaments, and great∣ness of Revenue. On the 18th of July dy'd Pope Honorius III. Gregory IX. succeeded him.
At this time flourished D. Lucas, Bishop of Tuy, famous for Virtue and Learning. He writ D. Lucas, Bishop of Tuy, a fa∣mous Writer. a History of Spain, the Life of S. Isidorus, and a great Book of Miracles, in which, he also confutes the Errors of the Albigenses. He composed these Books, as he himself testifies, by order of Queen Berengaria, a very devout Lady, and great favourer of Virtuous and Learned Men. Thus it appears those Hereticks had at that time crept into Spain. CHAP. VIII. The War with the Moors renewed. The Island of Majorca Conquered by the Aragoni∣ans. The Pope's Legate disanuls the Marriage of King Jayme, on account of Con∣sanguinity. Raymund, Earl of Toulouze, a Heretick reduc'd. THE Citizens of Baeça Besieged the Castle, which, as has been said, was in the hands War re∣new'd with the Moors by King Ferdinand of Castile. of the Christians. They, tho' few in number, being furnished with Provisions, held out till King Ferdinand coming with a great Army, the Moors not only raised the Siege, but abandoning the City, retired further into Andaluzia. D. Lope de Haro for his good Service, was appointed Governour of that City. Martos was given in charge to Alvaro Perez de Ca∣stro, and Tello de Meneses. Nothing more of note was done this Campaign. After the King's return to Toledo, D. Tello with the Forces under his Command, made an Incursion as far as Se∣vil. To divert him, and at the Sollicitation of the Moors that abandoned Baeça, the King of Sevil advanced as far as that City, but finding he had not a Force to make head against the Christians, he concluded a Peace, promising to pay 300000 Maravedis yearly. The Moors of Murcia proclaimed one Abenhut, of the Blood Royal of Zaragoça, and an utter Enemy to the Almohades, their King. A vast number of People resorted to him, he palliating his Ambition with Religion, and giving out, that all the losses sustained, were a punishment for the new Opinions introduc'd by the Almohades. This was the posture of Af∣fairs in Spain, in the Year 1228. In France, this same Year, Raymund, Earl of Toulouze, being Raymund, Eael of Tou∣louze, a He∣tick redu∣ced. hard pressed by King Luis, was reconciled to the Church, and obtained Peace upon those con∣ditions, That he should labour to extirpate the Heresie of the Albigenses. That his Daugh∣ter should Marry one of the King's Brothers. That if he dy'd without Issue, the Earldom of Toulouze should be annex'd to the Crown of France. That he should maintain at his cost a College for Instruction of his People, and that he should serve five years in the Holy-Land. For security of performance, he deliver'd up to the King five Castles, and his Daughter. Now dy'd in Spain among other Persons of note, D. Ramiro, Bishop of Pamplona, of the Blood Royal of Navarre. Peter Ramirez succeeded him, in whose time Pope Gregory IX. took that Church and its Prelates under his Protection, which was the same as exempting 'em from the Jurisdiction of the Spanish Metropolitans. In Aragon, the King by Policy reduc'd the factious Nobility. His Uncle Ferdinand, he again took into favour, upon condition he Pacifica∣tion in Aragon. should promise that the Conspirators would quit the Engagements they had made to one ano∣ther. D. Sancho, Bishop of Zaragoça, press'd to have those Towns that belong'd to his Bro∣ther Peter de Ahones, and had been seized by the King when he was kill'd, restored to him. It was agreed to stand to Judgment, and the Result was, that such places as he held as the King's Lieutenant, should remain to the King; but what was his own by Inheritance, should be restored to the Bishop. Thus call Animosities seem'd to cease, but that the Family of Cabrera was not yet quell'd. Aurembiasse, the Daughter of Armengaud, Earl of Ʋrgel, de∣manded to be restored to her Father's Dominions, according to sentence of Law. Those Gentlemen being in possession, made no account of that Lady; but the King who protected her, by force of Arms recover'd many Towns, and among them Balaguer, the head of that Earldom. This done, he Married that Lady to Prince Peter of Portugal, his Father's Cousin-German, who at that time was in Aragon, having fled from his own Country. Gerard Cabrera, who lost the Earldom, took the Habit of the Templers. Some years after, his Son Ponce re∣covered the Earldom of Ʋrgel, the Lady Aurembiasse dying without Issue. Both Castile and Aragon, at one time made War upon the Moors. The Aragonians advan∣ced their Affairs much, but the Castilians at present, made no great progress. Abenhut, the new King of the Moors, being possess'd of the Noble City of Granada, was an Eye-sore to King Ferdinand, who marched with his Army up to the Walls of that City, and even as far as Almeria. Yet nothing of moment was done, for the Moors would not hazard a Battle. Thus this, and the following Year 1229. were spent. At this time the Knights of the Toutonick Or∣der, 1229. The Con∣quest Majorca re∣solved up∣on by the King of Aragon. who had served well in the Holy-Land, having lost Ptolemais, return'd into Germany, and setled in Prussia, where they grew so strong, as to Conquer Livonia, where they main∣tain'd themselves many years. Let us return to Aragon, where the King having appeased all Tumults, now bent his thoughts upon carrying on the War against the Infidels. It hap'ned one Peter Martelle invited the King to Dinner. The Windows of his House look'd upon the Sea, and thence, the Island of Majorca was in sight. This gave occasion to discourse of that and the adjacent Islands, and Peter Martelle much commended their Fruitfulness, and magni∣fied the damage done from thence on the Coasts of Catalonia. But a few days before, those Moors had taken some Vessels of the Catalonians and Retabohihes, the Moor that took them,
when Restitution was demanded in the Name of Jayme, King of Aragon, proudly answer'd, What King is that you speak of? The Embassador reply'd, He is Son to that King of A ragon, Insolency of a Moor. who at Nabas de Tolosa, overthrew a mighty Army of your Nation. These Words so incens'd the Moor, that he scarce forbore offering Violence to the Embassador; yet caused him imme∣diately to depart the Island. This mov'd the King to undertake that War, and in order to it, held the Cortes, or Parliament, at Barcelona, where his design met with such Approbati∣on, that they again gave him the Tax called Bovaticum, which used to be given but once in a Reign. He sent out his Orders for all the Forces to Rendezvous by the middle of May, at Salu, near Tarragona, where the Fleet was fitting, and all Provision making to pass over to Majorca. At this time, John, Cardinalof S. Sabina, came as the Pope's Legate to Aragon; the King went to meet him at Calatayud. Thither resorted Zeit, King of Valencia, expelled his Kingdom by a Moor, called Zaen. His love to the Christians, and a report that he de∣sign'd Pope's Legate in Aragon. to be Converted, brought this disaster upon him, for which reasons the King resolv'd to protect and restore him, which he afterwards perform'd. The Legate's Business was to examine whether the Marriage of the King were valid; tho' he had then a Son by the Queen, it was declared null, by reason of Consanguinity, ye so, that the Son should inherit the Crown. The Queen went away to her Sister Berengaria, yet her Jointure was not taken away, and she carry'd with her many Jewels and other Riches. After this, the King went to Tar∣ragona, where he spent the Summer, preparing all things for the Enterprize in hand. All Necessaries being in a readiness, he set Sail in September. His Fleet consisted of 135 Vessels, whereof 25 great Ships, 12 Galleys, the rest Brigantines and small Vessels, to carry Horses. The Land Forces were 15000 Foot, and 1500 Horse. In sight of Majorca, a sudden Storm put the whole Fleet in great danger, but that ceasing, they arrived all in safety. Majorca is Majorca described. square, the four Angles pointing to the four parts of the World. In the West side, is the Port Palumbaria, and opposite to it, the Island Dragonera. Cape Salinas looks towards the South, and in the mid-way betwixt it and the Port, is seated the principal City, called as well as the Island, Majorca. The Capes Piedra and S. Vincent, point to the East and North. Near Cape Piedra, is a small Town, but safe Harbour, called Palencia, formerly a Roman Co∣lony. The King would have entred this Port, but the contrary Winds forc'd him to Palum∣baria, 30 Miles distant from that City. The Admiral Galley, in which the King was, en∣tred the Port first, and after it, all the Fleet, not one Vessel being lost. A Multitude of Moors opposed their landing, which oblig'd them to pass on to the Port S. Poncia, where, notwithstanding all resistance, they gain'd the Shore. Some Skirmishes hap'ned, in which, the Christians had always the better, and therefore they marched towards the City, which King Jayme lands on it being once taken, the rest of the Island would soon be reduc'd. The Moorish King encamp'd on Mount Portopi, in sight of the City, with a great Body of Men, and laid an Ambush a∣mong the Rocks and Woods. His design took effect, the Christians marching as if no Enemy had been near, and the Moors seeing them in disorder, charg'd furiously. Among many o∣thers, William de Moncada, Viscount of Bearn, and Raymund de Moncada, two Men of great Note, were kill'd, being in the Van. Great numbers of Moors came down from the Hill to second their Companions, and the Christians were in great danger, but the King's Valour and Fortune, overcame all difficulties. His Men encouraged by his example, put the Infidels to flight, and forc'd their Camp, yet pursu'd no farther, because the City was near. They Encamp'd in sight of it, and immediately fell to work, fixing their Engines, and making their The Ara∣gonians rout the Majorcans. approaches. The Ditch, tho' very deep and wide, was soon fill'd. Many Sallies were made by the Moors, but for the most part, they return'd with loss. At length the Christians lodg'd themselves under the Wall, and undermin'd four Towers, which they propped with Timber, then setting Fire to it, all those Towers fell, and left a wide Breach. This mov'd the Inhabitants to treat of a Surrender, upon condition, to be transported into Africk with their Goods. Some were for admitting this offer, others cry'd out for Revenge of so many Gentlemen as had been lost. Dispair made the Infidels furious, insomuch, that many on our side repented they had opposed their Surrender. An Assault must be given, and many ad∣vised to do it by Night; but the King to avoid the confusion that is common in the dark, drew out by break of day, in order to storm, causing all the Avenues to be guarded, that none of the Enemy might escape. Three times the Sign was given to fall on, and the Soldi∣ers stirred not, till the King calling upon them, as it were wak'd them out of a heavy sleep. Then with a terrible shout they gave the Assault. The Moors with great Courage ran to meet the Danger, but being over-power'd and born down, the City was entred, and plundred, and Majorca taken by Storm. the People put to the Sword. The Moorish King was drawn out from a private place, where he lay hid, and King Jayme took him by the Beard, having sworn so to do, yet comforted him with good words and promises. After taking the City, the Castle soon surrendred, where was found a Son of the King's 13 years of age, who was afterwards Baptiz'd by the Name of D. Jayme, and had an Estate given him, which was the Town of Gotor, in the King∣dom of Valencia, whence his Successors, Gentlemen of Note in that Country, take their Name. Majorca was taken on the last day of December preceeding the Year 1230. This City was 1230. made an Episcopal See, notwithstanding the Canons of Barcelona pretended a Right to it, but could make no good proof. All the rest of the Island was easily brought under, which done, most of the Soldiers return'd home, and the King to Catalonia. This Year the Order
of Mercela, Instituted some time before, was Confirm'd by Pope Gregory IX. as appears by his Bull dated at Peroza, in Tuscany, the 17th of January. CHAP. IX. Alonso, King of Leon, Defeats the Moors, takes Merida and Badajoz, and dies. Crowns of Castile and Leon united under Ferdinand. Sancho, King of Navarre, dies, Theobald succeeds him. Interviews of several Kings. WHilst the Forces of Aragon Conquer'd Majorca, Alonso King of Leon again Alonso King of Leon, over∣throws the Moors, and takes Merida and Bada∣joz. entred the Territories of the Moors, and took the Town of Caçeres, in Estre∣madura, where he had before been repulsed. This Success encouraged him to Be∣siege Merida, a great City, once the chiefest in those parts. Abenhut, the Moorish King, thinking to establish a Reputation, marched to relieve that place. King Alonso was much in∣feriour to him in number, and therefore being dubious what was best to be done, he held a Council of War, in which, most were for drawing off. Yet Honour prevailing, the King resolved to give Battle, and accordingly drew up his Army. The Moors were not backward, and the Signal being given, both Parties charged with great resolution. Long the Fight continued very bloody, but at length, the Valour of the Christians overcame the number of Infidels. This Victory and Slaughter, were so great, that many of the neighbouring Towns were abandon'd by the Inhabitants. It was reported, that the Apostle S. James, and other Saints, were seen in this Fight encouraging the Christians; as also that at Zamora, S. Isidorus, and others, had appeared, as preparing to go aid the Faithful. But who can assert the truth of this? Great Victories often cause any sort of Miracles to be believed. After this Defeat, no other hopes of relief remaining, Merida was surrendred. Badajoz, a City on the Borders of Portugal, Estremadura and Andaluzia, also submitted. King Alonso, who was the ninth of that Name, the Season being unfit for Action, dismissed his Army, resolving as soon as the Weather would permit, to carry on the War with greater Forces. Death prevented his The death of Alonso I. King of Leon. Designs, which cut him off at Sarria, about the end of this Year, as he was going to pay his Vows at Santiago. His Body was bury'd in that Church. By D. Teresa, his first Wife, he had two Daughters, Sancha and Dulcis; by Queen Berengaria, he left Ferdinand, already King of Castile, and Alonso, Lord of Molina, and Berengaria, Marry'd to John, King of Je∣rusalem. He had besides, a Bastard, Son, call'd Roderick de Leon. He Reign'd 42 years, was Valiant in War, and a great Lover of Justice; wherefore he assigned Salaries to the Judges, that they might take no Bribes, and punished them severely, if faulty. His hatred to his Son Ferdinand was such, that in his Will he appointed his two Daughters to succeed him. King Ferdinand had Besieged Jaen, and not being able to carry it, was remov'd to Daralherça, where the News of his Fathers's Death was brought to him. He was very intent upon the War of Andaluzia; but the necessity of securing the Crown of Leon, drew him away. At Orgaz, five League from Toledo, his Mother met him, and they resolv'd with all speed to move towards Leon. All things there prov'd easier than had been imagined. Most places received him with great Joy and Tokens of Love. He was Crown'd at Toro, which had first Union of the Crowns of Castile and Leon. by Letters sent to invite him. Some great Men sided with the Princesses, which might have proved of dangerous Consequence, had not the Prelates interposed, and reduc'd them to sub∣mit to him, who had the most right. Teresa, Mother to the Princesses, came out of Portu∣gal to their aid, but considering it was best to compound with her Son-in-law, she met Queen Berengaria at Valencia, in Galicia, where it was agreed the Princesses should quit their claim to the Crown, and in lieu thereof, the King should allow them 30000 Ducats a year for Life. This done, the King set forwards towards Valencia, by the way at Bonavente, the Princesses met him. To the Archbishop of Toledo, for his indefatigable Services the King gave the Town of Cascata in that Country. Thus the Kingdom of Leon was again united to Ca∣stile, after it had been separated from it 63 Years, and this Union has continu'd to our days. D. Sancho, King of Navarre, who in his Youth, was call'd the Strong, liv'd now retir'd in the Castle of Tudela, without attending to the Government. This his retirement, gave Rebellion in Navarre. his Subjects opportunity to mutiny, which Pamplona in particular, did several times. Besides, Lope Diaz de Haro, Lord of Biscay, entred the Territories of Navarre, and took some Towns and Castles. King Ferdinand was suppos'd to have some hand in this Affair. Yet the worst was, that Theobald, Earl of Champagne, the King's Nephew and Heir, impatient of delay, contriv'd with the Nobility to Depose him. King Sancho no way able to oppose so many Ene∣mies, sent to invite Jayme, King of Aragon, newly return'd from the Conquest of Majorca, to the Castle of Tudela, there to consult about Affairs of the highest nature. King Jayme be∣ing then at Zaragoça, set out immediately, as was desired, without asking any further secu∣rity Interview of the Kings of Aragon and Na∣varre. for his Person. Both the Kings expressed much affection at their meeting, and the Ce∣remonies being over, he of Navarre complain'd of the evil Practices of his Nephew Theobald, of the ambition of King Ferdinand. At the same time, he declar'd he had resolved to make use of the King of Aragon for regaining what he had lost about Biscay, and in return, would
immediately adopt him his Son and Successor King Jayme accepted of the Adoption, which was there instantly perform'd, and for the better colour, it was reciprocal, so that whoever dy'd first, the other was his Heir. On the 4th of April this Contract was sign'd, such of the No∣bility of both Kingdoms as were present, Confirming it. Besides, the Navarrois lent the A∣ragonian a great Sum of Money towards the charge of the War, and had some Towns given him in pawn for the same. News being brought that the King of Tunez was equipping a great Fleet to recover Majorca, King Jayme was forced to make short, and return to Zarago∣ça. At this time dy'd the Lady Aurembiasse, and appointed her Husband her Heir, whence ensu'd new Troubles, for D. Ponce de Cabrera would not quit the old Pretensions of his Fa∣mily. The King prevented the mischiefs that might have follow'd, giving the Earldom to the new Pretender, except the City Balaguer, which he kept himself; and to the Prince he gave the Command of the Island Majorca, for Life. This done, he sail'd over to Majorca, and understanding the King of Tunez could not come that Year, return'd home. King Fer∣dinand being taken up in setling his new Kingdom, gave the Charge of carrying on the War against the Moors, to Roderick, Archbishop of Toledo, and for his encouragement, assign'd him the Town of Quesada, if he could retake it from the Infidels, who of late had possessed them∣selves Roderick the Arch∣bishop, in∣vades the Moors. of it. As soon as Summer came on, the Archbishop having spoiled all the Country, and burnt the Corn on the Ground, took not only Quesa and Caçorla, but also Cuenca, Che∣lis, Niebla, and other Towns of less Note thereabouts. This was the Original of the Go∣vernment of Caçorla, which for many Years was in the hands of the Archbishops of Toledo, who appointed a Lieutenant to act there in their Name. Quesada being again taken by the Moors, and recovered by King Ferdinand, remain'd in Propriety to the Kings of Castile. About this time, John, King of Jerusalem, having lost most of his Kingdom, went into Italy. He was by birth, a Frenchman, and now solicited the Christian Princes to assist him in reco∣vering John, King of Jerusa∣lem, comes into Spain. his Dominions. In the mean time he Marry'd his only Daughter Violante, to the Em∣peror Frederick II. who for that reason, took the Title of King of Jerusalem, from him his Successors, the Kings of Sicily had it, and so it was continu'd in the Kings of Aragon, and of Spain successively. After this Marriage, King John came into Spain, and landed at Barcelona, in the Year 1232. was nobly entertain'd by the King of Aragon, the same by King Ferdinand, 1232. in his way to Santiago, whither he was going to pay his Vows. At his return, he Married Berengaria, the Daughter of the King of Castile, then went back into Italy, hoping with the Succours of Christendom to conquer the Holy-Land, but the Success answered not his expecta∣tion. The Annals of Toledo say, his coming into Spain was eight Years before this time. Having lost all hopes of regaining his Kingdom, by the Pope's Command, he took upon him the charge of the Empire of Constantinople, during the Minority of the Emperor Baldwin, who in Recompence for his good Services, afterwards Marry'd Mary, his Daughter, by the Lady Berengaria. In Castile, the Soldiers of the Military Orders joyning with the Bishop of Plasencia, took from the Moors the Town of Truxillo, in Estremadura, on the 25th of Janua∣ry. The Islands Mi∣norca and Yuisa con∣quered. King Jayme went over the third time to Majorca, and Conquer'd the Island Minorca. Yvica, one of the Pituissae, was subdu'd the following Year 1234. by and at the Charge of William, Bishop of Tarragona, and therefore that Island was added to his Bishoprick. This Year, on the 7th of April, dy'd at Tudela, King Sancho of Navarre. His Body was bury'd 1234. at our Lady of Roncesvalles, a Monastery of Canon Regulars, built by him. As soon as he Sancho King of Navarre dies. Theobald I. King of Navarre. was dead, the Navarrois sent for Theobald, Earl of Champagne, as being the next of the Blood, and Crown'd him in May, at Pamplona. An Author writes, that the King of Aragon wink∣ed at it, perhaps out of scruple of Conscience, as having no Right; but the War he made afterwards, shows it was rather the necessity of the times that made him lie still for the pre∣sent, till he was in a better condition to pursue his Pretensions, tho' there seem'd to be little hopes, because the People bore him no Affection. He was besides, taken up with the thoughts of Marrying Violanto, Daughter to the King of Hungary, which King Ferdinand labour'd to hinder, hoping to reconcile him to his Aunt Ellenor, from whom he was Divorc'd some Years before. Embassadors had passed betwixt them upon this subject; but nothing being conclu∣ded, the two Kings had a meeting at Huerta, on the Borders of both Kingdoms, upon the King of Castile and Arragon meet. 17th day of September. Nothing was done as to the main Business, for strong reasons the Ara∣gonian urged. But besides the Towns she had before, he gave to Queen Ellenor, Heriza to live in, and condescended that for her satisfaction, her Son might stay with her till he grew bigger. This Lady spent her Time and Revenue in Pious Works. Particularly, near Alma∣çan, at her own cost, she founded a Monastery of Premostratenses, an Order not long before instituted by Humbertus, a Native of Lorrain. The Name of Premostratenses, these Religious took from the first Monastery they had, which was built in the Wood of Premostre.
CHAP. X. The beginning, progress, and end of the War against Cordova, with the Conquest of that noble City. AFter the interview between the two Kings of Castile and Aragon, they both return'd to the War against the Moors. The Aragonians incourag'd by their Success in Majorca, Castilians and Ara∣gonians make War upon the Moors. and offended at Zaen, who after Usurping the Crown of Valencia, had entred the Territories of Aragon, burning and destroying many Towns and Villages, as far as Amposta and Tortosa, were resolv'd to invade Valencia. The Castilians advanc'd still in Andaluzia. The distracti∣ons that were among the Infidels promis'd success to the Christians; for they were at that time divided into the Factions of Almohades, Almoravides, Benamarines, and Benadalodes. Such Confusion was among them, that tho' no Body had lent a hand to pull it down, their Division among the Moors. Kingdom must have fallen of it self. In Catalonia the Tax called Bovaticum was again rais'd. Many Incursions were made into the Territories of the Moors, particularly D. Blasco de Ala∣gon, took from them the strong Town of Morella. It somewhat offended the King that any private Person should commence that War before him; therefore he took that Town from D. Blasco, and in lieu of it gave him the Town of Sastago. This is the original of the Earls of Sastago, a Noble Family in that Kingdom. After the taking of Morella, another Town called Burriana, having held out a Siege of two Months, surrendred to the King, up∣on promise of Life and Liberty; 7000. Men and Women march'd out of the place. This loss was so much the more considerable to the Moors, for that the Territory of those two Towns maintain'd many other Castles which were now necessitated to Surrender. Among these were Peniscola, Castellon, and Bun̄ol. D. Ximeno de Ʋrrea took Alcalaten, which was Many places ta∣ken by the Christians therefore given to him and his Heirs, the most noble Family of the Ʋrreas, and continues to this day. Farther on, upon the Banks of the River Xucar, our Forces by night surprized Al∣mazora, the Moors flying without offering to resist. King Ferdinand having setled the King∣dom of Leon, left the Queen there to gain the affections of those People; and gather'd a powerful Army in Castile to prosecute the War in Andaluzia; which had been of late inter∣rupted. He laid Siege to Ʋbeda, which being a great City, and but a League distant from Baeza, was very strong, well Garrison'd, and stor'd with Provisions; yet the Kings reso∣lution made all easy, and it was surrendred to him, the Inhabitants Articling only for Life. On the other side the Military Orders took Medellin, Alfanges and Santacruz. This Joy had some allay of trouble for the Death of the Queen, who departed this Life at Toro, and was bury'd at Huelgas. Her Body was afterwards translated to Sevill, where she lies by her Hus∣band, with whom she had lived lovingly. Ʋbeda being taken, the King return'd to Toledo, resolving again for Leon, to secure the affections of those people. The Garrison of Ʋbeda making an Incursion into the Territory of Cordova, took some of those old Souldiers, that are appointed to keep Garrisons, whom the Moors call Almogaraves. These gave Intelligence, that then was a fit opportunity to take Cordova. That part of the Suburb called Axarquia, Part of the City Cordo∣va taken by a hand∣ful of Men. joins to the Wall, and those sort of Souldiers had the guard of it, who suffer'd the Christians to Scale the Wall, and enter the City, on the 23d of December, in the Year 1235. It was but a small number that undertook this great action, therefore they only possess'd themselves of a few Towers, and secur'd the Gate of Martos, hoping they should soon be reliev'd; and therefore sent Messengers to all parts, to carry the News of what they had done, and the 1235. danger they were in, if not speedily succour'd. As soon as it was day the Moors prepar'd to expel those new Guests. D. Alvaro Perez de Castro, whose Loyalty was very remarkable, since his reduction was the first that brought relief to Cordova from Martos, where he was at that time. Scarce had the King receiv'd the News when he set forwards from Leon, and tho' the distance was great, and the season unfit for action, he march'd with what Men he could ga∣ther, leaving Orders every where for the Gentry to follow him. By the way he summon'd the Castle of Bienquerencia; the Commander whereof gave the King Provisions, and promis'd King Fer∣dinand hasts to secure the Conquest of Cordova. to Surrender, if Cordova were taken. Therefore leaving that place the King advanc'd, and found many Soldiers resorted to him from all parts, yet not enough to compose a sufficient Army. King Abenhut was then ready at Ecija, with a great power. D. Lorenzo Suarez be∣ing Banished, followed that King. The Moor knew not whether to relieve Cordova, or Va∣lencia first, both places being in equal Danger, and equally pressing for aid. The King of Aragon had attempted Cullera, but was obliged to forbear, because there were no stones near to cast out of the Engines, however the Castle of Moncada was taken, and demolished for a Terror to the Infidels. King Abenhut, being advertised of all, and not knowing which way to turn, sent D. Lorenço Suarez to get intelligence. He desiring to return into favour with King Ferdinand, underhand gave him notice of the posture of affairs, and having received instructions, how to behave himself, went back to the Moorish King, and with feign'd tokens of fear, magnified the Forces of King Ferdinand. This Artifice diverted him from thinking of the relief of Cordova, to the great joy of the Christians, which was increased by the News brought a few days after, that he had been killed by his own People at Almeria. His Death
fell out very fortunately for us, because he was an Active, Wise, and Valiant Prince, and might have contributed much towards Re-establishing the Dominion of the Moors in Spain. Cordova, is seated almost in the midst of Andaluzia, in a Plain, at the Foot of Sierra Morena. Descripti∣on of Cor∣dova. On the left hand it is Watered by the River Guadalquivir, which having received many other Streams is there Navigable. The City lying along the Bank of the River makes a long Square. Whilst the Moors possessed it, much of its Beauty was lost, they being not at all curious in Archi∣tecture. Formerly it had 5 Gates, now 7. The Suburbs are as great as a good City, especi∣ally that we said was called Axarquia, on the Bank of the River, without the East Gate, which is encompassed with a Wall, and joins to the City. The King's Palace is on the West side, shut up within a particular Wall. On the River is a Beautiful Bridge, the Foot where∣of reaches to the Cathedral. It was formerly called Colonia Patricia, because of the great number of Nobility that liv'd there. All the Country about is Fruitful and Pleasant, and even the Mountains bear Vines, Olive, and other sorts of Trees. On the Mountains about a League from the City, is a Monastery of Fryars of S. Hierome, where there are still to be seen some ruins of the Ancient Cordova, either Built, or repaired by Marcus Marcellus, when he was Praetor in Spain. Part of the Walls of this City being already possessed by the Christians, King Ferdinand laid Siege to the rest, in the Year of Grace 1236. The Moors being nume∣rous, The Siege. and expecting relief, defended themselves with much Bravery. Many Bloody Skirmishes 1236. hap'ned in the very Streets. Some time was spent in this manner, till Fame, and some Pri∣soners they took, informed the Besieged, that Abenhut King of Granada was killed, and D. Lorenço Suarez had returned to the Christians, and lay with them before the Town. Thus all hopes of relief being taken away, they resolv'd to surrender, and after much time spent City sur∣rendred. in Treating, obtained no better Conditions, than to have leave to depart, where every Man pleased. The Town was delivered upon the 29th day of June, being the Feast of St. Peter, and St. Paul, and immediately the Cross, and Royal Standard were set up, in the Steeple of the great Mosque, which was Consecrated by several Bishops, who followed the Army. F. Lope, a Monk of Fitero, near Pisuerga, was the first Bishop of that See. Because the Moors 260 Years before, had caused the Bells from Santiago in Galicia, to be brought to this City, on the Shoulders of the Christians, he now caused them to be carryed back, in the same manner by Moors. All the Infidels departing, the City was left desolate, which ob∣liged the King to grant extraordinary Priviledges, to such as would come and inhabit there. Great numbers resorted, to whom Lands and Houses were given. Alonso de Meneses was ap∣pointed Governour, and D. Alvaro de Castro General of the Frontiers. To his other Titles the King added, that of King of Cordova and Baeça. At this time the Episcopal See of Cala∣horra, was translated to St. Domingo de la Calçada, but those two Cities disputing the right, they were at length both made Bishopricks. CHAP. XI. A Moorish King Baptized. Description of Valencia, its Siege and surrender to the King of Aragon, who is Wounded before it. Theobald, King of Navarre goes with others to the Holy-War. THE King of Aragon ceased not to press the Moors of the Kingdom of Valencia. Zeit A Moorish King Bap∣tised. their King was Banished thence, and being well affected to the Christian Re∣ligion, was at length Baptized, by the Name of Vincent. This was done privately, that the Moors might not know it, he still entertaining hopes of recovering his Kingdoms. His Con∣version had been foretold by two Fryars, John and Peter, whom for that reason, he caused to be put to Death. D. Sancho Ahones Archbishop of Zaragoça, laboured to have him Marry, because his Life was scandalous, he indulging his former Libertinism. His Wife's Name was Dominga Lopez of Zaragoça. By her he had Alda Hernandez, Marry'd to Blasco Ximenez Lord of Arenos, who inherited many other Towns of his Father-in-Law, and from him came the Fa∣mily of Arenos. In Prosecution of his design, the King of Aragon wasted the Territory of Exerica, burning the ripe Corn on the Ground. Bernard William the King's Unkle, by the Mother's side, was appointed General of the Frontiers to oppose the Moors, he being Famous for Martial exploits. In October following, the Cortes, or Parliament was held at Monçon, Siege of Valencia resolved. where it was resolved to carry on the War, and Besiege Valencia. It was also determined, that a certain Coin called Jaquesa, which had much mixture of Brass, should not be called in, because it would be a great loss to those who had any quantity of it. On this account they or∣dered that every House should pay to the King one Maravedis in Seven Years. Bernard William repaired the Castle called Poyo de S. Maria, destroy'd by the Moors, and kept a good Garrison in it. Zaen, King of Valencia resolved to Besiege this Castle, with 600 Horse and 40000 Foot. The Christians, tho' nothing equal in Number, drew out to Fight them in the Field, and were reduced to the utmost peril, but at length, their Valour overcame the Multitude, and the Infidels were put to flight. It was given out, that St. George assisted the Christians in that
Fight. When success is beyond expectation, Men are apt to attribute it to Miracle. It is al∣so said, an Image of Our Lady was found under the Bell in the Castle, to which the Neigh∣bouring People erected a Church. This Battle was fought in the Month of August of the Year 1237. King Jaime hearing of the Victory, and being informed, tho' it proved a false report, that the Moors were returning with a greater force, he with more Courage than 1237. discretion, having in his Company only 130 Horse, advanced beyond Poyo and Monviedro. There a strong Squadron of Moorish Horse met him, under the Command of D. Artal de Ala∣gon, Son to D. Blasco, then in Banishment. The danger was great, but the King's good For∣tune, and above all God's Special Providence brought him off, for the Moors marched off an∣other The King of Aragon in Dan∣ger. way, without offering to charge the Christians. It was very dangerous, and expensive to keep the Castle of Poyo, which lay near Valencia, and far from Aragon, but chiefly for that Bernard William the King's Unkle, who Commanded there was dead, which was the cause that the King set out from Zaragoça, where he had passed the Winter, and exposed himself to that danger. He bestow'd on William Entença, Son to the deceased, all the honours and places of Trust his Father had possessed, which were justly due to him, for that Gentlemans good Service. Berengarius Entença, was made Governour of the Castle, notwithstanding the most were for abandoning of it, yet the King would not consent, because it stood oppor∣tunely to forward the taking of Valencia. Understanding the Soldiers designed to make their escape thence, and forsake it, he gathered them in the Chapel of the Castle, and there upon the Altar, took an Oath Solemnly, that he would never return home without being Master of Valencia. This his Resolution so encourag'd the Soldiers, that they willingly stayed there, and so dismay'd the Infidels, that their King Zaen sent to sue for Peace, offering to deliver up several Forts, and pay a considerable Yearly Tibute. Yet the King, contrary to the advice of most Men, refused these conditions, not doubting of the Conquest of that City. He was the more incouraged, for that Almenara, Betera, Bulla, and other places were surrended to him. With the King at this time, there were only 1000 Foot and 360 Horse, a small force for so great an undertaking. With this handful, he durst pass the River Guadalaviar, and lay Siege to that great and populous City. He intrenched himself in the Mid way, between Valen∣cia and the Grao, which is the shore so called, for that it rises as it were by Steps, a Mile distant from each place. Valencia is seated in that part of Spain formerly called Tarraconensis, in the Territory of the Edetany. The Country about it is Fruitful and pleasant, but is sup∣plyed Descripti∣on of Va∣lencia. with Corn from abroad. It was furnished with good Soldiers, rich in Merchandize, and so pleasant, it neither felt the sharpness of Winter, nor extream Heat of the Summer. Its Buildings are stately, its Gardens and Orchards replenished with all variety of Trees, in some places cut in various shapes, in others, so intermixing and intangling their boughs, they make a continued Arbour, always Green and Pleasant. Such were the Elysian Fields, feign'd by the Poets. Such the beauty of this City, which may compare with the pleasantest in Europe. On the left side it is Watered by River Guadalaviar, which runs between the Wall and the Royal Palace, and on the East joins to the City by a Bridge. Many small Chanels are drawn from this River to Water the Orchards. Three Miles off, near the Sea, is Albufera, a place not very wholesome, but where great plenty of fish is taken. At that time the Walls of the Town were round, containing 1000 paces in Circumference, and had Four Gates. The first called Boatelana towards the South East; the second Baldina towards the North; the third Templaria (so called of a Church Built there by the Templers) towards the East; the fourth Xaraena, betwixt which and Boatelana, the King incamped, that being the best place for Battery, by reason of a sort of Angle the Wall made there. Great dili∣gence was used by the Christians, in fixing their Engines for Battery. King Zaen, the first Valencia Besieged. day before they could intrench, drew out to give Battle, but the Christians would not be drawn to Fight, because their Number was yet small, and supplies came in daily to them. Many Prelates and other Persons of note were at the Siege. A Body of Frenchmen, came un∣der the Command of Aymilius Bishop of Narbonne, also succours out of England, drawn by the Fame of the enterprize. In several Skirmishes the Enemies were worsted, which made them more cautious how they Sally'd. The Christians lodging themselves under the Walls, in Three several places, lay'd open, as much of them as for one Man to pass. Mean while the Besieged were not idle. Peter Rodriguez de Açagra and Ximeno de Ʋrrea, at the same time took the Town of Cilla, on the other side of Valentia. Yet the Moors gain'd Courage at the Arrival of the King of Tunez, his Fleet consisting of 18 Ships and Gallies. This availed them nothing, for the Africans understanding a Fleet was furnishing against them at Tortosa, sailed away without relieving the City, or taking Pen̄iscola on that Coast as they had de∣signed. Now the Besieged began to dismay, not only for this disappointment, but also be∣cause Provisions began to grow scarce, and they feared greater want. On the contary, the Christian Camp was full of hopes, and had plenty of all things, notwithstanding they were so increased, that now they amounted to 60000 Foot, and 1000 Horse. The King gave great demonstrations, as well of his Valour as Conduct, and acted the part not only of a The King Wounded at the Siege. General, but of a Soldier upon occasion, insomuch, that approaching too near the Wall, he was wounded with a dart in the forehead. For five days he could not go abroad. On the 13th of June, this Year 1238. he received Embassadors in the Camp from the Pope, and Ci∣ties 1238. of Lombardy, offering to put themselves into his hands, if he would assist them against the
Emperor Frederick II. By the advice of his Queen Violante, who had great power over him, and by whom he had a Daughter of the same Name, he accepted of their offers, but could not perform as to succouring them, he being so engag'd in the Wars of Spain; besides, that the Emperor was reconciled to the Pope, tho' but superficially. The Besieged having lost all hopes of Relief, resolved to surrender. Haliabata, the King's Favou∣rite, and after him, Abulhamaler, his Nephew, were sent out to treat. After many Debates, both Parties being eager to come to a conclusion, the Capitulation was sign'd, and the principal Articles were. That the Moorish King deliver up the City Valencia, and all other Towns and Castles on this side the River Xucar. That the Moors be safely conduct∣ed to Cullera and Denia. That they have liberty to carry along with them as much Gold, Valencia deliver'd up to the Christians. Silver, Jewels, or any other Goods, as they can, without being searched. That a Trūce be inviolably observed betwixt the two Kings for the Term of 8 Years. Five days were allow∣ed for the performance of Articles, but the Moors before the time was expir'd, quitted the City to the number of 50000 Men, Women and Children. They march'd thro' a Lane made of the Christian Army. On Michaelmass-Eve, the Victors took possession of that Ci∣ty and Kingdom, Consecrated the Churches, and chose Ferrer de S. Martin, some say he was a Dominican, the first Bishop. People resorted to inhabit there, chiefly out of Catalonia, from Tarragona, Girona and Tortosa. The Country about the City was equally divided a∣mong the Prelates, Gentlemen, and Councils of such Cities as were assisting in carrying on the Siege. Also the Knights of S. John, and the Templers had their Quota, To 380 Horse, was assign'd a particular share, on account that they should defend the Frontiers, 100 of 'em doing Duty every four Months. Because the City was not naturally strong, and the Walls were batter'd, the King raised a new Wall larger than the former, and square, with 12 Gates, 3 towards each quarter of the World. New Laws were also given to the Inhabitants. Thus Zaen, the Moorish King, lost the Kingdom he had wrongfully Usurped; for no Power unjustly acquir'd can be lasting. Great was the Joy for this Success throughout all Spain, and it was the greater, for that scarce any Gentleman of Note was lost in the Expedition. Only D. Artal de Alagon, who seeing the Moors go down the Wind, had return'd to his Allegiance, and together with Raymund Folch, Viscount of Cardona, took Villena, in a Skirmish with the Moors, near Saix, was killed with a Stone. This was the conclusion of the Conquest of Va∣lencia. Whilst the Aragonians were busie in this War, the Navarrois committed not the least Hostility. Theobald, Earl of Champagne, was their King, as has been said above. This King being ambitious of Honour, and zealous of God's Glory, and his Kingdom enjoying Peace, agreed with the Earls, Henry of Bari, Peter of Berteigno, and Aymerick of Montfort, to go over with their Forces to the Holy-Land. All things being in a readiness on their Theobald, King of Navarre, ingages in the Holy-War. part, the Genoeses failed sending a Fleet to transport them. They took their Journey by Land thro' Germany, Hungary, and Thracia, and passed over the Streight of Constantinople. In Cilicia, about the Passes of Mount Taurus, they were in great danger, being attack'd by vast numbers of Turks, so that scarce the third part of the Army that set out, reach'd the City Antioch, and those that did, sick and worn out with their long march. Their Success in Palestine, was answerable to the beginning, very few return'd home. The French Histori∣ans place this Expedition of King Theobald, 10 Years later, when S. Luis, their King, went to the Holy-Land. But that cannot be, because Roderick the Archbishop, mentions this Action of Theobald, and his History reaches but five Years after the Conquest of Valencia; besides that, he was dead before S. Luis set out for the Holy-War. THE History of SPAIN. The Thirteenth BOOK. CHAP. I. The taking of many Towns by the Christians. The Kingdom of Murcia surrendred to King Ferdinand. His Marriage. Salamanca made an Ʋniversity. 20000 Moors defeated by the Christians. THE two Kings of Spain, Jayme and Ferdinand, tho' they were before famous for their Valour, and other Vertues, became now much more Renown'd, for the ta∣king Peace for some time: of Cordova and Valencia. Several Embassies were sent them by Foreign Princes, Congratulating their Success, and exhorting them to root out the Moors, now re∣duced almost to extremity. Nevertheless, the War ceased for some time, for the King
of Aragon had made a Truce, and soon after, went to Montpelier. King Ferdinand was Cele∣brating his Nuptials at Burgos. Queen Berengaria his Mother, had concluded a Match for him, with the Lady Joanna, Daughter of Simon, Earl of Poitiers, and Adeloyde his Wife, Ferdinand, King of Castile Marries. Grandchild of Luis, King of France, and Elizabeth, the Daughter of Alonso the Emperor. By her the King had Issue, Ferdinand, Sirnamed Poitiers, Luis and Ellenor. After the So∣lemnities were perform'd, both King and Queen took a Progress thro' the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile. He used to give access to all Men, and hear their Business, not only in publick Audiences, but even in his Closet, which gain'd him the affections of all his People. Being come to Toledo, he sent a great Sum of Money to Cordova, to relieve the Inhabitants, who suffer'd want, the Country about them lying still waste. A Bushel of Wheat was worth 12 Maravedies, and a Bushel of Barly 4, which in that Age was an extrordinary rate. In the following Year 1239. we find there were two Eclypses of the Sun, one on the 3d of June, 1239. being Friday, when the Sun at Noon day was so darkned, as if it had been night. The o∣ther Two Eclypses. on the 25th of the same Month, as Bernard Guido, an Aragonian Historian writes. But there must be some mistake in this last, for there could not be a Conjunction of the Sun and Moon at that time, and nothing else can cause an Eclypse of the Sun. Pliny affirms, the E∣clypse of the Moon cannot return till the 5th Month, and that of the Sun till the 7th. That Year was unlucky to Castile for the Death of two Notable Men. These were D. Lope de Ha∣ro, to whom succeeded his Son James, and D. Alvaro de Castro, who made good our Party in Andaluzia. This Gentleman perceiving the evil posture of Affairs, went to Toledo to ac∣quaint Bravery of a Wo∣man. the King with it, and being upon his return, dy'd by the way at Orgaz. During his absence 50 Soldiers, under the Command of Alonso de Meneses, D. Alvaro's Kinfman, went out of the Castle of Martos, to plunder. Albamar, chosen King of Arjona, in the place of Abenhut, having notice of that advantage, laid Siege to the Castle. D. Alvaro's Lady caus'd all the Women to Arm themselves, and cast Stones from the Wall, making show as if they had been Soldiers. Thus they defended themselves till D. Alonso and his Company having Intelligence of their danger, return'd, and being encourag'd by one James Perez de Vargas, of Toledo, fought their way thro' the Enemy. They being entred, the Moorish King raised the Siege for want of Provisions. The loss of those two great Men not a little perplex'd the King, who upon it set out from Burgos, travelling with all speed towards Cordova. With him went his two Sons, Alonso and Ferdinand, Princes excellently qualified, and now at age to bear Arms. At the same time, King Jayme went to Montpellier to try if he could raise some Money in that City, which he stood in need of, no less than he of Castile; besides, he design'd to quiet that City, then divided into Factions, and punish the Mutiniers. He compassed both his Designs. Albamar, the Moorish King, to his other Dominions, by the consent of the People joyn'd the famous City Granada, and this was the beginning of that Kingdom, which lasted till the age of our Grandfathers. At Murcia, the Citizens in hatred to Alhamar, chose for their King one Humiel, which gave occasion to the mortal Enmity that continu'd many Years betwixt those two Cities. The Moors of Andaluzia tired out the Christians with false Alarms and Ambushes, but would never come to a Battle. On the contrary, the King's Forces took from them many Towns, Cities and Castles. Among these were of Note, Ezija, Estepa, Lu∣cena, Several Towns ta∣ken from the Moors. Porcuna, Marchena, Cabra, Ossuna and Vaena. Places of less note are not worth name∣ing, some of them were given to the Knights of Santiago and Calatrava, and some to the Pre∣lates and Nobles, who serv'd the King in those Expeditions. These losses put the Moors in∣to the greatest consternation imaginable. One of the Family of the Almohades, whose Name is not known, came now over out of Africk, hoping to raise himself a Kingdom, by reveng∣ing the harm done his Nation by the Christians, but by some Policy he was taken, tho' the manner, or place where it was done, is not set down in any History. King Ferdinand having concluded a Truce for one Year, with Albamar, King of Granada, after he had spent 13 Months in this Expedition, return'd now to Toledo, where his Wife and Mother receiv'd him with great Joy for his many Victories. Thence he went to Burgos, and translated the University of Palencia, Founded by his Grandfather King Alonso, to Salamanca. He was induc'd to Salamanca made an University make this change by the conveniency of this City for Schollars, the River Tormes coming up to it, and supplying it with all Necessaries. Besides this, he had another reason, which was to oblige the Kingdom of Leon, within whose Limits Salamanca stands. His Father Alonso, King of Leon, had there laid some small Foundation of an University, that his Subjects might not be oblig'd to go for Learning to Castile. Now thro' the Bounty of his Son Ferdinand, and afterwards of his Grandson Alonso, a great Favourer of Learning, it so increased, that no place in the World affords greater Rewards of Learning, or has better Salaries for the Professors of Arts and Sciences. D. James de Haro, Lord of Biscay, about this time Revolted twice, the cause not known, the goodness of King Ferdinand, and care of his Son Alonso, still reduc'd him, bestowing greater Favours on him than before. Respect was had to the Services of his Ancestors, and it was of evil consequence to be imploy'd in Civil Broils, when there was so fair an opportunity of Extirpating the Moors. These things hap'ned in the Year of our Lord 1240. The same Year, in the King's absence, the Garison of Valencia, under the Command 1240. of William de Aguillon, and other Men of Note, plundred the Territory of Xativa, took Re∣bolledo 20000 Moors over∣thrown. by surprize, and besieg'd the Castle of Chjo, which stands on the Mountains, and is an Inlet to a delightful and pleasant Plain. 20000 Moors came to the Relief of it, who charg'd
the Christians with great Resolution, but were overthrown, and put to flight. After this Victory the Castle was taken, and demolished. At the King's return, the Moors complain∣ed of this breach of Truce, and Reparation was made them. No sooner did that Truce ex∣pire, but the King entring their Country, took the Castle of Bayren, seated in a Valley that bears Sugar and Rice, as does all the Territory of Gandia. Villena was also taken, and Ca∣stillon, but Xativa, tho' Besig'd, held out. In the midst of these Actions, the King was cal∣led away to Affairs of greater moment in France. Each having setled his Kingdom in the best manner time would permit. The King of Ar∣ragon The King∣dom of Murcia delivered up by the Moors. prepared to depart into France, and he of Castile into Andaluzia. A dangerous Sickness detain'd King Ferdinand at Burgos. Alonso, his eldest Son, was sent before to carry on the War, because the Truce was almost expired, and the Frontiers must be Reliev'd, lest they should be in danger. Alonso being come to Toledo, there met him Embassadors from Hudiel, King of Murcia, offering him that Kingdom upon these Conditions. That Hudiel being ta∣ken into the Protection of the Kings of Castile, should by them be defended from all Do∣mestick and Foreign Enemies, and particulary, against Alhamar, King of Granada, whom of himself he was not able to withstand. That during his Life, he should enjoy half the Reve∣nues of that Crown. These Conditions were very advantagious. It was requisite to use di∣ligence, lest the minds of those People should alter, for the Moors are very inconstant. Therefore the Prince set out after the Embassadors, without staying to consult his Father. At his Arrival all places submitting, he put Garisons into them, particularly into the Ca∣stle of Murcia. Revenues were assign'd all the chief of the Moors. Only the Cities Lorca, formerly call'd Eliocrota, Cartagena and Mula, would not submit to the Christians. It was tedious to force them, and Prince Alonso had not a sufficient Power; therefore he returned with all speed towards his Father, who being recover'd, was come as far as Toledo, and de∣siring to gain the Affections of the Moors, resolv'd to visit that new Kingdom. There is ex∣tant a Grant sign'd by the King of Murcia, to the Church of S. Mary of Valpuesta. Thence the King, and his Son Alonso, were called away upon urgent Affairs to Burgos. At the same time, Berengaria, the King's Daughter, became a Nun at Huelgas. Jayme, King of Aragon, having recommended the Government of his Kingdom to D. Ximeno, Bishop of Taraçona, was now at Monpelier. Thither the Earls of Toulouze and Provence, came to visit him, on pre∣tence of Friendship, but in reality, to treat about a Divorce betwixt the Earl of Toulouze, and his Wife Sancha, King Jayme's Aunt. The reason was, because Joanna, that Earl's Daughter, and Heiress, he having no Issue Male, would convey her Father's Dominions to her King of Aragon Leagues with 3 Princes a∣gainst the King of France. Husband, Alonso, Earl of Poitiers, Brother to Luis, King of France. King Jayme, lest so considerable a Principality should fall into the hands of the French, sought some colour for a Divorce, that the Earl of Toulouze Marrying again might have Issue Male. This was con∣trary to the Agreement we mention'd above, was made at Paris. Therefore, in order to oppose the power of France, these three Princes concluded a League on the 5th of June, in the Year 1241. The same Year dy'd Pope Gregory IX. Celestin IV. succeeded him, and he dying within 17 days. Innocent IV. was chosen, after the Chair had been void six Months. 1241. In the time of these Popes, Hugo, a Dominican, and Cardinal, famous for his great Learn∣ing, writ large Commentaries on the Holy Scripture. He was the first that attempted to write the Concordance of the Bible, a Work almost infinite, yet he compassed it by the help of 500 Monks. The like was afterwards imitated by the Hebrews and Greeks, and is a great help to Learned Men. CHAP. II. A Defeat of the Christians, who recover, and are successful, take Jaen and many o∣ther Places. The King of Granada made Tributary. King Sancho II. of Portugal, Expell'd his Kingdom by his Rebellious Subjects. THE War in Andaluzia was not prosecuted with any Vigour, King Ferdinand being full A Defeat of the Christians of other cares. Roderick Alfonso of Leon, the King's Bastard Brother, making an In∣cursion into the Territory of Granada, was defeated by the Moors. Several Persons of Note, and a great number of Soldiers being kill'd in the Action. This Success encouraged the Moorish King to waste our Frontiers, no Body offering to oppose him. King Ferdinand be∣ing advertiz'd hereof, order'd his Son Alonso speedily to secure the Kingdom of Murcia, re∣solving himself to march for Andaluzia. Being come to Andujar, he ravaged the Terri∣tories of Arjona and Jaen, then in the hands of the Moors. Arjona soon after, was taken from them, and other Towns of less note in that Neighbourhood. Thence the King sent his Brother, Alonso, Lord of Molina, with a good Army, who plundred all the Lands of Grana∣da, and encamped before the City. King Ferdinand believing the Moors would gather from all parts to relieve that place, marched thither with greater Forces. A mighty Army of infidels was there put to the Rout. Yet the City could not be taken, for that it was strong∣ly Fortisied, well provided, and had a great Multitude of Inhabitants. Besides, that at the
same time Advice was brought, that the Gazules, a powerful Party among the Moors, had The Chri∣stians suc∣cesful. Besieged Martos. This mov'd the King to send his Brother Alonso, and the Master of Cala∣trava, before, with part of the Army to relieve the Besieged, but the Moors staid not for their coming. Thus much the King thought might suffice for the present, and therefore he returned to Cordova, with his Army entire, in the Year 1242. Prince Alonso his Son, was no less For∣tunate 1242. in Murcia, and of the three Cities we said before would not submit, he took Mula by force, and then wasted all the Lands of Carthagena and Lorca in such manner, that they medi∣tated a Surrender. To Sancho Maçuelos, for his good Service in this War, the Prince gave the Town of Alcaudete, near Bugorra. From him descends the Noble Family of the Earls of Al∣caudete, in Castile. Winter drawing on, the King went to Poçuelo, where his Mother ex∣pected him, to treat about important Affairs, she being now near the end of her days. He spent 45 days with her in that Town, after which, the Queen returned to Toledo, and the King to Anduxar, at the beginning of the Year 1243. The Queen Consort remained at Cor∣dova. 1243. All the Lands about Jaen and Alcala, Sirnamed Bençayde, were wasted by the King in Person. Illora was burnt, and he marched in sight of the City Granada. D. Pelayo Correa, Master of Santiago, who had done good service under Prince Alonso, in Murcia, came now to Andaluzia, and persuaded the King to lay Siege to Jaen, which had been often attempted, and always without Success. Great difficulties seem'd to obstruct this undertaking, as the greatness of the Garison, plenty of Provisions within, and natural strength of the Place, which hindred the applying of Engines for battery. That City is seated at the side of a crag∣gy Jaen City described. Mountain, stretching out in length betwixt the East and South, not so broad as long, is plentifully supply'd with Water of several Springs, and the River Guadalquivir runs three Leagues distant from it. It was stored with all Necessaries, and well Garison'd, besides its natural strength. Pelayus's Constancy prevailed beyond all these difficulties. All things were provided, and the Siege opened, yet many days were spent, and no advance made. It Besieged. fell out that the Faction of the Oysimeles, at Granada, Mutiny'd, which brought that King into great danger of losing his Kingdom and Life. In this condition no Refuge was left him, but among the Christians; wherefore having obtain'd a Pass, he came to the Camp of King Ferdinand. He offered to serve him faithfully, if he would take him into his Protection, and in token of submission, kissed his hand. A League and Friendship was established betwixt them upon the following Articles. That Jaen be immediately delivered. That the Reve∣nue of the Kingdom of Granada be equally divided betwixt the two Kings; it was then va∣lued at 170000 Ducats a Year. That the Moorish King, as Homager, be obliged, when sum∣moned, to come to the Cortes, or Parliament. That this League be Offensive and Defensive. Thus the Treaty being concluded, the City was surrendred, and the King entred in solemn Procession. He caused the Walls to be Repaired, the Church to be Consecrated, and made Surrend∣red. the City a Bishoprick. Authors do not agree about the time when this City was taken, the most Learned affirm, it was in the Year 1243. the Annals of Toledo say three Years later. The Siege lasted eight Months, and our Men kept the Field, tho' the Winter prov'd very hard. 1243. Here Roderick the Archbishop of Toledo concludes his History, and says it was the 33d Year he had enjoy'd that Dignity. The following Year there were Tumults betwixt the Catalonians and Aragonians, each side pretending that Lerida was within their Limits. The Aragonians said their Borders extended to the River Segre, and the Catalonians affirm'd that the River Cinga parted those Dominions. King Jayme was more inclinable to the Catalonians, designing to Discord in Aragon and Catalonia. divide his Dominions, and leave Aragon to Alonso, his eldest Son, and the Principality of Catalonia to Peter, whom he lov'd most, tho' the youngest, born of Violante, his second Wife. In fine, the case being put to Arbitration, the King gave Judgment for the Catalonians, to whom he assign'd all the Country betwixt the Rivers Segre and Cinga. This resolution of dividing his Kingdom, offended not only Prince Alonso, but most of the Nobility of Aragon and Catalonia. Upon this the Prince withdrew to Calatayud, with such as were of his par∣ty, the chief whereof, were Ferdinand the King's Uncle, Abbot of Montaragon, D. Peter Rodriguez de Aragon, Peter Infante of Portugal, and other Persons of both Nations, who disliked the King's Designs. Portugal was now in an Uproar, and full of Tumults. Sancho II. called Capelo, of the form of his Cap, then Reigning, at the first Govern'd not altogether ill, for we find he King San∣cho of Por∣tugal ex∣pelled the Kingdom by his Rebellious Subjects. made War upon the Infidels, and gave Mertola, and other Towns, taken from them, to the Knights of Santiago. In other respects, he was of so easie a nature, it almost came to be an Infatuation. Mencia his Queen, and Daughter to Lope de Haro, Lord of Biscay, had so in∣tirely gain'd the ascendant over him, that she seem'd to be King, and he only the Instrument of her Will. Her Favourites were of the worser sort, and at their will Honours were be∣stow'd, Crimes pardon'd, and Punishments inflicted. This prov'd the King's ruin, for the Noblity offended to see the Government in the Hands of mean People, first endeavoured to have the King Divorc'd, upon account of Consanguinity, and the Queen's Barrenness. The business was mov'd to the Pope, and to the King, who was Consciencious enough, yet it a∣vailed not; it being hard to prevail with the Pope, and the King being so in love with the Queen, that the People said, She had bewitch'd him. But love is Witchcraft enough of its self. King Sancho had a younger Brother, called Alonso, Marry'd to the Countess of Bologne, in France. The Nobility sent the Bishops of Braga and Coimbra, to Pope Innocent, who then
held a General Council at Lyons, in France, to obtain his Consent for Deposing of their King, General Council at Lyons. and Enthroning his Brother; but the Pope could not be brought to it, only granted that A∣lonso should take charge of the Government. D. Alonso having first been with the Pope, at Paris took an Oath, that he would have regard, above all things, to the Publick Good, then went into Portugal. It was no difficult matter to seize upon the Government, the Nobility being all for him; yet many Troubles ensued, in which Ferdinand, and Alonso his Son, Kings of Castile, bore a part. At first, King Sancho withdrew into Galicia, whither the Queen had before fled. Afterwards he went to Toledo, to King Alonso, then Reigning, hoping to regain his Kingdom with the Forces of Castile. But his Brother Alonso prevented him, by offering to put away his Wife, and Mary Beatrix, Bastard Daughter to King Alonso; and moreover, to do him Homage, and pay Tribute for the Kingdom of Portugal, as had been done Originally. Interest bore down Honour, and the Pope declared the first Marriage void. Thus the Nuptials were Celebrated. Certain Towns near the Mouth of the River Guadiana, taken by the Castilians, which the Portugueses pretended to belong to their Conquest, were given in Dower. Hence some believe the Kings of Portugal took occasion to add an Orle of Castles to their former Arms. King Sancho having lost all hopes of regaining his Kingdom, spent the rest of his days at Toledo, living upon Revenues assigned him by the King of Castile. After his Death he was Honourably Bury'd in the Cathedral, near to Alonso the Emperor. Authors do not agree about the time of his Death, some say it was 13 years after this we now write of, others but 3, and that he Reigned 34 years. At the time that King Sancho dy'd, his Brother Alonso besieg'd Coimbra, which still continued Loyal to the King, tho' the King San∣cho of Por∣tugal dyes at Toledo. Martin de Freitas was the Name of this loyal Go∣vernour. Inhabitants suffer'd great hardships. Freitas the Governour, being inform'd the King was dead, yet not giving credit to the Report, desir'd leave to go to Toledo to be satisfy'd. Leave was granted, and a Truce concluded betwixt the Besieged and the Besiegers for that time. Freitas being come to Toledo, and understanding the truth, caused the King's Tomb to be o∣pen'd, and put the Keys of the City into his Hands, saying, My Sovereign Lord, and King, whilst I thought you liv'd, I endured all Miseries, eat Hides, drank Ʋrine, and encourag'd the Townsmen to do the like. I have done all that could be expected of a Loyal and dutiful Subject. Now you are dead, I deliver up the Keys to you, which is my last Duty, and with your leave, will advise the Citizens, since they have discharged their Duty, that they submit to your Brother Alonso. An example of Loyalty that well deserves eternal praise. CHAP. III. The beginning of the War against Sevil. Aragon under a general Interdict. The Siege and Surrender of Sevil, Carmona, and several other Places. THE League made with the King of Granada, put King Ferdinand in hopes of subduing Sevil. 500 Light-Horse were sent before, under the Command of the King of Granada, Ferdinand of Castile prepares to Besiege Sevil. to waste the Lands of Carmona, formerly a considerable Town. Alcala Guadayra, thro' that Kings persuasions, surrendred. Thence a good Body marched towards Sevil, and fired the ripe Corn, the Vines, Olive-trees, and all the Country-Houses. D. Pelayo Correa, Master of Santiago, Commanded this Party. Another under the King of Granada, and Master of Ca∣latrava, did the like harm in the Territory of Xerez. King Ferdinand himself was at Alcala Guadayra, providing all Necessaries that the War might be carry'd on before the Enemy had time to gather strength. Now dy'd Queen Berengaria, the Kings Mother, and soon after Rode∣rick, Archbishop of Toledo. As to the Year Authors vary, some say it was 1245. others 1247. 1245. and this agrees with the Inscription upon his Tomb. The Queen was very ancient; the Archbishop, besides his great Age, was worn with continual Labour, and had been lastly at the Council of Lyons, among other things to reduce the Aragonians to submit to the Juris∣diction of the See of Toledo. The Prelates of that Country in a Provincial Synod held at Valen∣cia, had Decreed, that the Archbishop of Toledo should not have his Cross carry'd before him in that Province, and Interdicted any Town that should permit him to do it. D. Roderick happening to be there, continu'd to have his Cross carry'd as usual, for which, D. Peter de Alvalete, the chief Fomenter of that Contention, declar'd him Excommunicate. They had recourse to Pope Gregory IX. who gave Judgment in favour of Toledo. Yet the Aragonians not submitting, D. Roderick now undertook this Journey to secure his Prerogative. He dy'd in France, being upon his way home. His Body was brought into Spain, and bury'd at Huer∣ta, a Monastery of Benardine Monks, on the Borders of Aragon. Near to the High Altar is to be seen his Sepulchre, with an Inscription in unpolish'd Latin suitable to that time, to this effect, Birth Navarre gave, Castile me bred, and Paris taught, Huerta my Bones receiv'd, my Soul Heaven sought. His Body dy'd, but the fame of his Vertue will last for ever. John II. of that Name, by some called of Medina, succeeded him in the Archbishoprick. About the same time dy'd Raymund, Earl of Provence, leaving four Daughters, Margaret Marry'd to S. Luis, King of France, Ellenor, to Henry, King of England, Sancha, to Richard, the Brother of the said Henry, and
Beatrix, to Charles, Earl of Anjou. This Earl, tho' his Wife was the youngest, by the assi∣stance of King Luis, and consent of that People, inherited the Dominions of his Father-in∣law. Mean while King Ferdinand staid at Cordova, resolving to lay close Siege to Sevil. He sent Raymund Boniface, a Native of Burgos, and well versed in Maritime Affairs, to fit out a Fleet in Biscay, that Country being stor'd with Wood, and the People good Sea-men. Whilst the Fleet was providing, the King laid Siege to Carmona, in the Year 1246. or there∣abouts. 1246. The Town was well Fortified, had a strong Garison, and plenty of Provisions, for Carmona Besieged and other Towns taken. which reasons, it could not be entred, yet it submitted to pay down a great Sum of Money, and a Yearly Tribute for the future. Constantina, Reyna, Lora, Cantillana, and Guillena, were all taken, some by Assault, others surrendred; Reyna was given to the Knights of Santiago, Constantina, to the Council of the City Cordova, and Lora, to the Knights of S. John. All things succeeded prosperously, only it was fear'd lest the King of Aragon should be some hindrance to the Affairs of Castile; for that King was displeased with Prince Alonso, upon pre∣tence that he did not keep within the Limits assign'd by agreement, to the Conquest of each Crown. It was fear'd this might come to a Breach, and therefore some Persons employ'd to adjust these Matters, sought means to reconcile all differences. Nothing appear'd more effectual than a Match betwixt Prince Alonso and Violante, King Jayme's Daughter, which might be advantagious to both Kingdoms. This was no sooner proposed, than agreed to by both Par∣ties, and the Marriage was Celebrated with all Magnificence, at Valladolid, in the Month of November. King Ferdinand was not present at the Solemnity, being wholly bent upon the Siege of Sevil; for now Raymund Boniface, with a Fleet of 13 Sail, had Coasted about by Cape Finisterre, and lay before the Mouth of the River Guadalquivir, where he Vanquisht the E∣nemies Navy. The Moors of Tangier and Ceuta, fitted out a Fleet of 20 Ships and Galleys for the Relief of Sevil, and meeting with our Squadron, there ensu'd a desperate Fight. Those Africans were experienced Seamen, and being so much superior in number, would not give way to the Biscainers, who with the lightness of their Vessels had the advantage to The Moors vanquish∣ed in a Sea Fight. shun the Enemy when there was occasion, and to lay them Aboard when they found it for their purpose. Three Ships of the Moors were taken, two sunk, one burnt, and the rest fled. Aragon was now under an Interdict, and all the Churches shut up. The occasion was, that The King∣dom of Aragon under an Interdict. the King in his Youth had familiarity with D. Teresa Vidaura, who now challenged him for her Husband before the Pope, pleading a Verbal Contract. She having no Witness, Sentence was given against her. After this, the Bishop of Girona, to whom some say, the King had revealed the secret, acquainted the Pope with it, upon which, the Pope was inclinable to call the Cause over again. This being known to the King, in a rage he sent for the Bishop, and caused his Tongue to be cut out. If the Bishop revealed a secret told him in Confession, he well deserv'd that Punishment. As soon as Pope Innocent, who then held the Council at Lions, as has been said, heard what had been done, he laid an Interdict on the Kingdom, and Excommunicated the King. Hereupon, the King submitting, begg'd Absolution, which was granted, and the Pennance imposed on him, that he should finish the Monastery of Beni∣facianum, begun 20 Years before, in the Mountains of Tortosa, and assign it Revenues to the yearly value of 200 Marks of Silver, also 600 Marks yearly to the Hospital at Valencia, and that he should erect a Chapellany in the Cathedral of Girona, where Prayers should be per∣petually offered up for himself and Successors. This account is taken out of the Records of the Monastery Benifacianum, and tho' most Authors make no mention of it, I would not wholly omit it. The Reader may give credit to it as he thinks the thing deserves. In the utmost part of Spain, towards the West, stands the City of Sevil, the Metropolis of Andaluzia, and for Riches may be reckoned among the Chiefest in Europe. Its strength con∣sists Descrip∣tion of Sevil. not only in the Walls, but the number of Inhabitants, its beauty in the numerous, state∣ly Buildings, and splendour of the People. Betwixt this City, which is on the left hand, and a Suburb called Triana, on the right, runs the River Guadalquivir, hem'd in with high Keys, and carrying water enough for Ships of great burden, which renders it commodious for the Trade of the Ocean and Mediterranean. A Bridge of Wood built upon Boats joyns the Suburb to the City. In the City is the old Palace inhabited by the ancient Kings, in the Suburb facing the East, is another stately Royal House. Near the River stands a Tower, for the excellency of its Workmanship, commonly call'd the Golden Tower. Near the Cathedral, This mea∣sure I be∣lieve is mi∣staken as to height. is another Tower of Brick, exceeding all the others, being 60 Yards in breadth, and four times that height, upon it another little Tower, now White-washed, and Painted with sun∣dry Figures wonderfully beauteous. It would be too tedious to relate all that is great and extraordinary in this City. There were in it at this time 24000 Families, divided into 28 Parishes. The first and chiefest, is S. Mary, and is the Cathedral, none in Spain compares with it for greatness. It is a common saying of the Churches of Spain, that of Toledo is Rich, that of Salamanca Strong, that of Leon Beautiful, and that of Sevil Great. The Revenue of the Church is 30000 Ducats, the Archbishops 120000, the Canons, and other Dignities pro∣portionably. The Country is plain, pleasant and fruitful. A great part is planted with Olive-trees, which produce large and pleasant Fruit, thence sent to other parts. It has so great a Trade, and the Farmers are so numerous and rich, that in the time of the Moors, in Olive-Orchards call'd Axarase, there were 100000 Cottages and Oil-Mills, which number,
tho' it seem incredulous, we have the Authority of King Alonso the Wise's History to testifie it. The concourse of Strangers is greater than could be imagin'd, especially since the Trade with the West-Indies. All these things stirr'd up King Ferdinand to undertake the Conquest of so important a place. Axatafe, King of Sevil, was not unprovided, but gather'd Forces, not only of his own, but out of Africk, and laid in great stores of Arms and Provisions. All things being plentifully provided for the carrying on a long Siege, King Ferdinand mov'd from Sevil Be∣sieged. Alcala Guadayra, where he had spent some time, and sate down before Sevil, on the 25th of August, in the Year 1247. The King himself Encamp'd on the Bank of the River, below the 1247. City, by the Fields of Tablada. D. Pelayo Perez Correa, Master of Santiago, took his post on the other side the River, in a Village called Aznalfarache, to oppose Abenjafon, King of Nie∣bla, who was possessed of all the Towns in that Neighbourhood. Many Sallies were made by the Moors, to obstruct carrying on the Works, but no consiedrable Action hap'ned. It was the chief care to guard all the Avenues, as well the River as the Land, and the Soldiers ceas∣ed not to plunder all the Country. Carmona streightned with these losses, surrendred. No∣thing Carmona surrend∣red to the Christians. was omitted by the Besieged that might endamage the Christians, especially they at∣tempted several times with Artificial Fire-works to burn our Fleet, but the great Vigilance of the Admiral Boniface, disappointed all their designs. D. Pelayo Correa, Master of Santia∣go, and D. Lorenco Suarez, did great service during the Siege. Above all, things incredible are related of Garci Perez Vargas of Toledo, and being such, they are not worthy to have a place here. Mean while Prince Alonso the King's Son, being invited to it by the Townsmen, de∣sign'd to possess himself of Xativa, in the Kingdom of Valencia, and did actually take Enguer∣ra, a dependance of Xativa. The King of Aragon justly provok'd by these Proceedings, took Villena, and 6 other Towns, in the Limits of Castile, having Brib'd the Governours. Besides, at the beginning of the Year 1248. he took from the Moors, a Town called Bugerra, in the same Territory. These Misunderstandings seem'd to threaten greater and worse Con∣sequences, 1248. therefore Prince Alonso, who was inclin'd to Moderation, resolv'd upon a Con∣ference with the King of Aragon, and accordingly they met at Almizra, a Town belonging to that King. There by the Mediation of the Queen of Aragon, and D. James de Haro, with other great Men, all matters were adjusted, the Towns wrongfully taken, restor'd on both sides, and the Limits and Conquests of each Party assign'd. By this Contract, Almansa, Sara∣sulla, Accom∣modation betwixt Castile and Leon. and the River Cabriolo, were allotted to Murcia; to Valencia, Biara, Saxona, Alarca and Finestrato. All things being setled, the Princes parted. King Jayme laid Siege to Xa∣tiva, and had it surrendred to him towards the end of the Summer. This City stands in a pleasant Country, near the Mouth of the River Xucar. Prince Alonso, and D. James de Haro, made hast to the Siege of Sevil. Alhamar also, King of Sevil, joyn'd King Ferdinand with a good Body of Men, and that so opportunely, that the Christian Soldiers weary of so tedious a Siege, were about abandoning the Camp, Sickness that began to spread among them, great∣ly discourag'd them. Winter was spent, and no great advance made, King Ferdinand him∣self tired with so many difficulties was dubious whether to raise, or continue the Siege, The Besiegers reinforced Besieged in a Sally, having burnt our Engines, and overturn'd the Works, now scoffed at our Men from the Walls. Nevertheless, the Siege was continued with so much the more resolu∣tion, because fresh Supplies came daily into the Camp. Thither repaired the Bishops D. John Arias of Santiago, but falling Sick, made no stay, D. Garcia of Cordova, D. Sancho of Coria, also the Masters of Calatrava, and the Princes Frederick and Henry, besides a great number of Nobles. It was hard, by reason of the greatness of the City, to secure all the Avenues, tho' they were strictly watched. Boniface the Admiral desiring to destroy the Bridge, provided two great Ships, which with the Flood, and a strong Westerly Wind, with full Sails so vio∣lently bore upon it, that the Chains which held the Boats could not withstand the force of the shock. Thus the Bridge was cut off on the 3d of May, to the great Joy of the Army. Bridge of Sevil bro∣ken. Flush'd with this Success, the Soldiers on a sudden gave an onset on all sides, labouring to make a Breach with all sorts of Instruments, so resolutely, that the Besieged were in great danger, Their resolution, and the strength of the Walls, overcame the labour of the Chri∣stians. Provisions beginning to fail, and no hopes of Relief appearing, the Citizens at first in Whispers began to talk of a Surrender, soon after, it became the publick Discourse, and at last they demanded a Parly. The Commissioners sent out to treat, were for submitting to a∣ny Conditions, except delivering the City, and the King would hearken to nothing less than a Surrender. Whilst the Treaty lasted, a Truce was concluded upon. At first they offer'd to pay the same they had always done to the Miramamolines. This offer being rejected, they proposed to deliver the third part, and then half the City, to be separated from the rest by a Wall, over and above those Revenues. King Ferdinand admitting of no Proposal less than the surrender of the City, at last they came to this Conclusion. That the Moorish King, with all the Inhabitants, carrying all their Goods might freely depart whither they pleased. That Sevil and its Depen∣dencies delivered up. excepting Sanlucar, Aznalfarache and Niebla, all other Towns and Castles depending on Se∣vil, should be delivered up. A Month was allow'd for performance of Articles. The Ca∣stle was presently deliver'd up, and on the 27th of November, 100000 Moors, Men, Wo∣men and Children, marched out of the City. Some went over into Africk, the rest were di∣spersed into other Towns and Cities in Spain. This Siege lasted 16 Months, during which time, the Camp was like a City, all things being there plentifully sold in Shops regularly di∣sposed,
and Smiths, Carpenters, and other necessary Trades continually working. On the 22d of December, the King in great State entred the City, and heard Mass in the Cathedral, which to that purpose had been Blessed by Gutierre, late Elect, Archbishop of Toledo, in the place of John, who dy'd on the 23d of July. Raymund de Losana, was chosen Archbishop of the new City. Sevil was then quite destitute of Inhabitants; but the King promising that all such as would come and inhabit there, should be exempted from Taxes, it was soon Peopled, and regain'd its former Lustre. CHAP. IV S. Luis, King of France, sends Presents to the Church of Toledo, and makes an un∣fortunate Expedition to the Holy-Land. Aragon Embroyl'd. King Ferdinand of Castile, after gaining much from the Moors, dies. WHilst Sevil was Besieged, S. Luis, King of France, Enrich'd the Church of Toledo with King Luis of France, sends Pre∣sents to the Church of Toledo, & under∣takes the Conquest of the Ho∣ly Land. many Holy Relicks, which much encreased the Devotion to that Church, and gain'd him the esteem of the People of Spain. Those Relicks are preserv'd to this day, and shown in the Treasury of that Church, with the Original Letter sent by S. Luis upon that occasion. After that, King Luis sailed from Marseilles to the Conquest of the Holy-Land; but his Success was not answerable to the Piety of the Undertaking. For after reducing the City Damiata, in Aegypt, Robert, the King's Brother, was killed in a Battle, Alonso and Charles, his two Brothers, together with the King himself, were made Prisoners, in the Year 1249. Their Liberty cost dear, and little was done in the Holy-Land, except the taking of Joppe, Sidon and Cesarea, by the French, in the Year 1250. This same Year D. Gutierre, Archbi∣shop 1249. of Toledo, dying at Atiença, on the 9th of August, as appears by the Annals of Toledo. 1250. D. Sancho, Son of King Ferdinand, was promoted to that Dignity. Some call him Peter, and others John, but doubtless, both Names are mistaken. Roderick the Archbishop, by order of Queen Berengaria, bred her two Grandsons, Philip and Sancho, at Toledo. He made them both Canons of that Church. Both of them study'd at Paris, particularly, Philip was Disci∣ple to Albertus Magnus, that great Philosopher and Divine. His Learning, and the Interest of his Father, preferred D. Sancho to the Archbishoprick. Pope Innocent IV. approved the Election, but he was not Consecrated, because he was not of Age, being the youngest but one of all his Brothers. For his sake, the King gave Ʋzeda and Iznatoraf, to the Church of To∣ledo, in lieu of Baça, which he had given when Jaen was taken. About this time lived a fa∣mous Man called Pero Gonzalez, who leaving the Court, where he had a considerable Employ∣ment, spent the rest of his life in instructing the People of Galicia and Asturias, and was a famous Preacher. His Cotemperary Bernard, a Canon of Santiago, thro' his great knowledge of the Canon-Law, became Familiar with Pope Innocent, and writ the Comments upon the Epistolae Decretales. At the same time, the Aragonians divided into Factions, consumed them∣selves Discord among the Arago∣nians. with Civil Wars. King Jayme by his Queen Violante, had these Sons, Peter, Jayme, Ferdinand and Sancho, and as many Daughters, Violante, Constantia, Sancha and Mary. The Queen, who govern'd the King, persuaded him to divide his Dominions among his Sons, an advice destructive to the Kingdom, and unjust in regard to Alonso the eldest Son. For this reason, most of the Nobility revolted from the King, and openly sided with the Prince, who countenanc'd them. In order to compose these Differences, which threatned greater Mischiefs, the Cortes, or Parliament, was held in February at Alcanizes, a Town in Aragon. Judges be∣ing appointed to determine betwixt the Father and Son, they gave Judgment against the Son. This avail'd little, the Subjects being dissatisfied, and the King persisting in his Resolution, insomuch, that even before his Death he gave the Principality of Catalonia to his Son Peter, which incens'd the other Party the more. This in Aragon. King Ferdinand's Affairs were in a much better posture, for having setled Sevil, where he intended to reside, he took Xerez, Medina Sidonia, Begel, Alpechin and Aznalfarache. Besides, about the Sea Coast he forc'd and demolish'd many Forts. The Lands of Nebrixa were wasted; yet some Towns of the Moors being well Fortify'd, resolv'd to endure a Siege, either for that they thought it more ho∣nourable, or more safe. There were thoughts of carrying on the War into Africk, and to that purpose a great Fleet was providing in Biscay. Death put a stop to this design, which seiz'd King Ferdinand at Sevil, on the 30th of May, in the Year 1252. He Reign'd over Ca∣stile 34 Years, 11 Months, and 23 Days, over Leon, about 22 Years. He was endew'd with all good Qualities, his Life was such, that it purchased him the Title of the Saint. It is doubted whether his Valour, Piety, or good Fortune excelled most. In fine, he acted the part of a good Man, and a Just Prince. No time made his Piety so visible as the Hour of his Death. Raymund, Archbishop of Sevil, Administred the Blessed Sacrament to him; at the time it came into the Room he fell upon his Knees, with a Halter about his Neck, like a Criminal, with great Humility, begging pardon of his Sins, and at the last gasp asked For∣giveness of all that were present. Taking the Candle in his Hand, with Eyes lifted up to Heaven, he said, Lord, the Kingdom which you gave me, and all the Honour I could merit, I re∣store
to thee. Naked I came from my Mothers Womb, and Naked I resign my self to the Earth. Receive O Lord my Soul, through the Merits of thy Holy Passion, and vouchsafe to place it among thy Servants. This said, he order'd the Clergy to sing the Litany, and Psalm. Te Deum, and then yielded up the Ghost. A little before his Death, he gave much good advice to his Son Alonso, whom he appointed his Heir, and recommended to his care his Queen, and his other Sons, of which Frederick, Henry and Philip, Elect of Sevil, were present at his Death, D. Sancho, Elect of Toledo, was then at his See. The next day the Obsequies were perform'd with much Grandeur. His Body was bury'd in the Cathedral of Sevil. This King is said to His good Ordi∣nances. have instituted the Council of State, which to this day has the Supream Authority in deter∣mining Causes. He appointed 12 Judges as a higher Court, whither all Appeals from infe∣rior Tribunals should be brought, so that he, who Appeals deposites 500 Pistols, and in case judgment be given against him, forfeits them. The Number of Law suits increasing, and the Malice of the times still producing new Frauds, it was necessary to erect this Tribu∣nal; for before each City was content with the determinations of their Judges, or only Ap∣peal'd to the Provincial Courts, looking upon it as Superfluous to have recourse to the King. Besides, this he gave Men of Learning the care of inventing new Laws, and gathering the old into one Volume, now call'd Partidas, which work begun in his time, was perfected and publish'd under King Alonso his Son. D. Lucas de Tuy, brought his History down to the Death of King Ferdinand, and no farther. CHAP. V. The beginning of the Reign of King Alonso, he is chosen Emperour, by part of the Electors, and Richard Duke of Cornwall by the rest. Theobald, the first King of Navarre dies, his Son Theobald the Second succeeds him. KIng Alonso the Tenth of the Name, as was of right, succeeded his Father Ferdinand. His Reign for the strange variety of Revolutions that happen'd, prov'd much more won∣derful Alonso the 10th suc∣ceeds to the Crown of Castile. than glorious. For what can be more admirable than to see a Prince bred in War, and so Learned, that few private Persons could compare with him; reduc'd to that Unfortunate State, he could neither obtain the Empire, offer'd him by Strangers, nor secure the Kingdom left him by his Father; but to be reduc'd almost to the state of a private Man. He sully'd the Title of the Wise, purchas'd by his Learning, by not knowing how to foresee and prevent the Calamities that fell upon him. At Sevil, where he was when his Father dy'd, he was Pro∣claim'd King. His first action was to renew the League with the King of Granada; and he remitted him the sixth part of the Tribute he us'd to pay. This was done in respect to his good Services, and to encourage him to continue faithful. That Prince was so great an ad∣mirer of King Ferdinand, that, tho' a Moor, he sent Yearly 100 Wax Torches to Sevil, for that Kings Anniversary. There was great scarcity of Money, to relieve which want, it was thought fit, that instead of Pepiones, a Coin so call'd, that was made of pure Metal, there should Burgaleses be us'd, which were base, and full of allay. This was no relief to the King's wants; for all things grew dear, and he was forc'd to raise the Salaries of all Officers. But the People were much more inrag'd, when another sort of Money was invented, call'd Black, because it had much Copper; 15 pieces of this Money were worth a Crown, one Burgales was worth two Pepiones. This Method of raising Money has often been found very prejudicial, and soon made King Alonso odious to his Subjects. King Alonso was troubled for the Barrenness of his Queen Violante; Flatterers advis'd there might be a Divorce obtain'd, and the King was easy to be perswaded. He sent to conclude a Match with Christina Daughter to the King of Denmark, and she was brought into Spain. King Jayme of Aragon indeavour'd by fair means to alter this resolution, but those failing, had recourse to Arms. Thus the War broke out, incursions were made on both sides, and the Frontiers plunder'd. Theobald King of Na∣varre dy'd, now on the 8th of July, 1253. As he was worthy of praise for his zeal towards the Holy Land, so he was Blameable for invading the rights of the Church, on which account it 1253. is said, that Kingdom was for the space of three Years under a general Interdict. After that Theobald King of Navarre. dies. time was expir'd Peter Remigius, or Gaçoliz Bishop of Pamplona, who had been Banished was reconciled to the King, and return'd to his Church. Theobald was honourable for other good qualities, and especially for his Learning. He had Three Wives, by the first who was Daughter to the Earl of Lorrain, he had no Children. Being Divorc'd from her, by the Pope's Command, he Marry'd Sibila, Daughter to Philip Earl of Flanders, by whom he had Blanch, Marry'd to John Duke of Britanny, called the Red. By his third Wife, the Daughter of Archimbaud Earl of Faux, he had Theobald, Henry and Ellenor. Theobald succeeded his Fa∣ther, being then not 15 Years of Age, but of an Excellent temper, and promising hopes. Theobald the second King of Navarre. Queen Marguerite, his Mother, fearing Alonso King of Castile, being eas'd of the War with the Moors, would again set up his pretensions to that Crown, had recourse to the King of Ara∣gon, with him, she had a Conference at Tudela in August, and they concluded a League Offensive and Defensive. It was also agreed, that Theobald should Marry one of King
Jayme's Daughters, and that neither of them should be given to any of the King of Castile's Brothers, without the consent of Queen Marguerite. However the King of Aragon sav'd to himself, his pretensions to that Crown, on account of the adoption of King Sancho. That this League might be the firmer, they had it confirmed by the Pope. It aim'd directly at Castile. The apprehensions of a War, caus'd the King of Aragon, and his Son to be reconcil'd. Thus I find that Alonso the eldest Son, confirm'd under an Oath, what his Father had given to Pe∣ter and Jayme, the two Younger Brothers. A new War ensued. Alasarcho, a designing Moor, promis'd to deliver up the Castle of Reguara, King Jayme being a forward Prince, easily gave credit to him, and was on the way with a small handful of Men. He had fallen into the snare, and been taken, but that he had intelligence of the design. The Moor thus disap∣pointed Moors Ba∣nished Valencia. perswaded those of Valencia to revolt, thither the King hasted, and it was debated to expel all the Infidels. Interest sway'd the Nobility to oppose this ad∣vice, but the Prelate, and Commonalty prevail'd, so the Moors were Commanded to depart Valencia, and all its Territory within a time prefixt. They tho' 60000. strong and in Arms, obey'd, and dispersed themselves into the Country of Murzia and Granada. A considerable number also setled in that part now called La Mancha de Aragon, formerly Montaragon, of a Town of that Name. At that time it was not Tilled nor Im∣proved, at present yields Corn that supplies many Places. Ferdinand, Brother to King Alon∣so, made a considerable profit of the Moors, for being Governour of Villena, through which they were to pass, he obliged every one to pay a Crown of Gold. These affairs hindred the King of Aragon from falling upon Castile, and this delay proved fortunate. At the same time that Christina, after her long Voyage, came to Toledo, which was in the Year 1254. it appeared that the Queen was with Child. The King moved, at so unexpected an accident, 1254. Queen Vi∣olante proves with Child and pre∣vents being di∣vorced from the King. changed his hatred into Love, and those who before perswaded a Divorce, now pleaded for the Queen. Such is the Custom of Flatterers. Philip, the King's Brother, notwithstanding he was Abbot of Valladolid, and Elect Archbishop of Sevil, renounced the Priestly Function, and with the King's consent, Marry'd Christina, who dy'd soon after. Queen Violantes Bar∣reness, was chang'd into Fruitfulness, and she bore many Children. These were Berengaria, Beatrix, Ferdinand called de la Cerda, that is, of the Hair, because of long Hair that grew on his back, Sancho, Peter, John, James, Elizabeth, and Ellenor. By a Woman of mean Extra∣ction, the King had Alonso Fernandez, by D. Mayor, Daughter to Peter de Guzman, he had Beatrix, both Illegitimate. In the following Year 1255. Edward the Eldest Son, of Henry King of England, came into Spain, the cause of his coming is not known, unless, it were on 1255. account of Christina, who was his Cousin-german. He was honourably received by the King at Burgos, and by him Knighted, according to the Custom of those times. Honours directed to appease the Fierce Youth. King Alonso had not the same Character in all parts. In Spain, he was hated by his Sub∣jects, and not much beloved by the Neighbouring Princes. Abroad, the Fame of Learning K. Alonso chosen Emperor, by part of the Electo∣rs, and Richard Duke of Cornwal by the other. gained him renown. This moved the Electoral Princes of Germany, after the Death of the Emperor William, to choose him his Successor. But they did not all consent, for the Arch∣bishops of Cologne and Mentz, and the Count Palatine, Elected Richard Duke of Cornwal, Bro∣ther to Henry King of England. This Election was made on the 6th of January in the Year 1256, some say two Years later. The Archbishop of Treves, and Duke of Saxony look∣ing upon the other as invallid, on the last day of March following made choice of King A∣lonso. Embassadors were sent to them both, and both took the Title of Emperors, but Richard had so much the advantage, that he immediately went over into Germany, and was Crowned the first time at Aquisgran, by the Archbishop of Cologne. King Alonso was hindred 1256. by his Domestick troubles, and forced to put off his departure. This delay gave time to his party to cool in their Affections, and the other to strengthen it self. Richard seemed to have the better Title, being chosen within the Year, after the Death of his Predecessor, and on the day appointed for the Election, and also, for that within the space of another Year, he was Crowned at Aquisgran, by the Archbishop of Cologne, and seated in the Chair of Charlemaigne, in token of possession. Besides, the Princes and Governours did him Ho∣mage. All these Circumstances pleaded for Richard's right, whereas King Alonso had per∣formed none of the usual Ceremonies. Both the Elector Palatine, and King of Bohemia, who are the Umpires, when there is any thing depending, had declared for Richard. On the other side, King Alonso pleaded, that he was Elected according to Custom, within the City Walls. That the Archbishop of Cologne, and the Palatine came with great Military Power, as it were to force the others, and had made a Separate Election without the Town. That the Princes in the City, had waited so long to reduce them to observe Order, and at length, the Arch∣bishop Contests about the Imperial Crown. of Treves, with the Duke of Saxony, who had also the Marques of Bradenburgh's Voice, had Elected King Alonso, the King of Bohemia's Embassador joining with them. Besides, these formal reasons, they exprobrated Crimes to each other, one side said, The Archbishop of Treves, was Excommunicated for oppressing his Subjects with Taxes. The other ob∣jected he of Cologne, had Wounded the Pope's Legate, and stricken a Bishop, and that the Elector Palatine abused the Churchmen, and in the late Confusions had joyned with the Emperor against the Pope. King Alonso, being far off, was detained by many troubles at home, besides, that he was naturally unconstant, and hoped by some Artifice, to put an end
to that debate. Richard was hindred by the Wars at that time, betwixt England and France, and dy'd the 6th Year after, he took the Title of Emperor. The end of this contest shall be told in its place. CHAP. VI. Aragon and Castile at variance and reconcil'd. Sancho King of Portugal dies in Exile. Death of the Queen and Prince of Aragon. Portugal under an Interdict. Marriages of the King of Navarre, and Prince of Aragon. KING Alonso was naturally Mild, had a great Spirit, sought Glory rather than Pleasure, K. Alonso's qualities. addicted himself to Learning, yet was very inconstant and covetous, which drew upon him the hatred of the People, and he neglected to gain the Love of the Nobility. To shun idle∣ness, the ground of all intestine troubles, he invaded Andaluzia, his Army divided into se∣veral Bodies, the better to recover divers places, the Moors still possessed. He in Person Towns in Andaluzia taken. took Xeres, his Brother Henry, Arcos and Nebrixa, a Town near the mouth of the River Guadalquivir. D. Nun̄o de Lara, was appointed Governour of Xerez. Now might the Moors have been expell'd, all that Country, had not another War called away the King. Theobald the second King of Navarre, being come to Age, with the assistance of the King of Aragon, with whom he had renewed the League before made, resolved to invade Castile, pretending that Guipuscoa, Alava, Rioja, and Briviesca, belonged to his Crown, and had been wrongfully taken from his Predecessors. Many Nobles of Castile, went over to Aragon and Navarre, having first by a publick instrument, renounced their Country, which was the Custom used then, not to be thought Traytors. These stirred up, and incensed that Young Prince. Among them the chief was James de Haro, who soon dy'd at Ban̄ares, whether he went to be Cur'd. Yet his Son Lope de Haro, with a great retinue went to Estela, where the King of Differ∣ences be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon compos'd. Aragon then was. The same did Prince Henry, being much disgusted with his Brother. These Princes made a League among themselves. The People of Castile, tho' they had not declared, were of the same Opinion. They were offended at the baseness of the Coin, which caused all things to grow dear, and the King having set rates upon all things there, ensued a great scarcity, because those who had stocks, would not sell at that rate. King Alonso, under∣standing his danger, began to Treat of some Accommodation, with the King of Aragon, who was not averse to it, being again, tho' old, entangled in the Love of D. Teresa Vidaura, to such a degree, that he seemed infatuated. At Soria, the two Kings met, and concluded a Peace, in the Year 1256. At the same time Marguerite, Mother of Theobald King of Na∣varre, 1256. dy'd in Champagne, whether she went to settle the affairs of that Earldom. She was buryed in the Monastery of Claravelle, then Famous for the Sanctity of its Monks. The fol∣lowing Year dy'd at Toledo, Sancho Capelo King of Portugal, as Garibay in his History relates, but Duarte Nun̄ez, will have his Death to have happen'd in the Year 1246. His Brother Alonso, who had Governed the Kingdom Thirteen Years, only as Regent, now took the Title of Sancho K. of Portugal dies at Toledo in Exile. King. He had by Beatrix, Daughter to the King of Castile, Denis his eldest Son, Alonso Earl of Portalegre, Blanch who lies bury'd at Huelgas, where she was long Abbess, and Constance who dy'd Young. At this time Henry the King's Brother, stirred up both the Moors and Christians at Nebrixa; whether he was withdrawn to Rebellion. D. Nun̄o de Lara having notice of it, repaired thither from Sevil, and Prince Henry not being able to oppose him, fled by Sea to Valencia. The King of Aragon, at first received him favourably, but for fear of infringing the Treaty, concluded with his Brother, obliged him to take his flight into Africk. Thence after four Years spent at Tun̄ez, he went over poor, and miserable into France, and so into Italy, desiring to make War on his Brother, if any Prince would support him. The King of Aragon, having setled Valencia, passed over to Mompellier, designing to meet the King of France. On the 11th of May in the Year 1258. they met at Carbolio, and were 1258. perfectly reconciled, both parties freely resigning what had been before taken, on either side. Kings of France and Aragon meet, and are re∣conciled: Catalonia and Barcelona, were also declared wholly independent of the Crown of France, for till that time they had acknowledged a certain dependance, tho' it was only in form. To make this Alliance the firmer, a match was concluded betwixt Philip, the King of France his eldest Son, and Elizabeth, the King of Aragon's Youngest Daughter, he giving her the Towns of Carcassonne, and Bezieres for a Portion. This Year there hap'ned extraordinary Floods, which continued from August, till the 26th of December, the Rivers swelling beyond their Banks, and doing infinite harm. Many Bridges were carry'd away, and among them that at Toledo, called of Alcantara. But the following Year it was rebuilt, as appears by the Inscription on the first Arch of the Bridge. Spain was now somewhat quiet, considering how many diffierent Princes ruled it. Yet some misfortunes hap'ned. D. Violante, Queen of Aragon, and her Son-in-Law Alonso dy'd. The King's extravagancies seem'd to have shortned both thier Lives. Prince Alonso was troubled Death of the Prince and Queen of Aragon. that his Father showed him no affection at present, and by dividing his Dominions had les∣sen'd his Inheritance for the future. This was not only grievous to the Prince, but to all the
Nobility, who publickly espous'd his quarrel, and the King, not long before his Sons Death, to pacify them, deliver'd up Valencia to him, ordaining it should be always annex'd to the Crown of Aragon. The Queen was offended that D. Teresa Vidaura, after she had been some time laid aside, was now again so great with the King, that he did nothing without her. He was so infatuated, that he kept her as well before as after the Queen's Death, with all the State due to a Queen. She twice Challeng'd the King for pro∣mise of Marriage before the Pope. By her the King had Peter Lord of Ayerve, and Jaime Lord of Exeriça. Queen Violante was bury'd at Valbuena in Catalonia, Prince Alonso in the Cathedral of Valencia. Zurita, a Noble Historian of Aragon writes, he was interred in the Monastery of Viruela of Cistercians. Theobald King of Navarre, after the Death of his Mo∣ther, Theobald King of Navarre Marries. valiantly maintained the Earldom of Champagne, against many Princes of France, who sought to make themselves Masters of it. This done he Marry'd Elizabeth, the Youngest Daughter of Luis, King of France. The Nuptials were Celebrated at Melun, but prov'd not Fortunate in the end, by reason of the Queen's Barrenness. This King had a Bastard Daughter, by D. Marquesa de Rada, and marry'd her to Peter, the King of Aragon's Bastard Son. Maud Countess of Bologne, understanding the Death of King Sancho of Portugal, went Unjust proceed∣ing of Alonso K. of Portugal. thither by Sea to plead her right of Marriage with Alonso the present King, and try whether he could be moved to do her justice. She came to Cascaes, not far from Lisbon, but the King being nothing concern'd at her misfortunes, or at a Letter she sent him, was forc'd to return without seeing him. The King boasted, he would Marry again the next Day, if he thought it were for the good of his Kingdom. Maud, went herself to complain of the wrong done her, to S. Luis, then King of France, and sent Embassadors to the Pope. That King was too far from Portugal to relieve her. The Pope sent to warn King Alonso, of the wrong he offered that Lady, and how hainous an offence it was to God; but he gave no Ear to his ad∣vice. At length, he refusing to obey, the Pope excommunicated him, and laid an interdict on the whole Kingdom, which is said to have lasted 12 Years, because that King would not mend, nor the succeeding Popes abate any thing of their rigour. In other cases King Alonso Portugal under an Interdict. was of a good Temper, and a great Lover of Justice. He clear'd the Kingdom of Robbers, which were grown Numerous, through the ill Government of King Sancho. He also establish'd wholesome Laws, and carry'd an even hand between the Nobility and Commonalty. In War-like Affairs, his Government was not inferior to the Civil, for he enlarg'd his Dominions, taking from the Moors, Faro, Algezira, Albufera, and other Towns in the Territory of Sil∣ves. Castro, Estremoz and Portalegre, were founded by him, and the City Beja, ruin'd by the Wars, was rebuilt. In Lisbon, there is a stately Convent of Dominicans built by him, and another of poor Clares at Santarem. His Liberality towards the poor was such, that having exhausted his Treasures, he often Pawn'd his Jewels to relieve them. At this time, the fame of King Alonso of Castile, his Learning being spread throughout the World, there came to him Embassadors from the Soldan of Aegypt, bringing presents of rich Germents, Car∣pets Embassy to the K. of Castile from the Soldan of Aegypt. and Tapistry, as also several strange Beasts, never before seen in Spain. This was in the Year 1260. This same Year a Town of Guipuscoa, then called Arrasata, chang'd its name for that of Mondragon, as appears by a Charter of King Alonso, the ancientest extant in Spanish; for he was the first King of Spain, that caused all Publick Acts to be writ in Spa∣nish, whereas before they were all in Latin. On the 27th of October 1261. dy'd D. Sancho, 1260. Archbishop of Toledo. Pascualis, or Pascasius Dean of that Church, who had carry'd the Cross 1261. before Roderick the Archbishop, at the Battle of Nabas de Tolosa, succeeded him. Doubtless he was very old, and dy'd only Elect, in June following. His Tomb is in the Chapel of St. Lucy in that Cathedral. Frederick, the Emperor dying, his Son Conrade succeeded him, who also four Years after end∣ed his days in Sicily, either of a natural Death, or as some would have it, poison'd by his Bastard Brother Manfredus. This Manfredus (notwithstanding Conrade had appointed a Son, then a Child, which he left in Germany to succeed in all his Dominions) by force of Arms Succession of Sicily. possess'd himself of Sicily, and the Kingdom of Naples. The Popes whose feof those Coun∣tries were, admonish'd him to desist, but he taking no notice of the Ecclesiastical Censures, made War in Tuscany, where the Guelphs, a Faction that favoured the Pope, were very power∣ful, and overthrowing them, soon became absolute Master of that Province. The Pope us'd all possible means to overturn that new Kingdom. Charles Earl of Anjou, and Brother to Luis King of France, was invited into Italy, upon hope given him of being made King of Sici∣ly. On the other side Manfredus, sought to obtain aid from all parts, and therefore had recourse in the first place, to Jayme King of Aragon, offering his Daughter Constance for Wife, to his eldest Son Peter. This match was not displeasing to the Aragonians, for besides 120000 Ducats, that he offer'd down with her, she was Heiress to the Kingdom of Sicily, Manfredus having no Heirs Male. All points being agreed upon, he sent F. Raymund de Pen̄afuerte of the Order of S. Dominick, Embassador to the Pope, to indeavour to compose the differences betwixt him and Manfredus. The Pope gave no manner of Ear to F. Raymund, but utter'd threatning Speeches against Manfredus, accusing him of many Crimes, and affirming, he would King of Aragon Marries his Son to the Daughter of the King of Sicily. never Treat with him, unless he laid down Arms, and came submissively to him. At the same time he advis'd, and warn'd King Jayme, not to ingage himself with so wicked a Man, least he should draw some judgment upon himself. This answer put the King of Aragon to a stand, but at length interest prevail'd. The Marriage was Solemniz'd at Monpellier in France,
in the Year 1262. The King returning to Barcelona, divided his Dominions among his Sons. 1262. To Peter, the eldest, was assign'd all Aragon, Catalonia and Valencia. To his Son Jayme, he gave Russillon, Cerdagne, Colibre, Conflens and Valespira; yet so as that he should do Homage for them to the King of Aragon. They were also to be govern'd by the Laws of Catalo∣nia, and not to have Authority to Coin Money. Besides those Dominions, he gave him Ma∣jorca, with the Title of King, and also Montpelier, in France. Thus the Father reconcil'd the two Brothers, who began to be at variance about their Inheritance, the Nobility heightning their divisions, without regard to the Publick, every one of them striving to make his own advantage. CHAP. VII. The Family of the Merines obtains the Empire of Africk. The War against the Moors renew'd in Spain. Cuidad Rodrigo built. Troubles in Aragon. The City Murcia taken, and the King of Granada made Tributary. A New and more dangerous War than any of the former, seem'd now to threaten Spain, from a new Empire lately erected in Africk. The Family of the Merines having overthrown The Fa∣mily of the Me∣rines ob∣tains the Empire of Africk. and destroy'd the Almohades, reviv'd the former Valour of that Nation, and purpos'd to march over into Spain to restore its Empire there. After the Death of Mahomet, called the Green, who lost the famous Battle of Nabas de Tolosa, Arrasius, his Grandson, and Son of Bussafo, who dy'd before his Father, succeeded him. When the Empire of the Almohades ex∣tended from the Ocean as far as Aegypt, the Government of Tremecen, a City on the Shore of the Mediterranean was given to a Moor, call'd Gomarança, of the Family of the Abdalueses, which is very Noble and Rich. This Man was the first that offer'd to Revolt from his Prince. Arrasius coming to suppress him, was treacherously Murder'd. No Enemy is so dangerous as a false Friend. A Kinsman of Gomarança pretending to desert from him, slew the King. He being dead, his Forces were easily vanquish'd by the Rebel, who Sally'd out of the Castle Tremesessir, where he was Besieg'd. Such as escap'd the Slaughter fled to Fez, which is near to that part of Africk call'd Algarve, or the Plain Country. Bucar Merin, Governour of Fez, under pretence of revenging his Master, gather'd these broken Forces, overthrew the Rebels, and then, as a Reward of his Victory, laying a side the Title of Governour, assum'd the Stile of King, securing the Empire of Africk to himself and his Successor. Thus, only the Usur∣per being chang'd, Bucar Merin founded a new Empire in Africk. For Almorcanda, who was of the Family of the Almohades, and had succeeded Arrasius at Morocco, designing to subdue Bucar, was by him defeated, in a Battle fought near a Town call'd Merquenosa, a days Journey from Fez. By this means, that which before made one Empire, was divided into two, which were Fez and Morocco, and so continu'd some time. Hiaya, the Son of Bucar suc∣ceeded him. He dying young, his Uncle Jacob Abenjoseph, who Govern'd in his Name, and was a warlike and wise Man, not only secur'd to himself the Dominion of Fez, but with won∣derful ease Conquer'd the Empire of Morocco, and almost all Africk, which he left to his Heirs. No People under the Sun are more Inconstant than the Africans, which is the reason that no Dominion is lasting among them. Budebusio, a powerful Moor, of the Family of the Almo∣hades, offended that Almorcanda, who was not so near Related to the Kings of Morocco as himself, should be preferred before him, offer'd Jacob, King of Fez, all the Lands from that City to the River Nababo, if he would assist him to recover his Right. Almorcanda, by their joynt Forces was easily drove from Morocco, yet Budebusio, not only refused to perform his promise, but threatned the King of Fez. After three Years spent in War between them, Bu∣debusio was despoiled of all his Dominions, and the King of Fez, taking Morocco, became ab∣solute Monarch of all Africk, except the Cities of Tremeçen and Tunez. During these Confu∣sions, two of the Almohades secur'd those Places, and kept them with the Title of Kings, tho' of no great Power. From this Family, without any interruption, descended Muleasse, King of Tunez, who being Banished his Kingdom by the famous Pyrate, Barbarossa, was restored by the Emperor Charles V. These were the Families that Rul'd in Africk. In Spain, Mahomet Almahar, was King of Granada; and Hudiel of Murcia, both Weak and Tributaries to King Alonso of Castile. These Moorish Kings in Spain Re∣volt. two grown weary of their Subjection to the Christians, and hoping to be reliev'd by Jacob, King of Africk, who began to gain great Renown, agreed among themselves to Revolt. Tho' before they were mortal Enemies, yet their hatred to the Christians, and hope of casting off their Yoke, made them Friends. They carry'd their Designs very private, lest being too soon discover'd, they might accelerate their Ruin. King Alonso, either that he had know∣ledge of these Practices, or else desiring utterly to expel the Moors, had no other care but of renewing the War against them. Some Cities in Andaluzia refus'd to submit to him, which he thought to reduce by force. To this effect, Pope Alexander IV. granted the Croisade to all that would serve in that War at their own Cost and Charges. Embassadors were sent to the neighbouring Princes to obtain Supplies, particularly it was demanded of the King of
Aragon, that he would give leave to his Subjects to take Arms in that Holy War, as had been agreed by the Treaty at Soria. The King of Aragon neither flatly deny'd, nor fully granted, for he excepted all the Nobility, who either depended on him for their Estates, or receiv'd his Pay; but he allow'd, that their Vassals, and others of the Commonalty, might take Arms. This old King design'd by these means to secure the Nobility, of whose Loyalty he was not fully satisfy'd, if they should get into Castile. This answer so provok'd King A∣lonso, that he once design'd to turn his Forces against Aragon, but at last the Publick Good prevail'd. Having taken this Resolution, he deliver'd up the Castles that had been agreed at Soria, to be put into a third hand, by way of Caution or Security. They were put into the Hands of D. Alonso Lopez de Haro, for him to hold in trust, and that he might perform it with freedom, he was absolv'd of his Allegiance to Castile. The Castles were Cervera, Agre∣da, Aguilar, Arnedo and Autol. Whilst the Christians were taken up with these Debates, the Moors understanding all these Preparations were level'd against them, not to lose time, took the Castle of Murcia, and other places in that Neighbourhood, in which were Christian Garisons. Next, they Brib'd the Moors in Sevil, to Murder the King, but that design failing, having gather'd Forces from all parts, they Invaded the Christian Territories with such fury Moors be∣gin the War. and success, that on a sudden they recover'd Xeres, Arcos, Bejar, Medina Sidonia, Rhoda and Sanlucar. Garci Gomez, Commander of the Fort of Xerez, gave a most notable Testimony of his Valour and Loyalty, for when all his Garison was kill'd or wounded, he could not be pre∣vail'd upon to surrender upon any Conditions, tho' there was no hope of Relief. The Moors admiring so much Bravery, even in an Enemy, and desiring to save his Life, contriv'd with a great Iron Hook to draw him off the Wall, had his Wounds carefully dress'd, and gave him his Life. King Alonso, who was gone to the inward Parts of Spain to raise Men, the follow∣ing Year came down to put a stop to the Current of the Enemies Success. By the way, not Cuidad Real built. far from the Ruins of Alarcos, where there was a Village call'd Poçuelo de S. Gil, about a League from the River Guadiana, in a pleasant and fruitful Plain, he Founded a large Town, and called it Villa Real. King John II. of Castile, afterwards chang'd it to that of Cuidad Real, which it still retains. The intent of building this Town was to repress the Incursions of the Moors, and thence to ravage their Lands. Thence he advanc'd into the Enemies Country, doing much harm whereever he came. The damage the Moors sustain'd in the Year 1263. is not to be computed. This Year a great number of Voluntiers came to the Camp, induc'd by a Grant 1263. from the King, which made all such as serv'd three Months every Year with Horse and Arms at their own cost, free from a Tax call'd Martinjega. The Moors perceiving they were no way able to withstand so great a Force as was that of the Christians, made fresh Instances to the King of Morocco, pressing hard for Relief. Their Embassadors declared to him the great danger they were in, if not speedily succour'd. That King having heard them, granted their Request. He sent them 1000 Light-Horse, who Mutinying, put the Affairs of the Infidels Towns re∣cover'd by the Chri∣stians. into a worse condition than they were before, to such a degree, that Xerez, and all the other Towns lately taken by the Moors, were again recover'd by the Christians. Near Port S. Mary, (formerly call'd Portus Muestus) was built a Town of the same Name upon the old Ruins, which show'd the footsteps of its former Grandeur and Beauty. In Toledo, also the King built the Church of S. Leocadia, behind the Pallace. These things being perform'd in the Year 1264. the King return'd to Sevil, part of the Army was put into Winter-Quarters, and the rest dismiss'd. Fame, which magnifies all things, now gave it out, that the Enemy did 1264. not only sollicit for Supplies and Auxiliaries, to be sent them out of Africk, but for a com∣pleat Army to regain their Empire in Spain. These Rumours perplex'd the Castilians and Aragonians, who lay most expos'd, and on whom, of necessity that storm must first fall. King Alonso fearing the dangerous Consequences of this War, sent Peter Yanez, Master of Calatrava, his Embassador to the King of Aragon, to propose to him the joyning of their Forces against the Common Enemy, urging the publick danger, the Kindred that was be∣tween them, and the Honour of the Christian Religion. The Affairs of Aragon were not in a peaceable posture, nor had the King's Sons laid aside their Animosities, the Nobles were di∣vided Troubles in Aragon. into Factions, and the Commonalty followed their Example. These distractions pro∣duced Robberies, Murders, and all sort of Crimes, insomuch, that the Cities of Aragon, which stand in the Mountains, were obliged to institute Brotherhoods to supress those Out-Laws, and by framing new and severe Laws, to terrifie those wicked Men. The greivous∣ness of the Punishments were terrible. Indifferent Crimes were chastized with Death, the least with Whipping, or some other shameful Penalty. The Minds of the Nobility were wholly alienated from their King. They complained all Honours were bestowed on Stran∣gers, or mean People. That their Liberties were infringed, and the Authority of the Justice of Aragon, who is to secure the Franchises of the People, was diminished. That not only the Commonalty, but the Nobility were oppressed with Taxes. These were the Publick Com∣plaints. Besides these, every Man had his private Grievance. Therefore the King at Barce∣lona, desiring to raise the Tax called Bovaticum, Raymund Folch, Viscount of Cardona, ob∣stinately oppos'd him, affirming, unless the King altred his method of Government, he would never give over. He had not stopped here, but that some other Men of Quality told him it was an unfit season to stir up the People to Mutiny, that it was better to wait a fitter oppor∣tunity, and not oppose the publick good. At Zaragoca, the Cortes, or Parliament was held,
in order to raise Money, but most of the Nobility oppos'd the King. Fernan Sanchez, his own Son, and Simon de Ʋrrea, his Father-in-law, were most remarkable in heading the Muti∣niers. They carry'd it so far as to depart the Assembly, and make a League among them∣selves at Alagon, in order to oppose the King. War must have decided these Controversies, had not some Religious Persons interpos'd, and prevail'd with both Parties to stand to Arbi∣tration. The King himself being a Politick Prince, refus'd not to redress all that was amiss. A Truce was concluded, and the Bishops of Zaragoca and Huesca, were appointed Judges, who wisely compos'd all those Differences. These Tumults appeas'd, Forces were rais'd in order to commence the War on that side, in the Year 1265. King Alonso, with a powerful 1265. Army, entred the Territories of Granada. King Jayme undertook Murcia. All things prov'd The Kings of Castue and Ara∣gon, in∣vade the Moors. easier than had been expected, for I don't find that any Succours came over to the Infidels out of Africk. King Jayme entring by the way of Valencia into the Limits of Castile, took Villena from the Moors, and restor'd it to Emanuel, the King of Castile's Brother, who was his Son∣in-law, having Marry'd his Daughter Constance. After that he had made himself Master of Elda, Orcelis and Elche, and many other Towns in that Neighbourhood. Then passing the River Segura, he intercepted a Convoy of 2000 Load of Provisions that was going to Murcia, under a strong Guard. Mean while King Alonso prosecuted the War so vigorously in Grana∣da, that he oblig'd those Moors to make humble Suit, that the former Capitulation might be Re-establish'd. The two Kings, Alonso and Jayme, the better to consult about the future Operations, had an Interview at Alcaraz, Queen Violante was at this Conference. After some days spent in taking the necessary Measures, they both return'd to the War. The Ara∣gonians being provided with all Necessaries, march'd from Orcelis towards Murcia, and in∣vested it in January 1266. That City is seated in a Plain, thro' which the River Segura runs, 1266. the Country about is very delightful. The River drawn into small Chanels waters the Fields Murcia ta∣ken by the Ara∣gonians. and City, which is full of Mulbery, Citron, Orange, and other sorts of Trees, which make it look like a Terrestial Paradise. In our days, the principal Trade of that City is Silk. At that time it was well Fortify'd, and had a strong Garison. Some Sallies were made at first, in which, the Besieg'd came off always with loss. In conclusion, the Siege had not lasted long before the Moors Capitulated, and Surrendred the Place. On the other side, King Alonso, at Alcala de Bençayde, came to an Accommodation with the Moors of Granada, upon the follow∣ing Conditions. That the King of Granada break the League with Hudiel, King of Murcia. That he pay 50000 Ducats Yeatly, as was done before. That King Alonso on his part no longer Protect the Moors of Guadix and Malaga, provided the Moorish King grant them a Truce for a Year. That the King of Murcia, if taken by the Christians, have his Life spar'd. These Articles being sign'd, King Alonso hasted to take possession of Murcia, after the sur∣render whereof, King Jayme was return'd home. At the Town of Santistevan, Hudiel, King of Murcia, met King Alonso, and falling at his Feet, begg'd pardon for what was past, which was granted, upon condition he should no longer use the Stile of King, but be content with such Revenues as were assigned him. The Title of King was given to Mahomet, the Bro∣ther of that Abenhut, who we said above, was kill'd at Almeria. Only the third part of the King's Revenue was allotted him, the rest to be paid to the Crown of Castile; this was the end of the War which had held most People in suspence. CHAP. VIII. The Kingdom of the Normans in Sicily, extinguish'd by the French. Wars in Italy. The Empress of Constantinople comes into Spain. And Jayme, King of Aragon, to Toledo. WHilst the War was in Andaluzia and Murcia, the other parts of Spain enjoy'd Peace, or there were no considerable Troubles, a thing rare among so many Princes, and in such a time of Popular Liberty. Only Gonçalo Yanez Baçan, a Nobleman of Navarre, ha∣ving by a publick Instrument renounc'd his Country, with the King of Aragon's consent, built a Castle he call'd Boeta, whence he infested the Lands of Navarre. S. Luis, King of France, at the same time sent to Pamplona a piece of the Crown of Thorns, which was put upon our Sa∣viour's Head. Baldwin, the Emperor of Constantinople, had pawn'd it to him for a Sum of Money. In Italy, Charles, Brother to the King of France, slew King Manfredus, possess'd Charles, Brother to the King of France, Crown'd King of Sicily. himself of all his Dominions, and at Rome was Crown'd King of Sicily and Naples. The Bat∣tle was fought near Benavente, which put an end to the Dominion of the Normans, when it had lasted many years in those parts. The new King oblig'd himself to pay 40000 Ducats every Year to the Church of Rome, as an acknowledgment for that Feof, and engag'd not to accept of the Empire, tho' offer'd him, without his Procurement. King Jayme much con∣cern'd at the misfortune of his Ally Manfredus, study'd how to retrieve that loss. As soon as the War was concluded in Murcia, he went to the farthest part of Catalonia, to be ready, if there were any means left to restore the remainder of the Normans, and possess himself of that Kingdom, which he pretended belong'd to his Son, in the Right of his Wife, the only Daughter of Manfredus. Mean while King Alonso was busie in setling the Affairs of Murcia,
gathering People to inhabit that Country, and building Castles for its security. Castile could not furnish a sufficient Multitude, therefore he brought many out of Catalonia to settle there. Tho' contrary to the late Capitulation, he ceas'd not to relieve the Moors of Ma∣laga and Guadix. The King of Granada came himself to Murcia, to complain of this wrong, and receiving no satisfactory answer, return'd home worse offended than he came. Some Nobles, who before were disgusted at King Alonso, laid hold of this opportunity, and ad∣vis'd the Moor to take Arms. The chief of these was D. Nun̄o Gonzalez de Lara, a Rich and Christian Nobles persuade the Infi∣dels to Re∣volt. Powerful Man, who pretended the King had much wrong'd his Father D. Nun̄o, and D. John, his Brother. This was the beginning of new Troubles, at such time as the King pro∣mising himself a lasting Peace, was gone to view the Building of Villareal. Thence he sent Embassadors to S. Luis, King of France, to demand his Daughter Blanch in Marriage for his eldest Son, Prince Ferdinand. This done, he went to Vitoria, where the King of England had appointed to meet him, upon Affairs of high concern, yet came not. Nevertheless, he sent Edward, his Son, at such time as King Alonso was gone back to Burgos. At the same time, the Empress of Constantinople being drove from her Empire, came to confer with the Empress of Constan∣tinople, in Spain. King. Baldwin, her Husband, and Justinian the Patriarch, being Expell'd Greece by Michael Paleologus, were taken by the way, and fell into the Hands of the Soldan of Aegypt. The Empress, whose Name was Martha, agreed to give 30000 Marks of Silver for his Ransome. To gather this great Sum, she had recourse to the Pope, and King of France, and lastly, coming to Burgos, in the Year 1268. made her address to the King for only the third part of 1268. that Sum. The King gave her the whole, which was Profuseness rather than Liberality, at a time when the Royal Treasures were quite exhausted. Some Historians reject this Re∣lation, and say Baldwin was never taken by the Soldan of Aegypt. In this, I have follow'd the Authority of our Histories, tho' I know Fame often exceeds the truth. Baldwin, the Em∣peror, having recover'd his Liberty, and lost his Empire, went into France, and thence to Namur, which City was his own, where he spent the residue of his Life. By a Grant made to the Knights of Calatrava, in the Year of our Lord 1264. it appears the See of Toledo was then Vacant, unless, as it often happens, the Years therein be mistaken. Either this Year, or rather some time sooner, Sancho, Son to Jayme, King of Aragon, succeeded Pascualis, Archbishop of Toledo. I imagine the new Prelate being under Age, staid some time in Ara∣gon before he came to his Church, which might give occasion to some to write that the See was vacant. His Father lov'd him tenderly, and therefore about this time came to Toledo to see him, as shall presently be related. Great Wars and Confusions were now in Italy, for Conradin, the Suevian, strove by force, and against the will of the Pope, to recover his Father's Dominions. Frederick, Duke of Wars in Italy. Saxony, accompany'd him out of Germany, and Henry, Brother to the King of Castile, went to him from Rome, where he was a Senator, his Birth, as I suppose, supplying his Defects. Besides these, all the Gibellins of Italy took up Arms for him. With these Forces Conradin broke into Naples, and in Abruzzo, near the Lake Taliacoso, came to a Battle with King Charles, who was there ready to receive him. The French obtain'd the Victory. Frederick and Henry, were taken in Fight, Conradin in the pursuit, which was very bloody. Conradin and Frederick, had their Heads cut off at Naples; a hard Judgment upon such great Princes. At this time another Debate arose in Aragon, Gerard de Cabrera pretending to the Earldom of Ʋrgel, pleading that his Brother Alonso's Children were not Legitimate. Raymund Folch, A new de∣bate in Aragon. their Uncle by the Mother's side, and other Men of Note supported them. King Jayme seem'd to espouse Gerard's quarrel, and that the more, for that he had made over his Right to the King, as not able to carry it off himself. The King of Granada prepar'd to make War upon Guadix and Malaga, and was offended that King Alonso, contrary to what had been agreed, did underhand support them. D. Nun̄o de Lara, and D. Lope de Haro, being disoblig'd by the King, blew the Coals. They promis'd the Moor, if he would take up Arms, not only they, but many other Men of Note would go over to him. There was some rumour spread abroad of these Practices, but there wanted Witnesses to prove the Fact. This mov'd the King to go into Andaluzia. This Year the King chang'd the Name of the Village call'd S. Peter de Ariznoa, in Guipuscoa, into that of Vergara, and made it a Market-Town. The Affairs of Andaluzia being setled, and Winter coming on, King Alonso return'd to Toledo to entertain his Father-in-law, the King of Aragon, who came to be present at the first Mass of his Son D. Sancho the Archbishop, which was to be Celebrated on Christmass-day. D. Sancho Jayme, King of Aragon, at Toledo. accordingly said Mass that day, the two Kings of Castile and Aragon, the Queen, and Prince Ferdinand, being present. King Jayme of Aragon, staid but 8 days at Toledo, being resolv'd, tho' very old, to go over to the War in the Holy-Land, inflam'd with the desire of restoring the ancient Glory of the Christians in those parts. A great and valiant Prince, worthy to have succeded better than he did in that Expedition.
CHAP. IX. The King of Aragon's Expedition for the Holy-Land. The Kings of France and Na∣varre, and the eldest Son of the King of England, move upon the same Enterprize. The Nobles of Castile Revolt. Troublesin Aragon. THE Affairs of the Christians in the Holy-Land, were reduc'd to the last extremity Now unexpectedly a fair opportunity of restoring their losses offer'd it self, and stir∣red up at one-time England, France and Spain, to take Arms. Whilst Pope Innocent IV. held the General Council at Lyons, in France, he sent four Preachers of the Holy Order of S. Do∣minick, Preaching among the Tartars. among the Tartars, to try whether that Barbarous People could be reduc'd to em∣brace Christianity. Those Preachers were so successful, as to gain Reputation among the Barbarians, who began to show some affection towards the Christian Religion. These Peo∣ple had now Invaded that part of Syria which was under the Saracens, and the great Cham, their King, sent Embassadors to invite most Princes of Europe to share in that Conquest. Par∣ticularly, he sent Embassadors to the King of Aragon, with John Alaricus of Perpegnan, whom the King on account of an Embassy, receiv'd before, had sent into Tartary. The Tartar Em∣bassadors Embassy from Tar∣tary. staid ar Barcelona. Alaricus went to Toledo, where, in an Assembly of the Nobles he gave an account of his Embassy. King Jayme resolv'd to go in Person to that War, without regard to his great Age, or the Intreaties of King Alonso, and Queen Violante. King Alon∣so seeing he was not to be disswaded, promis'd him 100000 Ducats towards the Charge of the War. Some Nobles of Castile offer'd to bear him Company, and among them, the Master of the Knights of Santiago, and D. Gonçalo Pereyra, Grand Prior of S. John. From Toledo, he went to Valencia, where he gave Audience to the Tartars, and also to another Embassador from the Emperor Paleologus, who promis'd to furnish Provisions, and all other Necessaries. After all things were in readiness, at the request of Queen Violante his Daughter, he went as far as Huerta, and there took his leave of her, his Sons and Grandchildren. On the 4th of September, in the Year 1269. he set sail with a Fleet of 30 great Ships, and some Galleys. 1269. The Season was not fit for such Expeditions. In three days they had sight of Minorca, where Jayme, King of A∣ragon, im∣barks for the Holy-Land. a violent Storm dispers'd the whole Fleet, which was drove to several Ports. The King was put in at Marseilles, and thence remov'd to the Gulph of Agde, Some Ships, and among 'em that in which went Fernan Sanchez, the King's Son, weather'd the Storm, and arriv'd at Acre, in the Holy-Land. After refreshing himself at Montpelier, the King now repenting that he had undertaken that Expedition, return'd to Catalonia. In Castile, King Alonso, with Edward, Son and Heir to the King of England, went as far as Logrono, to meet his Daughter-in-law, who was coming out of France thro' Navarre to her Husband. This Marriage was So∣lemniz'd with greater Splendour than was ever seen before, for there were present at it Jayme, King of Aragon, Grandfather to the Bridegroom, Peter, his eldest Son, Philip, eld∣est Son to the King of France, Edward, Son and Heir to the King of England, the King of Granada, King Alonso, his Brothers, Sons, and Uncle Alonso, Lord of Molina. A great num∣ber of French, Italian and Spanish Nobility was there, and among them William, Marques of Montseratte, who, Jovius says, was Son-in-law to King Ferdinand. Sancho, Archbishop of Toledo, was also present, some say he Marry'd them. This Match was contriv'd that the King of France might quit the Pretensions he had to Castile, as being the Son of Blanch, eldest Sister to King Henry. After the Solemnity, King Alonso accompany'd the King af Aragon as far as Tarraçona. The English and French went further than the Aragonians in the Expedition of the Holy-Land, but without much Success. Edward, eldest Son to the King of England, with a good English & French in the Holy-Land Ex∣pedition. Fleet arriv'd at Ptolemais, and escap'd himself the danger of the Assassins. S. Luis, King of France, set Sail from Marseilles on the first of March 1270. Theobald, King of Navarre, ha∣ving committed the Government to his Brother Henry, accompany'd S. Luis. After a Storm they landed at Tunez, Invested the Town, overthrew the Infidels twice in the Field, and 1270. continu'd the Siege the space of 6 Months. The great heat caus'd the Plague, whereof vast numbers dy'd, and among them Prince John, the King's Son, and lastly, the King himself on the 28th of August. Charles, King of Sicily, landing at this Juncture, the Besieg'd agreed to pay him 40000 Ducats a Year, and then the Army went over into Sicily. Theobald, King of Navarre, dy'd there, in the City Trapana, on the 5th of December. The Body of Theobald, King of Navarre dies. S. Luis was carry'd to S. Denis, near Paris; that of the King of Navarre, to Champagne. Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, dy'd on the 25th of April the Year following at Hiere, in Pro∣vence, Let us return to Castile. King Alonso at this time was perplex'd with many cares. The ambition of taking upon him the Empire of Germany had not ceas'd. His Nobles were Mutinous, and there was a re∣port that the Moors of Africk made greater Preparations against Spain than they had ever done before. Yet Peter Martinez the Admiral, the last Year had taken Cadiz from the Moors by surprize. There was some difficulty in maintaining that Island, and therefore it was re∣stor'd to the King of Morocco, whose it was before, by that means to oblige him. King
Alonso of Portugal, sent his Son Denis, then but 8 years old, to his Grandfather the King of Castile, to obtain of him that Portugal might be independant, he quitting his Claim to any Homage from that Crown. This was propos'd in an Assembly of the Nobility, and oppos'd Portugal made in∣dependent of Castile. by none but D. Nun̄o Gonzalez de Lara, the chief of the Malecontents. Nevertheless, the King carry'd it, and Portugal was made Independant. D. Nun̄o worse offended than before, conspir'd against the King with D. Lope de Haro, and Prince Philip, the King's Brother: Find∣ing themselves too weak to carry on a Rebellion, they sollicited Prince Henry, who then go∣vern'd Navarre, to joyn with them, but he excus'd himself with the absence of the King his Nobility of Castile conspire a∣gainst their King. Brother. Being disappointed there, those great Men sollicited the Kings of Portugal and Granada, and even the Emperor of Morocco, to joyn with them in making War upon Castile. King Alonso was a Man of great sence, but more fit for a Scholler than a King; for whilst he Study'd the Heavens and Stars, he lost the Earth, and his Kingdom. Understanding what was in hand, by the information of Fernan Perez, whom the Conspirators endeavour'd to en∣gage to their Party; he was much surpriz'd, and apply'd his Thoughts to prevent the Mis∣chiefs that threatned. To this effect from Murcia, where he then was, he sent Henry de A∣rana, his Embassador, to endeavour some Accommodation with those Nobles, who had then assembled themselves at Palencia, to prepare for War. He, with the Queen, went to Valen∣cia, to Confer with the King of Aragon. That Prince, like a wise Man, having forseen the Storm that threatned Castile, had at Burgos advis'd King Alonso not to proceed in making him∣self odious to his Subjects, and that if he could not reconcile the Nobility, he should gain the Commonalty and Prelates, with whose assistance he might baffle all the designs of the others. At this Conference nothing of moment was done. King Alonso, nevertheless, was forc'd the next Year to return to Alicant, to see the King his Father-in-law, and desire he would with∣hold the Nobles of Aragon from joyning with the Rebels of Castile, as they intended to do. He also ask'd his advice, for that the King of Granada made War upon Guadix, and Malaga, which Affair he ought first to take in hand. King Jayme advis'd to observe the Treaty made with the Moors, but that avail'd nothing, for the King of Granada invited by the Rebels, en∣tred the Christian Territories, burning and destroying all before him. A Body of African Horse, sent by Jacob Abenjoseph, King of Morocco, followed him. Hereupon, King Alonso orders his Son Ferdinand, then at Sevil, with all the Force he could make, to oppose the Moors. He himself went to Burgos, to try if there were any means left to reduce the Rebels. In that City the Cortes, or Parliament met, all those Mutiniers being summoned upon security of Progress of the Re∣bellion in Castile. their Persons, and for their greater safety, the Hospital Royal without the City, was ap∣pointed for that Assembly. After several Conferences, they were further from any Accom∣modation than before. Their Passions swel'd to that height, that many renouncing their Allegiance, went away to Granada, in the Year 1272. D. Nun̄o de Lara, D. Lope de Haro, 1272. and Prince Philip, were the chief of the Conspirators. Next to these, Ferdinand de Castro, Lope de Mendoça, Giles de Roa, Roderick de Saldan̄a, besides a vast number of inferior Persons. At their departure they burnt Towns, and wasted the Country in token of their malice. The King made hast to Toledo, thence to Almagro, and despairing of reducing the Rebels, en∣deavoured to appease the King of Granada. It this did not succeed, he resolved to make War upon him with the greatest Force he could gather. Whilst these things were acting in Castile, Philip, King of France, Son to S. Luis, added Poitiers and Toulouze to his Crown by Inheritance. Not long after, he expelled Roger Bernard, Earl of Faux, because he would not stand to Judgment. This had like to have caus'd a War betwixt France and Aragon, because that Earldom was a Feof of the latter. The wisdom of King Jayme prevented it, for he persuaded the Earl to submit himself to the King of France, and so the dispute ended. There were some apprehensions of Troubles within the Disorders in Aragon. Kingdom. Peter, the King's eldest Son, being offended at Ferdinand Sanchez, his Bastard Brother, for that in his return from the Holy-Land, he had been nobly entertain'd by Charles, King of Sicily, and he suspected they had contriv'd something prejudicial to the Kingdom. Ferdinand was at Burriana, thither Peter came with a number of Soldiers, and Ransack'd the whole House. Mean while Ferdinand, and his Wife Aldonça, made their escape. From this beginning, greater Troubles arose, the Nobility being divided between the two Brothers, with such heat, that Ferdinand's Party doubted not to raise War against the King himself. All the Effect was that the Viscount of Cardona, and other great Men, lost their Estates. Ferdinand Sanchez being taken by his Brother in the Castle of Pomar, was Strangled, and cast into the River Cinga. The Head being taken off, the other Conspirators were soon subdued. But the Death of Fernan Sanchez hap'ned three Years later. He left a young Son, from whom the Family of Castro, in Aragon descends. To Roger Lauria, King Jayme gave an Estate in Valen∣cia, because he had accompany'd his Daughter-in-law from the furthest parts of Italy. This Gentleman proved a great Commander, especially by Sea. A Truce was concluded for ma∣ny Henry, King of Navarre. Years with Henry, now King of Navarre, his Brother Theobald dying without Issue. The King of Aragon pretended a Right to Navarre, but finding his own Subjects inclinable to Re∣bel, thought good to agree with the Foreigners, lest they should joyn with his People against him.
CHAP. X. Rodulphus of Ausburg, chosen Emperor. Henry, King of Navarre dies, his Daughter Joanna Inherits. Alonso, King of Castile, agrees with his Nobles, then goes into France to plead for the Empire, before the Pope, and returns re infecta. KIng Alonso ardently desired to go over into Germany to take possession of the Empire, and the more, for that Richard, his Competitor being dead, the Electors were about Alonso, K. of Castile, aspires to the Empire choosing another. This moved him to prepare for that Journey. The wiser sort said, it were better to settle the Kingdom at home. Vain Men advised to carry an Army to subdue all that should oppose him in Germany. Being resolved upon this Expedition, he de∣termined at any rate to Compound with the Moors of Granada, and his own Nobles. Mean while, Alhamar, King of Granada, died, at the beginning of the Year 1273. He was a Man of Courage and Conduct. Some differences arose about the Succession, but that Party pre∣vail'd 1273. with which the Outlaws of Castile joyned, and Mahomet Miralmutio Leminio, eldest Son to the Deceas'd, was Proclaimed King. Tho' this Prince was naturally an Enemy to Chri∣stians, and many advised him to War; yet because he was not well setled in his Kingdom, King Alonso hop'd to conclude a Peace. Besides, several of the Revolted Nobles began to slacken in their Demands, particularly, Ferdinand de Castro, and Roderick de Saldan̄a, upon a safe-conduct, came to the Cortes, held at Avila. At the same time in Germany they proceed∣ed Rodulphus of Ausburg, chosen Emperor to an Election, and Rodulphus, Earl of Ausburg, was by the unanimous consent of the E∣lectors chosen Emperor. All the Opposition King Alonso's Embassadors, then at Francfort, could make, availed nothing. The Cortes at Avila being broken up, King Alonso went to Requena, to consult with the King, his Father-in-law, about the carrying on the War a∣gainst the Moors. There he was seized with a dangerous Sickness, and because nothing suc∣ceeded to his Mind, thought good to try whether a Peace could be concluded by the means of the Queen, and D. Sancho the Archbishop. They two went immediately to Cordova to set the Treaty on foot. To Pope Gregory X. the King sent Aymarus, a Dominican, and Ferdi∣nand de Zamora, his Chancellor, who before the Pope, pleaded the Illegality of Rodulphus's Election. Ferdinand, Bishop of Oviedo, was sent to the Electors upon the same Errand. All these Embassies took no effect. But in the following Year 1274. the Pope holding a Ge∣neral Council at Lyons, Fredulus was sent with the Legantine Power into Spain, and Orders 1274. to offer King Alonso the tenth of the Ecclesiastical Revenues, for carrying on the War against the Moors, provided he would give over his vain pretensions to the Empire, and not disturb the Peace of the Church. Mean while, King Henry of Navarre, overgrown with Fat, died Henry, K. of Navarre, dies. Joanna his Daughter, Queen. at Pamplona, on the 22d of July. By his Wife Joanna, Daughter to Robert, Earl of Artois, the Brother of S. Luis; he left one only Daughter, called like her Mother, Joanna, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, tho' but three years of Age. This was the original of new Troubles, and the cause that the Kingdom of Navarre was annexed to France. Fredulus, his Embassy was not ungrateful to King Alonso, who answered he would entirely refer him∣self to the Pope. Whereupon, his Holiness in open Consistory, confirmed the Election of Rodulphus, and wrote accordingly to all Christian Princes. He also ordered Rodulphus to pre∣pare to go into Italy, in order to be Crowned. King Jayme, tho' old, went to the Council at Lyons, and returned thence dissatisfied with the Pope, because he refused to Crown him, unless he would pay the Tribute agreed by his Father, King Peter, as has been said before. Mean while, the King of Granada, and Rebellious Nobles of Castile, by the Queen's Media∣tion were reconciled to King Alonso. All their Demands were granted to the Nobles The King of Granada was ordered to pay 300000 Maravedies of Gold yearly, and a great Sum of ready Money. Besides, because King Alonso had taken Guadix and Malaga, into his Protecti∣on, a Truce for a Year was concluded between them, and the King of Granada. Gonzalo Ruys de Atiença, was then a great Man, and the King's Favourite, who had a great hand in Nobles of Castile re∣concil'd to King A∣lonso. this Accommodation. The King of Granada, and the Nobles, with Prince Ferdinand, set out from Cordova, and were kindly received by King Alonso, at Sevil. Things being thus setled, the Army of Castile, under the Command of Prince Ferdinand, and by his Father's order, moved towards Navarre, to Conquer that Kingdom. King Jayme having made o∣ver his Title to that Kingdom to his eldest Son Peter, sent him to gain the good will of the People of Navarre, who naturally were more inclinable to the Aragonians than the Castilli∣ans. Neither the Policy of Aragon, nor the Arms of Castile prevailed, for the Queen, re∣tired into France with her Daughter, under the Protection of that King. Prince Ferdinand attacked Viana, and being repulsed, took Mendavia, and other small Towns. All things proved more difficult than had been expected, notwithstanding no Army appeared to oppose him, and the Nobility of that Kingdom was divided into several Factions. Most inclinable to the Aragonians, but chiefly Armengaud, Bishop of Pamplona, and Pero Sanchez de Monta∣gudo, Governour of the Kingdom. Peter, Prince of Aragon, came as far as Sos, a Town on the Borders of both Kingdoms, there he pleaded his Title to the Crown, or at least demand∣ed 70000 Marks of Silver, which King Theobald not long before had agreed to pay. A Trea∣ty
being set on foot, the Nobility proposed a Match betwixt the young Lady Heiress of the Articles betwixt Aragon & Navarre. Crown, and Prince Peter, who was to have the Kingdom in Dower with her. In case that Match should be disappointed, they engaged to pay the Prince 200000 Marks towards the charge of the War they were to make with joynt Forces against Castile, in case that King persisted to molest them. These Articles were agreed on at Olite, in November. King Alonso being re∣solved to take a Journey into France, held the Cortes, or Parliament at Toledo, that all things being setled, he might set forwards. The Government of the Kingdom he left to his Son Ferdinand, to several Noblemen he gave Posts of Honour, and made D. Nun̄o de Lara, Gene∣ral of the Frontiers against the Moors. The Cortes breaking up, the King and Queen, their younger Children, and Emanuel, the King's Brother, about the end of the Year set for∣wards. Their Journeys were short, by reason of the greatness of the Retinue. They Progress of King Alonso of Castile. went to Valencia, then to Tortosa, then to Tarragona, where King Jayme waited to entertain them. They kept Christmass at Barcelona, and there began the Year 1275. Both Kings were present at the Funeral of F. Raymund de Pen̄afuerte, a Dominican, and Person of singular Pie∣ty. 1275. This same Year died D. Pelayo Perez Correa, Master of the Knights of Santiago, very Aged, and Famous for his great Exploits. His Body was Buried at Talavera, in the Church of S. James the Apostle, which is in the Suburb, as the People of that Town affirm. Others say at S. Mary de Tudia, a Church built by him at the foot of Sierra Morena, in memory of a great Victory obtained there by him over the Moors. Which was so remarkable, that the People gave out the Sun had stood as at Joshua's Command. They also say, that Church at first was called of Tentudia, from the words the Master said to the Mother of God, which were Sen̄o∣ra Ten Tu Dia, that is to say, Lady hold thy Day. Fear makes one Hour look like many, and many things are feigned, or fancied in danger which never hap'ned. King Jayme no way approved of his Son-in-law King Alonso's Journey, and endeavoured all he could to dissuade him from prosecuting of it. King Alonso would not give ear to any advice. Therefore leaving his Queen and Children at Perpignan, in the Spring he passed thro' France as far as Belcayre, in Provence, where the Pope having dismissed the Council, had appointed to meet him. There the King on the day appointed, before the Pope and Cardinals, made a long Harangue in King A∣lonso of Castile, meets the Pope in France. vindication of his Right to the Empire. The Pope in few words answered to all his Preten∣sions, intreating him, if still he thought himself any way wronged, for the love of God, and for his sake to put it up, since it concerned the Peace and Quietness of all Christendom. Then the Pope being a meek Man, and understanding how to appease Generous Spirits, em∣braced and kissed him. Thus that Pretension was given over. Yet he set up other new ones. He pleaded a Title to Suevia, since the Death of Conradin, as being descended by the Mo∣thers side from the Princes of that Country, and said Rodulphus, besides taking the Empire from him, did him wrong in Usurping that Country. Besides, he urged, that he had an ancient Right to the Kingdom of Naples, and that the French acted unjustly in seizing that Kingdom, which they could pretend to Title to, but that of a forcible possession. To conclude, he demanded that the Pope would order his Brother Henry to be set at liberty, because Charles, King of Sicily, excused himself, pretending it was not the Will of the Pope that he should be released. The Pope and Cardinals being deaf to all these, as he thought just demands, he stormed with Passion. In fine, towards the end of Summer, and beginning of Autumn, he de∣parted out of France much offended at the Pope. Being returned into Spain, he ceased not to take the Title of Emperor, and use the Imperial Robes, till the Archbishop of Sevil, by King A∣lonso re∣turns home. order from the Pope, obliged him with Ecclesiastical Censures to desist. The Tenth of Church Revenues was granted him towards carrying on the War against the Moors. This was the Original of the Custom of making use of the Church Revenues in Castile. And this was all that King Alonso profited by that troublesome Journey, made in hopes of obtaining the Em∣pire. The End of Book XIII.
THE History of SPAIN. The Fourteenth BOOK. CHAP. I. The King of Morocco passes over into Spain; The War with the Moors, the Christians twice defeated, death of Prince Ferdinand the Heir of Ca∣stile, Troubles in Navarre betwixt the Natives and the French. JAcob Abenjoseph King of Morocco having now obtain'd the Empire of all Africk, and un∣derstanding Andaluzia was left defenceless by King Alonso's departure into France, was dubious whether he should invade Spain, and revenge the Losses sustain'd by his Nation, or whether he had not better stay at Home and settle his new accquir'd Do∣minions. An Embassy that came to him out of Spain, soon put him out of this doubt. Ma∣homet The Em∣perour of Morocco called into Spain. King of Granada having more regard to his Profit than the Oath he had taken, was no sooner gone from Sevil, but he began to Meditate how to possess himself of all Andaluzia. Considering of himself he was not able to deal with the Christians, notwithstanding the ab∣sence of King Alonso, he resolv'd to invite the King of Morocco, then a famous and potent Prince, to his Aid. The King of Morocco overcome by the Perswasions of the Spanish-Moor, resolv'd upon the War in Spain. He rais'd Men, gather'd Ships, Horses, and Arms; and made all manner of Preparations throughout his Dominions. Nothing troubl'd him so much as want of Money, and the care of keeping his Design private, lest the Christians be∣ing inform'd thereof should be provided to receive him. To remedy his Want, and co∣lour his Intentions; he sent Embassadors to the King of Aragon to borrow Money of him, up∣on pretence of making War against a powerful Moor, who had rebell'd at Ceuta. Fame spread abroad what he endeavour'd to conceal: Therefore neither the King of Aragon sent him Mo∣ny, nor did the Castilians neglect providing to oppose him. True it is, Things were carry'd on slowly because King Alonso was absent, and Prince Ferdinand stay'd at Burgos, after tak∣ing a Progress through the Kingdom. The African Moor sent Officers to take Possession of Algezira and Tarifa, which as had been agreed between them were to be deliver'd to him by the King of Granada, as cautionary Towns. There he Landed a vast Number of A vast multitude of Infidels Land in Spain. Africans. The Horse are said to be 17000, the Number of Foot not known; but pro∣portionabe to so great an undertaking. The first care was to reconcile the Moors among themselves, so those of Malaga and Guadiz came to agreement with the King of Granada. At Malaga they held their Council of War, where it was resolv'd to divide the Army into two parts, that the Multitude might the better subsist, and the Christian Territories be the more endamag'd. Thus the King of Morocco undertook the Country about Sevil, he of Granada that of Jaen. D. Nun̄o de Lara was General of the Frontiers, who with all speed sent to Prince Ferdinand for supplies, whilst he gathering what Forces he could, put himself into Ezija, a strong place, by which the King of Morocco must of necessity pass. A great number of Gen∣try resorted to him from the neighbouring Parts; whereby finding himself strong, lest the Enemy should take courage at his shunning them, he resolv'd to hazard a Battle: At first the Christians seem'd to have the better, but the Multitude at last prevailing, were put Over∣throw of the Chri∣stians. to flight. D. Nun̄o himself with 250 Horse, and 4000 Foot were slain in the Fight. Those that escaped fled to the City which was near. D. Nun̄o's Head was sent of a Present to the King of Granada, which was not very pleasing to him, remembring his former Friendship, and how by his Means he had obtained the Crown. Therefore he sent it to Cordova to be buri∣ed with the Body. This misfortune which happen'd in May 1275, struck a great Terror in∣to all the Kingdom. Some comfort it was that the Enemy, tho' Victorious, could not enter 1275. Ezija; yet another disaster follow'd. Sancho Arch-Bishop of Toledo, having heard this sad News, gather'd all the Gentry he could about Toledo, Madrid, Guadalaxara, and Talavera and march'd in all hast towards Andaluzia. The Moors of Granada destroy'd all the Lands of Jaen, without sparing Man or Beast. These the Arch-Bishop attacks with more Heat than Prudence, contrary to the Opinions of the wisest, who advis'd to expect D. Lope de Haro, who was upon his March to joyn them with a good Body of Men. Near Martos on
the 21st of October, they fought and were easily vanquish'd, not only by reason of the disparity A second defeat. of Number, but also because the Christians were raw, and the Infidels disciplin'd Souldiers. The Rout was shameful, the Dead but few for so remarkable a Victory. D. Sancho the Arch-Bishop was taken, and the two Moorish Kings being at variance about which of them he belong'd to, Atar Lord of Malaga run him through with his Sword, saying, There was no Reason such Men should fall out about that Dog. The Arch-Bishop's Head and left Hand, were cut off. This Disaster was so much the more to be lamented, for that the Enemy in that Fight might have been utterly overthrown had the Christians expected till D. Lope de Haro could joyn them; for he coming up soon after with only his own Forces oblig'd the Moors to retire; but could not totally defeat them, because Night came on. The Body, Head, and Hand of the Arch-Bishop being ransom'd at a great rate, were bury'd in the Royal Chappel of To∣ledo, where lay Alonso the Emperour, and his Son Sancho. Ferdinand Abbot of Covarrubias succeeded in the Archbishoprick, and he having after six Months resign'd it, because the Pope would not confirm his Election, the Pope made choice of D. Gonzalo, the second of the Name, who had been Bishop of Cuenca first, and then of Burgos. He is said to have been a Car∣dinal, and dyed in the Year 1299. This unhappy Year we now write of, was yet more re∣markable for the Death of Prince Ferdinand. He dyed at Villareal where he had appointed Prince Fer∣ainand of Castile dies. the Rendezvous of all the Forces. His Body was bury'd at Huelgas, and his Death caus'd no less Grief at present, than it afterwards produc'd Troubles, his Brother Sancho pretending the Crown of Right appertain'd to him, as second Son to King Alonso then Living, notwith∣standing Prince Ferdinand by his Wife the Lady Blanch, left two Sons call'd Alonso and Ferdi∣nand, whom at the time of his Death, he recommended to D. John de Lara eldest Son to D. Nun̄o de Lara. Prince Sancho being a Youth of good Conduct made Head against the Moors and put a stop to their proceedings. He garison'd all strong Places, and avoided giving Bat∣tle, by that means gaining time for the fury of the Infidels to spend it self. The Moors of Va∣lencia encouraged by the success of the others, and despising King Jayme who was grown old, revolted, notwithstanding Prince Peter was upon the Borders of Murcia wasting the Lands of Almeria with a good Body of Men. Navarre was no better setled at that time. Philip King of France, having contracted Joanna the Heiress of Navarre to his Son Philip who succeeded him, and was called the Fair, made Stephen de Belmarc a French-Man Viceroy of Navarre, Affairs of Navarre. taking that Imployment from Peter de Montagudo. A stranger, had not sufficient Authority to quell the Tumults that then were in the Kingdom, and Peter de Montagudo offended that he had been removed from that Post joyning with Garcia Almoravides who had always fa∣vour'd the Castilians, they both headed the Mutineers. Within the City Pamplona the Two Fa∣ctions came to Blows. Such was their cruelty that they burnt the Ripe-Corn, and dash'd out the Brains of Children, but the French had the worst of it. Peter de Montagudo inclin∣ing afterwards to the French Party, either for the sake of Peace or some other Cause, was kill'd by his own People. A Man unworthy that hard Fate for his many Virtues. CHAP. II. Three Popes Dye in one year. Prince Sancho of Castile contrives to Ʋsurp that Crown from his Nephews. The Death of Jayme King of Aragon, and of Alonso of Portu∣gal. Peter succeeds the first, and Denis the latter. THE following Year 1276 was remarkable for the death of Three Popes, which were Gregory the Xth, Innocent the Vth, and Adrian the Vth. Innocent held it but Five Months Death of 4 Popes. and Two Days, and Arian only Thirty Seven Days. John the One and Twentieth succeed∣ed him, he was born at Lisbon, and a great Scholar as appears by his Writings. In the Ninth Month of his Pontificate he was kill'd at Viterbo by the fall of the Roof of the Room where he was; Nicholas the III. was his Successor. At this same time in Castile were sowed the Seeds of a Civil War, which prov'd lasting and destructive. Prince Sancho us'd all means to gain the affections of the Nobility and People, which the King his Father had utterly lost. His Journey into France had increas'd their Discontent. The People was desirous of Novel∣ties, and the Nobles were well dispos'd to Rebel. D. Lope de Haro, a Man in great power was reconcil'd at Cordova to Prince Sancho. A Truce was concluded with the Moors for two Years. This done the King of Morocco pass'd over into Africk. Prince Sancho with great speed went to Toledo upon pretence of visiting his Father, then newly return'd from France. His chief Design was to have the Succession settled upon himself with the consent of the King and Pr. Sancho aspires to Usurp the Crown from his Nephews. Nobility. D. Lope de Haro undertook to propose this Affair, which highly displeas'd King Alonso, both for that they urg'd the Succession whilst he was yet living, and because he thought it a great wrong to exclude his Grand-children. However by the Advice of his Brother Prince Emanuel, then a great Friend to Prince Sancho, it was resolv'd the Cortes or Parlia∣ment should meet at Segovia to determine this Affair. Their Judgment was given in behalf of Prince Sancho, in which doubtless regard was had to the Peace of the Kingdom which he would otherwise never have ceas'd to disturb. In Aragon King Jayme us'd all his Endeavours
to quell the Moors by Policy, or if that fail'd, to apply Force. To this purpose he March'd through Valencia, and in several Rencounters, sometimes the one, sometimes the other Party had the better. Whilst the King was at Xativa his Forces were so intirely cut off at Luxen, that from that Day which was Tuesday, the People began to account Tuesday an unlucky Day. Garci Ruiz de Açagra, Son to Peter de Açagra Lord of Albarazin was slain in that Fight, and the Head-Commendary of the Knights Templers taken. The King griev'd at this loss and be∣ing Slaughter of the Ara∣gonians. very much broken with continual Labour left the Charge of the War to his Son Prince Poter and was carry'd away sick to Algezira a Town in Valencia. There being given over by the Physicians, he resign'd up the Kingdom to his Son giving him much wholesome Advice. Then he put on the Habit of S. Bernard, intending to spend what remain'd of Life in the Mo∣nastery of Poplete, where he would also be buryed. His Sickness gave him not so much Leisure, he dy'd at Valenica on the 27th of July. His Fame will be immortal not only for his great war-like Exploits, but also for his Piety, since Authors assirm that he built 1000 Churches, Jayme I.K. of Aragon dies. I suppose he caus'd most of them to be Consecrated, having taken them from the Moors. For Martial Affairs he may be compar'd to the most renowned antient Commanders, having fought Thirty pitched Battles with the Moors, and been Victorious in them all, whereby he obtained the Name of Conquerour. He reigned Sixty Three Years, and somewhat blemish'd his Good Name by his Incontinency. By Queen Violante he had, Peter, Jayme, Sancho the His Issue. Arch-Bishop, Elizabeth Queen of France, Violante Queen of Castile, Constance marryed to Prince Emanuel, and Mary and Elenor who dyed young. This was his lawful Issue. By D. Teresa Egidia Vidaura he had, D. Jayme Lord of Exerica, and Peter Lord of Ayerve, both whom at his Death he declared Legitimate, and appointed to succeed in Case Queen Violante's Children left no Heirs. By another Woman of the House of Antillon he had Fernan Sanchez, who we said above was killed by his Brother. By Berengaria Fernandez, he had another Son called Peter Fernandez, to whom he gave the House of Ixar. From them all are descended Noble Families in the Kingdom of Aragon. It is remarkable that after his four Sons which he declared Legitimate, he appointed the Heirs Male of his Daughters Violante, Constance and Elizabeth to succeed, excluding the Mothers themselves and all other Women from ever in∣heriting the Crown of Aragon. He charg'd his Son to expel all the Moors the Kingdom, as being a People never to be trusted. Prince Peter tho' his Father were dead took not im∣mediately the name of King, but stil'd himself Heir of the Kingdom till such time as he was crown'd at Zaragoça, which was on the 16th of November after the Troubles of Valencia were appeas'd. The Queen also was Crown'd, and the Nobility took an Oath to Prince Peter Crown'd King of Aragon. Alonso the new King's Son as Heir apparent of the Crown. To D. Jayme the late King's young∣er Son were given the Islands of Majorca and Minorca, with the Title of King as his Father had order'd. He had also the Earldom of Rusillon and Mompellier in France. This Prince had Three Sons, Sancho, Ferdinand, and Philip. The Division of the Kingdom caus'd dis∣gusts between the two Brothers which at length broke out into open War. D. Jayme com∣plain'd that the Kingdom of Valencia had been taken from him, and he left a Homager to his Brother, thus his Ambition push'd him on to his Ruin, and he never gave over till stripp'd of all his Dominions. Navarre was nothing quieter than the rest of Spain. Philip King of France having taken Troubles of Navar. upon him the Charge of that Kingdom resolv'd to go thither in Person, with a sufficient Ar∣my to compose those Distractions. The Weather was unseasonable, the Pyrenean Mountains cover'd with Snow, and great want of Provisions. Which difficulties caus'd him to return Home himself; yet he sent forward Charles Earl of Arras with the most and best of the Army. This was a Person of great Authority as being Uncle to Queen Joanna, and therefore his presence was of great use. The contrary Faction being worsted by the French near a Town call'd Reniega, retir'd to that quarter of Pamplona call'd Maverreria, the French still pursuing and pressing upon them. Therefore Garcia de Almoravides the head of those People with all his Friends and Kindred in the Dark Night got through the Enemies Centinels and fled out of the Kingdom. Some of them setled in Cerdagne, where their Posterity remains to this Day. Pamplona was taken and fired. Such as remain'd terrify'd with this Punishment submitted themselves; others that were fled being summon'd to appear and answer for Navarre brought under by the French. themselves, upon contempt were in absence attainted of High Treason. The French Gene∣ral having quieted the Kingdom, went into Castile and was nobly entertained by King Alonso, with whom being somewhat familiar, the King said, He wanted not intelligence from the French Court of such as were near about that King and revealed his Secrets. This, whe∣ther true or false brought Broquiol the French King's Chamberlain into suspicion, which was increas'd by Letters of his to King Alonso written in Cyphers, intercepted by his Enemies, and at last cost him his Head. Da. Violante Queen of Castile seeing her Grand-children slight∣ed, Violante Queen of Castile, with her Grand-children, slies to Aragon. and Prince Sancho prefer'd before them, and not thinking her self safe resolv'd to fly, and to that purpose perswaded her Brother the King of Aragon to come to the Monastery of Hu∣erta upon pretence of visiting him there. With the Queen were her Grand-children, and all together went into Aragon. King Alonso when he understood her design indeavour'd to prevent it, but too late. No misfortune could have troubled him more than this did, therefore he vented his Passion upon those he thought had any hand in the Queens departure. He caus'd his Brother Prince Frederick and Simon Ruiz de Haro Lord of Cameros to be appre∣hended.
The Court was full of discord and many favour'd the King's Grand-children. Si∣mon Ruyz was burnt at Trevizo by Prince Sancho his Order; he also caus'd Prince Fredrick's Head to be cut off, which drew on him much hatred, especially for that they were executed without being try'd. Embassadors pass'd between the Two Kings. He of Castile demanded his Wife should be sent back, and the Election of D. Sancho allow'd. The King of Aragon excus'd himself saying, that Business was not yet fully determin'd, and that all Persons found pro∣tection in his Kingdom, much more a Sister. These differences were so heightn'd, that it was thought the King of Aragon would have made War upon Castile, had not the Moors of Valen∣cia rebell'd and taken Montesa, relying upon the King of Morocco. But those Tumults were quell'd sooner than was expected, for the Moors seeing no Succours came from Africk deliver∣ed up to the King Montesa and many other Castles they had, in the Month of August 1277. Now King Alonso was come from Burgos to Sevil and thence sent a great Force to Besiege Al∣gezira 1277 by Sea and Land. Prince Peter the King's Son undertook to subdue that City, but he return'd with Shame having lost many Men, and our Fleet being ill mann'd was destroy'd by the King of Morocco. Our Army dispers'd. Some say the King of Morocco then built another Algezira, not far from the former. The Body of King Jayme of Aragon was deposited near the high Altar of the Cathedral Church of Valencia, and thence in the Summer transla∣ted to the Monastery of Poblete. Both the Kings of Castile and France, were equally concern'd about the departure of Qu. Violante, he of Castile fearing lest the Children should be carryed into France, where they were sure of Protection, and he of France lest they should fall into the Hands of their Uncle, where their Lives were in danger, or at least, their Liberty was certainly lost. Solemn Em∣bassies were sent from both Princes upon this Score to the King of Aragon, who at length resolv'd that Queen Violante should return to her Husband, and that the Two Princes should The true Heirs of Castile im∣prison'd. remain in Aragon, where they were secur'd in the Castle of Xativa. This resolution trou∣bled the Lady Blanch their Mother, seeing them depriv'd of Liberty, where she ex∣pected they should have been protected. Hereupon she went away to Aragon, and not ob∣taining any thing of that King pass'd over into France to perswade the King her Brother to make War upon Castile and Aragon, unless they comply'd with her reasonable demands. The Kingdom of Navarre which the French then possess'd, lying so opportunely to infest Castile and Aragon mov'd that King and Prince Sancho to appoint a Conference at a place between Requena and Bun̄ol. There they met on the Fourteenth of Sept. 1272, and laying aside all for∣mer Animosities concluded a League. After the conference the King of Aragon went away to Commoti∣ons in Ca∣talonia. Catalonia, then in an Uproar caus'd by the Nobility. Armengaud de Cabrera, Son to Alvaro de Cabrera, to whom the King not long before had given the Earldom of Ʋrgel, was the great incendiary. The King besieg'd Balaguer, the chief City of that Earldom, and in it took Ar∣mengaud himself, and his Uncle Roger Bernard, and some other Lords, whom he long kept Prisoners, especially the Earl of Faux, who had Rebell'd several times. Thus the Trou∣bles of Catalonia ended, Prince Sancho of Castile went to Badajoz, whither his Father was gone from Sevil, to endeavour to make Peace between his Grandson, Denis King of Portugal, and Alonso that Kings Brother, whom he labour'd by Force to deprive of the Possessions his Father had left him. King Alonso of Portugal, Father to Denis, dyed at Lisbon the beginning of this Alonso King of Portugal his death. same year. He Liv'd 70 years, Reigned 32. and was buried in the Monastery of S. Dominick, Built by himself in that City. Prince Sancho having seen his Father, was sent away to make New Levies throughout the whole Kingdom, in order to March against the King of Granada, who was then taken up in Building the Palace of that City call'd Alhambra, an excellent Structure, which cost much Mony, that King being no less skill'd in Works of that Nature than in Military Affairs. What pretence there was for this War, I know not, but suppose he was not included in the late Treaty made with the King of Morocco. Denis the King of Denis suc∣ceeds to the Crown of Portugal. Portugal, either that he confided not in his Grandfather, or fearing he was more inclinable to his Brother, tho he came as far as Yelves, which is but Three Leagues from Badajoz, on a sudden turn'd back and went away. King Alonso in a great Rage, to be so disappointed, return'd to Sevil. At this time Conrade Lança Admiral of Aragon, with a Fleet of Ten Galleys, scour'd the Coasts of Africk, particularly of Tunez and Tremezen, because they re∣fus'd to pay the Tribute agreed upon some years before. A certain Author affirms, this Expedition was undertaken to restore Mirabusar, Expell'd his Kingdom of Tunez by his Bro∣ther. All agree, a great Booty was taken by the Aragonians; and that at the Streights of Gi∣braltar they defeated Ten Galleys of the King of Morocco, Taking some, and Sinking others. The King of Aragon at Valencia, where he commonly resided, gave a Grant of the Lordship of Segorve to his Bastard Son D. Jayme about the Month of November.
CHAP. III. The Practices of Prince Sancho. He Rebels against his Father. The King of Morocco comes to Aid King Alonso: Returns home, leaving a Thousand Horse to serve under him. King Alonso Disinherits, and Curses his Son Prince Sancho. IN Castile the Affection the People bore Prince Sancho daily increas'd, and many believ'd when he was once well rid of his Nephews, he would ease his Father of the Burden of the Crown. His Father suspected nothing less than such a Design. Prince Sancho in the Spring of the Year 1280. March'd with the Army he had rais'd, to the Frontiers about Jaen, and 1280 being there Recruited with Forces sent by his Father from Sevil, entred the Territories of Gra∣nada, Prince Sancho his Practices to gain the Affections of the Peo∣ple. where he Burnt all the Country as far as that City, and then return'd with a great num∣ber of Cattle and Captives to Cordova, and thence bore his Father Company to Sevil. This Success endear'd him more to the People, which was what he chiefly aim'd at, to secure the Suc∣cession to the Crown. Philip K. of France sent Embassadors to demand, that his Nephews should be set at liberty, and deliver'd up to him; and in case fair means would not prevail, to threaten War. Nothing being concluded, it was agreed the Three Kings upon sufficient Security given, should meet, and commune together. All the Kings set forward, but they met not; for Prince Sancho cunningly broke off that Interview, fearing his Father, who was inclinable to his Grandchildren, might conclude something that might be prejudicial to him. However it was agreed, that Charles Prince of Taranto, Son to the King of Sicily, should carry the messa∣ges between the Kings; yet all came to nothing, Prince Sanoho undermining their Designs. The French only ask'd, that Prince Alonso should have the City Jaen given him with the Title of King, and to hold of the Crown of Castile. After this Disappointment the Kings of Ara∣gon and France met about the same Affair, and with the same success, only the King of France took an Oath, he would resign the Lordship of Mompellier, to which he had pretended a Right, to Jayme King of Majorca. Prince Sancho was extreamly pleas'd that he had disap∣pointed all the Designs of those Kings, yet fear'd his Fathers Love towards those Children; and there wanted not some, who incensed King Alonso against his Son. Therefore the Prince resolv'd to strengthen himself with Foreign Aids, and to that purpose procur'd an Interview between his Father, the King of Aragon and himself at a Town call'd Campillo between Ag∣reda 1281 and Taraçona on the 27th of March 1281. At this Conference a League offensive and League be∣twixt Ca∣stile and A∣ragon. defensive was established between the two Kings, upon penalty of 20000 pound weight of Silver to him that first broke it. Palaçuela, Teresa, Xera, and Ayola were now given to the King of Aragon, and in lieu of them to Prince Emanuel the King's Brother, whose those Places were, Escalona was given. This is what was publickly acted: In private they con∣cluded with jont Forces to invade Navarre, and agreed what part each was to have when Conquer'd. Prince Sancho obtain'd, that the young Princes his Nephews, should be secur'd in the Castle of Xativa; and the more to oblige the King of Aragon, he promised after his Fathers Death, to yield him up all the Kingdom of Navarre; and to give him in Castile, the Town of Requena, with all its Dependencies, which lies on the Borders of Valencia towards Murcia. He valu'd not what promises he made to secure his Power. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, a powerful Man, was then Lord of Albaracin, having Marry'd the Daughter and Heiress of D. Alvaro de Açagra, the Son of Peter Rodriguez de Açagra, both Lords of that City. Thence he made inroads into both the Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, carrying away much Booty, and gave Protection to all those that fled to him on account of any Crimes whatsoever. Par∣ticularly D. Lope Diaz de Haro a mighty Lord, being offended at King Alonso and Prince Sancho for the Death of Prince Frederick and the Lord of Cameros, was retir'd thither. The King of Aragon and Prince Sancho consulted at Taraçona about taking that City, and expelling D. John de Lara. King Alonso went to Burgos to Celebrate the Neptials of his two Sons Peter and John. Peter marry'd a Daughter of the Lord of Narbonne, and John the Daughter of the Earl of Monferrat. Spain at present seem'd quiet, but a great Storm hung over it. The Jealousies between King Alonso and his Son Prince Sancho, at length broke out into open War. It troubled the King to see himself slighted by reason of his Age, and his Sub∣jects Rebellion of Prince Sancho a∣gainst his Father. gaping after Innovation. Therefore to gain Reputation, he gather'd Forces; and tho weak with Age and Troubles, Ravag'd all the Country of the Moors. Nothing per∣plex'd him so much as want of Mony: To redress this he Coin'd a new sort, not so Weighty nor Pure as what was in use. This increas'd the hatred of the People, who gave out, that he had no regard to Justice; and that many had their Estates Confiscated upon forg'd Crimes. Fredulus Bishop of Oviedo, a French Man by Birth, was now sent by the King Embassa∣dor into France; the pretence was, to Visit King Philip, and by his means obtain of the Pope the Croisade, for all such as would serve against the Moors at their own Cost. But the real design was to treat about setting the King's Grandsons at Liberty. Prince Sancho was not ignorant of this practice, and therefore to secure himself, went away to Cordova, and made a League with the Moorish King of Granada, remitting him two Thirds of the Tribute he paid, the more to gain his good will. Besides, the Nobility of Spain before disgusted with the King for his
great severity, declar'd for the Prince. These things were in hand about the beginning of the year 1282. The same year in August, the Marriage between King Denis of Portugal, and 1282 Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to the King of Aragon, was solemnized at the Town of Trancoso. King Denis of Portugal Marries S. Elizabeth. This is that Queen Elizabeth, who for her great Virtue is enrolled among the Saints, and her Feast celebrated in that Kingdom. King Denis without respect to his Uncle, openly made a League with Prince Sancho. King Alonso, to the end he might quiet his Son, and the Nobi∣lity, without Bloodshed, summon'd the Cortes, or Parliament, to Toledo; and to prevent dis∣orders, provided sufficiently for his own Safety. Prince Sancho on the other side, summons The Cortes summon'd by the King and Prince, fol∣low the latter. them to Valladolid; and thither the greatest number resorted. Here he marry'd Mary the Daughter of Alonso, Lord of Molina, his Third Cousin, and by her had Ferdinand the eldest, and other Children. Every thing was done in that Assembly that the Nobility desir'd; for Prince Sancho to oblige them refus'd nothing, but promis'd much more. New Employments were constituted, and new Laws enacted. By these means, not only the Nobles, but the Commonalty were drawn into Rebellion, and some in that Confusion saluted Prince Sancho King, calling him Father of his Country, and all other Names given to Sovereigns. He po∣sitively refus'd that Title whilst his Father liv'd, and nevertheless the Heat was such, that Prince Emanuel D. Sancho's Uncle, in the Name of all the Nobility publickly in open Assem∣bly, depos'd King Alonso from the Government. This was a just Judgment of Providence for his presumption, in daring to find fault with the Works of God, as has been deli∣ver'd to us by Tradition. He is also said to have foreseen by his Skill in Astrology this Mis∣fortune; and that this foresight made him Cruel, which hasten'd what he apprehended. King Alonso thus forsaken by his Subjects, apply'd himself to the King of Morocco for Sup∣plies of Men and Mony, sending him his Crown, which was of great Value, in Pawn. Alon∣zo de Guzman Lord of Sanlucar, was at that time in Morocco, and much in Favour with that Prince; to him King Alonso writ a very submissive Letter, desiring he would intercede with the Moorish King to grant his Request. That King hoping to make his Advantage of the discord among the Christians, did more than was ask'd of him. He came over to Algezira, King of Morocco comes to assist King Alonso. and had a Meeting with King Alonso at Zahara. Great Compliments passed between them, and King Alonso had the Upper Hand given him, not only as a Stranger, but because he was descended from Kings, whereas the Moor had gain'd his Kingdom, as he himself urg'd. Here they consulted how to carry on the War, since there were no hopes of Peace. Sevil held for King Alonso, Cordova for Prince Sancho his Son. This City the Moors undertook to Besiege, and King Alonso joyn'd them with what Forces he had; but the Place being well provided with all Necessaries, after 20 Days spent before it, they rais'd the Siege. Thence at the instance of King Alonso, the Moors pass'd Sierra Morena, advanc'd as far as Montiel, and having plunder'd all the Country, return'd with their Booty to Ezija. Thither King Alonso came, but went away privately, being inform'd the Moor designed to secure him, whe∣ther true or false, is not known. Certain it is, that King highly resented his Honour should be brought in question, and so went over into Africk. Yet he left King Alonso 1000 Horse that had long serv'd him. Hernan Ponce Commanded this Body, and 'tis said of them, that meeting 10000 of the Enemies Horse near Cordova, they charg'd so furiously, that they broke, and put them to Flight. Such was their extraordinary Valour. At Sevil King Alonso in a solemn Assembly, disinherited his Son Sancho, and pour'd out many Curses upon him. King Alonso disinherits and curses his Son Sancho. That Prince regarded not his Fathers Curses, but renew'd the League with the King of Gra∣nada, and made all manner of Preparations about Cordova, putting the Army into Winter Quarters in that Neighbourhood. CHAP. IV. The Conspiracy of John Prochita in Sicily, against the French; and Slaughter of them call'd the Sicilian Vespers. Kings of France and Aragon at War about Sicily. Castile and Aragon under an Interdict at the same time. THis Year was Memorable, not only for the Wrongs done to King Alonso, but also for Conspira∣cy against the French in Sicily. the famous Conspiracy of John Prochita. He had been Lord of the Island Prochita, on the Coast of Sicily; a Man of great Parts, much a Friend to King Manfredus, and since his Overthrow, fearing the French, fled to Aragon. There he was honourably entertain'd by the Two Kings, Jayme and his Son Peter, and had large Revenues given him. The Gibellines at that time oppress'd by the French, had cast their Eyes on the King of Aragon for Protecti∣on. Charles, King of Sicily and Naples, kept all Italy, and even the City of Rome, in Sub∣jection, and refus'd to release Beatrix, the Daghter of Manfredus, and Sister to Constance Queen of Aragon. John Prochita laid hold of these Disgusts between those Princes and Great Men, and hoped to improve them to the recovering of his Estate. In order to it, he went in disguise to Constantinople, and inform'd the Emperor Paleologus, how Charles King of Sicily, with the Power of the French, intended to deprive him of the Empire, and restore Baldwin, whose Daughter he had Marry'd. The Emperor, tho convinc'd that what Prachita
told him was true, would not openly declare himself, but promis'd under-hand, to assist the King of Aragon in his Pretensions, with a great Sum of Mony. This done, Prochita returns into Italy, where he gave the Pope an account of his Negotiation, and then went into Sicily, to stir the People there to Rebel. Such was the Security of the French, and the Secrecy of the Conspirators, that nothing was discover'd. At this time dy'd Pope Nicholas, and Martin the IVth native of Tours, succeeded him. This Pope was wholly devoted to King Charles, and to oblige Pope Mar∣tin and the King of Aragon at vari∣ance. him, Excommunicated the Greek Emperor. Besides, he refused to Canonize Raymund of Pena∣fuerte, which the King of Aragon solicited for, pretending that nothing ought to be granted him, whilst he refused to pay the Tribute he ow'd to the Church of Rome, but instead thereof he recall'd the Grant of the Tenths of Ecclesiastical Revenues, which his Predecessors had made to King Jayme, Father to him now Reigning. What might have terrify'd the Arago∣nian, made him the more eager; and therefore he furnish'd a mighty Fleet on the Coast of Aragon, giving out, it was to go over into Africk, where two Sons of the King of Tunez, who was deposed by Conrade Lança, were at variance about the Cities of Constantina and Bugia. This was given out, but his real design was against Sicily. The Popes and King of France's Embassadors, pressing to know the intent of those Preparations, as being both con∣cern'd for King Charles, the King of Aragon in a Passion answer'd, If he thought his Shirt knew his design, he would take it off and burn it. The Grecian Emperor according to pro∣mise, sent a considerable Sum of Mony. The Conspiracy of the Sicilians was put in Execu∣tion at the holiest time of the year, to wit, on the 21st. of March, being Easter Tuesday, when the French were most secure, being wholly bent upon Sports and Pastimes. At the time Massacre of the French called the Scicilian Vespers. when the Bells Rung to Vespers or Evensong, all the French throughout the whole Island were Massacred; and thence came the Proverb of the Sicilian Vespers. Besides, the Sicilians seiz'd upon all the Fleet provided in the Ports of that Island against the Grecian Emperor, then de∣clar'd an Enemy by the Pope. This is the most receiv'd Relation of that memorable Action. Yet others affirm, it began at Palermo, where a French Man offering to search a Woman for Arms, the People laid hold of that occasion to Rise, and kill all the French in the City, Castle and Country, without sparing either Age or Sex, insomuch that they slew such Women as they thought to be with Child by them, that none of the Race might remain. The City of Palermo was Plunder'd, as if an Enemy had entred it. All other Towns follow'd the Ex∣ample of Palermo. Only Mecina was some time quiet; because Herbertus Aurelianensis Go∣vernour of the whole Island for the French, was there, yet soon after the Mecineses expell'd the Governour and Garrison. William Porcelotte a Provençal, who was Governour of Cala∣tafimia, in the Heat of that Confusion was permitted to depart peaceably, the general opi∣nion conceiv'd of his Goodness and Modesty, protecting him. This was the event of that most famous Conspiracy of John Prochita. The Sicilians after their Fury was over, reflecting on their Danger, and resolving rather to Dye than fall again into the hands of the French, thought fit to have recourse to the Ring of Aragon for Protection. Whilst this was doing in Sicily, he was at Tortosa, with his Fleet in a readiness, and thence went over into Africk; where having plunder'd and ruin'd the Sea Coasts, on a sudden he Sail'd over to Corsica. There he was inform'd of what had been done in Sicily, and that King Charles was gone in great haste from Tuscany, and had laid Siege to Mecina, Battering it with the greatest Fury imaginable. The Mecina be∣sieg'd by the French. French acted with Rage, seeking to revenge the Slaughter of their Country-men, and the Be∣sieg'd defended themselves with such Resolution, that the Women and Children were not exempted from the Labour or Danger. Now the King of Aragon arrived at Palermo, where the more to tye him to the Interest of the Island, he was Crowned; and there his Fleet was Increas'd with the Addition of the Ships taken by the Sicilians, and provided by the French against the Grecian Emperor. Hope of speedy Relief encourag'd the Besieg'd, and King Charles was forc'd to quit the Siege, and with Shame return into Italy. The Two Kings sent one another Letters full of reproachful Language, and declar'd open War. The King of Aragon expected Supplies from Spain, King Charles from France and Marseilles. The later incamp'd with his Army near the Streight of Mecina, in sight of Sicily. King Peter had di∣stributed his Forces in Garrisons. He finding the Enemy was Strong, and that his own Re∣cruits were to come from far off, thought good to make use of Policy. King Charles was Brave, and valu'd himself much upon his Strength and Skill at all Weapons. King Peter A chal∣lenge be∣twixt the Kings of France and Aragon. sent him a Challenge to Fight Hand to Hand, and decide the Quarrel without the Effusion of so much Blood, as must of necessity be shed in a Battel: So say the French Historians. But the Aragonians affirm, that King Charles Challeng'd King Peter, and that Simon Leontius a Do∣minican, brought the Challenge. Certain it is, the Challenge was accepted; and they agreed to Fight with 100 Gentlemen on a side. A Dispute arising about the Place of Com∣bat, Bourdeaux was agreed upon as an indifferent Place, being then in the Hands of the King of England. They appointed the Day, and swore to the Conditions of the Combat. The Pope knowing what had been done in Sicily, charg'd the King of Aragon to desist, and not disturb the publick Peace; but he refusing to obey, on the Ninth of November was Excom∣municated. He also sent to the King of England to forbid him permitting the Battel in his Dominions, yet that avail'd not. Queen Constance by her Husband's Order went to Sicily that the Sicilians might not Revolt, she being their Natural Sovereign. She arriv'd at Me∣cina on the 22th. of April 1283. and with her, her Son Jayme, to whom his Father design'd to 1283
give the Kingdom of Sicily. Both Kings prepar'd for the Challenge. King Charles went over into France, and he of Aragon, with his Fleet, into Spain. On the first day of June, the day appointed for Battel, King Charles with his Troop of Gentlemen, appear'd at Bour∣deaux. King Peter came not. The French Authors attribute this to Cowardize and Falshood; for at the same time the King of Aragon was making Warlike Preparations. Our Historians excuse him, saying, he was warn'd by the Governour of Bourdeaux, to have a care of Trea∣chery, for that the King of France was Marching that way with a powerful. Army, so that his 100 Aragonian Horse were to encounter with the whole Power of France. This gave oc∣casion to every one to make Reflections according to their inclination, and was the ground of a lasting War. As soon as the King of Aragon return'd home, he took in hand two several Affairs. One was to drive D. John Nun̄ez de Lara out of Albaraçin, since relying on the Strength of that The Cortes meet in the King∣dom of Aragon. Place, he made Incursions upon the Frontiers of Aragon. The other was to appease the No∣bility of Aragon and Catalonia, who were then Mutinous, and stirr'd up the People to Rebel∣lion upon the usual Pretences of Liberty and Property. To this effect the Cortes, or Parlia∣ment, met first at Taraçona, then at Zaragoça; and lastly at Barcelona, where the King gave Orders for the Redressing all Grievances; and so the People were pacified. The War he had in hand with the French made him condescend, lest whilst he was busie in Sicily, or Italy, the Aragonians should Revolt. Besides, he was perplex'd; for that the Pope had not only Excommunicated, but Deposed him of his Fathers Dominions, and given the Conquest thereof to Charles de Valois, the King of France his younger Son. No less Troubles were at the same time in Castile, caus'd by the Discord between King Alonso and his Son. The greater Rebellion in Castile. number follow'd Prince Sancho. King Alonso being forsaken by his own People, had again recourse to Strangers, and brought the King of Morocco the second time into Spain, giving out, it was against the King of Granada, who was in League with the Prince. This Expedi∣tion produc'd nothing remarkable, because both Christians and Moors were better provided than had been expected; and the King of Granada having put strong Garrisons into all his Towns, would not hazard a Battel; and so the King of Morocco return'd into Africk, with∣out doing any thing remarkable. This Design failing, King Alonso solicited the King of France to make War upon his Son; and at the same time to have the Zeal of Religion make for him, accus'd his Son before the Pope of Disobedience, Impiety and Ingratitude, in usurp∣ing his Crown before he was Dead. The Pope gave Ear to this Complaint, and Excom∣municated all those that adher'd to Prince Sancho. He also appointed Judges to hear both Interdict in Castile and Aragon at one time. Parties; and they laid an Interdict upon all Towns that were for the Prince, so that at one time, both in Castile and Aragon, tho for different reasons, the Churches were shut up; yet the Rebellion continu'd, the Prince threatning Death to the Popes Commissioners if they fell into his hands. However, the dread of Ecclesiastical Censures caus'd many to fall off from him. Among the first, his Brothers Peter and John began to take Compassion on their Father, which Prince Sancho understanding, he detain'd his Brother Peter, with the promise of the Kingdom of Murcia; but John withdrew privately; and through Portugal, got away to his Father at Sevil. Many Towns repenting their Disloyalty, sought how to obtain the King's Pardon, and clear themselves of the Excommunication they lay under; and having obtain'd both, presently submitted themselves. Agreda and Trevin̄o were of this number. Many Men of Note, as D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, D. John Alonso de Haro, and Prince James, joyn'd the Army of Philip King of France, then marching to the Assistance of King Alonso; and with him entred Castile, plundering all the Country as far as Toledo, without meeting any Opposition. CHAP. V. The Death of Alonso King of Castile. The beginning of the Reign of King Sancho the IVth. The Defeat of the French Fleet on the Coast of Italy. Albarazin taken by the King of Aragon. KIng Philip of France had a Son of the same Name, distinguish'd by the Title of the Fair; who this same year (others say the next) Marry'd Joanna Queen of Navarre, with whom he had that Kingdom. This Prince, now began to plead the Rights of his Prede∣cessors, and by that means sought to extend the Borders of his Kingdom; which his Design was not a little forwarded by the Discord at that time in Castile. Prince Sancho did as much as could be in such a Time of Confusion. He quell'd the City Toro which was about Revolt∣ing, The enmi∣ty betwixt K. Alonso of Castile, and his Son Sancho increases. and went out to meet D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, who wasted the Territories of Calahorra, Osma and Siguença, and made him retire with more speed than he came. After this it was agreed, the Father and Son should have a Conference, in order to which King Alonso came as far as Constantina, and Prince Sancho to Guadalcanal. Great hopes were conceiv'd of an amicable Accommodation; yet by the perswasion of some of the Princes Familiars who hated his Father, or rather, because many hop'd to make their Advantage of the Publick
Calamities: They met not, but the King return'd to Sevil, and the Prince to Salamanca. By Consent of both Parties, Beatrix, Queen Dowager of Portugal, and the Prince his Wife Mary, who was then deliver'd of a Daughter, met at Toro, and labour'd all that might be for an Accommodation, but to no Effect; for the Enmity daily increas'd, and with it the Mi∣sery of the Kingdom. This was the Posture of Affairs, when King Alonso dy'd at Sevil, some say on the 5th, some the 21st Day of April, without doubt it was in the Year 1284. In his Will sign'd the 1284. foregoing November, he appoints D. Alonso first, and then Ferdinand, his grand-Children to King Alon∣so of Ca∣stile dies. succeed him; and in Case they dye without Issue, then Philip King of France to be next Heir, as descended from the King's of Castile, being Grandson to Queen Blanch, and Great Grandson to King Alonso, who won the Battle of Navas. He made no mention of his Sons and Brothers, in hatred to Prince Sancho, but hop'd to bring the Power of France upon him. Yet at the Hour of Death, at the suit of his Son Prince John, he bequeath'd to him Sevil, and Badajoz; and to his Brother James, the Kingdom of Murcia, with the Title of Kings, but so as to hold of the Crown of Castile. He order'd his Heart should be bury'd on Mount Calvary, and his Body in Sevil, or Murcia, but it was not perform'd; for the Heart and Bowels are at Murcia, and the Body at Sevil. He was a great and wise King, had he made use of his Knowledge, to his own Advantage, and had he not blemish'd his good Qualities with Avarice, and overmuch Severity. It was he who first ordain'd, that all Contracts, and publick Instruments should be writ in Spanish, and caus'd the Holy Bi∣ble to be Translated. So that the Latin being no more us'd, produc'd a profound Ig∣norance, as well in the Clergy, as Laiety. King Alonso being Dead, tho' his Son Sancho's Title was not good, yet he succeeded him Sancho U∣surps the Crown of Castile. without any Opposition. He was at that Time at Avila, scarce recover'd of a Sickness, in which he had been almost given over by the Physicians at Salamanca, and strength of Youth help'd the Medicines to take Effect: Here he took upon him the Title of King, which he had forbore during his Father's Life. The Title of the Brave he gain'd by his great Spirit, and Actions, till then more Successful, than Honourable; for glorious Ti∣tles are generally obtain'd by the favour of Fortune, rather than by Merit. He was doubtless Bold, Subtle, and Industrious in all his Undertakings. His Reign lasted 11 Years and a few Days; his Memory defac'd with the Wrongs he did his Father, yet the Kingdom he unjustly Usurp'd, he govern'd Prudently. At Avila he perform'd his Father's Exequies with Magnificence, and at Toledo laying aside his Mourning, put on the Royal Robes. The Gentry who had been against him, now throng'd to make their Court, either in hopes to appease him, or else to hide what was conceal'd in their Hearts. The new King at present dissembl'd, yet resolv'd as soon as setl'd to vent his Rage: All the Nobility and Commons swore Allegiance to him and his Daughter Elizabeth, as Heiress in case he had no Issue Male. This was done to exclude the two Brothers his Nephews, whose just Cause many yet fa∣vour'd. King Sancho resolv'd to gain the good Will of the King of Aragon, who had those young Princes in Custody, and was then preparing to besiege Albarazin, being no longer able to bear with the Insolencies of D. John Nunez de Lara. Therefore King Sancho because he could not go in Person, sent a good Body of Men to the Assistance of the King of Aragon against that Common Enemy. This done he went away for Sevil, because Prince John his Brother endeavour'd to possess himself of that City by virtue of his Father's last Will, but the Citizens oppos'd him, and were headed by D. Alvar Nun̄ez de Lara. These Disputes ceas'd upon the coming of the new King, who caus'd his Brother to desist. To this City came Ambassadors from the King of Morocco to settle Peace, but were sent away with Scorn, which provok'd the Moors to invade Spain again. King Sancho to oppose them pro∣vided a great Fleet. At that time the Genoses were Famous for their skill in Navigation; thence the King sent for Benedict Zacarias, who brought with him twelve Galleys, was cre∣ated Admiral, and had the Town, Port S. Mary given to him and his Heirs, upon Conditi∣on they should always maintain a Galley at their Cost. The Cortes or Parliament met at Sevil, their Business was to redress Grievances, and to make void many Grants forc'd in time of Necessity, from the present King and his Father. That Assembly breaking up, the King return'd to Castile, where some conspir'd to restore his Nephews, but he coming upon them, some submitted, and others were put to Death. At this same time Roger Lauria, Gene∣ral of the Aragonians in Sicily, having near Malta defeated 20 French Galleys, killing their General, William Cornutus, sailing towards Naples, offer'd Battle to Charles the Lame, Prince The Ara∣gonians gain two Victories at Sea. of Salerno, and Son to King Charles, who was ready with a mighty Fleet, to pass over into Sicily. Many, and particularly the Pope's Legate advis'd the Prince not to Fight, but he gave no Ear to them. The Battel was Bloody, but in Conclusion the French were beaten, and Prince Charles taken. Authors differ about the Number of Vessels on each side; the most receiv'd Opinion is that the Aragonians had 42 Galleys, and the French 70. This Bat∣tel was fought on the 23d of June, and the Aragonians making use of their Victory, took several Towns in Italy. Three Days after the defeat, King Charles arriv'd at Gaeta, with 20 Galleys from Provence, and there understood how his Son was condemn'd to Death at Me∣cina, by the Sicilians, in revenge of the Death of Conradine, executed by the French, after he was taken in Battel. The Queen sav'd him on pretence of acquainting her Husband, yet
such was the Fury of the People, that they broke the Prisons, and put to the Sword 60 other Prisoners. The King of Aragon, as if he had no War abroad, now lay'd Siege to Albara∣zin, and furiously Batter'd it. The City was naturally Strong, well Fortify'd, and had a good Garrison of hardy Souldiers; yet Provisions falling short, D. John Nun̄ez de Lara re∣solv'd Albarazin taken by the King of Aragon. to make his Escape, but advis'd the Garrison to hold out whilst he went to Navarre, where he was sure of Succour. After his Departure, the City held out a few Days, and then desparing of Relief, surrendred on Michaelmas Day. The Garrison consisted of French and Navarrois, who were all dismiss'd, and People brought from the Neighbourhood as well to Inhabit the Place, as Till the Land. The King had a Bastard-Son by the Lady Agnes Za∣pata, to him he had before given Algezira and Liria, in the Kingdom of Valencia, and now gave him the City Albarazin. This was the end of that Principality, for many Years possess'd by the noble Family of the Açagras. CHAP. VI. The French invade Catalonia, take Girona, and retire back to France with Loss. The King of Morocco Besieges Xeres, and is repuls'd. The Death of the four Kings, of France, Aragon, Naples, and Morrocco. AFter the taking of Albarazin, a greater Storm threatn'd the King of Aragon from France. The Aragonian alone was not able to withstand the French, and therefore had recourse The King of Aragon seeks Aid against the French. to Forreign Aids. He sent Embassadors into Germany to the Emperors Rodulphus, who be∣ing a cautious Man, and at that time in War with the Switsers, gave only good Words. King Sancho at the Instance of the King of Aragon, had Conferences with him at Ciria and Borobia, two Towns about Soria, where they made a League, and promis'd to assist one another. The King of Morocco design'd to make War in Andaluzia. The French wasted the Frontiers of Aragon, and Jayme King of Majorca sided with them. 18000 Moorish Horse besieg'd Xerez de la Frontera, and made Incursions as far as Sevil. King Sancho went with speed to Toledo, where Charles Earl of Artois, Embassador from the King of France expected him. His chief Business was to procure the Liberty of the King's two Nephews, and perswade King Sancho not to have to do with the King of Aragon, who was Excommunicated by the Pope. The King's Answer in Publick was, that he would send Embassadors to adjust all things in France, and privately he declar'd himself much the King of France his Friend. The King of Aragon lay'd Siege to Tudela in Navarre, by that means to divert the French, who design'd to pass into Aragon, through Russillon. That City was bravely defended by D. John Nunez de Lara, who lost Albarazin, and was more Successful in the Affairs of others, than his own. All the Country about was wasted, and the Frontier Towns of Aragon strongly Garrison'd to op∣pose the Enemy. This done, because Winter came on, the King of Aragon return'd to Zara∣goça. There he spent the remainder of this Year, and beginning of the next, which was 1285, in which on the 7th of January, Charles King of Naples departed this Life at Fogia, a Town of Apulia, being worn out with Misfortunes, and griev'd at the Imprisonment of his Son. 1285. Charles King of Naples dies. This Prince had been Famous, as well in Peace as War, had the end of his Life been suitable to the beginning. Age made him feel the Inconstancy of Fortune, as it has happen'd to many. Besides the Vigour of the French was decay'd, and they debauch'd with Ease and Pleasure, and their Governours made the King odious through their Avarice and Exactions. The Death of the King of Naples was equally pleasing to the King of Aragon, and grievous to him of France. To divert his Melancholy by offending his Enemies, he made great Levies. His Land Army amounted to 20000 Horse, and 80000 Foot, and at the same time he pro∣vided a Fleet of 120 Sail, between great Ships, Galleys, and other smaller Vessels. He re∣solv'd to go in Person to this Expedition, and with him Philip and Charles his Sons, and Jayme King of Majorca, who follow'd the French, being highly offended at the Aragonian his Brother. With them also was Cardinal Gervasius sent by Pope Martin the 4th, as his Le∣gate. That Pope dying at Perosa, on the 29th of March, Honorius the IVth a Citizen of Rome, of the Family Sabela was chosen in his Place, and took the Part of the French no less than his Predecessor had done. The Army Rendevouz'd at Narbonne, and thence march'd towards Perpignan. This Town was surrendred to King Jayme, and admitted the French. The Ex∣ample was followed by all the Towns of Russillon, and that Neighbourhood, except one call'd The French Ar∣my enters Catalonia. Genova, which in hatred to King Jayme, and hoping to be speedily reliev'd, held out. They were deceiv'd in their Expectation; for the Town was taken by Assault, and all the Inhabi∣tants put to the Sword, without sparing the very Buildings, which were all Burnt and De∣stroy'd. The Bastard of Russillon, a Man of great Courage, who was in the Town, got into the Tower of the Church, where King Jayme's Intercession sav'd his Life, rather than the Strength or Holiness of that Place. Yet he show'd his Gratitude to the French, for the King of Aragon being possessed of all the Passes on the Pyrenean Mountains, so that there was no hopes of getting by, he conducted them through By-paths known to him, till they reach'd the Tops of those Hills, and Encamp'd above the Aragonians. Thus the two Kings advanc'd
as far as the Territory of Ampurias. There they easily took several Towns, particularly Peralada and Figueras, without meeting any Opposition till they sat down before Girona, a great and noble City sting the People, formerly called Ausetani. It is Seated on the side Girona Be∣sieg'd by the French. of a Hill, at the Foot whereof runs the River, antiently called Thici, now Tera, which has so wash'd away the Banks next the City, that they and considerably to its Strength. The Walls are well built, the Towers of Stone, and strong; in the highest part of the City stands the Cathedral, and Bishop's House, a large and beautiful Fabrick. Above the Cathedral is a large Tower call'd Gironela. Raymund  Cardona,  Governour of that City, had added new Works, and throw down all the Suburbs, only  the Church of S. Felix, for the great Devotion of the Place, and it's Antiquity. His Valour and Industry was great, so that he several times but  of the French,  mind their Works. The King of Aragon was not far off; but being too weak to give the Enemy Battel, sought some Oppor∣tunity of gaining an Advantage and putting Relief into the Town. It had been three Months Besieg'd, when Sancho King of Castile sent Martin, Bishop of Calahorra, and Gonuz Garçia de Toledo, Abbot of Valladolia, his Embassadors to compose these Differences. They were sent back with many Reproaches, having scares seen the King of France. It was reported King Sancho wanted not Good Will to assist the Aragonians, but that he was taken up with the War in Andaluzia, where  Moors, as was said before, had y'd Siege to Xerez de la Frontera. King Sancho was my of putting all to the hazard of a , and therefore only pass'd be∣tween Sevil and Nebrixa, always in a Readiness to cut off the Parties of Moors that made In∣cursions Xeres be∣sieg'd by the Moors, and the Siege rais∣ed. into the Country. Thus after a Siege of 6 Months, the Moors raised their Camp from before Xerez, being i ent of all Necessaries, and fearing lest King Sancho should of∣fer them Battel. After they had pass'd the River Guadalete, rather in the nature of Flight, than a Retreat, one ask'd of the Moorish King the Reason why he show'd so much , and he answer'd: I am the first that rais'd the Family of Bar-ameda to the Regal Dignity; my Enemy is descended from above 40 Kings, which in Battle would have been a great Terror to me, and a mighty Incouragement to him. This seem'd to be a good Opportunity to pur∣sue the Infidels, but King Sancho was for the safest, rather than dangerous Counsels. There∣fore having repair'd, and revictuall'd Xerez, he return'd , notwithstanding the Soul∣diers muttered they lost a great Opportunity of destroying  Enemy. Embassadors pass'd betwixt the two Kings, and at last they had a Meeting of the Banks of Guadalquivir, others say at Raserrada. There it was agreed the King of Morocco should thy 1000000 of Mara∣vedies, (a  that had not always the same Value) towards the Charges of the War, and thus it ended. Many Persons of Note were disgusted at this Peace, particularly Prince John, Peace with the Moores. the Kings Brother, and D. Lope Diaz de Haro, who both withdrew out of Sevil, and went away to their own Lordships. Not long after dy'd the King of Morocco, and left his Son Joseph to succeed him. Let us return to the Siege of Girona. The King of Aragon desiring to cut off the Provisions that were brought to the French Army from the Port of Roses, resolv'd to lay an Ambush in a convenient Place by the Way. This design being discover'd by Spies, Rodulphus,  France, and John Marshal de Harcourt, with the Earl of Marche, went to the Place where the Ambush was lay'd, with only 300 Horse. On the 15th of August the Parties met, and there ensu'd a desperate Fight. The Aragonians were the greater Number, but the French, made the  Bravery, and Dexterity. The King did all that could be ex∣pected of a wise Commande and resolute Souldier. He was hurt in the Head, and endea∣vouring then to get off, a  Man seized his Horses Reins, and had taken him, had he not with his Sword cut the Rins and fled. This writes Villancus, who gave occasion to others to commit the same Error. For all the  of Aragon affirm the King came off without hurt, that the Number of the Stain was  both Sides, tho' the French were Masters of the Field. Thus  Authors to vary. The Season being very hot, brought the Plague into the  Camp, and yet the Besieg'd hearing of this Defeat, and having no hopes of Relief,  Condition they should be suffer'd to depart whither they Girona taken be the French. pleas'd, and to take  as much of their Goods as they were able to carry. Much Cruelty was us'd  them that Surrendred, and even the Churches were Pro∣fan'd. The Sepulcher of S. Narcissus, who is Patr of that City, and the reverenc'd with sin∣gular Devotion was spoil'd of all the Riches belonging to it, which were very considerable, and carry'd away. The Plague increas'd, which was look'd upon as a Judgment for that Sacri∣ledge; and  the French resolving to return into France by Land, about Autumn, dismiss'd many hir'd Ships they had i the  Roses, to  Charges. Mean while Roger Lauria, Admiral of Aragon, having take the  in the  Part of Italy, came with great speed to relieve the King of Aragon, being come upon the Coast of Spain, he fell upon the Aragoni∣an destroy the French Fleet: French Fleet, then out of Port, consisting of few Ships, and those unprovided, and so easily overthrew them. John Scous the French dmiral was  with 15 Galleys, 12 others fled to the Port of Roses, whence they had . Their  burnt, not only them, but the very. Town, such was their Constenation, and fled to the Camp, whither they carry'd the News of their Defeat. The King of France finding all things more Difficult than he had ex∣pected, and much griev'd with Sickness, repair'd , and leaving a strong Garrison in it, march'd with the remainder of his Army towards Roussillon. On the Pyrenan Mountains the whole Army was in great Danger, the Aragonians having secur'd all the Passes, in hopes to
take the King of France, who by reason of his Indisposition was carry'd upon Men's Shoul∣ders. Great loss was sustain'd, much Baggage lost, and what was worst of all, the King fatigu'd with the Journey, d'd at Pepignan on the 6th of . His Body as he had order'd was carry'd to the Church of . Denis, near Paris. His Son Philip the Fair, or the Philip the Fair, King of France. Beautiful, succeeded him, being before that King of Navarre. Upon the Departure of the French, all the had taken was recover'd by the . Besides Prince Alonso snt over by his Father to that effect, took all the Island of Majorca, in  that the King of it had joyn'd with the French.  his own Brother. The King of  design'd to pur∣sue his good Fortune, and had new Design  to strengthen himself, when Death put a Period to all his Resolutions. He dy'd at   8th. Day of November, in the Prime of his Age, being but  Six Years old,  the height of his Glory. He Death of the King of Aragon. was call'd the Great, for that  Sicily to his Dominions and for his other memo∣rable Exploits. He was an , being of  only Presence, Presence, of large Stature, a generous Spirit, well skill'd at all Weapons, especially in wielding a Pole-Ax. He had a particular Way of ining Peoples Affections with Good Words, Courtesey and Libe∣rality: He let no other Reflection on himself, but his lying under an Excommunication till the end of his Life, the Thoughts whereof often perplexed, him, and particularly at the Hour of his Death. He was resolv'd of that Scruple in the last Agny, by the Arch-Bishop of Tarragona having exacted to Oath from him, that he would for the future be obedient to the Church. His Body was Buried in the Monastery of Santa Cruz, which is near that Place. His Children went D. Alonso the Eldest, whom in his Will he appointed Heir of his Kingdoms, without making particular mention of Sicily; then Jayme, , Peter, Elizabeth, and the  Constance, all Born of Queen Constance his Wife. Arnaldus de Vallanova, a most famous  of those times, was with the King when he dy'd. This Man and all his Works, were afterwards condemn'd by the Inquisitions. Tostatus affirms, he attempted with Hu∣mour,  and other  to form a Man, and that tho' it took not effect, he went a great way towards it  is not our Business to argue the Truth of this Assertion. CHAP. VII. The King of Castile and Portugal meet. D. Lope de Haro flies to Navarre. A Treaty in order to release the two Princes of Castile. Charles Prince of Salerno set at Liberty. France and Castile joyn against Aragon. Denis King of Portugal his Issue. THis Year unfortunate in the Death, of so many Princes, was in some measure bless'd Birth of Ferdinand Prince of Castile. with the Birth of Prince Ferdinand, Son to the King of Castile, and born at Sevil, while his Father was gone to Badajoz, to appease some Troubles that were in those Parts. The Care of his Education was committed to Hernan once  Leon, a Man of great Note, and Zamora was appointed for his Residence, as being a Place  and Pleasant. Moreo∣ver the following Year, which was 1286, in the Cortes or Parliament, he was sworn Heir to 1286 the Crown which was his Father's chiefest Cae both in respect he fear'd his Nephews, as also because his Marriage with the Queen was illegal upon account of Consanguinity. He endeavour'd to obtain a Dispensation, but could never Prevail with the Popes, the King of France always opposing it in favour of the two excluded Princes, his near Kinsmen. King Sancho labour'd by all means to gain his Good Will, and to that purpose sent the same Embassadors, who went to him the Year, , and were the Bishop of Calaherra, and Abbot of Valludoli, Philip the  King of France, was Crown'd at Rheimes, on the 6th of January. In Sicily Prince Jayme, as soon as he neard of the Death of his Father, took upon him the Title of King of Sicily, and Prince of Apulia and  as being possess'd of a good Part of the Kingdom of Nap and hoping in a short time to be Master of all that re∣main'd. Yet all places were well fortify'd and provided to oppose the Sicilia, though the Valour and Industry  Robert Earl of Arras, to whom the King of France, after the Death of King Charles, had committed the Care of the Kingdom of Naples,  the III. King of Aragon, being sometime taken up in fitting out a Fleet to invade Majorca and Minorca, as Alonso the III. King of Aragon crown'd. was left him in Charge by his Father delay'd his Coronation  the 14th of  being Easter Sunday. He was crown'd at Zaragaca by the Bishop of , the See of Tarragona, whose that Honour was, being then vacant, and took the usual Oath to preserve the Liberties of the People. The Expences of the Royal Family were retrench'd and at the Cortes or Parliament held at Huesca, the King granted that Valencia, sometime before annex'd to the Crown of Ara∣gon, should be govern'd according to the Law  that Kingdom. Gonçalo Archbishop of Toledo, a Person of great Esteem with the King, here him company to S. Sebastian, in order to a Conference between him and the King of France; but they met not. However, the Arch-Bishop was sent by King Sancho, and the Duke of Burgundy by him of France, to Bayonne, where a Treaty of Peace was earnestly labour'd upon. The French would give Ear to no Propo∣sals unless King Sancho would put away his Wife, to whom he was illegally Married by rea∣son
of their Consanguinity, and Marry one of the King of France his Sisters, which were , after Wife to Edward King of England, and Blanch Marry'd to the Duke of Austria. King Sancho would hot be perswaded to putaway a Virtuous Wife by whom he had a Son and  Daughter, so the Treaty broke off and he return'd to the Queen to Vitoria. The King was highly affended at the Abbot of Valladalid, for that it was he who started that Dis∣course and consulted with the Queen how to be reveng'd. They thought fit to call him to Aount for the administration of the Royal Revenue which, he had Charge of, and the Bu∣siness was committed to the Arch-Bishop of Toledo. King Sancho went away to Santiago in , and by the way in the Monaster of Sahagun finding that the Bonca of King Alonso the VIth and his two Queens Elizabeth and Mary, were meanly laterred, he us'd them to be put into decent Tombs with . Being return'd to Valladlid, he honour'd D. Lope Diaz de Haro rd of Biscay, to whom chiefly he  Crown, with the place of Lord Steward of his Household, and his Standard heaery. Besides, he made him Governour of many Forth, and on the 1st of January gave him the Title of an Earl, all these Honours in remainder to his son James Lopez de Haro.  de Haro Brother to D. Lope, was made D. Lope and Haro favourite to King Sancho of Castile. General of . Thus that Family increas'd Riches and Power, and D. Lope be∣came the King's Favouri, all Things were govern'd according to his Will, in so much that the other Nobles complain'd he tyranniz'd in the Name of King Sancho. Paticularly the Peo∣ple of Leon and Gcia found fault that he bestow'd all  upon his own Creatures. D. Lope great yt more Hanghty, having marry'd his Daughter Mary to Prince John, and endeavour'd to have the King put away his Queen, that he might Marry his Consin Gulielma, Daughter to astn Earl . This was not at all pleasing to the King who had now by the Queen another Son call'd Alonso, and therefore sought an Opportunity to ake off D. Lope, yet fearing some Rebellion, kept him close about his Person in the same Hur; whilst he visited the Kingdom of Toledo, and went to . The Design of this burney was to  the People of Galicia, who had revolted, and put a stop to the incursions of the  Prince Alonso the King of Portugal's Brother, and D. Alvar Nun̄oz de Lara, Son to D. John de Lara, a restless Man and us'd to live upon Rapine. Prince Alonso was possess'd of the  of Pertaleg and Ronca on the Frontiers of Castile and Portugal  Lope de Haro was lest to reduce the Rebels of Galicia. The affair of Portugal was  of between that King and him of Castile, and they agreeing, with joynt Forces laid Siege to Ronca, destroy'd all the Country and oblig'd it to surrender. The two Kings being toge∣ther at this Siege the Portuguese advis'd the Castilian to take D. Alvar Nun̄ez de Lara into Fa∣vour, that his Greatness might serve as a check to D. Lope de Haro, which was done accor∣dingly. D. Lope diving into that Design upon pretence of visiting his Cousin the Viscount of Bearne withdrew into Navarre. The Navarrois were of themselves inclinable to make War against Castile, and therefore upon his coming took up Arms. Clement Luna a French∣man was then Viceroy of Navarre. Many Incursions were made by the Navarrois as well in∣to Castile as Aragon, but nothing of Note was done, except taking the Town of Salva∣tierra from the later. The Aragonians made War into Italy with better success. Roger Lau∣ria a brave Commander, and famous for his late Victories, surpriz'd a mighty Fleet of the Aragonians successful in Italy. Enemy near Naples, and after a sharp Dispute obtain'd a compleat Victory, taking 42 Sale and 5000 Prisoners, among which were many of Note. Most of them were ransom'd; only Guido de Montfort was not releas'd, the Kings of England and Aragon being his  Enemies, because this Man was Great Grand-son to Simon Earl of Montfort, who as has been said, over∣threw and kill'd Peter King of Aragon in the War of Toulouze. And Simon Grand-son to the other Simon took Richard, Brother to King Henry of England, Prisoner. Guido also cruelly Murder'd Henry the Son of that Richard the Emperour, in the Cathedral of Viterbo, at Man, in Revenge for his Father kill'd in Battle, by Edward King of England. The French and English Histo∣rians affirm  Guido was deliver'd up to the King of England. A Sicilian Writer of that Age, positively says, he  Sicily of a Disease which could not be cur'd, without having to do with a Woman, which he absolutely refus'd, because he would not wrong his Wife Marguerie, who after his Death behav'd not her self so well as she ought to have done. The Aragonians were now at Peace, and famous for their Riches, Strength, and the me∣morable Action they had perform'd. Only, the King of Majorca ested the Coast of alonia, but  nothing Remarkable. Alonso King of Aragon was renowned, and had the The right∣ful Princes of Castile Prisoners. Ballance of Peace and War in his Hands, keeping the two rightful Princes of Castile, Prison∣ers in Aragon, and him of Salero in Sicily. These Princes growing weary of their Confine∣ment, inclin'd to admit of any  so they might be enlarg'd, and great Kings in∣terceded for them. Many  sent from France and Castile upon that Affair; but the Authority of Edward King of England was of most Weight, because the Aragonian sought to Marry his Daughter Ellor. ose Kings resolv'd to meet at the City Oloron, in the Province of Bearne; and there  of the King of England it was agreed, that the Prince of Salerno should be set at Liberty, within a Year, upon these Conditions. That the Kingdom of Sicily should remain to D. Jayme. That he should prevail with the Pope to give his consent, and take  censures under which the Kingdom of Ara∣gon lay. That he should Pay 30000 Marks of Silver. That Charles of Valcis should quit his Pre∣tensions to the Crown of Aragon given him by Pope Martin. And that if all this were not perfor∣
within the Term of three Years, that Prince should return in Prison, and in the mean while, Charles Prince of Salerno made King of Apulia and Sicily. should give his Three Sons, Robert, Charles and Luis, and Sixty Men of Note, of , as Hostages. Charles Prince of  being set at liberty, went over into France, and thence into Tuscany, and after having appeas'd the Tumults, rais'd by the  in Rod, was at last by Pope  the IV th. declared King of Apulia and Sicily, and accordingly  Pope pretended the late Agreement was invalid, being made without his Consent that Kingdom being an antient Fle of the Church. This highly perplexed the King of Ara∣gon, and the Word for that he understand that Sancho King of Castile was  to break  him, and joyn with the King of France, the Queen and Arch-Bishop of Toledo favour∣ing the French, and many others oppos'd. He  many Troubles ensu'd, and D. Lope de Haro dying  shall be related, but Friends and  fled to Aragon, and were the  of new Wars. This  speedily with the French. The Embassadors of both Kings and the Popes  at the ity Lyons in French, and here they agreed, Th King Sancho should give to D. Alonso de la Cerda the Kingdom of M∣c, upon Condition he should not assume the Title of King of Castile, and ould hold that Crown of him, and do him  for it. That if D. Alonso dy'd without , his Bro∣ther Ferdinand should . That the King of Castile should send 000 Horse to Articles betwixt France and Castile. the Assistance of the King of France, to make War upon Aragon, but give  Army free passage through his Dominions, if there was Occasion. That the Two Princes then Prison∣ers, being by the Two Kings set at Liberty, should be deliver'd to the King of France. This Agreement was so displeasing to Blanch, the Mother of  Princes, that leaving her Brother, she went away to Portugal. She labour'd with a  Spirit to get assistance against  but the Success answer'd not the Pains she took. Denis King of Portugal having  the Moors his Dominions njoy'd perfect Peace, and would by no  be perswad∣ed to hazard his own Quiet for the good of others. This King had good natural Parts, King Denis of Portugal his Issue. and who happy in a numerous ue. By his Queen Elizabeth he had Two Daughters, Eli∣zabeth and Constance, and one Son called Alonso, who  him. By other Women he had Alonso de Albuquerque, from whom descends a Noble Family in Portugal, Peter given to , as appears, by a Book he wrote of the Nobility of Spain , and Ferdinand;  two Daughters, one marry'd to D. John de la Cerda, the other to . CHAP. VIII. Troubles in Castile. The rightful Heirs to that Crown, before Prisoners in Aragon, set at liberty. Wars on that account betwixt those two Crowns. Badajoz Mtinies and is reduc'd. An Interview betwixt the Kings of France and Castile. CAstile was at peace with the Moors, Amity being establish'd with the King of Granada, Seeds of discord in Castile. and a Truce with the King of Morocco. A Civil War was fear'd by all Men. These Troubles were occasion'd by the Death of D. Lope de Haro, kill'd in the Court, and even in the King's presence in this manner. D. Alvar Nun̄ez de Lara dying soon after he was reconcil'd to the King, his Competitor D. Lope de Haro return'd to Court, hoping to recover his former Fa∣vour. But no sooner was D. Alvar dead, than D. John his Brother, was rais'd to the same degree of Esteem, to the great satisfaction of the People, and no less Grief of D. Lope de Haro, who so highly resented it, as to complain to the King himself. Prince John, D. Lope's Son in Law,  Incursions far as Guidad . The King complain'd thereof to D. Lope, who had the Boldness to say  by his Consent, and added, that if the King went to Valladolid, his Son in-Law would come to igules, a Town  that  which was threatning of him. The King tho inrag'd at this Affront, diss'd it at present, and going to Valladolid, spoke with D. John his Brother, o those Troubles as'd for some time. From Valladolid the King  to Roa, thence to , then to Soria, and then set forward towards Taragona to meet the King of Aragon and treat about delivering the Two Prin∣ces his Nephews. This Meeting of the Two Kings was prevented by the Policy of D. Lope de Haro, who pass'd betwixt them, and made Proposals to each of them, which the other never thought of. His Design was by  of these two Princes to pull down King San∣cho, from whom he was wholly . Therefore nothing being concluded, King Sancho return'd to Alfaro a Town, or , on the Borders Beacon and Navarre. Prince John, and D. Lope de Haro came thither to attend him, without a sufficient Retinue to guard them. There were  at that  Arch-Bishop at Toledo, the Bishops of Plasencia, Callahorra, Osma and Tuy, besides the . Lord , and the Abbot of Valladolid, all summon'd to a Council. Prince , and D. Lope, being come into the Kings Presence, he commanded them immediately to deliver up all the  they held of the King, and they excusing themselves, he order'd them to be apprehended D. Lope  Hand on his Sword and wrapping his Cloak about his Arm, call'd the King Tyrant, gave him much more D. Lope de Haro kill'd at Court. opprobrious Language, and stepp'd forwards to kill him. All that were by , and falling
upon him, first out off his Right Hand, and soon made an end of him. Prince John after wounding some of the King's Servant, seeing his Father in Law Dead, fled to the Queen's Chamber, who stood before him to stop the King, that follow'd with his drawn Sword, and by her intreaties sav'd his life. However he was put in Prison, to stand Tryal for his Offences. It would be tedious to relate all the particulars of this Treason, and the Confusion in the Royal Family. These Heads being taken off, all Tumults ceased for the present, and the Example terrifyed others from attempting just then to Rebel. But when the Terror was somewhat abated, that Action of the King's began to be openly censur'd: The Friends and Kindred of those two great Men withdrew from Court, and many got out of the Kingdom. Thus a mighty Storm seem'd to threaten, and therefore the King, as was said, made hast to conclude the League with France. Joanna Wife to the late D. Lope de Haro, Daughter to D. Alonso, Lord of Molina, all clad in Mourning, went to see the Queen her Sister at Santo Domingo de la Calçada, where the Court then was, and prevail'd so far with her Tears; and the Queens intercession, that the King was appeased, and granted her Son should not be depriv'd of his Lord-ship of Biscay, as had been design'd, the Town of Haro and Castle of Trevin̄o being already seiz'd. Moreover the Queen promis'd her Sister, that if her Son would be quiet and submit himself to the King, he should be restor'd to his Father's Honours. The Lady Joanna, like an un∣constant Woman, thinking this proceeded from Fear, incens'd her Son against the King, and perswaded him to cast off his Allegiance and go over to Aragon. Mary, Wife to Prince John, then a Prisoner, fled to Navarre, and with her many of her Friends; but others better advis'd stay'd to see the Event of Things. Gaston Viscount of Bearne came speedily to Aragon, resol∣ving to hazard his Person and Estate in defence of his Kindred. At the Request of all these The right∣ful Princes of Castile released. Nobles, the King of Aragon releas'd the Two Brothers Princes of Castile, and the more to incense King Sancho, in the Month of September at Jaca, saluted Alonso, the eldest, King of Castile and Leon. This was the Foundation of new Wars, which presently broke out between Castile and Aragon. The Commonalty of Castile were for a Change; the Gentry for the most part stood by King Sancho. He about that time went to Vitoria in the Province of Alava, and there the Queen was deliver'd of a Son, who was call'd Henry. This Journey was underta∣ken in order to meet the King of France at Bayonne, as had been agreed, and to subdue Biscay. This War prov'd more difficult than was expected, by reason of the natural Strength of the Country, want of Provisions, and the Resolution of that People. Some Hopes there had been of gaining D. James de Haro Brother to D. Lope, by the means of Ruy Perez Ponce, Master of Calatrava, and the Lord-ship of Biscay was partly offer'd him; but he chose rather to re∣tire into Aragon, resolving to stand by his Nephew. All things were disposed for a Rupture, when D. James de Haro, Son to D. Lope, dy'd very fortunately for King Sancho. His Death caus'd the Affections of his Followers to cool, and all Biscay, which till then held out, to sub∣mit to the Valour of James Lopez de Salzedo, a Man in great esteem, to whom that Affair was committed. King Sancho having settled Biscay, and put off the Interview with the King of France, left his Brother Prince John Prisoner in the Castle of Burgos, whence he was remov'd to Curiel, and he himself being perplexed in Mind about the War with Aragon, went to Sabugal, a Town on the Frontiers of Portugal. There he concluded a League with that King, against the Aragonians, and the out-Laws of Castile, who prepar'd for War under Colour of restoring War be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon. D. Alonso de la Cerda, who stil'd himself King of Castile, to his Grand-father's Kingdom. These Things concluded, King Sancho March'd with all the Forces he could gather to meet the Aragonians at Almaçan. The Two Armies met in the Month of April 1289, but nothing remarkable was done. Only Moron was taken by the Aragonians, and Almaçan Besieg'd. On the other side, King Sancho entring the Frontiers of Aragon, destroy'd all the open Country, and burnt many Towns. D. James Lopez de Haro in the same manner, wasted all the Territory of Cuenca and Huete, and defeated a Party of the Enemy near Pajaron, killing Redorick de Sotomayor, Commander of the Castilians. D. James sent the Colours taken, to the City Tiruel. One Misfortune still follow'd upon the Neck of another, and the Innocent Peo∣ple suffer'd for these Quarrels of the great Ones. Most Cities sided with King Sancho, but at Badajoz there happen'd a great Tumult. That City of old, was divided into Two Factions, Mutiny at Badajoz. the Bejarani, and the Portugueses. The Bejarani being expell'd the City by their Enemies, ap∣ply'd themselves to the King for Redress, he order'd they should be restor'd, but the Por∣tugueses obey'd not. Hereupon the Bejarani having gather'd a good Force, kill'd many of their Adversaries, and forc'd the rest to quit the Place. This done, they fortify'd them∣selves in the upper Part of the City, and proclaim'd D. Alonso de la Cerda King. King San∣cho highly offended hereat, laid Siege to the Town, which presently surrender'd, having Articled only for Life. Contrary to Agreement, 4000 Men and Women were put to the Sword. The same happen'd to Talavera, a considerable Town in the Kingdom of Toldo, upon the same Account, 400 of the principal Inhabitants were publickly Quarter'd at the Gate, which for that Reason, was ever since call'd the Gate of Quarters. This the Inhabi∣tants 1290 have by Tradition, tho no Author makes mention of it. These Two Towns serv'd for Interview of the Kings of France and Castile. an Example to all others. The following Year 1290, it was again agreed the Kings of France and Castile should meet. They both accordingly came on the Day appointed, to Bay∣onne. The chief Points agreed upon at this Interview were, That the King of France
should desist giving any farther Protection to the two Princes of Castile, That he should re∣nounce all Claim and Title to that Crown, as Great Grandson to Queen Blanch. And that both Kings should make War upon Aragon. At the same time Tolosa, Segura, and Villafranca, which began to be Rebuilt in Biscay, in the time of King Alonso, were now finish'd by King Sancho, as appears by publick Instruments sign'd at Vitoria and Valladolid, whither the King went from Bayonne. The King of Aragon finding himself too weak to make Head against France, Castile, and Italy, inclin'd to Peace, notwithstanding Charles King of Naples did not perform his Promise, at which the King of England, who had procur'd his Liberty, was highly of∣fended. All Parties had recourse to the Pope, laying their Case before him. He answer'd he would send Legates, who having heard them all, should endeavour to reconcile these Dif∣ferences. Benedict Colona, and Gerard de Parma, two Cardinals, were sent into France to this Purpose. Mean while Charles King of Naples, and the King of Aragon, upon Security given on both Sides, met at Junquera, a Town in Catalonia. There they concluded a Truce for some Months, whilst the Cardinals could settle a Peace, which both earnestly desir'd; King Charles that he might recover Sicily, and the Aragonian to take off that long Interdict, under which his Kingdom lay, and put an end to the War with France, that he might be at Leisure to bend his Force against Castile. CHAP. IX. The revolt of D. John Nunnez de Lara. The Death of the King of Aragon: His Brother Jme succeeds him. Matches betwixt the three Kings of Spain. Defeat of the Moors at Sea Original of the Dukes of Medina Sidonia. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, began again to incline to take part with the Aragonians, either out of his natural Inconstancy, or because some Overtures were made of restoring D. John Nunnez de Lara re∣volts from Castile. Albarazin to him. King Sancho understanding of what Consequence his stay or departure might be, did all he could to oblige him, and therefore made him General of the Frontiers of Aragon, and bestow'd other Favours upon him. All prov'd ineffectual, and the more, for that at Burgos, where the Court then was, Letters were brought him, intimating some De∣sign against his Person, whether true or false, is not known. D. John who was naturally jea∣lous, gave Credit to those Letters, and withdrawing from Court, went away nastily through Navarre to Aragon, notwithstanding the Queen us'd means to stop him, and the King himself went after him as far as Valladolid. As soon as D. John had joyn'd the other Conspirators, he enter'd Castile, and did all the harm he could as far as Cuenca and Alarcon. A Body of King Sancho's Forces coming to oppose him, was defeated, and many Colours taken, after which he forc'd the Town of Moya, and return'd to Valencia with a great Number of Pri∣soners and Cattle. From thence the King of Aragon, D. James de Haro, and D. John de Lara made an Incursion by the way of Molina, Signença, Berlanga, and Almaçan, and destroy'd all the Country without meeting any Opposition. King Sancho endeavour'd to put a stop to this Mischief; but an Ague kept him in such a Condition he could neither Act, nor give the ne∣cessary Orders, insomuch that he was given over by the Doctors. The Queen who was late∣ly deliver'd of a Prince call'd Peter, tho' not perfectly recover'd, set out to see the King. Her Presence was comfortable to him, and produc'd good Effect. She reduc'd D. John de Lara, who now repented his Change, being disappointed of recovering Albarazin. It was agreed that Elizabeth, Daughter to the Lady Blanch, and the Queen's Brother, should be Marry'd to D. John de Lara's Son. Her Portion was the Lordship of Molina, her Father having no Issue∣male. The Marriage was solemniz'd at Cuenca; thence the King, Queen, and D. John went D. John reconcil'd to King Sancho, a∣gain ready to fly from him. to Toledo, the latter took up his Lodging in the Monastery of S. Paul of Dominicans without the City, on the Banks of Tagus. Being at Dice late at Night with a rich Jew, on a sudden a Servant of his call'd Nun̄o Churuchao advis'd him to make his Escape, for there was a Design to kill him, and in order to it, Arms had been carry'd into the Court. He credited the In∣telligence, but could not get away, for that the City Gates were shut, and his Servants and Horses within. He spent the Night in Fear, and having call'd his Servants at break of Day, they perswaded him not to stir, for that there was not the least ground for any Suspicion. The King was much concerned that he should be Suspected, and the more he endeavour'd to satisfy D. John, the more Jealous he was. At this time the League with the King of Grana∣da was renew'd, upon Condition he should pay the usual Tribute; for that King was before wavering. Hernan Ponce de Leon, who commanded upon the Frontiers was the chief Instru∣ment of continuing this good Understanding betwixt the two Kings. From Toledo the King and Queen went to Burgos, and thence to Palencia, where was held a general Chapter of the Order of S. Dominick. D. John de Lara could not be oblig'd by any Favours, but endea∣vour'd to stir up the Nobles to revolt. To oppose him, Prince John the King's Brother, who was belov'd by all Men, was taken out of Prison, and took the Oath of Fidelity to the King and his Son Ferdinand, as Heir apparent, kissing his Hand according to the Custom of Castile. By his means many were reduc'd to the King's Service. The King also going to Santiago of
Galicia, under colour of Devotion perswaded D. John Alonso de Albuquerque, a Man of great Power, who at the Instigation of D. John de Lara had revolted, to lay down his Arms. These Things happen'd in Castile, in the Year of our Lord 1291, when in the Month of February 1291. the Pope's Legates in France at Tarascon compos'd the Differences betwixt the Kings of France Peace be∣twixt France and Ara∣god. and Aragon. Charles King of Naples was present with the Embassadors of the other two Kings. Peace was concluded upon the following Conditions; That the King of Aragon send Embassadors to Rome, humbly to beg Pardon of his past Contumacy and Disobedience; That he pay the yearly Tribute of 70 Ounces of Gold to the Church, as was promis'd by his Grand∣father. That he go with a powerful Fleet to the Service of the Holy Land. That at his re∣turn he advise his Mother and Brother to quit Sicily. That he publish an Edict, commanding all Aragonians under severe Penalties to depart that Island. That Charles of Valois resign his Claim to the Crown of Aragon, on Account of the Gift of the Pope. That his Holiness shall receive the Aragonian into Favour, and send a Prelate to take off the Interdict from his Kingdom, to whom the King shall deliver the Hostages he has from the King of Naplas. At the con∣cluding of these Articles, the Embassadors of Sicily were not present, by the Contrivance of the King of Aragon, knowing they would break all these Measures, at which King Jayme and all the Sicilians were highly offended. They complain'd he who ought to have Protected, had deceiv'd and forsaken them, yet resolv'd rather to dye, than return under the Dominion of the French, and they obtain'd their Ends. The French were disappointed of recovering Sicily, and the King of Aragon's Voyage to the Holy Land was prevented, the City Ptolemays, the last that remain'd in the Hands of the Christians being taken, and utterly subverted by the Infidels. The Kings of Aragon and Naples met a second time at Junquera, in order to establish a lasting Peace; both of them being weary of the War. Therefore as soon as they parted King Charles marry'd his Eldest Daughter Clemencia, to Charles of Valois, giving her in Dower the Earldom of Anjou, and Province of Main, upon Condition he should quit all Pretensions to the Crown of Aragon. The King of Aragon was resolv'd to fullfil all that had Death of Alonso the 3d King of Aragon. been agreed upon when Death cut him off at Barcelona, in the midst of his Preparations to receive the Princess Ellenor his Bride. He dy'd in the Flower of his Youth, being but 27 Years of Age, and on the 18th Day of June. His Body was bury'd in the Monastery of S. Francis in that City, with the Habit of that Order. Upon the News of the King of Aragon's Death, his Brother Jayme presently came over Jayme Crowned King of Aragon, from Sicily to take Possession of that Crown which appertain'd to him, as next of Blood, his Brother dying without Issue, and having in his Will appointed him his Successor. He was receiv'd without any Opposition, and Crown'd at Zaragoça, with the usual Solemnity on the 24th of September. He would not allow of that Clause in his Brother's Will, which appointed Prince Frederick his younger Brother King of Sicily, but resolv'd to keep and maintain that Kingdom. Alonso de la Cerda, who had only the Title and Right to the Crown of Castile, and was then present, and King Sancho who was in Possession of the Kingdom, both strove for his Friendship. The Aragonian was more inclinable to the Fortune of King Sancho, than the Justice of D. Alonso, whose Strength decay'd, especially since the Queen politickly drew away D. John Nun̄ez de Lara from his Party. Besides, King Sancho to strengthen himself, had made a League with the King of Portugal, and concluded a Match betwxit his Son and Heir Prince Ferdinand, and Constance, that King's Daughter, giving some Towns in Castile, to secure the Performance. The Kings of Castile and Aragon at length concluded a Peace, and for the Ra∣tification A League betwixt Castile and Ara∣gon. of it agreed to meet at Montagudo, a Town on the Borders of the two Kingdoms. There on the 20th of November they made a League Defensive and Offensive, and articled, that neither should protect the others Rebels, but deliver them up. Moreover, for that the King of Morocco, notwithstanding the Truce had lay'd Siege to Beja, the Aragonian oblig'd him∣self if it were requir'd to send 20 Galleys to relieve it. To make this Agreement the sirm∣er, it was resolv'd the Aragonian should marry Elizabeth the Daughter of the King of Castile, tho' but 9 Years of Age, hoping the Pope would dispense with the Consanguinity, and ac∣cordingly they were Contracted at Soria, on the first of December. The Child was deliver'd to her Husband, and then the two Kings went to Calatayud, where there were great Enter∣tainments of all sorts. The Nobility of Aragon for some Years had been very Mutinous, and in the Reign of King Alonso they endeavour'd to Retrench the King's Houshold, and still labour'd to alter the Laws, and erect a new Form of Government. Now by means of King Sancho they were reconcil'd and pardon'd. The Kings parted about the end of the Year, when he of Morocco rais'd his Siege, and returu'd to Africk, fearing Benedict Zacharias, who was Equipping a great Fleet upon the Coast of Galicia; besides the Town was strong, and brave∣ly defended. These things concluded, Spain at length was restor'd to Peace, both at Home and Abroad. Only D. John de Lara could not be pacify'd, therefore King Sancho bent his Force against him, and took the Towns of Moya and Canete, which he had given him when he return'd from Aragon. D. John having no Refuge left in Spain, fled to France. After him went the Arch-Bishop of Toledo, sent by King Sancho to appease that King, and continue the Amity that was betwixt them, excusing the League made with Aragon, as of absolute Ne∣cessity to prevent Civil-Wars. The King of France answer'd, he was no ways displeas'd at it, but that his Brother Charles would freely renounce his Claim to Aragon, provided that King would restore Sicily to the See of Rome. While these things were in Agitation, at the
beginning of the Year 1292. Benedict Zacharias, Admiral of Castile, on the Coast of Africk, 1292. Moors van∣quished at Sea. fought 20 Galleys of the Moors, and took 13 of them. This Loss prevented the King of Morocco from passing over to Spain again, as he had intended, having a great Army ready for that purpose at Tangier. King Sancho was encourag'd by this Success, to set down before Ta∣rifa, which after a long Siege, he took on the 21st of September. The King of Portugal tho it was ask'd, sent no Succour. At the same time the Queen of Castile at Sevil was deliver'd of a Son call'd Philip. At first Roderick, Master of the Knights of Calatrara was made Governour of Tarifa, afterwards Alonso Perez de Gusman offer'd to defend it for one third of what was given to other Governours. He had gather'd much Mony, not only in Spain, but in Africk, while he serv'd the King of Morocco. With it he bought several Towns in Andaluzia, and added them to his paternal Estate. He also gave great Alms, and was therefore call'd the Good, which Name his Family still keeps up. From him are descended the Dukes of Medina, Sidonia. D. Alonso had a Son call'd John, and a Grandson by him, of the same Name, mar∣ry'd to Beatrix, Bastard Daughter to King Henry the II. who gave him the Town of Niebla, in Dower with the Title of an Earl, and therefore he call'd his Son Henry. John the Son of Henry, was by King Henry the Fourth created Duke of Medina Sidonia, which Title continues in the Family. Let us return to the Kings. CHAP. X. Alcala de Henares made an Ʋniversity. Tarifa Besieg'd by the Moors: A brave Action of the Governour. Sancho King of Castile dyes. Ferdinand the Fourth succeeds. Peace betwixt France and Aragon. POpe Nicholas the Fourth, and Sancho King of Castile earnestly endeavour'd to compose the Endea∣vours of Accom∣modation betwixt France and Ara∣gon. Differences betwixt France and Aragon. The Pope sent to this purpose, Boniface Cala∣mandra, a Knight of S. John, into Aragon; but Death put a stop to his good Intentions. The Sea of Rome was vacant two Years, the Cardinals not agreeing. King Sancho, as to the Af∣fairs of Aragon, made amends for the want of a Pope; for having receiv'd a favourable An∣swer from the King of France, he invited the Aragonian to Guadalajara, hoping they would terminate that Affair. They met, but nothing was concluded; only they agreed upon ano∣ther Conference at Logron̄o, and invited Charles King of Naples thither, who came not, the Reason is not known; but the Aragonian restor'd him his Children as had been promis'd by his Brother. The following Year 1293. the Kings of Castile and Aragon met at Logron̄o; all the fruit of the Conference was, that they grew Jealous of each other. The Father in Law treat∣ed 1293. the Son harshly, and wrested all things to his own Advantage. From that time the Ara∣gonian began to have no Kindness for the Lady Elizabeth, and to think of another Match, and to this purpose pleaded Consanguinity and want of a Dispensation. By the means of Calaman∣dra he had a Conference with the King of Naples at Junquera, where they treated of Contract∣ing an Allyance by Marriage, but very privately. Time, that discloses all Secrets, made it appear, they consulted about the Restitution of Sicily, and marrying the King of Aragon to Blanch, the Daughter of King Charles. At this time King Sancho, by a special Charter grant∣ed there should be publick Schools at Alcalà de Henares, with the same Priviledges as at Sala∣manca. Alcala de Henares made an Universi∣ty. Elizabeth, Wife to D. John de Lara the younger, dying, the Lordship of Molina re∣turn'd to the King, as next of Blood. D. John de Lara the younger, and Prince John the King's Brother began to raise Tumults. The King to prevent a War, reduc'd them by fair means. D. John de Lara, and his Father, who now return'd from France, were reconcil'd to the King. Prince John the King's Brother retiring to Portugal, thence together with D. John de Albuquer∣que made Incursions into the Country of Leon. The King sent D. John de Lara, the Elder, with Forces to oppose him, but he was overthrown and taken. Being set at Liberty, he came to Toro, where the King was very joyful, for that he had a Daughter born there call'd Beatrix. There was a Report that the King of Granada design'd to make War, and he of Morocco to return into Spain, therefore the King sent D. John de Lara with his two Sons, D. John, and D. Nun̄o to the Frontiers of Andaluzia. But all this came to nothing, for the Moorish Kings were quiet, and D. John de Lara dy'd at Cordova. This Storm being blown over, Prince John the King's Brother rais'd another; for he being commanded by the King of Portugal, lest he should seem to infringe the Peace, to depart his Kingdom, went over to Tangier. The King of Morocco thinking he might be of Use for carrying on the War in Spain, entertain'd him Honourably, and sent him with 5000 Horse to attack Tarifa. Passing over into Spain he bat∣ter'd Tarifa be∣sieg'd by the Moors. that Place with all manner of Engines, and the Besieg'd encourag'd by their Commander, Alonso Perez de Gusman, and the Strength of their Wall, defended themselves as resolutely. It happen'd the Governour's only Son was taken, whom the Moors presented to the View of the Besieged, threatning to cut off his Head, unless they Surrendred. The Father not the least daunted answer'd, if he had an Hundred Sons, they should all dye sooner than he would Stain his Honour, by delivering that Place he had been Entrusted with; and to shew his Resolution
threw a Sword down from the Wall for them to Execute him with. This done he went away to Dinner. Soon after he return'd, call'd by a great shout the Souldiers gave, seeing those Bloody Barbarians execute the Innocent Child. The Fact was more hainous, because done by the Command of Prince John. The Father understanding the Cause of that Shout, calmly said, I thought the Enemy had entred the City, and so return'd to Dinner with his Wife, without the least sign of Concern. The Moors desparing of Success since they could not move the Governour by the Death of his only Son, return'd into Africk. Besides they restor'd the City of Algezira to the King of Granada, to the great Satisfaction of the Christians, who fear'd that might serve as an Inlet to the African Moors. About this time Prince Henry the King's Uncle, who had been long a Prisoner at Naples, arriv'd in Spain, was received with much Joy by the King, and they both went together from Burgos, into Biscay, to oppose D. James de Haro, who with Assistance out of Aragon endeavour'd to recover that Province. Having expell'd him the Country, they return'd to Valladolid, and thence to Alcalà de Henares. There the King receiv'd the News of what had happen'd at Tarifa, whereupon in the Month of January, 1295. the King wrote a Letter to Alonso Perez de Gusman, extolling his Loyalty and 1295. Bravery, comparing him to Abraham in Sacrificing his Son, giving him the Title of the Good, to be annex'd to his Sirname, and inviting him to Court. The Original Letter is preserv'd to this Day, by the Dukes of Medina Sidonia. Three Months after on the 25th of April the King San∣cho of Ca∣stile dyes. King dy'd at Toledo. He fell Sick at Alcala, and was carry'd on Mens Shoulders to Toledo, to see if change of Air would contribute to his Recovery, but nothing avail'd. He Reigned 11 Years and 4 Days, was Resolute, Wise, Subtle, and not a little Cruel. He appointed his Son Ferdinand the IVth. King. Ferdinand, the 4th of the Name to Succeed him, and the Queen to govern during his Minority, notwithstanding she was not his Lawful Wife, by reason of Consanguinity, there being no Dispensation granted them. Next to the Queen D. John de Lara had all the Power, which was done to oblige him, and prevent Troubles. The King's Body was bury'd in the Royal Chappel of the Cathedral. In the time of King Sancho two famous Civilians flourish'd, who were William Galvan̄ in Aragon, and Garcia Hispanus in Castile. At this time Boniface the VIII. sat in the Chair of S. Peter, being Successor to Pope Celestile Pope Ce∣lestine the V. Abdi∣cates. the V. he who being brought from the Desert, and appointed to govern the Church after 6 Months Abdicated the Papacy, an Example extoll'd, and admir'd by many, but imitated by none. Therefore the more was his Successor to blame, who brought him back when he was returning to his Solitude, and cast him into Prison, where he dy'd a Year and half after, and was Canonized by Pope Clement the Vth. Boniface this same Year also Canonized Luis King of France. Now by the Industry of Pope Boniface, who was a great Scholar and States-man, that was brought to pass, which had been labour'd for so many Years in Vain, which was the Peace betwixt France and Aragon. To effect this, there met at Agnanl the Pope, Charles King France. and Ara∣gon make Peace. of Naples, and the Embassadors of France and Aragon, Men of the first Quality. The Conditi∣ons were these, viz. That the King of Aragon marry Blanch, the Daughter of the King of Na∣ples: That her Portion be 70000 Pound weight of Silver: That Sicily and all the Aragonians are possess'd of in Calabria, be restor'd to the See of Rome: That if the Sicilians shall refuse to submit, the King of Aragon be oblig'd to furnish such a Number of Troops, as shall be appointed by Arbitrators, towards subduing of them: That Charles of Valois renounce the Title he pretends to have to the Kingdom of Aragon. That the Pope absolve all that lye under any Ecclesiasti∣cal Censures, upon account of these Differences: That the Hostages be set at Liberty. At the Instance of the Pope and King of France, it was granted the King of Majorca should be restor'd to his Kingdom. This is what was spoken in Publick. In Private the Pope gave a hint of deliver∣ing the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica to the King of Aragon, as lying Opportunely for him, be∣ing near to Spain. There is still a Bull of Pope Boniface extant to this effect, dated the 27th of June. The News of this Treaty being spread Abroad, fill'd all Christendom with Joy. Only the Sici∣lians were griev'd at it, for they look'd upon it as the greatest of Misfortunes to return under the Subjection of the French. Prince Frederick to whom his Brother at his Departure had left the Government of the Island, and with him Roger Lauria, John Prochita, and Manfredus Lança, all Men of great Note, went to attend the Pope at Rome by his Order, because they were concern'd at the late Agreement. The Pope promis'd to marry Prince Frederick to Catharine, Daughter to Philip, and Grandchild of Baldwin the Emperor of Constantinople, and offer'd the Empire of Greece, which he hop'd to regain as a Portion, provided he would not oppose what had been Capitulated. The Offer was not contemptible, had the Effect been suitable to the Promise. After the Sicilians had with repeated Instances implor'd the Assistance of the King of Aragon without any Success, in a general Assembly, held at Palermo, they proclaim'd Prince Frederick King. Nevertheless his Brother King Jayme marry'd his new Bride at Villabeltran, in October. The Lady Elizabeth to whom he was before contraction was sent back to Castile. He also publish'd a Proclamation, commanding all the Aragoniant that were in Sicily to return Home. Thus those Troubles were compos'd, Peace was restor'd to Aragon, and Sicily was not quite lost, against which a great Storm was gathering Navarre was quiet under the Dominion of France. Hugo de Constens, Marshal of Champagne, a Frenchman, was Viceroy. Honours and Em∣ployments were indifferently given to the Natives and Frenchmen, which somewhat mitigated the dislike of those People, since tho they were govern'd by Strangers, they did not take to themselves all Employments of Profit and Trust. The End of the Fourteenth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The Fifteenth BOOK. CHAP. I. New Troubles and Wars in Castile; where Prince Henry takes the Government from the Queen. Prince John Proclaim'd King of Leon and Galicia. Castile invaded by the Moors, Portugueses, and Aragonians. THE Affairs of Castile, were now in a very unsetl'd posture, the Nobility being divided, each striving to exert his Authority, according to his Power, and the Rebellion in Castile. Commons in Confusion gaping after Novelties. Robberies, Murders, and all sorts of Crimes were committed. The Queen was slighted by reason of her Sex, and the King was not regarded because of his Age; notwithstanding he had been proclaim'd the day after his Father's Death, with all the Solemnity usual in like cases. The Queen immedi∣ately caus'd the Excise upon Provisions to be taken off. This Excise had irritated the People against her Husband King Sancho, and now oblig'd them being taken off, so that they continu'd firm to their Prince. All the Neighbouring Princes were in a readiness to make their Advan∣tage of the King's Minority. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, tho he had an Obligation laid upon him to continue Loyal, favour'd the Enemy. Prince Henry grown Peevish by his long Im∣prisonment, and us'd to Evil Practices, studied how to get the Government into his Hands, and look'd upon it as an Affront, that the late King had made no mention of him in his Will. He first held Private Cabals at Berlanga, then beginning to act more openly, many Towns declar'd for him; and particularly the Royal City Burgos. The Cortes, or Parliament, As∣sembled at Valladolid, where the Nobility declar'd so much in Favour of Prince Henry, that tho' the King and Queen  thither, they would not admit them into the City till it was late, and they had left their Retinue behind. Here it was resolv'd, that Prince Henry should govern the Kingdom, and the Queen have the Education of the King, to whom, nevertheless, Pr. Henry governs Castile. they all again took the Oath of Allegiance. King Sancho by his Will, left the Lordship of Biscay, as gain'd in War, to his Son Prince Henry. James Lopez de Haro broke into that Pro∣vince by the way of Navarre, and made himself Master of all Places, except Balmaseda and Ordun̄a. The Two Brothers of the House of Lara, laying aside their Enmity with the House of Haro, joyn'd with him in Hatred to Prince Henry, who they could not endure should Govern the Kingdom contrary to the King's Will, which nam'd one of them. Prince John, the King's Uncle who had stay'd till then in Africk, came into the Kingdom of Granada, aiming at the  of Castile, thinking he had a better Title than his Brother King Sancho; for that the present King Ferdinand was not Born in lawful Wedlock. It was wonderful, to see how many Revolted upon this account; which gave him an opportunity of seizing Alcan∣tara, and other Places on the Borders of Portugal. King Denis of Portugal was so earnest for him, that at the time the Cortes were held at Valladolid, he sent to declare against Castile. A great Storm threatned on that side, but no less was on the other; for at Bordalva in the Ter∣ritory of Hariza, the King of Aragon, and D. Alonso de Cerda, who stiled himself King of Castile and Leon met. There on the 21th of January 1296 they agreed upon the following Articles. That they joyn their Forces in order to restore D. Alonso to his Grandfathers Kingdom. That 1296 Confede∣ration a∣gainst Ca∣stile. the Kingdom of Murcia be given to the King of Aragon, The Kingdom of Leon, Galicia and Sevil, to Prince John, Cuenca, Alarcon, Moya and Can̄ete, to Prince Peter of Aragon, for his Service as General of that Expedition. In this League were included Queen Violante, Grand∣mother to D. Alonso, the King of France, Portugal and Granada, and soon after D. John de Lara in hopes of recovering . On the other side, through the Queens Industry, D. James de Haro was reconcil'd the King, and all the Estate of D. John de Lara, who was gone to the Aragonians added his Lordship of Biscay. By these means other Great Men were gain'd, particularly D. John Alonso de Haro, giving him Cameros, which he had a Right to. The Army of Aragon under the Command of D. Alonso de la Cerda, and Prince Peter of Aragon, entred Castile in April, at Baltanas; Prince John, and D. John Nun̄z de Lara joyn'd them. They march'd without any lett as far as the City Leon, formerly great and rich, then poor and unprovided, and therefore was easily surrendred; the sooner, for that some Citi∣zens
held Correspondence with the Enemy. There Prince John was proclaim'd King of Leon, Galicia, and Sevil. Soon after D. Alonso de la Cerda was in the same manner, proclaim'd King Pr. John Proclaim∣ed King of Leon and Galicia. of Castile at Sahagun. Thence they march'd, and laid Siege to Mayorga, which is Five Leagues from Sadagun; the Town being Strong, and well Garrison'd, defended it self bravely, and the Siege lasted till August: Mean while the Cortes or Parliament, was summoned to meet at Valladolid. The first that appear'd was Prince Henry, who as soon as he alighted, without changing his Riding Apparel, went to the Queen then at Mass in the Castle. After the usual Reverence, with a feign'd Sorrow, he laid before her the Danger of the Kingdom, and urg'd, how little Defence there was in a Woman, a Child, and an Old Man: Then advis'd her to Marry the Prince of Aragon, by whom she might be Protected, and the Crown defend∣ed. The Queen put him away with signs of Displeasure, affirming, She would rely on God, and not use any dishonourable Means for her Preservation. Thus Prince Henry's Design fell to the Ground. About 4000 Horse were levy'd, but Prince Henry could not be prevail'd upon to March with them, and raise the Siege of Mayorga, excusing himself with the War in Andaluzia. Yet they March'd to Zamora to settle that Place, then wavering in it's Duty to the King. The length of the Siege allay'd the Fury of the Besiegers; and the Heat of the Weather, together with the Want of all Necessaries, caus'd much Sickness among them. These things, and the Death of their General, Prince Peter of Aragon, oblig'd them to re∣turn home much weaker than they set out. At their first entring Castile, they consisted of 1000 Men at Arms, and 50000 Souldiers. The King of Aragon at the same time, had better Success in Murcia; for he took the City of that Name, and all other Places about it, Murcia ta∣ken by the Aragonians. except the Towns of Lorca, Alcala and Mula, which held out for King Ferdinand. In all these Dangers and Troubles Prince Henry, who govern'd Castile, acted nothing for either side, but seem'd to stand Neuter, so that he oblig'd not the Enemy, and drew on himself the Hatred of all Men, who laid the Blame of all the Loss sustain'd, to his Charge. The Queen wink'd at these Practices of the Prince; but some Men of Note did not spare to upbraid him therewith. The Chief of these was Alonso Perez de Gusman, who bravely defended the Fron∣tiers of Andaluzia, and more than any, oppos'd the Designs of Prince Henry. With a Body of Men he gather'd, the Prince march'd to Andaluzia, lest he should be thought altogether Idle; and in a Skirmish he had with the Moors near Arjona, was defeated, and in great danger of being taken, his Reins being Cut, so that he could not guide his Horse. Alonso Perez de Gusman in that danger furnish'd him with another Horse, on which he escap'd. After this Rencounter, a Treaty of Peace was propos'd to the Moors. The King of Granada demanded Tarifa, offering in lieu of it, 22 Castles, 20000 Crowns in ready mony, and to advance the usual Tribute of Four Years. Prince Henry approv'd of these Conditions, because of the present Necessities, and want of Mony. Alonso Perez de Gusman violently oppos'd it. This difference was heighten'd to such a degree, that the Moors being joyn'd by some Christians, Tarifa a∣gain Be∣sieged. laid Siege to that City. Alonso de Gusman had not a sufficient Force, his Men deserted, and those were his Enemies, who ought to have protected him. In this Condition, he resolv'd to have recourse to Foreigners. The King of Portugal was a declar'd Enemy of Castile, therefore he resolv'd to try whether the King of Aragon would relieve him. To this pur∣pose he wrote to him, begging his Assistance; and pondering how great a Service it was to Christendom, and how much Honour would redound to him by so Noble an Action. The King of Aragon answer'd, extolling his Loyalty, but as to Relief said, he could send none; for that he had but just before concluded a Peace with the Moors, and could not in Honour break his word. Another War broke out at the same time from Portugal. That King K. of Por∣tugal in∣vades Ca∣stile. march'd with his Army as far as Salamanca; Prince John, King Ferdinand's Uncle, and D. John Nun̄ez de Lara joyn'd him, after the Aragonian Army return'd home. Having consulted what was best to be done, it was thought expedient to Besiege Valladolid, where King Ferdinand was. With this Resolution they advanc'd to Simancas, within Two Leagues of that City. There many Gentlemen deserted the Portuguese Camp, looking upon it as a shameful thing, that a King should be Besieg'd by his Subjects. The King of Portugal fearing lest the rest should do the same, and securing the Passes, he might find it difficult to return home; be∣sides Winter drawing on, march'd hastily to Medina del Campo, and thence to Portugal, dis∣missing his Army. The Forces the Queen had prepared for this War, went by her Order to Besiege the Town of Paredes. Nothing was done there, for that Prince Henry with the Forces he had gather'd in Castile, and the Kingdom of Toledo, prevented their Design. He pretended it was not proper to disturb the Cortes, or Parliament then Sitting, by bringing the War so near to them; but in truth, he was disgusted with the King, and favour'd his Enemies. The Queen dissembled, and endeavour'd to gain him by Favours, giving him at that same time, the Towns of Santisleva de Gormaz, and . By the same means she drew to her D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, tho' no Confidence ould be reposed in him; for he would have gone over to the Aragonians, had they given him the Town of Albarazin. The Cortes were held at Valladolid, in the beginning of the year 1297. and there being great 1297 scarcity of Mony, all Places promis'd to furnish a great Sum, which they afterwards per∣form'd. The Cortes of Castile raise Mo∣ny. At the same time, by the Valour of John Alonso de Haro, the Navarrois were put to Flight, who had surpriz'd part of the Town of Najara, designing to recover those Parts they had old Pretensions to, and particularly the Territory of Rioja. D. Jayme King of
Aragon at Rome, whither he was call'd by the Pope, was Proclaim'd King of Sardinia, and K. Jayme of Aragon proclaimd K. of Sar∣dinia and Corsica. Corsica. Thither went from Sicily, Constance his Mother, Violante his Sister, Roger Lauria the Admiral, and John Prochita. A Match was concluded betwixt the Lady Violante, and Robert Duke of Calabria, Heir to the Kingdom of Naples. The Nuptials were perform'd with great State, Pope Boniface himself officiating. King Frederick prepar'd to defend the Kingdom which had been given him by so general a Consent of the People. War was declar'd against him, as the disturber of the Peace of Christendom, and his Brother the King of Ara∣gon appointed Generalissimo. All things being thus order'd, the King of Aragon return'd home to prepare for the War. Rogor Lauria was sent to Naples to serve that King. Queen Constance and John Prochita, weary of so many Troubles, and pitying the unfortunate State of Sicily, stay'd at Rome. Some say they both dy'd there, but most Authors agree, she ended her days Five Years after at Barcelona, and was buried in the Monastery of St. Francis, where there is a Tomb to this day, with an Inscription, and her Name. CHAP. II. Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal setled by the means of double Allyances betwixt those Princes. The Progress of the Wars in Sicily. The Jubilee first instituted. Bilbao Built; and Prince John reconcil'd to the King. THE King of Aragon being return'd home, the Towns of Lerida, Ʋlia, Filera, and Salvatierra, were restored to the Crown of Navarre, in pursuance of the Articles made at Agnani, not fulfill'd till then. Alonso Ronco, a Frenchman, was Viceroy of Navarre in the year 1298. The City Albarazin was taken from the King of Aragon's Bastard Brother, 1298. and restor'd to D. John de Lara, on pretence of doing him Justice, but indeed, to draw over that powerful Man. D. John took the Oath of Fidelity to the King at Valencia, on the 7th day of April. This the King of Aragon did to strengthen himself, to invade at once Castile and Sicily, Attempts too great for his Power. The King of Sicily forsaken on all sides, was most exposed to Ruin. He of Castile was reconcil'd to the King of Portugal, by the means of two Matches that were concluded. The one was betwixt King Ferdinand, and Constance Castile and Portugal reconcil'd. the Daughter of King Denis, tho' she was under Age. They were Contracted with great Solemnity at Alcaniz, a Town on the Borders of Portugal; and the Publick Joy was the greater, for that Blanch, King Ferdinand's Sister, was Marry'd to Prince Alonso, Son and Heir to King Denis, tho' but eight years Old, which was the other Match. The Bride was deli∣ver'd to her Father-in-Law, and carry'd to Portugal. So eager were the Castilians upon secu∣ring of Peace, that tho' nothing was given in Dower by the Portuguesse with his Daughter, King Ferdinand with his Sister gave the Towns of Olivença, Conguela and Campo de Moya, which was no small disgrace to Castile; but the necessity of the Times excus'd it. All the King of Por∣tugal did, was to send 300 chosen Horse, under the Command of D. John de Albuquerque, to serve the King of Castile against Prince John his Uncle, who stil'd himself King of Leon; but all this came to nothing, and those Horse return'd to Portugal as they came. D. Alonso de la Cerda on the other side, had taken Almazan, and other Towns upon the Frontiers of Ara∣gon, and Garrison'd them. Siguença was Attack'd by D. John de Lura, but defended by the Valour of the Citizens. The Conspirators wanted Mony, and therefore lest Provisions, and the Souldiers Pay should fail, they Coin'd Some; but of base Allay. Denis King of Portugal, at the Request of his Son-in-law, brought a good Body of Men to his Assistance, by the way of Cuidad Rodrigo, but being more inclinable to Peace than that Time would bear, he return'd to Portugal dissatisfy'd. The reason of his disgust was, that he would have the Province of Galicia given to Prince John, who call'd himself King, and to his Heirs; and that he should keep the City Leon during his Life. The Queen and Nobility of Castile, would not consent to those Conditions, as dishonourable and prejudicial. Upon the King of Portugal's Return, some Nobles of Castile, whom Fear before aw'd, began to Revolt. But the great Wisdom of the Queen pacify'd them, giving every one as much as he could expect to gain by Rebelling. Sicily was now distress'd with War. Roger Lauria serv'd the French, and Fortune seem'd War in Sicily. to incline to the Side he took. Many Towns in Italy were taken by his Conduct, where∣upon in Sicily he was Attainted of Treason, and a great Estate that had been given him for his good Services, was confiscated. Soon after having taken the City Cantazara in Calabria, and besieging the Castle, he was Overthown in Battel by a much less Number of the Ene∣my, many of his Men slain, and the rest escap'd by the Favour of the Night. His too great Contempt of the Enemy, and Fighting with the Sun in his Face, are said to have been the Causes of this Misfortune. Roger Lauria himself being wounded, lurk'd about some time till he made his Escape into Aragon, meditating Revenge; being the more sensible of this Dis∣grace, for that it was the first that befell him. From Aragon, the King and Roger Lauria, set Sail with a mighty Fleet, in which were no less than 80 Galleys. They went directly to Rome, where the Pope Blest their Standard, and gave them his Benediction. At Naples, Robert Duke of Calabria, joyn'd them with another Squadron. They scour'd the Coast of
Sicily, where at first they found less Opposition than had been expected. The City Patti, and some other Places about it, were taken; then turning Cape Milazzo near Mecina, and passing the Streight, they came to the City Siracusa, and laid Siege to it. Whilst the Forces of Aragon were employ'd at that Siege, the People of Patti ran to Arms, expell'd the Garri∣son, and besieg'd the Castle, which was possess'd by the Aragonians. John Lauria was sent by the King with 20 Galleys, to relieve the besieg'd, and furnish'd them with Provisions, and all other Necessaries; but as he return'd, was beaten by the Mecineses, who lay in wait for him with a Squadron, in the Streight, and he with 16 of his Galleys taken. The occasion of this disaster was thus, the Sicilians were better acquainted with that swelling, and rapid Streight where they Fought, which is betwixt Italy and Sicily. Siracusa held out bravely, being en∣couraged by King Frederick, who lay not far off, waiting to lay hold on any Advantage that Siracusa in vain be∣sieg by the Aragoni∣ans. should offer. Thus the Aragonians were constrain'd to raise the Siege, having lost 18000 Men by Sickness. At Mecina, John Lauria was try'd, and condemn'd as a Traytor, and had his Head cut off. Roger Lauria rav'd with Passion, knowing that Affront was offer'd to him; but could not then seek Revenge, being gone into Spain with the King of Aragon. As soon as the Winter was over, they both return'd to Sicily, with a greater Fleet than before. Robert and Philip, the King of Naples his Two Sons, joyn'd them by the way. They sail'd together to Cape Orlando, near the City Patti, the Fleet consisting of 56 Galleys, and a great number of other Vessels. King Frederick finding his Men in Heart since their last success, tho' inferiour in Strength, not having above 40 Galleys, resolved to Fight, but was defeated, several of his Galleys taken, and the rest put to Flight. Roger Lauria in Revenge for his Ferderick K. of Sicily beaten at Sea. Cousin, us'd great Cruelty towards the Prisoners, killing many of them, and among others, Conrade Lança a Man of Note; which drew the Catalonians into great Hatred. King Frede∣rick himself was in great danger; for after a Brave Defence, he fainted away, and yet his Men brought off his Galley; which with a few others, got into Mecina. The King of Ara∣gon return'd into Spain, being call'd by his People; but the Pope and King of Naples were offended at him. That memorable Battel was fought on a Saturday, being the 4th of July, 1299. The same year dy'd at Rome, Gonçalo Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, as appears 1299 by the Inscription on his Tomb in the Church of St. Mary the Greater, in that City. D. Gonçalo the IIId. his Nephew, succeeded him. The French who remain'd in Sicily, to prose∣cute their Victory, divided their Forces. Robert and Roger Lauria laid Siege to Rendazzo, a strong Place in the mid-way between Patti and Catanea. Philip Duke of Taranto went with part of the Fleet to scour the Coast about Cape Trapana. King Frederick came upon him so unexpectedly, that he was defeated, and taken Prisoner; which occasion'd a Treaty of Peace; and those two Nations concluded an Allyance as Fortunate, as the War had been Destructive. It was now the last year of this Century, viz. 1300. remarkable for the Jubile first in∣stituted 1300 by Pope Boniface; who ordain'd, that every hundred years there should be a full re∣mission Jubile first instituted. of sins to all those that visited the Churches of Rome. Clement the VIth reduc'd it to every 50 years; and afterwards Sixtus the IVth, considering the shortness of Man's Life, to 25. In Biscay, this year was Built the famous City Bilbao, on the Bank of the River Ibai∣sebolo, City Bilbao built. two Leagues from the Sea; a Place of great Trade, and therefore the Inhabitants of Bermeo all remov'd thither. The King of Aragon founded an University at Lerida. Navarre enjoyed a perfect Peace under the Government of the Viceroy Alonso Roleedo, who sent Em∣bassadors to the Queen of Castile, then at Valladolid, to demand Restitution of all the Country as far as Atapuerca, a Town near Burgos, alledging it appertain'd to the Crown of Navarre, and had been wrongfully possess'd by the Kings of Castile. The Queen entertain'd the Em∣bassadors Nobly, but gave them no satisfactory Answer; whereupon they repair'd to D. Alonso de la Cerda,, and D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, who having in vain attempted Valencia, were retir'd to Duen̄as. D. Alonso having heard the Embassadors, easily granted what he had not, and D. John de Lara was sent to France to desire Succours. Little was done in that matter, tho' D. Alonso de la Cerda, and his Brother, both follow'd D. John into France; for they got nothing but good words, and leave to raise Men in Navarre; the King of France being enga∣ged in a War in Flanders. They accordingly form'd a Body in Navarre, and making an In∣cursion into the Territory of Calahorra, were routed by D. John Alonso de Haro Lord of Ca∣meros. D. John de Lara was taken, and could not be releas'd, till he deliver'd up all the Towns he held, for the King, and took the Oath of Allegiance. The King of Aragon made use of this occasion, to take from him the Town of Albarazin, he had before given him. 1301 Prince John the King's Uncle, submitted himself in the year 1301. upon these Conditions; viz. That he should forbear stiling himself King, and restore all Places taken during the War, Pr. John reconciled to the K. That he should leave the Lordship of Biscay, to which he pretended a Title by his Wife, to D. James Lopez de Haro; That in lieu thereof, the Towns of Medina de Ruyseco, Castronun̄o, Mansilla, Paredes and Cebreros, be given him to support his Dignity.
CHAP. III. Of Raimundus Lullus, and the Master of Calatrava. The Marriage of King Ferdinand. Peace concluded betwixt the Kings of Sicily and Naples. A Synod of Bishops. Trou∣bles in Castile. Pope Boniface dyes. Benedict the Eleventh succeeds him. AT this time dy'd Raimundus Lullus, born in the Island Majorca, who being bred a Mer∣chant, retir'd to the Desert, where he, tho ignorant even in the Latin Tongue, wrote several Raymundus Lullus. Books of all Arts and Sciences, and even of Divinity, but so obscure they are scarce Intelligi∣ble. He affirms he had it all by Revelation from our Saviour, who appear'd to him Cruci∣fy'd. What is most to be commended in him is, that he went over twice to Bugia in Africk, where not ceasing to instruct that Barbarous People, he was the first time Imprison'd, and the second stoned to Death. His Body carry'd to Majorca, is there held in great Venerati∣on, tho not Canoniz'd as a Saint. His Books are variously spoken of, some Condemn, and others highly Esteem them, but 500 Propositions taken out of them, were condemn'd at Avig∣non by Pope Gregory the XIth. Thus much of Raymundus Lullus. Garci Lopez de Padilla, Ma∣ster of the Knights of Calatrava, by his great severity and harsh Temper, had offended his Garcia Lopez, The Ma∣ster of Ca∣latrava depos'd. Knights, who endeavour'd to cast him off. It happen'd under the present Confusions, the Christians were not able to make Head against the Moors, who the last Year took from those Knights the Town of Alcaudete, attempted Vaena, and tho they entred it, were repuls'd by the Garrison, and now lastly they lay'd Siege to Jaen. The blame of all these Misfor∣tunes was lay'd upon Garci Lopez, and besides they accus'd him of keeping private Correspon∣dence with D. Alonso de la Cerda. This was what they pretended, but in Reality they hated him for his Severity, and envy'd his Valour. The Knights held a Chapter, and depos'd Gar∣ci Lopez de Padilla their Master contrary to Equity, as was afterwards determined by the Cistercian Monks constituted Judges in that Case by the Pope. In this Place D. Aleman, Com∣mendary of Zorita, was chosen Master. Garci Lopez, about the end of the Year was restored to his Dignity, and govern'd those Knights a long time, yet their hatred not ceasing in his Old Age, they charg'd him with fresh Articles, and having again wrongfully depos'd him, chose D. John Nun̄ez de Prado in his Place. He being past Service, voluntarily left the Ma∣stership to his Competitor, only reserving to himself some Towns in Aragon for his Main∣tenance. Pope Boniface being well Affected to Spain, the Kings of Spain and Portugal had a Meet∣ing at Plasencia, where they agreed to send an Embassy to him, as they did, and obtain'd a Dispensation for consummating the Marriages betwixt those Kings and their Queens; he also Marriage of King Ferdinand of Castile. dispens'd with the Marriage of the late King Sancho, tho then dead. As soon as the Dispen∣sation came, the Nuptials were Celebrated betwixt King Ferdinand, and the Lady Constance at Valladolid, having been put off till this time, as well in regard to the King's tender Age, as the Consanguinity. The King setled his Houshould, and took upon him the Government. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara was made Steward of the Houshould. Prince Henry the King's Un∣cle had Atiença and Santistevan de Gormaz given him in lieu of the Government he lost. All these Favours could not overcome his Wicked Inclination, for still he held Correspondence with the Aragonians and Moors, and caus'd the Siege of Almaçan, which Place held for D. Alonso de la Cerda, to be rais'd, and the Forces to be sent to other Parts. At Hariza he had a Meeting with the King of Aragon. That King held Lorca, a strong Place in the Kingdom of Murcia Besieg'd a long time, and at last it was Surrendred to him at the beginning of the Year 1302. On the first day of April, a Synod of the Province of Toledo was celebrated at 1302. Pen̄afiel, a City in old Castile, at which Gonçalo Arch-Bishop of Toledo Presided. The third A Synod at Toledo. Canon of this Council forbids the Clergy keeping of Concubines openly. The sixth, upon pain of Punishment, (such was that Age, they thought it enough to punish publick Sins,) or∣dains that any Priest who Reveals what he hears in Confession, be kept in perpetual Impri∣sonment, and fed with only Bread and Water. Many other Constitutions were made, re∣lating to Ecclesiastical Affairs. In May following dy'd Mahomet King of Granada. His Son Mahomet Almahor succeeded him, but he being Blind, his Brother in Law Farraquin, Lord of Malaga had the Administration of the Government. At the same time in Sicily, after those tedious Wars spoken of, Peace was establish'd. The Sicillian Fleet near the Island Ponça was Peace be∣twixt Si∣cily and Naples. overthrown, and their Admiral Conrade Doria, a Genoese taken Prisoner. The French imme∣diately lay'd Siege to Mecina, which was bravely defended by the Townsmen, and the great Care of King Frederick. Queen Violante bore her Husband Company in that Expedition, and was then at Catanea. Through her Procurement the two Kings met upon the Coast of Sira∣cusa to Treat, and tho they could not conclude a Peace, yet a Truce was agreed on. Two Accidents happen'd that might have cut off all hopes of a Peace; One the Death of Queen Vio∣lante, at Termini, a Town Possess'd by the French near Palermo. The other the coming of Charles of Valois into Sicily, as he was going to recover the Grecian Empire. King Frederick to avoid coming to a Battle, caus'd all Provisions to be convey'd into Places of Strength, and what could not, to be destroy'd. This oblig'd the Enemy to make Overtures of Peace, in
order to which those three Princes met between Jaca and Calatabelota, where after much con∣testing, they agreed upon these Articles. That Philip Prince of Taranto, and all Prisoners on both sides be set at liberty. That King Frederick quit all the Places he is possess'd of on the Continent, and the French, all they have in Sicily. That the Lady Ellenor, Sister to Robert, be married to King Frederick, and retain Sicily as her Portion, till such time, as with the Popes leave and assistance Sardinia, or some other Kingdom be conquer'd. If this succeed not, King Frederick's Heirs shall be oblig'd to quit Sicily, upon receiving 250000 Crowns of the King of Naples. That deserters on both sides be pardon'd. These Con∣ditions were Sign'd the last day of August, and all Hostilines ceas'd. This Year there was great scarcity of Corn, especially in Spain; because, as grave Authors affirm, the fourth part of the Country People was consum'd during the Troubles. About this time D. Jayme eldest Son to the King of Majorca, resigning his Right to that Crown, became a Franciscan Friar, and his Father dying, Sarcho the 2d Son succeeded, who did Homage, and swore Fidelity to the King of Aragon for his Dominions. In Castile all was not very quiet, and there was great want of Mony. The Cortes or Parliament was held More Troubles in Castile. at Burgos, and Zamora, where publick Expences were Retrenched, and a great Sum of Mo∣ny rais'd. Besides, Pope Boniface by his Bull, granted to Queen-Mother, a Remission of all the Thirds of Ecclesiastical Profits which the Kings, Alonso, Sancho, and Ferdinand had re∣ceiv'd without leave till then, and gave them to her for three Years longer. The Nobility was dissatisfy'd with the Queen Mother, and the Princes, John and Henry the King's Uncles, with D. John, Son to Prince Emanuel, D. John de Lara, D. James de Haro, and other great Ones endeavour'd to estrange the King from her. To this Effect they call'd the Abbot of Santander, who was Chancellor and Treasurer to account for the Revenue, because he was preferr'd by the Queen, but he being clear'd with Honour, that Design fell to the Ground. Philip King of France at the beginning of the Year 1303. sent Embassadors to demand those 1303. Towns the Navarrois pretended to belong to them, but they obtain'd nothing. The King of Aragon made Overtures of Peace, which were also rejected. He offer'd to restore all the Kingdom of Murcia, if they would only deliver Alicant to him. The Queen lik'd not the Proposal. She remov'd D. John de Lara, who began to be great with the King, and made Prince Henry Lord Steward, but he held it not long, and these beginnings produc'd Jealousies betwixt the King and his Mother, and disorders among the Nobility. Prince John, and D. John de Lara laying aside their former Grudges, had great Power over the King. Prince Henry, D. John Son to Prince Emanuel, and D. James de Haro, could not endure to see the Queen Mo∣ther slighted, for that they ow'd her Obligations. This disgust had such Effect, that they sent for D. Alonso de la Cerda in order to agree with him. Gonzalo Ruiz was sent to Alma∣zan, to set this Affair afoot, and perswade the Aragonians to march into Castile. Whilst these things were in Agitation in Castile, Pope Boniface was made Prisoner in the City Agnani, by a Party of 300 Horse that broke in upon him, being rais'd by the Cardinals of the House of Colonna. whom he had depos'd, and not without consent of the King of France, whom he Excommunicated. Three days after the Citizens of Agnani rescu'd him from the Conspira∣tors, Pope Bo∣niface dies. Benedict the XIth. succeeds. and he return'd to Rome, where he dy'd of a Disease caus'd by Grief, conceiv'd for this Affront on the 12th day of October, and the 35th after his Imprisonment. Nicholas, Ge∣neral of the Dominicans, was in the next Conclave chosen Pope, and took the Name of Be∣nedict the XIth. CHAP. IV. The Differences betwixt the Kings of Castile and Aragon reconcil'd: After which they joyn in League against the Moors, but to no consider able Effect. Death of Roger Lau∣ria, the great Admiral of Aragon; and Divisions among the Moors. SPain weary'd out with long Troubles, enjoy'd some Peace; but there rather wanted Pow∣er than Will to disturb it. The Differences betwixt the Princes were great, and it was Mighty Divisions through∣out Spain. requisite to compose them. Castile and Aragon were at Variance about the Kingdom of Mur∣cia. D. Alonso de la Cerda Itil'd himself King of Castile, but had no Power. The King of Gra∣nada invaded the Territories of the Crown of Aragon and took Bedmar, a Town not far from Baeca. Prince John, the King's Uncle, and the Family of Haro were Enemies; the former pretending to the Lordship of Biscay, in right of his Wife, and hoping to prevail by his Interest with the King. The Family of Haro, for the same reason was Discontented, and ready to take up Arms. King Ferdinand earnestly desir'd to put an end to all these Conten∣tions; to this purpose he sent Prince John his Uncle Embassador to the King of Aragon, whose Power and Authority was then great. In the Month of March 1304 at Calatayud after much 1304. debate, it was agreed that Arbitrators should be chosen, to whom the whole Affair should be referr'd, and a Truce was concluded till Judgment should be given. Time and Place were also appointed for the Kings to meet, mean while King Ferdinand being careful for Andaluzia,
set out from Burges, and in April came to Badajoz to meet his Father in Law, the King of Portugal, of whom he expected to recover certain Towns pawn'd to him, during his Mino∣rity. This enterview produc'd Discontents, and nothing was done, but only that the Por∣tugues sent his Son in Law some Mony, with which he went away for Andaluzia. No Action happen'd, but a Peace was concluded, the Moor promising to pay the same Tribute his Fa∣ther had done, and so both Armies broke up. Prince Henry dy'd about this time very Aged, at Roa, and was bury'd in the Monastery of S. Francis at Valladolid. He was ever of a rest∣less Spirit, and ambitious of Command. His Death was pleasing to all the Kingdom, for they fear'd he would disturb the Peace that was afoot; and because he left no Issue, his Estate was divided among several Noblemen, the best part falling to D. John de Lara, who held the first Place in the King's Favour. In pursuance of the Agreement at Calatayud, Denis King of Portugal was chosen Arbitrator to decide the Differences betwixt Castile and Aragon, K. Denis of Portu∣gal as Ar∣bitrator, reconciles Oustile and Aragon. and for his Associates, Prince John for the former, and D. Ximeno de Luna, Bishop of Zara∣goça for the latter Kingdom. The two Kings met at Torrellas, a Town on the Frontiers of Aragon, where the Judges decreed that the River Segura should part the Dominions of Ca∣stile and Aragon, which was what the Aragonian had strugl'd for. Judgment was given on the 8th of August, and the next day the three Kings met at Campillo, and ratify'd the Decree. Thence they went to Agreda, and so to Taraçona, and were receiv'd with great Joy; for besides the 3 Kings, there were as many Queens, the Mother and Consort of Castile, and Elizabeth of Portugal famous for Sanctity, besides Elizabeth, Sister to King Ferdinand, who had been Contracted to the Aragonian. The Retinue was great, especially that of the Por∣tugues, who brought with him out of Portugal 1000 Horse, and by the Way would never lye in Towns, but in Tents set up in the Fields. As to the Pretentions of the two Brothers Cerdas, the Kings of Aragon, and Portugal as Judges, decited that D. Alonso should no longer take the Title of King, but restore all the Towns he had been, and that Alva, Bejar, Val∣decerneja, Gibraleon, Sarria, and some other Towns should be setl'd upon him. A small re∣compence for so many Kingdoms. This Judgment was so grievous to D. Alonso, that he would not appear, but went away heartily cursing the Kings. It remain'd only to adjust Matters betwixt Prince John, and D. James de Haro. Therefore as soon as the Conference was dissolv'd, King Ferdinand summon'd D. James to appear at Medina del Campo, where the Cortes were to meet. Judges were appointed to hear their Pretentions, and determine the Cause, but D. James fearing the King favour'd his Adversary, withdrew. After the Cortes broke up, Judgment was given in favour of Prince John, but the Execution of it deferr'd in hopes some means might be found of adjusting that Matter. This was the Posture of Affairs 1305. in Castile, in the Year 1305. On the 17th of January dy'd Roger Lauria, the famous Admi∣ral of Aragon, who gain'd Sicily for King Peter, perform'd many brave Exploits by himself, Roger Lau∣ria the great Ad∣miral. and those Kings did none without him. His Body was bury'd in the Monastery of Santa Cruz, near unto the Tom of King Peter. On the 6th of April dy'd Joanna, Queen of Navarre, at Paris, and was bury'd in the Monastery of S. Francis. Luis call'd Huttin succeeded his Mo∣ther in the Kingdom of Navarre, and afterwards his Father in that of France. The Queen left two other Sons, Philip the Long, and Charles the Fair, who all came to be Kings of France and Navarre. She left also two Daughters, one dy'd Young, the other call'd Elizabeth was marry'd to Edward King of England, and was the beautifullest Lady of her Time. Benedict sat in the Papal Chair, but 8 Months, and 6 Days; And he dying it was vacant 10 Months, and 28 Days. After long Debates betwixt the French and Italian Cardinals, Clement the Vth. was chosen and proclaim'd on the 5th. of June. He was before Arch-Bishop of Bour∣deaux, Clement the Vth. chosen Pope. and is said to have promis'd many scandalous Things to the King of France, before he would permit him to pass towards Rome. He was Crown'd on the 11th. of November, at which time a Wall falling as the Procession was going, did much mischief, and struck the Tyara off his Head, out of which a great Carbuncle was lost, which Things were look'd upon as ill Omens; and the rest of his life was not unlike to this beginning, but those Things do not belong to this History. At the same time troubles began again to break out in Spain. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara declin'd in the King's Favour, who took from him the Of∣fice of Lord Steward, and confer'd it on D. Lope, Son to D. James de Haro, on pretence that D. John de Lara being General of the Frontiers, could not serve both places, but in re∣ality to oblige the Family of Haro, and divide it from that of Lara. Those Families under∣standing the Design, knit their Interests the closer together, and seem'd to threaten a Rebel∣lion. Alonso Perez de Guzman and the Queen interpo'd, and restoring each of those Gentle∣men their Honours, pacify'd them. Besides, the dispute betwixt Prince John, and the House of Haro was reconcil'd upon these Conditions. That D. James de Haro during his Life should possess the Lordship of Biscay, and after his Death it should fall to Prince John. That Or∣duna Houses of Haro and Lara reconcil'd. and Balmaseda, should be Intail'd on D. John, D. James his Son and his Heirs, and in lieu of what he was to lose, Miranda de Ebro and Villalva de Losa were given him. All Men rejoyc'd to see these Differences compos'd, except D. John de Lara, who in a rage that he had not been consulted, in the Affair of D. James de Haro, and studying to make his Advantage of the publick Calamities, renouncing his Oath of Fidelity, withdrew with his Followers to Tordehumos, a strong Pace, where he hoped to be able to withstand the King, whom he had hainously offended. The King's Forces laid Siege to that Place, but many favouring D.
John, it was protracted to a long time. Some Overtures of Accommodation were made, and because the King would not harken to them, his Army broke up of it self and disbanded. Among others, Prince John favour'd D. John de Lara, and the Business was carry'd to such a beight that the King was forc'd to Pardon him, only taking from him the Towns of Moya and Canete, the Gift of King Sancho. Nor was the Peace lasting, for both those Gentlemen imagining the King had a Design to take away their Lives, openly rebell'd again. Prince John was soon appeas'd, but it was not so easy to reduce D. John de Lara. D. Alonso de la Cerda forsaken of all Men, and seeing no Hopes of obtaining the Crown, sent Martin Ruiz to take possession of the Towns assign'd him by the Arbitrators, and was ever after call'd D. Alonso the Disinherited. The Moors of Granada about this time began to Mutiny, for that their King was blind, Discord a∣mong the Moors. and his Brother-in-Law the Lord of Malaga, govern'd the State with the same Grandeur as if he had been another King. The Nobility were not wanting to incense the Commons. Among them Aborrabes, a Gentleman descended from the Kings of Morocco, seiz'd Almeria, and call'd himself King of that place, Most of the People favour'd Mahomet Azar the King's Brother, and were for putting the Crown upon his Head. Aborrabes was expell'd Almeria by the contrary Faction; and he designing to seize upon Ceuta, a City on the Coast of Africk, belonging to the Kingdom of Granada, thought to obtain Aid of the Christians. This seem'd a good opportunity to drive the Moors quite out of Spain, and in order to it the Two Kings of Castile and Aragon met at the Monastery of Huerta, upon the Borders of both King∣doms, at the beginning of the Year 1309. There, and at Monreal whither they remov'd, it 1309 was agreed, First, to pacify D. Alonso de la Cerda, somewhat mollifying the Decree of the Castile and Aragon in League a∣gainst the Moors. Arbitrators, lest whilst they were busie in the War with the Moors, he should raise Tumults in Castile. Next to make War upon the Moors with two Armies, and at once besiege Alme∣ria and Algezira. Besides, it was resolv'd Prince Jayme, the King of Aragon's Son, should Marry Ellenor the Sister of King Ferdinand, her Dower to be the sixth part of what was gain'd in War, and particularly the City Almeria. After the Interview broke up, great preparations were made. King Ferdinand went away to Toledo, to see the Body of his Father King Sancho translated to a stately Tomb built by the Queen. This King was naturally meer and merciful, and of Body comely and well shap'd. He advis'd a Gentleman to whom he had given the Government of Galicia, not to put to death some Men of Note that had rais'd Rebellion in that Country, but to send them to him, which prov'd very advantagious, for they to blot out the shame of their Crimes, did extraordinary Service against the Moors. The Army march'd into Andaluzia, and the Castilians laid Siege to Algezira on the 27th of June. About the middle of the next Month the King of Aragon set down before Almeria. Ceuta ta∣ken. Gilbert Viscoune Castelnovo with part of the Aragonian-Fleet sail'd to Ceuta in Africk, and took it. The Plunder was given to the Souldiers, the City to Aborrabe, as had been agreed. The Moors of Granada with all their Forces march'd to relieve Almeria, but were so bravely re∣ceiv'd by the Aragonians, that after a sharp Dispute they fled, and a great Slaughter was The Infi∣dels twice over∣thrown. made, tho the Woods which were near sav'd many. Whilst the Aragonians were busy in the Pursuit, the Besieged fallying entred their Works, but the Christians returning Victori∣ous, soon drove them back into the City. On the 15th of October 40000 Moors again as∣sauited the Aragonians in their Works, and met with the same success they had done before. No'less Valour and Industry was us'd by the Castilians at Algezira; but the place being strong and well Garrison'd, they advanc'd but little: Because the Siege seem'd tedious, the Arch-Bishop of Sevil, and D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, were sent with some Forces to attack Gibral∣tar. Alonso Perez de Gusman so much spoken of, was kill'd by the way, in a Skirmish with the Moors, to the great grief of all the Kingdom. Gibraltar surrender'd to King Ferdinand, Gibraltar taken. who came thither to that purpose. The Moors were permitted to go over into Africk, and carry their Goods with them. Winter and other hardships made the Souldiers before Algezira steal away from the Camp, and many Men of Note went off, as well as the meaner sort, and among them Prince John, and D. John Manuel, and D. James Lopez de Haro dy'd before the Town; and by his Death the Lorship of Biscay, as had been agree'd, fell to the La∣dy Mary, Wife to Prince John. In fine, the Siege was rais'd, the Moors delivering up the Towns of Quesada and Bedmar. The Aragonians did the same at Almeria, only upon having the captive Christians restor'd to them. This was all the Fruit of that mighty Expedi∣tion.
CHAP. V. The King of Granada depos'd. The King of Castile's Sister marry'd to the Duke of Bri∣tany. The extirpation of the Knights Templers. The Death of Ferdinand the IVth, King of Castile. DUring the late War, the Blind King of Granada was depos'd by his Brother Azar, kept sometime Prisoner at Almunecar, thence carry'd back to Granada, and there The Moor∣ish K. of Granada depos'd. murder'd. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara had been sent Embassador into France, and having dispatch'd the Business he went about, return'd to the King then at Sevil. His Embassy was to the Pope, to obtain of him a Grant of the Tenth of Ecclesiastical Revenues, which was done, and to advise him not to lay any, blemish on the Memory of his Predecessor, Pope Boniface, at the instance of the King of France. In Guipuscoa, the Town of Azptitia was now Founded. From Sevil, the King went to Burgos, to assist at the Marriage of his Sister Eli∣zabeth, that had been contracted to the King of Aragon, and was now given to John Duke of Britany. D. John Manuel was made Lord Steward of the Houshold, Prince Peter from whom that Employment was taken, shewing no discontent. D. John was also General of the Frontiers in Murcia, and Peter Lopez de Ayala executed that Command as his Lieutenant. All this was done to oblige that Gentleman, who was a Man of great Interest, and so fortunate, that Constance his Daughter by the first Wife was Queen of Portugal, and Joanna, whom he had by Blanch, the Daughter of Ferdinand de la Corda, Queen of Castile. The King in his way to Burgos, pass'd through Toledo, at the time when D. Gençalo the Arch-Bi∣shop dy'd. D. Gutierre the IId. then Archdeacon of that Church, succeeded him. Thence the King went to Burgos, where the Marriage was solemniz'd with all Imaginable Grandeur. There was no confidence to be repos'd in Prince John the King's Uncle, and therefore there was a design of making away with him at Burgos, whither he went to the Wedding. D. John Nun̄ez de Lara understanding the Design, indeavour'd to disswade it, and the Prince getting some intelligence stole away, and many Men of Note without respect to the King follow'd him. The Queen Mother made up all these Breaches, and reconcil'd the Prince to the King her Son. At Palencia, a violent Sickness put the King's Life in danger, but he remov'd to Queen Blanch of Aragon dies. Valladolid and recover'd. Blanch Queen of Aragon dy'd at Barcelona, on the 14th of October. She was a Lady endu'd with all Virtues, and left a numerous Offspring, viz. the Princes James, Alonso, John, Peter and Raymund Berengarius. Her Daughters were Mary, Constance, Elizabeth, Blanch and Violante. Blanch was Abbess of Xixena, the others were marry'd to se∣veral Princes. The Queens Body was bury'd with Pomp, in the Monastery of Santa Cruz, in Catalonia. A General Councel was now assembl'd by Pope Clement, at Vienne in Dauphine. Among other Things intended to be brought before the Council, was the Case of the Knights Tem∣plers, A general Council held at Vi∣enne in Dauphine. who were accus'd of most hainous, and unhear'd of Crimes. And indeed such were the Articles said to have been preferr'd against them, as by their Absurdity seem to prove the Innocency of those Gentlemen, and to convince the whole Matter was an Imposture; for it is beyond all belief, that so many Men of Quality, Parts, and Honour throughout the whole World, should be entangled in such Follies and Enormities. To shew somewhat of the The Knights Templers destroy'd. haniousness of the Crimes imputed to them, we will set down the Heads of the Articles ex∣hibited against them, which were; That when first they were admitted into the Order, they recounc'd Christ, the Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints. That they deny'd Salvation through Cst, and his Divinity. That they said he suffer'd on the Cross for his own Sins. That they spit upon, trampl'd and defil'd the Cross, and Image of Christ, and that par∣ticularly in the Holy Week, when Christiens celebrate the Memory of his Passion. That they deny'd the real Presence in the Eucharist, and rejected that, and the other Sacraments of the Church. That the Priests of that Order did not pronounce the Words of Consecra∣tion in the Mass, as reputing them meer Inventions of Men. That they held the Great Master, and all who presided in any House or Convent of their Order, tho no Priests, had the Power of remitting Sins. That a Cat us'd to come to their Assemblies, which they re∣verenc'd as coming from Heaven. That they had an Idol, sometimes with three, and sometimes with one Head, and othertimes a dead Man's Skul, and cover'd with the Skin of a Man, of whom they acknowledg'd all Benefits receiv'd. That they touch'd certain Cords to this Idol, which they wore Superstitiously about them. That they committed the Sin of Sodom, and many other Things, most horrid to relate. The Reader may Judge whether these do not sound more like Imposture, than true Crimes. Villaneus, S. Antonine and others, vindicate the Knights, tho the generality condemns them. Their vast Riches, were doubtless the cause of their Ruin; thence proceeded the hatred of the People towards them, and Princes laid hold of the Opportunity, to seize upon their Estates and Treasure. Sixty two Knights of the Order, are said to have been examin'd before the Pope, and owning their Crimes, to have beg'd Pardon. Their first Accusers were two of the Order, to wit, the Prior of Montfalcon,
in the Territory of Toulouze, and Nofus an out-Law of Florence; Witnesses scarce allowable in a Matter of such Moment. Others came in to them, and among the rest the Pope's Chamberlain, who took that Habit at eleven Years of Age. The Heads of these Accusations were sent to the King of France, then at Poitiers with the Pope. By their order all the Knights throughout the Kingdom were apprehended, on the 13th of October, 1306. They were all put to the Rack, where some through excess of Pain, said any thing they would have them, yet many dy'd with Resolution. The Great Master of the Order, James de Mola, as he was led to be Burnt, being proms'd his Life if he would confess, openly protested the In∣nocency of his Order, declaring he had falsly charged them with those Crimes, at the in∣stigation of the Pope, and King of France, for which he beg'd Forgiveness of God. Many others did the like. The following Year Pope Clement by his Bulls, appointed the Arch-Bishop of Toledo and Santiago, with other Prelates Judges over the Knights Templers in Ca∣stile, the Bishops of Valencia and Zaragoça, for Aragon, and so in all other parts of Spain, and throughout Christendom. They had all Orders, after examining the Case, to give Sentence in the Provincal Synods. In Aragon those Knights stood upon their Defence, in several strong Places, but particularly at Monçon; yet the King's Forces coming upon them, they were all taken. In Castile, the King summon'd them to appear before the Arch-Bishop of Toledo, and at the same time caus'd them to be apprehended, and their Estates to be put into the Hands of the Bishops, till such time as they were try'd. A Synod met at Salamanca, where after a full Hearing, the Templers were acquitted; Yet the final Determination was refer∣red to the Pope, whose Decree superseded the Opinions of all those Prelates, and the whole Order was abolish'd. By virtue of this Decree, King Ferdinand seiz'd upon all they possess'd, as well in Lands as Goods. In Galicia, they had the Towns of Ponferrada and Fa∣ro. Possessions of the Templers in Spain. In Lean, Balduerna, Tavara, Almansa, Alcanizes. In Estremadura, Valencia, Alconita, Xeres de Badajoz, Fregenal, Nertobriga, Capilla, and Caracuel: In Andaluzia, Palma: In old Castile, Villalpando: In the Territory of Murcia, Caravaca, and Alconchel. In the King∣dom of Toledo, Montalvan: Besides, S. Pedro de la Zarça, Burguillos; and many other Towns, and Houses too tedious to repeat. They are said to have had Twelve Monasteries in Spain. They were summon'd before the Arch-Bishop of Toledo, in the Year 1310. In a Sy∣nod 1310 held at Munster in Germany, the Templers were declared innocent. At last the Council of Vienne was open'd upon the 16th of October 1311. Here it was decreed that 1311 Pope Boniface should not be condemn'd. Some Discourse there was about renewing the War, in the Holy Land, but to no effect. As to the Knights, Templers, it was ordain'd their Order should be totally abolish'd, their Goods to be given to the Knights of S. John, who had then taken the Island of Rhodes. Only Spain allow'd not of that Decree, by reason of the War, with the Moors, which it was thought would prove dangerous. All the World was astonish'd at the Ruin of the Templers. Castile was full of Joy for the Prince Alonso of Castile has Birth. Birth of Prince Alonso, of whom the Queen was delivered on the 3d of August, and he soon after succeeded his Father Ferdinand. The Joy was the greater because, the Queen had never before been with Child, and was thought to be Barren. A Match was agreed betwixt Prince Peter, King Ferdinand's Brother, and Mary Daughter to the King of Aragon. The two Kings met at Calatayud with a great Court, and there the Marriage was celebrated with extraor∣dinary Pomp. Ellenor the Sister of King Ferdinand, before contracted to Prince Jayme, the King of Aragon's Son, was now marry'd and deliver'd to her Father in Law. Some Discourse there was about carrying on the War against the Moors in the Spring. There was a Diffe∣rence betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal, about the Towns of Mora and Serpa, near Cape S. Vincent, which had been deliver'd to the Portugues contrary to Equity, during King Ferdinand's Minority. The King of Aragon was chosen Umpire in this Difference. This done, Prince John the King of Aragon's Brother was sent into Portugal about that Affair. King Ferdinand went to Valladolid, where he assembl'd the Cortes or Parliament, and demanded Mo∣ny for carrying on the War, which was readily granted, in hopes of driving the Infidels quite out of Spain. Prince Peter the King's Brother being made General in the Spring of the Year 1312. march'd and lay'd Siege to Alcaudete, which as was before said, the Moors had taken. The King follow'd to Martos, there a very strange Accident happen'd. Two Brothers, Pe∣ter 1312. and John Carvajal, were apprehended for the Murder of a Gentleman, of the Family of War with the Moors. Benavides, kill'd at Palencia. Many had been troubled for this Fact, but it could not be prov'd upon any Body. Lastly these two Gentlemen were condemn'd for it, without being suffi∣ciently Convicted or Confessing. They were adjudg'd to be cast headlong off from a Rock, and no Intercession could mitigate the King, for he was inexorable. As they were led to A won∣derful Judg∣ment. Execution, they call'd God to witness their Innocency, and appeal'd to his Tribunal, before which they summon'd the King to appear within 30 Days. These Words at first look'd up∣on as Vain, were afterwards much Reflected on. The King little regarding them, went away to the Camp before Alcaudete, there a violent Sickness forc'd him to return to Jaen, not withstanding the Moors were upon surrendring. His Disease increas'd, so that he could not attend any Business, and one day being somewhat Joyful with the News brought him, that the Moors had surrendred, he retir'd after Dinner to Sleep, and was found Dead. His Ferdinand the IVth King of Castile dies. Death was upon a Thursday, the 7th of September. He was taken off in the Flower of his Youth, at the Age of 24 Years, and 9 Months, when he began to know somewhat of Happiness. He
Reign'd 17 Years, 4 Months, and 19 Days, and was the Fourth of the Name. Some said excessive Eating and Drinking caus'd his Death, others that it was a Judgment, for that he dy'd exactly the 30th Day after he was Summon'd. For this reason he was call'd King Fer∣dinand the Summon'd. His Body was deposited at Cordova, because by reason of the great Heat of the Weather, it could not then be carry'd to Sevil or Toledo, the Burial Places of the King. It was the more confidently believ'd he dy'd in pursuance of the Summons, because the same happen'd at the same time to the Pope, and King of France, who were also cited by several Knights Templers, as they were led to Execution. What the King of Aragon decreed, as to the Difference betwixt Castile and Portugal is not known, but it was visible he favour'd the Portugues, and King Ferdinand dying, he still kept those Towns which remain to that King∣dom to this Day. CHAP. VI. The beginning of the Reign of Alonso the XIth King of Castile. The many Confusions in that Kingdom, by reason of his Infancy. The Moors of Granada expel their King The Turks, their Original and Growth. GReat Troubles ensu'd upon the Death of King Ferdinand, because the new King was but a Year and 26 Days old. As soon as the King dy'd, Prince Alonso his Son was pro∣claim'd Alonso not 13 Months old, de∣clar'd King of Castile. by the means of Prince Peter his Uncle, who came to Jaen as soon as Alcaudete was taken, and by this Loyal Action gain'd the Love and Applause of all the People. The young King was at Avila. Vataza a Noble Lady, Grandaughter to Theodorus Lascarus, Em∣peror of Greece, who came from Portugal with Queen Constancy, was appointed his Governess. She afterwards return'd to Portugal, dy'd there, and lyes Bury'd in the Cathedral of Coimbra, as appears by the Inscription on her Tomb. Queen Mary the King's Grandmother liv'd a re∣tir'd Life at Valladolid. Queen Constance, who had follow'd the King her Husband, was at Martos overwhelm'd with Sorrow. Prince John was gone to Valencia, and D. John de Lara to Portugal, both in Disgrace with King Ferdinand. Every Body strugl'd to have a share in the Government, chiefly D. Alonso, Lord of Molina the Queen's Brother, Prince Philip his Uncle, and D. John Manuel labour'd hard, but underhand, and modestly. Prince John, and Prince Peter, Uncle and Nephew aspir'd more openly; Prince Peter being the nearest of rago dies. kin to the King, and most in the Favour of the People, stood fairest. Prince John was of riper Yeas, but restless and inconstant, so that he seem'd to be born only to embroil King∣doms. Prince Peter had charge of the Affairs of Andaluzia; and concluded a Peace with the Moors, which was convenient for both Parties, for the Prince could not follow the War, being taken up with his Pretensions at Court; and among the Moors, Farraquin, Lord of Ma∣laga sought to revenge the Murder of the late King. Queen Constance, and Prince Peter hav∣ing conferr'd together, resolv'd to go to Avila, where the King was hoping the Townsmen would not oppose them, or If they should, to prevail by Force. On the other side Prince John, King Ferdinand's Uncle, and D. John de Lara joyn'd in a League, the likeness of their Inclinations, and their common Danger made them Unite. They labour'd to draw Queen Mary to their Party, giving her hopes she should have the Education of her Grandson. D. John de Lara came first to Avila, but could not lay hold of the King, for D. Sancho the Bi∣shop The young King kept by the Citizens of Avila. convey'd him into the Cathedral, and there made himself strong, and defended him. Next came Queen Constance, and Prince Peter, but the same thing happen'd to them. Means of Accommodation were propos'd, and it was agreed the King should be deliver'd to none but such as the Cortes or Parliament should appoint, and the Citizens of Avila made an Asso∣ciation in order to see this perform'd. D. John de Lara gave this Advice, hoping to ex∣clude Prince Peter. The Cortes met at Palencia in the beginning of Spring, where much Bri∣bery was us'd. The better sort were for Queen Mary and her Son Prince Peter. Others preferr'd Prince John, and Queen Constance, who was subtilly drawn away by the adverse Party from Prince Peter. Hence sprang new Fumults and Confusions. Prince Peter con∣fiding in his own Power, and the Affections of the People, as also hoping for Aid from Abroad, agreed with D. John Manuel upon Condition, that if he obtain'd his Ends, he would give him the Government of the Kingdoms of Toledo and Murcia. At the beginning of the 1313. Year 1313. he met his Father in Law, the King of Aragon at Calatayud, to whom he urg'd how much he was oblig'd to favour his Pretentions, and prevent a War which might other∣wise ensue. Therefore by Consent of both, Michael Arbe was sent Embassador to Portugal, to try whether that King could prevail with the Mutineers to desist from their Pretensions, and leave the Government of the Kingdom to Prince Peter, allowing Queen Constance the Charge of Educating the King. The People of Avila were not zealous for either Party, but at last joyn'd with Prince Peter, and Queen Mary his Mother, yet upon Condition they should not carry the King out of the City. At this Time Azar King of Granada was forc'd The Moors of Granada expel their new King. to retire to the Alhambra, a strong Pallace in the highest part of the City, because Ismael the Son of Farraquin had caus'd the Townsmen to Rebel against him. Prince Peter who was then
at Sevil, march'd thither to relieve that King, who was his Friend and Ally, but came too late, for he had already agreed to quit the Fitle and Authority of a King, and remain con∣tent with only the City Guadin, seated in the pleasant Plains of the antient Turduli. Tho' the Prince could not Relieve, he endeavour'd to Revenge him; for he took from the Moors a strong Castle near Granada, call'd Rute, and made great spoil throughout the Country. Azor had Reign'd Four Years, and seven Months when he was deposed. Ismael his Competi∣tor and Nephew, being the Son of Farraquen, and his Sister, succeeded him. The taking of Rute gain'd Prince Peter great Reputation; for that in three days he did that which seve∣ral Kings had attempted in vain: but the War was not carryed on, because of the intestine Divisions. The Cortes met in the Monastery of Sahagun, to endeavour to compose those Dif∣ferences. Whilst they were sitting, Queen Constance departed this Life, for Grief that her Son was kept from her; and that she was reduc'd to such Poverty, that all her Jewels would not pay her Debts; as she her self declar'd at her Death. The Queens Death made things easier to be compos'd; for Prince John having lost that support, apply'd himself to Queen Mary, and Prince Peter. They agreed that the Queen should have the Breeding up of the King, and the Princes should joyntly govern the Kingdom, each in that Part which had Vo∣ted for him in the Cortes or Parliament, held not long before at Palencia. The King was carry'd to Toro, a healthy and pleasant Place; but the main design was to get him out of Avila, and revenge the Affronts receiv'd of that People. It was now the year 1314. when New Tumults broke out in the Kingdom of Toledo, and all manner of Crimes were com∣mitted. 1314. In order to settle a better Form of Government, the Cortes met at Burgos, where The Cortes settle the Govern∣ment of Castile. it was enacted, that the supream Authority and management of Affairs, should be in the Council of State; That the said Council should attend the King and Queen where-ever they went; That the two Princes should determine all smaller Affairs but have no power to alie∣nate the Revenues of the Crown nor to appoint another in their stead, in case any of them, or the Queen, should dye. At the same time dyed Three Persons of great Note, Peter the Queens Brother, D. Tello his Son, and D. John de Lara Lord Steward. That Place was given to D. Alonso Prince John's Son. D. John de Lara had a Sister marry'd to D. Ferdinand de la Cerda, of whom was Born Blachs, and D. John de Lara who took that Sirname, because he inherited the Estate of the Family. This in Castile. In Aragon the King, in November sent his Daughter Elizabeth to Germany, she being Contracted to Frederick Duke of Austria, who was now chosen King of the Romans, by the Three Electors of Cologne, Saxony, and the Pala∣tine; the other three Elected Lewis of Bavaria, and Wenceslaus King of Bohemia joyned with them. This last overthrew his Competitor in Battel, and took him Prisoner. At this time Andronicus, a wicked Prince, was Emperor of Constantinople. Now it was Turks their Original & Growth. also that the Turks, a People before scarce known, began to grow mous. They came ori∣ginally from that part of Scythia next the River Volga, and having broke into Europe in the year 700. were overthrown by the Hungarians, and retir'd into Asia, invited by the Rich∣ness of the Country, and Cowardize of the People. There they made themselves Strong in the Mountains, which for a long time defended them more than their own Valour. They were not any thing famous, or had any noted General, but liv'd by Rapine, and serv'd the Neighbouring Princes in their Wars, according as every one bid most; but they most especially favd the Soldun of Egypt. In the War Godfrey of Ballogne made in the Holy Land, they began to gain Reputation for the many Overthrows they gave, and receiv'd of the Christians. They were divided under several Commanders, till in the time of Androni∣cus, one call'd Ottoman, the Son of Zicus, having kill'd many of those petty Lrds, and worst∣ed Ottoman Founder of the Em∣pire of that Name. the rest, became Absolute over all the Turks, who then liv'd dispers'd like the Arabs. This was the first Founder of the Ottoman Empire, from whom that Family takes Name and from him are descended all their Emperors to this day. Orcanes the Son of Ottoman, suc∣ceeded him in the Empire, then his Son Amurat, next Bajazet Son to Amurat, Famous for the Overthrow given him by Tanerlan. Bajazet had a Son called Calapin, who succeded him, and two Sons called Moyses and Mahomet, who both Regin'd. Then Amurat the Son of Ma∣homet, who weary of the World in the best of his Age, and greatest exaltation of his Em∣pire, Abdicated the Crown, and retired to live a quiet Life; by which he gain'd more Re∣nown, than by all his other Actions; which were great. After Amurat Reign'd his Son Ma∣homet, who took Constantinople. Then Bajazet, next Selim, after him Soliman, then another Selim, Amurat, another Selim; and lastly, Mahomet: And so from Father to Son, to him that now Reigns. And thus the Empire of the Turks has from time to time, extended it self to the Grandeur it contains at present; and all through the Negligence of the Christians, or rather, their Divisions among themselves, which have always hinder'd them from joyn∣ing their Forces against the Common Enemy.
CHAP. VII. The Actions of the Catalonians in Greece. The War in Andaluzia. Death of Luis Hutin, King of France. Philip the Long succeeds him. John the XXth chosen Pope. Defeat of the Moors, by Prince Peter of Castile. WHen the Turks had possessed themselves of a great part of Asia, they began to cast their Eye towards Thracia, and for some time the narrow Streight that parted those Actions of the Cata∣lonians in Greece. Countries, was the only lett that hinder'd them. Andronicus the Emperor being sensible of his Danger, thought fit to have recourse to foreign Aids. The Catalonians after Peace was set∣led in Sicily, fell to Pyracy. Roger de Brindez, their chief Commander was invited to Greece with mighty promises from the Emperor. This Man had gain'd great Fame by his Exploits, was originally a German, his Father serv'd the Emperor Frederick, and had a great Estate about Brindez. The Son was first a Knight Templer, and had afterwards serv'd King Fre∣derick in the War of Sicily, and gain'd much Reputation. Having obtain'd his King's leave, he went to Constantinople with a Fleet of 38 Sail, in which were 18 Galleys, 1500 Horse, and about 4000 Foot, a small Number, but all of try'd Valour. At Constantinople, Roger marry'd the Emperor's Neece, and had the next Place to him, with the Title of Magaduke, that is, Great General. This done the Catalonians pass'd over into Asia, where in the first Ingage∣ment they slew 1000 Turkish Horse, and 10000 Foot. Then advancing near to Philadelphia, They o∣verthrow the Turbs. they fought again with the same Success, and no less Slaughter. Lastly, on the Streights of Mount Taurus, call'd the Iron Gate, they gave the Enemy a third Overthrow, nothing infe∣rior to any of the former. Great hopes were conceiv'd upon these Prosperous beginnings; but Roger was now call'd back by the Emperor Andronicus to settle some Disorders at Home, which succeeded accordingly. Berengarius Entença, a Gentleman of Catalonia, was very ser∣viceable in this War, for he brought over 300 Horse, and 1000 Foot. Hereupon he had the Title of Great General conferr'd on him, and Roger was saluted Cesar, which is the highest Dignity. Thus far things advanc'd successfully, but Fortine was now to change. The Gre∣cians began to hate the Catalonians, as well through Envy, as because those that were in Gar∣rison at Gallipoli, mutiny'd for their Pay, and spreading themselves through the Country, committed all sorts of Enormities. The Emperor in a Rage sent for Roger de Brindez to Adri∣anople, on pretence of Business, and caus'd him to be kill'd. A Multitude of Greeks besieg'd Thier Ge∣neral put to Death, They de∣feat the Greeks. Gallipoli, where the Catalonians not only defended themselves, but after several successful Sallies, at last in one  slew 6000 of the Enemy's Horse, and 20000 Foot, the rest fled, leaving the Victory and  Camp to the Catalonians. This seems incredible, but Raymund Montaner who was present, in his History affirms it as an Eye witness. Berengarius Entença being resolv'd to revenge the Death of Roger de Brindez, sail'd to Constantinople, burnt and destroy'd all the Coast, even to the City Walls, and in Battle defeated the Emperor's Son, who came to oppose him. At this time a Fleet of Genoeses commanded by Edwand Doria, ar∣'d in those Parts, and under show of Friendship secur'd the Catalonian Fleet, and took their General Entenga. Robert Rocafort was in Garrison at Gallipoli, under whos Conduct the Ca∣talonians spoiled the Country, and often defeated the Greeks and Genoeses. Rocafort puft up with this Success would acknowledge no Superior, but committed all manner of Crimes with∣out the least osition. Entença having at length obtain'd his Liberty return'd to Catalo∣nia, where selling a good Estate, he fitted out auother Fleet and went back again to Greece. Rocafort  to acknowledge him as his Superior, and thereupon they fell at Variance, and study'd the Ruin of one another. Frederick King of Sicily, by whose order they went, sent Ferdinand the younger Son of the King of Majorca, to reconcile them. He could not prevail, but perswaded them, since the Country about Gallipoli was ruin'd, they should remove to Na∣poli, a City on the Borders of Thrace and Macedon, very Plentiful and Rich. By the way, the They fall out among them∣selves. two Commanders fought, and Entença was kill'd, with many others. Prince Ferdinand in his Return towards Sicily, was taken by the French near Negropont. Rocafort setl'd Friendship with those French, expecting no Pardon from the Aragonians or Sicilians, but carrying him∣self haughtily was taken by them, with his Brother, and deliver'd to Robert King of Naples his mortal Enemy, who secur'd them at Aversa. There they were till both dy'd with hard Usage. Prince Ferdinand of Majorca was not kept to strictly, and was soon after releas'd. At Mecina, he marry'd Elizabeth, the Grandchild of Luis the last Prince of the Morea, a Frenchman, who dy'd not long before without leaving any Heir-male. After the Departure of the French from the Levant, those Catalonians that remain'd there destroy'd all wherever they went. Gualter de Brena, Duke of Athens being then at War, entertain'd them, and they soon mutiny'd, kill'd him and plunder'd the City, but reserv'd the Title of Duke for Frede∣rick King of Sicily, in hopes he would relieve them. King Frederick accepted of the Title, and sent Governours and Officers, under whom the War was continu'd with various Success. This Dukedom he left to his younger Son William, and he to his Brother John; then succeed∣ed Frederick his Son, who dying without Issue, that Title fell to Frederick King of Sicily, Great Grandson to him that first sent the Catalonians to Greece. Hence the Kings of Aragon, as Kings of Sicily stil'd themselves Dukes of Athens and Neopatria.
Luis Hutin King of France dying on the 5th of June, 1315. Philip the Long his Brother suc∣ceeded 1315 him, Joanna his Daughter being excluded by the Salique Law. But she could not be Luis King of France dyes, and Philip suc∣ceeds. excluded from the Crown of Navarre, because her Grandmother not many Years before had inhen'd that Crown. Pope Clement dying at Avignon, the See of Rome was Vacant two Years and four Months, through the Divisions among the French and Italian Cardinals; at last John the XXth was chosen on the 7th of August, 1316. He made Zaragoça an Arch-Bi∣shoprick, 1316 to whose Jurisdiction he subjected Pamplona, Calahorra, Huesca, and Tarraçona, all John the XXth chosen Pope. which and Zaragoça it self were before Subordinate to Tarragona. In Castile things were ve∣ry much unsetled, and yet they made War upon the Moors. Azar not brooking his Fall, contrary to Agreement, assum'd the Title of King, and being of himself too weak, us'd the Assistance of the Christians. It was not fit to let slip so good an Opportunity of extirpating the Moors. Prince Peter was appointed General against them both, because of his Age, and because he had many Friends among the Infidels. As also because his Uncle, Prince John, was then afflicted with the Death of his eldest Son, D. Alonso, who dy'd at Morales, near Toro, and was bury'd at Leon. About this Time Prince Ferdinand of Majorca dy'd in the Morea, whi∣ther he went to recover his Wife's Dominions. His Body was brought to Spain, and bury'd at Perpignan. He left a Son call'd D. Jayme. Prince Peter in Andaluzia provided a great Convoy for Guadix, which suffer'd want, and the Enemy lying in the way he March'd with it himself. Near Alaten a great Number of Moorish Horse commanded by Ozmin, a brave Souldier, met him. After a sharp Ingagement the Moors were put to Flight, 1500 of them Infidels de∣feated by Prince Pe∣ter of Ca∣stile. kill'd, and among them 40 of the Noblest of Granada. Guadix was reliev'd, and two Forts call'd Gambil and Algabardos taken. This Success which ought to have gain'd him the Love of all Men, rais'd Emulation, and many sought his Ruin, whom his Uncle Prince John in∣cens'd. It was propos'd the Governours should deliver up some Towns of their own for Security, that they would Govern uprightly. This Business was mov'd in the Cortes at Bur∣gos first, and then at Carrion, where Prince Peter to his great Honour comply'd with all their Demands. Mony was wanting, and the People would not hear of Taxes; therefore upon Suit made to him the Pope granted the Tenth of Ecclesiastical Revenues, for the War and the Cruzade to all that serv'd upon their own Cost. Besides the Country rais'd some Mony. Thus our Army being increas'd, wasted all the Country as far as the Walls of Granada, the Moors refusing to hazard a Battle. The Infidels designing to besiege Gibraltar, it was pro∣vided with all Necessaries, so they desisted, and at the same time the Castle of Belmes was taken from them. It was now the Year 1316, in which Rocaberti Arch-Bishop of Tarragona 1316 dying, the Chapter elected Prince John the King of Aragon's 3d Son, but the Pope could never be brought to confirm the Election. Therefore they were forc'd to proceed to a new Choice, which fell upon D. Ximeno de Luna Arch-Bishop of Zaragoça, D. Peter de Luna suc∣ceeded him in that See, and Prince John was made Abbot of Montaragon, vacant by the Pro∣motion of D. Peter to the Archbishoprick. CHAP. VIII. Institution of two new Orders of Knighthood in Aragon and Portugal. Peter and John Princes of Castile kill'd by the Moors. The Government of that Kingdom in Confu∣sion. A great Overthrow given the Navarrois, by the Biscainers. IN the Year 1317, the King of Aragon obtain'd leave of the Pope to institute a new Or∣der 1317 of Knighthood out of the Ruins of the Templers. That they should be of the Cister∣cian Knights of Montesa in Aragon, and of Christ in Portugal. Order, subject to that of Calatrava, but to have a particular Master of their own. Their Badge was a plain Red Cross, on a White Cloak. Their principal Seat Montesa, whence they took their Name. They did as good Service against the Moors, who infested the Coasts of Valencia, as any other Order. Soon after in Portugal by Permission of the same Pope, was instituted another Order call'd of Christ, the chiefest in that Kingdom. Their Badge a Red Cross, with a white Twist in the middle. To them also were given the Lands of the Tem∣plers, their chief Seat is at Tomar. The Portugueses had long enjoy'd Peace, which was now disturb'd by Civil Discord. Prince Alonso was displeas'd with his Father, the true Cause was Ambition, and the desire of igning before his Time; but he pretended his Bastard Brother Alonzo Sanchez had too much Power, and more Interest with the King than was rea∣sonable. Many forsook the King and follow'd the Prince, who seiz'd upon the Cities of Co∣imbra, and Porto. The King endeavour'd to appease him by fair means, and us'd all possible Methods to prevent a War. Mean while in Aragon dy'd Queen Mary, Sister to the King of Cyprus, whence she came the Year before, and was marry'd to the King of Aragon. The Marriage was Celebrated at Girona, and she was bury'd at Tortosa, where she ended her Days in the Year 1318. The following Year 1319, was Remarkable for two extraordinary 1318 Accidents. One, the unfortunate Death of the two Princes, John and Peter. The other, the 1319 voluntary Resignation made by D. Jayme, Heir to the Crown of Aragon. Prince John en∣vy'd Two ex∣traordina∣ry Acci∣dents. the Honour and Esteem his Competitor Prince Peter acquir'd, and Prince Peter was a
Man would take no wrong. It was fear'd these Differences might break out into open Ho∣stilities; for Prince John, under colour of the War with the Moors, had rais'd great Forces in Old Castile. The Queen made up these Breaches at Valladolid, where the Cortes tha sat, and it was agreed, both Princes should Command severally against the Moors, and ea have the payment of his own Army. In this Assembly the Archbishop of Santiago in the Pope's Name, propos'd the business of D. Alonso de la Cerda, threatning to proceed to Ecclesiastical Censures if he were not satisfy'd. D. Alonso now demanded those Towns, which he refus'd when offer'd him. The Nobility excus'd themselves, saying, it was against the Oath they had taken, to lessen any thing of the King's Patrimony during his Minority. All that could be obtain'd was, that Ferdinand, D. Alonso's younger Brother, should be made Lord Steward of the Houshold. The Queen went to Cuidad Rodrigo, to reconcile her Son-in-Law Prince Alonso, to his Father, but all in vain. The two Princes John and Peter, went several ways to Andaluzia. Ismael King of Granada, to obtain Succours out of Africk, gave the King of Morocco, Algezira and Ronda, with all their Dependencies. Prince Peter took Tiscar, a strong and populous Town. Mahomet Andon, whose the Town was, surrender'd the Castle. Prince John, extravagantly ambitious of Honour, resolv'd to march up to the Walls of Granada; a rash design, considering the great Heat of the Season. At Alcaudete the two Princes joyn'd their Forces, which consisted of 9000 Horse, and a great number of Foot. They march'd into the Enemies Country, destroying all before them. Prince John led the Van, and Prince Peter brought up the Reer. They took the Town of Alora, but being in great haste, did not make themselves Masters of the Castle. On a Saturday, being the Eve of Mid∣summer-day, they appear'd in sight of Granada, and rested there the next day. The 3d day; perceiving what Difficulties surrounded them, they began to retire, Prince Peter in the Van, and Prince John in the Reer with the Baggage. The Moors hearing of their Retreat, Sally'd out of Granada, to the number of 5000 Horse, and a multitude of Foot, under the Com∣mand of Ozmin. Their design was only to stick upon our Reer, without hazarding a Battel. In the Heat of the day our Men were far from the River, and wanted Water. Hereupon the Moors charg'd them with great Fury, and hideous Cries. Prince Peter hearing the Noise, Fac'd about to succour those that Fought. The Soldiers were dispers'd, and Fainting with the Heat, whom the Prince endeavouring to encourage and bring on, opprest with Labour, and the Fury of the scorching Sun, he fainted away, and dy'd, without any assistance. The same befell Prince John, who yet sensless, liv'd till Night. This News being spread abroad, the Soldiers drew themselves into a Close Body, and the Moors having plunder'd the Baggage The death of the Princes of Castile, Pe∣ter & John. retir'd. Night sav'd many of the Christians. The Bodies of the Princes were bury'd at Burgos. Prince John left a Son of the same Name, call'd also One-ey'd, because he was re∣ally so: His Inclinations were no better than his Presence. Mary Wife to Prince Peter, was deliver'd at Cordova of a Daughter, call'd Blanch; the Education of whom, and the Care of her Estate, Garcilasso de la Vega, a great Friend of her Fathers, took upon him. New Trou∣bles ensu'd in Castile upon the Death of the Princes, every one striving to have the greatest share in the Government. At the same time Aragon was disturb'd upon a very extraordinary occasion. D. Jayme the King's eldest Son, had resolv'd to renounce and resign his Right and Title to the Inheritance of that Crown. His Father us'd all possible Arguments to dis∣swade him, but all to no purpose. Therefore on the 23th of November, before the Cortes or Jayme heir of Aragon, abdicates. Parliament then assembled at Tarragona, he made a publick act of Resignation. That done, he took the Habit of Calatrava, and soon after that of Montesa. The Lady Ellenor, who had been Contracted to him, was sent back a Maid into Castile. His loose manner of Life was a sufficient proof, that it was not Virtue, but weakness and inconstancy, that mov'd him to re∣fuse a Kingdom. D. Alonso his second Brother, succeeded in the Title to the Crown, and had at t time by his Wife the Lady Teresa, a young Son call'd Peter, born the 7th Month. This Ladys Portion was the Earldom of Ʋrgel, left her by her great Uncle Armengaud, Brother to her Grandmother. The Moors incourag'd by their last Success, took Huescar, Orles, and Galera, Towns be∣longing Several places ta∣ken by the Moors. to the Knights of Santiago. Besides they made themselves Masters of Martos, a very strong place where they spar'd neither Sex, nor Age; some Christians sav'd themselves up∣on a Rock, near the Town, and in the Castle. Castile was full of Confusion, caus'd by the many Competitors to the Government. Queen Mary according to what had been agree'd some years before, pretended it belong'd to her alone, and sent her Letters to all Places, exhorting the People to stick by her. Being a Wom she was look'd upon as too weak to undergo so great a Burthen, and many strove to raise themselves to the supream Power. Among these the chief was Prince Philip, the King's Uncle, D. John Manuel, and the other D. John who had but one Eye, and was Lord of Biscay, all powerful Men, of the Blood Roy∣al. These were all put into Power, not by publick Consent, but in part, as every ones Interest lay. Several Assemblies of Provinces were held, the result was that Andaluzia chose Prince Philip for their Governour. The Kingdom of Toledo and Estremadura, elected Several Governors chosen in the Pro∣vinces of Castile. D. John Manuel, most part of old Castile stood by D. John, Lord of Biscay. These things were not lasting, but at every foot the Governours were chang'd, as the Peoples Minds al∣ter'd, which caus'd an unspeakable Confusion. D. Ferdinand de la Cerda had no great Inter∣est, and was suspected by all Men; he resolv'd to joyn with D. John, the Lord of Biscay.
This was the condition of Castile in the Year 1320. The same Year Prince John the King of Ara∣gon's third Son, was consecrated Arch-Bishop of Toledo, at Lerida. Queen Mary was some∣what 1320 jealous of that Prince, but the Pope by his Letters, assur'd her he would do all things in her Favour. The new Arch-Bishop had great Disputes with the Prelates of that King∣dom about carrying his Cross through their Diocesses, and he persisting to do so, the Arch-Bishop of Zaragoça excommunicated him, and shut up all the Churches. This he did, relying on a Decree of the Prelates of that Kingdom, by which they declare any Bishop excommunicate, that shall carry his Cross in the Diocess of another. The King of Aragon was highly offended at it, and wrote to the Pope Letters, full of Passion and Threats, and had perhaps gone farther, but that he was disswaded by his Friends. The Pope's Answer was Ambiguous, for he blam'd the Arch-Bishop of Zaragoça, yet order'd him of Toledo to be absolv'd of the Excommunication, lest it might have been just. The new Prelate being come to Toledo, behav'd himself in such manner towards D. John Manuel, who was marry'd to his elder Sister Constance, that all Apprehensions of his favouring him ceas'd. He would by no means suffer him to receive the King's Revenue in his Arch-Bishoprick, whence there ensu'd a mortal Enmity betwixt them. At the same time the Na∣varrois still subject to France, sustain'd a great loss in Biscay. Philip the Long, King of France dying without Heirs, on the second of June 1321, his Brother Charles the Fair, succeeded 1321 him, and equall'd his Brothers in Liberality, Valour, and Beauty. In his time the Biscainers seiz'd the Castle of Gorricia, in Guipuscoa, pretending the Navarrois withheld it from them wrongfully. 60000 Men-march'd out of Navarre (if the Numbers are not mistaken) and came to Botivara on the 19th of September. 800 Biscainers having secur'd the Passes of the Biscainers and Navar∣rois at War. Mountains, from thence roll'd down Barrels full of Stones, and Bodies of Trees, on the Navarrois, which broke and put them to flight, with greater Slaughter than could be imagin'd, from so small a Number. Giles Oniz commanded the Biscayners, and Ponce Morentaina a Frenchman, and Viceroy of Navarre, those People. The Pope sent Cardinal William of Bay∣onne his Legate, into Castile, to endeavour to put an end to the Distractions of that King∣dom. He procur'd the Cortes or Parliament should meet at Palencia, at the same time that Queen Mary the Protectress of three Kings, and Honour of Castile, worn out with Age and Troubles dy'd at Valladolid, on the first of June 1322. She built the Monastery of Huelgas in that City, where she order'd her self to be bury'd, another at Burgos, a third at Tore, 1322 and others in several Parts of the Kingdom. The Cortes at Palencia it seems, took no effect. A Synod of all the Bishops or Castile was held at Valladolid by the Legate. There on the 2d. A Spanish Synod held at Valladolid. of August, many wholsom Constitions were enacted. Among other things, those that shall eat Flesh, or sell it publickly in Lent, or the Ember-days, are Excommunicated. Such as are not Christians are forbid to be present at Divine Service; yet if Baptiz'd, they are allow'd to be capable of Benefices. The common way of Purgation used in Spain is Condemned. The Decrees of D. John Archbishop of Toledo, publish'd at that time, are preserv'd to this day. He ordains, that Divine Service do not go forwards till the Jews or Moors, go out of the Church. That Monies gather'd upon the Croisade, be deliver'd to the Prelate for Redemption of Cap∣tives, and Relief of the Poor. That Priests say Mass at least four times a year; and that after they have said Mattins. That what is gotten by the Church shall not be left to Chil∣dren, tho' got in Wedlock. This same year, Ismael King of Granada, was kill'd in the Al∣hambra King of Granada murder'd. by his own People, stirr'd up against him by the Lord of Algezira and Ozmin; the first was offended at him, because at the taking of Martos, he took from him a Beautiful Cap∣tive; the other, because he lost a Nephew he dearly lov'd there. Scarce was his Death known abroad, when his Son Mahomet but 12 years of Age, was carry'd on a Chair on Men's Shoulders through the City, and proclaim'd King. By this means the Governour of the City manifested his Loyalty, and prevented the designs of the Conspirators, who intended to have set up a King of their own making, but were now forc'd to quit the City, and to fly to several places. CHAP. IX. King Alonso the 11th of Castile, takes upon him the Government. The Conquest of Sardinia by the Aragonians. The Death of King Denis of Portugal. His Son Alonso succeeds him. Jayme the 2d, King of Aragon, is succeeded by his Son Alonso the 4th. UPon the Death of Queen Mary, the Disorders of Castile were doubl'd. No hopes of Remedy remain'd, but in the King's coming to Age to take upon him the Government. King Alon∣so of Castile enters up∣on the Go∣vernment. There were great Tokens to be seen of his Prudence and Virtue. At last being arriv'd at the Age of Fifteen, tho' so young, the necessity of the Times oblig'd him to take up the Go∣vernment of his Kingdom. Besides the Subjects press'd him, and particularly Garcilasso de la Vega, and Alvar Nunez Ossorio, Men of great Note, who labour'd to get into the King's Fa∣vour, thereby to obtain Pardon of the Crimes they had committed during his Minority. He
admitted them into his Family, and they grew so great, that he was chiefly govern'd by them. One Joseph a Jew of Ezija, a very Rich Man, and Chief of the Farmers and Managers of the Revenue, had the next place to these Two Gentlemen. The King sent Letters of Summons to the Governours of the Kingdom, who presently came to him to Valladolid, each striving to be first in gaining his Favours, tho' their Hearts were not sincere, as soon ap∣pear'd; for only Prince Philip stay'd with the King. D. John Manuel, and D. John Lord of Biscay, withdrawing privately from Court. Their pretence was as usual, Evil Counsellors. They joyn'd their Forces, and made a solemn League at Cigales. The Form of Covenant formerly us'd among the Nobles of Castile was thus: Having read the Articles of Agree∣ment, one of the Gentlemen concern'd, in the Name of all the rest said: I swear by Al∣mighty The Rebels associate. The form of Associa∣tion. God, and by his most glorious Mother, that every one of us will perform all that has been read in this Publick Instrument, without Fraud or Deceit. That we will not go one without the other against our Enemies, nor in any manner act contrary to what has been here establish'd. Whosoever shall first violate it, that very Day do Thou, Almighty God, in this World take away his Life, and torment his Soul in the other, with cruel and everlasting Torments; let his Strength and his Speech fail him; and in Battel his Horse,Arms and Spurrs; and his Vassals when he has most need of them. Then all present answer'd, Amen. Other times they divided the Consecrated Host into Two Parts, and each took one; then follow'd the Curses and Imprecations. This is the solemn manner of Associating themselves long us'd in Castile. This Union was dangerous to the King, and therefore to break it, he agreed to Marry D. John Manuel's Daughter, who thereupon came to Pen̄afiel, submitted himself to the King, and deliver'd him his Daughter, as yet too young to be marry'd. The other D. John seeing himself forsaken, thought of Marrying Blanch the Daughter of Prince Peter, kill'd in Andaluzla, for her great Portion, she being Lady of Almaçan, Alcocer, and other Towns upon the Borders of Aragon, which lay oppor∣tunely to forward his designs. To prevent him, the King was advis'd to seize upon all the Lady Blanch's Patrimony. Garcilasso forgetting his Obligations to Prince Peter, was the chief Man that gave this Advice. D. John Manuel being restor'd to the King's Favour, meditated Revenge against the Archbishop of Toledo. Hereupon some hard words passing betwixt them in the King's Presence, the King depriv'd the Archbishop of the Chancellorship, whereat he being offended, withdrew into Aragon, and there exchang'd Churches with D. Ximeno de Luna, Archbishop of Tarragona, with the additional Title of Patriarch of Alexandria. Gar∣cilasso was made Chancellor, and from that time the Office fell to nothing, tho' afterwards for some years the Archbishops appointed Deputies to execute it, and now they have only the bare Title of Lords Chancellors of Castile. D. John the Archbishop, increas'd the num∣ber of 13 Poor, maintain'd at the House of those Prelates, to 30; which holds to this day. The King of Aragon in persuance of the Popes Grant, was resolv'd to possess himself of the Sardinia conquered by the A∣ragonians. Island of Sardinia, then subject to the Republick of Pisa. To this purpose he sent his Son D. Alonso, who in the term of two years Conquer'd it, defeating those of Pisa, in several En∣counters. Yet most of the Aragonians dy'd through the unhealthfulness of the Country. Prince Peter, younger Brother to Alonso, mov'd by the fresh example of Castile, and the fa∣vour of many Nobles, hop'd, if his Brother dy'd in that Expedition, to exclude his Sons, and inherit the Crown, which he understanding, soon concluded a Peace with Pisa in the Month of June 1324. upon these Conditions, That Prisoners on both sides be set at liberty; That Trade be restor'd; That the Castle of Caller, with all its Territory, remain to the People of 1324 Pisa; That all the rest of the Island belong to the Aragonians. This done, he came over into Spain, and prevail'd with his Father, to declare his Sons Heirs of the Crown, notwithstanding he should dye before them, in the Cortes at Zaragoça, and there the Oath of Fidelity to them as Heirs, was accordingly taken. The following 1325. in January, and at Santarem, dy'd 1325 Denis King of Portugal, a Prince famous for the long time he Reigned, which was 45 Years, 9 Months and 5 Days, as also for his continual Prosperity till the latter end of his Reign, when Denis K. of Portugal dies. St. Eliza∣beth Queen of Portugal. it was disturb'd by his Son. He was bury'd in the Monastery of St. Bernard, built by himself, a League and half from Lisbon. Queen Elizabeth his Wife, liv'd 11 Years after him, and dy'd on the fourth of July 1332. She was afterwards Canonized for her extraordinary Virtue, and Acts of Piety. Alonso, King Denis his eldest Son, succeeded him, and was call'd the Brave, for his Love to Martial Affairs. Of six Children he had, three dy'd young, which were Alonso K. of Portugal. Alonso, Denis, and John; Mary, Peter, and Ellenor outliv'd their Parents. This year dy'd Sancho King of Majorca at Cerdagne; and because he had no Children, appointed D. Jayme his Brother Ferdinand's Son, his Heir. The King of Aragon pretended it belong'd to him by his Grandfather's Will, who was the first that erected that Kingdom. Jayme had the pos∣session, but the Aragonian was powerful; therefore at the instance of Philip the late King's Brother, by him appointed Governour during the Minority of D. Jayme, it was agreed, That D. Jayme should Marry Constance, Grandchild to the King of Aragon, who should give her in Dower, the Right he pretended to that Crown. Castile was not yet quiet, which caus'd King Alonso, tho' naturally merciful, to punish Rebels of Castile punished. some Heads of Mutineers, whence he got the Name of the Revengeful. D. John the Lord of Biscay, who aspir'd to marry the Lady Blanch for her great Estate, and design'd to call D. Alonso de la Cerda out of France, to stir up new Troubles, was the first that suffer'd. The
King upon pretence of making War against the Moors call'd D. John to him, and made some Overtures of giving him his Sister Ellenon in Marriage. He came to Court on the Day of all Saints in the year 1327, and being invited to a Feast, was there put to Death by the King's 1327. Order. One only Daughter he had then at Nurse, was carry'd to Bayonne, then in the Hands of the English. Mary his Mother, who was in the Monastery of Perales, sold all the Lord∣ship of Biscay to Garcilasso de la Vega. Yet the King being afterwards appeas'd, the Heiress of that Estate, was marry'd to D. John de Lara, and had the Lordship of Biscay restor'd to her. The Towns and Forts D. John had by Inheritance, which were above 80. were ei∣ther taken by Force, or Surrender'd, and annex'd to the Crown. D. John Manuel com∣manded in the Frontiers against the Moors, and tho he did not much confide in the King, yet he carry'd on the War vigorously. The Infidels had not long before surpriz'd the Ca∣stle of Rute, and design'd an Incursion into Andaluzia, under their General Osmin then re∣concil'd to the King. D. John ingag'd them near the River Guadalhorça, routed them, and killed a great Number. After this Victory he retir'd to his Estate much Discontented, for that the King put away his Daughter Constance, and marry'd Mary. Daughter, to the King of Portugal. This was highly resented by D. John, and the King of Aragon, Uncle to the Lady Constance. Alonso the IVth at this time was King of Aragon, his Father King Jayme the Jayme the IId. King of Aragon dies. Alonso the IVth suc∣ceeds. IId. dying at Barcelona, where he was bury'd, the Day after, D. John the Lord of Biscay was put to Death in Castile. The Lady Teresa the King's Daughter in Law dy'd 5 days before him at Zaragoça, and was there bury'd in the Monastery of S. Francis. D. Alonso who suc∣ceeded King Jayme, had by his Wife the Lady Teresa these Children; Peter, Jayme, and Constance, for four others dy'd in their Infancy. King Jayme ordain'd that the Principalities of Drago, Catalonia, and Valencia should never be parted. He was so great an Enemy to Law-Suits, that he for ever banish'd Ximeno Rada, a great Lawyer, by whose Contrivance many had suffer'd in their Estates. Charles the Fair, King of France and Navarre, dy'd at Bois de Vincennes, on the first of February, 1328. His Queen 3 Months after his Death was deliver'd 1328. of a Daughter call'd Blanch. By the Laws of France she could not inherit the Crown, there∣fore Occasion of Wars betwixt France and Eng∣land. a Son of Charles de Valois (who dyed two years before the King) call'd Philip, Cousin German to the three late Kings on the one side, and Edward King of England, as Son to the Lady Elizabeth, Sister to those three Kings on the other, pretended to that Crown. The States of the Kingdom according to the Salique Law, proclaim'd Philip de Valois, whence ensu'd bloody Wars betwixt those two Nations, and the Kings of England took the Title of Kings of France, and quarter'd the Flower de Luces in their Arms. Navarre was more Fortunate, for it was deliver'd from the Dominion of France. Joanna the Daughter of King Luis Hutin marry'd the Earl of Eureux, call'd Philip, and they were proclaim'd King and Queen of Na∣varre at Pamplona, by the general consent of all People, that Lady having the undoubted Right to the Crown by her Mother. The King of France made no Opposition, as well in regard to her Title, as because the Earl was his near Kinsman, being Great Grandson to S. Luis King of France. Before the Government was well setled, the People of Navarre mu∣tiny'd, and were so outragious against the Jews, that in only the Town of Estela 10000 are said to have been kill'd; perhaps there may be a mistake in the Numbers. CHAP. X. The Wars betwixt the Christians and Infidels. Rebellions in Castile. Aragon, Castile and Portugal joyn in League. The King and Queen of Navarre come into that Coun∣try, and return again to France. AT the same time in Castile great Preparations were made for the War with the Moors. Castile at War with the Moors. The Moorish King's tender Years, and the Distractions among the Infidels offer'd a good Opportunity of making some considerable Advantage. Besides that a Son of Ozmin, call'd Abraham the Drunkard, because he drank much Wine, had deserted to the Christians. With him came a good Body of Men. King Alonso went to Sevil, and from thence made Incursi∣ons, wasting the Enemy's Country. He took from them Olivera, Pruna and Ayamonte. Thus the Summer was spent, and Winter coming on, the Souldiers return'd Rich with Plunder, to Quarter in Sevil. D. Alonso Jofre the Admiral, brought thither the News to the King, that he had defeated 24 Galleys of the Moors, taken 3, and sunk 4. Some of these belong'd to Granada, the rest were of Asrick. Above 1200 Moors were kill'd and taken. Embassadors were sent to Treat about the King's Marriage. D. John Manuel seeing the King resolv'd to put away his Daughter, publickly renouncing his Allegiance, joyn'd in League with the Kings of Aragon and Granada. Besides he made Inroads from Chinchill and Almansa, two strong Places wasting all the Country. At the same time the King at Sevil gave the Title of Earl of Trastamara, Lemos, and Sarria to Alvar Nun̄ez Osorio his great Favourite, an Ho∣nour had not been given in Castile for many Years past. The Ceremony was very odd. Three Sops were put into a Cup of Wine, and set before them; the King and Earl complimented one another three Times about taking the first; at last the King took one and the Earl ano∣ther.
The Earl was allow'd in the Camp to keep a Kitchin apart for his Company, and in the Army to have Colours with his own Devise and Coat of Arms. His Patent being sign'd and read, all that were present cry'd, Let the Earl Live. This was the manner of creating an Earl in those Days. At Cordova the King caus'd John Ponce to be Beheaded, for that he had not obey'd his Orders in restoring the Castle of Cabra to the Knights of Santiago, from whom he took it during the late Troubles, besides he was accus'd as a Seditious Person. Ma∣ny Citizens of Cordova suffer'd the same Punishment for the same, or other like Crimes. Gar∣cilasso de la Vega was murder'd at Soria in the Church at Mass, by the contrivance of the No∣bility. The King was much concern'd, and had sent him not long before from Sevil to thwart the Designs of D. John Manuel. Escalona a small Town in the Kingdom of Toledo mu∣tiny'd, and was for joyning with the Rebels. In Castile there were Uproars, particularly Several Places in Castile Re∣bel. Toro, Zamora, and Valladolid had reyolted. The chief Contriver of this Rebellion was Her∣nan Rodriguez de Balboa, Grand Prior of the Order of S. John. His Pretence was the Great∣ness of the new Earl, Alvar Osorio and Joseph the Jew. The King lay'd Siege to Escalona, but hearing the News of Castile, was forc'd to quit it. He came to Valladolid, where they would not admit him unless he cast off the Earl Osorio, which was accordingly done. This Affront was so hainously resented by Osorio, that he Rebell'd and joyn'd with D. John Manuel, which prov'd his utter Ruin. Ramiro Flores de Guzman counterfeiting he fled from the King, gain'd his Friendship, and finding an Opportunity, stabb'd him. The King presently seiz'd all his Lands and Treasure, and declar'd him a Traytor, no body appearing upon Summons to Vindicate him. Joseph the Jew was protected by his Meanness, and general Contempt of that Nation. The King was married at Cuidad Rodrigo, where with him of Portugal he con∣triv'd to draw away the King of Aragon from the Interest of D. John Manuel. To this pur∣pose they offer'd him Ellenor the King of Castile's Sister in Marriage, which he accepted of, and the Lady was sent into Aragon, his first Wife Teresa being dead before. D. John the Patriach, and Arch-bishop of Tarragona went as far as Alfaro to meet her. The Ceremony was perform'd at Taraçona, the King of Castile being present with him of Aragon; this was at the beginning of the Year 1329. To make this League the firmer, Blanch the Daughter of Prince, Peter who was kill'd by the Moors, was contracted to Peter the King of Portugal's el∣dest 1329 Son. The Three Kings agreed with Joynt Forces to make War upon the Moors, till Accord betwixt Aragon, Castile and Portugal. they had totally driven them out of Spain. Also that none of them should shelter or protect the Rebels to any of the other. D. John Manuel having thus lost the Protection of Aragon, to make the best Interest he could, marry'd the Daughter of Ferdinand de la Cerda. D. John de Lara likewise marry'd Mary the Daughter of D. John, Lord of Biscay, hoping with their Joynt Forces to recover that Province which the King had taken from that Lady. D. John de Lara, and D. John Manuel were in open Rebellion, others consented underhand, as D. Peter de Castro, and D. John Alonso de Albuquerque, Son to Hernan Sanchez, and Grandson to King Denis of Portugal. The greatest of all was D. John de Haro, Lord of Cameros. Great part of the Kingdom follow'd these Rebellious Noblemen. This Year the new King and Queen of Navarre came to Pamplona, and were receiv'd upon these Conditions. That no Mony should be coin'd during the Term of 12 Years, because if was then usual to Stamp base Metal; That Foreigners should not be put into places of Trust; That it should not be in their Power to sell or change the Kingdom, or alienate the Revenue; That their first Son, as soon as he came to Age should be King, and take upon him the Government, and his Fa∣ther Philip should allow 100000 Crowns for his Expences. The King and Queen swore to the Performance of these Articles, and were thereupon Crown'd in the Cathedral on the Affairs of Navarre. 5th of March. Great Joy was express'd by all sorts of People; for that the Kingdom was restored to Princes of their own, after it had been 55 Years subject to Foreigners. These Princes had 3 Sons, Charles, Philip, and Luis, who had all great Possessions, and as many Daughters, Joanna, Mary, and Blanch, who also were well Marry'd. At this time the Flem∣mings were in Rebellion, and had imprison'd Luis their Earl, who getting loose was by them besieg'd in Gant, whence he fled to the King of France for Protection. That King sent Em∣bassadors to Flanders, but they proving unsuccessful, he had recourse to Arms. Many Princes went to that War, and among them Philip King of Navarre. The two Armies met near Cassel. After some Skirmishes, one day in August, in the heat of the Day, the Flemmings surpriz'd the French Camp, gain'd their Works, and came to the King's Tent, killing ma∣ny before they could defend themselves. The King himself was in Danger, till the Forces gathering from the other part of the Camp, the Flemmings spent with the Heat were put to the rout. After this Victory, the Earl was easily restor'd. King Philip return'd to his King∣dom, which he found full of Robbers, and other Outlaws. Hereupon new Laws were En∣acted, which are commonly call'd Fuero Nuevo, that is, The new Charter. The Affairs of the Kingdom being setled, the King and Queen return'd to France, upon pretence of Assisting the French King, their Kinsman in his Wars against the English, but in Reality the Love of their Country and Riches of France drew them, which caus'd them to despise the Poverty of Na∣varre. Henry Soliberte a Frenchman was left to Govern the Kingdom. Castile was ingag'd in Civil Discord, and the War with the Moors at the same time, be∣sides great want of Mony. The Cortes or Parliament met at Madrid, where it was Enact∣ed, Acts of the Cortes at Madrid. That no Man should have more than one Employment in the King's Houshold; That no
new Taxes should be rais'd without the Consent of the Cortes; That no Benefices should be given to Foreigners. Mony was easily granted, because the Moors had taken Priego, a Town belonging to the Knights of Calatrava, the Governour delivering it up without Bloodshed. To pacify D. John Manuel, his Daughter Constance till then kept in the Nature of a Prisoner at Toro, was deliver'd up to him. Joseph the Jew being call'd in Question for the King's Revenue, whereof he was Treasurer, could not make good his Accounts, and was therefore depriv'd of that Place. It was ordain'd, that none who was not a Christian should for the future enjoy that Imployment. Also that the Treasurer should not be call'd Almojarise, a Word odious, because Moorish, but for the future should have no other Name but that of Treasurer. The King of Portugal sent 500 Horse for the War against the Moors. The King of Aragon, and D. John Manuel promis'd to invade them with Forces of their own. D. John had the Command of the Frontiers of Mur∣cia, and Peter Lopez de Ayala was his Lieutenant. The King of Castile march'd into the Kingdom of Granada, and lay'd Siege to Tebas de Hardales, a strong Town, in the year 1330. Ozmin lay with 6000 Horse at Turon, 3 Leagues from Tebas, and did great harm 1330. to the Christian Forragers, but durst not hazard a Battle. Mean while the Christians took the Town of Pruna. Ozmin sent 3000 Horse to the River, which runs near, to En∣gage the Christians on that Side, whilst he made himself Master of their Camp. The King having Notice of it, sent a strong Body to meet the Moors at the River, and stay'd himself with the rest in the Camp. The Moors being put to Flight, our Men pur∣su'd Over∣throw of the Moors. Several Places taken from them. them so furiously, they entred their Camp, and plunder'd all their Baggage. Thus the People of Tebas having no hopes of Relief, surrendred in August, Articling only for Life. Canete and Priego, and many other Places did the same. These Actions were the more Honourable to the King, for that neither D. John Manuel, nor the King of Aragon assisted him, the one not being well pacify'd, and the other alledging for his Excuse, that the Genoeses infested his Coasts; besides the Portugues Horse were return'd Home. This was new Cause of Offence against D. John Manuel, and therefore Peace was concluded with the Moors, upon Condition they should pay 12000 Ducats yearly. That done Trade was restor'd. All things were the sooner agreed because the King at Sevil began wholly to devote himself to the Lady Ellenor de Guzman, and Treated her as if she were his Wife. This Lady was Happy in Birth, Riches and Beauty, she was the Daughter of Pero Nun̄ez de Guzman, and Wife to John de Velasco lately Deceas'd. By her the King had many Children, but particularly one who came to be King. Ozmin the Moorish Commander dy'd at Granada, leaving two Sons, Abraham, and Abuzebet. The Moorish King went away into Africk to bring over Forces, with which he began the Bloody War we shall soon speak of. The End of the Fifteenth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The Sixteenth BOOK. CHAP. I. The King of Granada goes into Africk. Abomelique passes over into Spain. The War with the Moors. A Truce concluded. Alonso de la Cerda rightful King of Castile, submits to King Alonso the Possessor. AFrick is the Third Part of the formerly known World. It is bounded on the West with the Atlantick Ocean, on the East, by Egypt and the Red Sea, on the North, by the Mediterranean, where it is broadest, and from thence running to∣wards Descripti∣on of A∣frick. the South, groweth still narrower, in the nature of a Pyramis, till it ends in the Cape of Good Hope. The Inhabitants differ in Laws, Customs, Religions, Habit and Colour. The inner parts are inhabited by the Ethiopians and Blacks. Next is Lybia, then Numidia, divided by Mount Atlas. Along the Coast of the Mediterranean, are the People peculiarly call'd Africans, and Moors, which is Barbary. The Country bears Corn, and Feeds Cattle, but has little Wood; it seldom Rains there, and there are but few Rivers and Springs. The People are Healthy, Laborious, and Active. In War they are more successful by their Numbers, than Valour their chief strength consists in Horse. Here Alboacen the IXth; King of Morocco, of the Family of the Merines, posses'd a mighty Empire, having subdu'd all the neighbouring Princes, and was the only Prince that could aspire to the Crown of Spain, be∣ing terrible to the Christians, a Man of noted Valour, and endu'd with many other good natural Parts. He was at War with Botexesin, King of Tremecen, which War he had as an Inheritance from his Father. This was the only thing that hinder'd him from invading Spain. Maho∣met King of Granada being of himself too weak to withstand the Christians, sail'd into Africk, to perswade Alboacen to joyn with him in the attempt of conquering Spain. At Fez he was Mahomet K. of Gra∣nada in A∣frick. nobly entertain'd by the African King, and all former Animosities laid aside, for he was a mortal Enemy to Ozmin and his Family. Both Kings strove to out-do one another, in Courtesy and Liberality. After these Formalities being come to treat of their Affairs, the King of Granada earnestly press'd the African to joyn with him, that they might restore the Honour of their Fore-Fathers, in Spain, and offer'd freely to yield him all that should be taken, contenting himself only with the Pleasure of Revenge. Alboacen promis'd, as soon as the Wars in Africk were ended, to go over in Person, and the mean while was willing to send his Son Abomelique with a good Body of Horse, as a Pledge that he design'd to follow. While these Things were contriving in Africk, the Moors of Granada, under the command of Reduan, and Abucebet, made an incursion into Murcia, wasted all the Country, carri'd away 1200 Captives, and burnt the Town of Guardamar so call'd, because it lies upon the Mouth of the River Segura. King Mahomet being come to Granada. D. John Manuel and the other Rebels, enter'd into a League with him, which was concluded by Peter Carillo, who pass'd between them. Their Hearts were so full of Venom, that they had no respect to Loyalty or Christianity. Elizabeth Queen of Portugal was still living, and tho very aged, spar'd no Labour that might conduce to the publick Good. She prevail'd with the King of Castile to meet her at Alonso de la Cerda rightful K. of Castile, submits to Alonso. Badajoz, but the interview prov'd fruitless. As the King return'd from this City, D. Alonso de la Cerda who had so long with undoubted Right, strugl'd for the Crown, met him unexpect∣edly at Burgillos, and kiss'd his Hand in token of Submission. The King was extreamly pleas'd, and assign'd him Lands to live upon. D. Alonso in France had marry'd a Lady of the Blood Roy∣al, call'd Madelfa, by whom he had two Sons Luis and John. Luis the eldest, came with him in∣to Spain; John, on account of his Kindred with the King of France, was by him created Duke of Angoulesme, and Constable of France, which was the next Dignity to the King, in Mar∣tial Affairs; now in Spain it is but a bare Title. The King came to Talavera, in the King∣dom of Toledo. Santollala was a Town half way betwixt Toledo and Talavera; it belong'd to D. John Manuel, and thence some wicked Men us'd to break out and commit Murders and Robberies. These being apprehended by the King's Order, were put to death. Such an∣other Example was made at Toledo, whence the King went to Madrid, Segovia and Vallado∣lid.
Here the Lady Ellenor was brought to bed of a Son, who was call'd Peter, to whom the Lordship of Aguilar del Campo was given. There being great scarcity of Mony, a base sort of Coin was then stamp'd, call'd Cornade, which caus'd all Provisions to grow excessive dear, and Trade to cease. At Burgos, Embassadors came to the King from that part of Biscay, call'd Alava, offering him the Lordship of that Country, which till then was free, and go∣vern'd by its own Laws excu Vitoria and Trevin̄o, that were subject to Castile. In the Plains of Arriaga, where they us'd of old to hold their Assemblies, they made their Sub∣mission to the King,  themselves up voluntarily to him, and were allow'd the Char∣ter of Logron̄o, and all their ancient Priviledges, which are in Force to this day, so that they enjoy a sort of Liberty, and are exipted from all Taxes. Publick Instruments of these Acts, are preserv'd under King Alonso's Hand, dated at Vitoria on the second of April, 1332. Here the King intistuted a new Order of Knighthood, call'd of the Belt, from one 1332 those Knights wore, about Four Fingers broad, of Colour Red or Crimson on the right Order of the Belt instituted. Shoulder, and falling under the left Arm. None were admitted to this Order, but Men of noble Extraction, who had serv'd 10 Years in the Court or Army. The King himself was Master of the Order, which was long held in great esteem, but in time fell to nothing: So that only the bare memory of it remains. The King visited the Church of St. James the Apostle at Compostela, was there Knighted, and at Burgos both he and the Queen were Crown'd. The Queen for modesty sake was not anointed; besides, that she was with Child. Many Gentlemen arm'd, Capape were Knighted, and it was ordain'd that for the future, all Persons should receive that Honour, in that posture. Two Things disturb'd the Publick Joy, one was, that Prince Peter of Portugal began to talk of putting away the Lady Blanch. The other, that he was about Marrying Constance the Daughter of D. John Manuel. The Lady Blanch was Sickly and Barren. Fernan Rodriguez de Balboa Great Prior of S. John, was the promoter of this Design, advising the Queen to forward it in Revenge, because her Husband was wholly devoted to other Women. At this time the King had by the Queen his Son Ferdinand, who if he had liv'd had been King, and by his Mistress the Lady Ellenor, he had D. Sancho, to whom he gave the Town of Ledesma. Both were born at the same time in Valladolid. Abomelique the King of Morocco's Son, as had been agree'd with him of Granada, pass'd the Streights of Gibraltar, and at Algezira, took the Title of King of that Place, and Ronda. He brought out of Africk 7000 Horse. At the beginning of the Year 1333, 1333 D. Ximeno de Luna Arch-Bishop of Toledo, held a Synod at Alcalà de Henares. Abomelique in War with the Moors. February laid Siege to Gibraltar, and storm'd it with all manner of Engines. The King made some stay in old Castile, an appease the Tumults there, but sent before Godfrey Tenorlo, the Admiral and the Masters or the Military Orders, to relieve the besieg'd, who were in great want, for Vasco Perez the Governour, through Covetousness, was unprovided of all Necessa∣ries. The King of Granada made an incursson into the Territory of Cordova, wasted the Country, took Cabra, ras'd the Castle, and carry'd away all the Inhabitants into Slavery, they having been betray'd to him by their Governour.  after suffering great Hardships was surrender'd, upon condition the Garison and Townsmen might March away. Vasco Perez the Governour, fearing his King's displeasure, went over into Africk. The King having pacify'd the Mutineers, march'd to Sovil, but too late to relieve Gibraltar; which he understood at Xeres, was surrendred; yet he resolv'd to attempt the Recovery of it be∣fore the Moors could Victual and Repair it. D. Jayme de Exerica was here with a Body of Aragonians. Near Gibraltar there happen'd several Skirmishes, but neither side was for ha∣zarding a Battle. Provisions growing scarce among the Christians, many deferted and were taken by the Moors, who laid wait in the Passes. The King of Granada joyn'd Abo∣melique, who being thus reinforc'd, and finding the Enemy much weaken'd, drew out twice, and offer'd Battle. But the King intrench'd himself before the Town strongly, drawing a Line quite round, which ended upon the Sea. Mean while D. John Manuel, and D. John de Lara with their Followers, having made a League with the King of Aragon, did great Harm in Castile. D. John de Haro Lord of Cameros, had joyn'd them. These Things oblig'd the King to desist from his Enterprise upon Gibraltar, and conclude a Truce with the Moors for Four Years, the King of Granada being still oblig'd to pay the usual Tribute. CHAP. II. The Moors of Granada murder Mahomet their King. Wars among all the Christian Kings of Spain. Alonso King of Aragon dies. Fresh Rebellions in Castile. The Portugues Fleet-beaten by the . THE Kings of Castile and Granada, after concluding the Truce, dined together, and strove to outdo one another in making Rich Presents, which prov'd the ruin of the later. The King of Castile went to Sevil, Abomelique to Algezira, and he of Granada to Malaga. Mahomet King of Granada murder'd. There the Sons of Ozmin, hating the King for his entertaining Friendship with the Christians, conspir'd with one Abmar of the antient Blood Royal of Granada, and murder'd him on the
20th of August. Reduan a Gentleman of great Note, who had been Governour of Granada, and had no hand in this Treason, set up Joseph Bulhugia, Brother to the deceas'd, which dis∣pleas'd many, because there was another Brother Elder than he, call'd Ferrachen. Thus the Moors were in confusion, D. Gonçalo and Ferdinand de Aguilar, two Brothers, Lords of Mon∣tilla and Aguilar, went over to the New King, being disoblig'd by their own. Incursions were made upon the Borders, and the Truce lately concluded, violated. More mischief had ensu'd, but that Abomelique was call'd into Africk by his Father to serve against Tremeçen. He being gone, a Truce was again concluded in the beginning of the year 1334. with the New 1334 King for four years; yet so that the Moors were freed from the Tribute they used to pay, the King of Castile being wholly bent upon subduing his Rebels. At this time the Lady Ellenor de Guzman the King's Mistriss, was brought to Bed of two Sons at a Birth, which were Henry and Fredrick, of whom we shall have much occasion to speak. In the Spring the King return'd to Ca∣stile, was at Segovia, and thence went to Valladolid. The Rebellious Nobles not being able to Rebels sup∣press'd in Castile. maintain a War, were hard press'd, and most of the Towns belonging to them taken, the greatest part of Biscay submitting to the King, to whom they swore Fidelity under an Old Tree at Guernica, as is their Custom. Some few Places impregnable by Nature, still held out for D. John de Lara. D. John de Haro was beheaded as a Traytor in his own Town of Agoncillo, and his Estate Confiscate, except the Town of Cameros, given to his Brothers D. Alvaro and D. Alonso, that so Noble a Family might not wholly perish. The Governour of the Castle of Iscar shut the Gates against the King, and being taken, lost his Head for the same. About the end of August the Queen was deliver'd of a Son at Burgos, who was call'd Peter; and his Brother Ferdinand dying, came to be King of Castile. By the Lady Ellenor the King had another Son call'd Ferdinand. In Aragon two Brothers of that King dy'd one after another, one was D. Jayme Master of the Knights of Montesa, who had renounc'd his Right to the Crown, and D. John Archbishop of Tarragona, in whose place Arnaldus Cascomes Bishop of Lerida succeeded. The King of Aragon by reason of his indisposition, committed the whole care of the Government to his eldest Son Prince Peter. Queen Ellenor who govern'd the King, through her importunity obtain'd of him several Towns for her Sons Ferdinand and John, to the prejudice of Prince Peter, and as was said, contrary to the King's Oath, who had sworn not to alienate any thing belonging to the Crown. This was the ground of great Hatred betwixt the Mother and Son-in-Law, which caus'd many Tumults in the Kingdom. The Queen had a meeting with her Brother of Castile, and he promis'd to support her, as did D. John de Exerica, and his Brother Peter, who were both of her Party. At the beginning of the year 1335, D. John Manuel, terrify'd by the example, of D. John de Haro 1335 and D. John de Lara, was reconcil'd to the King, to the great Joy of all People; for Christian Kings of Spain at variance. which there were publick Sports, and particularly a notable Turnament. But this Joy was not lasting; for the King of Portugal was resolv'd to put away his Wife Blanch, and Marry the Lady Constance, and rathe hazard a War, than not have his Will. The King of Aragon's Eldest Son was contracted to Mary, Daughter to the King of Navarre, she eing preferr'd before her Sister Joanna the Elder, to inherit the Crown, in case that King dy'd without Issue Male. Henry Viceroy of Navarre contriv'd these Affairs, which were very displeasing to the King of Castile, against, whom they seem'd to be levell'd; for the Prince of Aragon made this League with Navarre in hatred to his Mother-in-Law. The Navarrois surpriz'd the Monastery of Fitero, apper∣taining to Castile. Complaint being made to the King of Aragon, he answer'd, by reason of his Indisposition, he could not govern his Son. Thus the War broke out. Martin Portocar∣rero was sent with a great Army into Navarre. They came to a Battel near Tudela, which was very Bloody; but the Navarrois were defeated, and a great number of them drowned in the River Ebro. D. Michael Zapata the Aragonian General, was absent, fortifying Fitero, but Castilans overthrow the Arago∣nians and Navarrois. appear'd on the Neighbouring Hills when the Battel was almost over. His coming caus'd the Navarrois to Raily, and the Battel was renew'd; yet the Aragonians, tho' they came in fresh, were put to Flight, and their General taken by the Castillians. The Slaughter was not so great as expected, because the Castilians were tir'd, and Night drew on; besides that, the Enemy differ'd not in Language, which sav'd many. On the other side, the Biscayners under their General Lope de Lescan̄o, having destroy'd all the Territory of Pamplona, took the Castle of Ʋnsa. Thus the Insolency of the Navarrois was check'd. At that time the King of Castile lay sick of an Ague at Palencia, and taking Compassion of the Navarrois, order'd his General to March out of that Country; who brought with him Prince Peter of Aragon's Royal Stand∣ard. Gaston Earl of Faux, march'd to the Assistance of Navarre; and their Forces being joyn'd, they laid Siege to Logron̄o, the chief City on the Frontiers. The Neigh∣bouring People, and Inhabitants of that Place, gave the Enemy Battel, but were defeated, and forc'd to retire into the City, Ruy Diaz de Gao mander, and a Native of Logron̄o, with only three Soldiers, made good a Bridge against the whole Army of the Enemy, left they should enter the Town together with the Citizens. He was kill'd, his Companions came off, and defended the Town; for the Navarrois finding great opposition, rais'd the Siege, and return'd home. John Archbishop of Reimes going on Pilgrimage to Santiago at this time, in his way made a Peace betwixt these two Crowns. Three Embassies came at once to the King of Castile, from the Kings Edward of England, Philip of France, and Alboacen of Morocco. The last sent Rich Presents, and desir'd to have the Truce renew'd. The English
offer'd a Wife for Prince Peter, which was refus'd by reason of his tender Age. This in the Year 1335. Soon after at the beginning of the following Year, D. Alonso King of Aragon 1336. dy'd at Barcelona. He was a just, merciful and religious Prince, and was therefore call'd Alonso the IVth K. of Aragon dyes. the Pious. He was more Fortunate during his Father's Reign than his own, and that by rea∣son of his continual Indisposition. To D. Jayme his youngest Son, by his first Wife he left the Earldom of Ʋrgel, and Prince Peter was Heir to the Crown. To his Sons by the 2d Wife he left other Possessions, as has been said above. Queen Ellenor fearing her Son in Law, went away to Albarazin, being a place of great Strength, and near the Frontiers of Castile. D. John, and Peter de Exerica follow'd her. A Storm threatened Castile from Portugal, and no great Confidence could be repos'd in the Loyalty of D. John Manuel, and D. John de Lara; the former was much troubl'd at the delays of the Marriage with Portugal, but fear'd to stir in it without the King's leave lest he should seize his great Patrimony in Castile. D. Peter Fernandez de Castro, and D. John Alonso de Albuquerque openly rebell'd and solicited the Rebellion of Castro and Albu∣querque in Castile. King of Portugal to make War in Castile. The King took several places belonging to D. John de Lara, and besieg'd him in the City Lerma, all possible Means were us'd to enter the Place or bring the Townsmen to deliver up D. John, but they stood firm to him. D. John Manuel in order to relieve the Place, went to Pen̄afiel a Town of his own, and narrowly escap'd being taken by the King. D. John Albuquerque submitted himself. The King of Portugal sent Embassadors to perswade him of Castile to raise the Siege, but they did nothing, and their King assembling his Forces, lay'd Siege to Badajoz. Alonso de Sousa sent by him with a Par∣ty to plunder the Country, was routed and many of his Men kill'd and taken, which mov'd the Portugues to raise the Siege, and return home. Lerma having lost all Hopes of Relief was surrender'd. Nevertheless D. John de Lara was restor'd to the King's Favour, and to all his Estate in Biscay. Only Lerma was Dismantled, as a Punishment for its Rebellion. This year the King of Morocco added the Kingdom of Tremeçen to his Dominions, having over∣thrown and kill'd that King, which rais'd the Hopes of the Moors, and was a new Terror to the Christians. The King of Castile labour'd in vain to gain his Nobles by fair means. He kept his Christ∣mas Rebels of Castile harden'd. in the Year 1337. at Valladolid. There he made D. John de Lara his Standard-Bearer, and pardon'd D. John Manuel a false Man, who Treated with both the Kings of Castile and Aragon at once, that he might always have one to fly to. The Enmity betwixt the King of 1337. Aragon and his Mother in Law continu'd, and tho he was Solicited by an Embassador, to an Accommodation, he only gave fair Words. The King of Castile met his Sister at Ayllon, and there at her Request, order'd D. James de Haro to make an Incursion into Aragon, with the Forces of Soria, Molina, Cuenca, and that Neighbourhood. Queen Ellenor went to meet the King at Madrid, he having appointed a great Rendezvouz of his Forces at Badajoz, in or∣der to make War upon Portugal. Now was Born to the King, by the Lady Ellenor, ano∣ther Son call'd D. Tello. By the way of Badajoz, the Castilians broke furiously into Portugal, and Harrass'd all the Country, but the King falling Sick of a Fever at Olivença, was oblig'd in June to return to Sevil. About the same time Godfrey, Admiral of Castile having scour'd all the Coast, not far from Lisbon, fought the Portugues Fleet, commanded by Pecanus, a Genoese. At first the Portugueses had the best, and took two Castilian Galleys, but their Castilians over∣throw the Portuguses at Sea. Admiral being soon after taken, and his Flag lower'd, the Enemy was soon put to Flight, 6 of their Galleys sunk, and 8 taken, with their Admiral and his Son Charles. This Victo∣ry was so great, that the King himself went out to meet the Admiral at his Return to Se∣vil. The Arch-Bishop of Reims, Embassador from the King of France, and the Great Ma∣ster of Rhodes, from the Pope were here endeavouring to conclude a Peace, but effected no∣thing, and the King of Castile being recover'd, broke into Portugal again through Algarve, where formerly were the Turdetani, whilst the Portugues with whom his Subjects were high∣ly offended, made the War upon Galicia. The King of Castile having met no Army of the Enemy in Autumn, return'd to Sevil. CHAP. III. The Death of Frederick King of Sicily. A Truce betwixt Castile and Portugal. The Death of Abomelique, and defeat of his Army. Peace betwixt Castile and Aragon. A Synod at Barcelona. ON the 25th of June 1337, dy'd Frederick King of Sicily, of a great Age, and Famous for 1337. the War, he long maintain'd against Powerful Princes. He lies bury'd at Catanea. His Frederick King of Sicily dies. Son Peter succeeded him in the Throne. The Dukedoms of Athens and Neopatria, he left to his 2d Son William, and other Legacies to his 3d Son John. His four Daughters he total∣ly excluded from inheriting the Crown, contrary to what had before, and was afterwards us'd in that Kingdom. D. Ximeno de Luna, Arch-bishop of Toledo dy'd on the 16th of No∣vember, and was bury'd in his own Cathedral. Giles Alvarez de Cuenca, otherwise call'd Al∣bornoz, at the Instance of the King was chosen to succeed him. This Prelate was Famous for
his Learning, Piety, and Virtue. Being created Cardinal, he was very Serviceable to the Popes. He founded a College at Bolonia, in Lombardy, for 4 Chaplains, and 30 Students, all Spaniards. Besides he left to the Chapter of Toledo the Town of Paracuellos, with an Ob∣ligation of paying a Pension to the Church of Villaviciosa, built by himself. The Arch-bi∣shop of Reimes, and Great Master of Rhodes went from place to place exhorting the Kings of Spain to Peace. It was agreed he of Castile should go to Merida to Treat, there a Truce was concluded for one Year, in the beginning of that which was of our Lord 1338, but no Peace could be Established. 1338. Great Preparations for War were now making in Spain, and it was much labour'd to set∣tle a General Peace in the Country, because Fame which always is greater than Truth spread Preparati∣ons for War. it abroad, that Albohaçen King of Morocco design'd to land in Valencia with an innumerable Multitude, bringing over their Wives and Children, in order to settle in Spain. The King of Aragon entertain'd the English Embassadors, who came to settle Peace, with Ambiguous, yet fair Words. On the 20th of July he marry'd Mary, Daughter to the King of Navarre, having deferred it so long, by reason she was not of Age. An Embassy was sent to the Pope, begging he would order the Tenths of Ecclesiastical Revenues granted for carrying on the War against the Moors to be paid according to the full Value, because they were worth lit∣tle as they were in the Ancient Records. This in Aragon. The King of Castile was gone to Burgos to hold the Cortes or Parliament, where Laws were established to regulate Excess in Dyet and Cloathing. Godfrey Tenorio the Admiral was sent to the Streights, to obstruct the Passage of the Moors. From Burgos at the Request of his Sister, the King went to Cuenca, and with him D. John de Lara, and D. John Manuel, who were now reconcil'd to him. Thither came D. Peter de Açagra from the King of Aragon, to propose an Allyance against the Moors, and offer the 3d part of the Fleet that should be requisite to hinder their Passage. The Castillian answer'd, that the Friendship of the Aragonian would be very grateful to him when he had given Satisfaction to his Sister Ellenor, in the Complaints she had against him. In the Cortes of Aragon held at Daroca, Prince Peter the King of Aragon's Uncle, and D. John Peace be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon. Manuel were chosen Arbitrators to decide these Differences, and they agreed that D. John de Exerica should be pardon'd, and all that had been granted to the Queen and her Sons by the late King confirm'd to them. It happen'd fortunately, that D. Peter de Luna, Arch-bi∣shop of Zaragoça was then at Rome, who might have obstructed this Agreement. The King of Castile sign'd these Articles at Madrid, and Queen Ellenor with her Children return'd to Aragon, where they were receiv'd with great Pomp. The Arch-bishop of Reimes, the Great Master of Rhodes, and Arch-bishop of Braga, Embassador from Portugal, were dismiss'd be∣cause they demanded Constance the Daughter of D. John Manuel, for the Prince of Portugal. Vasco Rodriguez Cornade, Master of the Knights of Santiago dying, his Nephew Vasco Lopez, was by the Knights chosen to succeed him, at which the King was offended because he de∣sign'd that Honour for his son Frederick. Many Objections were made against the new Ma∣ster and his Election, whereupon he fled to Portugal, and was therefore depos'd, and D. Alon∣so Melendez de Guzman, Uncle by the Mother's Side to Frederick the King's Son chosen Ma∣ster. D. Ruy Perez Master of Alcantara was also depos'd, and D. Gonçalo Martinez elected in his Place. A mighty Army was gathering about Sevil, for the War with the Moors. The King of Castile us'd all Expedition, because he understood Abomelique was come out of Africk with 5000 Horse, and the time of the Truce was now expir'd. All the Territory of Ante∣quera, Territo∣ries of the Moors ra∣vaged. Archidona and Ronda was wasted, and a great Multitude of Moors who came out of the last, and fell upon our Rear, routed by D. John de Lara, D. John Manuel, and the Ma∣ster of Santiago, who Commanded there. In the Pursuit, many Moors who had fled to the Ridges of the Mountains, cast themselves headlong for fear of the Christians. This done the Army return'd to Sevil, and was dispers'd into Garrisons to guard the Frontiers. At this time came Gilaberto Admiral of Aragon, with 12 Galleys to joyn the Fleet of Castile, and guard the Mouth of the Streights. There was great want of Mony. In September the King went to the Cortes he had Summon'd to meet at Madrid, leaving the Master of Santiago to Command as General, and other Noblemen in other Posts. Great store of Corn was lay'd up at Nebrixa, near the Mouth of Guadalquivir, which the Moors, knowing the King was gone, thought to make themselves Masters of. Our Men tho' it was the dead of Winter, drew out of their Garrisons. Abomelique incamp'd near Xerez, and sent 1500 Horse to Nebrixa. The Town defended it self, but all the Country was destroy'd. Fernan Perez Portocarrero, Alvar Perez de Gusman, and D. Peter Ponce de Leon, with a small Party march'd Day and Night, and near Arcos overtook the 1500 Moors, who mov'd slowly by reason of their great Booty. They charg'd them so furiously, that few escap'd being kill'd or taken, and the whole Prey was recover'd. Incourag'd with this Success, they resolv'd to fall upon Abome∣lique, 10000 Moors slain with their King. and the main Army of the Moors. Abomelique was marching towards Arcos in great Disorder, without any advanc'd Parties. The Christians at break of Day, fell on with ex∣traordinary Bravery, 500 Moors made some Resistance upon passing a River, but our Men being over the Infidels soon fled and were entirely Overthrown. Abomelique in the Confusi∣on flying afoot was kill'd in the Croud, his Cousin Aliatar dy'd in the Battle, and 10000 Moors were slain, as the Report went. The Christians having taken all the Enemie's Tents, and Baggage, return'd Joyful, and with Honour, after obtaining two Victories to their Quar∣ters.
This year the Arch-bishop of Tarragona held a provincial Synod at Barcelona, and the Synod at Barcelona. Body of Saint Eulalia was in solemn Procession translated to a more honourable Tomb. The King of Aragon went to Avignon to do Homage to the Pope for the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica. CHAP. IV. A new Invasion of Spain, by Alboacen King of Morocco, with 470000 Moors; he Besieges Tarifa, and is there routed with the loss of 200000 Men, by the Kings of Ca∣stile and Portugal. Three Defeats of the Infidels at Sea. THE Death of Abomelique was much lamented in Africk, and stir'd up an earnest desire of Revenge. Great Levies were made throughout all that Empire, in order to in∣vade 470000 Moors in∣vade Spain. Spain. Thus 70000 Horse, and 400000 Foot were rais'd, the greatest Army ever yet enter'd Spain. Besides the Moors fitted out 250 Ships, and 70 Galleys. Whilst the King of Castile was afflicted with the Thoughts of making Head against that Multitude, another Mis∣fortune increas'd his Trouble. D. Gonzalo Martinez or Nunez, Master of Calatrava was im∣peach'd of several hainous Crimes, and being Summon'd to appear and answer for himself, fled to the King of Granada. Besides the Admiral of Aragon making a descent near Algezira was kill'd in a Skirmish with the Moors. Nevertheless in the Spring the King went into An∣daluzia, and besieg'd the Master of Calatrava in Valencia, a Town within the Bounds of the Antient Lusitania. He was taken, condemn'd as a Traytor, Beheaded and Burnt for a Ter∣ror to others. D. Nun̄o Chamizo, a Man of known-worth was chosen in his Place. Alboa∣cen began to send over his Army into Spain, and had Landed 3000 Horse, who made an In∣cursion into the Territories of Xerez, Arcos, and Medina Sidonia. As they return'd loaded with Booty, and fearing no Danger, the Garrison of Xerez fell upon them unexpectedly, recover'd the Prey, and kill'd 2000. Five Months being spent in passing over all the Moorish Army, at last they Randezvouz'd near Algezira. The People lay'd the blame upon Tenorio The Chri∣stian Fleet destroy'd by the Moors. the Admiral of Castile, and said he might have hinder'd their Passage, which Reflection his Great Spirit disdaining to bear, he adventur'd to Fight the Enemy's whole Fleet, but was overthrown, all his Squadron lost, himself kill'd, and only 5 Galleys escap'd to Tarifa. The King much perplex'd about the dangerous Posture of Affairs in Spain, assembled all the Pre∣lates and Nobility at Sevil, where he was making Preparations for the War, lay'd before them the Condition of the Kingdom, the greatness of the Danger, and want of Mony, and then withdrew that they might debate with more Liberty. Some were positive for making Peace with the Moors at any rate, being in no Condition to withstand them. Others resolute∣ly oppos'd that Opinion, and would hear of nothing but carrying on the War, since no Peace could be then Honourable or Secure. This advice prevail'd, and it was resolv'd to sollicite the Kings of Aragon and Portugal to joyn their Forces with Castile. The Fleet was refitted at Sanlucar, and the Command of it given to D. Alonso Artiz Calderon, Great Prior of S. John. The King of Aragon sent his Fleet, commanded by Peter de Moncada, 15 Galleys came from Genoa, at the Charge of the King of Castile. John Martinez de Leiva went Em∣bassador to the Pope, and obtain'd the Croizade for all those that serv'd three Months at their own Expence. To oblige the King of Portugal he of Castile consented that the Lady Constance, Daughter to D. John Manuel, should be sent to Portugal, and marry'd to Prince Peter, which was accordingly perform'd at Ebora. Her Portion 300000 Ducats. Besides Mary Queen of Castile went by the King her Husband's Order to Portugal, to intreat the King her Father to joyn his Forces with those of Castile, against the common Enemy. Her Father promis'd to go in Person, and immediately sent 12 Galleys, commanded by the Admiral Peeano, who was now releas'd. The two Kings of Castile and Portugal had a Meeting at Jurumen̄a, a Town on the Banks of the River Guadiana, and parted good Friends, laying aside all former Grudges. Forces from all Parts march'd to Sevil, and still they were hasten'd, because News was brought that Alboacen and the King of Granada had lay'd Siege to Tarifa. They sat down before it on the 23d of September, and batter'd it furiously, applying great Wooden Towers Tarifa be∣sieg'd by the Moors. to the Walls, for the more Terror. Tho the Garrison was numerous, it was fear'd they could not long hold out, and therefore the King still gave them fresh assurances of Relief, and provided for it with all possible Diligence. The King being come back to Sevil, and the King of Portugal soon following him with 1000 Horse, more valuable for their Bravery than Number, they both instantly set forward from Sevil, where the Rendezvouz was, re∣solving to relieve the Town, or hazard a Battle for it. The Number of the Christians was not to compare with that of the Moors, for they had but 14000 Horse, and 25000 Foot, yet with that Force they march'd to Tarifa. The Moorish Kings understanding the Resolu∣tion of our Army, Burnt their Engines, and possess'd themselves of certain Hills near their Camp. They intrench'd not, believing the Victory secure. Our Army being come to a Village call'd La Pen̄a del Ciervo, there discover'd the Enemy, and held a Council of War. Here it was resolv'd that at Midnight 1000 Horse, and 4000 Foot should be put into Tari∣fa,
who when they saw the Armies ingag'd, were to sally and flank the Infidels upon the Hills; the rest of the Army was order'd to refresh themselves, and be ready for the Fight at break of day. Great Joy was among the Christians that Night, they offer'd up their Vows to Heaven, and swore to stand by one another, and never to return Home, unless Victorious. At break of Day, the Kings and others by their Example receiv'd the Holy Communion, and then the Army was drawn out: D. John de Lara, D. John Manuel, and the Master of Santiago commanded the Van, D. Gonzalo de Aguilar the Rear, and D. Pero Nun̄ez, a Reserve of Foot. The main Body was headed by the Two Kings, and with them the Arch-Bishop of Toledo, and many Prelates and Nobles. A French Gentleman call'd Jugo, by the Popes ap∣pointment, carry'd the Standard of the Croizade, and all the Souldiers wore a red Cross on their Breasts, in Token they fought for the Faith. The King of Portugal undertook to charge him of Granada, and had with him, besides his own People, the Masters of Cala∣trava and Alcantara. The King of Castile, just as the Armies were ready to fall on, encou∣rag'd The Battle of Salado. his Men; and then the Signal being given, they mov'd towards the Enemy. Betwixt the two Armies was a River call'd Salado, which not far from thence, falls into the Sea; from this River the Battle took Name, and was ever called of Salado. Whoever first pass'd seem'd to have gain'd some Advantage, therefore the Moorish King sent 2000 Horse to guard the Passage: Mean while he not doubting of the Victory, Rode among his Battalions, exhort∣ing and animating them. D. John de Lara and D. John Manuel were the first of the Christi∣ans that came to the River, and made a Stand, which caus'd many to believe they acted treacher∣ously. The Two Brothers Gonzalo and Garcia Lasso passing over a small Bridge; were the first that ingaged. They were in great danger, being overpower'd by Numbers, when Alvar Perez de Guzman reliev'd them, and then all the rest follow'd. The King of Portugal march'd on the left, along the Hills; he of Castile taking a Circuit by the Shore, fell furious∣ly on the Enemy. Both Sides rent the Skies with hideous Cries, and being come to Handy∣strokes, stood their Ground without giving way, the Generals causing the Standards to be advanc'd where the greatest Danger was. Certain Bands of Christians, through By-ways, got to the Enemies Camp, which they plunder'd having slain those that were left to Guard it. They that Fought understanding what had happen'd, were dismay'd, and soon after fled. A 200000 Infidels slain. mighty Slaughter of them was made. 200000 are said to have been kill'd, and a great Num∣ber taken. Only 20 Christians are reported to have perish'd, which seems absolutely incre∣dible. Those Soldiers that belong'd to the Fleet did no Service, for all the Aragonians re∣main'd aboard. Navarre sent no Succour, that King being taken up in the Wars of France. Reginald Poncius a French-man govern'd that Kingdom. The Arch-Bishop of Toledo never stirr'd from the King of Castile's Side, during the Battle, and hinder'd him from casting himself de∣sperately among the Enemy, being almost forsaken by his Men. This Battle was fought in the Year of Grace 1340. Authors vary about the Day, but I look upon the most certain Ac∣count to be, that it was upon a Munday the 30th of October, as it is set down in the Kalendar of the Church of Toledo, where according to antient Custom, a Thanksgiving Day is kept on this account. The routed Moors fled to Algezira, and thence fearing a Siege, the King of Granada withdrew to Marbella, Albohacen to Gibraltar, and that same Night sail'd over into Africk, fear∣ing Particulars of the suc∣cesses. lest his Son Abderhaman hearing of his defeat should rebell against him. In this Fight, Fatima, Daughter to the King of Tunez, Albahacen's chief Wife, and three other of his Wives, as also his Son Abohamar were taken. Two other Sons of his were kill'd. In the Moorish Camp, vast Riches were found, of all sorts, but particulary, so much Gold and Silver, that it caus'd the value of Mony to fall in Spain, and all Commodities to rise. Our Victo∣rious Kings return'd at Night to the Camp; those that pursu'd the Enemy came back, tir'd with killing, and such as lov'd profit more than Honour loaden with Plunder. Next day they furnish'd Tarifa with all Necessaries, and order'd the Breaches to be repair'd. It had been The Kings after the Victory return to Sevil. expedient in that consternation of the Moors, to besiege Algezira, but the Army being un∣provided for a Siege, Provisions growing scarce, and Winter drawing on, they return'd to Sevil. There they were receiv'd in Triumph, and great Rejoycing was throughout all Spain, with publick Thanksgivings. The King of Portugal of all the Booty, took only some Horse-Furniture and Cimiters, to keep as a Trophey of that Victory. Some Slaves also were given him, and he return'd Home with great Honour, the King of Castile bearing him company, as far as Caçalla de la Sierra. A Present was sent to the Pope then at Avig∣non, of 100 Horses, each carrying a Cimiter and Buckler, hanging at the Pummel of the Saddle, 24 Colours taken from the Moors, the Royal Standard, and the Horse upon which King Alonso Charg'd. The Cardinals came out of Town to meet John Martinez de Leyva, the Embassador. The Pope himself after saying a thanksgiving Mass, spoke much in Com∣mendation of King Alonso. The King of Castile appointed Giles Bocanegra a Genoese Admiral, giving him in Charge, to secure the Streights Mouth, lest the Moors should return. This was done to oblige the Genoeses, that they might not recal their Galleys as the Aragonians and Portugueses had, tho they soon after sent them again more in Number, than at first, it be∣ing Progress of the Chri∣stians a∣gainst the Moors. fear'd the Moors having recruited their Army, would return in Spring. This Danger being over, all Mens Thoughts were bent upon wholly driving the Moors out of Spain. It was requisite to raise Mony, for all that was taken had been expended in
Gratifying and Paying the Souldiers, and the King was in great want. Only the Mer∣chants were rich; the rest of the Kingdom being exhausted with Taxes. At Ellerena and Madrid an extraordinary Subsidy was granted, but it was small in regard of the pressing Necessities of the Crown. However, at the beginning of the Year, 1341, the Army having 1341 Rendezvous'd at Cordova, enter'd the Kingdom of Granada. Some Ships were sent loaden with Provisions to divert the Enemy, as if it were design'd to besiege Malaga. The Moors supply'd that Place with all Necessaries, and the King on a suddain set down before Alcalà la Real, which surrender'd on the 26th of August, upon condition the Inhabitants might freely depart. After this, Priego, Rute, Benanècir, and several other Towns and Castles were taken. Then the Army was sent into Winter-Quarters, leaving sufficient Garrisons upon the Frontiers. All the Kings Thoughts were fixed upon besiegeing Algezira, and raising Mony. He was advis'd to lay a Duty upon Merchandize, which then seem'd easy, yet after∣wards was found to be attended with some Inconveniencies. This Advice being approv'd of, the King went away for Burgos, leaving the care of the Frontiers to the Master of Santi∣ago. He kept his Christmas at Valladolid. In the beginning of the Year 1342 the King sum∣mon'd 1342 many Prelates and Nobles to Burgos, particularly, the Arch-Bishop of Toledo, the Bishop of Burgos, and D. John de Lara, that they might gain the others. At theirs, and the Kings Instance, the People of Burgos granted the King the 20th Part of all things that should be sold, towards the War against the Moors, but this only during the Siege of Algezira. This Example set by Burgos, was follow'd by Leon, and most of the Towns in the Kingdom. This new Imposition was call'd Alcavala, a Word taken from the Moors. The People were not a little encourag'd to grant this new Duty, by the News brought that the Moors had been defeated at Sea. At Ceuta on the Coast of Africk, there lay 83 Galleys in order to re∣new the War; and 12 more in the Port of Bullon. These last were destroy'd by 10 of ours that surpriz'd them, before they could joyn the Main Fleet. Afterwards the whole Fleet of The de∣feats of the Infi∣dels at Sea. the Infidels was overthrown, at the Mouth of the River Guadameçil; after a Bloody Fight, 25 Galleys were Taken and Sunk, and both the Admirals of Africk and Granada kill'd. The Galleys of Aragon were not in this Action, but they coming from Home, defeated 13 Galleys of the Enemy, laden with Provisions, near Estepona, took four, and sunk two of them, the rest fled into Africk. Both Sea and Land favour'd the Christians. The Victory at Guadameçil had been greater, had the Moors been assail'd by Sea and Land, and the King hasted towards Xerez, in order to it: There the News of the Victory overtook him. An Accident caus'd the Battle to be given so soon, for Three of our Ships being left aground upon the Ebb, the Moors attack'd them, and the Christians coming up to rescue them, that bloody Battle ensued. CHAP. V. The Siege and Surrender of Algezira. The Infidels attempt to Murder King Alonso of Castile; the Earls of Derby and Salisbury come to his Assistance, out of England, and the Earl of Faux, out of France. Robert King of Naples dies. THE late Successes made all Things appear easy. Our Fleet lay in the Port of Algezira besieg'd. Xatarez, near Tarifa. Thither the King went to take a View of Algezira by Sea, and finding it a Beautiful and Spacious City, the Captives also affirming it was ill provided with Corn, he resolv'd to lay Siege to it. His Forces we  ut small, and he had no store of Provisions. Nevertheless he call'd together all the Garisons of the Neighbouring Places, and summon'd many of the Nobility to attend him. The Councils of Andaluzia furnish'd more than their usual Quota towards the War, and the King went away to Sevil, to provide Magazines. 2000 Horse, and about 5000 Foot being gather'd, he set down before Algezira, on the Third of August. The Galleys of Castile and Aragon were to guard the Sea, for those of Portugal after the Victory of Gaudameçil, return'd Home. In the Town were 800 Horse, and 12000 Archers, a Force great enough to have given Bat∣tle in open Field. They made often Salleys, and skirmish'd with various Success, yet the Tower of Cartagena near the City, was taken from them. One Day the King was in great danger of being kill'd by a Captive who struck, at him with a Dagger, he snatch'd out of a Souldier's Hand, but such as were near interpos'd. It was believ'd the Siege would last long, and therefore Trenches were ast up. Mean while to the King's great Dissatisfaction, in September the Fleet of Aragon went away, on pretence of the War with Majorca. Yet soon after, upon the King of Castile's pressing Instances, 10 Galleys were sent him under the Aragonian, Viceadmiral Mathew Mercero, and again 10 more under Jayme Escrivia. At this time died the Master of Santiago, a Man of great Worth, and much in the King's Favour. That Honour was given in the Camp, to Frederick the King's Son, tho under age. In Octo∣ber fell such great Rains, that all that was in the Camp was spoil'd. The Army labour'd under many Hardships, especially want of Mony, and the Kingdom being exhausted, the King was oblig'd to borrow of Pope Clement the VIth, and the Kings of France and
Portugal. The King of France lent 50000 Ducats, 20000 down, and the rest upon Bills at Genoa. The Pope gave the 3d part of Ecclesiastical Revenues. These were but small Sums yet the King's Resolution overcame all Difficulties. The besieg'd promis'd great Rewards Attempts of the In∣fidels to Murder the King of Castile. to any that would undertake to Murder the King, and a Moor blind of one Eye was taken and confess'd he and several others were out upon that Design. Soon after two others be∣ing put to the Wrack confess'd the same. Both the Moorish Kings desir'd to relieve the Town. He of Morocco durst not leave Ceuta, for fear his Son Abderhaman should Rebel, who about this time was put to Death for attempting it. The King of  durst not alone ha∣zard a Battle; but lest he should be thought to be Idle, sent part of his Forces to over∣run the Country of Ezija, whilst he Burnt Palma, a Town seated upon the Conflux of the Rivers Xenil and Gaudalquivir. He durst not Garrison it, nor make any stay there, hearing the Country was gathering to make Head against him. His other Forces were defeated by Ferdinand de Aguilar, who took from them all the Booty they had gather'd. It was now the beginning of the Year 1343, and nothing considerable was done at Algezira, only some 1343. Works were carry'd on by In̄iga Lopez de Horosco; wooden Towers were apply'd to the Walls, and other Engines play'd, but all was destroy'd with Stones cast by the Defendants. The Place was unfit for advancing of Works, or for the Men to ascend. In the Streight of Gibraltar, there are two Bays of the same Form, but one bigger than the other. Tarifa stands upon the Lesser; and Algezira over the Greater, upon a steep and craggy Hill. It is divid∣ed into the New and Old, each encompass'd with a Wall, like two distinct Towns. This was then the Seat of the African Empire in Spain. No Provision could be convey'd into the Town except a few Boats that stole in by Night, which was a small Relief, where Hunger began to pinch. It was now doubtful, whether in were not better to raise the Siege than continue it, for Algezira Siege con∣tinu'd. the Mony sent by the Pope and King of France was spent, and he of Portugal had contributed nothing. Some Overtures of Peace were made, but took no Effect. Therefore the King of Granada advanc'd with his Army, as far as the River Guadiarro, 5 Leagues from Algezira. In Ceuta a great Fleet was ready with the Power of Africk, to pass over into Spain. These were fresh, and the Christians harrass'd, yet the King's Resolution and good Fortune over∣come all Difficulties. Considerable Succours came to him at the same time from England, France, and Navarre. From England the Earls of Derby and Salisbury. (This Earl of Derby Succours from Eng∣land and other Parts. must doubtless be John of Gant, 3d Son to King Edward the IIId. for it was he had the Ti∣tle at this time) From France the Earl of Faux, with his Brother, and some others. King Philip of Navarre, having sent before great store of Provision by Sea, and order'd his Ar∣my to follow, hasted away himself, to come time enough for the Battle, which was expected would be fought. D. John de Lara, and D. John Manuel came before, and daily fresh Forces arrived from all Parts. This increase of the Christian Army terrify'd the Moors, and they propos'd a Truce. Notwithstanding the Treaty, the Town was batter'd, and the besieg'd did great harm among the Christians with Iron Bullets they shot. This is the first time we find any mention of Gun-powder and Ball in our Histories. In the Month of August, in the County of Ʋrgel, a Child was born with two Heads, and four Legs. The Superstitious Peo∣ple bury'd it alive, and the Parents suffer'd Death for consenting to that Act. This year Robert K. of Naples dies. also dy'd Robert King of Naples. At Algezira, when Autumn came on, the foreign Souldiers went away, the English pretended they were call'd home by their King, the Earl of Faux said his Men complain'd of the Pay. But Sickness was the chief Motive of their Departure, and the Earl of  dy'd at Sevil, King Philip of Navarre at Xerez, both in the Month of Sep∣tember, their  were carry'd into their Countries. The Departure of those Princes en∣courag'd the  hazard a Battle 60 Galleys of theirs, which in October had Anchor'd at Estepona, pass  to Gibraltar. The River Palmones parted the two Armies; both Parties several times meeting in that River, at last they came to a Battle, in which the Moors shew'd no Bravery, but presently fled. Hunger press'd in the City, for our Fleet had taken two Galleys of theirs carrying in Provisions. Five Barques got in at the beginning of the Year 1344, and they returning to Africk, gave an Account that the besieg'd could hold out no longer. Presently after a Treaty was set on Foot, and on the 26th of March the City 1344. was deliver'd upon the following Conditions. That the King of Granada pay the usual Tri∣bute: Algezira surren∣der'd. That the besieg'd have leave to depart, and carry away their Goods: That there be a Truce for the term of Ten Years. Many of the Moors went over into Africk: The King enter'd the City in solemn Procession on the 27th of March; the great Mosque was con∣secrated, and the Country divided among the Souldiers who were willing to live there. This done the King went to Sevil, where he receiv'd an Embassy from King Edward of Eng∣land, offering his Daughter Joanna in Marriage to France Peter, the Heir of Castile. This offer was then accepted of, yet afterwards took no effect. In the late Battle of Tarifa, two Daughters of Albohacen were taken Prisoners, and now sent to him without any Ransom, but he return'd rich Presents, Great rejoycing was throughout all Spain, and the Churches resounded with Thanksgiving.
CHAP VI. The King of Aragon conquers Majorca, and all its Dominions. Great Troubles in Ara∣gon. The Rebels suppress'd. An Ʋniversal Plague. The Knights of Calatrava at Variance, at length reconcil'd. DUring the time of the War in Andaluzia, the King of Majorca was depriv'd of his King∣dom, Majorca subdued by the A∣ragonians. by Peter the Ceremonious, King of Aragon, who ought chiefly to have protected him. The City Montpellier in France, was subject to the Kings of Majorca, for which place the Kings of France pretended the others ought to do them Homage, they having bought it of the Bishops of Magalone, to whom of right it belong'd; but those Kings refusing, the French by force made themselves Masters of many Towns, subject to Montpellier, and put Garrisons into them. The King of Majorca being a Dependant on the Crown of Aragon, begg'd assi∣stance of that King. The Aragonian cunningly temporiz'd with the King of France, and gave the other nothing but good Words. At length they met, and the Aragonian promis'd to aid his Kinsman, in case the King of France should refuse to put the Difference between them to Judgment. Embassadors were sent on this Message; but this was only to gain time, or mean while the King of Majorca was charg'd with many Crimes, whether true or false, is not known, but such as serv'd for a pretence to deprive him of his Crown. The Pope and Queen of Naples labour'd in vain to compose these Differences; the Mallorquines wasted with heavy Taxes, were willing to change their Master. At length the War broke out, Peter Moncada the Admiral was call'd from the Siege of Algezira, and a Fleet of 116 Sail fitted out. The King of Aragon landed in Majorca, where the Islanders had assembled 300 Horse, and 15000 Foot, but all Raw undisciplin'd Souldiers. They were easily overthrown, and their King fled to the City Poncia, and thence, desparing of better Fortune, over to the Continent. Those People being before well affected to the Aragonian, soon took the Oath of Fidelity to him, and he return'd to Barcelona, leaving Arnaldus de Eril, Viceroy of the Islands. Russillon and Cerdagne on the Borders of Spain were Infested, and some Towns there taken, belong∣ing to the King of Majorca. A Cardinal was now sent by the Pope as his Legate, to reconcile these Kings; his coming, the approach of Winter, and want of Engines to batter Walls, made the War cease for sometime, but his Embassy took no further Effect. In the Month of April 1344, the War was renew'd with more Fury than at first, all the open Country destroy'd, and the places of Strength taken. Some perswaded the King of Majorca to put himself into 1344. the Power of the Aragonian. Others more fierce, said it was better to dye than trust him. Nothing was left the King of Majorca but the Town of Perpignan, therefore he sent by D. The K. of Majorca delivers himself to him of A∣ragon. Peter de Exerica to acquaint the King of Aragon he would put himself into his Power, upon promise of Life and Liberty. Having receiv'd that Promise in July, he came from Perpig∣nan to Elna, where the Camp of Aragon then was. Being come before the King of Aragon he kiss'd his Hand, and with Submissive Words begg'd pardon. The Aragonian receiv'd him with feign'd Friendship, and promis Forgiveness, but his Actions were not answerable to his Words. Soon after in an Assembly of Nobility at Barcelona, he depriv'd him of the re∣gal Title, and asign'd him some Estate to live upon. Finding himself deceiv'd, the King of Majorca fled into France, designing to renew the War, and seeing there was little help in the Pope, cast himself wholly upon the King of France, to whom he sold the Lordship of Montpellier for 100000 Crowns in Gold. The War was again Commenc'd in the Island, Cerdagne and Russillon, which prov'd fatal to him, for he was 5 years after overthrown and kill'd in a Battle in Majorca by the Aragonians. His Body was deposited in Valencia, his Sons and Nephews liv'd Poor and in Bannishment. The same year that Algezira was taken, and the King of Majorca depos'd, there was a mighty Earthquake at Lisbon, which shook all the Earth∣quake at Lisbon. Buildings, and threw down the Steeple of the Cathedral, and was look'd upon as an Omen of ensuing Misfortunes. Constance the Daughter of D. John Manuel, and Wife of Prince Pe∣ter of Portugal, dy'd in the year 1345. Her Death was the less grievous to him because he 1345. was in Love with the Lady Agnes de Castro, and kept her in as great State as his Wife. The Lady Constance left two Sons, Ferdinand and Mary. After the War with the Moors was ended, the King of Castile labour'd to punnish the Disorders that had happen'd in that turbulent Time, and to perswade the Kingdom of To∣ledo and Andaluzia, to grant him the same Duty on Merchandize, as Burgos and Leon had done. In Aragon new Troubles began to break out, for the King endeavour'd by all Troubles in Ara∣gon. means to increase the Grandeur of the Crown by recalling many Grants of his Predecessors, and oblig'd his Brother D. Jayme to quit the place of Vicar General of the Kingdom. In the year 1346, dy'd the Queen of Aragon, a most virtuous Lady. She was bury'd at Valen∣cia. 1346. To the intent the King might have Issue male, a Match was presently propos'd with the Lady Eillenor, Daughter to the King of Portugal. Ferdinand the Aragonian's Brother thought to marry that Lady, but the King prevail'd, chiefly by the assistance of D. John Manuel, whose Son Ferdinand marry'd Joanna cousin German to the King of Aragon. The Nobility and Commous of Aragon rebell'd upon pretence that Wrong had been done to D. Jayme the King's Brother, and that several publick Acts were made in the Name of the Lady
Constance, as Heiress of the Crown. Ximeno de Ʋrrea, Peter Coronel, Blase de Alagon, and D. Lope de Luna were appointed Conservators of the Liberties of the People. D. Jayme Earl of Ʋrgel, was chen for their chief. His Brothers Ferdinand and John were call'd out of Castile. The King assembl'd the Cortes at Zaragoça, and to please th eople, restor'd the Vicarship to his Brother D. Jayme, and declar'd him heir of the Crown. Thus all People were pleas'd, but D. Jayme soon dying, their Joy expir'd. The King went to Barcelo, whither he had order'd his Queen to be conducted from Portugal, and here it was the Earl of Ʋrgel dy'd, 1347 about the end of the Year 1347. His Brothers Ferdinand and  aded the Mutiners, being assisted by the King of Castile with 800 Horse. The King of Aragon was marry'd K. Peter the IV. of Aragon marry'd. without any Pomp, by reason of the publick Sorrow, for the death of D. Jayme, as also be∣cause of the Troubles of the Kingdom. The Two Brothers Ferdinand and John, who had been in Castile, to consult with their Mother and the King their Uncle, headed the Rebels, being assisted with 800 Horse from Castile. Ferdinand went  to Valencia, and John, to Zaragoça. Their Mother resided at Cuenca and Requena. Fernan Perez Portocarrero was sent from Castile, and Mun̄on Lopez de Tauste from Aragon, to reconcile the Brothers of that Crown, and procure that no Aid might be given to the Rebels. Alvar Garcia de Albornoz, was allow'd to raise 600 Horse in Castile, to serve the King of Aragon, who put himself into the Hands of the Rebels, at Valencia. Here the People Mutinying, assaulted the Palace, and the King was forc'd to ride out among them, and grant that D. Ferdinand should be Vicar of the Kingdom, and Heir to the Crown, ex∣cluding the King's Daughters. After the King's departure D. Lope de Luna who was recon∣cil'd to the King, was very severe towards  Conspirator. He encamp'd about Daroca. Prince Ferdinand march'd against him with 15000 Horse and Foo; they came to a Battle in which the Rebels were routed,  Prince Ferdinand himself taken; but Alvar Garcia de Albornoz who was intrusted to  him, suffer'd him to make his escape into Castile. The King to reward D. Lope, created him Earl of Luna; a thing not much us'd in Aragon. After this Victory all submitted to the King. Yet Prince Ferdinand was again declar'd Heir, and the Power of the High Justice of Aragon was increas'd, that the King might not oppress the People. This in Aragon in the Year 1348. This Year a 1348 destructive. Plague spread it self first in the East, then into Italy, Sicily, Majorca, and Universal Plague. Spain; where no City escap'd it, and the Mortality was so great, that only in the City Za∣ragoça in October 100 dyed in one day. The infection was so great, that nobody would look to the Sick, or bury the Dead. Ellenor the new Queen of Aragon dy'd about this time at Ex∣erica, whither the King retir'd for fear of the Plague. The King having overcome the Re∣bels of Valencia, made severe Examples of them to terrify others. The Knights of Calatrava, of Castile and Aragon were at Variance, and had chosen Two Dissention among the Knights of Calatrava. Masters, one at Calatrava, the other at Alcanizes. Garci Lopez, who was Master of the Or∣der, 20 Years before this time, being accus'd of nations Crimes, and summon'd to appear before the King of Castile, to answer for himself, fled to Aragon and Garci Lopez protected by the King of Aragon resided at Alcanices, a Town belonging to the Order, and there sup∣ported his Authority; tho condemn'd as a Rebel, by the King of Castile and depos'd from his Mastership, yet he exercis'd that Power. John Nun̄ez de Prado, who was reported to be Bastard Son to the Lady Blanch, Aunt to the King of Portugal and Abbess, of the Monastrey of Huelgas, was chosen in his place. The stercian Abbots confirm'd this Election, yet the Ara∣gonians would not admit of it, but Garci Lopez dying, made choice of Alonso Perez de Toro, and he was confirm'd by Arnoldus, Abbot of Morimonte in France. It was often indeavour'd to reconcile the ights, but could never be effected till now; Alonso Perez dying, they of Alcanizes Elected John Rodrigues. Before this last Election was confirm'd the Kings of Castile and Aragon, caus'd the Two Masters of the Order to meet at Zaragoa, where their Case be∣ing refer'd to the King of Aragon, he gave Uudgment in favour of Castile, and John Rodriguez was depos'd, but had the chief Commend of Alcanicez given him, with Jurisdiction over all the Knights of that Kingdom, during by Life. At this time Luis Earl of Clermont, Son to D. Alonso de la Cerda, call'd the Disinherited, was fitting out a Fleet in Catalonia, the Pope ha∣ving two Years before given him the Conquest of the Canary, or Fortunate Islands, with the Canary Islands. Title of King of them; upon condition he should cause the Gospel to be preached to the Bar∣barous Inhabitants. These Islands lie in the great Atlantick Ocean, westward of Africk. They are 7 in Number, and in the Latitude of 27 Degrees North. The  called Ganaria, whence the others take Name. They are very fruitful, but were once almost destroy'd by Rabbits, which carry'd from the Continent increas'd beyond measure. The Island call'd Hi∣erro, has no other Water than what Distils from the Leaves of one Tree▪ D. Luis by reason of the Wars in France, and the loss of the Battle o Cressy, in which Philip of France was defeated by the English, never went forward with this Conquest. About 50 Years after this time the Biscainers and Andaluzians set out a Fleet to plunder these Islands, and having brought a great Booty from that call'd Lançarote, the Kings of Spain had a desire to conquer them, but were diverted by other things. Some Years after John Betancour a French-man, with per∣mission of Henry the IIId. of Castile, undertook▪ the Conquest, upon Condition he should hold them off the Crown of Castile. He subdu'd the 5 lesser Islands, but could not conquer the two greater. A Bishop call'd Mendo was sent thither.  Menaut Heir to Betancou and this Bi∣shop
were at Daggers draw, the former regarding nothing but his Interest, and the latter not enduring to see the Poor Islanders oppress'd. The King of Castile hearing of these Disorders, sent one Peter Ba who possess'd himself of the Islands, and sold them to a Gen∣tleman call'd Porca, from  one  had them, and stil'd himself King of Canaria. But not being able to conquer Grand Canaria, he sold four of the Islands to the Catholick King Fer∣dinand, and retained Gomera, stiling himself Earl of it. King Ferdinand conquer'd and annex'd all those Islands to the Crown of Castile. Let us return to Spain. In the Year 1349 the Lady Ellnor el∣dest Sister o Lu King ▪ was marry'd to the King of Aragon, with great Pomp, at Valencia. 1349 CHAP. VII. The Siege of Gibraltar; the King dies and the Siege is raised. King Peter succeeds him. The dy Ellnor de Guzman kill'd. Some Nobles rebel and are subdu'd. Biscay an∣nex'd to the Crown of Castile. Interviews of Kings. GReat Confusions arose in Africk, about this time; for Abohacen the Son of Albohacen, re∣bell'd against his Father, and possess'd himself of the Kingdom of Fez in Africk, and of Confusions in Africk. Gibraltar, Ronda and all other places, subject to the African Crown in Spain. He blam'd his Father for all the losses sustain'd in Spain, promis'd to reestablish the Honour of the Peo∣ple, and the giddy Multitude easily gave ar to these Speeches, and adher'd to him. These Bros among the , seem'd o offer the Christians an Opportunity of making their Advantage, but th  they d made for Ten Years obstructed it: Yet some pleaded that ey were ab  from that Oath, because he was dead to whom they made it. Interest is always more powerful than Conscience. Mony was wanting. The Cortes or Par∣liament were summon'd to Alcalà de Henares, and many Towns were now allow'd to send their Representatives, that had never that Priviledge before. Andalzia and the Kingdom Cortes held at Alcalà. of Toledo us'd o be free from Taxes, because they were at great Expence in making Good the Frontiers against the Moors; it was now labour'd they should pay the Duty that Castile and Lon did, for all Things that were sold. In this Assembly there rose a Contest betwixt the Representatives of Toledo and Burgos, about Precedency. Many Arguments were brought on both sides, and the Nobility were divided, yet at last it was agreed that Burgos should have the upper Seat, and Rote first, but that Toledo should have a Seat apart from the rest, directly opposite to the King, and be first nam'd by the King, after this manner, I speak for Toledo, which will do whatsoever I shall order, let Burgos speak first. Thus that difference was compos'd, and the same Method is us'd to this Day. Eighteen Towns, and Cities have ancient Priviledge, to send their Representatives to the Cortes. Bur∣gos, Soria, Segovia, Ala and Valladolid, in old Castile. Leon, Salamanca, Zmora and Toro, Places that sent repre∣sentatives to the Cortes o Parlia∣ment. in the Kingdom of Leon. Toledo, Cuenca, Guadalajara and Madrid, in the Kingdom of Tole∣do. Sevil, Granada, Murcia, Cordova and Jaen in Andaluzia. Among these Burgos, Ln, Granada, Sevil, Cordova, Murcia, and Jaen, have precedence according to this Order, s being the Heads of Kingdoms▪ Toledo is apart, as has been said above. All other Towns and Cities sit promiscuously as they come. At these Cortes of Alcala, many other places had their Representatives, the King bestowing that Honour  many, to oblige the People. Here the King demanded the Alcavala, or Duty upon all Things sold, which tho with diffi∣culty was granted, and the War with the Moors Voted. Accordingly preparations were instantly made throughout the Kingdom. The Army being assembl'd march'd into Andalu∣zia▪ and laid Siege  Gibraltar, casting up great Works about the Town, and applying Gibraltar besieg'd. their Engines. The own was well provid strongly fortify'd, and had a good Garri∣son. As soon as the Town was invested, all  Country about was laid Waste, and pre∣sently the Walls began to be batter'd. The Siege lasted long, notwithstanding the Towns∣men abated of their Heat, seeing no hope of Sucr, yet the Garison held out resolutely. During the Siege, the Embassadors sent by the  of Castile, to establish Peace, and de∣sire Succours of the King of Aragon, return'd to the Camp, and with them Bernard de Ca∣brera, a Man of great Parts, and therefore brought to the Court by the King of Aragon, from his retirement▪ nd employ'd in the most important Affairs of the Government. He came to the Camp on the 0th of August, and establish'd a League betwixt the two Kings upon these Conditions: That Queen Ellenor and her Children shall peaceably enjoy all that was gi∣ven them by her Husband, and their Father. That the King of Castile shall not give them any assistance, if they raise Commotions in the Kingdom. After this, the King of Aragon Castile and Aragon joyn in a League. sent 400 Cross-bow-Men, and 10 Galleys under the command of Raymund Villano. Joanna Queen of Navarre, who after the Death of her Husband Philip, resided in France, at the Town of Conflans, seated at the meeting of the Rivers Seyne and Oyse, dy'd on the 5th of Octo∣ber, and was buried in the Church of St. Denis, near her Father King Luis Hutin. She was a most virtuous Lady, and had a numerous Issue. Charles her Son succeeded her at the Age of 17. She had two lesser Sons, Philip and Luis, he who had the Seignory of Durazz in Dower, and these Daughters, Joanna, Mary, Blh and Agnes, who were all marry'd to great Men, the
first to the Lord of Roan the 2d to the King of Aragon, the 3d, to Philip de Valois, King of France, and the last to the Earl of Faux. Mossen John de Conflans a Frenchman was now Vicery of Navarre. Let us return to the Siege of Gibraltar. The Moors of Granada always laid Ambushes about the Christian Camnd pick'd up all Straglers. The besieg'd made often Sallies, and did some Execution. But what was worst, a violent Plague rag'd in the Army, and great Numbers dy'd▪ Most Men, and particularly D. John de Lara, and D. Ferdinand Manuel who had succeeded his Father in the Lordship of Villena, were for raising the Siege. These things somwhat mov'd the King et his Resolution pre∣vail'd unfortunately to him; for the Infection seiz'd him, and he dy'd on the 26th of March 1350. This was the first year in which Pope Clement allow'd the Jubilee to be gain'd every 1350. 50th year, which before was every Century. It was also remarkable for the Death of Phi∣lip K. Alonso of Castile dies. King of France. His Son John succeeded him. This was the end of King Alonso the XIth of Castile, in the 38th year of his Age, and 'tis thought had he liv'd longer, he would have drove the Moors out of Spain. He might have been compar'd to the best of Princes▪ had he not emish'd his Virtes by much Inconstancy. His Severity in executing Justice gain'd him the Name of The Ʋpright. Immediately upon his Death the Siege was rais'd. His Body was carry'd to Sevil, and bury'd in the Royal Chappel. In the Reign of his Son Henry, he was Translated to Cordova, as he had order'd it in his Will. D. Giles de Albornoz, Arch∣bishop of Toledo, was created a Cardinal by Pope Clement, on the 18th of December▪ Laurence de Padilla, says this was the Cause why he quitted the Archbishoprick, for in those Days two such Dignities were incompatible, and that D. Gonçalo the IVth succeeded him, and go∣vern'd that Church but 3 Years. Mighty Troubles and Confusions follow'd in Castile. Most Men lay all the blame on the new King, and therefore call him The Cruel▪  Authors attribute it to the Pride and Ambition of the Nobility, who  the King to make  ere Examples. As soon as King Alonso dy'd, his lawful Son Peter was proclaim'd King  the Camp, tho he was but Peter de∣clared K. of Castile. 15 years of Age, and then at Sevil with his Mother. His Age was unfit for Government, but his forward▪ Wit promis'd well. He was fair of Complexion, had an agreeable Face, with much Majesty, a great Heart for difficult Attempts, and would undergo any Labour. He lov'd  king above other Sporst, and was rigid in Administring Justice. Among these Virtues some Vices began to appear, as Pride and Passion in his Youth; afterwards he added Avarice and Incontinency. These natural Imperfections were increas'd by the ill Government of his▪ Tu∣tor, D. John de Albuquerque, who gave him his Will in all things, and by that means rose to the great Favour he had with him. The new King had these Bastard Brothers, Henry Earl of Trastamara, Frederick Master of Santiago, Ferdinand Lord of Ledesina, and Tello Lord of Aguilar, these the Sons of the Lady Ellenor de Guzman. Besides these the Lady Joanna mar∣ry'd to Ferdinand and Philip de Castro, Sancho, John, and Peter; for another Peter and Sancho dy'd Young. These Bastard Brothers had not much Confidence in the King, who was wholly govern'd by his Mother Queen Mary. The Lady Ellenor de Guzman fring the Queen Dowa∣ger, set out from the Camp with the dead King's Body, but by the way changing her Reso∣lution, left it and went to Medina Sidonia, a strong Town of her own. Here she was some time dubious what to do, but at last resolv'd to put her self upon the King's Goodness. Hav∣ing fix'd this Resolution, she went away to Sevil, her Sons and other great Men of her Kin∣dred went to Algezira and other strong Places. The King yielding to his Mother's Passion, the Lady Ellenor was cast into Prison. Her Son Henry being expell'd Algezira, upon a safe Conduct came to the King, and hastily concluded a Match with the Lady Joanna▪ Sister to D. Ferdinand Manuel, to be  Condition to oppose the King. The King fell so des∣perately Sick, that he was given over by all the Physicians. Every one named a Successor ac∣cording K. Peter Sick, and recovers. to his Fancy; but the King soon recovering, this only serv'd to discover the Inclina∣tions of the People. D. John de Lara, envious of the great Power of D. Alonso de Albuquer∣que, went away for Castile, designing to raise a Rebellion, which was easy, because of his great Possessions in that Country. His Designs were prevented by Death, which took him away at Burgos, on the 28th of November. His Body was bury'd in the Monastery▪ of St. Paul of the Dominians in that City. He left a  Nun̄o de Lara, but two years Old. Almost at the same time dy'd his Brother in Law, D. Ferdinand Manuel, leaving only a Daughter call'd Blanch. The Death of these two great Men was very pleasing to D. Alonso de Albuquerque, who hop'd they being remov'd to be absolute without Controul. The King upon the first News set out from Sevil, hoping to seize upon their Estates, and gave by the way some Signs of his Severity▪ D. Frederick his Bastard Brother met him at Ellerena, and was receiv'd with exterior Tokens of Affection, but it appear'd afterwards they were Counterfeit. At the same time he order'd D. Alonso de Olmedo to put to Death the Lady Ellenor de Guz∣man, then a Prisoner at Talavera in the Kingdom of Toledo. This Town being part of the Queen's Dower, was from that time call'd Talavera de la Ryna. Garcilasso de la Vega was kill'd in the Palace at Burgos, his chief Crime was the Affection he bore to D. John de Lara. Garcilasso was Lieutenant of Castile. Garci Manrique succeeded him in that Post. It was consulted how the King might get the young Child, D. Nuno de Lara, Lord of Biscay into his Power: But D. Mencia, who had the Care of him, fled with him Biscay u∣nited o the Crown of Castile. into Biscay, hoping that People would defend him. The King pursu'd, and they narrowly
escap'd, but the Child soon dying he easily subdu'd all that Lordship, and annex'd Bis∣cay, Lerma, and Lara, with other Places, to the Crown, having before secur'd Joanna and Elizabeth, Sisters to the Child deceas'd. These things were acted in the year of Grace 1351. Great rejoycing was  in Aragon for the Birth of Prince John, which put an end to 1351 the strife there had been about the Succession. Bernard de Cabrra was appointed his Tutor, and the young Prince was created Duke of Girona. From this time forward the eldest Son to the King of Aragon was always Duke of Girona. Both the Kings of Castile and Aragon en∣deavour'd to make a  with Charles King of Navarre, who the year before was Crown'd at Pamplona. This King thought it convenient to entertain both those Kings with fair pro∣mises. Yet at the request of the Castilian he came to Burgos, where they both labour'd to out∣do Interviews of Kings. one another in Civility and Gallantry. Being almost of the same Age and Natural Incli∣nations, they became great Friends. This King Charles was by some call'd the Wicked, by others the Cruel, because  punish'd with severity a Mutiny that was rais'd at his first Acces∣sion to the Crown. After some days spent in Mirth at Burgos, the King of Castile went away to hold the rtes or Parliament at Burgos, and King Charles returned to amplona. Thence, desiring to be gone into France his Native Country, he first went to Moblanco in Aragon, to meet that King. There two Marriages were propos'd, one for King Charles, with the Sister to the King of Sicily, and the other with Blanch, Widow of Philip King of France; but no∣thing was concluded, because he hop'd to Marry Joanna the King of France's Daughter. CHAP. VIII. Embassadors sent by King  of Castile into France, to obtain for his Wife, Blanch, Daughter to the Duke of Bourbon, who is brought into Spain, and Marry'd to the King; but he being before in ove with the Lady Mary de Padilla, slights and for∣sakes his Queen. SOme Towns in Old Castile had an antient inmemorial Privilege of chusing their Lords, and were therefore call'd Behtrias, from the Greek word Hetera, signifying a Company. D. Alonso de Albuquerque in the Cortes, labour'd that it should be establish'd, for the future the King should appoint those Lords, but it could not be obtain'd. The next thing propos'd was to Marry the King; and to that purpose John de Roela Bishop of Burgos, and Alvor Garcia de Blanch Daughter to the Duke of Bourborn contracted to K. Peter of Castile. Albrnoz, a Gentleman of Cuenca, were sent Embassadors into France, to ask one of the six Daugh∣ters of the Duke of Bourbon, the most powerful Prince of the Blood Royal in France, which they should most approve of for the King. The Duke having shew'd them his Daughters, they made choice of the Lady Blanch, and she was Contracted to the King by Proxy. This Lady was bless'd with all Perfections of Soul and Body; but unfortunate in her Marriage, which ought to have been the Complement of all her Felicity. Henry Earl of Trastamara after the Death of his Mother, and Gareilasso, fled out of Asturias to Portugal, fearing the King, whom he was not able to oppose. The King of Portugal taking compassion on the Earl, and fearing let any misfortune might befall his Grandson the King of Castile, his People being incens'd against him, met him at Cidad Rodrigo. There he perswaded him to pardon Count Henry▪ In the beginning of the year 1352. Discontents began to break out in Andaluzia, 1352 Asturias, and Murcia. D. Alonso Fernandez Coronel, a powerful Man in Andaluzia, was pos∣sess'd Seditions arise in the Domi∣nions of Castile. of Aguilar by the King's Gift, and had long been at  with Bernade Cabrera about that Town. He was ealous of the King, for that during his sickness at Sevi, he had let fall some words signifying, that D. John de Lara ought to succeed him; which the King heinously resented. This Gentleman confiding in the Strength of Aguilar, stor'd his other Towns, and made an Alliance with other mutinous Nobles. He rais'd Men, and ask'd Aid of Foreign Princes. Particularly he sent D. John de la Cerda Son to Lewis, and his Son in Law, to the Moors. Neither the King of Granada, nor the African would give him any Succour; but it is said, he serv'd Albohacen in a Battel, in which he overthrew his Father Albohacen. Thence he return'd to Portugal, and there continu'd in Banishment. His Wife the Lady Mary Coronel, not able to endure the absence of her Husband, or resist her unchast desires, rather than yield to them, is said to have put burning Coals into that Part which molested her. The King of Castile having taken several Towns in Andaluzia, prepar'd to Besiege Aguilar, when News was brought him, that Count Henry had Rebell'd at Gijon in Asturias, and his Brother D. Tello committed many Outrages, making Incursions from Montagudo on the Frontiers of Aragon. This oblig'd him to March to Asturias, where Gijon surrender'd, upon promise of Pardon for themselves and Count Henry, who lurk'd in the Mountains. In this march it was, that the King fell in Love with Da. Maria de Padilla▪ a young Maid that was bred in the House of D. Alonso de Albuquerque. Their familiarity began at Sahagun, which prov'd Fatal to the King Da. Mar de Padilla Mistress to King Petir.and Kingdom. John de Hinestrola the Ladies Uncle, was the manager of the unhappy Bar∣gain. The King march'd to Montagudo and took it, with several other Towns; for D. Tello had abandon'd it, and was fled to Aragon. The two Kings of Aragon being so near one ano∣ther, set onfoot a Treaty of Peace; they met not themselves, but their Embassadors D. Alonso
de Albuquerque, and Bernard de Gabrera, concluded a Peace at Taraçona. A League offensive and defensive was establish'd▪ and they agreed the one should pardon D. Tello, and the other D. Ferdinand de Aragon. Then ing Peter return'd into Andaluzia, and after a Siege of four Months, took Aguilar in February 1853. D. Alonso Coronel being taken, was Executed as a Traytor, with Five of his Companions, The Town was dismantled, and the King pardon'd the multitude. On the 25th of the same month dy'd D. Gonçalo Archbishop of Toledo. D. 1353 Vasco, or Blas then Bishop of Palncia, succeeded him. From Aguilar the King went to Cor∣dova, at such time as D. Maria de Padilla was brought to Bed of  Daughter call'd Beatrix. Thence he return'd into the Kingdom of Toledo. At Torrijos five Leagues from Toledo, in a Turnament made for Joy▪ of his Success, and Birth of his Daughter, the King receiv'd a Wound in his Hand, which had like to have cost him his Life; fo that the Surgeons could find no means to stop the Blood. To this Town came D. Alonso  Albuquerque, who had been on an Embassy in Portug▪ and brought with him D. John de la ▪ whom the King receiv'd into Favour with demonstrations of Affection; but could never  prevail'd upon to restore him his Father in Laws Lands, for he now began to be positive▪ About this time the Lady Blanch of Borbon came to Valladolid accompany'd by the Viscount of Narbonn, and D. Frede∣rick the Master of Santiago, who went out to meet her▪ D. Alonso de Albuquerque was for having the Marriage▪ solemniz'd immediately. He then was so absolute, that at times he spoke dis∣respectful Words to the King, and hastned his Marriage lest, Da. Maria de Padilla's Relations, should work him out of Favour; and so it fell out. Yet the Marriagew as solemniz'd on the King Peter marries. 3d. of June. At the same time in France, another more fortunate Marriage was consumma∣ted betwixt Charles King of Navarre, and the Lady▪ Joanna, eldest Daughter to the King of France. A Match I say more happy for the  they always had to one another, and their Issue. They had three Sons▪ arles,  and Peter, the second dyed young; and three Daughters, Mary, Blach and Jon:  liv'd  Years, the other two were Match'd to great Princes. Before he was Marry'd King Charls had a Bastard-Son called Leo, of whom are descended the Marqueses of Cortes in Navarre. The Marqueses of Falces in that Kingdom say they are descended from Peter the Kings lawful Son. Scarce was King Peter mar∣ried when he began to slight the Bride, being wholly devoted to Da. Maria de Padilla. Two Days after he prepar'd to go to the Castle of Montalvan, on the Banks of Tagus, where he had left his Minion. The Queen his Mother, and his Aunt Queen Ellenor conjur'd him not K. Peter forsakes his Queen for Da. Moria de Padilla▪ to forsake his Queen, and give himself up to his Lust, but he nothing mov'd said, He did not design any such thing, yet immediately took Horse and rode away without speaking to any body. Count Henry, D. Tello, and the Princes of Aragon went with him, for now the Nobility study'd to please and flatter him. Only D. Giles de Albornos the Cardinal, who had been. Arch-Bishop of Toledo, ceas'd not to reprove him, till he became hateful to him. Then with leave he retir'd to Cuença, and thence went into France to Pope Innocent, who had suc∣ceeded Pope Clement the last Year. The King and Lady Mary Padilla, from Montalvan went to Toledo. At Valladolid it was consulted how to bring him back by force, which he under∣standing, was so offended at D. Alonso de Albuquerque the first mover of that Design, that he was forc'd to appease him, to deliver up his Son Giles as an Hostage. At length through much intreaty of the Nobility, he was perswaded to return to Valladolid to see the Queen, but stay'd with her only two Days. It was given out he was bewithc'd by a Jew, with a Rib∣ben so charm'd that it appear'd to the King like a Snake. Some believ'd the King did not so suddenly quit his een without cause, but because he discover'd Treachery in his Brother, Frederick, which I suppose is ment in regard to her Honour. But all these are Surmises, for there needs no stronger Witchcraft, nor other Offence to draw a Man away, than Love. From Valladolid the King went away to Olmedo, a Town in that Neighbourhood. Thither by his Order came the Lady Mary de Padilla from Toledo, and he never more had Compassion, or so much as thought of the Queen, his unfortunate Wife. CHAP. IX. King Peter of Castile removes his Officers, punishes some Rebels, and reduces several Towns▪ The War of Sardinia, where Diseases raging in the Aragonian Army, that King clap up a dishonourable Peace, and returns to Aragon. D. Alonso de Albuquerque being in disgrace spent some time upon his own Estate, and then fearing the King would pursue him, fled to Portugal. D. Frederick Master of Santigo had been discontented, ever since the King caus'd his Mother to be put to death; but being now reconcil'd, came to Cuellar, where the Court resided. D. Tello his Brother, at Segovia, Marry'd Joanna, Daughter to D. John de Lara, and had with her the Lordship of Biscay. The Kindred of Da. Maria de Padilla promoted this Match, to oblige the King's Brothers who were Enemies to D. Alonso de Albuquerque. Queen Blanch resided at Medina del Campo with the Queen her Mother-in-Law, living like a Widow, and spending her time in modest Recreations. Thence she was by the King's Order, remov'd to Arevalo, and
forbid conversing with her Mother-in-Law, or any of the Nobility. Peter Gudiel Bishop of Segovia, and Tello Palomeque a Gentleman of Toledo, were appointed to guard her. The King K. Peter changeth his Offi∣cers. chang'd the Officers of his Houshold, and made James Gara  Padilla, Brother to his Mistress, Lord Chamberlain, Alvaro  Albornz Cup-bearer, and Peter Gonzalez Mendoça Taster. These changes were made in hatred to D. Alonso de Albuquerque, who had before many of his Creatures at Court. In Autumn the King went to Andaluzia, and displac'd many great Men, preferr'd by Alonso de Albuquerque. The King was wholly govern'd by D. Maria de Padilla, and her Kindred; and  Nobility, even his Brothers, made their Court to her. This Winter the great Rains caus'd mighty Floods, especially at Sevil, where they made up all the Gates of the City lest it should break in. At the beginning of the year 1354. D. John Nun̄ez 1354 de Prado, Master of Calra, who had fled to Aragon, came to Almagro, the chief Town of He punish∣es Rebels. that Order, being invited by the King's kind Letters. There D. John de la Cerda, who was in Favour, made him Priso▪ His greatest Crime was, being a Friend to D. Alonso de Al∣buquerque, and having perswaded the King to return to the Queen▪ D. James de Padilla was immediately chosen Master, and John Nunez put to Death at Maqueda. The King seem'd sory for hi ath; but no body▪ being question'd, it was concluded to be done by his Com∣d. N he King invaded the Inheritance of D. Alonso de Albuquerque, in which were man rong aces. Meden was besieg'd, and the Governour not able to defend it, surren∣der'd, having first obtain'd his Master's Consent. The Town of Albuquerque tho' besieg'd, held out; and D. Frederick and Count Henry were left at Badajoz to Blockade it. The King went to Ccers, and thence sent Embassadors to Alonso King of Portugal, who at that time was at Ebora, celratin the Marriage of  his Grandchild with Ferdinand Prince of Ara∣g▪ ee the Embassado ean  D. Alonso de Albuquerque should be deliver'd up,  ccont of the  had th management of. D. Alonso answer'd, h as ready to account in ▪ and lleng'd any body that should lay any Disloyalty to his Charg Ths  were dismist. The King's Bastard Brothers made an Association with D. Alo d querque, ad othe obles, and would have drawn in the Prince o Portugal,  him the Crow  Castile; but the King of Portugal was offended at the , and so the design e. ow the King o Castile committed a Crime not ex∣cusab if the rest of his Life re such. D. oanna de Castro, Widow to the late D. James de   with . The King fell in Love with her, and knowing he  ain her  fer'd to Marry her. To this purpose he undertook to prove K. Peter marries another and for∣sakes her, his first Wife still living. he  bere, and putting it to the Judgment of the Bishops of Avila and Sala∣, they▪ declar'd he was no ays ty'd to the first Marriage. As soon as this was declar'd  hr the King was, the tials were perform'd in hast. Having obtain'd his desires he w soon weary▪ t is rted, he stay'd with her but one Night, and then left her, upon pretence that the Nobty Revolted, and he must put a stop to their Proceedings. D. Jonna de Castro withdrew to Das, where she cover'd her Disgrace with the Title of Queen▪ and had a Son call'd D. hn, at present her Comfort; and afterwards the Scorn of ▪ Whilst the Rebellion was conting at Castroxeriz in Old Castile, Elizabeth second Der  D. John Nun̄ez de Lara, was marry'd to D. John Prince of Aragon, and had with her the Lordship of Biscay taken from▪ D. Tello the King's Bastard Brother, who had it in Rht of his Wife, being e eldest Sister, and lost it for Conspiring against the King. Da. Maria  was now dellyer'd of a Daughter call'd Constance, afterwards marry'd in Engla  he Duk of Lancaster. Still other Nobles joyn'd in the Association, particularly D. Fer de Cast to revenge the Affront put▪ upon his Sister by the King. The same was done by the Cities of Toledo, Cordova, Jaen, Cuenc and Talavera; and lastly, the Princes of Aragon. Queen Mary and Queen Ellenor favour'd the Rebels; and thus way was made to a bloody Civil War, which long harassed Spain. Let us leave the Troubles of Castile a while, to speak of the other Provinces of Spain. Joseph Bulhagix King of Granada, having Reign'd 21 years, was murder'd this year by his Subjects. Mahomet Lagus Uncle to Joseph, and chief Contriver of the Treason, usurp'd the Moorish K. of▪ Granada murdered. Kingdom, and held it as long as he liv'd, tho' incumber'd with many Contentions and Broils. This same year the King of Aragon founded an University at Huesca. This was done at such a time as all that Kingdom resounded▪ with Warlike Preparations for the Island of Sardinia. The Aragnians, as was said in its place, had conquer'd that Island; but the People were Expediti∣on against Sardinia. given to change. The Family of the Orias of Genoa were possess'd of some Towns in Sar∣dinia. These relying on the Affections of the People, and the Assistance of Genoa, attempted to expel the Aragonians. The pretence they made use of was, that the Aragonians had taken from them Sacer and Caller, two strong Towns. War being declar'd, they took Alguer, and laid Siege to Sacer, but could not enter it; for the Townsmen bravely defended it, till the King of Aragon sent his Fleet to their Relief; which for some time supported the War with various event. The Venetians, always Enemies to the Genoeses, made a League with the King of Aragon against them. Three years before this we now write of, the Fleets of Aragon and Venice near Pea, which is a League from Constantinople, and was then subject to the State of Genoa, fought the Genoese Fleet, tho' the Sea was at that time rough, and took 23 of their Gal∣leys; many were also drove ashore. Twelve Galleys of Aragon, and their General Ponce de San∣tapan, were also lost. Yet both Parties pretended to the Victory. The Popes Clement & Innocent la∣bour'd
to reconcile these Nations, but all in vain. Marianus Judge of Arborea, an antient Prince of Sardinia, and a Powerful Man sided with the Genoeses, and joyn'd Mathew Doria their chief. Thus they soon possess'd themselves of all the Island, except the two Towns of Sacer and Cal∣ler, which always continu'd firm to the Aragonians. The dangerous Posture of their Affairs, being known in Aragon, a Fleet was fitted out consisting of a 100 Sail, among which 55 were Galleys. In it were 1000 Men at Arms, 500 light Horse, and about 12000 Foot, all of known bravery. Great stores of Provisions were also laid up, and many Souldiers and Persons or Note came to serve the King of Aragon, out of England, Germany and Navarre. All the Nobility of Aragon, strove to go upon this Expedition, and Bernard de Gabrera was Admiral of the Fleet, which Rendezvous'd at Roses, and set sail thence about the middle of June. Prince Peter, the King's Uncle, was left to govern the Kingdom. They had a good Voyage, in 8 Days arriv'd at Sardinia, anker'd within three Miles of Alguer, and landed the Army. Presently the Army March'd towards the City, and Bernard de Cabrera follow'd with the Fleet. The ing at the Head of his Men, and shun'd no Danger to encou∣rage them: About Forty Genoese Galleys appear'd in the Sea, rather to shew their Swiftness than Valour. The Lord of Arborea incamped in sight of the Aragonians with 2000 Horse, and 15000 Foot, but durst not give Battle, because they were raw undisciplin'd Men. Whilst the Aragonians batter'd the Town, the Weather being had, and the Country un∣healthy, the Aragonian Army sicken'd, and the King himself was diseas'd, wherepon a Treaty was set afoot. Peace was concluded upon dishonourable Conditions for the King of K. of Ara∣gon makes Peace in Sardinia. Aragon; which were that the Judge of Arborea and Mathew Doria should be pardon'd, and keep what they had. Besides, the King  the former several Towns in Gallura, a Province of that Island. Thus  stead of Punishment, the Enemies grew more fierce. Alguer was deliver  the  the Inhabitants had leave to depart, and many old Catalonian Souldiers setled there. The Queen who was there present, being ear∣nest to return Home, and several Noble Men dying, caus'd this Treaty to be hastily conclu∣ded, in November. Yet the King stay'd Seven Months longer in Sardinia, settl'd the Island, punish'd some Offenders, reducing the Judge of Arborea and Mathew Doria, who again were about to revolt. Olfo Prochita being left Viceroy there, the Fleet return'd to Aragon, having perform'd little for so great Preparations. CHAP. X. The Nobility of Castile, and particularly the King's Bastard Brothers in Rebellion, they treat with the King without success, the Queen Mother joyns them, the King gets the better, and executes many of them. AFter the King of Castile had reduced most of the Towns belonging to D. Alonso de Albu∣querque, being about to set out to besiege his Bastard Brother Frederick, who made him¦self Progress of the rebel∣lion in Ca∣stile. strong in the Castle of Segura, he sent John Fernandez de Hinestrosa into old Castile, to bring Queen Blanch and secure her in the Pallace of Toledo, on pretence of the Rebellion that was in the Kingdom. Being come to Toledo, she went directly to the Cathedral, under show of Devotion, but when there, would not come out, expecting to be defended by the Sanctuary. The King understanding what had happen'd, in a Passion return'd to Ocan̄a. There he caus'd John de Padilla, to be chosen Master of Callatrava,  stead of his Bastard-Brother Frederick, notwithstanding he was a Marry'd Man, and  such had ever had that Honour before. This was the beginning of admitting Marry'd Men to be Masters of that Order, in favour of Da. Maria de Padilla, whose Brother this Man was. Mean while the Power of the Rebellious Nobles increas'd, D. John de la Cerda joyn'd them. The King want∣ing Forces, went into old Castile to raise Men, and came to Tordesillas, where the Queen his Mother was. The People of Toledo sent for D. Frederick, who came with 700 Horse, and the other Nobles flocking together, kept the King besieg'd in Tordesillas. Ellenor Queen of Aragon was sent by them to propose to him, to banish Da. Maria de Padilla, and remove her Kindred, and they would all submit to him, but she prevail'd not. The Queen Mother and the King her Son departing from Tordesillas, the Rebels march'd towards Valladolid, thinking to surprise that place, but being disappainted, remov'd to Medina del Campo, and took it without bloodshed. Thither came the Bastard D. Frederick, and there dy'd John Alonso de Al∣buquerque, poyson'd by one Paul a Roman Doctor, brib'd by his Enemies. His Body as he order'd it in his Will, was Embalmed and carry'd about by those his Fellow-Conspirators, till the end of the War. After this, the Nobles sent some Men of Note to treat with the King, the result was; that they agreed upon a time to meet at a Village near Toro. On the Day Treaty be∣twixt the K. and his Rebels. appointed, they met with 50 Horse equally arm'd on each side, where they receiv'd one an∣other with the usual Respect, the Nobles according to custom kissing the King's Hand. This done, Gutierre de Toledo by the King's Order told them, The King was much concern'd to see so many Men of Quality in Rebellion, indeavouring to bring him to their Beek. That he forgave them all, provided they would submit and disband their Forces; and that as to
what they desir'd in relation to Queen Blanch, it should be done, provided their Demands ended there. Ferdinand de Ayala being appointed by the Nobles to speak for them with, very submissive Words excus'd their coming arm'd into his presence, extoll'd the virtue of Queen Blanch, represented the Danger that threaten'd her from Da. Maria de Padilla, and begg'd of the King to comfort and protect her, and prevent the Ruin that threaten'd the Kingdom. The matter was too weighty to be concluded in so short a time, therefore four Gentlemen for each side were appointed to agree upon Articles of Peace. Thus they parted, and the King us'd such delays, that all hope of adjusting Affairs vanish'd, especially because he went away from Toro to meet his Mistress. The Queen Mother hereupon joyn'd with the Rebels, and deliver'd the City Toro up to them. The King startled at the News, return'd to Toro with Queen Mo∣ther joyns the Rebels. John Fernandez de Hinestrosa, and Samuel Levi a Jew, who was his Treasurer. The Queen Mother receiv'd him with great Affection, and he told her he came to put himself into her Power and do whatsoever she would have of him. Those who came with him were secur'd, and the Officers of his Household chang'd. D. Frederick was made Lord Chamberlain, Prince Ferdinand of Aragon Chancellor, D. John de la Cerda Standard-bearer, D. Frederick de Castro Lord Steward, and he marry'd Joanna the King's Bastard-Sister, but was divorc'd as being her second Cousin. These were rather Spies to secure, than Servants to attend him. This done they bury'd the Body of Alonso de Albuquerque, thinking the War at an end. The King had liberty to Hunt, and having gain'd some of the Nobles, fled to Segovia, and with him Samuel Levi, who was out upon Bail, and D. Tello, to whom the King shew'd some Affection, but it lasted not long. This was the beginning of new Uproars. The Princes of Aragon and their Mother Queen Ellenor, went to Roa, given them by the King whilst at Toro. D. John de la Cerda went to Segovia to the King, D. Frederick to his Forces at Talavera, D. Ferdinand de Castro to Galicia, D. Tello to Biscay, Count Henry and Queen Mother stay'd at Toro. These Things happen'd at the end of the Year. In the beginning of the Year 1355, the Cortes or 1355 Parliament was held at Burgos. There the King complain'd of the Insolency of the Nobility, and desired to be assisted against them. An extraordinary subsidy was granted him. At the same time in France the King of Navarre murder'd the Constable, D. John de la Cerda, younger K. of Na∣varre mur∣ders the Constable of France. Son to D. Alonso the Disinherited; at which Action the King of France was highly offended, for the love he bore the Constable. The cause of his Death was, that the King gave him the Earldom of Angoulesme, which the King of Navarre pretended a Right to, as also to those of Champagne and Brie. In a Rage because the King of France refus'd him those Lordships, he caus'd the Constable to be murder'd in his Castle of Aygle in Normandy, on the 18th of January. The King of France was not seen in four Days after he heard of this mischance; and causing the Business to be in∣quir'd into, summon'd the King of Navarre to answer for himself. He appear'd having first receiv'd Luis the King's Son as Hostage for his safety. He could not clear himself, and the King order'd him to be apprehended, but upon the Intercession of the Queen, and his Sister pardon'd him. We said above, that Prince Peter of Portugal had long to do with the Lady Pr. Peter of Portugal marries the Lady Ag∣nes de Ca∣stro. She is murder'd. Agnes de Castro; her he privately Marry'd the last Year. The King his Father to remove this Stain from the Royal Family, caus'd her to be kill'd at Coimbra. An unjust severity, when she had born him four Children, D. Alonso who dy'd young, D. John, Denis and Beatrix. In July dy'd Luis King of Sicily. His Brother Frederick call'd the Simple, being naturally so, suc∣ceeded him. The Reigns of both those Kings were tempestuous, which open'd the way to the King of Aragon, to recover that Island. But let us leave that a while to go on with the Affairs of Castile. The Cortes at Burgos being broken up, the King went to Medina del Campo: There he put K. Peter punishes Rebels. to death Peter Ruiz de Villegas, Lieutenant of Castile, and Sancho Ruiz de Rojas two Men of Note. Some others he imprison'd. John Fernandez de Hinestrosa, was let out of Prison at Toro, up∣upon parole that he would return if he did not appease the King; but he broke his Word. Henry and Frederick the King's Bastard-brothers, seiz'd the City Toledo, rob'd all the Jews, and murder'd about 1000 of them, but the King coming upon them before they were provid∣ed to make resistance, they were forc'd to fly for their lives. The King reveng'd himself upon the Town, executing some Gentlemen, and Twenty two of the Commonalty. Among those condemn'd was a Goldsmith Eighty Years of Age, a Son of his of Eighteen Years old offer'd to die for him, and the King accepted of the Exchange. Peter Gomez Barroso Bishop of Siguença, was imprison'd for favouring the Towns-men, and Queen Blanch sent to the Castle of Siguença. Toledo being subdu'd, the King went about to reduce the other Cities. Cuenca shut the Gates against him, and being a strong place he would not use Violence. D. Sancho another Bastard-brother of the Kings was bred there, under the care of Alvar Garcia de Albor∣noz, who fled with him into Aragon. Toro was besieged, within it were the Queen Mother, D. Henry, D. Frederick, D. Peter Estevanez Carpintero who call'd himself Master of Calatrava, with the best Forces of the Association. During the Siege Da. Maria de Padilla was deliver∣ed at Tordisillas of a third Daughter, call'd Elizabth. D. John de Padilla Master of Santiago, was kill'd in a Skirmish with a party of Rebels. The King would not bestow that Honour, leaving it as a Bait to attract D. Frederik to his Service. Pope Innocent sent the Cardinal of Bolonia to compose the Differences, but he effected nothing, only obtaining that Bishop Pe∣ter Gomez Barroso should be released. Count Henry fled from Toro to Galicia. D. Frederick Toro taken by K. Peter. went over to the King. Lastly on the 5th of January 1356, one of the Towns-men who had
the Guard of a Gate, gave the King entrance. The King being Master of the City, caus'd Peter Estevanez Carpintero, Ruy Gonzalez de Castan̄eda, and other great Men to be put to death in the Queen's presence: She fainted away at the sight, and coming to her self, loud∣ly curs'd the King her Son, and soon after with his leave went away into Portugal, where she liv'd as lendly as she had done before. There having an Intrigue with D. Martin Tello, a Portugues Gentleman, she was poison'd by the King her Brother. Some say it was by her Fa∣ther Infamous Life and Death of the Queen Mother of Castile. King Alonso the IVth. The King of Castile went to Tordesillas, and there had a Turneament for Joy of his success. Next Morning he caus'd two of D. Fredericks Followers to be put to death, which terrify'd their Master, but no harm was done him. This Year there was a great Earth-quake, which did most harm to the Maritmie Towns. At Sevil the Iron Apples that were upon the Steeple fell down, and the Chappel-Royal newly finish'd by King Alonso at Lisbon, was destroy'd. This was look'd upon as Ominous, and Processions were made to ap∣pease the divine Wrath. After the taking of Toro, Count Henry fled into Biscay, to his Bro∣ther Tello, who made his Party Good, and twice defeated the King's Forces. Thence he went by Sea to Rochel in France. At the same time the King of France surpris'd, and made Prisoner him of Navarre, as he was at a Feast with the Dauphin at Roan in Normandy. He was accus'd of Treason for favouring the English, being a Subject to France. Thus the Spaniards residing in France were divided. Count Henry receiv'd Pay of the King of France, and Phi∣lip the King of Navarre's Brother joyn'd withe English in Normandy. The Earl of Faux did the same, offended at the wrong done to that King his Brother-in-Law. Thus great Revo∣lutions and Bloody Wars threaten'd France and Spain at the same time. The End of the Sixteenth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The Seventeenth BOOK. CHAP. I. The beginning of the War in Aragon. Many Rebellious Nobles in Castile put to Death. The War between Castile and Aragon carried on by Sea and Land. VVE shall now write of a War betwixt two Kingdoms Ally'd by several Mar∣riages. A War bloody and destructive, which consum'd many Noble Per∣sons; and lastly him that began it, giving a new Race of Kings to Castile, and restoring Peace. The motives of this War consider'd singly and apart, were inconsiderable; but concurring all together, made a mighty Flood of Discontents. Both the Kings of Castile and Aragon were Princes of high Spirits, alike in Conditions and War be∣twixt Ca∣stile and A∣ragon. harshness of Nature; yet he of Castile as the younger, was hottest. The Aragonian com∣plain'd, that the Castilian countenanc'd his Brothers in raising Seditions in his Kingdom, and was offended that his Brother Ferdinand had put Castilian Garrisons into his Forts of Alicant and Orihuela. The King of Castile was incens'd; for that the Galleys of Aragon had taken certain Ships laden with Corn at the mouth of Guadalquivir, which made the want there was be∣fore more grievous; besides that, the Out-laws of Castile were protected in Aragon; and also, that the Aragonian Knights of Calatrava and Santiago, would not obey their Masters in Castile. Another new Complaint was added to all these, which was, That the King having reduc'd Castile went to Sevil, and thence for his Diversion, in a Galley to ee the Fishery at Almadra∣vas, near S. Lucar. Two Ships lay then at Anchor in that Port: Ten Galleys of Aragon bound to the Assistance of the French, against the English, Coasting that way, spy'd those two Ships, and carry'd them away before the King's Face. This was a hainous Affront, and The Cau∣ses of the War. Gutierre de Toledo was sent to demand satisfaction. The Aragonian Commander answer'd, that those Ships belong'd to Genoeses, with whom they were then at War, and might there∣fore lawfully be made Prize. Having receiv'd this positive Answer from the Admiral, the King of Castile sent Giles Velazquez de Segovia Embassador into Aragon, to demand Restitution of the Ships taken; and that the Commander of the Galleys should be deliver'd up to him. At that time the King of Aragon was fitting out a Fleet at Barcelona, to subdue the Rebels of Sardinia, and therefore return'd a favourable Answer, saying, He would give Satisfaction to the King of Castile, would banish his Fugitive Subjects out of Aragon, and punish the Admiral at his Return. But as for the Knights of Santiago and Calatrava, that they being Religious Men, he would stand by whatsoever the Pope should decree in that case. Giles Velazquez was not satisfy'd with this Answer; and therefore in his King's Name, declar'd War. The King of Aragon reply'd, he thought there was no sufficient ground for a War; and therefore would not commence it, but did not doubt, if invaded, to repulse it. Thus the War broke out. Many Catalonian Merchants resided at Sevil, in a moment they were all secur'd, and their Effects seiz'd upon. Both Kingdoms made Preparations, and endeavour'd to obtain Foreign Aids. Particularly Luis Brother to the King of Navarre, then a Prisoner in France, was so∣licited by both Parties, but he would declare for neither, tho he rather inclin'd to the Ara∣gonian. Incursions were made three several ways, into the Kingdom of Valencia. Prince Ferdinand of Aragon hoping that Kingdom would rebel, but he was deceiv'd, for they were terrify'd with Punishment. Thus the War was carry'd on at the end of August, with great Desolation of the Country. Near the same time was the memorable Battle of Poitiers in France, in which the whole power of that Kingdom was discomfited by a small Number of English, Victory of the English at Poitiers. the King of France, and his younger Son Philip taken, and a great number of Nobility slain. That famous Battel was fought on the 19th of September, 1356. Upon occasion of this defeat, the King of Navarre broke Prison, and getting to Paris, headed the People against the Dau∣phin. 1356 There in a great Assembly he complain'd of the Wrongs done him, and pleaded his right to the Crown, as Grand-Son to King Luis Hutin, whereas the King of England was Son to the Lady Elizabeth that King's Sister. This had been a ground of new Confusions, but that the King of Navarre wanted Power. However he prevail'd so far as to have all that was his own restor'd to him, with an addition of the Lordships of
Mascon and Bigorre. Yet he could not obtain the Earldoms of Champagne, Brie, and Burgundy, to which he pretended to have right. Heny Earl of Trastamara, escap∣ing from that Fight, fled to the King of Aragon, being invited by him. This was the first step he rose towards obtaining the Crown of Castile. It was agree'd betwixt the King of Aragon and him, That Count Henry should renounce his Country, and take an Oath of Fide∣lity to the Aragonian, and that the King should give him pay for 600 Horse, and as many 1357 Foot, who were to serve under him. At the beginning of the Year 1357, the War went on with various Success on the Frontiers of Castile and Aragon. The Arigonians took Alicant, Towns ta∣ken on both sides. the Castilians Embite and Bordalva. Chief Commanders for the King of Aragon were Count Henry, D. Peter de Exerica, and Count Lope Ferdnandez de Luna. For the King of Castile D. Frederick Master of Santiago, the two Princes of Aragon, and D. John de la Cerda. Those of Aragon serv'd their Master with greater Fidelity than those Castile, who at last were all drawn over by the Enemy. D. John de la Cerda, and Alvar Perez de Gusman were the first that deserted the King of Castile, remembring the death of D. Alonso Coronel whose Daugh∣ters they had marry'd, and who was kill'd by the King's Order, as also fearing the King had a Mind to Da. Aldonça, Wife to Alvar Perez. They fled to Andaluzia, hoping to raise a Re∣bellion there. At this time the King of Castile, laid Siege to a Castle on the Borders of Castile and Aragon, call'd Tebat, or as others write Silamo, there he receiv'd the News that those Gentlemen were fled into Andaluzia: He pursu'd them a while, but finding it impossible to overtake them, return'd to the War with more fury than before: He took some Towns of small Note, and with the same Violence enter'd Taraçona, a noble City near Navarre, on the 9th of March. The Citizens seeing the upper part of the Town lost, surrender'd upon promise of Life and Goods, and were suffer'd to depart to Tudela. It was said, this City was lost through the Cowardise of the Governour Michael de Guerrea, who not knowing how to answer it, with∣drew with his Family to Navarre. The King peopled the Town with Castillian Souldiers, di∣viding the Houses and Lands among them. This City being lost, the King of Aragon thought not himself safe in Zaragoça, especially for that, at the same time D. John de la Cerda was defeat∣ed and kill'd, by the Forces of the Council of Sevil, commanded by D. John Ponce de Leon, Lord of Marchena, and Gilos Bocanegra the Admiral. From France came the Earl of Faux with many Gentlemen of Note, to serve the King of Aragon. His Enemy the Lord La Brie came with a number of Lances to King Peter. Pope Innocent's Legate, the Cardinal of Bolonia sent to that purpose labour'd much to bring them to Peace, and at last obtained a Truce for 15 Months. Mean while Bernard de Cabrera, and John Fernandez de Hinestrosa were ap∣pointed Commissioners, the first for Aragon, the other for Castile, to treat. All Places ta∣ken on both sides were deliver'd in Trust to the Cardinal Legate, who excommunicated him that should offer to break the Truce. This Agreement was made on the 18th of May. This Month dy'd Alonso the IIId, King of Portugal, Aged 77 Years and a Half. He reign'd Alonso the IIId. K. of Portugal dies. Peter King of Portugal. 31 Years, 5 Months and 20 Days, and was buried by his Queen Beatrix, in the Cathedral of that City. His Son Peter call'd the Cruel, succeeded him. About a Month before he had a Son born to him of Da. Teresa Gallego, whom he kept after his Father, caus'd the Lady Ag∣nes de Castro to be put to death. She was graceful, but had no other good quality, her Son was call'd John, to whom Heaven had reserv'd the Crown of Portugal, as shall appear in its Place. The Truce concluded betwixt the Crowns of Castile and Aragon, the Aragonian de∣liver'd up to the Legate the Places he had taken, being but few, but King Peter could never be induc'd to draw the Souldiers out of Taraçona, to whom he had given Houses there. He went away to Sevil, to settle Andaluzia, and set out a Fleet to infest the Coast of Aragon, for he neither expected nor desir'd Peace. At Sevil he was so taken with the Lady Aldonça Coronel, that he made no account of Da. Maria de Padilla. The Legate offended at his course of Life, excommunicated him, and laid an Interdict upon all Castile. This was an extrava∣gant Action of the Legate, therefore the Pope call'd him out of Spain. All was contriv'd by the King of Aragon to make King Peter odious. Another Displeasure befel him. The Lady Joanna. Wife to Count Henry, was convey'd into Aragon, to her Husband by Peter Ca∣rillo, a Servant of his, which cut off all hope of Peace. The other Brothers Frederick and Tello were willing to rebel, but fear'd they could have nothing in Aragon equivalent to the Estates they must leave in Castile. Prince Ferdinand of Aragon kept the Town of Jumilla ta∣ken from the Aragonians, he dealing underhand with Bernard de Cabrera, went over to the King of Aragon upon conditition to be made Vicar of the Kingdom, and have all his Estate re∣stor'd. The Revolt of Count Henry, and Prince Ferdinand, as it was the Life of Aragon so it Rebellion of the Ba∣stards of Castile. prov'd fatal to their Brothers, as shall be seen here after. Mathew Doria dying in Sardinia, advanc'd the King of Aragons Interest, for tho Marianus of Arborea was not quiet, his Pow∣er alone was inconsiderable. Luis of Naples was possess'd of the greatest part of Sicily. Frederick call'd the Simple, who two Years before, succeeded his Brother Luis, was Young and Weak, as well in Judgment as Forces, and preserv'd the Title of King in the City Cata∣nea. The Power of the French daily increasing, he was so dismay'd, that he freely made over all his Dominions of Sicily, Athens, and Neopatria to his Sister Ellenor, Wife to the King of Aragon, to whom he sent a publick Instrument of this donation, to oblige him to send Forces to his Aid, but the Aragonian had his Hands so full at Home, that he could not relieve his Brother-in-Law. The Affairs of Sicily reduc'd to this miserable Condition,
were up-held by the Valour of D.  de Aragon, Earl of Mistreta, and Lord Justice of Sici∣ly, who overthrew the Enemy in Battel, punish'd some Rebels, and redu'd others. CHAP. II. The Kings of Castile and Aragon both call the Moors to their assistance. The War is car∣ry'd on vigorously on both sides. The Castilians treacherous to their King. He punishes many of them. The computation of time in Aragon alter'd. REvenge carry'd the King's of Castile and Aragon headlong to their Ruin, and so blinded them, that they call'd the Moors to their assistance. The King of Granada sent a Body of Moors cal∣led by the Christians to their as∣sistance. Horse to the Service of Castile, as was agreed betwixt them. The King of Aragon call'd over the King of Morocco. Pope Innocent by Letter grievously complain'd of this Action, but in vain. The Nobles of Castile were wrought upon by the Aragonians, and forsook their Prince. The first was Prince Ferdinand of Aragon, as was said above. Yet Jumilla by him betray'd, was retaken at the beginning of the Year 1358, by D. Frederick Master of Santiago. This done he went away to the King then at Sevil, who caus'd him to be put to death in his pre∣sence, 1358 by his Guards, understanding he dealt underhand with the Aragonians. From Sevil the Rebels pu∣nished. King went with great speed to Biscay, designing the same Fate for the other Brother D. Tello, who suspecting it fled by Sea into France, and thence into Aragon. D. Tello being gone, Prince John of Aragon begg'd of the King he would put him into Possession of the Lordship of Biscay, to which he had right by his Wife the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to D. John Nun̄ez de Lara. The King knowing he was associated with the rebellious Peers, caus'd him to be slain by his Guards in his presence, and his Body to be thrown out at a Window, and say'd to some Biscayners that look'd on, Behold him that would have been your Lord. His Body was carry'd to Burgos, there cast into the River, and never after seen. Queen Ellenor that Prince's Mother and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, were sent Prisoners from Roa to the Castle of Castroxeriz. Six Heads of Men of Note were brought to him to Burgos from several Places. He had resolv'd to execute others at Valladolid, but was prevented by the Incursions, Count Henry and Prince Ferdinand made into his Territories, the former wasted all the Country of Campos, Soria and Almaçan, the other, the Kingdom of Murcia. From Osma the King went to Burgos, to pro∣vide against these Irruptions. Thence he sent to complain to the King of Aragon, that he had broke the Truce. That King answer'd, the Truce had been broken in retaking Jumilla, and calleng'd him to decide the Quarrel with 20, 50, or 100 Men of a side. King Peter made small account of his Challenge, but sent D. Gutierre Gomez de Toledo, lately made great Prior of St. John to secure the Kingdom of Murcia, others had other Commands given them. He himself went away to Sevil, where he had fitted 12 Galleys, which were joyn'd by 6 from Genoa, with which he design'd to scour the Coast of Valencia, and attempt the Maritime Towns. These Galleys took the Town of Guardamar, belonging to Prince Ferdinand, but were pre∣vented from taking the Castle, by a suddain Storm in which they all perish'd, except two that were out at Sea. This loss no way discourag'd the King, who burnt the Town, and march'd away to Murcia. Thence he sent his Favourite Martin Yanez to Sevil, to equip an∣other Fleet, and he having gather'd an Army from all parts, march'd away to Almaçan, and thence into the Enemies Country, where he took several Towns. Winter drawing on, he return'd to Sevil, resolving to fit out a great Fleet, to which purpose the King of Portugal his Uncle, sent him Ten Galleys, and he of Granada Three. This Year was remarkable for the Birth of the Lady Ellenor, Daughter to Peter King of Aragon, and of D. John Son to Count Henry, whom Heaven had decreed should be marry'd together, and inherit the Crown of Castile. This Year also it was ordain'd in the Cortes of Valencia, that the computation of Era of Ce∣sar abo∣lished. Years should no longer be taken from the Era of Cesar, but from the Birth of Christ. At the beginning of the Year 1359, the King of Aragon laid Siege to the strong Town of Medina Celi, but it being well defended, return'd to Zaragoça without any Success. The King of 1359 Castile being on the way to relieve Medina Celi, understood the Cardinal of Bolonia, the Pope's Legate, was arriv'd at Almaçan. In that place the Legate had Audience, and earnestly ex∣horted the King in the Pope's Name, to incline to Peace with the Christians, and employ his Arms against the Infidels. The King answer'd he had been already impos'd upon by the King of Aragon, under pretence of Peace, and therefore was resolv'd to give no more Ear to it, unless the Aragoman would banish the out-Laws of Castile, restore the Towns wrongfully taken, during his Grand-fathers Minority, and pay 500000 Florins for the Charge of War. With this Answer the Legate went to the King of Aragon who excus'd himself, and laid the blame upon his Enemy, as is usual. The time was spent in Messages to and fro, and yet not so much as a truce could be concluded. All hopes of Peace being laid aside, the King of Castile at Almaçan, declar'd Prince Ferdinand Expediti∣on of King Peter by Sea. and the two Brothers Count Henry and D. Tello Traytors. Queen Ellenor was put to death in Prison, and soon after the Lady Joanna de Lara. Her Sister the Lady Elizabeth was sent with Qu. Blanch from the Castle of Siguença to Xerez de la Frontera. This done the King imbarqu'd aboard
a Fleet of 41 Galleys, and 80 Ships, so well stord, and carrying so powerful an Army, that they were provided for any great Enterprize. By the way he took a mighty Venetian Garack, only because it resisted; it was carry'd to Cathagena, and all its rich Lading secur'd. The Fleet sail'd to Guardumar, and took both the Town and Castle by Storm. Alicant was aban∣doned by the Aragonians. D. Gutierre de Toledo was left with a good Force to secure the Towns taken. The King with the rest of the Fleet sail'd to Tortosa, at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Ebro. There the Legate came aboard his Galley, and again made some Overtures of Peace, but in vain. Thence he sail'd to Barcelona, where he found 12 Galleys of Aragon, which he twice attempted to carry off but could not, because they lay near the Shore, and were bravely defended by the Catalonians. Thus disappointed he sail'd for the opposite Islands. He landed at Yviça, and tho he assaulted the Town of that Name, could not take it. Mean while the King of Aragon having gather'd 40 Galleys sail'd over to Majorca, de∣signing to Fight the Castilian Fleet. The King at the Request of his People stay'd in the Island, and sent the Fleet under the command of Bernard de Cabrera, his Admiral, and the Viscount to find out the Enemy, who leaving Yviça were come to Calpe with the same Reso∣lution. The Aragonian Fleet lay at the Mouth of the River that falls into the Sea, neat Denia, both Parties seem'd desirous to Ingage, yet both were cautious, so all this threaten'd Storm vanish'd. The Aragonians put into Barcelona, and the King of Castile from Cartagena sent his Fleet to Sevil, and went by Land himself to Tordesillas, to see Da. Maria de Padilla, who was there deliver'd of a Son call'd Alonso. The King's Joy for his Birth was not lasting, for he dy'd soon after. In the Fields of Araviana, at the foot of the Mountain Moncayo, Count Henry and his Brother D. Tello with 700 Aragonian Horse charg'd a Party of Castile, and The Rebels defeat the Royalists. overthrew them, killing about 300, and taking many Men of Note. Among the rest was killed John Fernandez de Hinestrosa, the Commander in Chief. The King of Castile in a rage caus'd two Bastard Brothers he kept Prisoners to be put to Death, which were John and Pe∣ter. It is likely they were convicted of keeping Correspondence with the Rebels, yet this Action terrify'd the whole Kingdom. All the great Ones trembled, but doubtless it was their Guilt made them do so, for many Men of Quality not thinking themselves secure in Castile fled into Aragon. The King was charg'd with Cruelty, but the Subject consider'd not how many frequent Rebellions oblig'd him to make Examples of Justice. Having Intelli∣gence that 12 Venetian Galleys were ready to pass out of the Streights, the King sent 20 to Intercept them, but a Storm disappointed the Design. This is represented as a hainous Crime, without reflecting that is was say'd before the Venetians were in League with Aragon, and might therefore be justly looked upon as Enemies to Castile. But it was the Misfortune of this King to have all his Actions misrepresented, and to have those things call'd Cruelty in him, which were but just Punishment of Rebels. Yet because a Bastard prevail'd against him, that Bastard was applauded as lawful King, and the true King stiled a Tyrant. Such is the Judgment of the World, that Mis∣fortunes make the best King a Tyrant, and success Crowns the vilest Ʋsurper with the Name of a Lawful Prince. The Cardinal Legate took much pains to set on Foot a Treaty of Peace, which he compass'd at the beginning of the Year 1360. Embassadors were sent on both sides with full Power, and the King was near a Conclusion. Yet neither at Tudela, nor at Sadua, where 1360 the Treaty was renew'd and continu'd, could any thing be brought to Perfection; for the Aragonians were incourag'd with their late Success, and the King of Castile after so many Disappointments would not yield the least Point. Yet finding so much Falshood among his People he knew not who to trust, and therefore every Day chang'd the Officers of his House∣hold and Army. This was the unhappy condition of King Peter. CHAP. III. The Death of Queen Blanch, and Da. Maria de Padilla. Peace betwixt Castile and Aragon. The War with the Moors, and Death of their King. The King of Ara∣gon's Daughter marry'd to the King of Sicily. THE Treaty of Peace was so carry'd on, that still fresh Preparations for War were made on both Sides. The King of Castile went from Sevil towards Leon in speed to appre∣hend Various accidents. Peter Nun̄ez de Guzman Lieutenant of that Kingdom, but he having Notice of the King's approach fled to Portugal, a sign he was not Innocent. Peter Alvarez Osorio being at Dinner with D. James Garcia de Padilla Master of Calatrava was put to Death by two of the King's Guards. From Leon the King went to Burgos, where he put to Death, James Arias Maldo∣nado the Archdeacon, for keeping a Correspondence with Count Henry. Many others sav'd their Lives by the sudden Irruptions of the Aragonians under Count Henry, D. Tello, and the Count de Osona, into the Territory of Rioja, where they took the Town of Haro, and City Najara, killing a great Number of Jews, and making great Slaughter and Destructions. In this heat they advanc'd as for as Pancorvo. Gonzalo Gonzalez de Lucio, Governour of Tara∣çona for the King of Castile deliver'd it up to the Aragonians. The King of Castile march'd towards the Enemy then at Najara, and encamp'd near a small Town call'd Azofra. Here
a Priest came to tell him he had a Revelution that his Bastard Brother, Count Henry would kill him unless he mended his Life; but the King for his Intelligence caus'd him to be pub∣lickly Burnt in the Camp. From Azofra the King march'd towards Najara, and there to∣tally routed the Aragonians, who fled to the City, which might have been taken, but the King could not be perswaded to besiege it. Within two or three Days the Aragonians aban∣don'd Haro and Najara, and the King put Garrisons into them. Having secur'd the Fron∣tires he return'd to Sevil, and there agreed with the King of Portugal, that each should de∣liver up the Out-laws that fled from the other. The King of Portugal put to Death one Pe∣ter Peter K. of Portugal executes the Mur∣derers of the Lady Agnes de Castro. Coello, and another because they had murder'd the Lady Agnes de Castro. James Lopez Pacheco, who had a Hand in her Death fled to Count Henry, who afterwards for his good Service gave him an Estate in Castile, and he was the Founder of the Noble Family of Pacheco. Others were deliver'd to the King of Castile, who put them to Death at Sevil. One of these was Peter Nun̄ez de Guzman, the Lieutenant of Leon. Another was Gomez Carillo beheaded in a Galley, as he was going by the King's Order from Sevil to Algozira, upon pretence of being Governor of that Place. Gutierre Fernandez de Toledo was put to Death at Alfaro, for favouring the Party of Count Henry. Gutierre Gomez and Toledo, and James Gomez Brother to the deceas'd, understanding he was Executed, fled to Aragon. D. Vasco, Arch-bishop of Toledo was banish'd the Kingdom without allowing him time to change his Cloaths. He went to Coimbra, where in a Monastery of Dominicans he ended his Days holily. Some Years af∣ter his Body was Translated to the Cathedral of Toledo. Many call this Archbishop Blase. It is suppos'd D. Vasco resign'd the Archbishoprick as soon as he was Banish'd, for the same Year we find D. Gomez Manrique succeeded him. Whilst these things happen'd in Castile, the King of Aragon sent 4 Galleys well equipp'd, to the Assistance of the King of Tremecen his Ally. They met 5 Galleys of Castile, which took and carry'd them to Sevil, there many of them with their Commander Mathew Merzero were put to Death by the King's Order. Samuel Levi a Jew was the King's Treasurer, and had the diposal of all the Revenue, where∣by he gather'd great Riches, which now prov'd his Ruin. He was accus'd of many Frauds, and being put to the Wrack dy'd upon it. The King seiz'd upon his Estate, valu'd at 400000 Ducats, others say more, besides Moveables and Jewels. At the end of this Year Mahomet Constance. the K. of Aragon's Daughter marry'd to the K. of Sicily. Lagus was expell'd his Kingdom by his own Subjects. Mahomet Aben Alhamar was set up in his Place, and from the Colour of his Hair, and Beard, call'd the Red. They said the Crowa appertain'd to him as being descended of the Antient Kings of Granada. Hence en∣su'd new Wars, for the King of Castile was a Friend to him that was depos'd, who fled to Ronda, a Town belonging to the King of Morocco. The King of Castile resolv'd to stand by his old Friend. On the other side the new King to strengthen himself sought the Friendship of the Aragonian, which, and calling King Abohanen out of Africk, cost him his Life. At the end of this Year, the Lady Constance, Daughter to the King of Aragon was sent into Si∣cily to be marry'd to King Frederick. Olfo Prochita, Governour of the Island Sardinia com∣manded the Fleet that carry'd her. The Marriage was celebrated on the 11th of April 1361, 1361. at Catanea. From that time the Affairs of the Island began to be more Successful; the Neo∣politans being vanquish'd and expell'd the Kingdom. Of this Queen was born the Lady Ma∣ry, who was afterwards Queen of Aragon, and had in Dower the Kingdom of Sicily. At length by the Industry of the Cardinal Legate, Peace was concluded in Castile, yet so that none thought it would be lasting. The Articles were, That all Places taken on both Sides should be restor'd, and that the Out-laws of Castile should be expell'd Aragon, provided the Peace be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon. King pardon'd them. On the 18th of May the Peace was Proclaim'd at Deza, where the King of Castile was then encamp'd. This Peace was forwarded by the fear of the War the King of Granada then made upon Castile. For the greater security it was agreed that cau∣tionary Towns on both sides should be put into the Hands of King Charles of Navarre, who was then coming out of France into Spain very Joyful, for that his Queen had brought him a Son call'd Charles. Mean while his Brother Prince Luis Govern'd the Kingdom. Peace con∣cluded, the King of Aragon went away to Zaragoça, and he of Castile to Sevil, Count Henry and his Brothers into France, hoping to renew the War. Many Nobles of Castile were rea∣dy to take up Arms upon pretence of protecting Queen Blanch; which heightned the King's hatred towards her. It was said he caus'd her to be Poison'd in the Prison where he kept Blanch Q. of Castile dies. her. She was doubtless the most unfortunate Queen of Spain. There is a report that the King being a Hunting near Medina Sidonia, there met him a Shepherd of a terrible Aspect, threatning him if he had not Compassion of Queen Blanch, and that the King sending pre∣sently to see whether it was not some body employ'd by her, she was found at Prayers, and closely Guarded. The Shepherd being releas'd out of Prison, was never after seen. Doubt∣less were this a Vision, he had never been put into Prison. The Lady Elizabeth de Lara, Daughter to D. John de Lara, was also Poison'd in Prison at Xerez. An Historian who stiles himself head Caterer to Queen Ellenor of Castile, in certain Commentaries he writ upon what happen'd in his Time, says, Queen Blanch dy'd at Ʋren̄a near the City Toro in old Castile. This uncertainty as to the Place of her Death makes it appear, the manner of it is not so cer∣tain, tho the Malice of Authors, who all humour'd the Success of Henry the Bastard, caus'd all Crimes to be laid to his Predecessor Peter, because he was Unfortunate.
The publick Grief for so many Calamities was somewhat asswag'd by the Death of Da. Da. Maria de Padilla dies. Maria de Padilla, who ended her Days at Sevil in July. A Woman, laying aside her Inconti∣nency, in all other Respects worthy to be a Queen. Her Funeral-Rites were perform'd throughout the Kingdom, with the same Magnificence as if she had been Queen. She was bury'd in the Monastery of S. Mary de Estudilla, which she built in old Castile. The Body of Queen Blanch was deposited in the Cathedral of Tudela, by some French Gentlemen, who came to the Assistance of Count Henry, in order to carry it into France. In the Monastery of Dominican Nuns at Toledo there are 3 Tombs, one of the Lady Teresa, by whom King Peter had a Daughter called Mary, who was many Years Prioress in that Monastery, and lies in the 2d Tomb. In the 3d are D. Sancho, and D. James, Sons of King Peter, by the Lady Peter of Portugal declares his Chil∣dren Le∣gitimate. Elizabeth. At this time the King of Portugal solemnly declar'd in Lisbon, that the Children he had by the Lady Agnez de Castro, were born in lawful Wedlock, and as such capable of inheriting the Crown, and as Witnesses of his Marriage, he produc'd Giles Bishop of Guardia, and Stephen Lovata his Master of the Robes. The King and Witnesses made Oath of the Truth of their Assertion, in the Presence of all the Nobility, and of John Alonso Tello the year before created Earl of Barcelos, and was the first that obtain'd that Honour in Portugal. Mean while the War of Granada was carry'd on with great Heat. The Forces of Castile ravag'd the Territories of the Moors, and laid Siege to Antequera, formerly call'd Syngilia, a strong and well Garrison'd Town, whence they were Repuls'd. Having wasted the Plain of Granada, they return'd Home without performing any memorable Action. Soon after 600 Moorish Horse, and 2000 Foot broke into the Lieutenancy of Caçorla, and took a great Booty of Cattle. The Gentry of Jaen, and the Neighbouring Places assembling recovered the Prey, killing many of the Enemy, and putting the rest to Flight. A more dangerous War was expected from France; which the Cardinal Legate endeavour'd to prevent, and to that effect spent the Summer at Pamplona. He labour'd to perswade King Peter to pardon the Out-laws of Castile, and reverse their Attainder of Treason. The King would not hear of it, therefore the Cardinal at the Solicitation of the King of Aragon took upon him to de∣clare their Attainder Void. This provok'd the King of Castile, who resolv'd to take Re∣venge Presump∣tion of a Legate. as soon as he had put an end to the War with the Moors. On the 18th of February 1362, the Moors obtain'd a notable Victory over the Christians near Guadix. D. James Garcia de Padillu, Master of Calatrava, and Henry Enriquez, Lieutenant of the Frontiers of Jaen, with 1362. other Gentlemen entred the Moorish Territories, with 1000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, design∣ing Victory of the Moors over the Christians. to Attack Guadix. A great Number of Men was put into that Place unknown to the Christians, who sent some Troops to Plunder the Fields, call'd Val de Alhama. The Moors perceiving they were divided, fell upon those with great Fury that remain'd behind. The Fight lasted all Day, but the Number of Moors prevailing, many of our Men were kill'd, many taken, and among them the Master of Calatrava, who was carry'd to Granada, and that King being desirous to appease King Peter, sent him away without any Ransom. King Peter believing this Courtesy proceeded from fear, assembling his Forces, enter'd the King∣dom of Granada, took several Towns, and return'd to Sevil with a rich Booty. To this Misfortune of the Moorish Kings another was added, which was, that many Men of Note forsook him, and favour'd his Adversary, Mahomet Lagus, who was in Banishment. The King fearing he should be expelled the Kingdom, consulted with his Friends what was best to be done, and by the advice of one Edriz a constant follower of his Fortunes, having obtain'd a Pass, came away to Sevil with 400 Horse, and 200 Foot, to put himself under the Protection of the King of Castile. The King receiv'd him Honourably in the Palace of Sevil, and having heard him, promis'd all should be well. Then he was sent to Sup with D. Gar∣cia The Moorish K. of Grana∣da wrong∣fully put to Death. de Toledo, the Master of Santiago; whilst they were at Supper the Moorish King was ap∣prehended, and a few Days after being Cloath'd in his Royal Robes, which were Scarlet, was carry'd out upon an Ass, with 37 of his Gentlemen, to the publick Place of Execution, which is near the City, and is call'd Tablada. There they were all put to Death. It was given out their Riches were the Cause of their Death, and some Authors say King Peter himself slew the Moorish King with a Spear. His Body was sent to his Competitor, Mahomet Lagus, who immediately recover'd his Kingdom, and sent away all the Christians taken at the Fight of Guadix, without Ransom.
CHAP. IV. Castile and Navarre joyn in League. The War is carry'd on Successfully against Ara∣gon, by King Peter of Castile, who declares the Lady Mary de Padilla to have been his lawful Wife. The Death of John King of France, and Constance Queen of Aragon. THE War with the Moors being ended, the King of Castile bent his Thoughts against Ara∣gon, but gave out that the Preparations he made were to defend himself against France. He resolv'd to make a League with England, fearing the King of France would take Revenge Castile and Navarre join in League. for the Wrongs done his Neece, Queen Blanch. At Soria he had a Meeting with the King of Navarre, and they made a League against Aragon, the Navarrois pretending to take Re∣venge, for that the Aragonian being his Brother in Law and Ally, had not assisted him when he was Prisoner in France. Having therefore assembl'd all the Force of his Kingdom, he lay'd Siege to the Town of Sos in Aragon, and took it after a vigorous Resistance made. At the same time the King of Castile with an Army of 10000 Horse, and 30000 Foot entred Aragon, resolving to besiege Calatayud. By the way he took Hariza, Ateca, Cetina, and Al∣hama, and in June sat down before the strong City of Calatayud, within it was a numerous and resolute Garrison. The King of Aragon considering the Danger the Besieg'd were in, sent the Count de Osona, Son to Bernard Cabrera, D. Peter de Luna, his Brother D. Artal, and other Gentlemen to attempt getting into the Town, that they might encourage the Besieg'd till he could send them Relief. They being come to Miedes, a Town near Calatayud, King Peter who had notice of it surpriz'd the Place, and carry'd them away Prisoners to the Camp. The King of Aragon being unprovided sent to desire Aid in France, and to call Count Henry and his Brother D. Tello to his Assistance. Relief was long a coming, and the City no longer able to hold out, was surrendred upon the 29th of August, upon Condition the Inhabitants should remain free in their Persons and Estates, as they had been under the Crown of Aragon. This City being taken, and a good Garrison put into it, under the com∣mand of the Master of Santiago, the King return'd to Sevil. Here before he went to Cala∣tayud he had held the Cortes or Parliament, in which he publickly declar'd and vouched that Da. Maria de Padilla had been his lawful Wife, he being privately Marry'd to her long be∣fore Queen Blanch came into Spain, which made his Marriage with that Lady void. That Da. Maria de Padilla declared by King Peter his lawful Wife. he had not discover'd it before, fearing the Malice of the Nobility; but thought himself now oblig'd in Conscience to do it, as also for the sake of the Children he had by her. He order'd she should for the future be call'd Queen, and bury'd among the Kings. On the 17th of October following dy'd his Son Alonso, whom he design'd his Heir. On the 18th of November the King made his Will, in which he orders himself to be bury'd with the Habit of S. Francis, betwixt Da. Maria de Padilla, and his Son Alonso. It appears he was not so re∣mote from godly Thoughts as his Enemies represent him, tho his violent Nature often trans∣ported him. By this Will he appoints his Daughters by Da. Maria de Padilla successively his Heiresses, and after them his Son John, by the Lady Joanna de Castro. The Witnesses of the Marriage produc'd, were of undoubted Reputation, such as D. Garcia de Padilla, Master of Calatrava, John Fernandez de Hinestrosa, one John Alsonso de Mayorga, and John Perez a Priest, who all made Oath upon that Matter. In one Article of his Will, he forbid his Daughters on pain of incurring his Curse, and forfeiting the Crown, marrying of Prince Ferdinand of Aragon, or Count Henry, or D. Tello his Bastard Brothers; but order'd Beatrix the Elder to marry Ferdinand Prince of Portugal; and that the Crown of Castile should be her Dower. D. Garci Alvarez de Toledo, Master of Santiago, was appointed her Tutor. He also ordain'd that D. James de Padilla, Master of Calatrava, and D. Suero Martinez, Master of Alcantara should be supported in their Estates, Honours, and Dignities. Having setl'd all things in the dead of Winter, being the beginning of the Year 1363, the War was carry'd on with 1363. great Vigour. Levies were made throughout the Kingdom, and a League with the King of Castile in League with Eng∣land. England. Malvenda, Aranda, and Borgia, with other Towns of less Note were taken, and Taraçona besieg'd. On the other side the King of Navarre made an Incursion into Aragon, and destroy'd all the Country wherever he came. Luis, Brother to the King of Navarre, Giles Fernandez Carvallo, Master of Santiago in Portugal, with 300 Horse, and some French Gentlemen came to serve the King of Castile. The King of Aragon courted him of Granada to make War in Andaluzia, but he refus'd, acknowledging the Favour lately receiv'd. He also solicited the African Moors, and excus'd himself for so doing, by the Example of the King of Castile, whom Farax Reduan serv'd with 600 Moorish Horse, sent by the King of Gra∣nada. Count Henry was daily expected out of France with 3000 Lances, yet all the Power of Aragon was Inferior to that of Castile, wherefore Taraçona, Tervel, Segorbe, Exerica, and ma∣ny other Places surrender'd. The Castilians without Opposition peirc'd into the Heart of the Kingdom, and took Monviedro. On the 20th of July they besieg'd Valencia. In Aragon they gave themselves for lost, when Count Henry arriving reinforc'd their Army, so that they durst advance towards the Enemy. But the Army of Castile being much weaken'd with
Garrisoning the Towns taken, the King would not hazzard a Battel, and therefore retir'd to Monviedro. The Aragonian perceiving he could not draw the Enemy to a Battel, retir'd to Burrlanna a strong Town. 2000 Horse were sent by the King of Castile to disturb their March, but they did nothing worth taking notice of. Whilst these Things were in Agitati∣on in Spain, King John of France dy'd at London, whether he went to ransom the Hostages left there when he was releas'd. His Son Charles the Vth. succeeded him. Charles the John K. of France dies Charles the Vth succeeds. new King was an utter Enemy to him of Navarre, therefore as soon as he was possess'd of the Kingdom, he sent Bertran Claquin, a famous General with an Army to invade his Ter∣ritories in France. This General took several Towns, and overthrew in Battle Philip the King's Brother, who soon after dy'd. His death mov'd the King of Navarre to propose a Peace betwixt the Kings of Spain. Besides, he began to pity his Kinsman, the King of Aragon, and was envious of the Success of the Castilian. Hereupon Luis the King of Navarre's Brother, and the Abbot of Fuscan, the Popes Nuncio, went to treat with the King of Ca∣stile, and found with him the Count de Denia and Bernard de Cabrera, Embassadors from the King of Aragon. These Gentlemen mollify'd the King of Castile's Heart, especially by pro∣posing two Matches, one for him with Joanna Daughter to the King of Aragon, the other for his Daughter Beatrix, with John Duke of Girona, Heir of that Crown. This is what was propos'd publickly. Underhand the death of Henry Earle of Trastamana, and Prince Ferdinand of Aragon were contriv'd, but the King of Aragon was unwilling to condescend. Never∣theless whether it was to please the King of Castile or for any other Reason, Prince Ferdinand was put to death at Castellon, a Town near Burriana. The old Animosities were reviv'd, and he was about making his escape into France, with some Castilians that follow'd him. His Wife flying towards Portugal, was taken by the way, and afterwards sent to her Father. Count Henry was not a little pleas'd at the death of Prince Ferdinand, as being thereby deli∣ver'd of a powerful Competitor in his pretensions to the Crown of Castile. But his Joy had like to be but short, for the next day he was in evident Danger of his Life, without knowing any thing of it. The Kings of Aragon and Navarre had agreed to meet together, with Count Henry, in the Castle of Ʋncastel, belonging to the Aragonian, on the Borders of Navarre, and there to kill him. The Count tho ignorant of the Design was jealous, and would not go into the Castle. To satisfy him, John Ramirez de Arellano was made Governour of the Place, in whom doubtless the Count had some Confidence, and went thither upon his patole. Some say this Meeting was at Sos, on the Frontiers of Navarre. This Caution sav'd Count Henry's Life, for the Kings could not prevail with the Governour to suffer him to come to any harm. He said the Count was his Friend; and besides, he had ingag'd his Honour to him, and therefore on no account would blast his Reputation, with the Name of Treachery. About this time Constance Queen of Sicily, ended her days at Catanea. She left one Daughter Constance Qu. of Si∣cily dies. called Mary, who afterwards inherited her Father's Kingdom, which in her right came to Martin Her Husband, the Son of another Martin Duke of Monblanc, and lastly, King of Ara∣gon. The Treaty of Peace being broke up, the King of Aragon went to Catalonia, to provide for his defence. He of Castile return'd to Sevil with such eager Desire of renewing the War, that about the end of the Year, he enter'd the Kingdom of Valencia, took the Towns of Ali∣cant, Muela, Gallosa, Denia, Gandia and Oliva, and in the Month of December laid Siege to Valencia the Metropolis of that Kingdom. CHAP. V. Count Henry proclaimed King of Castile. King Peter expelled the Kingdom. Re∣fus'd entertainment in Portugal, gathers a Fleet in Galicia, and flies into France to the protection of the English. THE King of Aragon who kept his Christmas at Lerida, was much surpris'd at this Ad∣vance of the Castilians. On the 23d of February 1364, he had a Conference with the King of Navarre at Sos. Count Henry was there, being reconcil'd to the Two Kings, or 1364 Confedera∣tion a∣gainst Ca∣stile. what is likelyest, not knowing what had been design'd against him. They make a Confede∣racy which was not lasting. Castile they divided among themselves: The King of Navarre was to have Biscay, and old Castile; he of Aragon, the Kingdoms of Murcia and Toledo, Count Henry all the other parts. Only Bernard de Cabrera lik'd not these Proceedings, therefore they resolv'd to kill him, which was not so private, but he had some notice of it, and fled to Navarre. Count Henry sent some Officers after him, by whom he was apprehended at Car∣castillo, and deliver'd to the King of Aragon. That King having gather'd his Forces, march'd to raise the Siege of Valencia. The Castilians would not come to a Battel, but kept within their Intrenchments, and so the Aragonians got into Valencia. The Fleet of Castile consisting of 24 Galleys, and 46 Ships sail'd to Monviedro, there they understood that the Viscount Car∣dona was with 17 Galleys of Aragon, in the River of Cullera. The King of Castile made thi∣ther resolving to take them, but at the Mouth of the River, a sudden Tempest forc'd him back to the Port from whence he set out. The King himself was in great Danger, and
therefore as soon as he Landed went in Pilgrimage to the Church of our Lady del Puch, to give Thanks. He is said to have done this Barefoot and in his Shirt, which shews he was not so ungodly as he is represented. After this, the King of Aragon return'd to Barcelona, he of Castile to Murcia, and thence to Sevil, in the Heat of Summer. On the 26th of July, Bernard de Cabrera was publickly put to death at Zaragoça, the King himself giving Sentence against him, and consiscating all his Lands. This was doubtless a cruel Act, for he had serv'd well, Bernard de Cabrera cruelly put to death. was Innocent, and had been the King's Tutor, all his Crime was speaking the Truth to the King's Advantage; but Kings love Flatterers. The Queen, the King of Navarre, Count Henry, and Count de Ribagorça contriv'd his death. The War continu'd hot. Ayora in the Kingdom of Valencia was taken by the King of Castile. D. Gutierre de Toledo Master of Cala∣trava, leading a Convoy to Monviedro, was defeated and kill'd by the Aragonians. Martin Lopez de Cordova, succeeded him. The King of Castile thought to make himself Master of Orihuela, but the Aragonian offering him Battel, and he refusing, the place was relieved, and the Aragonian return'd home. At the beginning of the Year 1365, the King of Aragon be∣sieg'd 1365 Monviedro, and had it surrender'd to him. On the other side the Castilians after a long Siege took Orihuela. D. Gomez de Porras Prior of St. John, either because he fear'd King Pe∣ter, for loosing Monviedro, or to curry favour with Count Henry, deserted to the Aragonians with 600 Horse that were in that Town. From this time the Forces of Castile began to de∣crease, and there being Peace betwixt France and England, many French came to serve the King of Aragon. These were no better than common Robbers, to whom the Pope and King Foreign∣ers come to serve Count Henry. of France gave great Summs of Mony to purchase their absence. They were invited into Spain by Count Henry. This Body was made up of English and Germans, as well as French, to the Number of 12000: Frossarte a French Historion says 30000. Bertran Claquin and Hugo Carbolaye were their chief Commanders. On the First of January 1366 their advanc'd Parties came to 1366 Barcelona, the rest of them soon after. The King of Aragon receiv'd them joyfully, distribu∣ted a Summ of Mony among them, and promised much more. Bertran Claquin he made Earl of Borgia. The King of Castile held his Cortes or Parliament at Burgos, and demanded supplies of Mony. Monsieur de la Brie who came out of France to serve him; advis'd to buy off the Strangers that follow'd Count Henry, and undertook to manage that affair, but King Peter being a Man without fear, gave no attention to his Counsel. Count Henry and the King of Aragon met at Zaragoça where the foreign Forces were. There the League betwixt them was renew'd, the limits of their Dominions in case they succeeded determin'd, and it was agreed that D. John the Count's Son should marry Ellenor the King's Daughter. This done the King stay'd at Zaragoça, and Count Henry having assembled all his Army enter'd Castile by the way of Alfaro. Ynigo Lopez de Horosco was Governour of that Town, which was very strong, therefore the Army stay'd not to besiege it, but march'd towards Calahorra, the chief City in those parts, seated on the River Ebro. Ferdinand Bishop of that place, and Fernan Sanches de To∣var the Governour open'd the Gates to the Count on the 16th of March. Here a Councel was held to consider how to proceed. Some were for marching directly to Burgos, the chief City of Castile. Others advis'd Count Henry to take the title of King, that so there might remain no hope of reconciliation, with King Peter of Castile. Bertran Claquin spoke much to this pur∣pose, and all the chief Officers of the Army siding with him, they easily perswaded him to ac∣cept Henry the Bastard proclaims himself K. of Castile. of the Title, and immediately proclaim'd him about the Streets. The new-made King was bountiful of what was not his own, giving Towns and Cities to all present. To Bertran Claquin he gave Trastamara, and to Hugo Carbolaye Carrion with the Title of Earls. To his Brother D. Tello he restor'd Biscay, to D. Sancho he gave Albuquerque, the Master-Ship of San∣tiago to Gonçalo Mexia, that of Calatrava to Peter Muniz, to D. Alonso de Aragon that King's Uncle, the Marquisate of Villena, and all that belonged to D. John Manuel, and as much more to many others. Thus Castile was divided betwixt two Kings striving for the Crown. Nothing kept the people in their Obedience to King Peter but fear, tho his was the undoubted Right, the other Castile. di∣vided. being a Bastard. Henry advanc'd towards Burgos, leaving Logron̄o as believing it in vain to at∣tempt it. Navarrete and Bribiesca surrendred. King Peter was at Burgos, doubtful that course to take, as confiding but little in his People. At length he resolv'd to go to Sevil, for there were his Children and Treasure. The People of Burgos offer'd to stand by him, he thank'd them, but would not then make use of their Zeal, and absolv'd them from their Oath of Fidelity, that if they were put to Streights, they might receive Count Henry without being look'd up∣on as Rebels. Before his departure he put to death John Fernandez de Tovar, Brother to him that deliver'd up Calahorra. On the 28th of March he set out from Burgos, sending Orders by the way to the Commanders of the conquer'd places in Aragon to burn them, and with King Peter expelled the King∣dom. all Speed march to meet him at Toledo. Thus all he gain'd in some Years, was lost in one Day. He stay'd some time at Toledo to secure that City, and left D. Garci Alvarez de Toledo Master of Santiago, to command there. No sooner was King Peter gone from Burgos but the Citizens sent to invite Count Henry thither. They stil'd him Count, but offer'd him the Crown, if he would take it in that City, according to ancient Custom. He accepted their Offer, march'd thither and was Crown'd in the Monastery of Huelgas. After the Example of Burgos, most Cities in that Kingdom within 25 Days submitted to him. Thus his Power became equal to his Adversary, the Nobility and Commonalty striving to gain the Favour of the new King.
The Affairs of Castile and Leon being setled, he remov'd to Toledo, where he was receiv'd with joy. Garci Alvarez de Toledo, resign'd the Mastership of Santiago, in lieu thereof, and for deserting his Master, had Oropisa and Valdecorneja given him. Count Henry being pos∣ses'd of Toledo all the rest was easy, so that King Peter durst not stay longer in the Kingdom, but imbarqing his Children and Treasure aboard a Galley, fled to Portugal. The King of Portugal would not receive him. Ferdinand his Son favour'd Count Henry, and kept correspon∣dence with him. Yet King Peter had no Wrong offer'd him, but was suffer'd to pass quietly through that Kingdom into Galicia, where he design'd to gather a Fleet in order to sail to Bay∣onne. At Compostella he caus'd D. Suero Arch-Bishop of that See, and the Dean to be put to death. Having got together Twenty two Ships and some smaller Vessels, he set Sail for France, carrying with him his Son D. John, and two Daughters, for Beatrix the eldest was dead tho Polydore writes she dy'd at Bayonne. There he arriv'd safe; that place being then in the Hands of the English, with a considerable part of his Treasure, for the rest which his King Peter flies to the English. Treasurer Martin Yanez had in a Galley, was taken by the People of Sevil to please Count Henry, who after the surrender of Cordova was expected at Sevil. The new made King Henry being come to Sevil, concluded Peace with the Kings of Portugal and Granada. That done, as if nothing more remain'd to do, he disbanded his Army, retaining only 15000 Lances of the Foreignes, under the command of Bertran Claquin, and Bernal Son to the Earl of Faux. His Wife and Daughter-in-Law, the Princess Ellenor came to him but of Ara∣gon, and with them D. Lope Fernandez de Luna, Arch-Bishop of Zaragoca, and several other Men of Note. It was requisite to settle the Kingdom and raise Mony, for it was not doubted but a Storm threaten'd from France. Therefore the Cortes were assembled at Burgos, and there John the Son of the new King Henry was sworn Heir to the Crown, after his Fathers Decease. The Tenth of all things sold, was here given him without any limitation of time. Their hatred to King Peter binded them, so as not to reflect how heavy a Burden they lay'd up∣on the Country. King Henry gave to the City Burgos, for their Service at his Coronation, the Town of Miranda de Ebro. D. Dominick was at this time Bishop of Burgos, who Ele∣ction was remarkable. His Predecessor Ferdinand dying, the Chapter could not agree who should succeed. It was therefore resolv'd to stand the Decision of this Dominick, being then one of the Canons. He without regarding the Competitors said, Since there must be a Bishop let Dominick himself be Bishop. All the Chapter rejoye'd at his Choice, and he was according∣ly consecrated. About this time D. Lope de Luna the Archbishop, came again into Castile, being sent Embassador by the King Aragon, to demand Performance of Covenants, and a great Summ of Mony he had lent Count Henry. The new King acknowledg'd the Debt and all that was demanded to be due, but said the Kingdom being not yet setled, he could not alinate so great a part of it without exposing himself to extraordinary Danger, yet as∣soon as he were well fixed, he would perform all Articles, and in the mean while look'd upon the King of Aragon as his Father and Preserver. This he said to amuse that King, be∣being resolv'd to part with nothing. Thus Princes devote themselves to their Interest without regarding Promises or Oaths. CHAP. VI. The War betwixt France, Navarre, and Aragon. King Peter of Castile supported by the English in France: Is brought into Spain by the Prince of Wales with an Army; Overthrows Henry the Ʋsurper, and recovers his Kingdom. THE War commenc'd three Years befor this, betwixt France and Navarre, still conti∣nu'd with disadvantage to the latter, who lost several Towns. At Toulouze a LeagueWar of Navarre. was concluded betwixt the Kings of France and Aragon, wherein it was agree'd that the Ara∣gonian should make War upon Navarre, to which effect the King of France was to assist him with 500 Lances maintain'd at his own cost. This being known to the King of Navarre, he stay'd in Spain, to make head against the Aragonian, by whose command Luis Coronel was al∣ready wasting the Frontiers of that Kingdom. He sent the Queen his Wife, tho with Child, into France, to try if she could bring that King her Brother to Composition. Her Journey pro∣ved in vain for the King of France was resolv'd to seize all that the Navarrois possess'd in France. At Evreux in Normandy, the Queen was brought to Bed of her Second Son call'd Peter, who was Earl of Mortaine. With him in the heat of Summer, she return'd to Navarre, not lik∣ing her Entertainment in France. It was requisite for the King of Navarre to seek some new Allyes; he thought it convenient to joyn with King Peter then in Banishment, who made him great Offers, as Men commonly do in distress. King Peter of Castile was then busy soli∣citing for Succours to recover his Kingdom, and particularly apply'd himself to Edward Prince of Wales who then govern'd Guienne for his Father. They met at Cabreron, a Town not far from Bayonne; King Charles of Navarre was with them. The Prince invited them to Dinner, Articles betwixt K. Peter and the Prince of Wales. King Peter was seated on the Right Hand, and the Prince next to him; on the left sat King Charles by himself. There they swore to the Articles of Allyance made betwixt them, which were,
That King Peter should be restored to his Kingdom: That the Prince for his Service there∣in should have Biscay, the King of Navarre Logron̄o; and, That King Peter should leave his Daughters in Guienne, as Hostages for performance of Articles, and payment of Mony, lent him to defray the Army. The King of Aragon renew'd his League with France. He of Na∣varre fearing all the Burden of the War would fall upon him, chang'd his Mind, and meeting Henry, the new-made King of Castile at Campeio, concluded a League with him by which it was Articled, That the King of Navarre should not give Passage to the English through his Dominions: That he should assist Henry against them, and deliver up certain Towns for Se∣curity of Performance: That Henry should give him the Town of Logron̄o, promis'd to him not long before by King Peter. About this time Luis, Brother to the King of Navarre mar∣ry'd Joanna, Dutchess of Durazzo in Macedonia, as eldest Daughter and Heiress to Duke Charles, to whom Pope Ʋrban the VIth some time after gave the Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples. Because there is generally a mistake made in the Genealogy of these Princes I thought good to set it down here. Charles the IId, King of Naples was Father to John Duke of Durazzo; John had Charles and Luis. Charles was Father to John and Margarite. Luis the other Son to John had Charles that came to be King of Naples, and Joanna who we said mar∣ry'd Luis, Brother to the King of Navarre. On the 18th of January 1367, (some Authors 1367. say a Year later) King Peter of Portugal dy'd at Estremoz. He liv'd 46 Years, 9 Months, Peter King of Portugal dies. and one Day; and reign'd 9 Years, 9 Months, and 28 Days. His Body was bury'd with great Pomp at Alcobaça near to the Lady Agnes de Castro. He left a Revenue for Chaplains to pray for his Soul, and those of his Predecessors, was a rigorous observer of Justice, and much lamented by his People. He order'd that nothing should be taken up for his Use up∣on trust, but paid for at the full Value with ready Mony; made wholsome Laws to curb the Avarice of Judges and Lawyers, was most Severe against Malefactors, particularly for Adul∣tery, insomuch that he is say'd to have struck the Bishop of Porto on that Account, and us'd Yearly to distribute a considerable Sum of Mony among his Servants according to the Merits of every Man. His Son Ferdinand succeeded him, who concluded a Peace with the King of Ferdi∣nand K. of Protugal. Aragon's Embassadors. This King kept the Lady Ellenor de Meneses, whom he took from her Husband Laurence Vasquez de Acuna, who therefore fled to Castile, and is said always to have worn in his Cap a pair of Silver Horns denoting the King's Lust, and his own Shame. All France and Spain resounded with Warlike Preparations. Henry the new-made King The Eng∣lish pass the Peri∣neans in defence of K. Peter. was at Burgos gathering an Army to oppose the Enemy, who had passed the Mountains at Ronoesvalles, and without meeting any Opposition advanc'd to Pamplona, that King being de∣tain'd a Prisoner at Burgid, by Oliver de Mani, who held that Place for Bertran Claquin, and took the King as he was Hunting. From Burgos Henry set out with a great Number of Foot, and 4500 Horse compos'd of all the Gentry of Castile, with the French and Aragonians that came to his Assistance. At the Wood of Ban̄ares he held a Council of War. The French Embassadors, and Bertran Claquin were against Fighting, and gave several Reasons for this their Opinion. Others more hot would not hear of Delays. The worst Advice was taken and the Army march'd towards Alava to oppose some Parties of Horse that spoil'd that Country. Near Saldrian they encamp'd in Sight of the Enemy upon an Advantagious Ground, the Rear cloas'd up with Mountains. The English perceiving that Advantage, march'd away towards Logron̄o, which was for King Peter, resolving to draw the Enemy to a Battle, or else to pierce into the Heart of the Kingdom. Henry understanding their Design mov'd back∣wards towards Najara, made famous by the Battle fought there. Some Letters pass'd be∣twixt the Princes, but the Difference being a Crown, it was impossible to reconcile them, and therefore they order'd their Battles. On the right Henry plac'd the French, and his Bro∣ther The Bat∣tle of Na∣jara. Sancho with most of the Nobility of Castile, on the left his Brother D. Tello, and the Earl of Denia: He and his Son D. Alonso commanded the main Body. On the Enemies side who consisted of about 10000 Horse, and as many Foot, the Duke of Lancaster led the Van, with Hugo Carbolaye, who was gone over to the English; the Count de Armagnac, and Mon∣sieur de la Brie, commanded in the Body; the Rear was brought up by King Peter, the Prince of Wales, and Jayme Son to the King of Majorca, who after he escap'd out of Prison had mar∣ry'd Joanna Queen of Naples. Charles King of Navarre sent 300 Horse under Martin Enri∣que to serve King Peter. Henry had pass'd a River that ran between the two Armies, and drawn up his beyond it. Here both Armies met with great Fury. The Right of Henry's Army where Claquin commanded, stood firm, and seem'd to have the better, but D. Tello on the Left fled without so much as giving a Charge. Thus Bertran, and D. Sancho being encompass'd on all Sides, were easily Overthrown, with a great Slaughter of the No∣bility and Commanders. Henry did all that could be expected, to stop and rally his Man, but seeing all lost, fled to Najara, and thence into Aragon, with a few Men of Note that follow'd him. He made no stay, fearing that King, but went quite through into France. His Army was so dispersed, that no one Body was to be found in any Place. After the Fight, Henry routed, & K. Peter restored. King Peter put to Death some of the Prisoners, others were protected by the English, and the Prince of Wales is say'd to have blam'd him for that Severity. Peter Lopez de Ayala, who writ the History of King Peter, was one of the Prisoners, and therefore deserves little Cre∣dit; having writ Maliciously, as being Attainted of Treason at Alfaro. This Battle was fought upon a Saturday, being the 3d of April 1367. D. Tello carry'd the News of the defeat
to Burgos, and the Lady Joanna, Wife to Henry, with the Archbishops of Toledo, and Zara∣goça, fearing King Peter, fled to Aragon, where they were not well receiv'd for that King was resolv'd to side with the Conqueror. To that purpose Hugo Carbolaye was already in Aragon, and because it requir'd more time to settle a Peace, a Truce was for the present concluded. King Peter with all his Army march'd to Burgos, where he apprehended the Arch-bishop of Braga for sding with his Enemy, and put him into a Dungeon. The King was perplex'd about performing what he had Covenanted: It was hard to deliver up Biscay to the Prince of Wales, because that People would never condescend to be Subject to a Stranger, and it was no less difficult to raise so great a Sum of Mony as was due to the Eng∣lish. In order to raise the Mony, he went to Toledo, and thence to Cordova, where he caus'd 16 Men of Note to be Executed, for admitting his Enemy. Others were executed at Sevil. Sixteen put to Death for Treason. Among them Da. Ʋrraca de Osorio was Burnt, and a Maid of hers is said to have cast her self voluntarily into the Fire. The King of Navarre after the Fight came from Borgia, where he had been Prisoner to Tudela, and kept Mossen Oliver Prisoner, till he deliver'd him his Son Prince Peter, left as a Hostage for Performance of what was agreed betwixt them. This same Year, on the 24th of August dy'd the Cardinal D. Giles de Albornoz, a Man of great Parts, and much in Favour with 3 Popes. He recover'd the Patrimony of the Church, from those that had usurp'd it, and by that means made way for the Popes to return to Rome. His Body was deposited at Assis, and thence translated to the Cathedral of Toledo. The Pope granting Indulgence to such as should carry him upon their Shoulders. People came flock∣ing out of the Towns that lay in the way, and in that manner he was carry'd to Toledo. CHAP. VII. King Peter Excommunicated and Absolv'd. Count Henry returns into Spain, is again receiv'd by many Places. Toledo opposes him, and is Besieg'd. King Peter comes to its Relief, is overthrown, betray'd to, and Murder'd by Henry the Bastard. THE Author we have above spoken of, who calls himself Q. Ellenor's Caterer, make smention of the Master of S. Bernard taken in the Battle of Najara, and put to Death by King Pe∣ter. K. Peter excom∣municated and ab∣solved. No other Historian mentions it, nor have we any the least Memory remaining of such a Dignity. This Master must needs have been a Churchman, for on his Account, King Peter was Excommunicated. Pope Ʋrban the Vth, because the King had killed that Master, and bannish'd the Bishops of Culahorra, and Lugo, sent an Archdeacon to notify the Sentence of Excommuni∣cation to him. This Archdeacon fearing to trust to the Mercy of King Peter, came up the Ri∣ver to Sevil in a swift Galliot, and waited there till the King coming that way, he asked if he would hear some News from the Levant. The King drawing near to hearken to him, he pro∣nounc'd the Sentence of Excommunication and immediately, fled down the River. The King in a Rage spurred his Horse into the River, and went so far, he had been drown'd, had not a Boat brought him off. He vow'd to be revenged of the Pope, and immediately gave orders for fitting out a great Fleet, and raising a powerful Army. The Pope dreading the Anger of King Peter, sent the Cardinal of S. Peter his Nephew to appease and absolve him. They were re∣concil'd by the Legate upon these Conditions, That the Dignity of Master of S. Bernard being extinct, all the Towns belonging to it should as before be call'd Behetrias, and be annex'd to the Crown, so as never to be alienated: That the 3d part of Ecclesiastical Revenues then pay'd to the Pope should be given to the King towards the Charges of the War with the Moors: That the Pope without the King's Consent, should not in his Dominions dispose of Bishopricks, Ma∣sterships of Military Orders, the Grand Priorship of S. John, or other considerable Benefices. Count Henry was well receiv'd and entertain'd in France, by the Count de Faux, yet not The French support Henry the Bastard. without Apprehensions of the English. Thence he went to Villeneufe, near Avignon, where Luis the King of France's Brother lent him Mony, and advis'd him to send an Embasly to the King, begging his Assistance for recovering of Castile. That King easily condescended to favour, him in Hatred to the English, and King Peter. He gave him the Castle of Perapertuse, on the Borders of Russillon, for his Wife and Children, who were fled from Aragon to live in, and the Earldom of Sesene to subsist on till he receiv'd the Crown. Many Prisoners who were ransom'd, and had been protected by the English came daily to him. Among them was Bernal, Son the Earl of Faux, whom afterwards King Henry created Earl of Medina Celi; he marry'd the Lady Elizabeth de la Cerda, Daughter to Luis, and Grandchild to D. Alonso de la Cerda, from whom King Sancho usurp'd the Crown, from them the present Dukes of Mc-dina Celi are Lineally descended. It happen'd well for Count Henry, that the Prince of Wales return'd to Guienne much offended at King Peter, for that he neither gave him the Lordship of Biscay, as had been agreed, nor pay'd him the Money lent, or the Army their Arrears. Besides in Castile many great Men declar'd for him, as did the Provinces of Guipuscoa and Bis∣cay, and the Towns of Segovia, Avila, Palencia, Sulamanca, Valladolid, and others in the Kingdom of Toledo. Henry having gather'd an Army, enter'd Aragon, at the Pass of the Pyreneans call'd Valde∣andorra, Henry re∣turns into Spain. and march'd with such swiftness that he was in Castile before the Aragonian could stop
him, tho he endeavour'd it. On the Banks of Ebro he ask'd whether that were the Dominion of Castile, and being told it was, that a solemn Oath never more to go out of Castile, but rather to die. Then he mov'd to Calahorra the first City of Castile, and was receiv'd there with great Joy. From Calahorra he went to Burgos, where the Bishop, Clergy, and Townsmen met him in Procession. He releas'd D. Philip de Castro a Nobleman of Aragon, marry'd to his Sister Jo∣anna, who was Prisoner in the Castle, and put into his place D. Jayme King of Naples, and Son to him of Majorca, left there with the Governour Alonso Fernandez, by King Peter. Ma∣ny other places follow'd the example of Burgos, and Henry march'd to Leon, which was sur∣render'd to him upon the last Day of April 1368. In Toledo some were for Henry, but the 1368 greater part for King Peter. In the City was a good Garrison of Crossbow-Men, and 600 Men at Arms under the command of the Governour Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo. Hen∣ry's Army consisted of 1000 Men, at Arms, and a great number of Foot. He laid Siege to Toledo believing nothing would withstand him, that City once taken. He in∣camped on the Plain, that lies on the North Side, and secur'd the Passes beyond the River Ta∣gus which encompasses the City on three sides. To secure the communication he built a Wooden-Bridge, which prov'd very useful. The Townsmen held out couragiously dread∣ing King Peter, who had carry'd away the principal Men as Hostages. Cordova had now rebell'd, and King Peter ask'd Aid of the King of Granada to besiege it. Mahomet sent a good body of Horse, with whom, and his own Forces he laid Siege to that City, and press'd it so hard, that the Moors scal'd the Walls and took the old Palace; but the Citizens dreading the King if the Town were taken, fought so desperately, they again drove out the Moors, killing many; the very Women assisting the Men. The two Kings despairing of Success rais'd the Siege. King Peter went to Sevil to provide for the War, meeting with greater dif∣ficulties than he had imagin'd. The King of Granada plunder'd Jaen and Ʋbeda, which were in Rebellion; he also wasted all the Country of Andaluzia, carrying away a vast mul∣titude of Captives, in so much that it is said above 11000 Souls were taken, in only the Town of Ʋtrera. King Peter in cave for the City Toledo, resolv'd with what Forces he had to give the Ene∣my K. Peter provides for his de∣fence. Battel; the People of Sevil advis'd him to stay till his Army was recruited, and his Friends could joyn him, but he was running to his Ruin; at this Conjuncture another misfortune befel him, which was that Vitoria, Salvatierra, and Logron̄o, that had adher'd to him were taken by the King of Navarre, being assisted by D. Tello, who tho an Enemy to King Peter, was at variance with his Brother Henry, and therefore kept in Biscay. The Siege of Toledo continu'd, and the Citizens being divided, the Faction that was for Henry, attempted to secure a Tower opposite to the Camp, and being disappointed, thought to give the Ene∣my entrance over S. Martins Bridge; the other Party having Notice of it, they came to Blows, and many Townsmen were kill'd. King Peter hearing of these Tumults, made the more hast to relieve the City. His Sons Sancho and James, with all his Treasure, he put into Carmona a strong Town near Sevil. Then gathering his Army, he prepar'd to march to Toledo. He had 3000 Horse, but half of them were Moors, and therefore no great Con∣fidence was repos'd in them. At the time of his departure he is said to have consulted a Moor call'd Benagarin, who foretold his death, out of Merlin's Prophecy, but these Prophecies al∣ways come to light, after the Event. King Peter march'd to Montiel a strong Town in that part of Spain, call'd La Mancha. Henry being inform'd of his approach, left Gomez Manrique Arch-Bishop of Toledo, to continue the Siege, and march'd away in hast to meet King Peter, without expecting the Foot. At Orgaz five Leagues from Toledo, Bertran Claquin joyn'd him with 600 Foreign Horse, a considerable reinforcement, they being old try'd Soldiers. Several Noblemen came thither to him. With this Body Henry march'd all Night, and at break of Day discover'd the Enemy, who knew not that they were remov'd from Toledo. This caus'd a great Consternation among them, but the Officers gather'd their Men, who were dispersed in the Villages about Montiel, and at Sun-rising both parties form'd their Bat∣tels, and encourag'd their Soldiers. The first Onset was furious; but King Peter's Moors be∣taking K. Peter over∣thrown. themselves to flight, the Castilians could not stand it long, but retir'd with King Peter into the Castle of Montiel. Many of the Moors were kill'd, of the Christians only one Gentleman. This Battel was fought on Wednesday to 14th of March, 1369. Henry perceiv∣ing King Peter had shut himself into the Town, immediately encompass'd it with a dry Wall, 1369 of Stone, without Mortar, that he might not escape. Want pinch'd the besieged, and the King began to study how to make his escape. Men Roriguez de Sanabria a very Loyal Gentle∣man of Trastamara was with him, this Man was employ'd to offer Bertran Claquin many Towns, and 200000 Castilian Doubles, to leave the service of Henry, and carry the King off. Bertran re∣fus'd, but being press'd consulted with some Friends, who advis'd him to acquaint Henry with the Proposal. He did so, and Henry thanking him for his Fidelity, perswaded him to carry on that Design, and secure King Peter at his Quarters. King Peter accordingly came with only a few Gentlemen to Bertran, and said it was time to be gone. At the same time Henry enter'd the Tent, and stood some time as it were astonish'd, at the sight of the King, Betrayed and Mur∣dred by his Bastard Brother. till a Frenchman pointing at him, said to Henry, Take notice, that is your Enemy. King Peter with his natural fierceness, answer'd, I am, I am. Then Henry taking out his Dagger, wounded him in the Face, they clasped one another, and both fell to the Ground, but Henry
was undermost, till Bertran turning them, Henry got uppermost, and then stabb'd the King several times till he dy'd. A horrid sight to behold, a lawful King descended of Kings murder'd by a Bastard. Frossarte a French Historian, writes that as Henry enter'd the place, where the King was, he said, Where is this Jewish Son of a Where who calls himself King of Castile? and at that the King answer'd, Then art the Son of a Where, for I am the lawful Son of King Alonso. King Peter dy'd on the 23d of March, in the flower of his Age, being but 34 Years and 7 Months old; he reign'd 19 Years lacking 3 Days. His Body was carry'd without any Pomp to Alcoçer, and there deposited in the Church of S. James. Afterwards he was translated by King John the IId, to the royal Monastery of Dominican Nuns at Madrid. After the King's death, several of his Followers were apprehended. CHAP. VIII. Several Foreign Princes pretenders to the Crown of Castile. War with Aragon, Por∣tugal, and Granada. Affairs of Aragon, Sardinia, and Navarre. The League be∣wixt Portugal and Aragon. MOntiel immediately submitted, and Toledo upon the News of the King's Death was sur∣render'd. Several preten∣ders to Castile. Among foreign Princes there arose a Dispute, concerning the succession of the Crown. All agreed that Henry being a Bastard, could have no Right, and every one strove to make his Advantage of the Troubles of Castile. The King of Navarre, as has been said, had already taken several good Towns belonging to Castile. Molina, Can̄ete and Requena were betray'd by their Governours to the Aragonian. The King of Portugal call'd himself King of Castile and Leon, being great Grandson to King Sancho, and Grandson to Beatrix his Daughter. He was already possess'd of Cuida Rodrigo, Alcantana, and Tuy. The King of Granada, always a Friend to King Peter, hop'd to make his Advantage. Yet the greatest Storm was threaten'd from England and Guienne; for John Duke of Lancaster, Brother to the Prince of Wales, had marry'd Constance Daughter to King Peter, and the Earl of Cambridge another Brother, had to Wife Elizabeth the younger Sister, both Daughters to Da. Maria de Padilla. The only remedy against all these Evils that hung over the new King Henry was to secure the Affections of the Nobility, and Commons of the Kingdom. Therefore he immediately went away to Sevil, where he was receiv'd with the usual Joy of the Rabble; thither all the Cities of Andaluzia sent to make their Submission, except Carmona, where King Peter had left his Children and Treasure, under the Care of Martin Lopez de Cordova, Martin Lopez faithful to K. Peter Master of Calatrava, who still continu'd faithful to his dead Master. At Sovil King Henry not without Infamy endeavour'd to settle a Truce with the King of Granada, but could not ob∣tain it. Therefore having secur'd the Frontiers, he went to Toledo, knowing his Wife and Son were come thither from Burgos. Here it was taken into Consideration how to raise Mony, to pay the Arrears due to the Foreigners, and what was promis'd to Bertran Claquin at Mon∣tiel, for his good Service, or rather infamous Treachery. All that could be gather'd of the King's Revenue was but a small Summ, towards satisfying the Foreigners, who boasted they had put the Crown upon Henry's Head. To supply this want two new sorts of base Coin were invented, the one call'd Cruzados, the other Royals, which caus'd all things to grow excessive dear. The Kings of Aragon and Portugal at this time infested the Frontiers. Pero Gonzalez de Mendoça, and Alvar Garcia de Albornoz were sent with an Army to oppose the Aragonians, and recover'd Requena from them. Henry himself march'd towards Galicia, where he heard the Portugueses did much harm: By the way he attempted Zamora, yet stay'd not to take it but enter'd Portugal between the Rivers Duero and Min̄o, burning and destroying all the Country, and taking Braga, and Bragança. This done he return'd into Castile. His Brother Sancho was with him, having been ransom'd from the English, who took him at the Battel of Najara. The King of Portugal was too weak to give Battel, and Henry drew off with much hast, upon the News that the King of Granada wasted all Andaluzia, having taken Algezira, and so demolish'd it, that it was never after Rebuilt. Be∣sides, he was forc'd to return to Castile, to raise Mony for Payment of the foreign Souldiers, and discharging of Bertran Claquin, who was courted by the King of Ara∣gon to go over into Sardinia, against Marianus the Judge of Arborea, who had again re∣bell'd Affairs of Aragon & Sardinia. and taken many Towns. D. Peter de Luna had been sent against him before, who re∣duc'd him to secure himself in the City Oristan, whence watching his Opportunity he sally'd, and surprising his Besiegers, put the whole Army to flight, killing the General and his Bro∣ther Philip. Some Days after Brancaleon Doria who was of the Lord of Arborea his Party, was reconcil'd to the King, but the Rebels made even for this loss, by taking the City Sacer the Capital of the Island. Berengarius Carroz, Earl of Quirra, was sent as General to put some stop to the Proceedings of the Rebels, and Bertran Claquin was sollicited to accept of that Command. Bertran was about to accept of that Offer, when another more impor∣tant War drew him away. The People of Guienne weary of the English Government, solli∣licited the King of France to assist them in their Rebellion. He gladly condescended, and
sent for Claquin to command his Army in that Expedition. At the same time he desir'd the King of Navarre to assist him. That King resolv'd to go into France, tho he had but then Of Na∣varre. sent John Cruzate Dean of Tudela, into Aragon to settle a Confederacy. He left his Queen to govern Navarre, and went to his own Estate in Normandy, resolving not to trust the King of France, but to make his advantage of those Wars. The King of France sent Em∣bassadors to him, and at last they had a Meeting at Vernon, on the Seine. Here they agreed the Navarrois should deliver up Mante, Meùlan, and the County of Longeuville, about which they were at variance, and in lieu thereof should have the Lordship of Montpelier. These things were done later in the Year 1375, therefore let us return to Castile. King Henry's Joy for his Success was somewhat abated by the many Enemies he had yet to Henry the Usurper finds ma∣ny Ene∣mies. deal with, for still King Peter's Party was not extinct. The Portugueses had a strong Garri∣son in Cuida Rodrigo, and thence infested all the neighbouring Country. This place King Henry laid Siege to at the beginning of the Year 1370, but the Portugueses defended it so bravely that he was forc'd to quit that Design for the present, and march away to Medina 1370 del Campos. Here he held the Cortes or Parliament. The chief Thing done at this Meeting, was the granting of an extraordinary Subsidy towards the War. There was due to Bertran Claquin 120000 Doubles promis'd him for betraying of King Peter at Montiel; this was a vast Summ in those Days. Jayme King of Naples was deliver'd to him as payment of 60000, the Treachery rewarded. Queen his Wife offering so much for him, the rest was paid down in Gold. Besides the King gave him the Towns of Soria, Almaçan, Aciença, Montagudo, Molina, and Seron. This done he return'd into France where he was made Constable, and serv'd well against the English. In July the Aragonians and Navarrois concluded a League only defensive as was given out, but in reality design'd against Henry of Castile. Then the Towns of Salvatierra, and La Re∣al formerly belonging to Aragon, were restor'd to that Crown by the Queen of Navarre. In Ca∣stile, Peter Manrique Lieutenant of that Kingdom, and Peter Ruiz Sarmiento Lieutenant of Galicia, were order'd with some Forces to defend Galicia, where the Portugueses had taken Compostella, Tuy, and the Port of Corun̄a. D. Tello King Henry's Brother was also commanded thither. This done King Henry went away to Sevil with the best of his Army, for there was the greatest need of it, because the Moors made War on that side. Carmona still held out, and the Portuguese Fleet, kept the Mouth of the River Gaudalquivir, Henry was much pleas'd that the Masters of Santiago and Calatrava concluded a Truce with the King of Granada; for he could not have with∣stood so many Enemies, at once. The Portuguese fleet consisted of 16 Galleys, and 24 Ships. King Henry order'd 20 Galleys to be lanch'd, but they could not all be fitted, because King Peter had laid up the Tackling at Carmona; therefore a Fleet was order'd to come from Biscay, which the Portuguese understanding, durst not stay to give them Battel, but return'd to Portugal, having lost three Galleys and two Ships. The Portuguese Fleet was at that time weaken'd, having sent some Galleys to Barcelona, to carry the Embassadors, who went to make a League with the King Allyance betwixt Portugal and Ara∣gon. of Aragon. They concluded the Confederacy upon these Terms. That the Kingdom of Murcia, and City of Cuenca, with all its Dependencies should belong to the Crown of Ara∣gon, all the other Dominions of Castile, should fall to the King of Portugal, who already call∣ed himself King of Castile. That the King of Portugal should marry the Lady Ellenor, Daugh∣ter to the Aragonian, her Dower to be 100000 Florins. This Contract came to nothing, for the King of Portugal fell in love with, and marry'd the Lady Ellenor Tellez de Meneses, Daugh∣ter to Alonso Tello Count of Barceols, and the Aragonian, taken up with the War of Sardinia, had no leisure to attend that of Castile. On the 15th of October dy'd D. Tello King Henry's Brother, Lord of Biscay. Some say he was poison'd; others deny it. The King gave the Lordship of Biscay and Lara, belonging D. Tello, to his own Son John, and ever since they have been annex'd to the Crown of Castile. The Body of D. Tello was bury'd with great Pomp in the Monastery of S. Francis at Palencia. CHAP. IX. The Siege of Carmona. The King of Portugal marries the Lady Ellenor de Meneses. Peace betwixt Castile, Portugal and Nevarre. KIng Heny eas'd of two great Troubles, by the Truce made with the Moor, and the removal of the Portuguese Fleet, laid Siege to Carmona, the only Refuge of King Peter's Friends, in the Carmona besieged by the U∣surper. Spring of the Year 1371. This Siege lasted long, and many notable Exploits were perform'd by the Besieged, who kept their Gates always open, making continual Salleys. One Day just at Noon, the Heat being very great, the besieged observ'd the Enemy to keep very close in their Tents, and thereupon sallying furiously enter'd their Trenches, and went directly to the 1371 King's Tent, resolving by his death to put an end to the War. He was in extream Danger, but that some Gentlemen came to his rescue, and stop'd the Fury of the besieged, till the Army gathering, they were repuls'd with considerable Loss: After this King Henry attempted by Night to scale the Walls; about 40 Men at Armes got up, and secur'd a Tower, but the Towns∣men taking the Alarm, fell on them with such Bravery, that the Ladders not able to bear them,
going down broke, and those that were in the Tower were left behind. Martin Lopez de Cordeva the Governour, who was out of the Town that Night, returning caus'd them all to be put to Death. Provision failing, the Governour was at last forc'd to Surrender upon Ar∣ticles, Henry the Bastard takes Car∣mona, and breaks the Arti∣cles. which were basely broken, and the brave Governour Martin Lopez de Cordova, pub∣lickly put to Death, or rather murder'd at Sevil by the King's Command. The Treasure and Innocent Children of King Peter fell into the Hands of King Henry, who kept those guiltless Persons in perpetual Imprisonment. This done King Henry caus'd the Bones of his Father King Alonso to be translated to the Royal Chappel of the Cathedral of Cordova. At the Siege of Carmona he receiv'd the News that Peter Fernandez de Velasco had taken the City Zamora from the Portugeses, and his Liuetenant, Peter Manrique, and Peter Ruiz Sarmiento pacify'd Galicia, having defeated D. Ferdinand de Castro, the chief Man that favour'd the Por∣tugeses, who having lost the Battle fled to Portugal. King Ferdinand of Portugal discourag'd at these Losses gave ear to Peace propos'd to him on the behalf of King Henry, by Alonso Perez de Gusman, chief Alguazil of Sevil. The Treaty was concluded on the 1st Day of March, Peace be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. upon these Articles, That the King of Castile restore the Towns taken, during the War: That the King of Portugal marry. Ellenor, Daughter to him of Castile, whose Dower was to be Cuidad Rodrigo, Valencia de Alcantara in Estremadura, and Monreal in Galicia. The Love the Portuguese bore the Lady Ellenor de Meneses (as has been said before) prevented this Match, and he sent an Embassy to excuse himself, and deliver'd up all the Places he had be∣longing to Castile. His Excuses were easily allow'd, and he publickly marry'd the Lady E∣lenor Ferdinand of Portugal marries the Lady Ellmor de Meneses. de Meneses, which prov'd an unhappy Match, and produc'd Wars betwixt Castile and Portugal. Before the King was marry'd his Design being known at Lisbon, the People mu∣tiny'd to prevent it, but the King stole away privately to Porto, and was there solemnly mar∣ry'd. He setl'd on her many Towns, and commanded the Nobles there present to kiss her Hand, as their Queen, which all did, even the King's Brothers, except only Denis, who re∣fuss'd, which at the King was so incens'd, that he ran at him with his Dagger. D. Denis fled and absconded for some time, till he got into Castile, where he serv'd that King. From this time the Queen govern'd the Kingdom absolutely. The Gentlemen of the Family of Vasquez de Acun̄a fled, knowing she bore them a Grudge, for the Mutiny of Lisbon, whereof they were the Authors. Her Kindred and Relations were all preferr'd and honour'd. The King and Queen's greatest Favourite was D. John Fernandez de Andewo, a Nacive of Galicia, who in the Wars of that Country came over to the King, and was created Earl of Oren. The Queen was very Familiar with this Gentleman, and us'd to be alone with him in Private, for which reason it was suspected their Friendship was dishonest, and it was publickly say'd, the Children she had were not got by the King, but by D. John. These were the malicious Suggestions of the Multitude. At the end of this Year King Henry held the Cortes at Toro, where it was decreed the Army should be sent to recover the Places taken by the Navarrois, since the Portuguese had restor'd those in his Possession; It was also order'd, that the Jews who liv'd intermix'd with the Christians should wear a Mark of Distinction. The Cruzados and Royals coin'd before, were cry'd down to a lesser Value, but not quite forbid to pass, because the Treasury was exhausted. The King would have had those Towns call'd Behetrias, which did not belong before to the Master of S. Bernard, given to some Great Men, but he could not carry it. When the Cortes broke up, King Henry sent his Army into Navarre, where after a few Days it was agreed with the Queen Regent, that those Towns about which they were at Variance should be put into the Hands of Pope Gregory the XIth, who this Year The Pope returns to Rome. was elected in the Place of Ʋrban the Vth. This Pope restor'd the Apostolick See to Rome. The first Cardinal he created was, Peter Gomez Barroso, Archbishop of Sevil, who dy'd 4 Years after at Avignon. D. Peter de Luna, a Noble and Learned Aragonian was made Cardi∣nal by him. It was agreed that the Pope's Legate who was daily expected, should be Arbi∣trator betwixt Castile and Navarre. These Towns were put into the Hands of John Ramirez de Arellano, a Navarrois, made Lord of Cameras by King Henry, for that he would not deli∣ver him up at the Congress of Ʋncastel, or Sos. This Gentleman took an Oath to hold them for his Holiness, and to deliver them to whom they should be adjudg'd by him. Thus for the present the War betwixt Castile and Aragon ceas'd, yet soon after King Henry sent his Army contrary to what had been agreed, and to  Salvatierra and Santa Cruz de Campezo. No Faith is to be had in Usurpers, for they can never be true to Strangers, who are false to their Sovereign. Logrono and Victoria continu'd firm to the King of Navarre. A more dangerous War was fear'd from Aragon, that King being offended upon many Accounts, and particularly for that D. Jayme, King of Naples had been releas'd, contrary to what he had sent the Archbishop of Zaragoça to desire. That King fear'd he should en∣deavour to recover the Island of Majorca taken from his Father. Therefore a League was design'd with the Duke of Lancaster against King Henry, but it came to nothing, because the English were engag'd in a War with France, and the Aragonian was in Care for Sardinia, be∣sides he fear'd the Prince of Majorca would invade Russillon with French Forces, as was con∣fidently Reported. Pope Gregory the XIth sent the Cardinal of Cominges to compose these Dif∣ferences. He prevail'd with them to ratify the Promise they had made to one another, and threaten'd severe Penalties to him that should break the Truce concluded on the 4th of January 1372. Yet King Henry fearing the Pope, would favour the Aragonian, delay'd the
Conclusion of this Affair, hoping to find some other means of Accomodation. About this time King Henry besieg'd and took the City Tuy; which Men Rodriguez de Sanabria, and other banish'd Men of Castile held for the King of Portugal. He also sent 12 Galleys, under the Command of Micer Ambrosio Booanegra his Admiral, to the Assistance of the King of France. These having join'd the French near Rochel, defeated the English, took several Ships, and the Victory at Sea of the Spaniards and French over the English. Earl of Pembrook, with many other Men of Note, and much Mony. All was sent to the King then at Burgos. From this Ambrose Bocanegra, are descended the Earls of Palma. The King of Aragon had 3 Children by his Wife Queen Ellenor, Daughter to the King of Sicily; these were Prince John the Heir of the Crown, Martin and Constance, who as has been said, was marry'd to Frederick King of Sicily. In June Prince Martin marry'd the Lady Mary de Luna, Heiress to the Earl D. Lope de Luna, her Dower was the Earldoms of Luna and Sogorve; the King gave him the Barony of Exerica made an Earldom, and soon after appointed him Con∣stable of the Kingdom. Prince John marry'd Martha, Sister to the Earl of Armagnac, and had with her 150000 Francs. Of them was born the Princess Joanna, marry'd afterwards to Matthew Earl of Faux. On the 22d of August D. Bernardine de Cabrera, Grandson to Bernard de Cabrera was restor'd to all his Grandfather's Estate, except the Town of Vique, and the Country a League about it. The War broke out again betwixt Castile and Portugal, on Ac∣count that the Portugueses took certain Ships belonging to Biscay. King Henry was then at War be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. Zamora, whence he sent Embassadors to demand Reparation of Dammages, and in case of Denial to declare War. D. Alonso King Henry's Bastard-Son was sent to make War in Por∣tugal, on the Side of Galicia, and to besiege Viana. Bocanegra the Admiral was order'd to equip 12 Galleys at Sevil, and scour the Coast of Portugal. King Ferdinand of Portugal was at Variance with his Subjects, therefore King Henry laying hold of this Opportunity, en∣ter'd Portugal with a great Power, Burning and Plundering all the Country, and took the Towns of Almeyda, Panel, Celorico, and Linhares. This was about the end of the Year. He now receiv'd Letters from Guido, Cardinal of Bolonia, sent by Pope Gregory to fettle Peace betwixt him and Portugal. King Henry sent to desire him to expect his coming at Guadala∣jara, where the Queen was. The Cardinal answer'd it was not fit for him to neglect what he came about, which was putting an end to the War, and therefore made hast to Cuidad Rodrigo designing to speak with both Kings. Mean while Portugal was consum'd, for at the beginning of the Year 1373, King Henry took the City Viseo, march'd in sight of Coimbra, 1373. but would not stay to besiege it, resolving to advance towards his Enemy, who was incamp'd at Santaren. The King of Portugal being too weak for his Enemy kept himself within the Walls, and King Henry march'd away to Lisbon. At his first coming he enter'd and burnt the Suburbs, but the City being strong and well defended, could not be taken. However some Ships were burnt in the River, and others taken by the Fleet of Castile, a great Num∣ber of Prisoners, and a rich Booty was carry'd away. Mean while the Legate ceas'd not to labour for Peace, and at last brought the two Kings together into a Boat upon the River Tagus, on the 28th of March, and they agreed to these Conditions, That the King of Portu∣gal Peace be∣twixt the two Crowns. by a certain Day should banish his Kingdom the Gentlemen that fled from Castile, who were about 500 in Number: That all Places taken during that War should be restor'd on both Sides: That Beatrix, Sister to the King of Portugal should be marry'd to D. Sancho, Brother to King Henry, and Earl of Albuquerque, and Elizabeth, Bastard Daughter to the King of Portugal, to Alonso the Bastard of King Henry. King Ferdinand gave Hostages for Security of Performance. D. Sancho, and the Lady Beatrix were presently marry'd at San∣taren. The Lady Elizabeth being but 8 Years of Age, was delivered to King Henry, and then the two Kings parted. King Henry march'd directly against Navarre, but the Pope's Legate reconcil'd those two Kings also. The Navarrois restor'd the Towns of Victoria, and Logron̄o. Charles his Son was contracted to Ellenor, Daughter to the King of Castile, her Portion 120000 Crowns of Gold. The Kings met at Briones, a Town on the Fron∣tiers, where the Princes were marry'd, and the King of Navarre gave his younger Son Peter to him of Castile, as a Hostage. When the King of Navarre return'd out of France, he found that Bernard Bishop of Pamplona, and Cruzate Dean of Tudela, whom he had joyn'd in Commission with the Queen, had not discharg'd their Trust faithfully. They understand∣ing the King's Displeasure fled, the Bishop got to Avignon, but the Dean was kill'd by the way, as was suspected by the King's order. The Bishop went on to Rome, where he dy'd.
CHAP. X. Peace concluded betwixt Castile and Aragon. Several Matches of Princes. French and Spaniards besiege Bayonne in vain. The Papal Chair restor'd to Rome. Death of Frederick King of Sicily. FRom Briones the King of Castile return'd to the Kingdom of Toledo, he of Navarre to his Court, whence he sent the Queen into France to appease that King, who was highly of∣fended suspecting the Navarrois had employ'd People to Poison him. Then the King of Navarre went in Person to Madrid to perswade King Henry to forsake the French, and side with the English; Offering if he would pay the Arrears due to the Prince of Wales, and his Army from King Peter, that the English would quit their Claim to the Crown of Castile, and lay down all other Animosities. King Henry answer'd he would never depart from the Inte∣rest of France, where he had found Relief in his Distress; but that if the English would make Peace with France, he would join in it, and pay them as much as should be adjudg'd by impartial Judges. Thus nothing was concluded, and the Navarrois return'd to Pam∣plona, the Castilian to Andaluzia. The Lady Mary, Daughter to D. Ferdinand de la Cerda, marry'd in France to the Earl of Alençon, sent to demand of King Henry the Lordships of Biscay and Lara, as of right appertaining to her: He reply'd if she would send two of her Sons to reside at his Court, they should be put into Possession; but having better Estates in France they never came. In October, Balthasar Spinola, a Genoese, came into Aragon as Em∣bassador from the English, to conclude a League against Castile. They offer'd him if the Kingdom were conquer'd, the Cities of Murcia, Cuenca, and Soria, with all their Dependen∣cies, but the King of Aragon could not be prevail'd upon. In February happen'd a great A great Earthquake. Earthquake in the Earldom of Ribagorça, in which many Towns were wholly swallow'd up. Luis Duke of Anjou came to Carcassonne to endeavour to settle a Peace betwixt Castile and Aragon, fearing lest the English, the mortal Enemies of France should become Masters of Ca∣stile. After much debating it was resolv'd to referr the Dicision of their Differences to Guido, Cardinal of Bolonia, the Pope's Legate. On the 15th of October Pope Gregory the XIth confirm'd the Order of the Fryers of S. Hierome, first invented by certain Italian Hermits, near Orders of St. Hie∣rome, and St. Isidort. the City Toledo. Some Years after the Order of the Isidorians was taken from this same. In December, tho Peace could not be concluded, a Truce was agreed upon till the Feast of Pentecost. In the Year 1374, John Duke of Lancaster landed with an Army at Calis, and 1374. being join'd by the Duke of Britany, march'd across the Country to Bourdeaux, with a De∣sign to conquer Castile. He sent Embassadors to the Kings of Aragon and Navarre, to ask Supplies, but they thought it safest to look on as Neuters. King Henry fearing this Storm, went to Burgos, where he made all possible Preparations to withstand it. D. Sancho his Bro∣ther endeavouring to appease a Sedition among the Souldiers, was wounded in the Face with a Spear, and dy'd. The Lady Beatrix his Wife left with Child was deliver'd of a Daughter called Ellenor, who was marry'd to Prince Ferdinand, afterwards King of Aragon. King Henry near Ban̄ares made a review of his Forces, and found 1200 Horse, and 5000 Foot, a small Number, but good Men. The English Forces consum'd by their long March, when they came to Bourdeaux were not above 6000 strong, and therefore had lay'd aside the De∣sign of entring Spain. Luis Duke of Anjou thinking this a good Opportunity to expel them France, advis'd King Henry to joyn his Forces with him, and besiege Bayonne. King Henry French & Spaniards besiege Bayonne. took his Advice and besieg'd the Place, but was forc'd by the Rains and want of Provisions to quit it. Beltran de Guevara, Lord of On̄ate, did good Service in this Expedition, for which the King at his return gave him the Valley of Leniz. In August the Prince of Major∣ca enter'd the Country of Russillon with a powerful Army, yet did nothing considerable. On the other side the Lord of Bearne and Godfrey Recco a Breton, made an Incursion into the Territory of Borgia, and destroy'd all they came near. The King of Aragon sent Francis de Perellas, Viscount Roda to conclude a League with the Duke of Lancaster. A violent Storm cast him upon the Coast of Granada, where he was made Prisoner by that King in revenge for certain Vessels of his taken by the Aragonians, and to please the King of Castile. A new Em∣bassy was sent by King Henry to Barcelona, to establish Peace with the Aragonian. On the 3d of November dy'd in Normandy, Joanna, Queen of Navarre at whose Request her Brother the King of France often pardon'd her Husband. She now dy'd of Grief, because he refus'd her. Her Body was bury'd among the Kings at S. Denis. The King her Husband made himself odious by persecuting the Kindred of those who had been against him. Aragon be∣sides the Wars this Year suffer'd by Famine, which was somewhat abated, by bringing Corn from Africk, and did some good by forcing the Enemy to depart the Kingdom. Jayme King of Naples, who marched into Castile with his Army to look for Provisions dy'd there at the beginning of the Year 1375. His Sister Elizabeth, who was with him led the Army back into France, there she resign'd all her Claims against the House of Aragon to Luis the King 1375. of France his Brother, which caus'd new Troubles. Now the Peace betwixt Castile and Ara∣gon was concluded on the 12th of April, the Conditions were, That the Lady Ellenor before promis'd to Prince John should be marry'd to him, her Dower 200000 Florins lent by the
Araganian to King Henry, at the beginning of the Civil Wars: That Molina should be re∣stored to Castile, and, That the Aragonian should pay 12000 Florins towards the Charge of the War. This Agreement was celebrated with great Joy in both Kingdoms. This Year was Fortunate to all Christendom, as well as Spain, because Pope Gregory the Pope Gre∣gory the XIth re∣turns to Rome after the Papal Chair had been 70 Years at Avignon. XIth return'd to Rome, after the Popes his Predecessors had resided 70 Years at Avignon. Ber∣tran Claquin having for his good Service got the Earldom of Longueville in France  sold his Lands in Spain to King Henry for 260000 Doubles. At Soria on the 27th of May; Prince Charles of Navarre marry'd Ellenor, King Henry's Daughter, and on the 19th of June Prince John his Son took to Wife Ellenor, Daughter to the King of Aragon. News was now brought that D. Ferdinand de Castro, who the last Year fled to Portugal, was dead in England. Also that Ferdinand de Tovar, Admiral of Castile had done much harm along the Coasts of that Island. From Soria King Henry went to Burgos. He design'd to assist the French with all his Power against the English. His Son Alonso Earl of Gijon, to avoid marrying Elizabeth, Daughter to the King of Portugal fled into France, but was soon brought back by his Father. At the end of this Year dy'd D. Gomez Manrique, Arch-bishop of Toledo. The Chapter having chosen two to succeed him, the Decision of the Controversy was left to the Pope, who allow'd of neither of them, but gave that Dignity to Peter Tenorio, then Bishop of Coimbra. About this time dy'd some Men of Note of Navarre: Particular∣ly D. Roderick Ʋrriz, a Man of a great Estate and Interest, was by the King's Command ap∣prehended, 1376. and Beheaded in Pamplona, at the latter end of March 1376. Some private Cor∣respondence he held with the King of Castile was the cause of his Death. It was Reported he intended to betray the Castles of Tudela, and Caparroso, but it is not likely they should so soon design to disturb the Peace. D. Bernard Folcaut, Bishop of Pamplona dy'd on the 7th of July, in Banishment at Agnani in Italy. D. Martin Calva, a most learned Man, was chosen to succeed him. Frederick King of Sicily departed this Life at Messina, on the 26th Frederick the IId. of Sicily dies. of July. His Daughter the Lady Mary was left sole Heiress of that Kingdom, and the Dutchies of Athens and Neopatria, which produc'd Differences betwixt several Princes aspiring to marry her. This also administred to the Aragonians a fair Opportunity of enlarging their Dominions. The End of the Seventeenth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The Eighteenth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Wars of Navarre. Matches of some of King Henry's Children. The Schism in the Church, caus'd by the Election of the Two Popes, Urban and Clement. The death of King Henry of Castile, and of Mahomet the Moorish King of Gra∣nada. SPAIN now enjoy'd a perfect Peace, all its Kings being Ally'd by Marria∣ges, and grown weary of the long Wars. With the Moors there was a Truce. A general Peace in Spain. The Duke of Lancaster ingag'd in the Wars of France, could not apply himself to the Conquest of Castile. King Henry having thus put an End to all the Wars, ap∣ply'd himself to the Civil Government, and reformation of many Abuses, crept in by the li∣berty of the Times. Only Aragon was under the Apprehensions of a War; for Luis Duke of An∣jou, to whom Jayme Prince of Majorca had made over his Title to that Kingdom, began now to set up his Pretensions. The King of Aragon assembled the Cortes at Monçon, where new Impositions were laid upon the Jews and Moors only, for none would be allow'd upon the Christians; yet they offer'd to defend the Country at their own Charge. Great Preparati∣ons were made for that War. It is reported that 40 Galleys were fitted out on the Coast of France, and 4000 Men at Arms gather'd, and it was fear'd in Aragon, that peace being con∣cluded with the English as was expected, the Pope interposing, all the Power of France would fall upon that Kingdom. Besides a Matter of small Moment had like to have produc'd ano∣ther War. D. John Ramirez de Arellano returning from Rome through Aragon, at Barcelona was challeng'd and call'd Traitor in the King's presence, by the Viscount de Rota, for that he had entic'd D. Jayme Prince of Majorca to invade Aragon. The Challenge was accepted and the time fix'd for fighting 90 Days after. King Henry labour'd to prevent the Combat, but the King of Aragon favouring the Viscount, they could not agree. The King of Castile here∣upon said, They should Fight, but he would send 3000 Horse to see Justice done, which was as good as declaring War. This mov'd the Aragonian to desist. A Treaty of Peace was set afoot at Bruges in Flanders first, and in the Year 1377 at Bologne in Picardy, betwixt the English and French, the Embassadors of Castile being present, in Order to have their King Comprehended, 1377 but nothing was concluded. The Death of the Prince of Wales and his Father King Edward the IIId. broke all their Measures. Richard the King's Grandchild, and Son to the Black Prince, succeeded King Edward. The Duke of Burgundy after the Treaty broke up came into Spain, to pay a Vow he had made, to visit the Body of the Apostle S. James in Galicia. In his return Home he was nobly entertain'd by King Henry at Segovia. The rest of the Sum∣mer the King spent at Leon, and the Winter at Sevil. All the Warlike Preparations made in France, fell upon the King of Navarre's Dominions; Charles, Peter and Mary, Princes of The French invade Na∣varre. Navarre were in France. With Charles went Baldwin, who was Governour of several strong holds in Normandy, and Jaques de la Rue his Favourite, who had Orders to propose to the English, that the King would make War upon France, if they would give him the Dutchy of Guienne, to be held in Feof of them. The French having intelligence of this Design, secur'd Rue, put him to the rack, and he confessing was executed at Paris. Baldwin was command∣ed to deliver up all the Towns in Normandy he held for his King. Charles the Heir of Na∣varre was confin'd to the Court, and his Brethren, Peter and Mary were imprison'd at Bretol. All the Dominions of the Navarrois in France were taken from him, except two Towns, and Cher∣bourg which was pawn'd to the English. Not content with this, the French labour'd to induce the King of Castile to invade Navarre, and he wanted not the Will, only look'd for some speci∣ous pretence to declare War. It happen'd opportunely that the King of Navarre complain'd Castile at variance with Na∣varre. that the Mony agreed to be paid him in Gold, was paid partly in Silver Coin, which had much Allay, and was under Value. To revenge this Wrong he dealt underhand with Peter Manrique Lieutenant of Castile, and Governour of Logron̄o, to deliver up that City to him. The Governour gave his King an account of it, who order'd him to carry on the Plot, and secure the King of Navarre. He did so, and that King coming with 400 Horse, sent part
of them to the City, suspecting some Treachery, and therefore would not go himself. Those sent being admitted into the Place, were most of them taken and stript, only a few escaping. Among these Martin Enriquez the King's Standard-bearer, defended himself with only his Sword, against a great Number, and at last sav'd himself and the Standard, leaping off the Bridge into the River Ebro. This was the beginning of the War. King Henry gave the Command of his Army to his Son Prince John, who enter'd Navarre plunder'd the Coun∣try, took Guardia and Viana, and burn't , and Artaxond. Thus Navarra was wasted by two powerful Kings, neither of whome alone it was able to withstand. This in the Year 1378. The King of Castile resided at Burgos, where the marriage of his Bashard 1378 Son D. Alonso Earl of Gijon, with Elizabeth the Bastard-Daughter to the King of Portugal was Marriages of K. Henry's Bastards. solemniz'd. He also contracted two Bastard-Daughters to the two Sons of D. Alonso de Ara∣gon, Earl of Denis, and Marquis of Villena. Peter the younger Son, presently marry'd Jo∣anna the eldest, and had by her Henry and Alonso. Ellenor the youngest was contracted to D. Alonso, who was then as a Hostage in the Hands of the English for his Father's Ransom, yet afterwards the Match broke off. Another Match was concluded betwixt Beatrix Legitimate Daughter to the King of Portugal, and Frederick Bastard to King Henry. Pope Gregory the XIth dy'd at Rome, on the 27th of March. The conclave Meeting to elect a new Pope, after many intreaties, and Threats of the People and Senators of Rome, chose Bartholomew-Butillius a Neapolitan Arch-bishop of Bari, who took the Name of Ʋrban, the VIth. This done, some of the Cardinals withdrew to the Castle of . Angelo, others fled, yet they all assisted at the Coronation: Nevertheless they met afterwards at Fundi, and elected another Pope, who was Robert Cardinal of Geneva, and took the Name of Clement the VIIth. This was the be∣ginning Schism in the Church. of the Schism that follow'd. Pope Ʋrban in one day created 29 Cardinals all Men of Note. Clement went away to Avignon, and all Christendom was divided, not knowing the true Pope. The English, Italians, and Germans follow'd Ʋrban, the French and Scotch, sup∣ported Clement. The Spaniards at first stood Neuters, tho courted by both. Whilst the Church was thus divided, Portugal enjoy'd perfect Peace, yet, as it is usual, the Troubles in Portugal. People was discontented for that the Queen manag'd all things, and bestow'd all Honours upon her own Friends and Relations; besides, she was suspected of entertaining a scandalous Fami∣liarity with D. John Fernandez de Andeyro, Earl of Dren. Denis and John the King's Brothers be∣ing disgussed fled to Castile. John their Bastard-Brother and Master of Avis, was cast into Prison, but submitted to the Queen, and appeas'd her. The lower part of the City Lisbon, towards the Sea was wall'd in, because that side had receiv'd most Harm, in the last Siege. Both the Popes sent their Legates to court the Kings of Spain to declare for them. The Aragonians resolv'd to stand Neuter, tho offended at Ʋrban, who went about to take Sicily, and Sardinia from him, yet he would not suffer the Edicts of Clement, to be read in his King∣dom, but order'd all the Ecclessastical Revenues, appertaining to the Pope, to be deposited in a third Hand. Pope Ʋrban's Legates found King Henry at Cordova, and press'd him to de∣clare against Clement, but he would not give any Answer till the Case was debated by learn∣ed Men at Toledo. Prince John being return'd from the War in Navarre, was in that City, as also the French Embassadors who came to sollicit for Clement. An Assembly of Bishops and Learned Men was held, who declar'd it was not their Part to judge of that Contro∣versy, but would stand by him that should be own'd Pope by the Church, and that till it were decided the Ecclesiastical Revenues should be deposited for the true Pope. This was the Answer given to the Embassadors in the Year 1379: Hence King Henry went away to 1379 Burgos, to prepare for the War with Navarre, and there met him Embassadors from that Navarre and Castile make Peace. King, to treat of Peace, which was concluded upon these Conditions. That the English Soldiers should depart Navarre. That 20 strong places, and among them Estela, Tudela, and Viana, should admit Castilian Garrisons for 10 Years. That the King of Castile should lend the Navarrois 20000 Ducats as soon as the Peace was ratify'd. This done, the two Kings met at Santo Domingo de la Calcada with great Retinues, and strove to outdo one another in Grandeur and Courtesy. The King of Granada having always favour'd King Peter, fear'd King Henry now at leisure would take Revenge. Not finding himself able to withstand his Power, he employ'd a Moor to Murder him. This Moor endeavour'd to gain King Henry's Favour by continual Attendance, and many Presents. Among other Things he gave him a pair of Moorish Buskins, as Grave Authors affirm they were poison'd, but this is a fabulous Conceit taken up, because he fell Sick the Day he put them on, and dy'd ten Days after in the City of Santo Domingo. His death happen'd on the 29th of May. Good Writers affirm Death of K. Henry. he dy'd of the Gout. He liv'd 46 Years and 5 Months, and Reign'd after he was call'd King at Calahorra, 13 Years and 2 Months. His Body was carry'd to Burgos, his Son John now King accompanying it, and was deposited in the Cathedral. Thence he was translated to Valladolid, and lastly to Toledo. He order'd himself to be buried in the Habit of S. Dominick, for the particular Devotion he had to that Saint, of whose Order the Kings us'd to choose their Confessor. About the same time dy'd the King of Granada, Mahomet, call'd of Gaudix Mahomet K. of Gra∣nada dies. for his Curiosity in beautifying that City. He may be esteem'd more fortunate than all his Predicessors, having had no civil Broils during his whole Reign. The King of Aragon tho very antient, took to Wife Sybila Fortia a Widow Lady of great Beauty, which made him prefer her before Joanna Queen of Naples who was offer'd to him. By this Lady
he had two Sons who dy'd young, and a Daughter call'd Elizabeth, afterwards marry'd to the Earl of Ʋrgel. CHAP. II. King John succeeds his Father in the Throne of Castile. Charles King of France dies. Charles the VIth succeeds him Pope Clement own'd in Spain through the French Interest. KING John having bury'd his Father was Crown'd together with his Wife Queen El∣lener, in the Monastery of Huelgas at Burgos. He Knighted 100 young Gentlemen, ac∣cording John suc∣ceeds to the Crown of Castile. to the manner of those Times, and gave the Town of Pancorvo to that City in Pay∣ment of the Expence it had been at, and to reward its Loyalty. The Cortes or Parliament was held in that City, where several Laws were enacted. One was, that a Man who had receiv'd the lesser Orders if he marry'd, should pay Taxes, but if he liv'd Single, was shorn and were the Habit of a Clergy Man, he should be priviledg'd as a Church Man. Great re∣joycing was throughout the whole Kingdom for the King's Coronation. The Joy was the greater, for that it was hop'd he would prove an excellent Prince, being Generous, sharp Witted, Mild, Religious, and not Conceited, but always inclinable to be advis'd. Of Sta∣ture he was low, yet with Majesty. The first thing he did after his Accession to the Crown was to express his Affection to the French, and therefore immediately fitted out a Fleet, and sent it against John de Montfort Duke of Britany, whom, because he sided with the English, the King and Counsel of France had declar'd an Enemy to the Crown, and confiscated his Estate. The Fleet scower'd the Coast of Britany, and took there the Fort, they call'd Gaye. Castilian Fleet ra∣vages the Coasts of Britany. The King spent the Summer at Burgos. Two things concurred, the one to increase, the other to lessen the publick Joy. The first was, that one Joseph Pico a rich and famous Jew was kill'd by his own People. He was Receiver General of the Revenue, which rais'd him to a great height. Some Jews of Note bore him ill will, the reason of it is not known, and they contriv'd to make him away. To this purpose they deceitfully obtain'd an Order of the King, for putting of him immediatly to Death, and finding out the Executioner pre∣vail'd with him to kill the Jew without delay. The Fraud being discover'd, the Contrivers of it were punish'd, and that People were debarr'd the Power they had before of Judging their own Members, a Liberty till then allow'd by the Kings, forc'd by their wants, because the Jews have extraordinary Methods of raising Mony. The Subject of Joy was, that on the 4th of October the Queen was deliver'd at Burgos of a Son call'd Henry, in Honour of his Grandfather, this Child came afterwards to inherit the Crown. About the end of this Year, and beginning of the next, which was 1380, the Rains were so great, and continu'd 1380. so long, that all the Rivers overflow'd, and all the low Lands were under Water. Parti∣cularly Great Floods. the River Ebro, near Zaragoća broke down it's Banks, and ran a new way, so that it cost much Mony and Labour to bring it back into it's own Channel. From Burgos King John went to Toledo, where he again repeated his Father's Exequies, and plac'd his Body in the Tomb built for him. Then he set out for Andaluzia, resolving to aid the French against the English. At Sevil he fitted out 20 Galleys, with which Fernan Sanchez de Tovar, having coasted along Spain and France, came to the English Shore, and ran up the River Thames, de∣stroying all the Country, and burning the Villages. The Difference about the two Popes was now hotter than ever, and each of them had powerful Supporters. Pope Ʋrban medi∣tated Revenge against the Queen of Naples, the chief causer of the Schism, whom her wick∣ed Life had rendred Infamous. He invited Charles Duke of Durazzo, descended of the Kings of Naples into Italy, intimating he would conferr that Crown upon him. On the other sid'e the Queen having no Children adopted Luys Duke of Anjou giving him the Title of Duke of Calabria appertaining to the Heirs of that Crown; not doubting by that means to be supported by the Arms of France. This is all the Title the Dukes of Anjou have to that Crown, which was the occasion of tedious and bloody Wars betwixt them and Spain; tho at this time the De∣sign was only to support the Queen and Pope Clement. On the 13th of July dy'd the Famous Bertran Claquin, at the Siege of Chasteauneuf in Britany, and on the 16th of September follow∣ing Charles King of France departed this Life at Bois de Vincennes. His Son Charles the VIth Charles K. of France dies. Charles the VIth. succeeds. succeeded him. The King of Portugal was concern'd about the Succession, be being old, and having never a Son. Beatrix his Daughter by the Queen, whose Birth was afterwards call'd in Question, was contracted to Frederick Duke of Benavente, and Bastard Son to King Henry. After the Death of Henry the Portuguese would not stand to that Match, but sent Embassadors to the new King, to offer her to his Son Prince Henry, then a Child but a few Months old. King John hoping to joyn the Kingdom of Portugal to Castile admitted of the Proposal. The Articles of Marriage were agreed upon at Soria where the Cortes met, but at last they came to nothing. Peter Manrique, Leiutenant of Castile was apprehended, being accus'd of hold∣ing a treasonable Correspondence with D. Alonso de Aragon, Earl of Denia. He dy'd in Pri∣son without leaving any Children. James Manrique his Brother inherited his Estate and Ho∣nours
as he well deserv'd for his good Service in Navarre. Luis Duke of Anjou govern'd France, for King Charles who was under Age. The King of Aragon fear'd lest he should lay hold of that Opportunity to conquer the Kingdom of Majorca, to which he pretended a right as has been said, but he had bent his Thought upon securing the Crown of Naples to himself and his Heirs. However King John of Castile sent Embassadors into France to accommodate that Affair, and it was agree'd he should sell the Title he had bought. King John advanc'd a good Summ out of kindness to his Father-in Law, and to secure the Peace of Spain. He also sent Embassadors to the Soldan of Egypt, to sollicite for the Liberty of Leo King of Armenia, whose Wife and Daughter had dy'd in Prison. The barbarous King granted his Request, and releas'd the Prisoner, sending him into Spain with Letters, full of Pride and Arogancy in relation to him∣self, Leo K. of Armenia in Spain. but honourably writ in regard to King John, whose Power and Valour he extoll'd de∣siring his Friendship. Three Years after that unfortunate King came into France, and thence into Spain, where the King entertain'd him honourably, and gave him the Towns of Madrid and Andujan, with a competent Revenue for his Maintenance. He stay'd not long in Spain, but return'd into France, designing thence to go into England, to perswade those Kings to make Peace, and unite their Forces against the Enemies of the Gospel in Asia. Death cut him off without doing any thing of what he intended. In the Church of the Celestines at Pa∣ris, there is to this Day an Arch in the Wall of the great Chappel, with a curious Marble Tomb, and an Inscription signifying,LEO King of Armenia lies there. The Christian Princes were weary of hearing the Legates of the Two Popes. The King A Schlsm. of Castile resolv'd to hold the Cortes at Medina del Campo, to decide this debate in Castile. The Legates of both Popes labour'd hard to be receiv'd, believeing all Spain would follow, whatever was decreed there. Opinions differ'd, some were for the one, some for the other; but the wiser sort were for standing Neuter, as if there were no Pope, till a general Coun∣cel had determin'd that Controversy. Mean while the Queen on the 28th of November was deliver'd of a Son, who was call'd Ferdinand, exceeded all the Princes, his contemporaries in Pr. Ferdi∣nand born in Castile. greatness of Spirit, and good fortune, and at length came to be King of Aragon. A great Number of Benedictine Monks came to the Cortes, complaining that the Noble Men who were their Patrons did them signal Wrongs, whereupon it was order'd that the King alone should be their Protector, which lasted during his Reign. D. Peter de Luna was one of the Cardinals that favour'd Clement, who at the beginning of the Year 1381, sent him as his Legate into Spain, to draw those Kings to his Party. In Aragon he effected nothing, but in 1381. Castile the Cortes which had been adjourn'd to Salamanca, on the 20th of May, acknowledg'd Pope Clement own'd in Castile. Pope Clement who resided at Aivignon. The Interest of France sway'd more with them, than Equity and Justice. Many look'd upon it as a Judgment for this wrongful Decree, that Queen Joanna the King's Mother a most Pious Woman and of so great Charity, that she was call'd the Mother of the Poor, dy'd soon after. During her Widowhood she wore the Ha∣bit of a Nun, and was bury'd with it at Toledo near her Husband Henry. CHAP. III. Charles Duke of Durazzo Crown'd King of Naples. The War with Portugal. Peace concluded. The King of Portugal dies. Actions of the Aragonians and Cataloni∣ans in Greece: And of the former in Sardinia. CHarles Duke of Durazzo call'd by Pope Ʋrban, came out of Hungary into Italy. The Florentines gave him a great Summ of Mony that he might not enter Tuscany in warlike Charles Duke of Durrazzo crown'd K. of Na∣ples. manner. At Rome the Pope gave him the Title of Senator of that City, and crown'd him King of Naples. All things succeeded better than he had expected, for all places even the City of Naples, receiv'd him joyfully. The Queen fortify'd herself in Castel Nuovo. Otho her Husband was defeated and taken, whereupon she deliver'd her self up to the Victor. Soon af∣ter she was hang'd in the same place, where she had strangl'd her Husband Andreasso. Otho was set at Liberty. Thus Pope Ʋrban was successful. The Duke of Anjou had enter'd Italy, with a powerful Army, but he dy'd in Apulia. Prince Luis of Navarre, and the new King Charles had married two Sisters, but that Prince was not with him in this Expedition, being ingag'd in a War for recovering of Athens and Neopatria, on the account of the antient Title the Kings of Naple had to those Dominions. The chief of that Country being descended from Catalonia, ceas'd not to invite the King of Aragon to take possession of those Dutchies, as at last he did. A new Storm broke out betwixt Castile and Portugal, which reduc'd the Country to great English joyn with Portugal a∣gainst Ca∣stile. Streights, and put King John in danger of losing his Kingdom. The English and Portugueses entred into a League, and joyn'd their Forces against Castile. The English pretended a right to the Crown of Castile, because the Duke of Lancaster had marry'd the eldest Daughter of King Peter, and the King of Portugal was not pleas'd to see his Title laid aside. Besides, he look'd upon John as an Excommunicated Person, for adhering to Clement, whereas Portugal was for Pope Ʋrban. Alonso Earl of Gijon laid hold of this Opportunity to mutiny. King John
hasten'd to Oviodo, the capital City of Asturias to reduce him, and at the same time order'd Levies to be made, and a Fleet equip'd against Portugal. The Earl easily submitted, but whe∣ther sincerely will appear hereafter. The Rendezyouz of the Army was appointed at Siman∣cas. Assoon as all things were in readiness, the King repair'd thither, march'd directly in∣to Portugal, and laid Siege to Almeyda, a Town not far from Badajoz. The Place being strong and bravely defended, the Siege went on slowly. At Sea 16 Galleys of Castile met with 23 of Portugal. They fought and the Castilians obtain'd a memorable Victory, taking 20 of the Enemies Galleys, and in them their Admiral D. Alonso Telez Earl of Barcelos. This Victory had been more advantagious, if well prosecuted, but the Admiral of Castile Fernan Sanchez de Tovar satisfy'd with what he had done, return'd to Castile, which gave the Portu∣gueses time to recover themselves, and the English Fleet to come to Lisbon, which was the greatest damage. Nevertheless, King John encourag'd by that Success, sent a formal Chal∣lenge to the Enemy by a Herauld, offering as soon as Almeyda were taken, to advance two Days March to meet him. The English being hot and resolute were for Fighting, but they wanted Horse, having brought none in the Fleet, and it being difficult to raise them in Portu∣gal. Therefore the Herauld contrary to Justice, was secur'd. Winter drawing on, the King of Castile withdrew without doing any thing of Moment, but resolving to return with a great∣er Power at the beginning of the Spring, of the following Year 1382. The Earl of Gijon again rebell'd, and fled to Bragança, but his Friends forsaking him, and the Marques de Ville∣na 1382. Rebellion suppress'd. interposing, he again submitted, and was the second time pardon'd by the King. The Marques for his good Service, was created Constable, an Honour new in Castile, tho long us'd in other Countries. Fernan Alvarez de Toledo, and Peter Ruiz Sarmiento, were made Ma∣reschals, equal to our Major-Generals. Winter being spent, the Randezvous was again ap∣pointed at Simancas, that Country being plentiful to supply the Army. As soon as all was in a readyness, the King set out for Badajoz, being inform'd that the Enemy design'd to in∣vade Castile that way, and were already advanc'd as far as Elvas, which is but three Leagues from Badajoz. The Portugues Forces were 3000 Horse, and a great Number of Foot; the English 3000 Horse, and as many Archers. In the Army of Castile, were 5000 Horse, and a much greater Number of Foot, all old Soldiers and eager to fight. Yet the King of Castile rather than put all to the hazard of a Battel, thought good to make overtures of Peace. D. Alonso de Castro was sent to make the Proposals. The English were inclinable to harken to Peace, being sorry, they had undertaken a trouble some War so far from Home, notwithstanding their Title to Castile, and that the King of Portugal offer'd to marry his Daughter Beatrix, the Heiress of that Crown, to Edward the Son of Edmund Earl of Cam∣bridge. A Treaty being set afoot, the following Articles were agreed upon. That Beatrix Articles betwixt Castile and Portugal. the Daughter of Portugal should be contracted to Ferdinand, younger Son to the King of Castile, that so Portugal might not be united to Castile. That the Prisoners and Galleys taken in the Sea Fight should be restor'd to the Portugues. That the King of Castile should fur∣nish the English with a Fleet to return Home. These were hard Terms for the King of Ca∣stile, but the Desire of Peace overcame all Difficulties, and he gave Hostages for the Perform∣ance of those Conditions. Thus the Battel was prevented, and the War ended. The Joy conceiv'd, for this Peace was interrupted by the death of some eminent Per∣sons. King John return'd to the Kingdom of Toledo, and lay Sick at Cuellar, when his Death of the Qu. of Castile. Wife Queen Ellenor dy'd in Childbed of a Daughter that liv'd not long. Her Body was Bu∣ried in the Royal Chappel at Toledo. Her death mov'd the King of Portugal to alter the first Article of the late Treaty, and he sent to offer his Daughter to the King, thinking by that means to secure the Succession of the Crown of Portugal, it being tedious to expect, till Prince Ferdinand were grown up. They easily agreed, and one of the Articles was that in case King Ferdinand dy'd, the Queen Dowager should govern Portugal, till the Princess had a Child of Age. The City Elvas was the place appointed for the Marriage. These things happen'd in Spain, about the end of the Year. At the same time in Greece the Aragonians and Navarrois were at War, about the Dutchess of Athens and Neopatria. Philip Dalmao, Viscount Rocaberti, Admiral of the Aragonian Fleet, subdu'd those Dominions, for he ex∣pell'd the Navarrois, put Garrisons of his own into the Towns, leaving Romanus de Villanucva, Governour and return'd home himself. Sicily was also in Confusion, for Artal de Alagon, Count de Mistreta being a Man of great Power, would marry the Queen to his own liking, and bestow the Crown on whom he pleas'd. To this purpose he call'd out of Lombardy, John Galeazzo who was not yet Duke of Milan, but he would not go because the Aragonians had taken his Fleet in the Port of Pisa some time before. The Nobility of Sicily were offended that D. Artal should pretend to the whole Power of Government. William Ray∣mund de Moncada, having Communicated his Design to the King of Aragon, enter'd Catanca, seiz'd the Queen, and convey'd her away to Augusta, a strong Fort of his own, on the Sea Shore, into which he had put a good Garrison of Catalonians, sent him by the King under the Command of Roger de Moncada. D. Artal seeing himself disappointed, lay'd Siege to Augusta. Dalmao in his Return out of Greece, touch'd in Sicily, and understanding how Af∣fairs stood, forc'd the Enemy to raise the Siege, and convey'd the Queen safe into Spain. The Queen afterwards marry'd in Aragon, and by that means the Kingdoms of Aragon and Sicily were united with a stronger and more lasting Band than they had been before. Charles
the Heir of Navarre was still detain'd a Prisoner in France. The King of Castile interceding for him, he was set at Liberty, which  oblig'd him, that he ever continu'd firm to the Interest of Castile. He came to  at the beginning of the Year 1383, and was 1383. receiv'd with Joy. His Father grown Old corrected his course of Life. The Marriage of Marriage of the K. of Castile with the Princess of Portugal. the King of Castile, with the Princess of Portugal was solemniz'd with great Pomp, at the Place appointed. Her Father could not be Present being then Sick. D. Alonso Earl of Gijon again rais'd Uproars in Asturias. Some Forces were sent which easily reduc'd him to his Duty, and the King went to hold the  at Segovia, where nothing memorable was done, but altering the Common Account, as had been done before at Valencia, of reckoning from the Aera of Cesar to begin at the Birth of our Saviour On the 20th of October after a languishing Ferdinand King of Portugal dies. Sicknels, Ferdinand King of Portugal dy'd at Lisbon. He liv'd 43 Years, 10 Months, and 18 Days, and Reign'd 19 Years, 9 Months, and 10 Days, and may be reckon'd among the good Princes for his Meekness, Learning, and Sweetness of Temper. His Body was bury'd in the Monasters of Franciscans of Santarem, near to his Mother Queen Constance. Sardinia was not yet free from Tumults. Hugh Arborea, Son to Marianus aim'd as well as his Father at a Crown, but being of a cruel and haughty Temper, was murder'd by his own People. It was hop'd his Death would put an end to those Troubles: Therefore Brancalcon Doria, who had serv'd the King faithfully repair'd to Aragon to regulate the Affairs of the Island, but was secur'd because his Wife Ellenor Arborea, a Masculin Woman attempted by force of Arms to Revenge her Brother's Death, and recover her Father's Estate, and took several strong Holds. Her Husband Brancalcon was carry'd under a strong Guard to pacify her, but could not prevail, wherefore he was long in Custody at Caller, and the Interest of Aragon went down the Wind, the King being wholly taken up with other Cares which touch'd him nearer. CHAP. IV. Portugal full of Divisions about the Succession to the Crown. King John of Castile hav∣ing been proclaim'd at Lisbon, enters that Kingdom, has many Places deliver'd to him, Besieges Lisbon, but is forc'd to raise the Siege, and return to Castile. THE King of Portugal's Death was the cause of bloody Wars betwixt that Crown and Divisions in Portu∣gal about the Suc∣cession of the Crown. Castile. The People would not hear of submitting to a Stranger; all were for Elect∣ing a King of their own. A Meeting of the Nobility was held at Lisbon, but nothing con∣cluded. Some of the great Ones underhand invited King John of Castile to take Possession of the Kingdom. Among these was D. John, the Master of Avis, who dealt subtilly because he had not yet gain'd the Affections of the People. Time was spent in Castile consulting the Affair till the Opportunity was lost never to be recover'd. At last it was decreed the King should go before in peaceable manner, and the Army follow to subdue, if there were Occa∣sion, such as offer'd to oppose him. The Bishop of Guardia, which is on the Borders of Portugal, offer'd to deliver up that City to the King. Before he set out upon this Expedition it was requisite to put a stop to the wicked Designs of some Men in Castile. D. John, Brother to the late King of Portugal, who had fled to Castile, was imprison'd at Toledo for no other Crime but because he might pretend a Right to that Crown, being Brother to the late King. The Earl of Gijon was secur'd in the Castle of Montalvan, because after he had been pardon'd so often he still kept Correspondence with the Portugueses. All his Estate was Consiscated, and he left in Charge with the Arch-bishop of Toledo, who kept him long at Almonaçir, three Leagues from that City. This done the King and Queen went to Plasencia, and thence set out for Portugal. The Clergy of Guardia, as had been promis'd by the Bishop, came out to meet them with Crosses, wishing them Joy of their Accession to that Crown. The Go∣vernour of the Castle held out, not knowing what party to take. Before the King's com∣ing he was proclaim'd at Lisbon through the Persuasions of D. Henry Emanuel, Earl of Sintra, King John of Castile proclaim∣ed K. at Lisbon. and Uncle to the late King Ferdinand. Ellenor the Queen Dowager consented to it, knowing her self too weak to oppose the Designs of the great Ones. Yet the People began to be di∣vided, and many Lives were lost. The first kill'd was the Count John Fernandez de Andeyro, whom the Master of Avis stabb'd in the very Palace. The popular Fury stopp'd not here for they Murder'd D. Martin Bishop of Lisbon, in the Tower of the Cathedral, whither he fled for Sanctuary, only because he was a Castilian, and seem'd to favour King John. The Queen fearing some Outrage with the consent of the Master of Avis, withdrew from Lis∣bon to Santarem. Only Passion and Madness seem'd now to Reign. The Master of Avis was Handsome, Generous, Familiar, and had many other good Qualities which seem'd to make amends for the Fault in his Birth. On the other side King John, tho mild unless provok'd, was reserv'd and of few Words, so that tho some Places submitted to him upon his first coming, he gain'd not the Affections of the Portugueses, who expect to be familiarly Treated by their Kings. At the beginning of the Year 1384, the King went from Guardia to San∣tarem to visit the Queen Dewager his Mother in Law, and consult with her what Method was
to be taken. With him went 500 Horse; a sufficient Number in time of Peace, but too small to quell Rebels. The Governours of the Kingdom of Toledo ceas'd not to make new Levies, and send them towards Fortugal. The greatest want was of Mony, the Treasury and Country being exhausted with the last Wars. They therefore took to the value of 4000 Marks of Silver out of the Treasury of the Church of our Blessed Lady of Guadalupe, which the People look'd upon as an ill Omen,  War began with Sacriledge. Charles Prince of Navarre, that he might not be thought ungrateful was gathering a good Body of Men to assist King John. The King of Aragon thought it safest to look on. In Portugal af∣ter much Consultation it was resolv'd the Queen Dowager should resign the Government of the Kingdom to the King her Son in Law. This which was look'd upon as the means to appease the People, provok'd them the more to Mutiny. They hated the Government of Portu∣gueses that fa∣vour'd the K. of Ca∣stile. Castile, and upbraided the Queen with Parjury, and breach of Trust; yet many of the Nobles who had much to lose, were concern'd at these Confusions, and favour'd King John. These were Henry Emanuel, Earl of Sintra, John Texeda who had been Lord Chancellor, D. Peter Pereyra, Grand Prior of Portugal, who was afterwards Master of Calatrava in Castile, and his two Brothers James and Ferdinand, with many more. Besides these many of the Commonal∣ty, especially in the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, where one Lope de Leyra, born in Galicia was Governour. Alonso Pimentel deliver'd up Bragança, he being Gover∣nour there. John Portocarrero and Alonso de Silva did the same by other Places, where they Commanded. Thus far the pretensions of Castile went on successfully, and it was thought the whole The Ma∣ster of  a Ba∣stard as∣pires to the C own of Portu∣gal. Kingdom united, could not oppose them, much less being divided. But their Hopes soon vanish'd. D. John Brother to the late King being detain'd Prisoner in Castile, the People fixt their Eyes upon the Master of Avis, Bastard Son to King Ferdinand. He laying hold of the opportunity, offer'd to expose himself for his Country. Yet the People at that time did no more but name D. John that was Prisoner in Castile their Governour. The more to incense the People, he was painted upon their Colours in Irons. The Command of the Army was given to the Master of Avis. They said Queen Ellenor was not lawfully marry'd to the King, and therefore Queen Beatvix was a Bastard. This was done in Lisbon which had declar'd against Castile, and was supported by many of the Nobility, particularly by Nun̄o Alvarez Pereyra, Son to the Grand Prior, tho his Brothers sided with Castile. This Gentleman was the Founder of the House of Bragança, the most powerful in Portugal. Nun̄o Pereyra was sent with a Body of Men to wast are Frontiers of Castile. Some Forces sent by King John to oppose him were routed with great Slaughter, and much greater Disgrace. D. Gonçalo, Brother to the Queen Dowager, was in Coimbra with a good Garrison. Thither King John went with the two Queens, believing he would have receiv'd him, but was disappointed. This was the more grievous to King John, for that Peter, Earl of Trastamara, Son to D. Frederick deserted from him, and fled to that City. It was suspected that Queen Ellenor weary of favouring Castile, knew of his Flight. Therefore the King sent her to Tordesillas in Castile with a great Retinue, where she afterwards dy'd. She lies bury'd at Valladolid, in the Cloi∣ster of the Mercenarians. This done a Council of War was held about besieging Lisbon the Metropolis of the Kingdom, whither the principal People were withdrawn, with the best of their Goods. Opinions vary'd. Some were for dividing the Army, and securing the Country. Others said all would be easy Lisbon once taken. This Advice prevail'd, and the Army march'd to the Siege. By the way they wasted the Country, burnt the Villages, Lisbon be∣sieged. drove the Cattle, and took several Towns. They incamp'd and intrench'd themselves be∣fore that part of the City, where now is the Monastery of All Saints. To secure the Sea as well as the Land, 13 Galleys, and 12 Ships came from Sevil, and anchor'd before the City, to hinder any Resort of Provisions, which soon grew scarce, for the Multitude of the Be∣sieg'd was great. To remedy this want 16 Galleys, and 8 Ships came from Porto, which with the help of the Wind and Tide, tho they lost 3 Ships, supply'd the distress'd City. This Relief chang'd the Face of Affairs, for Autumn coming on, the Army in the Field sicken'd and therefore King John made some Overtures of Peace. Peter Fernandez de Velasco, for the Castilians and the Master of Avis for the Portugueses were commission'd to Treat. The Ma∣ster of Avis positively affirm'd they would accept of no Conditions unless he were left to govern the Kingdom till such time as Queen Beatrix had a Son of Age to take the Admini∣stration upon him. This he would not depart from having, already conceiv'd some Hopes of obtaining the Crown for himself. Sickness dally increas'd, and many Men of Note dy'd, of the Common sort 200 perish'd in one Day. This made the great Men waver, and grow weary of that unfortunate War. They wish'd for any manner of Composition, and at length the Mortality was so great, that the Siege was rais'd with much Loss and Dishonour, and the Army march'd away. James Sarmiento was made Marshal de Camp in the Place of his The Siege raised. Brother deceas'd, and had the Government of Santarem given him. Other Officers were put into Garrisons about the Country, the King designing to recruit his Army, and return as soon as possible. This done the Fleet and Army mov'd towards Sevil. Much harm might have been done them, had the Besieg'd pursu'd, but they were glad to be rid of them at any rate. Processions were made at Lisbon, and throughout the Kingdom for this Deli∣verance. At this time the King of Aragon shew'd no Kindness to his two Sons by the first
Wife, the Princes John and Martin. The Blame was laid upon the Mother in Law, but Prince John had offended his Father by Marrying privately the Lady Violante, Daughter to the Duke of Berri, not regarding the Queen of Sicily, which was much the better match. The King vented his Passion upon John Earl of Ampurias, in whose Dominions, and under whose Protection they were Marry'd, for as soon as his Son return'd home and was Pardon'd, he seiz'd the greatest part of the Earl's Estate. The Earl himself fled by Sea to Avignon, re∣solving to make use of the Forces of his Friends for recovering of his Dominions. CHAP. V. John the Bastard, Master of Avis proclaim'd King of Portugal. King John of Castile sends his Fleet, then enters Portugal himself with an Army. The famous Battle of Aljubarrota, and rout of the Castilians. AT the beginning of the Year 1385, the King of Castile was employ'd in raising Land-Forces, 1385. and had fitted a Fleet of 12 Galleys, and 20 Ships. Yet all things went on slowly, because he fell Sick, and was in Danger of Death, yet as soon as recover'd he for∣warded all Preparations. News was brought that the Garrison of Santarem had taken the Master of , and Grand Prior of S. John, but this prov'd False, and the Joy conceiv'd John the Bastard pro∣claim'd K. of Portugal. was turn into Sorrow, for it was certainly known that the Portugueses in Coimbra had pro∣claim'd the Master of Avis King, which was engaging themselves so far, that there was no way to go back again. The chief of the Rebels in that City had consulted together, and agreed it was absolutely Necessary to choose them a Head, and that for the greater Autho∣rity he ought to be declar'd King. Some thought this too bold an Attempt, and were against excluding Queen Beatrix, whose Right it was, or so far Provoking the Anger of Ca∣stile. Others favour'd Prince John, tho then a Prisoner at Toledo, but this was wholly re∣jected, he being in no Condition to assist them. Therefore they all voted for the Master of Avis who was present, and proclaim'd him King on the 5th of April, at the Monastery of St. Francis in Coimbra, where that Consultation was held. All that were present, even those that had before oppos'd it kiss'd his Hand, and did Homage to him to express their Zeal. Prophesies were then invented to justify their Choice, and they gave out, that at the begin∣ning of these Troubles, a Child in the Cradle had three Times with a loud Voice cry'd out, D. John King of Portugal. Which they attributed to the Master of Avis, for Men are apt to fancy every thing as they would have it. From that Day the Portugueses despairing of Par∣don, became more resolute and bold. The Province between the Rivers, Duero and Min̄o, soon declar'd for the new King. This Joy was somewhat abated by the Arrival of the Fleet of Castile, on the Coast of Portugal, which meeting no body to oppose it ravag'd all the Sea Castilian Fleet ra∣vages the Coast of Portugal. Coasts. The King of Castile was at Cordova, and thence at the beginning of Summer sent his Queen to Avila, since she could be no longer useful, her Subjects having wholly cast her off. About the beginning of July D. Peter Tenorio, Archbishop of Toledo made an Incursion in∣to the Country of Viseo, destroying all the Country, and sparing neither Sex nor Age, but at their Return they were met with and overthrown by the Portugueses. Many other En∣counters happen'd with various Success, but all prov'd ruinous to the Natives, for both Parties liv'd at Discretion. The Army of Castile randevouz'd at Guidad Rodrigo, when the Summer was well advanc'd. Only Prince Charles, Son to the King of Navarre, was expect∣ed with a good Body of Men. A Council of War being held, the wiser sort were against Fighting, and only for wasting the Country, and wearying out the Rebels: But their Opi∣nion prevail'd, who being young were hottest, and magnify'd the Strength of Castile, des∣pising the Enemy, as a raw and undisciplined Rabble, and therefore were for putting an end speedily to the War. This advice the King follow'd, tho the other was the safest. The Castilians were overseen in many things, and they ought at least to have expected the Suc∣cours that the Prince of Navarre was to bring. Having fix'd this Resolution they enter'd that part of Portugal call'd Bera, and took Cillorico. Thence they advanc'd and burnt the Suburbs of Coimbra, and attempted to take Leyria, which held for Queen Ellenor. During the Siege of Cillorico, the King being unhealthy, and considering the Danger of the War, made his Will upon the 21st of July. In it he ordain'd that the Lordships of Biscay and Mo∣lina his Mother's Inheritance should for ever be annex'd to the Crown, and belong to the eldest Sons of the Kings of Castile. He appointed 6 Tutors for his Son and Heir Henry, and 12 Governours of the Kingdom during his Minority. The Queen his Mother in Law, the K. John of Castile makes his Will. Princes John and Denis of Portugal, the Children of King Peter, and Son of D. Ferdinand de Castre, who were all Prisoners in Castile, he order'd should have Justice done them. The Shortness of his Life gave not Leasure to make it known, whether he design'd to put to Death or release them. Many other things he ordained in his Will, which being made with∣out Deliberation was the Cause of many Troubles and Confusions. The Portugues Army was advanc'd to Tomar with a Resolution to try their Fortune. The Castilians march'd to meet them. They discover'd one another about the Mid-way, and there Intrench'd them∣selves.
The Portugueses were in a narrow Place, having a Plain on the Front, and deep Morasses on each side, which secur'd their Flanks, they were 2200 Horse, and 10000 Foot. The Castilians being much more Numerous encamp'd in an open Plain about a League and Famous Battel of Aljubaro∣ta. half from them, and being confident of their Strength, advanc'd and offer'd Battol on the Eve of the Assumption. The King of Castile led the main Battel, and some of the Nobles the Wings, which in the time of need were useless by season of the Streightness of the Ground. D. Gonzalo Nun̄ez de Guzman, with a Body of  was order'd through. By ways to fall upon the Enemies Rear, that none might escape being taken or kill'd. The Portugueses kept their Ground because it was advantagious, and drew their Army into two Bodies. Nun̄o Alvarez Pereyra created Constable by the new King, led the Van, the main Body the King himself headed. Both Parties advanc'd somewhat, but the Portugueses not above a Stones throw, to avoid coming out to the Plain. Then the new Constable demanded a Conference, at it were to make some Overtures of Peace, but tho some Men of Note were sent to him they only spent time in fruitless Debates. Mean while the Castilian Commanders consulted whether it were better to give Battel or delay it till the next Day. The more prudent were against attacking the Enemy in that advantagious Post, but the younger sort thought they had got them in a Pound whence none could escape. John de Rio the French Embassador be∣ing ask'd his Opinion, earnestly disswaded giving Battel, and the King was inclinable to take his Advice, when some young Noblemen without expecting the Signal furiously charg'd the Enemy, then the others rather than leave them in the Danger advanc'd. First the Darts and Arrows flew, then they came to their Swords, and the Horse and Foot fought desperately mixt without any Order. Every Man stood his Ground, resolving to kill or be kill'd. The King of Castile by reason of his Indisposition was carry'd about upon Mens Shoulders, and thence encourag'd his Men. The first Body of the Enemy began to give way and was ready to fly, when their new King advanc'd with his Party, loudly calling upon the Souldiers and encouraging them. Thus animated they rally'd, and the Fortune of the Day was soon Castilians defeated. chang'd. The Castilian Commanders were slain in their King's sight, without turning their Backs, and great Numbers of Souldiers were Slaughter'd being depriv'd of their Officers. The King fearing to fall into the Enemy's Hands mounted on Horseback and fled, the rest follow'd his Example. 10000 Men were slain, and among them many of great Quality, as two Cousin Germans of the King, the Lieutenant of Castile, the Admiral, a Marshal de Camp, and the French Embassador. Night which came on soon after the Fight, sav'd any. Some of these joyned the Body commanded by the Master of Alcantara, which notwithstanding the Rout held together. Others went to meet Charles, Son to the King of Navarre; who had enter'd Portugal another way, but came too late for the Fight. The greatest Numour having lost their Arms fled into Castile. It was no cheap Victory to the Portuguesess, there are those who write they lost 2000 Men. The King of Castile, Fear being more prodominant than his Weakness, travell'd all Night, without stopping till he came to Santarem, which was 11 Leagues distant. Thence he went down the River Tagus in a Boat, and getting aboard his Fleet which lay before Lisbon, sail'd away for Sevil. Thither he came cover'd with Mourn∣ing which he wore some Years. That City receiv'd him with Joy and Tears mixt, lament∣ing that great Loss, but glad their King had escap'd the Danger. This is the memorable Fight in which the Portugueses Triumph'd over the Power of Castile, and was call'd of Alju∣barrota, because fought near the Village of that Name a Place only Famous for this Over∣throw. This Day was kept every Year by the Portugueses as a Holy Day, and the Preachers from the Pulpits extoll'd the Valour of their Nation, reproaching the Cowardize of the Ca∣stilians with Language misbecoming that Place, the People resorting to hear them as it had been to a Play. After the Victory all Portugal submitted to the Conqueror. Sant arem, Bra∣ganca, All Portu∣gal sub∣mits to John the Usurper. and all other Places surrender'd, and thus the New King secur'd to his Posterity the Crown he had wrongfully obtain'd. At this time the King of Aragon was very ill at Figueras, he was worn with Age and Troubles. As soon as recover'd he shew'd himself Dissatisfy'd with his Son Prince John. The People laid the Blame upon the Queen, saying she had be∣witch'd the King. Prince John in Discontent withdrew from Court, and call'd the Earl of Ampurias, who had been outed his Estate, with Forces from France to his Assistance. For this reason the King depriv'd him of the Vicarship of the Kingdom, an Honour peculiar to the eldest Son of those Kings. In Aragon, as has been said heretofore, they have a Magi∣strate call'd the Justice of Aragon, who is a sort of Moderator betwixt the King and the People in the Nature of the Roman Tribunes of the People. To him the Prince had recourse to support him against the Wrongs offer'd him by his Father openly, and by the Queen un∣der hand. That Justice supported him in the Possession of his Employment, as having been Arbitrarily depos'd, till the Case were brought to Judgment. The Debate began this Year and was ended the next ensuing. Let us see what happen'd in Castile and Portugal after that me∣morable Battel.
CHAP. VI. The Portugueses make an Inroad into Castile, and defeat a Body of Castilians. The Duke of Lancaster lands at Corunna, and takes several Towns. The Death of the Kings of Naples, Aragon and Navarre. THE Portugueses resolving to prosecute their Victory and make the most of their Success, sent a solemn Embassy into England to joyn in League with the Duke of Lancaster, the old pretender to the Crown of Castile, in right of his Wife. Whilst that Business was in agitation, to avoid lying idle and hinder the Enemy from recovering themselves, the new King of Portugal travers'd all the Country, recovering entirely all that was possess'd by the Castilians. His Constable Nun̄o Pereyra, made an Incursion into Andaluzia pillaging and wasting all that Province. Peter Nun̄ez Master of Santiago, Gonzalo Nun̄ez de Guzman now Master of Calatrava, and the Earl of Niebla, with what Forces had escap'd the late Rout, Another verthrow of the Ca∣stilians. went out to meet the Portugueses who were less in Number, and inclos'd them as it were in a Net, near a Town call'd Valverde. They seeng their Danger offer'd to capitulate, but For∣tune still favour'd them, for at the first Onset, the Master of Santiago's Horse, and then he himself was kill'd. His Men taking this for an ill Omen, drew off, and the Portugueses return'd Home with a rich Booty. Nun̄o Pereyra the Constable, for his good Service was by the new King created Earl of Barcelos. Garci Fernandez de Villagarcia, was by the King of Castile made Master of Santiago, in stead of Peter Nun̄ez. That King was concern'd how to defend himself against the English. He went away from Sevil to Valladolid, to hold the Cortes or Parliament. Charles Son to the King of Navarre, a brave Prince and grateful towards his Brother-in-Law, met him at that City. It was resolv'd to levy greater Forces than had been in Arms till that time. That all Subiects should arm themselves according to their Power. That publick Prayers should be made to appease God. That Foreign Succours France and Navarre joyn with Castile. should be procur'd, as well of Mony as Men, for there was great scarcity of it. France was judg'd the most likely place to find Relief, and a solemn Embassy was sent thither. The Embassadors having laid down the miserable Condition of their King; made humble suit for assistance, and all the Nobles of France unanimously agreed the King ought to be supported. It was resolv'd 2000 Horse should be sent into Castile, under Luis de Bourbon the King's Uncle by the Mothers side, and 100000 Florines for their pay. They promis'd if this relief prov'd too small that the King himself would March in Person, with all the Power of France, and esponse the Quarrel of Castile. Pope Clement from Avignon, wrote a letter to King John com∣forting him in his Adversity. Peter Earl of Trastamara the King's Cousin, who deserted from his Army to Coimbra, and thence went over into France, being pardon'd return'd now into Castile. These Helps were small, but the slowness of the English prov'd the safety of Castile. The King of Portugal besieg'd Coria, but could not take it because some fresh Forces got into it, therefore he return'd Home with much Booty. The Corses met again at Segovia, in order to lay Taxes for raising of Mony. Here the King Publish'd a Manifesto to prove his Title to the Crown against the Duke of Lancaster: But what just Title could the Son of a Bastard have, where there were so many of the True Line living? The Duke of Lancaster accepted of the Offers made by the Portugues. He endeavour'd to obtain passage through Aragon, and the King of Castile to hinder it. Both parties sent their Embassadors to that King upon this account. Passage being refus'd, the Duke came over from England into Spain by Sea, and The Duke of Lancaster lands at Co∣runna. landed at Coruna, on the 26th of July. In that Port he took 6 Galleys of Castile. Fer∣nan Perez de Andrada Governour of the Town, defended it with such bravery, it was not taken. The English were only 1500 Horse, and the like number of expert Archers, a small Body, but might have done great Harm, had they immediately joyn'd the Portugueses. The time they lost before Corun̄a gave a great Advantage to their Enemies: Nevertheless, they took several Towns in Galicia, and even the City of Santiago the Metropolis of that King∣dom. Some Men of Note of that Country went over to the English. The Duke of Laucaster at length sail'd for Portugal, and Anchor'd at the Mouth of the River Duero. The King and Duke met at Porto. With the Duke came his Wife Constance, his Daughter Catherine, and Philippa and Elizabeth, two Daughters by his first Wife. It was resolv'd they should joyn their Forces. That the Duke should have the Kingdom of Castile, and the Portugues certain Cities and Towns. They agree'd the new King should marry the Dukes Daughter Philippa, in Case the Pope would dispense with his Vow of Chastity, as Master of Avis. The King of Castile was at Zamora making Preparations to defend himself, and gathering the Forces that came from France and Castile, He publish'd an Edict by which all were ennobl'd who should serve two Months with Horse and Arms at their own Cost and Charge, D. John Garcia Manrique Arch-bishop of Sevil, was sent with a good Body of Men to secure Leon. All things suc∣ceeded better than was expected. The third part of the English not us'd to that Climate was consum'd by Sickness. Besides, many ranging the Country disorderly, were cut off by the Boors. Thus nothing remarkable was done that Summer, only some Messages pass'd betwixt the Kings. The Duke sent to challenge the King of Castile, and require him to resign up that
Crown to him. The King also sent Persons of Note to justify his Title, but underhand to propose a Match betwixt his Son and Heir Henry, and the Dukes Daughter by the Lady Constance. This Proposal was no way displeasing to the Duke, yet in publick he answer'd, He would hear of no Terms but delivering up the Kingdom. Near about this time, tho far remote as to Place dy'd three Kings. On the 4th of June, Charles King of Naples was kill'd in Hungary, his Head being cloven with a Partesan. On the Death of 3 Kings. first of January following, which began the Year 1387. Charles the IId. King of Navarre ended his Days at Pamplona. Some say it was the Year before: His Body was buried in the Cathedral of that City. Four Days after Peter the IVth. King of Aragon, departed this Life at Barcelona. He liv'd 75 Years, and reign'd 51, wanting 19 Days. Of Stature he was Of Peter K. of Aragon. small, not Healthy, very quick, a great lover of Honour, and of making a show of Majesty, in so much that he was call'd Peter the Ceremonious. He maintain'd War against powerful Princes, without Foreign Aids only by his own Valour and Conduct, was a lover of learned Men and particularly addicted to Astrology and Chimistry. His Body was first bury'd at Barcelona, and thence translated to Poplete, as he had ordain'd. Charles King of Naples upon the death of Luis King of Hungary, had that Crown offer'd him by the Nobility; he went thither and being entertain'd at Dinner by the Queen, was murder'd by her Order. He left a Son and a Daughter, which were Ladislaus and Joanna, they both reigned in Naples. successively, and the one being a Child, the other unfit for Government, they were the cause of Bloody Wars in Italy. The King of Navarre had long been troubled with a Leaprousy. It was commonly reported he was burnt to death, for that by the Advice of Phisitians, he us'd to be wrap'd in Cloaths dip'd in Brimstone, on which a Spark of Fire accidentally falling, is said to have consumed the Bed and Him. This was the more easily believed, because he was Cruel, Covetous, and Lascivious. Joanna his youngest Daughter was Married to John de Montforte Duke of Britany, who had by her four Sons, and three Daughters. Charles the Charles In∣herlts the Crown of Navarre. Son of him Deceased, Friend and Brother-in-Law to the King of Castile, inherited the Crown of Navarre. He return'd out of Castile, and in the Cortes caus'd Pope Clement to be own'd, as had been done in Castile, for till then Navarre as well as Aragon had stood Neuter. This was thought to be done, rather to please the French and Castilians, than out of respect to Ju∣stice. The King of Castile to oblige the new King withdrew his Garrisons out of several. Towns in Navarre, which he held by Contract, and forgave him a great Summ of Mony his Father ow'd. Thus the new King was encourag'd to attempt the recovery of many Towns taken from his Father in Normandy, by the French and English, and sent Embassadors to them accordingly. This King was mild, liberal and generous, whence he came to be call'd the Noble. By his Wife the Lady Ellenor, he had the Princesses Joanna, Mary, Blanch, Beatrix and Elizabeth; his Sons Charles and Luis died Young. Illegitimate, Godfrey Marques of Cortes, the Founder of that Family, and Joanna marry'd to In̄igo de Zuniga. In Aragon King John was Crown'd, after the death of his Father. He was a meek Prince if not provok'd. He could not be present at the enterment of his Father, being then Sick at Girona, nor attend John crown'd K. of Ara∣gon. the Government then in Confusion, the Queen Dowager, her Brother, and many Men of Note being imprison'd, they endeavour'd to fly for fear of the new King. The Queen was accus'd by a Jew, of having given her Husband some bewitching Potion; severals were tortur'd and put to death, on this account, and the Queen condemn'd to the Wrack, but it was not put in Ex∣ecution, yet all her Estate was seiz'd, and she only allow'd a Pension to live on The first thing the King did, was the submitting his Kingdom to Pope Clement, as Castile and Navarre had done before. John Earl of Ampurias being at Barcelona, in Hopes to be rewarded for his Services to the new King, while Prince, was cast into Prison upon Pretence that he had call'd in the French, to recover his Estate. D. Ximeno Peres de Arenos the King's Lord Chamberlain, was sent to compose the Affairs of Sardinia. He agreed with the Lady Ellenor Arborea, in behalf of her Son Marianus, whom she had by her Husband Brancaleon Doria. That the Judicature of Arborea should remain to them and their Heirs. That for other Towns they pretended Right to they should be left to Arbitration. That all Places taken during the War, should be restor'd. Both Parties having Sign'd these Articles, the War ceas'd. CHAP. VII. Peace Concluded with the English. The Heir of Castile in imitation of the Prince of Wales in England, is created Prince of Asturias. A Truce with Portugal and the Moors. King John of Castile kill'd by a fall from his Horse. THE Treaty of Peace with the English was still afoot, and yet the War was vigorously Prosecuted. 600 English Horse and as many Archers, for the rest were consum'd with Sickness, sat down before Benavente, whith them 2000 Portuguese Horse, and 6000 Foot. Alvaro Osoiro the Governour, defended the Place bravely, and did the Enemy some Harm. The King of Castile was unwilling to hazard a Battel, which gave the Enemy the Opportuni∣ty of taking some Towns in that Neighbourhood. Yet their Loss was greater than the Ad∣vantage,
they could propose to themselves, for the Flague rag'd among the Foreigners, and Famine consum'd them all. Therefore after two Months spent in the Siege, they return'd in∣to Portugal. The Treaty of Peace drew near to a Conclusion, therefore the King of Castile sent back the Succours, that came to him from France. He also sent Embassadors to the Duke Peace e∣stablish'd betwixt the English and Casti∣lians. of Lancaster, with Power to conclude. The Duke was at Trancoso, a Town in Portugal, there he receiv'd the Embassadors. The Articles agreed upon were, That the King's Son and Duke's Daughter should immediately be contracted. That the Bride by way of Joynture should have Soria, Atiença, Almaçan, and Molina. That the Dutchess her Mother should have Gaudalajara, Medina del Campo and Olmedo. That the Duke should have 600000 Florines paid him at certain times appointed, and 40000 yearly during his Life, and the Life of his Wife Constance. These are the Heads of that Agreement. The King of Portugal storm'd, not thinking himself secure as long as he of Castile reign'd. On the other side, the Duke complain'd that the King had consummated the Marriage with his Daughter, before the di∣spensation came, and therefore from Porto, sail'd directly for Bayonne in France. Upon his Departure, the Towns in Galicia that held for the English, submitted to their King, as did the Gentry that sided with them, having obtain'd Pardon. The King of Castile commonly re∣sided at Salamanca or Toro, to be at Hand upon all Occasions. He sent Embassadors to Bayon∣ne, to ratify what had been concluded. The greatest Difficulty lay in raising the Mony to pay the Duke of Lancaster. To this intent the Cortes met at Briviesca, about the beginning of the Year 1388. To oblige his Subjects the King granted all their Requests. It was design'd 1388. to lay the Tax upon Estates, without exempting the Nobility or Clergy, but the great Ones opposing it, as a Breach of Privilege, other Methods were found out. After the Cortes broke Kings of Castile and Navarre meet. up, the Kings of Castile and Navarre met first at Calahorra, then at Navarrets, where they renew'd their antient Friendship. Queen Ellenor bore her Husband company, and with his Consent stay'd in Castile to try whether her Country Air could cure her, as she pretended, but in reality to be parted from him, as afterwards appear'd. After this interview the King of Castile appointed the City of Palencia, for the Cortes to meet, because the Plague was still at Burgos. Here his Son was with great Pomp marry'd to the Duke of Lancaster's Daughter. Their Ages were not answerable, the Prince being but 10 Years of Age, the Lady Catharine 19. The eldest Sons of the Kings of England, are call'd Princes of Wales. In imitation of them, the King of Heir of Ca∣stile made Prince of Austurias. Castile created his Son Prince of Asturias, and gave him the Lordships of Bijar and Andujar, which Custom has continu'd to our Days, and so we shall hereafter call the Heir of the Crown. The chief Thing done at the Cortes, was setling how the Mony for the Duke of Lancaster should be rais'd. That done, and Peace concluded, Constance the Dutchess, King Peter's Daughter laying aside the Title of Queen, came in August to Medina del Campo, to see the King, who entertain'd her nobly, and gave her the City Huete. Betwixt the King and the Duke rich Presents pass'd, particularly, the Duke sent the King a very curious Crown of Gold. The Dutchess went to Guadalajara, and took Possession of that Place, about the be∣ginning of the Year 1389: The King stay'd at Madrid, thither came Embassadors to him from the Duke of Lancaster, desiring they might meet on the Borders of Guienne and Biscay. He set out in order to it, but fell sick by the Way at Burgos, yet went on as far as Victoria, where he took leave of the Dutchess, sending some Persons of Note to bear her Company, and excuse him to her Husband, on account of his Indisposition. In reality he fear'd meeting the Duke, left he should endeavour to take him off from siding with the French, and he was unwilling to disoblige the Duke, or break with France. The Duke thus disappointed, com∣municated his Design to the Embassadors, who answer'd they had no Orders about that Af∣fair, and so return'd to Victoria. On the 13th of March as they were digging a Foundation in some part of the Church of S. Engracia, at Zaragoça, they found two Tombs with Inscrip∣tions, the one of S. Engracia, the other of S. Lupercius. Among the Articles made with the English there was one, that any of the Allyes of either part should be admitted into that Treaty. The Cortes of Castile met at Segovia, and sent Em∣bassadors to Portugal, to try whether that King would come into the League. He puss'd up Truce with Por∣tugal. with Success, had resolv'd to continue the War, and invade Galicia, yet by the Industry of F. Ferdinand de Illescas, one of the Embassadors, he agreed to a Truce for 6 Months. On the 15th of October dy'd at Rome, Pope Ʋrban the VIth. In his place the Cardinals of that Facti∣on, soon chose the Cardinal Peter Tomaçello of Naples, who was call'd Boniface the IX. No sooner was the Term of the Truce expir'd, but the Portugues sat before Tuy, a City in Gali∣cia, plundering all the Country about it. The King of Castile was afraid to hazard a Battel, but sent the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and Master of Alcantara, to carry Relief to the besieg'd. They came when the City was taken, but lost not their Labour, for they concluded a Truce for 6 Years upon Condition Tuy and all other Towns taken, during the War, should be re∣stor'd on both sides. The Year 1390 was very remarkable in Castile for the Cortes then as∣sembl'd, 1390. and the important Affairs in them debated. First the King offer'd to resign the Acts of the Cortes of Castile. Crown to his Son the Prince, hoping that done, the Portugueses would easily admit of his Wife's Title. Neither the Nobility nor Commons would upon any account consent to it, because the Prince was under Age. Next it was consider'd what should be done with those who during the War, had deserted the King. A general Pardon was decreed for all excepting only the Earl of Gijon, who had often relaps'd, and was still a Prisoner, and doubtless the K. if he
durst, would have made an end of them. It was enacted that the Kingdom should furnish a suf∣ficient Sum of Mony to pay the standing Forces, which then us'd to live upon Discretion, and ruin the Farmers. To this purpose a Reform of the Troops was made, so that only 4000 Men at Arms, 1500 light Horse, and 1000 Archers were left on Foot, who were to be ready upon all Occasions, and live upon their Pay. All Subjects were forbid serving any foreign Prince, which was afterwards strictly observ'd. The Popes us'd to give Benefices in Spain to Foreigners, whence it follow'd that those Benefices were not serv'd, and the Natives wholly neglected Learning. It was therefore made a Request to Pope Clement, that he would remedy that Abuse. Besides the great Men in the Times of Confusion had seiz'd the Church-Livings, and put in such Priests as they pleas'd, allowing them small Stipends, and kept to themselves all the rest of the Profits. The Bishops of Burgos and Calahorra, who were most concern'd sought for Redress, and the King favour'd them, but seeing those great Men concern'd op∣pos'd it, he would proceed no farther, fearing to disoblige them more than he had done by a Decree which allow'd all Vassals of Lords to appeal from their Courts to the King's. King Henry by his last Will had recall'd many Grants made during his Life, and now the Nobles strugl'd to have them put in Force again, the King in outward appearance seem'd willing, but he had other Thoughts in his Heart, as appear'd by his Actions. At this same time Embassadors came to that City from the Kings of Granada and Navarre. Those of Na∣varre demanded that since Queen Ellenor left in Castile for recovery of her Health, was now perfectly well, she should return to her Husband. The King thought this a just Request, and therefore order'd his Sister to prepare for her Journy. She excus'd her self, alledging the hatred that People bore her, who had endeavour'd to Poison her, by the Hand of a Jabish Physician. The King would not force his Sister, yet oblig'd her to restore her Daugh∣ter Joanna to her Father, since they had no Issue-male. Thus the King of Navarre being for∣saken by his Wife, was Crown'd by himself with much Pomp in the Cathedral of Pamplona. He was Anointed, lifted upon Mens Shoulders, and all there present saluted him King. From the Moorish King came the Governour of Malaga Embassador to Castile, to renew the Truce then ready to expire, which was granted him, he bringing great Presents of Horses, Truce with the Moors of Granada. Furniture, and rich Cloth. This Truce was sign'd by the Kings and their eldest Sons. D. Pe∣ter Tenorio, Archbishop of Toledo, at his own Cost built a beautiful Bridge over the River Tagus at that City, which to this Day is call'd the Archbishop's Bridge. Near the Bridge were some few Houses or Cottages, and the King pleas'd with that Seat to encourage People to live there, granted a Charter of Priviledges, and call'd it Villa-franca. To Prince Ferdinand his younger Son, besides the Lordship of Lara which was his already, he gave the Town of Fen̄afiel, with the Title of Duke. In token of this Dignity a plain Crown was put upon his Head without Flowers, to distinguish it from the Regal. His Arms were those of Castile and Aragon quarter'd by way of Distinction from the Prince, and because he was descended from both those Houses. The Cortes held at Guadalajara broke up when the Summer was well advanc'd. In June the Truce with Portugal for 6 Years was concluded. The Power of Por∣tugal daily increas'd, and they adher'd firmly to the Popes of Rome. Therefore Boniface the IXth who, as has been said, succeeded Ʋrban, made Lisbon a Metropolitan See. Segovia is a City seated on the Mountains that part Old and New Castile, its chief support is the Wool∣len-Manufacture. Winter there is very sharp by reason of the Mountains, the Summer tem∣perate, the Hills being always cover'd with Snow. There the King resolv'd to spend the Pious Gifts of the K. of Castile. Summer, and by the way to see the Monastery of Paular, which he was building at Rasca∣sria, not far from that City, and is the beautifullest the Carthusians this day possess in Spain. At Valladolid he gave to the Benedictine Monks the Old-Palace to convert it into a Convent, where they now hold their General Chapters. Besides he had before given the Church of Guadalupe then possess'd by secular Priests, to the Hieronimites. These are three Monuments of this King's Piety, besides certain Religious Laws which he establish'd. Particularly at the Cortes at Briviesca, three Years before this he forbid bringing out the Cross at the Re∣ception of Kings, and weaving it on Carpets or other things where it might be trod upon. Summer expiring he sent the Prince and Princess to Talavera, he himself went to Alcala de∣signing for Andaluzia to regulate some Disorders there. 50 Christian Souldiers who had serv'd the King of Morocco, and were call'd Farfanes came to Alcala. These were expert in the Moorish manner of Exercise, which those People perform dexterously on Horseback. The King upon Sunday the 9th of October went out to see these Men exercise. He was K. John of Castile kill'd by fall from his Horse. mounted on a Mettlesom Horse, and having a mind to Gallop some way clapt Spurs to him, he ran into the Plow'd Lands, and stumbling in the Furrows came down with such Violence that he kill'd the King. He liv'd only 33 Years, and reign'd 11 Years, 3 Months, and 20 Days. To stir up his Subjects to honourable Emulation, he invented an Order, or Bro∣therhood, who were to wear a Collar of Gold, with a Pidgeon hanging at it, and instituted Rules for this Order; but Death put an end to this, and all other his Contrivances.
CHAP. VIII. John King of Aragon upon Complaint of his Subjects complies with their Demands. Irruptions of the French into Aragon. Henry the IIId proclaim'd King of Castile. The form of Government appointed there during his Minority. JOHN the first, the new King of Aragon acted nothing like his Father, who was an active Qualities of King John of Aragon. Man, warlike and ambitious of enlarging his Dominions. King John was meek and af∣fable, unless provok'd, more inclin'd to his Ease than warlike Affairs. He lov'd Hawking, Hunting, Musick, and Poetry, and all things that represent Grandeur, so that the Revenue was too small for his Expence. The Queen was in all things like her Husband, so that the Court was full of Foosting, Balls and Pleasure. Great Rewards were given to Poets, and so fond was the King of them, that he sent an Embassy into France only to have some choice ones sent him. The Nobility of Aragon offended at the King's Extravagancy, met at Cala∣sanz, at the same time the Cortes sat at Monçon. They sent their Complaints in Writing to the Cortes, which where chiefly the extraordinary Expences, the Lewdness of the Court, and that the Kingdom was govern'd by a Woman. This was meant of Da. Carroça de Villaragur Favourite to the Queen, who entirely rul'd the King. Messages pass'd to and fro, and at length the King being of an easy Nature, comply'd with their Demands, retrench'd his Ex∣pences, set out Proclamations for restraining the Disorders of the People, banish'd that La∣dy, and for bid the Queen intermedling in the Government. Thus those Discontents were lay'd, when at the same time a War seem'd to threaten from France. Bernard de Armugnac French invade Aragon. broke into Catalonia with a Body of Bretons, yet made more Noise than he did harm. Soon after he was follow'd by his Brother the Earl of Armagnac with greater Forces. Tomich a Catalonian Historian writes he had 18000 Horse; a falshood which yet shews their Number was great. There was no cause to make War, but the desire of Robbing. They burnt some Towns and Farms, and carry'd away a great Number of Prisoners and Cattle. This mis∣chief fell heaviest upon the Territories of Ampurias and Girona. The Forces of Aragon as∣sembl'd and had several Rancounters with them. In one, Bernard de Cabrera overthrew 8 Companies of French near Navarre. In another, Raymund Bages near Cavan̄as defeated a good Body of them, and took their Commander call'd Martin. The King set out from Girona to oppose them, but they return'd into France by the way of Russillon, where they did much harm. The King of Aragon had stir'd up Arigotte of Auvergne to make War upon the Lands of Armagnac, which mov'd the Earl to return to defend his own. Luis the Son of Luis Duke of Anjou, who dy'd in the Conquest of Naples, and stil'd himself King of Hierusa∣lem and Sicily, marry'd Violante, the Daughter of the King of Aragon at Barcelona. The end of this Match was that the Aragonian should assist his Son in Law in the Conquest of Naples. D. Martin Lord of Exerica the King of Aragon's Nephew, as being the Son of his Brother Martin, with the King's Consent marry'd Mary Queen of Sicily, the Pope also agreeing to it because that Kingdom is a Feofe of the Church. Sardinia was again in an uproar, for that Brancaleon. Doria not regarding the late Settlement, and the Pardon he had receiv'd, took up Arms again at the beginning of the Year 1391, on pretence of asserting the Peoples Liberties. With this specious pretence he drew to his side the Genoeses, and many of the 1391. Islanders, so that he took Sacer the Capital City of the Island, and many other Towns and Forts. To crush this Rebellion the King rais'd Men, and set forth a Proclamation com∣manding all that had Lands in the Island to go over to defend it. At this same time Pope Clement created Martin Bishop of Pamplona Cardinal, who was the first of those Prelates that obtained that Honour. When King John of Castile fell with his Horse, as has been said, the Arch-bishop of Tole∣do who was by, caus'd a Tent to be set up in that Place, and guarded with trusty Persons con∣cealing the King's Death, and sending out several Messages in his Name. But this Fiction could not hold long. The first that resorted to behold this miserable Spectacle, was Queen Beatrix, before despoil'd of her Father's Kingdom, and now of her Husband, being left with∣out any Children to be a Comfort in her Widowhood. Prince Henry surpriz'd at his Fa∣ther's Henry the IIId. pro∣claimed K. of Castile. Death, set out from Talavera, and stopp'd at Madrid with his Brother Ferdinand. There the Arch-bishop caus'd him to be proclaim'd King, he was the third of the Name, and commonly call'd the Sickly, for his want of Health. All the great Men of the Kingdom flock'd to kiss his Hand, and offer their Persons and Estates. D. Alonso de Aragon Mar∣ques de Villena dissatisfy'd with the late King, was withdrawn into Aragon. He offer'd to re∣turn to Castile provided he might be restor'd to the Office of Constable. The King and Queen condescended to his Request, and yet he came not, being detain'd for certain Reasons in Aragon. The Ceremony of proclaiming the King being perform'd, he went to Toledo to bury his Father in the Royal Chappel, as he had ordain'd. Next the Cortes assembl'd at Madrid, and took in hand to settle the Government, the King being but 11 years of Age. Ellenor the only Daughter to the Earl of Albuquerque, for her great Fortune commonly call'd the Rich Female, was then at Court. Many courted her, and among them her Cousin the Duke of Benavente; but Prince Ferdinand was preferred before him, and they were Contract∣ed,
yet so that the Match should not go forwards till the King was 14 Years of Age. This was that in case the King dy'd before that Age, the Prince might marry Queen Catherine, the Duke of Lancaster's Daughter as had been agreed. The Bride swore to the Contract, being 16 Years of Age, but the Prince was too young to swear. When the Cortes were about setling the Go∣vernment they understood by Peter Lopez de Ayala, that the late King had made a Will. This Will being found and read, rais'd variety of Opinions. They were chiefly offended at K. John of Castile his last Will. one Clause which appointed for the young King's Tutors, till he was 15 Years of Age, D. Alonso de Aragon the Constable, the Arch-bishops of Toledo and Santiago, the Master of Cala∣trava, the Earl of Niebla, and Peter de Mendoça, the Lord Steward, and with them 6 Citizens, one of each of the Cities of Burgos, Toledo, Leon, Sevil, Cordova, and Murcia, to be chosen by the Counsels of those Places. Every one that was not of the Number was offended. The Affair was long debated. Some few were for fulfilling the Will, but the greatest Number were for cancelling it. The Arch-Bisop of Toledo would not suffer it to be burnt, because there were certain Legacies nam'd in it for his Church, which he would have valid, tho the rest were not. The Will laid aside, the Government of the Kingdom was committed to the Form of Govern∣ment of Castile du∣ring the Kings Mi∣nority. Duke of Benavente, the Marques de Villena, the Earl of Trastamara, the Archbishops of Toledo and Santiago, and the Masters of Santiago and Calatrava. Of the 16 Representatives of Cities, eight were appointed by turns for three Months at a time to joyn with the others. The Majority of Votes among them to be of Force in any Affair. The Arch-bishop lik'd not this Method thinking his Share in the Government too little, tho he pleaded the greatness of the Number would cause Confusion; yet he was forc'd to yield to the Importunities and Threats of the Nobility, A certain sort of base Mony call'd Agnus Dei's, was here regulated how it should pass. The Archbishop of Toledo kept the Earl of Gijon Prisoner, but fearing some Change of times, labour'd to be discharg'd of him. He was therefore remov'd to Monterrey, and committed to the care of the Master of Santiago, till his Case was adjudg'd. At Sevil and Cordova the Rabble in a riotous manner, fell upon the Jews, plunder'd their Houses, and offer'd them many Injuries, the Magistrates not being able to prevent it. Ferdi∣nand Martinez Arch-deacon of Ecija, with seditious Speeches made in the Streets stirr'd up the People. This Example was follow'd in sundry parts of Spain. On the 5th. of August the following Year, the like was done at Toledo, Logron̄o, Valencia and Barcelona. Many Jews to save themselves, pretended to turn Christians, but this happen'd later. CHAP. IX. The Contentions betwixt the Nobility of Castile about the Government: They agree on a Settlement; then alter it. The Affairs of the Moors at Granada. Warrenew'd with Portugal. King Charles the VIth. of France rus distracted. IT was the Custom of the States of the Kingdom to meet in a certain Church of Madrid. The Duke of Benavente and Earl of Trastamara came arm'd into that Assembly, leaving Strife a∣mong the Nobility of Castile. Guards about the Church, as if it were besieg'd. The Arch-bishop of Toledo was so affront∣ed at this Action, that he left the Court and went away to Talavera, from which place by his Letters he stirr'd up the People, to rise in Arms and deliver the Kingdom, from those who under the Title of Governours were become Tyrants. These same Complaints he sent to Pope Clement, and to the Kings of France, and Aragon. Soon after the Duke of Benavente being disgusted withdrew to his Town of Benavente, without taking his leave of the King. He presently joyn'd with the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and the Marques de Villena, tho then ab∣sent, being out of Castile sided with them. Those that remain'd of the Governours sent abroad their Letters, requiring all such as were Members to be present at the Cortes. They ex∣cus'd themselves upon several accounts. Pope Clement sent F. Dominick of the Order of Preach∣ers, and Bishop of Ponce, his Nuncio with two Letters, the one directed to the King, the other to the Governours. Both of them tended to express his Sorrow for the Death of King John, and exhorted them to Unity in then Proceedings. The Nuncio labour'd to recon∣cile the Nobles, but all in Vain. Embassadors came from France and Aragon to the same Ef∣fect, all they could do was to renew the former Alliances. From Navarre also came Em∣bassadors to condole upon the King's Death, with Orders to endeavour Queen Ellener should return to her Husband, promising her all manner of kind Entertainment. The Queen ex∣cus'd herself, and the young King could not have more Power over his Aunt than her Bro∣ther had. Mean while the Arch-bishop of Toledo, gather'd Forces upon pretence of freeing the Kingdom from slavery, but it was generally look'd upon as only the effect of his Ambiti∣on. Endeavours for an Accommodation betwixt the Nobles were us'd, but to as little Pur∣pose They raise Forces. as before. The Citizens that had a share in the Government, not thinking themselves safe at Madrid; remov'd with the King to Segovin. The Earl of Trastamara one of the Go∣vernours aspir'd to be Constable of Gustile, pretending the late King had signify'd he de∣sign'd him that Honour. It was not thought convenient to incense the Marques de Villena who was then in possession of it, therefore 60000 Maravedies of the Marques his Sallery
were assign'd him yearly for the present, with a promise of the Place, in case the Marques would not comply. Besides those mention'd, there joyn'd with the Arch-bishop of Toledo, the Master of Alcantara, and James Mendoça, from whom the Dukes del Infantado are descend∣ed. They gather'd 1500 Horse, and 3500 Foot. With this Force they march'd to Vallado∣lid, where the King was, and encamp'd on the Banks of the River Pisuerga, which runs by that City and soon after falls into the River Duer; Ellenor Queen of Navarre, after much La∣bour spent therein, prevail'd with the two parties to have a Conference. Deputies met ac∣cordingly at the Town of Perales. Thither came the Queen and Pope's Nuncio as Media∣tors. The chief Dispute was whether King John's Will ought to be valid or not. The Arch-bishop of Saniago cunningly demanded of him of Toledo, whether he should have that Will allow'd in all its Articles. He of Toledo made some hesitation, fearing to be entrapp'd, and particularly to disoblige the Duke of Benavente, who was not nam'd in it. At last he answer'd craftily, he would, provided the Duke of Benavente, the Earl of Trastamara, and the Master of Santiago might be added to the number of Governours, it being so requisit for the publick Peace. The other Party tho against their Wills, as fearing to provoke those great They a∣gree. Men, consented. It was agreed the Cortes should meet at Burgos, to ratify what they had resolv'd upon mean while considerable Hostages were given on both sides. Thus those Commotions ceas'd for that time. By this new settlement the Arch-bishop of Toledo became so powerful, it was fear'd he The Cortes settle the Govern∣ment. alone would sway more than all the rest in the Government. Therefore the Arch-bishop of Santiago and his Associates thought it convenient to procure the Releasment of the Earl of Gijon, that he might be a Foil to the Other. Accordingly, they took him out of Prison, and brought him to Kiss the King's Hand, who order'd him to be restor'd to his Estate. The Cortes met at Burgos of had been agreed. The settlement made, being brought upon the Stage, the Arch-bishop of Santiago said he would not stand to it, unless the Earl of Gijon were admited as well as the other three Noblemen, since he was inferiour to none of them for Birth, or Estate. It troubl'd the Arch-bishop of Toledo to be taken in his own Snare, and the Case came to be hotly debated, so that to prevent further Mischief, it was consented to by both Parties, that it should be left to Arbitration. D. Gonzalo Bishop of Segovia, and Alvar Martinez, both well vers'd in the Civil and Canon Law, were appointed Judges. They could not agree, but continu'd divided till the beginning of the Year 1392, 1392. when at last it was decree'd the Earl should be admitted. The management of the Reve∣nue was distributed among them, and it was order'd that five should govern one half of the Year, and five the other. This settlement it was hop'd would end all debates, but it was soon broken by an Accident. Two of the Duke of Benavente's Servants kill'd one belonging to the Earl of Gijon, as was suspected by their Master's Order, whereupon looking on him as Fierce, and Ill Princip'd, the Cortes alter'd the Form of Government, and ordain'd that the King's Will should be fulfill'd, yet so that till the Marques of Villena, and Count Neibla being sent fo by the King, came to Court, the Arch-bishop of Toledo should act for them, and have 3 Votes among the Governours. Two Millions of Marauedies were allow'd the Duke of Bena∣vente and Earl of Gijon yearly, during their Lives, in lieu of the Government. Besides, it was granted to the Arch-bishop, that he alone should have the Management of half the Re∣venue. The truce with Portugal was upon expiring, and it was no time to renew the War. The King being in his Minority, and the Kingdom exhausted, Embassadors were sent to re∣new and proloug the Truce. John Allonso de Guzman Earl of Niebla, left his House to at∣tend the Government, whereupon ensu'd a great Mutiny at Sevil, James Hurtado de Men∣doça A Mutiny at Sevil. being great with the King, aspir'd to be made Admiral, which could not be done without disobliging Alvar Perez de Guzman, who had some time been in possession of that Command. The Earl of Niebla favour'd the new Pretender, whereupon the other joyning with Peter Ponce Lord of Marchena, secur'd Sevil and turn'd out all the Earl's Adherents. At Segovia the Embassadors return'd to the King from Portugal, with News that that King would not hear of prolonging the Truce. The Duke of Benavente being ill look'd upon at Court, and depriv'd of the Government, withdrew to his Estate, and it was reported he held intelligence with Portugal, and had agreed to marry that King's Bastard-daughter Bea∣trix. He understood what was given out, justify'd himself by pleading the Wrong done him, in depriving him of the Lady Ellenor de Albuquerque, and over'd if he might have her, to break off the other Match. The Governours considering the state of Affairs, consented and appointed the place for celebrating the Mariage, but the Duke immediately recanted, and pursu'd the Match in Portugal. The Arch-bishop of Toledo to prevent any mischief might ensue, went to confer with the Duke, and offer'd him in Mariage a Daughter of the Mar∣ques de Villena, with as good a Portion as he expected from Portugal, but the Duke would not harken to it. Seeing nothing would content him, the Arch-bishop return'd to Zame∣ra, to prevent the Governour of the Pallace who held the Tower of S. Saviour, from deli∣vering It up to the Duke, as was suspected he would, and the City was in Arms upon that score. All things were compos'd, and the Governour deliver'd up that Tower, according to the Arch-bishop's Order. It was now the Heat of Summer when News was brought, that the The War with Por∣tugal breaks out again. Embassadors again sent to Portugal, could not obtain a Prolongation of the Truce. The Portu∣gueses were resolv'd to make use of that Advantage and enlarge their Dominions. The first that
took the Field was the Duke of Benavente, who with 500 Horse, and a great number of Foot incamp'd near Pedrosa, a Town not far from the City Toro Ca∣stile was reduc'd to great Streights. At Granada the Moors mutiny'd. About the beginning of this year King Mahomet, always a Friend to the Christians, dy'd. His Son Joseph succeeded him, and was of the same Temper, for he freely releas'd ma∣ny Christians during his Father's Life. This his Goodness was prejudicial to him. He had four Sons, Joseph, Mahomet, Hali, and Hamet. Mahomet was ambiti and having no hopes of obtaining the Crown by fair means, us'd Craft, giving out that his Father was a Moor only in Name, but in his Actions a Christian. Many upon this Account sided with him, and the Business was brought to that height, that the City was in danger of falling together by the Troubles among the Moors. Ears. An Embassador of the King of Morocco, who was there at that time, interpos'd, and in an Assembly of the Principal Men of the City represented to them the Mischiefs of Dis∣cord, and the Advantage might then be made upon the Christians, if they were united. This he did so effectually, that all the Rebels were pacify'd, and Mahomet promis'd to submit himself to his Father. After this they gather'd 700 Horse, and 3000 Foot, and making an Incursion into the Kingdom of Murcia, took a great Booty of Cattle, and carry'd away ma∣ny Captives. Alonso Fajardo the Lieutenant of that Country pursu'd them with only 150 Horse, yet charg'd them so furious, and fortunately, that he routed them, kill'd many, and recover'd the Prey. Thus Spain was deliver'd of a great Danger that threaten'd on that side, which was such that the King of Aragon who was least concern'd, that he might be the more at leasure to oppose the Moors, lay'd up a great Fleet he had fitted out against Brancaleon Do∣ria, who again revolted in Sardinia. This Defeat so terrify'd the Moors that they sent to beg a Truce of the King of Castile, which was easily granted, in regard to the War that was ex∣pected with Portugal. The Portugues King was puff'd up with his Success seeing himself so setled in the Throne, and having in the space of four Years, as many Sons by his Wife, the Lady Philippa. The 1st was Alonso, who dy'd young; the 2d Edward, who succeeded his Fa∣ther; the 3d Peter, created Duke of Coimbra; and the 4th Henry, Duke of Viseo, and Master of K. John of Portugal his Issue. the Order of Christ, and much given to the Study of Astrology, by the help of which, and the greatness of his Spirit, he first attempted to Coast along the vast and unknown Shore of Africk, by that means opening the way to those, who after him discover'd the remotest Countries of the East, to the great Honour and Profit of the Portugues Nation, as shall be shown in its place. This King's youngest Children were John and Ferdinand. This same year Charles the VIth King of France ran distracted. The Constable of France was murder'd by a Gentleman, who immediately fled to the Duke of Britany. This Action so inrag'd the King, that because the Duke refus'd to deliver up the Murderer, he march'd against him in Person, and one day be∣ing upon his March at Noon when the Heat was most violent, he suddenly drew his Sword kill'd two that were next him, and wounded another, raging in that distracted manner till he fell from his Horse. He was carry'd back to the City, where he recover'd his Senses, yet so that he was ever after craz'd. John Juvenal Bishop of Beauvais says, that in his Fits nothing so much enrag'd him as hearing the English nam'd, and that he abhorr'd a Red-Cross, because born in the English Colours. CHAP. X. The Divisions among the Nobility of Castile continue. A Truce betwixt Castile and Portugal for 15 Years. The Nobility of Castile at length pacify'd. Sicily brought un∣der the Aragonian Yoke. THE obstinacy of the Duke of Benavente troubl'd all Castile, especially those who had the Discord continues in Castile. Charge of the Government. They were desirous of appeasing him, but could find no means to effect it. The Arch-bishop of Toledo who labour'd all ways for the Publick, re∣solv'd to undertake another Journey to Treat with him. He hop'd by his Authority and offering more advantagious Terms, to content him. At the beginning of the Year 1393 1393. they met. He perswaded him to proceed slowly in his Match with Portugal, and see whe∣ther the Truce which was again in Agitation was concluded. It could not he obtain'd of him to disband his Forces and return to Court. His Excuse was that he had many power∣ful Enemies at Court, and could not be safe during the King's Minority, besides that it was not becoming a Person of his Rank, to appear at Court without any Post. The Archbishop departed from him at such time as the City Zamora was the second time in danger of being betray'd to the Duke of Bonavente, the Alcayde or Governour Villaiçan holding Correspon∣dence with him in order to deliver that Castle to him. The City was in an Uproar, but the Archbishops of Santiago and Toledo, with the Master of Calatrava coming, prevented the Dan∣ger, and quieted the People. The Duke with his Forces came up in sight of the City, relying on the Promises of the Governour with whom, as was said, he held Intelligence, but finding himself disappointed fell upon Mayorga, a Town belonging to Prince Ferdinand, and had the Castle deliver'd to him by the Governour John Alonso de la Cerda. This Man
was disoblig'd, for that King John by his last Will depriv'd him of the Place of the Princes Steward, and for this Reason he betray'd the Castle. Villaiçan, who govern'd at Zamora was disgusted because he had not the Place of chief Alguazil as his Father had before him in that City. It was contriv'd to secure that City by fair means, and to this effect Villaiçan, was allow'd all the Profits of the Place, and deliver'd up the Ca∣stle to Gonçalo de  of Ledesma, the Son of that Men Rodriguez de Sanabria, who accompany'd King Peter when he came out of Montiel, and after the King's Death re∣main'd a Prisoner. King Henry remov'd his Court to Zamora, as lying near to Portu∣gal, the better to carry on the Treaty that was then on Foot for a Truce. This caus'd the Duke of Benavente's Forces to grow thin, many coming over daily to the King. At length the Castilians and Portugueses came to a Conclusion upon these Terms. That Sabugal and Miranda should be deliver'd up to the Portugueses, whose they were before: Truce with Por∣tugal for 15 Years. That the King of Castile should not support either Queen Beatrix, or the Princes John, and Denis of Portugal, then Prisoners in Castile, in their Pretensions to the Crown of Portugal: That the King of Portugal should do the same in regard of any that should lay any claim to the Crown of Castile: That Prisoners on both sides should be releas'd. For security of performance, 12 Sons of Noblemen of Castile were to be deliver'd as Hostages to the Portugues. This Article was chang'd into two Sons of eminent Citizens of each of the Cities of Sevil, Cordova, Toledo, Burgos, Leon, and Zamora. Thus about the middle of May the Truce for 15 Years was proclaim'd at Lisbon and Burgos, in which Cities the Kings at that time were. These Articles were advantageous for Portugal, and no less scandalous for Castile. But it is Prudence to comply with the Times, which were then very trou∣blesom in Castile, and the part of Good Men to bear with some loss of Reputation when Necessity requires it. The Joy conceiv'd by all Castile, for the Truce concluded with Portugal was much aba∣ted Arch bi∣shop of Toledo ar∣rested by the King. by the Imprisonment of the Arch-bishop of Toledo. That Prelate acted for the Duke of Benavente, and endeavour'd to have John de Velasco Chamberlain to the King, restor'd to part of his Pension, cut off by the late King's Will. Tho he labour'd much, yet he could not prevail, and therefore in a Passion resolv'd to withdraw from the Court. It was fear'd by the other Governours that his Absence might cause new Discord, he be∣ing very Powerful, Haughty, and Ambitious. A Consultation being had before the King upon this matter, it was agreed to arrest him, which was accordingly executed together with his Friend John de Velasco in the Palace. This Gentleman was considerable of him∣self, and had not long before the Town of Villalpando in Dower with his Wife. His Fa∣ther was Peter Hernandez de Velasco, who dy'd with many more at the Siege of Lisbon, and was the Founder of the Noble Family in which the Honour of Constable of Castile continues to this Day. D. Peter de Castilla, Bishop of Osma, and John Abbot of Fuselos, two great Friends of the Arch-bishop were also apprehended. It was look'd upon as a great disre∣spect to apprehend such eminent Churchmen, but the pretence of the publick Good ex∣cus'd it. Zamora, Palencia and Salamança were put under an Interdict, the King and all the Nobles concern'd were excommunicated. But the Prisoners were soon releas'd, giv∣ing Sureties. The Archbishop gave four of his Kindred as Hostages, and put his Towns of Talavera and Alcalà into a third Hand. John de Velasco deliver'd the Castle of Soria, which he held for the King. Absolution from Ecclesiastical Censures was begg'd of the Pope, which he impower'd his Nuncio Dominick, Bishop of S. Ponce, and of Albi in France, to grant. The King in the Cathedral of Burgos on his Knees swore to be obedient to the Church, and make Satisfaction to the Arch-Bishop, restoring him his Towns, and then was absolv'd on the 4th of July. The Interdict was taken off, and to make this Joy the Nobility of Castile recon∣cil'd. more compleat, the Duke of Benavente through the good Management of the Arch-bishop of Santiago, who did all, disbanded his Forces, and submitted to the King. In lieu of the Portion, he was to have from Portugal he was allowed 60000 Florins, and to have li∣berty to marry where he pleas'd, except in Portugal. Besides a Pension was setl'd upon him, and then he came to Court without demanding any Security for his Person. The King receiv'd him with Affection, and as soon as he took the Government upon himself, treated him with great Respect. Thus the Kingdom began to breath after so many Trou∣bles. This Action gain'd the Arch-bishop of Santiago great Reputation, but his Satis∣faction was not lasting, for soon after the King took upon him the Government, and the Arch-bishop of Toledo being taken into Favour his Interest declin'd. The English re∣stor'd to the King of Navarre the Town of Cherbourg in Normandy, which had been Mort∣gag'd to them for a Sum of Money. Martin de Lacarra was made Governour of that Place. The Marriage of D. Martin of Aragon, with the Queen of Sicily, was at length consummated, the King of Aragon, and the Pope consenting to it, as has been hinted be∣fore. In Sicily the Barons continu'd in Rebellion, and had secur'd a great part of the Island. No hopes remain'd of reducing them by fair means. Therefore the King and Sicily re∣duc'd un∣der the Dominion of Aragon. Queen, with the Duke of Monblanc the King's Father, went over with a good Fleet to subdue the Rebels. At first the Aragonians were successful, but afterwards the For∣tune of War was so chang'd, that the King and Queen were forc'd into the Castle of Catanea, and there besieg'd. D. Bernard de Cabrera, a Man then of great Note had been
upon that Expedition, but return'd into Aragon being appointed Admiral of a Fleet that King had fitted out to subdue Sardinia. This Gentleman knowing what had hap∣pen'd in Sicily, resolv'd to remedy it. He gather'd a good Body of Catalonians and Gascons, and for their Pay mortgag'd all his Estate. He set sail, and landed in Sicily, when all was reduc'd to Extremity. By his Conduct the Success was soon chang'd, for in several Rencounters he overthrew the Enemy, by which means the Island was re∣duc'd, and against the Will of many return'd under the Dominion of Aragon, as it has ever since continu'd to this Day, and in all Probability is like to continue much longer. The End of the Eighteenth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The Nineteenth BOOK. CHAP. I. King Henry takes upon him the Government. The Cortes at Madrid. Discontents among the Nobility. The death of the Master of Alcantara. The Biscainers invade the Canary Islands; The Plague at Madrid. CAstile after so many violent Sorms of Discord, was at length somewhat Calm. All K. Henry takes up∣on him the Go∣vernment. these Confusions proceeded from the many Hands employ'd in the Government. To prevent these Mischiefs for the future, the King resolv'd to take upon him the Administration of his Affairs, tho as yet he wanted two Months of 14 Years of Age; The time limited in his Father's Will. Many perswaded him to take this Resolution, some ho∣ping to make their Advantage of his Youth, and others because they were weary of the pre∣sent Government. At the beginning of August, the King assembled the Nobility and Pre∣lates, in the Monastery of Huelgas, where the Kings of Castile us'd to be Crown'd. There he spoke to the whole Assembly, signifying that he now took upon him the Government, praying to God it might be for the Good of the Kingdom; that he desir'd they would help his Youth with their Advice, and that he there discharg'd the Governours of their Employment. All the Commons as well as Noblemen and Prelates applauded his Resolution with great ex∣pressions of Joy and Satisfaction. The Arch-bishop of Santiago made an Oration, declaring how much all Men were delighted to see the King at Age to Govern, and how justly the Go∣vernours had behav'd themselves in their Charge. To this the King answer'd, He was well satisfy'd of their Fidelity, and would always make use of their Advice. Many Strangers aspir'd to Ecclesiastical Preferments, and the Popes bestow'd them on several, without regard to Learning or Merits. It had been often propos'd in the Cortes to remedy this Evil, and as has been said, it was in some Measure regulated in the Session at Guadalajara. Yet still the Popes continu'd to use there Power, as before. This Affair was now again debated, in the Cortes assembled for the Coronation of the King, yet nothing could be determin'd for the present; but that it might be settled with more deliberation, the Cortes were again summon'd to meet at Madrid. Mean while at the earnest request of the Biscainers, the new King went in Person to take possession of the Lordship of Biscay. In an Assembly of the principal Men, the King granted that after the manner of Castile, they might decide Controversies by Combat, for still that ill Custom was in use. This Year was remarkable, for that the Enterprise of the Ca∣naries was again taken in hand. The Biscainers fitted out a Fleet, and took a Survey of all Biscainers invade the Canary Islands. those Islands, learning their Names, Prduct, and Value. Then landing at Lançarote, one of the Islands, they overthrew the Islanders, took their King and Queen, with 160 of their Subjects. This done, they return'd into Spain, the Vessels loaden not only with Captives, but with Goat Skins and Wax, wherewith those Islands abound, to show the Habits, Fruitful∣ness, and Riches of those Islands, and the Profit might be made of them if conquer'd, as afterwards they were. Mean while the Cortes met at Madrid, and the King repair'd thither in November. The Cortes meet at Madrid. first day of the Session in few Words, he told them he had good Examples of his Progenitors to govern by, that during his Minority, civil Discord had almost ruin'd the Nation, and he design'd with their Advice to remedy those Disorders; that he would take care Mony should not take place of Merit, and to see the Laws effectually put in Execution; that the Revenue was exhausted, and either new Taxes must be laid, or the Grants made in his Nonage va∣cated. His well fram'd Speech was pleasing to them all, tho they perceiv'd he only spoke what his Favourites had put into his Mouth, and many were offended they were not in the same Post. The Men most in the King's esteem were, John Hurtado de Mendoça, Lord Steward of the Houshold, James Lopez de Zun̄iga, chief Justice, and Ruy Lopez Davalos, Lord Chamberlain. They agreed among themselves, a thing rare among Court Favourites. Their chief Aim was to curb the King's tender Years, to take care or the Government, and to protect the weaker against the great Ones. It being propos'd to supply the King's wants, the Commons answer'd, the People were so exhausted they could bear no more Taxes, yet
they would grant the 20th Penny of all Merchandize, and it were requisite to lessen the Number of standing Forces, or at least their Pay, as also to Retrench the Pensions of great Men. This was look'd upon as the b Advice, and all Pensions granted during the King's Minority were struck out of his Books. Many concern'd, in private resented this Reform, but in publick all Men spoke well of it. After this the King being now at Age, was mar∣ry'd to Queen Catherine, as was also Prince Ferdinand his Brother to the Lady Ellenor, Coun∣tess of Albuquerque. There was great rejoycing, and thus the Cortes of Madrid broke up. 1394. At the beginning of the Year 1394, the Plague being at Madrid, the King remov'd to Il∣lescas, The Plague at Madrid. a pleasant and healthful Place in the mid-way betwixt Madrid and Toledo. Hither the Arch-bishop of Toledo, the Town being his came, to pay his Respects to the King, who receiv'd him graciously, and he soon recover'd the Favour and Authority he was in before, being excellently qualify'd to gain the Affections of Princes. His Competitor the Arch∣bishop of Santiago, was so offended at the Honour done him, that he withdrew from Court to his Town of Hamusco in old Castile, meditating Revenge if an Opportunity were offer'd. These Prelates were the most remarkable Men of that Age, but their Ends were very dif∣ferent. Their Birth, Age, Eloquence, and greatness of Spirit were almost equal, but their Practices were nothing alike. He of Santiago us'd Craft, Fawning and Liberality, he of To∣ledo depended upon his Integrity and other good Arts. The former endeavoured to please and attract the great Ones, the other was grave, and austere. The one gave, the other had more to give; the first protected Criminals, the latter was for punishing Offenders. The one was always watchful to serve his Friends, and deny'd nothing he could perform, the other pursu'd a strict Reformation of Abuses, and lov'd Virtue. The one resented that he had, as he thought, been wrongfully put by the Archbishoprick of Toledo, the other was esteem'd for having obtain'd it without making any Interest for it. Besides he was honour'd and fear'd by his Adversaries, and tho often undermin'd by them, yet he always triumph'd over all their Contrivances in the end. It was grievous to the great Ones to have their Pensions retrench'd, and therefore some Discon∣tents a∣mong the Nobility of Castile. rais'd Tumults in old Castile. The Duke of Benavente went away from Madrid in a Passion, and seiz'd upon the King's and Church's Revenues wherever he could. Garzi Gonçalez Herera the Marshal was sent to reduce him by fair means. He had also orders to Treat with the Queen of Navarre, and Earl of Gijon and Trastamara, who design'd to join their Forces on the same score. The Duke of Benavente answer'd, he had left the Court because he could not endure to see Men rais'd from nothing to have all the Power, and would not return unless the Children of the three Favourites, were given him as Hostages. Much to the same purpose was the answer of the other Mutiniers. James Lopez de Zuniga was sent by the King to order the Archbishop of Santiago to Court, for it was suspected he held Corre∣spondence with the others. He answer'd, his antient Enmity with the Arch-bishop of Tole∣do would not permit him to come to Court whilst he was there. The King of Navarre un∣derstanding the Confusions of Castile thought this a good Opportunity to recover his Wife. His Embassadors propos'd their Business to the King of Castile at Atcala de Henares, yet tho the King was displeas'd with the Queen, he would not use any force towards her, she ex∣cusing her self as she had done before. Then the Embassadors propos'd at least that she should send two Daughters she had with her to their Father, but neither was this obtain'd. This Affair being over, there came Embassadors from Portugal, demanding to have the Ca∣pitulations of the Truce sign'd by certain Noblemen who had refus'd to sign before. These were the Marques de Villena, and the Earl of Gijon. He of Villena said he would not sign be∣cause he had no hand in the Treaty. He of Gijon before he sign'd, demanded to have certain Towns in Portugal assign'd as his Wifes Portion, deliver'd to him. Thus the Embassadors return'd re infecta, not without Jealousy of a Breach. A new Accident of great Concern which hap∣pen'd caus'd the Danger that threaten'd from Portugal to be forgot. D. Martin Yanez de la Barbuda, who in Portugal where he was born, was Deputy to the Master of the Knights of Avis, left his Employ to side with Castile, where he serv'd, and in requital for his Service was made Master of Alcantara. He was rash and inconsiderate. John Sago a Hermit held in The Ma∣ster of Al∣cantara cut off by the Moors. the Reputation of Sanctity for his retir'd Life, told him by way of Revelation, he should grow Famous and Great if he challeng'd the Moors upon account of Religion. He was easi∣ly perswaded, and sent to Granada to challenge that King to Combate in Person, or if he re∣fus'd to offer 20, or 30, or 100 Christians should Fight double the Number of Moors, and that Religion should be esteem'd truest whose Party was Victorious. The Moors affronted his Messengers, and sent them away with Scorn. He incens'd at it, and relying on the Words of the Hermit, gather'd 300 Horse, and about 5000 Foot, all raw Men and ill Arm'd, The King knowing of it endeavour'd to disswade him, as did the Brothers, Alonso and James de Cordova, Lords of Aguilar, who went out to meet him on his March, and labour'd to put him off from that mad Enterprize. He was nothing mov'd, but broke into the Territories of the Moors on the 26th of April, and besieg'd the Tower of Egea on the very Frontires. On a sudden the Moorish King came upon him with 5000 Horse, and 120000 Foot. At the sight of this Multitude the Christians dismay'd. Most of the Foot being parted from the Horse, were cut off, only a few who fled at first, escaping. The Horse stood together long, and above all, the Master signaliz'd himself; but the Number of the Enemy prevailing
he was kill'd with all his Men, none offering to turn his Back. With the Moors Permission the Body of the Master was convey'd to Alcantara, and there bury'd in the Cathedral with this Insoription on the Tomb which he had order'd to be carv'd himself, Here lieth he into whose Heart fear never : This Inscription being told to Charles the Vth, he answer'd. Doubtless that Gentleman never snuft a Candle with his Fingers. Ferdinand Rodriguez de Vil∣lalobos, an antient and bre Man was Deputy to the Master of Calatrava. The Knights meet∣ing to choose a Master the King prevail'd to have him elected, tho he was a Bastard, which was much refented by many, but the King's Will, and the merit of the Elect prevail'd. The Moors tho offended at this Breach of the Truce, before they would openly declare War sent an Embassador to complain, who found the King at St. Martin de Valdeiglesias. The King answer'd that only the Master was to blame for that Attempt, and that the Death of him and his Men was sufficient Satisfaction. Thus the Moors were appeas'd. CHAP. II. Another Rebellion in Castile quell'd by the King. Pope Clement dyes, and Benedict the XIIIth is elected, which continues the Schism. The strange Death of John King of Aragon. THE Nobility of Old Castile were discontented, and made Levies of Men, on pretence of Rebellion in Old Castile, serving the King in the War, that, as has been said was fear'd from Granada, but in reality to carry on a Rebellion. At the same time the King came to Illescas with a great Re∣tinue; thither the Master of Calatrava brought the Marques of Villena to reconcile him to the King, and with him came many Men of Note from Aragon. He was receiv'd by the King with great Tokens of Affection, and presently ask'd to be restor'd to the Honour of Consta∣ble conferr'd on him by King John, and taken away during the present King's Minority by the Governours. The King having taken Advice upon it, answer'd he was pleas'd to grant his Request provided he would bear him Company into Old Castile, whither he was going to reduce the Rebels. He excus'd himself saying, he was not provided for such an Expedition, and return'd dissatisfy'd to Aragon. In Castile the Tumults continu'd, and consequently the poor People suffer'd. But the King raising Forces, such of the Noblemen, as were not strong enough to oppose him submitted. Upon security given for their Persons, there came first to Court the Archbishop of Santiago, and after him the Duke of Benavente. They plead∣ed in their own defence the great Power of their Enemies, and promis'd to make amends for their Faults by their future Fidelity. Both were pardon'd by the King, and the more to oblige the Duke he had a Pension of 500000 Maravedies allow'd him, and the Town of Va∣lencia Mutinous Lords sub∣mit. in Estremudura given him in lieu of the Portion he was to have from Portugal, but upon Condition he should be accountable, for as much of the King's Revenue, as he had re∣ceiv'd the last Years. To add to the Joy of the Reduction of these great Men. D. Alonso Enriquez prevail'd with his Brother the Earl of Trastamara to submit himself. A Pension of 500000 Maravedies was also assign'd him, and that he might be equal to the Duke of Benavente, the Town of Paredes wrongfully detain'd from him by the Earl of Gijon was restor'd. On∣ly the Earl of Gijon remain'd, who being ill inclin'd was not to be reduc'd by fair means, and the King prepar'd to subdue him by force. At that same time came Embassadors from the King of Navarre upon the old Account of having the Queen return to live with her Husband. What Justice could not effect in so long time, an Accident brought to pass. The Queen had retir'd from Madrid, offended that part of her Pension was cut off, and kept Correspondence with the mutinous Noblemen. For this Reason the King of Castile was displeas'd, and this was the Occasion of the Embassy. It happen'd the Earl of Trasta∣mara under standing what was design'd against the Queen, went away from Court to Roa where she was, to assist her that no Violence should be offer'd her. His Departure troubled the King, fearing new Tumults, and the more for that it was suspected he had communi∣cated his Designs with the Duke of Benavente, who was therefore sent for to Court, and be∣ing come was arrested and secur'd on the 25th of July. This done, lest the Queen and Earl should grow strong, the King with the Forces he had prepar'd against the Earl of Gijon march'd hastily to Roa. The Earl fled in time to Galicia. The Queen understanding the Fresh Troubled in Castile quleted. Danger she was in went out with her Children in Mourning to appease the King, and ex∣cus'd her self, saying she had no Hand in the Earls escape, and could do no less than receive her Brother, who came to comfort her. These Excuses seem'd to satisfy the King, yet he se∣cur'd the Town, leaving her the Revenue, and carry'd her to Valladolid, where she was kept under a Guard that she might not fly. Mean while the Earl of Gijon fortify'd himself in that Place, and the King march'd speedily for Asturias. He took the City Oviedo, which held for the Earl, and then advanced, and incamped before Gijon. The Place could not be taken by force, because of its natural Strength, and the Coldness of the Season, and Sick∣ness in the Army would not allow to lye long before it. Yet the Labour was not quite lost, for the Earl of Trastamara submitted, was pardon'd and came to the Camp. It was also
concluded betwixt the King and the Earl of Gijon, that the King should put Garrisons into all Towns of his Estate, except only that. Also that the Earl should appear in Person be∣fore the King of France, who by both Parties was appointed Umpire betwixt them, and should stand by his Judgment. For security to Performance  Earl deliver'd his Son Henry as a Hostage to the King of Castile. Thus they lay'd down  and the Kingdom was eas'd of a great Trouble. This was the posture of Affairs in Castile, when Pope Clement dy'd at Avignon on the 16th Pope Cle∣ment dies, the Schism continues. of September. All the Christian Princes by their Embassadors requir'd the Cardinals not to proceed rashly to another Election, but find out some Method to put an end to the Schism which so long disturbed Christendom. They resolv'd not to delay the Election, but to show they in some Measure comply'd with those Princes, ordain'd that every Cardinal should positively Swear that in case he were Elected, he would abdicate the Papacy whenso∣ever the Pope at Rome would do the same, which they look'd upon as the best expedient to unite Christendom. By the unanimous Consent of 21 Cardinals, who were present at the Election, D. Peter de Luna, Cardinal of Aragon was osen. His Birth was well known, his Learning famous in the Civil and Canon Law, besides many Embassies in which he had been employ'd. He was very dexterous in gaining the good Will of all Men. In his Pa∣pacy Benedict the XIIIth chosen Pope. he was call'd Benedict the XIIIth. On  chosen he began to think of removing his Seat into Italy without remembring the Oath  taken, or considering of means to abdicate the Papacy. This much surprized the French. An Assembly of Nobles and Prelates was held at Paris, and there in order to curb the aspiring Thoughts of the new Pope, who they knew was a Man of a high Spirit▪ as he sufficiently testify'd afterwards, they resolv'd to send some eminent Persons to represent to him the desires of France, and the Church in ge∣neral. The Dukes of , and Borges were appointed Embassad. These being come to Avign requir'd him to restore eace to Christendom, to  the Ca∣lamities cs'd by that Division in the Church, to remember his Oath, and particularly press'd him to call a general Council, in which the Prelates might determine what was fit to be done in that Case. He answer'd he would upon no Account for sake the Church of the living God, and quit the Helm of S. eter's Ship put into his Hands. This answer was no way pleasing to those Princes, but seeing they could prevail no frther upon him, they re∣turn'd home much offended, as was their King and all the Nation. To appease the King, the Pope granted him the Tenths of all Ecclesstical Revenues for one Year. This happen'd in May, and the Year of Grace 1395, in which the new Pope's prosperity began by degrees 1395. to dcline, and was converted into Misery. The Governour of Avignon by the King's or∣der with French Forces besieg'd him in his Palace. An  was also publish'd forbidding all Persons to have recourse to him upon Ecclesiastical Affairs; all his Cardinals forsook him except only he of Pamplna, who continu'd with him till Death. In fine he was so streighten'd he was forc'd to fly in a disguise to Calonia. But this happen'd somewhat later. Many Embassies pass'd betwixt the Christian Princes about this Affair. The King of France labour'd to draw those of Castile, Aragon, and Navarre, from the Obedience of that Pope. They were hard to be perswaded, especially the King of Castile▪ who sent the Bi∣shop of Cenca Embassador into France to reconcile that King to the Pope, believing he was displeas'd on some private Account, but this Emssy avail'd nothing. A great number of French enter'd Aragon by the way of Russ to rob and plunder the Country. Queen Vio∣lante who by reason of her Husband's Carelesness govern'd the Kingdom, sent an Embassa∣dor to complain to the King of France, and her Uncles  Dukes of Burgndy, Beri, and Orans, whereupon the French return'd home, at such time as King John of Aragon was taken away suddenly. He went a Hunting on the Mountain of Foxa, near the Castle of Mongriu and Ʋrriols in the fthest part of . He rous'd a she Wolf of a prodigious size, or whether he only imagin'd it, for with the Surprize he fell down and gave up the Strange Death of K. John of Arag. Ghost, on the 19th of May. He was more remarkable for his lazy Life, than for any Vir∣tue. His Body was bury'd at Pblet the common Place of Burial of those Kings. He left no Issue-male, but two Daughters by two Wies, call'd Jona and Violante. The first was marry'd to Mathew Earl of Fx, the latter contracted to  Duke of Anjo. In his Will Martin K. of Aragon. he appointed his Brother Martin Duke of  his Successor, which was approv'd of  all the Kingdom to avoid falling under a , if the Daughters inherited. Martin was busy subduing of Sicily, Mary his Wife supply'd his Place, taking the Title of Queen, and acing Guards to look to Queen Violante, who say'd she was with Child, to prevent any Frand. The Earl of  pretended to the Crown in right of his Wife, because the Fe∣males had always been allow'd to inherit. Yet notwithstanding his just laim, the Cortes which met in July at Zaragoça unamously adjudg'd the Crown to Martin then absent. They also treated of the Preparations it was requisite to make to repulse the War which was ex∣pected from France.
CHAP. III. The Queen of  turns to her band. The Earl of Faux invades Aragon. The War bet  and Portugal renewed. Joseph King of Granada dies. Mahomet his 2d Son usurps. The Turks come over into Europe. THE Kingdom of Aragon labour'd under the Apprehensions of a War, and all the Coun∣try . Elle of Na∣varre re∣turns to her Hus∣band. was full of Martial Preparations. Castile was at Peace, the Nobility being re∣duc'd, the Earl of Gijn gone to France, as had been agreed. The Queen of Navarre, tho against her▪ Will was at  to return to her Husband. To make her easy he made Oath he would treat her  a Queen, and the Daughter of Kings, and the King of Castile bore her Company to , a Town on the Boders of Navarre. Her Husband receiv'd her at Tudel with all possible Expressions of Affection, and there was publick Thanksgiving in all Places for her Return. John Hutad  Mendoça, the Lord  was much in the King of Castile's Favour, who for his good Service gave  of Agreda, Ciria, and Boravia. This Bounty of the King's  Envy in the , and those of Agre∣da would not admit him as their Lord, but  to stand upon their Defence. The King went thither, and being receiv'd into  Town was prevail'd upon not to alienate that Place from the Crown, and in lieu of it gave D. John the Towns of Almaçan and Santistevan de Gormaz. King  Embassadors into France  the Earl of Gijon, and they came to Paris at the time appointed, but the Earl appear'd not yet as they were up returning they understood he was arriv'd at Rochel in the Provin . They impeach'd him before the King, and after a full hearing he was declar'd , and commanded to sub∣mit himself to the King, of whom he might hope for Pardon▪ o obtain which the King of France offer'd his Intercession. In case he refus'd to put himself upon his King's Mercy he was given to understand he must expect no shelter or assistance in France. Orders were sent to Britany and all other rates dependant on the Crown of France, not to give him any Sc∣cour or Relief. The  of Castile knowing what Judgment had been given demanded the Earl of Gi∣jon de∣clar'd Traytor. Town of Gijon should  surrender'd to him, but the Earl's Wife who was in it refus'd. Whereupon he laid lege to it, and having taken it cast down not only the Walls but the Houses. Her Son Henry was delivered to the Countess upon Condition she should depart the Land. This done the King return'd to Madrid intending to visit Andluzia, and in or∣der to it went to Talaver, where in November he receiv'd the Embassadors, who came from the King of Granada to renew the Truce. They were order'd to follow the King to Sevil, where he was receiv'd with the usual Joy. He caus'd the Archdeacon of Ezija to be appre∣hended as a mutineer and promoter of all the harm done to the Jews. The Truce was re∣new'd with the Moors, and thus the whole Kingdom was restor'd to Peace. Great hopes were conceiv'd of King Henry, but all vanish'd away, for he became sickly which continu'd all his Life time, and his Judgment fail'd, so that nothing hardly remarkable is recorded during the rest of his Reign. Some attribute this to the defect of our Histories, and others say the profound Peace he enjoy'd, gave him no Opportunity of acting any thing worthy of Note. The Duke of Benavene was kept Prisoner at Monterrey, in custody of the Master of Santiago, and thence remov'd to Almdvar. This offended the Arch-bishop of Santiago, The Arch∣bishop of Santiago flies to Portugal. upon whose Word he came  Court. Besides that Prelate would not own the Popes of Avignon; on these Distates he withdrew into Portug▪ There he was first chosen Bishop of Coimbra, and afterwards Archbishop of Braga.  this time John de Castro was Bishop of Palencia more famous for his Loyalty to King Peter, than any other thing. This Prelate fled into France, and was restor'd when Queen Constance came to the Crown. He is  to have writ the be and truest Chronicle of the Life of King Peter, but it is not Extant; doubtless suppress'd by the prevailing Enemies of that unfortunate King. In Aragon the People were indifferent peaceable, tho where a Prince's right is disputable, it commonly causes Trou∣bles. D. John Earl of Ampuria was secur'd for favouring the Earl of Faux his claim. A War threaten'd from France. On the 2d of October the Cortes met at St. Francis in Zaragoça, in a very full Assembly, it was there resolv'd to raise an Army, and give the Command of it to Peter Earl of Ʋrgel. It was not without Cause they made these Preparations, for the The Earl of Faux invades Aragon. Earl of Faux, having pass'd the Pyrnean Hills with a mighty Army, wasted all the Country along the River Sgre, and at last in November lay'd Siege to the City Barbastro with 4000 Horse, and a great number of Foot. In the Camp he caus'd himself and his Wife to be pro∣claim'd King and Queen of Aragon. About the middle of December there was an Earth∣quake at Valncia, which threw down many Buildings, and shook others. This the Com∣monalty look'd upon as an ill Omen, foreboding future Calamities. These fears vanish'd, the Earl of Faux raising the Siege of Barbastro, and marching away through Navarre in such hast, it rather look'd like a Flight than a Retreat. The cause was, that the People had carry'd all Provisions into strong holds, and the Earl of Ʋrgel sticking upon his Skirts, he was forc'd to leave part of his Baggage in several Places. This was about the beginning of the Year 1396, at which time Martin the new King having receiv'd these good News, and 1396.
subdu'd the Rebels in Sicily resolv'd to return into Spain. By the way he touch'd in Sardinia, and pacify'd that Island, and thence went up the River Rosne in Provence, to the City Avignn, to see Pope Benedict. The Pope gave him a Rose of Gold, and the Investiture of Sardinia and Corsica with the Title of King, but to hold them of the . Thence he came to Barcelona, and was receiv'd in Triumph. In a great Assembly o  Nobility he took pos∣session of the Crown, and declar'd the Earl of Faux and his Wie Traytors, for having as∣sum'd the regal Title and invaded the Kingdom. The Eastern Empire through intestine Divisons, and the perpetual felicity of the Otto∣mns Turks pass over into Europe. was now tending to Ruin. That▪ Party of the Greeks which was weakest call'd over Amurat▪ Emperor of the Turks to their Assistance, and he passing the Hellespont seiz'd Glli∣poli, Adrianople, and many other Places. Sigsmund King of Hungry dreading so dangerous a Neighbour, begg'd Succour of Charles the 6th King of France who sent him a good body of Horse, under the Command of John, Son to the Duke of Burdy. These Forces being come into Hungary, it was resolv'd to give the Enemy Battle. The French naturally eager, advancing too far before the Hungarians were most of them kill'd, and the Duke of Burgun∣dy's Son taken, whom his Father Ransom'd for a great Sum of Mony. Thus the whole Ar∣my was overthrown, and King Sigismund escap'd by Flight. At Granad King Joseph dy'd, Joseph K. of Grana∣da his strange Death. Mahmet Usurps. as was suspected poison'd by the King of  who sent him a rich Coat, which as soon as he put on he fell into violent Torture, and expir'd 30 Days after, his Flesh flling off by Piecemeal. A wonderful thing, if true. After his Death Mahomet his 2d Son surnam'd Balva▪ usurp'd the Crown, excluding. Joseph the elder. He had secur'd the Affections of the People, and only fear'd lest the King of Castile should take  part of his Brother. To prevent which he went away to Toledo to gain the good Will or the King and his Courtiers with rich Presents. His Designs succeeded well, for he renew'd the Truce made with his Father. At this time the  sting at Toledo, an Edict was publish'd excluding all Stran∣gers excepting a few particular Persons, and the whole Portugues Nation whom they thought by this means to oblige, from enjoying Ecclesiastical Benefices. It was also ordain'd that none should keep a Saddle-Mule who had not a good Horse, to encourage the breed of Horses. On the 5th of October at Sevil dy'd John de Guzman, Earl of Niebla; his Son Henry succeeded him, and was Father of John de Guzman, who was afterwards created the first Duke of that noble Family. The Portugueses to make their Advantage of the King's want of Health, resolv'd to take up Arms, and gave out to Colour this Breach, that it was be  some of the Nobility of Castile had not sign'd the late Treaty. Their Army at first Badajoz taken by the Portu∣gueses. onset took Badajoz, a City on the Frontiers. From this beginning the War was after∣wards continu'd the term of three Years. The King of Castile having assembl'd his Forces gave the Command of them to Ruy Lopez Davalos, not long before made Constable of Castile. James Hurtado de Mendoça the Admiral was sent to look to the Mariime Affairs. On May 1397, 5 Galleys of Castile met 7 of Portugal coming from Gena laden with Arms and Am∣munition. 1397. These they assail'd so desperately that four were taken, one sunk, the other two fled. It was a great piece of Cruelty, that after Quarters given in cold Blood they threw 400 Men into the Sea. The Admiral coasting along Portug burnt several Towns, and plunder'd the Country without Opposition. Many Portugueses of Note came over to the King of Castile; and serv'd him well. The chiefest of them were, Martin, Giles, and Lope de Auna, three Brothers, also John and Lope Pacheco Brothers. All these Gentlemen had good Estates given them by the Kings of Castile for their good Services, and were the Founders of several Noble Families. In Galcia the Portueses took the City Tuy. In Estradura they lay'd Siege to Altara, but the Constable of Castile coming down in time, not only rais'd the Siege, but entring Portugal ravag'd the Country and took seve∣ral▪ Places of small Note. The Master of Alcantara, the Admiral and chief Justice of Ca∣stile besig'd Miranda de Duero, and the Constable coming to joyn them, the Besieg'd were forc'd▪ to surrender. Thus the Damage being equal on both sides, it was hop'd a Peace might ensue betwixt the two Nations.
CHAP. IV. Two Francisans  to the Moors of Granada suffer Martyrdom. The Truce with Portugal  Two great Plagues in Spain and France. The Year of Ju∣bilee 1400. AT the beginning of this War two Franciscan Fryars, whose Names are not known, Franciscan Fryars preach to the Moors of Grana∣da. zealos for the ropagation of the Faith adventur'd to preach publickly to the Moors in Granada, and many People flock'd to hea them: Being warn'd to desist, and they still going o, the  by the King's Order apprehended and beheaded them, and they are reverenc'd as Martyrs.  Benedict, as has been said before, was forsaken by all his Car∣dinals at Avignon, the Ki of France press'd, and only those of Spain own'd him. A great assembly of Preles and other learned Men was held betwixt the French and Spaniards about him, but nothing was resolv'd upon, only they agreed both Popes should recal the Ecclesi∣astical ensures they had thunder'd one against the other, and appoint a Place of meeting to compose those Differences. In Pamplna great rt of the Cathedral had fallen seven Years before, and neither the rots of the Church▪  private Contributions were sufficient to repair it, therefore the King assign'd the 40th part of his Revenue for 12 Years to carry on that Work. This King desiring to recover the County of Eureux, and his Possessions in Normandy had sent an Embassy to that effect into France, but that not succeeding went thi∣ther himself to as little , the King of France not being recover'd of his disposition. Thus without doing any thing he return'd home in September 1398▪ Being come home he 1398. caus'd his Son Charles, but a Year old, to be sworn to as Heir of the Crown. The Joy of this solemnity was ort, for the Prince dy'd soon after. The Portugueses humbled by their late Truce with Por∣tugal re∣new'd. Disappointments sent Embassadors to treat of Peace. King Henry answer'd he neither began the War nor would obstruct the Peace, provided it were Honourable. After much de∣bating, not being able to agree upon Articles of Peace they confirmed the former Truce. Castile was jealous of a Breach with Aragon. The Marques de Villena would not come to Court, and had a great Estate on the Borders of Valencia, he was much suspected to sir up the Aragnians to War. A new occasion offer'd it self to deprive him of his Estate. Alonso and Peter, two Sons of the Marques had marry'd two of the King of Castile's Aunts, and had 30000 Ducats with each of them, which Mony was pay'd down to ransom the Marques taken by the English, as has been said. Peter dy'd in the Battle of Aljubarra, and was Father to the famous D. Henry de Villena, who desirous of Knowledge study'd Negro∣mancy. D. Alonso never consumated the Marriage, excusing himself with the ill Repu∣tation of his Bride. King Henry as Nephew to these Ladies took their Business in Hand, and demanded to have their Portions restor'd, since the one was left a Widow, and the other never consuminated the Marriage. The Marques his Sons would give no ear to these De∣mands. Upon this account King Henry invaded the Marques his Estate, and easily made himself Master of all▪ except Villena and Almansa, in which were strong Garrisons of Ara∣gonians. Contemporary with D. Henry de Villena, and not unlike to him in Learning was D. Paul de Cartaga. He was born a Jew, and by his great insight in the Scripture con∣verted, Paul de Cartagen famous for Learning. and writ several notable Books. For his Learning and to encourage other Jews to embrace the Faith, he was first made Archdeacon of Trevin̄e, then Bishop of Carthagena, and lastly of Burgs. He was also Chancellor of Castile, and Tutor to King John the IId. Before his Conversion he had four Sons. Gonçale the eldest came to be Bishop of Plasencia first▪ then of Siguença. Alonso the 2d succeeded his Father in the See of Burgos, and writ the Anacephalosis of the Kings of Spain, also Dfensorium Fidei, and Defensorium Catholitae unitatis. The two younger Sons were Peter and Alvaro. Some think this Alvaro writ the Chronicle of King John, but it was his Uncle Alvar Garzia de Sana Maria, and others had a hand in it, particularly Frnan Perez de Gusman carry'd it on to the end, and writ the Lives of the Famous Men of his time, and other Works. The Discord betwixt the two Popes, and the little prospect there was of reconciling it, and uniting the Church, perplex'd l Christendom. In Spain the last Year the Plague began Plague in Spain and France, and great Floods. to rage, and continu'd spreading it self particularly along the Coast from Barcelona, as far as Avignon in France. Besides, the  were so violent that there ensu'd mighty Floods, and particularly the Rivers Ebro and Ʋrba overflowing their Banks, carry'd away Multitudes of Men and Cattle, destroy'd the Corn, and overthrew many Buildings. As soon as the Season would permit, the King of Aragon went from Barcelona to Zaragoça to hold the Cortes there, which sat on the 29th of April in the Church of S. Saviour. There the King being seated in his Royal Throne made a learned Speech, extolling the Bravery and Loyalty of the Aragonians, showing how thereby they had enlarg'd their Dominions, recommending to them to continue such for the future, and lastly requiring them to do their Homage, and take the Oath of Allegiance to him and his Son. All the King had de∣manded was perform'd with much Satisfaction of the whole Body. The publick Joy con∣ceiv'd on this Account was somewhat abated by the Apprehensions of a War that threaten'd
from France. The Bastard of Tardes passing the Pyrenean Mountains, possess'd himself of French ex∣pell'd Aragon. Termas, a Town on the Frontiers of Aragon towards Navarre, which extreamly alarm'd all the Kingdom. Giles Ruyz de Lihorri, Governour of Aragon march'd thither with a good Body of Souldiers, and some Men of Note. The French expcted not his coming, but abandoning the Place retir'd to France, to theirs, and the  of the Earl of aux, who sent them. Sicily was not wholly pacify'd. Some hopes of a Settlement appear'd, the Queen being deliver'd of a Son call'd Peter, on the 17th of November, who if he had liv'd would have inherited that Crown, but he and his Mother soon after dy'd, and all these Hopes vanish'd. Not long after in April▪ 1399;  Queen  were Crown'd at 1399. Zargoça by the Arch-bishop of that Pla.  of Villina, was allow'd to add the Regal Arms to his own, and was created Duke of Gandia in requital for what he lost in Castile. At the same time Pope  being forsaken by the Gardinals was much press'd by his Enemies who besieg'd him. The King of Aragon sent two Embassadors to him, who treated with him about finding out some  of putting an end to the Schism and uniting the Church. He answer'd he would commit that Affair to those Princes that had own'd him, and particularly those of France and Aragon. But his meaning was not the same, for he charg'd them under Colour of Peace not to depart from Justice, which he said was wholly on his side, but that he coveted nothing more than to pu an end to those Divi∣sions. The Aragonian Embassadors  give an Account of their Negocation to the King of France. In an Assembly held  upon this Affair, it was resolv'd to send to re∣quire the Pope to put a speedy end to the Schism, and to that purpose he should wholly re∣fers his Case to a Council of Bishops that was to meet, and the King of France would en∣gage  the security of his Person, and furnish him with a sufficient Guard. Whilst these things were in Agitation, D. Peter Tnrio, Arch-bishop of Toledo dy'd in Castile. He was Works of Peter Te∣nrio, Archbi∣shop of Toledo. a Man of Judgment and Resolution, fit either for Peace or War. He was first Bishop of , and thence without any Solicitation on his part preferr'd to Toledo. In his Ex∣pences at home he was Frugal, and spent the great Revenues of his Church in publick Buildings, and relieving the Poor. The Bridge of S. Martin at Toledo, a Castle near to the Monastery of S. Servandu, the Cloister that joins to the Cathedral, with a Chappel in it and his own Tomb are all his Works. That Chappel he endow'd with Revenues to maintain 16 Chaplains to pray for his and the Souls of his Predecessors. At Alcala Real, on the  of  he built a high Tower, where a Light was kept every Night to guide the Christians that made their▪ escape from the Moors. At Talavera he founded a stely Monastery of the Invocation of S. Catherine, design'd for the Canons of that Church, but they refusing to live as Regulars, he gave it to the Hieronimites. The Arcbishop's Bridge was also of his Foundation. After the Death of the Arch-bishop, the Chapter chose D. Gutirre de Toledo, Archdeacon of . The King offer'd the Archbishoprick to Ferdinand Yan̄ez a Canon of that Church of the Order of S. Hierome, but he refus'd it. Pope Benedict gave it to his Nephew, Ptr de Luna, but the King not approving of him, the Bishop of Siguença, Vicar of the Archbishoprick had charge of it for some Years, till the Popes election took place. The Joy and Devotion of the great Year of Jubilee 1400, was much lessen'd by the Schism in the Church, tho the Christian Princes us'd all possible Means to put an end to it. 1400. To this purpose for the humbling the Obduracy of Pope Benedict the King of Castile at the perswasions of D. Peter Hernandez de , Cardinal of Spain, publickly disown'd him. Yet the King of Aragon interposing three Years after he submitted to him again. From Plague in Spain. Lagdoc and Cataloa the Plague spread over all Spain with such a mighty Mortality, that it oblig'd the King of Castile to give leave to Widows to marry the same Year their Hus∣bands dy'd, which before was forbidden. The King generally resided at Sevil, that being a Pleasant and Healthy place, and he very ickly. In July the first Clock was fixing in the Steeple of the Cathedral (for there were no such Clocks before in Spain) and a great Bell to it, the King, Noble▪ and a Multitude of People being present, when on a sudden a Storm rising, a flash of Lightning kill'd several Men. This being taken as an ill Omen, Processions were made to appease God's Wrth. Near the Town of Nieb, 5 Leagues from Segovia, an Image of our Blessed Lady was  and many People devoutly re∣sorting thither to visit it. Queen Cathrine built there a Church for it, with a Monastery of Dominican adjoyning to it, which drew many  and settle there, so that in our Days it is grown up to be a pretty considerable .
P. V. The Death of the  Sicily. Of Tamerlan and Bajazet. Pope▪ Benedict again received in Castile. The King of Castile has a Son born. Pope Boniface dies. Innocent the VII chosen at Ro. THE Lady Violante, Daughter to John King of Aragon, was during her Father's Life con∣tracted to Luis  Anjo, as was said before. Her Marriage was delay'd, because Violante Daughter to the K. of Aragon marryed to Luis Duke of Anjo. she  under Age, and  Year it s concluded upon. She was to have 160000 Florins Portion, and he to swe never to lay any claim to the Crown of Aragon in her Right. This done she was nobly Conducted into France to her Husband. In the Month of March 1401, the King of Castile assembled the Cortes at Tordesillas, where many good Laws were enacted, particularly to restrain the Avarice of the Farmers of the Revenue and Officers of Justice. In the Month of May, Mary Queen of Sicily dy'd at Catane, as was thought of Grief for the 1401. Mary Q. of Sicily dies. Death of her Son, who ended his Days at  Age of 7 Years. Both the Mother and Son were bury'd in that City. However her  next of Blood remain'd King, and all the Nobility aim'd to marry their Daughters  to him. He marryed Blanch, third Daughter to the King of Navarre, who afterwards inherited her Father's Kingdom. The Kings of Aragon and Nava met upon this Account on the Frontiers, there the  deli∣ver'd his Daughter to the  in Law, who sent her from Valencia to Sicily in a eet com∣manded by D. Bernard de Cabrera, but her Departure and Marriage was in the Year 1402. 1402. In November the same Year the Queen of Castile was deliver'd of a Daughter call'd Mary, who was afterwards marry'd to her Cousin German Alonso King of Aragon and Naples, but they had no Issue for she prov'd Barren. After the Defeat of the French and Hungarians at Nicopolis, Bajazet Emperor of the Turks Tamerlan the Tatrar his ex∣ploits. lay'd Siege to Constantinople. At the same time Tamerlan the Tartar with an incredible Army, as is reported of 40000 Horse, and 600000 Foot, overran all the East. His Custom was when he sat down before a City, the first Day to put up white Colours in token of Mercy, the second Day they were red, to denote he would shed the Blood of the Inhabitants, and the third black, which signify'd the utter Desolation of the Place. It happen'd the City Berytus did not surrender before the second Day, and then sent out their Women and Child∣ren cloath'd in White with Boughs in their Hands to appease him, but he nothing mov'd caus'd his Horse to trample them to Death. A Genoese who follow'd his Camp took the Boldness upon this Occasion to put him in mind he was a Man, and he with a furious Counte∣nance answer'd. Dost thou think I am a Man? I am no such, I am the Scourge of God, and Plague of Mankind. Bajzet seeing all Asia was in danger of being lost, rais'd the Siege of Constantinople and pass'd over into Asia. On that part of Mount Taurus call'd Stella they came to a Battle, and after a mo Bloody Dispute 200000 Men being slain, Bajazet was over∣thrown and taken. Him Tamerlan put into a Cage, and in that manner carry'd him about Asia, treading on his Shoulder every time he mounted a Horse-back, and feeding him like a Dog with bits thrown from his Table. King Henry of Castile, though sickly, attended the Affairs of the Government, and sent Embassies to all parts; and particularly to the Levant he sent Pelayo de Sotomay, and dinand de Palaçuelos, who were present at that famous Bat∣tle between the Turks and Tartars. Tamerlan treated them courteously and at their return Embassies betwixt Tamerlan and the K. of Castile. to Spain sent along with them an Embassador of his own to settle Peace and Unity with the King of Spain. He having concluded his Negociation return'd home accompanied by three Spanish Embassadors, who writ a Journal of that Embassy, which is still Extant. Tamerln's Glory was not lasting. At his return home he built a beautiful City which he called Mer∣canti. He left two Sons, who differing about the Inheritance tore in  the Empire pur∣chas'd by their Father. This Year was unhappy to the Portugueses and Navarrois, for the Heirs of both Kingdoms dy'd. D. Alonso eldest Son to the King of Portugal was but 12 Years of Age. He was bury'd in the Cathral of Braga. This Loss was the more tolerable, for that there were several Brothers besides, as the Princes Edward, Peter, Henry, John and Ferdinand, and two Sisters; Blanch and Elizabeth. At Painplona dy'd the Princes Charles 5 Years, and Lys, but 6 Months  were bury'd in that Cathedral. The Grief of the Navarrois was the more inconsolable, for that there remain'd never an Heir-male, and the Crown must of course fall to the Female. This Wier at the end of the present Year, and beginning of that of our Lord 1403, the Rains were so great in Spain that most Rivers over∣flow'd, 1403. doing great harm, Particularly Guadalquivir swell'd, above the Was of Sevil, and Great Floods. came as far as the Church of St. Michael. Alonso Perez, then Governour, by his Industry pre∣vented much Mischief that might have been done. The See of Toledo was vacant since the Death of the late Archbishop▪ D. Peter Torio. This was caus'd by the Discord betwixt the Popes, for Castile had in such manner disown'd Pope Benedict, that it did not submit to the other. To remedy this Evil the Cortes assembled at Valadolid. Thither the Aragonian Em∣bassadors repai'd in favour of Pope Benedict, who after he had continu'd two Years at Avig∣non, in the nature of a Prisoner, made his escape in a Disguise down the River Rosne. His
Interest was so well manag'd by the King of Agon, that on the 28th of April he was again solemnly acknowledged by the King, Nobility▪  rgy. The same was done in France on the 26 of May, but this was not lasting. Hwever▪ by virt  this Submission, Pope Benedict, as he had design'd two Years before, gave the  of  to D. Peter de Luna his Nephew, who yet made some stay in Arag on other Affairs. Pope Benedict was withdrawn to Seillon, a Town in Proce, by reason of the Plague that rag'd; there Martin de Salua, Cardinal of Pamlona dy'd.  he Pope gave th his▪ Archbishoprick and Cardinal's Cap to Michael de Salua his Nephew. Mathew Earl of Faux departed this Life, and with him dy'd his Pretensions to the Crown of Arago  he left no Heirs, and the Lady Joanna his Wife compounded with the King her Un he had 3000 Florins a Year assign'd her, a small Recompence for a Kingdom wrongfully taken from her, but Ne∣cessity took Place of right. This done she spent the rest of her▪ Life in Aragon. Spain enjoy'd Peace, intestine Broils having ceas'd, and its Enmies abroad being tyr'd The King of Navarre uses means to reco∣ver his Possessions in France. with long Wars. Only the King of Navarre was dissatisfy'd for having lost his great Pos∣sessions of Evreux, Bri, and Champagne in France. Many Embassies were sent in to France about this Affair, and he himself went thither twice, but all to no effect. His Right was indisputable, therefore he resolv'd▪ the  ime to try whether he could obtain by Pre∣sents and Courtship what had been bef  him. He left the Queen to govern in his Absence, and departed for France. Thereer much debating of this Affair, it was at last agreed he sould quit those Pretensions and withdraw his Garrison out of Chrbourg, which still held  him, and in lieu thereof should have the Ciy Nmo in the Province of Beance in France, th the Title of Duke, also a Pension of 12000 Florins, and a great Sum of rea∣dy Mony. This was concluded at Paris on the 9th of July 1404. It is reported that with 1404. this Mony King Charles built two stately Palaces at Olit and Tafalla, Towns of Navarre about a League distant from one another, and that if Death had not prevented him he in∣tended to joyn those two Towns by a continu'd Gallery built betwixt them. The Kings of Castile and Granada seem'd to vie with one another in sending rich Presents, and other acts of Courtesy. It was convenient for the Moors to support that Friendship, because they were weak, and to the King of astile by reason of his continual Indisposition. One rich Present the Mooish King made of Jewels and rich Garments; that it might be the more ac∣cbl, he sent it by one of his Wives, for the Moors especially the Kings have many. t not long after the War broke out betwixt these two Kings. Of the first of October Boniface the Pope dies, and Innocent the VIIth is chosen at Rome. Pope Boniface the IXth dy'd at Rome. His Cardinals immediately assembled and chose Cos∣ Meorato an Italian, who took the Name of Innocent the VIIth. He enjoy'd that Dig∣nity only two Years and twenty Days. The Christian Princes lay'd hold of this Opportu∣nity to unite the Church, but all in vain, for both Popes pretended there was no place of Security for them to meet. In Truth neither car'd to hazard losing that high Dignity, particularly Pope enedict, who was crafty and subtle. Yet many Persons esteem'd for San∣ctity of Life ader'd to him, and among them the Holy F. Vincent Ferreriu, of the Order of S. Dominick, famous for the Gift of Miracles, and for th ast Nmbers he converted, of which 8000 Moors, and 35000 Jews are reckoned, besides the Christians he reclaim'd from their Wicked Lives. The general Joy conceiv'd throughout the Kingdom upon this Ac∣count was increas'd by the Queens being deliver'd at Toro on the 6th of March 1405, of a Son▪ call'd John. It s a great Addition to the publick Satisfaction, that all Men had des∣pair of it, because of the delay and the King's Infirmit. There was publick rejoycing at home, and Emba▪ came to ongratulate from abroad. The Queen lay'd hold of this Opportunity to  pardon for D. Peter de Castilla, Son to D. John, and Grandson to King Peter, whose only Crime was to be descended from that King. He was not only par∣don'd, but had a Pesion allow'd him, left several Children, and of him is descended the Family of Castilla no n being. At Guadalujara dy'd D. James Hurtado de Mendoça, Ad∣mil of Castil.  on In̄igo Lopez de Mendoca, afterwards created first Marques of San∣ti inherited his Estate. D. Alonso Enriquez, younger Brother to the Earl of Trastamara  made Admiral. CHAP. VI. Great Tmults in Aragon appeas'd by the Cortes. A Battle betwixt the Castilians and the Moors▪ The Cortes of Castile meet at Toledo, and King Henry dies there. A notable  his. ARagon at this time was full of Tumults. At Zaragoça there were two Factions, the Heads of them were Martin Lopez de  za, and Peter Cerdan two powerful Men. At Valencia there were also two Factions, that of the Sleres, and that of the Centellas. They decided all their Differences by dint of Sword,  and plundering, the Officers of Ju∣stice not being able to curb them. The King assembl'd the Cortes at Maella, a Town in Ara∣gon to put a period to these Troubles. There many good Laws were enacted. It was also
ordain'd that Martin King of Sicily should  as soon as possible into Spain, that he might learn to observe the Prildges of , and not endeavour afterwards to govern that Kingdom arbitr ▪ He understanding this was the desire of his Father and all the Kingdom, fitted out , and set  from Trapana, a City in Sicily. By the way he touch'd at Nice in Pi to visit Pope Benedict, who was there at that time, pretending to agree Differences with his Competitor.  Duke  Ano who call'd himself King of Na∣ples, and in Right of his Wife clain'd th own of , was there at that time, and by the Pope's Mediation that Affair was compos'd. The King of Sicily departing thence on the 3d of April landed at Baa. Great rejoyng was throughout the Kingdom for his Ar∣rival, hoping his stay wo be long, but th were deceiv'd, for he pretending the Islanders were not fully acify'd, and that D. Bernard de Cabrera govern'd in his Absence too abso∣lutely, leaving Affairs but half compos'd in Aragon, but to Sea▪ ain on the 6th of August in the same Fleet that brought him, and pass'd over to Sicily. As soon as Arriv'd he banish'd D. Bernard the Court, and soon after commanded him to depart the Island, and go over to answer before his Father to such things as should be lay'd to his Charge. He obey'd and came to Barcelona about the beginning of Nober, at which time there were brought ∣ther four Statues of Silver hollow within, and  precious Stones, sent by Pope Benedict, that the Relicks of the Saints, Vale, Vinc  aurence, and Engracia, which were at Zragoça might be put into them, and so carry'd about in great Processions. In Castile the Jews and Moors di∣stinguish'd in Castile. Conversion of the Jews was carryd on▪ and to humble those obstinate Peo  was or∣dain'd they should not put  use, and that to be known they should  a Round of Red Cloath on their right Shoulder three Fingers broad. Three Years  was or∣dain'd that the Moors should wear a larger Round of Blw Cloath in the shape of a half Moon. 25 Years before this King John the first in the Cortes enacted, that the Mistres of Priests should be distinguish'd from honest Women, by wearing a piece of Cloath  Fingers broad on their Head Cloaths. What relates to the Jews wa now establish'd in the Cortes assembl'd at Valladold, to swear Allegiance to the New-born Prince John, and was proclaim'd at Madrid on the 21st of December. The King was gone that way to prepare for the War against the Moors, because that King notwithstanding their late Friendship and Allyance had taken the Town of Ayamonte at the Mouth of Guadian from Alvaro de Gzman whose it was and refus'd to pay the usual Tribute. Nevertheless before he proceeded farther the King sent Embassadors to see whether he would make Satisfaction for those wrongs. The Moor gave no Ear to them, but at the beginning of the Year 1406, sent a considerable Body to 1406. invade the Territory of Baza, where they did great harm. Peter Manriques who com∣manded that part of the Frontiers, James Benavides, and Martin Sanchez de Rojas gathering what Force they could, overtook them near Quesada. They fought with equal Courage till Night parted them. The Christians standing close together, brok through the Moors to The Bat∣tle of Col∣lejarts. gain an advantagious Post on a Hill, which shew'd they had the worst, and indeed they had lost several Men of Note. This is call'd the Battle of Collejares. King Henry tho indispos'd neglected not the . He summon'd the Cortes to meet at Toledo to provide for that War. The King of Navarre having setl'd his Affairs in France, as has been say'd, in his Return pass'd through Narome, and traversing Catalonia in March met the King of Ara∣g at Lerida, and was honourably entertain'd by him there and at Zaça. At length be∣ing come to Pamplona he there Celebrated the Marriage of his younger Daughter Berix, with James of Bourbon, Earl of March, a Man noble and admirabl qualify'd▪ to whm she had been long before Contracted. This was in September, in  Michael de S, Cardinal of Pamplona dy'd near Monaco on the Coast of Genoa, of th ague. He was bury'd at Nice. Lancelotte of Navarre succeeded him in the See of Pamplona, at such time as France tyr'd with the delays made by Pope Benedict, in abdicating the Papacy and uniting the Church, again disown'd him, and  to give him Obedience. The Cortes were held at Toledo, and prov'd very remarkable, as  their fulness, as Cortes held in Castile. for the Death of the King which happen'd in that City, and at that time. At the very open∣ing of this Session the King's Sickness so increas'd, that he could not attend it. His Brother Ferdinand supply'd his Plce. There was great want of Mony for carrying on the War against the Moors. It was propos'd to raise such a Sum as would maintain 14000 Horse, and 50000 Foot, fit out 30 Galleys,  50 Ships, and furnish 6 great Guns, which our Hi∣storians call Lombards, I suppose because they first came out of Lombardy into Spain, and 100 lesser, with all other Necessaries proportionable, believing this Necessary to extirpate the Moors in Spain. The Commons were against raising o great a Sum, and the more for that the Clergy refus'd to contribute towards it. After much contesting,  nted  Mil∣lion of Gold, a great Sum in that Age, and the more considerable becae it was allow'd in case that fell short, that new Taxes might be levy'd without the Consent of the Cortes. Innocent the Pope dies at Ro▪  Gregory the XIIth is chosen. Henry K. of Castile dies. In those days the Pay of a Horseman was 20 Maravedles, and half as much to a Foot ldier. On the 6th of November dy'd at Rome,  Innocent, and the Cardinals immedia elected Angelu Corari of Vnice, who took the Name of Gregory the XIIth. On the 2th of De∣cember King Henry also dy'd at Toledo.  was 27 years of Age, and Reign'd 16 Years,  Months, and 21 Days. He left Issue by the Queen, Prince John, and the Princesses My and Catherine. He was bury'd in the Royal Chappel of Toledo. Great was the Grief con∣ceiv'd
for his Death, he being a hopefull Prince, and the Kingdom by his Death left ex∣pos'd to all the Calamities that generally  left to a Child. As to his Parts he was affable, and liberal, eloquent, and crafty, on Countenance graceful, especially before his Sickness dissigur'd him. Of his Prudence and Resolution,  as an Instance. At his first Accession to the Crown he generally resided at Burgos, and was chiefly delighted in catching of Quails. Returning one Day somewhat late from his Sport, he found hothing provided for Dinner, and asking the Reason,  there was neither Mony nor Credit to buy Meat. He was surpriz'd at this Answer; yet said no more, only orderd that a Coat should be pawn'd to buy some Mutton to be dress'd with the  for his Dinner. Whilst Dinner lasted the Discourse was how the Nobility liv'd, much after another manner, for A notable Action of K. Henry. they made Banquets, and treated one another in their turns. That Day the Arthbishop of Toledo treated the rest. At Night the King in Disguise went to view them, and having soen the Splendout of their Entertainment, found the Discourse was what Estate every Man had, and what sension from the King. He having heard all, resolv'd to be Revern'd, and to that purpose the next Morning feigning himself Sick, gave out he would make his Will. Imme∣diately all those Lords repair'd to the Castle where the King was. He had order'd that as every one of them came their Serva  Retinue should he turn'd out. All things were perform'd as he had directed, and all  Nobles waited a long time in a great Hall. At Noon the King came in Arm'd, and with his Sword drawn. All were supriz'd at that sight, and they standing up the King sat down with a storn Countenance, then turning to the Archbishop ask'd him how many Kings he had knownin . The same he ask'd of all the rest.  said they had known three, some four, and the eldest said five. How can that be (reply'd the King) whereas, I that am so Young have known 20. They admiring at it, he added, You are those Kings, to the ruin and shame of the Crown, but I will make your Reigs short. This said he call'd in the Executioners, and 600 Souldiers he had in a readiness. All were astonish'd, but the Archbishop of Toledo fell on his Knees begging Par∣don, and all the rest follow'd his Example. Seeing them at his Feet, the King pardon'd them, but kept them two Months Prisoners in the Castle, till they deliver'd up all the Towns they held, and refued what they ow'd to the Crown. This Example made the No∣bility more Submissive than ever they had been. He us'd greater Severity at Sevil, for he  1000 Men to be Executed for being guilty of the Tumults ais'd by the Earl of Niebla,  Peter Ponce. He advanc'd his own and the Prince his Brother's Revenue, so that great  were every Year lay'd up in the Palace of Madrid, to which he added those Towers that are still standing, for its greater Security. His is that saying, I fear the Curses of the People more than the Enemy's Weapons. Thus without oppressing his Subjects he gather'd great Treasure, only by looking after his Revenue. CHAP. VII. The Crown offered to Prince Ferdinand, he refuses it. John the IId proclaimed King of Castile. The Death of the Queen of Aragon. The War of Granada. Several Places taken by the Christians, who also obtain a Victory at Sea. After the  of the King's Interrment were perform'd with the Pomp and Ma∣jesty that was becoming, the Nobility met, as the Rebellious Custom was, to appoint a Successor, and do their Homage to him. This was in the beginning of the Year 1407. Their 1407. Opinions vary'd, and every one spoke according to his Inclination. Many thought it hard to stay till a Prince then but 22 Months old came to Age. The late King's Will was read K. Henry's Will. in which he dain'd that the Queen and Prince Ferdinand should govern the Kingdom, and  lectors to the young King. James Lopez de Zuniga, and John de Velasco were appoint∣ guard and educate him, and the Bishop of Carthagena, Lord Chancellor to be his Pre∣ceedor, till he was 14 Years of Age. These three were commanded only to attend to the Education of the Child without intermedling with the Government. Some said no part of this Will ought to be observ'd, as being made but the day before the King dy'd, when he was not absolutely Master of his Reason, but his Brain disturb'd, and that it was not rea∣sonable to expose the Kingdom to so many Confusions as might arise upon this Account. This was not only discours'd in private, but in publick Meetings, and about the Streets. Every one condemn'd the Will, and yet none car'd to expose himself too much by opposing it. They  Prince Ferdinand as the only Man that could deliver them from the Wonder∣ful mode∣sty of Prince Ferdinand who re∣fuses the Crown being of∣fer'd to him. Misfortunes they apprehended, yet they feard he would not consent to it, because he was naturally very meek and modest, which some call'd fear, some laziness, and others mean∣ness of . The Absence of the Queen, her , and being a Foreigner made Men bold. She  then at Segovea with her Children, over wholm'd with Grief for the Death of her Husband, and in care for the Event of those Practices at Toledo. The Nobility having con∣sulted together, resolv'd to try Prince Ferdinand, and in the Name of them all Ruy Lopez Davalo made a long Harangue, offering him the Crown, and pressing him to accept of it at
their Hands. After Ruy Lopez had done,  the other Nobles begg'd the same of him, and there wanted not some who pretended  and Revelations to justify their Request. The Prince with wonderful Modesty answer'd, that a Crown was not so much to be covet∣ed as to become infamous for the sake of it, by wronging an innocent Child, and a Widow Queen, whom all ought protect. Besides, that of necessity Wars must ensue. That he thank'd them for their good Will, and in requital would give them a King, which was his Brother's Son, and his own Nephew, and n his  would spare no Labour or Dan∣ger for the publick good, but take upon him the Government as his Brother ordain'd. Soon after he assembl'd the  and Prelates in the Chappel of D. Peter Tenorio which is in the Cloisters of the Cathedral. There Ruy Lopez the Constable thinking his Mind might be al∣ter'd, publickly ask'd him, whom he would have proclaim'd King: The Prince with some marks of Displeasure, answer'd aloud, Who but my Brother's Son? Then the Standards John the IId an In∣fant pro∣claim'd K. of Castile. were display'd as the Custom of Spain is in the Name of King John the IId, and the Kings at Arms proclaim'd him first in the Assembly, and then in all publick Places of the City: Prince Ferdinand by this Action purchas'd an immortal Renown, and his Moderation and Loyalty were highly extoll'd, even by those that advis'd him to accept of the Crown, and thus he made himself way to obtain other ; which Heaven for his Virtue had re∣serv'd for him. His Glory was so much , for that his Brother for some time before his Death had bore him ill-will, giving Ear to the Insinuations of some Court Para∣sites. True it is he was  concil'd and agreed that his Daughter Mary who might come to inherit the Crown  marry'd to D. Alonso the Prince's eldest Son, which was Advantagious to both Brothers, and for the common good of the Kingdom. Queen Mary of Aragon dy'd on the 29th of December at Villareal, a Town near Valencia, Aragon left without Heirs. to the great Grief of the King her Husband, and all that Country, for her extraordinary Parts. Her Body was bury'd with the usual Magnificence at Poblete, the Burial place of those Kings. Of four Children she had three dy'd Young, which were James, John, and Marga∣ret. Only Martin was left, then King of Sicily, who applying himself wholly to the Affairs of that Island without regard to his Health, as being Young, and offering himself freely to all Dangers as being of a great Spirit, soon after was snatch'd away and left his Subjects over∣whelm'd in Troubles. Prince Ferdinand having setl'd  at Toledo, on the 1st of January, Govern∣ment of Prince Ferdinand of Castile. went thence to Segovia to visit the Queen, and take  in all things relating to the Administration of the Government. That all things might be done with the greater Ma∣jesty and Authority he summon'd thither the Cortes, and accordingly the Nobles, Prelates, and Commons met there. Several Affairs were consider'd of by them. Particularly the Education of the young King was committed to the Queen, she pressing for it; tho it was contrary to the Will of the late King Henry. To John de Valasco, and James Lopez de Zuniga, in lieu of that Employment taken from them, they gave the Sum of 6000 Florins each. A small Recompence for so great a Trust, but Necessity oblig'd them to comply with the Will of the Queen and Prince, nor was it safe to oppose them, who had the Power of the Go∣vernment. The  design'd against the Moors was also taken into Consideration, and in February the Christians made an Incursion into their Territories by the way of Murcia. They lay'd Siege to Vera, but could not carry it, being unprovided of all Necessaries for such an Undertaking, besides that a great Body of Moors was marching to the Relief of the Place. Therefore raising the Siege they advanc'd to meet the Infidels, and  Xuxena engag'd and overthrew them. The Slaughter was not great because they had a etreat near at Hand? Yet they took and plunder'd the Town, but the Moor  This Success made so great a Noise, that the Cortes hoping it was a good Omen of future Advantages granted the Supplies that were requir'd of them by the Queen and Prince. They also, as was but Reason, appointed Prince Ferdinand General, betwixt whom and the Queen there began to be some misunderstandings. Malicious Persons, such as are always encourag'd in Courts heighten'd those Discontents, and said, one day Prince Ferdinand would perplex the Queen and her Children. Many lay'd the blame on a Woman call'd Ellenon Lopez, for that she bred ill Blood betwixt them, and was greater with the Queen than became her Majesty, or was for the good of the Kingdom. These Differences increasing, it was contriv'd the Govern∣ment Govern∣ment di∣vided be∣twixt the Queen and Prince. should be divided, so that the Queen should have Old Castile, and the Prince the New, with some Towns of the Old. This one the Prince sent his Wife and Children to Medina del Campo, and set out himself from Sagovia for Villareal, designing that the general Randez∣vouz of the Forces. Mean while the Commanders on the Frontiers ceas'd not to make Incur∣sions into the Country of the Moors, wasting their Lands, and driving great Booties of Cat∣tle and Captives, yet sometimes they came off with  Worst. A Moor inclin'd to Christi∣anity, came over from them, and being carry'd before Laurence Suarez de Figueroa, Master of Santiago, who commanded on the Frontiers, and was then at Ezija, said to him, I am not ignorant how odious the Name of  Deserter is to all Men, yet I resolv'd to come over to you, being mov'd to it from Heaven  my  testify the Sincerity of  Words. First let me be Buptiz'd and I will give you Instances of my real Fidelity. Being  he inform'd them he would shew them a way o surprize Pruna, a considerable Town of the Moors. They gave credit to his Words, and the chief Commendary of Santiago went with him. The Moor perform'd his Promise, and the Town was taken on the 4th of June. Thus
the Moors lost that Nest, whence they continually infested the Christian Territories. Prince Ferdinand went to Cordova, and thence to Sevil,  fell sick, at such time as there came to that City the Earl of Marche, Son in Law to the King of Navarre, of the best Blood of France, of a graceful Presence, and so Courteous, that he gain'd the Affections of all Men. He brought with him 80 Horse to serve in that War, which was expected would prove long and dangerous. The Moors were not idle, but first assaulted Lucena, a great Town, and finding they could not carry it, they march'd away o Baeça. Their Numbers were great, for it is lay'd they amounted to 7000 Horse, and 100000 Foot, an incredible Multitude; but such it was as put the whole Kingdom into a Consternation. Nevertheless they could not take the City, for it was bravely defended, but they burnt the Subarbs. All the Christians far and near took the Alarm, and gather'd to relieve that important Place, which the Moors understanding rais'd the Siege and departed loaded with Booty, and with many Captives Victory of the Chri∣stians by Sea. taken in that Country. On the other Hand Alonso Enriquez the Admiral obtain'd a consi∣derable Victor over the Infidels on the Sea near Cadiz. The Kings of Tunez and Tremezen had fitted out 23 Galleys to scour the Coast of Andaluzia, at the Request of their Con∣federate the King of Granada. The Admiral when he discover'd them had but 13 Galleys, yet attacked them with such Fury that he  eight sunk some, and put the rest to flight. Mean while Prince Ferdinand recover'd to the Sickness, and being joyful for this Success march'd from Sevil on the 7th of September. He had not fix'd what enterprize to take in Hand, therefore a Council of War being call'd, it was resolv'd to enter the Territory of Ronda, and lay Siege to Zahara a Town of Note in that Country. This was put in Execu∣tion, and they began to batter it with 3 great pieces of Cannon day and night, yet the harm they did was inconsiderable, because the Gunners in those days were not expert at playing and levelling their Pieces. For this Reason the Siege might have prov'd difficult, if the be∣sieg'd beginning to feel want, and fearing they should have no Quarter had not made hast to surrender, capitulating only for their Persons and Estates, and delivering up their Arms. Other small Towns follow'd the Example of Zahara and submitted. Septenil, a Town strong and well Garrison'd refus'd to submit, it was therefore besieg'd and batter'd, at such time as Peter de Zuniga recover'd Ayamonte from the Moors, as had been given him in charge by Prince Ferdinand. The Moorish King was unwilling to hazard a Battle, and therefore go∣vern'd himself by Policy, endeavouring to live his Enemy some considerable Diversion. He gather'd his Forces, which are said to have amounted to 6000 Horse, and 80000 Foot, but they were a meer Rable without Discipline or Sense of Honour. With this Army he sat down before Jaen, but sailed it, for our Army march'd thither with speed, and oblig'd him to retire with shame. Some harm he did in the Country, but that was retalia∣ted by wasting all his Territories . Besides, several Parties spread them∣selves over all the Dominions of the Moors, so that they had no Place of safety. It was some Disappointment that  was not taken. Autumn was advanc'd and the usual great Rains began to fall. Therefore Prince Ferdinand rais'd the Siege on the 25th of October, and re∣turning to Sevil, restor'd to its Place the Sword with which the Holy King Ferdinand took that City, which is there kept to this Day, and us'd then to be taken out by Generals, when they went upon any considerable Enterprize. This done he put his Forces into Quarters in Sevil, Cordova, and other Places, and went away himself to Toledo to raise more Men, and make other Provision  continue the War. CHAP. VIII. The Murder of the Duke of Orleans by him of Burgundy. The War carry'd on with the Moors  concluded. Original of D. Alvaro de Luna. Continuation of  Schism. time dy'd at Calahorra, Peter  Ayala, Chancellor of Castile, a Man  for many things, and particularly for the Chronicle he wrote of the Kings, Peter, Henry the IId. and Jo the Ist, tho it is generally believ'd he wrong'd King Peter magnifying his Vices, and said more than was true in Commendation of King Henry, France Luis Duke of Orleans murder'd. was in Confusion, for that John Duke of  had caus'd Luis Duke of Orleans to be mur∣der'd in  as he went from Court late at Night. The Assassine's Name was Ottonville. The Cause was suppos'd to be, to  of such a Competitor, the Duke Burgundy as∣piring to the  of the Kingdom by reason of the King's Weakness in his Under∣standing. As soon as the Murder was discover'd, the Duke fled to his Country to stand up∣on his Guard. At the suit of the Dutchess Dowger he was summon'd to appear and answer for him  which he relying upon  Interest and Riches accordingly did. John Pettite, a Divi  in his Sermons  this Action, saying it was lawful to kill a Tyrant, and such a  he accounted the Duke of Orleans. The Judges also clear'd the Duke of Bur∣guidy, whence there  and bloody Wars in France, which consum'd its Riches, and much diminish'd its Glory. The question was whether it be Lawful for a private Person to
kill a Tyrant, was long disputed among the Divines, and the Council of Constance which met not long after, gave their Judgment and  Decree in the Negative. Luys Duke of Orle∣ans was Brother to the King of France, and the Duke of Burgandy's Cousin German. Prince Ferdinand kept his Christmas, and began the Year 1408 at Toledo. The King and 1408. Queen Mother resided at Guadalajata, it being a temperate and healthful Place. Thither the Cortes of Castile grant su∣plies for War with the Moors. Cortes were assembled to grant Supplies for carrying on the War. All were willing to for∣ward so good a Work, but it was hard to find ways to raise Mony, the Country being ex∣hausted. However the pressing Instances of the Prince, and other great Men prevail'd so far that 150000. Ducats were granted, but upon Cohdition an account should be kept how it was lay'd out, that it might not be misapply'd. Whilst the Cortes were sitting, the King of Granada lay'd Siege to Alcaudete, with a prodigious Army of 7000 Horse, and 120000 Foot. The Town was in Danger, and all Andaluzia alarm'd, being in no Condition to op∣pose so great a Power, because the Forces were dispers'd, and Winter Season was not fit to take the Field. However the besieg'd held out bravely, and the Christians made Incursions into the Enemy Country three several Ways, as a diversion, ravaging all their Territories in revenge for the harm they had done on our Frontiers. The Moors discourag'd by so ma∣ny Losses sent to Treat of concluding a Truce. The Prince oppos'd it, hoping to gain some Advantage upon the Moors, but the Queen  it should be agreed to for eight Months. The Country would have the Tax remitted since the War ceas'd. The Prince would not consent, saying it was necessary to be provided for the next Year; however the fourth part was abated. To these Cortes came D. Peter de Luna, the Pope's Nephew, and Arch-bishop of Toledo. He brought along with him his Nephew, Alvaro de Luna, a youth  18 years of Age, Bastard Son to Alvaro de Luna, Lord of Can̄ete and Juhera, and of Mary de Can̄ete, a Woman so leud, she had four Bastards by four several Fathers, one, him we have spoken of, another call'd John de Cereçuela, by the Governour of Canete, Martin the third by a Shep∣herd call'd John, and the fourth called also Martin by a Farmer of Canete. The two last D. Alvaro de Luna who he was. in respect to their Brother, took the Name of Luna. From so base an Origin sprung this Youth, who in time rose so high as to overtop the greatest Nobles of Spain, and was unfor∣tunately cast down again. He was Christen'd by the Name of Peter, and Pope Benedict taken with his Person and Wit, caus'd him at his Confirmation to take the Name of Alvaro in re∣spect to his Father. Being come into Castile he was made one of the King's Bedchamber, in which employ he so behav'd himself that he gain'd his Affection, and had the ascendent over him. On the 11th of May dy'd Mahomet King of Granada in that City, which gave occasion to hope there would ensue a lasting Peace. He is said to have been kill'd by a poison'd Shirt he put on. His Brother Joseph then a Prisoner at Salobren̄a was brought out and proclaim'd King. As soon as Joseph came to the Crown, he sent Embassadors to the King of Castile with rich Presents of Horses, Furniture, Cimiters, rich Silks, Raisins, Figs, and Almonds, the chief Dainty among those People. They had other things given them in return, but obtain'd not what they desired, which was to prolong the Truce. Pope Benedict having tir'd the World with his Double-dealing, which was now discover'd Pope Be∣nedict for∣saken. was forsaken by his Friends, and knew not what course to take to support his Authority, which was his main Design. From Avignon he was come to Marseilles, and thence sent to his Competitor, Pope Gregory, to make some Overtures of an Accommodation, which he pre∣tended he had always desir'd. To this effect he said it were convenient they should meet in some proper Place, because Affairs could not be so well setl'd by a third Hand. Embassa∣dors were sent by Pope Gregory to agree upon the place of Meeting, and after much con∣testing, concluded upon Savona, a Town in the Territories of Genoa, they also articl'd that neither Pope should create Cardinals till they had conferr'd together. After this Pope Bene∣dict immediately imbarqu'd for the place appointed, that the World might believe he de∣sir'd to compose Matters. Pope Gregory thought not that place secure, as favouring his Ad∣versary, yet came as far as Luca, and Pope Benedict advanc'd to Portovenere to be the nearer to him. All he acted was deceitful, and even Pope Gregory contrary to what had been agre∣ed created three new Cardinals, which disgusted those of his Faction, and they withdrew to Pisa. Pope Benedict sent thither four of his Cardinals, and three Arch-bishops, who had a Conference with the other Cardinals, and they agreed to call a General Council. It was given out they intended to apprehead the two Popes, whereupon Benedict fled out of Italy, having before his Departure summon'd a general Council to meet at Perpignan. On the 2d of July he landed at Colivre, and thence went to Perpignan to influence the Council. The King of Navarre visited the Pope there, in his way to France, whither he was going in hopes to recover part of what he had lost, during those Troubles, but he did no more this Jour∣ney than he had done the former. At Perpignan & 20 Bishops met, most of Spain and France; the Business was to put an end to the Schism, and finding no likelihood of Success, most of the unprivately got away. Only 18 Bishops remain'd, who petition'd the Pope to restore Unity to the Church, tho it were by renouncing the Papacy. It was not likely he would condescend, yet he sent Persons of Note to Pisa  on pretence of Treaty,  reality as Spies. In that City besides many Bishops there were as Cardinals, 6 of them of Pope Bene∣dict's Faction, they all sommon'd both Popes to appear before them, and make good their Claims, and seding neither appear'd, by common. Consent on the 26th of June 1409, they 1046.
elected a third Pope, who was Peter Philargus, a Native of Candia, of the Order of Fryers Alexander the Vth chosen Pope. Minors, and Archbishop of Milan. In his Papacy he took the Name of Alexander the Vth. His Reign was short, and extended not to a Year. This which was looked upon as a Re∣medy, only serv'd to increase the Disease, for instead of two, now there were three Popes, each pretending to be the Right. So weak is all humane Policy. CHAP. IX. The Death of Martin King of Sicily. Several pretenders to the Crown of Aragon. Their several Claims. Martin King of Aragon prefers that of his  Prince Ferdinand of Castile, tho unjust. PRince Ferdinand govern'd the Kingdom of Castile prudently, yet let slip no Opportuni∣ty Animosi∣ties a∣gainst Prince Ferdinand of Castile. of advancing his Family, and increasing his Estate. For this reason some Persons spar'd not to set the Queen against him, which was easy, as she was a Woman, and natu∣rally Jealous. There is nothing more uncertain than the favour of Princes. They said the excessive Power of Prince Ferdinand might prove dangerous to the Crown, for that too much Grandeur is seldom attended with Loyalty. James Lopez de Zun̄iga, and John de Ve∣lasco whose Interest was great at Court, were the Men that chiefly heightned these Jealousies. Frederick rl of Trastamara, the Son of Peter, Constable of Castile, advis'd the Prince to se∣cure them, but they having notice of the Design fled. The Queen when she knew it was of∣fended and grew more suspicious than before, saying that Affront was offer'd to her, and design'd to deprive her of their Advice, and Assistance. Besides the other Blessings which Heaven and Nature had plentifully bestow'd on Prince Ferdinand, in which no Prince of that Age surpass'd him, he had a numerous Issue, viz. 5 Sons, Alonso, John, Henry, Sancho, and Peter, call'd afterwards the Princes of Aragon, and two Daughters, Mary and Ellenor. About this time dy'd Ferdinand Rodriguez de Villalobos, Master of the Order of Alcantara, and Prince Ferdinand obtain'd that Honour for his fourth Son Sancho, the Pope dispensing with his Age. Henry the third Son was in the like manner, soon after made Master of the Order of Santiago upon the Death of Laurence Suarez de Figueroa. Many were offended that the Prince not content with the Government▪ bestow'd all Perferments upon his Sons. At this time the Duke of Austria, and Earl of Luxembourg sent to offer Supplies of Men to carry on the War of Granada, Charles Duke of Orleans promis'd 1000 French Horse, and made suit to have to Wife Queen Beatrix the Widow of King John the Ist of Castile, who had the right to the Crown of Portugal. Neither was his offer accepted of, nor his Request granted, for the Queen would not marry again, or leave Spain, and the Truce was continued for 5 Months▪ longer at the suit of Joseph King of Granada. Yet soon after the Moors making an Attempt upon Priego gave a sufficient occasion to the Christians to break with them, but the King of Granada ent to excuse that Action as done without his Consent, and offering to make Reparation of Damages▪ such as Judges appointed on both sides should decree. This year betwixt Salamanca and Cuidad Rodrigo was found an Image of our Blessed Lady held in great Veneration, and call'd De la Pen̄a de Françia, very famous for a Monastery of Domini∣cans, built in that Place, and for the great Concourse of People that resorts thither. The Martin K. of Sicily dies. same year was unfortunate to the Aragonians to the Death of Martin King of Sicily only Son and Heir to the King of Aragon, who departed this Life at Caller in Sardinia, on the 25th of July, in the flower of his Age, and the promising hopes conceiv'd of him. His Father had sent him into that Island to suppress Brancaleon Doria, and Aymerick Viscount Narbonne, who having marry'd two Daughters of Marianus, Judge of Arborea, lay'd claim to and endea∣vour'd to possess themselves of it. They were grown strong, because the Power of the Aragonians was small and the Islanders rather favour'd them than Strangers. The King's coming chang'd the Face of Affairs. Both Parties assembl'd their Forces, and met near a Town call'd Luri. There they engag'd, the Isanders were overthrown, and Brancaleon their General taken. Death prevented the Kingdom making his Advantage of that Victo∣ry, and putting an end to the War. But Peter de Torrellas, the Mareschal that Prince's Fa∣vourite, and some other Men of Note with the Forces that remain'd, for some time made good the Aragonian Party. The King's Body was bury'd in the Cathedral of Caller. By his Wife Blanch he had one Son, who dy'd not long before him. He had also two Bastard Sons by two Sicilian Women, one was , whose Mothers Name was Teresa, and by Agathusa he had the Lady Violante, afterwards marry'd to the Earl of Niebla. It was re∣ported the Cause of his Death was his too much Familiarity with a young Woman of Sardi∣nia, before he was perfectly recover'd of a Sickness he had. In his Will he constituted his Father Heir of the Kingdom of Sicily, and ordain'd his Wife  Blanch should continue in the Government thereof as he left her at his Departure then  Several Persons of Note were nam'd to be assisting to her with their Advice. The loss of this Prince was much la∣mented throughout the Kingdom of Aragon, and many contests arose about the Right of Succession. It is in vain to relate how grievous this Misfortune was to his Father, every
one may judge himself. Yet he monerated his Sorrow, and having perform'd the Fune∣ral Rights to  apply'd himself to setling of the Kingdom. His Favourites advis'd Martin K. of Aragon marries. him to marry,  was  might have Children, and by that means set∣tle the  prevent many Mischiefs, which must otherwise follow. He approv'd of the  beautiful Lady, and of the Blood Royal of Aragon. The Marriage was solemniz'd at Burcelona, on the 17th of September. The King was but 5 years of Age; but sickle and extreamly fat, those very Medicines or Pro∣vocatives he made use of for getting of Children, wasted him inwardly and hasten'd his Death. Luis Duke of Anjou, being inform'd of the Death of the King of Sicily, was the first that reassum'd his Hopes of inheriting that Crown. He sent the Bishop of Conserans, to de∣sire the King to declare his Son Luis, whom he had by the Lady Violante, Daughter to King John,  to the Crown, as being the next of Blood; the eldest Sister Joanna being dead two years before. He also ask'd leave for the Mother to come to Aragon, to breed up her Son according to the Custom of the Country. It was look'd upon as an ill Omen, that the King during the Solemnity of his Marriage should he pressed to declare an Heir. The Peo∣ple thought the Earl of Ʋrgel to have a better Right, but it was only to please their own In∣clin'd out for all Nations would rather have a King of their own Country than a Stranger. The Earl's descent was from King Alonso IVth, who was his great Grandfather, his Son Preten∣ders to the Crown of Aragon. Jayms being Father to Peter, and Grandfather to the present Earl. Besides he had to Wife King Martin's Sisters, the Daughter of King Peter by Queen Sibila. D. Alonso de Aragon, Mar∣ques de Villena, the Earl of Deni, had also a Title to the Crown, but it was farther remov'd, yet at the perswasion of his Friends, tho very Old, he set up his Title among the rest, as being lineally descended from Jayme the IId King of Aragon. The King of Aragon gave Audience to the French Bishop, harkened to his Demands, and the Reasons on which he grounded his Claim. After that was over, retiring to his Apartment, Dispute concern∣ing the Crown of Aragon. those that were about him continu'd the Discourse, and at length came to argue the Case in Form before the King. William de Moncada pleaded for the Duke of Anjou, whose doubtless the Right was, as may appear by his Descent set down before. Bernard de Centellas argu'd for the Earl of Orel, and Bernard Villalice for the Marques de Villena, who was the remotest. When they had all done, the King have his Opinion, which agreed with none of theirs, for he positively affirm'd Prince Ferdinand of Castile had the best Title, as being his Nephew the Son of his own Sister Ellenor. In reality he was himself but an Usurper, the Duke of Anjon having a better Right than he, but he resolv'd to cut him off, and continue the Crown in his own Family. This Discourse of the King's being made publick, first at Barcelona, where it was spoken and afterwards through all Christendom, much advanc'd Prince Fer∣dinand his Pretension, and avail'd him to be preferr'd before his Competitors. This was the common Discourse of the Town, and even in the King's Presence,  which he seem'd to be pleas'd, yet in his Heart he was more inclined to his Grandson , Bastard Son to the late King of Sicily, whom he had already created Earl of Luna, and in order to make him capable of inheriting the Crown, treated with Pope Benedict about his Legitimation. If this succeeded not, he preferr'd his Nephew Prince Ferdinand before all others, his Va∣lour and Virtue, and his despising the Crown of Castile, having render'd him worthy of an∣other Kingdom. Nevertheless upon the pressing Instances of the Earl of Ʋrgel, the King constituted him Vicar, and Governour of the Kingdom; an Honour usually given to the Heir of the Crown, and might have been very prejudicial to the other pretenders, had he not underhand given orders to the Ʋrreas and Herias, two powerful Families in Zaragoca not to admit him into that City, or suffer him to exercise that Office, notwithstanding his Letters Patents. This doubl dealing highly offended the Earl of Ʋrgel, and was the Cause of great Troubles. CHAP. X. The Moors having done mah harm in the Christian Territories, Prince Ferdinand marches against them, defeats them and takes Antequera and other Places. Martin King of Aragon dies. A Love-Adventure. THE Truce with the Moors was now expir'd, and their Boldness provok'd and oblig'd Prince Ferdinand marches against the Infi∣dels. the Christians to renew the War for they  the Town of Zahara, ravag'd all the Coun∣try and drove the Cattle. To put a stop to their Fury, and revenge the Wrongs receiv'd, Prince Ferdinand having made the necessary Provision of Men, Mony, Ammunition, and Victuals, in the Month of February of the Year 1410, march'd with his Army towards Cor∣dova, at such time as the Infidels being disappointed of taking the Castle of Zahara aban∣don'd 1410. the Town, and our Forces speedily repair'd the Walls, and put the Place into a Po∣sture of Defence▪ Prince Ferdinand's Army consisted of 10000 Foot, and 3500 Horse, the very Flower of the Castillian Forces, all brave and resolute Souldiers. With him were Sancho de Rojas, Bishop of Palencia, Alvaro de Guzman▪ John de Mendoça, John de Velasco,
D. Ruy Lopez Davalas, and other Towns and Men of Quality. With these Forces the Prince sat down before the City Antquera, on the  till he had made himself Master of that  sent 5000 Horse, and 80000 Foot . They march'd up to the City, and  they rang'd their Battles and engag'd. The  5000 of 'em Moors over∣thrown. kill'd in the fight and pursuit  and their Camp plunder'd. This Victory was so  the more Remarkable,  of the Christians only 120 were lost. Prince Ferdinand  thanks to Almighty God,  great Success, and sent Expresses to convey the good News to . The more  the Besieged, he caus'd a deep and large. Trench to be  with a good Breast work, and Forts at convenient Distances, to hinder the , and all manner of Provision or Relief from coming to them. This  neces∣sary, his Forces, at that time being weak, because several parties were abroad by  order plundring and destroying all the Country, which was done  to the Walls of Malaga. Great harm was done, but the Terror spread abroad was much greater. The Moorish King commanded all that were of Age without exceptions  and appear in Arms, by which means he gather'd a  Multitude  not to hazard another Battle, and only shew'd himself to terrify the Christians,  kept on the Hills and in the Woods. The besieged began to be strenghten'd  most per∣plext them was, that they had no hopes of Relief. It was as bad as Death to surrender, and they had no means to hold out. It happen'd 300 Horse of the Garrison or Jaen made an In∣cursion into the Territories of the Moors  orderly that they were surpriz'd and all cut off. This small Success encourag'd the besieged to hope that some Misfortune might befall the Besiegers. Whilst these things were acting at  the new Pope dy'd Pope A∣lexander dies, John the XXIIId is chosen. at Bolonia, on the 3d of May. His Body was bury'd in the Church  of that City. The Cardinals of his party met, and on the  Month, Cota Deacon-Cardinal born at Naples, who was then Legate  him∣self in his Papacy John the XXIIId. He was bold, subtle,  made of good or bad Practices as the occasion requir'd, or was . Purpose  happier in the time of his Predecessor, when he govern'd all things than in his own, being cast down, and depriv'd of the Tiara. Soon after follow'd the Death of the King of Aragon, Martin K. of Aragon dies. who dy'd of a stoppage in his Head, on the last of May, at Valdoncellas, a Monastery of Nuns adjoyning to the Walls of . His Body was  at Poplete with very little Pomp, the People being affirmed at their present Loss and apprehenst or what was like to follow. The Cortes of that Principality were  not without some  of Troubles likely to break out.  that all the States should depute certain Persons of Note to  King in his  and intreat him that to prevent▪ Disorders he would appoint who was to succeed him. This, was accordingly put in Execution, and by consent of all the Deputies, Frrer head of the Council of that City was appointed to speak to the King. He asked of him, whether it was his Will that he should succeed him who had the best Title. The King bow'd his Head to denote he comented to what was said. To other Questions which were put to him, he return'd no manner  Answer. In him ended the Male-Line of the Earls of Barcelona, whilst had continu'd  then in Aragon the space of 600 Years. The good Fortune  an Race of the Earls of Barce∣lona ex∣tinct. Eclipse. Many lifted up themselves to  Crown  that , if we may so call it. Upon such occasions  of great Moment. Prince Ferdinand for whom Heaven had reserv'd that Crown, was  with the War in Andaluzia, He made a publick Act of accepting of the Inheritance and Crown which no Body offer'd him, and at the same time sent Ferdinand  and D. John Gonçalez de Azevedo Men of address and parts, his  his Interest in Aragon. He himself would not quit the Siege, being in hopes  Master of the City very speedily, and his hope was increas'd by a skirmish which  hear Archidona, betwixt a Party of his and the Moors, who were worsted. Of which Action, and the manner how it came to pass, it will not be amiss to give a full Accounts taken out of the Learned History which Lau∣rence Valla wrote of the Life and  of his Prince Ferdinand, afterwards King of Aragon. The Christians made themselves Masters of several Towns, as Goza, Sebar, Alzana and Mara, some were taken by Storm; others terrify'd with their Example surrendred. The Several Towns taken by the Chri∣stians. Moors fear'd lest the same fate should befall Archdona, a considerable Town two Leagues distant from Antequera. To secure this Place the wnt into it a strong Garrison with store of Provisions and Ammunition. This done they wasted all the Neighbouring Country, and destroy'd or carry'd away all sorts of Provisions, that the Army which lay before Antequera might be reduc'd to want. They had more Horse than the Christians, which facilitated their carrying on their Designs. Being inform'd that our Horses were every day carry'd to Grass down to the River Corza, which runs near that Place, with only a small Guard, they resolv'd to surprize and drive them away. A Centinel that stood on a Hill call'd Pen̄a de los Endrades, or the Lover's Rock, made a Smoak to give notice of the Danger the Horses
and Vivandiers were in unless reliev'd in time. The Christians immediately march'd out of their Trenches and charg'd the Infidels so vigorously that they oblig'd them to retire to∣wards Archidona. They were too hard press'd to get into the Town, in sight whereof above 2000 were kill'd, many taken, and the rest entirely dispers'd and routed. Of the Christians only two were slain, and a few ounded. On account of this Victory we may give the Reason why that Hill is call'd The Lover's Rock, since this Action happen'd so near  it: The Hill stands betwixt Archidona and Antequera. A certain Christian youth A Love Adven∣ture. was a Slave among the Moors: He was so well accomplish'd, so industrious, obliging and careful of his Business, that his Master trusted him with all his Affairs both at home and abroad. A Daughter the Moor had fell in Love with the Youth. She being marriageable, and he a Slave their Amours were hard to conceal, and dangerous if discover'd, for if her Father and his Master had understood any thing of that Affair it would cost them their Lives. They  to make their Escape to the Country of the Christians, which was most agree∣able to the Youth, as returning home, and perhaps not so much to her, unless she design'd to become a Christian, which I scarce believe. They set out very privately, and travell'd as far as the Hill we now speak of, where the young Woman sat down to rest. They had not been long there before they discover'd the Father, who pursu'd them with a party of Horse. What could be done in that Case? They resolv'd to climb up to the top of the Rock, which was but a poor Defence. The Father with a stern Countenance commanded them to come down, threatning if they refus'd, to put them to a cruel Death. Those who came with him advis'd the same, saying it was the only way left them to obtain Pardon, and move him to Compassion by coming down, and casting themselves at his Feet. They refus'd to obey, and the Moors alighting off their Horses attempted to climb the Rock, but the young Man kept them down with Stones and Staves, the only Weapons the Place and his Despair furnish'd him with. The Father perceiving their Resolution sent to the next Town for some Cross bow-men to shoot them, and they seeing no way to escape resolv'd Death should free than from the Reproaches and Torments they fear'd. It is needless to repeat the lowing Expressions that pass'd betwixt them, but in conclusion embracing one another, they cast thmselves off the Roo on that side where the stern Father stood looking on them. Thus they dy'd before they came to the Bottom, moving the beholders to Compassion with that dismal Spectacle, and there against the Father's Will they were bury'd in the same manner as they fell. A happy End had it been for the sake of Religion and Virtue, and not to satisfy their inordinate Desires. Let us return to the Siege of Antequera, where after the Fight of Archidona, they ceas'd not with their Artillery to batter the Walls, and made several Breaches, the Besieged by Night making up all that was beaten down in the Day. Thus much Labour was spent, and yet the Siege advanc'd but slowly. Prince Ferdinand ob∣serv'd that all the top of one of the Towers was quite beaten down, that he judg'd a pro∣per Place to be assaulted, and order'd scaling Ladders to be apply'd, and the Souldiers to mount. His Commands were resolutely put in Execution, tho with great Danger and Dif∣ficulty, Anteq̄uerā taken by Storm. for the Moors defended the Place with extraordinary bravery. At last the Christi∣ans mounted, and oblig'd the Moors to retire into the Castle, hoping to maintain themselves there, or at least to obtain advantagious Conditions. Next day there arose a Dispute among the Souldiers about who was the first that mounted the Wall. Many claim'd that Honour, and it was hard to decide, every one having Friends, Relations, or Country Men to back his Pretensions. It was  some mutiny might be rais'd on that Account. The Judges appointed to decide this Controversy gave their Judgment, that Gutierre de Torres, Sancho Gonçalez, Serva, , and Baeça were the first who attempted to mount, but that John Biscaino who was kill'd upon the Tower got before them all, and after him John de S. Vin∣cente had the chief Honour assign'd him. The Prince commended and rewarded them all as they well desery'd for taking so considerable a Place. Antequera was entred on the 6th of September. Those who retir'd to the Castle surrendred eight days after, having capitulated The Castle surren∣dred. for their Persons and Goods, and we conducted to Archidona. The Victors gave thanks to Almighty God for this Success, and consecrated the great Mosque. Roderick de Narvaez was left Governour of the City and Castle, and took his Oath accordingly. Some other small Towns and Castles were taken, and all the Country of the Moors wasted. Then Au∣tumn being near stept the Army return'd to Sevil and was receiv'd with great demonstrations of Joy. The End of the Nineteenth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The Twentieth BOOK. CHAP. I. The State of Christendom. Nine Judges appointed in Aragon to decide the Dispute about the Succession. Arguments us'd by each of the Candidates. The Government of King John of Portugal. NOT only Spain, but all Christendom was afflicted with bloody Wars, civil Dis∣cord, Turbulent State of Christen∣dom. and such Confusions as made even Peace it self dangerous and destructive. Italy was consum'd by the Schism that had continu'd so many Years, and the un∣limited Ambition of three Popes, each pretending a Right to S. Peter's Chair. This was in a great Measure the fault of the Emperors, who ought to put a stop to those growing Evils. Ladislaus King of Naples on the one side supported Pope Gregory the XIIth. On the other Luis Duke of Anjou favour'd the Popes of Avignon. Galeazzo Duke of Milan made his Advantage of these confusions to enlarge his Dominions, and had taken Blania. Abortus the Emperor dying, the Empier of Germany was in an Uproar. Wencestan King of Bohemia by his neglect of the Government gave occasion to John Hus, and Hierome of Prague to start new Opinions and raise Tumults. The Eastern Empire since Tamorlan overthrew the Turks, enjoy'd some Peace; but they having somewhat recover'd themselves it was fear'd they would again pass the Helespent and subdue Greece. To provide against this Storm Emanuel Palogus the Emperor went to Venice, and thence pass'd into France to obtain Suc∣cours, but his Labour was lost, for that Kingdom was involv'd in War, and full of Distra∣ctions since the Duke of Burgundy murder'd the Duke of Orleans. In Aragon since the Death of King Martin, the People were divided and could not agree who should inherit that Crown. A civil War was much fear'd, the all possible means were us'd to adjust that Affair Aragon divided about the Succession. by the Sentence of the Laws. Many Meetings were held upon this Account, and at first nothing was concluded. These Troubles caused the Interest of Aragon to sink in Sardinia, notwithstanding Peter Torrellas did what he could to support it, tho with small Hopes of Success, his Forces being inconsiderable, and no Supplies coming to him from Spain. In Si∣cily Bernard de Cabrera committed many Insolencies, and at last presum'd to besiege the Queen Dowager in the Castle of Syracusa. The King of Navarre understanding her Danger in his return from France took Barcelona in his way, and arriv'd there on the 20th of December pre∣ceeding the Year 1411, to sollicit that the Queen his Daughter might return home, for that 1411. since she had no Children, it was not reasonable she should govern that Kingdom, exposing her self for the Advantage of others. The Government of Castile was divided betwixt the Queen Mother, and Prince Ferdinand, a dangerous Method, especially for that some ill-meaning People ceas'd not to incense the Queen against the Prince, but his Prudence and Patience defeated all their Contrivances. He had happily concluded the War with the Moors, and made a Truce with them for 17 Months, then having setl'd the Affairs of An∣daliza he return'd to Castile. New Troubles were now fear'd, for Frederick Duke of Bena∣vente, who had been long Prisoner at Momal, having kill'd the Governour of that Place made his escape. This accident much perplex'd the Prince, fearing lest he being a powerful Man, and of the Blood Royal should disturb the Peace, wherefore he caus'd all the Ways to∣wards Portugal to be guarded. This availed nothing, for the Duke either by chance, or relying upon the Friendship that was betwixt him, and his Brother in Law the King of Na∣varre, fled thither. He took the wrong Course, for Prince Ferdinand sent Embassadors to demand him, and he was deliver'd up, and secur'd in the Castle of Almodovar in the Terri∣tory of Cordova, where he ended his Days. Only Portugal enjoyed a lasting Peace, and the K. John of Portugal his Go∣vernment. new King by his good Actions made some amends for the fault in his Birth. He built a Monastery of Dominicans at Aljubarrota, called Batalla, or the Battle, in Memory of his Suc∣cess over the Castilians in that Place. On the Banks of Tagus he founded the Town of Alme∣rin, at Sintra erected a Royal Palace, besides many other stately Works. He was remarka∣ble for administring Justice, to such a degree, that he caus'd Ferdinand Alfonso de Santarn his Vice-chamberlain to be taken out of the Church and burnt, for having to do with D.
Beatrix de Castro, one of the Queen's Ladys, and turn'd her out of the Court. The Portu∣gueses were so rich and powerful, that they resolv'd to undertake new Conquests, and pass over into Africk, which was the first step they advanc'd towards mighty Undertakings. This was the general Posture of Affairs in Christendom. The Schism in the Chuch per∣plex'd all People considering what might be the End of it. But the Succession to the Crown of Aragon was more hotly debated in Spain. The Aragonians, Catalonians, and Valencians, three Nations comprehended under the Confusi∣ons in A∣ragon. Crown of Aragon, assembl'd every one apart to determine what ought to be done in re∣lation to the Succession of the Crown. Their Opinions and Inclinations could not be re∣concil'd. Each of the Candidates had Friends, whose chief aim was to oblige the new King they thought to set up, and drove their own Interest rather than his. Most of the Cata∣lonians favour'd the Earl of Ʋrgel, and among them, particularly the two noble Families of Cardona and Moncada. Those of Alagon and Luna among the Aragonians sided with them, and that so passionately, that Antony de Luna to carry on his Design caus'd D. Garcia de He∣redia, Arch-bishop of Zaragoça to be murder'd, way-laying him near Almunia, for no other reason, but only that he was the chiefest that oppos'd the Earl of Ʋrgel. This was a hainous Action, and accordingly resented. The Actors were excommunicated, and the Earl's Cause suffer'd by in for many dreaded a King who us'd such horrid means to obtain a Crown. The Nobility of Aragon had recourse to Arms, some to revenge the Death of the Arch∣bishop, others to protect the Murderer. It was requisite for these Reasons to come to some Determination, and the more for that a War was expected from France, and the Troops of Castile appear'd on the Frontiers, both sides threatning Force if the Crown was not given them by fair means. The three Provinces having consulted what was to be done, after Judges appointed to decide the Right to the Crown of Aragon. much contesting agreed that 9 Judges should be chosen, 3 of each Province. These were to meet at Caspe, a Town in Aragon, there to hear and determine betwixt the Candidates. Whatsoever 6 of them agreed to, was to stand good, provided one of each Province were of the Number. Having ratify'd this agreement, the Aragonians on their side chose Domi∣nick Bishop of Huesca, Francis de Aranda, and Berengarius de Bardax. The Catalonians ap∣pointed for them Sargarida, Arch-bishop of Tarragona, William de Valseca, and Bernard Gu∣albe. For Valncia were nam'd F. Vincent Ferrer, of the Order of S. Dominick, his Brother Boniface Ferrer a Carthusian, and Peter Beltran. These Judges immediately met and sent their Summons to the Candidates to appear, warning such as refus'd that their Pretensions should be utterly lay'd aside. Prince Ferdinand sent James Lopez de Zuniga, Lord of Bejar, and D. Sancho de Rojas Bishop of Palencia, who is said by this and the like Negociations to have obtain'd the Earldom of Pernia, which the Bishops of Palencia possess to this day. For the Earl of Ʋrgel came Ximeno a Franciscan Bishop of Malta. They were oblig'd to take an Oath that they would stand by the Decision of the 9 Judges. Luis Duke of Anjou refus'd to ap∣pear, resolving to make use of Force. Besides, he excepted against 4 of the Judges, as par∣tial. Among the Candidates no account was made of Frederick Earl of Luna, because he was a Bastard, and had no great Interest. D. Alonso de Aragon dy'd in the heat of this Dispute, and his Son Alonso, as also his Brother John, Earl of Prades were easily put by, being not so near of kin to the late Kings, as the other pretenders. On the behalf of the Earl of Ʋrgel, it was pleaded, That according to antient Custom, Females ought wholly to be excluded Earl of Ʋrgel's Pretensi∣ons. from any pretension to the Crown, and if that were allow'd their Sons could not pretend to the Right their Mothers had not. Besides, that King Martin in latter days had constitut∣ed the Earl Governour of the Kingdom, and Constable, a certain Sign he thought the In∣heritance appertain'd to the said Earl and no other. Prince Ferdinand's Agents, as they were instructed by Vincent Arias Bishop of Plasencia, and the most famous Civilian of that Age, made no mention of the Prince's Right by the Female Line, but pleaded, That the Crown is inherited by Right of Blood, therefore when the immediate Line fails, and it must fall to one of the collateral Branches, there must respect be had to the Sex and Age if they be within the same degree of Consaguinity, so that the Male take place of the Fe∣male, and the elder of the younger, without regard to the Stock from which they pro∣ceed. CHAP. II. Ferdmand Prince of Castile declar'd King of Aragon by the Judges, and afterwards proclaim'd at Zaragoca: He settles the Kingdom, besieges and takes the Earl of Urgel, who aspir'd to the Crown. WHen the Judges had heard what each of the Competitors had to say, and the case Ferdinand declared King of Aragon by the Judges. had been thoroughly argu'd they clos'd the Informations and conferr'd together about the Judgment they were to give. They kept their Opinions private, and held the People in suspence, as desirous to see the end of that Debate. To give Judgment with the Solemnity that was requisite, and to the satisfaction of all Men, they caus'd a large Scaffold
to be erected before the Church, so high that they might be seen all round. Mass was said by the Bishop of Huesca, as is usual in such Casts. Then the Judges came out of the Church, and seated themselves at the upper end of the Scaffold, and in another place the Embassadors of the Candidates. Pope Benedict was present and had a great Hand in the Affair. F. Vin∣cent Ferrer for his great Sanctity and paticular skill in preaching, was employ'd to make a Speech to the People, and pronounce the Sentence. His Harague being ended, all Men were at∣tentive to hear the new King nam'd. Then F. Vincent with a loud Voice read the Decree of all the Judges which he had in Writing. When he came to name Ferdinand the Shouts and Acclamations were so great they seem'd to rend the Skies, and nothing else could be heard for a long time. After they had somewhat ceas'd, the Musick there ready sang the Te Deum. This remarkable Act was perform'd on the last day of June, which ended, imme∣diately Embassadors were sent to give Notice thereof to Prince Ferdinand, and hasten his coming. He was then at Cuenca in care for the Event of that Affair. Embassadors came from all parts to Congratulate with him, some out of Love, others to temporize. Parti∣cularly Sigismund the new Emperor, elected the last May, a Prince more fortunate in Peace than in War, and famous for restoring Unity to the Church by putting an end to the Schism that had so long continu'd, sent to give him Joy of his Accession to that Crown. Prince Perdinand as soon as he had setled his private Affairs went away to Varag\l=c;\a, in He is pro∣claim'd at aragoca. which City he was proclaim'd King on the 3d of September. The Nobility did Homage and took the usual Oath of Allegiance to him and his eldest Son Prince Alonso, whom they ac∣knowledg'd true Heir of the Crown after the death of his Father, giving him the Title of Prince of Girona, in imitation of Castile, whereas till then the eldest Sons of the Kings of Aragon were call'd Dukes of that City. Of the Competitors to the Crown there came to that so∣lemnity Frederick Earl of Luna, and D. Alonso de Aragon the younger, Duke of Gandia. The Earl of Ʋrgel to excuse himself pretended Sickness, but in reality thought to possess himself by force of Arms of the Crown, which he said was wrongfully taken from him. Of him∣self he was but weak, nor had he any Allies to support him, and therefore resolv'd to make use of the Assistance of the Duke of Clarence, Son to the King of England.  great Power at that time. These Practices perplexed the new King, considering  times a small Spark not quenched raises a great Flame. However as soon as the Solomnity was over, he thought fit in the first Place to apply himself to the Affairs of Sicily and Sardinia, which were in danger of being lost. The Genoeses, tho they aim'd at the Conquest of Sardi∣nia, Settles the Affairs of Aragon. yet mov'd by the Fame that was spread abroad of the new King, sent Baptista Gigala, and Peter Perseo, Embassadors to Congratulate with him. By their means a Truce was esta∣blished betwixt those two Nations for five Years. In Sicily Bernard de Cabrera was Prisoner, being surpriz'd by his Enemies at Palermo, and put into the Castle of Mota, near Tavormina. He was kept more strictly than became his Quality, or suited with his former Services, but as he deserved for his insolent Design of marrying the Queen Dowager, without considering her Dignity, or his own Age, which was far advanc'd. Sancho Ruyz de Lhorri, Admiral of the Sicilian Sea, was the chief Man that oppos'd, and brought him to this Condition: The new King order'd the should be set at Liberty upon Condition he immediately de∣parted out of Sicily, and as soon as possible appear'd before him to answer to such things as should be lay'd to his Charge. This was done, tho with some Difficulty, and thus at length after so many Revolutions that Island was pacify'd. Sardinia was also brought under, by an Agreement made with William Vincent Narbonne, in Virtue of which he was to deliver up to the King the City Sacer, which he was then possess'd of, and all his other Lands and Possessions in that Island, and in lien thereof to have certain Towns and a Sum of Mony in Spain. This was the Posture of Affairs in Aragon. In France about this time dy'd Archim∣baud Archim∣baud Earl of Faux his Death and Issue. Earl of Faux. He left 5 Sons, John who succeeded him in the Earldom, Gaston the IId, Archimbaud the IIId, Peter the IVth, who became a Priest, and was Cardinal of Faux, and the youngest Matthew Earl of Cominges. John the eldest marry'd the Princess Joanna, Daughter to the King of Navarre, and she dying without Issue, he took to Wife Mary, Daughter to Charles d' Albret, by whom he had two Sons, Gaston the eldest, and the young∣est Peter Viscount Lautrec, the Founder of the Family of that Name in France, which has pro∣duc'd many famous Men, and continu'd very renown'd till near our Days, The Peace the Kingdom of Aragron enjoy'd abroad could not influence the Earl of Ʋrgel The new King's Actions. to desist from his wicked Machinations. In Castile the Truce concluded with the Moors at their Instance the foregoing April was prolong'd for 17 Months more. For this reason the Mony that the Country had rais'd to carry on the War against the Moors, and amounted to the Sum of 100000 Ducats, was by the general Consent and Approbation of the whole Kingdom, given to the new King Ferdinand for his present Expence, besides a good Body of Horse and Foot, that attended him. A very opportune Supply to settle him in his new ac∣quir'd Kingdom, and curb the wicked Designs of ill-meaning Men. His greatest Recom∣mendation was his courteous and loving Disposition, which gain'd him the good Will of all Men, and yet the Aragonians were dissatisfy'd that he kept about him a Guard of Stran∣gers, and pretended by that Method to secure to himself the Crown they had of their own accord given him. They complain'd it was a Reflection upon the Loyalty of the Natives, and the Fidelity they had inviolably observed towards their Kings, since that Kingdom was
first  King with  what he could gather in Aragon march'd after  punish him. The Earl had but a small Power to  thought to make use of Policy. Therefore he sent Embassadors to  to do Homage to him, which accordingly they  October. All this was only to amuse the new King, to the  his Army and send back the Troops of  greatest part of them. The King and Pope Benedict K. Ferdin∣and and Pope Be∣nedict meer.  upon there, the Pope gave the King the Investi∣ture , and Corsica, as was of Custom, they being Feoes of  the Kings of Aragon. After this Interview, at the end of  the next, which was 1413, the Cortes of Catalonia met at 1413.  to pacify the Earl of Ʋrgel, that he might not disturb the Peace  to which purpose they granted all he sent to demand, and particular∣ly that Prince  should marry his Daughter and Heiress. All these Condescentions did not satisfy him, but  Correspondence with England and France to procure Assistance . The King having notice of it, to sh him in time rais'd all the Forces he  sent him 400 Horse out of Castile, but they  joyning him. The King of Navarre offer'd his  Subjects should take it ill if he made use of many  of ortes, Bastard Son to that King, came with He be∣sieges the Earl of Ʋrgel in Balaguer. a good . With this Force he broke into the Country of the Earl of Ʋrgel,  till he st down before alaguer, the chief Town of that Dominion, in which  confiding in the Stren of the Place, was. The Siege was tedious and difficult, but whilst it lasted all the rest of the Earldom submitted to the King. At this time came  Embassadors from the Kings of France and Naples. He of France adver∣tiz'd him▪  the Insolency of the ke of Burgundy, and the rebellious Practices of the  as in great Danger, being in a manner a Prisoner with his Son, and , and therefore earnestly intreated he would assist him. King Ladislaus  their Forces against the Duke of Anjo, his Competitor in the Kingdom  might prove a dangerous Enemy to Aragon, hav∣ing also  to that Kingdom. To the King of France he answer'd he was much con∣ce  Misfortunes, and would as soon as his Affairs did permit, assist him with his ut∣most ower. The answer to Ladislaus was▪ That he thank'd him for his offer of Friend∣ship, but that there had been an uninterrupted Friendship betwixt him and the Duke of An∣jon, which he could not violate▪ and therefore would rather chuse to be a Mediator betwixt them,  part with either against the other. The Embassadors being dismiss'd, the Siege was  observ'd,  began to want Provisions, and desir'd to Arti∣cle. Elizabeth th Countes to prevent further  with her Husband's leave, and the King's Permission,  out to endeavour to app him. All she could obtain of the King was the Earls▪  he would surrender▪ himself. The Case was desperate and there The Earl surren∣ders him∣self. was no way  o submit to Necessity. On the last day of October the Earl came to the Camp, and lling at the King's Feet begg'd Pardon, promising to behave himself better for the future▪ All the King answer'd was, That tho he had deserv'd Death, he gave him his Life▪ y made o  his Liberty or Estate, but order'd him to be secur'd at Lerida. After the  and that Earldom pacify'd, the Earl was convicted of high Treason and  was confiscated, and he condemned to perpetu∣al Imprisonment  many Friends in that Kingdom, and therefore was sent to Ca∣stile, where  Castle of Ʋren̄a, next in that of Mora, and lastly dy'd a Pri∣soner at  of Valencia. Antony de Luna, who held the Castle of Lohorri, for the Earl, seeing that had befallen him, left that Castle and his own Estate and fled. Thus those Troubles concluded with more ease than had been expected. CHAP. III. The Christian Princes all combine with the Emperor to put, an end to the Schism in the Church: In order to it King Ferdinand of Aragon has a Conference with Pope Bene∣dict. The Council of Constance. The two Popes John and Gregory abdicate. WHilst what has been related happen'd in Aragon, all the Princes of Christendom sent their Embassadors to Sigismund the Emperor, desiring him to find out some means to Applicati∣on for u∣niting the Church. restore the Unity of the Church by putting an end to the Schism which had lasted so ma∣ny Years. He having consulted with the Embassadors about that Affair, sent to require those who call'd themselves Popes to consent to the calling of a General Council, where they should all freely renounce the Papacy, and stand to the Determination of the Fathers. Hitherto their Condescention was fegn'd, and they had far different Thoughts. Now the Popes, John and Gregory gave ear to this Request. Only Pope Benedict persisted obstinately,
and would hear of no Proposals of Peace. It was given in charge to the King of Aragon to reduce him to Reason. He and the King of France sent Embassadors to him upon that Ac∣count. At the same time the King of Aragon having subdu'd Ʋrgel, and establish'd Peace in his Kingdom return'd to Zaragoça, and enter'd that City in Triumph. There he was Ferdinand crown'd at Zara∣goca. crown'd on the 11th of February 1414, that Ceremony having been deferr'd till then for se∣veral Reasons, and was now perform'd by the Arch-bishop of Tarragona, as Primate of all that Kingdom. The King was crown'd with the Crown sent him by his Sister in Law, Catherine Queen Dowager of Castile, the value of its Workmanship, being equal to that of the Matter, tho made of Gold set with precious Stones. Several Embassadors of Forreign Princes were present, as also the Prelates and Nobles of that Kingdom, particularly D. Bernard de Cabrera, Earl of Osona and Modica, now restor'd to the King's Favour, and D. Henry de Villena, a Man no less remarkable for his extraordinary Learning, than for the Mis∣fortunes he underwent, and was at that time depriv'd of his Inheritance, and the Master∣ship of the Order of Calatrava. The manner of it was thus. D. Gonzalo de Guzman dying, D. Henry de Villena through the Favour of King Henry the IIId obtained that Dignity. Ma∣ny of the Knights objected that he was marry'd, and therefore according to the Constitu∣tions of the Order could not be Master. His Ambition was such, that he resolv'd to be Divorc'd from his Wife the Lady Mary de Albornoz, tho her Portion was great, she being Lady of Alcoçer, Salmeron, Valdolivas, and the other Towns of the Infantado. To carry on this Divorce he own'd himself naturally Impotent, and to the end his own Estate might not fall to the Order, made over to the King the Towns of Tineo and Cangas, and his Right to the Marquisate of Villen̄a. The Commendaries of the Order easily perceiv'd this was all Fraud. They assembled again, and having taken this Affair into Consideration depos'd D. Henry as illegally elected, choosing D. Luis de Guzman in his Place. This Election caus'd Dis∣putes, which lasted 6 Years. All the Knights of that Order did not agree, some were for the first, some for the last Master. In conclusion, the Cistercian Monks by order of Pope Benedict, having hear'd both Parties gave Judgment in favour of D. Luis de Guzman. Thus he who valu'd himself upon his great Learning, was found not to understand his own Inte∣rest, and taking his Wife again, spent the remainder of his Days in Poverty; for tho the Ma∣stership was taken from him, the Patrimony of his Ancestors was not restor'd him. After the Solemnities at Zaragoça were perform'd, the new King bent his Thoughts to the Af∣fairs of the Church, as all Christian Princes desir'd. Having signify'd so much to Pope Be∣nedict, King Fer∣dinand confers with Pope Benedict. they agreed to meet at Morella, a Town in the Kingdom of Valencia on the Borders of Aragon and Catalonia. The King signaliz'd himself in treating the Pope with all manner of Respect. For first he led the Horse on which he rode to the Church, and thence to his Lodging, carry'd his Train; next day he waited upon him at Table, and Prince Henry did the Office of Cup-bearer. His Service, which was of Pewter, he chang'd into Silver and Gold, all to soften his obdurate Heart. They met several times to treat of the Affair in Hand. The Pope would not yield to lay down that Dignity, and his followers obstructed it: 50 Days were spent and nothing concluded. At the same time came News from Italy of the Death of Ladislaus King of Naples, who was reported to be poison'd in the height of all his Prosperity, when he might have hop'd to make himself Master of all Italy. He had no Issue, for which reason that Crown fell to his Sister Joanna, Widow of William Duke of Austria, not above 30 Years of Age, and no less leud than the other Queen of Naples of the same Name, we have before mentioned. Many Princes considering a Kingdom was her Dower were ambitious to marry her, and she was contracted to John, second Son to the King of Aragon, who on that Account went over to Sicily, and yet the Match was broken off, and that Queen marry'd to James of Bourbon, Earl of Marche, a comly Youth. Pandolphus Alo∣pus was greater with the Queen than became the Regal Dignity, which was censur'd by the People, and resented by the Nobility. All hopes of reducing Pope Benedict being lost, the Christian Princes still continu'd their Resolution of assembling a General Council, and ap∣pointed Council of Con∣stance. the City Constance in Germany to be the Place of Meeting. The Bishops of Italy and France came first. Pope Gregory sent his Embassadors with full Power to renounce the Papacy for him, if requir'd. Pope John came in Person, relying on his Friendship with the Emperor. King Ferdinand ceas'd not to press Pope Benedict to comply as well as his Competitors. Af∣ter much contesting they sent an Embassy to the Emperor, desiring they three might meet in some convenient Place. The Prelates continued to assemble at Constance, and about 300 met. The Council was open'd on the 5th of November. At the same time in Aragon a great Number of Jews was converted by S. Vincent Ferrerius. To facilitate the Conversion of the Jews con∣verted. rest several severe Laws were enacted against them. At Constance on Christmas Night which preceded the Year 1415. Pope John and the Emperor went together to Matins, two Chairs were set for them, the Pope's somewhat above the Emperor's. After the Divine Service they began to discourse of the Affair in Hand, and it was agreed by all the Prelates that the three Popes should freely abdicate, to which Pope John, tho with some Reluctancy, condescended. On the 4th of March he said a solemn Mass, and that ended, promis'd in publick to renounce 1415. the Papacy, which gave great Satisfaction to all Men. This was but Counterfeit, for not Pope John forced to quit the Papacy. long after he fled away by Night, with a design to keep that Division afoot. Some Persons were sent after him, who apprehended and brought him back to Constance, where he was
forc'd to resign the Papacy, and given in Custody to the Count Palatine; yet three Years af∣ter he escap'd, and to pacify him had his Cardinals Cap restor'd, and dy'd at Florence, where he was also bury'd. The Treasures he had heap'd whilst Pope were left in the Hands of Cosmo de Medices, a Noble Citizen of that Place, which is said to have been the first step he ascended by, and his Family afterwards to be Princes of that Dominion. The Joy con∣ceiv'd for the deposing of Pope John was redoubl'd 5 Days after, when Charles Malatesta, Pope Gregory's Commissioner made a solemn Act of Renunciation in his Name. Only Pope Benedict remain'd, of whose Obstinacy they fear'd he would continue the Schism, should they elect another before he resign'd. There was but one way left, which was that the Emperor, Pope and King of Aragon should meet as had been propos'd. To this effect Embassadors were sent to the two last, and the City Nice on the Coast of Piemont, appointed for their Con∣ference. Still it was hop'd Benedict would follow the Example of his Competitors, and submit to the Resolutions of all Nations. CHAP. IV. The Portugueses pass over into Africk and take Ceuta. All Endeavours us'd to move Pope Benedict to resign the Papacy prove vain. Ferdinand King of Aragon his Death. The Council of Constance puts an end to the Schism in the Church. WHilst these things were in Agitation at Constance, the King of Aragon at Valencia with Marriage of the Prince of Aragon with the Princess of Castile. all Majesty solemniz'd the Marriage of his Son Alonso, with the Princess Mary, Si∣ster to King John of Castile. To Honour the Solemnity, Pope Benedict came thither, as did all the Nobility of the Kingdom. With the Princess came from Castile D. Sancho de Rojas, then translated from the See of Valencia to the Archbishoprick of Toledo, upon the Death of D. Peter de Luna, who departed this Life at Toledo, on the 18th of September, and was bury'd in that Cathedral. D. Sancho was promoted at the Instance of the King of Aragon, and he well deserv'd it for his good Parts, and the signal Services he had done to the Crown. Prince Alonso was marry'd on the 12th of June. Her Father left the Princess the Marquisate of Vil∣lena for her Dower, but it was taken from her, and in lieu of it she had 200000 Ducats, because the Castilians would not allow that Estate to be given to the Aragonians, it lying on the Borders of both those Kingdoms, very opportunely to make Incursions in time of War. The King of Portugal since the last Year was fitting out a powerful Fleet. All the Neigh∣bouring Princes, as is usual in such Cases, were jealous lest it might be design'd against them: Particularly the King of Aragon was concern'd, because it was reported the Portugues design'd to undertake the Protection of the Earl of Ʋrgel, which would disturb the Peace of Aragon. They were all deceiv'd, for the Designs of the Portugues were of another Nature, Ceuta tak∣en by the Portugueses to wit to pass over into Africk and make new Conquests there. His good Fortune which had gain'd and fix'd him in that Kingdom, to which he had no Right, encourag'd him, and he sought new Conquests to bestow on his many Children, because the Limits of Portugal were but very Narrow. By the Queen his Wife he had the Princes, Edward, Peter, Hen∣ry, John, and Ferdinand, and the Princess Elizabeth. Besides them a Bastard Son call'd Alon∣so, afterwards Earl of Barcelos. He fitted out 30 great Ships, 27 Galleys, 30 Galliots, and many other small Vessels, which in all made up 120 Sail. With this Fleet the King set sail towards Africk, notwithstanding that at the same time Queen Philippa dy'd, whom he caus'd to be bury'd in the new Monastery of Batalla at Aljubarrota. At his first Landing on the 22d of August he took the City Ceuta, seated upon the Sreights of Gibraltar by Storm. The first that mounted the Wall was a Souldier call'd Cortereal, another call'd Albergueria was first at entring the Gate. Both were rewarded by the King as they deserv'd, and others were honour'd according to their Merits. Of the Moors, some were put to the Sword, others fled, and others were made Slaves. This lucky beginning put the Portugueses in hopes of subduing large Territories in Africk. This same Year they also alter'd their manner of Com∣putation from the Era of Cesar, and began to reckon from the Birth of our Lord, as all other Countries did. The Council of Constance still labour'd to settle the Affairs of the Church. King Ferdinand could not go to Nice by reason of Sickness, and therefore it was resolv'd the Emperor should come as far as Perpignan, in the County of Russillon: Pope Benedict and King Interview of Princes at Perpig∣nan. Ferdinand being nearest came thither first. On the 19th of September came the Emperor with 400 Men at Arms on Horseback, a splendid Retinue. His Habit was plain, and the Ser∣vice of his Table of Pewter, in token of Mourning for the unhappy State of the Church. Thi∣ther resorted Embassadors from France, Castile, and Navarre. All the World was in Expe∣ctation what this Meeting would produce. King Ferdinand by reason of his Indisposition could not attend the Conferences. Yet from his Bed conjur'd Pope Benedict to restore the Peace of the Church, and to remember the Promises he had formerly made. He urg'd the Example of his Competitors, and shew'd how short a time he could expect to live, being of a great Age. Pope Benedict was resolv'd not to agree to any Composition, and therefore only stu∣dy'd to protract or delay time. Both Princes press'd him to come to some Resolution. One
day he made a long Harangue in defence of his Right, alledging, that if ever there was any doubt of the dueness of his Election it had now ceas'd by the Resignation of his Competitors, he only being left as sole Governour of the Church; that the Older he was the more cause he had to fear offending God, by timorously yeilding to quit his Charge. He spent 7 whole Hours in this Discourse without the least sign of Weariness, tho he was 77 years of Age, and the Auditors tir'd slip'd away one after another. At last he urg'd, that in case he were not the true Pope, yet the choosing of another appertain'd to him alone, as being the only Cardinal left alive of those promoted before the Schism by a Pope, whose Right was indis∣putable. Much time was spent in these Debates, and no hopes of any Conclusion. The Em∣peror Pope Be∣nedict dis∣own'd in Aragon. weary of these delays departed from Perpignan, threatning Pope Benedict to make use of Force, since he could not be reduc'd by fair means. Yet he made some stay at Narbonne, to see whether King Ferdinand could work upon that hard Heart; but all was in vain, for Pope Benedict fled to Piniscola, hoping to maintain himself there, it being seated on a Rock en∣compass'd almost on all sides by the Sea. At length the only remedy remaining was made use of, which was to disown him in Aragon, as was done by Edict, and all Persons forbid to acknowledge him as Pope. F. Vincent Ferrerius, who had always adher'd to him, was the 1416. Man that now advis'd to cast him off. Some Persons still retain'd a scruple, but the gene∣rality easily consented. Benedict himself was so offended, that he say'd, he who was most beholding to him was his chief Enemy, and he hop'd God would for his Ingratitude deprive him of the Kingdom which he had given him. Whilst these things were hottest in Debate, Ellenor Queen of Navarre dy'd on the 5th of March at Pamplona. She lies in an Alablaster Tomb in the Cathedral of that City, with an Inscription signifying the time of her Death. King Ferdinand's Disease continu'd, and he earnestly desir'd to return to Castile, to try whether his Native Air would recover him. Sickly Persons, especially at the Point of Death, fancy whatever they desire. Besides he was solicitous to promote the Interest of Castile on account of his Kindred with that King, and as Governour to him during his Minority. He also was desirous that Kingdom should cast off Pope Benedict, as Aragon had done. To this purpose he return'd from Perpignan to Barcelona, and at the beginning of the Summer set out for Castile. Travelling increas'd his Distemper, and he was forc'd to take up at Igualada, 6 Leagues from Barcelona. There the Physicians gave him over, and having receiv'd the Sa∣craments, he dy'd like a good Christian upon the 2d of April. He was a Prince endu'd with Ferdinand of Aragon dies. excellent Perfections, of a graceful Presence, and dextrous at gaining the good Will of all Men. Some accuse him of being very slow, for abandoning Pope Benedict, for making his Advantage of the Revenue of Castile, for being lavish of his own, and covetous of what be∣long'd to others to supply his Extravagances. He reign'd 3 Years, 9 Months, and 28 Days. His Body lies at Poblete in a very mean Tomb. By his Will made some Months before at Perpignan, he provided for his Children in this manner. To Prince John he gave the Estate of Lara, and Medina del Campo, also the Town of Monblanc, with the Title of Duke in Ca∣talonia, and several other Towns. To Prince Henry he left Albuquerque, and to D. Sancho Montalvan. He appointed Alonso his eldest Son, Heir to the Crown. In case all the Brothers should die without Issue, he order'd the Sons and Grandsons of his Daughters, Mary and Ellenor, should succeed, yet excluded the Mothers. King Ferdinand's Death was the cause that Castile for some time continu'd to give Obedience to Pope Benedict. He had many Friends, whom he had oblig'd in Castile, and particularly the Arch-bishops of Toledo, and Sevil, D. Sancho de Rojas, and D. Alonso de Exea stickl'd for him. Fresh Tumults began in Castile, which shew'd how necessary the Prudence and Valour of King Ferdinand had been for the Peace of that Country. Queen Catherine immediately entred New Troubles in Castile. upon the whole Government of the Kingdom. She committed the Education of the King to the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and joyn'd with him John de Velasco, and James Lopez de Zuniga, the chief Justice. Many complain'd they had no share in the Preferments given, and among them were D. Alonso Enriquez the Admiral, and D. Ruy Lopez Davalos the Constable. At the beginning of the Year 1417, a Truce was concluded with the King of Granada for two 1417. Years, by which he was oblig'd every Year to release 100 Christian Slaves. The Prelates at the Council of Constance attended to all that was for the Advancement of the Church. To pacify the Rebellion in Bohemia, and reduce the Hereticks, they brought their Heads, John John Hus and Hie∣rome of Prague burnt. Hus, and Hierome of Prague to that City, having obtain'd them a safe Conduct from the Emperor. Heresy once fix'd, is hard to be rooted out. They both fled from the City, and being apprehended by Parties sent out after them, were publickly Burnt. The Hereticks being punish'd, and their Heresy condemn'd, the Bishops again apply'd themselves to make up the Divisions in the Church. On the 26th of July they excommunicated Pope Benedict, who only remain'd of the three, and depriv'd him of any Right he could pretend to S. Pe∣ter's Chair. This Sentence being made publick, they proceeded to the Election of a new Pope. There were present 22 Cardinals of those that had follow'd the three Popes; to these were joyn'd 30 other Electors, some of them Bishops, the others Men of Note, all which were shut up in the Conclave. All of them to a Man agreed to the Election of the Cardinal, Otho Colonna, a Native of Rome. This was done on the 11th of November, and he took the Name of Martin the Vth. The Joy for this Choice was universal, for all Nations Martin the Vth. chosen Pope. laying aside former Prejudices submitted to the new Pope. Only the King of Scotland, and
Earl of Armegnac with some few Cardinals for a while stuck to Pope Benedict, but they also in a short time forsook him. Soon after the Council was dissolv'd, but it was decreed they should meet again within 5 Years, and the second time 7 Years after that, and then at the end of 10 Years, and that for ever after there should be a General Council once in 10 Years. The new Pope sent two Cistercian Monks to advise Benedict to submit to the Decree of the Council, and admonish his Cardinals to leave him. They prevail'd not upon Benedict, but his four Cardinals who were Spaniards, and whom he had retain'd upon promise of Prefer∣ment left him, and repair'd to the new Pope at Florence. This Year was unhappy to France, The Cana∣ries con∣quered. and no less fortunate to Castile for the renewing of the Voyage to the Canaries, by consent of the Queen of Castile, by which means John de Betancour, a French Man, who undertook this Expedition, subdu'd 5 of those Islands. Menante his Kinsman succeeded him. Pope Mar∣tin gave the Bishoprick of those Islands to a Fryer call'd Mendo. These two fell at Variance, and Peter Barba was sent by the King to compose them. He bought the Islands for a Sum of Mony of Menante, and sold them again to Peter Peraça, a considerable Citizen of Sevil, whose Heirs possess'd them till the time of King Ferdinand the Catholick, who intirely subdu'd and annex'd them to the Crown of Castile. This is what relates to Spain. The Misfortunes of France happen'd in this manner. Henry the Vth King of England demanded of Charles the VIth of France his Daughter Catherine in Marriage, which he refusing King Henry sail'd over into Henry the Vth of England invades France. Normandy, overthrew the French Army, took the Dukes of Orleans and Bourbon Prisoners, and after a troublesom Siege made himself Master of Roan, the Metropolis of that Province. This was not all, for Elizabeth Queen of France left her Husband, and with her Daughter Catherine, fled to Tours, whence she sent to the Duke of Burgundy, who not only secur'd the Queen and her Daughter, but also the King and City of Paris. Charles the Dauphin made what Head he could against the English and Burgundians. The Dauphin and Duke of Burgun∣dy agreed to have a Conference upon a Bridge over the Seine, on the middle of which was a strong Barrier; the Dauphin invited the Duke to come over to him, and some Words arising kill'd him. Whether his Life or Death were most fatal to France is doubtful, for his Son Philip to revenge the Death of his Father deliver'd up the City of Paris with the King, Queen and Princess Catherine to the English, whence ensu'd innumerable Calamities which happen'd later, and are forreign to our purpose. CHAP. V. The Death of the Queen of Castile. Marriages of Princes. Prince Henry of Aragon seizes the King of Castile. Tumults in that Kingdom. Strange Prodigies. Many Colledges built in Castile. QUeen Ellexor of Aragon after the Death of the King her Husband retir'd into Castile, and there spent the time of her Widowhood with her Children. A motion was made that the King of Castile should marry her Daughter the Princess Mary. Queen Catherine approv'd Catherine Queen of Castile dies. not of that Match. To prevent it she pleaded the King was too young, whereas in reality she was rather inclin'd to Match him in Portugal with the Princess Ellenor, who was her Neece, and not only she, but most of the Court thought that Match would unite the two Kingdoms in a lasting knot of Amity. Death prevented those Designs, which suddenly took away Queen Catherine at Valladolid, upon Thursday the 2d of June, in the Year 1418, at the age of 50. Of Body she was large and gross, somewhat free in drinking as is the Custom of her Country; open hearted, and bountiful, which Virtues some made use of to advance their Interest, and slander others. Most of her Counsellors and Ministers were mean Persons, which is very dangerous for Princes. She was bury'd in the Royal Chappel of Toledo in a particular Tomb, where she had given a Revenue for 15 Chaplains to pray for the Souls of her and her Husband. The Queen's Death produc'd great Alterations. The King notwith∣standing John King of Castile govern'd by the Archbi∣shop of Toledo. his tender Age came out of that profound Ignorance in which his Mother had kept him, and began in some Measure to govern the Kingdom, assisted with the advice of some Persons about him. Among them the chiefest was the Arch-bishop of Toledo, who being of a haughty Spirit, ambitious of Honour, and a busy Man, seiz'd the Government into his own Hands, so that under the Shadow of the King's Name he turn'd all things which way he pleased. Two Embassadors came from France to sue for some Succours in that time of need. They were put off with an excuse grounded on the King's Minority, the late Troubles, and new ones that were fear'd. It was again propos'd to marry the King. The Arch∣bishop ow'd all his Preferment to the Crown of Aragon, and therefore prevail'd the Match with Aragon should be preferr'd before that of Portugal. On the 21st of October the King and Princess were contracted at Medina del Campo with great Pomp. One of the Articles of Marriage was that the Princess Catherine, younger Sister to King John should be marry'd to Marriages of Princes. one of the Princes of Aragon. None was particularly nam'd because Prince John the eldest was unresolv'd where he should take a Wife. First he was contracted to Elizabeth, Daughter to the King of Navarre, and broke off in hopes of marrying Joanna, Queen of Naples, as
was said before. He spent some time governing Sicily, instead of Queen Blanch, whom her Father the King of Navarre caus'd to return home, she being the eldest Sister, and Heiress of that Crown. Many Princes made suit to her for her great Fortune, but her Father preferr'd before them all this Prince John for his good Qualities, and because he hoped Aragon and Navarre might come to be united, King Alonso his Brother having no Issue. Her Dower for the present was 420000 Florins. It was also articl'd, That in case Queen Blanch should die without Issue, her Husband after the Decease of his Father and Mother in Law should during his Life stile himself, and be actually King of Navarre. They were marry'd by Proxy at Olite. The Prince's Commissioner was James Gomez de Sandoval, Nephew to the Archbi∣shop of Toledo, Lieutenant of Castile, and Steward to the Prince, with whom he afterwards was in the highest Favour, and at last was cast down, as shall be shewn in its place. This Contract was made in the Year 1419. This same Year the Admiral Vincent Ferrerius of the 1419. Order of S. Dominick chang'd this Life for a better at Vannes in Britany, and was afterwards for his Virtue and the Miracles he wrought, put into the number of the Saints. His Body was bury'd in the Cathedral of that City. Let us return to King John of Castile. Castile began to be disturb'd, the Nobility being at Variance. The King was too young Nobility of Castile raise Tu∣mults. and weak to curb them. Many envy'd the Arch-bishop of Toledo, and were offended that a Priest should have more Power than all the Nobility. The King was advis'd to take upon him the Government, since he was 14 Years of Age. To this purpose the Cortes met at Madrid, to which all Persons of Note resorted. On the 7th of March all that Assembly being together in the Palace of that Town, the Archbishop made a study'd Speech, declaring to them how the King intended to take the Government upon himself, and lay aside his Tutors. D. Alon∣so Enriquez the Admiral in the Name of all there present approv'd of his Resolution, and they altogether applauded it. It was requisite the King's tender Years should have some support, therefore he admitted to his Council all those who had been of it in his Father's time, and during his Nonage. The Arch-bishop of Toledo, the Admiral, the Constable, Peter Manrique, Lieutenant of Leon, and John Hurtado de Mendoça the Lord Steward, were appointed Commissioners to consider of all Grants, and bestow Preferments. Gutierre Go∣mez de Toledo, Arch-deacon of Guadalajara, was appointed to draw up and register all Or∣ders. This the Arch-bishop took ill, pretending it belong'd to him as Chancellor of Castile: Among others the Princes of Aragon, John, and Henry, Master of the Order of Santiago were then at Court; them the Arch-bishop endeavour'd by all means to draw to his Party, that they might support him against his Enemies, and he continue fixt in the Government. From Madrid the King went to Segovia, where a Dispute happening betwixt the Courtiers and Townsmen, they were very near coming to blows. The Princes of Aragon did not agree among themselves, both aspiring to possess themselves of the King and Government, and admitting of no Competitor. The Nobility was divided, D. Ruy Lopez Davalos the Constable, and Peter Manrique favour'd Prince Henry, Ferdinand Earl of Trastamara, and the Arch-bishop of Toledo sided with Prince John. The King was young and changeable, King John's Character. soon angry, and as soon pleas'd. His Stature was large considering his Age, his Com∣plexion clear, but withal he was weakly, and had no good Face, yet of Temper was mild and tractable. He delighted in Hunting, Justs, and Turneaments, lov'd Learning, and could himself make indifferent Spanish Verses. These Virtues which shew'd themselves in his Childhood, in his riper Years spread more and grew to Perfection. Yet all this was defac'd by his love of Ease, and neglect of the Government. He gave little attention to Business, and that always in hast; in short he was not fit to rule a Kingdom. This it was that put his Courtiers in the way of obtaining great Preferments, especially Alvaro de Luna, D. Alvaro de Luna the great Favourite. who began already to be more in his Favour than any other. Queen Mother some Years before to obstruct his unreasonable Advance in the King's Esteem, had prudently forbid him the Court, ordering him to return to Aragon. Yet she acted very indiscreetly, in keep∣ing the King as she did till her Death, which was for above 6 Years lock'd up at Valladolid in a House near the Monastery of St. Paul, without suffering him to go abroad, or permit∣ting any Body to visit him, but his menial Servants. This she did that the Nobility might not seize him, and disturb the Peace of the Kingdom. A miserable sort of Education for a Prince, so that afterwards he knew not the Noblemen that came to visit him. The ri∣per Years are for the most part answerable to the Education, as appears by this Prince. For after the Queen's Death, as if he had been kept in a dark Place, or were just come from his Mother's Womb, he always behav'd himself like an utter stranger to the Affairs of the Government. Business perplex'd and troubl'd him. This is the reason he was always govern'd by his Courtiers and Favourites, which was the cause of great and continual Trou∣bles. At the beginning of the following Year which was 1420, the King went to Tordesillas, a Town in Old Castile. Prince Henry, Master of the Order of Santiago, either to facilitate 1420. his Marriage with the Princess Catherine, or to get the upper hand of his Adversaries, came to that Town with a party of his followers, secur'd John Hurtado de Mendoça, Lord Steward of the Houshold, and others belonging to the Court, and took the King himself, not permitting him to go any whither, or to dispatch any Business. A great disgrace to K. John of Castile un∣der re∣straint. the Kingdom, that the King should be detain'd Prisoner by his own Subjects. This Af∣front mov'd the Nobility to take up Arms. Prince John of Aragon headed them, who hav∣ing
spent but four Days in celebrating the Solemnity of his Marriage at Pamplona, set out immediately for Castile, moved to it by the Report of what had happen'd, and the Letters of many that invited him thither. At Avila the King of Castile was marry'd without any Magnificence, or demonstrations of Joy, by reason most of the Nobility were absent, and he himself no better than a Prisoner. Prince Henry for his own security, and to strengthen his Party, kept 3000 Horse in that City. His Brother Prince John was at Olmedo, and had an equal number of Horse canton'd in the neighbouring Towns. To him resorted all sorts of People from all Parts of the Country, designing to revenge the Affront done to the King and Kingdom. It was endeavour'd to have the two Brothers meet, but it was prevented, nor would they suffer Prince John to speak to the King. Prince Henry tho he had all the Power in his own Hands, yet to provide for the future contriv'd to have the Cortes meet in that City. No body had liberty of Speech, or durst utter his Thoughts, the Town be∣ing full of Souldiers, and the place where they met surrounded with armed Men. Thus Prince Henry was by those Cortes clear'd of any thing that might be lay'd to his charge till that time. No Man durst oppose this Resolution, or mutter, in so much, that as it were to reward that Exploit by the King's Consent it was obtain'd of Pope Martin the Vth, that the Mastership of the Order of Santiago should be setl'd hereditary upon Prince Henry and his Heirs, which had prov'd a new Plague to Spain, had not the King when he came to riper Years cancell'd that Decree. The Princess Catherine openly oppos'd Prince Henry. She said plainly she would not have a Husband, who aimed by force of Arms to take what he ought to hope for as the reward of his good Service. However her weak Resolution was vanquish'd, and they were marry'd at Talavera, a great Town near Toledo, whither the King went from Avila. He had with her the Lordship of Villena, with the Title of a Duke. To Alvaro de Luna the chief of the Courtiers for being instrumental in this Affair, was given the Town of Santistevan de Gormaz. This was the first step he advanc'd towards the great Preferments and Riches he afterwards acquir'd. About this time every day there were Earthquaks, and noises under Ground in Catalonia from Tolosa to Perpignan. Near Girona Prodigles. was a Town call'd Amer, where the Earth gap'd in two Places and cast out Fire that burnt all that came within two Stones throw of them. Out of another Mouth near those of Fire gush'd black Water, and half a mile from thence mixt with a River (which I suppose to be Sameroca) so that that Town was destroy'd, and all the Fish in the River dy'd. The stench of the Water was such, that the Birds clapt their Wings as they flew that way, and it ex∣tended as far as Girona, tho at four Leagues distance. James de Anaya Arch-bishop of Sevil built the College of St. Bartholomew, at Salamanca, and endow'd it with Revenues to main∣tain a good Number of Scholars, in imitation of the Colledge built at Bolonia by the Cardinal Giles de Albornoz. This good Example was afterwards follow'd by several Persons of Qua∣lity, who built other Colleges, which have brought forth many Men famous for Learning. Three other Colleges were built at Salamanca, and call'd the Great Ones, a fourth at Valla∣dolid, a fifth at Alcala, and many others of less Note. CHAP. VI. Original of the Portugues Discoveries. King Alonso of Aragon adopted Heir to the Crown of Naples. The King of Castile escapes from his Confinement, and suppresses many of the Rebels. D. Alvaro de Luna made an Earl. NOW it was that the two Nations of the Aragonians, and Portugueses made themselves way to obtain new Dominions. Henry Son to the King of Portugal, being much ad∣dicted Discove∣ries by Henry In∣fante of Portugal. to the study of Astrology, imagin'd unknown Countries and Islands might be dis∣cover'd in the vast Ocean. To this purpose he fent out several Ships, and in the way be∣twixt Lisbon and the Canaries found a small, but fruitful Island, so full of Trees that they call'd it Madera, that is to say Wood. Thus coasting along Africk this Prince and the Kings of Portugal after him at length came to the Coasts of Asia, India, and China to their no less Honour than Profit. Luis Duke of Anjou had besieg'd Joanna Queen of Naples within that City. The cause of making War upon her was the antient hatred he bore to that Crown, and the Leudness of the Queen, whose Husband no longer able to bear with her, returned to France, and became a Franciscan Fryar. The Queen being reduc'd to great Streights, sent Alonso K. of Aragon adopted Heir of Naples. to invite Alonso the 5th King of Aragon, famous for his Valour, and the conquest of Sardinia, to her assistance, promising to adopt him as her Son, and leave him the Kingdom of Naples. He sail'd from Sardinia to Naples, and rais'd the Siege, in recompence of which Service he was adopted Heir to the Crown, and the Pope approved of that Act. It is needless to dis∣pute the Legality of that Adoption, but certain it is it was the cause of tedious and bloody Wars betwixt Spain and France, which have lasted till our Days. King Alonso having sub∣du'd Sardinia and abandon'd Corsica to the Genoeses, sail'd with speed to Palermo in Sicily, hoping to secure the Succession to the new Kingdom, and was the more bent upon it, for that a certain Mathematician five years before told him, That Heaven promised him great
Things, that he should be Master of Naples, that he should have many Subjects, and heap mighty Riches, whereupon he encourag'd him boldly to pursue his Fortune. The depriving the King of Castile of his Liberty caus'd great Commotions, and the Im∣prisonment of several Persons of Note. The Court was at Talavera, as has been said, and the King, as if he minded not the wrong done him, diverted himself in Hunting. This gave him K. John of Castile makes his escape. an opportunity on the 29th of November, to make his escape to Montalvan, a Castle seated up∣on an Eminence almost in the mid-way betwixt Talavera and Toledo, on the Banks of Tagus. Alvaro de Luna his great Favourite advis'd him to fly. Prince Henry gathering his Forces besieg'd the Place, but would not batter it, in respect to the King. Prince John, the Archbi∣shop of Toledo, D. Alonso Enriquez the Admiral and other Nobles assembl'd to revenge this Affront. Hunger began to pinch in the Castle, and they eat their Horses and other filthy Beasts. At length the Siege was rais'd by them that came to relieve the Place, and Prince Henry went away to Ocana, a Town of his own as he was Master of Santiago, resolving to stand upon his Guard. After his Departure the King return'd to Talavera, and was met upon the way by the Princes John and Peter of Aragon. Great demonstrations of Affection passed betwixt them, and the King by the Advice of Alvaro de Luna, who rose apace to give the greater fall, commanded them to return. This alter'd the Posture of Affairs: The King kept his Christmas, and the beginning of the Year 1421 at Talavera. Thence he went to Old Castile, where he had more Forces, and the People were better affected towards him. 1421. Prince Henry had the Marquisate of Villena given him with his Wife, which those People re∣sented, because it had been purchas'd for a sum of Mony of the King of Aragon, and ought not to be alienated from the Crown. Prince Henry seiz'd and garrison'd all the Towns of Prince Henry in open Re∣bellion. that Dominion, except Alarcon, which being naturally strong held out against him. The King commanded him to disband his Forces, and he refusing to obey, that Estate was taken from him by Force. Besides the King recall'd his Patent which made the Mastership of Santiago hereditary to the Heirs of Prince Henry. This so provoked him that he set out from Ocan̄a after the King with 1500 Horse. He passed the Mountains, and without mak∣ing any stop came to Arevalo, where the King was. There was danger of a Battle, and therefore Queen Ellenor in care for her Son Prince Henry endeavour'd to lay that Storm that threatn'd. The Archbishop of Santiago did the same. They perswaded the Prince to lay down his Arms, and thus, for that time War was prevented. Blanch Daughter to the King of Navarre on the 29th of May was brought to Bed at Arevalo of a Son, who was call'd Charles, as his Grandfather by the Mother's side. The Cortes were summon'd first to Toledo, and then to Madrid, and in order to meet them the King and Queen set out towards new Castile. On the 23d of October they came to Toledo. Prince Henry of Aragon, Ruy Lopez Davalos the Constable, and Peter Manrique the Lieutenant being summon'd excus'd them∣selves, saying, they had powerful Enemies at Court. Mean while Alonso King of Aragon, and Luis Duke of Anjou contended for the Kingdom of Naples. King Alonso kept in that Competi∣tors for the King∣dom of Naples. City. Aversa, a Town near it was held by the French, and Excursions were made by both Parties. Cerra, a Town four miles from Naples, was besieg'd by the Aragonians and taken after a vigorous Defence. Prince Peter of Aragon being call'd by his Brother, with the consent of the King of Castile went away to serve in that War, at the beginning of the Year 1422. The Cortes sat at Madrid, Prince John of Aragon and other great Men were present. The Archbishop of Toledo was not, being then sick. Prince Henry and his adherents, because 1422. the King would oblige them to come, resolv'd the Prince and Garci Fernandez Manrique, af∣terwards Earl of Castan̄eda, should go, but the Constable and Peter Manrique should stand up∣on their Guard in Places of Safety. On the 13th of June the Prince and Garci Fernandez came to Madrid, were kindly receiv'd, but the next day apprehended. Prince Henry was sent Prisoner to the Castle of Mora, and the care of him committed to Garci Alvarez de To∣ledo, Prince Henry im∣prison'd. the Earl of Ʋrgel, who had been some years a Prisoner there, being remov'd to Madrid. An Impeachment of high Treason for corresponding with the Moors was brought into the Cortes against those Lords. 14 Letters written by the Constable to King Joseph of Granada were produc'd and read. Therefore the Estates of Prince Henry, and Garci Manrique were confiscated, and the same was decreed against Peter Manrique, who having notice of what was in hand fled to Taraçona. The like Sentence was given against the Constable, who with the Lady Catherine Prince Henry's Wife, fled first to Segura, a strong Place towards Murcia, and thence to Valencia. He left a mighty Estate in Castile; for Arcos, Arjona, Ossorno, Riba∣deo, Candeleda, Arenas, and many other Towns were his, so that the House Davalos began to decay. Several other noble Families, as the Fajardos, Enriquez, Sandovals, Pimenteles, and Zunigas rose out of the Ruins of the Davalos. It was then whisper'd that those Letters of the Constable were forg'd, and afterwards his Secretary John Garcia confess'd he had counterfeited them, and was put to Death; yet because the King and others were concern'd the Constable was not restor'd. Now the King created Alvaro de Luna Earl of Santistevan Alvaro de Luna made an Earl. de Gormaz, and made him Constable. Gonzalo Mexia Commendary of Segura was impower'd to act as Master of Santiago. These things being concluded, the King went away to Alcala, and at the same time the Queen was deliver'd of a Daughter at Illescas, on the 5th of Octo∣ber; she was call'd Catherine. This caus'd great Joy, being an Argument the Queen was not barren, as had been fear'd. The Archbishop of Toledo after a tedious Sickness dy'd at
Alcala de Henares, and was put into a curious Marble Tomb, built by himself in the Parish Church of St. Peter. D. John Martinez de Contreras, Dean of Toledo, by the King's Inte∣rest was chosen Archbishop. The Chapter rather favour'd the School-Master, John Alvarez de Toledo, but the King's Recommendation prevail'd. The elect Archbishop went away to Rome to be confirm'd by Pope Martin the Vth, as was then the Custom, and spent two years in that Journey. CHAP. VII. The Death of the Moorish King of Granada. A Truce betwixt Castile and Portugal. The Interest of the Aragonians decays at Naples. Joseph King of Granada dies. Mahomet succeeds him. AT Toledo (whither the King of Castile went, as soon as the Cortes broke up) the form Govern∣ment of Toledo al∣tered. of Government was alter'd, the Town being before divided into Factions, and sub∣ject to Mutinies. It was the Custom every two Years to choose 6 Officers, somewhat in the nature of Aldermen, 3 of the Commonalty, and 3 of the Gentry. These with the two Alcaides, who are not unlike to our Sheriffs, and the chief Alguazil, made up a Court, or Council, and govern'd all the Affairs of the City. All Men were free to come to their Consults, and Vote with them, which occasion'd Disorders. The King regulated this Af∣fair, and order'd as King Alonso had before done at Burgos, that there should be 16 Regidores or Aldermen, chosen half of the Gentry, and half of the Commonalty, who were to con∣tinue for Life, and the most Votes among them should take place. When any of these dy'd the King was to name another. This caus'd another inconveniency for those Places were expos'd to sale. At Pamplona, the Government of that Place which was divided betwixt Also at Pamplona. three Governours, was afterwards also reform'd. One of these Governours had charge of the Suburbs, another of the City, and the third of a certain Quarter call'd Navarreria, which often caus'd Disputes about the extent of their Jurisdiction. King Charles ordained there should be but one Governour, and with him 10 Aldermen, who should have the whole Power in their Hands, and that all the City should compose but one Body and be subject to one Tribunal. John Earl of Faux had now a Son born to him call'd Gaston, who in time through strange Revolutions came to be King of Navarre, Prince Charles Son to Prince Gaston Heir of Navarre born. John of Aragon, and the Lady Blanch his Wife dying. He ought to have inherited his Grandfather's Crown, and his Father sent his Mother with him to be bred in her Father's Court. As soon as the Prince came to Court he was created Prince of Viana, and several other Towns, particularly Corella and Peralta given him, a thing new in Navarre, but done in imitation of the neighbouring Kingdoms. It was enacted that those Dominions should for the future ever belong to the Heir of the Crown. This Law passed on the 20th of Janu∣ary 1423. Five Months after to satisfy the desires of the People, the Oath of Allegiance to 1423. the Prince, as next Heir was taken by the three Estates, at Olite, where the King being very antient, commonly resided, by reason of the Pleasantness of the Seat, and the Beauty and Magnificence of a Palace, he himself had built. Ever since his Minority, the King of Portugal had pressed him of Castile to settle a lasting Peace, and enter into a League, both Na∣tions being wasted with tedious Wars, and desirous to put an end to the Miseries it occasin'd. So far the Portugues was comply'd with, that a Truce was concluded for 29 Years, and it Truce be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. was also agreed that after the Expiration of that time neither Party should commit any Ho∣stility upon the other, without declaring War a year and a half before such Breach made. This Truce was proclaim'd at Avila, where the King then was, to the great Joy and Sa∣tisfaction of the People. Processions of Thanksgiving were made, and all manner of Sports to express the publick Satisfaction. In certain Justs that were kept at Court, Ferdinand de Castro, the Portugues Embassador, was Challenger, and all others refusing to run against him, Roderick de Mendoça, Son to John Hurtado de Mendoça, threw him out of the Saddle at the first shock, and had like to have kill'd him. The King comforted, and presented him, and as soon as recover'd sent him home well satisfy'd. Embassies pass'd now betwixt the Kings of Castile and Aragon. John Hurtado de Mendoça sent to the latter at Naples, gave him the Reasons why Prince Henry was confin'd, and demanded in his King's Name to have Catherine the Prince's Wife, Ruy Lopez Davalos the Constable, and the other Fugitives of Castile deliver'd up. Dalmatius Archbishop of Tarragona was sent by the King of Aragon to Castile, to shew that the Reason why he did not grant what that King requir'd, was, that it was contrary to the Antient Liberties of the Kingdom of Aragon, not to protect any that sled thither for shelter, besides that he had given them a safe Conduct, which according to the Laws of Nations could not be violated. He also declar'd to the King the posture of Troubles of Naples. Affairs at Naples, how many Jealousies arose betwixt the King and Queen, whereupon the Country was divided into Factions, and that the Fortune of the Aragonians began to decline, it being much fear'd they would come to blows: The Queen complain'd that King Alonso took more upon him than was his due. That he bestow'd all places of Trust, chang'd Gar∣risons,
and made the Souldiers take an Oath of Fidelity to him: In fine that he turn'd all things which way he listed, and incroach'd upon the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom. These things she lay'd to the Charge of her adopted Son King Alonso, as an inconstant and changeable Woman grown weary of him, and now she was deliver'd of Fear, prov'd as un∣grateful as she had been liberal in her Distress. King Alonso fear'd the Inconstancy of the Queen, and could not bear with her open Leudness, therefore he order'd a Fleet to be fitted out in order to send her away to Catalonia. This was not carry'd so privately, but the Queen had notice of it, and from that time the Friendship betwixt those two Nations began to grow cold. Both parties complain'd that their Adversaries dealt not ingenuously, but lay'd Snares to intrap them, and it was true enough. The King kept at Castelnovo, the Queen at Porta Capuana, a strong Place. From this beginning sprang two Factions in Naples, one of the Aragonians, and the other of the Andegavenses, or Anjovines, Names odious in that Kingdom, and which lasted till our Days. The Enmity and Contrivances went on. King Alonso feign'd himself sick. John Caracciolo the Seneschal, came to see him. He was great in the Queen's Favour, and that more than became her Modesty, therefore he was secur'd at this Visit, and the Aragonians immediately repair'd to Porta Capuana. The Queen's Party shut the Gates, and drew up the Bridge, so that King Alonso was forc'd to go off not with∣out some Danger; for they cast Darts at him from the Walls. Thus by degrees they came to sight in the very Streets. At first the Aragonians got the better, possess'd themselves of the City, and having plunder'd and burnt several Houses, besieg'd the Queen in her strong Palace. Its own Strength, and the Resolution of the Garrison defended it against all the K. Alonso of Aragon besieges the Queen of Naples in her Palace. Attempts of the Aragonians. Sforcia, who lay near at Hand, came to relieve the Queen, and Bernard de Cabrera came out of Sicily to reinforce the King, as did a Fleet of 22 Galleys, and 8 large Ships from Catalonia. This Fleet arriving at Naples, on the 10th of June, recruited the Aragonians, who were now grown weak and declin'd. Encourag'd with this Relief they again fought in the City, many were kill'd and several Houses plunder'd. The Queen went away to Aversa, and Sforcia with her, as also a good Garrison, and 5000 Citizens, who offer'd to stand by her. Prisoners on both sides were exchang'd, and thus Caracciolo reco∣vered his Liberty. At length on the 21st of June the Queen at Nola recall'd, and made void the Adoption of King Alonso, as an ungrateful and unworthy Person. In his stead she adopted and appointed her Successor, Luis Duke of Anjou, the third of the Name, and Son to the 2d. To this effect she sent for him from Rome, and created him Duke of Calabria, a Luis Duke of Anjou adopted Heir of Naples. Title usually given to the Heir of the Crown. Sforcia, and Caracciolo, who were most in favour, gave the Queen this Advice. From this time the good Fortune of the Aragonians began to change and decline. King Alonso sent for Braccio de Monton, out of Abruzzo, where he was besieging Aquila, a great City, designing to set him up against Sforcia. But he excus'd himself, either not liking the Party, or because he hop'd to make himself Master of that City, and all its Territory. For this reason King Alonso was oblig'd to resolve upon returning to Spain to settle his Affairs and gather new Forces to carry on the War, tho he gave out it was to set at Liberty his Brother Prince Henry. He left his other Brother Prince Peter his Commissioner with full Power to Command in his Absence. With him stay'd James Caldora, and several other considerable Officers of both Nations. Antony de Luna, Son to Antony de Luna, Earl of Calatabelota was appointed Governour of Gaeta. At the same time the King of Castile took a Progress to Plasencia, Talavera and Madrid, and his Queen was brought to Bed on the 10th of September of another Daughter, call'd Ellenor. Joseph the Joseph K. of Grana∣da dies. Moorish King dy'd at Granada, and Mahomet his Son, called The left-handed, succeeded him. He was afterwards Famous for being three times depos'd, and as often restor'd to his King∣dom, and for his many Misfortunes rather than any great Actions. At first he observ'd the Peace with the King of Castile, and oblig'd Muley King of Tunez. Thus he endeavour'd by the Friendship of these Princes to secure himself against his Enemies, but took no care to gain the Affections of his People, the surest Prop of Princes. So that he appears to have been as imperfect in his Judgment, as he was in his Body; and Fortune prov'd his Enemy. CHAP. VIII. The pretended Pope Benedict dying, another is supported by the King of Aragon, who plunders Marseilles, prepares to make War upon Castile, but comes to an Accommoda∣tion, yet loses all his Interest at Naples. D. Peter de Luna, who during the time of the Schism, call'd himself Benedict the XIIIth, as long as he lived, kept at Peniscola relying on the Strength of that Place, and persisted Benedict the pre∣tended Pope dies. in calling himself Pope. He dy'd in that Town on the 23d of May, being Whitsunday, at the Age of 90 Years, a wonderful thing that he should live so long amidst so many Troubles. Luis Pançan a Citizen of Sevil, and follower of D. Alonso Carrillo, Cardinal of S. Eustachius in a Commentary he writ of some remarkable Occurrences in those Times, affirms posi∣tively, that Benedict was Poison'd in some Wafers he us'd to eat after Meat, by a Fryar call'd
Thomas, who was very familiar with him, and that he being afterwards by his own Confes∣sion found Guilty of the Fact, was torn in Pieces by four Horses. He further adds that the Cardinal of Pisa sent to Aragon to apprehend Benedict, gave this Advice, and that it being put in Execution, he fled from Tortosa, where he had stay'd to see the Event, fearing D. Roderick, and D. Alvaro, who resolv'd to revenge the Death of their Uncle Benedict, by kil∣ling the Legate, if he had not made his Escape, having perform'd what he came for, but not wholly put an end to the Schism. For by two Cardinals that remain'd of the Faction of Benedict, one Giles Mun̄oz a Canon of Barcelona was set up in his place. He was a Man of no Note, and the election of so little Value, that he himself was dubious whether he should accept of it, till King Alonso of Aragon encourag'd and perswaded him to take upon him the Alonso K. of Aragon supports an Anti∣pope. Papacy by the Name of Clement the VIIIth. This the King did to be reveng'd of Pope Mar∣tin the Vth, who favour'd the Party of the Anjouins, and oppos'd the Aragonians, insomuch that he had of late created Luis, Duke of Anjou, King of Naples, and had approv'd of the new adoption made by the Queen, joyning his Forces with hers. A General Council which be∣gan to assemble at Pavia, in pursuance to the Degree of the Council of Constance, was by reason of the Plague, which rag'd in that City, removed to Siena in Tuscany, and thither the Bishops and Embassadors repair'd from all Parts. King Alonso sent his, with Orders to ju∣stify Pope Benedict, and complain of the wrong done in deposing of him. This struck a Terror into Pope Martin, and made him slacken in favouring the Faction of Anjou; so he speedily broke up the Council, Proroguing it to a farther time. He fear'd lest the Schism should again be reviv'd, and Christendom farther involv'd in Difficulties. D. John de Con∣treras, Arch-bishop of Toledo took place of all the Spanish Arch-bishops at this Council, by order of Pope Martin, as appears by two Bulls of his still extant among the Records of the Church of Toledo. But these things happen'd somewhat later. King Alonso having resolv'd to pass over into Spain, imbark'd on a Fleet of 18 Galleys, and 12 Ships. About the middle of October he sail'd from Naples. The Weather being bad the Fleet was dispers'd, but as Marseilles taken by the Ata∣gonians. soon as it clear'd up they joyn'd again, and sail'd together to Marseilles, on the Coast of Provence, a City belonging to the Duke of Anjou. Having broken the Chains, they entred the Port and assaulted the City. The Service was hot, and lasted till Night, when Folch Earl of Cardona, who commanded the Ships, advis'd to desist, because they knew not the Streets, and in the dark, tho the Gates had been open the confusion would be great, and the Townsmen have a considerable Advantage over them. John de Corbera on the other side affirm'd the Townsmen were now in a Consternation, and ought to be press'd before they had time to recover themselves. This Opinion was approv'd of by the King, the Assault was renew'd, and the City enter'd. Night and Darkness gave the Souldiers an Opportuni∣ty to commit all manner of Insolences, but the King shew'd himself Religious, for he or∣der'd that no wrong should be offer'd to Women who had taken Sanctuary in Churches, nor any thing that they carry'd with them taken from them. This Order was proclaim'd and punctually observ'd. They Ship'd the Booty, and left the City about the end of the Year. Among other Things the Bones of S. Luis Bishop of Toulouze, Son to Charles the 2d King of Naples, were carry'd into Spain to the City of Valencia, where the King landed. The King of Castile hearing of his Arrival sent Embassadors to him at the beginning of the Year 1424, to Congratulate with him upon his safe Arrival, and the Victories he had 1424. obtain'd, as also again to demand the Fugitives and Out-laws should be deliver'd up to him, to answer to such things as should be lay'd to their Charge. These Embassadors had Au∣dience at Valencia upon the 3d of April. At the same time the Affairs of Aragon declin'd Affairs of Aragon unsucces∣ful at Na∣ples. apace in Naples, and no hopes remain'd of retrieving them, notwithstanding that Sforcia the famous General marching to raise the Siege of Aquila, was on the 5th of January drown'd passing the River Averno, then much swell'd with the Winter Rains. His Death was no way Advantagious to the Aragonians, for Francis Sforcia his Son supply'd his Place. Pope Martin, and Philip Duke of Milan joyn'd with the Faction of Anjou. The Duke fitted out a Fleet at Genoa, and sent it to the Relief of the Queen, under the Command of Guido Tau∣rello. This Fleet and the Army by Land besieg'd Gaeta. It might well have been defend∣ed, but was soon surrender'd, only upon Condition the Aragonian Garrison should have liberty to depart. From Gaeta the Army and Fleet mov'd towards Naples. James Caldora to whom that City was committed, agreed with the Enemy who promis'd him the Arrears due to him from the Aragonians, and he open'd the Gates to them. He pretended to justi∣fy himself that Prince Peter design'd to kill him, whereas in Truth he was a faithless and changeable Man. On the 12 of April the City of Naples was lost, but still the Aragonians kept two Castles there, viz. Castelnovo, and that called Del Ovo, which is very little, but strong, being seated on a Rock encompass'd by the Sea. After the taking of Naples all other Towns surrender'd to the Victors. The King of Aragon was much concern'd that the King of Castile imprisoning his Brother had oblig'd him to quit Naples, which was the cause it was lost. He meditated Revenge, yet resolv'd to try all ways rather than declare War. Dalmao de Mur, Arch-bishop of Tarragona, sent Embassador upon this Account, de∣liver'd his Message before the King of Castile and Nobles at Ocan̄a. He demanded the Prince's Liberty, saying if he were Guilty of any Crime his long Imprisonment was Punish∣ment enough, and he ought to be forgiven, being so near of Kin to the King of Castile; be∣sides
that his Brother the King of Aragon, would never desist till he had obtain'd his De∣mand. There were many about Court who had advis'd the Prince's Imprisonment, and fear'd if he were releas'd they should suffer. Others were apprehensive of losing what they had got of the banish'd Person's Estate. These oppos'd the releasing of the Prince, and Alvaro de Luna, proud with his vast Preferment, sided with them. Thus nothing was concluded, and the Embassadors departed. The King of Castile went away to Burgos at the same time that his Daughter Catherine dy'd at Madrigal, a Town in Old Castile, on the 10th of August. She was bury'd in the Monastery of Huelgas. Soon was the Grief conceiv'd for her Death converted into Joy, the Queen being deliver'd on the 5th of January 1425, at 1425. Valladolid of Prince Henry. In April the three Estates took the Oath of Allegiance to him, Prince Henry of Castile born. as Heir to the Crown. The King of Aragon was making all necessary Preparations for War at Zaragoça. At Valladolid a Council was held to make the necessary Provision to op∣pose him. Opinions vary'd, as is usual in such Cases. Some were for declaring War im∣mediately; a hot sort of People, where there is no Danger. Others more prudent said, all possible means ought to be us'd to prevent a Breach. The King was doubtful, and knew not which Advice to take. Charles King of Navarre fearing this Dispute might be destru∣ctive to Spain, sent Peter Peralta his Steward, and Garci Falces his Secretary, Embassadors to Castile, to offer himself as Mediator. When this Proposition was ready to be embrac'd, it was obstructed by Letters from the King of Aragon, requiring Prince John his Brother to repair to him immediately. He having obtain'd leave of the King of Castile, set out for Aragon, and had Commission to treat with that King of an Accommodation. The Army Victory obtain'd by the Queen of Naples. of Aragon, lay at Taraçona, ready to break into Castile, and the King was so intent upon this Expedition, he seem'd to have lay'd aside all Thoughts of Naples. And Yet he had receiv'd Intelligence that Braccio who besieged Aquila, was overthrown and killed before that Place on the 25th of May. James Caldora General of the Pope's Forces in the Service of the Queen obtain'd this Victory, being assisted by John and Sancho Carrillo, Nephews to the Cardinal of that Name. They in pursuance of the Victory soon made themselves Masters of Marca de Ancona, which Braccio had before taken. The Body of Braccio was carry'd to Rome, and bury'd before the Gate of S. Laurence, he being an Excommunicated Person. In the time of Pope Eugenius the IV, he was translated to a beautiful Tomb at Perosa, by Nicholas Forte∣brachio, who took Rome, and did this Honour to his Uncle by the Mother's side. In May at Florence dy'd D. Peter Fernandez de Frias, Cardinal of Spain; his Body was brought over and bury'd in the Cathedral of Burgos. He was of a mean Extraction, but his good Parts ob∣tained him that Preferment, together with the Favour of the Kings, Henry and John. His Life was scandalous for Avarice and Leudness. Having some Words at Burgos with the Bi∣shop of Segovia, a Servant of his cudgell'd the Bishop, which render'd the Cardinal very odi∣ous, tho afterwards the Servant confess'd he had done it without his Master's Knowledge. Yet many saying he ought to be punish'd, he was forc'd to withdraw into Italy, The King seiz'd upon all the Mony he had gather'd, which was a great Sum. He was Governour of Marca de Ancona for the Pope, and in Castile built the Monastery of Espeja of the order of S. Hierome. Prince John was nobly receiv'd by his Brother at Taraçona. Whilst the said Prince John made Proposals for an Accommodation, and expected a more ample Commissi∣on from the King of Castile to determine the Points in Debate, the two Brothers march'd into the Territories of Navarre, but without doing any harm, and encamp'd near Milagro, the heat of Summer being then over. The Commission being come from Castile, certain Per∣sons Accord betwixt Castile and Aragon. of all three Kingdoms met at Aruel, and on the 3d of September came to this Conclu∣sion: That Prince Henry be immediately set at Liberty, and all his Honours and Estate re∣stor'd him, as also the Arrears of the Profits thereof which had been deposited during his Confinement. The same was decreed in favour of Peter Manrique, who was also banish'd. This Resolution appear'd very hard on his side to the King of Castile, but it was natural for Prince John to favour his Brother; besides that the King of Aragon would hear of no Conditions without the Prisoner were releas'd, which made the King of Castile and his No∣bles to condescend.
CHAP. IX. The Death of King Charles of Navarre. King John proclaim'd. D. Alvaro de Luna banish'd the Court of Castile. Villanous Practices of the Nobility. The King of Granada deposed. UPon Saturday the 8th of September, being the Feast of the Nativity of our Blessed Lady, Charles K. of Na∣varre dies. dy'd Charles the Noble King of Navarre, at Olite, of a sudden fit that seiz'd him, and no remedy could be found for it. His Body was bury'd with great Pomp in the Cathedral of Pamplona. His Daughter Blanch was with him at his Death, and had been not long be∣fore deliver'd of a Daughter called also Blanch, who prov'd very Unfortunate. As soon as her Father was dead she sent her Husband the Royal Standard in token of his Accession to the Crown, and he was proclaim'd King of Navarre in the Camp. Some blamed this Acti∣on K. John pro∣claim'd. as Precipitate, and said they ought first to have taken the usual Oath of preserving the Liberties of the People. The News of Prince Henry's being set at Liberty reach'd his Bro∣thers in a day and half, it being so order'd that the Beacons should be fir'd, whereof there is a great number in Castile. Hereupon the Forces of Aragon return'd to Taraçona, and in November following were dismiss'd. Prince John went as far as Agreda to meet his Brother Henry, and conduct him to the King of Aragon. It was a joyful Day for the three Brothers not only for the Liberty Prince Henry had obtain'd, but because it was a sort of Victory to have reduc'd Castile to Complyance. About the same time at Valencia, on the 29th of November dy'd D. Alonso the younger Duke of Gandia, without Issue. His Dominion of Ribagorca was given to Prince John at this time King of Navarre. D. Henry de Guzman, Earl of Niebla after many Disputes was parted from his Wife the Lady Violante, Daugh∣ter to Martin King of Sicily, to the great Regret of her Bastard Brother D. Frederick Earl of Luna. It griev'd him to see his Sister so wrong'd without any fault committed on her Side, only for the extravagant Amours of her Husband, and therefore endeavour'd to gain the Affections of the Nobility of Castile, hoping that way to secure his Revenge. Prince Henry's Liberty reduc'd the Affairs of Castile to a worse Condition than they were Factions in Castile. in before. Till this time the Kingdom was divided into three Factions, that of D. Alvaro de Luna, and those of the two Princes, John and Henry of Aragon. The rest of the Nobility according to every Man's Inclination adher'd to some one of these Parties. Now the two Princes being reconcil'd, the three Factions were reduc'd to two. Most of the Nobility con∣spir'd against D. Alvaro. It griev'd them to see him and a few Creatures of his ingross all the King's Favour, and Envy push'd them on to contrive his Ruin. But he relying on his Prince's Favour, with whom he had been Familiar from his tender Years, despis'd them all, insomuch that it was given out, and great Men affirm'd, he had the Boldness to make Love to the Queen, but this could never be prov'd, and it is to be believ'd that many things were wrongfully lay'd to his Charge through the Envy of his Adversaries. This Conspiracy was first begun against him at Taraçona when the three Brothers of Aragon met. It was brought to Perfection the following Year 1426. The King of Castile kept his Christmas, and new Year 1426. at Segovia, and John the New King of Navarre at Medina del Campo with his Mother, hav∣ing Conspira∣cy against D. Alvaro de Luna. not long before met the King of Castile at Roa. Prince Henry was gone to Ocan̄a, being forbid coming to Court, or intermedling with the Government. The King of Aragon re∣sided at Valencia at such time as the Lady Constance, Daughter to the Constable Ruy Lopez Davalos was marry'd to Luis Massa a noble and rich Youth, the King paying the greatest part of her Portion. This Prince was so generous, he not only supported the Father, but afterwards when he recover'd Naples gave great Possesseions to his Son D. In̄igo Davalos, and to his Grandson call'd D. In̄igo de Guevara. The Queen Dowager of Aragon with her Daugh∣ter the Princess Ellenor went to Valencia, at the Request of the King her Son, but soon re∣turn'd to Medina del Campo. She was unwilling by her long Absence to offend the King of Castile, who had now sent the Earl of Ʋrgel from Castrotaraf, whither he had been remov'd from the Castle of Madrid, into the Kingdom of Valencia, supposing he might be useful in Aragon by reason of the Troubles that threaten'd Castile. He was put into the Castle of Xativa, where he ended his Days, and tedious Imprisonment. At Toro the Cortes met, where it was propos'd to Retrench the King's Expences, because they exceeded the Revenue. There∣fore the Guards that consisted of 1000 Horse were reduc'd to 100, and D. Alvaro de Luna made their Captain, which increas'd his Power, and the Envy conceiv'd against him. At this same time dy'd John de Mendoça, Steward of the Houshould, and Alonso Enriguez the Ad∣miral fell sick of a Disease that carry'd him off three Years after, their Employments were given to their Sons. The great Men by Letter, that their Meeting might not cause Suspi∣tion, Conspira∣cy of the Nobles. associated themselves. The chief of them were the Masters of the Orders of Calatra∣va and Alcantara, Peter Velasco Lord Chamberlain, the King of Navarre and his Brother Prince Henry. They took a solemn Oath to stand by one another, and with regard to the King's Majesty use all means that the Publick might not suffer by evil Counsellors. This Association was concluded about the beginning of November, at the Hermitage of Orçilla in
the Territory of Medina del Campo. From Toro the King of Castile went to Zamora, at the beginning of the Year 1427. Prince Henry of Aragon, tho forbid the Court, mov'd from 1427. Ocan̄a towards Old Castile with a great Retinue well Arm'd. The King was gone to Siman∣cas, and the Princes of Aragon with the Competitors stay'd at Valladolid. Such of the No∣bility as were not in the Association stood Neuters. His People being divided the King was Weak and Naked, besides his natural inclination to Ease. A Petition was presented by the Conspirators, representing what they found fault with in the King's Family, and the Crimes of D. Alvaro de Luna. Having consider'd this Affair, Judges were appointed to re∣gulate it, most of them were in the Association, viz. the Admiral, the Master of Calatrava, Peter Manrique, and Ferdinand de Robles, who tho of mean Extraction was very Rich and High Treasurer. These were Commission'd to examine into the Crimes imputed to D. Alvaro de Luna, and to them was joyn'd the Abbot of St. Benedict, that in case they were divided, the most Votes should decide the Matter. They having consulted together De∣creed, That the King should remove to Cigales: That the Princes of Aragon should have leave to visit him, and That D. Alvaro de Luna should be banish'd the Court for a Year D. Alvaro de Luna banish'd the Court. and half. I know not whether it was more shame to the King or Kingdom, that the King should be commanded by his Subjects. The King, as had been ordain'd, went to Ci∣gales, where the Conspirators visited him, and among them Prince Henry, who kneeling shed Tears in token of Repentance. Such is the Power of Dissimulation. D. Alvaro went to Ayllon, a Town of his own, many Nobles bearing him Company. After his removal the Nobles fell at Variance, every one striving to gain the King's Affection, because he was intirely govern'd by his Favourite. Ferdinand Alonso de Robles had got the start of all others, for having been in Favour before, now his Competitor was remov'd, he grew still greater, insomuch that upon pretence he was indispos'd, the King and Nobles often went to Coun∣cil to his House. It rais'd Envy in many to see a mean Person lifted up to that Height, and the King was displeas'd at him for having rashly given Judgment against D. Alvaro de Luna to whom he ow'd many Obligations. His Enemies making use of the King's Displeasure, prevail'd with the King of Navarre to accuse him of many Crimes, as that he was a Se∣ditious Person, kept Correspondence abroad, and Conspir'd with the Nobility against the King, and often spoke irreverently of him. His Case being hear'd he was secur'd at Se∣govia, and at last dy'd a Prisoner at Ʋzeda, leaving an Example of the uncertainty of Court-Favour. This Year the King of Granada was by his Subjects expell'd his Kingdom, The K. of Granada expelled by his Subjects. and went over in a miserable Condition to beg the King of Tunez his Assistance. Mahomet call'd The Little, as soon as he was seated in the Throne persecuted all the other King's Friends, putting some to Death, banishing others, and seizing their Estates, which he pro∣digally gave away. One Joseph of the noble Family of the Abencerrages, who was Go∣vernour of the City, seeing no hopes of prevailing against the Usurper, fled to Murcia, hoping to bring the Forces of Castile upon the new Tyrant before he was well fix'd in the Government. At the same time two remarkable Things happen'd in Castile. One was that the King obtained of Pope Martin the Thirds of Ecclesiastical Revenues for ever. The other, that the Order of St. Hierome was divided into two Branches. One F. Lope de Olmedo, who was familiar with Pope Martin, was the Author of this Separation. Near Sevil he founded a Monastery of the Invocation of St. Isidorus, which was the Head of his Reformation, and of it the Fryars were called Isidorians. This Division lasted till King Philip the II again united the whole Order under the Antient Rule of St. Hierome. Let us return to the Troubles of Castile. CHAP. X. D. Alvaro de Luna returns to Court greater in the King's Favour than ever. The banish'd King of Granada restor'd. Some Affairs of France, and final end of the Schism in the Church. SOme natural Sympathy, or other extraordinary hidden Cause it was doubtless, that so Strange Fond∣ness be∣twixt the King and D. Alvaro de Luna. link'd together the Affection of the King of Castile, and D. Alvaro de Luna, that they could not live asunder, notwithstanding on that Account they both became odious, but particularly D. Alvaro to such a degree, that it exceeded all the Malice the Antient Ro∣mans ever bore Sejanus, or any other the Favourites of their Emperors. They were so blind in their Affection that neither the King took Notice how prejudicial that Familiarity was to him, nor D. Alvaro was sensible that he was driving headlong to his Ruin. Nothing pleas'd the King, nor was his Countenance ever smooth or serene since D. Alvaro was re∣mov'd from him. Of him he commonly spoke in the Day, and thought of him at Night. The Courtiers perceiving that of necessity, D. Alvaro must shortly be restor'd, and that then his Power and Interest would be much greater than before, as having overcome the Malice of his Enemies, and conquer'd his ill Fortune, made all their Efforts to gain his Favour. Even the King of Navarre, being envious that his Brother Prince Henry should
have a greater Interest in the King of Castile than himself, began to favour D. Alvaro, and sollicit he might return to Court. On the 6th of January 1428 dy'd D. Ruy Lopez Davalos 1428. at Valencia, where the King of Aragon then was. This Gentleman was more Fortunate in The Fa∣mily of Davalos. his Issue, than in his Life. By three Wives he had seven Sons and two Daughters. From them in Italy are descended the Earls of Potencia and Bovino, the Marqueses del Vasto and Pescara, and many other Honourable Families in Spain. His Body was deposited at Valencia, thence afterwards translated to Toledo, and bury'd in the Monastery of St. Augustin. He us'd to give ear to Astrologers, being himself much addicted to that vain Science, yet he could never foresee his own Fall. When he dy'd he had not altogether lay'd aside the hopes of recovering his Estate. Prince Henry of Aragon began to labour to bring it about, but For∣tune and all his Friends fail'd the Unfortuate Ruy Lopez. Only Alvar Nun̄ez de Herrera, a Fidelity of a Ser∣vant. Citizen of Cordova, his Steward in the time of Prosperity continu'd faithful to him till the last, and was cast into Prison as accessary to the Crime his Master was accused of. As soon as discharg'd he never gave over prosecuting John Garcia, the Forger of that Contrivance, for Perjury, till he was executed on that Account. To relieve his Master he sold all he had got under him, and gather'd 8000 Florins in Gold, which he put into the Timber of a Loom, that it might not be discover'd, and loading it upon an Ass, sent his Son a Foot in a Disguize with it to him. A wonderful act of Fidelity well deserving a particular Encomium. His Death secur'd D. Alvaro de Luna in the Ministery. The King of Castile resided at Sego∣via, his thoughts taken up in disappointing the Designs of the Nobility, and breaking their Cabals. He publish'd an Order, commanding them to release one another of the solemn Promises they had made to stand together, and granted a general Pardon for all past Faults. To the Princess Catherine, Wife to Prince Henry, in lieu of Villena, he gave the Cities of Truxillo and Alcaraz, and some lesser Towns in the Kingdom of Toledo near Gaudalajara, as also 200000 Florins, which was a prodigious Portion. At the Instance of Prince Henry the King also revers'd the attainder of Ruy Lopez Davalos, but his Estate and Honours were not restor'd to his Children, as of Right they ought to have been. After this the King went to Turuegano. Thither by his Order came D. Alvaro de Luna, with a great and splendid Retinue, and joyful for the Victory he had obtain'd over his Enemies. He advanc'd daily D. Alvaro de Luna returns to Court. in the King's Favour, and his Interest alone was greater than that of all the Nobility. The Lady Ellenor, Sister to the King of Aragon was contracted to Edward Prince of Portugal, who was 36 Years of Age, the Marriage by Proxy was solemniz'd at a Village call'd Ojos Negros in the Territory of Daroca, the King of Aragon being present. Her Portion was 200000 Florins. The Lady Constance de Tovar, D. Ruy Lopez Davalos his Widow, was appointed her first Lady of the Bedchamber. This Princess from Valencia travelled through Castile, and at Valladolid the King entertain'd her nobly, and thence she went on richly presented to∣wards Portugal to meet her Husband. The Joy for this Match was the greater, because that Prince had so long put it off, and it was fear'd he would not Marry. At the same time Pe∣ter, Peter In∣fante of Portugal a great Tra∣er. Brother to Prince Edward, after his long Travels, in which he visited the Emperor Si∣gismund and Tamerlan the Tartar, return'd to Spain, and many fabulous Stories are writ of his Peregrination. He landed at Valencia in June, and in September marry'd Elizabeth the eldest Daughter of the Earl of Ʋrgel, who was in Prison. By her he had Elizabeth, afterwards Queen of Portugal; Philippa who became a Nun; Peter Constable of Portugal; James a Car∣dinal and Bishop of Lisbon; John King of Ciprus, and Beatrix, Wife to Adolphus Duke of Cleves. Prince Peter after his Marriage visited the King of Castile at Aranda, and came safe to Por∣tugal. Whole Towns went out to meet him, admiring him as if he had dropp'd from Hea∣ven, the Ignorance of that Age making his Travels appear Supernatural. The King of Ca∣stile having setled Old Castile, and releas'd Garci Fernandez Manrique, who as has been said, was apprehended at the same time with Prince Henry of Aragon, and restor'd him his Estate, return'd towards the end of this Year to the Kingdom of Toledo, and having spent some time at Alcalá, went thence to Illescas. Thither came to him Joseph Abencerrage, who fled from Granada to espouse the depos'd King's Quarrel. The King treated him generously, and sent along with him Alonso de Lorca to the King of Tunez, to exhort him to take Com∣passion on that Injur'd King, and assist him with his Forces to recover his Crown, promising not to be wanting on his part. The King of Tunez encourag'd by this Embassy sent King Mahomet into Spain with a good Fleet, and 300 Horse. He landed at Vera, and immediatly a The ba∣nish'd K. of Grana∣da restor∣ed. wonderful change appear'd, for all places submitted to him, and even the City Granada was deliver'd up at the beginning of the Year 1429. The Usurper retir'd to the Castle call'd Alhambra, where he was soon after taken and put to Death, leaving the Crown he had un∣justly possess'd to the rightful owner. Thus much in Spain. France could hardly be in a worse Condition, the English being Masters of Paris, and the greatest part of that Coun∣try. Charles the VII, King of France in that Distress, sent Embassadors with great Submis∣sion to beg Assistance of several Princes, and among them of the King of Aragon. Mathias Rexaque sent on this Embassy, came to Barcelona in April. At that time the King of Aragon was bent upon two several Wars. That of Naples troubl'd him most, Prince Peter his Bro∣ther Preparati∣ons for a War in Aragon. being return'd thence into Spain, having lost all hope of Success. Dalmatius Sasera was left in his Place to preserve what remain'd in the Hands of the Aragonians. Besides, the King of Aragon was making great Preparations for a War with Castile. For these reasons the
French Embassy had no Success: But the Affairs of France were recover'd out of that des∣perate Condition by a wonderful Providence. The English had besieg'd Orleans seven Months, and Hunger began to pinch the besieg'd, when on a sudden a Maid about 18 years of Age, whose Name was Joan, and is commonly called The Maid of Orleans, persuaded the French she was sent from Heaven to relieve Orleans. She gain'd Credit, and put Relief into the Town, and at lengh the Siege was rais'd. From this time the English lost many Towns, this Maid encouraging and leading the French. At last she was taken by the English, carry'd to Roan, where she was tryed, condemned, and burnt for a Witch. Many have been of Opinion she was wrongfully put to Death, and the French to this Day reverence her as a Saint. Her Statue is upon the Bridge of Orleans, kneeling on the left Hand of a great Cru∣cifix, and the King on the Right. But these things belong to the Histories of France and England, where they are handl'd at large. Peter Cardinal of Faux, Legate from Pope Mar∣tin A Synod at Tarage∣na, and end of the Schism in the Church. the V, assembled a Synod of the Bishops of the Province of Tarragona in that City. What Acts pass'd in that Synod is not known. But the matter of greatest Concern there brought to Perfection was, that they prevail'd upon the Canon Giles Mun̄oz to resign the Title of Pope, and the Cardinals that follow'd him were depriv'd of that Dignity. This was done by the King of Aragon's Order to oblige Pope Martin, whom before he kept under by Ter∣ror, and now endeavour'd tō oblig'd by this Courtesy. Peniscola which before belong'd to the Knights of St. John was now annex'd to the Crown. Giles Mun̄oz, in requital for his Re∣signation, was made Bishop of Majorca. Alonso de Borgia was also chosen Bishop of Valencia in recompense of the Pains he had taken to reduce Giles Mun̄oz and his Companions to Complyance, and this was the first step Borgia made to attain the highest Dignities. All this was done at Tortosa in August. This was the end of that Schism which lasted longest, and was hottest maintain'd of any that has been in the Church. Processions and all manner of Devotions were perform'd in Thanksgiving for this Blessing, and to implore the Mercy of God, that such Judgments might be averted for the future. It will be well we con∣clude this Book with Peace, to begin the next with a bloody War betwixt the Kings of Spain. The End of the Twentieth Book.
THE History of SPAIN. The One and Twentieth BOOK. CHAP. I. The War betwixt Aragon and Navarre on the one side, and Castile on the other. The King of Navarre crowned. John King of Castile breaks into Aragon with a power∣ful Army, and does much harm there. SPain had of late years enjoyed Peace, the Kings there of being tyr'd with the former Wars, and now ally'd to one another in a very strict Degree. With the Moors of Granada there was a lasting Truce, or if there happen'd any Breach it was of no great Moment. True it is, the Christians wanted not the Will to extirpate that perverse Nation, and a good Opportunity seem'd to offer it self, the Moors being divided into seve∣ral Factions among themselves. But these Thoughts were lay'd aside, by reason of a new War be∣twixt Ca∣stile, Ara∣gon and Navarre. War that broke out betwixt the King's of Aragon and Navarre on the one side, and him of Castile on the other, and yet the noise prov'd much more than the Execution. We shall now relate the cause of this War, and its event, as also the rise and fall of D. Alvaro de Luna, who now the second time began to tend to his utter Ruin, perswading the King at his re∣turn to Court, to command all the Nobility to retire from Court to their own Houses, which Advice was bad in it self, and prov'd fatal to him that gave it. Peter Fernandez de Velasco, Peter de Zun̄iga, D. Roderick Alonso Pimentel, Earl of Benavente, and the Masters of the Orders of Calatrava and Alcantara understanding the King's Pleasure, immediately re∣tir'd to their own Houses. There only remain'd the Princes of Aragon, who seem'd too great to be turn'd off; but D. Alvaro was so bold he doubted not to ingage them. He first attack'd the King of Navarre, whom all the World blam'd for neglecting his own, to apply himself to the Business of another. This Censure of the World was pleasing to the King and D. Alvaro, and some Persons of Note were sent to signify the King's Pleasure to him. Queen Blanch his Wife foreseeing the Danger, sent to invite him home in the Name of all the People of Navarre. King John was offended at these Contrivances of D. Alvaro, yet seeing he must submit to Necessity, he had a Conference with the King at Valladolid, where the Cortes then sat. Here the League before made betwixt Castile, Aragon, and Navarre Peace con∣cluded. was renew'd and sworn to by the two Kings. Dr. James Franco was sent Embassador to get the Ratification of the King of Aragon, who was not present at the Treaty. These things being thus concluded the King of Navarre went away to his Kingdom. He of Aragon after many delays at Barcelona, told Dr. James Franco he did not approve of many of the Arti∣cles, which ought to be alter'd, and believing this Embassador a fit Man for his purpose, he sent by him a private Message to D. Alvaro, acquainting him that Peter Manrique was the Man who blew the Coles, and sow'd Discord betwixt his Brothers. That he was a Double∣dealing Person, and therefore ought to be expell'd the Court. The cause why the King of Aragon was displeas'd with Peter Manrique is not known. At the same time the Archbi∣shop of Zaragoça was cast into Prison, where he dy'd. The manner of his Death is vari∣ously reported, some say he was strangl'd, others that he was cast into the River. Seve∣ral Citizens of Zaragoça were also executed. They were accus'd of keeping private Cor∣respondence with D. Alvaro; the Truth is, they were too free in speaking of the King, say∣ing he ought to be oblig'd to observe the Peace made with Castile, lest the whole Kingdom should suffer for his Miscarriages. Francis Clement Bishop of Barcelona succeeded the Arch∣bishop. The two Brothers, Kings of Aragon and Navarre, plotted to joyn their Forces to ruin D. Alvaro de Luna. He of Aragon call'd to him his Brother Prince Henry at the begin∣ning of April 1429. They met at Tervel, and resolv'd upon the War with Castile. The 1429. King of Navarre was not present at this Interview, being then busy about the solemnity of King John of Na∣varre crowned. his Coronation which was perform'd at Pamplona on the 15th of May. The King and Queen in their Royal Robes, and their Crowns on their Heads, after the manner of the Goths, were lifted up on the Shoulders of the Nobility, the Royal Standards were display'd, and they proclaim'd by a Herauld. Presently after Levies of Men were made underhand in both Kingdoms. It was given out those Preparations were to assist the French, but in truth they
were design'd against Castile. This could not be so secret but the King of Castile understood it. Embassadors pass'd betwixt them, but to no effect. Then the two Kings advanc'd as far as Hariza, upon the Borders of Aragon, designing to break into Castile on that side. To A new Breach of the Peace. this purpose James Gomez de Sandoval put a Garrison into Pen̄afiel, and Prince Peter of Ara∣gon came to the Camp from Medina del Campo. The King of Castile made great Levies, and commanded all the Nobility to assist him, particularly Prince Henry of Aragon, and Frederick Duke of Arjona were summon'd. Besides he oblig'd the three Estates to take an Oath they would serve him faithfully in that War, and discover any Designs against him, making a Vow if they fail'd to go bear-footed to Hicrusalem, without ever desiring to be absolv'd of that Vow. This was done at Palencia at the beginning of May. D. Al∣varo de Luna, the Admiral, Peter Manrique, and Peter Fernandez de Velasco were appointed to guard the Frontiers with 2000 Horse, no sufficient Force to oppose the Aragonians. James Lopez de Zun̄iga was order'd to follow them, as a reserve with another Body of Horse. The King himself with part of the Army undertook the Siege of Pen̄afiel. He encamp'd before it, and summon'd the Inhabitants to surrender upon pain of being us'd as Traitors. The Townsmen immediatly surrender'd and were pardoned. D. Peter de Aragon, and James Gomez de Sandoval Earl of Castro retir'd to the Castle, which was not besieg'd because it would require much time. The Kings of Aragon and Navarre enter'd Castile by the way of Cogolluda, and encamp'd in an open Plain. The Castilians on a Hill a League and half distant. The Forces of Aragon and Navarre consisted of 2500 Horse, 1000 Foot, all well Armed and old Soldiers. In the Camp of Castile there were but 1700 Horse, and 400 Foot. Both Parties being eager to fight mov'd forwards on the first of July, the Generals exhorting their Men. D. Alvaro de Luna, when the Enemy came in sight perceiving the greatness of the Danger, order'd the Carts to be drawn up about his Men in the Nature of a Trench, resolving not to fight unless he had some Advantage, or were forc'd. Prince Henry for the one side, and the Lieutenant Peter Manrique for the other met, and conclud∣ed nothing, having only affronted one another. Some Skirmishes pass'd betwixt them, but the Cardinal of Faux, the Pope's Legate in Aragon interposing, the Battle was deferr'd till next day. That delay prov'd Advantagious, for the Queen of Aragon, a Woman of a man∣ly Spirit came and pitched her Tent betwixt the two Armies, and manag'd the Affair so discreetly, that Peace was concluded, and as soon as the Castilians had sworn to observe it Hostilities ceas'd. The Castilians stay'd in the same place, but the Kings of Aragon and Na∣varre King John of Castile breaks in∣to Aragon. returned home without doing any harm to the Country. Prince Henry was of late very near surprizing the City Toledo, but failing a little before the Skirmish, went and joyn'd his Brothers. Now relying on the Articles of Peace, he went by the way of Siguen∣ça to Veles, resolving if what had been agreed upon in relation to him were not observed to raise new Troubles. Nevertheless the King of Castile advanc'd with 10000 Horse, and 50000 Foot. His Sister the Queen of Aragon, and the Cardinal of Faux told him what had been agreed, and advis'd to lay down his Arms. But he desirous of Revenge said, that Treaty was concluded without his Consent, and that it was but reasonable to chastize the Insolency of the two Kings. He lay near Balmaçan, a Town on the Banks of the River Duero. Thither came Frederick Duke of Arjona, and Earl of Trastamara, who was imme∣diately apprehended and sent Prisoner to the Castle of Pen̄afiel, now in the King's Power, where he dy'd the following Year. Thence the King of Castile mov'd into the Dominions of Aragon striking a mighty Terror into that Country. The Country People with what they could save fled to Places of Strength, whilst the Soldiers burnt and plunder'd the deso∣late Villages. Hariza is a strong Town seated on an Eminence, thither the Army came, and because the Townsmen retir'd into the Castle the Town was plunder'd, and great part of it burnt. At the same time Peter Velasco, who commanded upon the Frontiers of Navarre, enter'd that Country with a Body of Castilians. They took and burnt the Town of St. Vincente because the Castle was not tenable. The Bishop of Calahorra, and James de Zun̄iga his Nephew took the Town and Castle of Guardia. Besides D. Roderick Alonso Pi∣mentel, Earl of Benavente, with other Forces possess'd himself of the Towns and Forts be∣longing to Prince Henry in Castile. He forsaking Ocan̄a, the Head of his Patrimony, with∣drew to Segura, a Castle on the Borders of Portugal upon the Banks of the River Guadiana. There he left the Princess his Wife and return'd to Truxillo, to endeavour since he had lost the rest, to do some harm on that side. Thither came to him his Brother Prince Peter, a youth of a great Spirit, and who had learn'd experince in the Wars of Naples.
CHAP. II. Actions of the Aragonians against Castile. Several Assemblies of the Cortes. The Estates of the Princes of Aragon in Castile confiscated. A Truce concluded with that Crown for five Years. War with the Moors. CAstile was now Successful, had gain'd Reputation, and chastiz'd the Insolency of its Ene∣mies. It was tedious to besiege the Castle of Hariza, and the Advantage when taken, small; therefore the King of Castile return'd to Medina Celi, where having dispos'd good Garrisons along the Frontiers, he dismiss'd the rest of his Army. About the end of Autumn the King went away for Medina del Campo, where he had appointed the Cortes to meet him. His Absence encourag'd the Enemy. The King of Navarre was gone to defend his own. The Aragonian gathering his Forces enter'd Castile by the way of Soria, took the Town Aragoni∣ans invade Castile. of Deça, and the Castles of Ciria, and Borovia: Bozmediano was sold to him by the Govern∣our. Thus having taken a great Booty of Corn and Cattle, and many Prisoners, they re∣turn'd without any Loss to Calatayud, whence they set out. On the Borders of Portugal next the River Guadiana, the Princes of Aragon did greater harm, that Country of Estre∣madura, being plentiful of Cattle. Nor could the Earl of Benavente, sent thither to that purpose, make Head against them. Therefore D. Alvaro de Luna, and by his Order Peter Ponce, Lord of Marchena, repair'd thither. They sent to demand the Booty of the King of Portugal, because it was convey'd into that Country, but obtain'd nothing. For the King of Portugal was glad of the Troubles of Castile, which gave him an Opportunity of fixing him∣self in that Kingdom he had Usurp'd. The Princes of Aragon finding themselves too weak to withstand D. Alvaro, burnt the Suburbs of Truxillo, and fortify'd the Place, putting a good Garrison into the Castle. They themselves surpriz'd Albuquerque, a strong Town on the Frontiers of Portugal. This Loss was the more resented by the Castilians, because they were Jealous that the Portugueses might secure that Town. By the Advice of D. Alvaro the King went thither in Person, that his Presence might influence, and the Success might be attributed to him. Truxillo and Montanges were taken, but Albuquerque could not be reduc'd. The King and D. Alvaro return'd to Medina del Campo, leaving the Master of Alcantara, and D. John, Son to Peter Ponce, to command upon the Frontiers. At the taking of Truxillo there Truxillo recovered by a strange Contri∣vance. happen'd a remarkable Passage. D. Alvaro the Constable was in the Town, and the Castle held out for Prince Henry. One Garci Sanchez de Quincozes, who had great influence over the Garrison, hinder'd the Governour from treating of a surrender. D. Alvaro with much Difficulty obtain'd to speak with him at a Wicket, which look'd towards the Camp, to which there was a steep Ascent. They met, and Garci Sanchez giving no ear either to Threats or Promises, the Constable clasp'd him in his Arms, and both roul'd down the Hill, so that before he could be reliev'd from the Fort, he was taken by 100 Men lay'd in Am∣bush to that purpose, upon which the Castle immediately surrender'd. At the same time the Forces of Castile receiv'd a Defeat in the Plains of Arabiana, that lie at the Foot of the Mountain Moncayo. Ruy Diaz de Mendoça call'd the Bald, tho born in Sevil commanded 400 Horse of Navarre. He defeated Yn̄igo Lopez de Mendoza, Lord of Hita, who ventur'd to fight him with a lesser Number. Few were killed, for the Commander perceiving his Men to give way retir'd to a rising Ground which he made good with a few that stood by him. The most fled and escap'd because the Enemy knew not the Country, and Night came on. At the beginning of the Year 1430 the Cortes of Castile assembled at Medina del Campo, and those of Catalonia at Tortosa, both Kings being present at their respective Assemblies. Mony was the common want of both, and both complain'd of the Perfidiousness of the Nobility. The King of Aragon would fain have reduc'd Frederick Earl of Luna, who favour'd Castile, but could not prevail, nor lay hold of him, therefore he confiscated all his Estate, which was very great. He of Castile did the same by the Princes of Aragon, and that they might have no hopes of being restor'd, divided all their Possessions among other great Men. Several noble Estates of the Prin∣ces of A∣ragon in Castile confiscat∣ed. Families rais'd out of the Ruins of those Princes, are still great in Castile. To Frederick Earl of Luna, who fled out of Aragon and came to Medina del Campo, were given the Towns of Cu∣ellar, Villalon, and Arjona, with other Revenues to support his Grandeur. Queen Ellenor of Aragon was put into the Monastery of S. Clare at Tordesillas, and had three Castles taken from her, that she might not be in a Condition to assist her Sons. Yet soon after she was set at Li∣berty, and her Castles restor'd to her upon promise that she would not be aiding to them in that War. An Embassy came from Portugal about concluding a Truce betwixt Castile and Aragon till they could agree upon Articles of Peace, but prov'd unsuccessful. Some Au∣thors write, that this Year on Palm-Sunday a most fragrant Smell issu'd from the Tomb of Pope Benedict at Pen̄iscola; I cannot give much credit to this particular, but this Report was the cause why his Nephew John de Luna translated him thence to Illueca, a Town of his own, be∣twixt Tarraçona and Calatayud, having obtain'd leave for so doing conditionally he bury'd him not in hallow'd Ground, as being Excommunicate when he dy'd. The King of Castile hav∣ing gather'd his Forces, march'd to Osma in order to enter Aragon, having order'd Frederick
Enriquez the Admiral with the Fleet to do all the Mischief he could upon the Coasts of that Kingdom. Both the Kings of Aragon and Navarre prepar'd for War, but advanc'd little, their Subjects looking upon that as very unfortunate. On the 14th of June Embassadors from the King of Aragon arriv'd at Osma to treat of Peace. Being admitted to Audience they cast all the Odium of that War upon the King's Favourites, whereupon D. Alvaro and the Earl of Benavente spoke for themselves and others, which rais'd some hard Words among them. Raymund Perellos one of the Aragonian Embassadors offer'd to make good what had been say'd by Combat, but the King being present the Dispute ended. Afterwards the Em∣bassadors spoke with all the Castilian Noblemen apart and inclin'd them to Peace. The Ar∣my of Castile lay incamp'd at the Bridge of Garay, suppos'd to be the Place where Numantia stood: Thence the King march'd to Majano. There a Truce was concluded for 5 Years, Truce for 5 Years. upon these Conditions; That Commerce should be restor'd: That the Princes of Aragon should deliver Albuquerque, and not come into Castile during the time of the Truce; That the King of Castile should not take from them the other Towns they were then possess'd of; and lastly, That Frederick Earl of Luna, and Godfrey Marques of Cortes, who were then fled into Castile should not be wrong'd by the Kings of Aragon and Navarre. To agree other Diffe∣rences seven Commissioners should be appointed on each side, with Power to determine. Im∣mediately this Truce was proclaim'd in the Camp, and soon after in all other Places, to the great Satisfaction of the People. Expresses were sent to carry the News, and particularly to Portugal, where that King then celebrated the Nuptials of his Daughter Elizabeth with Phi∣lip Duke of Burgundy. Of her was born Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, no less famous for his great Exploits, than for his unfortunate End. The King of Aragon sent a Fleet to bring his Brothers from Portugal, designing to employ them in the War of Naples, upon which he had bent all his Thoughts, but they came not then. The Army of Castile broke up at Osma, with Orders to be in a readiness the next Spring to make War upon the Moors of Granada. All the rest of that Summer the King spent at Madrigal, where the Queen then was. The end of the War of Aragon was the beginning of two others, viz. that of Naples, and that of Granada. Mahomet the left-handed being restor'd to his Crown, as has been said, re∣fus'd War with the Moors. to pay the usual Tribute. Yet he desir'd a Truce which was neither granted nor de∣ny'd whilst the War of Aragon was in Hand, but an Embassador was sent to amuze the Moor. Now another Embassy came from him to the same Effect, it was answer'd nothing could be concluded till he pay'd what was due. Alonso de Lorca sent to the King of Tunez with rich Presents to acquaint him how ungratefully the King of Granada acted, prevail'd with him to send Mahomet no relief out of Africk. The Cortes met at Salamanca, and granted a greater supply than had been ask'd, because the War was against the Infidels. D. Gonçalo Bishop of Jaen, and James de Ribera Lieutenant of Andaluzia, with 800 Horse, and 300 Foot enter'd the Plain of Granada, where they lay'd two Ambushes. 80 Horse advanc'd to draw out the Moors, who pursu'd them cautiously till they saw the first Ambush fly, as had been order'd. Then the Moors thinking the Danger over follow'd disorderly, and fell into the other Am∣buscade, where 200 of them were kill'd, and 100 taken, the rest knowing the Country escap'd. Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo with a Party made an Incursion towards Ronda, but was forc'd to retire with some Loss. Soon after Roderick Perez Lieutenant of Cazorla, making another inroad was surpriz'd, most of his Men cut off, and he had much ado to escape. Gar∣cia Mighty Floods. de Herrera in the Night surpriz'd the Town of Ximena. At this time the Floods were great, and particularly the River Aragon in Navarre carry'd away great part of the Town of Sanguessa. The King of Castile summon'd James Gomez de Sandoval, Earl of Castro, and D. John de Sotomayor, Master of Alcantara to appear before him, but they favouring the Princes of Aragon refus'd to obey. At the same time D. Alvaro de Luna, his first Wife dying, marry'd Joanna, Daughter to the Earl of Benavente at Palencia, but without much Solemnity, because the Brides Grandmother dy'd then. The King and Queen honour'd the Wedding. This was at the beginning of the Year 1431. 1431. CHAP. III. The Death of Pope Martin the V. Eugenius the IV succeeds him. The Moors of Gra∣nada overthrown in Battle. Peace concluded with Portugal. A Truce with the Moors. Prince Peter of Aragon made Prisoner. ON the 20th of February the same Year 1431, tho some will have it to be the Year following, 1431. dy'd Pope Martin the V. at Rome of an Apoplexy, being now reconciled to the Aragoni∣ans, Pope Martin the V. dies. Eugenius the IV. succeeds him. whose King Alonso he had invited to Italy. Eugenius the IV. succeeded him on the 3d of May. Cardinal Jordan Ʋrsinus was very instrumental towards his Promotion, therefore he favour'd the Family of Ʋrsini, and perfecuted that of Colonna their Adversaries, and Joanna Queen of Naples in imitation of him took the City Salerno from Antony Colonna. The King of Castile resolving to go in Person to the War against the Moors, appointed Peter Manrique to govern Castile in his Absence. Then from Medina del Campo he went to Toledo, where in the
Cathed ral he spent all Night in Armour, as those that were to be Knighted used to do. In the Morning he caus'd his Colours to be bless'd and set out. Cuidad Real is in the mid-way, where he made some stay, and on the 24th of April at two in the Afternoon there was such an A great Earth∣quake. Earthquake that many Buildings were shaken, and some Battlements of the Castle fell down. The King was forc'd to fly into the Fields, and all was in a great Consternation for fear of him, but not a Man was kill'd. In Aragon, Catalonia and Russillon the Damage was great, se∣veral Towns being wholly overthrown, and others suffering much by Earthquakes. Soon after at Granada, and in the Camp which lay near it, the Armies being ready to engage, the Earth shook, which both Parties look'd upon as an ill Omen to themselves. All Spain was in a Consternation, apprehending fatal Consequences. At Barcelona dy'd now Queen Violante, be∣ing of a great Age, she was Wife to King John the 1. and Grandmother to Luis Duke of An∣jou, with whom the Aragonians were now at War about the Crown of Naples. In May the King of Castile came to Cordova, and from thence sent D. Alvaro de Luna before him with a good Body of Men, who wasted all the Country, and destroy'd the very Orchards in sight of Granada, without sparing a beautiful Palace that King had there. Yet neither this Damage King John of Castile invades Granada. nor the Challenges sent by D. Alvaro could draw the Moors out to fight. A Council of War being held at Cordova, some advis'd only to pillage and wast the Country, others to under∣take some considerable Siege. At length it was resolv'd to march to Granada and try the Fortune of a compleat Battle, as one Gilairo advis'd, who having been taken by the Moors young, had renounc'd the Faith, but not from his Heart, and was therefore now return'd to Cordova. He assur'd that as soon as they should appear before the City, Joseph Benelmao, the Grandson of Mahomet the Red, who was kill'd at Sevil, would come over with a good Body of Men. This being resolv'd, the Queen who till then accompany'd the King, departed for Carmona, and the Army march'd on. The King halted at Alvendin till all the Forces were joyn'd. 80000 Men randezvouzed there, and among them many of Note. James Ribera, and John de Guzman, had the  of Major Generals, which before was executed by the Mar∣shals. Advancing thence, of the 2d day they came into the Country of the Moors, marching in order as if the Enemy were in sight. D. Alvaro de Luna led the Van, in which were 2500 Men at Arms. In the main Body was the King with many Nobles. In the Rear came the Courtiers, and a great Number of Church-men. The Flanks were secur'd by several great Men. The two Major Generals march'd before with a Forlorn of 1500 light Horse. These began the Battle, which was fought on the 29th of June, in this manner. The Moors march'd out of Granada with mighty shouts, but the Christians were the first that gain'd a rising Ground, which began the fight. Great was the Number of the Infidels, who were still relieved by Drives the Moors into that City. fresh of oops from the City. Our Forces also advanc'd. Peter Velasco gave such a Charge as made the Moors give way. Yet they retir'd orderly to the City, so that for that day none turn'd his Back. The Moors being retir'd, the King encamp'd and intrench'd himself at the foot of the Mount Elvira. Of the Moors there were 5000 Horse, and about 200000 Foot, part quarter'd in the Town, the rest under the Walls. On Sunday following the Infidels drew out to fight. The Master of Calatrava was with a Number of Pioniers levelling the Ground which was all enclos'd. Upon him and his Pioniers fell the first fury of the Moors. Henry Earl of Niebla, and James de Zun̄iga, who were nearest, came to his Relief. The heat of the fight and on the Day increas'd, for it was now about Noon. The King in a Passion, because he design'd not to have fought that day, sent D. Alvaro de Luna to command the Men to retire, but they were so far ingag'd it was impossible. This being told the King, he drew out all his Ar∣my, Gives them a great o∣verthrow. and having encourag'd them, gave the sign to fall on. They were vigorously receiv'd by the Moor  and great cries rais'd on both sides. For some time the Battle stood firm, so that no Advantage appear'd on either side. The King was among the foremost Ranks, which greatly encourag'd his Men, and made them charge with fresh fury. Then the Moors gave way, some retur'd to the City, others fled to the Mountains, our Men pursuing till the darkness of the Night parted them. It is not exactly known what Number was kill'd, but it was suppos'd to be about 10000. D. John de Cereçuela Bishop of Osma gain'd the Enemy's Camp, which was among the Vineyards and Olive Gardens, the other Church-men went out with their Crosses to meet the King as he return'd to the Camp. There the Army con∣tinu'd ten Days. No proposals of Peace were made by the Moors, tho they durst not so much as come out to their Vineyards. All the Country about was wasted without any Op∣position. This done the King return'd. The command of the Frontiers was given to the Master of Calatrava, and the Lieutenant James de Ribera. Benalmao was left with them, and had the Title of King given him, that if his Party prevail'd it might be a means to take Gra∣nada. This was the Success of this Expedition, and of the famous Battle called De la Higuera, Battle De la Higuera, or the Fig tree. or of the Fig Tree, because one stood in the Place where they fought. Few Christians were kill'd in this Expedition, and of those none of Note, which made the Joy of the Victory the more compleat. D. Nuno Alvarez Pereyra, Constable of Portugal, and Earl of Barcelos and Oren, who had long liv'd retir'd in the Monastery of Carmelites, built by himself in Lisbon, dy'd now in the 71 year of his Age, and 46 of his Constableship. He also founded two other Monasteries, one of St. George, at Aljubarrota, and another of St. Mary at Villaviciosa. The King honour'd his Funeral with his Presence, at the said Church of the Carmelites. He left one only Daughter,
called Beatrix, who was marry'd to D. Alonso, Duke of Bragança, Bastard Son to the King of Portugal. All his Estate he divided among his Grandchildren, born before his Death. The King of Portugal warn'd by the Death of his Friend, who was of the same Age with him, that he had not long to live, resolv'd to use all his endeavours to conclude a Peace with Ca∣stile. King John had departed out of the Kingdom of Granada very hastily, whereby many said a good Opportunity of gaining some Advantage was lost. It was reported that D. Al∣varo was brib'd to give this Advice by a great sum of Gold sent him in a Present of dry Figs, and this was the more easily credited, because all things were done by his Advice. From Cordova they went to Toledo, and thence to Medina del Campo, whither the Cortes were sum∣mon'd. In them nothing remarkable was done, except the changing the Truce with Portu∣gal Peace be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. into a perpetual Peace, which was proclaim'd on the 30th of October at Medina and Lisbon. The Earl of Castro was attainted of high Treason. The Towns belonging to the Master of Alcantara were confiscated and garrison'd by the King. Peter Fernandez de Velasco Earl of Haro, Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo, and D. Gutierre de Toledo Bishop of Palencia were appre∣hended, their Charge was favouring the Princes of Aragon, and contriving to kill D. Alvaro. These things much incensed the Nobility, some of whom resolv'd to take up Arms. Parti∣cularly Yn̄igo Lopez de Mendoça fortify'd and garrison'd the Town of Hita. Mony was rais'd for carrying on the War against the Moors, which was now well advanc'd, the Lieutenant and Master of Calatrava having taken Meros, Ronda, Cambil, Illoro, Archidona, Setenil, and other Places of less Note, and also the City Loxa, tho very strong, was gain'd. Our Forces besieged the Cittadel into which the Citizens were retir'd. Joseph Abencerrage came from Granada to relieve them, but was overthrown and kill'd. The Moors being ill affected to King Mahomet, and favouring Benalmao, Mahomet fled to Malaga, and Benalmao was receiv'd into Granada on the first day of the Year 1432. In January the same Year, Edward Prince of 1432. Portugal had a Son by his Wife the Lady Ellenor, called Alonso; afterwards famous for the Mahomet K. of Gra∣nada again expell'd, and re∣stor'd. Misfortunes that befel him. All the People of Granada endeavoured to signify their Affection to the new King. He took an Oath to be always a Friend to Castite, and justly pay the Tri∣bute agreed upon. But he was of a great Age, and therefore his Reign very short, for he dy'd the 6th Month after his Accession to the Crown, on the 24th of June. Thus Mahomet the left-handed was again call'd from Malaga, and restor'd to his Kingdom. As soon as re∣stor'd he made one Andilbar Governour of Granada instead of Joseph Abencerrage, who was kill'd, as has been say'd. He concluded a Truce for a short time with Castile. The Princes of Aragon ceas'd not to disturb the Peace on the Borders of Portugal, and the King's Treasure being exhausted he could not withstand so many Enemies, which oblig'd him to agree to this Truce. Besides he was willing to oblige the King of Tunez, who interceded for that King D. Alvaro de Isorna Bishop of Cuenca was sent to endeavour to reduce the Master of Alcantara, who sided with the Princes of Aragon, but could not prevail upon him. Yet soon after some signs of Repentance appearing, Dr. Franco was sent on the same Errand: But he on a sudden deliver'd the Castle of Alcantara to Prince Peter, and the Doctor himself to Prince Henry, which render'd him incapable of the King's Mercy, and also made him odious to the People, as a Man who violated the publick Faith. D. Frederick the Admiral, and Peter Manrique the Lieutentant with a good Force were order'd to besiege Albuquerque, and manage the War against the Princes of Aragon. Gutierre de Sotomayor, chief Commendary of Alcantara, on the first of July at Night surpriz'd Prince Peter in his Bed, and deliver'd him up to the King, who in reward for this good Service made him Master of Alcantara in the place of his Uncle. The Commendaries of the Order met and condemn'd D. John de Sotomayor, whereupon D. Gutierre was chosen Master. All the Nobles of Castile that had been imprisoned were dis∣charg'd. CHAP. IV. The declining posture of the Aragonians at Naples; Yet that King is again invited thi∣ther and adopted anew by the Queen. He agrees with Castile. King John of Portugal dies. Edward succeeds. ALonso King of Aragon returning into Spain (as has been said) his Party wholly declin'd in Naples. His Adversaries grew strong, most of the Nobility sided with them, and The Ara∣gonians decline at Naples. but few inclin'd to the Aragonians. Yet, they tho too weak to maintain that War, undertook another. The Family of Fregosa very powerful at Genoa being expell'd thence by Philip Duke of Milan, had recourse for succour to Prince Peter, who then supported the Interest of the King his Brother in Naples with a very small Power. He hoping to make himself Master of that City, or at least to be reveng'd on the Duke of Milan for the wrongs done during the late War, joyn'd his Forces with the Fregosos and Fliscos, and recover'd several places along the Coast of Genoa. The Duke fearing to lose Genoa, sent Embassadors to Spain, promising the King to deliver to him the City Bonifacio, the Capital of Corsica, for which Island the Ara∣gonians and Genoeses had long contended. The King lik'd the Proposals, and sent an Embassa∣dor
into Italy to conclude the Peace. Bonisacio could not be deliver'd, the Senate of Genoa op∣posing it, but instead of it they gave Portovenere and Letici. Prince Peter came from Sicily, whither he had return'd, put Garrisons into those Places, and leaving 6 Galleys with Duke Philip to guard the Coast, sail'd away with the rest of the Fleet. Then having plunder'd an Island on the Coast of Africk, call'd Circina, now Charcana, and setled the Affairs of Sicily and Naples, he return'd to Spain to assist his Brothers without any hopes of recovering the Kingdom of Naples. King Alonso however despair'd not, believing the Forces of the Enemy would decay, the Minds of the Natives would alter, and the Queen her self grow weary of those Guests. Nor was he deceiv'd; for the Duke of Anjou was sent by the Queen into Calabria with orders to apply himself to the Military Affairs without concerning himself with the Go∣vernment. Caracciolo, Seneschal of Naples, gave this Advice, hoping to draw all the Power in∣to Alonso K. of Aragon again in∣vited to Naples. his own Hands, and perceiving he was thereby grown odious, he invited the King of Ara∣gon into the Kingdom, promising to stand by him. Antony Ʋrsino Prince of Taranto, a noble Person, and ambitious of Honour, sollicited the return of the Aragonians. These advices mov'd the King of Aragon, tho he did not wholly conside in those Men, nor would he utterly reject their offers. Therefore having fitted out a Fleet of 26 Galleys, and 9 great Ships, and left the Government of the Kingdom to his Brothers, he resolv'd to sail over to Africk, there to gain Reputation, and be the nearer to his Friends. With this design he set sail from Va∣lencia, and after touching in Sardinia, arriv'd in Sicily. The French had besieg'd the strong Castle of Trupia in Calabria, and reduc'd it to such extremity, that the besieg'd promis'd to surrender if not reliev'd in 20 Days. Storms hinder'd the King from coming in time, and the Place was deliver'd in his sight. At Messina 70 Sail joyn'd the Fleet of Aragon, and they altogether steer'd their Course for Gelves, an Island on the Coast of Africk. It is near to an∣other Island call'd Sitre the lesser, and is encompassed with dangerous movable Sands, being but four Miles from the Continent, full of Inhabitants and a delightful Place. On the West it draws nearer the Continent, to which it is joyn'd by a Bridge a Mile in length. This enter∣prize was difficult, the place being strong and well guarded, for Bofferriz King of Tunez having intelligence of the Design was come thither to defend it. At first landing the Arago∣nians took the Bridge, and overthrew the Moors, forcing them to retire to their Camp, which He over∣throws the Moors in Africk. also they enter'd, and after a hot Dispute near the King's Tent put them again to flight. The slaughter was not great, nor the Booty, but 20 pieces of Cannon were taken. Neverthe∣less they could not make themselves Masters of the Island, for the Islanders spent much time in capitulating, till, as they had design'd, the Fleet for want of Provisions was forc'd to re∣turn to Messina. There it was consulted how to recover Naples. To forward this Design it happen'd that John Carracciolo was murder'd by the Contrivance of Corbella Rufa, Wife to Antony Mariano, Duke of Sessa, she being the next to him in the Queen's Favour, and hating him mortally. The King, who let slip no Opportunity to advance his Interest, sent immedi∣ately Embassadors to the Queen, and went over himself to the Island Ischia, to be the nearer to her. Most of the Summer was spent in treating, but at length the Queen disannull'd the Adoption of the Duke of Anjou, and renew'd that of King Alonso. This was all privately transacted by the Advice of Corbella, by whom the Queen was wholly directed. Whilst these Differen∣ces be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Aragon composed things were in Agitation at Naples, the Princes of Aragon were in great danger, Peter being a Prisoner, and Henry besieg'd in Albuquerque. A greater War was fear'd, because the Ar∣ticles agreed on before had not been observ'd, whereof the Embassadors of Castile complain'd to John King of Navarre, who was Lieutenant to his Brother of Aragon. At length it was agreed that the two Princes should deliver up Albuquerque, and all other Places they held, and so depart Castile. This being concluded by the Mediation of the King of Portugal, the two Brothers, and Catherine, Wife to Prince Henry, with the Master of Alcantara, and Bi∣shop of Coria embarked at Lisbon, and went thence to Valencia, designing to try their Fortunes again in Spain; or if that fail'd to go over into Italy, which was what their Brother desir'd, being resolv'd to conquer the Kingdom of Naples, as knowing well the Queen was more in∣clin'd to his Competitor, and only study'd to amuze him. Frederick Earl of Luna kept up his Intelligence with Castile intending to betray Taraçona and Calatayud, Towns on the Fron∣tiers of Aragon, to King John. This seem'd the more easy, because at the same time there arose a Dispute about the Jurisdiction of the Church of Toledo. D. John de Contreras, Archbishop of Toledo with six others was appointed by the King of Castile to compose the Differences be∣twixt him and the Crown of Aragon. D. John as Primate of all Spain carry'd the Cross before him, which the Bishop of Taraçona first, and then the Arch-bishop of Zaragoça as Metropoli∣tan complain'd of. This Dispute betwixt the Prelates hinder'd the most important Affair of the Peace, which was the general Concern from being brought to an Issue, and it was fear'd the Truce being expir'd the War would again break out. Both Parties prepar'd for it, and both were streighten'd for Mony, but chiefly the Aragonians exhausted with such lasting Wars. Several strange Apparitions in the Sky terrify'd the Spaniards already alarm'd with the Apprehension of a new War. Particularly at Cuidad Rodrigo, where the King of Castile then Appariti∣ons in the Air, and other Pro∣digles. lay, there was seen for a long time a Flame moving about, which ended in a terrible clap of Thunder that was hear'd above 30 Miles from thence. At the beginning of the Year 1433, it Snow'd in Aragon and Nevarre for the space of 40 Days continually, which destroy'd vast 1433.
Numbers of Cattle and Fowl. The very wild Beasts came from the Woods to the Towns forc'd by hunger to seek Food. From Cuidad Rodrigo the King of Castile went to Madrid to hold the Cortes. Thither resorted so great a Multitude that the Town tho large could not contain it, and many were forc'd to lodge in the neighbouring Villages. Here it was con∣sulted how to carry on the War of Granada, the Truce being expir'd. Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo was sent to begin the War. He took some strong Holds from the Moors. All the rest of Spain enjoy'd Peace this Year. The Nobility of Castile strove to out do one another in the splendour of their Retinues and Expences, spending the time in running at Tilt and such Sports to delight the King and People, without any care of the War. At Lisbon this Year the Plague carry'd off great Numbers of People. King John of Portugal dy'd on the 14th of Au∣gust, K. John of Portugal dies. His Son Ed∣ward suc∣ceeds him. at the Age of 76, 4 Months; and 3 Days, and having Reign'd 48 Years, 4 Months, and 9 Days. He is famous for having in such a confusion of times secur'd that Kingdom to his Posterity. His Son Edward succeeded him, and was declar'd King in a great Assembly of the Nobility, being then 41 Years, 9 Months, and 14 Days old. Besides his other Felicities King John was happy in a numerous Issue, by his Wife Philippa, Daughter to John Duke of Lan∣caster. First he had Blanch, who dy'd young; 2dly Alonso, who liv'd but 10 Years; 3dly Ed∣ward, who succeeded him; 4thly Peter Duke of Coimbra, 5thly, Henry Duke of Viseo, 6thly John Constable of Portugal, 7thly Ferdinand Master of Avis, and 8thly Elizabeth marry'd to Philip Earl of Flanders and Duke of Burgundy. On the Day of King Edward's Coronation, it is reported that a Jewish Physician call'd Gudiala advis'd to put off that Ceremony till the Afternoon, else it would be unfortunate, but his Council was slighted as superstitious. As soon as the King took upon him the Government, he order'd the Funeral of his Father with greater Pomp than had been till then, he with all the Nobility accompanying the Corps to the Church of Batalla at Aljubarrota, built by the deceas'd King, as was said before. All the rest of this King's Reign was answerable to this pious Beginning. CHAP. V. The Council of Basil. The Affairs of Naples, and death of the Duke of Anjou, and the Queen of Naples. The Nobility of that Kingdom incline to favour the Aragoni∣ans. The Pope expell'd Rome and restor'd. POpe Martin the last Year of his Life had summon'd all the Christian Prelates to hold a General Council at Basil, in order to reform the universal Corruption of Manners, and Council of Basil. to  to the true Faith the Bohemians, then tainted with new Heresies. Cardinal Julian Cesarinus went from Rome to be present at the opening of the Council Eugenius successor to Pope Martin endeavour'd to remove the Council into Italy, but Sigismund the Emperor oppos'd it. Other Princes were courted to joyn with each of them. The King of Aragon thought fit to be of the Emperor's Party, hoping he would be the surer Friend to him towards obtaining the Kingdom of Naples. For this Reason he sent his Embassadors to Basil, as did all the other Princes of Spain mov'd by his Example. At the beginning of the Year 1434 dy'd at Basil Car∣dinal Alonso Carrillo, a Person of great Learning and Wisdom, and Protector of Spain. D. 1434. Alonso Carrillo his Nephew succeeded him in the Bishoprick of Siguença, and came at last to be Archbishop of Toledo. Sigismund the Emperor answer'd not the Expectations of the King of Aragon, but as soon as he was crown'd at Rome, as if the Crown had chang'd his Nature, he made a League with the Venetians, Florentines, and Philip Duke of Milan for expelling the Aragonians out of all Italy with their joynt Forces. This he did rather to comply with the Pope, than out of any particular Prejudice. But all things happen'd otherwise than they ex∣pected, as shall appear hereafter. Frederick Earl of Luna added one Crime to all his former Extravagancies, which brought End of the Earl of Luna. him to his Ruin. He was bold and restless, had left a great Estate in Aragon, and sold the Towns given him in Castile. Being by his Prodigality reduc'd to Poverty, he resolv'd to plunder the rich City of Sevil. He was offended at the Earl of Niebla, who had great Pow∣er in that City, and design'd by the way to be reveng'd on him. So great an Enterprize was not to be undertaken without Company. To this purpose he drew together many whom their leud Lives had reduc'd to want, and among them two considerable Men call'd Regidores, of Sevil. A Secret could not be kept among so many. The Plot was discover'd and D. Fre∣derick secur'd at Medina del Campo, whither the King went at the beginning of the Year. Thence he was carry'd to Ʋren̄a, and afterwards to a Castle near Olmedo, where he ended his Days, pitied by no Man, the Castilians hating him as a Deserter from his Prince. His Companions were all put to Death. Violante Countess of Niebla, his Sister, who would have interceded for him, was not permitted to speak to the King, but sent away to Cuellar, with Orders she should not stir from thence without leave, it being suspected that the Earl had un∣dertook that desperate Enterprize relying on her Assistance. The Punishment of the Earl no way discouraged the Princes of Aragon from proceeding in their wicked Practices after they were expell'd Castile. The King of Castile complain'd that they violated the Conditions of
the Truce agreed upon not long before, and therefore said it was requisite to secure the pub∣lick Peace they should be sent out of Spain. The King of Navarre having hear'd the Embassa∣dors, perswaded the Princes his Brothers to go over into Italy, whither he would soon follow them, telling them the Kingdom of Naples once conquer'd it would be easy to recover their Estates in Castile. They went over to Sicily, where King Alonso then was endeavouring to gain the Affections of the Neapolitan Nobility, and to settle a Peace with the Princes of Italy in or∣der to possess himself of Naples. Above all he labour'd to reconcile Pope Eugenius whom he knew to be his Enemy. A fair Opportunity seem'd now to offer it self, the Queen having been long Sick, and the Nobility at variance, and a great Misfortune befalling the Pope in this manner. Antony Colonna Prince of Salerno coming to Rome, the People mutiny'd and expell'd Pope Eu∣genius expelled Rome by the Peo∣ple. the Pope, being inrag'd for that he persecuted the Family of Colonna, and because through his Fault Francis Sforcia with some Forces of the Duke of Milan had wasted the Territory of Rome. The Pope fled down the Tiber in a Boat, the People throwing Stones at him, and in the Gal∣leys he found at Ostia, went away into Tuscany. This Affront offer'd the Pope variously af∣fected several Princes. Some of them said he had well deserv'd it for provoking the People, and opposing the Council of Basil. The News of this Accident reach'd the King of Aragon at Palermo on the 9th of July. He hop'd this might be a means to gain the Pope to his Interest. Therefore he sent Embassadors to condole, and offer his Assistance for vanquishing his Ene∣mies, and pacifying the People. The Pope accepted not his offer, for within the 5th Month the Tumults of Rome ceas'd, and the Citizens submitted themselves to him admitting a Gar∣rison into the Capitol, which done they were absolv'd of the Censures they had incurr'd by affronting the Pope. On the 16th of September dy'd D. John de Contreras Archbishop of Toledo at Alcala de Henares. His Body was bury'd with Pomp in the Cathedral of Toledo. The Chapter was divided about choosing one to succeed him; some were for Vasco Ramirez de Guzman Archdeacon of Toledo, others for the Dean Ruy Garcia de Villaquiran. This disagree∣ment gave the King an Opportunity to intrepose, and by his Procurement D. John de Cereçuela Archbishop of Sevil was elected. At the same time that the King was at Madrid, D. Henry de Villena dy'd there. He sustain'd the Loss of his vast Fortune with great Patience, living to a great Age, and wholly devoted to his Study. His Inclination to Learning was such, that he study'd Magick, and some of his Books were afterwards burnt by the King's Order. The Nobility of Naples favour the Aragoni∣ans. Nobility of Naples weary of the Government of a Woman, and of her Extravagances in∣clin'd to favour the King of Aragon. He drew to his Party with great Promises, Nicholas Picinus then a renouned Captain in Italy, and Kinsman to Braccio. At Palermo he also joyn'd in League with the Prince of Taranto, and all his Adherents, who being injur'd by the Duke of Anjou and James Caldora, had recourse to the King of Aragon for Relief. It was agreed they should espouse the Quarrel of the Aragonian, he assisting them with 2000 Horse, and 1000 Foot, which they judged a sufficient Force to oppose the Enemy, but it prov'd otherwise. For the Prince of Taranto was soon stripp'd of all his Possessions, which were great, except some few small Places of very great Strength. The War seem'd to be near an end, when the Duke of Anjou worn with Fatigue, and overcome by the Unhealthiness of the Air dyed in Calabria about the middle of November in the Flower of his Age, and the height of his Pros∣perity, being almost possess'd of the Kingdom, and then newly marry'd to Margaret, Daugh∣ther to Amedee Duke of Savoy. The Queen of Naples also departed this Life in that City, at Joanna Q. of Naples dies. the beginning of the Year 1435. Her Body was bury'd with little Ceremony in the Church Annunciada. The Death of the Queen and Duke advanc'd the Interest of Aragon, and weaken'd that of the French. Yet the People of Naples without any Order, or consulting the Nobili∣ty 1435. proclaim'd Renee, Brother to the late Duke their King, as the Queen had order'd in her Will. But there was little help to be expected from him, being then a Prisoner. He had marry'd the Daughter of the Duke of Lorrain, and he dying without Issue-male possess'd him∣self of that Dukedom. Antony Earl of Vaudemont, Brother to the deceas'd, overthrew, took him Prisoner, and deliver'd him up to the Duke of Burgundy. Orin Carracciolo, George Alemani, and Baltasar Rata, the most noted Men of the French Faction were appointed Governours at Naples. In Spain D. Roderick de Velasco, Bishop of Palencia was unfortunately kill'd by his own Cook, who being distracted and going about with a Club in his Hand, was ask'd what he de∣sign'd to do with it, he answer'd, kill the Bishop, but being a Forreigner and not well un∣derstood, because he spoke not plain was laugh'd at, yet presently after he came upon the Bishop and beat out his Brains.
CHAP. VI. Mighty Inundations throughout Spain. A great Victory over the Moors. The further Actions of the Aragonians at Naples. The Kings of Aragon and Navarre taken by the Genoeses, and set at Liberty by the Duke of Milan. THIS prov'd a dangerous Winter in Castile, by reason of the great Rains. The Roads were so deep there was scarce any Travelling. Many Buildings were carry'd away by Great Floods in Castile. the Floods at Valladolid, and more at Medina del Campo. In 40 Days no Corn was ground, so that the People fed upon the Grain. boil'd for want of Bread. At Sevil the River Guadal∣quivir swell'd within a Yard of the top of the Walls. Some of the Inhabitants liv'd aboard Ships for fear of being drown'd, others Day and Night were repairing the Walls, and Cauk∣ing the Gates. These Rains and Storms began on the 28th of October, and continu'd without ceasing till the 25th of March. Mean while the War with the Moors was carry'd on with va∣rious Success. James de Ribera the Lieutenant at the Siege of Alora was kill'd with a Dart from the Wall. At another place in a Skirmish the Moors slew John Faxardo, Son to Alonso Faxardo the Lieutenant. Perafan Son to James Ribera, tho but 15 years of Age succeeded him, in recompence for the good Service done by his Father. These Losses were in some measure made up by the taking of Huescar, a very strong Town, by Assault. Roderick Man∣rique, Son to the Lieutenant Peter Manrique, took it. Besides, a great Body of Moors that was marching to the Relief of it was overthrown by the Lieutenant of Caçorla, and the Lord of Valdecorneja, whereupon the Castle, which still held out, surrendred. But another Misfor∣tune soon allay'd the Joy of this Victory. D. Gutierre de Sotomayor, Master of Alcantara made an Incursion into the Lands of the Moors with 800 Horse, and 400 Foot to attack Archidona. The Moors gave the Alarm, firing their Beacons, upon which about 500 Men got together Arm'd with Darts and Slings, and securing the Passes kill'd most of the Christians, so that Slaughter of the Christi∣ans. he escap'd with a very few. This Misfortune mov'd the Lord of Valdecorneja to raise the Siege he had lay'd to Huelma, tho it was near surrendring, fearing the Moors, encourag'd by this Success, would come to relieve it. He soon gather'd more Forces, and joyning with the Bishop of Jaen wasted all the Territory of Guadix, burning the Corn which was fit to cut. His Force was 1500 Horse, and 6000 Foot. A great Number of Horse, and 40000 Foot march'd from Granada to oppose him. Nothing daunted at that Multitude he engag'd, and A small Body of Christians defeats a great one of Moors. put them to flight, killing 400, the Night hindring the pursuit. This Day the Lieutenant Perca signaliz'd himself, for his Horse being kill'd, and he wounded in the Leg, he still fought so bravely afoot that the Moors were glad to leave him. In the Kingdom of Murcia, not far from Huescar, there are two Towns, call'd Velez el Roxo, and Velez el Blanco. The Lieutenant Faxardo lay'd Siege to, and had them both surrendred. These things we have related are what happen'd in three Years against the Moors; we have put them together to avoid con∣founding the Memory. This Year we now write of was Remarkable for the Peace conclud∣ed betwixt France and Burgundy, which prov'd very Advantageous to France, but this belongs to their Histories. In Spain the Queens of Aragon and Navarre, whilst the Kings their Hus∣bands besieg'd Gaeta, as shall be related, obtain'd of the King of Castile (who was going from Madrid to Buitrago to be entertain'd by In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça) that the Truce should be prolong'd till the first of November. John de Luna Lord of Illueca sent Embassador on this Account, obtain'd this of D. Alvaro de Luna, who then manag'd all things, and was joyful for that he had a Son born at Madrid, who was call'd D. John. The King express'd great Satisfaction for it, and the Nobility feign'd it to gain his Favour. The Death of the Seneschal, John Carracciolo, the Duke of Anjou, and Queen Joanna, seem'd to have made way for the King of Aragon to obtain the Crown of Naples. Many of the No∣bility Progress of the A∣ragonians at Naples. having consulted together, seiz'd the City and Castle of Capua, and sent thence Regi∣nald de Aquino into Sicily to offer their Service to the King of Aragon, provided he would im∣mediately come to their Aid, before the Enemy gather'd strength. With the King were his three Brothers, all of Age, fit for War, and well inclin'd to it. Prince Peter was left in Sicily to gather the Fleet. The King with his Brother of Navarre, and Prince Henry set sail from Messina only with 7 Galleys. He touch'd at the Island Ponça, then at Ischia, and lastly came to Sessa, whither a great Number of Noblemen was come from Capua to meet him. The chief of them was Antony Marsano, Duke of Sessa. Here they consulted about carrying on the War, and it was resolv'd to besiege Gaeta. On the 7th of May it was invested by the Neapolitan Forces at Land, and the Fleet of Aragon at Sea. The Prince of Taranto came thi∣ther with his Forces. The King of Aragon possess'd himself of Mount Orlando, which over∣tops the City, whereby great hope was conceiv'd it would surrender, the Townsmen being in a Consternation, and wanting Provisions. But the Genoeses, who were numerous there by reason of their great Trade, resolv'd to defend the City. They chose Francis Spinola, a Man of Note, who chiefly encourag'd them, for their Commander, and then turn'd all useless Peo∣ple out of the City, whom the King of Aragon reliev'd and sent to the Neighbouring Villages, which gain'd him the Affections of the Besieged, and of all the Country. The Senate of Genoa
understanding the Danger their People were in by the Duke of Milan's Order, sitted out 12 great Ships, 2 Galleys, and a Galliot, Manning them well, and putting in store of Provisi∣ons. Blas Assareto was appointed to Command this Fleet, a notable Souldier, who had rais'd himself from a very mean Condition to that height by his Valour. The King of Aragon set out to meet this Fleet with 14 Ships, and 11 Galleys. With him went most of the Men of Note, not doubting of the Victory. The Aragonians anker'd at the Island Ponça, and the Genoeses on the Coast of Terracina. Thence they sent a Herauld to acquaint the King of Ara∣gon they came not to fight, but only to carry Provisions to their Countrymen. This Message was much ridicul'd by the Aragonians, and both Parties made ready to fight. Before they in∣gag'd, A Sea fight, the Aragoni∣ans de∣feated by the Geno∣eses. 3 Genoese Ships were order'd to stand out to Sea, that when the Dispute was hottest they might fall upon the Enemy's Rear. The Aragonians believing they fled, fell on without any Order. The King attack'd the Genoese Admiral. The Genoese bringing his Ship about poured abundance of Darts and Stones into the King's Poop. In the same manner the other Ships grapl'd and fought as if they had been on Land. The Aragonians had the Advantage in Numbers, but that caus'd Confusion among them, and many were Sea-sick, whereas the Genoeses had the odds of being expert Mariners, and us'd to that sort of fight. The Galleys were of no use, the Ships being ingag'd together, and so much higher above the Wa∣ter than the Galleys. It was now late when the 3 Genoese Ships, which at first were thought to fly, fell athwart the Aragonians, and gain'd the Victory. The Enemy enter'd the King's Ship, and he finding it made much Water, say'd he yeilded himself Prisoner to the Duke of Milan, tho not present. In the same Ship were taken the Prince of Taranto, and Duke of Sessa. 12 other Ships were taken, and in them many Prisoners of Note, among them the King of Navarre, whose Life Roderick Robolledo sav'd at the beginning of the Fight. Prince Henry of Aragon was also made Prisoner. Authors do not agree about Prince Peter. Some say he escap'd by Night with 3 Galleys out of the Fight. Others that he arriv'd with the rest of the Fleet from Sevil at Ischia, at the time of the Battle. Besides those mentioned, Kings of Aragon & Navarre Prisoners. Raymund Boil, Viceroy of Naples, James Gomez de Sandoval, Earl of Castro, with his two Sons, Ferdinand and James, D. John de Sotomayor, In̄igo Davalos, Son to the Constable. D. Ruy Lopez Davalos, and a Grandson of his called D. In̄igo de Guevara, fell all into the Hands of the Enemy. After this famous Victory the People of Gaeta sallying routed the Aragonians, enter'd their Camp, and plunder'd all the Baggage of those great Men. Many were taken Prisoners, the rest of the Army was dispersed. This Battle was fought on the 5th of August near the Island Ponça. Who would not have thought this Overthrow had quite defeated the hopes of the Aragonians? and yet contrary to all humane Probability, this very Misfortune was the best step towards their gaining the Kingdom of Naples. After the fight the Victorious Genoeses return'd home, where they secur'd the greatest num∣ber of Persons to pay the Charge of the Fleet. The Kings, with about 300 Men of Note, were carry'd to Milan, where the Genoese Admiral made his Entry in the nature of a Triumph, and such a one as had not been seen in many Ages. All Italy was in suspence, considering what Advantage that Duke would make of his Victory, and fear'd he would improve it to subdue all that Country. He himself was dubious whether he should impose some hard Conditions upon them, or put them to Ransom, but fear'd when at Liberty they would seek Revenge. At length Honour prevail'd, and he resolv'd to discharge them Gratis, sending them back Generosi∣ty of the Duke of Milan. with rich Presents. He therefore receiv'd the King of Aragon with much Honour, and they discours'd largely of the Danger of suffering the French to take footing in Italy. Whilst these things were in Agitation at Milan, the Lady Elizabeth, by order of her Husband the Duke of Anjou, who as has been said was Prisoner, went by Sea to Genoa, thence to Gaeta, and lastly coming to Naples on the 18th of October, much encourag'd those that were of her Party. Pope Eugenius assisted her with Forces, and she being a Woman excellently qualify'd purchas'd the Love of the People. Many Councils were held in Spain to consider what could be done for the Kings. The Cortes of Aragon met at Zaragoça, and it was agreed to equip a Fleet to se∣cure Sicily and Sardinia, for all thoughts of Naples were given over. At Soria the King of Castile, and Queen of Aragon prolong'd the Truce for 5 Months longer. Queen Ellenor, Mo∣ther to the Kings that were Prisoners, dy'd suddenly at Medina del Campo, and was bury'd at S. John de las Duen̄as, a Monastery she built. At Milan the Duke and his Prisoners conclud∣ed a League Offensive and Defensive. The King of Navarre went into Spain with full Com∣mission to govern Aragon, and raise Mony. The Prince of Taranto, and Duke of Sessa went to Naples to encourage their Party, and order Prince Peter with the Fleet to assist them. The Kings of Aragon & Navarre set at Li∣berty. King's Orders were obey'd, and immediately the City Gaeta was deliver'd up to him on Christmas day. Soon after the King of Aragon being set free by the Duke, came to Protovenere. Some will have it that there were signs which foretold the King's Imprisonment, as that an Arch of the Bridge that was then building at Zaragoça over the River Ebro, fell and kill'd five Men. Nine Leagues from Zaragoça, on the Banks of Ebro stands a Town called Villilla, where there is a Bell, which those People are perswaded rings of it self before any extraordinary Ac∣cident. This Bell is said to have rung without any humane help the day before the Kings were taken, also on the 30th of October, and again on the 5th of January following, which was the year 1436, and was the Day the King was set at Liberty. I do not pretend to justify these things, or so much as to plead for them. It is enough that grave Authors mention 1436.
them, and quote Eye-witnesses for the Truth of them. Let the Reader make what Judgment of it he pleases. CHAP. VII. The Affairs of Italy after the King of Aragon was releas'd. Peace concluded betwixt Castile and Aragon. The Prince of Castile marries the Princess of Navarre. The Portugues Loss in Africk. THE Peace concluded at Milan was the cause of a bloody War, for the Genoeses openly re∣volted against the Duke of Milan, complaining he reap'd the fruit of their Victory by Genoeses rebel and joyn with Pope Eu∣ganius, & the Duke of Anjou. releasing the Kings, whilst they lay under the Odium of having made them Prisoners; besides that the Duke had chang'd his Protection they had implor'd in time of need, into absolute Ty∣ranny. Thus having underhand made a League with Pope Eugenius, and the Duke of Anjou, they declar'd War. Paccio Alciato, Governour of the City for the Duke, was kill'd and ma∣ny others. The chief contriver of this Revolution was Francis Spinola, who had gain'd Re∣putation by defending Gaeta, and was therefore puffed up with Pride, besides that he did it in hatred to the Family of the Fliscos and Fregosos, who favour'd the Aragonians. Many other Towns follow'd the Example of Genoa, and expell'd the Milanese Garrisons. They kept the Spanish Prisoners they had, for whose Ransom the King of Aragon was forc'd to pay them 70000 Crowns. The Sicilians, on account of antient Friendship, were releas'd Gratis. Only 3 Sons of John de Vintemilla remain'd long Prisoners at Genoa, the cause of detaining them is not known. The King of Aragon at the request of Duke Philip endeavour'd to pacify the Peo∣ple of Genoa with the Fleet his Brother Peter sent him from Gaeta, but desisted for fear of losing time in reducing those People when the Affairs of Naples call'd upon him. From Porto Venere he sent his Brother Henry into Spain, and gave him the Territory of Ampurias, order∣ing him to be assisting in the War against Castile, in case that King did break, as was fear'd he would when the Truce expir'd. The King himself set sail, and arriv'd at Gaeta on the 2d of February. Mean while Prince Peter his Brother had taken Terracina, to the great regret of the Pope, to whom that City belong'd. Upon the King's Arrival the Neapolitan Nobility re∣pair'd to Gaeta. He appointed Francis Picinino General, to oblige Duke Philip, whose great∣est Favourite the Father of this Francis was. All Italy was alarm'd, and many Cities combin'd to drive the Aragonians out of Italy, and particularly the Venetians, Florentines and Genoeses Confede∣racy a∣gainst the Aragoni∣ans. joyn'd in a League at the Sollicitation of Pope Eugenius. At the same time the War with the Moors went on in Spain. Peace was like to be establish'd betwixt the other Kings at the pro∣curement of the King of Navarre, who design'd to bend all his Forces against Italy. Two Ca∣stles, the one call'd Galea, the other Castilleja were taken from the Moors by Roderick Man∣rique, who was abroad with a Party. Soon after Henry de Guzman, Earl of Niebla, having be∣sieged Gibraltar at the Mouth of the Streights, was drown'd with 40 Men, the Boat he was in oversetting being too full, and the Sea running high. D. John de Guzman his Son despairing of Success after that Misfortune rais'd the Siege and return'd to Sevil. This Gentleman was the first Duke of Medina Sidonia, King John honouring him with that Title to comfort him, for the loss of his Father, and reward his signal Services. The King was come to Toledo, af∣ter having been at Alcala and Madrid. Nothing was seen at Court but Sports and Pastimes, without any regard of the War. In this City the Peace betwixt Castile, Aragon and Navarre, Castile & Aragon make Peace. was concluded on the 2d of September, to the great Joy of all People. These were the Ar∣ticles agreed upon. That Henry Prince of Castile should marry Blanch, eldest Daughter to the King of Navarre: That Medina del Campo, Olmedo, Roa, and the Lordship of Villena be her Portion: That in case they have no Issue, those Places shall remain to the Crown of Ca∣stile, upon paying to the King of Navarre a sum of Mony agreed upon: That all Places taken during the War by either side be restor'd: That all Deserters and Fugitives on both sides be pardon'd, excepting the Earl of Castro, and Master of Alcantara, on the Part of Castile, and Godfrey Marques of Cortes, on the Part of Navarre. Thus the Truce was chang'd into a League Defensive and Offensive against all Princes whatsoever, excepting the Kings of France and Portugal on the Part of Castile, and on the Part of Aragon, the Duke of Milan, and Gaston Earl of Faux, whose Father dy'd not long before. Gaston inherited the Earldom at 15 years of Age, and was contracted to Ellenor the younger Daughter to the King of Navarre. Great Joy, and publick Thansgiving was throughout all Spain upon the proclaiming of this League. The Earl of Castro soon after obtain'd his Pardon and return'd to Castile, where for the fu∣ture he behav'd himself better, being humbl'd by his long Banishment. What is said relating to the Earl of Castro is taken out of the Chronicles of Castile. Those of his Family produce original Writings sign'd by Kings in Vindication of him, and promising Restitution of the Estate taken from him during the Troubles. It were well the Case were decided, that we might know what to give credit to. Mean while the King of Aragon ceas'd not to oblige the Neapolitans, and endeavour to subdue them by Policy as well as Force. Balthasar Rata, Earl of Caserta, one of the Governours appointed by the People embrac'd his Party. Raymund
Ʋrsin, Earl of Nola did the same. To oblige and attract him he was promis'd to Wife the Lady Ellenor, of the Blood Royal, Daughter to the Earl of Ʋrgel, who not long before dy'd at Earl of Ʋrgel dies. Xativa. This done the King took the Field, and soon made himself Master of the Valley of St. Severino, the City Salerno, and Coast of Amafil, Into all these Places he put Garrisons of Aragonians, which secur'd his Interest and weaken'd the Party of Anjou. Naples, the chief City, remain'd to gain, which was not much doubted of, the People being well-inclin'd to the Aragonians, and they still possess'd of two Castles there notwithstanding all their late Mis∣fortunes. This proved a very sharp Winter for Frost and Snow, insomuch that the oldest Men did A violent Winter. not remember to have seen the like. At Guadalajara, where the King was on the first day of the Year 1437, 7 Men going out to cut Wood were all Frozen to Death. Many People dy'd 1437. through the extremity of the Cold. In this hard Weather the King would go into Old Castile, and the Snow lay so deep on the Passes of the Mountains, that he was forc'd to send before 300 Pioniers to clear the Ways. From Roa he went to Osma in March, and thence sent Prince Henry his Son to Alfaro, a great Town on the Borders of Navarre. Most of the Nobi∣lity went with him, and he who appear'd above them all was D. Alvaro de Luna, who not long before by meer Importunity had obtain'd of the Queen the Castle of Montalvan, being before possessed of that of Escalona near Toledo. Two Days after the Prince arriv'd at Alfaro, the Queen of Navarre came thither with her Children, and a great Train of Nobles. The Prince and Princess were marry'd with extraordinary Pomp, both of them being then at the Age of 12 Years. Four Days were spent in rejoycing, and then the Queen with the Bride return'd to her Country. The King of Castile and the Prince his Son went to Medina del Campo. There by advice of D. Alvaro de Luna, and the Earl of Benavente, the Lieutenant Peter Manrique was apprehended and sent to the Castle of Fuentiduen̄a, which caus'd mighty Tumults and Troubles in the Kingdom. His Crime was conspiring with others to pull down D. Alvaro, de Luna. This year was fatal to the Portugueses for the slaughter made of Fatal o∣verthrow of the Portugu∣eses in A∣frick. them in Africk. Five Brothers, the King of Portugal being desirous of Honour, and of en∣larging their Dominions, had resolved to attempt it in Africk among the Enemies of Christi∣anity. Mony was wanting, for remedy whereof they obtain'd of Pope Eugenius the Croifade for all that would serve in that Expedition. Hereupon a great Rabble of People gather'd together. Prince Ferdinand, Master of Avis being the hottest of the Brothers, offer'd to com∣mand the Forces. This Affair being debated in a grand Assembly, Prince John the Master of Santiago in Portugal, who was more cautious and discreet, affirm'd that Africk ought not to be invaded unless with the united Force of the whole Kingdom. All wise Men approv'd of what he said, and among them the Princes Peter and Alonso. Only Prince Henry favour'd Ferdinand's Design, and he being a Person in great Repute for his Learning, the  ad∣vice prevail'd, so that it was resolv'd to proceed in that Enterprize. A Fleet being gg'd 6000 Soldiers were shipp'd aboard it, which were given out to be 12000. On the 12th of August they set sail, and in 15 Days arriv'd at Ceuta, where they anker'd and held a Council of War. It was resolv'd to besiege Tangier, at the Mouth of the Strelghts opposite to Tarifa. Accordingly the Siege was lay'd, and the Town batter'd the space of 37 Days, the Inhabi∣tants defending themselves with great Resolution, as those that were assur'd of Relief. To raise the Siege came the Kings of Fez and Morocco, with several Princes of Africk, 600000 Foot, and 70000 Horse, a wonderful Number if true. But Fame for the most part ceeds Truth. It was impossible for such a handful to oppose that Multitude, yet they behave them∣selves with much bravery, intrench'd their Camp, and were beset on all sides. Nothing but Despair appear'd in their looks. They would have fled, but the Field was cover'd with Ferdinand Infante of Portugal left a Ho∣stage with the Moors. Enemies. They offer'd to Capitulate, but were answer'd no Articles should be allow'd un∣less they would deliver up Ceuta, and so quit Africk. These were hard Terms, and not in their Power to grant, yet to save their Lives, they condescended, deliver'd up Prince Fer∣dinand the General, and several Persons of Quality as Hostages. The rest in a miserable Condition went away to Ceuta, and thence at the end of the Year to Portugal. A great Coun∣cil was held at Ebora to consider of the Articles made in Africk, and it was unanimously agreed they ought not to be perform'd, being made without the King's Knowledge or Consent, and therefore no way obliging him. Prince Ferdinand remain'd in perpetual slavery, and suf∣fer'd great Hardships. His Tomb is to be seen at Fez, standing on a very high Place, as a Trophy of the Victory gain'd.
CHAP. VIII. The State of Spain, and of the Catholick Church under great apprehensions of Troubles. Actions of the Aragonians at Naples. King Edward of Portugal dies. The Re∣bellion in Castile. SPain was now under great Apprehensions of new Troubles, the Nobility of Castile being incens'd against the King, for the unjust Imprisonment (as they term'd it) of Peter Man∣rique. Troubles of Castile, and in the Church. Among the Clergy was no less Contention, because Pope Eugenius labour'd to dissolve the Council of Basil, which was only a Design to lessen the Authority of General Councils, be∣cause they alone were a check upon Popes. Yet he desisted, being warn'd so to do by the Emperor Sigismand, and Cardinal Cesarinus his own Legate. The Bishops at Basil summon'd the Pope to appear there in Person, and he refusing to obey, threaten'd to depose him. The Christian Princes agreed not what was best to be done, but Sigismund the Emperor fearing a Schism, tho he lov'd not the Pope, oppos'd the deposing of him. His Authority soon ceas'd, for he dy'd on the 9th of December. His Son in Law Albertus, Duke of Austria, then King of the Romans, succeeded him, and was crown'd on the first of January 1438. This year at Ma∣deruelo, 1438. a Town in Old Castile belonging to D. Alvaro de Luna, there fell Stones as big as small Cushions, which yet did no great harm, being very light. John de Agreda carry'd some of them to Roa, where the King then was. About the same time Huelma, a strong Town and well Garrison'd was taken from the Moors, by In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, Lord of Hita, who then commanded on the Frontiers about Jàen. Soon after Roderick Perea, Lieutenant of Cagorla, making an Incursion with 1400 Men, was kill'd, and of all his Party, only 20 escap'd, the Enemy being very numerous, and yet bought not this Victory cheap, for many of them were slain, and among them the Governour of Granada. The King of Aragon being offended at Pope Eugenius, favour'd the Fathers at Basil, and the more now, because John Vitelesco, Patriarch of Alexandria with Forces of the Popes enter'd the Kingdom of Naples, which gave many of the Natives occasion to change their Affections. Particularly the Prince of Taranto, and Earl of Caserta, Men of little Faith went over to the Pope. On the other side Antony Co∣lonna was reconcil'd to the King of Aragon, being put in hope he should be restor'd to the Prin∣cipality of Salerno. The Patriarch was overthrown by the Aragonians, and drove out of the Kingdom of Naples. The Nobility was soon reduc'd. At the same time Renee, Duke of Duke of Anjou in Naples. Anjou having been Ransom'd arriv'd with his Fleet at Naples on the 19th of May. His Arri∣val produc'd no great effect, because he brought no Mony to defray the Charge of the War-Ye several places it broke out anew, and chiefly in Abruzzo, where James Caldora, a re∣nowned Captain supported the Interest of Anjou. Renee to gain Reputation challeng'd the King of Aragon, and sent him his Gauntlet; the Aragonian accepted the Challenge, but it came to nothing, for they could never agree upon the Time and Place. At Bourges the King of France by Proclamation approv'd all the Acts of the Council of Basil, whereupon Pope Eugenius order'd the Council to remove to Ferrara in Italy. Cesarinus the Legate, and 5 other Cardinals immediately repair'd to that City. It was given out that the Cause of removing the Council was to unite the Eastern and Western Churches, the Emperor John Palcologus, and the  of Constantinople being come into Italy to that purpose. From Ferrara the Council remov'd to Florence, the Plague being in the other City. Here the Affair of the Union was long debated to little purpose. The Fathers at Basil would have the Greeks go thither, but they refus'd. For this reason, and because the Pope had dissolv'd that Assembly they grew into Heats, and began to assume more than belong'd to them. In Italy whilst Renee was bu∣sy reducing some Castles in Abruzzo, the King of Aragon resolv'd to besiege Naples then weak, because most of the Youth had follow'd Renee, and Provisions were scarce. In the Ara∣gonian Naples be∣sieg'd by the Ara∣gonians. Army there were 15000 Men, and the Fleet consisted of 4 Galleys, 7 great Ships, and many small Vessels, fit to hinder any Supplies from coming to the City. With this Force he lay'd Siege to Naples on the 22d of September. He fortify'd his Camp and prepar'd all things to give an Assault, when an unexpected Misfortune overthrew all his Designs. On the 23d of October Prince Peter going out to view the City was kill'd by a Cannon Ball from the Church of the Carmelites. The Ball rebounded 3 times, and at the 4th dash'd his Head to pieces. His Body was carry'd to the Church of St. Mary Magdalen, where the King came and wept over him. He dy'd in the prime of his Age, being but 27 years Old, a Batchelor, and had gain'd Honour in War. His Body was deposited in the Castle del Ovo. The Soldiers took his Death as an ill Omen, and believ'd it the more because the Rains hinder'd carrying on the Siege, which was rais'd, and the Army retir'd to Capua. John Vintemilla, Marques of Girachi, who had been sent to meet Renee then marching to the Relief of Naples, falling upon him unexpectedly in the Valley Gardano, took many Prisoners and forc'd him to return towards Nola. This done Vintemilla return'd to the Siege of Naples. King Alonso intending to take the Field as soon as the Season would permit, sent for his other two Brothers out of Spain. He was so bent upon the Conquest of Naples that he seem'd not to regard the Kingdom left him by his Father, which was now infested by a Body of French, who being us'd to live upon plunder under the com∣mand
of Alexander de Bourbon, Bastard Son to John Duke of Bourbon, had broke into Aragon by the way of Russillon. The Q. of Aragon, and K. of Navarre were much alarm'd, but this Storm soon vanish'd, for the Weather drove the French another way, without doing any consider∣able harm. This year was unfortunate to Portugal, not only for their Loss in Africk, but for the Plague which rag'd throughout the Kingdom, and destroy'd great Numbers of People. Also King Edward dy'd of a Fever at the Convent of Tomar, whither he withdrew for fear of Plague in Portugal. K. Edward dyes. the Plague. His Reign was short; for it lasted but Five Years and Thirty Seven Days. He writ a Book of the Government of a Kingdom; and ordain'd, that for the future the King's Eldest Son should be call'd Prince, as was the Custom in Castile. He had Issue Alonso, who suc∣ceeded him, and was the First that had the Title of Prince in Portugal. Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, Master of the Orders of Christ and Santiago, Constable of Portugal, who was Father of Ellenor Queen of Portugal, Elizabeth Dutchess of Bragança, James, Kill'd by his Brother-in-Law King John, and Emanuel that came at length to be King of Portugal. Ellenor the Em∣press, Wife to Frederick the III. and Mother to Maximilian, was also Daughter to King Ed∣ward. Besides, he had Catherine, Contracted to several Princes, yet never Marry'd; and Jo∣anna Wife to Henry IV. King of Castile. The late King order'd the Queen should Govern during the Minority of his Son; but the Nobility mutiny'd, and chose Peter Duke of Coimbra the New King's Uncle. The Queen complain'd of the Wrong done her, but to no purpose. In August Peter Manrique the Lieutenant, with his Wife and Two Daughters, let themselves Conspira∣cy to de∣stroy D. Alvaro de Luna. down by Ropes out of the Castle of Fuentiduen̄as, where he was Prisoner, and escap'd by the Assistance of some Servants of the Governour Gomez Carrillo; and this occasion'd New Trou∣bles. Many Noblemen associated themselves with him, in order to pull down. D. Alvaro de Luna; which was a difficult Task, his Power being very great. At Medina de Ruysico they made all manner of Warlike Preparations. In February 1439. the King went from Madrigal 1439. to Roa, to prevent their Designs, carrying along with him his Son Prince Henry, D. Alvaro de Luna, and several other Nobles and Prelates. The Conspirators sent a Letter to the King full of submissive Language, protesting they were ready to Obey him, or his Son; and that they had taken up Arms to defend themselves against the Favourite. The King return'd no Answer. Roderick de Villandrando was then come from France, bringing with him 4000 Horse to serve the King, upon promise of being Created Earl of Ribadeo. Prince Henry of Aragon, and his Brother the King of Navarre, entred Castile with 500 Horse, hoping during those Tumults, to recover the Lands that had been taken from them. Both Parties sent to Court them, neither knowing what they design'd. They agreed among themselves, that the King of Navarre should go to Cuellar, where the King of Castile then was, and Prince Henry to Pen̄afiel, a Town which had been his. Their design was to look on till they found which side was likeliest to restore them to their Estates. Mean while In̄igo de Zuniga, Brother to the Princes of Aragon joyn with the Rebels of Castile. Earl of Ledesma, with a Party of 500 Horse secur'd Valladolid, a Large, Rich, and plentiful Town. Immediately a great Number of the Conspirators repair'd thither. The King of Castile fearing these Beginnings might produce greater Mischiefs, went to Olmedo, to be the nearer in order to appease those Commotions, and to bring Prince Henry over to his Party. They had several Conferences to this purpose, but all without success; for the Prince after amusing both Parties for some time, at last joyn'd with the Rebels. This was suppos'd to be done with the Advice of the King of Navarre, that he might have a sure Stake, whoever was uppermost. The whole Kingdom was under great Apprehensions of a New War. Therefore some Religious, Pious, and Learned Persons interpos'd. They spoke to those Re∣bellious Noblemen, and represented to them the Miseries of a Civil War, advising to com∣pose Differences before any Blood was spilt. They labour'd so much, that they perswaded both Parties to meet at Castro Nun̄o, there to treat of some amicable Accommodation. CHAP. IX. The King of Castile and the Rebels agree. The Rebellion breaks out again: The King taken Prisoner. Blanch Queen of Navarre dyes. Her Son Charles succeeds. The Council at Basil Deposes Pope Eugenius, and chooses Felix. ON the 24th of August, Castelnovo in Naples having endured a tedious Siege, notwithstand∣ing the King of Aragon was preparing to Relieve it, was deliver'd up to the Enemy. Yet the King of Aragon made amends for this Loss, by recovering the City Salerno, and seve∣ral other Places. At Castro Nun̄o the King of Castile and his Nobles, at last agreed upon these Articles: That D. Alvaro de Luna be Six Months from Court without being allow'd to write Agree∣ment be∣twixt the King of Castile and the Rebels. to the King. That their Estates be restor'd to the King of Navarre, and Prince of Aragon, or in lieu of them, such a Revenue as shall be adjudged by Arbitrators. That all Forces be dismissed. That the Conspirators withdraw their Garrisons out of the Towns they have seized. That no Man be punish'd for having formerly sided with Aragon, and now with the Conspirators. Hereupon the Mastership of Santiago was restor'd to Prince Henry, and the Town of Cuellar to the King of Navarre. D. Alvaro de Luna in lieu of it had Sepulveda.
This done, the King went to Toro. There he receiv'd the News, that the Lady Cathorine, Wife to Prince Henry of Aragon, dy'd at Zaragoça without Issue, on the 19th of October. D. Alvaro de Luna in pursuance of the late Capitulation on the 29th of October, went away to Sepulveda, so highly offended he could not concea it. With him went Jonntile Silva chief Stand∣ard-Bearer to the King, Peter de Acun̄a, Gomez Carrillo, and many other Men of Quality who were beholding to him, or hoped to be so. The Council of Basil at last deposed Pope Euge∣nius, Pope Eu∣genius de∣posed. Felix V. chosen. and in his Place chose Amadec on the Fifth of November, by the Name of Felix V. He had been Forty Years Earl and Duke of Savoy, and then Abdioating his Dukedom, and Re∣nouncing the Pleasures of the Court, liv'd a solitary Life, aiming at Perfection, accompany'd only by six antient Men of Quality. It was happy for Pope Engenius that the Christian Princes made no account of that Election, not even the King of Aragon, and Duke of Millan, tho Enemies to Eugenius, and higher offended at him. The Authority of the Fathers at Basil declin'd, yet they broke not up till the year 47 of this Century, at which time they dissolv'd, and return'd home, being terrify'd by Luis Dauphin of France, who was marching to break up their Assembly, by a Decree of Frederick the Emperor. Felix the New Pope, upon better Advice, soon after said aside the Pontifical Robes, and was by Pope Nicholas, Succeslor to Engenius, made Cardinal, and Legate of Savoy. Castile seem'd to be restor'd to perfect Peace by the Banishment of D. Alvaro de Luna, but Ambition the Bane of Kingdoms, soon disturb'd it. The King was not of Judgment sound New Com∣motions in Castile. enough to govern without the Help and Advice of another. This was well known to the Nobility, and every one strove to gain his Favour, in order to become First Minister of State. D. Frederick the Admiral, a Bold Man, and of a ready Wit, stood fairest, being par∣ticularly recommended to the King by D. Alvaro de Luna at the time of his departure. The Princes of Aragon were enrag'd, that all their Contrivances fall'd them. At Toro the Servants of the several Factions quarrell'd, and were like to come to Blows about taking up their Lodgings. The King knew not how to pacify the Nobles, and therefore by the Advice of D. Alvaro's ads, under colour of Hunting, fled to Salamanca, at the beginning of the year 1440. After him went the Princes of Aragon, the Earls of Benavente, Ledesina, Haro, , Valencia, and In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, with 600 Horse, resolving to use Violence 1440. if oppos'd. The King being inform'd of their coming, remov'd to Bonilla, a Loyal and Strong Town. Thence he sent to the Princes of Aragon, who under a safe Conduct came first to Salamanca, and thence to Avila, whither the Mutinous Lords were come, designing to secure that City. The Archbishop of Seviil who then sighaliz'd his Loyalty, was the Chief Man that passed between them, but without success. Yet the Nobles made use of him to write to the King, giving him grave Advice, and charging D. Alvaro de Luna. He return'd no . They went the Earls of Haro and Benavente to him, who prevail'd to have the  at Valladolid. Yet those Lords were so far from restoring the Towns they had serz'd and their hands, that they secur'd Leon, Segovia, Zamora, Salamanca, Valladolid, Avila, Burgos, Placencia, and Guadalasara. Besides Prince Henry had Toledo deliver'd to him by Peter Lopez de Ayala, who was Governour of the Town and Castle for the King. At the Cortes which sate at Valladolid in April, the first thing consider'd upon, was to give satisfaction to D. Alvaro de Luna, and bring him back to Court. To this effect Letters were sent to him from that Assembly, yet he came not for the present. Soon after, all the Revolted Cities return'd to their  had particularly Toledo. Prince Henry at this time Rebell'd against his Father, being  that D. Alvaro should return to Court. John Pacheco, Son to Alonso Giron Lord of  had the same influence over the Prince, that D. Alvaro had over the King, and endeavour'd by supplanting D. Alvaro, who had preferr'd him to rise to his Grandeur. Prince Henry of Castile withdrew from Court, giving out, that he would not return till some of the King's Counsellors, with whom he was displeas'd, were remov'd; yet he came back late at Night at the perswasion of his Father-in-Law the King of Navarre. To pacify him, his Wife was brought from Navarre to Valladolid, where on the 25th of September, the Nuptials were celebrated with great Pomp, and there was a Feast of Tilting in which some Nobles were kill'd, because they ran with sharp-pointed Spears. The Bride remain'd a Maid, which was at first conceal'd, but afterwards became Publick, to the great Grief of all People. At the same time that the Publick Rejoycing was for the Marriage of Prince Henry, the Lieutenant Peter Manrrique Dy'd. He was a Man of a mean Stature, a great Spirit, Subtle and Bold. His Son James Manrique, who was also Earl of Trevin̄o, succeeded him in his Progress of the Re∣bellion in Castile.  D. Alvaro de Lara, tho absent from Court, govern'd the Kingdom, which inrag'd the  have all,  Son, who left his Father, and went away to Segov declaring for the Princes of Aragon. John Pacheco his Favourite, neightned his discontent. Toledo was again'd deliver'd up by the same Peter Lopez de Ayala, to Prince Henry of Aragon. The Citizens provok'd the King by securing his Messengers sent to complain of their Disloyalty which mov'd him with a small Retinue, the hast thither, believing they would Respect his Person. He stopp'd at the Hospital of Saint Lazo∣rus, which is in the Road to Madrigal. Prince Henry of Aragon came out of the City with Two Handred Horse: Those with the King being Fe in Number, For∣tify'd themselves where they were; but Prince Henry fearing he should become yet more odious than he was if he offer'd Violence to the King, return'd into the City. Rode∣rick
de Villandrando signaliz'd his Zeal and Legality for the Defence of the King in this Place, in recompense for which he had a Priviledge granted him, that the Earls of Ribadeo his Succes∣sors should always upon New-years Day dine with the King, and serve him in the Bed-cham∣ber. For it was on the first of January 1441, that the King was in Danger in the Hospital. The King went away to Torrijos, and leaving Pelayo de Ribera, Lord of Malpica with 100 1441. Horse to secure that place, remov'd to Avila, whither D. Alvaro came to consult about car∣rying on the War they had in Hand. His coming more incens'd the Mutineers. Most of them were at Arevalo, and the Queen her self favour'd her Son and Brothers against the King her Husband. The King sent the Bishops of Burgos and Avila, to try if there were any way of composing Differences, but they could not prevail. James de Valera, a Gentleman who follow'd the Prince, wrote a Letter to the King, advising him to incline to Mercy rather than Severity. It being read in Council, no Body said any thing to it but the Archbishop, D. Gutierre de Toledo, who answer'd, Let Valera give us Assistance, for Advice we want none. This Valera was a Man of very good natural Parts, was twice Embassador in Germany, and writ a short History of Spain, of him called Valeriana. But there is another Valeriana writ by an Archdeacon of Murcia, and quoted in this Work. Prince Henry being sent for by his Father to treat of Peace, came to Avila, but nothing was concluded. The Prince being return'd to Segovia, desir'd the two Queens, his Mother, and Mother in Law then in Castile, to go as far as Santa Maria de Nieva, to endeavour to appease those Commotions. In that Town Blanch Queen of Navarre dy'd on the first day of April, and was bury'd in the famous Church of that Place. This grave Authors affirm, but there is no sign of it in the Church. Charles Prince Charles the II. K. of Na∣varre. of Viana, her Son, inherited the Crown, but took not the Title of King out of respect to his Fa∣ther. This Prince Charles was very studious, and there are some Works of his Extant, as Aristole's Ethicks translated into Spanish, a short History of Navarre, and many Compositions in Verse which he us'd to sing to the Guitarre. A Youth deserving of a better Fortune, and a more peaceable Father. He was 21 years of Age when his Mother dy'd. Her Death put an end to the Treaty of Peace, and the Queen of Castile return'd to Arevalo, where she was before. War broke out in several Places at the same time. The Chief Heads of the Rebel∣lion were Prince Henry of Aragon, the Admiral, and the Earl of Benavente. D. Alvaro de Lu∣na, and his Brother the Archbishop of Toledo bravely made head against the Rebels. In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça escap'd being kill'd very narrowly, with a very few of his Men, all the rest being cut off by John Carrillo, Lieutenant of Caçorla, who lay'd an Ambush for him. At the same time another Party of the Malecontents was defeated by the Forces of D. Alvaro, near a Town call'd Gresmonda. In this Action was kill'd Laurence Davalos, Son to the Constable D. Ruy Lopez Davalos. John de Mena a famous Poet in those Days lamented his Death in Ele∣giack Verse. At the same time the King of Navarre came into New Castile with a good Body of Men in favour of the Rebels, because the Royalists were too hard for them, and being dispersed about the Country plunder'd it, and ravish'd the Women. In Old Castile the King took Medina del Campo, and Arevalo from the King of Navarre. At a Village call'd Naharro in that Neighbourhood, he had a Conference with Ellenor, Queen Dowager of Portugal. No∣thing was concluded touching the Rebels, but the King sent Embassadors to advise Peter, Duke of Coimbra to do the Queen right. The King of Aragon also sent an Embassy from Italy to Portugal to the same effect, but nothing was done, for that Prince would not quit the Govern∣ment, and the Kings were not at Leasure to use Force. So that Queen Ellenor ended her days in Castile. The Princes of Aragon hasted out of the Kingdom of Toledo to Old Castile to secure their Interest there. Arevalo open'd the Gates to receive them, and thence they went to Medina del Campo and sat down before it. Some Skirmish happen'd, but the Siege lasted not long, for some of the Townsmen by Night gave entrance to the Rebels. The King had dispos'd his Forces about the Streets, and publick Places. The Townsmen kept close in their Houses. D. Alvaro de Luna, his Brother the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Master of Alcan∣tara in Disguize escap'd through the midst of their Enemies, being advis'd so to do by the King, knowing their Lives were in Danger, if taken by the Rebels. They came and kissed the King's Hand, conducting him to the Palace with feign'd Respect. The Queens and Prince Henry hearing what had happen'd came thither, and after a long Consultation in hatred to D. Alvaro, K. John of Castile made a Prisoner by the Re∣bels. all the Officers of the King's Houshold were remov'd. Others that had adher'd to the King were turn'd out of the City. It was propos'd to compose Differences, the King be∣ing then a Prisoner, and Judges were appointed to decide all Controversies. D. Alvaro was commanded not to depart out of such Towns of his own as should be assign'd during the term of 6 Years, and that he should not write to the King, unless the Letters were first perus'd by the Queen and Prince Henry. Moreover that he should not make any new Alliances, or main∣tain Soldiers, and for Security that he would perform all this he should deliver his Son D. John as Hostage, and nine Castles within 30 Days. These things much afflicted D. Alvaro, who yet ceas'd not to study new ways to rise. But all Men shun him that is falling, and the Rebels strengthned their Party by fresh Allyances. Joanna, Daughter to the Admiral was contracted to the King of Navarre. Beatrix, Daughter to the Earl of Benavente, to Prince Henry of Aragon. These Matches were contriv'd by James Gomez de Sandoval, Earl of Castro, who sought by that means to unite the Malecontents, and ruin D. Alvaro de Luna.
CHAP. X. The Progress of the Aragonians in Naples. That City taken by them. New Disorders in Spain. The Archbishop of Toledo Dyes. Of some Men famous for Learning. THe Civil War in Spain seem'd to be at an end; but Italy was all over in a Flame with the Progress of the War in Naples. War of Naples. The Forces of Renee wasted with delay, and his Wife and Children being sent to Marseilles, seem'd to denote there remain'd but small hopes. Besides, James Cal∣dora the great Prop of that Party, dy'd suddenly as he was going to Plunder Circaslo, a Town of the Pope's Jurisdiction, and the rest of his Family after his Death joyn'd with the Arago∣nians, whose interest daily advanc'd. They took the City Aversa, subdu'd all Calabria, and defeated the Forces of Francis Sforcia in Apulia. Pope Eugenius made a League with the Vene∣tians, Florentines, and Genoeses, to expel the Aragonians out of Italy. To this purpose the Car∣dinal of Trent entred the Kingdom of Naples with 10000 Men; but they being Raw Soldiers did no great matter. The Army of Aragon march'd directly to Naples, and sate down before it, Renoe not daring to come into the Field. Some Provisions and Recruits were brought to the Besieg'd by the Genoeses. These were small Helps; for the Multitude within was great, and began to suffer much Want, Corn being excessive dear. Some advis'd to Surrender upon any Terms, but that not succeeding, one Anello and his Brother, both Bricklayers, fled to the Camp, and offer'd to shew, how the City might be taken without much danger; so they were well rewarded. Their design was to convey Men into the Town through an Aqueduct that carries the Water into the City. 200 Men were chosen for this purpose, and order'd to obey the two Brothers. The Way was so difficult, that most of them were left behind, and only 40 went through, and came to the Wall of a Private House, where a Woman Cry'd out, and had betray'd them, had they not soon stopp'd her Mouth. Much time was spent in get∣ting through; the Sun was up, and no Sign made to give notice they were within. It was fear'd they were all Cut off; and yet the Forces appointed to give the Assault, apply'd the Scaling Ladders but faintly, hearing no Noise within. The 40 Soldiers hearing the Noise seiz'd a Tower upon the Walls call'd Sophia. Thither the King of Aragon made, to Relieve Naples ta∣ken by the Aragonians them, and Renee to drive them out; and there follow'd a hot Dispute; but at length, the Aragonians having forc'd some of the Gates, enter'd the City. Renee, after having done all that became a good Commander, and brave Soldier, retir'd to the Castle. Some Houses were Plunder'd, but no body Kill'd. Thus the Aragonians made themselves Masters of Naples upon Saturday the 2d. of June, 1442. The Soldiers were publickly commended, and rewarded ac∣cording to the Merit of every Man; and particularly Peter Martinez, Commander of those 1442. who came through the Aqueduct. The Two Bricklayers receiv'd more than could be expected by such mean persons. Some curious Men observ'd, that Belisarius took that City from the Goths by the same Stratagem. Renee having no hopes left, capitulated to deliver up all Places that held out for him, upon liberty to depart freely. This done, he went to Florence to see Pope Eugenius, and thence into France. After his departure, Abruzzo, Apulia, and all other Places, submitted to the Aragonians; and thus Italy was in part pacify'd. In Spain the Troubles did not cease, the Nobility slighting the Government. D. Luis de Guzman, Master of Calatrava, lay desperately Sick, and was given over. John Ramiroz de Guzman, Chief Com∣mendary of that Order, and Ferdinand de Padilla, the Master's Deputy, contended who should succeed him. The latter had secur'd the Votes of the Chapter that was to Elect. Therefore D. John resolv'd to obtain that Dignity by Force, securing the Towns that belong'd to that Order. D. Ferdinand with 400 Horse met him at Barajas, defeated, and took him Prisoner, with his Son and two Brothers, and by that means obtain'd the Mastership; which yet he en∣joy'd not long: For the King design'd that Dignity for Alonso, Bastard Son to the King of Na∣varre, who Besieg'd Calatrava. There the New Master was unluckily kill'd by a Stone, one of his own Men was throwing at the Enemy. After his Death, D. Alonso was made Master of the Order. In Biscay Tumults were rais'd upon two accounts: One was, that certain So∣cieties that had been confirmed by the King, fell upon the Estates of the Nobility. Among the Rebellion in Biscay. rest, Peter de Ayala was Besieg'd in his Town of Salvatierra, and reliev'd by his Cousin the Earl of Haro, who having receiv'd a Letter in which he begg'd his Assistance, swore he would not enter into a House till he had reliev'd him. Another cause of these Troubles was, the wicked Heresy of the Fratricelli, newly started at Durango. Many were put to the Wrack upon that account, and others Burnt. Alonso Mela a Franciscan Fryar, the Ring-leader of them, fled to Granada with several young Wenches, where they liv'd lewdly among the Moors; but at last he was put to Death by them. This Man had a Brother call'd John Mela, then Bishop of Za∣mora, and afterwards a Cardinal. In Portugal about the end of October, dy'd Prince John, the King's Uncle, aged 43 years. He was Constable and Master of Santiago. By his Wife the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to his Brother D. Alonso Duke of Bragança, he left a Son called James, who inherited his Honours, and Three Daughters, Elizabeth, Beatrix, and Philippa, from whom sprang great Princes.
D. Alvaro de Luna resided at Escalona, and contriv'd to regain his former Power. His Brother the Archbishop of Toledo dy'd at Talavera on the 4th of February, which was a great Loss to him. There only remain'd D. Roderick de Luna his second Cousin, whom afterwards he promoted to the Archbishoprick of Santiago. In that Confusion of times every noble Man seized upon Famous Men about this time in Spain. what he could get, and among them Peter Xuarez secur'd Talavera, scarce admitting the King, who came to quel those Disorders. The Archbishop was bury'd in a beautiful Chappel of the Cathedral, built by D. Alvaro. After much Contention, D. Gutierre de Toledo, Archbishop of Sevil was promoted to the See of Toledo. He was a Man too upright for those times, and enjoy'd that Dignity but three Years. The Bishop of Oviedo was Translated to Sevil, he of Orense to Oviedo. To conclude, the Bishoprick of Orense was given in Commendam to John de Torquemada, a Dominican, afterwards Cardinal of S. Sixtus, a Person of great Learning, as ap∣pears by his Works. His Contemporary was Alonso Tostado, born at Madrigal, renowned for his many Writings. He came in process of time to be Bishop of Avila. At Siena in Tuscany he put up several Propositions in Divinity, offering to defend them in the Schools. Some of them were dislik'd, and the Cardinal Torquemada writ against him. Tostado answered him, not sparing the Pope's Authority to defend his Opinions. He dy'd on the 3d of September 1455. The End of the One and Twentieth Book. THE History of SPAIN. The Two and Twentieth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Success of the Aragonians in Italy. The Rebellion in Castile. The Death of the Queens of Portugal and Castile. The Battle of Olmedo, and Death of Prince Hen∣ry of Aragon. THE Affairs of the Spaniards succeeded better in Italy than in Spain. There was no great Difference betwixt the Castilians and Aragonians, but their Fortune was dif∣ferent according to the Quality of them that govern'd. The King of Aragon was an active and ambitious Prince, and spar'd no Labour to advance his Glory. Be∣sides, his Goodness and Bounty gain'd him the Affections of all his Subjects, as well Italians as Aragonians. In Castile the Power of D. Alvaro continu'd, tho his Person was remov'd. The King of Navarre endeavour'd net to redress what was amiss, but to make himself Master of the King, who always left the Government to another. The King of Castile had some good Qualities, but the bad were more prevalent. He was addicted to Poetry and Musick, and had a Genius that way, lov'd Hunting and Sports, but could not endure Business, and therefore gave little attention to it, and answer'd short. His first Minister did what he would in his Name. The King of Aragon having taken Naples, and subdu'd all the Faction of Anjou, on the Success of the Ara∣gonians at Naples. 26th of February 1443, entred that City in Triumph after the manner of the antient Romans, on a Chariot drawn by 4 White Horses, another of the same sort being led before him. All the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom follow'd the Chariot afoot, and the Clergy went be∣fore singing Praises to Almighty God. The People with loud Acclamations wished him a 1443. long and happy Reign. He would not be crown'd, saying, That Honour was due to the Saints, who assisted him to gain the Victory. All the Streets were strew'd with Flowers, and rich∣ly hung, and all Places full of sweet Odours. It only remain'd to gain Pope Eugenius, with whom a Treaty was set afoot at Siena, where he then was. On the 15th of July they agreed upon these Articles: That the Kingdom of Naples should remain to the King of Aragon, and after him to his Son Ferdinand, whom, tho Illegitimate, he appointed his Heir, as to that Crown only: That the King of Aragon should pay yearly to the Pope 8000 Ounces, a sort of Coin then in use: That he should endeavour to quel Francis Sforcia, who, proud that he had mar∣ry'd
the Duke of Milan's Daughter had gain'd a great part of Marca Ancona. The King per∣form'd more than he had promis'd, for he in Person recover'd all Sforcia had taken in Marca Ancona, and restor'd it to the Pope. Peace was also concluded with the Genoeses, they pro∣mising every Year whilst the King liv'd, to present him with a great Bason of Gold. But be∣cause this Act was perform'd in the sight of the People, as a memorial of his Victory they con∣tinu'd it but 4 Years. In Castile the King of Navarre using immoderately the Power he had unjustly acquir'd, enjoy'd it but a short time. He kept the King of Castile Prisoner placing People to watch his Words and Actions. The Admiral and Earl of Benavente, nay the Prince of Castile, and Queen had a hand in this Practice. F. Lope Barrientos, Bishop of Avila, mov'd A Plot to rescue the K. John. by the Wrong done the King, and desiring to restore D. Alvaro, discour'd John de Pacheco seriously upon the Point, and they resolv'd to try whether some of the Nobles had Courage enough to oppose the Princes of Aragon. To the end their Designs might be the better con∣ceal'd, they advis'd the Prince, who was of Council with them, to go from Tordesillas to Sego∣via, upon pretence of Hunting. Thence they sent Letters to D. Alvaro, giving him an Ac∣count of what they had done. At the same time the Earls of Haro and Ledesma meeting at Curiel, had consulted about setting the King at Liberty, which oblig'd the Prince to return to Tordesillas to see what could be done. But the Princes of Aragon prevented their Designs, and forc'd them to fly, whence ensu'd new Troubles. The King of Navarre was marry'd at Lo∣baton, on the 1st of September 1444, and Prince Henry at Cordova, where he was fixing the In∣terest of his Party. James Valera was sent Embassador into France to obtain Liberty for the 1444. Earl of Armagnac, secur'd by the Dauphin, and for Martin, Son to D. Alonso, Earl of Gijon. He was accus'd of holding Correspondence with the English, and set at Liberty upon Condi∣tion, that if ever he was found faulty, he should forfeit the Towns of Ribadeo and Cangas in Asturias. Besides, the King of Castile oblig'd himself in such Case to make. War with the Forces of Biscay, that bordered on his Dominions. At the same time some dealt with Henry Prince of Castile about destroying of D. Alvaro, and others about restoring him. Bishop Barrientos, and John Pacheco thought fit to dispatch before they were discover'd, and to that purpose held the King of Navarre in hand, as if they design'd to joyn with him. Mean while Prince Henry return'd to Segovia, and thence sollicited the Earls of Haro, Plasencia and Castaneda to unite their Forces with his. Besides them the Earl of Alva, the Archbishop of Toledo, and Lord of Hita took party with them. This done, thinking themselves strong enough for the Princes of Aragon, by the Prince's Order they all went to Avila. They had 1500 Horse, and D. Alvaro de Luna came to them. Their greatest want was of Mony. Thence they went to Bur∣gos, where the other Nobles their Associates were. The Aragonians sent the King to the Town of Portillo with the Earl of Castro to guard him, and the King of Navarre gather'd 2000 Horse. With this Force he march'd towards the Confederate Nobles, who daily grew strong∣er, and near Pampliega in the Territory of Burgos the two Parties drew up. Some Religious Persons endeavour'd to compose Differences, but a light Skirmish that happen'd drew them to a Battle, which was parted by the Night. The King of Navarre finding himself too weak retir'd in the dark to Palencia, a strong City. Another Misfortune was added to this which K. John of Castile makes his escape. was, that the King of Castile under colour of Hunting made his escape to his Son. His Liber∣ty chang'd the Face of Affairs. The King of Navarre went to his Kingdom to raise Forces, and carry on what he had begun, all the other great Men of his Faction went each to his own Lands. Thus the Towns belonging to the Princes of Aragon fell into the Hands of the King, particularly Medina del Campo, Arevalo, Olmedo, Roa, and Aranda. Prince Henry of Aragon return'd to his Town of Ocana in Andaluzia. Henry Prince of Castile, and D. Alvaro march'd after him, but he fled to the Kingdom of Murcia, there Alonso Faxardo, Lieutenant of that Kingdom receiv'd him into the strong City of Lorca, he being a favourer of that Party. This was about the end of the Year. On the 5th of July, the same Year dy'd Ferdinand, Uncle to the King of Portugal at Fez, where he was bury'd. Two years after his Body was translated to Aljubarrota, his Father's Burial place. The Portugueses account him a Saint, and say he ne∣ver had to do with Women, nor ever told a Lye. Castile seemed to be in a better Condition since the Princes of Aragon were expelled, but still a War was fear'd. The Cortes met at Medina del Campo, and order'd some Mony for the War, but not enough. Thither came the Prince of Castile, and D. Alvaro de Luna after they had taken from Prince Henry several Towns belonging to him, as Master of the Order of San∣tiago. Warlike Preparations were made. The King of Navarre made an Incursion into the Kingdom of Toledo, with 400 Horse, and 600 Foot by the way of Atiença, in which he had a Garrison. This Number, tho small, was formidable, because some of the People were for him, and others stood Neuters, so he easily made himself Master of Torija, Alcala de Henares, and other places. The King of Castile gathering what Force he had, march'd to Espinar, to wait there till other Troops joyn'd him. Soon after this on the 18th of February 1445 dy'd Queen Ellenor of Portugal at Toledo, and a few days after Mary Queen of Castile follow'd her, ending Queens of Castile & Portugal dye. her days at Villacastin near Segovia. It was suspected they were poison'd, because both dy'd so near the same time, and suddenly, also because Queen Mary's Body was full of Spots. This Report was the easier credited, because they lived a loose Life. From Espinar the King went 1445. to Madrid, and soon after to Alcala, being invited thither by the Inhabitants. The King of Navarre lay with his Forces thereabouts, and being joyn'd by his Brother Henry, was now
1500 Horse strong. With this Body he kept himself in the Mountains of Old Alcala, resolv∣ing not to fight without the Advantage of Ground, he being too weak in Numbers. Thence he sent Ferrer de Lanuza, Justice of Aragon, to his Brother the King of Aragon, to desire him since the War of Naples was ended to come into Spain, either to attend the War, or compose the Differences. The King of Castile also sent to complain to him of his Brothers. There was no Action at Alcala, and the Princes of Aragon by the way of Tablada hasted away to Are∣valo. The King of Castile follow'd close at their Heels, so that both came the same day to Are∣valo. The King of Navarre took Olmedo by force, and put to Death the loyal Party that had shut the Gates upon him. About half a League from Olmedo, near the Mills call'd de los Abades, the King of Castile intrench'd with 2000 Horse, and the like Number of Foot. There his Son Henry, D. Alvaro, John Pacheco, In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, the Earl of Alva, and Bishop Bar∣rientos joyn'd him. On the other side the Admiral, the Earl of Benavente, the Brothers, Pe∣ter, Ferdinand, and James Quin̄ones, the Earl of Castro, and John de Tovar brought a 1000 Horse to the Aragonians. By the Contrivance of Bishop Barrientos, a treaty was set on Foot to amuse the Rebels till the Master of Alcantara joyn'd the King. He being come the King's Forces offer'd Battle, but the Aragonians were too weak to fight, and too ill provided to en∣dure a Siege. Therefore they sent Commissioners to inform the King they were ready to submit to him, provided D. Alvaro were remov'd. The King only answer'd he would con∣sider of it. Whilst they were treating of Peace they came accidentally to a Battle, upon Wedensday the 19th of May. Henry Prince of Castile being a hot Youth, advanc'd with 50 Battle of Olmedo. Horse to draw out the Enemy to Skirmish. A like number came out of the Town, but back'd by Men at Arms. Those with the Prince seeing a great Number, fled, the Aragonians pursu∣ing them up to their very Trenches. Upon this the Royalists drew out, D. Alvaro led the Van, the Bishop of Siguença, Peter de Acun̄a, In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, and the Earl of Alva commanded the Men at Arms upon the Flanks. In the main Body was Prince Henry with 550 Men at Arms, under the Command of the Master of Alcantara. The King, the Archbi∣shop of Toledo, and other noble Men brought up the Rear. In this Order they stood most part of the Day, no Body coming out of the Town. Two hours before Sun set, Orders were given to return to the Camp. Then the Aragonians sally'd out with great shouts, think∣ing the Night would shrowd them if worsted, and could be no hindrance to them if Victori∣ous, because they knew the Country. The light Horse gave the first Charge and then all the rest fell on. The Body commanded by Prince Henry of Aragon charg'd D. Alvaro, that which the King of Navarre led, attack'd Henry Prince of Castile. Both sides fought resolute∣ly, but the Aragonians were inferior in Number, and began to give way. Night drew on, and the Princes of Aragon having done all that could be expected from brave Commanders, seeing their Men fly, retir'd to Olmedo. The Admiral and Earl of Benavente took another way. The Earl of Castro, Henry, Brother to the Admiral, and Ferdinand de Quin̄ones were taken with 200 more. Only 37 were kill'd in fight, but many wounded. The Princes of Aragon the same Night fled towards that Kingdom, the King of Navarre unhurt. Prince Hen∣ry dy'd soon after at Calatayud of a Wound he receiv'd in his left Hand, a Gangrene striking in∣to his Arm. He was a Man of a great Spirit, but restless. His Body was bury'd in that Ci∣ty. He left one Son of his own Name by his second Wife, who in time to come prov'd as Tur∣bulent as his Father. After the Victory the King sent Expresses to all parts to give Notice of it, and built a Chappel in the Place where the Battle was fought. CHAP. II. The Marriage of Ferdinand, Bastard Son to the King of Aragon, and appointed Heir to the Kingdom of Naples. Mahomet King of Granada depos'd. D. Alvaro de Luna chosen Master of the Order of Santiago. Continual Success attended the Armies of Aragon in Italy. King Alonso in favour of the Pope had recovered Marca Ancona from Francis Sforcia. Yet his Party ceased not to Affairs of Naples. raise Commotions, whereupon the King of Aragon at the Pope's Instance returned thither, and being come to Fontana del Populo, a Town not far from the City Teano, summoned the Nobles to attend him there. Among the rest came Antony Centellas, Marques of Girachi with 300 Horse, he had done good Service during the late War, and sold part of his Estate to pay his Men. The King desired to marry Enricosa Rufa, Daughter and Heiress to the Marques de Croton to In̄igo Davalos as a Reward for his good Service, and recommended this Affair to An∣tony Centellas. He liking her Fortune marries her himself, by which his Power was increased, and consequently his Boldness. At first this was connived at, but soon after he payed for all. He was charged with contriving the Death of a certain Favourite of the King's, whereupon he fled from the Camp to Catançaro, a Town of his own. The King moved at this returned to Naples, and sent Messengers to reduce Centellas by fair means, but he would not give ear to them. Therefore the King himself marches into Calabria, and having taken several Towns came before Cataniçaro. Centellas seeing no hope of Relief, surrendred upon promise of Par∣don.
He was ordered to deliver up that City, and the Castle of Turpia, and he with his Wife and Children was sent to Naples. Great rejoycing was throughout the Kingdom, as well for restoring of Peace to it, as on account that Ferdinand the King's Son was on the 30th of May married to Elizabeth de Claramonte, to whom he was before contracted. This was contrived to oblige the Prince of Taranto, whose Neece she was. In the midst of all his Joy came the sad News of the Death of the two Queens, the King's Sisters, and his Brother Prince Henry, and the King of Navarre's being expelled Castile. That King's Embassador pressed King Alonso to return into Spain: He answered when the Wars of Marca Ancona were ended he would go, that the mean while the King of Navarre should govern Aragon, and raise Forces in both King∣doms for the War with Castile, and also that a Truce should be made with the Moors of Gra∣nada for a Year. That City about this time changed its King. Mahomet the left-handed during the Rebellion in Castile enjoy'd Peace, which caused him Troubles at home. The Moorish King had two Cousin Germans, one of them called Ismael, being fearful of his Uncle, fled to the King of Castile. The other, called Mahomet the Lame, because he was so, associated himself with some Moors of Quality at Almeria. With their Assistance he seized the Castle of Grana∣da Mahomet K. of Gra∣nada im∣prison'd. called Alhambra, took the King and cast him into Prison. This done he usurped the Title of King. On this occasion the Moors were divided into Factions. Andilbar, Governour of Granada, seized the strong Castle of Montefrio near Alcala Real, and having no hopes of re∣storing the Old King, offered the Crown to Ismael: He having received Supplies of Men and Mony from the King of Castile, hasted to possess himself of a Kingdom. These things hap∣pen'd at the end of this Year, let us return to what is behind. After the Battle of Olmedo a Council was held in D. Alvaro de Luna's Tent, he being wound∣ed in the left Leg. There it was resolved that all the Rebels Estates should be Confiscated. Cuellar was taken, and Simancas besieged. Prince Henry was for pardoning the Admiral, the others opposed it. Therefore the Prince went away to Segovia, and the King his Father fearing fresh Tumults left Peter Sarmiento to reduce the other Towns, and went himself to Prince of Castile Rebels. Nuestro Sen̄ora de Nieva to reduce his Son. Before he would submit he demanded Jaen, Lo∣grono and Caceres for himself; Barcarroto, Salvatierra, and Salvaleon, Towns on the Borders of Portugal, for John Pacheco. The King condescended, and thus they received a Reward, whereas they deserved Punishment. Moreover at Medina de Rioseco the Admiral was par∣doned, provided he came in within 4 Months, and that the mean while his Daughter Joanna Queen of Portugal should remain in Castile as a Hostage. This done the Castle of that Town which held for the Admiral surrendred, as did all the Towns of the Rebels in Old Castile. At the beginning of the War by the advice of D. Alvaro, tho contrary to the Opinion of the Earl of Haro and other Noblemen, the King of Castile sent to Portugal for Supplies. Peter Duke of Coimbra the Governour sent 2000 Foot, and 1600 Horse, under the command of his Son Peter, who tho but 16 Years of Age, upon the Death of his Uncle Prince John was con∣stituted Constable of Portugal. They came to the King at Mayorga at such time as the War was ended. However all the Officers were splendidly entertained and presented. D. Alvaro underhand, and without the King's Knowledge, as was said, made up a Match for him with the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to D. John, Master of Santiago in Portugal, with whom he had special Friendship. The Portugueses being dismissed the Court went to Burgos. There, con∣trary to expectation, the Earls of Benavente and Castro were pardoned, conditionally that the latter should not in two years go out of Lobaton, nor the other out of Benavente. Other No∣blemen were highly Rewarded, and even above their Deserts. D. Inigo Lopez de Mendoça was created Marques of Santillana, and Earl of Mançanares. John Pacheco was made Marques of Villena. D. Alvaro de Luna at Avila, was by the Knights of that Order chosen Master of Santiago. D. Peter Giron in favour to his Brother John Pacheco, (for he had been of the Ara∣gonian Party,) D. Alvaro de Luna chosen Master of the Order of Santia∣go. was chosen Master of Calatrava, D. Alonso de Aragon being deposed on account that he followed his Father in the late Wars. Some Men would not allow those two Electi∣ons to be Legal, whereupon ensued much strife. D. Roderick Manrique, supported by the Prince, opposed D. Alvaro. D. John Ramirez de Guzman, the chief Commendary, who pre∣tended some right on account of his former Election, and had now some Votes for him, stood up against D. Peter Giron. Albuquerque still held out for the Aragonians, but the King going thither in Person it was delivered up by the Governour Ferdinand Davalos. Thence the King went back to Toledo, and at the suit of the Citizens took that Government from Peter Lopez de Ayala, giving it to Peter Sarmiento, which proved afterwards of ill Consequence, and at pre∣sent offended the Prince, who favoured Ayala. At the end of this Year, and on the 4th of December dyed D. Gutierre, Archbishop of Toledo at Talavera. His Body was certainly bu∣ry'd in the Cathedral. There is a Dispute whether it was afterwards removed or not: But it matters nothing. D. Alonso Carrillo then Bishop of Siguença was preferred to the See of Toledo at the beginning of the Year 1446. He was a Man of a haughty and restless Spirit, as appeared 1446. by the Disorders he afterwards caused in the Kingdom. Only Atiença and Torija held out for the King of Navarre, but they were well garrisoned and provided. Besides it was reported that the King of Navarre was preparing to return to Castile. The Moorish King also at the Instigation of the Aragonians, entring the Frontiers of Andaluzia, took Benamaruel, and Bençalema, two strong Towns. It was not practicable to oppose both Enemies at once, there∣fore the King's Forces marched against the Aragonians in May, and having besieged Atiença
three Months, they began to treat of surrendring. It was agreed that Town and Torija should be put into the Hands of Queen Mary of Aragon to hold them in trust, till such Judges as should by Consent of both Parties be appointed, decreed to whom they should be delivered. This done the King was received into the Town on the 12th of August. He caused part of the Walls to be cast down, and some Buildings to be fired. The Townsmen looking upon this as a breach of Articles, refused to admit him into the Castle, which oblig'd him to return to Val∣ladolid, without doing any thing to the purpose. CHAP. III. Disorders continue in Spain. The Florentine War. Pope Eugenius dies. Nicholas the V. succeeds him. The Breach betwixt Castile and Aragon continu'd. Several Noblemen of Castile apprehended. Others fly. AT his Departure from Atiença the King left the Archbishop of Toledo, and D. Charles de Arellan̄o to observe the Aragonians, and seize upon that Town and Torija if an Occasion offered. From those Towns the Aragonians sent out Parties as far as Guadalajara, where the Archbishop and Arellan̄o resided. Some ill affected Persons sowed Sedition through all those Parts, which the King of Navarre had more Confidence in, than in his Strength. Be∣sides D. Alvaro, and D. John Pacheco to advance their own Interest, put the King and Prince at Variance, to such a degree that both Parties raised Men. In a treaty betwixt the King and his Son, I find the King pardons the Earl of Castro and his Children, and orders them to be restored to their Estates. D. Roderick Manrique without any other right than what he ground∣ed on these Confusions, called himself Master of Santiago, at the Instigation of Pope Eugenius and the King of Aragon, without any consent of the Knights. By this means he hoped to seize the Towns belonging to that Order, but D. Alvaro opposed him, and there ensued much Mischief. Mean while the Moors at the beginning of the Year 1447, having wasted all the Towns taken by the Moors. Country took the Towns of Arenas, Huescar, Velez el Blanco, and Velez el Roxo in the Kingdom of Murcia, these Places being ill provided. 1447. It will not be amiss briefly to give some Account of the Florentine War. Blanch, Daughter to Philip Duke of Milan was married to Francis Sforcia. Her Portion 60000 Crowns, for which Cremona a rich Town in that Dutchy was Mortgaged to him, and he, tho his Father in The Flo∣rentine War. Law tendred the Mony, refused to restore it, hoping to secure the Succession to the Duke∣dom by the help of the Venetians, Florentines, and Genoeses, with whom he was in League. Duke Philip sent the Bishop of Novara to perswade King Alonso to make War on the Floren∣tines, whilst he recovered Cremona from his Son in Law, whom the Venetians favoured. Pope Eugenius being an Enemy to the Venetians stirred up King Alonso, but it was needless; his own Obligations moved him to do more than was asked. He sent Raymund Buil, an excellent Com∣mander, to Milan, and went himself to Tibur near Rome, where whilst the Florentines made Overtures of Peace, the Venetians possess'd themselves of a great part of the Dutchy of Milan, which obliged the Duke to be reconciled to his Son in Law. King Alonso at his suit did the same, and lent the Duke Mony. This was the posture of Affairs, when on a sudden the Duke changing his Mind sent for King Alonso to resign that Dukedom over to him. The King refused, and Messages past to and fro. The mean while Pope Eugenius dyed at Rome on the 22d of February. Within 10 Days the Conclave elected Thomas Sarzana of Luca, who took the Name of Nicholas the V. a good and virtuous Pope, a great favourer of Learning. Still the War continu'd in Milan, and Duke Philip was earnest with King Alonso's Embassador to resign that Dutchy to him; resolving to live a private Life, so he could first be Revenged of his Son in Law. Whilst Messengers passed betwixt them, Duke Philip dyed in the Castle of Milan on the 13th of August. That same Month the King of Castile married the Lady Elizabeth, but without much Pomp, by reason of the Tumults raised by the Nobility. Immediately the King and Queen began to contrive the Ruin of D. Alvaro de Luna, which was the Reward of his making that Match. King Alonso of Aragon was by Duke Philip appointed his Heir in his Will. In pursuance hereof Raymund Buil, the King's Commissioner, caused all the Officers in the Castle of Milan to take the Oath of Fidelity to him as Duke; but the Rabble soon made themselves Masters of both Castles, and rased them. King Alonso could not repair thither, being employed in the War with the Florentines, from whom he had taken Ripa, Maranica, and Castellon de Pescara. The Florentines implored aid of Frederick, Lord of Ʋrbino, and Ma∣latesta, Lord of Arimino. The King besieged Piombino, and took an Island near it called Lillo. The People of Piombino articl'd to pay yearly as an Acknowledgment, a Gold Cup with 500 Crowns. The Florentines also came to Agreement with the King, who went away to Sulmona, leaving Garrisons in the Island Lillo, and Castellon de Pescara. Next King Alonso marched to∣wards Milan, but Francis Sforcia prevailed and wrested that Duchy from him. In him began a new Race of Dukes, as also an Hereditary War betwixt France, Italy, and Spain, which has lasted to our Days, as will appear in the proper Places. Castile enjoyed no Peace, for the Moors pressed on the one side, and on the other the King Castile & Aragon still at va∣riance. of Navarre waited to make his Advantage of the Discord betwixt the Nobles of that King∣dom.
After a long Siege Torija surrendred to the King, but at the same time the Aragonian Garrison in Atiença surprized the Castle called Pen̄a de Alcaçar in the Territory of Soria. This moved the King to march to Soria with 3000 Horse. At the same time the Cortes of Aragon sat at Zaragoça to make Preparations for War, and ordered that every tenth Man by Lot should be listed. However they sent Embassadors to the King of Castile to know what his Design was, and advise him not to break the Peace. The King answered he always used to go well attended, but that the Aragonians had done ill in assisting the King of Navarre, and if they did not forbear he would take other Measures. He also sent Heraulds to make his Complaints in the Cortes, and the Aragonians sent back another Embassy. Whilst these Mes∣sages passed betwixt them, a Party of Castile surprized the Castle of Verdejo, in the Territory of Calatayud. Thus all treaty of Peace ceased, and they had soon come to blows, but that a Conspiracy of the Nobles in Castile obliged the King to return to Valladolid. There he kept his Christmas, and began the Year 1448. At the same time a party of Navarre, took the 1448. Town of Campeço, and the Governour of Albarrazin Huelama, a Town on the Borders of Castile. The chief care was to reduce the Nobility and reconcile the Prince to his Father, for he was a restless and inconstant Youth, never fixed. The Ambition of D. Alvaro de Lu∣na, and John Pacheco hindred any Agreement, each of them striving to ruin the other. D. Alonso de Fenseca, Bishop of Avila, a Person of great Judgment endeavoured to reconcile them. To disappoint the Designs of the Nobility it was resolved on a Day appointed to apprehend many of them. In order to put this Design in Execution, the King and Prince met betwixt Medina del Campo, and Tordesillas, on the 11th of May. As it had been agreed it was per∣formed. The Earls of Benavente and Alva, Henry Brother to the Admiral, the two Bro∣thers, Conspira∣tors ap∣prehend∣ed. O∣thers fly. Peter and Suero Quin̄ones were apprehended and sent Prisoners to several Places. It was layed to their Charge that they design'd to bring the King of Navarre into Castile, but the People said this was meer Invention. The Admiral and Earl of Castro fled to Navarre, and their Estates were seized upon, the Towns being unprovided, which were Medina de Ruyseco, Lobaton, Aguilar, Benavente, Mayorga, and many others. James Manrique voluntarily deli∣vered up the Castles of Navarrete and Trevin̄o as a Pledge of his Loyalty to the King. The Cortes still sat at Zaragoça, and a Truce for 6 Months was concluded betwixt Aragon and Ca∣stile. The Earl of Castro after he fled from Castile remained in Navarre, the Admiral came to Zaragoça on the 29th of May. There he consulted with the King of Navarre, and agreed to go over to Italy to give the King of Aragon an account of Affairs. At that time the King of Ara∣gon lay before Piombino, as has been said, thither came to him at the same time the Admiral, and Garci Alverez de Toledo, Son to the Earl of Alva. They were graciously received, and the King promised to assist them. In Castile some Months were spent in seizing the Towns be∣longing to the Nobility, the King and Prince having consulted together agreed to Garrison the Frontiers, especially against the Moors. Alonso Giron, Kinsman to John Pacheco was ap∣pointed to command the Frontiers about Hellin and Humilla with 200 Horse, and 400 Foot, with which Forces he overthrew a Body of Moors that made an Incursion on that side, but his Men falling to Plunder, the Infidels rallyed and charging them afresh cut off most of them, the Commander with a very few escaping. Prince Henry again offended at D. Alvaro de Lu∣na withdrew from Madrid, where he was with his Father, to Sagovia. This perplexed the King, and he resolved to summon the Cortes to meet at Valladolid to seek some Remedy for these Evils. Prince Henry by his Father's Command came to Tordesillas, the King before he met him having declared in publick that he was resolved to be reconciled to his Son, and to reward or punish the rest as they deserved, and particularly that he would divide the Estates of the Rebels, among those that had continued Loyal. All the Representatives of Cities that came to the Cortes commended the King's Resolution, only James Valera, who was for Cuenca, advised not to proceed against the Nobles. Ferdinand de Ribadeneira, told him what he had said would cost him dear, but the King going away seemed not to approve of Ribadeneira's Boldness. CHAP. IV. The Earl of Benavente escaping raises new Tumults. The Affairs of Portugal. The Mu∣tiny of Toledo. Fresh Tumults among the Nobility of Castile. The Mutineers of To∣ledo punish'd. THE Imprisonment of those great Men, and Flight of the others caused great Troubles in Castile, and all the Discourse was of restoring them. The Earl of Benavente made his Earl of Be∣navente escapes, and raises new Trou∣bles. Escape out of Prison by the Assistance of Alonso de Leon, whom he bribed, and the Govern∣our of the Castle trusted. 30 Horse were hid in a Wood, and with them the Earl fled to Be∣navente, where as soon as he came the Townsmen turned out the King's Garrison. Then marching out relieved Alva de Liste besieged by the King's Party, and took some small Towns. The King alarmed at this News, left D. Alvaro at Ocana to make Preparations for War, and went himself in great haste to Benavente, but that Town being well provided he passed into
Portugal. That Kingdom was then full of Joy for the Marriage of the King with Elizabeth, Daughter to Prince Peter the King's Uncle, and Governour of the Kingdom, to whom he had been 7 Years Contracted. This Lady was very Virtuous and Beautiful. Of her was born D. John, who dyed a Child, and Joanna, who also dyed, and another D. John who lived many Years, and succeeded his Father. The King was young, and Prince Peter had the whole Power of the Government, which some great Men highly resented. Among them the chief∣est was D. Alonso, Earl of Barcelos, the Prince's Brother, and by him created Duke of Bra∣gança. Affairs of Portugal. He perswaded the King to take upon him the Government, and put to Death his Un∣cle for the wrong done to his Mother, in depriving her of it. The King contrived how to put this advice in Execution, and Prince Peter having notice of it, fled and made himself strong in Coimbra. From thence he held Correspondence with some of the Citizens in order to possess himself of Lisbon. Having layed his Design, which could not be kept secret, he set out, but being attack'd in the way by a Party that lay in wait for him, was killed with most of those that attended him, in the Year 1449. Authors do not agree in what Month. He was a Man of a great Spirit, and very wife. It is said the King was much concerned at his 1449. Death, but that is not likely, since he lay long unburyed, but at last was honourably Inter∣red at Aljubarrota, the Burial Place of the Kings. His Son James was taken, went afterwards to Flanders, and his Aunt, the Dutchess Elizabeth, made Interest at Rome to have him chosen a Cardinal. His Sister Beatrix went also to Flanders, and was married to Adolphus, Duke of Cleves. After this Portugal enjoy'd Peace a long time, and the King being come to Age governed pru∣dently, but was more Fortunate in the War he made with the Moors whilst young, than in that with Castile in his latter Years. He spent much of his Treasure in redeeming of Captives that were in Africk, and is only censured for having been too much governed by his Cour∣tiers and Favourites. D. Alvaro being left at Ocan̄a, as has been said, to make the necessary Preparations for Mutiny in Toledo. War, found himself much streightned for Mony, and therefore by way of Loan demanded a Million of Maravedles of Toledo, a rich and large City. Alonso Cota, a considerable Citizen was employed to Collect this Mony, but the Citizens opposed him, saying, it was contrary to their Charter. D. Aloaro being informed of it, order'd the Collection of the Mony to go on. Hereupon the Town mutiny'd, and gave the Alarm with a Bell from the great Church. John Alonso, and Peter Galvez, two Canons, were they that stirred up the People. A Fellow that made Skins to carry Wine, whose Name is not known, headed the Rabble. They fired the House of Alonso Cota, and the Flame spreading, all the Quarter of St. Mary Mag∣dalen was consumed, where most of the rich Merchants lived, whose Houses were plundered. This happen'd on the 26th of January. The greatest Sufferers were those they call New Chri∣stians, because descended from Jews. Peter Sarmiento the Governour, and his Lieutenant Mar∣cos Garcia, whom in contempt the People to this Day call Marquillos de Maçarambro, that ought to have quell'd the Mutiny, encouraged the Rabble. This done, fearing the Punishment they had well deserved, they shut their Gates, and their Joy was soon turned into Sorrow. D. Alvaro of himself not being strong enough to appease those Tumults, because Peter Sarmi∣ento was his Enemy, gave advice to the King, who having taken Benavente repaired to Toledo, and the Gates being shut against him took up his Quarters in the Hospital of S. Lazarus. Se∣veral Cannon-shot were made at him from the City. Peter Sarmiento put some Citizens up∣on the Rack, plundered their Houses, and executed them for Corresponding with the King. The King removed to Torijos, thither came Deputies to him from Toledo, to tell him if he did not remove D. Alvaro de Luna, and preserve their Franchises, that and other Cities would proclaim Prince Henry King. These Deputies were dismissed without any Answer. The King besieged the City, but Prince Henry coming to its Relief the Siege was raised, yet the People would not deliver the Keys of the City or Castle to the Prince. On the 6th of June, the Citizens made an Order that none descended of Jews should be capable of any publick Em∣ployment. A Dean of Toledo writ a Treatise to shew the illegality of that Ordinance, and offered to defend his Opinion by publick Dispute. He also writ largely about it to the Bi∣shop of Cuenca, shewing that many very noble Families were related to Jews. So far he pro∣ceeded herein that Pope Nicholas by his special Bull condemn'd that Act or Ordinance. This Bull bares date September the 24th 1449. Two years after he put out another Bull to the same effect. The Archbishops of Toledo, D. Alonso Carrillo, and the Cardinal D. Peter Gonzales in 1449. two Synods, one held at Alcala, the other at Vitoria, condemned it also. Our Historians have omitted this Tumult of Toledo, as I suppose, for fear of making themselves odious, but I would not omit it, having found it in very authentick Manuscripts. The King of Navarre ceased not to stir up the Nobility of Castile to Rebellion. The Cities Nobility of Castile supported in Rebel∣lion by the K. of Navarre. of Murcia and Cuenca were ill affected towards the King, which was no small Encouragement to the Navarrois and his Adherents. Many Incursions were made by the Aragonians into Castile. and they took a great Booty of Cattle about Requena, defeating a Body of the Townsmen, who ventured out to recover it. Nevertheless their Design of securing Murcia failed them. Cu∣enca was attempted by the Aragonians, invited thither by the Governour of the Castle, which was then in the highest part of the City, now only the Ruins of it remain. Here also they were disappointed, for Bishop Barrientos defended the City with great Resolution. In Aragon the Admiral of Castile being returned out of Italy, the King's Orders were read in a full As∣sembly
of the States and some were for raising Forces and declaring War with Castile. But the Commons oppos'd it, and therefore other Methods were thought of. It was propos'd to marry the Prince of Viana with the Earl of Haro's Daughter. It was also laboured that the Nobility of Castile should have a Conference, and chiefly that the Prince of Castile should joyn with the Malecontents. This they durst attempt because Prince Hemy had then possessed him∣self of Toledo in opposition to his Father. Those who had raised the Tumult were for sub∣mitting to the King, they were apprehended in the Cathedral where they took Sanctuary. The two mutinous Canons were sent to the close Prison at Santor caz, their Lives being spared in regard they were Churchmen. Mark Garcia, and Ferdinand de Avila were dragged about the Streets, and after much ill usage, as they deserved, put to Death. Mean while the Moors, there being no body to oppose them, ravaged all the Frontiers of Andaluzia on that side next to them. They took much Booty, and came up to the very Walls of Jaen and Sevil. So great was the Confidence of the Moorish King, that he assured him of Navarre, that he would not The Moors ravage Andalu∣zia. doubt of taking Cordova, provided he would make a Diversion on the side of Aragon. The King of Navarre returned thanks for that offer, but the putting it in Execution was delay'd for some time. On the 26th of July many Nobles of Castile met at Corun̄a near Soria. Some will have it that Henry Prince of Castile was in this Assembly. They complained of D. Alvaro de Luna, who was the cause that many Noblemen lived in Banishment, and others in Prison, and therefore encouraged one another to stand together. It was resolved that every one should gather the greatest Force he could till the middle of August, and joyn Prince Henry. Yet tho they met at the time appointed near Pen̄afiel in Old Castile, many Noblemen slunk away with∣out regard to their Ingagements. Every one suspected the other, but above all they were jealous of Prince Henry, because he was very uncertain in his Humour, and no less of the King of Navarre, who had much Business to mind of his own at home, and in France. This King had a Castle in Guienne called Maulisson, delivered to him by the English, and had given Charge of it to his Constable. This Castle the Earl of Faux besieged with 12000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, entrenching his Army and battering the Walls. The King of Navarre repaired thi∣ther with what Forces he could gather in haste, and encamping near the Enemy, they had an Interview, in which nothing was concluded, the Earl affirming he could not depart with∣out taking the Castle, having promised it to the King of France. Hereupon the King of Na∣varre returning to Spain, the besieged were obliged to surrender only upon Liberty for the Garrison to march whither they pleased. The delay of the King of Navarre, and slowness of the Nobility gave time to reconcile Prince Henry to his Father. The Agreement being well advanced both dismissed their Forces the King stayed in Old Castile, and the Prince re∣turned Prince Henry of Castile re∣conciled to his Fa∣ther. to Toledo, where he was received with all manner of Expressions of Joy. There at length Peter Sarmiento designing to deliver up the City to the King, and putting no end to his Robberies and Extortions, was deprived of the Government of the City and Castle at the be∣ginning of the Year 1450. He complained and put the Prince in mind of his Promise; ne∣vertheless he was forced to depart the City, carrying with him 200 Horses and Mules loaden 1450. with Riches he had plundered. The People was not permitted to take any thing from him, he having the Prince's Pass. Yet he was robbed of part by the way, and the rest when he came to Gumiel was seized by the King's Order. Sarmiento himself fled to Navarre, and hav∣ing obtained Pardon of his Crimes, lived Miserably the rest of his Days at Bastida, a Town in the Territory of Rioja, that place alone being left him of all his Possessions. His Confede∣rates were more severely punished. They were taken in several Places, and put to Death with exquisite Torments. The Punishment seemed cruel, but it was designed to terrify o∣thers from committing the like Violence and Extravagances for the future, and to warn those that were in Power, not to make use of it to the Destruction of those committed to their Charge. CHAP. V. The mutiny of Segovia. The Affairs of the Crown of Aragon. The Civil War in Na∣varre. The Factions of the Agramonteses and Biamonteses there. The Emperor Frederick marries Ellenor, Sister to the King of Portugal. The Moors twice de∣feated by the Christians. SCarce was the Mutiny at Toledo quelled when another broke out at Segovia, whither the Prince was gone. Peter Portocarrero, who began to be great with the Prince, accused Mutiny at Segovia. John Pacheco, Marques of Villena, of a Crime for which he ought to be apprehended. The Bishop of Cuenca, John de Silva the King's Standard-bearer, and the Marshal Pelayo de Ribera attested the same thing. They all advised the Prince to make him an Example, and it was resolved to secure him. It was not easy to do it by reason of his great Power, and also that he having notice of the Prince's Displeasure, made himself strong in a quarter of the City. Lest much Blood should be shed in forcing him, he was permitted to go away to Turuegano, a Town of his own. There, to gain Peter Portocarrero, he gave him to Wife Beatrix his Ba∣stard
Daughter, and with her the Town of Medellin in Estremadura near Guadiana. Thus his Enemies were weakened, and the Prince began to be appeased. The War with the Ara∣gonians continu'd, but not very hot. Bordalva, a Castle on the Frontiers of Aragon was taken and lost again. The King of Aragon was worse looked upon, as being the chief con∣triver of all the Troubles, and an Opportunity was now offered of being revenged on him. Many advised the Prince of Viana to take upon him the Crown and Government, since his Father had no Right to it, and this was the beginning of great Disorders. The King of Na∣varre was at Zar agoca, where the Coxtes of Aragon met in Summer. They limited the Power of the Deputy Justices of Aragon, and decreed that all Goods upon which there depended any Law-suit, should be deposited in the Hands of an Officer appointed for that purpose, that the Judges having such Goods in their Power might not delay deciding of Causes. The King of Aragon sent Embassadors to exhort the Princes of Spain to Peace, resolving if there were War to stand by his Brother and Subjects. In all other respects he seemed to have for∣got Spain, taken up with the Pleasures of Italy, having gained much Reputation, and enjoy∣ing Peace, the Fruit of his great Labours. The Grecian Emperor oppressed by the Turks, sent Embassadors to him to desire his assistance against them. The same did Demetrius Paleologus, Embassies to the K. of Aragon for aid a∣gainst the Turks. Prince of Attica, and Peloponnesus, or Morea, Brother to the Emperor Constantine, offering him great Territories when the War was ended. Aranitus, Earl of Epirus, or Albania did the like. But above all we must not omit the Embassy sent by George Castriot, commonly cal∣led Scanderbeg, the Turks having given him that Name, signifying, The Lord Alexander. He was given up a Hostage to Amurat the Turk, but making his escape with a handful of Men held out for several Years in Epirus, and overthrew great Armies of Turks. But finding himself too weak alone to oppose that great Power, he laboured to get forreign Aids, and to this purpose made a League with the Venetians, implored the Favour of the Popes, and sent a solemn Embassy to the King of Aragon at the beginning of the Year 1451, offering if he relieved him with Men and Mony, that after the War was ended, that Province should 1451. pay the same Tribute to him, it used to pay to the Turk. The King sent some Supplies, but too small to oppose the vast Power of the Enemy. This Year was Fortunate to Spain, for the Birth of the Princess Elizabeth, for whom Heaven design'd the Crown of Castile, her Brothers dying. She was an incomparable Princess, and the Glory of Spain. She was born at Mndrigal on the 23d of April. Henry, Brother to the Admiral, who had been taken up with the other Noblemen three Years before, made his escape out of the Castle of Langa, near Santistevan de Gormaz. He had a Clew of Thred sent him, and laying his Cloaths in the Bed with the Night-cap, as if he had been there, went up to a Tower, where with the Thred he drew up a Rope that some of his Friends had ready below for him. The Rope was knotted, and so he let himself down. Mean while the Governour looking into his Room and seeing something in the Bed thought he slept and went away satisfyed. It Portugal, El∣lenor the King's Sister was contracted to the Emperor Frederick at Lisbon on the 9th of August. Soon after the Bride was sent by Sea to Pisa, and went thence to Siena in Italy. The Nobility of Castile falling off from him, and the Prince of Viana revolting the King Decay of the K. of Navarre's Power. of Navarre's Interest declined both at home and abroad. All this was the Contrivance of D, Alvaro de Luna to secure himself, but it turned to his Ruin. By his advice there was a sort of an Accommodation made betwixt the Kings of Castile and Navarre. It was agreed that the Admiral and Earl of Castro, and other Noblemen should be pardoned and restored to their Estates, as also that D. Alonso, Son to the King of Navarre should again have the Ma∣stership of Calatrava. But this succeeded not, for Peter Giron who was in Possession made himself strong in the Town of Almagro resolving to stand upon his Guard. So D. Alonso was forc'd to return to Aragon as he came, which highly offended the King of Navarre. To add to his Trouble, Prince Henry was by the means of D. Alvaro entirely reconciled to his Father. But the most grievous thing of all was, that a tedious and bloody Civil War broke out in Navarre. That Nation had been long divided betwixt two Factions, the Bia∣monteses, and the Agramonteses, headed by the Earl of Lerin, and Marques of Cortes, and Two Fa∣ctions in Navarre. much Blood had been spilt. The Agramonteses were for the King, the Biamonteses inticed the Prince to take up Arms against his Father, who they said wrongfully with-held the Crown from him. In the first Place they made a League with Castile and France. The King of Castile promised to assist the Prince, provided he would declare and take up Arms. The King of France did the same, being then in a Condition to do it, having recovered all Guienne from the English. As soon as the Civil War broke out in Navarre, the Biamonteses seized several Towns and Cities, and among them Pamplona, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, Olite and Aivar. Yet the greatest part of the Kingdom and the Principality of Viana remained in the King's Power, he having in time put Garrisons and given the Government of Towns to Men of approved Fidelity. Prince Henry, and soon after his Father the King of Castile came and layed Siege to Estela, where the Queen of Navarre was. The King her Husband speeded from Zaragoça to her Relief, but bringing small Force with him, and the Agramonteses not being yet able to oppose the Enemies, he was forced to return to Zaragoça designing to raise Men in that Kingdom. As soon as he was gone the King and Prince of Castile as it the War were ended, tho they had done nothing, at the Request of Prince Charles returned to Burgos. His mild Nature was hurtful to Prince Charles, for his Father having raised an
Army, tho small in Number, yet composed of Old Soldiers lay'd Siege to Ayvar, a well for∣tify'd Town. His Son came to relieve the Besieged, and on the 3d of October both Armies drew out. Some Religious Persons laboured to reconcile the Father and Son. Prince Charles was willing to lay down Arms upon Condition all that had followed him should be pardoned; That the Principality of Viana, and half the Revenues of the Crown should be given to him, and that the King of Castile, without whom he had sworn he would make no Peace, should approve of these Articles. The King of Navarre allowed part and rejected part of the Conditions, whereupon the signal for Battle was given on both sides. At first the Biamonteses made their Enemies give way, but Roderick Rebolledo the King's Lord Cham∣berlain stood his Ground with such bravery, that he gave time for those who had not engaged to come up, and then they that fled before rallying endeavoured to blot out the shame of having turned their Backs. Thus the Prince's Forces being an undisciplined Multitude, not able to bear the Charge were put to Flight. The first that ran were the Horse of An∣daluzia. But a few were killed, many taken. The Prince himself being beset delivered his Sword and Gauntlet to his Brother Alonso. Authors do not write what Numbers fought, or what were killed, nor give any particular Account of the Battle. The Prince was sent Prisoner to Tafalla, and thence to Monroy. It is reported he was always suspicious of being Poisoned, and therefore when taken would not eat till his Brother had tasted. The King of Navarre after this Victory returned to Zaragoça with his Wife, who proved soon after with Child. Yet the Biamonteses were no way dismayed at this Loss, especially because Prince Henry came to their Assistance. Besides, the Nobility of Aragon favoured Prince Charles, and plotted how to release him. Navarre was in a miserable Condition, the Country plundered by Soldiers, and the Towns divided into Factions, which often fell to blows. In Andalu∣zia the Affairs of the Christians succeeded better. On the 9th of February 1452, a much less 1452. party of Christians routed 600 Moorish Horse, and 800 Foot, who wasted the Country Two de∣feats of the Moors. about Arcos. D. John Ponce, Earl of Arcos, and Lord of Marchena commanded this Party. In March 600 Horse, and 1500 Foot of the Infidels were overthrown with great Slaughter, by 300 Christian Horse, and 2000 Foot near Lorca, in the Kingdom of Murcia, and a Booty of 40000 head of Cattle they had gathered, recovered. This Victory was obtained by Alon∣so Faxardo, Lieutenant of Murcia, Garcia Manrique his Son in Law, and James Ribera, Go∣vernour of the civil Affairs in the City Murcia. Thus the Moors were checked and began to be mutinous among themselves, grown weary of the Government of Mahomet the Lame. Nothing remarkable happen'd this Year in Spain, but that the Queen of Navarre on the 10th of March at a Town called Sos, on the Borders of Aragon and Navarre, was delivered of a Son called Ferdinand, to whom Heaven had alotted vast Kingdoms, and immortal Renown for his extraordinary Actions both in Peace and War. At Siena in Tuscany the Emperor Fre∣derick met the Lady Ellenor his Bride, who came thither by Sea from Portugal. There they rati∣fyed the Contract; at Rome they were marryed and crowned by the Pope, and at Naples the Marriage was consummated. The Feasts and publick Expressions of Joy were so great as no Man living had seen the like. CHAP. VI. D. Alvaro de Luna the King of Castile's great Favourite, his Character and fatal End. Mahomet the Turk takes Constantinople. Mahomet King of Granada deposed. Cruzadoes coin'd in Portugal. LET us now come to the unhappy Death of D. Alvaro de Luna, Constable of Castile, and Master of Santiago, who from a low Condition ascended to the height of Worldly Hap∣piness, D. Alvaro de Luna his Cha∣racter and fatal End. whence he was cast headlong by an unbrideled Ambition. He had good Natural Parts, and no less good Qualities, a ready Wit, a piercing Judgement. His Words were always Premeditated, but sharp, tho he had an impediment in his Speech. His cunning and art of Dissembling were great, his Pride and Ambition nothing inferior. Of Body he was little, but it was strong and enured to Labour. The Features of his Face were pleasing, and withal Majestick. As he grew in Years he also grew in haughtiness, was difficult of access, spoke harshly, and suffered himself to be swayed by Passion, never putting any mean to his Revenge. He had been often impeached upon several Articles, as that he had ga∣thered more Treasure than suited with his Quality, and ceased not still to heap up more. That he had disgraced the Nobility. That he had the King in his Power and governed absolutely, wanting himself nothing but the Name of a King, having gain'd the Affections of the People, and being possest of many strong Holds, and vast Riches drawn out of the King's Coffers. These things the King was sensible in part were true, and yet he only durst some∣times complain to the Queen, till at length a fair opportunity of destroying him was offered. D. Peter de Zun̄iga, Earl of Plasencia was withdrawn from Court to Bejar, and D. Alvaro believing it was in hatred to him, resolved to do him all the harm he could. Near Bejar is the Castle of Piedrahita, whence D. Garcia, Son to the Earl of Alva ceased not to do much
harm in revenge that his Father was kept in Prison. D. Alvaro advised to besiege this Ca∣stle, hoping to surprize at the same time the Earl of Plasencia. The Earl of Haro, and Marques of Santillana agreed with the Earl of Plasencia to send 500 Horse to Valladolid, where the Court was, to murder D. Alvaro, but he having timely notice of the Design per∣swaded the King to remove to Burgos. In̄igo de Zuniga was Governour of the Castle of that City. The King being now weary of D. Alvaro, sent the Countess of Ribadeo, Neece to the Earl of Plasencia, to advise him to come speedily to Court to secure his Enemy D. Al∣varo. The Earl being then sick could not go himself, but sent his eldest Son D. Alvaro, who stopped at Curiel, near Burgos, to gather some Horse. The King advised D. Alvaro de Luna to retire to his Estate, but he refused unless the Archbishop of Toledo were left in his Place. D. Alvaro de Luna suspecting some Design against him, caused Alonso de Vivero an Officer of the Revenue to be mudered in his Chamber and thrown out of the Window in∣to the River, without respecting the King, or the Holiness of the Day, it being Good Fry∣day the 30th of March 1453. This Crime hastned his Ruin, for the King sent to call D. 1453. Alvaro de Zuniga. He came to the City in Disguize, about 80 Horse following him in small Parties at distances. It being then Night they sent for some of the Townsmen to the Ca∣stle, and advis'd them to guard the Streets. This could not be done so privately, but that it was noised about, that D. Alvaro de Luna was to be apprehended the next Day. No Bo∣dy offered to give him Notice of it but one James Gotor, his Servant, who advised him to fly to his own Lands, but he refused to stir as undervaluing his Enemies. On the 5th of April the House where he Lodged was beset, and after some Messages had passed to and fro he surrendred himself, having first received a Promise under the King's Hand, that no wrong should be done to him. He was secured in that same House, and thither the King came to dine after hearing Mass. D. Alonso de Fonseca Bishop of Avila came by the King's side. D. Alvaro spying him, laying hold of his own Beard said, By this thou shalt pay for thy advice little Priest. The Bishop answered, Sir, I call God to witness I have no more hand in this Business than the King of Granada. After Dinner D. Alvaro asked leave to speak with the King, and being denyed sent him a Letter to this Effect. It is 45 Years since I came into your Service, and confess my Reward has been greater than I could have hoped for. There wanted nothing to compleat my Happiness, but that I had retired in time. I might well have withdrawn as other great Men have done, but chose rather to serve still and dis∣charge my Duty, which proves my Ruin. It is a great grief to be deprived of my Li∣berty, having ventured my Life and Fortune to obtain it for your Highness. I know I have offended God, and shall think it a Happiness if my Troubles serve to appease him. My riches have brought me to this pass, and I would willingly resign them were they not in your Hands already. I am sorry it is not in my Power to shew to the World that I can despise as well as gather them. I only beg that in regard my Conscience is trou∣bled about 10 or 12000 Crowns which I have unjustly gathered to supply the wants of the Exchequer, they may be refunded out of my own Treasure, which if I have not de∣served by my Service, at least it ought to be granted, because the Request is just in it self. The King answered, "That he had received more than ever Prince bestowed on a Sub∣ject. That as to assisting him in recovering his Liberty he was also the Cause that he lost it. And as to the wants of the Exchequer, since he had made them it had been rea∣sonable he had supplyed them out of his own Fortune, yet Justice should be done. It is a wonderful thing, that none of all those D. Alvaro had raised now, appeared for him. He was sent Prisoner to Portillo, in keeping of James de Zuniga, Son to the Marshal In̄igo de Zuniga. This Year so remarkable in Spain for the Death of this great Man, was fatal to Christen∣dom, for the loss of the City Constantinople, taken by Mahomet the Great Turk, after a Siege of 54 Days. Great Cruelties were committed in it when entred, and it has ever since Constanti∣nople tak∣en by the Turks. been the Metropolis of the Turkish Empire. Charles Prince of Viana was carryed to Zara∣goça, and there at the Request of the Aragonians pardon'd and set at Liberty on the 22d of June. The Prince promised Obedience for the future, and to withdraw his Garrisons out of all Places that held for him. For Security of Performance he delivered Luis de Bia∣monte, Earl of Lerin, and Constable of Navarre, and his Children, with other Noblemen as Hostages. The Joy for this Agreement was not lasting, for new Tumults began soon af∣ter. The Father's Covetousness, and Son's Impatience for a long time consumed the King∣dom of Navarre, as shall be related in its place. Whilst the King of Castile seized upon D. Alvaro de Luna's Lands and Treasures, he prepared in Prison to clear himself of the Crimes lay'd to his Charge, but there was no likelyhood he should be cleared, the King being his Enemy. The Judges appointed to ex∣amin his Case gave Sentence of Death against him. From Portillo he was carryed to Val∣ladolid to be Executed. Having confessed and received the Sacrament, he was led out to Execution, a Cryer proclaiming before him in manner following; Our Sovereign Lord the King commands this cruel Tyrant to be Executed, for that he with extraordinary Pride and Presumption, to the great abuse of the Royal Majesty, which is the Image of God upon Earth, made himself Master of the King's Court and Palace, usurping the place that did not belong to him, and committed many great Crimes, Extortions, Rapines, Violences and tyrannical Actions to the hainous offence of God, and our faid Lord the
King, the disgrace and lessening of his Person, Crown and Dignity, the impairing of his Revenue, and obstructing of Justice. For which his Offences he is to be beheaded, that the Justice of God and the King may appear, and he be made an Example to deterr others from committing the like Crimes. To such Actions such a Reward. In the Market∣place was erected a Scaffold with a Crucifix, and two Flamboys on the sides of it. Being upon the Scaffold he bowed to the Cross, and going forward gave his Ring he used to Seal with, and his Hat to his Page, saying, This is all I have lest to give you. This moved him to weep, and many followed his Example. Barrasa, Master of the Horse to Prince Henry be∣ing present, D. Alvaro called and said to him, Go warn the Prince from me, not to follow this Example of his Fathers in rewarding his Servants. Then seeing a high Iron hook, he asked the Executioner what it was for, and being told it was to fix his Head upon, answered, When I am dead do as thou wilt with my Body, for to a brave Man neither is the manner of his Death disgraceful, nor can it come too soon to him that has attained such high Honours. This said, he opened his Garment, and without the least mark of fear bowed down his Head, which was cut off on the 5th of July. He was a Man in all respects great, who for the space of 30 Years absolutely governed the King, and directed all his Actions. Alonso de Espina, a Franciscan Fryar accompanied D. Alvaro de Luna to the place of Execution. This Fryar wrote a Book called Fortalitium Fidei, an excellent Work. The dead Body remained three Days on the Scaffold with a Bason by it to gather Alms to bury him, that not long before was equal to some Kings. He was interred at St. Andrews, the common Burial Place of Per∣sons executed, thence removed to St. Francis in that Town, and lastly to his own Chappel in the Cathedral of Toledo. It is reported an Astrologer told D. Alvaro his Death would be at or on Cadahalso, which he supposed to be meant of a Town he had of that Name, and therefore never went thither, but Cadahalso in Spanish is a Scaffold. But these are vain Observations. The King besieged Escalona, which place after the Death of D. Alvaro was surrendred by his Wife, upon Condition, his Treasure should be equally divided betwixt the King and her self. All the rest was confiscated except the Town of Santistevan left to his Son D. John, whose Daughter and Heiress married James the Son of John Pacheco, and so the Earldom of Santistevan and Marquisate of Villena were united. D. Alvaro had a Daugh∣ter married to In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, Duke del Infantado. Also a Bastard Son and Daugh∣ter. Thus much of D. Alvaro. At Granada, Ismael, with the Assistance of the Christians, K. of Gra∣nada de∣posed. and his Party among the Moors, wrested the Crown from his Cousin, Mahomet the Lame; but being in the Throne soon forgot the Obligations he owed to the Christians. In Portu∣gal a new sort of Mony was coined called Cruzados, which took that Name from the Croi∣sade, Cruzados first coin∣ed in Por∣tugal. then granted by Pope Nicholas the V. to all that went to the War against the Moors in Barbary, at the Request of D. Alvaro Gonzalez, Bishop of Lanego. CHAP. VII. The Designs and Death of King John of Castile. Discoveries of the Portugueses along the Coast of Africk. Prince Henry proclaim'd King of Castile. Peace con∣cluded betwixt Castile, Aragon and Navarre. The Character of Henry the new King of Castile. THE Death of D. Alvaro de Luna no way contributed to alter the Posture of Affairs for the better, tho the King was resolved (had he lived) to take upon himself the Go∣vernment, Designs of K. John of Castile. and follow the Advice of the Bishop of Cuenca, and Prior of Guadlupe, Men of great Integrity and Piety. To this purpose he sent for them both to come to Avila, whi∣ther he went from Escalona. He designed also to keep 8000 Horse in constant pay, to be a check to his Subjects, and a standing Power against Forreign Enemies. Besides he resolved that every City should be impowered to Collect the Revenue, that there might be no need of Farmers or Collectors, who oppress the People to enrich themselves. The Por∣tugueses at this time began to make vast Discoveries along the Coast of Africk, as far as the Cape of Good Hope. Prince Henry, Uncle to the King of Portugal being learned in Astrology, and zealous of promoting the Christian Faith, was the first that undertook this Affair. Cape of Good Hope discover∣ed. The King of Castile pretended that Conquest appertained to him, and threatned War in case the Portugues did not desist. He answered, he knew no wrong had been done, and hoped the King of Castile would not begin a War before that dispute was decided by Law. The King of Castile went to Medina del Campo and Valladolid, to try whether the Change of Air would remove an Ague that consumed him. There he received the Answer from Portugal, and the Queen of Aragon, who came to settle Peace betwixt the Princes of Spain, wherein she was not unsuccessful. Notwithstanding there happened a new Cause of Offence, which was that Prince Henry was Divorced from Blanch his Wife, pretending that by rea∣son of some Witchcraft he could not have to do with her, whereas in Truth, his other Debaucheries made him unfit to have to do with a Maid. The Divorce was first granted by Luis de Acun̄a, Administrator of the Church of Segovia for the Cardinal D. John de Cer∣vantes,
and afterwards confirmed by the Archbishop of Toledo, commissioned by Pope Nicho∣las. But the World was surprized that after this Divorce, Prince Henry should marry again. On the 13th of November the King of Castile had a Son born at Tordesillas, called Alonso, who tho short liv'd was the cause of a Bloody War. At the Instance of the Queen of Aragon, a Treaty of Peace was set on Foot betwixt the Kings of Castile and Aragon, as also betwixt the King of Navarre, and the Prince his Son, and for the better carrying of it on, a Truce was concluded for the following Year. Whilst these things were in Agitation the King's K. John of Castile dies. Sickness increased to that Degree, that having received the Sacraments, he dyed at Valla∣dolid on the 20th of July 1454. For the present he was deposited at St. Paul in Valladolid, and afterwards, as he had ordered, translated to the Carthusians at Burgos, built By his Fa∣ther, 1454. and given to that Order by him. His Obsequies were performed in all Cities, and even at Naples, where the Vinetian Embassador appearing among the Mourners cloathed in Scarlet and Crimson changed their Sorrow into Laughter. Besides a great part of the Mau∣soleum built of Wood in the Church was burnt by the great number of Lights. In his Will the King left the Mastership of Santiago, and Constableship of Castile to his Son Prince Alon∣so, and appointed the Bishop of Cuenca, the Prior of Guadalupe, and John de Padilla, the Lord Chamberlain his Tutors. It is thought if he had not been so young he would have appointed him his Successor, being highly offended at Prince Henry. To the Princess Eli∣zabeth he left the Town of Cuenca, and a great Sum of Mony, to the Queen his Wife Soria, Arevalo and Madrigal. Four days after the late King's Death, Prince Henry was proclaimed King. Immediate∣ly Henry the IV. pro∣claimed K. of Ca∣stile. the Earls or Alva and Trevin̄o were released out of Prison, which made the Joy at the Coronation the more compleat. All the late King's Officers of the Houshold were con∣tinu'd in their Posts. Lastly the Treaty of Peace began by the Queen of Aragon, was con∣cluded upon these Conditions, That the King of Navarre, D. Alonso his Son, and Henry Son to Prince Henry of Aragon, renounce all their Pretensions to any Estates or Dignities in Castile: That in lieu thereof the King of Castile pay them yearly certain Pensions then agre∣ed upon: That the Admiral of Castile, his Brother Henry, John de Tovar, Lord of Berlanga and the rest that took party with the King of Navarre, may return to their Estates. D. James Gomez de Sandoval, Earl of Castro dyed before his Cause was determined, and was buryed at Borgia. Before his Death for his great Fidelity to the Aragonians he had Denia in the Kingdom of Valencia and Lerma in Old Castile given him. These Towns he left to his Son Ferdinand, who with some other Outlaws was not comprehended in the Pardon, but left to the Mercy of the New King. All Places taken during the late War on both sides were agreed to be restored. 15000 Florins were given to the King of Navarre, for the Town of Atiença. Next it was attempted to settle the Affairs of Navarre, but that succeeded not. Whilst the Princes concerned could ratify the Peace already concluded, it was agreed to prolong the Truce for a Year longer. This done the Queen of Aragon returned to her Kingdom. D. John Pacheco, Marques of Villen̄a was now beyond Dis∣pute, the most powerful Nobleman in Castile as well in respect of his great Riches, as the Favour of the new King. He and D. Ferrer de Lanuza, and D. John Biamonte, Brother to the Constable of Navarre, being commissioned by their Masters the Kings of Castile and Navarre, and Charles Prince of Viana, met at Agreda about the beginning of the Year 1455, 1455. to compose the Differences betwixt the King of Navarre and his Son, but they had no Suc∣cess. It was supposed D. John Pacheco underhand obstructed the Peace of Navarre, fearing it might be a means to lessen his Authority. Only a Truce was concluded to last till the end of April. Thus much of Navarre. In Castile the hopes the People had conceived that K. Henry how dis∣posed. the Change of Government would produce some good Effect, now vanished. The new King was as much given to his Ease as his Father, and in other Respects was worse. He had Wit enough, but no Resolution, was given up to Lewdness, and hated Business. D. John Pacheco governed with more Moderation than D. Alvaro de Luna, or at least was more Fortunate, for he held it all his Life time. King Henry had a great Head, a high Fore∣head, cloudy Eyes, his Nose fallen, not naturally, but by an accident, his Hair of a Chesnut colour, his Complexion ruddy, and swarthy. All his Face was disagreeable, his Body tall, his Legs long, but his Limbs strong. He loved Hunting and Musick, and was not over curious in his Dress. He drank Water, eat much, his Manners and course of Life were wholly addicted to Debauchery and Lewdness. This weakned his Body, which was sub∣ject to Diseases, as his Mind was to Inconstancy. He was called the Liberal and the Im∣potent, this last Title from a defect in Nature, the other from his great Profuseness in giving. He forgot the Favours he bestowed, but remembred any Service done him. He was extreamly courteous, spoke lovingly to all Men, and was merciful to a Fault. This strange Mixture of different Qualities was the cause there never were greater Troubles than in his Time. He reign'd 20 Years, 4 Months, and two Days.
CHAP. VIII. The great League made in Italy. The Death of Pope Nicholas. Calixtus succeeds him. The War of Granada. King Henry of Castile marries Joanna, Sister to the King of Portugal. Earthquaks in Italy. THREE years before this we write of, there began a bloody War in Italy. Francis Sforcia War in Italy. being possessed of the Dutchy of Milan, demanded of the Venetians certain Towns be∣longing to the Dutchy, which they held along the River Abdua. They refusing he resolved to use Force, and to that purpose joyned in League with the Florentines. In revenge the Ve∣netians commanded all Florentines to depart out of their Territories, and forbid all Commerce with them. Besides by the means of Leonello, Marques of Ferrara, they joyned in League with the King of Aragon. William Marques of Montferrat was sent with 4000 Aragonian Horse, and 2000 Foot to invade the Duke's Territories on the side of Alexandria la Palla. Ferdinand the King's Son, and Duke of Calabria, who had now 3 Children, Alonso, Frede∣rick, and Ellenor, had 6000 Horse, and 2000 Foot to make War upon the Florentines. He entred the Territories of Cortona and Arezo, wasted the Country, burnt the Villages, and took the considerable Town of Toyano. He also overthrew Astor de Faenca, who came first to the Assistance of the Florentines, whereupon some other Castles were taken. On the other side Antony Oleina having made himself Master of Vado, a Town in the Territory ceas∣ed not thence to infest the Lands of the Florentines. The War went on no less vigorously in the Dutchy of Milan. Francis Sforcia endeavoured to draw Renée, Duke of Anjou to his As∣sistance, promising when that War was ended to aid him in recovering the Kingdom of Na∣ples. Renee found the Passes on the Mountains guarded by the Duke of Savoy, and Marques of Montferrat, and therefore came to Genoa by Sea with only two Ships, and a small Retinue, which soon rendred him contemptible. Luis, Dauphin of France, who was afterwards King, came as far a Ast with Forces to favour the Dukes of Milan and Anjou, but at the end of three Months that Army returned into France without doing any Thing. Thus the Af∣fairs of the Milaneses and Florentines were in a dangerous Posture, but the Ruin of others proved their Safety. The loss of Constantinople inclined all Parties to harken to Peace, and the more readily, because it was given out the Turk design'd to pass over into Italy. Simon de Camerino, an Augustin Fryar, a Man more active and fit for Business, than Learn∣ed, took such pains, that in April he concluded a League betwixt the Venetians, Florentines, and Milaneses, which was afterwards ratifyed in August. The King of Aragon complained of the Falshood of the Venetians in that they should conclude any Confedracy without his Knowledge or Consent. Hereupon he recalled his Son from Florence to Naples. The Vene∣tians, Florentines, and Milaneses, fearing to offend so powerful a King, sent Embassadors to him to excuse their Hastiness in concluding the League, whereof they still offered to make him the Head, begging if still he thought them faulty that he would forgive it. To back them the Pope also sent the Cardinal of Fermo his Legate to the King. He in a long Har∣rangue laid before him the Danger that threatned from the Turks, offered him in the Name of the Confederates to be Head and General of the League, and prayed he would not ob∣struct the Peace of Italy. The King answered, he neither began the War, nor would be any hindrance to the Peace; that he forgave the Affront done him in making any Confedera∣cy without his Knowledge, and was ready to take upon him the Command against the In∣fidels. After the King had given his Answer the Articles of the League made betwixt the Venetians, Florentines, and Milaneses were read, and were to this Effect. That the Venetians, Francis Sforcia, and the Florentines shall inviolably observe what is here agreed unto among the Confederates for the term of 25 Years, and longer if it shall be so thought fit, and be in perfect League and Friendship with King Alonso of Aragon for the publick Peace of Italy, and to oppose the Designs of the Turks: That King Alonso shall defend the Venetians, Mi∣laneses and Florentines, as if they were his own Subjects against all Enemies, either Italians, or Forreigners: That in time of Peace, to be in a readiness for any sudden War, the King, Venetians, and Francis Sforcia be obliged to keep each of them in constant Pay, 8000 Horse, and 4000 Foot, and the Florentines 5000 Horse, and 2000 Foot well armed and equipped: That if any War break out, none of the Confederates shall make Peace without the Con∣sent of the others, nor joyn in League with any State in Italy without the Concurrence of all: That if any of the Confederates be invaded, each of the others be obliged immediately to send to their Assistance half his Horse and Foot, which shall not be recalled till the War is ended. That whosoever shall receive such Succour be obliged to assign them Quarters, and furnish them with Provisions and other Necessaries at the same rates, as the Natives have it: That if any of the Confederates shall make War upon another of the Allyes, then the others be obliged to send the same Supplies to him that is attack'd, as if the other were none of the Confederates, and yet the League to stand good in all other Re∣spects: That if any of the Allyes be invaded, none of the others shall give his Enemies Pas∣sage through his Country, or furnish them with Provisions, but rather oppose them with
all his Power. These Conditions with only some small Amendments were approved of by the King. All the Cities and States of Italy were included in the Confederacy, except the Genoeses, Sigismund Malatesta and Astor de Faença, who were not admitted by the King. The Genoeses, because they observed not the Articles of Peace, concluded on some Years before. Sigismund and Astor because after receiving Mony from the King of Aragon, for to pay their Men, they went over to the Enemy. This League it was generally hoped would advance the publick Interest of Christendom, Pope Ni∣cholas dies, Calixtus chosen. but all fell to nothing by the Death of Pope Nicholas, who supported this great Colossus, and departed this Life on the 24th of March. Within 14 Days the Cardinals elected in his place Cardinal Alonso Borgia, who had before vowed and given it under his Hand, if he were chosen Pope he would make War on the Turks, calling himself Calixtus, so great was his Assurance of obtaining that Dignity; it being, as was given out, foretold him when a Child, by F. Vincent Ferrer. To requite whom for that Prophecy he Canonized him, as he did S. Edmund an Englishman. This Pope was born at Xativa in the Kingdom of Valencia, of mean Parentage, but he never did any thing that was little. He proved a constant Enemy to the King of Aragon, either because he thought it conduced to his Grandeur, or that, as it generally happens, he hated him being more obliged than was in his Power to pay. Thus he could never be prevailed upon to grant a new Bull of Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples to the King and his Son. He was more studious of advancing his Kindred than became him, for in one Day he made his two Nephews, John Mila, and Ro∣derick Borgia, Cardinals. He also constituted Peter Borgia, Brother to Roderick, Vicar Ge∣neral of all the State of the Church. Pope Alexander, and Duke Valentine, two Persons af∣terwards odious to the World for their wicked Practices, were Branches that sprang from this Papacy. Peace was ratifyed betwixt Castile and Aragon, and the King of Navarre, as had been agreed, ceased pretending to any Towns in Castile, receiving a Pension in lieu of them. The Tumults in Navarre did not cease, the People being divided into Factions. A great Number followed Charles Prince of Viana, most Men believing he had the best right. His Sister Blanch espoused his Quarrel with all her might, which so highly offended the King their Father, that he treated with the Earl of Faux his Son in Law about making over the Crown to him, and disinheriting Charles and Blanch. The better to secure their Design, they courted the King of France to joyn with them. The King of Castile favoured Prince Charles, and therefore there was danger of a War betwixt France and Spain. At the same time King Henry was making Preparations for the War with the Moors of Granada, and concluding a new Match then in Hand. The Cortes met at Cuellar, where all degrees of People encouraged one another to take Arms, and laboured to express their Loyalty to the new King. During the King's absence the Archbishop of Toledo, and Earl of Haro were left at Valladolid joynt Commissioners to govern the Kingdom. This done, having Henry of Castile ra∣vages the Territo∣ries of the Moors, & marries Joanna, Sister to the K. of Portugal.gathered a powerful Army in which were 5000 Horse, the King entred the Territories of the Moors, and marched to the Plain of Granada. Soon after he destroyed all the Ter∣ritory of Malaga with Fire and Sword, in so short a time, that a single Man a Horseback could scarce have overrun it so soon. Joanna Sister to King Alonso of Portugal had been contracted to the King of Castile by Proxy. The Marriage was celebrated at Cordova on the 21st of May, with great Solemnity and Joy, the Nobility and Commonalty from all parts flocking thither. There was running at Tilt, and other Sports and Shows among the Military Men. Some looked upon it as an ill Omen that the Marriage was solemnized in the heat of War, and therefore said that Joy would not be lasting. They were married by the Archbishop of Tours, then Embassador in Castile from the King of France, with whom Castile was in amity, and at odds with the English, they being mortal Enemies to the French. The fame of the War against the Moors brought such Numbers of Men, that the Army consisted of 14000 Horse, and 50000 Foot. With these Forces three Incursions were made into the Territories of the Moors, firing all the Plain even in sight of the City Gra∣nada. The Moors assembled on all sides, but the King thought not fit to come to a Battle, having resolved for three Years continually to destroy the Corn, and by that means re∣duce them to extream want. This highly offended the Soldiers who gaped after Plunder, and they threatned since so many Opportunities were let pass, they would not fight when their Officers commanded. The Nobility also conspired to seize the King and carry on the A Conspi∣racy a∣gainst K. Henry. War after another manner. Peter Giron, Master of Calatrava, was the chief of the Conspi∣rators. In̄igo de Mendoça, third Son to the Marques de Santillana, advised the King to return from Alcaudete, where that contrivance was hatched, to Cordova, without acquainting him what was intended against him. At Cordova the King was informed of the Conspiracy. For that Reason, as also because the Season was far advanced, he dismissed his Army with Orders to be again ready in the Spring. The Nobility were also dismissed, and their Posts given to others, which was a Punishment for their disloyalty, and shewed their Intrigue was discovered. The King went away to Avila, and thence to Segovia to hunt, resolving to return to Andaluzia very soon, and to express his Resolution, took two Branches of a Pomgranate Tree knotted together for the Orle of his Scutcheon, that being the Coat of Arms of the Kings of Granada. This denoted he would not desist till he had quite expelled the Moors. In Naples at the beginning of the Year 1456, D. Alonso de Aragon, Prince of Ca∣pua, 1456.
and Ellenor his Sister both Grandchildren to the King of Aragon were married to Hip∣polito, and Sforcia Maria, Son and Daughter of Francis Sforcia, Duke of Milan. Pope Calix∣tus was much alarmed at this Allyance, it being chiefly designed against him. The King of Castile returned to the War with the Moors, but without the Nobility. He observed the same method he had done before, of wasting the Country, and the Soldiers being kept from fighting were ready to Mutiny. To prevent any Tumult, the King called them together, and in few Words shewed how much better it was to subdue the Enemy without hazarding themselves, than to try the event of a Battle which must cost many Lives. Thus the Ar∣my was rather appeased than satisfyed, and returned to Cordova, where some were dismis∣sed, and others put into Winter Quarters. About the latter end of the Year the King went away to Madrid. Mean while the King of Portugal sent a great Fleet towards Italy to joyn with the Confederates. It arrived there at such time as the heat of the Princes of Italy was abated, and new Commotions began to break out at Genoa and Siena. Thus the Portugues Fleet returned home without effecting any thing. Elizabeth Queen of Portugal dyed at Ebora on the 12th of December. It was suspected, and even agreed on all Hands that she was Poi∣soned. The great Love the People bore her whilst she lived made this Suspicion the more easily pass for Truth, and their Tears for her Death sufficiently declared their Affection. The King tho he was in the prime of his Age would not marry for several Years. This year was very unfortunate to the City and Kingdom of Naples for great Earthquakes, which overthrew, or at least endamaged many Towns and Castles. The greatest Mischief was done at Brindez and Isernia. In the farthest parts of Italy some Buildings were levelled with the Ground from the very Foundations, others were abandoned, and a Town called Boyano was swallowed up, a Lake remaining in the Place of it to this Day, as a Memorial of that Disaster. 60000 Souls are said to have perished. Pope Pius the II. and S. Antoninus say 30000, either of them a prodigious Number. CHAP. IX. The Prince of Viana flies to Naples. The Kings of Castile and Navarre meet and con∣clude a Peace. The War with the Moors. The Death of Alonso King of Aragon: His Character and Will. John King of Navarre inherits the Crown of Aragon. SPain found no end of its tedious Troubles. The Tumults in Navarre were hotter than ever. Their Neighbours the Biscainers took Arms against one another, and many were Broils in Navarre & Biscay. daily killed. Among them the great Men and Heads of Families devoured the People con∣fiding in the strength of their Houses, which are like Castles. King Henry coming in time from Segovia with a sufficient Force to quell these Disorders overthrew many of those Houses, which served as an Example to others not to commit the like Insolencies. This happened in February 1451. Upon the way the King received into his Family a Youth born at Darango, his Name Perucho Munzar, who afterwards became his great Favourite. Be∣ing 1451. so near Navarre the King was willing to assist Prince Charles his Friend and Ally, but could not, because that Prince being too weak to oppose the Aragonians and Earl of Faux had abandoned the Country. Besides it was reported, that the King of France was in League with them, which moved him to pass over to France to gain that King, but on a suddain altering his Resolution he decreed to go to Naples to his Uncle the King of Aragon, who The Prince of Viana flies to Naples. had sent for him, determining if he would not assist him to spend his Days in Banishment. By the way he visited the Pope, to whom he complained of his Father's Ambition. He offered to stand to the Judgment of his Holiness, but all to no effect. At Naples he was honourably received, only the King his Uncle kindly blamed him for taking Arms against his Father. The Prince in few Words excused himself for what was past, and offered for the future wholly to submit to what he should Decree. Roderick Vidal, a Man of Quality sent into Spain to compose these Differences, laboured therein with all possible Industry. This Treaty was interrupted by an unexpected Accident, which was, that the Prince's Fa∣ction, tho he was absent, proclaimed him King at Pamplona, which cut off all discourse of Peace. The King of Castile at the request of the King of Navarre, who to this effect deli∣vered up his Son Ferdinand Hostage, had an interview with him at Alfaro in March. The Interview of the Kings of Castile & Navarre. Queens of Castile and Aragon were there present. Peace was there concluded betwixt the two Kings. Moreover at the Sollicitation of Luis Despuch, Master of Montesa sent thither Embassador by the King of Aragon, and at his Perswasion the Confederacy made with the Earl of Faux was declared void, and all the Differences betwixt the King of Navarre and his Son, were by Consent of both Parties referred to the King of Aragon as Arbitrator. The hopes conceived of obtaining a lasting Peace by these means soon vanished, as will ap∣pear hereafter. In Andaluzia the Christians encamped near the Frontiers of the Moors. Thither King Henry came after the Conference in the Month of April. Immediately they invaded the Territories of the Moors, marched in sight of Granada, wasted all the Coun∣try, and destroyed the Corn. A party of Christians advanced without Orders, and in∣gaged
the Enemy. They were few in Number, and the Enemy many, consequently they Country of the Moors wasted. were easily overthrown, most of them killed, and among the rest Garcilasso de la Vega, a Knight, of Santiago, of great Renown. This disaster so incensed the King, that he not only burnt the Corn, as he used to do, but also fired the Vines and Orchards, which before he spared. Besides, having taken a Town, called Mena, by Assault, they put all the In∣habitants to the Sword, without sparing Women or Children. Thus the Moors were so humbled, that they sued for and obtained Pardon. A Truce was concluded for some Years, by which the Infidels were obliged to pay the yearly Tribute of 12000 Du∣cates, and to release 600 Christian Captives, which Number if they had not, they were to make up with Moors. The Frontiers about Jaen were excepted in this Capitulati∣on, where the War was to continue, and D. Garcia Manrique, Earl of Castan̄eda was left to command there with 2000 Horse. To encourage this War, Pope Calixtus sent at the beginning of this Year his Bull, granting the Croisade to the Living and Dead, a thing new in Spain. F. Alonso de Espina preached it up, and sent Word to the King then at Palencia, that the Mony collected could not be spent any other way but in the War with the Moors. He brought a Priviledge, that at the point of Death any that went to the War, or advanced 200 Maravedies for the Expence of it, might be ab∣solved by an Priest, tho he had lost his Speech, so he could give any signs of Con∣trition. Also that such as were killed should be free from the pains of Purgatory. This Grant was to last four Years. It raised almost 300000 Ducats. Very little of it was employed against the Moors. After the War was ended an Embassador came from Rome to Madrid, who brought the King a Hat and Sword usually blessed on Christmas Night, and sent to great Princes, such as King Henry was then esteemed. There is no Joy in this World perfect. News was brought that the Earl of Castan̄eda pursuing a party of Moors fell into an Ambush, was himself taken and most of his Men cut off. Another Commander of more foresight was put in his Place. The Earl was ransomed for a great sum of Mony, and the Truce changed into a Peace. In Italy the City Ge∣noa was in Arms, being divided into Factions. The King of Aragon favoured the Ador∣nos, and John Duke of Lorrain, Son to Renée Duke of Anjou, who stiled himself Prince of Calabria the Tregosos. Mean while the King of Aragon fell sick on the 8th of May 1458. He was very ill at Castelnovo in Naples, till the 13th of June. Then the Disease 1458. increasing he caused himself to be removed to the Castle del Ovo, but nothing availed, Alonso the 5th King of Aragon dies at Naples. for he gave up the Ghost on the 27th of June at break of Day. He was a most re∣nowned Prince, nothing inferior to any of the Antient ones, and the Honour of Spain. Besides his other Virtues, he was a great encourager of Learning, and very familiar with Laurence Valla, Antony Panormita, and Georgius Trapezuntius, Men famous for their Knowledge. He was much concerned at the Death of Barthlomew Faccio, who writ the History of this King. Hearing that a King of Spain had said, Learning belonged not to a King, he said, that was an Expression of a Beast, not of a King. Many sharp and witty Sayings of this King are related, which I thought needless to insert here. Not long before his Death a Comet appeared betwixt Cancer and Leo, whose Tail was 60 Degrees in length. He made his Will the Day before he dyed. In it he appoints his Bro∣ther, John King of Navarre his Successor in the Kingdom of Aragon. That of Naples as won by the Sword, he leaves to his Bastard Son Ferdinand, which was the cause of great Troubles and Wars. He made no mention of the Queen his Wife. It is report∣ed by grave Authors, that he designed to have been Divorced from her, and to have married a Mistress he had called Lucrecia Alania. There is still extant a Letter of Pope Calixtus, writ with his own Hand to the Queen, in which he tells her, she is more be∣holding to him than to her Mother, but that it is not convenient it should be publickly known. That Lucrecia came to Rome with a Royal Retinue, but could not obtain what she came about, because he would not have a Hand in so great a Sin. King Alonso's greatest Crime was that of Incontinency, but at his Death he shewed great Tokens of Repentance and dyed like a good Christian. He ordered that his Body should be buried without any Tomb at the very Church door of Poblete, the Burial Place of his Ancestors. A great sign of Humility and Modesty. About the same time dyed D. Alonso de Cartagena, Bishop of Burgos, who composed some Books, among them a short History of the Kings of Spain in Latin, called Anacephaleosis; his other Works are all mentioned in the History called Valeriana. D. Luis de Acuna succeeded him in the Bishoprick.
CHAP. X. The new War at Naples upon the Death of King Alonso, and Succession of his Bastard Son Ferdinand. Pope Calixtus dies. Pius the II. succeeds him: Alcazar on the Coast of Africk taken by the King of Portugal. Prodigies in Spain. KING Alonso's Death put an end to the Peace of Italy, and the Kingdom of Naple, which seemed to be setled, was again perplexed with new Troubles. A new War broke out New War in Naples. there in such manner, that it rather seemed conquered anew than preserved. Ferdinand King of Naples had good Natural Parts, improved with Learning, and no less Experience of Military Affairs. He was inferior to none in all sorts of Many Exercises, and Inured to suffer Hardships. In his Conversation courteous and affable. All these good Quali∣ties could not gain him the Affections of the Nobility, who bore him perfect hatred. Charles Prince of Viana was perswaded to pretend to that Crown as appertaining to him of Right. He was willing to harken to these Insinuations, and rather wanted Strength than Will to attempt it. Some offered to stand by him, but he durst not rely on them, knowing how much easier it is to promise than to perform. It was impossible these Con∣trivances could be kept private, therefore the Prince fearing the new King, sailed over into Sicily, there to wait the Event of those Affairs. Whilst he lived there in Banish∣ment he had by a mean Woman called Capa, two Sons, Philip and John; and by Mary Ar∣mendaria, the Wife that had been of Francis Barhastre, a Daughter called Ann, afterwards married to D. Luis de la Cerda, first Duke of Medina Celi. Notwithstanding all his Practices King Ferdinand payed him a Pension of 12000 Ducats a Year, left him by his Father. Prince Charles his Departure into Sicily did not discourage the Nobility of Naples. The Prince of Taranto, and Marques of Cotron sent to invite King John of Aragon to come and accept of that Kingdom; but he content with what he had secure made no account of their offer. He set out from Tudela, and having received the News of his Brother's Death came to Zaragoça, where he took possession of the Kingdom of Aragon, not as Lieutenant as he was before, but as Proprietor. The storm raised by Pope Calixtus (from whom it had been least expected) was great. He said, that Kingdom which was a Feof of the Church, ought not to have been given to a Bastard, and therefore pretended it was again forfeited to the See Apostolick. This was believed to be only a Colour, and that his Aim was to secure that Kingdom for Peter Borgia, whom he had created Duke of Spoleto, a Ci∣ty in Ʋmbria. An extravagant Ambition much misbecoming his Age, and the high Dig∣nity God had raised him to. This was supposed would prove the cause of a new War, and every Body feared the late Calamities would again be renewed. King Ferdinand de∣siring to reconcile and appease the Pope, wrote a very submissive Letter to him, acesting his respect to the Church, and particularly to his Person, putting him in mind that he had been bred under him as his Scholar, and came over into Italy with him, and therefore prayed to be looked upon as a Son, and treated as such, promising on his part to act accordingly. This Letter had no effect upon the Pope, who began to sollicit all the Princes and Cities of Italy to take Arms, but all his Contrivances were disappointed by Death. He departed this Life upon the 6th of August, happily and in good Season for the Kingdom of Naples. In his Place was elected Aeneas Silvius, a Native of Siona, of the Family of Picolomini, who in all Re∣spects acted suitable to the Name he took, which was Pius the II. for he restored Peace to Italy, and used his utmost endeavours to renew the War with the Turks. He confirmed the Kingdom of Naples to Ferdinand, only adding this Provisu, that it should not be found to be done in wrong of any other. He summoned a General Council to meet at Mantra, in order to treat in it of the Expedition against the Turk. The Neapolitans once having began to raise Commotions could not be so easily quelled. The Calabrians took Arms, and John Duke of Lorrain being invited from Genoa where he then was, arrived on the Coast of Naples with a Fleet of 23 Galleys. The chief cause of these Tumults was Abtony Cen∣tellas, Marques of Girachi and Croten, who to revenge the wrong he pretended done his Fa∣ther by King Alonso doubted not to prefer the Dominion of the French before that of the Spaniards, tho descended himself from Spain. These Troubles were very great and lasted long, therefore it would be too tedious to relate all the Particulars of them, it will be pro∣perer for our History to return to Spain. In Castile King Henry raised mean Persons to Henry of Castile raises mean Per∣sons in Oppositi∣on to the Nobility. high Posts and Dignities. He made Michael Lucas de Trançu, born at Belmonte, a Town in the Country of la Mancha, Constable of Castile, and gave him the Town of Agreda, and Castle of Veraton and Bormediano. Gomez de Solis, who took the Name of Gaere from his Country, and was Steward of the Houshold, was by the Knights of Alcantara, to please the King, chosen Master of that Order, in the Place of D. Gutierre de Sotomayor. To the Bro∣thers of these two the King gave plentiful Estates. To John de Valençuela, the grand Prior∣ship of S. John. These Men he designed should stand by him against the Nobility, who were disgusted. His ordinary Residence was at Madrid, where he wholly gave himself up to Pleasure, without applying himself to the Government. This extraordinary Negli∣gence
drew him into great Inconveniences, and no less could be expected, since he used to sign all Orders or Grants without reading, or knowing what was contained in them. The Revenue could not answer the vast Expence of his Houshold, and other Prodigalities. James Arias his Treasurer finding a fit Opportunity gave him to understand as much, advising him to Retrench the number of his Servants, since many of them only wasted the Revenue with their Salaries, and were of no manner of use. This advice did not please the King, who presently answered. Were I Peter Arias I should have more regard to Mony than to Gene∣rosity. You speak like your self, and I will do as becomes a King without fear of coming to Poverty, or having occasion to raise new Tares. It is the Duty of Kings to give, and to measure their Power not by themselves but by the publick Good, which is the true fruit of Riches. To some we give because they are Serviceable, to others that they may not be Wicked. Words well becoming a great Prince, had his Actions been suitable to them. This popular Inclination so entirely gained him the Affections of the Commonalty, that they were never known to continue more firm to their Prince, but it disobliged most of the Nobility. John de Luna had the Government of Soria taken from him, and was cast in Prison, by the Contrivanc of John Pacheco, who by these means endeavoured to get into his Power a Grandaughter of D. Alvaro de Luna, Daughter to his Son John de Luna, then dead. The young Maid was in the Custody of that Governour of Soria, who was her Kinfman, and his Wife her Aunt. This young Lady he married to his Son James Pacheco, and by that means united the Farldom of Santistevan to his own Estate. Alonso Faxardo, Lieutenant of Murcia, making his Advan∣tage of the Confusion of those Times, seized Carthagena and Lorca, with several other Forts in that Country. Against him the King sent Gonçalo de Saavedra, who took from him not only those Places, but all he had inherited of his Forefathers, and he thought it a Happiness to save his Life. At the same time dyed the Marques de Santillana. He left these Children, James his Heir, Peter then Bishop of Calahorra, In̄igo, Laurence, John, and others from whom some noble Families in Castile are descended. On the 4th of September dyed the Queen of Aragon at Valencia, and was buryed in the Monastery of Nuns in that City called the Trinity. Soon after the King of Portugal passing over into Africk with a powerful Fleet, on the 18th Alcacar in Africk taken by the Por∣tugueses. of October took from the Moors a Town called Alcaçar near Ceuta. His Brother Ferdinand, Duke of Visco, and his Uncle Henry were with him in this Expedition. Duarte de Meneses was left Governour of the Place. He after the King's Departure three several times re∣pulsed great Multitudes of Moors that attacked him, and made them desist from that Enter∣prize. Prince Charles sent Embassadors out of Sicily to his Father to beg Pardon, and offer his Submission. But he dealt not fairly, for at the same time he sollicited the King of France, and Duke of Britany to joyn in League with him to recover by Force what his Father would not voluntarily yield up to him. For this Reason, and for fear the Sicilians should pro∣claim him King, his Father pardoned him, and he came over to Spain at the beginning of the Year 1459. Thence he went over to Majorca to wait the Event of what his Father design∣ed for him, despairing of obtaining his Mother's Kingdom. His death, which was near at 1459. Hand, put an end to all his Contrivances. His Demands were that his Father should par∣don him and his Adherents, and release the Constable of Navarre, D. Luis de Biamonte with all others that had been delivered as Hostages. That he should cause the Oath of Allegiance to be taken to him as Heir, and give him leave to live quietly in any Town ex∣cept the Court: That he should restore to him Viana and Gandia, which were his own. If this were granted he offered to withdraw his Garrisons out of all Places that held for him. He also desired that his Sister Ellenor, Wife to the Earl of Faux might be removed from the Government of that Kingdom. Much time was spent in Debate, but at last neither was all he demanded granted, nor what was promised performed. It was the Opinion of the Vul∣gar, that this was all the Contrivance of his Mother in Law, who wished his Death, fear∣ing if he succeeded his Father it would not be well with her self, and her Children. The Seed, of Sedition which had been long sowed in Castile at length broke out. The Grounds of new Troubles in Castile. King besides his other Faults was wholly devoted to Women. First he loved one Catherine de Sandoval, but left her, because she admitted the Courtship of another, yet soon after made her Abbess of the Monastery of S. Peter de las Duen̄as at Toledo. Alonso de Cordova her Gal∣lant was beheaded at Medina del Campo. In the Place of Catherine de Sandoval he took the Lady Guiomar, the most Beautiful Woman next to the Queen. They two as is usual in such Cases fell at Variance. D. Alonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of Sevil favoured the Mistriss, the Marques de Villena sided with the Queen. Thus the Court was divided, and the Servant grew so haughty as to Cope with her Sovereign. It came to that pass that they gave one another ill Language, and at length the Queen laid violent Hands upon the Mistriss and treated her severely, which the King highly resented. Another scandalous thing happened, which was, that D. Beltran de la Cueva, Lord Steward of the Houshold, a great Favourite of the Kings, to whom he had given a plentiful Fortune, grew into Familiarity with the Queen. The People generally judged ill of that Freedom, and some were of Opinion the King knew they were faulty, and consented to it, to hide his own Impotency. It is to be suspected that a great part of this Fable was forged in favour of King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth, when they came afterwards to the Crown. Some time after this Scandal gathered strength, when upon account of an Embassador coming out of Britany, D. Beltran was Challenger in a Feast
of running at Tilt that was in Madrid and Pardo, and after the Sport was over made a Ban∣quet greater than was thought could be done by any private Person. The King was so pleased, that in the Place where the Tilting was, in memory of it he caused a Monastery of Hieronimites to be erected, which because the Place was unhealthy was afterwards re∣moved to that where it now stands. The People after the Example of the Court were ad∣dicted to all manner of Ludeness and Prodigality, and the Nobility without any regard of the King combined to raise new Troubles. About this time many extraordinary Accidents were thought to foretell the Calamities that were threatned by these Disorders. There ap∣peared Prodigies. in the Sky a great Flame, which dividing it self into two Parts, the one ran towards the East and vanished, the other continued some time. In the Territory of Burgos and Gra∣nada there fell a shower of great Stones, which killed much Cattle. At Pen̄alver, a Town in the Country of Alcarria, it was reported, a Child of three years of Age foretold the Troubles that would ensue, unless the People did Pennance for their Sins. The King's Lions at Segovia fought, and the little one killed the biggest and eat part of him. The People made Processions to appease God, being terrify'd with these strange Omens, but they mended not their Lives. Particularly the Clergy was extraordinary depraved, in so much that about this time D. Roderick de Luna, Archbishop of Santiago forced away a Bride on her Wedding Day to debauch her, which caused the People to Mutiny, being Headed by D. Luis Osorio, Son to the Earl of Trastamara. In revenge of that hainous Crime they deposed that Bishop, and seized all he had. His End was answerable to his Life, the rest whereof he spent in Poverty, yet wickedly and hated by all Men. Thus he soon endured the Punishment of his short Pleasure, being severely chastized by the Hand of God, as he had well deserved. The End of the Two and Twentieth Book.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXIII. CHAP. I. The Councel of Mantua; Beginnings of Tumults in Castile; War at Naples betwixt the Aragonians, and House of Anjou; Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, comes to the Assi∣stance of Ferdinand, King of Naples. POpe Pius the Second having appointed a General Councel to meet at Mantua, a great number of Bishops from all Parts, and Ambassadors of Princes, repaired thither, as General Council at Mantua. did the Pope himself. His only Care was, to stir up all Christendom to unite its For∣ces against the Common Enemy. David, Emperor of Trebizonde, a City in Asia the Lesser upon the Euxine Sea, Ussumcassanus King of Armenia, and George, who stiled himself King of Persia, offered great Numbers of Horse and Foot, and a mighty Fleet, but there was little Confidence to be reposed in their Promises. The Western Countries were so en∣tangled with Broils and Confusions at home, that little could be hoped from them. Notwith∣standing all these Difficulties, the Pope was not discouraged, but resolved to use his utmost Endeavours to promote the Holy War, and therefore in a full Assembly of those that came to the Councel, made a most Learned Speech, laying before them, how great a Reproach to Christianity the loss of the Eastern Empire had been, and how much nearer since that time the Danger threatned all the Western Part of the World. He pressed for some Prince to encourage that War, by taking upon him to be General, and then offered to carry the Cross before them himself. His Words moved the Auditory, but the Ambassadors of Prin∣ces wasted the Time in Private Controversies. Particularly John Duke of Lorrain, Son to Renee Duke of Anjou, complained that the Pope had given the Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples to Ferdinand his Enemy. Thus nothing was done to any purpose, only a Verbal Decree was made for carrying on the War. The Pope published a Bull, in which, contrary to his own Opinion at the Councel of Basil, he ordains, That none shall Appeal from the Pope to a General Councel. Thus the Councel was dissolved the Eighth Month after the opening of it. The Aragonian Ambassadors, after the Councel broke up, went away to Naples, to Congratulate with the new King upon his Accession to that Crown. In̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, the Ambassador of Castile, obtained of the Pope a Jubilee for all that gave certain Alms, employed to build at Tendilla a Monastery of Friars of St. Isidorus, of the Invocation of St. Ann. Mean while the City Guadalajara was taken from his Brother James de Mendoça, he having possessed himself of it wrongfully. John Fernandez Galindo, a famous Officer, sur∣prized it with 600 Horse. This the Nobles took for a new Cause of Discontent, and com∣bined against the King. D. ederick the Admiral heightned their Discontents. He sollicited his Son-in-Law, the King of Aragon, to join with the Seditious Nobility, and make War upon Castile. With him joined the Archbishop of Toledo, D. Peter Giron Master of Calatrava, and the Families of Manrique and Mendoça. Their Pretence was to reform the Government. D. Alonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of Sevil, gave the King an Account of these Practices. As a Reward for this good Service, the Archbishoprick of Santiago, vacant by the Death of D. Rode∣rick de Luna, was given to a Kinsman of his, called also Alonso de Fonseca, who was Dean of Sevil. D. Luis Osorio had then possessed himself of the Revenues of that Church, confiding in the Power of his Father the Earl of Trastamara. None but a Person of great Authority could reduce him, and therefore the two Archbishops changed Sees by the King's Consent. The Church of Pamplona, upon the Death of D. Martin de Peralta, was given to Cardinal Be∣sarion, a Greek, but very Learned, and of a godly Life. The Troubles of Naples were the chief Thing that disturbed Pope Pius, otherwise wholly War at Naples be∣twixt the Arago∣nians and House of Anjou. bent upon the Holy War. The War began again to break out betwixt John the Son of Renee, and the new King Ferdinand, most of the Neapolitan Nobility, as given to Change, favouring the House of Anjou. The first that appeared in Arms, was Anthony Centellas, Marquis of Cro∣ton, who having got his Liberty, meditated Revenge; but the King was too quick, and again laid him in Prison. Martin Marciano, tho married to Ellenor the King's Sister, headed the Re∣bels; many joined with him, among whom the chief were, the Prince of Taranto, Anthony Cardora, and John Paul, Duke of Sora. Francis Sforcia, Duke of Milan, being at the Councel of Mantua, advised the Pope to enter into League with King Ferdinand, for that the French being expelled Italy, all Difficulties that obstructed the War with the Turks would be easily surmounted. The Pope approved of this Councel, but it was not easily to be put into Exe∣cution, for that King Ferdinand was then besieged in Barletta, a City of Apulia, and knew not
well how to defend himself. The Pope would send him no Relief, because the Enemy had secured all the Avenues by Land: Therefore he sent to George Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, Scanderbeg comes to the Assi∣stance of Ferdinand, King of Naples. then a most Renowned General, who understanding the Pope's Will, sent before Coicus Stro∣sius with 500 Albanian Horse, and soon after gathering a good Fleet, sailed to Ragusa, and thence to Barleta. Immediately upon his Arrival, the Rebels raised the Siege. King Ferdi∣nand having joined the Succours sent him by the Pope and Duke of Milan, overthrew his Ene∣mies in Battel, and soon recovered the Towns that held for them. Scanderbeg having spent a Year in this Expedition, returned home well satisfied with the King, who gave him and his Heirs the City Trani, and the Castles of St. John and Siponto. After this he obtained seve∣ral Victories over the Turks, and died at the end of Seven Years, leaving a Son called John under the Care of the Venetians. Nevertheless he ordered him, till he could recover his Prin∣cipality, to live at Naples upon what Estate that King had given him. From him is descended the most Noble Family of the Castriots, Marquisses of Civita de Santangelo in the Kingdom of Naples. In Spain, Charles Prince of Viana having obtained Pardon for himself and his Fol∣lowers, and the Promise of a competent Revenue for his Maintenance, came from Majorca to Barcelona on the 22d of March, 1460. It was proposed to marry him with Catherine, Sister 1460. to the King of Portugal. When the Match was as good as concluded, the King of Castile took it off, offering him his Sister Elizabeth, with Assurance of obtaining what he desired of his Father with the Assistance of Castile. Hereupon Prince Charles no farther thought of the Match with Portugal, and the Princess Catherine went into the Monastery of S'Clare at Lisbon, where she ended her Days, at such time as it was designed to marry her to Edward IV. King of England. D. Frederick, the Admiral, discovered the Prince's Designs to the King of Aragon: He sent for him to Lerida; where the Cortes of Catalonia then sate, and those of Aragon at Fraga. He was advised not to go, but resolved to obey, and was received with Demonstrations of Love, but presently after committed to Prison, notwithstanding he loudly complained of Breach of Faith, and the Designs of his Mother-in-Law. The Nobility associated themselves, engaging never to give over till their Prince were set at Liberty. CHAP. II. War renewed by the Moors of Granada; the Prince of Viana imprisoned, and released; his Death; the Rebellion of Catalonia, also in Navarre; the Kings of France and Ca∣stile meet. THE Peace established with the Moors having lasted about Three Years, was now broken. Ismael, King of Granada, had Two Sons, Albohaçen and Boabdelin: Albohaçen desiring to The Moors of Grana∣da break the Peace. exercise his Valour, gathered 2500 Horse, and 15000 Foot; with this Force he entred the Territory of Estepa in Andaluzia, did great Mischief, and drove away a vast number of Cat∣tel. Roderick Ponçe, Son to the Earl of Arcos, being informed hereof, with the Assistance of Luis Pernia, Commandant at Osuna, mustered about 260 Horse, and 600 Foot, and marched after the Enemy who was going off in disorder, and fearing no Encounter. It seemed a Mad∣ness for so small a Number to engage that Multitude; but D. Roderick from an Eminence ob∣serving, that part of the Moors with the Booty had passed the River called De las Yeaguas, and only the Horse remained behind, commanded the Trumpets to and, and his Men to fall on. The Christians charged the Moors, who were divided into three Bodies, and received them with Resolution. The Fight lasted long, but at length the Moors were put to the Rout, and 1400 of them slain. Of the Christians, 30 Horse and 150 Foot were killed. Our Men quartered that Night at a place called Fuente de Piedra, and being next day gathering the Plunder, saw the Cattel coming towards them in great Flocks. At first they imagined the Enemy had ral∣lied, but it soon appeared that the Cattel being left was returning, as naturally they will, to∣wards their own Pasture. The Peace thus broken, Incursions were made on both sides, but nothing remarkable happened: Only D. John de Guzman, first Duke of Medina Sidonia, prepa∣red to besiege Gibraltar, nothing discouraged by the Misfortune of his Father. The War, raised against the King of Aragon in his own Dominions, was more dangerous. The Catalo∣nians sent Deputies, to beg of him to set at liberty the Prince of Viana: He refused, and from Rebellion of Catalo∣nia. Words they came to Blows. A great Number of Men set out from Barcelona, and possessed themselves of Fraga, on the Borders of Aragon. Gonçalo de Saavedra, sent by the King of Ca∣stile to the Assistance of the Catalonians with 1500 Horse, was a great Encouragement to them. D. John de Cabrera, Earl of Modica in Sicily, was General of the Catalonians. On the other side, D. Luis de Biamonte was on the Frontiers of Navarre with a good Body, ready to enter Aragon if the King would not grant their Request. Necessity obliged him to set his Son free on the First of March, 1461. ordering the Queen, his Mother-in-Law, to conduct him from 1461. Morella, where he was Prisoner, to Villafranca. There he was delivered to the Catalonians, who nevertheless would not admit the Queen into Barcelona, tho' they laid down their Arms. Yet for all this, contrary to his Father's Will, they swore to him as Heir to that Principa∣lity, obliged his Father to declare him Governor of all his Dominions, a Dignity usually given to the eldest Sons of those Kings, and to consent that he should be Absolute in Catalonia.
These were hard Terms; but there was no other way to appease the Catalonians. Now again the Treaty of Marriage between Prince Charles and the Princess Elizabeth of Castile was hotly pursued, and it was looked upon as good as concluded; whereupon the Prince sent to Com∣pliment the Princess and her Mother. War broke out at the same time in Navarre; for Charles Artieda, as soon as the Prince was at liberty, seized in his Name the Town of Lumbier in that Kingdom. D. Alonso (afterwards Duke of Villahermosa) sent by the King, besieged and fu∣riously Civil War in Na∣varre. battered that Place. The Prince's Party was weak; but the King of Castile sent Ro∣derick Ponçe and Gonçalo de Suavedra with Forces, who raised the Siege. Greater Preparations were making to continue that War, when the News was spread abroad that the Queen was with Child. This pleased some; yet others gave out she was with Child by D. Beltran de la Cueva; but it could never be proved whether this were true, or that it was only so allowed afterwards in favour of King Ferdinand, when he came to the Crown. D. Alonso de Fonseca the Archbishop, was sent from Court on pretence of doing him Honour, to reside at Valladolid, and Govern the Kingdom, whilst the King was absent at the War he designed in Navarre. This was done by the Advice of his Competitor the Marquiss de Villena, who removed him from the King, hoping thereby to become absolute in his Favour, and promised to reduce the Disaffected Nobility, particulary the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Admiral; for the Master of Calatrava had already submitted, and was raising Men for the War in Navarre. As soon as D. Alonso de Fonseca was gone to Valladolid, the Marquiss de Villena went into the Kingdom of Toledo, and at the same time the Master of Calatrava came to Aranda de Duero with 2500 Horse. With that Force the King of Castile marched towards Almaçan. The Ara∣gonians were much alarmed; but the Army marched away towards Navarre, and in May came to Logron̄o, a great Town in the Territory of Rioja; there having received Supplies from all Parts, they advanced into Navarre. The Town of St. Vincent and Guardia surrendered. Viana was besieged, and at last delivered up by Peter Peralta, who was Governour thereof, and Constable of Navarre. Lerin was very strong, and could not be taken. D. Alonso, Son to the King of Aragon, took the Town of Arbacuca by assault, all the Castillian Garison being killed or taken. All these high Designs came to nothing, by the death of Charles Prince of Viana at Barcelona: It was supposed Trouble and Toil was the cause of his death; but the Bia∣monteses Charles Prince of Viana dies. could never be persuaded but he had a slow Poison given him in Prison. He died on the 23d of September, begged pardon of his Father at the Hour of his death, and was buried at Poblete. He lived 40 Years, 3 Months, and 26 Days, more famous for his Misfortunes than any other thing. His Device was Two fierce Mastives fighting for a Bone, denoting the Kings of France and Castile, between whom Navarre was consumed. Other great Men died now, as Charles VII. King of France: His Son Lewis XI. succeeded him. Prince Henry, Uncle to the King of Portugal, departed this Life on the 13th of November, having never touched Woman, tho 77 Years of Age. Of all the Brothers only D. Alonso the Bastard, Duke of Bragança, remained, and he also died the next Year. By his Wife Beatrix, Daughter to the Constable Nun̄o Pereira, he had a Son called Ferdinand, from whom are lineally descended the Dukes of Bragança in Portugal. Prince Charles dying, the Cause of Discord was taken away; and yet the Effect ceased not. Ferdinand, Brother to the Deceased, was immediately sworn Heir to the Crown; first at Cala∣tayud for Aragon, and then at Barcelona for Catalonia. Nevertheless, the People took Arms, the Nobility giving it out that the Prince was poisoned by his Mother-in-Law. The chief In∣cendiary was F. John Gualves a Dominican, who with seditious Sermons stirred up the People to Rebellion. Barcelona being in an Uproar, the Queen went away thence to Girona. The King of Aragon perceiving the Danger that threatned, sollicited foreign Princes, particularly the King of France and Castile, to assist him; or at least that the latter would not offend him, since Prince Charles was dead. King Henry was at Madrid, joyful that the Queen was with Child, having caused her to be brought thither on Men's Shoulders, that the Journey might A Friat stirs up the People of Na∣varre to Rebelli∣on. not do her harm. At the beginning of the Year 1462, she was delivered of a Daughter called 1462. Joanna, who was immediately sworn Heiress of Castile. The People believed her the Daugh∣ter of D. Beltran, and the more because he was then created Earl of Ledesma. Andrew de Ca∣bera, his great Friend, was made Steward of the Houshold, which was a step for him to at∣tain vast Wealth. The Count d' Armagnac was then at Court, as Ambassador from the King of France to settle Peace. The Archbishop of Toledo being reconciled to the King, held the Supreme Power. On the 23d of March, the Aragonian Ambassadors at length concluded a Peace between Castile and Aragon; and for Security, Cautionary Towns were given to the King of Castile, who put others into a Third hand, to remain as Pledges on his part. On the 12th of April, the King of Aragon made a League with the King of France at Olite: It was there agreed, That the King of France should send the Aragonian 700 Men at Arms, and 200000 Crowns, for which the States of Cerdagne and Russillon were mortgaged to him, the Revenues thereof not to be accounted any part of Payment. To ratifie this Contract, the Two Kings appointed an Interview at Salvatierra, a Town in the Province of Bearne. At the same time the Earl of Faux had the Lady Blanch, Sister to Prince Charles, and Heiress of Navarre, delivered up to him, notwithstanding her grievous Complaints of the Wrong done her. She was confined to the Castle of Ortes in the Territory of Faux, and there soon after poisoned: Her Body was buried in the City Lascar. Both the Kings of Castile and Aragon
ratified the Peace concluded at Madrid, On the 30th of May the Catalonians besieged the Queen of Aragon in Girona, forced the City, and had taken the Old Castle called Gironela, where the Queen was, but that the French Horse coming, obliged them to quit that Design and the City. The King of Aragon also hasted to the relief of his Wife, and having worsted the Rebels in several Rencounters, and taken many Towns, encamped near Barcelona at last. The Queen of Castile miscarried at Aranda, with the Fright that her Hair took fire by the Sun shining through a Glass. The Grief for this Loss was soon forgot, by reason of the great Joy and Fe∣stivals at the Wedding of the Count de Ledesma with the younger Daughter of the Earl of San∣tillana at Guadalajara, the King and Queen being present. Thence the Queen went to Segovia, and the King to Atiensa to Hunt. Thither came a Gentleman, called Copones, from the Cata∣lonians, to offer him that Country, provided he would support them. The King accepting their Offer, sent them 2500 Horse, whose arrival in Catalonia animated the Multitude, and K. Henry of Castile pro∣claimed Earl of Barcelona by the Re∣bels. they presently proclaimed King Henry Earl of Barcelona. This News was very pleasing to the King of Castile, but much more to hear that D. John de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, had taken Gibraltar from the Moors, and the Master of Alcantara Archidona. He ordered Gibraltar to be inserted among his Royal Titles. Incursions were made into Valencia and Aragon; and that Kingdom might have been sub∣dued, had King Henry been resolute: Therefore the King of Aragon laboured to be reconci∣led with him. To this effect the Admiral of France and that King's Ambaslador came to Almaçan, where King Henry was, at the beginning of the Year 1463. He was splendidly en∣tertained, and in a Ball Danced with the Queen; whereupon he swore never more to Dance 1463. with any Woman. It was agreed the Kings of France and Castile should have a Conference, and accordingly they met near Fuenterabia about the end of April. The Castilians vied to Confe∣rence of the Kings of France and Ca∣stile. outdo one another in rich Apparel, whereas the French, and particularly their King, were very plain, which caused the Castilians to jeer and reflect upon them. The Spaniards passed the River Videsao, some say by way of acknowledging the King of France to be the greater: Our Historians say it was because all that River belongs to Spain; and therefore King Henry being come to the High-water Mark on the further side, side, There were the Borders of Castile and France; and that King Louis answered, It is true. Here the Judgment given by the King of France, as Arbitrator between Castile and Aragon, was read; the Heads whereof were, That the Casti∣lians should quit Catalonia and Navarre: That the City Estela and its Liberty should remain to King Henry; and that the Queen of Aragon and her Daughter should remain at Raga, in custody of the Archbishop of Toledo, as Hostages for performance of Articles. This Judg∣ment offended all the Three Nations concerned, and nothing more was effected at this Con∣ference. Philip de Comines, a famous French Historian, absolutely condemns this, and all such Meetings of Kings, as the Incentives of Emulation and Discord; whereas all they can pro∣pose to do at an Interview, may be as well settled by their Ambassadors, without any Ha∣zard or Discontent to either Party. He relates how the Spaniards came over into France, and were entertained by the King; That King Henry had an unpleasing Countenance, and his Garb was disagreeable to the French; whereas the Spaniards attributed the Plainness of the French King's Habit to Covetousness. He adds, the only Fruit of this Meeting was Plots and Contrivances among the Nobility, which at length proved the Ruin of King Henry, whom, he says, he saw forsaken by his Subjects, and reduced to Misery. This Year, on the 12th of November, passed from this Life to a better the Holy F. James de Alcala, in the Monastery of Franciscans at Alcala de Heneres, built by D. Alonso Carrillo, Archbishop of Toledo: He was born at S. Nicholas, in the Diocess of Sevill. His Life, and the Miracles he wrought were such, That Pope Sixtus V. Canoniz'd him on the 2d of July, 1588. Garibay, Lib. 14. Cap. 7. says he died in the Year 1461. CHAP. III. The Catalonians send for Peter Constable of Portugal, and Proclaim him Earl of Barce∣lona. The Kings of Castile and Portugal meet. The Rebellion in Castile. D. Bel∣tran de la Cueva, great Favourite to King Henry of Castile, created a Duke. TWO Ambassadors from the Catalonians were at the Conference between the Kings of France and Castile, to sollicit they might not be forsaken; but their Negociation proved successless. At Tolosa, a Town in Guipuscoa, the Rabble killed a Jew called Gaon, on the 6th of May, for attempting, whilst the King was at Fuenterabia, to collect a certain Tax, about Mutiny a∣bout Taxes. which there had been great Mutinies before. This Murder was not punished. Soon after, at Segovia, whither the King went, great Broils were raised by Two Friars: One of them in his Sermons affirmed, That many Christians turned Jews; which was meant to reproach the Li∣berty allowed that People: The other as hotly opposed him. Sevill was in an Uproar, for that D. Alonso de Fonseca the Elder, sollicited to be restored to that Church, which he said he had only given in trust to his Kinsman. The Nobility and Commons were divided between him and his Competitor; but the King coming thither in Person, put D. Alonso the Elder into possession, and caused 6 of the principal Mutiniers to be executed. The King of Portugal
at this time returned into Africk with a powerful Fleet. Prince Ferdinand his Brother, and D. Peter his Cousin, bore him Company. The Catalonians being forsaken by the Castilians, and perceiving France and Italy were secured by the King of Aragon, sent to invite Peter the Constable of Portugal, to come from Ceuta, and take possession of that Principality, which they said appertained to him in Right of his Mother, who was Daughter to the Earl of Urgel. He embraced the Offer, and arrived at Barcelona on the 21th of January 1464. There he 1464. was immediately proclaimed Earl of Barcelona and King of Aragon. This Attempt proved un∣successful for want of Strength, and cost him his Life, besides other Mischiess. The first was, that by the Departure of the Constable the Forces of the Portugueses in Africk were weakned, which was the occasion they were repulsed with loss from Tangier, and the Inroads they made into the Country were inconsiderable. Near Mount Benasa, being engaged with the Enemy, the King was in great danger, and Duarte de Meneses exposing himself to save his King, was killed, with some others. The Earl of Villareal that day made good the Rear, which gained him great Honour, in so much that after the Fight the King said to him, By you alone the Faith has this day prevailed. The King of Castile from Sevill went to Gibraltar, and having invited the King of Portugal thither, Entertained him for the space of 5 days, after which he returned to his Kingdom. This done, King Henry, by the way of Ecija, broke into the Kingdom of Granada, and o∣bliged the Moores to pay the Tribute before agreed upon, and make him rich Presents. Thence he hasted back to Madrid, designing again to Entertain the King of Portugal, who came to pay a Vow he had made to our Lady at Guadalupe. The two Kings met upon the Bridge called Del Arçobispo, that is the Bounds of the Kingdom of Toledo; The Queen of Ca∣stile went with her Husband to see her Brother, the King of Portugal. Here it was agreed, the King of Portugal should Marry Elizabeth, King Henry's Sister; and the Prince of Portugal, Joanna, Heiress of Castile; but the Wedding being put off at that time, never after took effect. Heaven had decreed the Aragonians should possess the Crown of Castile, tho after many Troubles, which some Prodigies seem'd to foretell. At Sevil there happened such a terrible Hurracan, that it carried away a Yoke of Oxen with the Plow, and threw a great Bell a vast distance from the Steeple of S. Augustin's Church. It also tore up many large Trees, and ruined Buildings. In the Air Armies fighting were seen, but this may be doubted of be∣cause none but Children saw it. Lastly, Three Eagles fought in the Air till all three fell down dead. Hereupon Processions and other Acts of Devotions were performed to appease Gods Wrath. King Henry began to dislike the Archbishop of Toledo and the Marquiss de Villena, suspecting Rebels of Castile join with the King of Aragon. they had not dealt fairly betwixt him and Aragon; for this reason they were not with him in the Field, nor at the Interview with the Portuguese, but went away from Madrid to Alcala: Thither came to them the Admiral, the Master of Calatrava, the Family of Manrique, D. Peter Giron, and the Earls of Alva and Plasencia. The King of Aragon upon account of great Promises made him, joined with them, which was the beginning of mighty Troubles. Their Pretence was, That the Princess Joanna was not lawfully begotten, and consequently could not inherit the Crown. Therefore they resolved to seize Prince Alonso, and the Lady Elizabeth, the Kings Brother and Sister, who resided with their Mother at Maqueda. Upon Hostages given by the King for security of his Person, the Marquis de Villena came to Madrid, but with an ill Design, which was to withdraw the rest of the Nobility from their Allegiance. To this purpose he Advised the King to secure the Archbishop of Sevil, and at the same time gave him notice of what was designed, so that he fled, and joined with the other Rebels. This Success made D. John Pacheco so impudent, that he attempted with a Body of Armed Men to seize the King, and broke into the Palace, but the King retiring to a part thereof that was strong, he resolved to force it at night; yet the King having Intelligence, he was disappoint∣ed. Many Advised the King to secure the Marquis, but he refused, because he had given him a Safe-conduct. Thus the Posture of the Kings Affairs was daily worse, especially be∣cause at that time the Popes Bull came, which constituted D. Beltran de la Cueva Master of Santiago, a thing very offensive to the People, who looked upon that Dignity as Prince Alon∣so's due. D. Beltran was raised in opposition to D. John Pacheco, who again attempted to seize the King, perswading him to go to Villacastin, but was discovered and prevented. From Burgos the Conspirators, now in open Rebellion, sent a very Insolent Letter to the King, the Heads whereof were; That the Moores had too much Liberty at Court; That Preferments were sold; That the Mastership of Santiago was undeservedly given to D. Beltran; That the Princess Joanna, as unlawfully begotten, could not inherit the Crown; Lastly, That if these Grievances were Redressed, they were ready to lay down Arms and submit. This Letter the King received at Valladolid, and made no account of it. D. Lope de Barientas, Bishop of Cuenca, pressed the King to subdue the Rebels by force of Arms, but could not prevail, there∣fore a Treaty was again set on foot. The King and D. John Pacheco met in the open Field between Cabeçon and Cigales in Old Castile, there they agreed upon these Articles; That Prince Alonso should inherit the Crown, provided he Married the Princess Joanna; That D. Beltran should resign the Mastership of Santiago; That to decide other Differences there should be Two Arbitrators chosen by each Party, and F. Alonso de Oropesa, General of the Order of S. Hierome, to be the 5th, all things to be decided by the majority of Voices. Then Prince Alonso, being but Eleven years of Age, was brought to the Kings Camp, sworn Heir to the
Crown, and delivered to the Nobles, which caused new Troubles. In lieu of the Ma∣stership, the King created D. Beltran Duke of Albuquerque, giving him that Town, Cuellar, D. Beltran de la Cue∣va, the Fa∣vourite, created Duke. Roa, Molina, Atiença, and other Revenues in Andaluzia. The Rebels chose D. John Pacheco, and the Earl of Plasencia; The King Peter Hernardez de Velasco, and Gonzalo de Saavedra, on his part, to be Judges of the Differences between them. The Archbishop of Toledo, and the Admiral, were reconciled to the King, but their Friendship was not lasting, and therefore suspected to be feigned. It was feared if these Judges came to give Sentence, they would leave the King nothing but that bare Title. He therefore ordered the Master of Alcantara, and Earl of Medellin, in whom he reposed much Confidence, to come to him with what Force they could gather, to disappoint the Designs of his Enemies. Gonçalo de Saavedra, and Alvar Gomez, the Kings Secretary, to whom he had given Maqueda, Torrejon de Velasco, and S. Silvestre, in the Territory of Toledo, were sent for. The Rebels perswaded all four, that the King designed to secure them, and therefore their only way was to join with them. The King hearing hereof, protested against the Judges, as Partial, and ordered Peter Arias, a Ci∣tizen of Segovia, to take Terrejon by sorce, which he did, and left that Town to the Earls of Pun̄onrostro his Successors. Peter de Velasco sided with the Rebels, notwithstanding his Father, the Earl of Haro, blamed, and would not supply him with Money, which caused him to be but poorly attended among the Nobles. On the 14th of August at Ancona died Pope Pius II. He was carried to that City, tho then sick, designing to gather the Forces of Christendom, and go in Person against the Turks. He held the Papacy but 6 years. Cardinal Peter Barbo, a Venetian, was chosen his Successor on the 30th of the same month, and took the Name of Paul II. He was but Forty seven years of Age when Elected, proved a great Friend to Spain, and assisted King Henry in his Troubles. CHAP. IV. Proceedings and Defeat of the Rebels in Catalonia; Death of Ismael King of Granada; Progress of Rebellion in Castile, and most Villanous Action of the Rebels, who Pro∣claim Prince Alonso King; The King and they Disband. PEter Constable of Portugal his coming to Barcelona animated the Catalonians above their strength. Lerida, after a long Siege, was forced to surrender to the King. All that Pro∣vince was miserably wasted with the War. D. John Archbishop of Zaragoça, Bastard Son to the King of Aragon, and fitter for the Sword than Miter, commanded for his Father. Philip Duke of Burgundy sent a small Party of his Subjects to the Assistance of the Constable. A∣bout 2000 Catalonian Foot, and 600 Horse, joined them at Manresa. The Earl of Prades besieged çervera for the King, and the want of Provisions had almost reduced the Town. D. Peter resolved to Relieve it. The greatest part of the Kings Forces were upon the borders of Navarre, to reduce that Kingdom. Prince Ferdinand, tho but 13 years of Age, was sent with some Forces by the King to join the Earl of Prades. Necessity obliged him to take up Arms so young, which is the reason he never learned to write well, as appears by his Hand. The Constables Forces marched to a place called Prados de Rey, with a Resolution to Fight. Prince Ferdinand advanced to meet the Enemy: He halted on a Hill, from whence the Ca∣talonians were discovered. The Portuguese chose his Ground, and intrenched on another Hill: He drew out his Forces. Peter de Deça led the Van, in which were the Burgundians. Beltran and John Armanderia followed him with the Castillians and Navarrois. D. Peter himself com∣manded the Rear. Prince Ferdinand had but 700 Horse, and 1000 Foot. The Earl of Prades led the Van, Hugo Rocaberbi, and Matthew Moncada, commanded in the Wings. Henry Son to Prince Henry of Aragon, had charge of the Reserve. Prince Henry was in the Rear with many Noblemen. Bernard Gascon was ordered with some Foot to secure the Mountain, that they might not be attacked on that side. Before the Fight Prince Henry Knighted several Men of Quality. The Signal of Battle being given, the Catalonians soon gave way, and at last fled, the Foot to the Mountain, the Horse along the Plain. D. Peter having cast off his Upper Garment, mixt himself with the Victors, and the next day made his escape. Most of the Burgundians were killed, of the others many taken, and among them the Earl of Pallas, Proceed∣ings of the Rebels in Catalonia. the chief Promoter of this War. This Battle was fought upon the last day of February 1465. Not one of the Aragonians was killed, and but few wounded. D. Peter returned to Manresa. Beltran Armendario, with great Courage, put part of the scattered Army into çervera, and Over∣throw of the Re∣bels. fortified it. Thence the sury of the War was carried to Ampurias, the Aragonians still getting the better. The Tumults in Navarre were near quelled, the Biamonteses being reduced and pardoned. The Earl of Faux, and Eleanor his Wife, were also declared Heirs of that King∣dom. 1465. Ismael King of Granada, died on the 7th of April; his Son Albohazen, a Man of great Courage and Resolution, succeeded him. This King had Two Wives, one a Native Moor, Mother to Boabdil, afterwards called the Little King; the other a Renegade Christian, called Zoroyra, who had two Sons, Cado and Nacre, who when Granada was taken by King Ferdinand, became Christians, as did their Mother. In Italy King Ferdinand of Naples having subdued all his Enemies, settled his Kingdom. He overthrew John Duke of Lorrain, and forced him to
fly to the Island Ischia, and thence afterwards into France. This done, King Perdinand on the 14th of September came to Naples, where he was received with great Joy and Pomp. Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, visited the Churches, paying her Vows to Heaven, being a very Virtuous and Devout Lady, but died soon after the Kingdom was pacified. After this her Husband, King Ferdinand, Reigned above 30 years, always successful in several Wars he undertook for his Allies. Alonso Duke of Calabria, his Son, overthrew the Turks, who had possessed them∣selves of Otranto, and drove them out of all the Country. Prince Alonso of Castile, being in the Power of the Nobles, was the cause of greater Troubles increase in Castile. Troubles, which were designed to be quelled by those very Means. The King from Cabeçon went to the Kingdom of Toledo, and the Nobles to Plasencia. D. Peter Giron, Master of Cala∣trava, went away to Andalusia, where he had the Town of Ossuna, designing to stir up that People to Rebellion. D. John de Valencuela had the grand Priorship of S. John taken from him, and the Bishop of Jaen his Goods and Revenues, only because they were Loyal to their King. Besides this, D. Peter Giron raised Men, and endeavoured with large Promises to Debauch all the Nobility of that Country. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Earl of Arcos, D. Alonso de Aguilar, and the Councils of Sevill and Cordoua, resolved to join with the Rebels. King Henry perceiving the Storm gather, assembled a Councel at Madrid, where he asked what was best to be done in that Exigence. All being silent, the Archbishop of Toledo said his Opinion was, The first thing to be procured was, that Prince Alonso should be put into the Kings Hands, as the fittest Person to secure the Pledge of Peace; which if the Nobility used, then they ought to be proceeded against by force of Arms: That to this purpose the Court should re∣move to Salamanca, to be near to the Rebels, either to Treat of Peace, or to carry on the War. These things being thought to be meant as they were said, were easily agreed to. A Message was sent to the Nobles, and the Forces ordered to march to Salamanca. The King himself went away to Old Castile, and with what Forces he had laid Siege to Arevalo, then held by the Rebels. Thence the Archbishop of Toledo putting off his Disguise, went away to Avila, whereof he was made Governor by the King: Thither the Conspirators repaired to him. The Admiral, as had been agreed, seized Valladolid, where they designed their Forces should Rendezvous. These sad News having awaked the King out of his Lethargy, he is said to have fallen down before a Crucifix, and uttered these Words; Thy Aid I implore, my Lord, Christ the Son of God, by whom Kings Reign; To thee I Recommend my Person and Dignity; I only beg this Punishment, which I confess inferior to my Deserts, may be for the good of my Soul; Lord give me Patience to en∣dure it, and permit not the People to suffer for my sake. Then he hasted away to Salamanca. At Avila the Rebels resolved upon a most Barbarous Action, to the Eternal Infamy of Spain; Without the Walls of that City they Erected a Scaffold, and placed on it the Statue of A most Villanous Action of the Casti∣lian Re∣bels. King Henry in his Royal Robes on a Throne with his Scepter and Crown. Thither the Vil∣lanous Nobles, and a Multitude of People, resorted. Then a Cryer proclaimed Sentence against the King, laying to his Charge many horrid Crimes. Whilst the Sentence was reading, they leasurely stripped the Statue of all its Robes, and at last, with Reproachful Language, threw it down from the Scaffold. This Villany was acted upon Wednesday the 5th of June. Immediately Prince Alonso, who had been all the while present, was brought upon the Scaffold, there lifted upon the Shoulders of the Nobles, and proclaimed King, the Royal Standard be∣ing Displayed in his Name, as was the Custom at the Inauguration of Kings. The Multitude presently cryed, God Save King Alonso, which was ingaging themselves in the Quarrel. The News of this horrid Treason being spread abroad, some approved of, others condemned it. It was easie for the new King to be Liberal of what was not his own, to Gutierre de Solis, at the Request of his Brother the Master of Alcantara, he gave the City Coria, with the Title of an Earl. Burgos and Toledo approved this Act of the Nobles. On the other side many great Men declared for King Henry. D. Garcia de Toledo, Earl of Alva, being reconciled, came to him with 500 Horse and 1000 Foot. The Queen and Princess Elizabeth were sent to the King of Portugal, to beg Succours of him: They met him at Guardia on the Borders of Portugal, yet obtained nothing but good Words and Civil Entertainment. The Rebels Rendezvoused at Valladolid, the Loyalists at Toro, being more Numerous than well Disciplined. Pen̄astor was besieged by the Rebels, who because it made a Virgorous Defence, threw down its Walls to terrifie other Places. Thence they removed to Simancas, whither the King sent John Fernandez Galindo with 3000 Horse, which so encouraged the Besieged, that the Rabble formally condemned the Archbishop of Toledo, and having dragged his Statue about the Streets, burnt it, in revenge to the Affront offered to the King at Avila. Hereupon the Rebels raised the Siege, but especially because they heard the King had an Army of 80000 Foot and 14000 Horse at Toro. This Army marched to Simancas; By the way, in a Skirmish, John Carillo, a Captain of the Rebels, was wounded and taken; being at the point of Death, he disco∣vered a Conspiracy, naming the Persons concerned in it to the King in private, but the King fearing his Discovery might be feigned, concealed their Names. He laid Siege to Valla∣dolid, but could not take it, by reason it had a strong Garison, or rather because the Kings Men had no stomach to fight. There a Treaty was again set on foot. King Henry and the Marquis de Villena met again: Much was promised, and nothing performed; yet the King was perswaded, since his Revenue could not bear so great a Charge, to dismiss his Army, and then Prince Alonso, quitting the Title of King, with all the Nobility, would submit.
Thus both sides disbanded, and the Noblemen who were with the King, tho they had'done no Rebels Disband Service, were highly Rewarded. The Rebels went away to Arevalo, and so Valladolid re∣turned to its Duty. Prince Alonso was kept in the nature of a Prisoner, and they threatned to kill him because he designed to make his escape to his Brother. The Treaty of Peace went on, and the Rebels promised to submit, provided the Princess Elizabeth were Married to the Master of Calatrava. The King consented, and immediately sent the Duke of Albu∣querque and Bishop of Calahorra from Court, because they were Enemies to the Master. This Project afflicted the Princess, who wept bitterly, and having told the cause of her Grief to Da. Beatrix de Bobadilla, her first Lady of the Bedchamber, that Lady shewing her a naked Dagger, promised she would with it kill the Master of Calatrava rather than he should have her. But God ordered it better, for as he hasted from his Town of Almagro to celebrate the Marriage, he fell sick by the way, and died at Villarubia, at the beginning of the year 1466; 1466. He was buried in a private Chappel at Calatrava. His Two Sons inherited his Estate. D. Alonso Tellez Giron, the eldest, in pursuance of his Fathers Will, was Earl of Uren̄a, D. Rode∣rick Tellez, Giron, the younger, had the Mastership of Calatrava, having before obtained the Popes Bull to that effect. He had also a third Son called D. John Pacheco; all three unlaw∣fully begotten. Not long before the Masters Death, in the Territory of Jaen, there appeared such a multitude of Locusts, that they hid the Sun. Every one interpreted this and the like Prodigies as his Fear dictated, rather than according to any Reason. At this time Roderick Sanchez de revalo, who commanded the Castle of S. Angel at Rome, wrote in Latin a Hi∣story of Spain, more Devout than Elegant. It is called Palentina from the Author, who was afterwards Bishop of Palencia. Pope Paul II. gave him that Bishoprick at the Request of King Henry, to whom he Dedicated that History. The said Roderick Sanchez, tho a Spaniard, was very familiar with that Pope. CHAP. V. Peter the Constable of Portugal dies; The Rebels in Catalonia choose the Duke of Anjou for their King; The Battle of Olmedo; The Death of the Queen of Aragon and Prince Alonso of Castile; The King recovers Toledo; The Rebels of Castile Affront the Popes Legate, and are Excommunicated. CAstile was full of Confusion and Tumults, nothing but Rapine and Murders appeared in all Places, the Government being too weak to punish these Insolencies. For this Rea∣son Confusi∣ons in Castile. the Towns and Cities Associated themselves, and by the Kings Consent Rules were pre∣scribed the Heads of the Association to be governed by. The People generally feared left the Moores should again Conquer Spain, the Kingdom being no less Debauched than in the time of King Roderick, and the Archbishop of Toledo was commonly in scorn called D. Op∣pas, which was the Name of him that had helped to betray the Country to the Infidels when they over-ran it. These Divisions encouraged the Earl of Faux to invade Navarre, as his Wife's Dower, not content to expect the Death of his Father-in-Law, tho he had blamed that forwardness in his Brother-in-Law Prince Charles. Not so satisfied, he resolved to o∣blige King Henry of Castile to deliver up those Towns of Navarre in which he had Garisons. At the first onset he took the City Calahorra, and laid Siege to Alfaro. King Henry sent James Enriquez del Castillo his Chaplain, who also wrote a Chronicle of this King, to Treat with the Earl, but he finding nothing was to be done by fair means, gathered what Forces he could, and drove him out of the Country. Calahorra was also restored to the King, the Townsmen expelling the Garison of the Earl of Faux. In Catalonia the Aragonians in several places worst∣ed their Enemies, and recovered many Towns. But what was most considerable, D: Peter, the pretended Earl of Barcelona, died at Granobla on the 29th of June. His Body was buried Peter the pretended Earl of Barcelona dies. at Barcelona. He was thought to be poisoned, as was very usual in those days. In his Will he left that Earldom, wherein he had so small a share, to John Prince of Portugal, his Nephew. The Aragonians using the advantage of his Death, took Tortosa and other Places. To put a stop to all these Losses, the Catalonians in a great Assembly at Barcelona, chose Renee Duke of Anjou, the perpetual Enemy of Aragon, their King. On the other side the King of Aragon sollicited the Duke of Savoy and Galeazo, who had succeeded his Father Francis Sforzia in the Dukedom of Milan, to join in League with him. He also Courted the English, and at the be∣ginning Rebels in Catalonia choose the Duke of Anjou for their King. of the year 1467, sent Peter Peralta, his Constable, to Castile, to join in League with the Confederate Lords. For the better compassing his Ends, he gave Commission to Treat of Matching his Daughter Joanna with Prince Alonso, and his Son Ferdinand with Bea∣trix Daughter to the Marquis of Villena. Neither of these Marriages had effect. The Earl of Benavente at this time got Prince Alonso from the Archbishop of Toledo, for pretending to En∣tertain him in his Castle of Portillo; when he had him in he'kept him, yet not long after, at 1467. the perswasion of the Marquis de Villena, restored him to the Rebellious Lords. Thus all things tended to open War, which King Henry earnestly desiring to prevent, condescended again to have Two Conferences with the Marquis de Villena, but all to no effect; notwith∣standing the Earl of Plasencia's Lady, a Person of great Parts, and well affected towards the
King, was present, in hopes she would reduce her Husband and some others. The Marquess de Villena was more subtle to gain an Advantage, than King Henry to disappoint him. Ano∣ther Interview was appointed at Plasencia, which the Loyal Nobility were concerned at, saying, it was Lessening of the King to have so many Conferences with a Subject. At the beginning of Summer the King removed from Madrid to Segovia, and the Rebels possessed themselves of Olmedo. Peter de Silva, Commandant of the Garison, delivered it up. Mota de Medina belonged to the Archbishop of Toledo, and there was danger it would fall into the hands of the Lords. King Henry moved by all these Affronts, ordered great Levies to be made. Then he summoned the Nobility. There came to him the Earl of Medina Celi, the Bishop of Cala∣horra, the Duke of Albuquerque, who till then had been absent from Court; and Peter Hernan∣dez de Velasco, who being pardoned his former Fault, was now sent by his Father with 700 Horse, and a good Body of Foot. For this Service he had the Tenths of the Admiralty granted him. So great Fear had possessed the King, and he was so desirous to gain the Nobility, that to secure the Marquis of Santillana, he delivered up his Daughter Joanna to be kept by him in his Town of Buytrago. Every one sold his Service the dearest he could. The King having gathered a good Army marched towards Medina, but being come to Olmedo the Re∣bels drew out to hinder his Passage. King Henry was desirous to avoid fighting, but could not Olmedo doubtful Fight of the King with the Rebels. contain his Men. Upon the 20th of August the Two Armies met, and after a sharp Engage∣ment parted again upon equal Terms, yet both sides pretended to the Victory. Night sepa∣rated them, the Rebels returned to Olmedo, and the King with his Forces, which were 2000 Foot and 1700. Horse, marched on to Medina del Campo. King Henry was not in the Fight, being advised by Peter Peralta not to hazard his Person. Some were of Opinion he meant not honestly, being a Friend to the Rebels. Neither was the Marquess de Villena there, being then at a Chapter of the Order of Santiago, where he was chosen Master, which made the No∣bility very jealous, seeing him Preferred and Rewarded, when he deserved the severest Punish∣ment. Ellenor Countess of Faux Governed Navarre for her Father. Nicholas Echavaria, Bi∣shop of Pamplona, recovered Urania, which till then was held by the Castilians. A Son of this Ladies called Gaston, as was his Father, had at this time by his Wife Magdalen, Sister to Louis King of France, a Son called Francis, who for his great Beauty had the Sirname of Phaebeus. His Daughter Catherine, her Brother dying, by Marriage united the State of Albret and Crown of Navarre, as shall appear in its place. The King of Aragon resided at Tarragona, to be near to give Orders for carrying on the War in Catalonia, and tho very aged, and blind of both Eyes, had still a great Spirit. In that City, on the 22th of January 1468, Ellenor, his Bastard Daughter, was Married to D. Luis de Biamonte Earl of Lerin. Her Portion 1468. was 15000 Florins, and the Design to secure that Family so Powerful in Navarre. The Queen held the Cortes of Aragon at Zaragoça for the King her Husband. There she died on the 13th of February, to the great Grief of the King, who lamented it the more because he was so aged himself, and his Son, to whom she might have been a great support, so young. Not long before she met her Daughter in Law, the Countess of Faux, at Exea on the Borders of Aragon, and there they concluded a League Offensive and Defensive. Her Body was Buried at Poblete. Only one Crime was laid to her Charge, which was the Death of her Son in Law Prince Charles, and this they say troubled her Conscience at the hour of her Death. The News of the Troubles in Castile was come to Rome. King Henry sollicited the Pope to The Popes Legate Affronted by the Rebels. Depose the Bishops that were in Rebellion, and to Excommunicate the Nobility if they would not submit. Antony Venerio, Bishop of Leon, was therefore sent Nuncio into Spain. First he waited upon the King at Medina del Campo. Then endeavouring to Treat with the Rebels, was by them twice put off with Reproachful Language; and he threatning to Excommunicate them, they answered, The Pope had nothing to do with the Affairs of the Crown, and that they would Appeal to the next General Councel. Another Misfortune befell the King, which was, that D. John Arias, Bishop of Segovia, in revenge that his Brother Peter Arias had been wrongfully imprisoned, tho now set at liberty, resolved to deliver up that City to the Lords. The Place is strong, being seated on the Mountains that part Old and New Castile. The Queen and Dutchess of Albuquerque, who were there, were so surprized at the coming of the Rebels, that they could scarce have time to get into the Castle, nor were they easily admitted, Peter Munsares the Governor, being of Intelligence with the Rebels. The Princess Elizaheth, who knew of the Design, stayed in the Palace, and then went to her Brother Alonso, designing to take part with him. This News was soon carried to Medina del Campo, where King Henry was, which trou∣bled him more than any other Loss, because he loved that City, kept his Treasure there, and it was the place where he Diverted himself. From this time forward he seemed disturbed in his Brain, trust∣ed no Body, was suspicious of all Men, and unsettled, sometimes for Peace and sometimes for War, but Peace was more suitable to his Nature. He appointed to meet the Marquess de Villena at Coca, notwithstanding all his Friends opposed it, which made many forsake him. Nothing was done at Coca, therefore they agreed to meet again in the Castle of Segovia. There they agreed upon these Articles, which were no better observed than others had been; That the Castle of Segovia be delivered to Prince Alonso; That the King have Liberty to take out his Treasures, which shall be kept in the Castle of Madrid by Peter Muncares; That the Queen be left with the Archhishop of Sevil as an Hostage for Performance hereof; That these things performed, the Nobles within 6 months Restore the King to the Government, and submit to him. These were hard Con∣ditions
for the King. But the worst was, that the Queen in the Castle of Alabejos, whither the Bishop sent her, took a Liking to a young Man, and proved with Child by him, which confirmed all the former Suspicions of her Dishonesty, and made for the Rebels. The King distracted with these Misfortunes, went from place to place, almost like a Private Man, for∣saken of most Men, only 10 attending him. He resolved at last to try the Earl of Pla∣sencia, and put himself into his Power. He was there well received, and lived about 4 months in the Castle of that City. The Pope sent a new Nuncio to persuade the Lords to submit The Re∣bels Ex∣communi∣cated. to the King, but they persisting Obstinate, he Excommunicated them. This did not correct, tho it troubled them so much, that they sent Deputies to Rome, who were not suffered to come within the Walls of that City till they had taken an Oath, not to give the Title of King to Prince Alonso. The Pope severely Reproved them in the Consistory, assuring them God would punish their Disloyalty, and that it was to be feared the young Prince would come to an untimely Death for the Sins of others. This Saying of his proved Prophetick, and his Severity did some kidness to King Henry. At the same time the City Toledo was restored to the King. Peter Lopez de Ayala was Governor of that City. F. Peter de Silva of the Order of S. Dominick, and Bishop of Badajoz, his Brother in Law, Treated with his Sister, the Governors Wife, about delivering up the City to the King. They sent to him, he came from Plasencia in two days, and entring the City by night, was lodged in the Dominican Mo∣nastery. His coming being known, a Bell was Rung, and the People took the Alarm. Peter Lopez advised the King should not shew himself, because the People would not pay him any respect. Therefore about midnight he left the City, with him went Perafan de Ribera, and the two Sons of Peter Lopez de Ayala, Peter and Alonso: At the Gate the King found his Horse was tired, having travelled 18 Leagues that Day. He asked one of the Company to give him his Horse, which he refused; but the two Sons of Peter Lopez immediately alighted, and on their knees begg'd of the King to accept of theirs, one for himself, and the other for his Squire of the Body. The King did so, those Gentleman followed him a Foot: Being come to Olias, the King gave Peter Lopez de Ayala and his Sons, for ever an Estate of 70000 Mervidies a Year. The Bishop also was forc'd to leave the City; yet within Four days the Governors Wives tears prevail'd with him to call the King again. He came, and found all things better dispos'd than he expected, and at the suit of the People, confirm'd their Charter, granting them new Privileges. But Peter Lopez de Ayala was created Earl of Fuensalida, and continued Governor of the City; then the King went away to Madrid, there he secur'd the Governor of that Place, Peter Muçares, but soon after dismiss'd him. The loss of Toledo so nearly touched the Rebels, that they immediately Marched from Arevalo where their Forces were, to Besiege that City. In their March near Carden̄osa, Prince Alonso fell sick and died on the 5th of July, which put a stop to their proceedings. His Body was Buried in the Church of St. Francis at Arevalo; thence afterwards translated to the Carthusian Monastery of Miraflores at Burgos. Some said he died of the Plague, which then raged in those parts, others that he was poisoned. Alonso de Palencia who wrote his History, positively asserts his being poisoned by the Marquess of Villena: But I cannot find to what purpose that Nobleman should undertake such a hainous Crime. CHAP. VI. John Duke of Lorrain Supports and Heads the Rebels in Catalonia, for his Father; Fer∣dinand Prince of Aragon declared King of Sicily; The Crown of Castile offered to the Princess Elizabeth, she refuses it; Peace betwixt the King and Nobels. REnce Duke of Anjou, having accepted of the offer made him by the Catalonians, because he was himself too Old to undertake that Expedition, sent his Son John Duke of Lor∣rain, John Duke of Lorrain in Catalo∣nia for his Father. who we said before was by the Aragonians drove out of Italy. The King of France not regarding his League with Aragon, sent him Supplies as soon as he had ended the Civil War with his Brother the Duke of Berri, and Charles Duke of Burgundy. John Earl of Armagnac, between whom and the Duke of Lorrain there was a professed friendship, brought him some Sup∣plies; with these Forces he began the War fortunately, but the end was not suitable. Barcelona received him with joy, and it was resolved to carry the War to Ampurias. The King of Aragon tho' Old and Blind repaired thither, near Roses a Party of Aragonians was defeated. The Body of the French Army marched towards Girona, resolving if the Commandant Peter de Rocaberty came out, to fight him; if he kept close, to Besiege the Place. The Aragonians Marched out, and in several Rencounters worsted the Enemy. Prince Ferdinand came and put his Forces into the City, whereupon the Siege was raised. Soon after, the Prince going out with a Party, was defeated by the French, and many of his Men killed; Roderick Rebolledo who had behaved himself bravely in defence of the Prince, was taken. It was resolved to wear out the heat of the French, therefore all the Frontiers were Garrisoned, and Duke Alonso de Aragon left to Command there, and observe the Enemy. Prince Ferdinand returned to Zarogoza, where the Cortes sate, and was present when his Mother died (as has been said above.) His Mother be∣ing dead, and his Father 70 years of Age, all the weight of the Government fell upon him, therefore to give him the more Authority, he was declared King of Sicily. This was about
the time that Prince Alonso of Castile departed this Life, as we have declared. The death of Prince Alonso being known at Zaragoça, immediately Peter Peralta was sent to the Factious Lords of Castile to ask the Princess Elizabeth in Marriage for Prince Ferdinand. His Father stayed at Zaragoça, and he went away to carry on the War in Catalonia. The Duke of Lorrain desiring to possess himself of Girona, raised 15000 Men in Russillon and Cerdagne, which with the Forces he had before, was a Power too great for the Aragonians to cope with; so that they could put no Relief into the Town, which was closely besieged. Nevertheless, through the Valour of the Bishop, of D. John Meliguerite, and other Commanders, it held out. Mean while, Prince Ferdinand had a Town called Verga delivered to him on the 17th of September. From this time the Affairs of the Aragonians began to look with a better Aspect, and the more for that the King recovered his Sight, a thing then thought miraculous: A Jew of Lerida under∣took the Cure, and couched a Cataract in the Right Eye on the 11th of September, when he refused to proceed to the other, saying, There was no favourable Aspect of the Heavens; but being pressed by the King, on the 11th of October he perfected the Cure upon the Left Eye. To add to this Publick Joy, the Weather and want of Necessaries obliged the Enemy to raise the Siege of Girona. In Portugal, Prince John married his Cousin Eleanor, not regar∣ding the Promise he made to marry Joanna Princess of Castile: Her Mother's loose Life made her Birth suspected. Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, Father to the Lady Eleanor, passed over into Africk, obtained there some Victories over the Moors, and returning home, by his Wife Bea∣trix, the Daughter of D. John Master of Santiago in Portugal, had a Son called Emanuel, who came in time to be King of Portugal. The Portugueses talk of strange Prodigies seen at the Birth of that Child, denoting his future Grandeur. Upon the death of Prince Alonso, many submitted to King Henry; but the Peace was not lasting, and the War that ensued wasted the Power of Spain. Burgos returned to its Some Re∣bles sub∣mit, but fresh trou∣bles ensue in Castile. Duty, and at Madrid the Archbishop of Sevill, the Earl of Benavente, and other Noblemen, did Homage to the King. The Rebels having lost Prince Alonso, resolved to offer the Crown to the Princess Elizabeth, as they did at Avila, the Archbishop of Toledo making an Harangue to persuade her, and railing at the King. She thanked them for their Offer, and wishing long Life to the King her Brother, intreated them to pay to him that Duty they offered to her. Her Modesty surprized them all, and she was thought the worthier to Reign. They bent their Thoughts upon Peace, and the more, because the King had sent Commissioners to offer them all his Free Pardon. At length Peace was concluded at Avila, by the Archbishop of Sevill and Andrew de Cabrera Lord Steward of the Houshold, upon these Articles: That the Princess Elizabeth be sworn Heiress to the Crown: That the Cities and Towns of Avila, Ubeda, Medina del Campo, Olmedo, and Escalona, be given to her; but upon Condition she shall not Marry without the King's Consent: That the King be divorced from the Queen, the Pope consenting to it: That she and her Daughter be sent to Portugal: That all the re∣volted Nobility be pardoned and restored to their Estates and Preferments taken from them during the Troubles. Four Months were allowed for the Performance of these Articles. These Conditions pleased not the Marquss de Santillana and his Brothers, who thought it more for their Interest to have the keeping of the Princess Joanna. The Queen, with the Assistance of Luys de Mendoça, was gone away by Night, from the Castle where she was kept, to her Daughter at Buytrago. This much troubled the Archbishop of Sevil, who had the Charge of keeping her. During her Confinement, she was delivered of Two Sons, Ferdinand and Apo∣stol, who it is affirmed were bred in the Monastery of S. Dominick the Royal of Nuns in To∣ledo. The Monastery of Guisando, in the mid-way betwixt Madrid and Avila, was appoin∣ted for the King and the Lords to meet: There many Conditions were agreed to, and much granted to the Nobles, none of them doubting but the King and his Sister being weary of those Confusions, would refuse them nothing they could ask. It is said the King and Mar∣quess de Villena had a private Conference, the Substance whereof is not known; but by what followed it was supposed it only tended to the securing the Marquess and advancing his Fa∣mily. On the 19th of September, the Nobility did their Homage to King Henry, and swore the Princess Elizabeth Heiress to the Crown. Immediately, upon the Submission of all the Cities to the King, he took the Government of the City and Castle of Segovia from the Two Brothers of the House of Arias, and gave it to Andrew de Cabrera, who afterwards obtained great Preferments and Riches. About this time, near a Town called Peromoro, in the Ter∣ritory A Prodi∣gy. of Toledo, great store of Blood ran from the Sheaves of Corn newly mowed, which then surprized all Men, and afterwards was found to denote the great Calamity that ensued in Spain. The Marquiss de Villena being restored to his former Favour, grew absolute, to the great Dissatisfaction of the Nobility. He persuaded the King and Princess Elizabeth to re∣move to Ocan̄a, at the beginning of the Year 1469. His design was to marry the Princess to the King of Portugal; and to that purpose D. Alonso de Noguera, Archbishop of Lisbon, 1469. with other Men of Note, came Ambassador from thence. The Archbishop of Toledo, was for Matching her with Ferdinand King of Sicily, and spoke of it openly, after the departure of Peter Peralta, the Aragonian Ambassador: This Match pleased her best; and she had declared she would not marry in Portugal. The Marquess advised to marry her by force. King Henry was dubious; but at last resolved to dismiss the Portuguese Ambassador, telling him it was not yet time to treat of that Affair. The Cardinal of Arras came Ambassador from Luis XI. King of France, to demand the Princess Elizabeth in Marriage for his Brother Charles Duke of
Berri, which caused more Divisions among the Nobles. Andaluzia was not yet perfectly re∣duced. John Duke of Medina Sidonia dying, Henry his Bastard Son inherited his greate Estate and rebellious Spirit. D. Alonso de Aguilar, and the Earl of Arcos sided with him, and di∣sturbed the Peace of that Country in the Name of the Princess Elizabeth. It was thought fit the King should go in Person to quell those Troubles. The Marquess de Villena at the same time resigned and made over that Marquisate to his Son James Lopez Pacheco, hoping to obtain the Confirmation of the Mastership of Santiago from the King and Pope. The Princess was left at Ocan̄a, being again obliged to swear she would not marry or treat about it, without the King her Brother's Consent or Privity. The Earl of Benavente and Peter Hernandez de Velasco went to Valladolid, to Govern the Kingdom during the King's absence. CHAP. VII. The Marriage of Ferdinand King of Sicily with the Princess Elizabeth of Castile, and of the Duke of Guienne with the Princess Joanna, who is sworn Heiress of Castile: Dif∣ferences betwixt the Knights of Alcantara and their Master, and Troubles in Biscay: The Portugueses take Arzila and Tangier in Africk. KIng Henry going into Andaluzia, was nobly entertained at Jaen by his Constable Irançu: Soon after, he reduced the City Cordova, delivered to him upon Articles by D. Alonso Rebels re∣duced. de Aguilar, and quelled the Tumults raised by that Gentleman and D. Peter de Cordova, Earl of Cabra. In the Summer he went to Sevil, and did the same there. The Moors did not in∣fest our Borders, being closely observed by those that Commanded on the Frontiers, and di∣vided among themselves. Alquirçote, Governor of Malaga, an able Soldier, finding himself Master of that City, rebelled against his King Albohaçen, many siding with him, who were disgusted by the King, or out of their natural Inconstancy. They came to a Battel, and Rebelli∣ous Moors defeated. Alquirçote being the weaker, was overthrown. He proposed a League with King Henry, and came to meet him at Archidona, on the Borders of the Kingdom of Granada, bringing great Presents, and was dismissed with a Promise of Succour. Hereupon Albohaçen made several Incur∣sions into the Christian Territories, carried away great Numbers of Captives and Cattel, and burnt all the Country. He did much more Mischief than had been usually done of late upon the like Occasions, yet took never a Town of Note. Many Parties of Moors over-ran Andaluzia and Murcia, but rather in the nature of Robbers, than in warlike manner. Let us return to the Princess Elizabeth, whom many great Princes courted: She was a Woman excellently Quali∣fied, and Virtuous; but above all, her Dower, which was no less than a Kingdom, drew so many to pretend to her. At last, Ferdinand King of Sicily took place of the Portuguese, who was a Widower, and the Duke of Berry being too much a Stranger. His Father the King of Aragon left no means unessayed, but gave rich Presents, and made large Promises. Gutierre de Cardena was her great Favourite, and Gonzalo Chacon his Uncle govern'd him: To the last was promised the Town of Casarrubios, and that of Arroyo Molinos; to the other the Town of Ma∣queda, besides rich Gifts in hand, and Assurances of Favours to come. By their means, with the Assistance of the Archbishop of Toledo, the Match was made up, and Articles agreed upon, which chiefly tended to the giving all due Respect to King Henry as long as he lived, and after his death that the whole Government should be in the Power of the Princess; so that the King should bestow no Preferments on Strangers, nor on others, without her Con∣sent. That Match was privately concluded. The War in Catalonia detained King Ferdinand, for Girona was again besieged by the Enemy, and at last forced to surrender: Besides, another Storm was raised in Navarre. Nicholas Bishop of Pamplona going to Tafalla to meet the Prin∣cess A Bishop murdered. Eleanor, was murdered by the Procurement of Peter Peralta. Messengers were sent to the King of Aragon to demand Justice; they also complained the Murderer had possessed himself of Tudela, and that the King was too free in giving Charters to several Towns. They also prayed he would recover Estela and its Territory, still held by the Castillians. The Earl of Faux was dissacisfied, and seemed to threaten War; for which reason he was no less hateful to the King his Father-in-Law than Prince Charles had been. The King gave these Deputies good Words; but Peralta was not punished for that heinous Crime. The Princess Elizabeth being uneasie, fled from Ocan̄a towards Old Castile; and being denied admittance at Olmedo, went to Madrigal, where her Mother was. It was contrived by the Master of Santiago and Archbishop of Sevil to seize her; but they were disappointed by the Archbishop of Toledo and the Admiral, who with a Party of Horse carried her to Valladolid. King Ferdinand fearing to be disappointed, leaving the War in Catalonia, went away to Va∣lencia, to raise the Money he had promised his Bride to keep House. Thence he returned to Zaragoça, and so in a Disguize, with only four Persons attending him, came into Castile. At Osma he met the Earl of Trevin̄o, who was privy to the Match, and with him and 200 Ferdinand King of Sicily mar∣ries Eliza∣besh Sister to the King of Castile. Horse removed to Duen̄as, a Town belonging to the Earl of Buendia, Brother to the Archbishop of Toledo: There he saluted his Bride, and on the 18th of October they were married at Valla∣dolid, the Archbishop of Toledo pretending he had a Dispensation from Pope Pius II. but it ap∣pears to have been false, by the Bull afterwards granted upon that occasion by Pope Sixtus IV. King Ferdinand was but 16 Years of Age, but proper and strong. The new married Couple sent
Letters to the Pope, King Henry, and other Princes and Great Men, excusing their being so hasty in marrying. They were forced to borrow Money for their Expences. About the same time, Henry, Son to Prince Henry of Aragon, was by the King his Uncle created Duke of Segorve, and Alonso the King's Bastard-Son Earl of Ribagorça. On the 6th of December died at Rome D. John Cavajal, Cardinal and Bishop of Plasencia: He was Auditor de Rota, Legate to Three Popes, and a Man of a good Life. He built a Bridge over Tagus in Estre∣madura, which is still called the Cardinal's Bridge. Whilst King Henry was busie settling the Affairs of Sevil, advice was sent him from Cantil∣lana, by the Master of Santiago, of his Sister's Marriage: His Displeasure was very great. Immediately he set out for Truxillo, designing to give that Town to the Earl of Plasencia, for his good Services during the Troubles. The Townsmen resolved to oppose it; and therefore the King, rather than use Violence, gave him in lieu of it the Town of Arevalo in Old Castile; and because it was not worth so much as the other, added to it the Title of a Duke. At Truxillo, the Master of Alcantara, who had sided with Prince Alonso, was pardoned, and the King gave or restored the City Coria to Gutierre de Caceres and Solis his Brother. Thus many who deserved Punishment received Rewards. Here Letters were brought the King from his Sister, excusing her marrying, and promising she and her Husband would be as dutiful as if they were his Children, if he would treat them with the Affection of a Father. No other Answer was returned, but that the King at Segovia would consider of that Affair. Another Message was sent to Segovia, at the beginning of the Year 1470, to press the King to give 1470. leave to the Prince and Princess, that they might pay their Respects to him, promising their future Behaviour should make amends for the Displeasure they had done him. All the An∣swer was, a Business of that Importance required the Advice of the Nobility. This was the Pretence; but in reality he was offended at the Princess Elizabeth, and had fixed his Affection on his Daughter Joanna, whom Lewis King of France had sent to demand in Marriage for his Brother Charles, created Duke of Guienne. Besides, he pressed King Henry to join with him in calling a General Councel, in opposition to Pope Paul, with whom he was at va∣riance. This Request was flatly denied by the King; the Business of the Marriage was put off. At the same time. D. Alonso de Aguilar at Cordova, apprehended the Mareschal D. James de Cordova, who suspected no such Design. He was soon released by the King's Order; but thinking he should obtain no Satisfaction for that Wrong, went away to Granada, and thence with the Consent of the Moorish King, sent a Challenge to his Adversary to fight upon the Plain of Granada. On the appointed Day, having waited till Sun-set, and D. Alonso not appearing, he dragged his Effigies at his Horse's Tail: That done, he sent Letters to all Parts with Pictures representing that Passage. The Knights of Alcantara would not submit to Diffe∣rence be∣twixt the Knights of Alcan∣tara and their Ma∣ster. their Master, and the Dispute came to open Hostility. The Master not being able alone to oppose so many, begged Assistance of his Brother Gutierre de Solis. They wanted Money, and Garci Alvarez de Toledo, Earl of Alva, lent them a Sum upon the Mortgage of the City Coria. Thus the Earls, afterwards Dukes of Alva, got that City, which being confirmed to them by Grants of Kings, remains in the Family to this day. Nothing remarkable hapned between the Master and Knights, only they hindred his Forces passing the River Tagus, and soon after they were dispersed. The Master being thus outed his Estate, died some Years after. D. John de Zun̄iga, Son to the Duke of Arevalo, succeeded him, and was the last Ma∣ster of Alcantara, he resigning up that Dignity to King Ferdinand. D. John Pacheco, Master of Santiago, lay sick at Ocen̄a, being greater in the King's Favour than ever, notwithstanding all his Misdemeanours; which occasioned the People to say he had bewitched the King; and it was given out the Court removed to Madrid only to be near him. When he returned to Court after his Sickness, the King went out to meet him, and gave him the Town of Esca∣lona; the Inhabitants whereof refusing to receive him, the King went thither in Person to deliver it to him. The Earl of Armagnac fled into Spain, for fear of being killed, because he privately marry'd the Earl of Faux's Daughter without her Father's Consent. He was well received by the King, and soon after returned into France, the Cardinal of Albi in that King's Name assuring him his Life; but it proved fatal to him, as will appear hereafter. The Bis∣cayners, who had been long divided into the Factions of On̄es and Gamboas, about this time fell Confusion in Biscay. into great Confusions: Peter Fernandez de Velasco, Earl of Haro, was sent by the King to ap∣pease them, which he soon did, banishing the two Heads of the Factions, called Peter de Avendan̄o, and John de Moxica. Pope Paul II. granted a Jubilee to all that gave Alms, two thirds thereof to be employed in rebuilding the Church of Segovia, and the rest for his own Use. King Henry went thither from Madrid to gain this Jubilee. In Portugal the Duke of Viseo died at Setuva on the 8th of September, being 37 Years of Age: James his Second Son succeeded him. He was buried in the Monastery of S. Francis in that City, and thence translated to the Church of the Conception at Beja, which, with the Monastery of Nuns it belonged to, was built by his Wife Beatrix. In Valladolid the People mutinied, and took up Arms against those that were descended of Jews, tho Christians themselves; King Ferdinand and his Queen could not quell them. The Party oppressed, implored the Protection of King Henry, by which means that City was reduced to his Obedience. The Earl of Bena∣vente was left to Govern there, and King Ferdinand with his Wife returned to Duen̄as: There that Queen was delivered of a Daughter of her own Name. Ambassadors came
from France to press the Marriage before Treated of, and it was now agreed to. All things being concluded, the Marquess of Santillana brought the Princess Joanna, for which Service, and for having kept her, the King gave him the Towns of Alcoçer, Valdolivas, and Salmeron, which belonged to the Marquess de Villena, in the Right of his Wife the Countess of Santistevan, who in lieu of it had the Town of Requena, with all the Duties belonging to it, which are consi∣derable, because that place is near the Frontiers of Valencia. A Monastery of Carthusians called Paular, between Segovia and Buytrago, was the place appointed for Contracting the Princess. Thither went the King and Queen, with their Daughter, and the Master of San∣tiago, Joanna Princess of Castile Contract∣ed to the Duke of Guienne. the Archbishop of Sevil, the Duke of Arevalo, the Bishop of Siguença, and his Bro∣thers, there they all publickly renounced the Allegiance Sworn to the Princess Elizabeth. On the 26th of October the Ceremony of the Princesses Marriage was performed. The King and Queen Swore she was their Lawful Daughter, and the Nobility did Homage to her, and she was Sworn Heiress of the Kingdom. After the Solemnity, as they returned to Segovia, there arose such a Storm of Wind, Rain, and Snow, that the French Ambassadors were in danger, and some of their Servants perished, which some looked upon as an ill Omen to that Wed∣ding. From Segovia the Ambassadors returned home, well satisfied with their Negociation, the Bishop of Siguença, by the Kings Order, accompanying them as far as Burgos. This had been the Occasion of a Bloody War between Spain and France, had not Heaven prevented it. For the King of France had not long before a Son born, which cut off the Duke of Guienne's hopes of inheriting that Crown, and he died two years after, as shall be related in its place. CHAP. VIII. The Tumults and Confusions in Aragon, Sardinia, and Navarre; The King of Castile Labours to Reduce his Rebels; Pope Paul II. Dies, Sixtus IV. Chosen; King Alonso of Portugal takes Arzila and Tangier in Africk. AS the Power of Aragon had been increased by the Marriage in Castile, so was its Quiet much disturbed by the War which still continued in Catalonia, and new Commotions Troubles in Aragon, Sardinia, and Na∣varre. in Sardinia and Navarre. Leonard de Alagon, Son to Artal de Alagon and Benedicta de Arborea, in her Right pretended to the Estate of that Family, the Marquess de Oristan Salvador de Ar∣borea dying without Issue. He sought to do himself Right by force of Arms, and took se∣veral Towns belonging to the King and other great Men. Nicholas Carros, the Viceroy, had not a sufficient Strength to suppress him. In Navarre the Earl of Faux, with the Assistance of the Biamonteses, possessed himself of great part of the Kingdom, and laid Siege to Tudela. The King sent the Archbishop of Zaragoça before, and notwithstanding his great Age, fol∣lowed him with a good Force, which obliged his Son in Law to raise the Siege. A Treaty was set on foot, and at length at Olite it was Agreed, That the King of Aragon should still retain the Title of King of Navarre, but the Government should be wholly in the Power of the Earl of Faux and his Wife. News was here brought them of a sad Misfortune that had happened in France, which was, That at a Feast of Tilting made by Charles Duke of Guienne for Joy of his Marriage, a Splinter from his own Lance broke upon his Adversary, struck Gaston, Son to the Earl of Faux, through the sight of his Helmet, and killed him. This was on the 27th of November. He was 26 years of Age. His Body was carried to Bourdeaux, and there buried in the Cathedral of that City. He left Two Children by his Wife Magdalen, a Son call'd Francis Phebus, and a Daughter named Catherine, who both came to the Crown of Navarre. This grieved the King of Aragon, but above all the Danger of his Son Ferdinand, whom he thought not safe to leave in Castile, where he had many Enemies, and among them that King, nor yet to call him away unless he had secured his Succession to that Crown. He was the more perplexed, for that the Bishop of Toledo, a Man of great Power, was Discon∣tented, and took it ill that King Ferdinand was more Familiar with, and had more Confi∣dence in Guterre de Cardenas, and the Admiral D. Alonso Enriquez, than in him. Besides, that King had let fall a word, signifying, That he would not suffer himself to be governed by any Man. This troubled the Archbishop, and he resolved to withdraw. The King of Aragon being informed of it, endeavoured to appease him, writing a Letter to his Son, wherein he Advised him to Prefer the Archbishop before all others, and use him as a Father. Yet this did not fully satisfie the Archbishop. The Affairs of Aragon were in a good posture in Catalonia, for John Duke of Lorrain died at Barcelona upon the 16th of December, and was buried in the Cathedral. The Rebels were not at all dismayed hereat, but hoping the King of France would stand by them, published an Ordinance, enjoining all Places that were without Governours, not to admit of any, unless Renee Duke of Anjou, or his Grandson Nicholas, Son to the de∣ceased, came to them in Person. In Castile the King of Aragon used all Means to Oblige the Nobility. D. John Pacheco was promised his Estate should be enlarged, and the Archbishop of Toledo, that his Sons Troylo and Lope, should be Preferred and Provided for. Many others of the Nobility were reduced either by Fair Promises, or great Gifts, yet neither D. John Pacheco, nor the Archbishop, could be prevailed upon. King Henry used the same Art, especially to∣wards
the Archbishop. It was thought he would not be overcome by fair Means only, there∣fore Vasco de Contreras took from him the Town of Perales. The Archbishop gathering some Forces besieged that Town, but the King at the beginning of the year 1471, hasted to Ma∣drid, 1471. and marching thence with 800 Men, raised the Siege, which done, he returned back to Madrid, and the Archbishop to Alcalà. A new way was found to reduce the Rebellious Pre∣lates, Method of reduc∣ing the Rebelli∣ous Pre∣lates. but especially those of Toledo and Segovia. The King obtained of the Pope Two Bulls, one whereof Cited the Bishop of Segovia to Appear before him at Rome within 90. days after the Notification of it. By the other the Archbishop was Commanded to Submit to the King, and in case he was Refractory, 4 Canons of Toledo were empowered to draw up a Pro∣cess against him, and send it to Rome. These 4 Canons were appointed by the Chapter, but through the Contrivance of the Master of Santiago they proceeded not upon that Affair. To the Master of Santiago the King gave the Town of Alcaraz, and to D. Roderick Ponce, Earl of Arcos, the Island of Cadiz, and the Title of a Marquess, by way of Portion with Beatrix Daughter to the Master of Santiago, in order to make an Interest against the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who was an Enemy to them both. Biscay was again in an uproar, Avendan̄o and Moxica, the Heads of the Mutineers, being returned from Banishment by the help of the Earl of Trevin̄o, who assisted them in hatred to Peter Fernandez de Velasco, Earl of Haro, who ba∣nished them. Both these Noblemen marched with Forces into Biscay, and on the 27th of April came to a Battle near a Town called Monguia. The Earl of Trevin̄o was strongest in Foot, which were of most use in that uncouth Countrey, so that he overthrew his Adversary. Many were killed, especially of the Gentry, and more made Prisoners. King Henry hearing of it, posted away to Burgos, and thence to Ordun̄a, upon his coming all was presently quiet. He made a Truce between the Two Parties till such time as they could be fully Recon∣ciled, and set all the Prisoners free. After this great Levies were made throughout Castile, and the Nobility was summoned, to the end to force King Ferdinand and Elizabeth his Queen, to depart the Kingdom; yet by the Advice of the Master of Santiago this Design was laid aside. Toledo and Sevil mutinied at the same time, both Cities being divided into Factions. Those Mutiny at Toledo and Sevil. of Toledo were the Ayalas and Silvas. The Earl of Cifuentes was Head of the Silvas, and he of Fuensalida of the Ayalas. To put an end to these Contentions, by the Advice of the Bi∣shop F. Peter de Silva, the Earl of Cifuentes Married Ellenor, Daughter to him of Fuensalida. What was designed to produce a Peace, proved the cause of greater Discord, not only the Earl of Cifuentes, but John de Ribera, his Uncle, being admitted into the City against the Kings will, one of them coming to be Married, and the other to honour that Solemnity. The Faction of the Silvas having got their Chief among them, armed against their Adversa∣ries with such fury, that King Henry was forced to come thither in Person, and having ap∣peased the Tumult, deprived the Earl of Fuensalida of the Government of the City, which he had held many years, and put Garci Lopez into that Command, with the Title of Deputy. At Sevil the Marquess of Cadiz was expelled that City by the Duke of Medina Sidonia. Hence ensued a formal War, which was ended by D. Yn̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, Earl of Tendilla, sent thither to that purpose, he using more Art than Force or Severity. Medina Sidonia was restored to its Owner. It was a very great loss for Castile, that Pope Paul II. died on the 25th of Pope Paul II. dies, Sixtus IV. chosen. July. During his Papacy he did much for the good and advantage of Spain. On the 9th of August was chosen in his place the Cardinal Francis de Ruvere of the Order of Friers Minors, he took the Name of Sixtus IV. a Man of no less Merit than his Predecessor, and as well af∣fected towards Spain. At the same time a Body of Moores broke into the inward parts of An∣daluzia, and made great havock in the Territory of Alcantara; The Booty they took was so great, they could observe no Order in marching. In Revenge for this Affront, and to Divert the Enemy, by the King's Order, the Marquess of Cadiz, with his Forces, took the Town of Cardella in the Kingdom of Granada by force, but he leaving a weak Garison in the place, it was soon recovered by the Moores. This Year was Fortunate to Portugal. King Alonso about the middle of August set sail from Tangier and Arzi∣la taken by the King of Portugal. Lisbon with a Fleet, consisting of 300 Sail between great and small, resolving to renew the War in Africk. With him went Prince John his Son, that he might learn his first Military Rudiments in that Holy War, and all the Flower of the Nobility and Souldiery of the King∣dom. The Army consisted of about 30000 Men. At his first landing he took from the Moores the Town of Arzila, in which above 2000 Infidels were killed, and 5000 sold as Slaves, which raised a great Sum of Money. This Success was not bought without Blood, for several Persons of Note among the Portugueses were killed, and among them D. Alvaro de Castro, Earl of Montesanto, and D. John Coutin̄o, Earl of Marialva, whose dead Body the King having seen, turning to his Son, he said, God grant you prove so great a Souldier. The Example of Arzila so terrified the Moores of Tangier, that they abandoned it, the Command of which Place the King gave to Roderick Merlo. Henry de Meneses, Earl of Valencia, was left Governour of Arzila and Alcaçar. Having in so short a time concluded such Noble Exploits, the King returned with his Fleet in safety to Portugal. D. Alonso Vasconcellos was in this Expedition created Earl of Penella, as a Reward of his good Service.
CHAP. IX. Catalonia reduced; Charles Duke of Guienne dies; Cardinal Borgia, the Pope's Legate, comes into Spain; Interview of the Kings of Castile and Portugal; The Master of Santiago strengthens himself against his Enemies; Barcelona surrendred to the King of Aragon. IN Catalonia the Aragonians were now successful, for after the Death of the Duke of Lor∣rain, Catalonia reduced. Girona was surrendred to the King. What remained of the Enemy, whose Chief Commanders were Reiner, Bastard Son to the Duke, and James Galeoto, were either besieged in a Town called S. Adrian, on the Banks of the River Bese, or overthrown by the General D. Alonso de Aragon, as they marched to relieve that Place. The King, tho' so old, ceased not to press the Enemy in Ampurias. As he lay encamped near Torella, he is said in a Dream to have seen a notable Soldier that died in that War, who advised him not to decamp from thence, because it would prove dangerous to him. The King took no notice of this Dream, but moved thence, and having taken Roses, and laid Siege to Peralada, was in great danger of his Life by a Camisade given at Night by the Earl of Campobaso, who commanded the Enemy. He was so surprized, that he fled half naked to Figueras. Nevertheless next day he returned to the Siege, and wasted the Country, which obliged the Town to surrender. All that Coun∣try being subdued, he marched with his Army and sate down before Barcelona, the Siege of which Place lasted long, he being resolved to carry that Town by Policy, rather than open Force. In Old Castile, King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth laboured to draw the People to their Party, some Towns surrendred to him, and among them Sepulveda. This done, they sent for the Archbishop of Toledo, resolving to reconcile him at any rate, and being come, went with him to Tordelaguna, a Town of his, on purpose to oblige him. Charles, Duke of Guienne, not regarding that he was contracted to the Princess Joanna, as doubting whose Daughter she was, was now making a Match with the Duke of Burgundy's Daughter. As soon as King Henry had notice of it, he went from Segovia to Badajoz to meet the King of Portugal at the beginning of the Year 1472. The Earl of Feria, in whose Custody that City 1472. was, in Hatred to the Master of Santiago, would not admit the King. Between that Place and Elvas the two Kings met, and treated about the King of Portugal's marrying the Prin∣cess Kings of Portugal and Castile meet. Joanna, but nothing was concluded. The Portugues placed no great Confidence in the King, or the Master of Santiago, beside that King Ferdinand and his Queen became daily more acceptable to the People. For the present the Insolence of the Earl of Feria was winked at, but not long after King Henry went into Andaluzia, with a Resolution to punish all the Mutinous Lords. He came to Cordova, and would not go on to Sevil, because the Duke of Medina-Sidonia was possessed of that City, and had in it a good Body of Horse, for fear, as he said, of the Master of Santiago, his Enemy. For this Reason, as also because Toledo was again in an Uproar, the King returned without effecting any thing. In Toledo, the Earl of Cifuentes possessed himself of the Castle of S. Martin, then very strong, and secured the Deputy-Governor. Scarce were these Tumults in Toledo quelled by the King with the Assi∣stance of the Canons of that Church, when News came from Segovia, that that City was all in Confusion, which perplexed the King and forced him to speed thither, his Treasure being there. Great was the Misery of those Times, as well in Ecclesiastical as Civil Affairs. The Money was either Counterfeit, or of base Allay. Many Petitions were presented to the King for Redress of these Grievances, but all in vain. Ferdinand del Pulgar, a Man famous in those days, wrote a Pastoral Dialogue, being a Satyr upon the King and Nobles, refle∣cting severely on the Miscarriages and Abuses in the Government. The same Year, on the 12th of May, died Charles Duke of Guienne at Bourdeaux, having then concluded a League with the Dukes of Burgundy and Britany against the King of France. Bloody Wars followed afterwards between the King of France and Duke of Burgundy, which we leave to the French Historians. Gaston, Earl of Faux, has relation to the History of Spain, as pretending to the Crown of Navarre, in Right of his Wife Ellenor, but Death cut him off this Year at Ronces∣valles, in his way from France to Navarre. The Bishop of Siguença aspired with the King's Favour to be made a Cardinal, and had good Pretensions to it for his Birth and Services, but was so displeased his Promotion was delayed, that he would not attend the King in his late Journeys to Portugal, or Andaluzia. Means were used to pacify him, because he was a Man in great Power, and had Kindred that were very great. The Master of Santiago being now a Widower, married the Daughter of the Earl of Haro, and the Lady Mary de Mendoça. This Match allied him to the Velascos and The Ma∣ster of Santiago streng∣thens himself against his Ene∣mies. Mendoças, and made them of his Party: Particularly the Mendoças forsook the Duke of Medi∣na Sidonia. By this means the Master secured himself against the Malice of his Enemies. The Bishop of Siguença had fresh Assurances given him of obtaining a Cardinal's Cap, as soon as the Cardinal D. Roderick de Borgia, who was daily expected, arrived, as he did then at the City Valencia, his own Country, on the 20th of June. He was there nobly entertained, and went thence by Land to Tarragona to meet King Ferdinand, who having been with his Father before Barcelona, was returning to his Wife. There the Cardinal Legate gave him the Dispen∣sation
for his Marriage, referred by Pope Sixtus to the Archbishop of Toledo. Many Rea∣sons were given for this Journey of King Ferdinand. The true one was, to acquaint his Mother with the Match designed betwixt Henry Duke of Segovia and the Princess Joanna, which he endeavoured to break off. His Father gave little credit to it, besides that he loved his Nephew Henry, as being his Brother's Son. In fine, King Ferdinand hasted back to Va∣lencia, and thence to Castile, fearing some Revolution there. The Cardinal Legate came to the King of Aragon before Barcelona, at such time as the Besieged suffered much, yet continued obstinate. They had been many times summoned, but to no purpose. Therefore the King wrote a Gracious Letter to them, advising not to put him upon a necessity of coming to Ex∣tremities, but rather to make use of his Mercy, and promising to use them as his Children. This Letter softned their Hearts, and there being no hopes of Relief, they appointed Com∣missioners Barcelona surren∣dred to the King of Ara∣gon. to Treat, and surrendred upon Conditions. All the French Garrison, with their Commander, the Son to the Duke of Lorrain, was suffered to depart in safety. All Persons that had been in Arms against the King were pardoned, except only the Earl of Pallas, who from those Places he possest on the Pyrenean Hills, with the Assistance of France gave some trou∣ble, and held out for a long time after. All the Acts, or Decrees made by the Citizens for Ten years last past, and during the War were confirmed by the King. On these Terms the City was Surrendred. Two Matches were agreed upon at Naples, one of Frederick Son to Ferdinand King of Naples, with Joanna Daughter to the King of Aragon, which afterwards took no effect. The other of the Princess Elenor with Hercules de Este Duke of Ferrara, tho' she was before Contracted to Galeaço Maria Sforcia. In Navarre the Princess Elenor Resided at Sanguessa, and after the death of her Husband delivered up the strong Holds of that King∣dom to the King of France, for Security of her Grandchildren, whose Unckle that King was. This Action much offended the King of Aragon, who in Revenge thereof, and of the Suc∣cours sent against him during the War of Catalonia, resolved to Recover Russillon and Cerdagne. With this Resolution, he set out of Barcelona on the 29th of December, preceding the beginning of the year 1473. Elna and Perpignan immediately opened their Gates to receive him, and generally the People were well affected towards him, wherefore it was not doubted the other 1473. Towns would follow their Example. The Cardinal Legate set out towards Castile: At Ma∣drid he was Received with great Pomp under a Canopy; before him went the Lords and Pre∣lates, and he went upon the Kings right Hand, the greatest Honour according to the Custom Reception of a Le∣gate in Castile. of Spain. It was proposed in the Popes Name to Raise a Sum of Money upon the Revenues of the Church, to be Employed in the War against the Turks. Many Objections were made, especially the Poverty of the Clergy, yet the Legate prevailed with the Assistance of the King. The Clergy of Spain were so ignorant that few of them understood Latin, and besides, they were wholly given up to their Ease and Luxury: Their Avarice was such, that they thought all too little for them, and by reason of their Ambition, looked upon Simony as a lawful Pur∣chase. In the Synod called by the Legate it was proposed to Remedy these Evils, and to that effect they made application to the Pope, that in all Cathedrals the Bishop and Chapter should choose Two Canons, whereof one should be a Canonist, the other a Divine. This Request being so reasonable was easily granted by the Pope, and he sent his Bull to that effect. CHAP. X. The Pope's Legates Practices against King Henry of Castile; Massacre of the Jews; Sig∣nal Loyalty of Peter de Peralta; Traiterous Practices of Elizabeth Sister to King Henry of Castile; A Synod at Aranda. ALL the Labour employed by the Legate to Appease the Tumults in Spain, proved in∣effectual, the Inclinations of the People being Debauched, and he naturally favouring Evil Pra∣ctices of the Le∣gate. King Ferdinand, and endeavouring to advance his Interest. To this purpose he went to Al∣calà, where King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth were, and with them the Archbishop of Toledo. Thence he moved to Guadalajara, upon no other design than to gain the Famely of the Mendoças, and alienate them from King Henry, and the Master of Santiago. At the same time in several Cities Mutinies were raised to destroy those that were descended from Jews. This Storm broke out first at Cordoua, where the Rabble without any fear of punishment, com∣mitted great Barbarities against those Miserable People, Robbing and Murdering great numbers of them. Some said this was a Judgment upon them, for that many had fallen from the Christian Religion after embracing of it. Other Towns in Andaluzia followed the Example of Cordoua, but the greatest Violence was at Jaen. Irançu the Constable, endeavouring to pro∣tect those Wretches, the Rage of the Multitude was such, that they Murdered him in the Church as he heard Mass, and the Lady Teresa, his Wife, with her Children, had much dif∣ficulty to escape into the Castle. His Honours were given to others, the Office of Chancellor to the Bishop of Siguença, that of Constable to Peter Fernandez de Velasco, Earl of Haro, in whose Family it has continued to this day, whereas before it went from one Family to ano∣ther. The Death of Irança was a great Loss to the King, for his singular Valour and Loyalty. This Loss D. John Pacheco, Master of Santiago, laboured to make up some other way. To
this effect he sent for Henry, Duke of Segorve, out of Aragon, upon Promise of giving him the Princess Joanna to Wife. With him came his Mother, the Lady Beatrix Pimentel. The Ma∣ster himself went as far as Requena to meet him. Notwithstanding all this, the Match was broke off by the Contrivance of the same Master of Santiago, for that the Person of the Duke Prince of Segorve comes in∣to Castile. did not answer the Expectation conceived of him, and particularly because he was Haughty, and when the Nobility came to pay their Respects, stretched out his Hand to be kissed. Besides, the Master was jealous, that if he came to be King, he would recover the Towns that had been his Father's. These were the true Reasons of disappointing him, tho' it was given out, there was need of a more powerful Prince to quell all the Tumults then in the Kingdom. The King was unwilling to break his Word, and impose upon that Prince, but the Master replied, There would be need of much Money to carry on the War. This was levelled against An∣drew de Cabrera, who had the keeping of the Royal Treasure in the Castle of Segovia. In that City before this time, by the Contrivance of the Master, and after the Example of Andaluzia, a Mutiny had been raised against those that descended from Jews. Andrew de Cabrera quel∣led it, but not without much Trouble and Hazard to his Person. An Ambassador, sent pur∣posely by the Pope, brought the Bishop of Siguença the Cardinal's Cap, and gave it him at Madrid, the King coming thither to Honour him, and granting him the Title of Cardinal of Spain. Henry, Duke of Segorve was not permitted to come into Madrid, but ordered to stop at Xetafe, a League from that Town in the way to Toledo. There he spoke to the King in a Field, and it was agreed he should remove to Odon, another Village hard by. For delaying his Marriage, they pretended it was necessary to expect the Pope's Dispensation. Thus that Prince was imposed upon, who, by reason of this Misfortune, was ever after called D. Henry Fortuna. King Henry went away to Segovia to get Money, because Andrew Cabrera supplied him slenderly to cross the Master of Santiago, who he knew aimed at the Government of that Castle, having before taken from him that of Madrid. Besides, he favoured King Ferdinand, and was married to Beatrix de Bobadilla, who had served the Princess Elizabeth. The new Car∣dinal's Revenue increased upon the Death of D. Alonso de Fonseca Archbishop of Sevil, being promoted to that See, and still retaining Siguença, a Thing then altogether new. An Army of 20000 French Foot and 1000 Men at Arms, under the Command of Philip, Duke of Savoy, sate down before the City Perpignan, in the County of Russellon, on the 9th of April. The King of Aragon threw himself into it, resolving to undergo any Danger, rather than quit that Place, which is very strong, and seated on the Borders of France. To encourage the People, he assembled them in the Church, and took an Oath never to leave them till the Siege was raised. A desperate Action at his Years, and not to be commended in him on whom depended the Welfare of all the Country. Peter de Peralta, Constable of Navarre, gave a signal De∣monstration Signal Loyalty of Peter de Peralta. of his Loyalty, for being well skilled in the French Tongue, in the Habit of a Franciscan Friar, he passed through the Enemies Army, and got into the Town to bear his King company in that Danger. Of the King of Arragon's three Sons, D. Alonso was with his Father, the Archbishop of Zaragoça with a good Body of Men threw himself into Elna, which is near Perpignan, to be ready upon all Occasions. King Ferdinand marched with 400 Horse he gathered in Castile, and 100 he gathered by the way: With this Force in June he sate down before Ampurias, which so surprized the Enemy, that they soon raised their Siege, concluded a Truce till October, and cleared that Country. Thus the War being ended, the King of Aragon made his Entry into Barcelona in Triumph under a Canopy, sitting on a Chariot covered with Cloth of Gold, and drawn by four white Horses. On both sides of him was the Nobility and Magistrates, and vast Multitudes of People covered the Fields and Ways. His Son was gone to Tortosa to hold the Cortes of Aragon, but was hindred by Sick∣ness, and being called back hastily into Castile. About this time a certain Moor of the City of Fez stole away the Bones of Prince Ferdinand Master of Avis, and brought them to Portugal, where they were buried at Aljubarrota with great Solemnity. All other Parts of Spain at this time enjoyed Peace, except Castile, which was under con∣tinual All Spain in Peace, except Ca∣stile. Alarms, the Nobility being always at Variance, and the People, led by their Example, Mutinous. Most Cities and Towns were divided into Factions. King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth's Forces still increased, and many came over to them daily; whereas on the con∣trary, King Henry's Authority was lessened, the People being dissatisfied with him. In Com∣monwealths, as well as in the Body of Man, those Diseases are most dangerous that proceed from the Head. In Biscay the Disorder was great, because the new Constable used Force to reduce that fierce People who had more than others adhered to King Henry. On the other side, the Earl of Trevin̄o, who favoured the Aragonian with all his Strength, opposed him, and the Biscainers were of old better affected towards his Family. Thus that Country of it self, not very plentiful, was wasted and consumed; fresh Tumults broke out at Toledo. The Earl of Fuensalida confiding in the Assistance of the Master of Santiago, attempted to surprize the City Toledo, and turn out the Mareschal Ferdinand de Ribadeneira, who stood firm to King Hen∣ry. The Citizens repulsed him, and the King having notice of that Attempt, came himself and quieted the City. All things being reduced to good order, such as had a hand in that Uproar were pardoned, which made those Disaffected Persons the more bold. After this, D. John Pacheco, Master of Santiago, withdrew to Pen̄afiel, where his Wife was, being desirous at last to live at ease, and fearing he must be odious to many Men, having long continued
great at Court, which he thought his Absence would remedy. In his Place he sent his Son James, to whom, as has been said, he had before resigned the Marquisate of Villena. The King received the Marquess with as great Demonstrations of Affection, as if his Father had done him some signal Services. He had a good Presence, was in the Prime of his Youth, and his Garb suitable to the Greatness of his Fortune. From Toledo the King returned to Segovia, where his Affection to him daily encreased to that degree, that he went daily to visit the Marquess, who was lodged in the Monastery of Friars of S. Hierom, called El Parral. A Proposal was made of reconciling Andrew de Cabrera and the Family of Pacheco, and that he should deliver up to the King the Castle of Segovia, and all the Treasures in it. In lieu of it, they offered him the Town of Moya, near the Borders of Valencia, and not far from Cuenca, where the said Cabrera was born. He was willing to harken to these Proposals, but the Townsmen understanding it, mutinied, and brought in an Aragonian Garrison. John Fernan∣dez de Heredia brought those Forces from Valencia, and took Possession of the Town in the Elizabeth, Sister to the King of Castile, her Trai∣terous Practises. Name of the Princess Elizabeth, which much troubled King Henry. The Lady Elizabeth went from Tordelaguna, in the Kingdom of Toledo, to Aranda de Duero, being invited thither by the People in Hatred to Queen Joanna, whose that Town was, her Lewdness being very Offen∣sive to the whole Kingdom, and most particularly to the King, as who was chiefly concerned. But some Men, tho' Wickedness displease them, have not Resolution enough to punish it, and such was this Prince as long as he lived. The Queen and her Daughter Joanna were at this time kept in the Castle of Madrid by the Marquess de Villena. Agreda followed the Example of Aranda, near to which it is seated and submitted to the Princess Elizabeth, which was not only grievous to the King, but more to the Earl of Medina Celi, to whom he had given that Town. At this time D. Alonso Carrillo, Archbishop of Toledo, who accompanied the Princess to Aranda. assembled in that Town a Synod of the Bishops of his Province. Besides the Bi∣shops, A Synod of Bishops at Aranda. many other Ecclesiastical and Secular Persons of Note repaired thither. It was given out, they were assembled for Reformation of Manners, but it is rather to be suspected the Design was to strengthen the Aragonian Faction, and gain the Affections of those that came thither. On the 5th of December they published Four Decrees and no more, which were these: That Bishops in Publick always wear a Surplice. That every Priest be obliged at least three or four times a Year to say Mass. That Church-men shall not take Service, or receive Wages from any Man whatsoever, except the King. That no manner of Benefice be given to any who does not at least well understand Grammar. Scarce was the Synod broke up, when King Ferdinand came to Alma∣çan and Berlanga, where the Earl of Medina Celi, and Peter de Mendoça Lord of Almaçan, entertained him splendidly. Thence he went on to Aranda, to give Life to his Party by his Presence. This Year died in Castile, D. Frederick the Admiral, and D. Gomez de Caçeres y So∣lis Master of Alcantara, to whom succeeded D. John de Zun̄iga, as has been said before. In France, Nicholas, Son to John Duke of Lorrain, departed this Life. His Grandfather Renee was still alive, whose Grandson by a Daughter, called also Renee, inherited the Dukedom of Lorrain. This Duke was famous for a Victory he obtained over the Flemmings near to Nanci, a City in his Dominions. In this Fight, Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, was defeated and slain. John, Earl of Armagnac, after his flight into Spain, was never looked upon by his King Being therefore disgusted, he made War in Guienne with Forces of the Duke of Burgundy, and there took Peter de Bourbon, Governor of that Province, Prisoner, he being betrayed by his own Men. This Presumption much more offended the King, especially for that he would not release him till his Town of Lectour, which had been taken from him, was restored. The Cardinal Albigensis, with some Forces he gathered, took Lectour and destroyed it, and put the Earl to Death notwithstanding he surrendred upon Conditions. Tho' the Action in it self were not justifiable, being a Breach of Faith; yet most Men said, He had well deser∣ved that Fate for his many horrid Crimes, and particularly for Counterfeiting the Pope's Bull to dispense with him to marry his own Sister, which he did, and lay with her. The End of the 23d Book.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXIV. CHAP. I. The Princess Elizabeth pretends to be Reconciled to her Brother, and openly aspires to the Crown upon his Indisposition; D. John Pacheco, Master of Santiago, dies; Differences betwixt the French and Aragonians; King Ferdinand goes to Barcelona; Jews Massacred in Sicily; Ferdinand and Elizabeth proclaimed King and Queen of Castile; The King of Portugal undertakes the Protection of the Princess Joanna his Niece. THere was no end of the Discontents of the Nobility of Castile. The Aragonian Faction increased daily in strength. The Master of Santiago ceased not to heap up Riches, and only dreaded the Aragonians should prevail, which would endanger his Estate, great part whereof had belonged to the Princes of that House. This made him endeavour to obstruct the Mariage of Prince Ferdinand with the Princess Elizabeth, and that of D. Henry of Aragon with the Princess Joanna. His great Aim was to possess him∣self of the Castle of Segovia, as well as that of Madrid, looking upon them as his greatest se∣curity. Only Andrew de Cabrera, who had great Interest with the King, and was a Man of much forecast, opposed him. This caused Animosities betwixt them, and each strove to un∣dermine the other. The Master was more Powerful, but Cabrera more Fortunate and Poli∣tick. He used all his Endeavours to Reconcile King Henry to his Sister, the Princess Elizabeth, which the absence of the Master of Santiago much forwarded; and finding the King one day Counter∣feit Re∣concilia∣tion of the Princess Elizabeth to the King her Brother. alone, he pressed him hard upon that Point, representing to him the danger of opposing the Inclinations of the People, and how much to the King's advantage it was to have them well affected towards him. The King being naturally irresolute and inconstant, was easily moved. At several other times Cabrera urged the same thing to the King, till he perswaded him to send for his Sister. This done, he sent Beatrix de Babadilla, his Wife, in a Disguise like a Coun∣try Woman, to Aranda, where she advised the Princess to go away with speed to Segovia, as∣suring her of her Brothers Kindness, and that at worst she could be safe in the Castle. Ha∣ving agreed upon it, the Lady Beatrix returned to her Husband, and the Princess soon fol∣lowed, and came into the Castle of Segovia on the 28th of December preceding the beginning of the year 1474. Her coming surprized the Town and Court, and the Marquiss of Villena 1474. suspecting some Design against him, withdrew to Ayllon, a Town not far from thence. King Henry received the News in the Forest of Balsain, where he was Hunting. He immediately returned to Segovia, and visited his Sister. Both testified much Joy at their Meeting, and spent a long time in private. At parting the Princess recommended her Affairs to the King, who answered, he would consider of it. Next night they supped together in the Castle, and the 3d day the Princess appeared a Horseback in the Streets, the King himself holding her Bridle. This was a Joyful day to Spain, none doubting but it would put an end to so many Troubles. To add to the Publick Satisfaction, King Ferdinand, by the Advice of his Wife, came to Segovia. On the day of the Epiphany the Two Kings and Queen appeared together in publick, and afterwards Dined together in the Bishops House, where Andrew de Cabrera Treated them Magnificently. James Enriquez del Castillo writes, that D. Roderick de Villan∣dro, Earl of Ribadeo, Dined with them, by virtue of a Priviledge granted to his Father (as was said in its place) of Dining with the King upon New-Years-Day. After the Dinner there was a Ball, and then a Collation. But all this Joy was allayed by the King's Indisposition, who being taken with a violent Pain in his Side, was carried away to his Palace. It was sus∣pected by the People he was Poisoned, and their Opinion gained Credit, because he never af∣ter King Hen∣ry of Ca∣stile sup∣posed to be Poison∣ed. had his Health, and died within a year. But these were only Surmises, publick Prayers were made for his Health, and he was somewhat eased. As soon as the King recovered, Articles were proposed between him, and his Sister. The Princess demanded to be Sworn Heiress of the Crown, and promised if that were done, to be always Obedient to him, as also to deliver up her Daughter as a Hostage, to be kept by Andrew Elizabeth the King's Sister o∣penly a∣spires to the Crown. de Cabrera. On the other side, the Earl of Benavente required the Princess Joanna should be Married to D. Henry of Aragon, and threatned if it were not Granted, to break off any Agree∣ment designed betwixt the King and his Sister. All the other Nobles and Courtiers were di∣vided, as their Interest led them. The Family of Mendoça, both Numerous and Powerful, be∣gan to incline to the Princess Elizabeth. For that very Reason, the Archbishop of Toledo was for siding with the Princess Joanna. King Henry was irresolute. D. John Pacheco the Master of Santiago, advised him by Night to secure the City, and apprehend his Sister and her Husband,
promising to Assist him in it. This design was discovered, and King Ferdinand immediately withdrew to Turuegano. The Princess Elizabeth resolved to keep Possession of the Castle of Segovia, where all the Royal Treasure lay. After their parting the two Kings, Henry and Ferdi∣nand met again accidentally. The Earl of Benavente had some time before the Town of Car∣rion given him by King Henry, which he Fortified. The Marquess de Santillana was offended at it, and perswaded the Earl of Trevin̄o to Surprize it. He did so, and the Marquess March∣ed from Guadalajara with Forces to Support him. The Earl of Benavente moved from Segovia, to take Revenge of them both, and many of the Nobility flocked with Forces to favour the Party they inclined to. King Ferdinand Marched with some Troops to Assist the Marquess de Santilla∣na, and King Henry planted himself between the two Armies, to perswade them to an Accom∣modation, which he effected. The Earl of Benavente wholly referred himself to the King, and consented to Raze the Castle of Carrion, and resign the Town to the Crown, the Archbishop of Toledo giving him the Town of Magan in lieu of it. After this, the Marquess saw the Princess Elizabeth at Segovia, whence he returned to Guadalajara, with a resolution to change Parties. King Henry having been at Valladolid and Segovia, went to Madrid at the perswasion of D. John Pacheco. He perswaded the King to go to the Borders of Portugal, to make a Match for the Princess Joanna, with the King of Portugal; but his main design was to take Possession of Truxillo; which was given him by the King. Gracian de Sesse Governor of the Castle, refused to deliver it up, till what he had laid out upon it was Refunded, and his Accounts passed. King Henry finding his indisposition increase upon him, returned to Madrid. The Master of Santiago being also taken ill, was carried on Mens Shoulders to Truxillo. He designed to per∣swade The Ma∣ster of Santiage dies. the Governor to Surrender the Castle, but died suddenly, of a swelling in his Cheek, whence so much Blood gushed, that it Choaked him. It is said the last Words he spoke, were only to ask whether the Castle were Surrendred. His death was kept private, till the Castle was delivered up. In lieu of it the Governor had the Town of S. Felix in Galicia, given to him and his Heirs; an unfortunate Gift to him, for in a Mutiny the People of that Town stoned him to death. The Aragonians and French were at variance about Rusillon, and Cerdagne, the former en∣deavouring to Recover those Counties, and the latter pleading their Rights to them by way of French and Aragoni∣ans at va∣riance. Mortgage. Thus both Parties prepared to renew the War, after the expiration of the Truce. Nevertheless, John Folch Earl of Cardona, and Hugo de Rocaberti Castellan of Amposta, were sent Ambassadors to France, with a splendid Retinue, to endeavour the composing this Affair ami∣cably. They pretended the Money was not lent in time, and that contrary to the Agreement John Duke of Lorrain had been supported out of France. As the Ambassadors returned without concluding any thing, they were detained at Lyons, contrary to all Law and Equity. Those Lords being detained in France, the Aragonians durst not attempt any thing. Yet the beginning of the Summer, 500 French Horse Commanded by John Alonso, Lord of Aluda, entred Rusillon, and joyning with the French Garrisons, sat down before Elna, the lower part thereof as being weak, the Citizens abandoned. The King of Aragon then held the Cortes of Catalonia at Barcelona, and prepared for War, tho' Aged, and sick of a Quartan Ague. He had no great Force, and therefore sought to get Supplies from abroad. King Ferdinand of Naples, sent him 500 Horse by Sea. Ferdinand his Son in June possessed himself of Tordesillas, a good Town in Old Castile, being invited thither by the Townsmen to oppose Peter Menda∣via Governor of Castro Nun̄o, who with a Company of Robbers did great harm thereabouts. From Segovia whither he returned, he resolved to go Visit his Father, who was sick. By the way at Alcalà, he Visited the Archbishop of Toledo, thinking by that Civility to gain him to his Party. At Guadalajara he also Visited the Marquess de Santillana, and so went on to Bar∣celona, where his Father lay. In the Kingdom of Valencia, the Towns of Segorve and Exerica Mutinied at the same time, and took up Arms. The People of Exerica, to free themselves from the Tyranny of Francis Sarsuela, who they pretended oppressed them. Those of Se∣gorve, to follow D. Henry de Aragon contrary to the King's Will and Pleasure. These Con∣fusions lasted long, but nothing remarkable hapned in them, only, that at length Segorve was confiscate, and Exerica restored to its Owner. King Ferdinand was at Barcelona consulting with his Father about the War in Russillon, when News was brought him from Castile, that that D. John Pacheco, Master of Santiago, departed this Life on the 4th of October, upon whose Death the Nobles were worse divided than before. Many aimed at that Mastership. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Marquess of Santillana, and the Earls of Albuquerque and Be∣navente, confided in their Riches, and hoped that way to carry it. D. Alonso de Cardenas, chief Commendary of Leon, was chosen in that City; and D. Roderick Manrique, Earl of Paredes, at Veles. The Marquess de Villena pleaded, the Pope during his Father's Life-time, had given him that Dignity; but because he produced no Bull, it was supposed he only did it to delay time, till he could make an Interest with his Holiness. As he went towards Villa∣rejo de Salvanes, to meet the Earl of Ossorno, he was apprehended, and sent Prisoner to Fuen∣tiduen̄a. King Henry Resenting this Affront, and believing the Earl of Ossorno would not obey his Orders, sate down with some Forces before Fuentiduena, tho he was then much indisposed. Many Lords, as well Spiritual as Temporal, repaired thither to serve him. Delays were dan∣gerous, the King's Sickness increasing, and the Weather being bad, therefore they resolved to oppose one Fraud against another. Lope Vasquez de Acun̄a, Brother to the Archbishop of
Toledo, pretending to Treat with the Earl of Osorno's Wife, secured her, and a Son of hers, and carried them away to Huete. This obliged her Husband to release the Marquess. Thus the Designs of the Earl of Osorno were disappointed. King Ferdinand being informed what had hapned, left the Care of the War in Ampurias to his Father, and returned to Zaragoça. There he thought, if the Affairs of Castile would permit, to assemble the Cortes of Aragon in order to raise Money, whereof he stood in great want. The more because the French Forces daily increased, and they had besieged Elna with 900 Horse and 10000 Foot. That place being reduced to great extremity, surrendred on the 5th of December, upon Condition the Garrison should march away in safety. It was much feared lest Perpignan should be lost, the Castle being already in the Hands of the French, as were all the Garrisons about it. This year was particularly Remarkable for the Ha∣vock made among the Jews in all parts of Sicily. The Rabble without respect to D. Lope de Urrea, their Viceroy, who punished some of them, killed many of those Wretches, and plun∣dered their Houses. The Peace with the Moores of Granada was duely observed on both sides. In Navarre there were Tumults between the Biamonteses, who took part with the Princess El∣lenor, and the Agramonteses, who favoured the King of Aragon. CHAP. II. The Death of Henry King of Castile; Ferdinand and Elizabeth usurp the Crown of Castile from Joanna the Rightful Heiress, and are proclaimed King and Queen; The King of Portugal undertakes the Protection of the Rightful Heiress, his Neece. KIng Henry's Indisposition, which had held him long, daily encreased, and, being height∣ned with Troubles and the Toil of his late Expedition, became mortal. The Physicians Henry K. of Castile dies. ordered him to be carried to Madrid, hoping the Air might contribute to his Recovery; but neither that nor any Medicines proved effectual. On the 11th of December, having prepared himself as became a good Christian, he gave up the Ghost, at the end of the 45th Year of his Age, and having Reigned 20 Years, 4 Months, and 22 Days. His Will was not made in form, but written in haste by John de Oviedo his Secretary, in whom he reposed great Confi∣dence. He appointed the Cardinal of Spain and Marquess de Villena his Executors. Being asked by F. Peter de Maçuelos, Prior of S. Hierom in Madrid, who Confessed him at that time, Whom he appointed to Succeed him? He said, the Princess Joanna, whom he recommended to his Two Executors, as also to the Duke of Arevalo, the Marquiss of Santillana, the Earl of Benavente, and the Constable, in whom he most confided. His Body was deposited, with∣out much Ceremony, in the Monastery of S. Hierom at Madrid, and thence, as he had or∣dained, translated to the Church of Guadalupe. This Prince was for nothing so remarkable as for his loose Life. He left no Issue Male, and was himself the last of the Male Line of King Henry the Bastard. King Henry's death caused a mighty alteration in Castile: The greatest number took part with Castile di∣vided be∣twixt the Rightful Princess Joanna, and Eliza∣beth the Usurper. the Princess Elizabeth; yet many adhered to the Princess Joanna; particularly the Marquess de Villena and the Duke of Arevalo, with all their Kindred and Followers, supported that Lady. They expected she should have the Title of Queen, and they all the Power, chu∣sing a Husband for her where they thought fit. All the Country, from Toledo to Murcia, sided with these Two Noblemen, as did all the Men of Note in Galicia, with such Resolution, that they took Arms against D. Alonso de Azevedo y Fonseca, Archbishop of Santiago, because he declared for the other side. At Segovia, such as were there present, publickly took the Oath of Allegiance to Queen Elizabeth, upon a Scaffold raised for that purpose. Then King Ferdi∣nand and Queen Elizabeth were proclaimed by a Herauld, amidst the loud Acclamations of the People. All kissed her Hand, and conducted her a Horseback to Church. Few Lords were then in Segovia, and none of them Grandees. The first that came to express their Loyalty were the Cardinal of Spain, and Earl of Benavente; soon after, the Archbishop of Toledo, the Marquiss de Santillana, the Dukes of Alva and Albuquerque, the Constable and the Admiral. Others did their Homage, and took the Oath of Allegiance by Proxy. No Oath was taken to King Ferdinand, till he came and swore to preserve the Privileges of the King∣dom. He was then holding the Cortes of Aragon and Zaragoça, and endeavouring to raise Money; but as soon as he heard of the death of King Henry, he set out for Castile. He left his Sister Joanna, Contracted to Ferdinand King of Naples, then a Widower, to preside in the Cortes. It was usual with the Nobility of Castile to sell their Loyalty as dear as they could. The King being at Almazan, the Earl of Medina Celi sent to acquaint him, That the Kingdom of Navarre appertained to the Lady Anne his Wife, as Lawful Daughter to Charles Prince of Viana: He said if King Ferdinand would not assist him in recovering his Right, he should not want Aid elsewhere, meaning from France. Having sent away the Messenger without any Answer, the King went on to Turuegano, where he stayed till the City Segovia was provided for his Reception. He made his Entry into that City on the 2d of January, 1475. 1475. and was received with great Pomp. All the Three Estates did Homage to him, and Ferdinand received in Castile. kissed his Hand. Some Debate arose about the manner of Government: The Queen's Ser∣vants
contended King Ferdinand ought not to intermeddle in the Government, nor so much as call himself King of Castile; to which purpose they brought Examples of Queens of Naples. On the other side the Aragonians pleaded, That King Henry having left no Heirs Male, the Crown was devolved upon King John of Aragon, as Head of the Family. But this was easily answered by Examples of many Women that had inherited the Crown of Castile. At length the King and Queen agreed the Matter between themselves upon these Conditions; That in all Charters, Patents, and upon the Coin, King Ferdinand should be named before Queen Elizabeth; That the Arms of Castile should be on the right of those of Aragon; That all Gar∣risons should be held in the Queen's Name, and all Officers of the Revenue take their Oath to her; That Grants of Benefices should be in the Name of both, but only in the Disposal of the Queen; That when they were together, both should have equal Authority in the Admi∣nistration of Justice; and when in different places, each in that part; That the Affairs of other Provinces should be determined by him or her who was nearest to the Council, which should be observed in the Choice of Civil Governours. King Ferdinand was concerned, that his Subjects should prescribe Laws to him, but thought fit to wink at it for the present. And the Queen is said to have mollified him, promising, that the whole disposal of all things should be in him. This done, King Ferdinand applied himself to the Care of Settling the Kingdom, which was much distracted by the late Broils. The Marquess de Villena at the same time held Correspondence with King Ferdinand, and Marquess de Villena his double Dealing. King Alonso of Portugal. He was no less Politick than his Father, and it was not doubted, but he would incline to that side where he expected the greatest advantage. Of King Ferdinand he demanded, that his Two Competitors to the Mastership should be declared illegally chosen, and he secured in that Dignity. This Request seemed to the King somewhat harsh, not think∣ing it safe to add so great a Revenue to one so Powerful, and in whom he could repose but little Confidence: however he gave him a favourable Answer for the present, which was to promise, he would favour him in obtaining his Desires, provided he would deliver up the Princess Joanna to a Third Person. He replied he would not do it, nor should ever be pre∣vailed upon to break his Word to King Henry, having ingaged to him to take care of his Daughter. At the same time he sent Persons in whom he confided, to perswade the King of Portugal to take upon him the Protection of his Neece; since it appertained to him as the next of Kin, and as such he ought to take upon him the Government of Castile. He blamed his fearfulness, and conjured him since he was so powerful a King, not to forsake that Innocent Lady, assuring he would find many in Castile that would appear for him as soon as they had a Head to whom they might have recourse. The King of Portugal was at Estremoz, on the borders of his Kingdom, when King Henry died. He immediately called a Council, and laid before them what was proposed by the Marquess de Villena. Opinions, as is usual in such cases, varied. Most were for declaring War, and invading Castile without delay, pleading they had great store of Treasure heaped up having long enjoyed Peace, great numbers of Horse and Foot, and a powerful Fleet at Sea. John Prince of Portugal was the chief Promoter of this unfortunate War. Only Ferdinand, Duke of Bragança, whom Age made more Cautious and Circumspect, was against ingaging in that Affair, which some attributed to Fear, and others to Affection to Queen Elizabeth, who was his Brothers Grandaughter. He urged, the Mar∣quess de Villena and his Party were the same who not long since proclaimed Prince Alonso King, and declared the Princess Joanna a Bastard; That they offered no strong Holds for se∣curity of performing what they promised; and, That it was hard to perswade a Prejudiced People, that the Princess Joanna was Legitimate. These Precautions were approved of by the Wiser sort, yet the plurality of Voices prevailed, the common Misfortune of Councils, where Number takes place of Weight. However before they positively declared, Lope de Al∣buquerque was sent into Castile, to Examine into the Posture of Affairs, and at his return Nobles of Castile join with Portugal in favour of the Rightful Heiress. brought an Ingagement signed by many Noblemen, wherein they promised, That if the King of Portugal would Marry the Princess Joanna, they would when it was time appear for him. It fell out very opportunely to advance this Design, that the Archbishop of Toledo being dis∣gusted, withdrew from Segovia the 20th of February, pretending to retire for his Ease, having lived long at Court. This was the pretence, but in reality he was displeased. He complained, he was kept in Hand with Specious Promises, without receiving any Reward for his great Ser∣vices; or in Recompence of spending his Paternal Estate, to bestow the Crown upon those ungrateful Princes. Above all it grieved him to see the Cardinal so much in favour, that no∣thing was done without him. Means were used to appease him, but all in vain. He threat∣ned to make it appear how dangerous a thing it was to provoke the Archbishop of Toledo. Neither were the Prayers, mixed with Threats, of his Brother the Earl of Buendia, of any force. For he being Proud, and lavish of his Tongue, grew worse when good Advice was given him. Besides, one Ferdinand de Alarcon, who being of the same Temper, was his great Favourite, still was buzzing in his Ears, and inflamed his Passion.
CHAP. III. The King of Portugal calls himself King of Castile, and is assisted by many of the Nobi∣lity, being Contracted to Joanna the Rightful Heiress; He takes several Places in Castile; The French make Peace with England, and ingage to assist Portugal against Ferdinand. THE Disgust of the Archbishop of Toledo did not a little perplex the King and Queen, Ferdinand labours to gain the Nobility of Castile. fearing he might cause great Revolutions, being Rich and Powerful. This made them careful to gain what Friends they could, and to appease the Nobility. The first reduced was Henry of Aragon, which was done by restoring to him his Patrimony of Segorve and Ampu∣rias, and pardoning all past Faults, which highly obliged the Earl of Benavente his Cousin. It was now the easier to content him, because he had lost all hopes of Marrying the Princess Joanna, she being gone from Escalona to Truxillo, in order to be Married to the King of Por∣tugal. The Town of Perpignan being pressed with a long Siege, surrendred on the 14th of March, upon Condition the Aragonian Ambassadors detained in France, should be released, and the Townsmen have Liberty either to stay there, or depart whither they pleased. A Truce for 6 months was concluded between France and Aragon. King Ferdinand sent an Embassy into France to propose a Peace, and Treat about Restoring Russillon. The King of France received the Ambassadors Honourably, and sent one to Castile to propose a Match betwixt the Dauphin and the Princess of Castile, which if concluded, he promised Supplies of Men and Money to Reduce the Nobility of that Kingdom, and to stand to the Judgment of Arbitrators as to the Affair of Russillon. King Ferdinand was not averse from this Proposal, but the King of Aragon Resented it, and Complained that such Important Affairs should be Managed with∣out his privity. Above all, he feared lest the Archbishop of Toledo should endeavour to set up another King in Castile. The King of Portugal was ready on the Frontiers with an Army of 5000 Horse and 14000 Foot. Thus all hopes of Accommodation being taken away, the King and Queen prepared for War. Andrew de Cabrera to make himself the more acceptable, de∣livered up the Royal Treasures, for which he was created Marquess of Moya, Earl of Chin∣chon, and Hereditary Governor of the Castle of Segovia. Medina del Campo, a great Town of Trade, was secured to the Kings Interest, the Castle being delivered up to him by the Duke of Alva. The Rendezvous was at Valladolid, whither the King and Queen went, and soon ga∣thered an indifferent Army. King Ferdinand stayed in Old Castile, where the People were well affected towards him, and Queen Elizabeth passed the Mountains to endeavour to appease the Archbishop of Toledo; but he to avoid seeing her, went away from Alcalà to Brihuega, a strong little Town, pretending there was a design to kill him. Peter Fernandez de Velasco, the Constable, sent by the Queen upon the same Errand, could not prevail with him. However the Queen's Labour was not lost, for she secured Toledo, putting a Garison into that City, and expelling the Earl of Cifuentes and John de Ribera, who favoured the Archbishop. She went not to Madrid because the Marquess de Villena held the Castle. This done, she returned to Segovia to Coin all the Silver and Gold that was there. King Ferdinand secured Salamanca, but the Houses of such as were of the other Party were plundered. Zamora opened the Gates to him, but Alonso de Valencia, the Governour, would not deliver up the Castle, of which he was Governour. He thought not fit to attempt reducing it by force, nor to go to Toro, fearing John de Ʋlloa, a Powerful Citizen, who was inclinable to favour the Portugueses, having deserved Death for several Crimes. The King and Queen being come to Valladolid, the City of Alcaraz submitted to them, and the Citizens laid siege to the Castle. The Earl of Pa∣redes, the Lord of Coca, and the Bishop of Avila, assisted the Townsmen, and the Marquess de Villena came to raise the Siege, but finding himself too weak, desisted. This loss moved him by Letter to hasten the King of Portugal; That King was on the Frontiers near Badajoz in May, upon the 18th day of which month he had a Grandson born at Lisbon, which was looked upon as a good Omen; he was called Alonso, was Sworn Heir to the Crown, but lived not long. The Earl of Feria, who stood firm to King Ferdinand, was in Badajoz, and had lately taken a Town called Xerez. The Portugueses ought to have taken the Right Hand way, and broke into Andaluzia, where Carmona, Ezija and Cordoua were for them, so that having se∣cured Sevil they had left no Enemy behind them. Yet they turned to the Left, and marched through Estremadura to Plasencia. In this City the King of Portugal was Contracted to the Princess Joanna, and tho they Consummated not the Marriage, expecting a Dispensation be∣cause of the near Kindred that was betwixt them, yet they were Crowned and Proclaimed Alonso K. of Portu∣gal pro∣claimed King of Castile, being Contract∣ed to the Rightful Heiress. King and Queen of Castile. Here the King created Lope de Albuquerque Earl of Penamacor, to Reward his Labour in gaining the Nobility of Castile. A Manifesto was also published, and sent to all parts, declaring the Right of the Princess Joanna, and reflecting on King Fer∣dinand and Queen Elizabeth. The War broke out in several parts at the same time. Villena, with its Dependencies, was infested with Forces out of the Kingdom of Valencia. Hereupon the Inhabitants of that City, at the perswasion of the Earl of Paredes, took up Arms, and declared for King Ferdinand, having first Capitulated, That they should for ever be incorporated in the Crown of Castile.
Cuidad Reall was recovered from the Master of Calatrava, who had possessed himself thereof without any other Right than that of Arms. Great havock was made by both Parties in An∣daluzia and Galicia. Peter Alvarado saved the City Tuy for the King of Portugal. The Ci∣tizens of Burgos besieged the Castle of that City, which Inigo de Zun̄iga, the Governor, and D. Luis de Acun̄a, the Bishop, held for the Portugueses. That King being called upon on every side, knew not whither to go first. The Nobility failed in their Supplies of Men, Money, and Provisions. The People hated the Portugueses, and they themselves began to grow weary of the War, perceiving King Ferdinand, who at the time they broke into Castile, had scarce 500 Horse, now headed an Army of 10000 Horse and 30000 Foot. The King of Portugal marched first to Arevalo, a Town that was for him, and thence went to take possession of Toro and Samora. King Ferdinand marched after him, and encamped near Toro, where the Enemy was, designing to Relieve that Castle, which still held out for him. No Action hap∣ned betwixt them. King Ferdinand sent a Challenge by a Herald. The Portugues answered his Forces were dispersed, yet offered to accept of single Combat. Therefore King Ferdi∣nand not being able to relieve the Castle, which was at last surrendered, Provision and Mo∣ney growing scarce, returned to Medina del Campo. The Cortes assembled in that City, gran∣ted him, towards carrying on the War, half the Silver and Gold of the Churches, provided he engaged to restore it as soon as the Kingdom was free from War. Then he sent out to besiege the Castle of Burgos. Many said King Ferdinand retired from Toro through Fear, and that it denoted an ill posture of Affairs. Certain it is, it moved the Archbishop of Toledo, without regarding the Prayers of all his Relations and Friends, to go away and join the King of Portugal with 500 Horse. He and the Duke of Arevalo advised that King to march in Person with 1500 Horse, and a good Body of Foot, to relieve the Castle of Burgos; which he did, and by the way took the Castle of Baltanas, seated on the Mountains between Pi∣suerga and Duero, sending the Earl of Benavente, whom he found there, Prisoner to Pen̄afiel. The Portugues, satisfied with this Action, for that he had made a rich Booty, and believing himself too weak to encounter King Ferdinand, turned back, without attempting the Relief of Burgos. The Princess Joanna was at Zamora, and Queen Elizabeth at Valladolid, whence she moved with what Force she could gather to assist her Husband at Burgos, if need were. In July the Ambassadors of Castile and Aragon made their Submission to the Pope, and were fa∣vourably received and entertained by him, which offended the Portugues Ambassadors, who said the Pope ought not to receive them, till the Right both Parties pretended was cleared: Therefore the Pope said he received those Ambassadors from Castile, saving still to any others their Titles and Claims. This Year was very remarkable throughout all Christendom, for the great Jubilee granted by Pope Sixtus, to be continued afterwards every 25th Year, whereas be∣fore it was every 50th. Many resorted to Rome to gain this Indulgence, and among them King Ferdinand of Naples, now by reason of his Age grown more Devout and Religious than he was before. At the end of this Year, the King of Aragon held the Cortes of that Kingdom at Za∣ragoça, being in care about carrying on the War against Portugal and France: And the more, for that one Roderick Trahiguere not regarding the Truce then in being, had with French French and Portuguese Forces a∣gainst Ca∣stile. Forces entred Catalonia, taken the Town of St. Laurence, and struck such a Terror into all the Country, that all such as were of Age were by Edict commanded to appear in Arms, a thing never done but in time of extream Danger. In Castile, the Portugues Forces prevailed, and were encouraged by the Hopes of Succours out of France; which were reckoned the more secure, because a Peace was concluded betwixt the English and French, in which the Dukes of Britany and Burgundy were included. The Kingdom of Aragon was not able to withstand two such powerful Enemies; therefore in November the King concluded a Peace for Seven Months with the French on the side of Aragon. To weaken the Portugues, he wrote to the Archbishop of Toledo in very courteous Terms, desiring an Interview: But the Archbishop was a Man too positive to be brought to condescend. His Passion was so great, he was often heard to say, I made the Lady Elizabeth a Queen, and I will bring her down to the Spinning-wheell. King Ferdi∣nand valued not his Threats, believing if he were reconciled, the Cardinal might be disgusted. The Marquis de Villena, and Master of Calatrava, at this time went out of Old Castile to Al∣magro, designing for Baeça, the Castle of which City was besieged by their Adversaries. Hereupon Ocan̄a, a Town belonging to the Marquess, mutinied. The Earl of Cifuentes and John de Ribera, with the Forces they carried out of Toledo, turned out the Marquess's Gar∣rison, and left the Place to the Earl of Paredes, who called himself Master of Santiago. King Ferdinand hasted from Burgos to Zamora, and secured that City, with the Assistance of the Governour Francis de Valdes. The Castle was besieged, with a Resolution not to desist till it were taken. A Meeting was proposed betwixt the King of Aragon and his Son, as also the Princess Eleanor of Navarre, to find some Method of settling the Disorders in Navarre, as also to prevent any Succours coming to the Portugueses out of France through that Country. King Ferdinand was busie at Zamora, when the Castle of Burgos, there being no hopes of Relief, surrendered to Queen Elizabeth, at the beginning of the Year 1476. James de Ribera was ap∣pointed Governour of it, the Queen having an Affection for him, because he was Tutor 1476, to Prince Alonso. On the 17th of January died at Madrid Queen Joanna, Wife to the last King Henry, and Mother to the present unfortunate Queen Joanna. Her Body was buried in
the Church of St. Francis, in a Tomb of White Marble, near the High Altar. For that end were removed the Bones of Roderick Gonçalez de Clavijo, who went Ambassador to Tamerlan, and after his return, buik the great Chapel of that Church for himself to be buried in. Thus even after death the weakest are wronged. Many Reports were spread abroad about the Occasion of this Queen's Death, most Historians say she was Poisoned by her Brother the King of Portugal. CHAP. IV. Prince John of Portugal comes into Castile with Forces to his Father's Assistance; The Battle of Toro betwixt King Ferdinand and him of Portugal; The latter defeated; The Castilian Nobility forsake him, and he returns home. JOhn Prince of Portugal was left at home to govern the Kingdom: He being a forward John Pr. of Portugal comes to his Fa∣thers as∣sistance into Ca∣stile. Youth, and understanding his Father advanced little in Castile, raised 2000 Horse and 8000 Foot, but ill Armed, and Undisciplined. With this Recruit he set out to join his Father. Having passed the Bridge of Ledesma, he attacked the Town of S. Felices, but was repulsed. On the 9th of February he came to Toro, where he found his Father had 3500 Horse, and 20000 Foot, in Winter Quarters. King Ferdinand lay before the Castle of Zamora, with only 2500 Horse, and double that number of Foot; Thence he sent Orders to all his Forces to join him, being assured the Portugueses would oblige him to raise the Siege, or come to a Battle. The King of Aragon advised him not to hazard a Battle, as of dangerous Conse∣quence if lost, and costly tho gained. With King Ferdinand were the Cardinal of Spain, the Duke of Alva, the Admiral, and his Uncle the Earl of Alva Liste, the Marquess of Astor∣ga, and the Earl of Lemos. At Alahejos lay with a Body of Men, D. Henry of Aragon the King's Cousin, D. Alonso his Brother, and the Earl of Trevin̄o, ready to march to Zamora, which is not far distant, Queen Elizabeth from Burgos returned to Tordesillas, to be the nearer upon Occasion. The King of Portugal reinsorced by his Son, resolved to relieve the Castle, or at least to make a shew of so doing, and accordingly marched out of Toro as if he intend∣ed to move streight towards the Enemy. Yet on a sudden, as if he had changed his Reso∣lution, passed the Bridge, and marched on the other side of the River, encamping over∣against Zamora, near the Monastery of St. Francis. He planted his Cannon at the Foot of the Bridge which led from the City to his Camp, so that he could not obstruct the Battering of the Castle, nor was there any access to give him Battle. Thirteen days were there spent in fruitless Disputes. On the first of March, at break of day, he marched back, breaking the Bridge that the Enemy might not pursue. King Ferdinand having spent some time in repair∣ing the Bridge, resolved to follow, and sent before D. Alvaro de Mendoça, with 300 light Horse, to engage the Enemies Rear. Thus the King of Portugal marching but slowly by reason of his Baggage, King Ferdinand had time to overtake him, after passing a Defile, and entring a large Plain about a League and a half from Toro. This was about Sun-setting, nevertheless the Enemy could not avoid fighting; King Ferdinand being so near, and there being no way to escape but over the Bridge. Hereupon the Army halted, and the King drew it up in order of Fight be∣twixt the Portugues and Casti∣lian Ar∣mies. Battle. King Ferdinand was dubious, but the Nobility and Officers being all for fighting, the signal was given, D. Alvaro de Mendoça, with his 300 Horse, gave the first on-set. John Prince of Portugal, who led the Van, in which were 800 Men at Arms, mixed with Musqueteers, received them so hotly, they were put to flight. Both Kings were in the Body of their Armies, which charged furiously, and the Battle stood a long time dubious, both Par∣ties being disordered, and fighting confusedly. A hot Dispute was about the King of Portugal's Standard. Peter Vaca de Sotomayor took it from the Bearer called Duarte de Almeida, but o∣thers coming on both sides it was torn to pieces. Almeida was taken, or as others will have it, killed. His Arms instead of the Standard hang at this day in the Cathedral of Toledo. In fine, Defeat of the Portu∣gueses. the Portugueses fled, and the King with a few made his way to the Mountains, without ever stopping till he came to Castronun̄o. Night stopped the pursuit, but Henry Earl of Alva Liste, who had gone as far as the Bridge of Toro, was taken by a Party of the Enemy, under the Command of John Prince of Portugal, who made good his Ground upon a Hill King Fer∣dinand thought not sit to attack them, because his Men were dispersed plundering. Both Par∣ties stood looking upon one another several hours, but the Portugueses stayed last, which Acti∣on their Historians magnifie, and affirm the Prince had the Victory. King Ferdinand re∣turned to Zamora, and the Portugueses to Toro. In this Fight the Archbishop of Toledo never stirted from the Prince of Portugal's side. Few were killed, and fewer taken, but the Booty was considerable, most of the Portugues Baggage being lost. From Zamora King Ferdinand removed to Medina del Campo, where at the Suit of the Constable, whose Daughter was Con∣tracted to the Earl of Uren̄a, he Pardoned him and his Brother the Master of Calatrava, notwithstanding they and many others only waited to see which Party would prevail. This caused great Disorders throughout the whole Kingdom. Particularly at Fuenteovejuna, Great Disorders through∣out Ca∣sile. one night in April, the People took Arms to kill Fernan Perez de Guzman, chief Commen∣dary of Calatrava, which he had well deserved for the Insolencies committed in that Town
Such was the resolution of those People, that thô many young Men and Women were put up∣on the Rack to discover the Authors of that Design, nothing more could ever be got from them, but that Fuenteovejuna did it. All manner of Crimes were committed, the Law being of no Force, which moved the Towns, as we said had been done before, to associate themselves and raise Forces to punish Criminals. Alonso de Quintanilla the King's Treasurer, promoted this Design. Laws were established for the Associators to be governed by, which continued in force 20 Years, till all the troubles being ended, the Kingdom was restored to Peace. The Stress of the War was now removed to the utmost part of Biscay, called Guipuscoa, where stands the impregnable Fortress of Fuenterabia, encompassed with the Sea, and strongly fortified to Curb the French, who often commit waste in that Country. This Place the French Besiged by way of a diversion to the Forces that then lay before the Castle of Zamora. They battered down a great part of the Walls and filled the Ditch, which laid the Place open, the Garrison being weak and harrassed with continual labour. James Sarmiento Earl of Salinas who had the charge of the Castle encouraging his Men, made a desperate Sally and ruined all the Enemies Works. This good success and the accession of some Recruitsthat came to them, gave them courage to Fight the Enemy in open Field, where they parted upon equal Terms, but still the Siege was not raised. Thus much of Biscay. Peter Arias, and Peter de Toledo raised the Peo∣ple of Madrid, and having received some supplies from the Queen and Marquess de Santilla, besiged the Castle of that Town, which was held by a Garrison of the Marquess de Villena. At the same time Truxillo in Estremadura, and Baeça in Andaluzia were besieged by the Forces of King Ferdinand. Chinchilla and Almansa, Towns in the Marquisate of Villena, called Forces out of Valencia to their Aid, and revolted from the Marquess, but he soon reduced them. In all other things the Aragonians were succesful, and the Portugueses unfortunate. The Castle of Zamora surrendred to King Ferdinand on the 19th of March. This loss so discouraged the Portugueses, that their Prince carried away the Princess Joanna, on whose account the War was made, to Portugal under a Guard of 400 Horse. With a like number the Archbishop returned to his Province upon pretence of reducing some Persons who favoured King Ferdi∣nand, but in reality to retire, being weary of the War, and despairing of Success. King Fer∣dinand laid Siege to the strong Castle of Calatapieda, but soon desisted, and concluded a Truce for half a Year, upon condition the Towns of Villalva, Mayorga, and Portillo should be re∣stored to the Earl of Benavente, they having been lately delivered up by him to purchase his liberty. D. Roderick Manrique Earl of Paredes called himself Master of Santiago, was possessed of Vcles, the chief Town of that Order, and laid Siege to the Castle which held for the Mar∣quess of Villena. He and the Archbishop of Toledo came to relieve the besieged, but were re∣pulsed by D. Roderick and his Son D. George Manrique, a brave Youth, tho short lived, of whose parts we shall speak in another place. Neither was the Sea free from this War. An∣drew Suncer with some Gallies of Aragon did harm along the Coast of Portugal. So many losses perplexed the King of Portugal, and moved many of the Nobility of Castile who sided with him to think of making their Peace at home. Among these, the first was the Duke of Arevalo who gave the Town of Pinto to Roderick de Mendoza for assisting him in his reconci∣liation. He submitted and did Homage to Queen Elizabeth, whereby instead of punishment he obtained singular favours. In particular D. John de Zuniga his Son was made Master of the Order of Alcantara, which before was in dispute betwixt him and D. Alonso de Monroy. Soon after the Lady Beatrix Pacheco Countess of Medellin submitted. On the 4th of May a Match was concluded betwixt Ferdinand, Grandson to the King of Naples, and the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to the King of Castile. The King of Naples was to secure her 200000 Crowns, and her Father 150000, in case she had Issue Male. King Ferdinand was won to make this Match by a great Sum of Money offered him, whereof he stood in great need. The King of Portugal finding all things combined against him, resolved to leave Castile; but with a design to procure Forces out of France to March into Spain, since of himself he was too weak, and the Nobles that followed his Party either could not, or would not support him. Before his departure, he proposed a Peace, offering to refer himself wholly to the Ar∣bitration of the King of Aragon and Archbishop of Toledo. But the War being near ended, it was too late to harken to such proposals. He left the Earl of Marialva to Command at Toro, and returned to Portugal on the 13th of June. Some Gentlemen of Castile bore him Company, being resolved to stick by him, rather because they despaired of Pardon, than out of any affection.
CHAP. V. The Tumults of Navarre; The King of Portugal his Voyage into France; Toro recover∣ed by the Castilians, from the Portugueses; Several other Places retaken; Charles the Bold Duke of Burgundy, and Galeazzo Duke of Milan, Murdered. IN Russillon and Cerdagne, the French, notwithstanding the Truce, had taken Salsas, a strong Castle opposite to Narbonne, the Bulwark of Spain, and laid Siege to Lebia, a strong Town in Ampurias. Besides this, the Soldiers under Luis Mudarra who had served well at the Siege of Perpignan Mutinied for their Pay. They took several Towns, and made War as if they had been Enemies, and it was feared they would join with the French. There was no suf∣ficient Force to suppress them, therefore the King's Party in Lerida gave them Security that they should receive their Pay, and by that means they were pacified. Still they were not strong enough to oppose the French, the King of Aragon being then in Navarre, where the Factions in Na∣varre. Factions ran as high as ever. The Biamonteses had the better, being possessed of Pamplona, and having laid Siege to Estela. King Ferdinand also favoured them, which much offended his Father, and it was requisite to provide, that the French might not get Footing there. Those People were perswaded the King of Aragon and Princess Elenor contrived to deliver up the Kingdom of Navarre to King Ferdinand, and exclude Francis Phebus the Son of Gaston Earl of Faux, Grandson to the Princess Ellenor. King Ferdinand went to Biscay to appease the Tumults, and Relieve Fuenterabia. For the Relief of that Place, he ordered a Fleet to be provided, which he gave in charge to D. Ladron de Guevera a Noble Person. To settle the Affairs of Navarre, he desired his Father to give him a meeting at Vitoria. Queen Ellzabeth resided at Tordesillas on the River Duero, to Curb the Portugues Garison of Toro. D. Alonso de Aragon her Brother in Law was also there with 300 Horse, and despairing now of being Restored to the Mastership of Calatrava, he Married Ellenor de Soto, one of the Queens Lady's, the Pope having dispensed with his Vow of Chastity. This so incensed his Father the King of Aragon, that he took from him the Towns of Ribagorça and Villahermosa, and gave them to D. John his Bastard Son. D. Jaime de Aragon, pretended these Places belonged to him by Inheritance, and took up Arms to defend his Right, but it cost him his Life. The Citizens of Segovia Mutini∣ed and Besieged the Castle, where was the Princess Elizabeth, and it was given out they had taken it. Alonso Maldonado raised this Tumult in hatred to D. Andrew de Cabrera, who put him out from being Lieutenant. D. John Arias Bishop of the City, and Luis de Mesa assisted him. Queen Elizabeth repaired thither with Speed, and pacified that Insurrection; some of the Mu∣tiniers fled, others were Executed. In August the King of Aragon came to Vitoria, being de∣tained till then by a sore Foot. There with great Joy to see his Son King of Castile, whence he had been himself formerly Expelled, he embraced and kissed him. He would not suffer him to kiss his Hand, but gave him the Right. The Princess Ellenor was present at this meeting. They consulted about their Affairs, and some write that the King of Aragon had resolved to resign up that Crown to his Son, but desisted, because Castile was not then entirely Reduced, and Colora the French Admiral was gone with a Fleet to Portugal, to carry that King into France. He was then preparing for that Voyage, and being in a readiness, Sailed first over Alonso King of Portugal, goes o∣ver into Africk and thence in∣to France. into Africk, to secure his Conquests there. With him went the Duke of Bragança, the Earl of Pen̄afiel his Favourite, the Prior of Ocrato, and D. John Pimentel, Brother to the Earl of Bena∣vente. He carried 250 Men to reinforce the Garrisons of Tangier and and Arzila. From Ceuta he set Sail, and Landed at Colvire in September, whence he went to Perpignan and Narbonne, and was received Magnificently. His coming revived the War in Russillon. The Aragonians took the Town of St. Laurence, the French wasted the Territory of Ampurias. But the worst was, that the Natives were in an Uproar, and therefore could not oppose the Enemy. At the same time the King of Aragon returned from Vitoria to Tudela, being very desirous to put an end to the Troubles of Navarre. The Princess Joanna was left to Go∣vern Catalonia, during her Fathers absence. Knowing her own weakness, she endeavoured to come to an Accommodation, and Ambassadors were sent on both sides, but all they could Con∣clude was a Prolongation of the Truce. The King of Portugal made the best of his way to Tours, where the King of France was at that time. He was sumptuously Received and Enter∣tained. After the Ceremony of the Reception was over, he laid his Case before the King of France, declaring the justice of his Cause, and imploring his Aid. That King promised his labour in coming to him should not be lost, but his Actions were not answerable to his Words, for at Paris, whither the King of Portugal followed him, he excused himself upon account that the English and Burgundians had again declared War against him. Besides he pleaded the King of Portugal's Marriage with the Princess was not Lawful, by reason they were too near of Kin. The King of Portugal thus disappointed, went to meet the Duke of Burgundy his Kins∣man and Ally, hoping to be a Mediator betwixt him and France, but without any Success The War that broke out in France, was advantageous to Castile; for the French who Besieged Fuenterabia concluded a Truce with the Biscayners for a short time at first, and only by Land, but soon after by the Solicitation of the Cardinal of Spain, it was prolonged, and without that limitation.
After their parting at Vitoria the two Kings, Father and Son met again in October at Tudela to endeavour to quell the Tumults of Navarre. The Earl of Lerin and the Constable Peter Peralta who were Heads of the Factions came thither and promised to stand by what the two Kings should determine. Both Parties ingaged to stand to Judgment, and within 16 Months to appoint Arbitrators, who were to decide all Controversies. This much offended the Lady Endea∣vours to pacifie Navarre. Magdalen, Wife that was to the late Gaston Earl of Faux, fearing it was a contrivance to ex∣clude her Children their Fathers Inheritance. Berengarius de Sos Dean of Barcelona was sent Ambassador to appease that Lady, and advise her not to mistrust the Kings of Castile and A∣ragon, nor join with France. She was then at Pau a Town in Bearne, and answered she thank∣ed them, and would always endeavour rather to promote Peace than War. On the 5th of October, the Articles of Marriage betwixt Ferdinand King of Naples and Joanna Daughter to the King of Aragon, were Sign'd at Tudela. The Lady was Contracted at Cervera, a Town in Catalonia, and from thence forward she was called Queen of Naples. Beatrix Daughter to the King of Naples, was at the same time Married to Mathias King of Hungary. She was a virtuous Lady, but Barren, and consequently had no Issue by him, nor by King Ladislaus his Sucessor, whom she afterwards Married. Mean while the City Toro in Castile was surprized in the Night by D. Alonso de Fonseca, Bishop of Avila, and D. Frederic Son to D. Roderick Manrique Earl of Parades. A Shepherd, called Bartholomew shewed them how it might be scaled on that side which was least regarded, by reason of a Morass that lay before it. Hav∣ing Toro sur∣prized by the Castili∣ans. entred the Town, they Besieged the Castle, and Queen Elizabeth hearing the news, re∣paired thither with speed from Segovia, where she had been appeasing the late Tumult. Ma∣ry Wife to John de Ulloa surrendred that Fortress on the 19th of October. Her Son in Law the Earl of Marialva who Commanded in those parts, quitted another Fort called Villalfonso, near Toro, and retired into Portugal. There remained Castronun̄o, from which Place Peter de Mendoza an able Soldier did great harm to the neighbouring Country. For this reason the Kings Forces after the taking of Toro laid Siege to that Place, and planted their Artillery, which was carried thither with much labour. Great application was made at the same time to reduce the Marquess de Villena and Archbishop of Toledo. The Marquess seemed most inclina∣ble to Submit; but demanded the restitution of Villena, and above 20 Towns taken from him in that Neighbourhood. The Archbishop was more obstinate, tho the King of Aragon ceased not to advise to compound with him at any rate. But that Business was not yet ripe. They began by the Marquess de Villena, and promised to restore to him his whole Estate, provided he surrendred the Castles of Madrid and Truxillo which still held for him. The same offer was made to the Archbishop of Toledo. D. Lope de Acun̄a his Nephew delivered up the City Huete, which had been given him with the Title of a Duke in the time of his troubles by King Hen∣ry. At the same time were killed two powerful Princes, Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, and Galeazzo Duke of Milan, Murdered in the Church whilst he was at Mass. CHAP. VI. King Ferdinand possesses himself of the Mastership of Santiago in Trust, which has ever since continued in the King's of Spain; War with the Moores of Andaluzia; The King of Portugal, after having Abdicated his Crown, returns home and is restored by his Son. QUeen Elizabeth wisely put an end to a Debate that arose about the Mastership of Santia∣go. D. Roderick Manrique Earl of Paredes, who called himself Master of Santiago, and was famous for taking the Town of Huescar from the Moores, died in November at Vcles. His Son George Manrique wrote a learned Elegy upon his death. D. Alonso de Cardenas his Compe∣titor being dead, resolved to go to Vcles with armed Men, and force the Electors to chuse him. Many other great Men aimed at that Dignity. The King and Queen consulted at Toro what was best to be done in that Case, and resolved rather to make use of Cunning than Force. The King staied at Toro, but the Queen made such haste to Vcles, that as Ferdinand del Pulgar writes, she came to that Place in three Days from Valladolid. She perswaded the Knights to go with her to Ocan̄a. which being a bigger Town and strong, they might with more Se∣curity proceed upon their Election. There by the means of D. Alonso de Fonseca Bishop of Avila, and her Secretary Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo she prevailed upon them, that to avoid Contention, they should for some time Create King Ferdinand her Husband Administrator of King Fer∣dinand chose Ma∣ster of Santiago in trust. that Dignity. This was it that first weakened the power of that Order, and soon after those of Calatrava and Alcantara followed their example. Yet it was not long before the King and Queen conserred that Honour upon D. Alonso de Cardenas, only obliging him to pay a certain Pension towards carrying on the War with the Moores, which highly offended the other No∣bles, who thought they had as well deserved as he. King Ferdinand having settled the affairs of Old Castile, and concluded a Truce with the Enemy, went away to Ocana at the beginning of the Year 1477. Then he again pardoned and received into his favour the Earl of Uren̄a, who now seemed perfectly reconciled. From Ocan̄a he went with the Queen to Toledo, where in pursuance of a Vow made, if they overcame the King of Portugal, she ordered to be Built the famous Monastery of Franciscans still to be seen in that City, and called St. Juan de los
Reyes. Thence they removed to Madrid, and there received Advice that the Portugueses infested the Country about Badajor and Cuidad Rodrigo. D. Gomer de Figueroa Earl of Feria was sent before to oppose them, and the Queen followed soon after towards the Frontiers of Portugal. King Ferdinand staied at Madrid in hopes to reduce the Archbishop of Toledo, but he was so obstinate he would not see the King. Therefore on the 24th of March the King set out for Old Castile to endeavour to pacifie Navarre, which again laboured under the former Factions, the Agramonteses having taken Estela, and the Princess Elenor labouring to recover it with her own, and the Forces of Castile. At the same time the King and Queen were surprized with the News that Albohacen King of Granada, notwithstanding the Truce which had lasted several Years, had broke into the Kingdom of Murcia with 4000 Horse, and 30000 Foot. This Moores of Granada invade Murcia. attempt terrified the Christians who were wholly unprovided, and the more for that on the 6th of April he took a little Town called Ciesa by Storm, which he burnt and put all the Inha∣bitants to the Sword. Besides he took a great booty of Cattle, and returned home without any loss, tho Peter Faxardo Lieuteannt of Murcia endeavoured to oppose him. The harm done was not so great, but that Castile not being yet pacified, there was no hopes of taking revenge. Cantalapiedra and Castronun̄o two Castles that held for the Portugueses were again besiged and forced to surrender. The People were so incensed against Castronun̄o for the harm had been done them from thence, that they levelled it with the ground. The Garrisons of both Places according to Articles were conducted to Portugal. Mendavia Governor of Castronun̄o receiv∣ed 7000 Florins, and deserves great praise for having so long defended that Place against so great a power. The Queen was no less intent upon reducing Truxillo, the Castle of whice Place was held for the Marquess de Villena. Peter de Baeza the Governor being summoned, an∣swered at first, that he would not surrender unless the Marquisate of Villena were restored to his Lord, as had been agreed. The Queen offered to put those Towns into the power of a Third Person to be named by the Governor, who should deliver them to the Marquess at the end of 6 Months. But he fearing some Fraud would not submit; at last the Marquess to please the Queen, went into the Castle, and could hardly perswade him to surrender. The Governor was so higly offended that he discharged himself from ever more serving the Mar∣quess, who had not Capitulated for him, and his Men. King Ferdinand on the one side de∣sired to go to Andaluzia, whither the Queen his Wife called him, and on the other had a great mind to see his Sister Joanna before she Embarked for Italy. Navarre kept him employed, and he could not well depart thence. That Princess Sailed from Barcelona in August, aboard a Fleet brought thither to carry her, by D. Alonso her Son in Law, D. Peter de Guevara Marquess del Gasto, and many other Persons of Quality. She touched at Genoa, was there Nobly enter∣tained, and lastly arrived at Naples. There her Marriage was Celebrated, with all expressions of Joy imaginable. John Lopez de Medina-celi, Archdeacon of Almaçan Built a Colledge at Si∣guença, for 13 Collegians, and a Monastery of the Order of St. Hierome, called St. Anton. There was no end of the Troubles either in Castile, or Andaluzia, every Nobleman posses∣ed Noble∣men se∣cure to them∣selves all the strong holds. himself of what Towns he could. The Duke of Medina Sidonia held Sevil, the Marquiss of Cadiz, Xerez, D. Alonso de Aguilar, Cordova. Their pretence was to secure themselves a∣gainst their Enemies, especially the Portugueses, but the real design, to enlarge their Estates. Those very Cities were divided into Factions. In Sevil some favoured the Duke of Medina Sido∣nia, others the Marquess of Cadiz. In Cordova were the factions of Alonso de Aguilar and the Earl of Cabra. Queen Elizabeth, tho advised to the contrary, as having no sufficient Force, went first to Sevil. There she possessed her self of the Castle of Triana, and the other works belonging to the Duke of Medina Sidonia. King Ferdinand leaving Navarre, and having in some manner settled Old Castile, constituted Peter de Villaldrando Earl of Ribadeo, Governor of Galicia, and his own Brother D. Alonso de Aragon with the Constable Lieutenants of Castile. This done he set out towards Andaluzia, by the way visited the Church of Guadalupe and or∣dered the Duke of Alva and Earl of Benavente to bear him Company, being suspicious of them, because it was given out they were associating with others of the Nobility. On the 3d of September he came to Sevil, There he found the Marquess of Cadiz was suspected, and it was said of him, that he was inclinable to assist the Portugueses, and to that purpose kept a Garrison at Alcalà de Guadaira, under the King's Nose. It was proposed to gain and appease him, to this purpose he had a meeting with the King, by himself at Night. It was moved that he should deliver up the Forts he had taken. He answered he could not do it, unless the Duke of Medina Sidonia at the same time surrendred the Fortresses of Nebrixa and Utrera, and other Castles, otherwise it would be only weakening of him, to strengthen his Adversary. This Demand was thought reasonable, and therefore both of them delivered up their Forts to the King. The rest of the Lords and Nobles were induced to follow their ex∣ample, especially because at the same time a Truce was concluded by D. James de Cordova, Earl of Cordova with the King of Granada, in whom they reposed their greatest Confidence. The affairs of Navarre were in a worse posture, and no hopes of any composition, because the old animosities went on. The Princess Elenor sought some remedy, and put them in mind that the term of 16 Months wherein they had promised to accommodate all affairs, was near expiring. At the same time she protested that since there was no help in her Father, or Bro∣ther, she would have recourse to some other, the blame whereof must lie at their door who were the cause of it; for if some care were not taken, that Kingdom must inevitably run to
ruin; Great misfortunes make the afflicted speak boldly. Nevertheless all were deaf to these complaints, both Kings being far off, and they embroil'd with affairs of their own. Besides the affairs of Rusillon those of Sicily and Sardinia perplexed the King of Aragon. Raimund Floch Disorders in Sicily and Sardi∣nia. Earl of Cardona was Viceroy of Sicily. He went over to Naples with Queen Joanna, and re∣turned thence to his Command, at such time as D. John de Cabrera dying young, his Earldom of Modica fell to his Sister Anne. Many aimed at that Estate, some would exclude her, others aspir'd to Marry her. The King of Aragon because it was convenient to find a Husband to that great Fortune, resolv'd to Marry her to D. Alonso de Aragon, Bastard Son to his Son King Ferdinand. This did not succeed, but afterwards Frederick Son and Heir to the Admiral of Castile, carried her from all his Rivals, and by this means join'd that Earldom to his own Patrimony. In Sardinia, Leonard de Alagon Marquiss of Oristan mutinied, he had never been thoroughly pacified, and now complain'd of new wrongs done him by Nicholas Carroz de Ar∣borea. Neither Age nor Sickness hindred the King of Aragon from attending publick Affairs. The Marquess of Oristan was Impeached, and Judgment given against him at Barcelona on the 15th of October, by which he was declared to have forfeited his Estate. One only Ship was sent with Recruits, which being a small succour the War lasted long. King Ferdinand after reducing Andaluzia, was still in Care about Portugal. He rejoiced that tho' the King of Por∣tugal had brought home a dispensation from the Pope to Marry the Princess Joanna, yet he had obtained no succours in France. On the other side, he was concern'd because it was re∣ported the Archbishop of Toledo did Court that King to return to Castile. That Prelate being very old and passionate, scarce knew what he did, and therefore never reflected how weak that King was. It is reported that the King of Portugal having lost all hopes of Assistance, in despair set out from Paris, resolving to go in Pilgrimage to Rome and Hierusalem, and then The King of Portu∣gal re∣solves to go in Pil∣grimage to Hierusa∣lem, and resigns his Crown to his Son. John Prince of Portugal restores the Crown to his Fa∣ther. 1478 become a Fryar, rather out of disgust to the World, than affection to that Life. He went some days Journey, and then sent back one of Three Servants that were with him to open a Scrutore he left at Paris, where were found two Letters, one for the King of France, giving him an account of his design. In the other he advised his Son immediately to cause himself to be Crowned King. His Son having read this Letter, was Crowned on the 11th of November, only Five days before the arrival of his Father at Cascaes. For the King of France had imme∣diately sent some Persons after him, who forced him to come back. He advis'd him to return to his Country, which he accordingly did. The King came to Portugal very sad and lean. His Son went out with joy to receive him, and restored him his Crown and Dignity. This was the event of the King of Portugals Voyage and Attempts, which at first were hot, but in the Conclusion fell to the Ground. The following Year 1478, was unfortunate, and remarkable, because on the 23th of January was Born in Flanders of the Lady Mary, Heiress to Charles the Bold Duke of Burgundy, and Maximilian Duke of Austria, Philip who was afterwards happy in the great Dominions he acquired, and the Successor he left, tho his pro∣sperity was not lasting, Death snatching him away in the prime of his youth. In the Month of April, in the City of Florence, certain Citizens conspiring against the Brothers of the House of Medicis, who they suspected design'd to Usurp the Sovereignty of that City, till then Free, Murder'd Julian in the Church of St. Librada, the other called Lawrence de Medicis saved himself in the Sacristy of the said Church. Hereupon the other Citizens ran to Arms, and apprehended Salviato Archbishop of Pisa, one of the Conspirators in the Pallace of the Seigneury whither he went to exhort the People to defend their Liberty. Without farther Process he hanged him out of the Window. The Cardinal of St. George, who was said to fa∣vour the Conspirators, was in great danger. Florence was Excommunicated for the Murder of the Archbishop, but the King of France interposing, the City was absolv'd, rather through fear than for any good-will. The Pope and King of Naples had also made War upon the Florentines, but now also a Peace was Concluded, and they were left at Liberty as they were before. CHAP. VII. Sardinia entirely reduced; The Birth of John Prince of Castile; The Inquisition first settled in Spain; Peace Concluded betwixt France and Castile; the death of King John of Aragon. IN Sardinia the War continu'd hot, and both parties looked for supplies from abroad. The Genoeses who ought to have assisted the Marquess de Oristan, as their ancient Allie, forbore Sardinia reduced. because they had lately concluded a Truce at Naples, with the House of Aragon. Fresh suc∣cours came daily to the Royallists from Aragon and Sicily, and at last the Earl of Cardona Viceroy of Sicily went over in Person. After several skirmishes, the two Armies met near a Castle called Machomera. There the Battle was given, in which the Marquess was killed, and his Army routed. Artal his Son endeavouring to make his escape in a Boat, was taken by Two Aragonian Gallies, and carried Prisoner into Spain by Villamarin the Admiral. He was Confined to the Castle of Xativa, and all his Estate which was considerable, as well in
Sardinta, as the Continent Confiscate. Particularly the Marquisates of Oristan and Gociano, were for ever annexed to the Crown, and added to the other regal Titles. This Battle was fought on the 19th of May. Thus that Island which had been so long contended for, was at last wholly subdued by the Aragonians. King Ferdinand of Castile, tho the Affairs of Andaluzia were not altogether settled, and his Queen was with Child, returned to the Kingdom of Ara∣gon for two reasons. The first, to reduce the Archbishop of Toledo, and perswade him not to call in the King of Portugal again. The other to revive the Association of the Towns against Robbers and Outlaws, which decayed much by reason of the great charge of keeping Soldi∣diers in Pay. To this effect the Cortes were held at Madrid, where the Association was con∣tinued for Three Years longer. Nothing could be concluded with the Archbishop, tho en∣deavours were used to satisfie him, there had been no design of killing him. After the Cor∣tes broke up, King Ferdinand returned to Sevil, the Queen earnestly desiring it, because she was near her time. Thither came Ambassadors from the King of Granada to desire the Truce might be renewed, which was refused, unless besides doing Homage, he would pay the Tri∣bute used formerly. The King sent Ambassadors to Granada, to treat of it, and the Moore answered, That the Kings who used to pay that Tribute were dead many Years before, and that at present in the Mint of Granada no Gold or Silver was Coined, but instead of it they made Spears, Darts and Cimiters. King Ferdinand, tho' offended at this Answer, necessity obliging him to it, renewed the Truce. On the 28th of June the Queen fell in labour, and was delivered of a Son called Prince John, who was unfortunately cut off in the Flower of Birth of Prince John of Castile. his Age, as we shall relate in its Place. The King of Aragon tho tired with Age, demanded this Child should be sent to him, to be bred up after the manner of Aragon. At this time the King of Aragon contended for the Archbishoprick of Zaragoça. His aim was to confer it up∣on D. Alonso Bastard Son to King Ferdinand. The Pope was willing to dispence with his Ille∣gitimacy, but not with his Age, for he was but Six Years old, and therefore desired to be∣stow that See upon the Cardinal Ausias Despuch, believing the King would allow it by reason of the great services done by his Brother, the Master of the Order of Montesa. It proved otherwise, for the King in a passion seized the Cardinals Estate, and affronted his kindred. The King of Naples interposing, who was great with the Pope, the King of Aragon obtain∣ed his desire, and that Dignity was given to D. Alonso as perpetual Administrator. This was the foundation of a Custom prejudicial to the Church, ever since in use, and meerly extorted from the Pope at that time. It was then the Custom in Spain that all Bishops had their no∣mination from the King, whence ensued another dispute about the See of Taraçoza, for the Cardinal Andrew Ferrer, dying, the Pope bestowed it upon Andrew Martinez. King Ferdi∣nand opposed it, designing that Church for the Cardinal of Spain, who at last carried it. Such another debate hapned about the See of Cuenca, in which the King also prevailed. A Bull was also granted, by which the whole power of nominating their Bishops was granted to the Kings of Castile for ever. Four years before another Bull had been obtained, which ex∣cluded for the future all Strangers from reversions of Bishopricks. James Saldan̄a Ambassador from King Henry at Rome procured it. He went to Portugal with the Princess Joanna, and from him is descended a noble Family there of his Name. F. Alonso de Burgos Bishop of Pa∣lencia Built at Valladolid the famous Monastery of St. Paul, of his own Order, that is, the Do∣minicans. It had been began in the time of King Alonso the Wise. The Church was doubt∣less built lately by the Cardinal John de Torquemada, who had his Education in that House. At this time the holy Tribunal of the Inquisition was first erected in Castile. There were before certain Inquisitors of this nature, but they had not the power, nor the method that was Inquisiti∣on first settled in Spain. now introduced. The principal promoter and founder of this Court was the Cardinal of Spain, moved to it by the great corruption caused by the mixture of Christians, Jews and Moores. Many Jews who had been Converted, relapsed to their former Error, and particu∣larly the number was great at Sevil, where the Inquisition first executed its Authority. If their Crimes were hainous, they were burnt, if of a lesser hue their Goods were Confiscate, their Persons condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, or obliged to wear what they call a Sanbenito, that is piece of yellow Baise hanging on the Breast and Back with a red Cross upon it, which was a mighty Infamy. It was thought too much severity that the Children should suffer for the Crimes of their Parents, that the accuser should not be known nor confront the party accused, as had ever been used in all Courts, and lastly, that Sins of this nature should be punished with death. Some wholly condemned this severity, yet others approved of and defended it. The event has made it appear this Court has been very necessary and advanta∣geous to the Kingdom. Many wholesome Laws were at first Enacted, and have since been enlarged to restrain the power of the Judges, and keep them within the bounds of modera∣tion, that they may not be debauched by Avarice. But the greatest security consists in that these Imployments are always bestowed on Persons of great learning, and known integrity and piety. The first Inquisitor General was F. Thomas de Torquemada, of the Order of St. Do∣minick, Confessor to the King and Queen, and Prior of the Monastery at Segovia. His Au∣thority at first extended only to the Kingdom of Castile, Four years after it comprehended all Aragon. At first the Inquisitor General used to send his Commissioners to all parts as occasion required, without having any fixed Tribunals. Since it is established that the Inquisitor Gene∣ral with Five of the supream Councill determines all the most weighty Affairs of Religion at
the Court where the other Tribunals are. All smaller Affairs are committed to 2 or 3 Inquisi∣tors, who keep their Courts in several Cities. The places where now the Inquisitors reside, are Toledo, Cuenca, Murcia, Valladolid, Santiago, Logron̄o, Sevil, Cordova, Granada, Elerena, and in the Kingdom of Aragon, Valencia, Zaragoça, and Barcelona. An Edict was published by the Inquisitor General, offering a free pardon to all guilty Persons who should come in and submit themselves. 17000 as well Men as Women of all sorts are said to have presented themselves. 2000 were burnt, and a greater number fled. From this beginning it has rose to be the most dreaded Tribunal in the World. A proper remedy against the Calamities that soon after ensued, and confounded many other Kingdoms. Before the King and Queen of Castile went from Sevil, they ordered that neither the Duke of Medina Sidonia, nor the Marquess of Cadiz should be admitted into that City, so the heats Actions on the Frontiers of Castile, and Portu∣gal. of the Factions being taken away, all was in Peace. On the Frontiers of Portugal Lope Vasco a Portugues, Governor of the Castle of Mora, secured that place for King Ferdinand, and sent him advice of it that he might be relieved. King Ferdinand was very desirous to make War upon Portugal in Person, thinking it would redound to his Honour not only to defend his own, but to invade another. Neither his Father, nor any of the wiser sort approved of his design, as dangerous and unprofitable. Therefore he sent D. Alonso de Cardenas Master of Santiago with 1500 Horse, and 15000 Foot. Nothing of Moment was done, for John Prince of Portugal recovered the Castle of Mora, which disappointed all their designs. It was more requisite to secure Truxillo, thither the King and Queen went, taking Cordova in their way. Mean while at Land, a Town in the Territory of Cahors in France, a Match was agreed be∣twixt Frederick second Son to the King of Naples, and Anne Daughter of Amadee Duke of Savoy. The King of France promised the Bride who was his Sisters Daughter, a great Estate in France, and offered to deliver up Russillon and Cerdaigne, till such time as he performed, or the King of Aragon paid the Money about which they were at variance. This highly of∣fended the Two Kings of Spain, Father and Son, who resented that the King of Naples with∣out regard to their kindred, should prefer the friendship of France before that of Spain, and ac∣cept of those Places for which they were Engaged in War. The Truce was near expiring, and there was danger the War would again break out at a very improper time for both Nations. The King of France was busie in the Conquest of Flanders. In Castile all was not settled, for the King of Portugal prepared to renew the War, and the Countess of Medellin a Masculine Woman, with Alonso de Monroy Deputy to the Master of Calatrava were revolted. For these reasons John de Gamboa Governor of Fuenterabia, and the Archdeacon of Almaçan by Order of King Ferdinand began to treat of an acommodation with the French Ambas∣sadors, who were at Bayonne. They managed this Affair so well, that the Truce was chang∣ed into a Peace upon the old Conditions that had been betwixt those Two Crowns, and Peace be∣twixt Ca∣stile and France. the King of Aragon was included, which was only imposing upon him, since the Lands in dis∣pute were not restored to him. However it was agreed, Judges should be appointed to de∣cide that Difference. The joy conceived in Castile on account of this Peace, was increased by some concurring Causes. One was, that the Earl of Alva Liste, the Kings Unckle, came to Truxillo, having been à Prisoner ever since the Battle of Toro. Another, that the Archbi∣shop of Toledo, drove by necessity, all his Revenues being Seized, submitted to King Ferdinan∣do, and delivered up his strong Holds to be held by the King It was given out, he held Cor∣respondence with the King of Portugal still, nevertheless he was pardoned. Moreover, Pope Sixtus revoked the dispensation he had given the King of Portugal, for Marrying his Neece, the Princess Joanna, which many thought was too great a Compliance with the King of Na∣ples, at whose Suit it was done, and misbecoming the Papal Authority. In order to settle all their Affairs, and particularly the Peace with France, the Two Kings, Father and Son de∣signed to meet at Molina and Daroca. When on a sudden the King of Aragon fell sick at Barcelona, and died on the 19th of January 1479. His Body was buried at Poblete, and he was so Poor, that to defray the Charge of his Funeral, his Houshold Goods were Pawned. 1479. He lived 81 Years. 7 Months and 20 Days. Of Disposition he was Robust, and of Spirit John King of Aragon dyes. Lively. The latter part of his Life was stained with a leud Appetite, tho he was past acting, for he fixed his Affection upon a handsome young Woman, called Frances Rose, whom he design'd to have formerly Married to that D. Jayme de Aragon, who was Executed at Barcelona. In his Will, made 10 Years before his Death, he ordained several godly Works to be performed. Particularly the Erecting Two Monasteries of the Order of St. Hierome, which are famous at this time. One of them is St. Engracia at Zaragoça, the other St. Ma∣ry de Belpuch in Catalonia, his Son exactly performing all that he had ordained. He also ordered that the Grandsons of his Son Ferdinand, tho' by a Daughter, should Inherit the Crown of Aragon, and take place of their Mothers.
CHAP. VIII. Elenor Queen of Navarre; The troubles of that Kingdom, and her Death; The Countess of Medellin raises Tumults in Castile; Portugueses overthrown by the Castilians; Heretical Opinions Started and Condemned in Spain; King Ferdinand goes into A∣ragon. BY the Death of the King of Aragon, his Dominions were divided: Aragon fell to King Ferdinand, and Navarre to the Princess Elenor in the Right of her Mother. She had been 7 Years a Widow, and consequently exposed to great Misfortunes. That Kingdom was Factions continue in Navarre still divided betwixt the old Factions. The Biamonteses, Enemies to the new Queen were most prevalent. These troubles seemed to be a Judgment for the Murders committed upon Charles Prince of Viana, the Princess Blanch his Sister, and the Bishop of Pamplona. Queen Ellenor Reigned not a whole Month. She was more Fortunate in her Issue than in her Life, for she had 4 Sons, Gaston, John, Peter, and James, and 5 Daughters, Mary, Joan∣na, Marguerite, Catherine and Ellenor, we shall briefly speak of them all, great Families be∣ing descended from them. Gaston died, as was said before, and left two Children, Francis Phebus and Catherine, who both Reigned in Navarre successively. John was Lord of Narbonne, which he bought of his Father, and had Issue, Gaston and Germana. Gaston was killed at the Battle of Ravenna, where he was General for Luis the 12th of France. Germana Married King Firdinand after the death of his first Wife. Peter applied himself to learning and piety, and Pope Sixtus made him a Cardinal. James followed the War, and was never Married. Mary the Eldest Daughter was Married to William Marquess of Monferrat. Joanna to John Earl of Armagnac. Margaret to Francis Duke of Britany, and had Issue Ann and Elizabeth. Ann the Heiress being Married, first to Charles the 8th, and after his death to Luis the 12th of France, joined that Dukedom and Kingdom. Catherine 4th, Daughter to Queen Ellenor, Married Gaston de Faux Earl of Candale, and brought forth 2 Sons and a Daughter called Anne, Married to Ladislaus King of Hungary. Ellenor the Youngest Daughter died a Maid. Queen Ellenor died on the 12th of February at Tudela, where she began her Reign. In her Will she Ordained out of her own Money a Monastery of Franciscans should be Built at Tafalla, and that her Body should be Buried there, and the Bones of her Mother Queen Blanch be also Translated thither, from the Monastery of Nuestra Sen̄ora de Nieva in Old Castile, where they were deposited. The Revenue was so exhausted, that she was forced to Sell her Jewels to Live. Francis Phebus, so called for his extraordinary Beauty, being but 11 Years of Age suc∣ceeded her. His Mother the Lady Magdalen, and his Uncle Peter the Cardinal, had the Administration of the Government till he came to Years, and discharged their Trust Pru∣dently in those difficult Times. The late Queen during her Troubles, had no help from her Brother the King of Castile, therefore she made no mention of him in her Will, but directed the Governors to Adhere to France, as they did, which was the Cause they soon lost that Kingdom. Thus much of Navarre. In Castile some new Oppinions in matters of Religion were broached. One Peter Oxomensis a Professor of Divinity at Salamanca, was the Author. By Order of Pope Sixtus, the Archbishop of Toledo assembled several Persons of great Learn∣ing at Alcala, where he Refided, who all Condemned those new Opinions, and the Au∣thor was Excommunicated, unless he recanted. Sentence was given on the 24th of May, Heretical oppinions condemn∣ed in Spain. and soon after Pope Sixtus confirmed it by his Bull. John Prexanus a famous Divine in that Age. afterwards Bishop of Cuidad Rodrigo, wrote a Book against the said Peter. The Marquisate of Villena was now the Seat of War, for the Marquess, because Covenants were not performed with him, had recourse to Arms, and relieved the Town of Chinchilla, be∣sieged by the King's Forces. Peter Ruiz de Alarcon, who Commanded a Party of the King's, was defeated near Alberca by Peter de Baeça, and D. George Manrique, who in another Skir∣mish with Peter de Baeça was Wounded, of which hurt he afterwards died. A great pitty, that so ripe a Wit should be so soon cut off. Hereupon the Marquess was liable as having been in Arms against the King's Forces. He excused himself, laying the blame upon the Insolency of those Officers who forced him to do so, and pleaded he had no dealings either with the King of Portugal, or Archbishop of Toledo. These excuses, whether True or Coun∣terfeit, prevented any farther proceedings against him. In this War there happned an ex∣traordinary accident worth Relating. The King's Party had hanged 6 of the Prisoners they took. In revenge, John Berrio an Officer of the Marquess, ordered as many of those he had taken, to be put to death in the same manner. The Prisoners cast Lots, and among the rest, it fell to the share of one of 2 Brothers, that were Prisoners, who had a Wife and Children, to die. The other Brother who was a Batchellor, begged to be put to death in his place, and so it was done, after they had both long, and with many Tears contend∣ed about it. King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth received the News of King John's Death, and their Couness of Medel∣lin a tur∣bulent-Woman. own Accession to the Crown of Aragon, in Estremadura, where they were quelling the Tu∣mults raised by the Countess of Medellin, and D. Alonso de Mnrey. The Countess had a
Spirit above a Woman, for she kept her own Son D. John Portocarrero, some years a Prisoner, and at last turned him out of Doors, which was the cause she was in Arms, fearing lest she should be obliged to restore the Earldom to her Son, who laid Claim to it as his Father's In∣heritance. She also designed to keep the City Merida, in which she had a Garison. D. Alonso was digusted that the Mastership of Alcantara was taken from him, and given to D. John de Zun̄iga, upon which Pretence he seized several Towns belonging to that Military Order. The King provided for the War with Portugal, which it was feared would prove more bloody than before; yet both Parties being exhausted, a Treaty was proposed. This was the more Welcome to the Portugueses, because on the 24th of February they had received a great Over∣throw near Albufera, two Leagues from Merida, by the Forces under the Command of the Master of Santiago. The Slaughter was so great that few escaped to Merida, which, as was Over∣throw of the Por∣tugueses. said, held for the Countess of Medellin. In this Battle the Master and other Officers signa∣lized themselves, and among them James de Vera, who killed the Portugues Standard-bearer, and took the Royal Standard. As a Reward the Master had the Pension of 3 Millions he was to pay out of the Mastership, remitted; and other Favours were bestowed upon James de Vera, and the rest. The Lady Beatrix Dutchess of Viseo, Aunt to Queen Elizabeth, and Mo∣ther-in-Law to John Prince of Portugal, took upon her to Compose Differences betwixt Castile and Portugal. King Ferdinand was in haste to take possession of his new Kingdom, and the more, for that the Aragonians to curb the Navarrois, who had taken some Strong Holds on their Frontiers, had assembled the Cortes without acquainting him; which Action was contrary to the known Laws of that Kingdom. Therefore the King left Queen Elizabeth to conclude the Peace with her Aunt. Alcantara was the place agreed upon betwixt them King Fer∣dinand goes into Aragon. Two for their Meeting. This done the King went to pay his Devotions at Guadalupe, and thence by the way of Santollalla, Heriza, and Calataynd, to Aragon. He made his Publick Entry into Zaragoça on the 28th of June with great State, and the general Applause of the People, who went out to meet him. Next him went Luis Naya the chief Magistrate of the City. The King was richly Cloathed, and under a Canopy, and the People with loud Ac∣clamations wished him a Long and Happy Reign. There he spent some time in hearing the Complaints of all that thought themselves aggrieved. Soon after he went to Barcelona, where he made Proposals about Recovering Russillon and Cerdagne, but it took not effect then. Yet Four Judges were appointed to determine all Differences betwixt France and Aragon, as had been agreed at Bayonne. From Barcelona the King went on to Valencia, there he was splendidly received as in other Places, and applied himself to pacifie certain Tumults occasioned by D. Ximeno de Urrea, Viscount de Viota, who had by force of Arms seized D. Jayme de Pallas, Viscount Chelva, and his Wife, on pretence that Chelva and Mançanera possessed by the said D. Jayme, belonged to him. By the King's Command both Parties laid down their Arms. Afterwards when the Suit had depended three years, the Judges offended at the Insolency of D. Ximeno, in presuming to use Force, gave Sentence against him, and adjudged those Towns to his Adversary D. Jayme de Pallas. CHAP. IX. Peace concluded betwixt Castile and Portugal; The Turks get footing in Italy, and are again expelled; King Alonso of Portugal dies; Henry the late King of Castile his Grants vacated by the Cortes; Prince John, Son to King Ferdinand, sworn Heir of Castile. QUeen Elizabeth, and her Aunt the Dutchess of Viseo, met, as had been agreed, at Alcan∣tara, Peace concluded betwixt Castile and Por∣tugal. and after some days spent in Debating, fixed upon these Articles. That the King of Portugal should not Stile himself King of Castile, nor give the Arms of that Kingdom; and King Ferdinand should do the same in respect to Portugal. That Prince John, Son to King Ferdinand, as soon as he was of Age, should Marry the Princess Joanna. That in case Prince John, when at Age, should dislike that Marriage, then his Father and Mother should be o∣bliged to pay 100000 Ducats to the Princess Joanna. That if she thought the time too long to stay, she might have liberty to become a Nun. That the Princess Elizabeth of Castile should be Married to Alonso, Grandson to the King of Portugal. That the Disaffected Nobles of Castile should not be protected in Portugal. That the Conquest and Discoveries on the Coast of Africk, and in the Ocean, should entirely appertain to Portugal. Lastly, That for Security of the Performance of these Articles, the Princesses Joanna and Elizabeth, and Prince Alonso, should be delivered as Hostages to the Dutchess of Viseo, to be by her kept in the Castle of Mora, and the King of Portugal on his part to deliver up to her four other Castles on the borders of the Kingdom. This was the end of that tedious and expensive War. Great Rejoycing and Thanksgiving was throughout all Spain for the Peace. King Ferdinand from Valencia, where he received this Joyful News, returned to Toledo about the end of the year. There Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, expected him, and their Joy was redoubled by the Birth of the Princess Joanna, whom Heaven had decreed to inherit the Kingdoms of her
Ancestors. Soon after the other Princess Joanna, Daughter to King Henry, perceiving how she was imposed upon, became a Nun in the Monastery of S. Clare at Coimbra, where she led a Virtuous Life, and persevered till her Death. Nevertheless the Princess Elizabeth and Prince Alonso were delivered up to the Dutchess of Viseo according to Articles. The Coun∣tess of Medellin, and D. Alonso de Monroy submitted, as did other Nobles of Castile, who had been the chief support of Portugal. The Marquess of Villena, his former Articles being some∣what altered, was restored to the King and Queen's Favour about the beginning of the year 1480. By this new Contract the Marquess was left possessed of Escalona, Belmonte, Villena, 1480. and Almansa, the other Towns of his fell to the King. Necessity obliged him to submit to these hard Terms. In January died Renee, Duke of Anjou, in France, a Prince no less famous for his ill Fortune than long Life. Till the last he Stiled himself King of Aragon, Sicily, and Hierusalem, all empty Titles. In his Will he appointed his Nephew Charles his Heir. To Renee Duke of Lorrain, his Grandson by the Mother side, he left the Dutchy of Bar, which he possessed in France. At Toledo the Cortes of Castile were assembled: Great numbers of People resorted thither, and many Grievances were laid before them. The Country complained that the Nobility oppressed the Poor, and devoured the Revenues of the Crown, which was the cause that heavy Taxes were daily imposed upon the People. Commissioners were appointed to inspect into this Affair; and they having considered of it, declared, that all Grants made by King Grants made by King Hen∣ry: decla∣red void by the Cor∣tes. Henry, or extorted by force, ought to be void. Yet all the Power of the Laws and Magi∣strates was not of force to curb the Insolencies of the Nobility. In May all the Three Estates swore Prince John Heir of the Crown after the death of his Parents. Now Castile being thus settled, the King and Queen went first to Medina del Campo, and then to Valladolid, where some Noblemen received exemplary Punishment for Crimes committed, which terrified others. Galicia was not perfectly reduced, that being a fierce sort of People. The Cities Lugo, Orense, Mondon̄edo, Bivero, and Corun̄a, would not submit: Ferdinand de Acun̄a, and a Civilian called Garcia Chinchilla, were sent to pacifie them. These Two assembling the People at Santiago, and putting to death the Mareschal Peter Pardo, and some other Gentlemen, brought the Country under subjection. King Ferdinand was then gone to Catalonia upon this account: Mahomer the Great Turk having in vain besieged Rhodes the space of three Months, was for∣ced to quit that Enterprize. Part of his Fleet sailed to Vallona in Albania, opposite to Apulia, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples. Thence Achmet Bassa who Commanded, passed over into Italy, and took the City Otranto on the 13th of August, where he made a great Slaughter, The Turks take O∣tranto in Italy. sparing neither Sex nor Age. From this Place the Turks made Incursions into the Country, destroying all they came at, to the great Terror of all Italy. This moved the Christian Princes to think of joining their Forces to stifle that Flame. Particularly King Ferdinand sent Gonzalo Beteta Ambassador to Pope Sixtus, who was then much displeased with the King, as appeared upon several occasions, and now more especially; for he constituted the Archbishop of Toledo his Legate in Spain, without acquainting the King with his Design. The publick Danger made private Animosities be forgot. The King also sent D. John Melguerite, Bishop of Girona, in the Month of February, 1481. to make a League with all the Princes of Italy. At the same time the King gathered a Fleet of 35 Sail of all sorts at Barcelona. The 1481. King of Portugal fitted 20 Ships for this purpose; but these Succours went on slowly. There∣fore D. Alonso, Duke of Calabria, with what Forces he could gather in Italy, at last laid Siege to Otranto. It fell out happily that Mahomet the Great Turk died at Nicomedia in Bithynia, on the 3d of May. News hereof being brought to the Turks in Otranto, they surrendered that City the 5th Month after it had been besieged, upon condition to depart freely. The Duke of Calabria retained in his Service about 1500 Turks, designing to make use of them against the Florentines. It was the vulgar Opinion they well deserved it, because they had called in the Turks; yet many believed this was a Policy of the Duke, to cast the Scandal of retaining those People upon his Enemy. The Succours of Aragon and Portugal were of no use, for they arrived in Italy after Otranto was surrendred. Besides the distance, weighty Affairs kept those Kings employed, and diverted them from sending those Succours sooner. King Ferdi∣nand held the Cortes of Aragon at Calatayud, whither Queen Elizabeth by her Husband's Order brought Prince John. D. Alonso Enriquez the Admiral, and Peter Fernandez de Velasco the Constable, were appointed Commissioners to Govern Castile. The King's aim was to have his Son sworn Heir to that Kingdom, as had been before done in Castile, and was also perfor∣med there on the 29th of May. Soon after, the same was done at Barcelona for the Principa∣lity Ferdi∣nand's Son sworn Heir of Castile, A∣ragon, and Catalonia. of Catalonia. Besides these Cares, another was added from Navarre. Peter the Cardinal, and James his Brother, Unkles to the young King, came to Zaragoça: There being admitted to Audience, in a long Harangue they laid before King Ferdinand the Misfortunes Navarre la∣boured under, the Rebels being possessed of the most considerable Towns and Cities. The Biamonteses had Pamplona, the others Estela, Sanguessa, and Olite. They represented, That their King had nothing left him but the Title: That the Earl of Lerin ceased not to commit all manner of Crimes. Therefore they begged King Ferdinand to pity that young King, and deliver him from the Slavery of his Subjects. King Ferdinand having heard the two Brothers, promised he would stand by King Francis; and to shew his readiness, sent certain Persons with the Two Princes, who from him should advise the Rebels to submit to their King. The
Cortes of that Kingdom met at Tafalla; there King Ferdinand's Ambassadors gave an account of what they had in Commission. The Navarrois answered, That if the King had not been received as he ought in the Kingdom, it was not the fault of them all, but of some few, who disturbed the Peace of the Country; yet if he would come to them, no Town would be wanting in expressing its Loyalty. This Answer was satisfactory; and therefore it was pro∣posed to King Ferdinand that King Francis should go to Pamplona. It was thought sit he should go with a good Guard, lest in that time of Confusion any Affront should be offered him. At this time the King of Portugal died at Sintra, in the very Chamber where he was born, and Alonso King of Portugal dies. John II. of Portugal. on the 28th of August. His Body was carried to Aljubarrota. His Son John II. for his high Spirit and great Exploits Sirnamed the Great, succeeded him. This Prince, as well as his Fa∣ther, was always an utter Enemy to Castile. The Father carried it more openly, but the Son subtilly and underhand; and therefore more furiously vented his Passion upon some Noblemen of his Kingdom, whom he suspected of favouring Castile, as we shall soon see. For Piety, Goodness, Severity towards Crimina, Sharpness of Wit, and a Tenacious Memory, he equalled all the Kings his Contemporaries, and excelled many. He used to say, That a Kingdom either found Princes wise, or made them so, by their continual conversing with Men of great Parts, who constantly are about the Courts of Kings, and use all Arts in Speech and Behaviour to obtain their Desires, and discover their Ability. CHAP. X. Francis King of Navarre comes out of France, is Crown'd, and soon after Dies; A Con∣spiracy against the King of Portugal discover'd, and the Conspirators punish'd; Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal Ratified; Luis the Eleventh King of France dies. THree Princes died successively one year after another About the end of this year departed this Three great Men die. Life Charles Duke of Anjou. He appointed the King of France his Heir, by which means Anjou and Provence were annexed to the Crown of France, besides other Pretentions, which served only to intail a War upon that Kingdom. On the first of July, in the following year 1482, died D. Alonso Carillo y Acun̄a, Archbishop of Toledo, a Man even when of great Age, lively and active. He retired in his latter days rather through necessity, than of his own in∣clination. 1482. He was buried in the Monastery of S. Francis, built by himself at Alcalà de He∣nares; he also made the Church of S. Stephen, till then a Parish, Collegiate. He was addicted to Chimistry and died Poor, yet is said to have left some Money to repair the School at Alcala. On the left hand of the Archbishop's Tomb was buried his Son Troylus, which the Cardinal D. Francisco Ximenez caused to be removed, looking upon it as a Monument of that Prelate's incontinency. From this Troylus are descended the Marquesses of Falces in Navarre, their Sir∣name is Peralta. The Cardinal of Spain succeeded D. Alonso Carrille in the Archbishoprick of Toledo. He was Son to Yn̄igo Lopez de Mendoça, Marquess of Santillana, and Brother to James Hurtado de Mendoça first Duke del Infantado. This Prelate was a Person of great Virtue and Ability, and had this Dignity conferred on him as a Reward for his good Services. D. Ynigo Manrique, Bishop of Jaen, was translated in his stead to the Archbishoprick of Sevil. In Navarre a great Joy was allayed by a greater Sorrow. King Francis, who during the Troubles of Navarre had resided in France, at last, as had been agreed, came to Pamplona with his Mo∣ther, Uncles, and a great Retinue of Nobility of France, and Navarre. He was received Francis Crowned King of Navarre. with great Pomp and a general Applause, Crowned in the Cathedral, and Proclaimed King on the 3d of October. He was then in the flower of his Youth, being 15 years of Age, won∣derful Beautiful, and well inclined. The first thing he did was to forbid upon Pain of Death any Persons whatsoever calling themselves Biamonteses or Agramonteses, the hateful Names of those Factions which had so long distracted that Kingdom. He made Luis Earl of Lerin Constable, and gave him Larraga and other Towns to oblige him, because he was powerful. This done he took a Progress through the Kingdom, punished Malefactors, and secured the Authority of Magistrates. It was proposed to Marry him to secure the Succession. King Ferdinand offered his Daughter the Princess Joanna. The King of France advised him to take to Wife the other Princess Joanna, Daughter to King Henry, then a professed Nun in Portugal, thinking by this means to have an opportunity of subduing Castile. Magdalen the young King's Mother, an Ambitious Woman, was more inclinable to this Match, and there∣fore lest any Violence should be offered her Son, persuaded him to repass the Mountains, where he had large Dominions. He was no sooner come to the City Pau, or S. Paul in Bearne, but he fell sick and died on the 30th of January 1483. His Body was buried in Lescar, a 1483. City in Bearn. His Sister Catherine succeeded him in the Throne, as was her due. By her The young K. of Na∣varre dies. Traitors punished in Portu∣gal. Marriage soon after that Kingdom fell under the Dominion of the French, who enjoyed it not long. In Portugal King John punished some of the Nobility, who had conspired to Murder him, and with their Blood revenged their wicked Designs against his Person. These Nobles were offended at the King's Austere Temper, his Severity in punishing Offenders, and for his great freedom in declaring his Mind. But above all they resented, that contrary to ancient Cu∣stom,
the King's Alguaziles, or Officers, by his special Command, apprehended and punish∣ed Malefactors upon their Estates. They consulted together, and expecting no Redress by fair Means, resolved to use Force. The Heads of this Conspiracy were the Dukes Ferdinand of Bragança, and James of Viseo, the most Powerful Men in the Kingdom, and of the Blood Royal. Many others joined with them, as the Marquess de Montemor, the Earl of Haro, the Duke of Braganca's Brothers, D. Garcia de Meneses Bishop of Ebora, his Brother Ferdinand, and D. Lope du Albuquerque Earl of Penamacor. This Conspiracy was discovered after this manner. The Cortes sate at Ebora. Some good Laws were Established, and among other things it was provided, that the Nobility should not have the Power of Oppressing the People. This the Duke of Bragança complained was a Breach of the ancient Priviledges of the No∣bility, and offered to produce the Grants of Kings to his Predecessors. Lope de Figueredo, his Comptroller, searching for these Papers, found among them others which made out, that the Duke held Correspondence with the King of Castile, to the prejudice of the Crown of Portugal. He carried them privately to the King, who having viewed them, ordered him to Copy them, and return the Originals to the place where he found them. It hapned the Queen in the Spring of the year 1483, was sick at Almarin after Lying in. Her Brother the Duke of 1483. Viseo, and her Brother in Law the Duke of Bragança, came to visit her. The King Enter∣tained them kindly, desiring to put a stop to that Mischief without hazarding a War. At length one morning after hearing Mass, he took the Duke of Bragança aside, there he told him how he was informed of all his Designs and Treasonable Correspondence with Castile, that he was with much difficulty induced to believe it, and yet being convinced of the truth, was willing to Pardon, and bury it in oblivion, advising him to consider none could be more his Friend than he that was so near a Kinsman, and that if any thing had been amiss he ought to have advised him better, or winked at any Error in the Government. This Discourse of the King's surprized the Duke. He begged the King would not give Credit to Informers, who strive to rise upon the Ruins of others, assuring him he would not lay the stain of Disloyalty upon his Family, and affirming with great Imprecations upon himself, that all he said was true. The King went away to Santarem, the Dukes to their Estates, no way departing from their Designs. Mean while F. Ferdinand de Talavera, Prior of Prado, a Monastery of the Order of S. Hierome near Valladolid, and the King's Confessor, was sent to Portugal to Ratifie the late Ratifica∣tions of the Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal. Peace, and Propose, that the Prince and Princess given as Hostages, might be restored to their Parents, which was accordingly done. Only this Alteration was made in the former Ar∣ticles, that Prince Alonso should Marry the Princess Joanna, the youngest Daughter of King Ferdinand, because they were both of an Age. In May the Princess Elizabeth returned to Castile, and Prince Alonso to his Father, the Duke of Bragança accompanying him to Ebora, where the Court was. There he was apprehended, upon Intelligence given by Gaspar Jusarte, that he still held Correspondece with King Ferdinand, by the means of Peter Jusarte. Both Brothers were Rewarded for the Discovery. The Duke was impeached of High Treason, Tried, and Condemned to Death. His Execution was on the 22th of June. With him suf∣fered 6 other Fidalgos or Noblemen, found guilty of the same Crime. The Constable of Portugal, the Dukes Brothers, and others fled. The Dutchess, as soon as she received the News of her Husband's Death, sent her 3 Sons, Philip, James, and Denis, to Castile. Philip died there a Batchelor, James was Pardoned, and returned to Portugal, Denis Married the Hei∣ress of the Earl of Lemos in Castile. His youth saved the Duke of Viseo, the King only giving him a Reprimand the day after the Execution of the other. Neither the Punishment of the one, nor the Mercy extended to the other Duke, had influence enough to prevail with the other Conspirators to desist. They complained that no Man was safe, and that the Duke of Bragança had been wrongfully put to death. Therefore it was resolved the King should be murdered, and the Duke of Viseo set up in his place. They only waited an opportunity to give the Stroke, but before it could be performed all the Conspiracy was detected after this manner. James Tinoco had a Sister who was Mistress to the Archbishop of Ebora: She ha∣ving found out what was contrived, discovered it to her Brother, and he to the King, put∣ting on the Habit of a Franciscan Frier to speak to him at Setuval, that it might be the more private. Vasco Coutin̄o, whose Brother Gutierre Coutin̄o was one of the Conspirators, gave the King the same Account: He was afterwards Rewarded with the Earldom of Barba and Estre∣moz. The King went out to Visit a Church near Setuval, and with him the Conspirators, being resolved to execute their Design as he came out of the Church. By good fortune one of his Bed-chamber, whose Name was Faria, warned him of the Danger he was in. He spoke cour∣teously to the Conspirators, which abated somewhat of their Rage; however he got into ano∣ther Church in the Suburb of that City, called Nuestra Sen̄ora la Antigua. This he did to gain time till more of his Followers could come up, and therefore continued long talking with Vasco Coutin̄o. This perplexed the Conspirators, fearing if that Opportunity were lost, some of the Number might obtain a Reward with the Ruin of the rest. The King having escaped that Danger, sent, upon some other Pretence, for the Duke of Viseo, who was with his Mo∣ther at Palmela, waiting the issue of the Contrived Treason. Not imaging any Discovery, he adventured to obey the King's Call. No sooner did he enter the Chamber where the King was, but the King himself, in the presence of a few that were there, Stab'd him, saying these Words, Go tell the Duke of Bragança what all his Contrivances are come to. The Duke of Viseo was about
30 years of age when he came to this end. Astrologers had Prognisticated he should be a King. All his Estate was given to his Brother Emanuel, with the Title of Duke of Beja. He afterwards came to be King of Portugal, and created his Tutor James de Silva Earl of Porta∣legre. Some of the other Conspirators were taken, as the Archbishop of Ebora, his Brother Ferdinand, and Gutierre Coutin̄o. The rest lived poor, and died miserably in Castile. On the 30th of August died Luis XI. King of France, near Tours. He ordained in his Will that Rus∣sillon and Cerdagne should be restored to the former Owner. His Son Charles VIII. succeeded Luis XI. King of France dies. him, being but 13 years of age, sickly and mishapen. His Father caused him to be bred at Amboise, allowing but a few Servants to converse with him. Neither would he allow him so much Learning as his Grammar. He said all the Latin he had need of was these Words, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare. But we have out-run the time we were upon; to begin the next Book, it will be necessary to turn back to relate the Affairs of Castile. The End of the 24th BOOK.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXV. CHAP. I. The beginning of the War with Granada; King Albohacen surprizes Zahara; Alhama taken from the Infidels, and in vain besieged by them again. WE will begin this Book with the famous War of Granada, which was begun and carried on by King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth, for the space of ten The fa∣mous War with the Moors of Granada. Years, and in which happened many things very remarkable, and bloudy Battels were fought. The end of it was fortunate to Spain, and delightful to all Christendom, since it put a period to the Monarchy of the Moors, which had conti∣nued in this Nation above 700 Years, to our great Shame and Reproach The Kingdom of Granada lies between Murcia and Andaluzia, is about 700 Miles in compass, and extends far∣ther in length than breadth. From Ronda to Huesca it is counted 60 Leagues in length, and from Cambil to Almun̄ecar only 25 in breadth. It is bounded on the East with the Kingdom of Murcia, on the South with the Mediterranean Sea, on the West and North with Andaluzia. The Country is pleasant, and as fruitful as any in Spain, the very Mountains being full of Springs, and consequently always green. This occasions the Weather to be temperate both in Summer and Winter, especially in the City of Granada, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, one of the noblest and largest of all Spain, from which all that Province takes Name, and the City it self had it of a Cave which reaches to a Village called Alfahor, where it is reported the Natives formerly studied Art Magick. Gar in Arabick signifies a Cave, and certain Sol∣diers who came over with Tarif to the Conquest in Spain, being Natives of the City Nata in Syria, after that unhappy War was ended, fixed their abode in that Place. Of Gar and Nata was framed the Name Granada, as some Learned Men will have it. Other Etymologies of this Name are to be found, but it is needless to spend time in discussing that point. It is certain, that when this War began, there were in that Kingdom 14 Cities and 97 Towns. The principal Cities next to the Capital were Almeria, Malaga, and Guadix, called by Pliny Acci. They are all three Bishopricks, and well Peopled. The Division of Spain under so many several Monarchs, and the continual Supplies sent out of Africk, maintained this King∣dom of the Moors so many Ages. As soon as the Holy Inquisition was established, and the Authority of the Magistrates restored to its Vigour, Spain gathered Strength to extirpate the Dominion of the Moors: Besides the former Animosities betwixt the Two Nations of Moors and Christians on account of Religion, and Wrongs sustained in an Oppression of so many Years, the Infidels now added a new Motive for declaring War. Which was, That on the 27th of December, 1481. King Albohacen having Intelligence the Town of Zahara was unpro∣vided, he surprized it, that Place having been in the hands of the Christians ever since Prince 1481. Ferdinand, Grandfather to King Ferdinand, took it from the Moors. It was taken in a dark stormy Zahara surprized by the Moors. Night, all the Townsmen that made resistance being put to the Sword, and the rest carried away Slaves to Granada. This Town the Moors fortified. K. Ferdinand and Q. Elizabeth, who were at Me∣dina del Campo, derstanding what had hapned, sent Orders to the Commanders on the Frontiers, and the Cities, to prepare for War, and be upon their Guard. The Moors excused themselves, pleading it was customary during a Truce to make Incursions on both sides, and even to take Towns, provided above 3 Days were not spent in the Attack, and they did not for∣mally encamp before them. Under this same Pretence, the Infidels, at the beginning of the following Year, 1482. attacked Castellar and Olbera, but could not carry them. These Wrongs moved the Christians to seek Revenge. A good Body gathered at Sevil with all Necessaries. 1482. Whilst they consulted on which side to make an Incursion, advice was given them that the Town of Alhama was ill Garisoned, and might easily be surprized. James Merlo, Deputy of Sevil, and the Marquess of Cadiz, with 2500 Horse, and 4000 Foot, marched 3 Days, and came to a Valley encompassed with high Hills. There they informed the Soldiers, who were much fatigued, that Alhama was but half a League from them, and encouraged them to undergo the small Labour that remained chearfully, putting them in mind of the rich Booty that Place would afford. 300 chosen Men advanced, and came late at night to the Walls. Perceiving no noise in the Castle, they applied their Scaling-Ladders, and mounted the Wall. Alhama taken by the Chri∣stians. The first that got up was John de Ortega, then another John born at Toledo, and the third Martin Galindo, all three resolute Soldiers. They killed the Sentinels, who were asleep, and some others; then opening the Gate, all the others rushed in. The Townsmen speedily cast up Works to secure themselves against the Castle, and were attacked at break of day by our Men;
but without success. Sancho de Avila, Governor of Carmona, and Martin de Rojas of Arcos, be∣bing too forward, were both killed in the Castle-Gate. Any delay was dangerous, because Granada was but 8 Leagues off. Some were for demolishing the Castle, and retiring: The Bolder sort were against quitting the Enterprize upon any account. This Advice prevailed, and the Town was assaulted on all sides. Some from without scaled the Walls; thither the Moors bent their whole Force, which gave those in the Castle an opportunity of entring the Town on that side. A resolute Fight was maintained in the Streets. The Christians were the better Soldiers, but the Infidels more numerous; yet both Parties stood their ground till night, when such as remained of the Enemy retired to a Mosque, where many were killed, and the rest made Slaves. Thus the loss of Zahara was doubly repaid. This was the beginning of that tedious and bloody War. Alhama was taken on the last Day of February. The taking of this Place struck a Terror into the Moors, and caused the Christians to stand upon their Guard. The Moors finding the Christians gained footing so near Granada, feared the approach∣ing Downfal of that Kingdom: Besides, they were afflicted at some Apparitions seen in the Air, and because an old Fortune-teller, as soon as the Infidels took Zahara, is said to have cried out, The Ruine of that Town (God grant what I say prove false) will fall upon our Heads! My Mind gives me the End of our Dominion in Spain draws near. This caused the King to raise Men Alhama in vain be∣sieged by the Moors. throughout his Kingdom, and to march towards Alhama with 3000 Horse, and about 50000 Foot. So great an Army was terrible to our Men, who could not quit the Place without much Dishonour. They sent Messengers to all Parts to hasten Relief, and mean while ceased not Day or Night to repair the Walls and add new Works. The Safety of the Town consist∣ed in that the Enemy for haste brought no Cannon, or other Engines for Battery. There∣fore all their Assaults proved unsuccessful, for our Men bravely made good the Walls. The sharpest Dispute was at the River which runs near the Town, in which there being no Foun∣tains nor Cisterns, the Besieged were obliged to go out for Water: The Moors laboured to turn the River another way, which (tho' with much loss) they performed, cutting a new Channel. D. Alonso de Aguilar marched from Cordova with 1000 Horse and 3000 Foot to the Relief of the Besieged; but all Passes being secured by the Enemy, was forced to return without effect∣ing any thing. All the Hopes that remained was in the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and that not much, because of his ancient Enmity with the Marquess of Cadiz; to which was added, that he resented that Expedition had been undertaken without consulting him. The Love of his Country prevailed with his Generous Spirit above private Animosities, and the Publick Danger reconciled those Opposites. Having resolved to relieve the Besieged, he took the Royal Standard out of Sevil, and joined with other Noblemen, particularly D. Roderick Giron, Master of Calatrava, and D. James Pacheco, Marquess of Villena. They gathered about 5000 Horse and 40000 Foot. King Ferdinand the very Day he received the News of the taking of Al∣hama, and the Danger our Men were in, set forward with speed from Medina del Campo, leaving Orders for the Queen to follow him. He sent Orders to the Noblemen not to enter the Moorish Territories before he came, because it was requisite to carry a greater force. The great want of Water the Besieged endured made all delay dangerous; therefore the Lords notwithstanding that Order marched. The Moors expected not their coming, but raised the Siege, and departed. Then the Besieged marched out to meet those that came to their Re∣lief, and joyfully embraced one another. The Marquess of Cadiz embraced the Duke of Medina Sidonia; they saluted one another courteously, and so ended the Hatred which had been betwixt those two Families for many Years. This Joy was very near being converted into Sorrow, by a Dispute arising among the Soldiers. Those that came to relieve the Be∣sieged, pretended to have share in the Plunder of the Town, and from Words they had come to Blows, but that the Duke pacified his Men with fair Speeches, and promises of leading them to greater Plunder. A fresh Garrison was put into the Town, and the Army marched back. Immediately the Moors returned to the Siege, and several Parties went out to plunder the neighbouring Country. The Infidels observing the highest part of Alhama being difficult of access, was slenderly guarded, scaled it before break of day on the 20th of April. Our Men taking the Alarm, charged the Enemy with such Fury, that several of them were killed, and the rest to save themselves leaped over the Walls. Two Citizens of Sevil signalized them∣selves in this Action, the one called Peter Pineda, the other Alonso Ponce. CHAP. II. Preparations for carrying on the War against the Moors; Loxa in vain Besieged, and that War laid aside for some time; Some Tumults in Galizia; A great Slaughter of Christians on the Mountains of Malaga. WHilst the Moors lay before Alhama, the King and Queen consulted at Cordova about Preparati∣ons for War with the Moors. prosecuting the War, Some advised to abandon Alhama as hard to be defended, being encompassed with Enemies on all sides. The Queen was positive it ought to be defen∣ded: Her Opinion prevailed, and by the Advice of James de Merlo, whom the King held in
great account, it was resolved to besiege Loxa, a very strong City not far from Alhama. Ezija was the Place appointed for the Army to Rendezvous; about 5000 Horse and 8000 Foot gathered there: A small Number for so great an Undertaking. After the Moors were gone, the King marched with part of these Forces to Alhama, on the 29th of April. He put a new Garrison into the Place, and left D. Luis Portocarrero, Lord of Palma, a great Soldier, to Command there. Then having wasted the Plain of Granada without sustaining any loss, he returned to Cordova to make the necessary Preparations for War. Besides, the Queen was near her time, and he was willing to be present at her lying in. On the 29th of July she was delivered of two Children; the one that lived was called Mary, the other was dead. Hence the People took occasion to frame Omens of the Success of the War according to every Man's Fancy. But what most troubled them was to see those who carried the Standards to Church to be Blessed look extraordinarily melancholy. Others laughed at all these Observations as at vain and accidental things. The day following the King went away to Ezija, all Persons of any Note striving to have part in that Undertaking. According as had been resolved they marched to Loxa, where they encamped and entrenched themselves near the Suburbs among Olive Gardens, on that side where the River Xenil is so straightned by high Banks, that it is not sordable. The Ground was streight, and not proper for the Horse, and the Citizens be∣ing Masters of the Bridge, it was hard to pass the River. Near this place is a Hill called Al∣bohacen, which being commodious to hinder the Enemy from sallying, and to command the City, the Master of Calatrava, and Marquesses of Villena and Cadiz, were ordered to possess themselves of it. Within the City were about 3000 Horse, Commanded by Alatar a Brave Loxa be∣sieged by the Chri∣stians without success. Captain. They made several Sallies, particularly upon a Saturday, being encouraged by some Recruits they had received, and the Hopes that the King of Granada was marching to relieve them, they attacked our Post upon the Hill, sallying in two Bodies. Our Guards being sur∣prized, fled. Those that encamped next them, came to their Relief, but without any Order, or leaving a Guard in the Camp. The other Body of Moors laying hold of this Opportunity, easily made themselves Masters of our Works, which greatly discouraged those that were en∣gaged. However, they ran to defend their Camp, and behaved themselves with great Bra∣very. The Enemy pressed them in Front and Rear, which was the cause our Men were de∣feated. The Master of Calatrava was killed, with many others; the rest saved themselves by flight. King Ferdinand discouraged by this Misfortune, and perceiving that what his Brother the Duke de Villahermosa had said was true, to wit, That the Army was encamped in a dis∣adventageous Post; as also understanding the Enemy's Army marched towards him, the next day marched away as far as the Lovers Rock, called Pen̄a de los Enamorados, which was seven Leagues distant from Loxa. He retired in good Order, the Marquess of Cadiz facing the Enemy, who continually charged the Rear, but were so bravely received they fled to the City. This was the end of that ill laid Design. The Moors encouraged by this Success, re∣turned to the Siege of Alhama. King Ferdinand, on the 14th of August, in Person relieved the Besieged, laid in Provision for 9 Months, and gave the Lieutenancy of that Place to D. Luis Osorio, who tho' Elect Bishop of Jaen, was a brave and experienced Soldier. Be∣sides, the King plundered and burnt all the Plain of Granada. 600 Moors came out of the City to skirmish, but the Earl of Cabra, and Chief Commendary of Calatrava, killed many of them, and forced the rest back into the Town. These were great Losses to the Moors; but the greatest Mischief was Discord among themselves; for a great number of the Citizens of Granada taking Arms, drove their King Albohaçen out of the City: They accused him of Tyranny, and of beginning that bloody War. In his Place they set up his own Son Mahomet Boabdil, commonly called the Little King; others call him Haley Muley Alcadurbil. Malaga, Baça, and some other Cities, continued Loyal to King Albohaçen. Thus that Nation was di∣vided betwixt Two Factions, which did them no less harm than the Enemies abroad. It is remarkable, that amidst these Confusions neither Party asked Aid of the Christians; but in the heat of the Civil War, made Incursions into their Territories, and took the Town of Can̄ete on the Frontiers of that Kingdom. Other Affairs for some time diverted the King and Queen from the War with the Moores, The War with the Infidels put off for some time. and they returned to the Kingdom of Toledo. The Command of the Frontiers about Ezija was given to D. Peter Manrique, Earl of Trevin̄o, and lately created Duke of Najara. D. A∣lonso de Cardenas, Master of Santiago was to Command about Jaen. The Government of Sevil was given to D. John de Silva Earl of Cifuentes. All things thus settled, the King and Queen came to Madrid about the beginning of Winter. There the Cortes assembled to regu∣late the Association set on Foot some Years before as has been said, that they might not abuse the Power they had. Supplies were also demanded for the Expences of the War, and they offered to furnish 16000 Beasts for Carriage. Pope Sixtus commanded the Clergy to contribute 100000 Ducats for once. He also granted the Croisade to such as served at their own Cost, or at least contributed a certain small Sum of Money. This was again granted 3 Years after, and has continued ever since, being Yearly Collected, which brings a great Sum of Money into the Kings Coffers. Besides all this, much Money was borrowed of Bankers and other private Persons. The Aragonians would not receive D. Raimund Folch Earl of Cardona for their Viceroy, and pleaded it was a breach of their Priviledges to put a Stranger over them. After some debate the King condescended, and constituted his Son
Alonso de Aragon, Archbishop of Zaragoça Viceroy. The designs of the Portugueses and Na∣varrois did not a little perplex King Ferdinand. The King of Portugal proposed to Marry his Neece the Princess Joanna Daughter to King Henry, to Francis Phebus King of Navarre, who was not yet dead. Navarre favoured France. To prevent danger Ambassadors were sent to both. Those who went to Navarre, which was after the death of that King, had orders to propose a Match betwixt Queen Catherine who had Inherited that Crown, and Prince John King Ferdinand's Son. They had also instructions to endeavour to gain all the Men in Power, particularly the Faction of the Biamonteses, that was possessed of Pamplona, and most of the Kingdom, the Queen having little left her but the Name, tho' she had ap∣pointed a Viceroy, who was Monsieur de Abene, a Frenchman, well versed in Affairs of that nature. Magdalen the Queen's Mother seemed pleased at the Match, and said there could be nothing on her side to obstruct so advantageous a proposal. In Galicia the Con∣stable and Earl of Benavente with their followers were in Arms. Each of them strove to seize the Castles of the Bishops, to be in a better Condition to oppose his Adversary. King Ferdinand to prevent mischief, Ordered Ferdinand de Acun̄a Governor of that Country to seize those Places. The Governor besieging the Castle of Lugo, D. Peter Ossorio Earl of Lemos came with Forces to the Assistance of his Brother who was Bishop of that City. This Troubles Galicia. produced a new War, which obliged King Ferdinand to set out from Madrid on the 11th of February 1413, and hasten into Galicia. By the way he received advice that the Earl of 1483. Lemos was dead. He appointed his Grandson Roderick, his Heir, tho' a Bastard of his Son Alonso. The Grandfather obtained a dispensation of the Pope to make him Legitimate, and put him into possession of his Estate before his death. This produced a new debate, for Joanna Daughter to the Earl deceased, and Wife to D. Luis the Earl of Benavente's Son, claimed that Earldom. Upon this account both Parties were in Arms. King Ferdinand Com∣manded them to stand to the determination of the Law, threatning to fall upon him that should refuse, yet he favoured the Grandson of the deceased, who was in possession. Whilst he was busie in Galicia, the Moores near Malaga made a great slaughter of our Men, which was the greatest loss we sustained during that War. Peter Enriquez Lieutenant of Andaluzia having with the Assistance of the Earl of Cadiz recovered his Town of Can̄ete and Fortified it, was desirous to be revenged upon the Moores. D. Alonso de Aguilar and the Master of Santiago had also resolved to make an Incursion into the Moorish Territories. The Earl of Cifuentes had attempted to recover Zahara, but failed. All these Commanders agreed to make an Inroad into the Territory of Malaga in three Bodies. That Country is rich by reason of the Silken manufactures, and therefore they hoped to make a considerable Booty. Near Malaga there are certain uncouth Mountains called Axarquia, over those Mountains they Marched, plunder∣ed Slaughter of the Christians and burnt all the Country, and some Parties of Horse advanced even in sight of Malaga. This provoked the Citizens, and the People of the Mountains assembled and secured all the Passes. Our Men sought to retire, but could not. There were two Ways, the longest by the Sea, which was plainest, but dangerous, because of the Castle of Malaga, and several Creeks that cross it. The other through which they came was shorter, but very difficult by reason of the Woods and Mountains. Two Mountains particularly close up a deep Vally, through the middle of which runs a River that parts them. Our Men entred this Valley in a Con∣sternation, encumbred with the Booty, when on the one side the Moores attacked them, and on the other they saw the Pass secured by another Party, which added much to their Fear. They were Tyred with Marching two days, Faint for want of Food, and could neither go backwards nor forwards. Many were killed with Arrows and Musket Shot, the Moores being very good Marksmen. Night coming on, the Terror increased with the darkness and the continual shouts of the Enemy. Then the Master of Santiago cryed out, How long shall we suffer our selves Fellow-Soldiers to be Slaughtered like sheep? Our Swords and our Valour must open the Way, or at least let us endeavour to Sell our Lives dear, and not die unrevenged. Having spoke thus, they began to ascend the Hill, and with much difficulty reached to the Top. There the Fight was bloody, and the Slaughter on our side great, ma∣ny Persons of Note were killed. The Marquess of Cadiz found Guides, who led him off through by-ways. The Earl of Cifuentes his Squadron which brought up the Rear sustained most loss, he and his Brother Peter de Silva were taken and carried to Granada. Of 2700 Horse, 800 were killed, and among them 3 Brothers of the Marquess of Cadiz, James, Lope and Bertran, besides others of his Relations. Near twice as many were taken, and of them 400 of the best Gentry in Spain. Some few with the Master of Santiago escaped over the desert part of the Mountain, and got to Antequera. Others as chance led them, made their way to other Places. This Misfortune hapned upon the 21th of March, being the Feast of St. Benedict, usually a day of Joy in Spain, but now converted into Sorrow. Abohardil Brother to King Albohacen, and Governor of Malaga, who Commanded the Moores, gained great Reputation by this extraordinary Success.
CHAP. III. The Moores defeated, and Boabdil their King taken, and afterwards released; The Af∣faires of Navarre; Pope Sixtus dies, Innocent the Eighth succeeds him; Marquess del Gasto, and Pescara, from whom Descended. THE Sorrow conceived by The Christians for their loss, was soon allayed, by a greater Defeat they gave the Moores. Albohazen and Boabdil the Two Moorish Kings did one Two Moorish Kings at Granada destroy one ano∣ther. another all the harm they could, yet at the same time both endeavoured to gain the Affecti∣on of their People, destroying the Christians. To this purpose Boabdil having gathered a good Body entred the Territory of Ecija, designing to surprize Lucena a Town more large and rich, than strong. Alatar his Father in Law, who from a mean Condition, rose by his Valour to that Honour, gave this Advice. James Fernandez de Cordova who was Lord of that Town, and some others thereabouts, understanding the design of the Moores, gave advice of the danger he was in to his Unckle, the Earl of Cabra. But few Horse remained in those parts, by reason of the late slaughter, and the Inhabitants of Lucena were in a Consternation because their Walls were not Strong to make resistance. The Moores came before the Town on the 21th of April. The Governour coveyed the Townsmen into the upper Town, and gave the guard of the lower, to 200 Horse and 800 Foot he had got together. They de∣fended it so bravely that the Enemy dispairing of Success, and in a rage for some Men they lost in the Attack, vented their Fury upon the Olive Gardens. Besides, Hamet Abencerrage wasted the Lands of Mon̄tilla with 300 Horse. He was samiliarly acquainted with James de Cordova, the Family of the Abencerrages having resided at Cordova, when they were Banished out of Granada. Upon account of this acquaintance, he had an interview with James de Cor∣dova designing to circumvent him. His fraud was disappointed by another policy. The Governor seemed inclinable to surrender the Town, and by that means gained time till the Count de Cabra could come to his Relief. Upon the news of his approach, the Enemy raised the Siege, and began to March off with the Booty which was very great. The besieged Sallyed and Charged their Rear to keep them in Play till the Earl of Cabra came up. It will Defeat of the Moores. scarce be believed, that tho' the Moores were Ten times the number of the Christians, they did not stand the first shock. A League and a half from Lucena, and in the Way to Loxa, is a pleasant Brook, which then with the Summer Rains was swelled. The Enemies Foot having passed this. Brook, began to fly, only taking care to drive the Booty. Their Horse tho' in a Consternation made a stand, the King himself, striving to encourage them. All proved ineffectual, for the Christians advancing, they were Charged in Flank by D. Alonso de Aguilar, who came from Antequera with 40 Horse, and some few Foot. The Enemy suddenly gave way and fled. The King alighted off from a white Horse, and endeavoured to hide himself among the Trees and Bushes on the Banks of the River. Three Foot Soldi∣ers found him, and he discovered himself for fear of being killed. He was secured and sent Moorish King ta∣ken. to Lucena. In the pursuit which lasted till Night, above 1000 Horse were killed, and among them Alatar being 90 Years of Age, about 4000 Foot were either slain or taken. All the Booty was recovered. Having received the news of this Victory, Queen Elizabeth went a∣way to the Borders of Navarre, to hasten the Marriage betwixt her Son and that Queen. And King Ferdinand hasted to Andaluzia to prosecute the War. Being come to Cordova, it was resolved to raise greater Forces, because after the taking of Boabdil, the Moores were again united under Albohacen, and he had recovered Granada, notwithstanding many of the Citi∣zens hated him for his Cruelty and Avarice. King Ferdinand at the head of 6000 Horse, and 40000 Foot destroyed the Suburbs of Yiora, and having taken Tajara by Assault, utterly de∣stroyed it. Thence he Marched, and Encamping on the plain of Granada, sent out Parties, who burnt and destroyed all about them. King Albohacen having no confidence in the Citi∣zens, durst not venture out of the City, and onely some small Parties came out to endeavour to pick up Staglers. That King sent to offer the Earl of Cifuentes and Nine more of the principal Prisoners he had taken for his Son Boabdil. He also proposed Conditions of Peace but such as were haughty and violent. King Ferdinand answered, he was not come to receive, but to give Laws, and would not hear of any Peace till they laid down their Arms. The Marquess of Cadiz and others, ceased not to perswade the King to release Boab∣dil, because it was a mean to keep the Enemy divided, which would redound to our ad∣vantage. King Ferdinand having wasted the Country and lest a good Garrison in Albama under the Command of Ynigo Lopez de Mendoca Earl of Tendilla, returned to Cordova. Thi∣ther the Moorish King was brought Prisoner from the Castle of Porcuna. Being come before the King he offered to kiss his Hand, but King Ferdinand Embraced and Entertained him courteously. After some time they concluded a League upon these Conditions. That Bo∣abdil should give his Eldest Son and 12 other Sons of the principal Moores as Hostages, that he would always continue faithful to King Ferdinand. That he should pay the yearly Tribute of 12000 Ducats and come to the Cortes when Summoned. That in Five years time he should Release 400 Christian Slaves. Upon these terms he was dismissed. King Ferdinand Moorish King set at Liberty having Garrisoned all Towns thereabouts, and given the Government of Ezija, and general
Command of those Frontiers to D. Luis Fernandez Portocarrero, set out towards the Queen. At the same time 1500 Moorish Horse and 4000 Foot under the Command of Bexir Gover∣nor of Malaga broke into the Territory of Utrera, but were overthrown by Portocarrero and the Marquess of Cadiz near Guadalete. In memory of this good Service, it was granted to the Marquesses of Cadiz for ever, that they should have the Suit of Cloaths the King of Spain wore upon every Feast of the Nativity of our Blessed Lady, which is in September. Within the same Month the Marquess recovered Zahara by surprize. King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth went to Vitoria, tho' with small hopes that the Marriage designed would take effect. The Lady Magdalen pleaded the Queen her Daughter was Marriageable, and the Prince but a Child. At Vitoria the Earl of Cabra and James Fernandez de Cordova were received with extraordinary Honour, the Cardinal of Toledo with all the Nobility by the King's Order, going out of Town to meet them. A Pension of 100000 Maravedies was given to the Earl of Cabra for his Life, and to his paternal Coat of Arms was added a Kings Head Crowned, within an Orle of 7 Colours, betokening that number taken from the Enemy in their Retreat from Lucena. The Winter Floods carryed away a great part of the Wall of Alhama, and the Garrison was for abandoning the Place, but the Earl of Tendilla caused a Cloth painted in such man∣ner that the defect could not be perceived, to be spread along that part. By this project they gained time to repair the Damage before the Enemy understood the Cheat. For want of Money to pay the Garrison, he gave them Pastboard Tickets with his name on the one Side, and the value they were to go for on the other, promising to make them good as soon as the danger was over. On the 15th of November, the Pope gave a Cardinal's Cap to D. John de Melguerite Bishop of Girona. He wrote a brief History of the Kings of Spain, called Paralipomena, but enjoyed that Dignity only a few Months. His Body lies at Rome in the Church of our Lady de Populo. The troubles in Navarre did not cease, and the old Factions grew strong through the ge∣neral Contempt of the Government. To add to all former Misfortunes, a new War broke Rebellion in Na∣varre. out. John Viscount Narbonne Unckle to Queen Catherine, pretended to have Right to that Kingdom before his Nephews, and alledged that a Woman could not Inherit the Crown. The truth is, he had no Right, and therefore by force of Arms brought all the Earldom of Faux into Subjection. To put an end to these troubles, it was thought convenient to hasten the Queen's Marriage. The Lady Magdalen her Mother was for Marrying of her in France. The People pleaded she ought not to Marry without advice of the Cortes, and thereupon the Inhabitants of Tudela protested, if she were disposed of otherwise, they would deliver up the Town to King Ferdinand. He at the beginning of the Year 1484 held the Cortes of Aragon at Taraçona, where nothing remarkable was done, only at first the Catalonians plead∣ed 1484. they ought not to be summoned out of their own Province, yet at last they submitted. Mean while, Catherine Queen of Navarre was married to John d' Albret, Lord of Perigeux, Limoges, Dreux and many other Places. This Match produced new troubles in Navarre, King Ferdinand designing to make his advantage of those Confusions, stayed there himself, and sent his Queen to provide for the War in Andaluzia. Albohaen kept up his Authority, and his Son Boahdil had much ado to maintain the Title of King in the City Almeria, that People hating him as a Friend to the Christians, their Preachers employed by his Father never oeasing to rail at him. About 10000 Men from Sevil and Cordova in April wasted all the Lands of Malaga. No relief came to the Moores out of Africk, either because that People was ingaged in other Wars, or because our Fleet Commanding the Sea, gave them no op∣portunity to stir. All our Force being on that side, the Genoeses under the Command of Jordieto Doria ravaged all the coasts of Catalonia, and Valencia. A Fleet was therefore rigged upon that Coast, to Curb the Insolency of those Pyrates. Some troubles in Ecclesiastical Af∣fairs required the presence of King Ferdinand to settle them. Luis Despuch Master of Montesa dying, the Knights chose D. Philip Boyl in his Place, but King Ferdinand pleading that by vir∣tue of a Bull granted him by the Pope, no Master of a Military Order could be Elected without his Consent, the new Elect was Deposed; and Charles late Duke of Viana chosen in his stead. Also Pope Sixtus gave the Archbishoprick of Sevil to Cardinal Roderick Borgia, but the King opposed him, and it was given to James de Mendoça then Bishop of Palencia. Thus the Kings of Spain began to claim the Right of nominating their Bishops. The Nea∣politans and Venetians were now at War about Hercules Duke of Ferrara, whom the former Protected because he was Married to their King's Daughter. On the 12th of August died Pope Sixtus. His Successor was Cardinal John Baptista Cibo, who took the Name of Inno∣cent Pope Six∣tus dies. Innocent the 8th succeeds. the 8th. At the same time died In̄igo Davalos, Son to the Constable Ruy Lopez Dava∣los. He was in high favour with the Kings of Naples, and left several Children of whom some Princes in Italy are descended, and particularly the famous Ferdinand, Marquess of Pescara, who filled not only Italy, but all the World with the same of his Exploits. Inigo Davalo was Father to D. Alonso, Marquess del Gasto, who was also renowned for his Valour, and his Cousin dying without Children, he Inherited his Estate, which he left to his Heirs, upon Condition one of them should be called Marquess de Pescara, and the next Marquess del Gasto alternatively, as is practised till this day.
CHAP. IV. Alora and other Places taken from the Moores; Albohardil usurps the Crown of Gra∣nada, and defeats the Earl of Cabra; The Rebellion in Naples; Birth of the Princess Catherine of Castile, afterwards Wife to Henry VIII. King of England. IN Andaluzia our Forces never ceas'd to harass the Enemies Country. At Cordoua a Coun∣cil Alcara taken from the Moores. was held to agree about undertaking some Enterprize, and tho the Master of Santiago was of another Opinion, the Marquess of Cadiz his Advice prevailed, which was to attack Alora, a Town almost in the mid-way between Antequera and Malaga. It is stronger by Nature than any addition of Art. The Army was ready to march when King Ferdinand came and approved of the Enterprize. The better to amuze the Enemy, he gave out he was going to put new Forces into Alhama, but being come to Antequera turned short, and set down before Alora unexpected. Our Cannon soon beat down part of the Walls, which so terrified the Moores, that they surrendred on the 21th of June, upon Condition to carry their Goods with them. We lost not one Man in this Siege. Several other Places were at∣tacked, and at one called Caçarabonela, where there was a Skirmish with a Body of the Enemy, D. Gutierre de Sotomayor, Earl of Benalcaçar, being too eager, was killed in the prime of his Age. After this 300 Knights of Calatrava were put into Alhama, under the Command of Garzi Lopez de Padilla, chosen Master of that Order, in the place of Roderick Tellez Giron, de∣ceased. The King marched on, and incamped in sight of Granada. His Army consisted of 6000 Horse, and scarce 10000 Foot. In the City there were reported to be 70000 Comba∣tants, a number scarce to be believed. However King Ferdinand ravaged all that place, and having spent 50 days in this Expedition, returned with his Army entire, and loaded with Plunder to the Christian Territories. The Command of Alora he gave to Luis Fernandez Por∣tocarrero. D. Alvaro de Mendoça, Earl of Castro, was made Admiral, that he being a Man of singular Conduct, might hinder any Succours from passing out of Africk. After the heat of the Summer was over the Christians again took the Field. They battered a Castle near Ma∣laga called Septenil, which the Besieged, terrified with the Cannon, surrendred, being payed for the Provisions they left behind them. Thence our Army marched towards Ronda, a strong and almost inaccessible City, being seated betwixt craggy Mountains, the greatest part of it encompassed by a River, the rest covered with Rocks. The Inhabitants of this place were Resolute and Warlike, and well provided with all Necessaries for their Defence. Our Forces being come in sight of the Walls, destroyed all the Orchards and Olive-Trees there∣abouts, but Money growing short to pay the Soldiers, they made but a short stay there. The Army being put into Winter-quarters, the King and Queen went away to Sevil, and came to that City upon the 2d of October. In the month of January, 1485, the King took the Field, thinking to surprize the City Loxa, but desisted by reason of the Rains and bad Wea∣ther, as also because a Soldier of Note, called John de Ortega, said, that design was impracti∣cable. The Nobility came in daily with their Troops, so that in a little time the Army amount∣ed to 9000 Horse, and 20000 Foot. With this Force it was decreed to prosecute the War. At the same time the Citizens of Almeria, as if their King Boabdil were the Cause of all their Misfortunes, assaulted his Palace, killed his Brother, and secured his Mother, who had been the chief Incendiary betwixt the Father and Son. King Boabdil himself being then out of the Boabdil the Moorish King flies to Cordo∣va. Town, as soon as he received the News of that Misfortune, fled with a few Followers to Cor∣doua. The Inhabitants of Ronda, whose numbers were much decreased, were in a great Con∣sternation. A Moore called Joseph Xerife, gave notice of it to the Marquess of Cadiz, and it was decreed to undertake that Enterprize. First they attacked a Town called Cohine near Alora, which they took by Assault, and razed because it was too large to be defended. Ano∣ther Town called Cartama, of which all the Valley takes Name, was also taken. The Master of Santiago was made Governor of it at his own Request. This done they marched to Ma∣laga, where Albohardil, the Moorish King's Brother, resided, in whose Valour the Moores chiefly confided, for the Reputation he gained in the Slaughter of the Christians on the Moun∣tains of Malaga. Little was done there, and the Army returned the way it came to Ronda. The Forces were divided into 5 parts, that they might encompass the Town on all sides. The King with the greatest Body encamped before the Castle. All the Avenues were secured that no Succours might get into the Town, which was then much weakned, a great number of the Inhabitants being abroad upon Parties to plunder in Andalusia. For these Reasons, and because the Christians advanced their Works with great Industry, the Besieged surrendred upon Articles the 23d of May. Among the other Conditions it was agreed, that some of the Ronda taken. Principal Inhabitants should have Revenues assigned them at Sevil, out of the Estates of Gonçalo Picon, and others condemned by the Inquisition. A good Garrison was put into that City. Several other Towns along the Mountain surrendred, the chief whereof were Caçarabonela, and Marbella, which lies near the Sea. The Moores were in a great Consternation, and had little help in their Kings, the one being fled, the other ancient, sickly, and almost blind. This moved them to choose for their King Muley Albohardil, who resided at Malaga, and was a Man of great Courage and Conduct. He immediately accepted of the Crown they offered
him, went away to Granada; and entred that City in Triumphant manner, being proud that he had killed 90 Christians by the way, who lay very secure upon Sierra Nevada. The Ci∣tizens with great Acclamations proclaimed him King. Albohazen at the beginning of this Mutiny went away to Almun̄ecar, where his Treasure lay. There his cruel Brother caused him to be Murdered, only to secure himself in the Throne he had usurped. King Ferdinand, tho many were of Opinion the Soldiers who were harassed with the late Expeditions ought to rest, commanded the Army to Rendezvous at Alcala Real, because that Town was upon the Frontiers, and went himself thither from Cordcua upon the first of Sep∣tember, notwithstanding the Heat was excessive, that part of the Country being naturally hotter than the rest of Spain. The Earl of Cabra desiring to signalize himself, begged he might first enter the Moorish Territories, as he did with 700 Horse and 3000 Foot. He was ordered to take with him Martin Alonso de Montemayor, and to sit down before Moclin, a strong Town near Granada, the King promising to back them with the whole Army. The Earl marched day and night to surprize the new King Albohardil, who he understood was quartered near that place with 1500 Horse, and a greater number of Foot. This Design being dis∣covered Christians defeated. to the Moore, he removed to a Hill, and at break of day fell upon the Christians in certain Defiles with such fury, that the best Soldiers were killed, and most of the Foot. The Earl lost his Brother Gonçalo, and he with a few Horse fled towards the way where he ex∣pected to meet Garzi Lopez de Padilla, Master of Calatrava, who followed those that had ad∣vanced before. This Loss so troubled King Ferdinand, that he retired for some time. On the Frontier near Jaen, are two Towns and Castles called Cambil, and Albahar. The River Frio runs betwixt them, and tho small, is difficult to be waded, because of its high Banks. Both these Places were besieged, Albahar is beyond the River, and near it is a Hill that commands it, on which the King, tho with much labour, caused the Cannon to be planted. This so terrified the Moores, that they surrendred both Towns and Castles on the 23d of September, being the very day on which they were lost 120 years before. After this the King put the Army into Winter Quarters, and went himself with the Queen to Alcala de Henares. Dur∣ing this Expedition died D. Alonso de Aragon, Duke de Villahermosa, the King's Brother, a brave Commander. His Body was deposited at Baeça, and thence translated to Poplete, the burial-place of his Ancestors. Of him are descended the Dukes of Villahermosa, and Earls of Ribagorça. In Toledo the Inquisition severely punished those who renouncing the Christian Faith became Jews. A great number of those People who were reconciled, and implored Mercy, was pardoned. They are now called De la Gracia, that is, the People of Grace. The Nobility of Naples had now raised a Bloody War against their King Ferdinand, upon the usual Pretences. Pope Innocent favoured them, but it was rather in Words than Effect, for he Rebellion in Naples. was ancient, and otherwise employed. The chief of the Conspirators were the Princes of Sa∣lerno, Basigniano, and Altamura, as also the Marquess del Gasto. It was reported that Frederick, the King's Son, under-hand supported the Rebels, but this could never be proved. The Wicked Life of Alonso, Duke of Calabria, the King's Eldest Son, was one great Motive of this Revolt. The King resolved to reduce the Rebels rather by Policy than Force, and there∣fore gave his General Pardon to all the Mutiniers. King Ferdinand of Spain also sent the Earl of Tendilla his Ambassador, to ingage to those Noblemen for their safety, provided they laid down their Arms. But the King of Naples, as soon as the Storm was over, made no account of those Promises, and at several times, as occasion served, seized the Heads of the Rebellion, and put them all to death. King Ferdinand of Castile ceased not to protest against those Proceed∣ings, but he of Naples ceased not to proceed in cutting off his Enemies, which proved fatal to him at last, as we shall see in its place. Let us turn back. On the 16th of December Queen Elizabeth at Aloala de Henares, was delivered of a Daughter, called Catherine, well known in the World as Wife to two Brothers, Sons to the King of England, and for her great Sufferings caused by the inordinate Lust and infidelity of her Husband, which also drew great Calamities upon the whole English Nation. Their Sins and Rebellion drew Judgments upon them. Richard III. having murdered his Two Nephews, Edward and Richard, the rightful Heirs of the Crown, usurped the Kingdom. He Govern'd like a Tyrant, and ended accordingly. Henry Earl of Richmond, who had been a Prisoner in Britany, having obtained his Liberty, overthrew the Tyrant in Battle, and killed him. By that means he secured the Crown to himself. This Henry had a Son called Henry like himself, who was the Eighth of that Name King of England, and famous for his Incontinency, for putting away Catherine his Wife, and for disowning the Supremacy of the Pope, besides many other Crimes which have left an in∣delible stain upon his Name.
CHAP. V. The Tumults in Aragon, and Catalonia; Several Towns taken from the Moores; A Sedition in Galicia; King Albohardil attacks the Castle call'd Albaizin in Granada, and is repulsed; Azamor on the Coast of Africk delivered to the Portugueses. SOme small Tumults hapned in Aragon, but those in Catalonia were more dangerous, yet Tumults in Aragon and Cata∣lonia. the Prudence of King Ferdinand overcame them all. The City Zaragoça is seated in a Plain on the Banks of the River Ebro, and is in Beauty, Riches, and number of Inhabitants, almost equal to the best in Spain. This Place has often Mutinied in defence of its Priviledges, as it hapned at this time. John de Burgos, the King's Alguazil, gave some ill Language to Peter Cerdan, the Chief of the Aldermen, and Head of their Counsel. Others coming in apprehended the Alguazil, Tried, Condemned, and Hanged him, which was a great Affront to the King. He was then upon the point of entring upon the Kingdom of Granada with his Army, and therefore sent Orders to John Hernandez de Heredia, supream Governor of that Kingdom, to punish all that had a Hand in that Affair with the utmost rigor, and at the same time told the Deputies sent by the City, that no harm should be done; for he was ex∣pert in Dissembling. The Head of the Aldermen could not be apprehended, because the Chief Justice of Aragon protected him, but Martin Pertusa, who was the next, and had been very active in the Business of the Alguazil, was suddenly Executed, the King's Letters being carried before him upon a Spear to awe the People, who were ready to Rescue him. This struck a Terror into the others, and so the Sedition was appeased. Soon after another Tu∣mult hapned upon account of a more Hainous Crime than the last. Peter Arbuc was Inquisi∣tor in that City, and punished Offenders according to their Crimes. Certain wicked Mur∣derers, under colour of standing up for their Liberties, attempted to Murder him in his Bed, but not being able to force the Iron Bars of his Window, they Stabbed him in the Church before the High Altar, as he was at Mattins, on the 14th of September. He died not till the night following, which time he spent in Singing Praises to Almighty God. His Body was buried in the same place where they Murdered him, and soon after a Lamp was hung over his Grave, an Honour never allowed to any but Canonized Saints Charles V. the Emperor, obtained of Pope Paul III. that his Feast might be Celebrated on the 15th of September, as is duely now observed. All his Murderers died unfortunately within a year. After this, for the safety of the Inquisitors, they were lodged in the Castle called Del Aljaferia. This in Aragon. In Catalonia, and particularly the Territory of Ampurias, those Vassals who are vulgarly called Pageses, were oppressed by their Landlords, and Treated like Slaves. Those Lords obliged them to pay the heavy Impositions laid on them by the Moores, pleading Prescription to justifie this Proceeding. The Histories of Catalonia do not mention what Impositions these were, they only say they were very heavy, and that none was exempt from them but such as Ran∣somed themselves like Slaves. This moved the People often to take up Arms to deliver them∣selves from that Tyranny, but the Efforts of the Multitude for the most part are weak. They had recourse to their Kings for Redress, and several of them ordered those Impositions to be moderated, yet the Nobility would not part with any thing of what had been left them by their Ancestors. King Ferdinand at last, with his usual. Success, and good Conduct, put an end to all those Debates. From Alcala de Henarez the King and Queen went to Segovia, and thence to Medina del Campo. By the way they visited D. Garzia de Toledo, created by the King Duke of Alva, who now lived retired by reason of his great Age, having left his Son Frede∣rick to serve in his place. This the King did not only to Honour him, but to Reconcile him to the Constable Peter Fernandez de Velasco, to whom with D. Alonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of Sevil, he intended to leave the Government of Castile, whilst he prosecuted the War in Granada. In order to it he went to Guadalupe, where on the 28th of April he decided 1482. the Affair of the Pageses, ordaining, that in lieu of the old Imposition every one of those Vassals should pay to his Lord 70 Sueldos, or Shillings of Barcelona yearly, which tho a heavy Burden, was joyfully accepted by those People, and the more for that they were allowed to buy it off at 20 years purchase. Thus after long Disputes that part of Spain was pacified. In Portugal all was quiet since the death of those Nobles we have spoken of, and the King laboured to make his Kingdom renowned. Azamor, a City in Mauritania Tingitana on the Ocean, ha∣ving Azamor in Africk submits to the Portugue∣ses. formerly been Tributary to the King of Portugal, now took an Oath of Fidelity to him, and in acknowledgment of subjection obliged it self to give yearly 10000 Alosas, which is a sort of Fish that abounds there. It was a greater Honour to that Nation and its Princes, that they had not only formerly maintained their Liberty, and Erected a Kingdom to which they had no good Title, but did now subdue remote Cities and Provinces to their great glory and advantage. The Kingdom of the Moores decayed apace: Civil Discord consumed them no less than the Enemy abroad. In the City of Granada, Boabdil being called in by his Party, possessed him∣self of a Castle called Albaycin, and the Citizens sought and killed one another in the Streets. Yet they joined to oppose the Christians, and the danger being over to War among them∣selves Divisions among the Infi∣dels. again. An Alsaqui, which is in the Nature of a Priest, esteemed a Holy Man, went
about the Streets proclaiming their Madness, and threatning speedy ruin unless they grew wiser in time. His Words moved the People, and therefore through his Mediation, and of others of his Profession, the Two Kings came to an Agreement upon these Terms. That the Uncle should still keep Granada, Almeria, and Malaga; all the rest should belong to his Nephew Boabdil, who, I guess, resided in the Albaycin before-mentioned, tho our Historians do not mention it. Their chief design was, that Boabdil should have all those Places which they imagined the Christians would first attack, because he was in League with King Ferdinand. The Christians were not ignorant of their Policy, therefore having assembled their Forces they resolved to attempt Loxa. Boabdil advanced with 500 Horse to stop the passage of our Men, who were to march through uncouth and difficult ways. Nevertheless they came to the Suburbs of the City, where they had a Skirmish with the Moores whom they forced back into Loxa and other Places taken. the Walls. The Army was divided into 3 parts, the better to compass the Town, and the Bridge that led to it broken down. But the Christians built two others, to secure the Commu∣nication for themselves. A breach being made by the Cannon, and all things in readiness to assault it, the City surrendred the 9th day of the Siege, capitulating for liberty to depart with as much of their Goods as they could carry. Boabdil coming to the Camp, fell down on his Knees, protesting it was against his Will he had broke his Faith, and that he was forced to it. His Excuses were allowed, and he pardoned, because it was convenient to wink at his Faults, to keep up the Division that was among the Moores. King Ferdinand fortified the City, and gave the Command of it to Alvaro de Luna, Lord of Fuentiduen̄a, and Grandson to the Constable D. Alvaro de Luna. This done he marched to reduce other Places. Some few made resistance, but in vain, the most surrendred. Among others Illora was taken on the 28th of June, and after it Ban̄os, Zagra, and Moclin. Some of these Places were very strong, and might have held out long, being near Granada, whence they could be relieved. The Com∣mand of Illora was given to Gonçalo Fernandez de Cordova, afterwards the famous General in Italy. The Citizens of Granada used to call Illora the Right Eye, and Moclin the Buckler of that City, for which reason they began to despair of maintaining themselves, besides that the Christians destroyed all the Country about them. Nevertheless Albohardil sent part of his Horse to the Bridge called De los Pinos, a Place well known for the Slaughter of our Men made there formerly. These were to hinder the Christians passing the River Xenil. He him∣self stayed in the City to prevent Disorders. The Moores could not hinder the Christians pas∣sing the River, but charged the Left Squadron that passed, which was commanded by D. In̄igo de Mendoça Duke del Infant ado. Our Men were hard put to it, being beset by 1000 Horse and 10000 Foot, but the other Forces coming to their Rescue the Moores retired. Still our Men pursued close upon their Rear, and the Fight was renewed in the Olive Gardens of the City. D. John de Aragon, Earl of Ribagorça, signalized himself in this Ingagement, and had his Horse killed under him. King Ferdinand, the Summer being near spent, Garrisoned the Towns he had taken, and left D. Frederick, Son to the Duke of Alva, to Command on the Frontiers, by that means ending the Competition betwixt the Nobility of Andaluzia about that Post. At this time Galicia was in an uproar, because the Earl of Lemos had possessed himself of Pon∣ferrada, a very strong Town, and turned out the King's Garrison. The Earl upon his sub∣mission was pardoned, only that Town with some others were taken from him, and annexed to the Crown. The King and Queen having performed their Devotions at Santiago, returned to Salamanca, at the beginning of the year 1487. Here they resolved to erect a new supream Court in Galicia, to curb that Mutinous People. Frederick, Son to the Duke of Alva, was 1487. ambitious of signalizing himself. A great number of Christian Captives that were kept in the Dungeons of Malaga gave intelligence, that if the Christians attempted the Town, they would break Prison, and let them into the Town. Six hundred Horse sent by him to this pur∣pose were disappointed, because the Rivers were swelled and impassable. In the City Gra∣nada the Animosities ran as high as ever betwixt the Two Moorish Kings, insomuch that Albo∣hardil having brought Forces from Guadix and Baça, attacked the Castle of Albaicin and en∣tred it. Boabdil coming on with his Guard, soon repulsed his Enemy. They fought despe∣rately in the place before the great Mosque, and many were killed on both sides. King Ferdi∣nand came from Salamanca to Cordova on the 2d of March. Thence, understanding the dan∣ger that King his Confederate was in, he sent him Succours under the Command of Ferdinand Alvarez de Gadea, Commander of Colomera. With this Supply he gained much upon his Ad∣versary, to the great destruction of the Citizens, who like Mad men ran to their Ruin, siding with the Two Kings.
CHAP. VI. King Ferdinand takes Malaga and other Places from the Moores; Albohardil King of Granada having been defeated by the Christians, is expell'd by his Subjects, and Boab∣dil proclaimed King; Mighty Discoveries made by the Portugueses in the East. IT was debated at Cordova how to carry on the War. Some were for besieging Baça, o∣thers King Fer∣dinand takes Ma∣laga, and other Places. Gudix. The King resolved to attempt Malaga, because it lay opportunely for the Moores to receive Succours out of Africk, the passage there being but short. He set out of Cordova on the 7th of April, without communicating his Design to any Body. His Army consisted of 12000 Horse and 40000 Foot. Being come upon the Moorish Territories he dis∣covered his Design, and encouraged his Men to undertake that great and glorious Work, assuring them it would be the Ruin of the Infidels Dominion in Spain. The King's Will being known, all the Soldiers readily promised to undergo any labour or danger, shewing their rea∣diness to follow wheresoever he would lead. In their March the Army attacked Velez, a Town near Malaga. The Garrison sallying, fell upon the Troops of Galicia, which, tho couragious enough, not being well Disciplined, were worsted, till other Forces coming up, the Enemy were drove within the Walls. The Suburbs being taken, the Artillery was planted to batter the Town. All the Country about rose to succour the Besieged, but to no purpose. Albohardil understanding the Design of the Christians, resolved to relieve that City, on which his whole Kingdom depended. To this purpose he sent before Reduan Venegas, Governor of Granada, a brave Soldier, with some Foot, and 300 Horse, promising to follow them very speedily. Reduan designed to surprize our Guards, and nail the Cannon. His Design failed. The Moorish King came, and incamped on a Ground difficult of access near the Town. In his Army were 20000 Horse, and a like number of Foot. Tho weaker than the Christians he thought the advantage of Ground might secure him; it availed him not, for the Christians charged him, forced his Works, and plundered his Baggage. Their Consternation was such that all fled, and what was worst, the poor King being overthrown and forsaken, the People of Granada at his return shut the Gates against him. This done, they all unanimously pro∣claimed his Competitor Boabdil. No hopes of Relief being left, Velez was surrendred on the 27th of April, upon Condition the Inhabitants might depart whither they pleased, carrying their Goods with them. Immediately upon the surrender of Velez, another Town near it called Bentome opened its Gates, and received a Garrison. The Government of this Town was given to Peter Navarro, who being by Birth a Mean Person, and but a Private Sailer, became a most famous Captain. The People of Malaga despairing that they should be able to hold out long, Abenconnixa their Governor, with the assistance of John de Robles, who had been long a Slave in Malaga, came to the Army to Treat of a Surrender. Certain Soldiers of Barbary who were in Garrison there, having notice of this Design, fearing left they should be delivered up to the Enemy, and in a rage because they had not been consulted in that Affair, possessed themselves of the Castle that commands the City, called Alcaçava, turned out the Garrison that was in it, and killed a Brother of Abenconnixa. Then placing Guards on the Walls, and shutting the Gates, they put any of the Townsmen to death that were suspected of holding Correspondence with the Christians. The thoughts of a Surrender fail∣ing, the King caused heavy Cannon to be brought from Antequera, and incamped on the 15th of May before Malaga. The City is seated on a Plain, but on a rising Ground are two Castles, the lowest called Alcaçava, the highest Gebalfaro. It is small in compass, but beau∣tiful, and well Peopled. It is also a Seaport Town, and towards the Land is encompassed with Mountains, on which are many Orchards and Country-Houses. Between the two Castles runs a Line of Communication. The Country is pleasant and fruitful, and was then rich by reason of the Trade of Africk, and the East. In the King's Army was most of the Nobility of Andaluzia and Castile, and many Aragonians. It was resolved to draw a Trench round the City, to terminate at the Sea on both sides, and to keep a Force on the Hill on which the lesser Fort stands. The Marquess of Cadiz commanded on the Hill. The Queen came to the Siege, and with her the Cardinal of Spain, and Bishop of Avila. Many Skirmishes hapned before the Trenches were finished, in one of which John de Ortega, who had done great Service this War, was killed. On the 29th of May 3000 Moores sallied, and attacked the Marquess of Cadiz his Quarters, killing the Out-guards, and entring his Works. The Marquess nothing daunted, having drawn up his Men, charged the Enemy. Many were killed on both sides, and the Marquess wounded, but at last the Infidels were obliged to re∣tire. Some in the Town believing themselves lost, resolved to kill the King. Among these, one who was accounted a Holy Man, to compass his Design; suffered himself to be taken. He desired to be carried before the King, who at that time, as God ordered it, was taking his rest, therefore the Queen commanded him to be carried before the Marquess of Moya. The Moor, by the Riches he saw in the Tent, guess'd it to be the King's, and drawing a Cimiter, which through oversight had not been taken from him, made at D. Alvaro de Portugall, who was accidentally talking with the Lady Marchioness. He bowing his Body, escaped the Blow, and the Moore was killed by those that came in to rescue D. Alvaro. Thus through God's
Mercy that danger was diverted. The Army was increased by the arrival of the Duke of Medina Sidonia. Maximilian Duke of Austria, who was afterwards Emperor, sent two Ships from Flanders laden with all manner of Warlike Stores, under the Command of D. Ladron de Guevara. The number of the Besieged also increased, for that some got into the City through the Works next the Sea. Hunger pinched, and yet the Barbary Soldiers would hear of no Capitulation. The Citizens were for surrendring. One of them called Dordux, a Man of great Note, went out to Capitulate. The King said, there were no Conditions to be al∣lowed, but they must surrender upon Discretion. This was in publick, but under-hand he promised Dordux, that if he managed that Business well, he and all his Kindred should not only be set free, but well Rewarded. The Moore undertook to do it, and accordingly admitted the Christians into the Castle, and set up their Colours on the highest Tower. This terrified both the Citizens and Barbary Soldiers, yet at the same time they hoped the Capitulation made by Dordux would extend to them all. For this reason they packed up their Goods to depart, but they were deceived, for their Goods and Liberty were taken from them. The same hapned to the Soldiers who drew out near the Sea to march away. All the Africans, with their Com∣mander Zegri, were made Prisoners. Many Christians who had fled to the Moores were put to death. The Jews who after being Baptized, had relapsed, were burnt. All the other Jews and Moores, who were Natives of the City, were allowed to Ransom themselves at an easie rate. This Noble City was taken on the 18th of August, for which there was General Rejoycing and Thanksgiving throughout all Spain. It appeared, that in the time of the Goths it had been a Bishoprick, and therefore the Pope granted his Bull to restore that Dignity. The general Joy for this Success was somewhat abated by the News that Bajazet, the Great Turk, provided a mighty Fleet to invade Sicily, by that means to divert the Spaniards from the Conquest of Granada. Whilst the Moores were running to ruin, the Portugueses sending out Fleets every year, o∣pened Discove∣ries of the Por∣tugueses. themselves a way to the Eastern Countreys. A mighty Undertaking, first commenced, as has been said, by Prince Henry, who first caused the Coast of Africk, along the Ocean, to be discovered. This Work was continued several years after without intermission. But the Profit in those Discoveries not answering the Trouble and Cost, they designed to pass on∣ward to the rich Provinces of India, to bring home to their Country the Riches of those Parts, which Heaven had so largely bestowed upon those People, as all sorts of Spice, Precious Stones, Pearls, Gold, Silver, Ivory, and many other Things which the insatiable Pride of Man rather than Necessity has caused to be highly valued. Things strange and at that great distance are never truly represented, but highly magnified. It was reported there were Woods of great tall Trees, of Cinnamon, Cassiafistula, and Cloves, great store of Pepper and Gin∣ger, Beasts of extraordinary Shapes, and Men of strange Customs and Countenances. The Wiser sort thought it a great Madness for a Kingdom so small, and of so little strength as Portugal, to seek out those Nations, seated in respect to them, in the utmost bounds of the Earth, and parted from them by such a vast Ocean. But all Difficulties yielded to Avarice and Ambition. To this purpose the King of Portugal some years since sent Bartholomew Diaz, an able Pilot, to the Cape of Good Hope, which is the utmost point of Africk to the South, and beyond the Equinoctial. He passed that Cape, and came to a River which he called Del Infante. With Bartholomew Diaz went F. Antony of the Order of S. Francis, who was an Active and Bold Man. He having viewed a great part of Africk and Assia, travelling from that place came at last to Hierusalem. Lastly, he returning by Land, and Bartholomew Diaz by Sea, gave an Account to the King of what they had discovered. This encouraged the Portu∣gueses to proceed in so great an Undertaking. For the better carrying on of their Design, they chose two Men of Courage and Experience, and that were great Masters of the Ara∣bick Language, to proceed in this Discovery, one of them was Peter Covillam, and the other Alonso de Payva. To save the vast Charge of a Fleet they were sent by Land to discover the inferior Parts of Africk and Asia, each of them taking one of those Parts of the World for his Province. With these Instructions they set out of Lisbon on the 15th of May, took Naples and Rome in their way, thence passed to Hierusalem, then to Alexandria, and so to Grand Caire, the principal City of Egypt. Here they parted, Peter Cavillam for Ormuz, an Island at the mouth of the Persian Gulph, and thence to Calicut. Alonso de Payva undertook to exa∣mine the Inland of Ethiopia, where he died. For this Reason, and because he received Letters from the King, ordering him not to return till he had surveyed all those Provinces, Peter Co∣villam went into Ethiopia. Alexander, Nau, and David, successively Emperors of Ethiopia, and vulgarly called Prester John, took an Affection to Covillam, and therefore would not suf∣fer him to return home, but gave him a Wife and Land to live upon. Since he could not re∣turn, he thence sent an Account to the King in Writing of all he had seen. He said Calicut was the Richest and most famous Place of Trade in all the East, the Inhabitants of a Sallow Complexion, not Warlike, and Extravagant in their manner of living: That they went Naked from the Waste upwards, wore much Gold and Silk, their Arms loaded with Pearls, a Cimiter hanging from their Shoulders. That one Woman Married several Husbands, for which reason no body Knowing the Father, the Nephews, being Sons of Sisters, Inherited. That in Ethiopia were many large Provinces of Blacks, that they all profess Christianity, but much corrupted with Jewish and Heretical Customs. That they were all subject to one power∣ful
King who maintained mighty Armies of Horse and Foot, and always lived in the Field. To conclude, that he believed those People might be easily reconciled to the Church, if Ambassadors were sent, and Peace and Commerce settled with them. But most of these things hapned some Years later. It is time to return to Castile. CHAP. VII. Tumults in Aragon, the Cities Associate there; The War with the Moores renewed, and several Places taken from them, which they with the same facility recover; Maximi∣lian King of the Romans aimes to Marry the Princess Elizabeth of Castile AFter the taking of Malaga, when King Ferdinand thought to have gone on in his Con∣quest, the troubles in Aragon oblged him to go thither, to put a stop to the Murders Troubles in Aragon stop the progress of the War of Granada. and Robberies committed there. At Valencia D. Philip de Aragon Master of the Order of Montesa killed John de Valterra, a noble Youth and his Rival, for both Courted the Lady Ellenor Marchioness of Cotron, and Daughter of Anthony Centellas, which occasioned great Tumults in that City. To obviate these harms, King Ferdinand set out from Cordova, and arrived at Zaragoça on the 19th of November. The manner of choosing Magistrates in that City was altered. The Council and Commons used before to have the Election of them, and now because that produced Disputes and Mutinies, they desired for the Future the No∣mination of them should be in the King. Besides the Towns associated after the manner of Castile, each engaging to contribute to the Maintenance of 150 Horse, who were to Travel about, and punish all Malefactors. It was Ordained that the King should have the choosing of the Captain of this Association, or Brotherhood, out of 3 Citizens of Zaragoça, named by the Council of that City. Laws were also Enacted to prevent their abusing the Power given them. This was concluded at the beginning of the Year 1488. At the same time 1488. came Leonard Tocco a Grecian, and of the Family of the Grecian Emperors (whom the Turks had drove out of his Dominions, and obliged to fly into Italy) Ambassador from the King of Naples, to conclude the Match before proposed betwixt the Grandson of that King, and the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to King Ferdinand. This Affair took not Effect, because the King designed to Marry his Daughter to the King of France, or else to the Prince of Portugal, hoping that would be a secure Band of friendship with either of those Nations. Instead of her, he offered his other Daughter the Princess Mary. From Zaragoça the King and Queen went to Valencia, thither came to them Alan Father to John d' Albret, King of Navarre. He came to ask Succour against the King of France who had Conquered part of that Kingdom, and the Navarrois themselves who were in Rebellion, particularly the Biamonteses were posses∣sed of great part of Navarre, and kept the King out; notwithstanding, but three Years be∣fore all things had been agreed, and the Earl of Lerin with his whole Family and followers had been restored to their Possessions, and others given them that they might rest contented. It was also proposed that the King should Protect Francis Duke of Britany, whose Daughter Ann, many Princes sought to have to Wife, because he had no Heir Male. Charles the 8th, King of France made War on him on this account. Monsieur d' Albret and the Duke of Orleans favoured that Duke. Maximilian then King of the Romans was assaulted by the People of Bruges in Flanders, and kept Prisoner. All these things troubled the King because Maximi∣lian was a friend to Spain, and d' Albret who gave the Intelligence, his Confederate. In fine a League was concluded betwixt the King and Alan, against all Princes, except the King of France, whom it was not convenient for Alan or his Son to disoblige, because their Domi∣nions were either in his Power, or at least lay exposed to him, yet all this was Counterfeit, for the real design was to make use of the Forces of Spain against France. It was agreed a∣mong other things, that a Fleet should be fittedout on the Coast of Biscay, and Men raised to be sent to Britany, under the Command of Michael John de Gralla a Catalonian. All this Affair was Concluded and Signed on the 21th of March. The Cortes of Valencia were opened in that City, and broke up at Origuela, to settle that Country, which done, King Ferdinand made hast through the Kingdom of Murcia, that bor∣ders Several Places ta∣ken from the Moores. on the Moorish Territories. Great preparations were made for carrying on the War, and subduing that Country where Albohardil with much difficulty supported the Title of a King, tho' still stronger than his Nephew, as being possessed of Guadix Almeria, and Baça, with all the Mountain Country of Granada, which was as far as the Sea, whence he gathered a greater Revenue because the Mountain was untouched, besides the great advantage made of the silken Manufacture which is the best of all Spain. The Natives hated Boabdil, looking upon him as a Coward and Friend to the Christians, and Albohardil had gained Reputation by taking a great Booty about Alcalà Real. John de Benavides who Commanded there, soon revenged this Loss, burning all the Territory of Almeria. The Warlike preparations were not carried on with that Vigour the King could have wished, because Andalvzia had suffered this Year and the last by the Plague. The King Ordered the Rendezvouz to be at Murcia, where he was resolving to Attack Vera, a Town upon the Sea-coast. No resistance was made, but it surrendred on the 10th of June. Muxacra, Velez el Blanco and Velez el Rubio
with several other Towns and Castles that were not well Fortified did the same. The King was desirous to lay Siege to Almeria, a City in that Neighbourhood. An impregnable Castle called Taberna stood in the way, and the old Moorish King came in Person with 1000 Horse, and 20000 Foot to put a Garrison into it, resolving to lie in the Woods and cut off our Parties, and avoid coming to a Battle, because his Men were raw and undisciplined. The Enemy refusing to Fight, our Forces had the more liberty to wast the Country. Most harm was done about Almeria and Baça, which is a fruitful Country because watered. The Chan∣nels that convey the Water were the occasion that many of our Men were cut off, and a∣mong them D. Philip de Aragon Master of the Order of Montesa, a forward and brave Youth. The Moores recover the lost Towns. King Ferdinand, his Forces being weak, and he called away upon other Affairs, having Gar∣risoned the Frontiers, went away towards Castile. No sooner was he gone, but the Moorish King recovered all the Towns had been taken from him. Mean while the Inhabitants of Guasin a very strong Town near Ronda conspiring, put all the Garrison to the Sword. It was not long before they received the reward of that Action, for the neighbouring Moores to shew they had no hand in that Slaughter, and fearing least they should suffer for it, assembled and laid Siege to Guasin. The Marquess of Cadiz and Earl of Cifuentes came with Forces from Sevil to their Assistance, and having taken the Town, in Revenge either put all the Inhabi∣tants to the Sword, or sold them as Slaves. King Ferdinand came to Valladolid upon the 6th of September. There an opportunity was offered him of recovering the City Placencia, which the late Kings had Alienated, and given to the Family of Zun̄iga. D. Alvaro de Zuniga dy∣ing, a Grandson of his, whose Father was dead before, Inherited his Estate. James de Zu∣niga Unckle to the Heir pretended he had a better Right, as being Son to the deceased. The Kindred was divided between both. Thus the Family of the Caravajales seized the City, but could not make themselves Masters of the Castle which was well defended by the Garrison. King Ferdinand coming to appease that Sedition, seized all, D. Alvaro the new Duke sur∣rendring, and contenting himself with the Town of Bejar and its Dependancies in lieu of that City. This struck a Terror into all the Nobility, fearing they should be forced to re∣store to the King now grown strong, all they had extorted from his Predecessors in times of Consusion. New Tumults broke out in Aragon, upon account that the Nobility were for breaking off the Association not long since formed betwixt the Cities, as a thing that Curb∣ed them. They never gave over till some Years after; at the Cortes held at Barcelona, they obtained the Association should be dissolved for Ten Years. John de Fonseca and Alvaro Ar∣ronio were sent Ambassadors to Flanders, to procure the Liberty of Maximilian King of the Romans, imprisoned by the People of Bruges. They managed their business so well that he was Released and Reconciled to his Subjects. His first Wife the Lady Mary, to whom be∣longed the Dominion of Flanders being dead, he aspired to Marry the Princess Elizabeth of Castile. Her Father and Mother did not consent, because she was promised in Portugal, yet they offered one of that Princess's Sisters for Philip his Son and Heir. Frederick the Emperor, his Grandfather upon this design of Marrying him in Spain gave him the Title of Archduke of Austria, whereas before they were only called Dukes. The Fleet the Lord d' Albret was sitting out on the Coast of Biscay, contributed much towards the obtaining the Liberty of Maximilian, the People of Bruges being jealous it was designed against them. The Fleet Sailed to Britany, where the Duke of Orleans and his Confederates were overthrown by the King, the Duke and John Gralla who Commanded the Spaniards were made Prisoners, as shall be said hereafter. CHAP. VIII. The Masterships of all the Military Orders in Spain, annexed to the Crown for ever; Three Cities and other Places taken from the Moores; Elizabeth Princess of Castile Married to Alonso Prince of Portugal; His and his Fathers death. AT the end of this Year died Gazri Lopez de Padilla, Master of Calatrava. Many aspired to that Dignity, but King Ferdinand by virtue of a Bull obtained of Pope Innocent to Master∣ships of Military orders an∣nexed to the Crown that purpose, annexed it to the Crown. The same was afterwards done with the other Ma∣sterships, whence it followed that rewards due to Soldiers were afterwards bestowed on Courtiers. The usual Confusions at the Election of those Masters, and the Lowness of the Kings Revenue were the cause of this Alteration. In the East Bajazet the Turk gathered a mighty Army and Fleet, which Allarmed all the Christian Princes, but his design was a∣gainst the Soldan of Egypt. Only 11 Galliots of Pyrats invaded the Island of Malta, and plundered it all up to the very Walls of the City. This Island having Two Ports, can contain any Fleet. The Ports are divided by a point of Land called of Santelmo. This Point it was judged necessary to Fortifie, that the Enemy might not possess themselves of the Island, and from thence Infest the Coasts of the Christians. A Fleet Sailed from Sicily in search of these Pyrats, but came too late, for they were gone with their Booty. Another Fleet Sailed from Spain, with Ferdinand de Acun̄a who went Viceroy into Sicily. It was designed not on∣ly to defend their own Coasts, but to Invade those of Africk. King Ferdinand joined in a League with the King of England, and House of Austria, against the King of France.
All this tended towards subduing of the Kingdom of Naples, which some of the Banished Nobility offered to King Ferdinand, and others to the King of France, as the more Powerful and an Enemy to the House of Aragon. At the beginning of the Year 1489, 1000 Horse 1489. and 2000 Foot were sent into Britany to succour the Lady Ann, who succeeded her Father in that Dukedom. D. Peter Sarmiento Earl of Salinas Commanded that Body. The War against the Moores of Granada was of more Moment, and greater advantages were expected from it, therefore the King and Queen set out from Medina del Campo towards Andaluzia upon the 27th of March. The Rendezvous was at Jaen, where upon a Muster the King found 12000 Horse, and 50000 Foot, all the choice Men in the Kingdom. A good Body came from Three Ci∣ties and o∣the small Towns ta∣ken from the Moores. Biscay. Baça was resolved upon to begin the Campaigne with. By the Way, that no E∣nemy might be left behind, they took Cajor a small, but strong Town. This done Baça was Invested. This City is Seated on the Side of a Hill, down which, and along the plain below it, runs a small River, on all other sides it is encompassed with other rising Grounds. It was well Garrisoned and furnished with all Necessaries for 15 Months. The Scituation did not allow any Engines to be brought up to the Walls. About 1000 Horse, and 2000 Foot sallied out of the City and did us some harm, our Men being intangled betwixt the Chan∣nels of Water, but others coming to their Relief, the Enemy was repulsed with considerable loss. Several other Skirmishes happened, our Men destroying all the Orchards about the City. Our Men could not deal with the Enemy upon equal Terms, but they overpowred them in number. Thus the Siege was prolonged, and King Ferdinand was dubious whether he had not best raise the Siege, especially because he lost many of his Men by Sickness and other accidents. The Marquess of Cadiz then made a Duke, advised to raise the Siege However the King resolved to continue it, and the more to Curb the Besieged caused a Trench to be drawn quite round the Walls, with Nine Forts at convenient distances, all strongly Guarded, to prevent being surprized by the Enemy Sallying. All the Army was conveniently Posted about the Place, and the Duke of Cadiz with 4000 Horse had charge of the Artillery. Thus no relief could enter the City, but they had plenty of Provisions. In the Camp there was great scarcity of Bread and Money, and yet fresh Troops came in daily. About October came the Dukes of Najara and Alva, in Mourning for their Fa∣ther lately deceased. The Admiral also came, and the Marquis de Astorga. Soon after arrived the Queen, with the Princess Elizabeth, the Cardinal of Toledo and other Prelates. The Queens coming, as I believe altered the resolution of the Besieged, believing now the Siege was fixed. Hazen the Governor having consulted his King, who was at Guadix, tho' he might have held out much longer, surrendred the City, when least the Christians expected it. On the 4th of December the Capitulation was Signed, and the day following the King and Queen entred the City in triumphant manner. James de Mendoza, Lieute∣nant of Caçorla, and Brother to the Cardinal of Spain was made Governor. This struck such a Terror into the Moores that many Towns surrendred, gave Hostages, and furnish∣ed Corn and all other necessaries. Among these the chiefest were Taverna and Seron. What is more wonderful, the Cities Guadix and Almeria, either of which might have en∣dured a long Siege, submitted of their own accord. King Albohardil himself consented to it, and came out of Almeria to meet King Ferdinand in the Camp, by whom he was splen∣didly entertained. Besides, Two strong Castles upon the Sea Coast were taken, the one called Almun̄ecar, in which the Treasures of the Moorish Kings used to be kept. The other was Solobren̄a, where the Brothers and Sons of the Kings used to be kept in the nature or Prisoners. Francis Ramirez General of the Artillery, who had behaved himself bravely up∣on several occasions, was appointed Governor of that Castle. After performing such great Actions, a Review of the Army was taken on the last day of December preceding the Year 1490, and it appeared by the Muster Rolls 20000 Men were lost, 3000 of them killed by the Moores, the rest consumed by Sickness. Many of the meaner sort were frozen to 1490. death. King Ferdinand let slip no Opportunity of pulling down the tottering Kingdom of the Moors. Gutierre de Cardenas, Chief Commendary of Leon, who did great Service during this The Moor∣ish King submits. War, concluded the Treaty with the unfortunate Moorish King. By Virtue of this Capitula∣tion, he had the Town of Fandaraa on the Mountains of Granada, with all its Dependencies, amounting to the Yearly Value of 10000 Ducats, allowed him for his Maintenance. A small Recompence for a Kingdom, but good enough for him who began his Reign with the Murder of his Brother. The new conquered Moors were allowed to keep their Lands and Possessions, but not to live within Cities, lest they should have the Power of Fortifying themselves, and Rebelling, for which cause they were all disarmed. These Conditions were proclaimed at Guadix. This done, the King and Queen went away to Ecija, and thence to Sevil. All Places by the way received them, as if they had dropped from Heaven. Foreign Princes, moved by the Fame of these great Actions, sent to Congratulate with them, and seek their Friendship. The King of Portugal, in Prosecution of what had been before Treated, desired Elizabeth, Princess of Castile, married to Alonso, Prince of Portugal. to Marry his Son Alonso to the Princess Elizabeth, as a sure Bond of Friendship between the two Crowns. He sent Ambassadors to this purpose, and the Match was agreed upon at Se∣vil on the 18th of April. There was great Rejoicing on this account in both Kingdoms, but less in Portugal, because the following Month the Princess Joanna, Sister to that King, died at
Aveiro unmarried. Neither was the Joy of Castile lasting, tho' the Princess from Constantina set out for Portugal upon the 11th of November. A great number of Nobility bore her Com∣pany, and she was delivered up on the Banks of the River Caya, which runs between Badajoz and Elvas. The Chief of the Portugueses that came to receive her, was Duke Emanuel, who afterwards married that Princess, and inherited the Crown. The King of Portugal and his Son came to Estremez, and, the more to honour the Bride, seated her between them, the King being on the left hand. There they were married on the 24th of November by the Archbishop of Braga, Primate of all Portugal. The Rejoicing continued for half a year at Ebora and Santarem, whither the Prince and Princess went. All this Joy was turned into Sor∣row by an unthought-of Accident. The King going out to take the Air on the Banks of the Death of Prince A∣lonso, and King John his Fa∣ther. River Tagus, Prince Alonso, who was with him, had a mind to run a Race with John de Mene∣ses. In the Course, the Horse stumbled, and falling, so bruised the Prince, that he soon died It is needless to represent the greatness of his Parents and Wife's Grief. His Body was buried with the usual Pomp among his Ancestors. The Princess Elizabeth, no sooner a Wife than a Widow, returned to Castile in a Mourning Litter. Grief cast the King of Portugal into a lin∣gring Disease, of which he died 4 years after. He founded the Royal Hospital at Lisbon, and laid the first Stone of it. He left no Issue Male lawfully begotten; only D. George, whom he had by the Lady Ann de Mendoça, and whom, tho' but a Child, he left Master of Avis and Santiago in Portugal. After his Death, a new Line of Kings began. Emanuel, Cousin German to the deceased King, and Son to Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, inherited the Crown. John III. was Son to this King, and Prince John his Grandson, who dying young, inherited not the Crown: Therefore King Sebastian, Son to the Prince, succeeded. He being killed by the Moors in Africk, left the Kingdom of Portugal, first to Cardinal Henry his Great Uncle, and after him to Philip II. King of Castile, who was also Nephew to the Cardinal, and Grandson to King Emanuel, by his Mother Elizabeth the Empress. Let us leave this, and return to the War of Granada. King Ferdinand earnestly desired to put an end to the War with the Moors, which was so well advanced. Besides the Strength of the City Granada, and that it was abundantly furnished with all Necessaries, another greater Difficulty perplexed the King, which was, That his Word The Moor∣ish King besieged by his own Peo∣ple. was engaged to King Boabdil, that neither he nor his should be prejudiced by him. An Op∣portunity offered it self of subduing that City without breach of Faith. The Citizens, without regarding the Danger that threatned them from abroad, besieged their King in the Castle of Albaycin, and pressed him so hard, that scarce any hope was left of saving himself. The fu∣rious Multitude threatned, never to desist till they had his Life. It was not reasonable to for∣sake that unhappy Prince, when he begged Relief. At the same time the Soldan of Egypt threatned, That if King Ferdinand did not give over persecuting the Moors, he would put to Death all the Christians in Egypt and Syria. F. Anthony Millan, Guardian of the Franciscan Convent at Jerusalem, sent by the Soldan with this Message, by the way visited the King of Naples, and coming thence into Spain, delivered his Embassy, bringing also a Letter from the King of Naples, who was supposed to be a greater Friend to the Moors, than became a Chri∣stian Prince. He advised King Ferdinand, since the Moors had done him no Wrong, not to oppress them only upon account of Religion, which might occasion greater Harms. King Fer∣dinand was no way discouraged at the Threats of the Soldan, nor approved of the King of Naples his Advice. Yet after the War was ended, he sent Peter Martyr, his Ambassador, to the Soldan to appease him. He also, before he enter'd upon the War again, sent his Reasons for so doing to the King of Naples. The Guardian, both in regard of his Character as Am∣bassador, and the Opinion of his Sanctity, was nobly Treated, and dismissed with rich Pre∣sents. King Ferdinand offered the Citizens of Granada, if they would submit, they should be treated in the same manner as the others that had done so before. This moved both the Fa∣ctions in that City to join, in order to oppose the Common Enemy; for the Moorish King was convinced, that King Ferdinand, tho' he pretended to be his Friend, would never desist till he was Master of that City. The Alfaquies and others, held in the Opinion of Sanctity, ceased not to advise, that either for obtaining Peace, or supporting the War, it was requisite they should be united. Thus the Moors were brought to agree among themselves. King Ferdinand, leaving the Queen at Moclin, wasted all the Plain of Granada, destroying all the Corn, to the The Plain of Grana∣da wasted. great Grief of the Infidels, who feared lest they should be reduced by Famine. Prince John bore his Father Company in this Expedition, being newly Knighted by him. They returned to Cordova with the Booty. The Command of the Frontiers was given to the Marquess de Vil∣lena, in Requital for a Brother he lost in the War, and that his own right Arm was lame of a Wound he received rescuing one of his Men, Scarce were the Christians departed, when King Boabdil took the Castle Alhendin, where we had a Garrison, and razed it. The King revenged this in September, when he spent 15 days in destroying all the latter Corn on which the Moors hoped to feed the following year. The Moors at Guadix mutinied, and thought to have destroyed the Garrison in the Castle, but failed, and the Marquis de Villena coming with a good Body of Horse and Foot, turned them out of the City, which prevented any Disorders for the future. K. Ferdinand at the end of the year again ravaged all the Territory of Granada. Boabdil besieged Salobreria, which Francis Ramirez defended with much Bravery. The Moors believing King Ferdinand would relieve the Place, raised the Siege, and returned to Granada.
Because the Subjects of Abohardil mutinied, and would not obey him, King Ferdinand, accord∣ing to what had been Capitulated, permitted him to go over into Africk, with great Riches he gave him in lieu of what he left behind. CHAP. IX. The War with the Moors now effectually renewed; The Description of the City Granada; King Ferdinand lays Siege to it, and builds a Town for his Army to Quarter in during the Siege, to shew his Resolution not to depart without being Master of that City. THE King and Queen spent the Winter at Sevil, and in the Spring renewed the War. The Queen stayed behind at Alcala Reall with her Children, to furnish all things necessary, War with the Moors renewed. and soon after to follow and take part of the Honour and Danger of that Enterprize. All the Nobility came in Person, and the Cities sent Troops upon their own cost, with which and the other Forces King Ferdinand in three days appeared in sight of Granada, upon Saturday the 23d of April, 1491. He encamped at Guetar, a Village a League and a half from Granada: Thence he sent the Marquess de Villena with 3000 Horse to scour the neighbouring Moun∣tains, 1491. promising to follow him with the whole Army to relieve him, in case the Mountain-Moors, who are bold and daring, should fall upon him, or those of the City offer to cut off his Retreat. Accordingly he advanced to Padul, and repulsed the Moors of the City, who thought to fall upon the Marquess's Rear. By this means the Marquess was left at liberty to execute his Orders, burnt 9 Villages of the Infidels, and returned to the King loaded with Plunder. This beginning was looked upon as a good Omen of future success. They advan∣ced together to ravage the remoter Parts of the Mountain, which they did successfully, plunder∣ing and burning 15 other Villages. Besides, they defeated a Body of Moorish Horse and Foot, who had secured the Passes against our Army. The Booty was very considerable, that Country being very rich, because untouched till that time, being naturally strong and well guarded, as was requisite, the City being supplied there with Provisions. All this being per∣formed without any loss or bloodshed, the Army returned to its first Quarters; there they fortified themselves for the present. They mustered 10000 Horse and 40000 Foot, the very Flower of the Spanish Soldiery, being all Men of tried Valour, and expert Soldiers. In the City was also a great number of Horse and Foot, and all of them good Soldiers, being the Remains of all the late Wars. The multitude of Citizens was not of any moment, they being a sort of People always lavish of their Tongues, but Cowards when they came to Action. The City of Granada, by reason of its Situation, Largness, Forts, Walls, and Bul∣warks, Descripti∣on of the City Gra∣nada. seemed impregnable. On the West-side of it is a large Plain, about 15 Leagues in compass, pleasant and fruitful as well of its own Nature, as by reason of the Blood that had been there shed for many Years, which made it fat: Besides, that 36 Springs running down from the Mountains do render it more beautiful and rich than can easily be imagined. On the East of it is the Mountain Elvira, where formerly stood the City Iliberis, as appears by the Name Elvira. The snowy Mountain called Sierra Nevada lies on the South-side of it, and runs down as far as the Mediterranean Sea: The sides of it are not steep or craggy, and are there∣fore cultivated and well peopled. The City it self is seated partly upon the Plain, and partly upon two Hills; betwixt them runs the River Darro, which as soon as out of the City, mixes with, and loses its Name in the River Xenil, that runs quite a cross the Plain in length. The Walls are very strong, there being upon them 1030 Towers at distances, very beautiful for their Number and good Structure. Formerly it had 7 Gates, now 12. It cannot well be en∣closed all round, because of its great extent, and the unevenness of the Ground. Towards the Plain where the access is easiest, it is fortified with Towers and Bulwarks: In that part stands the Cathedral, then a Moorish Mosque nothing curious, now beautiful. It is held in great Veneration by all the neighbouring People, and famous not so much for its Riches as the Number and Piety of Clergy belonging to it. Near this Church is the great Market∣place called Bavarambla, 200 Foot in breadth, and three times as long. The Buildings about it stand in a streight Line; the Shops and Streets about it beautiful. Of two Castles that belong to the City, the chiefest lies betwixt the East and West, encompassed with a Wall of its own, and standing above the other Buildings. It is called Alhambra, that is Red, of the colour of the Earth about it, and is so big it looks like a City. In it is the Royal Palace and Monastery of S Francis, the burial place of the Marquess de Yn̄igo de Mendoça, the first Go∣vernour of it. King Mahomet Mir laid the Foundation of this Castle; other Kings conti∣nued the Work, and it was finished by King Joseph Bulhagix, as appears by the Arabick In∣scription over the Gate on a Marble Stone, signifying the Work was finished by that King, in the Year of the Moorish Account 747, which according to us is 1346. This same King built the Castle of Albaizin, opposite to this Castle. The expence of this Work was so great, that because 'twas thought his Revenue could not bear it, the People gave out he had found the Philosopher's Stone. Betwixt these two Castles, that is, Alhambra and Albaizin, lies the City. The Suburb called Churra, and the Street Dę los Gomeles, is on the side of Alhambra. On the
other side the Street Elvira, and the Ascent of Zenete most ill contrived, the Streets narrow and crooked, because the Moors were nothing curious in their Houses. Without the City is the Royal Hospital and Monastery of S. Hierome, the sumptuous Burial-place of Gonçalo Fernandez, called the Great Captain. It is reported the City contained 60000 Houses, a number scarce credible. What is most to be admired is what we find the Ambassadors of King Jayme II. of Aragon assured Pope Clement V. at the Council of Vienna, viz. that of 200000 Souls then li∣ving in Granada, scarce 500 were Children and Grandchildren of Moors. In particular they said there were 50000 Renegado's, and 30000 Christian Slaves. At present it is certain there are in that City 23 Parishes and Chapels of Ease. It is hard to tell the number of Inhabitants, and generally People stretch in those cases. It is also certain, that in the time of the Moorish Kings, the Revenue of that Kingdom was 700000 Ducats, a great Sum for those times, but credible because of the heavy Taxes. All Men paid the 7th part of what they were worth. If any Moor died without Children, the King was his Heir: If he left Heirs, the King had as good a share as any of them. This was the Posture of Granada at this time. It was believed the Siege would be tedious, therefore the Queen came to the Camp with her Children, be∣cause King Ferdinand resolved not to desist till he was Master of the City. To this purpose he caused the Country continually to be wasted, and in the place where he encamped, caused a strong Town to be built, which to this day is called Santa Fé. This Work was finished in a K. Ferdi∣nand builds a Town to lie in du∣ring the Siege of Granada. very short time. The Quarters, Streets, and Places within the Walls were distributed with great Order. Mean while the Parties that went out to Plunder, skirmished often with the Moors that came out of the Town. In one of these Rencounters our Men pressed so far, that they took some Cannon from the Infidels, and made many Prisoners, and forced the rest into the City. Another time they ventured near to the Walls, and possessed themselves of two Towers where the Enemy kept Garrisons. On the 10th of June at night a Fire broke out in the King's Tent, which caused a great Consternation. Most of the Men lay in Bar∣racks or Huts, and the Boughs being dry, there was danger they should all take fire. A Candle accidentally left by the Queen, set fire to the King's Quarters, and that to the next. The King fearing it might be a Contrivance of the Enemy, came out naked with his Sword and Buckler. The Marquess of Cadiz with a Party of Horse stood all night upon their Guard, in the way the Moors must of necessity come, if they designed to attack the Army The Fright was greater than the Danger or Loss; so the next day they continued to ravage the Country, and some Troops were sent to the Mountain. Nothing was left to the Besieged tho' they, animated by Despair, defended themselves resolutely. These Misfortunes obliged them to offer a Treaty. Bulcazin Muley, Governour of the City, came to the Camp to ca∣pitulate. The King appointed Gonçalo Fernandez de Cordova, afterwards called the Great Cap∣tain, and his Secretary Ferdinand de Zafra, to treat with him. After some days debating, at length they concluded on the following Articles, to which they swore on the 25th of Novem∣ber: That the Moors within 60 Days deliver up to the King the two Castles, the Towers, and Gates of the City: That they do Homage to King Ferdinand, and take the Oath of Allegi∣ance to him: That they set at liberty all Christian Slaves without Ransom: That till these Articles be performed, they deliver up 500 Sons of the Principal Inhabitants, as Hostages: That they be left possessed of their Lands, Arms, and Horses, only delivering up the Ar∣tillery: That they keep their Mosques, and have the free Exercise of their Religion: That they be Governed according to their own Laws, and to this purpose Persons of their own Nation shall be appointed, by whose Advice the King's Officers shall administer Justice to them: That part of the usual Taxes be abated during the term of three Years, and shall never after be greater than they used to pay to their own Kings: That such as will go over into Africk may sell their Goods, and shall be furnished with Ships for their Passage in any Port they shall chuse: That Boabdil's Son, and the other Hostages delivered by him, be re∣stored, since the City being surrendered, there is no more occasion for Hostages. Accor∣dingly they were brought from the Castle of Moclin to be delivered up. CHAP. X. A mighty Mutiny raised in Granada by a Phanatick Moor; The City surrendered to King Ferdinand; The Character of King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth; Their Triumphal Entry into Granada, and universal Joy for their Success. THE Surrender of Granada being agreed upon in this manner, all had like to have been broke off again upon the following occasion. In all places the Multitude, but especially A Phana∣tick Moor. among the Moors, is Faithless, Disloyal, Changeable, inclinable to Mutiny, hates Peace and Quietness, and upon any small Motives runs into Sedition. A certain Moor, whose Name is not yet known, as if he were possessed with some Fury, or quite distracted, with violent Words ceased not to persuade the People to take Arms. He preached and harangued the Multitude at the Corners of Streets and in the Markets with a loud Voice and horrid Counte∣nance. In this manner he stirred up 20000 Men to take Arms, and run about like Men out
of their Senses. The cause of their Discontent, or what they aimed at, was unknown, and therefore the Remedy harder to be found. Boabdil, called the Little King, fearing they would offer Violence to him, kept close within the Alhambra. The Multitude are furious at first, but soon cool, chiefly they who had no Head, and were consequently weak, and knew not their own Minds Therefore the next day the King went to the Albaizin, where the People were well affected towards him: There he assembled such as he thought fit, with whom he expo∣stulated the Madness of the Mutiniers, shewing how absolute Necessity and not Affection had obliged him to Capitulate with the Enemy, when no other way was left to save the City from perishing by Sword and Famine. His Words made them calm, and the People were pacified. Many times Seditions are as easily suppressed as raised. What became of the Moor who caused the Mutiny is not known; it may be imagined he fled. King Boabdil warned by the Danger past; and fearing that before the expiration of the Days agreed upon for delivering up the City, new Troubles and Tumults might arise, he immediately sent a Letter to King Ferdinand, with a Present of two choice Horses, a Cymiter, and some Furniture. He adver∣tised him of what had hapned in the City, and how the People had Mutinied, therefore in∣viting him to come and take possession speedily, lest Delay might produce some Alteration. In short, he told him since God had so ordained it, he would the next day deliver up the Al∣hambra and Kingdom to him as Conqueror. This Letter was brought to the Camp upon New-Year's Day: It is easie to imagin how Granada surrender∣ed to K. Ferdinand. great Satisfaction it gave to King Ferdinand. He ordered all things to be in a readiness the Day following for his Entrance, and that Day is still kept a Festival at Granada, in Memory of the Taking of that City. Having laid aside the Mourning he wore for his Son-in-Law Prince Alonso of Portugal, and put on his Royal Robes, he set out towards the Castle with his Army, in the same Order as if going to engage the Enemy. After him followed the Queen and her Children, then the Nobility clad in Cloth of Gold and rich Silks. When the King came in this pompous manner near to the Alhambra, Boabdil the Little King came out to meet him with 50 Horse. He offered to alight and kiss the Victor's Hand, but King Ferdinand would not permit it. Then fixing his Eyes upon the Ground with a sorrowful Countenance, he said, We are your Slaves, Invincible King; we deliver up this City and Kingdom to you, not doubting you will use us with Clemency and Moderation. This done, he put into his hands the Keys of the Castle; King Ferdinand gave them to the Queen, she to the Prince her Son, and he to D. In̄igo de Mendoça, Earl of Tendilla, whom the King appointed Governor of that City, and Captain General of that Kingdom. D. Peter de Granada was made head Alguazil of the City, and D. Alonso his Son Admiral of that Sea. The King entred the City with a good Party of Horse. A great Number of Noblemen and Prelates followed; among them the Chief were the Prelates of Toledo and Sevil, the Master of Santiago, the Marquess of Cadiz, and F. Ferdinand de Talavera, who of Bishop of Avila, was now Elect Archbishop of Granada: He having offered up his Prayers as is usual, set up the Banner, carried before the Cardinal of Toledo upon the highest Tower, and on the sides of it the King's and the Standard of San∣tiago. This Action was followed by the Acclamations of the whole Army. Then the King kneeling, returned Thanks to Almighty God, for that the Empire of the Infidels was extirpa∣ted in Spain, and the Holy Banner of the Cross set up in that City, where the Mahometan Su∣perstition had so long prevailed, and prayed that his Mercies might be continued unto him. After the Prayer, all the great Men came to congratulate his Success, and kneeling, kissed his Hand. The same they all did to the Queen and Prince. This Ceremony being ended, they returned in the same Order after Dinner to the Camp. To the Little King was given the Valley of Purchena, not long before taken from the Moors in the Kingdom of Murcia, with a sufficient Revenue; but he soon after went over into Africk: For they who have once been Kings, cannot ever patiently submit to lead a private Life. 500 Christian Captives were, ac∣cording as had been capitulated, set free without Ransom. They the next day, after hearing Mass, came in Procession to prostrate themselves before the King. They thanked the Soldiers, by whose means they obtained Liberty, and commending their Bravery, called them Fathers of their Country. Before the King entred the City, the Army took possession of the Gates, Towers, and Castles. That done, upon the 4th day they entred in the same manner as they had done before. All the Army sang Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God for their great Success. King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth being richly clothed, in the prime of their Age, and having conquered that Kingdom, seemed to appear more Majestick than before. They shined above all others, and were equal as to themselves. Every one looked upon them as more than Human, and sent from Heaven for the Glory of Spain. It Character of K. Fer∣dinand and Q. Eliza∣beth. was they that restored Justice, which before them was corrupted, enacting excellent Laws for the publick Benefit. They settled Religion, restored Peace, and enlarged their Territories, not only in Spain, but at the same time in the utmost Bounds of the World. What is most to be commended, they bestowed Honours and Preferments, not according to Birth, or for Favour, but proportionably to the Merits of every one, which stirred up their Subjects to Virtue and Learning. Both the King and Queen were of a middle Stature, their Limbs well proportioned, their Countenances graceful, pleasing and yet grave; their Mien majestick, but their Complexion somewhat swarthy; especially the King's was tanned with being always in the Field, his Hair Chesnut-colour and long, his Beard trimmed after the manner of that
Age, his Eye-brows large, his Head bald, his Mouth small, his Lips red, his Teeth little and thin, his Back broad, his Neck streight, his Voice sharp, quick of Speech, of a sharp Wit, of a sound Judgment, of a courteous Disposition, and easie of Access. In Martial Affairs he was expert, in Matters of Government not to be parallel'd; so great a Lover of Business, that it seemed to be his Delight and Diversion. His Body was not pampered with Pleasures, but inured to Labour. His Diet was temperate, and his Garb modest. He was an excellent Horseman. When young, he was addicted to Cards and Dice, grown more stayed, his chief Sport was Hawking. The Queen had a good Face, fair Hair, dark Eyes, she used no Paints or Washes, and had a singular Modesty and Gravity in her Looks. She was very Devout, and a Lover of Learning, bore her Husband Affection, but mixed with Jealousie. She had some knowledge of the Latin Tongue, which her Husband wanted, having no Learning given him in his Youth; yet he loved to read History, and converse with Learned Men. The same Day that King Ferdinand was born, as some relate, a certain Carmelite Friar of Naples, esteemed a Holy Man, said to King Alonso, Unkle to King Ferdinand, This Day in the Kingdom of Ara∣gon is born a Prince of your Family; Heaven promises him a large Empire, great Riches and Prospe∣rity; he shall be very Devout, of a virtuous Inclination, and a great Defender of Christianity. Amidst so many Virtues, considering human Frailty, there could not be wanting some Allay of Vice. Avarice, which is laid to his Charge, may be well excused with the lowness of the Revenue. The Wickedness of those Times was the cause of the Severity and Rigour he is blamed for. Foreign Writers accuse him of a wicked Craft, and that he valued not his Word where it was for his Advantage to break it. I will not dispute how true this is. He contracted Af∣finity with the Greatest Princes in all Christendom, as the Kings of England and Portugal, and the Dukes of Austria. Several other Princes were near of Kin to him, for he was Unkle to Anne Dutchess of Britany, as Brother to her Grandmother by the Mother's side. He was Cousin German to Ferdinand King of Naples, and great Unkle to Catherine Queen of Navarre, as brother to her Grandmother. This particularly is laid to his Charge, That without any regard of Kindred, only thro' Ambition of enlarging his Dominions, he thrust this Lady and her Husband out of their Kingdom, and obliged them to retire to France Others excuse him upon pretence of Religion, and the Pope's Command; but that is a weak Defence. Great Troubles ensued hereupon. Henry d' Albret, Son to that Queen, endeavoured to recover his Kingdom with more Valour than good Fortune. He had by the Lady Margaret, Sister to Francis King of France, one Daughter and Heiress, called Joanna, who married Anthony of Bourbon Duke of Vendosme, and was Mother to that Henry who married Margaret the Sister of Three Kings of France, viz. Francis II. Charles and Henry; who all dying without Issue, he inherited that Crown as next of the Male Line. Notwithstanding, the People of France pretended he could not inherit, because he had embraced the then new-broached Heresies that spread abroad in France. But let us leave this to put an end to the Affair of Granada. King Ferdinand and Queen Eliza∣beth having taken possession of that City by the special Providence of God, the Moors remain∣ing in that part of Spain, were for ever after brought under the Dominion and Government of the Christians. This solemn Entry was upon Friday the 6th of January, 1492. and accor∣ding to the Arabian Account the Year 897 of the Hegira, on the 8th of the Month which they 1492. call Rahib Haraba: Which Day, as it is a Feast of great Solemnity throughout the Christian World, as being the Epiphany of our Lord, so was it particularly Joyful and Fortunate to all Spain, and no less unhappy to the Moors: For by their Extirpation, the Honour of Spain was restored, and a great Province added to the Christian Dominions. All other Provinces of Christendom were made Partakers of this Joy, and particularly Pope Innocent had a large account given him of the Reduction of all Spain to its former Obedience to the Church. In all Parts there were Bonfires and Sports celebrated in token of Joy, and Men, Women, and Children went in Procession to the Churches, to give Thanks to Almighty God for so signal a Mercy. Rome was rejoycing for the Peace concluded betwixt the Pope and King of Naples, when John de Estrada, King Fedinand's Ambassador, brought this happy News. In token of their great Satisfaction, the Pope, Cardinals, and People of Rome went in Procession to the Spanish Church of Santiago; there the Divine Office was performed with great Solem∣nity, and a Sermon suitable to the Occasion preached; in which the Preacher highly extolled the King and Queen, and magnified the Valour of, and Victories obtained by the Spanish Na∣tion. The End of the 25th BOOK.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXVI. CHAP. I. The Affairs in Britany; The Jews expelled Spain; Pope Innocent VIII. dies, Alexan∣der VI. succeeds him; Navarre pacified. AFter putting so Honourable an end to the War of Granada, and totally subverting the Kingdom of the Moores in Spain, King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth bent their thoughts upon greater and more glorious Undertakings. Lest the great number they had of brave and expert Soldiers should be debauched with Luxury and Ease, since nothing remained to Conquer at home, they sent them to subdue Kingdoms abroad. Thus the Dominion and Name of the Spaniards, till then confined within the bounds of their own Country, was not only spread abroad through France, Italy, and Barbary, but extended to the utmost bounds of the Earth. I am sensible the Work that lies before me is too great for my weak Capacity, and might startle the greatest Wits. For this Reason in the Preface to my Latin History, I said I would conclude with the War of Granada, but several Learned People have perswaded me, this Work would be imperfect ending there, that the Actions since performed are so glorious they will be an Ornament to all the rest, and that every one is more delighed with Modern History, than with that which its Antiquity makes dubious. I have therefore resolved to continue this History some years longer, in which the Spaniards performed the most glorious Actions that were ever done, not only by them, but by any People in the whole World. Before we enter upon those mighty Exploits, it will not be amiss to put the Reader in mind of some things we have hinted before. Francis Duke of Britany Married Margaret Daughter to Ellenor Queen of Navarre, and Niece to King Ferdinand. They had no Issue Male, but only two Daughters, Ann and Elizabeth. Many Princes were ambi∣tious to Marry those Ladies, and especially the Eldest. Among the rest Charles VIII. King of Affairs of Britany in France. France was he that stood fairest, notwithstanding he was before Contracted to Margaret Daugh∣ter to Maximilian King of the Romans, who being now a Widdower Treated of Marrying the same Lady Ann. The King of France sought to gain by force what he feared not to com∣pass by fair means, and therefore upon pretence that the Duke of Orlcans was protected against him in Britany, he made War upon that Country. The Duke applied himself for Succour to the English, Germans, and Spaniards. To this purpose, as has been said, Alan d' Albret, Fa∣ther to the King of Navarre, hoping to Marry the Lady Ann, came to King Ferdinand, then at Valencia, and prevailed with him to send a Fleet and Land Forces under the Command of John Gralla into Britany. These Forces and the Dukes were defeated by the French in the Month of August 1488. After this the King of France and Duke of Britany were reconciled, the Duke promising not to Marry his Daughters without that King's Consent, which he per∣formed, for he died the following year, leaving them both Maids. He appointed the Ma∣reschal of Britany Tutor to his Daughter, and Governour of the Province, who favoured the Pretentions of Monsieur d' Albert, but the Earl of Dunois and the Chancellor opposed, and the Prince of Orange, who was her near Kinsman, seized upon the Dutchess and her Sister. The Mareschal obtained Succours out of England. The Prince of Orange had recourse to the Kings of the Romans and of Spain. King Ferdinand sent 1000 choice Horse under the Com∣mand of D. Peter Gomez Sarmiento Earl of Salinas, who landed in Britany at the beginning of the year 1490. This Succour did nothing there, and d' Albret despairing of success, upon pro∣mise of being made Constable of France, resolved to change Parties, and accordingly delivered up Nantes, the chief City of that Dukedom, to the French. King Ferdinand seeing his Forces were of no use in Britany, and upon hopes given him of being restored to Russillon and Cer∣daigne, called them home. Luis XI. King of France, had ordered that Restitution to be made in his Will, being perswaded so to do by F. Francis de Paula, Founder of the Minims, whom he sent for out of Italy before his death. The Spaniards being gone, the King of France soon possessed himself of the greatest part of Britany, and presently after Married Ann the Dutchess. This Marriage so increased the Power, and confirmed the Affairs of France, that all Divisions Jews ba∣nished Spain. being at an end, the French had leasure to invade Italy. In Spain King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth having ended the War with the Moors, resolved to banish the Jews out of all their Dominions. To this purpose they ordered a Proclamation to be set forth at Granada, where they then were in the Month of March 1492, commanding all that Nation to depart the King∣dom
within four months, leave being given them either to sell their Goods, or carry them with them. In the month of April, F. Thomas de Torquemada, the first Inquisitor General, pub∣lished an Order, forbidding all Christians after that time to Entertain or Conceal them under severe Penalties. This caused an infinite number of those People to transport themselves to several places. Some went over to Africk, others to Italy, and many to the Eastern Coun∣treys, where their Descendents still use the Spanish Tongue. A great number of them stayed in Portugal upon Leave granted by King John II. yet so that each of them should pay Eight Crowns in Gold for their Reception, and depart the Kingdom within a certain time limited. After the expiration whereof all such as stayed should be made Slaves. Many of them were accordingly brought into Servitude, and afterwards set free by King Emamul at the beginning of his Reign. What number of Jews went out of Spain cannot be positively affirmed. Most Authors say there were 170000 Families, and some say they made up 800000 Souls. A vast Multitude, which caused many to condemn this Action of the King's as a great loss to his Kingdoms, these being a Rich and Industrious People. No doubt but it was a great advan∣tage to those Countreys whither they went, because they carried with them great part of the Riches of Spain. True it is, many of them rather than leave their Country, and sustain such great loss, were Baptized, some sincerely, others only for Protection. At this time died at Rome Pope Innocent VIII. The next day after his Death the Cardinals Pope In∣nocent VIII dies, A∣lexander VI. suc∣ceeds. met to choose another, and at last, after much struggling, whether by fair or soul means, is not mine to decide, Cardinal Roderick Borgia was Elected, and took the Name of Alexan¦der VI. Many ill things have been said of this Pope, some it is likely were true, but mag∣nified through Malice because he was a Stranger, as being born at Valencia. When his Unckle Calixtus was chosen Pope he made haste to Rome, and being created Cardinal, had by a Roman Woman called Zanocia, or Vanezia, four Sons, Peter Luis the Eldest, Cesar, John, and God∣frey, and one Daughter called Lucretia. He was so rich, that he bought the Dukedom of Gandia, and gave it to his Son Peter Luis, and after his decease to his 3d Son John, whose Son and Heir was John Father to D. Francis Borgia, a Holy Man, for quitting that Estate he be∣came a Jesuit. Alexander was Elected on the 11th of August, and Crowned on the 27th. The same day he confirmed the Decree before passed for Erecting the See of Valencia into an Archbishoprick, and gave it to his Second Son Cesar, then Bishop of Pamplona. The year fol∣lowing he made him a Cardinal, several Witnesses being produced to Swear he was not Son to the Pope, but to Dominick Arin̄ano Husband to Zanocia, such was the Corruption of that Age. The youngest Son of all was Godfrey, who by Contract with the King of Naples, was created Prince of Esquilache. Lucretia was first Married to John Sforzia, then to Luis Alonso de Navarre pacified. Aragon, Bastard Son to Alonso King of Naples, and lastly to Alonso de Este, Eldest Son to Her∣cules Duke of Ferrara. During the Papacy of Alexander  Cardinals Caps were given to Spaniards. Navarre was now in an uproar for two Reasons: One was, that John Viscount Narbonne, Unckle to the Queen of Navarre, pretended he had a better Right to the Crown than she, because his Eldest Brother Gaston died before his Mother Queen Ellenor, and there∣fore he said he was to take place of the Grandchildren. On the other side the Earl of Lerin disturbed the Country, being possessed of Pamplona, Olite, and several other Places. Each Party had recourse to King Ferdinand to justifie their Proceedings, as to one who was so nearly concerned, and might be so great a support to them. As to the Viscount, King Ferdinand an∣swered, he would stand by the King and Queen of Navarre, their Right being undisputable. He therefore took several Places in the County of Faux by force of Arms, and at the same time pleaded his Title in the Parliament of Paris, yet at length he compounded, and gave over his Pretentions for a while. For the Earl of Lerin, it was ordained, that he should de∣liver up those Places he was unjustly possessed of, and be banished Navarre during his Life, together with his two Sons Luis and Ferdinand. To mollifie these hard Conditions, the Town of Huescar in the Kingdom of Granada was given him with the Title of a Marquess. This was concluded the following year, and put in execution 3 years after. Let us turn back to what we have left behind. CHAP. II. Discoveries and Conquests of the Spaniards in the West-Indies; Controversies arise be∣twixt the Crowns of Spain and Portugal concerning their Discoveries; Roussillon and Cerdagne restored to King Ferdinand. THE most Honourable and Advantageous Enterprize that Spain ever undertook was the Discove∣ries and Conquests in the West-In∣dies. Discovery of the West-Indies, properly called The New World, which hapned in this man∣ner. A Ship being drove by a violent Storm from the Coast of Africk, was cast upon an un∣known Land. After the Storm had ceased, the Master, with only 3 or 4 Mariners, the rest being consumed by Famine, returned to the Island Madera. Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, but Married in Portugal, was then in that Island, and was an able Seaman, and daring Man. He entertained the Master of that Ship in his House, who died soon after, and left Columbus his Journal of that Voyage. Others say, he was informed by one Marcus Polus a Florentine,
and others, that he found out by his Skill in Astrology, that there were vast Countreys to∣wards the West undiscovered. These his thoughts he communicated first to the King of Por∣tugal, then to Henry VII. of England, and being slighted by them both, came to the Court of King Ferdinand: There he waited 7 years, and at last after the subduing of the Kingdom of Granada, obtained of the King 3 Ships to attempt this Discovery. It is wonderful that so great an Undertaking was begun only with 17000 Duccats, which the King was forced to borrow, his Revenue was so far exhausted. Columbus set sail on the 3d of August from Palos de Moguer, and having touched at the Canaries, after several days sail, and many difficulties, he discovered certain Islands which he called The Princes Islands. He spent some days there, and leaving some of his Company in a Fort he built, under the Command of James de Ara∣na, returned to Spain with the News of what he had discovered, and some Proofs of the Riches of the Country. The following year he continued to discover many other Islands, the chiefest whereof were Hispaniola and Cuba. Besides he Coasted a great part of the Con∣tinent, as well towards the Southern as Northern Pole. Columbus died in the year of Grace 1500, a Man worthy of Immortal Praise. He was made Admiral of the Indies and Duke of Veraguas, Rewards due to his great Merit. Several others continued these Discoveries, as well during his Life as after his Death. Among these Americus Vespusius, a Florentine, by or∣der of Emanuel King of Portugal, in the year 1500 discovered all Brasil, which is a great part of that Continent. After much of the Northern Coast had been discovered by several Persons, Vasco Nun̄ez de Balboa, born at Badajoz, was the first that adventured to pass that narrow Neck of Land that lies between Nombre de Dios and Panama, and so came to the South Sea in the year 1513. These Discoveries of Columbus and Americus Vespusius raised a Controversie betwixt the Crowns of Castile and Portugal, the latter pretending all the Disco∣very of the New World appertained to him by Grants of several Popes, and particularly of Eugenius IV. On the other side the King of Castile pleaded a Bull of Pope Alexander VI. in the year 1493, which assigned to him all the Lands to the Westward of an imaginary Line Contro∣versies betwixt Castile and Portugal about their Dis∣coveries. drawn 100 Leagues beyond the Islands of Cabo Verde. This Grant was afterwards altered by another, which ordained the said Line to be drawn 370 Leagues farther towards the West, to the end that Brasil might fall within the Portugues Limits. Hierome Ozorio, Bishop of Silves, in the Life of King Emanuel, affirms the said Line was appointed to be drawn 36 Degrees West of the Meridian of Lisbon. Upon this Determination was grounded another Dispute, the Castillians pretending that the Molucco Islands, whence the Spice is brought, fell within their Limits, as being within that half of the World assigned them. All this the Portugueses deny, and each Party bring Arguments to make good their Assertions. Certain it is, that Ferdinand Magallanes, a Portugues, being disgusted because his King did not Reward his Ser∣vices done in India, perswaded, the Emperor Charles V. Grandson to King Ferdinand, that a new way might be found to the Moluco Islands by the South West. He had 5 Ships given him for this Enterprize, and sailed from Sevil in the year 1519. Having touched at the Canaries, he Coasted all along Brasil, and found a Streight in 53 Degrees of South Latitude, which of him is called the Streight of Magellan. At the entrance of that Streight one of the Ships struck upon a Rock and was lost; another weary of that long Voyage stole away by night, and re∣turned to Sevil. With the rest he passed the Streight, and was himself with some of his Companions killed in an Island called Zubu. Those that were left being too few to Man all the Ships, burnt one, and with the other two came to the Moluco Islands. They loaded in the Island of Tidore, but one of them being very leaky was lost. The other coming round by the Cape of Good Hope, at last arrived at Sevil, 3 years after his departure. The Ship was called the Victory, the Master John Sebastian Cano, a Biscainer, whose Name ought never to be forgotten, as being the first that sailed round the World. Many afterwards attempted that same Voyage, but the Profit not answering the Trouble it was laid aside, as also because King John of Portugal lent the Emperor Charles V. 350000 Duccats, upon Condition he and his Heirs should desist from that Undertaking, till the Money were repayed. On the Right Hand of that Neck of Land, which we have said lies between the North and South Seas, is the King∣dom of New Spain, and the City Mexico, its Metropolis, seated in the midst of a Lake. Over this and many other large Provinces and Kingdoms Reigned the mighty Emperor Montezuma, whom Ferdinand Cortes in the year 1520, with wonderful Resolution, apprehend∣ed, and made Prisoner in his own Palace. He being killed accidentally by a Stone cast at a Window where he was looking out to appease his People, Cortes brought those vast Provinces under the subjection of Charles the Emperor, gained himself Eternal Honour, and left to his Successors the Marquesses del Valle, a great Estate in the Kingdom of Mexico. On the Left Hand of that Neck of Land Francis Pizarro, in the year 1525, discovered the Kingdom of Peru, and 6 years after Conquered it, taking and putting to death Atabalipa Lord of that Country. This is the richest Countrey for Mines of Gold and Silver hitherto discovered, insomuch that all the Utensils of those People, even to their Pots and Kettles, were of these precious Mettals. Pizarro shared not the vast Booty he got there fairly with James de Alma∣gro, his principal Companion in that Conquest, and the rest of his Men, and yet the meanest Soldier's part came to 9000 Duccats, which was the richest Plunder ever taken till that time. His Force was about 300 Men, who in Battle overthrew above 100000 Indians. Riches and Plenty produced Pride and Insolence, for Ferdinand, Brother to Francis Pizarro, understand∣ing
that Almagro openly complained of the Wrong done him and meditated Revenge, he murdered him. A Bastard Son of Almagro, whom he had by an Indian, and whose Name was James, assaulted the House of Francis Pizarro in the City of Lima, and killed him in revenge of his Father. This was a bold Attempt, and to punish it the Governour Christo∣pher Vaca de Castro, joined with Gonçalo Pizarro, another Brother of the said Francis, and with their Forces overthrew and killed the said James. This Victory and his great Riches so puffed up Gonçalo Pizarro, that he attempted to make himself absolute Lord of that Country. Blasco Nun̄ez Vela was sent by the Emperor from Spain to be Viceroy of Peru, him the Rebellious Spaniards took Prisoner, and put to Death. Afterwards the Licentiate Peter de Gasca, tho a Priest, and one of the General Council of the Inquisition, put an end to all those Tumults rather by Policy than Force. He put to death Gonçalo Pizarro, and the other Heads of the Rebellion. This done he returned into Spain, where he was first Bishop of Palencia, then of Siguença till the end of his Life, which was very long. Ferdinand Pizarro, the only Surviver of the Three Brothers, was long a Prisoner in Spain, for before the Rebellion of his Brother he came to answer for the Murder of Almagro, which was the cause of all those Broils; Thus God punished the Murder of the Emperor Atabalipa, not suffering one of his Enemies to escape scotfree, and the ill acquired Riches perished with their Owners. The Customs of all these People were strange, and all other things extraordinary. Their Fish, Beasts, Trees and Herbs all different from ours. They had no use of Letters, no Money, no Weights, nor did they build any Ships, only Boats of one Tree hollowed like Trays, which they call Canoes. For Cloathing they had neither Linnen, Woollen, nor Silk, but only Cotton, whereof there is abundance. There was no Iron, and consequently none of the Weapons and other Neces∣saries made thereof. Corn like ours they have none, but a Grain they call Maiz, nor Oil, nor Wine made of Grapes, but they wanted not other Liquors to make them Drunk, to which they are much addicted. They know not how to make Candles of Wax or Tallow. There were no Beasts of Burden, nor to Ride, nor Carts, or Litters. Prisoners taken in War, and Slaves, were sacrificed in such vast numbers, that it is held for a certain truth above 20000 perished in this manner every year in only the City Mexico, whose Flesh they eat without any loathing. It was Customary to have many Wives, and Sodomy was permitted, so brutish was their Government. Their Garb was strange, and many went quite naked. Afterwards Chile upon the South Sea was discovered, where were found Warlike Indians, and difficult to be subdued, and on our side beyond Brasil and the River de la Plata lies Paraguay and Tucuman, extending to the Streights of Magellan. The Philippine Islands were found at another time, and took their Name from Philip II. King of Spain. The Lieutenant Michael Lopez de Le∣gaspi, conquered the chief of them called Luzon, and its City Manila, on the 18th of May 1572. Lastly, in the year 1598, a good Body of Men under the Command of D. John de Onate, set out from Mexico, to the Conquest of New Mexico. This Country lies in about 30 deg. of N. Lat. The Soil is fruitful, the People more polished than the other Indians, their Houses 3 or 4, and some 7 Stories high. It was known by hearsay ever since the time of Cortes, and often attempted to be conquered, but never before with such a Power. The Success was not answerable to so great Preparations. This may suffice as to the West-Indies. Charles VIII. King of France, being inflamed with the desire of conquering the Kingdom of Roussillion and Cer∣dagne re∣stored to King Fer∣dinand. Naples, to which he pretended he had a good Title, thought it necessary to secure King Fer∣dinand, by entring into a League with him, lest he should in his absence invade France, the Kingdom of Naples belonging to the House of Aragon. To this purpose a Treaty was carried on for restoring Russillon and Cerdaigne. King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth leaving the Go∣vernment of their new Kingdom of Granada to the Earl of Tendilla, in June set out towards Aragon, to be nearer to their Commissioners who managed that Treaty. At Zaragoça they settled the Government of that City, and went thence to Barcelona in October. There, as the King came out from giving Audience, according to Custom, one John Canamares, a Catalo∣nian, came up with his naked Sword to kill him, and gave him a Wound under his Ear. This Fellow being apprehended, it appeared he was Mad, and had undertaken that Action, be∣cause he Dreamed that if he killed the King he should succeed him. However, he was torn with Pinchers and then burnt. The League betwixt Spain and France, after much alterca∣tion, was lastly concluded at Narbonne on the 18th of January 1493, all Princes, except the Pope, being excluded. It was agreed that the King of Spain should not Marry his Daughters without the consent of the King of France, and that on this account Russillon and Cerdaigne should be restored. However some months passed before the execution. Next, to pacifie Maximilian King of the Romans, the King of France restored to him his Daughter, and the Earldom of Artois her Dower, and gave him Security for the Restitution of the Earldom of Burgundy, and the rest of the Dutchy wrongfully detained from him. At the same time died the Emperor Frederick, and his Son Maximilian succeeded him. King Ferdinand continued still in Aragon and Catalonia, till such time, as according to Contract, Russillon and Cerdaigne were delivered to him in September, the French Garrison marching out. All Historians, and especially the French, blame that King for parting with those Dominions he had in possession, upon an uncertain hope. Many lay the blame on the Bishop of Albi, who was the French Ambassador at the Treaty, and say he was corrupted with Spanish Gold.
CHAP. III. Palma, one of the Canary Islands Conquered; The Masterships of the Three Military Or∣ders annexed to the Crown of Castile; The Original of the Neopolitan War; The death of Ferdinand King of Naples. AT the same time that King Ferdinand recovered Russillon, he was in the farthest part of Spain restored to the Island of Cadiz and its Port, which is one of the most famous in the whole World. King Henry the IV. had with his wonted Prodigality given it to D. John Ponce de Leon Earl of Arcos, who dying some Months after the taking of Granada, that Island was taken from Rodcrick Ponce his Grandson and Heir, and restored to the Crown. Yet in lieu of it the Town of Casares in Africk, was given to Roderick Ponce, and his Title of Earl, changed into that of Duke of Arcos. The Island Palma, one of the Canaries, Palma, one of the Cana∣ry Islands conquer∣ed. was now Conquered by Alonso de Lugo, sent by the King and Queen upon that Expedition. But the most considerable thing which hapned this Year, was that the King possessed himself of the Masterships of the Three Military Orders in Castile. The Masters were exempt from the Regal Jurisdiction, and were so excessive powerful by reason of their vast Riches and ma∣ny Dependants, that they were grown terrible to the Kings themselves. For this reason Pope Innocent the VIII. granted the Catholick King Ferdinand should hold those Master∣ships as Administrator. This Bull was obtained about the same time that D. Garcia de Pa∣dilla Master of Calatrava departed this Life, which was in the Year 1487, and D. Alonso de Master∣ship of the 3 Mi∣litary Or∣ders inse∣parably annexed to the Crown. Cardenas, Master of Santiago dying at this time, the King took possession of that Master∣ship. The following Year he agreed with D. John de Zun̄iga Master of Alcantara to resign up that Dignity to him, and in lieu of it to accept of the Archbishoprick of Sevil. Thus the King became Master of those Three Orders for his Life, and Pope Alexander joined with him Queen Elizabeth, appointing her to Inherit those Dignities after his death. Lastly Pope Adrian some Years after, to oblige his Schollar Charles the Emperor, granted to him and his Heirs the Presentation of all the Bishops in Spain, which before, the Kings had on∣ly liberty to recommend by way of Suit. He also assigned him the Administration of the Three Military Orders for ever. To this last Master of Alcantara, who was afterwards a Cardinal, The Master Antony de Nebriga dedicated his Dictionary. This was a Man wor∣thy of Immortal Fame, and to have his Name Recorded in the History of Spain, as well because he laid the Foundation of all the Learning of the Latin Tongue there, as for the ma∣ny Books he writ, fraught with good Doctrine, and Learning. Among his other Works, he composed the Histories of the Wars of Granada, and that of Navarre, which hapned some Years after; true it is, in those Works there appears more of his diligence and sincerity, than elegancy. At the same time that the Marquess of Cadiz and Master of Santiago died, Henry de Guzman Duke of Medina Sidonia, and D. Peter Enriquez Lieutenant of Andaluzia de∣parted this Life. D. John his Son succeeded the Duke. Not long before, Peter Hernandez de Velasco the Constable dying, Bernardin de Velasco, his Son succeeded him, and Married the Lady Joanna de Aragon, King Ferdinand's Bastard Daughter. Nothing hapned about this time more remarkable, or that put Italy and the most part Original of the Neapolitan War. of Europe into a greater confusion, than the famous War in Naples, undertaken by Charles the VIII. King of France, as has been before hinted. To speak of this War, let us recol∣lect what has been in other places said of the Original Causes of it. Pope Urban the VI. caused Charles Prince of Durazzo to come out of Hungary to oppose him, against Joanna Queen of Naples, who had favoured the Election of Clement the VII. his Competitor, where∣by the Peace of the Church was much disturbed. She called to her assistance Luis Duke of Anjou, younger Son to the King of France, and adopted him her Son, and Heir to that Kingdom. This Luis had a Son of his own Name, who made War upon Ladislaus, Son to Charles, and King of Naples, but his success was no better than his Father's, for both were unfortunate in that War. Luis the Grandson was called by Pope Martin the V. against Joan∣na the younger, Queen of Naples, and Sister to Ladislaus. This Luis expelled Alonso King of Aragon, whom the said Joanna had adopted, and afterwards cast off. Renee his Brother succeeded Luis; with him King Alonso was long at War, and at last forced him to return into France. John Duke of Lorrain was Son to this Renée, and in the Barons War much distressed King Fredcrick of Naples, and afterwards headed the Catalonians in Rebellion against King John. He dying at Barcelona, as has been said, Charles Nephew to Renèe, his Brother's Son Inherited his Possessions. This Charles in his Will constituted Luis the XI. King of France his Heir, believing Renée Duke of Lorrain his own Nephew could not be able to withstand the pow∣er of the Aragonians. This was the original Cause of the War in Naples. Another secon∣dary Cause was added in this manner, Galleazzo Duke of Milan being Murdered by his Subjects, Luis Sforcia his Brother took upon him the Government of that Dukedom, under colour of the Minority of John Galleazzo, Son to the deceased. Luis Sforcia had to Wife Bea∣trix Sister to to Hercules Duke of Ferrara. Also Alonso Duke of Calabria, Son to the King of Naples was Married to Hippolita Sister to Luis Sforcia, by whom he had Ferdinand, and Eli∣zabeth. Ferdinand was King of Naples after his Grandfather and Father, Elizabeth was Mar∣ried
to John Galeazzo the true Duke of Milan. This Lady seeing her Husband excluded. tho' he had Two Children by her, perswaded her Father to restore her Husband to the Inheritance left him by his Ancestors. Luis Sforcia perceiving what a Storm threatned him from Naples, invited Charles the VIII. King of France to Invade that Kingdom; which he said of right appertained to him. Many Men of Note of his own Subjects encouraged the King to undertake this Enterprize, as also some Barons of Naples Banished by King Ferdinand Philip de Comines says those Noblemen were well received at first, yet such was their enter∣tainment, that necessity drove them to have recourse to King Ferdinand, who had a better-Title to that Crown, than the Possessors, who were of the Bastard Line. Yet the King perceiving those Lords only sought their own ends; and would consequently follow him that came first, thought not fit to engage in that War, and only endeavoured to disswade the French from it. By this time they were so far ingagaged, there was no going back Both Parties sought to strengthen themselves with Alliances. The French and Milaneses joyned in League with all the States of Italy, except the Florentines, who at first favoured the Aragonians, and the Venetians who chose rather to stand neuter, than favour either side. Pope Alex∣ander, tho' at first he appeared averse from the Kings of Naples, at last upon promise that his Sons should have possessions given them in that Kingdom, and that a yearly Pension should be paid to him, he resolved to stand by those who had obliged him. The King of Naples ceased not to provide for the War, and make all the Friends he could. Parti∣cularly, he sent an Ambassador into Spain, to press the King to make War upon France. He urged their near Kindred, as being Cousin-germans, and Brothers in-Law, and put King Ferdinand in mind of the danger of Sicily, in Case the French became Masters of Naples. All this moved not King Ferdinand to break with France, only he sent Garcilasso de la Vega to the Pope, to confirm him in his resolution of protecting the King of Naples; and D. Alonso de Silva, brother to the Earl of Cifuentes, was sent to France to disswade that King from the Enterprize he had in hand, and in case he would not desist, declare to him that King Ferdinand could not forsake his kinsman and Ally. This hapned at the beginning of the Year 1494, when King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth having till then staid in Aragon, went away from Zaragoça to Tordesillas, thence to Valladolid, and so to Medina del Campo. 1494 There they received advice that Ferdinand King of Naples was departed this Life. He died on Ferdinand King of Naples dies the 25th of January, of a great Age, and in care for the War then in Hand. Un∣fortunate on the one side, for leaving his Affairs in so ill a Posture, the chief cause where∣of was his austere Temper: Happy on the other side that he lived not to see the Ruin of that his flourishing Kingdom. His Son Alonso. succeeded him, and was no way more ac∣ceptable to the People than his Father had been. Cardinal John de Borgia sent on purpose by the Pope his Unckle, as Legate to Naples, Crowned him. This Year also the Pope by his Bull granted to the Kings of Castile for ever the 3d part of the Tithes of Castile, Leon and Granada, conditionally that the profit thereof should be spent in the War with the Moors. At Tordesillas on the 7th of June, was agreed the Difference betwixt Castile and Portugal, touching their Discoveries in the Indies. The Conquests of Castile were to begin 36 Degrees West from the Meridian of Lisbon, all thence Eastward as far as half the Cir∣cumference of the Globe to appertain to the Portugueses. The matter also of the Conquests in Africk was adjusted, so that all within the Kingdom of Fez should belong to Portugal, the Kingdom of Tremecen to Castile; but no Line was fixed to distinguish their Limits, which afterwards caused new disputes. CHAP. IV. The French Invade the Kingdom of Naples; An account of Luis Sforcia Duke of Milan; The French King at Rome; Alonso King of Naples Abdicates; The French Possess themselves of the Kingdom of Naples. THE King of France being resolved to Invade Italy in Person, gathered all his Forces; the Randezvouz of his Army was at Lyons. Thither came from Ostia, whither he fled French In∣vade Na∣ples. for fear of the Pope, the Cardinal of St. Peter to forward that undertaking. On the other side D. Alonso de Silva according to his Instructions in his King's behalf, protested against those proceedings. Nevertheless, the King of France committing the Government of his Kingdom to Peter Duke of Bourbon his Brother-in-Law, set out from that City upon Tuesday the 22th of July, with him went most of the Nobility of France. His Army consisted of about 20000 Foot, and 5000 Horse. To pay these Forces, he borrowed Money of the Nobility, besides 150000 Florms taken up of a Genoese Banker, a small Sum for so great an under∣taking. King Alonso sent a great Fleet under the Command of his Brother Frederick, to In∣fest the State of Genoa. By Land he sent his Son the Duke of Calabria to Invade the Terri∣tories of Milan. All things fell out unfortunately, for Frederick did nothing worth naming, and the Duke of Calabria was stopped by the Forces of France and Milan, from passing out of Romania. The King of France passed the Alpes, and on the 9th of September came to Aste, the Bounds of the Dukedom of Milan, and then possessed by the Duke of Orleans,
who was in that Expedition, and pretended a Right to the whole Dukedom. D. Alonso the Spanish Ambassador, was very little looked upon at Court, insomuch that he was or∣dered to be dismissed, but he winked at all, being a Person of great Prudence and Sagacity. At the City Aste they flighted him so far, as to assign him no Quarters, whereupon he was forced to go away to Genoa. There he began to treat with Luis Sforcia, who repented of what he had done, about joining in League with the Catholick King, giving him a hint that one of the Princesses should be Married to his Eldest Son, for they could not Marry with any other Prince by reason of the agreement made with France. This took so much with Luis Sforcia, that he resolved to change Parties, tho' at the same time he repaired to Aste, to receive the French King, and gave him a Sum of Money to pay his Army. The King leaving the Duke of Orleans who designed to lay hold of that oportunity to possess himself of the State of Milan, at Aste Marched with his Army to Pavia, where he visitted the Duke John Galeazzo, who was then at the point of death, and was his Cousin-german, both their Luis Sfor∣cia Duke of Milan. Mothers being Sisters, and Daughters to the Duke of Savoy. The Duke died on the 21th of October, and it appeared plainly he had been poisoned, which increased the Hatred con∣ceived towards his Unckle. The same day the King of France entred Plasencia, and with him Lewis Sforcia, who understanding the death of his Nephew; immediatly returned to Milan, and there publickly took upon him the Title of Duke, notwithstanding his Ne∣phew left a Son five Years of Age, as also two Daughters and his Wife big with Child. So far did his Ambition blind him, that the same day he wrote to King Alonso, giving an account of his Nephews death, and telling him the Nobility and People of Milan had obliged him to take the Title of Duke, and that he believed this would be no way displeasing to him, knowing how well affected he was towards him and his Kingdom. From Plasencia the King entred into Tuscany. Ambassadors came to him from all parts, and particulaly from the Venetians, offering their Friendship. The Pope sent the Cardinal of Siena his Le∣gate, who came as far as Pisa, but the King would not see him. The Florentines sent Peter de Medicis on the same account. He contrary to his Commission and Instructions was agree∣ing to deliver up to the French Saraçana, Saraçanella, and Piedrasanta, strong Holds belonging to the Republick on Mount Apennine, as also the Castles of Pesa and Leghorn, and some o∣ther things to this purpose. Hereat the People were so inraged, that they Banished him and his Brothers, the Cardinal de Medicis and Julian, plundered their Houses, and confisca∣ted all their Estates, which were very great. Being come to Pisa, the King restored that City to its Liberty, delivering it from the subjection it was under to the Florentines. He entred Florence the same day that Picus Mirandula died there at the Age of 34 Years, a Man of such an excellent Wit, that he was called the Phaenix. He agreed with the Florentines to restore their Forts after the War was ended, that they for his sake should pardon Peter de Medicis and his Brothers, and pay 120000 Florins towards the Charge of the War. Rome was in an uproar because the Cardinals could not agree, and the Nobility was divided, for Prosper and Fabricius Colonna favoured the French, and Virginius Ursinus the Neapolitans. The Colonneses with Cardinal Ascanius Sforcia had seized the City Ostia, by which means Rome suffered great want, no Provisions coming to it by Sea. It was genarally believed the Pope would agree with the King of France, or else depart Rome. Hereupon the People began to mutiny, and the Pope was obliged to satisfie the Cardinals and Roman Gentry, assuring them he would stand by the juster Cause, and if the King of France attempted to enter Rome with his Army, he would make head against him, and hazard his own Life in the Quarrel. All he could say, was of little force to encourage the People, who were terrified with the News daily brought of the approach of the French, and their securing the Towns belonging to the Church. The Pope himself perceiving that neither his own, nor the Forces of Naples, with a good part whereof the Duke of Calabria then lay at Burgos were sufficient to withstand the Power of the Enemy, retired himself to the Castle of Santangelo, and sent Word to the Duke to retire, lest some misfortune should happen to him. In fine, the King with his whole Army entred Rome upon the last day of December, preceding the French King at Rome. Year 1495, all the People, and some of the Cardinals making great expressions of Joy. He Lodged himself in the Pallace of S. Mark. At this time died the Cardinal of Spain at 1495. Guadalajara, upon the 11th day of January, aged 67 Years and 3 Months. He was a noble Person, excellently qualified, and had a great hand in the Government all his Life∣time. He Founded a College at Valladolid, and ordered in his Will an Hospital to be Built at Toledo, to which he left all he was Worth. The See of Toledo vacant by his death, the King would have given to his Son Alonso Archbishop of Zaragoça, but the Queen would not consent. She offered it to D. Peter de Oropesa one of her Council, but he would not accept of it, therefore it was given to F. Francis Ximenes de Cisneros a Friar Minor, of known Piety and Virtue, but of mean extraction. When promoted to the Archbishoprick, he was the Queen's Confessor, some Years after he was made Cardinal. At Rome, the Pope and King of France agreed that the Cardinal of Valencia should go with the King as Legate, that the Great Turk's Brother should be delivered to him, and that the Castles of Civita Vecchia, Terraçina, and Spoleto should be in his Power during the War. Hereupon the King obliged himself to cause the City Ostia to be restored to the Pope after
the War, and to do Homage himself to the Pope, as he did a few days after in the Palace of S. Peter. This done, the King set out from Rome on the 28th of January, taking his way to∣wards Naples; whence advice was brought, that the City Aquila and many other Places had voluntarily submitted to him. King Ferdinand of Spain understanding what was done, and of the Affront offered to the Pope, resolved to declare. To this purpose he sent Antony de Fonseca, and John d' Albion to require the King of France to forbear making War on the Lands of the Church, since he well knew the Pope and all that belonged to him, ought to be exempted by the late Treaty. At the same time he sent the Earl of Trivento to Command the Fleet that was fitting at Alicant, and Gonçalo Fernandez de Cordova, with 500 Horse by Land. The Ambassadors came to Rome the same Day the King set out from thence, and imme∣diately following, gave him their Credentials in the Field, as he was on Horseback, requiring him not to proceed further, without making Satisfaction to the Church. The King was sur∣prized, and said he would answer at Velitre: There they delivered their Embassie more at large, complaining of the Wrongs and Affronts offered to the Pope, and requiring him not to proceed as to the Affair of Naples, till the Case were decided in Judgment. After much con∣testing, the King said he was come too far to go back, and therefore would stand to Judg∣ment when he had conquered the Kingdom. Then Antony de Fonseca replied, Since your Ma∣jesty will have it so, and is resolved to be tried by the Sword, God the Defence of the Innocent shall be the Judge in this Cause. The King my Master has done his Duty, and is now left free to employ his Forces as he shall think fit. This said, in the presence of the King and his Council he tore the Articles of the late Agreement betwixt the Two Kings. A bold Action, which had almost provoked him to lay hold of him; but he returned to Rome. This Embassie encouraged the Pope not to stand by the late Capitulation; and the next Night the Cardinal of Va∣lencia in a Disguise stole away from Velitre: He took not the Road to Rome, lest it should be thought he fled by Order of the Pope, but went to Spoleto, a strong City belonging to the Church. Whilst the King of France was yet at Rome, Alonso King of Naples, who had not yet reigned Alonso King of Naples ab∣dicates. a whole Year, resolved to Abdicate, and to that intent assembled all the Nobility and his Council, to whom he delivered himself in this manner: You are all sensible of the dangerous Po∣sture of our Affairs. The Powerful Enemy presses upon us, and yet the French do not make more haste to advance, than our own People to declare for them. Foreign Succours are far off, and they who ought to relieve us, seem least concerned at our Misfortunes. I will complain of no body; my Sins are the cause of this sad Disaster, and it is fit he who is the occasion of it should suffer. My Life is in the hands of God; what I have to offer up is the Crown, which I take from my own Head as unworthy of it, and transfer it to my Son, whose Worth you all know. It is a good Change, since in lieu of a Sickly Man, I give you a Young and Valiant King. I wish things were in that Condition that I might shew to the World how little I value its Grandeur; but it is also Prudence to submit to Necessity. In fine, I am resolved, since I cannot be useful in this time of need, to quit my dear Country, rather than be a Witness of its Misfortunes. Perhaps this voluntary Sacrifice I make of my self, may appease God's Wrath,, and incline the Hearts of Men to defend you. It is needless to put you in mind of your Duty to your King, nor him of the Care he is to have of his Subjects. This Act of Resignation was per∣formed on the 23d of January, in the Castle del Ovo. Thence he shipped himself with his private Treasure, which was great, for Sicily, resolving to spend the rest of his Life in the Habit of a Priest in the City Mazara. He writ to several Princes, particularly King Ferdi∣nand, giving his Reasons for resigning the Crown; but the truth is, he did it because he was grown odious to his Subjects. He lived not a Year after, but spent his time in the Exercise of Virtue. His Body is buried in the Cathedral of Meçina. As soon as the New King was possessed of the Government, he showed himself abroad in the City; and to gain the Good∣will of the People, ordered a great Number of Prisoners to be set at liberty, as well of the No∣bility as Commons, only excepting John Baptista Marçano, Son to Marino Marçano, Prince of Rosano and Duke of Sessa, as also the Earl of Populo, who were both in Prison since the time of the Barons Wars, and were mortal Enemies to the House of Aragon. This done, he set out of Naples towards his Army, which lay at S. German on the Borders of the Kingdom, where it confines on the Lands of the Church. He left his Unkle Frederick, Prince of Altamura, Governour of Naples. The King of France coming to S. German, the Town surrendered, and the New King retired to Capua, which he had fortified, but was betrayed to the French by Trivulcio a Milanese the Governour. Whilst the King of France was at Capua, the Great Turk's Brother died. Others say it was at Naples, whether the King marched, and was recei∣ved into that most Noble City without any resistance, upon Sunday the 22d of February. The New King Ferdinand, before the French came, abandon'd all, and retired to Castelnovo, where were the Queen-Dowager, her Daughter, Frederick the King's Unkle, and many other Lords. Thence he went to the Castle del Ovo, and lastly over to Sicily, to wait some turn of Fortune. But the French were so fortunate, that in 15 Days after their entring upon the Borders of the Kingdom, all submitted to them to the utmost point of Italy. I believe never so great an Un∣dertaking was concluded in so short a time. Only some few Places in Calabria held out some time for King Ferdinand, but at last submitted, as did Rijoles, which is in sight of Meçina, where the Fleet of Spain lay, but had no Orders to attempt any thing.
CHAP. V. The League against the French carried on with wonderful Secrescy; The French King re¦turns home; The Venetians overthrown by the French; King Ferdinand of Naples successful against them, and recovers that Noble City. NO sooner had the French possessed themselves of the Kingdom of Naples, but all the League a∣gainst the French. Princes of Italy began to consider how heavy the Dominion of that Nation would lie upon them, if suffered to settle and root it self in Italy. King Ferdinand of Spain was in the greatest danger for the Island of Sicily, whither he was informed the French designed to pass, as soon as they concluded the Affair of Naples, being chiefly animated to that Enterprize by the Prince of Salèrno, one of the Outlaws, and principal Enemy to the House of Aragon. The better to oppose them, he sought to draw the other Princes to a League against France: To this purpose he had some Months since sent Laurence Suarez de Figuera to Venice, and now sent a Gentleman called John Deza to the Duke of Milan, with Orders to make an Overture to him, not only of giving him one of the Princesses his Daughters, but of making him King of Lombardy; both which Proposals he willingly gave ear to. He also practised to draw the Em∣peror and the English into the League, and in order to it proposed cross Matches to strengthen the Alliance between Prince John and the Princess Joanna his Children, and Maxi∣milian and his Sister Margaret on the other side; which Design was so well prosecuted, that it was fully concluded by Francis de Rojas, sent on purpose to Flanders. Care was taken to raise Money in Castile and Aragon, to defray the Charge of the War. In Aragon the Cortes met, which the King would have had the Princess Catherine hold; but it would not be allowed, and he was forced to come himself. Such Industry was used, that at last the League was con∣cluded at Venice. It was agreed this, called the Most Holy League, should last for the space of 25 Years, and that between them all should be raised an Army of 34000 Horse, and 28000 Foot, proportionable to the Power and Ability of each of the Confederates. It was given out the Design was to protect the Church, and defend their own Dominions; but in reality it was to drive the French out of Italy. This Business was carried on with such wonderful Se∣crecy, that the French Ambassador Philip de Comines, Lord of Argenton, a Man of great Wisdom and Experience, then at Venice, had not the least Intelligence of it, and was so surprized when Augustin Barbadico, Duke of Venice, gave him an account of it, that he asked whether the King his Master might return with safety into France. The face of Affairs was soon changed; for the Neapolitans repented of what they had done, because the Insolencies com∣mitted by the French were intolerable. The Duke of Milan was perplexed, for that the Duke of Orlcans had secured the City Novara; besides, he understood that the French, endeavoured to draw the Genoeses from his Subjection, insomuch that he was forced with great Submission to have recourse to the Venetians for their Assistance. The King of France understanding what had hapned, resolved to return with all speed before the way was stopped. Before his depar∣ture, he appointed Gilbert Duke of Monpensier, a Prince of the Blood, Viceroy of Naples; with him he left part of his Army, and some able Commanders. He also sent to the Pope to ask of him the Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples, and to let him know he desired to pass through Rome to confer with his Holiness about important Affairs. As to the Investiture, the Pope answered he was ready to do Justice according as he should find; and as for his going to Rome, it could not be without some great Disorder, because the People were enraged against the French. This unpleasing Answer made the King hasten his Journey. He set out from Naples on the 20th of May: Being come to Rome, he found the Pope was retired to Perosa. From Rome he went into Tuscany, spent some Days at Siena, and without entring Florence, went French King re∣turns home. on to Pisa. The Florentines demanded the restitution of that City, as had been promised them; but the People of Pisa prevailed upon him. Thence he went into Lombardy, where Francis Marquess of Mantua, General of the Venetians, came to cut off his Retreat. The French be∣ing fewer in number, would have avoided fighting, and endeavoured to join the Duke of Orleans; but it could not be. The Enemies met on the Banks of the River Tarro, which runs within a League of the City Parma. The Venetians lay near Fornovo, a Village at the Foot of the Mountains, the French at the entrance into the Valley: There the Battel was fought, Venetians over∣thrown by the French. which was one of the most remarkable that had hapned long in Italy. At first the Italians had the better; but then falling to plunder and seize the Cannon, the French had leisure to rally, and returned upon the Enemy with such Fury, that they broke them with a mighty Slaughter. The King was in great danger, all his Guards being slain; and tho' the Victor could not ob∣tain of the Enemy a Truce for three Days, wherefore he was forced to steal away to Aste without beat of Drum. It was no small help to him in his retreat, that the River being swollen with the Rain, the Italians could not so soon pass it to pursue him. Yet he sustained much loss by the Light Horse that kept in his Rear, and the Country-people who took Arms to secure the Passes. Above 4000 Italians were killed in the Fight. The Duke of Mantua im∣mediately sate down before Novara, where he much distressed the Duke of Orleans.
Scarce was the King gone from Naples, when the Affairs of that Kingdom began to change. Ferdinand King of Naples suc∣cessful a∣gainst the French. The Fleet of Spain, commanded by the Earl of Trivento, lay at Meçina. Thither came the Two distressed Kings, Alonso and Ferdinand, and Joanna the Queen-Dowager. Gonçalo Fer∣nandez de Cordova was stopped some Days with his Men at Majorca and Sardinia, but arrived at Meçina on the 24th of May. King Ferdinand of Naples had already possessed himself of Rijoles, and other neighbouring Places in Calabria, in which Province Everard Stuart Lord of Aubeni, a renowned Commander, was left Governour by the King of France. Rijoles, Cotron, Amantia, and some other Places were delivered to Gonçalo Fernandez, to hold them for the King his Master till he should be paid the Charges of that War, as also to secure Sicily Some diffe∣rence arose betwixt the new King and Gonçalo Fernandez, because the King was positive for mar∣ching with all his Forces directly to Naples, the Citizens inviting him, even before the King of France was gone thence. Gonçalo Fernandez would not abandon Calabria, where he had those Strong-holds, and doubted not but the rest of the Country would declare for the King of Spain, for whom they testified a singular Affection. It was agreed to relieve Semanera, which was distressed by the French. The Lord Aubeni lay in the way, with whom the King came to a Battel, was defeated, and had been killed or taken, his Horse falling dead under him, had not a Gentleman, called John Andrew d' Altavila mounted him on his own Horse; so the King escaped, and the Gentleman was killed; which was an extraordinary Demon∣stration of Loyalty in those corrupt Times. This Battel was fought on June 21. Our Forces retired to Semanera; thence the King went over to Sicily, resolving to return again to Naples, before the News of that Misfortune could come thither. Gonçalo Fernandez went away to the other part of Calabria, where he soon took several Places, and at last subdued the whole Pro∣vince: The King, with 60 Sail he found at Meçina, without any Land-men passed over to Naples, where he was received with great Joy. The People rose and plundered the Houses of the Princes of Salerno and Basignano. The Duke of Monpensier and Prince of Salerno re∣tired to Castelnovo. Capua and all Apulia followed the example of Naples. Besides, upon the News of the Battel of Tarro, the Colonels forsook the French, and agreed with the King of Naples. On the other side, the Ursini joined with the French. Still the Castles of Naples held for the French, but were close blocked up. A Moor who was in the Monastery of Santa Cruz, still held by the French, advertised the Marquess de Pescara he would give him admittance into it. The Marquess coming thither at night, that Fellow gave him a mortal Wound. This Nobleman was the King's General; he left a Son called Ferdinand, who was afterwards a famous Commander. Prosper Colonna succeeded him in his Command. The Castles were at length surrendered, the Duke of Monpensier and Prince of Salerno being before gone to the City Salerno by Sea. During this War of Naples, was first discovered a new Disease conta∣gious only by way of carnal Copulation: The Italians called it the French Disease, and the French the Neapolitan Disease; the Africans the Spanish-Disease. It is most likely it came from the Indies, and was carried to Naples by the Spaniards. Tenerif, one of the Canary Islands, was this Year brought under the Dominion of Spain, by Forces sent thither by the King. The King of that Island being brought to Spain, was sent as a Present to the Republick of Venice. Alonso de Lugo for his good Service in the Conquest of this Island and that of Palma, was made Lieutenant of the Canaries. Thus all those Islands were brought under the Dominion of Spain. CHAP. VI. The Death of John II. King of Portugal; The French quite expelled the Kingdom of Naples; Ferdinand King of Spain Honoured by the Pope with the Title of Catholick King; The Posture of Affairs in Portugal under Emanuel the New King. THE Catholick King laboured to draw the Kings of England and Portugal into the League against France. He of Portugal excused himself upon account of his ancient Friendship with France, and his Dissatisfaction against the Pope, who refused to Legitimate his Son George, whom he had by a Lady of Quality, and designed to make his Heir, having to that purpose sollicited the Emperor to renounce any Claim he might lay to that Crown. To the King of England it was not only proposed he should enter into the Confederacy, but also marry his Heir to one of the Princesses of Castile. Both things succeeded, but it was after some time. The King of Portugal being troubled with a Dropsie, went to the Baths of Algarve, which are John II. King of Portugal dies. the best in those Parts. This Remedy failed, and he died on the 14th of September at Alvor. In his Will he appointed Emanuel his Cousin, Son to his Unkle Ferdinand, to succeed him. In case he died withour Issue, he substituted his Bastard-Son George, to whom for the present he gave the Mastership of the Order of Christ, and the Dukedom of Coimbra. From him are descended the Dukes of Aviero. This Prince had a mixture of Good and Evil: He encou∣raged Brave and Virtuous Men, was a Lover of Justice, had a piercing Judgment, and Noble Inclinations. The Blood he spilt made him hateful to his Subjects, and his Device was a Pe∣lican that feeds its young with its own Blood. His Body was first buried in the Cathedral of
Silves, and thence translated to the Monastery of Batalla among his Ancestors. After his death, Emanuel was, by the General Consent of all Men, proclaimed King, notwithstanding Maximilian the Emperor had a better Title, as being the Eldest of the late King's Cousin-Germans; but this availed him not. D. Henry Enriquez, Earl of Liste, who Commanded on the Frontiers of Russillon, made an Incursion into the Frontiers of Narbonne. D. Peter Man∣rique did the same by the way of Guipuzcoa. They did nothing considerable, but were the cause that the King of France, who stayed at Aste till the end of Autumn, made haste to con∣clude a Treaty with the Duke of Milan. The principal Articles agreed upon were, That Agree∣ment be∣tween the Duke of Milan and French King. Novaro should be restored to the Duke: That the Castellet of Genoua should be put into the hands of the Duke of Ferrara, and free Passage and Assistance given the French to recover Naples: And, That the Duke of Milan should pay down 50000 Ducats to him of Orleans. This done, the King of France returned to his Country. The King of Naples complained of this Agreement, and the Duke made Necessity his Excuse. The Neapolitan, the more to ob∣lige the King of Castile to protect him, proposed to marry one of his Daughters. This being delayed, at last, by the Advice of the Queen Dowager, he resolved to marry the Lady Jo∣anna her Daughter, and his own Aunt, being Sister to his Father. He demanded Aid of the Venetians, and they sent him some Forces Commanded by the Marquess of Mantua, and 15000 Ducats in Money. For this Aid the King put into their hands as a Pawn the Cities Brindez, Otranto, and Trana, which lay convenient for their Trade in the East. King Ferdi∣nand of Spain provided for the War in Russillon. To this purpose the Cortes met the last Year at Taraçona, and resolved to assist the King with 200 Men at Arms, and 300 Horse, for 3 Years. After this, the Cortes of Catalonia assembled at Tortosa, and sate till the beginning of the Year 1496. They also granted Supplies. The two Matches with the House of Austria 1496. were also forwarded, because the Archduke's Inclination lay another way. Still the War in Naples continued; for tho' the French were few in Number, yet they had some considerable Places of Strength. In  Gonçalo Fernandez was strong, and strait∣ned Progress of the Af∣fairs in I∣taly. the French very much. Near Eboli the French defeated 4000 Neapolitans, which made them sole Masters of the Field in that Country. To raise Money they resolved to march into Apulia, and receive the Duties upon Cattel, which is one of the best Branches of the Re∣venue. The King was at Benevento, his Forces dispersed, and went thence to Foxia to pre∣vent the Design of the French. The Marquess of Mantua, with the Forces of Venice, join'd him. Fabricio attempting the same with 600 Swissers, had most of his Men cut off by the French; whereupon they grew so bold as to offer the King Battel at Foxia. He refused; but some small Skirmishes hapned betwixt them. The French marched on to receive the Duty; some they had, and some the King got; the rest was lost. Gonçalo Fernandez being possessed of almost all Calabria, had cooped the Lord Aubeni up in the extream part of that Province; yet the King called him away to strike at the Head. In his Place he left Cardinal Luis d' Ara∣gon, the King's Cousin-German. The Country-people thought to secure the Passes, but the Spaniards being well versed in that way of Mountain-fight, made a great Slaughter of them near a Town of Calabria called Muran. There they understood that some of the Barons of the French Faction lay not far off at a Town called Lacino, and designed to relieve the Castle of Confenza. Gonçalo de Cordova marched all night, surprized the Town, killed many of those Nobles, and sent the rest Prisoners to the King. The French besieged Xerula, 10 Miles from Benevento, and the King sate down before Frangito. The French came to relieve this Place at such time as the King's Forces entred and burnt it, to lose no time in Plunder∣ing. Both Armies stood in sight of one another on two Hills, neither daring to pass the Val∣ley that lay betwixt them. Tho' the French were weak, the King resolved not to fight till Gonçalo de Cordova had joined him; which he did, notwithstanding the Duke of Monpensier la∣boured to hinder it. On Midsummer day he came up with the King, who then lay before Amalfi, whither the French were then retired. He viewed the Place, and on the 1st of July attacked the Enemies Guard upon the Mills, and drove them away, destroying the Mills, which gained him such mighty Reputation, that the Italians began to call him the Great Cap∣tain, and looked upon him as Superiour to all other Officers. This Siege was carried on with such Vigour, that the Duke of Monpensier was forced to surrender upon Articles, which were, That if within 30 days he were not relieved from France, he would withdraw all the Forces out of the Kingdom, with their Goods, Arms; and Horses, and deliver up all Places except Gaeta, Venosa, and Taranto, and those Towns which the Lord of Aubeni and the Duke de Monte were possessed of, Upon this Condition the King was obliged to give the French free Passage by Sea and Land. This was agreed in July, and afterwards performed accor∣dingly. It is worth observing, That in Original Capitulations signed on both Sides, they gave Gonçalo Fernandez the Title of Great Captain. Nevertheless, few of the French ever reached home. The Duke of Monpensier died at Puzol. Virginius Ursinus, contrary to the Capitula∣tion was apprehended by the Pope's Order, with his Son John Jordan, and other Italian Lords. It troubled the King that his Word was broke, and that he could not relieve them, yet he durst not disobey the Pope, who commanded it, and whose Nephew John Borgia the Cardinal and Bishop of Melfi followed the Army as his Legate during this War, and the Duke of Gandia Commanded the Forces of the Pope. During the absence of the Great Captain, the Affairs of Calabria grew into a worse Posture, which obliged him to return thither. He
coming into that Province, the greatest part whereof the Enemy was again possessed of, so distressed them, that the Lord Aubeni was forced to subscribe to the Conditions made with the Duke of Monpensier, and return to France, having gained the Reputation of a Brave but Unfortunate Commander, in that he had to do with so great a Man as Gonçalo Fernandez, At the same time that the Affairs of Naples began to have a more favourable Aspect, that is, about the middle of August, departed this Life Queen Elizabeth, Mother to the then Queen of Spain: Her Body was deposited at Arevalo, where she lived the latter part of her Life some∣what distracted. Thence she was afterwards translated to the Church of the Carthusians at Burgos, where her Husband King John II. of Castile lay buried. Her Grandchild the Princess Joanna, on the 22d of the same Month, sailed from Laredo with a Fleet there provided to carry her to her Husband Philip Archduke of Austria. The Queen her Mother bore her Company to the Sea. Frederick Enriquez the Admiral carried her to Flanders, were she was Nobly entertained. This Year also the Pope gave to King Ferdinand of Spain the Title of Ferdinand of Spain called Ca∣tholick King by the Pope Catholick King, as Pius II. had before Honoured Luis XI. King of France with the Name of Most Christian. That is, whereas before they used to write on the Pope's Bulls, To the Illu∣strious King of Castile; now they first wrote, To the Catholick King of Spain. This highly of∣fended the Portugueses, who said King Ferdinand was not King of it all, their Kings possessing a great part. The Dispute lasted till that Crown was united to Castile. As soon as King Emanuel was seated on the Throne of Portugal, he assembled the Cortes of the Kingdom at Montemor, not far from Evora, in order to settle the Government. Thither Emanuel King of Portugal settles the Govern∣ment. came George the late King's Bastard-Son, then but 14 Years of Age, and with him his Tutor D. James d' Almeyda, Great Prior of S. John. The King received him with much Demonstra∣tion of Affection, promising to look upon him as his own Child, and to use him as such. He immediately sent Ambassadors to the King of Spain, to acquaint him with his Accession to the Crown, and to the Pope to pay him Reverence as usual. D. James de Sylva the King's Tu∣tor, and D. John Manuel his Foster-Brother, were in great Esteem with the King. D. James was created Earl of Portalegre, D. John made Lord Chamberlain, and afterwards became the King's greatest Favourite. A Proclamation was published to restore to their Liberty all the Jews, who as, was said before, were unjustly made Slaves by his Predecessor. He sent Men and Ammunition into Africk, where the Portugueses had Ceuta taken by King John I. and Tan∣gier and Arzila taken by King Alonso, Unkle to Emanuel. D. John de Meneses, Governour of Arzila, because some of the neighbouring Villages did not bring in their wonted Contribu∣tions, joined with the Commander of Tangier, and marched against them. They were un∣expectedly set upon by Barata and Almanderino, two Moorish Commanders; yet tho' the Ene∣my were much more numerous, they put them to the rout. All this hapned before the Cortes of Montemor broke up, which could not put an end to the Business in hand, because the Plague raging there, the King was forced at the beginning of this Year to remove to Setuval, to meet his two Widow-Sisters, Queen Ellenor and the Dutchess of Bragança. There it was proposed, that D. Alvaro, Brother to the late Duke of Bragança, and that Duke's Children who were in Castile, since nothing could be proved against them, should be restored to their Estates. King Ferdinand of Spain sollicited for them, and the King's Sisters begged it with Tears, especially the Dutchess as most concerned, as also his Mother the Dutchess of Viseo. The King was unwilling so soon to alter his Predecessor's Decrees, and to disoblige those that were in Possession of those banished Persons Estates; but at last overcome with so many In∣treaties, he made up their Losses other ways, so that none might have cause to complain. It was proposed to marry the King, who was 26 Years of Age when he Inherited the Crown. No Match seemed so advantageous as with Castile. King Ferdinand was willing, but would not give him his Eldest Daughter; the Second was gone to Flanders, and the Lady Catherine Contracted in England; so he offered the Lady Mary. The Portugues took it ill that any Prince should be preferred before him; besides, he took a liking to the Lady Elizabeth when she was in Portugal. Upon account of this Treaty, the Catholick King demanded of him, That he should enter into the League against France and the Princess: That he should banish the Moors and Jews. As to the King's Request, he excused himself, pleading the ancient Friend∣ship betwixt France and Portugal; yet he was willing to join in a League for the Defence of Spain, but would not involve himself in Quarrels that concerned him not. He condescen∣ded to the Desires of the Princess, tho' many opposed it: And accordingly about the end of the Year set out a Proclamation, commanding all the Moors and Jews to depart by a time limitted, or else they should be made Slaves. All the Moors, without hesitation, went over to Africk. In the Business of the Jews there was more difficulty; for soon after, the King ordered all their Children, under 14 Years of Age, to be taken from them and Baptized: A Practice not at all justifiable, because none ought to be forced to become Christians, nor Chil∣dren to be taken from their Parents. The rest were so hardly used, that great Numbers were Baptized; but it was a constrained Conversion. Leave was also obtained of the Pope for the Commendaries of the Three Military Orders in that Kingdom to Marry; so that they were only obliged to Conjugal Chastity. There were sufficient Causes to obtain this Liberty, and yet many condemned it. Certain it is, this made way for the spending the Revenues of those Or∣ders otherwise than had been intended; for what used to be employed in the War, was now consumed in Pleasure and Luxury.
CHAP. VII. The death of Ferdinand King of Naples; The Emperor passes into Italy; The Popes Forces defeated by the Ursini; The death of the Duke of Gandia; The Marriage of Prince John of Spain; Proposals concerning settling the Kingdom of Naples. THE Wars in Italy were not likely to cease. The King of England by reason of the Match agreed upon with Spain, resolved to enter into the League against France. The Emperor gave out he would go himself into Italy to settle the Affairs of Lom∣bardy England enters into the league against France. and Tuscany. This moved the Duke of Milan to think of forsaking the French Interest, and the more, for that about this time died the Dauphin of France a young Child, and the King being sickly, it was to be feared that Crown would come to the Duke of Orleans, his greatest Enemy. These reasons inclined him to adhere to the Confederate Princes. In the Kingdom of Naples the Venetians possessed some part of Apulia. The great Captain held Rijoles, Amantia, and other Places of Calabria for the Catholick King. Notwithstand∣ing the late Capitulation, the French were still possessed of some Towns. To reduce all the Kingdom, King Ferdinand sent D. Cesar de Aragon his Father's Bastard Brother to Taran∣to, and commanded the Duke of Urbin who served him in this War, to repair to Abruzzo, when having in a short time subdued most of that Province, he went away to Rome with Prosper Colona. Gaeta was a business of more concern, for tho' the Earl of Trivento and the Venetian Gallies pressed it by Sea, they advanced not much. It was proposed to Besiege the Place by Land, when King Ferdinand fell Sick of a flux at Soma; which so increased, that being carried to Naples, he died on the 7th of October. Frederick his Uncle then at Castel∣lon Ferdinand King of Naples dies understanding his death, immediately repaired to Naples, and was proclaimed King the very day his Nephew died. His first care was to aee with the Princes of Salerno and Bisignano, as also the Earls of Lauria and Melito, the great Enemies of the House of Ara∣gon. Many Princes began to have an Eye towards that Crown, and particularly the Ca∣tholick King, whose Title began to be urged both at Rome and Naples, but to no effect at that time, for the Pope and other Princes had rather have a weak King for their Neigh∣bour, than the Power of Spain. The Great Captain who might have done something in the Affair, was employed at the Siege of the Castle of Cosenza, which he hoped suddenly to be Master of, and thus to secure all that Province. Soon after having subdued Calabria, and taken that Fort, he went to Nola, and leaving his Forces there, visited the Queens, com∣forting them for the death of the King. The new King sat down before Gaeta with all his Forces. It hapned the Lord of Aubenie who was going by Land to Rome, came thither at such time as the besieged were much streightned, he entred the Town and caused it to be surrendred upon Articles. The French departed in a Galleon and Two Ships Loaden with the Booty, and Plate taken out of the Churches. One of the Ships perished in a Storm; the other ran aground near Terracina, which was looked upon as a Judgment. On the other side the Emperor as he had agreed, passed the Alps, and entred Lombardy with 1000 Horse and 5000 Foot. The Duke of Milan with his Forces joined him. From Aste he Summoned the Duke of Savoy and Marquess of Monferrat, as Feudataries of the Em∣pire, but they refused to obey, as did the Duke of Ferrara, because he had refused him the Investiture of Modena and Reggio, which are Feofes of the Empire. The Emperor's de∣sign was to prevent the French possessing themselves of Genoa, which they had attempted. Besides, the King of France in his way from Naples had set free the City Pisa, before Subject to the Florentines. To maintain this liberty, the People of Pisa had recourse to the Princes of Italy, and particularly to the Venetians. The Duke of Milan coveted that City, and therefore advised the Emperor to make War upon the Florentines in defence of it. To this purpose the Emperor in Person laid Siege to Leghorn, but was forced to raise it without doing any thing material. He had little Confidence in the Princes that sent for him, The Em∣peror Be∣sieges Leghorn in vain. and therefore thought of returning into Germany, and consulted at Pavia with the Duke of Milan, and Cardinal Bernardin de Carvajal, the Popes Legate, about this his design. This Cardinal perswaded him to stay, and succour Genoa which was in danger. But now came News which broke all their Measures, which was that the Kings of France and Spain had concluded a Truce, supposed to be an introduction to a Peace. It hapned in this man∣ner, During the heat of the War in Naples, Spain was apprehensive no less a Storm would fall upon it, because several inroads had been made into France, and the Warlike preparati∣ons made by the French were great. This moved the Catholick King to stay some time at Girona, with a great Body of Men he had gathered from all parts. But Autumn being spent, and he desirous to return to Burgos, whither he ordered the Queen to repair, to Celebrate the Marriage of the Prince, the Army broke up, and he went away. The King of France having Intelligence hereof, on a sudden gathered above 18000 Men. Charles de Alboin Commanded upon that Frontier for the Duke of Bourbon, Governor of Languedoc, he with those Forces broke into Rosillon, and laid Siege to Salsas the Key of that Earldom, but ill Fortified, for tho' it had a good Garrison, the Works were old. For this reason, the next day after he came before it, which was the 8th of October, he took the Town by
Assault, and the Castle upon Composition, many of the Defendants being killed. D. Henry Enriquez hasted thither with what Forces he could gather, and halted at Ribasaltas, a League from Salsas, at such time as the Place was lost. He pursued the Enemy who quit∣ted the Town as not Tenable, and retired to the Wood above Salsas, resolving not to hazard a Battle. Both Armies lay some days within a League of one another. A Treaty was set on Foot, and at last a Truce was concluded on that side, to last till the 17th of January of the following Year 1497. This Truce raised great Jealousies betwixt the Con∣sederate Princes, fearing lest the Catholick King should abandon them, and make a Peace by himself. Hereupon the Emperor left Italy, and soon returned into Germany, without having do ne any thing worth mentioning. After that, by the Pope's Order Virginius Ursinus and his Son were contrary to Articles The Pope Invades the Lands of the Urfini. apprehended, the Pope sent the Dukes of Gandia and Urbin, and Fabricius Colona with his Forces to Invade their Dominions. They took some Towns, and laid Siege to the Fort Brachano. Charles Ursinus and Vitelocius, having raised some Forces to divert them from the Siege, sate down before Vasano, a Town of the Church. The Enemy, tho' Inferior in Numbers, marched towards the Ursini, and they came to a Battle, wherein the Ursini were at first worsted, but rallying, put their Enemies to flight. The Duke of Gandia was wound∣ed, and the Duke of Urbin taken. This Defeat obliged the Pope to be reconciled to the Ursini The Great Captain had a hand in this Affair, and the Ursini were much ob∣liged to the Catholick King. The Great Captain came now to Rome, and at the Pope's request laid Siege to Ostia, which the French were still possessed of, and after Eight days Siege took it by Assault. As the Great Captain took his leave of the Pope, to return to Naples, the Pope told him, his King was much obliged to him, and did not act answer∣ably to his Obligations, but that no Man knew him so well as himself. Gonçalo Fernandez took the liberty to answer, That he doubted not, he knew him as being his Subject, but that it was Ingratitude to say he owed him any Obligation, since the Catholick King was the only support of him and his Family; therefore he begged him to behave himself bet∣ter, and not scandalize the Church, lest the King should be obliged to abandon him. The truth is, he was so wicked that several Princes sent their Ambassadors to warn him to mo∣derate his Extravagancies, but all in vain. Soon after in an Assembly of the Cardinals conven'd to give the Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples to King Frederick, he also proposed the giving the City Benevento to the Duke of Gandia, and releasing the Kings of Naples of the Tribute they paid to the Church, for Lands to be given to the said Duke. Nothing could have stopped his proceedings but the unhappy death of that Duke. On the 14th of June, the Duke and Cardinals of Valencia and Borgia having Supped in a Garden, as the Duke Duke of Gandia Murdered returned home, he sent his Footman for his Arms, who returning found him not, nor could any Tidings be heard of him the next day. After much inquiry, a Waterman said that a∣bout Midnight he saw three Men carrying one a cross a Mule, whom they cast over the Bridge, and one asking whether he sunk, the others said he did, and so they went away. The Place being searched, the Body was found with Nine wounds, and nothing taken from him. It could never be known who were the Murderers, some said the Ursini, but the common Report went, that it was his own Brother the Cardinal of Valencia. The Duke left a Son called John, who succeeded him in the Dukedom of Gandia. The same Fleet which carried the Princess Joanna to Flanders, brought the Princess Mar∣garet, Sister to the Archduke, and Contracted to Prince John. She arrived at Santander in March, and was received by the King and Prince with a great Retinue. They met at Rei∣nosa, and were Married at Burgos at the beginning of April. The Queen would not suffer any Alteration to be made in the Princesse's Family, but that she should keep her own Ser∣vants. A Peace was proposed betwixt France and Spain. Ferdinand Duke of Estrada was sent Ambassador to France, and a Truce was agreed upon at Lions, to begin in Spain on the 5th of March, and with all the other Confederate Princes on the 25th of April, to last till the first of November. This made the great Captain hasten his return from Rome to Naples, hoping before the Truce began to recover some Towns of the Cardinal of St. Peter, but he was disappointed. The French had often urged, that since King Frederick being of a Bastard Family, could have no Title to the Kingdom of Naples, the Right must either be in the King of France, or Spain, and therefore it were fit they should agree about it. The Catholick King was for standing to the Determination of the Emperor. This proposal did not please the French King; who offered, if the King of Spain would resign up his Pretensi∣ons, Proposals concern∣ing the Kingdom of Naples. he would make him amends in Money or otherwise, and offered the Kingdom of Navarre. This Affair was debated at Medina del Campa, whither the French Ambassadors came to King Ferdinand. They offered the whole Province of Calabria upon Condition; that if, after the Conquest of the Kingdom, if their King had a mind to it himself, he should give the Catholick King the Kingdom of Navarre, and 30000 Ducats a Year. Yet King Ferdi∣nand rather inclined to have Frederick left in possession, he paying to the French a Sum of Money towards the Expence of the War, and a certain Tribute yearly. It was also proposed that the Duke of Calabria should Marry the Daughter of the Duke of Bourbon, Niece to the French King. Thus the Ambassadors were dismissed, and because it was be∣lieved the War would again break out after the Expiration of the Truce, the Catholick King
endeavoured to secure himself on the side of Navarre. He demanded of that King some strong Holds for his Security, and appointed the Constable Bernardin de Velasco General upon that Frontier. The same Precautions were used on the side of Russillon. There hapned a Mutiny at Perpignan, betwixt the Townsmen and Soldiers, and D. Henry the General coming to part them, was wounded on the Head with a stone, whereof he died. The Duke of Alva succeeded in that Command, and the Fleet of Spain, of which D. In̄igo Man∣rique was Admiral, was ordered to repair to that Coast. These were the Preparations in Spain. In Italy King Frederick to gain the Duke of Milan, offered him to Wife his Daugh∣ter Charlotte, and his Daughter Elizabeth to his Eldest Son; but these Proposals were pre∣vented from taking effect by the fall of those Two Houses. He also pressed the Pope for the Investiture of the Kingdom, which at length he obtained, and the Cardinal of Valencia was sent to Crown him. After the Coronation, Prosper Colona was Created Duke of Tra∣geto, and Earl of Fundi, Fabricius Colona Duke of Tallacoço, and the Great Gonçalo de Cordova Duke of Monte de Santangelo, and D. In̄igo Brother to the Marquess de Pescara who was killed, Marquess del Gasto. CHAP. VIII. Progress of the Portugues Discoveries in the East; Peter Covillam and Alonso de Paiva sent to India by Land; Vasco de Gama sent to Discover India by Sea, with Four Ships; His Voyage till he came to Calicut. AT the same time that the other Parts of Europe, and especially Italy, were consumed with Wars, and labouredunder the Apprehensions of still greater Calamities, Portugal Progress of the Por∣tuguses dis∣coveries. having enjoyed a lasting Peace, was Imployed in extending its Dominions in remote Parts, and carrying the Light of the Gospel into the farthest bounds of the World, even into In∣dia. An undertaking at first thought rash, but which proved Honourable and Advantage∣ous to that Kingdom. Prince Henry Brother to King Edward was the first that attempted to discover the Coast of Africk towards the South. Death cut him off in the Year of Grace 1470, and of his Age 67. King Alonso his Nephew desisted from this Enterprize by rea∣son of the unhappy Wars in which he was involved. King John the II. his Son took this Work in hand again, and ceased not till having passed the Line, he discovered the Cape called by the Sailers Tormentoso, or Stormy, by reason of the great Tempests they met with there; but he called it the Cape of good Hope, which Name it still retains, because it gave him hopes that way to send his Fleets to the Coasts of Asia and India, and to partake of the Riches of those Countries. For his better Information he sent Peter Covillam and Alonso de Paiva (as has been already said) by Land to get some knowledge of those Eastern Coasts. Paiva died by the way, and Covillam having travelled all those Countries, sent his King an Account in Writing out of Ethiopia of what he had learnt, but was not suffered to re∣turn himself. Mean while King John died. His Successor King Emanuel was willing to carry on this Enterprize. He proposed it in Council, where some advised him to desist, others to proceed, others to Imploy himself in the Conquest of Africk, whereof enough was already discovered. Among this Variety of Opinion, the most Honourable took place, and accordingly the King Ordered Four Ships to be fitted. The Command of them he gave to Vasco de Gama, a Man of a great Spirit, and it was fit he should be such to be∣gin the longest, and most dangerous Voyage that ever was attempted in the World. With . him went his Brother Paul de Gama, Nicholas Coello, and other Men of Note. All his Force exceeded not 160 Men, as well Soldiers as Seamen. They blessed the Royal Standard in a Church of our Lady standing on the Shore, Founded by Prince Henry, where afterwards King Emanuel Built the famous Monastery of Belem. Thence they were Conducted by a great multitude of People who lamented them as dead Men, and so they set Sail on the 9th of July. They steered their Course first to the Canary Islands, and then to those of Ca∣boverde, called by the Antients Hesperides. Having passed these Islands, and the chiefest of them called Santiago, they stood to the Eastward crossing a mighty Gulph, where by reason of the great Storms and swelling Seas they spent three Months before they discover∣ed Land. In 10 Degrees of South Latitude they discovered a pleasant River whose Banks were shaded with Trees, where they Anchored to take in fresh Water and refresh them∣selves. The People here were Black, and had short curled Hair. Here they Traded by Signs and for some Baubles were supplied with fresh Provisions. The Gulph he called of St. Helona, and the River Santiago. They continued their Voyage to turn the Cape of good Hope. but the Weather proved so bad they oft gave themselves for lost. Here all the Commanders resolution was requisite, his Men protesting he ought to turn back, and not tempt Heaven, but neither Threats nor Intreaties moved him. It was agreed to kill him; his Brother discovered the design, he secured the Masters and undertook to Steer his Ship himself. In this manner he reached the utmost part of the Cape, and began to turn it on the 20th of November, it being then Spring there. About 50 Leagues beyond it is a Gulph which they called of St. Blas, and in the midst of it an Island where they found a multitude
of Sea Wolves, thither they went to Water. The Natives of it were like to those of the West Coast of Africk, went Naked and carried their Privities in Wooden Cases. The Coun∣try produces Elephants and Oxen, which they make use of as Beasts of Burthen. There are certain Birds they call Sotilicarios, as big as Geese without Feathers, and with Wings like Bats, which serve them not to fly, but help them to run the faster. Going on, tho' slowly by reason of the strong Currents, they came to a Country called Zanguebar, and be∣cause they arrived there on Christmas-day, called it Terra de Natal, as they also called a River de los Reyes, or of the Kings, because they watered there upon the Feast of the Epiphany. To shun the strong Currents and Tides, they stood out so far to Sea, that without touching at Zofala, the chiefest Place on those Coasts by reason of the Gold Mines; they dis∣covered a Country where the People were not altogether so Black as those they saw be∣fore, but were also better Habited and seemed more Civilized. On their Arms they had Copper Bracelets, and the Men wore Daggers with Tin hilts. Their Language was not. understood, but among them came one who in Arabick told them, that not far from thence, there were Ships like ours and White People that Traded in them. By this they guessed India was not far off, and therefore gave thanks to God, and called the Ri∣ver that there falls into the Sea De Bons Sinais, or the River of good Signs. On the Shore they erected a Pillar calling it St. Raphael, whence the Coast took its Name, and of 10 Condemned Persons they carried from Portugal for this purpose, they left 2 there to learn the Language, Customs, and Riches of those People. Great was the Joy of our Men, be∣living the end of their Voyage was at hand, but it was not a little allayed by a Disease which swelled their Gums, of which some died. Some attributed this to the unwholsom∣ness of the Air, others to the salt meat they fed on. They spent a Month upon that Coast with much trouble and danger. Thence they Sailed to Mozambique in 15 Degrees of South Latitude, and 20 Degrees beyond the Cape of Good Hope. It is a Place of great Mozam∣bique dis∣covered. Trade being a convenient Harbour. The Inhabitants were Moors of a tawny Complexi∣on, richly Clad with Silks and Gold, on their Heads great Turbants of white Linnen, from their Shoulders hung Cymiters, and on their Arms were their Bucklers. In this Garb they came out in Boats to visit our Ships. They were well received and entertained, and of them our Men understood that that City was subject to the King of Quiloa, whose Name was Abraham, and that he had there a Governour whom in Arabick they call Xeque, and his name was Zocoeya. To him they sent Presents, and having established Friendship, he gave them 2 Pilots to conduct them to India. At first the Natives thought our Men had been Moors of the West, which was the cause of their Civility, but afterwards understand∣ing they were Christians, they studied to do them all the Mischief they could, and the Pilots Swam away from them. Our Men fired their Cannon upon the City killing some People upon the Shore, which struck a Terror into those People. The Governor submitted, and offered to make Satisfaction, nothing was demanded of him but a Pilot. This Man treacherously en∣deavoured to betray our Men to the King of Quiloa. To this intent he told them the Inha∣bitants of that City were Ethiopian Christians, and that there they might be furnished with all they had occasion for. God delivered them, for the Weather being rough they could not make Quiloa, else they had been in danger, that King being powerful, and offended for what was done at Moçambique. However, the Pilot advised to go to Monbaça, a City seated on a Rock, almost encompassed with the Sea, that Forms a good Port. Some People came out of the City to meet them, to whom the Pilot imparted his Design. His treachery had succeeded, but that Vasco de Gama at the entrance of the Port fearing to strike upon the Rocks, gave order to cast Anchor there. His guilty Conscience accusing him, the Pilot thought he had been discovered, and therefore leaped over board to save himself, as did some of those that came from Shore, who were still aboard the three Ships now remaining; for the Fourth which brought Provisions, they being consumed, and some Seamen dying, was before burnt. Our Men praised God for delivering them from so great Danger. Sail∣ling thence they wanted a Pilot, but they had the Fortune to take Two Moorish Vessels, and in them 13 Moors, for the rest leaped into the Sea. Of these they understood that Melinde was not far off, the King of which Place was courteous to Strangers. Thither they Steer∣ed their Course, and found what had been told them was true. The King was pleased at their coming, and because he could not by reason of his Age go aboard himself, sent his Son, who behaved himself friendly towards the Portugueses, and was by them well entertained. He gave them a Pilot to conduct them to India, and they presented him the 13 Moors, which he was much pleased at. Being furnished with what they wanted, they took their leave, promising to return that way to take up the Ambassadors the King designed to send to Portugal. It was now Easter, when they set Sail for Calicut, which is almost 700 Leagues distant from Melinde, and was sailed by them in 21 days. On the 20th of May they discovered the wished for Shore, and soon after came to an Anchor, a League and a half from Calicut. That City has no Harbour, and the Season was not fit to lie out, because at that time the Winter begins there. The Province of Malabar where Calicut stands, is divided by a Ridge of Mountains, running down to Cape Comori. Both sides are in the same North Latitude, and yet in May the Rains begin on this side the Mountains, the other side at the same time being scorched with Heat, which is very wonderful.
CHAP. IX. A Short, but particular Account of India; What hapned to Vasco de Gama at Calicut His bold Enterprizes there, and a Relation of his Return to Portugal. BEfore we relate what hapned to Vasco de Gama at Calicut, it will not be amiss to give some short Description of the Greatness of those large Provinces of Asia. India towards Descripti∣on of In∣dia. the West, Borders upon the Provinces of Gedrosia, Arachosia, and the Paropomassidas. Towards the East it extends as far as the Confines of the mighty Empire of China. On the North it is shut up by Mount Imaus, which is a part of Mount Caucasus. On the South its Limits are the Ocean. The most famous River Ganges divides it into Two parts. True it is our People only call that India, which lies betwixt the two Rivers Indus and Ganges. This Country the Natives call Indostan. Along the mid space betwixt these two Rivers runs a Ridge of Hills, down to Cape Comori. Many different Nations are spread along these Coasts. The chiefest, Gambaya, which from the mouth of Indus extends to Malabar, and that to Cape Comori. Betwixt these two Nations in a small Island of the Kingdom of Decan is seated the famous City Goa. The Front of it is washed by the Sea, the other parts by two Arms of a River. Among the Malabars there are Four Conditions of People, the Nobility, cal∣led Caymales; the Priests, Brahmens, whose Authority is great; the Souldiery, stiled Nayres; and the Commonalty, such as Tradesmen and Country People. Generally the Merchants are Strangers. From the Waste upwards they go Naked, the lower parts are covered with Silks or Cotton, their Cymiters hanging down from their Shoulders. Their Customs and Worships are very strange. Let it suffice to say the Women Marry as many Husbands as they please, and therefore the Sorts do not Inherit the Fathers Estates, but the Sons of Sisters are the Heirs. Malabar is divided into several Kingdoms, the chief whereof, whom all the others look upon as their Superior, and is therefore called Zamori, that is Emperor, is the King of Calicut, a Rich and large City, Seated almost in the middle of the Coast. The Houses in it do not stand close together, but at great Intervals, each having Gar∣dens and Orchards belonging to it. Only the Kings Palaces and the Temples are of Stone, the rest of Timber, low and covered with leaves of Palm-trees. Neither the Nobles nor Commons are allowed to raise stately Buildings. This was the posture of Calicut, when Vasco de Gama arrived there. Many Boats came out immediately to see such strange People. Vasco de Gama at Calicut. Gama sent ashore one of the Banished Men he had with him, a vast multitude of People encompassed him. Among the rest were two Moors Born at Tunez, these finding by the Habit, the Man was a Spaniard, one of them called Monçayde asked him in Spanish of what part of Spain he was, he answered of Portugal. He carried the Man Home, and having discoursed him went aboard to see the Commander, whom he informed he had faithfully served King John of Portugal when he sent to Tunez for Arms, and having given him an ac∣count of the Country, offered to serve him in what lay in his power. Next day Gama sent Two Ambassadors with Monçayde to the King, to acquaint him he would not land with∣out his leave, but having once obtained it, would deliver the Letters he brought from his King, and treat with him about matters of great Moment. The King was then at Panda∣rane, a Town Two Miles from the City. There he received the Messengers friendly, an∣swered, he would gladly hear what their Commander had to propose, and the mean while would have him bring his Ships under the Shelter of Pandarane because the Place where he lay was not safe. This was accordingly done, and some days after he sent the Gover∣nor of the City whom he called Catual, to conduct Gama to his Pallace. He left his Brother to Command in his place, ordering him and Nicholas Coello that if any misfortune hapned to him ashore, they should immediatly hoist Sail and return to Portugal to give the King an account of their Voyage; but that they should still keep their Boats well Manned upon the Shore. He carried with him 12 of his Men in the best order he could. From the Shore he was carried on Mens Shoulders to the Kings Palace. There he was received by the Caymales and chief of the Brahmenes Cloathed all in White. This Man taking Gama by the Hand led him through several Rooms, the Door of each of them was guarded by Ten Men. They came to a large Room, the floor covered with silk Carpets, and the Walls hung with Silk and Gold. About it were certain steps like a Theatre, which were the Seats of the Nobility. The King Sate on a raised Throne, Cloathed in white Cotton, adorned with Roses of Gold, on his Head a Cap of Cloth of Gold in shape like a Mitre, his Arms and Legs naked, but with Brazelets and Plates of Gold. On his Fingers and Toes were Rings set with Diamonds and Pearls of a great Value. His Complexion was Tawny, his Stature large, his Countenance Majestick, Gama having saluted the King, and being Commanded to Sit, made an Harangue, telling the King, that he was sent to him by the mighty Emanuel King of Portugal, who moved by the Fame of his Grandeur which had reached the utmost bounds of the West, was ambitious to settle a friendly Correspondence and Commerce with him and his Country. That it would doubtless be very advantageous to both Nations to have a free Trade, and it would much redound to the honour of them both, to be the first, who at that distance had settled Amity and Friendship. This said,
he presented the Letters he carried, written in Arabick and Portugues, as also the presents he carried. The Embassy was pleasing to the King, who answered, that he willingly embra∣ced the Friendship of King Emanuel, and was ready to allow of a free Trade. He asked many Questions concerning their Voyage and Country, and ordered the Commander and all his Men to be well lodged. The Moorish Merchants fearing to lose their Trade, and in hatred to the Christians, assembled together, and laboured all that lay in their power by false Informations they devised, to turn the Hearts of the King and his Courtiers against the Portugueses. They said they were Pirates and the common Enemies of Mankind, and that if they were admitted into Calicut, all the Moors would be obliged to remove and seek some other place to Trade in. That it was worthy their Consideration, whether it were answer∣able to abandon their old tryed Friends, who brought so great a Trade to the Country, for a few Robbers. The Malabars are a People inconstant and easily perswaded, there∣fore giving Credit to the Moors, and at their instigation, they began to contrive how to destroy all the Portugueses. Monçaide gave Gama an account of their design. He stole a∣way the best he could, tho' not without danger to his Ships, and stood out to Sea. Thence he wrote a Letter to the King full of great Complaints, and particularly against Catual who, he was assured contrived to do him all the harm he could, and desired he would cause cer∣tain Portugueses and some Merchandize left ashore to be restored to him. The King gave good Words, but performed not what was demanded. Gama resolving to use Force, took the first Ship that came that way, and in it Six Men of Note with their Servants. The King to redeem them, sent the Portugueses and Merchandize, with his Letters in answer to those brought by Gama. Nevertheless he would not restore the Malabars, thinking it con∣venient to carry them to shew in Portugal, that they might give a more particular account of that Country. Before Vasco de Gama hoised Sail to return to Portugal, Monçaide got aboard, fearing his Correspondence with the Portugueses would cost him his Life. He left all his Goods at Ca∣licut, Vasco re∣turns to Portugal. for he had not time to carry any thing away. In Portugal he was Baptized, and lived like a good Christian. The King of Calicut could not take revenge of Gama because it being then Winter, his Fleet was laid up. However, he fitted out 70 Barques, and sent them well Manned to attack the Ships; but a Storm rising, the Barques were all dispersed, and our Ships which before for want of a Wind had made little way, got off and losing the sight of Calicut, came to certain little Islands that lie about that Coast. They met 8 small Vessels belonging to a Pirate called Timoja, one of which they took and scattered the others. Thence they Sailed to another Island called Anchediva, to refit and repair their Ships the best they could. This Island is distant from Calicut about 70 Leagues, yet not above one from the Continent, which was the reason that many came over from the main Land to see the Ships. Among the rest, came one who saluted Gama in Italian. This Man told them that not far off was the City Goa, and that the Lord of it, who was called Zabayo, and with whom he had great Interest, would be glad to be acquainted with them, and would give them good Entertainment. Gama asked what Country-Man he was, and he answered, he was an Italian, that sailing towards Greece he was taken by Pirates, and so from one to another, at last was brought to that Lord. Gama suspecting him by his Counte∣nance, and because all he said was not Coherent, put him to the Rack. Then he con∣fessed the truth, that he was a Jew, born in Poland, and that Zabayo his Lord had sent him as a Spie to view those Ships, designing to fall upon them with his Fleet. Gama having got this Intelligence, with all the speed he could sailed thence and prosecuted his Voyage. He carried the Jew with him, who in Portugal was Baptized, took the name of Garcia, and served King Emanuel in Affairs of moment. The Ships for want of Wind made little way, yet at length turned that Cape of Africk called Guardafu, not far from the Mouth of the Red Sea. They came to the City Magadoxa, not far from the Cape, and understanding the Inhabitants were Moors would not make a stay there any longer than whilst with their Cannon they battered their Houses, and sunk some Vessels they saw in the Harbour. Passing forwards, they met 8 Sail of Moors which they easily defeated. At Melinde they were re∣cived by the King with great affection. They furnished themselves with such Necessaries as they stood in need of, and as had been before agreed, took aboard an Ambassador that King sent to Portugal, to settle Amity with King Emanuel. The Ship which Paul de Gama Commanded, being much shattered both in the Hulk and Rigging, and there being want of Seamen, it was resolved to Burn her, and Paul de Gama went aboard his Brother. Thus they continued their Voyage, and discovered the Island Zanzibar, which is very pleasant, full of Trees bearing several sorts of Spice, lying 6 Leagues from the Continent of Africk, betwixt Melinde and Quiloa, and not far from Monbaça. At Moçambique they erected a Pillar of those they carried for this purpose. They anchored in the Bay of St. Blase to take Wood and Water, and turned the Cape of good Hope upon the 20th of April To conclude, they passed by the Islands of Cabo Verde, and thence taking a great compass, came to the Terceras, where Paul de Gama died of sickness which had stuck by him a long time before. They arrived at Lisbon in September, having been out Two Years. The King was overjoy∣ed at their Return, and all the City signified their great Satisfaction. There was no end of hearing the strange Relations they gave, the Dangers and Storms they had been in, and
of beholding those things they brought only as Tokens of the Riches of the East. Those Men also brought from India were no less admired for their Countenance, Language, and strange Habit. Gama and his Companions were looked upon as something more than Men. Of Four Ships that set out only Two returned, and of the Men not above the third part This did not at all deter many from wishing that Voyage might be continued, and upon the Prospect of Honour and Profit, offering themselves to all those Difficulties which appeared to be in so troublesome and distant an Enterprize. CHAP. X. An Account of the Navigation of Vasco de Gama, and of all the Coasts of Africk, as they lay in his way; Of the Island Zocotora, and of all the Coast of Asia, as far as China, and of the Method observed by the Portugueses in sailing thither. THus Vasco de Gama performed this Voyage, which was the most remarkable that had Account of the Na∣vigation of Vasco de Gama. been till then in the World, as well for the Length of it, as for the many Difficulties and Dangers he was to meet with: For then being ignorant what Course to steer, and also of the Nature of those vast Seas, they went as it were blindfold and groping. Time and Ex∣perience have made that Voyage easie; so that the Season for setting out, and the Course they steer, is much other than it was at first, which I have thought fit to give some account of for the Satisfaction of the Curious. It will be convenient, in the first place, to describe all those vast Coasts. Beyond the Streights of Gibraltar, upon the left hand, lies the Coast of Africk, which runs along for many Leagues both on this and the other side of the Equino∣ctial. First, the most celebrated Mount Atlas cuts the greatest part of Africk from East to West, and butts out into the Ocean. Beyond it is the Cape formerly by the Portugueses called Nam, that is, No; because they imagined such as passed it could never return. Next is Cape Bojador, in 28 Degrees of North Latitude, opposite to the Island Palma, which is one of the Canaries. All these three Capes are Branches of Mount Atlas. Then follows on that Coast Cape Blanco, in 21 Degrees of Latitude, and next to it the little Island Arguin, which gives Name to all that Gulph. Beyond this is the Promontory Cabo Verde and its Islands, be∣ing in number 10, the chief of them called Santiago, formerly known by the Name of He∣sperides, tho' some will have it that under this Name were comprehended all the Islands we have discovered to the Westward. Caboverde is in the Latitude of 16 Degrees. North of it the River Sanagá falls into the Sea, and to the Southward another, for the abundance of Water it carries named the Rio Grande. They are believed to be both Branches of one great River, that is, the Niger, much spoken of by the Ancients, as rising from the same Springs with Nile. Beyond Rio Grande, which is in 11 Degrees of Latitude, is Sierra Leona, a Mountain in the Latitude of 8 Degrees: In this Mountain there is great Thunder and Light∣ning, and great Lights are generally seen upon it from Sea, the Natives going out at Night to their Labour, which makes it appear at a distance as if it were all in a Flame. Some will have this to be the Mountain called by Ptolomy the Chariot of the Gods, which he places in only 5 Degrees of North Latitude. Under the Equinoctial lies the Island of S. Thomas, not far from the Continent, and from Portugal somewhat above 1000 Leagues. The Air of it is unhealthy, but it yields abundance of Sugar. Six Leagues beyond the Equinoctial is the Country called Mina, by reason of the pure Gold Mines in it. Beyond it the River of San∣tiago and Gulph of S. Helena, where Vasco de Gama put in for Water. Many other Rivers and Promontories there are, as may well be imagined in such a vast extent; but these are the chiefest. The Cape of Good Hope, which is the farthest Point of Africk, distant from Portugal about 2000 Leagues, lies in 35 Degrees of South Latitude. Turning this Cape, those Shoars run a vast length, with many Promontories and Rivers of Note. The Rivers of S. Blas, Natal, and Bons Sinais, are the most Principal till you come to Zofala, which is one of the most remarkable Towns on that Coast, by reason of the Gold Mines. Some are of Opinion that Zofala was Tharsis, whither, as the Scripture says, Solomon down the Red Sea sent his Fleets to bring Gold and other Riches, and the Natives affirm their Histories do prove as much. Others affirm it to be the Promontorium Frasium of Ptolomy, which he places in 15 Degrees of South Latitude; but Zofala lies above 20 Degrees beyond the Line. Beyond Zofala on the right hand lies the great Island of S. Laurence, commonly called Madagascar, and on the left Moçambique, a Place of great Trade, in 15 Degrees of South Latitude. Farther on, almost at equal distances, are Quiloa and Monbaça, with the Island of Zanzibar, and Melinde near the Line. Magadoxa is 5 Degrees on this side, and in 10 Degrees is the last Promontory of Africk, now called Cape Guardafu, by Ptolomy Aromata. Near to it is the Island Zocotora, which was found Inhabited by Christians, but very barren and destitute of all things necessary. This is believed to be the Island Ptolomy calls Dioscorides. Not far from thence is the Mouth of the Red Sea, or Arabian Gulph. Within it, on the side of Africk, is the Port of Arquico in the Kingdom of Barnagasso, subject to Prester John. On the Coast of Arabia stands the City Aden, a strong Place, and the Key of that Sea. Betwixt the Red Sea and the Gulph of Persia
lies Arabia Felix, and in the middle of the Coast Cape Fartaque. The farthest Point next the Gulph of Persia is Cape Rosalgate. Just in the Mouth of the Persian Gulph is the Island of Or∣muz, small and naturally barren, but by reason of its great Trade very rich; its Latitude 26 Degrees. Almost in the same Latitude to the Eastward, at the Mouth of the River Indus, is the Island and Fortress of Diu, well known for the Bravery with which the Portugueses have defended it, first against the Forces of the Soldans of Egypt, and then against the Great Turk Beyond Diu and Baçain which is near it, the Coast turns to the South, till it ends in Cape Comori; on the West-side whereof stands the City Goa in 16 Degrees of Latitude, and Calicut in 12. Between them both is Cananor, and nearer to the Cape Cochin and Coulam, all Cities in the Country of Malabar, and of great Trade for Spice. From the Cape of Good Hope to Goa, Seamen reckon 1240 Leagues. Opposite to the Coast of Malabar are the Maldivp Islands, which take their Name from the chiefest of them. They are in number above 1000, all small, and sometimes so close together, it is difficult to sail betwixt them. The chiefest thing they produce is the Tree that bears Coco's, so profitable that they are cloathed and fed by it. Near to Cape Comori, on the East-side is the Island Ceylon, whence we have most of our Cinnamon. Then follow the Kingdoms of Narsinga and Pegu, and in the midst of them that of Bengala, which gives its Name to that great Gulph ending at the City Malaca, near which is the Island Sumatra, lying under the Equinoctial. Most learned Men hold Suma∣tra to be the Trapobana of Ptolemy, and Malaca his Aurea Chersonesus, and there want not those who affirm Malaca to be Ophir whence Solomon had his Gold and Silver. Nay the People of the Kingdom of Pegu which is not far distant, value themselves upon being de∣scended of the Jews, whom Solomon sent thither to work in the Mines. Tho' these Mettals are not there to be found at present, they might formerly. Solomon's Ships spent Three Years in the Voyage to Tharsis because they always kept along the Coast, not having the use of the Compass. From Malaca Eastward are the Moluco Islands, the chiefest whereof are Five, whence we have our Cloves, in all other respects they are Barren. Bending Northward we come to the Vast and Rich Empire of China, and the Island Macao the Mar∣ket of the Portugueses for the Trade of that Kingdom, they not being admitted to enter into it. From Goa to China they reckon 1300 Leagues, 800 of them to Malaca, and the other 500 thence to China. From Macao to Japan, Northwards being the farthest extent of the Portugues Discoveries, are about 300 Leagues. The principal Islands of Japan are Three, besides many other small ones adjoining to them. The great Island it self extends about 200 Leagues in length, and not above 80 in breadth. In it are many Kings and King∣doms, and the People are Warlike, of sharp Wits. The Voyage from Portugal to India is performed in this manner. They set out from Lisbon in March or the beginning of April, thence they direct their Course to the Island Madera 150 Leagues distant, and then to the Canaries which are 300 Leagues thence. They steer next to Cape Blanco and the Islands of Cabo Verde. Then they stand off from the Coast of Africk, and by reason of the continual Southerly Winds bear up close towards the South-West, till they come sometimes near Brasil, where if the Wind will not permit them to Weather Cape St. Augustin, which is 10 Leagues beyond the Equinoctial, they cannot make their Voyage that Year. If they Weather the Point, then they Tack and stand for the Cape of good Hope, steering South East. To shun the Storms usual about that Promontory, they run to about 40 Degrees of South Latitude. Thus having turned the Cape they touch at Zofala, or Mocambique, where if their Voyage has not been Short they Winter; if it has, they cross the Gulph to Goa. It is a very good Voyage that is performed in 5 or 6 Months, for commonly it takes up a Year. From Goa to Malaca, and the other Eastern parts they sail at set times. To return to Spain they expect the usual Breezes in December. They turn the Cape about March or April. Then they pass by the Island of St. Helena, which Nature has provided as it were an Inn by the way in that vast Ocean, to refresh the Seamen with its Fruit, Fish and Flesh, tho' scarce Inhabited, being but Four Leagues in length, and so far from any Land. Thence, by the way of the Islands Terceras, the Ships generally return to Lisbon in August or September. The End of the 26th BOOK.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXVII. CHAP. I. The Death of the Prince of Castile; Of Charles VIII. King of France; Matches of Two Daughters of Spain; The Prince of Salerno expelled Naples; France and Spain agree. Hierome Savonarola burnt at Florence. THE Affairs of Spain at one and the same time prospered in Italy, and within Spain had a mixture of Felicity and Adversity. Two Matches for as many of King Fer∣dinand's 2 Daugh∣ters of K. Ferdinand matched. Daughters were concluded; that is, of the Princess Catherine with Arthur Prince of Wales, and Heir to Henry VII. King of England, and of the Princess Elizabeth with Emanuel King of Portugal. These Marriages were of great Importance, because, together with those of the House of Austria, they bound such Mighty Princes to the Interest of Spain. The Match with England was fully concluded upon the 15 of August, 1497. To forward the Marriage with Portugal, D. John Manuel, that King's Foster-Brother, came to 1497. Castile. It was agreed, that King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth should carry the Princess their Daughter to the Borders of Portugal, where King Emanuel should meet them to con∣summate the Marriage upon the last Day of September. Ceclamin was at first the Place ap∣pointed to meet; but that Town wanting Conveniencies, they spent three Days together at Valencia de Alcantara. Their Joy was much abated by the News of the Indisposition of Prince John, who died the 13 day after he was taken ill at Salamanca, on the 4th of October, to the John Prince of Castile dies. great Loss and Grief of the whole Kingdom. He left the Princess with Child; but that availed little; for in a short time after she miscarried. The Prince's Body was carried to Avila, to be buried in the famous Dominican Monastery of S. Thomas. This dismal News came to Alcantara whilst yet the Rejoycing for the Wedding lasted; but after King Ferdinand was gone, King Emanuel begged of the Queen his Mother-in-Law, not to let the Queen his Wife know any thing of it, and so went away with her to Ebora. There she was at last acquainted with the Death of the Prince her Brother: She resented it as became a loving Sister; but his Parents bore their Loss with great Magnanimity. The Kingdom of Naples was not yet peaceable, because the Prince of Salerno and his Party mistrusting the King, for∣tified their Towns and Castles. The first Demonstration that Prince gave of his Ill-will was, That tho' he appeared when King Frederick was Proclaimed at Naples, yet he would not be present at his Coronation, under colour of Poverty. However, the Prince of Basiniano came to Court the day following to excuse himself, and intercede for him of Salerno. No means of Peace prevailed, and the King was forced to march with his Army, and besiege him in his strong Town of Diano. Gonçalo Fernandez was now about returning to Spain, as reckoning the War of Naples at an end: To this purpose he had gone into Calabria, thence to Sicily, and now came to Naples to take his Leave of the King and Queen. They pressed him to aid them in that Siege, because the Defendants were numerous, and the King's Party favoured them. The Great Captain gathered 500 Spaniards, and the King furnishing him 500 Ger∣mans, Prince of Salerno ex∣pelled Na∣ples. he so straitned the Besieged, tho' with much danger of his Person, that the Prince was forced to surrender. It was agreed, That the Prince, with all such as would follow him, might safely depart the Kingdom with their Goods: That all the Towns and Forts belonging to the Prince, should be delivered up to the King, he paying for the Cannon and Provisions in them. Thus Diano was surrendered upon the 28th of December, and the Prince put him∣self into the hands of the Duke of Melfi, to be conducted to Sangalla, a City in Marca de An∣cona, which sided with the King of France. The Earls of Conça and Lauria, his Confederates, bore him Company. He of Capacho being very old, put himself upon the King's Mercy. This same Year in Autumn D. John de Gusman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, sent a Fleet over to Africk to People Melilla, which is opposite to Almeria, and had been abandoned by the Moors. In recompence for the Charge he had been at, that Town was given to the Duke and his Heirs for ever. The Xeque, or Lord of Gelves, who was in Rebellion aginst the King of Tunez his Sovereign, to secure himself under the Christian Protection, delivered up that Island and Port to the Catholick King, and in his Name to John de Lanuça, then Viceroy of Sicily. Captain Margarit was left with the Spanish Forces to secure that Island. A solemn Embassie from France now met the King at Alcala de Henares: The Proposals Accord betwixt France and Spain. made were, That the Two Kings with their joint Forces should invade Italy: That as to the
Kingdom of Naples, the Catholick King should possess Calabria till such time as the French King in exchange should give him the Kingdom of Navarre, and 30000 Ducats yearly for what it was worth above that Kingdom: That the States of Milan and Genoa should belong to the French, and all the rest of Italy be equally divided betwixt them: The Catholick King was not averse from the Business of Naples; but as for the rest of Italy, would not be concer∣ned without advertising the Empire, who had so great a Right to it. At last it was resolved King Ferdinand should send Ambassadors to France to prosecute this Treaty. At this time all the Monasteries of Castile were reduced to the strict Observance of their Orders, which the Dominicans, Augustins, and Carmelites easily condescended to: The Franciscans at first made some resistance. According to Agreement the King sent Ferdinand Duke of Estrada and Two others his Ambassadors to conclude a Peace with France. At the same time it was believed the French King resolved to invade Roussillon, but Death prevented his Designs. He departed this Life at Amboise on the 17th of April, 1498. The Duke of Orleans, called Luis XII. suc∣ceeded 1498. him. At Blois, where the New King was, and afterwards at Orleans, the Treaty of Charles VII. King of France dies; Luis XII. suc∣ceeds him. Peace was carried on, that King always giving good Words and fair Promises only to gain time till he was settled in the Kingdom, and could be divorced from his present Wife, Sister to the late King, in order to marry the Dutchess of Britany, who since the death of the late King her Husband, was for returning into her own Country. He at last compassed his ends, and had by that Dutchess two Daughters only, the Eldest of which was married to Francis the Heir of that Crown. Before the death of King Charles, it was proposed that Caesar Borgia should resign his Cardinal's Cap, to which purpose that King promised him an Estate in France, and to marry him to the Lady Charlotte, Daughter to the King of Naples. Her Father would not consent, because they demanded the Principality of Taranto with her as Dower; and this was suspected to be in order to seize the whole Kingdom of Naples. The Duke of Milan and Cardinal Ascanius his Brother, pressed the King to consent, lest the Pope should bring the French upon him again, which would prove his utter Ruin, as it did. K. Ferdinand did not approve of this Contrivance, tho' he was offered the disposal of the Churches of Pamplona and Valencia, then in the hands of Caesar Borgia. These Practices scandalized all Christendom, to see that a Cardinal in Holy Orders should have leave given him to marry. The Wickedness of the Court of Rome gave all the World enough to talk; therefore Hierome Savonarola a Domini∣can, who of late Years had a great hand in the Government of Florence, Preaching with ex∣traordinary Hierome Savanaro∣la, a fa∣mous Preacher in Florence, burnt. Freedom against the Extravagancies of the Pope, was by his Order publickly burnt, with two of his Companions, in the Market place of that City, upon Palm-Sunday. Many in Florence to this day account him a Martyr; others condemned his Boldness. But this hapned not only at Florence, for Garcilasso the Catholick King's Ambassador reproved the Pope to his face, and required him in his King's Name to redress those Disorders. The Pope was angry at this Liberty, but mended not his Faults. Soon after, Caesar Borgia publickly pro∣tested he took Orders against his Will, and desired a Dispensation to quit all his Benefices, and resign the Cardinal's Cap. Many of the Cardinals were of Opinion he deserved for his wicked Life to be degraded, and not suffered to resign, but none durst speak for fear of the Pope. In fine, he resigned, and the New King of France created him Duke of Valence. Being disappointed of the Daughter of Frederick King of Naples, he married the Daughter of the Lord d' Albret, and Sister to the King of Navarre. By her he had a Daughter, who her Father dying, was left to the Care of her Unkle the King of Navarre. This same Year the Great Captain having gathered a Fleet at Naples, sailed for Spain. He was the Honour of our Nation for the many Victories he obtained, and subduing that Kingdom after such great Disorders. CHAP. II. The King of Portugal sworn Heir to the Crown of Castile; Elizabeth his Queen delivered of a Son, dies; The Duke of Milan expelled his Dominions; University of Alcala founded; Rebellion of the Mountain-Moors. AS soon as Prince John died, the King and Queen began to be sollicitous about the Suc∣cession King of Portugal sworn Heir of Castile. of the Crown, but waited to see what the Princess Margaret would bring forth. Their Grief was increased, when at Alcala de Henares she miscarried of a Daughter. Here∣upon they advertised the King of Portugal of his Title to the Crown, and advised him to come to Castile, and be Sworn according to Custom. The Archduke and his Dutchess, who at that time took the Stile of Princes of Spain, were warned to forbear it. The King and Queen of Portugal entred Castile by the way of Badajoz, where they were received by the Dukes of Medina Sidonia and Alva, with many other Great Men. Thence they went to spend the Holy Week at Guadalupe, and on the 26th of April came to Toledo, where the Catholick King and Queen expected them; and according to Custom, on the Sunday following, Ho∣mage was done to them, and they were Sworn Heirs of Castile. The Business of Aragon was not so easie, because Henry Duke of Segorve was alive, and pretended no Woman could Inherit that Crown; and therefore it appertained to him and his Son Alonso, as descended of the Male Line of King Ferdinand of Aragon. To make all things the easier, the Kings of
Castile and Portugal went to Zaragoça, and there, on the 14th of July, proposed to the No∣bility to Swear to the King and Queen of Portugal as Heirs of the Crown. There arose a great Debate, some affirming no Woman could Inherit that Crown, and others maintaining the contrary. To end this Dispute, it pleased God that the Queen of Portugal, on the 23d of August, was delivered of a Son, whom they called Michael. She died within an Hour after. Queen of Portugal being delivered of a Son, dies. The King her Husband returned immediately to his Kingdom. The Queen's Body was de∣posited in the Church of S. Francis, and thence translated to the Monastery of Nuns of S. Eli∣zabeth, built by her Father at Toledo. On the 22d of September all Difficulties being removed, the young Prince was by general Consent Sworn Heir to the Crown of Aragon, and soon after the same was done in Castile. Before King Ferdinand went to Zaragoça, he had sent D. Alonso de Sylva his Ambassador to France, to Compliment the New King upon his Accession to the Crown, and at the same time to press the Conclusion of the Peace. He, with the other Ambassadors there before, soon brought it to a Period. The same was done on his part by the Archduke, without consulting his Father or Father-in-Law. Luis d' Amboise, Arch∣bishop of Roan, by his Interest with the King of France, much forwarded this Agreement. In September the Pope made him a Cardidal at the suit of the French King, who was intent upon passing into Italy, upon account of the Right he pretended to have to the Dutchy of Milan and Kingdom of Naples: From Zaragoça King Ferdinand sent D. Yn̄igo de Cordova, Brother to the Earl of Cabra, and Dr. Philip Ponce, to require the Pope to restore the City Benevento to the Church, and to reform the Abuses of his Court and Leudness of his Family. The King of Portugal, by the Advice of his Father-in-Law, sent D. Roderick de Castro, and D. Henry Coutin̄o to Rome with the same Embassie. They all admonished the Pope, and made their Protestation, Garcilasso de la Vega performing the Office of Notary Apostolick, The Pope was highly offended, and threatned to punish them for their Presumption; yet at last be answered, That Benevento was not nor should not be alienated. As to the Reforming his House, he answered harshly. Within few days the Prince of Esquilache, his Wife, his Sister Lucrecia and her Husband, whose Leudness, as well as Caesar Borgia's, incensed the People, all departed Rome. Such was the Hatred the Pope conceived on this account against Garci∣lasso de la Vega, that he was forced to leave that City, and the Portugues Ambassadors soon fol∣lowed, at the beginning of the Year 1499. Those of the Catholick King stayed some time longer till the coming of Lorenço Suarez de Figueroa, who was appointed to succeed his Bro∣ther 1499. Garcilasso, after he had been Ambassador at Venice, where he gained great Repu∣tation. Many heavy Cares at the same time lay upon the Catholick King. Italy was in danger by Perplexi∣ty of King Ferdinand. reason of the French King's Pretensions The Pope egged him on, in hopes to be revenged on King Frederick, and to raise Duke Valentine. The Venetians also, offended with the Duke of Milan, joined in League with the French King, engaging to aid them with 1200 Men at Arms, and 6000 Swissers. For this Supply the King was to give them Cremona and Guiradada, two Towns of Note in that Dukedom. The Duke seeing little prospect of Help in the Chri∣stians, prevailed with the Turks to infest the Venetian Territories, which rendred him still more odious. At the same time died the Prince of Salerno, leaving the Pretensions to that Princi∣pality, and his Hatred to the House of Aragon, to his Son Robert. The King of Navarre demanded of King Ferdinand the Restitution of the Towns of Arcos, Guardia, and S. Vincent, which the latter held instead of the City Estela, adjudged by the King of France to Henry IV. of Castile, when he was Arbitrator betwixt the Crowns of Castile and Navarre. This Preten∣sion gave occasion to fear some Breach with France; but that King being wholly taken up with his Pretensions in Italy, had not leisure to engage in other Men's Quarrels: For about the same time time a mighty Army of French passed the Alps, and marched to the City Aste, which for some Years had belonged to the Dukes of Orleans, being given to Charles Duke of Orleans by Philip Duke of Milan, for assisting him in his Wars with the Venetians. In August, 1499. that Army advanced under the Conduct of the Lord of Aubeni, and John James Tri∣vulcio. They met no Opposition, but in few Days made themselves Masters of Alexandria. 1499. Pavia, Plasencia, and many other Towns. On the other side, the Venetians took Cremona, The Duke of Milan expelled his Duke∣dom. Guiaradada, Lodi, and all that belonged to the Dukedom of Milan on that side. This gave the People of Milan occasion to mutiny. The Duke fled to the Castle, and having sent his Treasure and Family before him to Germany, followed soon after himself. On the 6th of September Genoa submitted to the French. The King of France, who till then had stayed at Lions, came to reap the Fruit of this Success. Duke Valentine came with him, whom he had promised to assist with 300 Horse at his own Charge, and 4000 Swiss, to be payed by the Pope to make War upon Romania. He also promised to aid the Florentines to recover Pisa. The Conquest of Milan being so easily performed, the King of France, encouraged by the Pope, bent his Thoughts upon Naples, but first returned home to recruit his Army. The Catholick King laboured to prevent the War in Italy, and made advantageous Proposals to the French in behalf of King Frederick. Finding nothing would after the Resolution of the King of France, he resolved to set on foot again the Treaty of Dividing that Kingdom betwixt that King and himself, since King Frederick, as descended of a Bastard, could have no Right. To this effect he sent one of his Domesticks to join with his Ambassador John Gralla then in France. It was believed these Proposals would have produced a firm Peace betwixt the Two
Kings, tho' at the same time King Frederick threatned if the French invaded him, he would bring the Turks upon Italy. At the same time he made large offers to be reconciled to the Pope, which Duke Valentin prevented taking any effect by writing, how displeasing those Overtures were at the French Court. At the end of this Year was Born in Flanders the Lady Ellenor eldest Daughter to the Archduke, who was first Queen of Portugal, and afterwards of France. About this time the Archbishop of Toledo began to Found an University at Alcalà, after the manner of that at Paris. The King was at Granada, and thinking the Conversion of the Universi∣ty of Al∣calá Founded. Moors who were very numerous, would be the only means to secure that Kingdom, gave it in Charge to the Archbishop of that City, with whom joined the Archbishop of Toledo. They consulted about punishing some who had been Christians and were again become Moors, and resolved to Baptize their Children. They also treated the Alfaquies with much Cour∣tesie, which was the cause that many Infidels were Baptized. These things moved the Moors of the quarter of Albaicin to mutiny and fortifie themselves, but they were at last suppressed by the Earl of Tendilla the Governor, and on the 18th of November 3000 of them were Baptized. Many that persisted obstinate were punished, and their Mosques were Consecrated into Churches. About 50000 of another quarter in Granada followed their Ex∣ample. The Moors living along the Mountains called Alpujarras hearing they were to be Baptized by force, rebelled, and first those of Huejar, who were soon subdued by the Earl of Tendilla and the Great Captain. Soon after the Moors in the Mountains were in Rebellion, and the Infidels Besieged Marxena, but D. Peter Faxardo taking Alhumilla, they raised the Siege. King Ferdinand hereupon came from Sevil to Granada, and gathering a powerful Army, Moors in the Moun∣tains Re∣bell. Marched himself to Lanjaron on the first of March 1500. That Town was taken by Storm and plundered. The Earl of Lerin and other Noblemen took several strong Places, where∣upon the Rebels submitted, and were received to Mercy upon promise they would within 4 days deliver up Castilde Ferro, Adra and Ban̄ol, as also all Arms offensive and defensive, and pay 50000 Ducats. This done the King dismissed his Army and returned to Granada, to forward the Conversion of the Infidels, and soon after those of Alpujarras, Almeria, Baça, Guadix and other Places were Baptized. Preachers were sent to all Parts with Guards for security of their Persons. This, and the report that they should be forced to quit their Sect, caused the Moors of Belefique and Nixar, which is the most inaccessible part of the Mountains of Alpujarras to Rebel the following Winter. The King appointed the Alcaide de los Donzeles to Command against them. He having gathered his Forces besieged Belefique, which held out some Months, but at last for want of Water was surrendred only upon pro∣mise of their Lives. Those of Nixar terrified by this example, submitted upon Condition they might ransom themselves for 25000 Ducats. Above 10000 Moors were now Baptized. On the other side the Moors of the Mountains of Ronda and Villaluenga revolted. The King to suppress them, published a Proclamation commanding them all to remove to Ca∣stile, but underhand permitted all such as were converted to stay and enjoy their Possessi∣ons. The Earl of Uren̄a, D. Alonso de Aguilar, and the Earl of Cifuentes were sent to make War upon those People. The native Moors had been easily reduced, but that some who came from Barbary encouraged them to stand it out. However many came from Ronda, and were Baptized for fear. All the rest retired to Sierra Bermeja, which is very difficult of access. Our Forces encamped at the Foot of the Mountain, the Moors at the same time guarded the passes. Some Christians carrying a Standard with them, their design being only to plunder, passed a Brook and began to ascend the Hill, the others fearing some Misfortune might befall them, followed after. The Moors endeavoured to keep them down, still securing every advantageous Post, but were driven till our Men came to a plain where the Enemy left their Goods, Wives and Children. This Place the Infidels soon quitted and the Christians fell to plunder, which an old valiant Moor perceiving, he en∣couraged the rest, who soon rallied and gave a fresh Charge upon the Christians. Here D. Alonso de Aguilar and above 200 of his Men were killed. His Son D. Peter de Cordova with much difficulty was brought off to the Earl of Uren̄a who made good his Ground. The Earl of Cifuentes made a halt somewhat lower, and there staying those that fled, stood the Enemy till towards Morning they drew back to the top of the Mountain. The King who was then at Ronda, sent the Duke of Najara against Daydin, and ordered the Earls of Uren̄a and Cifuentes to make show as if they would mount the same way they attempt∣ed before. The Moors perceiving they were lost Men, offered to submit. It was agreed that such as would, might have liberty to be transported to Africk, paying Ten doubles a Head, all that would stay should turn Christians. Many went over to Barbary, many more stayed and were Baptized, yet were no better than those that went away. Thus that War which had much alarmed all Spain was concluded. The death of D. Alonso de Aguilar hapned the ensuing Year. Let us return to what we left behind in point of time.
CHAP. III. The Birth of the Emperor Charles the V. The French possess themselves of the State of Milan, and take the Duke and his Brother the Cardinal; The Great Year of Jubilee 1500; The League betwixt France and Spain; Cefalonia taken from the Turks. AT the same time that the Moors of the Mountains Alpujarras were in Rebellion King Ferdinand had ordered a Fleet to be Rigged with all speed, to be Commanded by Ferdinand assists the Venetians. the Great Captain, in favour of the Venetians, and against the Turks who threatned Italy. It was given out that the Duke of Milan and King of Naples had brought them to their as∣sistance against their Enemies. Duke Valentin with Forces brought out of France made War in Romania, as General of the Church, against several who had possessed themselves of Towns in that Territory. He took Imola, and Fori, the Countess whereof he made Pri∣soner. His chief design was against the Lord of Pesaro who had Married his Sister, who understanding his own danger, having Garrisoned the City, absented himself. Luis Sforcia solicited the Emperor and Princes of Germany to assist him in recovering his Dominions. He raised Men among the Swissers and Grisons, and sending his Brother the Cardinal Asca∣nius before with them, all Places he came to submitted to him. The People of Milan drove their Governor into the Castle, whence he was forced the 3d day to fly towards Pavia. That same day the Cardinal entred Milan, and after him the Duke with great Joy of the People, tho' still the Castle was held by the French. Pavia, Lodi, Pertona, and Plasencia, did the same. The main of the French Army Rendezvouzed at Novaro, in order to oppose the Duke. Thither repaired the French Forces that had been with Duke Valentin, he there∣upon returning to Rome, where nothing was done by the Pope without his advice. At Ghent in Flanders the Princess Joenna, Wife to the Archduke, was brought to Bed of her Son Charles on the day of St. Mathias. This is he to whom Heaven had Decreed so Birth of the Empe∣ror Charles the 5th. mighty an Empire, as afterwards was subject to his Command. Eight days after his Birth the Princess Margaret came to Ghent, and was his Godmother, with the Dutchess Margaret 2d Wife to Duke Charles. The young Prince was Created Duke of Luxemburg, whereas before, the Eldest Sons of the Dukes of Burgundy were called Earls of Charalois. The News of his Birth wasreceived with great Joy in Spain, and the Catholick Queen said, The Lot has fallen upon Mathias alluding to the day he was Born upon, and considering the weakness of Prince Michael, who died soon after at Granada; after whose death the Archduke and his Wife, were Princes of Castile and Aragon. After the Return of Vasco de Gama from India, Peter Al∣verez Cabral was sent on the 8th of March, with a Fleet of 13 Sail to continue that Enter∣prize. By the way he Discovered Brasil, was at first well received at Calicut, but after∣wards came to Blows with that People. The War continued in Lombardy, and the Duke by degrees recovered all he had lost. He made himself Master of Alexandria and Novaro, and being desirous to put an end to the War, drew out of the City with all his Forces, which were about 16000 Swissers and Germans. Both Armies being ready to Engage, his Swissers refused to Fight against the French and their Countrymen who served on their side, whereupon he retired to the City in hopes to perswade them to Fight. But they had before sold, and now delivered him up to the French, who sent him to France, where he died in Prison. This sad News being brought to Cardinal Ascanius his Brother, who lay before the Castle of Milan, he went away with 500 Horse towards Placencia. Charles Ursinus who Commanded some The Fr. posses them∣selves of the Duke and Duke∣dom of Millan. Troops of the Venetians met, defeated and took him Prisoner. After the Venetians had kept him some time, they delivered him to the King of France, who secured him in Prison at Bourges, and some Years after set him at liberty. Maximilian and Francis the Dukes Sons were at the Empe∣ror's Court, which saved them from being involved in the Ruin of their Family. The French without any Opposition possessed themselves of all the Dukedom. The Cardinal of Roan resided at Milan, to gain whom the Pope made him Legate of France, excepting Bri∣tany for the space of a Year and a half. The King of Castile was jealous of the King of Navarre, because he shewed much affection towards the French, wherefore not content with the Ingagements the Governors of Towns were obliged to make to him, the Towns of San∣guessa and Viana had been put into a third Hand, by way of pledge for five Years. That Time being expired, the King of Navarre demanded the Restitution of them, and the Catho∣lick King delayed it. To end all Controversies, the King of Navarre came himself in A∣pril to Sevil, where the Catholick King and Queen were. All things were there adjusted, and the Towns restored. The Count de Lerin, then a Banished Man in Castile, was restored to most of his Eastate, and to the Office of Constable which he had before, to the great Offence of D. Alonso Peralta Earl of Santistevan, from whom that Honour was then taken, without any Demerit of his, or any Recompence made him. This 'twas feared might occa∣sion new Troubles. For Security of the Agreement betwixt the Two Kings, the King of Navarre left his Daughter, the Princess Magdalen to be bred up in the Court of the Ca∣tholick King, as a Pledge of his real Friendship. 1500. This was now the great Year of Jubilee, in which multitudes of People from all Parts of Great Year of Jubilee. Christendom flocked to Rome to obtain the Indulgence and Remission of their Sins. No∣thing
could be more depraved than the People of that City, but especially the Clergy, for which God seemed in some measure to threaten his Judgments by an Accident that befel the Pope. On the day of S. Peter and Paul, about Four in the afternoon hapned a violent storm of Rain and Hail, with so furious a Hurricane that it beat down the Stack of Chimneys over the Room where the Pope was, under that where Duke Valentin Lodged. The fall of it beat down the Floors of the Dukes Room, killing Two, and wounding a Third Florentine, who were waiting there to receive some Money. Many Bricks and Planks fell before the Pope, who was much saved by the Canopy under which he Sate. However he was found Senseless with a Wound on his Head, another on his Hand. The Cardinal of Capua and Mosen Po, who were with him, saved themselves within the Arches of the Win∣dows. The Pope was 70 Years of Age, and his wounds dangerous, which made People look upon him as a dead Man, and Duke Valentin was gathering Forces to have a Pope of his own chusing. It pleased God he recovered, and so all that Confusion Ceased. At this time the Great Captain set Sail from Malaga with a Fleet of 27 Ships, 25 Caravels, some Gallies and other small Craft, in which were 4000 Foot and 300 Men at Arms. With him went many Men of Note. They touched at Majorca, and Sardinia, and at last arrived at Mecina in Sicily on the 18th of July. Thither repaired to him the Spanish Soldiers that were in Italy, all choice Men, and he gathered some other Vessels. The Turks laid Siege to Mo∣don, a City of the Venetians in the Morea, and these pressed the Great Captain to join them; yet he could not set forward till the 27th of September, when Modon was lost. The Xeque of Gelves desired the Great Captain to send him some Succours, because the People of the Island were incensed against the Soldiers of Margarit for their Insolencies, and all Barbary against the Xeque, for having called the Christians. No Relief was sent, but Or∣ders given him to apprehend Margarit and all his Men, whom he afterwards released, and possessed himself of the Castle and Island of Gelves. On the 2d of October the Spanish Fleet arrived at Gorfu, an Island of the Venetians. Hereupon the Turks altered their Resolution of invading that Island, and marched to Napoli de Romania. Now the Peace betwixt France Peace be∣twixt Fr. and Spain. and Spain was concluded upon honourable Conditions. As to the Kingdom of Naples, it was agreed it should be taken from King Frederick, that Apulia and Calabria should be given to the Catholick King, Abruzzo and Campania to the French, and that all the Revenue of the Kingdom should be equally divided. This Agreement was not like to be lasting. Be∣sides, their pretensions of Right to that Crown, they had another colour, which was to make War upon the Turks, with whom King Frederick was in League. At first this contract was kept very private, afterwards discovered to the Pope, who was well pleased, and gave each of the Kings an Investiture of his Part; to the King of France, with the Title of King of Naples and Hierusalem; and to the Catholick King, that of Duke of Apulia. From Corfu the Spanish Fleet sailed to Zant, where it arrived the 5th of October. There the Venetian Fleet joined it. Two French Carracks came thither with 800 Men, that King having promi∣sed to assist the Venetians when they delivered up Cardinal Ascanius to him. The Turks who had distressed Napoli de Romania raised their Siege, and their Fleet drew into the Channel of Negropont on the farther side of the Morea. At Zant there were various Opinions about what was best to be done. The Great Captain was for attacking Modon. It was resolved to Conquer the Island Cefalonia, which is large and has one of the best Ports in the World on the West side. It lies between Corfu and Zant opposite to the Gulph of Lepanto. The French being gone upon pretence they were not paid, the rest laid Siege to the chief Town of the Island called S. George. In it were 300 Turks, chosen Men who defended themselves Cefalonia taken from the Turks. well; and the Christians were repulsed in an assault they gave the first day. By reason of the Bad Weather the Siege lasted some Weeks, but upon Christmas-Eve the Town was car∣ried by storm. 170 Turks were killed, and 50 that retired to a strong Tower surrendred upon discretion. Captain Martin Gomez was the first that entred the Town. That Island had belonged to Leonard Torus a Greek, from whose Brother the Venetians took, and gave it to the Turks. Now it was again given to the Venetians. This done, the Great Captain returned to Sicily, and arrived at Siracusa, where all his Fleet met, having been dispersed in a Storm. For his good Service done to that State, the Venetians sent the Great Captain the Title of Nobleman of Venice, and with it a present of Plate and rich Silks. All the present he sent to the King, contenting himself with the honour gained. At this time Duke Valentin after having murdered his Brother in Law D. Alonso de Aragon Duke of Viseli, had renewed the War in Romania, and taken Pesera and Arimino without any Resistance, Faença held out long. This Year also the Pope allowed of the Divorce betwixt Ladislaus King of Hungary, and Beatrix of Aragon, who had been Wife to Mathias his Predecessor, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Naples, and Niece to the Catholick King. Ladislaus Married Ann Daughter to Gaston de Faux, Lord of Candale, Niece to the Catholick King, and Grandchild to Queen Ellenor of Navarre.
CHAP. IV. King Ferdinand's Double-dealing; The Princess Mary of Castile married to the King of Portugal; The French and Spaniards jointly subdue the Kingdom of Naples; Actions of the Great Captain. OF Four Daughters the Catholick King and Queen had, the Princess Mary was still un∣married. Double-dealing of K. Ferdi∣nand. King Ferdinand of Naples was desirous to have her for his Son the Duke of Calabria, hoping by that means to secure his Crown. The King of Portugal also sollicited to have her, tho' he had been married to her Sister. This was thought the better Match, but the Dispensation was hard to be obtained, because the Affinity was in the First Degree. The Pope, tho' in other things free enough, was very backward in this, pretending that the King of France pressed him not to grant it. He said he would not consent to it, unless the Catho∣lick King would secure him against any harm that might threaten him upon that account. Much time was spent in debating this Point. King Ferdinand would have the Duke of Cala∣bria marry his Neice Queen Joanna, Widow of Ferdinand II. King of Naples, who was still in that Kingdom, her Father having left her 400000 Ducats. King Frederick approved of the Match to save the Payment of that vast Sum, but would have the King of Spain take him into his Protection. This the Catholick King would not agree to, because of the Treaty he had in hand with France; which being at last concluded, tho' King Frederick was willing the Match should go on, the Catholick King would not consent. King Frederick, to secure him∣self against the French, and divert them from their Pretensions to his Kingdom, made large Offers to them. The King of France proposed, That to secure the Performance of what they should agree upon, he should deliver up to him the Castle of Gaeta; and that Frederick's Son should reside in his Court, and marry Germana Daughter to the Earl of Narbonne, or the Sister of Monsieur d' Angoulesme. Besides, he demanded a Million in ready Money, and 25000 Ducats of yearly Tribute. All heavy Conditions, which that King could not conde∣cend to, tho' he was willing to give the Million demanded. In fine, none of these Matches was concluded. At length the Pope dispenced with the King of Portugal, and he was con∣tracted by Proxy at Granada in August, D. Alvaro de Portugal performing that Ceremony for him. There was no manner of Solemnity or Publick Rejoycing. In that City, on the 12th of September, the King passed a Grant to the Marquesses of Moya, by virtue whereof the Cup that the King drinks out of on S. Luis's Day every Year belongs to them. This was done in memory, that upon that Day D. Andrew de Cabrara, first Marquess of Moya, delivered up to King Ferdinand all the Treasure of King Henry that was in his custody in the Castle of Segovia, which was a great means to establish him in the Kingdom. With the Princess, as far as the Borders of Portugal, went D. James Hurtado de Mendoça, Archbishop of Sevil, Patriarch of Alexandria, and now made Cardinal of Spain, as his Unkle had been; he was also Brother to the Earl of Tendilla. Also the Marquess of Villena and many other Lords bore her Com∣pany. On the Borders of Portugal she was received by the Duke of Bragança, tho' at that time he was disgusted, because the King so highly favoured D. George de Portugal, whom he had created Duke of Coimbra, and given him to Wife Beatrix de Melo, Daughter to D. Alvaro de Portugal, and the Lady Philippa de Melo his Wife. With the Duke of Bragança were many other Nobles. She entred into that Kingdom upon the 20th of October, and on the 30th of the same Month was married with great Solemnity at Alcaçar do Sal, where the King waited her coming. This Marriage was very fruitful, for they had many Children, as shall be de∣clared in its place. Soon after, the Princess Margaret was married to Philibert Duke of Sa∣voy; but she was unfortunate in Husbands, for he also died soon after. The Soldan of Ba∣byl signified some Discontent against the Catholick King, because he made War against the Moors of Granada. It was feared he might molest the Christians that lived in his Dominions, and hinder the Pilgrimages to the Holy City Hierusalem. For this reason the King resolved to send a solemn Embassie to give him Satisfaction. Peter Martyr of Angleria, a Milanese, the King's Chaplain, was chose for this Employment. He did his Message discreetly, and ob∣tained of the Soldan all he desired. He was out a Year, and at his return was made Dean of Granada, where he afterwards died, and ordered himself to be buried sitting on a Chair, with a Casula or Vestment made of a rich Silk the Soldan gave him. He wrote Decades of the War of Granada, of his Embassie, and the Discovery of the West-Indies, in which is to be seen more of Truth than Elegancy. All Europe was in suspence, waiting the Event of the War of Naples, undertaken by the joint Forces of France and Spain for the Ruin of King Frederick, and deprive him of that Rich and Noble Kingdom. The Catholick King sent advice of his Resolution from Granada to the Great Captain on the 1st of March, 1501. ordering him at the same time to leave the War against the Turk, and return immediately with his Fleet to the Port of Meçina. Soon after, he sent him the Title of his Lieutenant in the Dukedoms of Apulia and Calabria. To oppose the Turk, he prevailed with the King of Portugal to send a Fleet to those Parts, which he did, under the Command of D. John de Meneses, Earl of Taroça, who by the way attempted the Port of Maçalquivir near Oran, and being repulsed, sailed on to the Island of Corfu, whence
he returned to Portugal without doing any thing. It was also proposed to the King of France to send his Fleet against the Turks. That King made choice of Luis d' Armagnac, Duke of Nemours, Earl of Armagnac and Guise, to Command his Forces that were to invade Naples. He would not give this Command to Luis de Luxembourg Earl of Ligni, who sued for it, lest he should cause some disorder by the Right he pretended to the Principality of Altamura. The Duke of Nemours made some stay in France: therefore the Lord of Aubeni, who was made Lord High Constable of Naples, moved with the French Forces out of Lombardy towards Naples, and with him the Earl of Gayace, a Man of great Quality, who had fled from Naples. At this time Francis de Rojas, a very able Man, was sent to succeed Laurence Suarez, as Ambassador at Rome. At the Emperor's Court had resided for some Years with that Character, D. John Emanuel, a Man of great Note, but Turbulent. In the Court of France John Michael Gralla was still resident, and John Claver at Naples. The Great Captain, in pursuance of the Orders he had received, repaired to Meçina with his Fleet; thence he went to Palermo to order the Viceroy John de Lanuça, to gather what Money and Forces he could for the Enterprize in hand. Some Misunderstanding there hapned betwixt them, as is usual where each arrogates to himself a Superiority; but at last they agreed in what concerned the King's Service; and the Great Captain having gathered what Force he could returned to Meçina, where was the General Rendezvous. The Great Captain was possessed in Calabria of the Dukedom of Monte de Santangelo, given him by King Frederick when the late War was concluded. Before he entred upon that Conquest, he sent Captain Gençalo de Foces to excuse him to that King; to restore to him that Dukedom, and renounce the Oath of Allegiance he had taken to him for the same. The King absolved him of his Oath, yet gave him the Duke∣dom again, wishing it were better for his sake, upon condition he should not infest his Sub∣jects from the Castles belonging to it. This and the Intelligence his Ambassadors sent from Spain, fully convinced King Frederick how near and certain his Ruin was. He turned him∣self about, and found no Loyalty in his Subjects, no Strength in his Kingdom, nor no Sup∣port from abroad. He sent his Son Ferdinend to Taranto, a strong City in the farthest part of Apulia and of all Italy. It was reported he sent him to Vallona, to obtain Succours of the Turk. He gathered all the Forces he could, which amounted to 800 Men at Arms, and 4000 Foot, fortified Capua, where he left Fabricius Colona and Hugh de Cardona with 200 Men at Arms, and 1600 Foot. The Great Captain being a Man of a vast Reach, easily per∣ceived that Agreement betwixt the Two Kings could not be lasting, as well for the natural Haughtiness of the French, as by reason of the Difficulties that must of necessity arise in di∣viding of the Country, besides that Sovereignty admits of no Rival: Therefore he thought it requisite to anticipate the French, that they might not obstruct his Conquest. He sent the greatest part of the Fleet, under the Command of James de Mendoça, to the Coast of Apulia, to hinder the Turks from coming over thither. The Fleet of Portugal came not in time. He sent Inigo Lopez d' Ayala with the rest of the Fleet to Naples, with Orders to transport Joanna the Queen Dowager of Naples into Sicily. King Frederick suffered her to depart, tho' he had before detained her, in hopes through her means to move King Ferdinand her Unkle to assist him. The Great Captain passed the Streight of Meçina with his Forces, which consisted of 300 Men at Arms, the same Number of Light-Horse, and 3000 Foot. The Spanish Am∣bassador at Rome sent him 600 Spaniards, who had served under Duke Valentine. Orders were left in Sicily for sending after him 400 chosen Horsemen. With this Force in a few days he subdued all Calabria, except the strong Towns of Girachi and S. Agatha, all other Places de∣claring for Spain. The Spaniards passed over to Calabria on the 5th of July, and on the 8th the French entred the Kingdom of Naples by the way of Rome. All Places submitted to them without resistance till they came to Capua, to which they laid siege. All Abruzzo sub∣mitted to the French in like manner. Capua could have held out long, but that the Earl of Palena betrayed it to them. They plundered the City, and took Fabricius Colona, Hugh de Cordona, and all the other Commanders that were in it. This News brought to the Great Cap∣tain at Nicastro on the 29th of July, made him hasten to take the Castle of Cosenza. He ap∣pointed Luis Mudarra Governor of that Town, and the Earl of Ayelo of all Calabria, march∣ing himself speedily to Apulia, that he might have done with that Province before the French at Naples. All Places yielded to him; at last he sate down before Taranto, where the Duke of Calabria was, at such time as the French were possessed of Naples. Duke Valentine having taken Faença and Poimbin, came now to serve the French. King Frederick and the French Ge∣neral agreed in Italy, That he should deliver up Naples and Gaeta with the Castles, and pay 60000 Ducats for their Expence; and they were to suffer him to depart with his Treasure and Servants to Ischia, where he had 6 Months allowed him to consider whither he would re∣move. The King with his Wife and Children, the Queen of Hungary, and Dutchess of Milan, went over to that Island. Thither repaired to them Prosper and Fabricius Colona, being Ransomed. So that the French were now possessed of all their Dividend of that Kingdom; but soon they began to cast their eye upon the rest. In Castile at this time there arose a great Controversie betwixt the Lady Mary Pacheco, Countess of Benevento; and her Son D. Alonso Pimentel, about the Guardianship and Marrying of the Marchioness of Villafranca, the Coun∣tess's Grandchild. The Dukes del Infantado and Alva asked her for their Sons, and the Earl of Benevento her Unkle for himself. At length it was agreed, That the Lady Beatrix, Daughter to the Countess, should be married to D. Garcia de Toledo, Eldest Son to the Duke of Alva, and the Marchioness to D. Peter, Brother to Garcia.
CHAP. V. The French and Spaniards fall at Variancc about dividing their Conquest; The Description of the Kingdom of Naples; Frederick King of Naples puts himself into the French King's hands; French perish by Pestilence and Stress of Weather; The coming of the Archduke into Spain. NO sooner were the French possessed of Naples, but there arose Debates betwixt them and Disagree∣ment be∣twixt the French and Spaniards. the Spaniards, about some Parts of that Kingdom which were not mentioned in the Di∣vision agreed upon by them. These were Capitanata, Basilicata, and the Hither and Farther Principality. The French were so forward, that they sent a Son of the Earl of Capacho to cause that part of Basilicata to declare for France. They also agreed with the Prince of Melfi about that Principality, which is in the same Province, and the King of France had already given it to John James Trivulcio. Some Noblemen were released, who had been imprisoned by the King of Naples, and among them John Baptista Morçano, after he had been almost 40 Years in custody. He boldly attempted to possess himself of the Principality of Rosano, which had been his Father's, and is in Calabria. Also Luis d' Arsi being empowered by the Lord of Ligni, raised the Principality of Altamura in Apulia for the French. These were Heart-burn∣ings at present, and seemed to tend to a Breach. Methods of reconciling these Differences were first proposed to the Lord of Aubeni, and then to the Duke of Nemours, who came after the Surrender of Naples. It was agreed, that neither Party should intrude into those Provinces which were out of Dispute; and that those that stood dubious which side they belonged to, should remain in common to both, till such time as the Controversie was decided. Matters of the Government and Revenue were also adjusted, but nothing observed. For the better understanding this Dispute, and the clearing which side had the most Right, it will be con∣venient to give a short Description of the Kingdom of Naples, and of all its Parts. The Descripti∣of the Kingdom of Naples. Kingdom of Naples contains all that Country which extends from Taracina or Fundi on the Mediterranean, and the River Truento, that falls into the Gulp of Venice, to the utmost Point of Italy. Mount Apenine which joins with the Alpes cuts this Kingdom and all the rest of Italy into two Parts. At the first entrance into the Kingdom, on the Right-hand of that Moun∣tain upon the Mediterranean, lies the Principal-part of it called Campania, or Terra de Labor, of the ancient Liborii who dwelt there. In this Province are Gaeta, Nola, Capua, and Naples the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom. Formerly all the Country from the River Tiber to Naples, was called Campania; now that which lies betwixt Rome and the Borders of that Kingdom, goes by the Name of Campagna di Roma. On the Left-hand lies Abrazzo, con∣taining many of the ancient Provinces, namely, the Sabines, where is Ascoli; the Marrucini, where is Theate; the Peligni and Vestini, in which are the Cities of Aquila and Sulmona; the Marsi, where is the Lake Ficinus, and the Dutchy of Tagliacoço; and part of the Samnites, famous in the Roman History, and reaching to Campania, The Moderns divide this Province into Abruzzo Citra, and Abruzzi Ultra, the River of Pescara being the Bounder of the Two Parts. These Provinces, in the Division of the Kingdom, were adjudged to the King of France. On the same side with Abruzzo is Apulia, divided into Capitanata, Terra di Bari, and Terra di Otranto; which runs as far as Taranto and thn Confines of Calabria. On the other side beyond Naples begins the Principality, whose Capital City is Salerno. Then follows Basilicata, formerly called Lucania, and then Calabria, where were the ancient Brutii, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean. In this Province is Cosenza the Capital City, and Rogio upon the Streight of Meçina. The Inland was called Magna Graecia, where are Rosano, Catançaro, and Cotron. As to the Principality, it is dubious whether it ought to be comprehended in Calabria. Touching Basilicata was the same Dispute, and therefore the Kings agreed these Provinces should be divided. Yet some affirmed, that this Territory lying along the Moun∣tains that part Apulia and Calabria, made no distinct Province from them two, but that as much as lies towards the East belongs to Apulia, and towards the West to Calabria. In Basi∣licata are Melfi, Atela, Barleta, and other Cities. Capitanata is that part which lies betwixt the Rivers Aufido and Tertoro; in it are Manfredonia, Monte Santangelo, and Troya. There is no doubt but that Territory was contained in the ancient Apulia, since Ptolomy places Mount S. Garganus, which is there Famous for the Church of S. Michael in Apulia. And the Moderns always understood that Apulia. began where Abruzzo ended, and was divided into those three Parts already mentioned. Nay, several Authors mention Capitanata as a Territory of Apulia; and always the Duty of the Cattel of Apulia was received in that Territory. Let every one judge as he shall think fit; it suffices to our Purpose, that hence the French and Spa∣niards took occasion to decide that by the Sword, which their Kings, tho' often pressed to it, could never be brought to resolve. But this we shall speak of hereafter. Now King Frede∣rick, Frederick King of Naples puts him∣self into the hands of the French. who continued at Ischia, as had been agreed, being out of conceit with the Catholick King, put himself into the hands of the King of France, and his Wife and Children, and the Cardinal Luis d' Aragon his Nephew, upon promise of 30000 Francs to maintain his House. His Sister Beatrix, Queen of Hangary, stayed in that Island, and thence went over to Sicily. Eli∣zabeth
his Niece, who had been married to John Galeazo the Great Duke of Milan, went to Bari in Apulia. Whilst this Treaty was betwixt the King of France and the Deposed Frederick, the Archduke in Flanders was courted to go over to Spain with his Wife, that they might, ac∣cording to Custom, be sworn Heirs to the Crown. This Year was born to the Archduke a Daughter called Elizabeth. The King his Father-in-Law was desirous to have him in Spain, that he might be acquainted with the Customs of the Country, and to break him of some youthful ill Habits he had learned of his Servants. But they being used to Govern him, were not willing he should stand in awe of D. John de Fonseca, Bishop of Cordova, who was sent to persuade him to come into Spain, and the King of France invited him to take his way through that Kingdom, as he did. The Princess Catharine sailed from Corun̄a, in a Fleet provided for that purpose, to be married in England, as had been agreed. She set sail on the 25th of Au∣gust With her went into England D. Alonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of Santiago, the Count and Countess of Cabra, and other Persons of Note. After their departure there arose such a Storm that the Fleet was scattered, and tho' some Ships recovered Southampton, the most were forced back to Laredo, On the 2d of September they put to Sea again, and arrived with the Princess in England. She was married with great Solemnity to Prince Arthur at London: But how much Misery did this poor Lady undergo, through the Extravagancy of her wicked Husband! This same Year the Lady Beatrix de Castro, Daughter to the Earl of Lemos, was contracted to Denis Brother to the Duke of Bragança, the King giving them the Towns of Sarria, Castro, and Otera, which the Earl of Lemos pretended to have a Right to. In October a Peace was concluded at the City Trent betwixt the Emperor and King of France: The chief Article was, That Charles the Archduke's Son should marry Claudia that King's Daughter; a Match often agreed upon, but that never took effect. The Fleets sent from France and Portugal at the instance of the Catholick King to aid the French pe∣rish by Pe∣stilence and Stress of Wea∣ther. Venetians against the Turks, did nothing worth relating. That of Portugal only went to Cor∣fou,, and returned. The French went to the Island Scio belonging to the Genoeses, and ha∣ving only hindred the Turks from receiving their usual Tribute there, suffered so much by Pe∣stilence, Stress of Weather, and the Enemy, that scarce 1000 Men of all the Fleet returned home. They repaired to Apulia, and were courteously entertained by the Great Captain's Order. The Venetians also returned home, who had but 25 Galleys ill provided. This Year the Turk put no Fleet to Sea, which if he had, there was no Force to oppose him. In Spain the Catholick King published a Proclamation, commanding all the Moors who were dispersed throughout Castile and Andaluzia, called Mudejares, either to become Christians, or depart the Country. About the end of the Year there was a certain Commotion, which if not prevented in time, might have produced a War. D. Luis de la Cerda, Duke of Medina Celi, upon his Death-bed married his Mistriss to Legitimate D. John, a Son he had by her. D. In̄igo de la Cerda, the Duke's Brother, whose Son Luis married the Duke del Infantado's Daughter, pretended he was Heir to that Estate. The Duke of Medina Celi being dead, the Duke del Infantado raised Men, and laid siege to Cogolludo, in order to seize all the Estate. The King ordered him to disband his Forces, and take his Course at Law. The Duke was forced to obey, and D. John was left possessed of his Father's Estate. News was brought that the Archduke with his Wife were coming through France. All the way they were nobly enter∣tained. At Paris, on the 13th of December, both Parties swore to the Peace before conclu∣ded The Arch duke comes in∣to Spain. at Trent, and the Archduke did Homage to the King of France, as Earl of Flanders. The Princess would allow that King no Superiority. Thence they set forward, and through Guienne came to Fuenterabia on the 29th of February, 1502. There they were received by the Con∣stable of Castile, the Duke of Najara, the Earl of Trevin̄o his Son, and the Chief Commendary D. Gutierre de Cardenas. The more to express the Publick Joy, leave was given that such as might wear Silk Doublets, might also have Silk Coats, and coloured, which shews the Modesty of those Times. At the beginning of this Year, Lucrecia de Borgia was married to the Heir of the Duke of Ferrara; her Portion was 100000 Ducats. The Archduke and his Wife by the way of Burgos, Valladolid, Medina, and Segovia, came to Madrid. The Catholick King and Queen came from Andaluzia to Guadalupe. There to oblige Duke Valentine, and in him the Pope, they gave him the City Andria, and other Lands in Naples, with the Title of Prince. It was also proposed, that the Kings of Spain and France should settle an Estate upon King Frederick and his Children. The King and Queen came to Toledo upon the 22d of April, as did the Princes on the 7th of May, having been stayed some days at Olias, by rea∣son of the Archduke's Indisposition. At Toledo on the 22d of May they were sworn Heirs of the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, in a great Assembly of Prelates and Noblemen. They were tied, in case they Inherited those Kingdoms, to Govern them according to their an∣cient and known Laws. At the same time that Spain rejoiced at the coming of these Princes, England lamented the Death of Prince Arthur. The Princess his Wife was supposed to be lest a Maid, tho' they lived together as Man and Wife for 5 Months. But the Prince was only 14 Years of Age, and of so weak a Constitution, that it gave sufficient Grounds to believe this might be true. Ferdinand Duke d' Estrada was sent by the Catholick King to Condole with King Henry, and to propose that the Princess might be married to his Second Son. But he neither restored her Portion, nor could for some time be brought to conclude that Match,
which afterwards proved so unfortunate. Soon after the News was brought of that Prince's Death, Mary Queen of Portugal was delivered at Lisbon of a Son, whom they named John: He afterwards Inherited his Father's Kingdom, and was a most Renowned Prince. CHAP. VI. Further Actions of the Great Captain at Naples; The Duke of Calabria contrary to Ar∣ticles sent into Spain; The French and Spanish Generals Consult their Kings, and have a Conference to Adjust Differences in the Division of Naples; The beginning of the War betwixt them. THE Great Captain, as has been said, laid Siege to Taranto some months before this time. In that Town was the Duke of Calabria well provided to hold out. Nevertheless the first The Great Captain's Actions at Naples. day the Town was invested a Treaty was begun, and at length the Duke, by the means of Octavian de Santis, concluded a Truce for Two months, that he might have time to consult his Father, both sides giving Hostages that nothing should be done to the prejudice of the other in the mean while. Afterwards, because the Messengers sent to King Frederick were not come back, the Truce was prolonged till the end of the year upon the same Articles as before. This Term also expiring without any Answer, the Truce was still continued for Two months longer, and the City put into the keeping of Bindo de Ptoiomeis, a Subject of the Catholick King, in whom the Great Captain reposed great Trust, upon Condition, that after that time the City should be surrendred without any farther delay, but that the Duke with all his Treasure and Family should be free. At the same time the Castle of Gerachi, a Place of great importance, 3 Leagues from the Sea, was surrendred; and the Prince of Salerno came to Treat with the Great Captain about coming over to his Party, provided he and the Prince of Bisignano might be restored to their Estates. He also demanded the Earldom of Lauria, and 5000 Duccats Pension which his Predecessors used to be allowed by the Kings of Naples. All these were extravagant Demands, and denoted he had but a small Inclination to submit. Many of the Barons who had withdrawn with King Frederick to Ischia, came over now to the Great Captain. Of them he admitted such as he thought were most important for his King's Service, and among them Prosper and Fabricius Colona, being informed the Venetians endeavour∣ed to draw them into their Service. D. James de Mendoça and In̄igo de Ayala took the City and Castle of Manfredonia, by Intelligence they held with the Governour that was to keep that place for King Frederick, notwithstanding the Lord of Alegre was marching at the same time to Re∣lieve the Besieged. At last the City Taranto, according to Articles, was delivered, with its Castles, to the great Captain. And because one of the Articles of Surrender was, That the Duke might have liberty to depart whither he pleased, for the present he went to Bari, which still held out for his Father (tho the City was weak, and the Castle but a plain House) resolving to stay there for his Orders, without which he would not do any thing. The Great Captain earnestly desired to reconcile him to the Catholick King, that be might not go to France, which might cause some Troubles. Proposals were made, and he offered him 30000 Duccats a year for ever, part in the Kingdom of Naples, and part in Spain, which was all he asked, or could expect in that Condition. The Duke liked the Offer, but would conclude nothing with∣out his Father's Consent. Soon after the Dutchess Dowager of Milan, his Cousin, rather than to go to Sicily, whither she was invited with the Queen of Hungary her Aunt, retired to that City. This Lady prevailed with the Duke to write a Letter to the great Captain, praying him, that notwithstanding the Capitulation, by which he was at liberty to dispose of himself, he would send him over to the Catholick King, because he found his Father's Designs were not for his Advantage, and yet he was not willing to act any thing publickly in opposition to him. It is to be believed the Duke did not continue long in this mind, for his Father by Letter pressed the Great Captain, according to what had been Capitulated, to give his Son his full Liberty, urging, that it was not like a Gentleman to break his Word, and that he ought to remember how much he had been his Friend in the time of his Prosperity. The Great Captain, who kept a Guard upon him that he might not escape, to the end to bring him to his Will, besides the Revenue he had offered before, now promised in the Name of the Catho∣lick King to Marry him either to the Queen of Naples his Neece, or with the Princess of Wales, both very advantageous Proposals. It was suspected that the Earl of Ponteza, D. John de Guevera, who always stuck by the Duke, led him which way he pleased. The Duke, tho he went about Apulia in appearance free, yet was so guarded that he could not get away, nor scarce go a Hunting. In fine, this Business was so contrived, that at Duke was brought back to Toranto, and thence John de Conchillos had Orders to carry him in a Gally to Sicily, and so to Spain, it being believed Matters would be the better adjusted betwixt the Parties themselves, and that the Duke would be easier reconciled to the King, who was his near Kinsman. It is plain this was a breach of Articles. In time of War Faith is not always observed, but neither in Peace or War is there any regard to it where State Policy and the Interest of Princes is con∣cerned.
The French and Spanish Generals in the Kingdom of Naples consulted together, and with Disagree∣ment a∣bout the Division of Naples. their Kings, about agreeing the Differences that arose between them, to avoid coming to Blows. Not long before the Archduke was sworn Prince of Castile, there came an Ambassador to To∣ledo from the King of France to Treat of this Affair. He pretended that the Revenue of the Provinces allotted the King of France was much less than that of Calabria and Apulia, and since some Recompence ought to be made he demanded the Country of Capitanata should be yielded to him. The Catholick King answered, That if the King of France thought the Di∣vision was not equal, he would change Provinces with him; yet if he insisted upon an Equi∣valent, it should be made up out of the Principality and Basilicata, because Capitanata was the best part of Apulia, and there was no reason it should be rent from it. In short, he offered to remit the whole thing to the Decision of the Pope and Cardinals. The King of France liked none of these Proposals, being unwilling to quit the Title of King of Naples and Hie∣rusalem if he Exchanged, and threatned to use Force. This Feud ran so high, that being one day told by the Spanish Ambassadors, that their King punctually observed all that had been agreed, He answered, He had done the same, and in Defence of his Assertion was ready to Combat with the King of Spain, or with the King of the Romans. Gralla replied, The King, his Master; was as just a Prince as any in the World, which, when required, he was ready to make good in the Field. The King of France said, The King of Spain shall not be greater than I. And Gralla answered, Nor you greater than the King my Master. True it is, the Ca∣tholick King used all possible means to prevent coming to a War. The first Breach was when the Lord of Alegre, who called himself Lieutenant of Capitanata, came to raise the Siege the Spaniards had laid to Manfredonia, as was hinted before; and not content with that, whilst the Great Captain besieged Taranto, the French possessed themselves of Troya and other Places in Capitanata, which they afterwards refused to restore. Before things came to extremity the Gene∣rals agreed to have a Conference. To this purpose the Great Captain went to Atela, and the Duke of Nemours to Melfi, Towns in Basilicata. In the mid-way between them, was the Confe∣rence of the French and Spa∣nish Gene∣rals. Chappel of S. Antony, where they appointed to meet. Both had with them Men Learned in the Law to plead their Title. The French urg'd, That what the Spaniards possessed yielded 70000 Duccats a year more than theirs, and therefore it was fit they should have some Recompence made them. The Spaniards insisted, that they ought first to be restored to Capitanata wrong∣fully taken from them, and then they would be ready to perform all Articles. Nothing was concluded, tho there passed great Civilities betwixt the Generals. All hopes of Accommo∣dation being taken away, they resolved to try the Event of War. Both Parties acquainted their Kings with it, and writ to them for Supplies of Men and Money. The Great Captain being scarce of Provisions, quartered part of his Men in the Principality. Captain Escalada, with his Company, drove the French out of Tripalda, and possessed himself of that Town, which is 30 miles from Naples. Other Spanish Commanders made themselves Masters of other Towns in that Neighbourhood. This was so highly resented by the King of France, that he caused all the Effects of Spanish Merchants throughout his Kingdom to be seized. The Catholick King was still for Composition, even tho he were forced to resign to the French all they possessed in Capitanata, which was the greatest part. The Generals met again in the same place, and made the Division again, in appearance, to the satisfaction of the French, for the Principality. Basilicata, and Capitanata, were to be divided, which was as much as they could wish. Whilst this was in agitation, the French were reinforced by 1000 Swiss, and 200 Horse sent from France, besides a Supply of Money, which puffed them up so as to com∣mence the War a-new. They took Venosa, the Commander, Peter Navarro, being forced by his Men to surrender. Quarata also yielded to them, both Places being but 12 miles from Barleta, where the Great Captain lay with most of his Forces. Viseli in the Principality of Altamura revolted, and the Spaniards by Sea having entred it, were again expelled by the French, who came to the Relief of that place. Summer was now advanced, and the French Camp at Quarata suffered for want of Water and Provisions, our Horse cutting them off. They removed thence, and incamped on the Banks of the River Ofanto. Then the Great Captain offered them Battle. They refusing, and drawing off towards Melfi, some of our Horse fell in with their Rear, killing many, and taking part of the Baggage, among which was some of the Equipage of the Duke of Nemours, and the Lord of Aubeni. The French would not hazard themselves till they were joined by 1000 more Swiss, who were come to Naples, and 400 Horse that were then at Florence. The great Captain pressed his King for Supplies, and particularly for 400 Horse, and 2000 Foot of Gallicia and Asturias. He recom∣mended to the Ambassador D. John Manuel, to send him 2000 Germans to mix with the Spa∣niards. The Catholick King fitted out a Fleet under the Command of Bernard de Villamarin, who was to transport 400 Horse, and some Supplies of Money. At the same time he per∣swaded the Emperor to invade Italy, and put one of the Sons of the Deposed Duke of Milan into possession of that Dukedom. And to gain the Pope, he consented that Duke Valentin should be put into possession of Florence, to hold that Dominion of the Empire with the Title of King.
CHAP. VII. The Archduke of Austria, and Princess his Wife, sworn Heirs of Aragon, he goes away for Flanders; The Spaniards offer Battle to the French, several small Actions betwixt them; The Spaniards decline in Calabria, are defeated. THE Catholick King spent some days at Toledo to Entertain the Archduke and Princess, Archduke and Prin∣cess sworn Heirs of Aragon. then leaving the Queen there set out for Zaragoça, to bring the Aragonians to his beck. The Cortes of Aragon were to meet on the 19th of July, but he sent to Prorogue them. Being come to Zaragoça at the beginning of September, because the Great Captain pressed for the Fleet, he ordered one to be fitted out under the Command of Manuel de Benavides, who was to transport 400 Horse and 300 Foot. Soon after he ordered the rest of the Fleet to Sail with Luis Portocarrero, Lord of Palma, who had served well in the Wars of Granada, and was now to be equal in Command to the Great Captain. With him went 300 Men at Arms, 400 light Horse, and 3000 Foot. Laurence Suarez de Figueroa was sent Ambassador to the Venetians, to conclude a League with them, and to promise them Assistance towards con∣quering of Milan or Abruzzo, which Provinces they were covetous to be Masters of. The Cortes were opened at Zaragoça on the day appointed, where the King proposed, since Prince Michael was dead, that the Archduke, and the Princess his Wife, should be Sworn Heirs. He also demanded Supplies for the War in Naples, as appertaining to that Crown. All he de∣manded was granted. On the 27th of October the Archduke and Princess had Homage done to them, and were Sworn Heirs to the Crown with the Solemnity and Ceremony usual a∣mong the Aragonians. Thus the Princess Joanna was the first Woman till that time ever Sworn Heiress to that Crown; for Queen Petronila, who inherited before, was admitted Queen without being Sworn Princess, which was not then used. Soon after the Archduke set out for Madrid, and the Princess followed, the King bearing her Company. He left his Sister, the Queen of Naples, to preside in the Cortes of Aragon. She came from Granada, having given out she would go over into Italy, and was now during her stay in Aragon, appointed Gover∣ness of that Kingdom, which Place was before held by D. Alonso de Aragon, Archbishop of Zaragoça, the Catholick King's Bastard Son. The Archduke had little Inclination to stay in Spain, and his Servants much less, by whom he was entirely governed. His Pretence to be gone was, That at his coming thence Flanders was unprovided of an Army, and might now suffer on account of the Breach betwixt France and Spain. The King and Queen laboured to stay him, chiefly because the Princess was far gone with Child. Nothing could perswade him to stay, or not to go through France. He said he would be the Instrument to settle a Peace, because that King had proposed the Kingdom should be restored to King Frederick upon Con∣dition he should pay. Tribute for the same, or otherwise, That both Kings should resign up their Right, he of Spain to Charles his Grandson, and he of France to his Daughter Claudia, as her Portion, and for concluding the Match betwixt those two young Princes. All this was only looked upon as a Practice to amuse the Catholick King, the easier to gain some Advan∣tage upon him. In fine, the Archduke set out from Madrid, leaving the Princess with her Parents; he took his way through Aragon, Catalonia, and Perpignan. There he received the Archduke returns to Flanders. King of France his Pass, with which he Travelled to Lions, where that King then was, with the Cardinal of Roan the Pope's Legate. But this was about the End of this year and the Be∣ginning of the next. Let us return to the War of Naples. Now the War began to spread through all the Kingdom of Naples, but the great stress of War be∣twixt the French and Spaniards at Naples. it fell upon Apulia and Calabria. There the Princes of Salerno, Bisignano and Rosano, and the Earl of Melito, stood strongly for the French. In this Province they resolved to apply their main Force. The Sieur de Alegre was left in Capitanata with 300 Lances. The Sieur de la Palisse at Bari with 300. Horse and 1000 Foot; in Basilicata, Luis de Arsi, with 400. Lances and some Foot. The Duke of Nemour's Design was to go to Calabria with 200 Horse and 1000 Foot, and that the Lord of Aubigni, should stay at Espin̄acola, 24 miles from Barleta, with all the rest of the Army. The Lord of Aubigni pressed to be sent to Calabria, because he aspired to the Dukedom of Terra Nova, granted to the Great Captain by the Catholick King. To end this Dispute they agreed to march both towards Calabria. However the Lord of Aubigni went first to Bari with 150 Horse and 1000 Foot. The Duke of Nemours having given out he marched for Calabria, turned short upon Taranto. By the way he took Matera and Castellaneta, and defeated the Earl of Matera and Bishop of Mazara, whom he found at Ma∣tera with some Forces. This done he sate down before Taranto, hoping to have found the Duke of Calabria there, but he was gone to Sicily nine days before. Some Spanish Troops made such a furious Sally out of Taranto, that they forced the Enemy to remove their Camp to a strong House 22 Miles from the City, designing to return into the Territory of Bari, there to join the Sieur d' Aubigni, and make themselves Masters of Bitonto, or else march into Calabria. It hapned that the French who lay in Basilicata, and were the Strength of the Army, sent a Trumpeter to Barleta, directed to D. James de Mendoça, to Challenge Eleven Spaniards to Fight a like number of them the day following. The place appointed was between Barleta and Viseli. The Condition of the Challenge was, That those who were overcome should re∣main
Prisoners to the Victors. The Commander, tho the time was short, accepted of the A notable combat of Eleven on each side: Challenge. Eleven were chosen, and among them the famous James Garcia de Paredes, who did singular good Service in this War, coming over about the beginning of it as Colonel of 600 Men. Next day in the morning they made themselves ready, and the great Captain be∣fore many Gentlemen encouraged them, affirming they could not return unless it were Victo∣rious. They all promised to lose their Lives rather than forseit the least Point of their Ho∣nour. With them went four Trumpets and two Pages. They entred the Lists an hour before their Adversaries. The Fight was obstinate, the Event that one of the French was killed, a∣nother taken, and Nine wounded, the like number of Horses killed. Of the Spaniards One was taken, Two wounded, and Three Horses killed. The Dispute lasted till Night, and the Spaniards could not overcome the French who were a-foot, because they main∣tained themselves amidst the dead Horses. Thus tho the French sustained most loss, neither Party could be said to be Victorious. This much offended the great Captain, who would not have had the Spaniards quit the Field till they had vanquished the French. At the same time the King of France to forward the War in Naples, resolved to go himself into Italy; but stayed in Lombardy. This was also the Design of the Catholick King when he went to Zaragoça, considering what great things had been done by his Ancestors in Sicily, Sardinia and Naples, which had never been performed by their Generals. However, he resolved to take Advice of the Nobility, who all except one Bishop disswaded his exposing himself. The Great Captain by Letter seconded them, and gave mighty Assurances of speedy Success, a thing not approved of by great Generals, who ought rather always to be dubious, never undervaluing the Forces of the Enemy, or confiding so much in their own Strength. The Rumour of Warlike pre∣parations at that time on the Frontiers of France, would not permit the King to absent himself. Whilst the Archduke was sworn Prince of Zaragoça, the Spaniards went down the wind apace in Calabria. The Viceroy hasted to Messina, and gathered all the Foreigners he could Several losses of the French: to Succour his Party. From Rome D. Hugo and D. John de Cardona Brother to the Count de Golisano, quitting the Posts they had under Duke Valentin, at the perswasion of the Spanish Ambassador carried 240 chosen Men to that City. As soon as they came to Messina, gather∣ing what other Forces they could, they passed the Streight at such time as the Earl of Melito Brother to the Prince of Bisignano, having taken the Town of Terranova, had much distres∣sed the Castle. D. Hugo marched thither, and having defeated the Earl, raised the Siege, and the Princes of Salerno and Bisignano who lay before Cosenza, were forced to quit that Enterprize, and came down to the Plain of Terranova, to endeavour to make up that loss. This Fight hapned 4 days before Emanuel de Benavides arrived at Messina with the Forces he brought in 15 Ships. Among the other Commanders, there came with him Antony de Leyva, a Man hereafter famous for Valour and Conduct. They passed over with the great∣est speed they could to join D. Hugo and the rest. The Princes being retired to Melito, sent the Earl with 700 Swiss and some Horse, and People of the Country to besiege Co∣sensa. He marched to Mota de Culambra, 3 Miles from Rosana, where lay most of the Spa∣niards, who were upon them by break of day, and the Town being open, entred it, killing some of the Enemy, others fled, and others with the Earl retired to the Castle. News be∣ing brought that the Lord of Aubigni with all his Forces was marching to the relief of the Earl, the Spaniards drew back to Rosana. At the same time Fabricius de Gesualdo, Son to the Earl of Conça, and Son in Law to the Prince of Melfi, who Commanded on the Fron∣tiers about Taranto, went out to Ravage the Territory of that City. Luis de Herrera and Peter Navarro, Captains of the Garrison of Taranto, lay in wait for the Enemy in a Pass, where they killed or took them all, only 3 escaping. Fabricius himself was made Prisoner. In the other parts of Apulia the War was hotly prosecuted, both Parties striving to re∣ceive the Duties of Cattle, which is one of the best Branches of the Revenue. It would be too tedious to relate all particulars, but the poor Country People suffered extreamly, both French and Spaniards driving their Cattle. To put a stop to this Mischief, the Duke of Nemours resolved to march with all his Forces, and break down a Bridge that was over the River Ofanto, 4 Miles distant from Barleta, thinking thus to prevent the Enemies Parties from passing over, especially when that River swells with the Rains. The Lord of Au∣bigni, as soon as he had entred Calabria, marched towards the Enemy that was in Terra∣nova. The Town was weak and ill provided, therefore they agreed to quit it, and pass over the Mountain to Retromarina. The French having taken the Passes, put to flight all the Spanish Infantry, and took about 50 Horse of the Troops of Antony de Leyva, who fought with much Bravery. Yet the greatest number fled to Girache and other strong Holds. Marquess del Gasto comes o∣ver to the Spaniards. This Defeat gained the Lord of Aubigni such Reputation, that most of Calabria submitted to him. Four days after the Duke of Nemours came with his Army to the Bridge of Ofanto, and with his Cannon beat down the middle Arch, and a Tower which he had half ru∣ined when he was there before. The Great Captain hearing of his Approach, sent for the Forces that were at Andri, and then followed the Enemy, but they marched off the same way they came. The Great Captain sent a Trumpet to stay the Duke, who answered, that when Gonzalo Fernandez would come as near Canoza, as he had been to Barleta, he en∣gaged his Word to come out and Fight him. At this time the Duke of Calabrta came to Madrid, and tho' a Prisoner, was entertained like the Son of a King. On the first day
of January 1503, Duke Valentin took Sonagalla. He also made Prisoners, Francis Ursino, Duke of Gravena, Paul Ursino, Vitellocio and Oliveroto, who came to him upon a safe Con∣duct. 1503. The Pope also apprehended Cardinal Ursino, their intent being totally to ruin the Family of the Ursini, as they had already the Coloneses; tho' but a little before they had made a strict Alliance with them. Soon after that Duke took Perosa, and Civita Castelli, and aimed at the Republicks of Siena, Luca and Pisa, but durst not attempt them for fear of the King of France, under whose Protection they were, which gave him an Opportunity of sending Forces to Naples in the same manner as if they had marched through his own Territories. For all this, the War betwixt Florence and Pisa continued, and the Pisans had thoughts of putting themselves under the Protection of the Catholick King. The King would not then admit them, and when he would, it was too late. Two Cousins, Alonso and Francis de Albuquerque with each of them 3 Ships sailed from Portugal, for India. CHAP. VIII. Great Booty taken by the Spaniards, as also the Sieur de la Palisse; A Combat betwixt 13 French, and as many Italians; Several losses of the French; The Marquess del Gasto comes over to the Spaniards. THE Great Captain who lay with his Forces at Barleta, was much perplexed, being resolved not to take the Field till the Germans, and Forces he Expected from Spain Great boo∣ty taken by the Spaniards. had joined him, but at the same time want of Provisions obliged him to march towards the Enemy, who lay at Monorbino, Canosa, and Cirinola. On the 15th of January he marched out of Barleta, sending before the Commendary Mendoza with 300 light Horse to drive the Country as far as Labelo, which was 25 Miles distant thence, and was plentiful of Cattle. He Halted Four Miles from Monorbino, to Face the French, if they should come out of the Town. Our advanced Party drove above 40000 Sheep. 200 Men at Arms and as many Archers came out of Cirinola, thinking to join a like number that lay at Canosa, and then recover the Booty from our Men, who endeavouring to cut them off, did it so disorderly, that they got into Canoza, tho' with some loss. The Duke of Nemours stirred not, so that our Men had leisure to carry off the Prey. Four days after, Intelligence being given, that the Sieur de la Palisse was marching with 500 Horse to Ravage the Territory of Barleta; the Great Captain and D. James de Mendoça possessed themselves of Two Passes, through which the Enemy must of necessity make their way. The Sieur de la Palisse fell with his Horse, at first setting out, which was the cause he went not himself, but sent one la Motte his Lieutenant, with 70 Men at Arms and Archers. They fell into the Ambush, and were all killed or taken; only Two escaping. Among the rest La Motte was taken by D. James de Mendoza. This La Motte in his discourse reflected upon the Italians in general, Yn̄igo Lo∣pez de Ayala stood up for them. It came to that, that the Frenchman offered to be one of Ten Frenchmen who should Fight the like number of Italians, which they acepted, and having obtained leave of the Great Captain, it was agreed they should Combat 13 of a side, between Andria and Quarata. On the 13th of February they met, the Great Captain having drawn out his Forces near Andria, that no wrong should be offered his Men. The Wind was high, which the French would have had parted by the Judges, but could not agree about it. They met with their Lances, and tho' most of the French lost theirs by reason of the Wind, yet no Horse was killed, or Man dismounted. Falling to their Swords, the Italians had so much the better, that they killed one of the French, and returned at Night to Combat betwixt 13 French and as ma∣ny Italiuns Barleta, with the other 12 Prisoners. Only one Italian was slightly wounded. The Great Captain to honour them, made them Sup with him that Night. At the same time Luis Her∣rera and Peter Navarro marching out of Taranto, took Castellaneta, and several other Places in that Neighbourhood, but there was another Enterprize, much more considerable to be attempted. The Sieur de la Palisse who called himself Viceroy of Abruzzo, and the Duke of Savoy's Lieutenant Quartered in a Yown called Rubo, 18 Miles from Barleta, with them were about 500 Men at Arms and Archers. The Great Captain designing to fall upon them, was informed that the Duke de Nemours was gone to recover Castellaneta, leaving the Strength of the French Army with the Prince of Melfi at Canosa, and that 150 Men more were gone to Rubo to secure that Place. Upon this Intelligence, the Great Captain set out on the 22th of February at Night, with 1000 Horse, 300 Foot, and some pieces of Can∣non, and appeared before the Town at break of day. The Soldiers without staying till a Breach was made, assaulted the Town, but were repulsed. A good part of the Wall be∣ing beaten down they attackt the Breach, and tho' well defended, forced their way, kil∣ling 200 of the French, and wounding others. The Sieur de la Palisse endeavouring to escape, was wounded in the Head and taken. The Duke of Savoy's Lieutenat retired to the Ca∣stle, thinking to hold out till Relieved, but seeing the Cannon Planted, surrendred upon di∣scretion. Many other Persons of Note were taken. Few of the Victors were killed. D. James de Mendoça was wounded in the Head with a Stone. Our Men immediately retired with the Booty, lest the French Army which lay not far off, should come upon them, for
the Duke of Nemours understanding the design of the Great Captain, was come back with∣out taking Castellaneta to join the Prince of Melfi, and relieve Rubo. He came too late, and from this time forward the Affairs of the French began to decline. One Pere Jean a Pro∣vençal and Knight of Malta, who with 4 Gallies and 2 other Vessels, hindred the resort of Provisions, and took several of our Ships, was now utterly destroyed. Lezcano who Commanded 4 of our Gallies, having taken 500 Soldiers aboard, went in search of Pere Jean towards Brindez, he, tho' Stronger in Vessels would not venture to Fight, but put into O∣tranto, hoping to be Protected by the Venetians. Lescano nevertheless took a Ship and caravel that lay without the Port, which so terrified Perejean that without offering to make any de∣fence, by Night he landed his Men with what else he could, and sunk the Gallies with the Cannon, that our Men might make no advantage of them. Villamarin the Admiral, lay with some Gallies at Messina to guard that Coast, and expected the coming of Portocarrero. The great Captain would have had him come to some Part of Apulia, lest he should stay in Calabria, as Emanuel de Benavides had done contrary to his Orders. He, and Luis de Her∣rera, Peter Navarro, and Lescano (who having disarmed the Enemy, landed his 500 Soldi∣ers) as also the Bishop of Mazara, who was at Galipoli, were all ordered to march with their Forces to Barleta, that being thus re-inforced, they might give the Enemy Battle, and at once put an end to the War. The Duke of Nemours at Canosa, was also busie recruiting his Forces, having lost many Several losses of the French. Men in several Rancounters. At S. John Redondo, Captain Arriaran who lay at Manfredonia, put to the Sword 200 French. Luis Herrera and Peter Navarro having taken a Pass near Grutallas, killed 200 and took 50. Afterwards these Two, with Lescano, betwixt Conversa∣mo and Casamaxima defeated and made Prisoner, the Marquess of Bitonto, who was march∣ing to join the Duke of Nemours with 500 Horse and Foot. Captain Oliva routed another Company of French, and killed 300 of them. D. James de Mendoça fell upon 50 Horse, and 70 Foot, who came from Viseli to cut off the Spanish foraging Party. The Horse fled to Viseli, the Foot to a Tower, where they were all put to the Sword. These and the like losses, moved the Duke of Nemours to Order the Lord of Aubigni, and the Princes of Sa∣lerno and Bisignano to leave Calabria in the best Order they could, and join him in order to give the Enemy Battle. They obeyed not presently, and gave their reasons for so do∣ing. Both Parties were streightned for Provisions, but neither durst quit their Quarters for fear the Country should Revolt. A Venetian Ship laden with Corn, coming to Trana, was seized by the Spaniards, and 5 others came from Sicily, which with the Cattle they took, maintained them for some time. The Great Captain held intelligence with the Cities of Abruzzo, and particularly with Aquila. On the other side, Capua, Castelamar, Aversa, and Salerno, offered to submit to him. It was agreed that as soon as he took the Field they should declare for Spain. He came to Agreement with the Earl of Muro, tho' he was the first that declared for the French in Basilicata. The Prince of Salerno offered to come over to him, and Marry his Daughter, but there was no Trust to be reposed in him, or the Prince of Melfi, who was also for compounding, D. In̄igo Davalos declared for the Catholick King, and brought under his subjection the Island Ischia, where he then was. This Gentleman was of Spanish Extraction, as descended from D. Ruy Lopez Davalos the Constable, of whom much was said in its Place. He was Marquess del Gasto, and had agreed with Marquess del Gasto comes o∣ver to the Spaniards. the Great Captain that all his Estate should be restored to him, and over and above, the Island Prochita was of new added to it, and the Command of 100 Lances, and 200 light Horse given him. To his Nephew was granted the Marquisate of Pescara, and Office of High Chamberlain. Besides, in case the Spaniards should be beaten out of Naples, they were promised Estates in Spain. Much time was spent in agreeing upon these Articles, which was the reason the Marquess did not declare sooner, he being naturally well affected to Spain, and an Enemy to the French. D. Alonso the famous Marquess of Pescara, was Son to this Marquess, and Inherited that Title of his Cousin Ferdinand, who died without Issue. The Marquess declared for Spain in Ischia upon Easter-day. About the same time the Com∣mendary Aguilera landed at Cotron 300 Men, sent by the Spanish Ambassador at Rome. The Commendary Gomez de Solis relieved the Castle of Cosenza, and entred the City by force, driving out the Earl of Melito, who was in it with Four times his Number. A dispute a∣rose betwixt the French and Spaniards about the Prisoners taken at Rubo. It was agreed that Horsemen taken Prisoners, should lose their Horse and Arms, and be Ransomed for a Quar∣ters pay. The French had taken Theodorus Bolala Captain of the Albaneses, James de Vera who had the Command of the Artillery, and Escalada a Spanish Captain of Foot with a∣bout 30 others. They released all, as had been agreed, except those Three, pleading that being Officers, they were not within the benefit of the Cartel. Yet now they would have all the Prisoners taken at Rubo Ransomed like private Men, without considering that many of them were Gentlemen and Commanders. The Great Captain was informed that accord∣ing to the Custom of Naples, in relation to the Cartel for Horsemen to be Ransomed for their Quarters pay, it did not extend to such as were taken in pitched Battle, or a Town taken by Storm. All the old Soldiers being of this Opinion, he answered the French ac∣cordingly, and the Prisoners were reserved to Ransom themselves according to their ability,
or as they could agree with those that took them. But the main design was to detain them that they might not be serviceable to the Duke of Nemours in the Battle, which as things then stood, it was believed must soon be fought. CHAP. IX. The Peace Concluded by the Archduke with France; It takes no effect; Succours from Spain arrive at Naples; The Lord Aubigni defeated and taken. AT such time as the Archduke was departing from Madrid, he pressed the King his Father in-Law to let him understand his ultimate Resolution as to a Peace with France, Archduke concludes Peace be∣twixt Spain and France. and give him Commission to Treat in case that King could be brought to any reasona∣ble Terms. At first the Catholick King would not consent, suspecting the Archduke and his followers to be too well affected to the French, and fearing to discourage his Friends in Italy, if they heard he was upon Treating with France. Nevertheless such Instance was made by the Archduke, that he gave him a Commission with a very limited Instructi∣on, which he promised not to exceed, and afterwards by F. Bernard Boil, Abbot of S. Mi∣chael de la Cuxa, sent him new Instructions and a larger Commission, yet so that he should let no body know he carried that Commission, but the Archduke; who should swear not to reveal it; and if he followed not the Instruction, he should not give him the Commission till farther Orders. The Archduke came to Lions at such time as the War was carried on in Apulia and Calabria, as has been said, and the Princess at Alcalà de Henares was delivered of a Son called Ferdinand; being Baptized by the Archbishop of Toledo, and the Duke of Najara and Marquess of Villena being Godfathers. At Lions was the King, the Pope's Legate, and the Cardinal of Roan. They began to Treat, but not according to the In∣structions. The Abbot put the Archduke in mind they ought to proceed no farther without acquainting the King. He was not allowed to send an Express, but on the con∣trary was put to such a Nonplus, being in the power of the French, and his own People advising him not to regard the Instructions, that he consented to what they pleased. It was believed the French had bribed his followers. The substance of the Agreement was, that one of these Two Methods should be taken, either the Catholick King should resign up his Part to his Grandson Prince Charles, and the King of France his, to his Daughter Claudia, these Two young Princes being Contracted, and that till such time as they were Married, the Catholick Kings Part should be put into the Hands of the Archduke, and the other to remain in the power of the French. Or else that both French and Spaniards should possess each their own Part, and Capitanata about which was the strife, should be delivered in Trust to a Third Person. These Conditions were extravagant, for by the first, the Spaniards were to lose what they held, and the French were left in possession, and the latter left the whole Dispute still undecided. Mean while the Catholick King returned to Zara∣goça, to break up the Cortes that Sate still. They agreed to furnish 200 Men at Arms, and 300 light Horse, at their own charge for Three Years, both the Men and Officers to be Natives of the Kingdom. These Men were soon raised, and ordered to march to Rus∣sillon, to oppose the French if they should attempt any thing on that side, because the Mar∣schal of Britany, Captain General of France, the Sieur de Dunois and the Grand Escuyer were marching with Forces towards Carcassonne. Hereupon the King ordered his Forces to draw near to Figueras, and D. Sanch de Castilla General of Russillon put all Places there in a Po∣sture of Defence. The King intending to be near the Frontiers, came to Poblete, where he had Intelligence from the Abbot Boil, how the Archduke was pressed to come to A∣greement, contrary to his Instructions. Orders were sent him by the King how to proceed. All this availed nothing, for the Peace was Proclaimed; and the Archduke sent John E∣din his Harbinger, and the King of France Edward Bollotte of his Bedchamber, to give no∣tice of it to the Great Captain and Duke of Nemours, that all Hostilities might Cease. This done the Archduke departed towards Savoy to see his Sister the Lady Margaret, with whom and the Duke of Savoy he stayed the Easter-Holidays. John Edin and Edward Bollotte speeded on their Journey through Rome, giving out the Peace was concluded. They came to Barleta at such time as both Parties were preparing to come to a Battle, particularly the Great Captain, after 2500 Germans whom he had long expected, came down the Gulph of Venice, and joined him. John Edin gave him the Archduke's Letter, requiring him to cease from any farther Acts of Hostility, but he was already advertized by the King, of the Archdukes going into France, and Commanded not to obey any Order of his, un∣less Confirmed by his Majesty. Therefore he answered, those Orders could not be re∣garded The peace takes no effect. till the King were acquainted with them, and that Policy should not avail the French, for he knew his Duty, and would himself carry the Answer to the Duke of Nemours. He was as good as his Word. The Catholick King would not agree to this Peace, but to satisfie the World, proposed the restoring of King Frederick. The King of France would not hear the Ambassador sent to this effect, but turned him away with disgrace, being offended the Peace lately agreed upon, was rejected.
Luis Portocarrero sailed from Cartagena, with the Fleet there provided for him, about the Succours from Spain land in Naples. middle of February. He had a troublesome Voyage, being in two Storms; however, he ar∣rived safe with the whole Fleet at Meçina in 20 days; but the Men and Horses suffered very much. It being consulted where were best to land, some were for sailing to Apulia, in pur∣suance to the Orders of the Great Captain; but Portocarrero thinking it too far to go by Sea, went over to Rijoles to make War in Calabria, as had been directed in Spain. The Lord of Aubigni, after he had defeated Emanuel de Benavides and D. Hugh de Cardona, lay at Mota Bubalina, in hopes to starve Girachi, which was but 3 Leagues off, whither most of the Spaniards fled after the Rout. The Prince of Basignano was gone home, and the Prince of Salerno and Earl of Mileto to Naples. Portocarrero resolving to take the Field, mustered his Forces at Rijoles, and there fell sick of a Fever. Before his death he understood that some Officers of Note were possessed of Terranova, which the French abandoned upon the News of the arrival of the Spa∣nish Fleet. He was also informed, That the Lord of Aubigni hearing of his Sickness, had be∣sieged them, and that they were distressed, that being a Place of no Strength. Hereupon Por∣tocarrero appointed D. Ferdinand d' Andrada his Lieutenant, ordering him to march with all the Forces to the Relief of the Besieged, and at the same time the Admiral Villamarin to come with the Galleys before Joya, to make the French believe there came Relief both by Sea and Land. The Spaniards made haste, being informed the Besieged suffered much for want of Provisions. They being come to Semenara, the Lord of Aubigni removed from Burgo de Ter∣ranova to Casales. D. Ferdinand satisfied he had relieved the Besieged, stayed at Semenera: Thither came to him Emanuel de Benavides, Antony de Leiva, Gonçalo Davalos, D. Hugo, and D. John de Cardona, with their respective Companies, with which he formed a Body strong enough to rout the Enemy in their Retreat to Melito. This was the Opinion of D. Hugo; but D. Ferdinand excused himself, saying, he had positive Orders not to hazard a Battel. In fine, Portocarrero died, and his Body was buried at Meçina. Hereupon some Dispute arose among the Chief Officers about the Supream Command. They referred themselves to the Viceroy of Sicily, who gave it for D. Ferdinand d' Andrada. D. Hugo and D. John de Cardona were offended that a younger Soldier should be put over their Heads; yet they submitted. Both sides were eager to fight, and the Lord of Aubigni sent a Trumpet to offer Battel; but the Spanish Com∣mander refused upon account of his Orders This encouraged the Enemy, as also that they understood our Soldiers were dissatisfied for want of their Pay. Therefore the Lord Aubigni marched his Forces out of Rosano and Joya, and came in sight of Semenera. He passed the River, and entred the Plain. Not long before, the Soldiers of Galicia had mutinied for their Pay, and there was danger some Disaster might happen. The Viceroy of Sicily sending some Money, and the Officers selling their Plate and Jewels, soon appeased them. The French were 300 Men at Arms, 600 Light-Horse, 1500 standing Foot, and above 3000 of the Country-People. The Spaniards marched out of Semenera in good Order, being about 800 Horse and 4000 Foot. The Lord of Aubigni retired to Joya, not daring to stand a Battel. Our Men followed, designing to attack the Town. After some Actions of lesser Note, on Lord of Aubigni defeated and taken. the 21st of April both Parties drew out as it were by Consent, and advanced towards one another by Sound of Drums and Trumpets. Each strove to take the advantage of the Sun: To this effect the Spaniards passed the River somewhat higher; the French imagining they drew off, charged disorderly, having fired their Cannon at random, which did no hurt nor discomposed the Spaniards, who had placed the Foot on the Left, the Light-Horse on the Right, and the Men at Arms in the Centre. Our Horse charged the Enemy with such Force, that most of them were dismounted; whereupon the Foot who followed fled without striking stroke. The Spaniards pursued them to the Gates of Joya, whither most of them fled. Most of the French Commanders were taken, and Horatius and Alonso de Sanseverino, the Brother and Cousin to the Prince de Bisignano, surrendered themselves and the Town of Joya. The Lord of Aubigni was taken at Roça d' Angito, whither he fled. This Victory, one of the Famousest during that War, was the cause that all Calabria submitted. CHAP. X. The Battel of Cirinola, and great Overthrow of the French; Almost all the Kingdom of Naples subdued by the Great Captain; His Reception into that Noble City. THE Great Captain was reduced to such Want, that he had but 3 Days Provision, and The Battel of Cirinola. no way to get any; besides, he feared the Neighbouring Towns that were all in the same Condition, would revolt: Therefore he resolved to march towards the Enemy, and first to Cirinola, a weak Town, but had a good Garrison in the Castle, and all the Enemy's Army lay within 6 Miles of it, which must oblige them to come to a Battel. Before he set out, he gave every Man at Arms two Ducats, and half a one to each Foot-Soldier. The Sol∣diers were forward enough, and not pressing for their Pay. The first day passing below the famous Town of Cannas, on the Banks of the River Ofanto, they encamped 3 Miles from the
French. Next day they continued their March towards Cirinola, always in good Order, be∣cause the Enemy was so near. Fabricius Colona and Luis de Herrera led the advanced Body, consisting of above 1000 Light-Horse. D. James de Mendoça led the Van, in which were 2000 Spanish Foot. The Great Captain kept in the Rear with some Men at Arms and Light-Horse, and the Germans, to receive the Enemy if they should follow him. The Coun∣try was dry, the Day hot, and the March long, which so fatigued the Men, that some Men at Arms and Foot died for Thirst. This being known to the French, they agreed to lay hold of so good an Opportunity and March out of their Strength to give them Battel. Their Force was 500 Men at Arms, 2000 Light-Horse, and 4000 Swiss and Gascons, embattelled after this manner: In the Van was the Prince of Salerno, with 200 Men at Arms, and 2000 Foot. In the Rear the Prince of Melfi, with one Troop of Men at Arms, 1000 of the Country-People, and some Gascons. The Duke of Nemours himself Commanded the rest of the Army, which made the Main Body. The Spanish Foot were best, if they had not been so fatigued; but the Enemy had the Advantage in Horse. In this manner the French marched to attack our Rear. It seemed impossible for the Spaniards to reach Cirinola, where they had fortified their Camp, without losing their Baggage and many of the Foot, who lay about the Fields, overcome with Thirst and Weariness. This nothing dismayed the Great Captain, who caused the Horse to take up behind them such of the Foot as were most faint, he himself doing the same, and carrying Drink to those that wanted most. In this manner they reached their Camp without any loss two Hours before Sunset. At this time the Enemy's Horse appeared, and the Spaniards soon drew up within their Trenches. Fear often is more Powerful than Weariness. The Great Captain went about encouraging his Men, and then the Fight be∣gan. It being so late, the Duke of Nemours was willing to have deferred it till next day; but the Lord d' Alegre pressed it should not be delayed, believing the Victory was certain. On each side were 13 Pieces of Cannon: The French played theirs first, which did no execu∣tion; but ours being planted higher, made a great Slaughter. It was fired but once, because an Italian thinking the Spaniards had fled, set fire to two Waggons of Powder. The Confu∣sion that followed was great, and the Flame spread so much, that all gave themselves for lost. Still the Great Captain had so much Presence of Mind, that he said with a chearful Counte∣nance to those about him, A good Omen, my Friends; for these are Bonfires for the Victory we have already in our hands. The Harm done by our Cannon moved the Duke of Nemours to join Battel immediately: He charged our Body with 800 Men at Arms. Before our Men was a Trench, which he had not observed, and obliged the French to wheel off, without breaking Lance to put themselves again into a posture. Then the German Musqueteers firing upon that Squadron, made a great Slaughter. After the Men at Arms followed the Lord Chandiou with the Swiss and Gascons: These the Spaniards charged with such Bravery, that they instantly broke them. The Princes of Salerno and Melfi, who were in the Rear advancing, were received by the Great Captain as became him. To conclude, the Enemy on all sides fled, the Spaniards pursuing them to their Camp, which was 6 Miles off, and was taken at the same Heat, our Men finding their Supper ready, whereof they had need enough being so tired. The Booty found there was great. This famous Battel was fought upon the 28th of April. At the first Onset was killed the Duke of Nemours, whose Body the Great Captain caused to be Ho∣nourably buried in the Church of S. Francis at Barleta. Besides him died the Lord Chandiou, the Count Morcon, and most of the Swiss Commanders. The Princes of Salerno and Melfi, and Marquess de Lochito were wounded. All their Cannon and most of their Colours were taken. The Slaughter had been much greater, but that Night coming on prevented it. The Victors having rested that Night, next day Cirinola surrendered upon Discretion, as did 700 that had fled to the Castle. Canosa also declar'd for Spain. None but the Spaniards signalized themselves in this Battel, for the Germans, bating the Volley they poured in upon the Enemy, did nothing. Among others, they that gained most Honour were of the Italians the Duke of Termes, and of the Spaniards D. James de Mendoça, of whom the Great Captain said, He had behaved himself as became the Grandson of such a Grand∣father. Of the French it appeared 3700 were killed; of the Spaniards only 9, and never a Man of Note. True it is, many died by the way with Droughth, and 1500 could not be dragged from the Water they found in certain Wells, nor did any Service that Day; which rendred the Success the more dubious, and consequently the Victory the more glo∣rious. After this great Defeat of the French, almost all the Kingdom submitted to the Spani∣ards. Almost all Naples sub∣dued by the Great Captain. The Great Captain was diligent in making his Advantage of the Victory, which was the more compleat, for that the Day following he received Letters giving him an account of the Overthrow of the French, and taking the Lord of Aubigni near Semenara. This Account was not brought sooner, because D. Ferdinand de Andrada having succeeded Luis Portocarrero in the Command, did not think himself subordinate to the Great Cap∣tain, which he resented, and asked Leave to return to Spain. The Catholick King or∣dered Ferdinand to cease from that Pretension, and the Great Captain to give him a Company of Men at Arms. The News of these Two Victories, and sending of several Barons home to their Estates, soon caused most of Capitanata and Basilicata to submit, and
in the Principality many Towns and Barons declared for Spain. Those who fled from the Battel, made their way to Campania, designing to fortifie themselves in Gaeta, a City naturally impregnable, giving all the rest for lost. Peter de Paz pursued them with some Horse, whose approach gave opportunity to Capua to declare for Spain; and some of the Citizens pursuing the French, killed about 50 Men at Arms before they could get into Gaeta. The Marquess of Sochito, tho' hurt in the Fight, went away with his Wife, and what he could carry to Rome, to his Unkle the Cardinal of Siena. Monsieur d' Alegre and the Prince of Salerno making their way towards Naples with 500 Horse, lost above 200 of them killed or taken by the Earl of Montela. Luis d' Arsi fortified himself at Venosa, re∣lying on the Strentgh of the Castle. The Great Captain encamped at Leonesa near to Melfi and Venosa. There the Prince of Melfi submitted himself, upon condition he might be allowed to live in another of his Towns, till it were known whether the King of Spain would admit him into his Service upon the Terms before proposed; but there was little Confidence to be reposed in his Fidelity. Fabricius Colona and the Earls of Papulo and Montorio were sent to Abruzzo to reduce that Province entirely. Villamarin the Admiral was ordered immediately, with all the Force he could make, to sail towards Naples, whi∣ther the Great Captain was marching with his Army by the way of Benevento and Gan∣delo. From this last Place he sent a Letter to the Citizens of Naples, promising them all manner of good Usage, and desiring them to prevent his Army doing any harm in their Territories. The Earl of Matera and the Syndics came out to Treat, and surrendered the City. At this time Monsieur de Vannes, Son to the Lord d' Albret, hearing of the Defeat of the French, obtained Leave of Duke Valentine whom he served, to go join the remains of the French Army in Naples, which he did with 200 Horse and some Foot. These being strengthened by some Forces from Apulia, Calàbria, and Abruzzo, formed some manner of Army, and encamped near Garelliano. For this Reason about 400 Spanish Horse were put into Capua and Sessa. The Great Captain keeping with him 1000 Men, which he thought enough to besiege the Castles of Naples, sent all the rest of his Army towards the Enemy. The Spanish Soldiers, desirous to be at Naples the Night before, demanded their Pay, which they said the General had promised to give them at Naples. To pre∣vent further Disorder, he took the Spanish Foot with him, sending the Men at Arms, Light-Horse, and Germans to Sessa, assuring them he would soon be with them. On the Reception of the Great Cap∣tain at Naples. 16th of May he entred Naples with as great Pomp as if it had been the King himself. Before him marched the Spanish Foot. The Gentry came out to meet him, and the Multitude covered the Fields, admiring that General who had so often Overthrown his Enemies. He was conducted through the Streets richly hung, strewed with Flowers, and full of sweet Perfumes, in the same manner as when their Kings went to be Crowned. Nothing but Joy appeared; they that were most inclined to the French, expressed most Satisfaction to disguise their own Faults. The City Naples, from whence the whole Kingdom takes its Name, is one of the fairest, richest, and most Populous in all Italy. It is seated on the Coast of the Mediterranean, at the side of a Hill that rises betwixt the West and the North. The Streets are long and strait, full of stately Buildings, because the No∣bility, who are very numerous, live there most of the Year, and vie amongst themselves in Erecting stately Houses. The most Famous are those of the Prince of Salerno and Duke of Gravina. They encline to live there by reason of the Temperature of the Air, the Fruitfulness of the Soil, and the beautiful Gardens that surround the City: So that there is scarce any City where so many Great Men reside. It is divided into Five Sejo's, which are so many Council-Houses, where the Nobility and Gentry of each Quarter meet, to consult about the Affairs of the City. The Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitals, are Nu∣merous and Magnificent, particularly the Hospital de la Annunciata, which spends yearly above 50000 Ducats, gathered by the Charity of the People upon pious Uses. The Walls are strong, adorned with Towers and Four strong Castles. Of these the First is Castelnovo, large, and to appearance impregnable, seated on the Shoar near the Mole which makes the Harbour. The Second the Gate of Capua, on the North, formerly a famous Place of Strength, now the Place for holding the Courts of Judicature. The Third the Castle del Ovo, in the Sea on a small Rock, but inaccessible. The Fourth that of Santelmo, in the highest part of the City, commands it all, and is of late strongly fortified. Two of these Forts, to wit, Castelnovo and Castel del Ovo, were now in the hands of the French. As soon as ever the Great Captain alighted, he went to give Orders for besieging those Castles Castelnovo was furiously battered, and they began to undermine it; but the Be∣sieged made a vigorous Defence. Villamarin with the Fleet came to an Anchor at Nostra Signora de Pie de Gruta; seven days after, the Great Captain entred the City. On the last day of May, the Pope created Nine Cardinals, Five of them Natives of Valencia. On the 12th of June, after a vigorous Resistance, Castelnovo was taken by Storm. John Pelaez de Berrio, Servant to the Great Captain, was the first that entred. The Captains Peter Navarro, an able Man at Mining, and Nun̄o d' Ocampo, signalized themselves; the last had the Command of the Fort given him. Among other Prisoners taken there, was Hugh Roger Earl of Pallas, who had been above 40 Years in Rebellion against the Catho∣lick
King and his Father King John. He was sent to the Castle of Xativa, where he ended his Days. Some French and Genoese Ships came from Gaeta too late to relieve the Besieged. The French Fleet, consisting of 6 Carracs, other Great Ships, and 5 Galleys, besides small Vessels, came at last; and Villamarin being too weak to oppose them, re∣tired to the Port of Ischia, which being beset by our Fleet, defended it self so well, that small harm was done to it. The Marquess del Gasto took care to defend the Fleet and Island. The Great Captain could not stay to take the Castle del Ovo, but left that in charge to Peter Navarro and Nun̄o d' Ocampo. They in Boats covered with Hides approached to un∣dermine the Rock on the side of Picifalcon. Our Batteries killed most of the Defendants, so that only 20 remaining, they surrendered, articling only for their Lives. At the same time Fabricius Colona with 800 Men sent from Rome, took the City of Aquila, the Chief of Abruzzo, and all that Province submitted. Fracaso de S. Severino, and Hierome Gallofo, the Chief of the French Faction in that City, made their escape to the Lands of the Church. The End of the 27th BOOK.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXVIII. CHAP. 1. The Siege of Gaeta; The Death of Pope Alexander VI. Pius III. Chosen. Practices of the Spaniards. The French Invade Roussillon. ON the 18th of June the Great Captain set forwards from Naples towards S. German, in order to oppose the French, who lay incamped on the other side the River Ga∣rellano, formerly called Lyris, and to reduce some Towns thereabouts that still held for the French. He passed through Aversa and Capua, those Cities desiring to see him, and express their Affection to Spain. Whilst he was thus stayed, James Garzia de St. German taken. Paredes, and Christopher Zamudio, advanced with 1500 Men to attack S. German. That City and its Castle soon surrendred, notwithstanding that Peter de Medicis lay with some French Forces near hand at Montecasino. He despairing of holding out there, went away, leaving 200 Men in the Monastery, who surrendred the Place. The Great Captain took Roca Guil∣lerma, a strong Place, also Targeto upon the River Garellano, and other Places. Castellon, and Mala, which lie near Gaeta, submitted. This done, the Great Captain on the first of July Gaeta be∣sieged. incamped near the Suburb of Gaeta. That City is very strong, being for the most part en∣compassed with the Sea, only towards the Land is a narrow and uncouth way to it, and over the City Mount Orlando of difficult access, where the French had planted many Pieces of Cannon, so that there was no coming near to it. In the Place were 4500 Men, 1500 of them Horse. What was worst of all, they were Masters of the Sea, being much stronger than the Spaniards, and consequently there was no hindring the recourse of Provisions, or o∣ther Supplies to them, tho Villamarin came thither with his Galleys. The Great Captain caused his Cannon to be brought from Naples to batter the Mount, whence his Men were much annoyed, lying within Shot. Many of his Men were killed, and among them D. Hugh de Cardona, a Man of great Worth. The Besieged suffered for want of Provisions, but chiefly of Meal, not having wherewith to grind their Corn. On the 6th of August they received Supplies of Provisions and 1500 Men in two Carracs, 4 Galleons, and some Galleys, which carried the Marquess de Saluzes, who was to succeed the Duke of Nemours as Viceroy. The same day this Supply came to them, Rabastein, Colonel of the Germans that served in the Spanish Army, was killed by a Cannon Shot. This made the Great Captain draw back to Ca∣stellon. All this while nothing was done, for tho a Breach had been made in the Town Wall it could not be attacked, nor did the Besieged offer to Sally. But the day we retired 2500 Men attacked our Germans in the Rear, who drew them on to an open Ground far from the City, then 400 Spaniards charged them so furiously they were driven to the very Gates of Gaeta with the loss of 200; whom our Men returning stripped at their leasure. Whilst this was doing at Gaeta, both sides made great Preparations. The King of France sent the Lord de la Trimoüille to the Relief of Gaeta with 600 French Lances and 8000 Swiss, besides 4000 French gone by Sea to Leghorne, Telamon, and Porto Hercules. The Rendezvous was at Parma. Thither repaired the Duke of Ferrara, the Marquess of Mantua, and other Italian Noblemen. Trimoüille dying, the Marquess of Mantua was made General of that Army. On the other side the Catholick King sent 6 Galleys to Naples, with Men and Money, under the Command of D. Raimund de Cardona. Still the Spanish Fleet was inferior to the French, which consisted of 30 Sail of all sorts. The Great Captain laboured to bring the Family of the Ursini to the Service of the Catholick King, and at length prevailed, Bartholomew de Albiano coming into the Service as their Chief, and behaving himself afterwards with much bravery in the Wars of Practices of the Spaniards: Italy. Money was offered the Emperor to induce him to invade Lombardy, and the Pope was also tampered with to declare for Spain, for at this time he stood Neuter, but the Treaty seemed to be well advanced if there were any Confidence to be reposed in Duke Valentin. Death prevented this taking effect, for the Pope was snatched away by Poison Duke Valen∣tin had prepared for certain Cardinals in the Garden of Cardinal Adrian Corneto, where they Supped. The Servants mistaking the Bottles, gave the Pope, the Duke, and Cardinal Adrian, of the Poison. The Duke immediately took Antidotes, which with the strength of Youth carried it off, but the Pope and Cardinal being old, could not overcome the strength of the Potion. This was the end of Pope Alexander, who had scandalized the World. Many a∣spired
to succeed him, grounding their Pretentions on their Interest rather than their Learn∣ing or Piety. King Frederick had now an Interview with the King of France at Macon, and Proposals were made for restoring him, but all to no purpose. Great apprehensions there were of a War in Spain by reason of the Forces that gathered about Narbonne. Hereupon the Catholick King went to Zaragcça, raised Men, and constituted The French in Roussillon. D. Frederick de Toledo, Duke of Alva, General of Russillon. Some were for perswading the King to be before-hand with the Enemy, and invade France. The distrust conceived against the King and Queen of Navarre daily increased, all that Family being of the French Interest, insomuch that the Lord of Vannes, Brother to the King, served under them at Naples, and his Father, the Lord d' Albret, was now made Governour of Guienne. Beside the Lord of Lusse intended to enter into the Valley of Anfo, which is part of Aragon, to attack the Castle of Verdun, and this could not be done without he were suffered to pass through Val de Roncal belonging to Navarre. That King endeavoured to clear himself, and had to that purpose sent his Daughter Magdalen to be bred under Queen Elizabeth, but this was now a small tie, be∣cause this same year was born to him a Son called Henry, who inherited that Crown. Upon this suspicion Queen Elizabeth ordered the Constable of Castile, and Duke of Najara, with their own Forces, and 500 Horse she sent, to draw near the Frontiers of that Kingdom, tho John de Ribera who commanded there before, was putting all things into the best posture he could, no body doubting but the War would break out on that side. So it proved, for the King of France with all his Forces, which amounted to 20000 Men, tho the strength of them consisted in 10000 Foot and 1000 Horse, resolv'd to invade Roussillon, believing he should find no sufficient Force there to oppose him. About the end of August the Mareschal de Rieux having assembled all these Forces, incamped on the Borders of Roussillon at a Place called Palma. There they stayed some days, and then marched towards Salsas, the Foot over the Mountain, the Horse through the Plain, leaving the Passes guarded lest our Forces should cut off their Provisions that came from France. On the 16th of September they sate down before Salsas. The Duke of Alva was then at Perpignan with 1000 Light Horse, 500 Men at Arms, and 6000 Foot. Next day after he came D. Sancho de Castilla, who Com∣manded there before, threw himself into Salsas. Some of the Dukes Parties went out to view the Enemies Camp and allarm them, the Duke himself came out of Perpignan, and en∣camped at Rabaltas, above Sallas and the French Army. There was no coming at him there by reason of the strength of the place, and he was ready to lay hold of any Advantage should be offered, yet he offered Battle, which was too much boldness considering how much weaker he was than the Enemy, but he had much the advantage of the Ground. Whilst the French lay before Salsas, the Cardinals at Rome were shut up in the Conclave to choose a new Pope. There were many Candidates. The Cardinal of Roan was strongly supported by the French, and the Cardinal Bernardin de Carvajall no less by the Great Captain. Yet nei∣ther of them, nor the Cardinal Peter Julia de Robere, nor he of Naples who also made Inte∣rest, carried it, tho they stayed the Election 35 days. The Cardinals agreed, that whoso∣ever was chosen Pope should be obliged within two years to assemble a General Council, and that one should be called every 3 years ever after to Reform all Abuses. To this all the Car∣dinals Swore, and then by Plurality of Voices made choice of Francis Picolomini Cardinal of Pius III. Elected Pope. Siena, who had the Reputation of a Pious Man. He was Elected on the 22th of September, and took the Name of Pius III. in Honour of his Uncle by the Mothers side, Pope Pius II. His first Thoughts were to Reform the Church and State, which he declared before his Co∣ronation, resolving to call a General Council immediately. But Death snatching him away 26 days after his Election, put a stop to all his Virtuous Designs. CHAP. II. The French besiege Saulses, or as the Spaniards call it Salsas; The Siege raised; Nine∣teen Sail of Infidels destroyed; Pope Pius III. dies; Julius II. Chosen; The French Army marches through Italy, Two Defeats given them. AT Salsas, or as the French call it Saulses, they battered the Castle so furiously, at the same time carrying on their Mines, that they overthrew a large space of the great Tower and Progress of the Siege of Saulses. Bulwark that was not quite finished. Thus the Ditch being filled up, they made their Ap∣proaches to the Wall. The Besieged resolved to quit the Bulwark, which when they saw co∣vered with the Enemy, they blew up, and sallying upon such as had escaped that danger put them to the Sword, so that above 400 perished. Fresh Forces still resorting to the Duke of Alva, his Army was now increased to 400 Men at Arms, 1500 Horse, and 10000 Foot. With this Power on the 13th of October he marched down, and stood till Sun-set before the French Camp. The Enemy would not leave their Works tho our Cannon played upon them, and did some Execution. At this time the Catholick King came to Girona, to gather the Forces that were coming from Castile, no fewer in number than those at Perpignan, and bet∣ter Armed. He gave out he would attack the French in their Works, if they refused to march out. A Fleet was also provided under the Command of Estopin̄an for the Coast of Roussillon,
but was not yet come. Whilst the King drew all his Forces to that part, 19 Sail of Moors Ninetten Sail of Infidels destroyed. took the opportunity to do some harm upon the Coasts of Valencia and Granada. Martin Her∣nandez Galindo, Admiral of the Coast of Granada, met them near Cartagena, where after a hot Dispute they were all burnt or sunk. This Joyful News being brought to the King, he set out from Girona, and came to Perpignan on the 19th of October. There understanding the Distress of the Besieged, he resolved that part of his Army should attack the French on the side next to France, and the rest on the opposite part. For the better effecting of it, he first assaulted and took a Wooden Fort the French had raised to secure the passage into France. The loss of that Fort, and approach of the King, so dismayed the Enemy, that they drew off their Artillery that night to the Road of Narbonne, and the day following marched off, Siege of Saulses raised. leaving part of their Baggage and Ammunition. At first they came down into the Plain, as if they had designed to fight, but immediately wheeled off towards Narbonne. The Arago∣nian and Catalonian Horse falling in upon their Rear, made them abandon some of their Artil∣lery and Baggage, yet tho the King came up in Person, the Enemy having their Retreat near at hand got off. The King entring France, took Leocata and some other Places about it. On the 24th of October was born at Lisbon the Princess Elizabeth, afterwards Empress and Queen of Spain. Soon after came Ambassadors from France, by whom a Truce was concluded for 5 Months betwixt the two Kings, exclusive of Naples. Thus the War ceasing, the Marquess de Denia was left to Command on those Frontiers with 1000 Men at Arms, 2000 Light Horse, and 3000 Foot. D. Dinas de Requesens was made Governor of Salsas, and then the King re∣turned to Barcelona. Thence he sent Michael John Gralla, and Antony Augustin, his Ambassa∣dors into France, to endeavour to settle the Affairs of Naples, for which the Catholick King was in Care, because Supplies were going thither from France, but chiefly because upon the Death of Pope Pius III. the Cardinal of S. Peter had been Elected Pope on the first of No∣vember by the Name of Julius II. He was by Birth a Genoese, but in Assection a Frenchman, Julius II. Pope. and it was feared lest he should embroil all Italy. Duke Valentin had influenced this Election. At this time the Archduke departed out of Savoy to see his Father, who advised him not to press the observation of the Peace he concluded with France. He also offered if the Catho∣lick King would furnish him with Money, to make War in Lombardy, but the Catholick King reposing no great Confidence in him, time was delayed, and nothing concluded. It be∣gan now plainly to appear that the Princess Joanna was distracted, which much troubled her Parents. She pressed to be gone to her Husband, and her Mother put her off with good Words, because the Season was not proper. It came to that, that she offered to depart a∣foot from Mota de Medina, where she was kept. No way was left to stop her, but taking up the Draw-bridge. She perceiving she could not get away, stayed at the Farriers, and there eat, and lay in a Kitchin, not regarding the Coldness of the Weather, and inconveniency of the place. Neither could D. John de Fonseca, Bishop of Cordova, who was with her, or the Archbishop of Toledo, who came on purpose, prevail with her to return to her Chamber, till the Queen came, who was sick at Segovia. To please her she ordered a Fleet to be Rig∣ged at Laredo, to carry her as soon as the Weather would permit to Flanders, whither her Hus∣band the Archduke was come, after his long stay in France and Savoy. The French Army in Italy marched very slowly towards Naples. They marched through French Army marches through Italy. Florence and Siena without any let, under the Command of the Marquess of Mantua. The Lord de la Trimouille being sick followed after, but went no farther than Rome. That City would not admit the French, but suffered them to pass the River Tiber at the Bridge called Molle, which is two miles from thence. The Great Captain was in care how to continue the Siege of Gaeta, and oppose those Forces that came to relieve it. Francis de Rojas, the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, very opportunely supplied him with 2000 Spanish, German, and Italian Foot, he gathered in that City, and 100 Light Horse, and made up 200 Germans and 500 Italians to send after the others. D. Hugo de Moncada, who had been in the Service of Duke Valentin, led these Men. This Supply came very opportunely, because the Siege of Salsas hindred any Succours coming from Spain. As soon as the Great Captain understood the Enemy approached to the Borders of the Kingdom, he marched with all his Army from Ca∣stellan towards them. The first day he came to the River Garellano, and leaving Peter de Paz with a Party to secure a Pass there, advanced himself to S. German. Then the French Army lay at Pontecorvo, a Town of the Church only 6 miles off. It was reported they were 1000 Curassiers, 2000 Light Horse, and 9000 Foot, most of them Italians. They had 36 Pieces of Cannon, whereof 16 were large, the rest Field Pieces. Peter Navarro advanced with a Body to attack the Castle of Montecasino, which still held for the French. It was carried by main force, to the great shame of the French, who lay in sight, and durst not relieve it. It was given out the Duke of Mantua used to boast, he desired nothing more than to come to a Battle with that Rabble. The Great Captain encamped within a mile of him, and then sent to offer him Battle, since he was so desirous of it. He answered they would meet at Garel∣lano, which River he would pass in despight of him. This River has its Springs in Abruzzo, and runs between S. German and the Lands of the Church in a narrow Channel, but so deep it is scarce fordable. There was no Bridge thereabouts but that of Pontecorvo. It has many great wandings, and therefore tho Gaeta stands on the Bank next to Rome, the shortest way to Relieve it was by passing the River twice. The Lord of Alegre came from Gaeta to join the
French Army with about 3000 Men. He pressed for passing the River and fighting, not tak∣ing warning by the last Battle at Cirinola. They passed the River at the Ford of Ceprano about the middle of October. Rocaseca was the first Spanish Town they came at after passing the River. Christopher Villalva Pizarro, and Zamudio, were there in Garison with 1200 Men. With these Troops they fell upon the Rear of the French, and cut off 300 of them. The French laid siege to the Town, but the Defendants sallying killed above 200, and drove the rest to their Works. Next day Prosper Colona, and Peter Navarro, reinforced the Town with 3000 Men, the Great Captain marching with all his Army to their Relief, but the Enemy fearing if any disaster befell them, to lose their Cannon, and the Weather being very Rainy, repassed the River. Two days after they passed again, and incamped at Aquino, 6 miles from S. German, whither the Great Captain was returned. The great Rain hindred them coming to a Battle, and the French drew back to Pancorvo. The Great Captain to prevent their re∣passing the River, followed till beyond Aquino, and bid them Battle. They drew into an ad∣vantageous Post with their Cannon, and the Spaniards were forced to return to S. German. The French repassed the River Garellano. At the same time the Ursini agreed with the Colo∣neses at Rome to come over to the Service of Spain by means of the Spanish and Venetian Am∣bassadors. For the Venetians were not fond of having such a Powerful Neighbour as the King of France. The Ursini obliged themselves to serve with 500 Men at Arms, for which they were to have a Pension of 6000 Duccats. Bartholomew de Albiano, chief of the Ursini, who was in all the Service at Garellano, offered to serve with 3000 Horse and Foot. Fabricius Co∣lona took Roea de Vandra in sight of the French Army, which marched down the River to a place 18 miles from S. German, and but 12 from Gaeta, where is a Bridge which they designed to pass. Peter de Paz, left to guard that Pass, with 1200 Foot and a few Horse, 200 other Horse having since joined him, made it good against the French Army 3 days and 3 nights. By this time the Great Captain came up with all his Army, and firing a part of the Bridge, Mutiny in the Spanish Army. which was of Wood, incamped at the foot of it. Here was great disorder among the Spa∣niards, who because the Weather was bad, and they not payed, robbed the Country, and many deserted, insomuch that the great Officers advised to draw off. It went so far, that a Private Centinel put the Spear of his Pike to the Great Captain's Breast. He bore all with great Resolution, and gathering what Money he could, gave every Man Two Duccats, and to the Captains who pressed him to retire he answered, I know of what Moment the Business in Hand is to the King, and am resolved rather to gain one fathom of Ground, tho it were to make my Grave in, than to give way, tho to live 100 years. This Dispute must be here ended, as it shall please God, and let no Man gainsay it. The Colonels chiefly pressed to retire, and were there∣fore suspected to hold Intelligence with the French. Many fled from the Spanish Camp, which was much weakned. Hereupon the French laid a Bridge over the River, and above 1500 of them passing, by surprize drove the Spaniards from one of their Intrenchments. The Camp, which consisted of a small number of Horse, and 5000 Foot, taking the Alarm, the great Captain mounted to range his Men. That done, he alighted, and taking a Halberd in his Hand, was the first that charged the Enemy. About 5000 of them were already over, and Defeat of the French. the rest continued to pass, their Cannon playing upon our Men from the other side of the River. Nevertheless the Spanish Foot charged with such fury, that they obliged the Enemy to turn their Backs, and fly towards the Bridge. About 1400 were killed and drowned in the flight. The Great Captain not regarding the Enemies Cannon, came to the foot of the Bridge, and some of his Men passed over among the French, but in their Retreat sustained some loss from the Enemies Cannon, some Men of Note being killed, and others wounded. Captain Zamudio among the rest was dangerously hurt. Nothing is more admirable than the Valour of the Ensign Ferdinand de Illescas, who having his Right Hand shot off, held the Co∣lours Notable Valour of a Spani∣ord. with his Left, and that being also carried away, hugged them betwixt his Arms without stirring till the French were drove over the River. A Man worthy of Immortal Fame, and the great Rewards bestowed on him by the King at the Instance of the Great Captain. This Defeat so discouraged the French, that they guarded the Bridge narrowly, lest our Men should come over to them, not thinking themselves secure, tho the River was between them. Beside great Differences arising betwixt the Marquess of Mantua, and the Lord of Alegre, the former resolved to quit the Command of the Army, saying, he could not bear the Insolency of the French. In his stead, till their King's Pleasure were known, the Officers made choice of the Marquess de Saluzes, then Viceroy, to Command as General. The Great Captain, tho infe∣rior in number to the Enemy, resolved to pass the River and fight them. To this purpose he ordered a Bridge of Boats to be laid over the River, 7 miles above that the French had made. Bartholomew de Albiano had this given in Charge. As soon as the Bridge was finished, he set out from Sessa on the 28th of December, and passed the River with 2000 Spanish and 1500 German Foot. He had left Orders with D. James de Mendoça, and Ferdinand de Andrada, to gather all the Horse which was quartered thereabouts, and be with him by break of day. As soon as the Spaniards had passed the River, the French quitted their Camp, and retired to the top of a Hill. Sui and Castelforte, held by the French upon the River, surrendred. That night our Army lay incamped before Monforte, and the next day marched down by the River to fight the Enemy. The French sent Peter de Medicis to carry part of the Artillery in Boats to Gaeta. Being come to the mouth of the River, tho the Water was rough, he would attempt to cross
it, but the Boats with the Cannon were sunk, and he drowned. The French Army an hour before day abandoning their Bridge, Heavy Cannon, Tents, and part of the Baggage, made haste to get into Mola, which is near Gaeta. The Great Captain understanding the way they Defeat of the French again. took, sent before Prosper Colona with the Light Horse to stay them till the Foot could come up. Being come to the Bridge of Mola the Fight began, but lasted not long, for the Enemy soon fled. Our Men pursued them close at the Heels up to the very Gates of Mola and Gaeta, where part of the Enemy saved themselves. Many were killed by the way. They lost 32 Pieces of Cannon and 1500 Horses. Such of the French as fled towards Fundi, and others that were quartered thereabouts, were killed or taken by the Country People, who rose and secured all the Passes, so that very few of them escaped. Bartholomew de Alvinao and D. Hugo de Moncada gave Proof of their Valour in this Action, and during the whole time it was in Hand. CHAP. III. The City Gaeta surrendred; A Truce betwixt France and Spain; The Prefect of Rome submits to Spain; The Nobility of Naples swear Allegiance to Spain, and several Cities of Italy sue for its Protection; Truce for Three years betwixt France and Spain. THE Great Captain would gladly have made use of the Confusion the French were in to Gaeta sur∣rendred to the Great Captain. have possessed himself of Mount Orlando, which Commands Gaeta, but the Rain was so violent, and the Souldiers so weary and spent with Hunger, not having eaten that day or the night before, that he was forced to return to his former Camp at Castellon. It was agreed by the French to fortifie themselves in Mola with their Field pieces, believing that would be the first Place attacked, but the Great Captain having refreshed his Men, to make his advantage of the Enemies Consternation, marched directly to Gaeta. Very little Defence was made at the Mount, where our Cannon had before made a Breach, and the Garison had scarce time to retire into the City. Here they lost what had been saved in the Fight, 1000 Horses were taken, and two Pieces of Cannon that did us all the mischief the first Siege. What is more, the French were quite dismayed, especially when they saw the Spaniards intrench themselves under the Works of the Town, 50 Men at Arms commanded by the Earl of Mirandula, came out of the Town, and surrendred themselves. That same night 3 Deputies came out from the Marquess de Saluzzes, to Treat of a surrender. Their first Demand was to have the Pri∣soners Ransomed, which was denied them. Then they offered to deliver up the City and Castle of Gaeta, the Rock of Mondragon, and all the Spanish and Italian Prisoners they had, in Exchange for the French and Italian Prisoners on our side. This Proposal was not disagreeable to the Great Captain, yet he would not consent to felease the Italians, particularly the Mar∣quess of Bitonto, Mathew de Aquaviva, and Alonso de Sanseverino, Cousin to the Earl of Bisinia∣no, whom he intended wholly to put into the Hands of the Catholick King. After some De∣bate, the French abandoned the Italians, and on the first of January, 1504, it was agreed, That the Lord of Aubigni, and the other French, should be discharged; and that as to the Ita∣lians the Catholick King should not Execute any of them till such time as the King of France could send Ambassadors to intercede for them. The Souldiers were to depart with their Arms and Baggage. The Citizens of Gaeta to be no way molested, nor the Inhabitants of any other Place for having sided with the French. Upon this Agreement such as were to go by Sea began immediately to imbark. Theodore Trivulcio marched out with the French and Italians that were to go by Land. This done, on the 3d of January the City and Castle were delivered up, and the Prisoners on our side released. The Government of the City and Castle was given to Luis de Herrera, as he had well deserved. His Command of Lieutenant of Taranto was conferred on Peter Hernandez de Nicuessa. Two days after the Surrender came thither the Lord of Aubigni, and about 1200 French Prisoners. Aubigni went presently aboard, the rest were conducted by Land, but most of them died by the way, as did the Marquess de Saluzzes at Genoa. The Sieur de la Palisse had before been Exchanged for D. Antony de Cardona. This D. Antony served very well, as did his Brothers, wherefore the Catholick King gave him Padula, which had belonged to the Earl of Caparlo, and created him Marquess thereof. Someblamed the Great Captain for giving such Advantageous Terms, but he had Reasons enough to justifie his Proceedings, the chief were want of Money to pay his Men, who he feared might again Mutiny; Then that the Pope was wholly Devoted to the French; And lastly, the Treaty about Restoring King Frederick, which did the Spaniards an incredible diskindness. For such as were of the Spanish Faction were discouraged, and their Adversaires took Heart, besides none of the Revenue was payed in, every one waiting to pay it to King Frederick if he returned. Thus the Wants of the Army daily increased. Therefore Gaeta being reduced, before any Change should happen the Duke of Termes was sent to Govern Abruzzo, and bring under the Estate of the Marquess de Bitonto in that Province. Bartholomew de Albiano against Luis de Arsi, who fortified Venosa. Against the Earl of Conversano, went the Earl of Matera, and Peter de Paz. Giles Nieto, and Peter Navarro, besieged the Earl of Capacho in Laurino, and gave him leave to depart with his Wife, and Children, and Equipage, to Trana, held by
the Venetians, but he was to leave the Cattle, Cannon and Amunition. In Galabria, Gomez de Solis took all the Dominions of the Prince of Rosano, except the City Rosano and Sanseverino, the first of which was Besieged. The Great Captain designed to Invade the Lands of the Prefect of Rome in the Kingdom of Naples, which he prevented by submitting them to the Prefect of Rome sub∣mits to Spain. Crown of Spain, wherewith the Great Captain was satisfied, tho' he knew him to be in his Heart a Frenchman, and only to submit to necessity. Rosano was at last delivered up by the Townsmen, and in it the Prince and several Barons were made Prisoners. Sanseverino soon after did the same. Peter de Paz took Conversano by Storm. Thus all Calabria was reduced, and D. Hugo de Moncada was appointed Governor of it, in the Place of the Earl of Ayelo, grown unfit by reason of his great Age. Having settled the Affairs of Gaeta and ordered it to be Inhabited by Spaniards, to save the great charge of a Garrison; the Great Captain went away to Naples, where he was Nobility of Naples swear Fi∣delity to Spain. received with such applause as if he had been their King who had returned Victorious. Thither he summoned the Barons, & Councels, because many, tho' they had submitted to Spain, had not yet taken the Oath of Fidelity. Such as had served well, he gratified and reward∣ed, particularly, Bartholomew de Alviano to whom in the Principality of Bisignano he assigned 8000 Ducats a Year, and 2200 among his Kindred,, according to every Mans merits. These favours done to the Ursini, so nettled the Coloneses, that Prosper Colona went to Spain to complain, and have the Government altered, and Fabricius sent from Rome to ask leave to serve the Florentines, which was granted, least he should have taken it, and so the Breach had been the greater. His chief care was to reestablish the Administration of Justice, much de∣praved by the late Confusions. He endeavoured to raise some Supplies of Money to help defray the past Expences, and pay the Forces he was to keep on Foot, which he Quartered about, as might be least offensive to the People. Some Companies of Spaniards whom he knew to be Insolent and Injurious he sent away to Spain in Two Ships. He forgot not to repair the harms done during the War, and particularly the Walls of Naples, and Gasto. Capua he secured with such Works as made it stronger than if it had been Walled. These things he did to be in a readiness, in case the Enemy should attempt any thing again, and all was easie to him by reason of the great reputation he had gained, not only in that Kingdom, Several Cities of Italy Sue for Pro∣tection of Spain. but throughout all Italy, so that many Cities offered to side with Spain. Genoa, both the Factions of the Adornos and Fregosos consenting, offered to revolt from the French, so they were supplied with 2000 Spaniards. Julian de Medicis Brother to Peter that was drowned in the River Garellano, promised 100000 Ducats a Year from himself and his Party, if he were re∣stored to Florence, whence at present he was Banished. The Council of Pisa to avoid falling again into the Hands of the Florentines, proposed either to submit themselves wholly to the Catholick King, or to put themselves under his Protection. The City Areço rather than continue subject to the Florentines made the same offers. The Lord of Plombin, a City, tho' small, yet of great importance for the defence of the Kingdom, put himself under the Pro∣tection of Spain. To be short, Pandolfo Petrucci and Paul Ballon made the same Overtures for themselves and their Cities of Siena and Perusa. Even in the City of Milan, 600 of the Ci∣tizens offered their Service, if he would attempt to Conquer that Dukedom. All these practices were at an end by the Truce concluded in France by the Ambassadors Gralla and An∣tony Augustin, for Three Years, the Kingdom of Naples included. The Catholick King Swore to observe it at Mejorada about the end of January. One of the Articles was, that Truce for 3 Years betwixt France and Spain. the said Truce should be Proclaimed at Naples on the 25th of February, which was not per∣formed because the Great Captain would first have it made known to such as were still in Rebellion. The Prince of Rosano would not admit of it; but because the Commendary Solis on that score did not press Rosano, he with his Forces sate down before Cherinthia, where he did much harm. Luis de Arsi, tho' he admitted the Truce, drove the Cattle of Andria and Barletta, and took what Prisoners he could. Our Commanders said, that notwithstand∣ing the Truce they might punish such of the Barons as committed any Insult after it, and therefore pressed both them we have spoken of. Venosa with its Castle was easily taken, be∣cause Luis de Arsi left it unprovided, when he retired thence to Trana, and thence to France, which in a Bravado he did with Colours flying and Beat of Drum. Thus only Six Towns in that Kingdom, and those remote from the Sea, were left to the French. The King of France pretended that all that was taken after the day appointed for proclaiming the Truce, ought to be restored, as unlawfully gained, and suspected the Delay of proclaiming had been advisedly contrived to that purpose. On the other side it was guessed, he never intended to observe the Truce, and had only contrived it to have the better Opportunity of taking the Spaniards at an Advantage, which might well be believed, because at the same time he had appointed John James Trivulcio his General in Italy, besides 5000 Swissers and 500 Horse were daily expected out of France, under the Command of the Lords of Aubigni and Alegre, and the Marquess of Mantua and Duke of Ferrara raised all the Forces they could in Italy. At the same time the Great Captain was dangerously sick, which with the Report spread abroad of Re-establishing king Frederick, and the Pope's soliciting to have him General of the French Forces, gave occasion to People to discourse variously of matters of State, and particu∣larly the Coloneses took the Liberty to utter some bold Speeches. All was again appeased by the Recovery of the Great Captain, who pesently appyled himself to make all the necessary Prepa∣tions
for a mighty War, which was expected would break out again in that Kingdom. All Italy and Spain suffered very much this Year by Famine, and on the 5th of April being Good Great Fa∣mine, and Earth-quakes. Friday, there were great Earth-quakes in Castile and Andaluzia, which overthrew many Build∣ings. The greatest harm was done in some Towns on the Banks of the River Guadalquivir. Lope Soarez de Albergaria Sailed from Lisbon with a good Fleet for India. This same Year the Catholick King gave the Office of Lord High Steward to D. Bernard de Sandoval, y Rojas Marquess of Denia, of whose Family, because often mention is made, it will not be from the purpose to set down the latter part of their Genealogy. Ferdinand Gutierrez de Sandoval, who is said to have been chief Commendary of Castile, was Father to D. James Gomez de Sando∣val, first Earl of Castro and Lord Lieutenant of Castile, his Eldest Son was Ferdinand, the Fa∣ther of D. James Gomez de Sandoval, whom King Ferdinand Created Marquess of Denia. His Son was D. Bernard, who we said was made Lord High Steward to the same King Ferdinand, in which place he continued even after the King's death, to Queen Joanna. D. Bernard had by his Wife the Lady Frances Enriquez Four Sons and Six Daughters. He had also a Ba∣stard Son, who for his good Parts came to be Archbishop of Sevil. Luis Eldest Son to D. Bernard was Father to Francis Earl of Lerma, who died before him, but left a Son called D. Francis Gomez de Sandoval who came to be Duke of Lerma, and a Cardinal, of whom we shall speak in another Place. D. Ferdinand Youngest Son to the said Marquess had many Children, and among them D. Bernard de Rojas y Sandoval Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, to whom that Church is obliged for restoring to it the Lieutenancy of Caęorla, after it had been many Years Alienated. CHAP. IV. Perfidiousness of Duke Valentin, who is as perfidiously sent into Spain by the Great Captain contrary to his promise, and he ill represented to the King; Projects of Peace betwixt France and Spain come to nothing. THE Vnetians after the death of Pope Alexander, had possessed themselves of several Cities in Romania, and aimed at the rest. Duke Valentin being no way able to oppose Perfidi∣ousness of Duke Va∣lentin. them; agreed to deliver such Forts as remained in his power to Pope Julius, who sent one Peter de Oviedo to take possession; but the Duke changing his Mind, gave private Orders to his Lieutenant at Cesana to Hang the said Peter. He did so, whereupon the Pope Arrested the Duke, till he should cause the Places to be delivered. It was agreed that till the Surrender of the Towns, he should be in Custody of the Cardinal Bernardine de Carvajal at Ostiá, which performed, the Pope was to furnish him with Two Gallies to go over to France. As soon as the Great Captain had notice of it, he sent Lezcano to Ostia to the Cardinal to ad∣vise him to perswade the Duke to go to Naples, that so that Boutefeu might do no more mis∣chief. The Cardinal having promised to use his endeavours, Lescano gave him the Great Captains safe Conduct. Mean while the Towns were delivered, and then the Duke at the perswasion of the Cardinal went to Naples, and delivered himself up to the Great Captain, who entertained him nobly. But he being a restless Spirit, and well beloved by the Soldie∣ry, as soon as he came to Naples contrived to send Men and Money to Relieve the Castle of Forli, which still held for him. He also meditated how to make himself Master of Plombin, Perosa and Pisa, tho' under the Protection of the Catholick King, and endeavour∣ed to debauch the Spanish and German Troops with great offers he made to them. The Great Captain understanding of it took care to disappoint his Designs. The Duke had laid Horses to make his escape from Naples, knowing the King of France had sent the Marquess of Final to Ostia, on purpose to draw him to his Service. To prevent his Escape, the Great Captain ordered him to be secured in Castlenovo, tho' the Pope demanded he should be sent back to Ostia, since the Castle of Forli was not delivered; but at length by the Pro∣curement of the Great Captain that Place submitted to him. Soon after the Great Captain The great Captain contrary to his faith given, sends Duke Va∣lentln into Spain. resolved D. Antony de Cardona, and Lezcano should carry the Duke to Spain to prevent far∣ther troubles in Italy. Most Men blamed the great Captain, as guilty of breach of Faith, in Confining and sending the Duke to Spain, and the Catholick King at first was sorry it was done. But the Great Captain had more regard to the common Good, than to his own Ho∣nour. The King of France was much concerned at the Dukes Imprisonment, as believing he should have a want of him, and as soon as he was informed of his being sent to Spain, said, From hence forwards the Word of the Spaniards, and the Faith of the Carthaginians may go together, since they are alike in all things. At this time the King and Queen of Navarre had sent a solemn Embassy to Castile, to propose a Match betwixt Henry d' Albret their Son, and Prince of Viana, and Elizabeth 2d Daughter to the Archduke. At first the Catholick King and Queen willingly harkned to this Treaty, as the proper means to secure themselves on the side of Navarre, which gave them no small Trouble; and the more for that the Princess Magdalen of Navarre who was kept by them in the nature of a Hostage for performance of the former Treaty, died soon after at Medina del Campo. D. John Manuel the Catholick King's Ambas∣sador
at the Emperor's Court, by the Archduke's Order went to Flanders. He was after∣wards very great with that Prince, and for the present it was Ordered that all Affairs relating to Spain should be communicated to him, which was more pleasing to the Emperor, who hoped by his means to compose some Differences he had with Son, than to the Catholick King, who pressed to have his Grandson Prince Charles brought to Spain for many reasons that moved him to it. The Emperor and Archduke delayed his coming, being desirous to conclude the Match betwixt him and Claudia, Daughter to the King of France, believing this to be the surest way to compose all the Differences then on Foot betwixt Spain, France and Bur∣gundy. Besides the King of France offered that the Estates of Orleans, Britany, Milan and Bur∣gundy should swear to them as lawful Successors, and offered to give what Security should be demanded for the Performance. The Queen, Mother to the Bride had rather she should be Married to Francis de Valois Duke of Angoulesme, who was Heir to the Crown, and would no ways suffer such large Dominions to be Alienated from it, unless they were immediately delivered up, which could not be done. In the midst of all his Prosperity and Honour acquired, the Great Captain was not free from Troubles and Crosses; for there are never wanting some who endeavour to undermine The great Captain ill repre∣sented to the King. and ensnare those whom they see Rise above themselves, and Princes commonly pay Services with Ingratitude, when they are greater than can easily be recompenced. It was impossible to satisfie all that had Served in that War, for every one values his own Merits at a greater Rate than he ought. Such as were dissatisfied, either went themselves to Spain to complain, or sent their Grievances in Writing, and were perhaps better admitted than they ought to have been. Many Articles were exhibited against the Great Captain, the chief were, That he had assisted the Cardinal Julian de Rouere to obtain the Papacy, as appeared by a Letter intercepted from the said Cardinal, promising great things if he would support him. The Truth is that the Great Captain favoured Cardinal Bernardin de Carvajal, and the Am∣bassador Francis de Rojas the Cardinal of Naples who had promised him a Cardinals Cap, but neither of them coming up, malicious Men charged the Election upon those who had no hand in it. His next charge was, that the Soldiers committed many Insolencies, and were not punished, which rendred the Spaniards odious to the People, and might be the cause of some disorder. He answered, he could not commend the Virtue of those People, most of them being such as Spain for their Villanies could no longer endure, and had been necessitated to disburden it self of them. Yet that the chief cause of their Disorders was want of Pay, and that it was rather to be admired they had been so much under Command having suffered so much, especially at Garellano and Gaeta, where 14 Months Pay was due to them, and yet no Mutiny happened. That nevertheless no Man committed a Crime, but he was punished, tho' in time of War it was impossible to prevent all disorders. His Third Accusation was, that the Revenue was lavished, since that which was great, together with the Confiscations amounting to vast Sums did not suffice to pay the Army, and that no Ac∣count could be given of the Money sent him from Spain. This last was the Fault of Francis Suarez the Paymaster and other his Officers, who had the Receiving and Laying out of that Money. The Revenue of Naples did not exceed 450000 Ducats, and the Pay of the Army in one Year came to 800000. As for Confiscations, there could not so much be made of them as was imagined, because the greatest Part was spent in Gratifications to those that had Served well. Hence sprung the chief Article exhibited against him, which was, that he gave away Towns, Estates, and Commands as if they were his own, and presented the Clergy to the Pope for Benefices, a Prerogative only pertaining to the King, and not to his Lieutenant. They also alledged he did not put in execution the King's Grants, as appeared in the Case of John Claver whom he kept out of the Estate of Alonso de Sanseverino, given him by the King, as he had done in other Cases. That at least he ought to have given his Reasons for suspending those Grants, if there were any. There is no doubt but in this par∣ticular the Great Captain was to blame; but perhaps his Meaning might be good, tho' the times would not bear it. These Articles were urged and much aggravated by the Coloneses, and particularly by Prosper Colona, who went to Spain purposely to complain, and endea∣vour the Great Captain should be removed. His greatest Grievance was, that Bartholomew de Albiano had been better Rewarded than either he or his Brother. The Great Captain ad∣vised the Catholick King to satisfie Prosper, yet so as not to wrong the Ursini, because it concerned him much to bind both those Families to his Service. In fine, the Complaints against the Great Captain were so urged, that the King resolved to send Alonso Deza, one of the Queens Servants to him, to lay before him all the Heads of his Accusation, and charge him for the future to take Care that the Revenue should be prudently managed, that the Soldiery should be kept under, the greatest part whereof he Ordered to be drawn away to serve in the War he designed to make in Africk. The Administration of Justice he Ordered to be reduced to the ancient Form; and that John Baptista de Espinelo should not execute the Office of Conservator, that Name being very odious in the Kingdom. In short, that he should not intermeddle with any thing farther than belonged to the Authority of a Viceroy. This last Article highly offended the Great Captain, thinking it a great Indignity that he who had Conquered the Kingdom with so much Glory, and obtained so many Victories, should be d up to the common Rules of other Governors. It also perplexed him that the Lieute∣tenancy
of Castelnovo which he had conferred upon Nun̄o de Ocampo was given without his knowledge to Luis Peixo. In France there was a Discourse of changing the Truce into a Peace. It was also proposed to restore King Frederick, which the Catholick King was not averse to, provided the Duke of Calabria would Marry Joanna Queen of Naples his Niece. The King of France would have him Marry Germana de Faux his Niece, in case that King were Reestablished; but he rather inclined to the other proposal of marrying Charles Son to the Archduke, with Claudia his Daughter. Some Months were spent in these Debates. The King of France would refer the matter to the Pope, and the King of Spain would have the Cardinals joined with the Pope. In short, they agreed in nothing. The greatest Dif∣ficulty was in restoring the Barons of the French Faction, for the King of France solemnly Engaged when the Princes of Salerno, Bisignano and Melfi came to him, not to make Peace with Spain, unless they were restored to their Estates. After much Canvassing the matter, without coming to any Agreement, and the News coming that Pisa had declared for Spain, the King of France in a Rage ordered the Spanish Ambassadors Gralla and Antony Augustin to depart the Court. They visited the Queen and Legate, and the next day had a Con∣ference with King Frederick, assuring him of the Catholick King's good-will towards him, and telling him he might by the Management of Affairs perceive whose fault it was, that he was not Restored to his Kingdom. This done, they took their way towards Spain on the 26th of August. CHAP. . V The League betwixt the Emperor, the Archduke, and King of France; The League against the Venetians; The death of King Frederick of Naples, and Queen Elizabeth of Ca∣stile; Contention about the Government of Castile betwixt King Ferdinand and King Philip; Treaties with France. ONE of the principal Causes of removing the Spanish Ambassadors was, that they might not hinder the proceedings towards a League Offensive and Defensive soon The Em∣peror, Archduke and King of France join in League. after Concluded on the 22th of September, betwixt the Emperor, the Archduke his Son, and the King of France. The principal Articles were, That the Emperor should attempt nothing against the Dukedom of Milan, or any other State then in League with France, but should pardon all Offences by them committed against the Empire since King Charles passed the Alpes till that day. That if for the future they failed of their Duty, he might Punish them, and the King of France should not Protect them. That the Investiture of Milan should within 3 Months be given to the King of France for him and his Heirs, he paying 200000 Livers for the same. That the King of France should come to no Agreement with the Ca∣tholick King about the Kingdom of Naples without the Emperor's Consent, and in case the Catholick King would not be brought to Composition, the Emperor should assist the King of France to Recover that Kingdom. That Lands and Revenues should be assigned in France to the Children of Luis Sforcia last Duke of Milan, whensoever they would go thither. That all those who were fled thence should be restored to their Estates, and the King's favour. Four months were allowed the Catholick King to come into the League, upon Condition he should resign all his Right to the Kingdom of Naples, to Charles his Grandson, on the Terms before proposed; and that each of the Allies should have 3 Months allowed him to bring his Confederates into the League. It much disgusted the Catholick King, and most Men observed that neither the Emperor, nor the Archduke named him among their Allies. This League was managed openly, but under Hand another was agreed upon betwixt the same Princes and the Pope, on pretence of Uniting their Forces against the Turks, but the real design was against the Venetians. Each of those Princes pretended that Seigneury wrongfully detained several Towns of theirs, which now they proposed to Recover by Force. A mighty Storm threatned that State, whereof Lawrence Suarez de Figueroa gave them notice, designing to draw them to join with Spain. The Enemy was Powerful, and League a∣gainst the Venetians. the Catholick King much Exhausted, for it appeared by his Books that he had already re∣turned above 331 Millions for the Charge of that War in Italy. (F. Mariana names not what these Millions were of, I guess them to be of Maravedies, which will amount to above 160000 Pounds Sterling, a vast Sum in those days.) The Venetians would not believe any thing of that League, and were resolved to stand Neuters, and take Party with that Side which proved strongest. At the same time they held Intelligence with the Soldan of Egypt, for hindring the Portugues Trade in India, which totally Ruined theirs at Alexandria. To this effect they sent an Ambassador to the Soldan, and Founders to cast Guns, as also Shipwrights to build Ships after our manner, and a great quantity of Mettal to be sent forward to Calicut, the chief Mart of the East for Spice, to the intent that King might drive the Portugueses out of those Seas. They also proposed to the Catholick King to be Mediator betwixt them and the Portugueses, for adjusting those Differences, which he refused, it being a matter not easily to be reconciled, the Interest of both Parties being so deeply concerned.
None of the Princes we have spoken of enjoyed any great Satisfaction. The Emperor was poor, and at variance with his Son. The Princess, Wife to the Archduke, was not in her Calami∣ties of Princes. right Senses. Queen Elizabeth laboured under a foul, tedious, and incurable Disease, which it was said would soon make an end of her. It was feared her Death would produce Troubles and change of Government. What Satisfaction could the King. of France have, seeing himself despoiled of a Kingdom he looked upon as his own? King Frederick ceased not to contrive ways how he might be restored. Seeing himself forsaken on all sides, Discontent cast him into an Ague, with which he returned from Blois to Tours his ordinary Residence. It grieved him to see there was no way left to reconcile the Kings of France and Spain; but above all, that his Son the Duke of Calabria was not a Man of those Parts as to wade through such Diffi∣culties. Hereupon towards his latter days, he wrote a Letter to him full of Fatherly Advice. Fortune so persecuted this unhappy King, that one night the House where he lay took fire, and he had much ado to escape naked with his Wife and Children. This Accident increased Frederick King of Naples dies his Sickness, of which he died in that City on the 9th of November. He left by his First Wife one Daughter married in France, and by the Second five Children, Elizabeth, Julia, Alonso, Caesar, and the Eldest of them all Ferdinand Duke of Calabria, who received the News of his Father's death at Medina del Campo, where the Court of Spain then was. Prosper Colona was sent by the King to give him the News, and comfort him. The King himself was then much afflicted on account of the Queen's Sickness, she being then in great danger. She pressed to have the Archduke and his Wife come into Spain, but the Archduke excused himself on ac∣count of the War he was engaged in against the Duke of Guelders. The truth was, he had no mind to come, and seemed not to value the Inheritance of such large Dominions. At length the Queen died on the 26th of November. She ordered her Body to be buried at Gra∣nada, where, because the Chapel designed for that Use was not finished, she was deposited in Elizabeth Queen of Spain dies. the Alhambra. By her Will she vacated some Grants prejudicial to the Crown, made at the beginning of her Reign. She declared the Marquisate of Moya had been given to D. Bernard de Conbera by her Consent, for his good Service. She also appointed the Princess Joanna and her Husband the Archduke her Heirs; but in case the Princess, by reason of her Indisposition, or for any other Cause, should not take upon her the Government, then, as had been before resolved in the Cortes, or Assembly of the Three Estates, King Ferdinand was to Govern till Prince Charles were 20 Years of Age. Besides the Administration of the Masterships of the Three Military Orders granted by the Pope to King Ferdinand, she left him half the Profits of the Islands and Continent newly discovered, and 10 Millions (of Maravedics) yearly, out of the Revenue arising in the Lands of the Three Masterships. Her Executors were the King, the Archbishop of Toledo, the Bishop of Palencia, Antony Fonseca and John Velasquez her Com∣ptrollers, and John Lopez de Lezarraga her Secretary. Notwithstanding the Queen's Will, there wanted not some who advised the King to enter upon the Government as Heir to the Crown, he being descended of the Male Line of the Kings of Castile, affirming this was his safest way; and that easing the People of some Burdens, he would be received with General Applause. However, the King, tho' offended at his Son-in-Law, and knowing the Incapa∣city of his Daughter, yet that very Afternoon appeared publickly on a Scaffold, and caused his Daughter Joanna to be proclaimed Queen of Castile, and the Archduke Philip King, as be∣ing her Husband. In all other Places only Queen Joanna was proclaimed, without making mention of the Archduke, on pretence that he ought first to swear he would preserve their Privileges, and not put Strangers into Publick Employments, which Queen Elizabeth had or∣dered in her Will. This Winter the Rains were so violent, that all the Corn was destroyed, and there ensued a great Famine. Upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, there arose Differences and Contention. King Fer∣didand, in pursuance to her Will, pretended to Govern Castile, Queen Joanna's Distraction Differen∣ces about the Go∣vernment of Castile. being so notorious, that she was shut up in Flanders. Two things he did to secure himself, one was, That he writ to the Archduke to acquaint him he would not be admitted into Ca∣stile, unless he brought his Wife with him to satisfie the People whether her Brain was really distempered or not. The other, That he assembled the Cortes at Toro. There on the 11th of January, 1505. Garcilasso de la Vega, Chief Commendary of Leon, who presided in the Assembly of the Three Estates having seen that Clause in the Queen's Will which related 1505. to the Succession and Government, solemnly swore Joanna Rightful Queen of Castile, and the Archduke her Husband King in her Right, and the Catholick King as Governour there∣of. Soon after the Queen's Distemper being made known, they made application to King Ferdinand to take upon him the Government. Letters were also sent into Flanders to the Arch∣duke pursuant to this Address. However, there ensued great Contention about the Govern∣ment. Many of the Nobility being disgusted by the Catholick King, desired a Change. The chief of these were D. Peter Manrique Duke of Najara, and D. James Lopez Pacheco Mar∣quess of Villena, who openly opposed the Catholick King; others, tho' of the same Opinion, temporized. Only D. Frederick de Toledo Duke of Alva stood firm to King Ferdinand. The New King and his Council protested against these Proceedings of the Catholick King, say∣ing, It was preposterous either to take the Title of King, or come into the Kingdom, if he was not to have the Power and Prerogative of a King. D. John Manuel, a Gentleman of a little Body but sharp Wit, heightned these Discontents. The Catholick King to remove him
from the Archduke, commanded him to return to the Emperor's Court, but the Archduke would never consent, and rather valued him the more, making him privy to all his Secrets. This Project failing, the Catholick King endeavoured to gain him by large Promises made to his Wife the Lady Catherine de Castilla; but he made more account of the present Bounty of a Young Prince, than the Promises of a crafty Old King. Nor was this all, the King grew jealous of the Kingdom of Naples, fearing lest the Great Captain should encline to favour his Son-in Law. Prosper Colona failed not to encrease this Jealousie, tho' he had obtained all he came to Spain for, and particularly that Bartholomew d' Albianos Company of 400 Men at Arms should be reduced to 200. Besides, the Catholick King ordered only 1200 Men at Arms, 600 Light Horse, and 3000 Spanish Foot, to be left in the Kingdom of Naples, 2000 Spaniards to be sent to Spain, and the Germans dismissed, all to save Charges, and weaken that Kingdom. A particular Council was erected in Castile for the Government of it. Ladron de Mauleon was sent Ambassadot from the King of Navarre, to confirm the ancient Alliance with King Ferdinand, by concluding the Match betwixt the Prince of Viana and the Archduke's Daughter. He also pressed to have Duke Valentine, then Prisoner, released, as did many Cardinals created by Pope Alexander. The King was willing to renew the League, and in∣clinable to the Match. As to the Duke he said it could not be done at present, tho' at the same time he thought to make use of him in Italy to balance against the Great Captain. He desired Security that he would be true to his Interest, and Alonso d' Este Duke of Ferrara, offered to be bound for him. Emanuel King of Portugal sent the Bishop of Porto and James Pacheco his Ambassadors to Rome, to acknowledge Pope Julius. After he had sent several Fleets to Trade in India, he now sent Francis d' Almeyda with the Title of Governour to reside there, that all who passed to those Parts might know who they were to obey. Many Difficulties attended the Prosecution of this Enterprize, besides the length of the Voyage: One was, the Opposition made by the Venetians, as has been hinted before; Another, that the Soldan of Babylon, either at the Instigation of that State, or of his own accord, undertook to ruin their Trade in those Parts. He sent Maurus, Guardian of the Monastery at Hierusalem, with Let∣ters to the Pope, complaining of the Proceedings of the Catholick King in the Conquest of Granada and Conversion of the Moors, and of the King of Portugal for ruining his Trade in India and taking his Ships. He desired him to put a stop to any further progress in this Af∣fair, otherwise he threatned to destroy the Holy Sepulchre, and put to death all the Christians within his Dominions. This moved the Pope to send the same Religious Man with the Let∣ters to Spain to both the Kings, neither of whom made any account of them or the Threats they contained. CHAP. VI. King Ferdinand becomes odious to the People; The Posture of Affairs in Italy; The Em∣perour and King Philip of Castile Ratifie the Peace with France; King Ferdinand agrees with the French King. THE Cortes at Toro passed the Laws called of Toro, which had been framed before the King Fer∣dinand be∣comes o∣dious to the Peo∣ple. death of Queen Elizabeth. After the Cortes were dismissed, King Ferdinand continued at Toro till the end of April, to be thoroughly satisfied whether King Emanuel of Portugal appro∣ved of his continuing in the Government. The Nobility, in hatred to him, gave out, that he treated about marrying the Princess Joanna, Daughter to King Henry, and to assert her Title, which before he had impugned; and by that means to maintain himself not only as Governour, but Rightful King of Castile, in opposition to his Daughter and Son-in-Law. It is scarce credible how much this Report incensed the People. Certain it is, his Vice∣chancellor Alonso de la Cavalleria endeavoured to persuade him to change the Name of Governour for that of Administrator and Guardian, as Fathers are to their Children before they are of Age; and Queen Joanna might be account such, either in regard of her want of Sense, or of her being confined, and that he ought to take the Title of King either on this account, or as Husband to Queen Elizabeth. He brought the Example of his Father King John, who still called himself King of Navarre, tho' he had Children, and that Kingdom had been his Wife's. The Nobility of Castile, and those of the New King's Council, were of ano∣ther Opinion: They said it were better for King Ferdinand to retire to the Kingdom of Ara∣gon, and from thence to aid his Children in what they should desire, for that One Kingdom would not admit of Two Heads. Neither could they agree as to his Kingdoms of Granada and Naples. The Catholick King pretended a Right to Granada, as conquered in his Wife's life-time; and as for Naples, he said there was no dispute of its appertaining to the House of Aragon, and therefore highly resented that his Son-in Law should pretend to dispose of it, without consulting him to whom only it belonged. This made him suspicious of the Great Captain, who was a Castilian; for the Emperor had sent to know which side he would en∣cline to, in case of a War, and the Pope had put the same Question to him. To the Em∣peror he answered in general Terms; to the Pope resolutely, telling him, It was plain he
knew not what Men he had to deal with, who were not used to commit any thing that was disloyal to their King, or unworthy themselves. From Toro the Catholick King went to Sego∣via, and thence sent D. John de Fonseca, Bishop of Palencia, to Flanders, to attend upon the Queen his Daughter. From the Emperor and his Son came as Ambassadors to the Catholick King, Andrew de Burgo of Cremona, and Philibert Lord de Vere, who was great with the Arch∣duke, and had much Knowledge of the Affairs of Castile. To him the Catholick King made known his Grievances, and again attempted to draw D. John Manuel from King Philip, but he instead of it discharged himself King Ferdinand's Service. King Philip also kept Lope de Con∣chillos, Secretary to the Bishop of Palencia, a long time close Prisoner, for writing a Letter from the Queen to the King, committing to him the Charge of the Government; which Let∣ter was intercepted, and thereupon no Spaniard was suffered to speak to the Queen; which so heightned her Distemper, that she was shut up. In Italy the Great Captain sent Nun̄o de Ocampo with 1000 Men of those that were ordered to be dismissed, to defend Plombin and Pisa. The Florentines laid Siege to Pisa, but Nun̄o de Campo throwing himself with his Men into it, they were forced to rise and depart without it. The Coloness pressed to have Bartholomew d' Alviano's Command reformed, which the Great Captain delayed, knowing the Worth of that Gentleman; but afterwards understanding he held Intelligence with the Pope, and de∣signed to Favour the House of Medicis against the Florentines, his Command was reduced. He knowing of it, thought to have seized Plombin; but being disappointed, aimed at Pisa. The Great Captain commanded him to desist, upon pain of Forfeiting his Possessions and Command in Naples. The Florentines laying wait for him, overthrew and wounded him. At Naples for his Disobedience his Estate was seized, whereupon he went over to the other Party. The Spanish Soldiers, who according to the King's Order were to be dismissed, tho' it was given out they should be sent to the Conquest of Gelves mutinied, and much perplexed the Great Captain. Yet he appeased, and sent them to Spain as he was or∣dered. The Emperor and King Philip met to ratifie the Treaty concluded with the King of France, from whom came also the Cardinal of Amboise, who took the Oath, and did Homage to The Em∣peror and King Phi∣lip of Ca∣stile ratifie the Peace with France. the Emperor, in the Name of the King his Master, for the Investiture of Milan, granted to him and his Heirs Males; and for want of them, it was to devolve to his Daughter Claudia and Charles her Husband. Yet in case that Marriage were disappointed through the King of France's means, then that Dukedom should again fall to the House of Austria. It was also de∣clared that Investiture was given saving always a better Title, which afterwards the Sons of Sforcia pleaded for recovery of that Dukedom. On account of the first of these Conditions, Prince Charles when Emperor pretended that Dominion appertained to him; but then the King of France was to be repaid the 200000 Livres he gave for the Investiture. Nothing was concluded concerning the Kingdom of Naples; but the Marriage of Prince Charles and the Princess Claudia being confirmed, it was supposed to be designed for her Dowry, as had been before agreed. These things perplexed the Catholick King, who therefore contrived K. Ferdi∣nand a∣grees with the French King. how to gain the King of France, and secure himself on that side. He thought the best way was to marry Germana de Foix, that King's Niece. F. John de Enguerra, of the Order of S. Ber∣nard, and Inquisitor in Catalonia, was sent to propose this Match. This was so pleasing to the King of France, that he resigned over the Kingdom of Naples to his Niece and her Heirs. On the other side, the Catholick King consented, That in case he had no Issue by her, that Kingdom should devolve to the King of France and his Heirs. Besides, he engaged to pay him 500000 Ducats within the space of 10 Years. He also promised to restore the Barons of the French Faction, which was hard to be done. All the Prisoners the Great Captain had were also to be set at liberty, and namely the Prince of Rosano and Marquess de Bitonto. Only Duke Valentine and the Earl of Pallas were excepted. On these Terms the King of France pro∣mised to aid the Catholick King against the Emperour and his Son, in case they attempted to remove him from the Government of Castile. Guicciardin adds, That the Catholick King engaged to assist Gaston de Foix his Brother-in Law, to conquer the Kingdom of Navarre, to which he pretended to have Right: As also, That the King of France should send the Queen-Dowager of Naples with her Children into Spain; and if she would not go, then to order her to depart his Dominions. All these Articles were agreed upon this Summer, and on the 25th of August D. John de Sylva Earl of Cifuentes, and Micer Thomas Malferit, were sent from Segovia to France, with the former Ambassador F. John d' Enguerra to Sign them. They had also Orders to release the Prisoners at Naples, and to secure the return of those that were ba∣nished. It was also proposed to Robert de Sanseverino, Prince of Salerno, and Head of the Ba∣nished Barons, to marry the Lady Marina d' Aragon, Daughter to D. Alonso d' Aragon, Duke of Villahermosa and Earl of Ribagorça; which was so pleasing to the King of France, that he en∣deavoured to hinder King Philip from going into Spain, sending his Secretary to require him not to undertake that Journey, till the Differences betwixt him and his Father-in Law were adjusted. To make the surer of him, he encouraged the Duke of Guelders to prosecute the War against him with a greater Power. This Treaty put the Kingdom of Naples into an Up∣roar; and those Barons who were possessed of the Lands of them that were fled, combined to stand by one another. Prosper Colona went to Rome, and offered the Pope to conquer that Kingdom for him, provided the King of France would quit his Claim. The Nobility of
Castile were no less disgusted, it being reported, That Queen Elizabeth before she died ob∣liged King Ferdinand to swear he would never marry, before she committed to him the Govern∣ment of the Kingdom. Some blamed the Great Captain, because he did not declare for King Philip, since that Match of King Ferdinand cut off Prince Charles from Inheriting the Kingdom of Naples, whether the King had Issue or not. King Philip was not a little offended to have the Kingdom of Naples absolutely disposed of from him, and the Crown of Aragon left dis∣putable, if King Ferdinand should have a Son. The Catholick King, to prevent further Mis∣understandings, sent D. Peter Ayala the Protonotary, who had been before Ambassador in Eng∣land to Flanders, that he, with Gutierre Gomez de Fuensalida his Ambassador there, should acquaint King Philip with the Treaty concluded, and endeavour the Enlargement of Lope de Conchillos, kept close Prisoner at Vilvorde. As to the Marriage, King Philip in general Terms answered, He rejoiced at it, that King Ferdinand was free, and might marry where he pleased. For what concerned Lope de Conchillos, he said, he was his Servant, and received Wages from him; and therefore having imprisoned him for his Demerits, he did not design to release him. Still the Venetians looked on, without perceiving how great a Storm threatned them. True it is, they compounded with the Pope, retaining Faença and Arimino, and restoring what they had in the Earldoms of Imola and Sessena. On these Terms they took into their protection the Duke of Urbino, and the Prefect of Rome the Pope's Nephew, whom the Duke had adopted, and to the intent he might inherit the Dukedom, given him to Wife the Daughter of the Marquess of Mantua his Brother-in-Law. Advice was given to the Great Captain of the Peace con∣cluded with the King of France, and he ordered to come to Spain, the Archbishop of Zara∣goça being privately appointed Viceroy of Naples. The Great Captain expressed Joy for the Peace, and caused it to be proclaimed at Naples; and as to his departure, answered it should be very speedily; but still he found Excuses to delay it, which encreased the Jealousie before conceived of him, and furnished much matter of Discourse, tho' he sent his Secretary John Lopez de Vergara to justifie him. CHAP. VII. Mazalquivir in Africk taken from the Moors; The Nobility of Spain divided for and against King Philip; The Agreement made betwixt the Two Kings Ferdinand and Philip; The latter in England. THE Archbishop of Toledo never forsook the Catholick King, but upon all occasions stood by him with extraordinary Fidelity, and was a great Check to many disaffected Per∣sons. Mazali∣quivir in Africk ta∣ken. This Prelate was a Man of a mighty Spirit, and more Generous than might have been expected of his mean Education. He often pressed the King, even whilst Queen Elizabeth was living, to make War upon the Moors in Barbary, as soon as that in Naples were ended. This Business was so far advanced, that the King ordered part of the Spanish Forces to be sent out of Naples into Spain, which was accordingly done. The Earl of Tendilla offered, if the King would assign him 40 Millions of Maravedies, to conquer Oran and the Port of Mazal∣quivir, with the Towns adjacent. In case any of that Sum were left after defraying the Charge, he promised to restore it; but if it fell short, to make it up of his own. This Con∣tract being well advanced, was broke off by the Queen's death. Yet that the Enterprize might not be wholly laid aside, and the Neapolitan Soldiers be idle, the Archbishop lent the King 11 Millions towards carrying on that Design. A Fleet was fitted out on the Coast of Andaluzia, at first intending to take Tedeliz, a Town betwixt Bugia and Argiers, to which purpose Intelligence was held with some Persons in it. But this appearing to be a Place of no Consequence, nor worth the keeping, it was resolved to attempt Mazalquivir, which in Arabick signifies the Great Port, and Ptolomy calls it Portus Magnus. It stands near to Oran, almost opposite to Almeria, only a little more to the Eastward. The Fleet consisted of 6 Galleys, and a great Number of Caravels and other small Vessels, in which were about 5000 Men, under the Command of D. James Fernandez de Cordova, a Valiant Officer. They sailed from Malaga upon Friday the 29th of August. D. Raymund de Cardona was Admiral. They met with bad Weather, and were forced to put into the Port of Almeria. Thence they set forward on the 11th of September, and came to an Anchor with the whole Fleet in the Har∣bour of Mazalquivir. On the Point of the Harbour was a Bulwark planted with Cannon, with other Works, under which our Fleet entred. 150 Horse and 3000 Foot came to ob∣struct our Men landing. The Landing-place was bad, and the Weather tempestuous, yet the Valour of the Christians overcame all Difficulties. Peter Lopez Zagal, a valiant Soldier, was the first that leaped ashore. The Moors were forced back to Oran, and only 400 left in the Fort of Mazalquivir. The Fort was battered, the Commander of it killed by a Cannon-Ball, and their best Guns dismounted. This so discouraged the Moors, that the third day they surrendered, and the Spanish Colours were set upon the Walls. It fell out very fortunately in the first place, that the Fleet was stayed by ill Weather; for upon the News of their setting
out of Malaga, a great Multitude of Moors assembled; but having waited 8 days, and Pro∣visions growing scarce, they thought our Fleet had steered another Course, and so they dis∣persed. Next, that the very Day the Fort surrendered, a great number of Moors came down the Mountain to relieve the Besieged, who might have done us much harm if they had come soon enough. They joined with those of Oran, and took the Field, in order as was thought to give Battel, which yet they durst not do, tho' our Commander drew out to meet them. Some Skirmishes there were with our Parties that went out for Wood or Water, of both which they were scarce. The Command of that Fort, with the Title of Captain General of the Conquests in Barbary, was given to James Fernandez de Cordova. D. Raimund de Car∣dona returned with his Fleet to Malaga, on the 24th of the aforesaid Month. Those that were left at Mazalquivir concluded a Truce with the Moors at Oran, by which a Free Trade was allowed between them, which was very advantageous to the Moors because of their Trade. This Enterprize gained the Catholick King much Reputation, tho' at the same time malici∣ous People gave out that was only a Colour to gather Forces, which in reality were de∣signed to keep out his Son-in-Law, if he should attempt to come to deprive him of the Govern∣ment. This good Beginning encouraged the Archbishop of Toledo to spend most of his Re∣venue in prosecuting that Design, insomuch that he thought of going over into Africk himself, as at last he did. About the middle of this Month the Queen was delivered of a Daughter called Mary. The Catholick King sent Charles d' Aragon, one of his Domesticks, to visit her, and advise King Philip to Peace. King Emanuel of Portugal retired to Almeria, because the Plague began to spread at Lisbon. This same Year the Court of Chancery was removed from Ciudad Reall to Granada, and the Bishop of Astorga made President. King Ferdinand spent some Months at Segovia, and in the Forrest of Balsain, and on the 20th of October went away to Salamanca, where he caused the Peace concluded with France Nobles in Castile for and a∣gainst K. Philip. to be Proclaimed, which was not so well liked for the most part in Castile as in Aragon. The same thing that pleased the one Kingdom, discontented the other, that is the Separati∣on of the Kingdoms. All things were disposed to oppose King Philip in case of an open Breach. He from Brussels sent to require the Nobility to stand by him, particularly the Marquess de Villena, the Duke of Najara, Garlciasso de la Vega, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Earl of Uren̄a, the Admiral and Constable of Castile, which Two last, tho' related to King Ferdinand were wavering. D. John Manuel with his Letters widened the Breach, but always seemed desirous they should come to Agreement, which he said was easie if King Ferdinand would leave Castile to his Son-in Law, whose of Right it was. Otherwise he must expect to be turned out of it, and in danger of Aragon, for King Philip either with or without his consent would be there very soon. In order to it, a great Fleet was fitting out in Zealand, and 60 Sail were already in a readiness. Notwithstanding the King of France sent twice to require King Philip not to undertake that Voyage till he had agreed with his Father-in-Law, on the 8th of November he set out from Brussels for Zealand. There he delayed the time, whereupon it was believed he staied to have those of his Party in Spain to declare themselves openly. The Marquess de Villena chief of them going at this time to Toledo, it was supposed he had Orders from King Philip to secure that City, which alarmed the People, and the Family of the Silvas who stood firm to King Ferdinand, joined with the Governor D. Peter de Castilla to oppose him, but the Marquess went away quietly. Besides the Family of Silva, the Duke of Alva, and the Archbishop of Toledo, the principal Men that adhered to the Catholick King were, D. Bernard de Rojas Marquess of Denia, D. Gutierre Lopez chief Commendary of Calatrava, Antony de Fonseca and Ferdinand de la Vega. These were for opposing King Philip by all means whatsoever, if he should at∣tempt to come to Castile before some Agreement were made. This was the Resolution of the Catholick King, tho' he was unwilling to take up Arms against his Children, and believed the Country would not be satisfied to have Force used against its rightful Sove∣reigns. When things were in this posture tending to a Breach, King Philip sent ample Commission to his Ambassadors to promote an Accommodation. In pursuance hereof the Two Kings came to an Agreement at Salamanca, on the 24th of November upon the fol∣lowing Conditions. That both Kings and the Queen should Govern jointly, and all their Names should be inserted in all Orders, Patents, or other publick Wrings; and the Secre∣taries Accord twixt the 2 Kings, Ferdinand and Philip should subscribe by Order of their Highnesses. That as soon as King Philip and Queen Joanna came into the Kingdom, they should be Sworn King and Queen, King Ferdinand Governor, and Prince Charles Heir apparent of the Kingdoms of Castile, Leon and Granada. That the Revenue of the said Kingdoms should be divided into Two equal Parts after all charges deducted, one Part for King Ferdinand, the other for King Philip and his Queen. That all Employments should be given in like manner, even the Commendaries of the Military Orders, tho' the Administration of them appertained beyond all dispute to the Catholick King. The Pope, the Emperor, and Kings of England and Portugal were chosen Guarrantees for the performance hereof. It was also decreed that in case the Queen would not be concerned in the Government, still all Three Names should be used, but only the Two Kings Subscribe, and if either of the Two was absent, then all business should be done by the other. A Copy of these Articles was sent to Flanders, which displeased King Philip and his; howsoever they were accepted of, and Sworn to; for the King of France
had great power in Flanders, and besides they hoped when they came into Spain all things would become more easie. Now the Secretary Lope de Conchillos was enlarged, having been all this while close Prisoner. This Agreement was Proclaimed at Salamanca on the 6th of January 1506, and Two days after the King and Queen set Sail from Zealand. Such a vi∣olent Storm arose that some Ships were lost, and the rest forced to put into Weymouth in 1506. England. Thence King Philip went to Windsor to meet the King of England, where they con∣cluded King Phi∣lip in England a League, and agreed that the King of England should Marry Margaret of Austria, Widow of the late Duke of Savoy, and Prince Charles of Austria Marry that Kings Daughter, which Matches took no effect. King Philip delivered up the Duke of Suffolk who had put himself into his Protection, to the King of England. In this, and in Feasting was spent all the next Month, after which King Philip returned to Plymouth to take Ship. The Catholick King hearing of the Storm his Son-in-Law had been in, gathered all the best Ships along the Coast of Spain, and sent them to him under the Command of D. Charles Enriquez de Cisneros, who about this time raised the Estate, which his Family still possesses at Portugalete. At such time as the Treaty was at Salamanca, the Catholick King writ a Letter to D. John Manuel requiring him to advise King Philip to wave all past discontents, and be entirely reconciled. It will not be amiss to insert his answer, to shew the Wit and boldness of that Gentle∣man, it is thus. I received your Highness's Letter, and shall perform what is your Order, which is to use all my endeavours that past Discontents may be laid aside, and Friendship established, for it is not to be doubted that so good a Master as your Highness, and such good Schollars as the King and Queen will contribute much to the Happiness of those Kingdoms. God and my Conscience can bear Wit∣ness, that has been always my Study, tho' some, and perhaps your Highness may have judged otherwise by the ill Usage I have received. But Mens Tongues and Thoughts are not to be Confined, nor do I seek any Reward for what I have done. It would suffice that my past Services and Fatigues were not forgotten as they are. I judge by my Age, and the small regard had of me, that your Highness designs me no other recompence in this World, but in Prayers against I go into the next: Which reward I do not aspire to, for I have often heard it said, that a Prince can carry his Ministers to Hell; but never, that any King, tho' the most Christian, as is he of France, fetched any of his Favourites out of Purgatory. However, I will not fail of doing my Duty, nor forbear begging your Highness to use your ordinary Good∣ness and Prudence towards advancing this Agreement. CHAP. VIII. The Affairs of Portugal; A bloody Mutiny at Lisbon; King Ferdinand Marries Queen Germana; King Philip comes into Spain, and declares against the Treaty with King Ferdinand; Death of Christopher Columbus. THE Catholick King sent Ambassadors to the Princes appointed Guarranties betwixt him∣self Little Faith in King Fer∣nand. and his Son-in-Law. In particular, he applied himself to King Emanuel of Portugal to understand how he would stand affected, in case the Agreement were broken. He an∣swered in general Terms, being in strict League with King Philip. In order to entertain whom, he made great Preparations, and caused much Plate to be provided either to Treat or present him, for it was believed he would Land in Andaluzia, and therefore might touch in some part of Portugal. But the Plague spread there and was come to Santarem, which made the King remove from Almeirin to Abrantes, a Town seated on a rising Ground and healthy. There on the 3d of March the Queen was delivered of Prince Luis, who proved a Person of singular Worth, Piety and Virtue, especially towards the end of his life, which was short. Yet in his youth he had by a mean Woman a Bastard Son called Antony, who was Prior of Ocrato, and famous, for that upon the death of his Unkle Henry the King and Cardinal; he took upon him the Title of King, and brought great mischief upon his Coun∣try. The joy for the Birth of the Prince was allaied by a mutiny raised in Lisbon upon a A bloody mutiny at Lisbon. light occasion. In the Church of S. Dominick was a Crucifix, which over the wound of the Breast had a Glass. Some People hearing Mass there, thought the light that came from that Glass had been miraculous, which one there present being a Jew newly converted, freely contradicted. The People in a rage laying hold of him, dragged him out of the Church, made a Fire, then killed and burnt him. A Friar of that Convent coming out, made an Harangue to the rabble, exhorting them to revenge the injuries done to our Saviour by the Jews, which was pouring Oyl upon the Fire, for immediately the multitude ran to the Houses of the new Converts, Two of the Friars going before them with a Cross. Such was their fury and madness, that in Three days this mutiny lasted, they murdered above 2000 of those People, and among them, either through mistake, or for private grudges, se∣veral of the ancient Christians. The Flemmings and Germans that were aboard their Ships in the Harbour came to take share in the plunder of the Houses. The King hearing of this Tumult, sent James de Almeyda and James Lopez to take cognisance of the matter. The Two Friars that were the Ringleaders, were put to death and burnt, and many others pu∣nished. The Strangers hoisting Sails got away with a rich Booty. In Castile, on the one
side was expected the coming of the new King and Queen, and on the other was great re∣joicing for the Marriage of King Ferdinand and the Lady Germana. From Salamanca went the Archbishop of Zaragoça, with other Men and Ladies of Quality to Fuenterabia, to attend the Bride King Ferdinand, the Two Queens of Naples, Mother and Daughter, the Duke of Calabria and many more Lords went to Valladolid, and thence to Duen̄as. There on the 18th of March they were Married. The Queen was great Niece to the Catholick King, and King Fer∣dinand Marries Queen Joanna. Grandaughter to his Sister Ellenor Queen of Navarre. The Popes dispensation was obtain∣ed with much difficulty, the Emperor and his Son opposing it. With the Queen came Luis d' Amboise Bishop of Albi, Hector Pignatelo and Peter de Santandrea the King of France his Am∣bassadors. There came also the Princes of Salerno and Melfi, and other Barons of the Facti∣on of Anjou, to settle their Affairs. Next day after the Marriage, the King and Queen with all their Train set out towards Valladolid. In that City the King took a solemn Oath in the presence of many Prelates and Noblemen to oblige himself and his Successors to the perfor∣mance of all the Articles of the League with France. A few days after the Neapolitan Barons did Homage to the King and Queen as rightful Sovereigns of the Kingdom of Naples, for themselves and those that were absent. This Solemnity being over, the King set out for Burgos to meet the new King and Queen, who he expected would Land at Laredo, or some other Port of that Coast, with whom went the Archbishops of Toledo and Sevil, the Duke King Phi∣lip lands in Spain. of Alva, the Admiral, the Constable and the Earl of Cifuentes. All these seemed inclined to see all that was ordained by the Will of Queen Elizabeth performed. At Torquemada the Catholick King received advice that his Son and Daughter were Landed at Corun̄a on the 28th of April. The cause of their coming so late was the stay they made with the King of England; and their being detained at Plymouth by the Weather. They Landed at Coru∣n̄a, King Philip being perswaded it was best for him to be the farthest he could from his Fa∣ther-in-Law, to have time to find how the Nobility and Commonality stood affected towards him, to behave himself accordingly; being resolved not to stand to the late Agreement, un∣less he were forced to it. This was the Advice of D. John Manuel who had great influence over him, and would have carried him to land in Andalucia if the Weather had permitted. About this time Gonçalo Marin̄o de Ribera Commander of Melilla for the Duke of Medina Si∣donia had the Town of Caçaça delivered to him by Composition. It is in the Kingdom of Fez, 5 Leagues from Melilla, and has a good Port, and remained in Propriety to the Duke of Medina Sidonia. The coming of King Philip which ought to have produced Peace, and a general Satis∣faction, might have caused an absolute Breach, had not the Catholick King prudently King Phi∣lip de∣clares a∣gainst the Treaty with King Ferdinand. quenched the spreading flame of Discontent which began to appear in all Places. The Humours and Designs of the Two Kings were opposite in all respects. As soon as King Philip Landed he sent to require the Earls of Benavente and Lemos, as also the other Nobility of Galicia and Castile to Declare for him, which was the way to raise Tumults rather than settle Peace. Finding this contrivance answered his expectation, and that many freely declared for him, he presently professed he would not stand to the late Treaty concluded at Salamanca. He also began to discountenance his Father-in-Laws Servants, and one day speaking to D. Peter de Ayala told him, that tho' he had in Flanders and England winked at his Proceedings in op∣position to his Service, he would no longer bear with it; and since he was his Subject, he should take care how he behaved himself. He turned away the Alcaides, and Alguaziles de Corte, sent by King Ferdinand to attend upon him, thinking his Father-in-Law designed to choose his Family. He was well instructed not to allow of any Tutor or Overseer, as D. John Ma∣nuel called it. His followers exclaimed against the Catholick King, especially for his Mar∣riage, and the Articles of it, which gave away the Kingdom of Naples from his Daughter and Grandson. In this particular, no doubt they had reason; but the King did it to gain the King of France. On the other Side the Catholick King, as soon as he heard of his Son-in-law, and Daughters Landing, sent D. Raimund de Cardona and Ferdinand de Vega to visit them, and went himself towards Leon in order to meet them; but stopped at Astorga till he knew their Will. He ordered the Marquess of Villena who was come to Burgos with a great Train, and the Duke of Najara who was raising his kindred and followers to go to Corun̄a in Warlike manner, to forbear proceeding after that manner, and to go thither with their usual Retinue. He pressed his Son-in-Law to dismiss 2000 Germans he brought with him, fear∣ing that might give some cause of Discontent to the People. He also sent Almaçan his Se∣cretary to join with his Ambassadors D. Raimund, D. Ferdinand de Vega, D. Peter de Ayala, and Gutierre Gomez de Fuensalida, that they might agree upon the Place where he should meet his Son and Daughter, which he desired might be very speedily, and King Philip's followers laboured to delay as much as might be. First Sarria, then Ponferrada were the Places propo∣sed for the interview, but none pleased his People, and particularly D. John Manuel who managed all, and feared that if the Two Kings met, the one being very subtle and the other open; besides the respect due to a Father, they would easily agree, which was what he chief∣ly laboured to prevent. To this purpose he told D. Peter de Ayala, that the Catholick King might be perswaded three things, whereon he much relied should never come to pass. First that at the Interview there should be no manner of Discourse of Business. Secondly, that the meeting should be in the Field, and not with equal Retinues, but that King Philip should
have much the greater. Thirdly, that the Catholick King should not Confide in the Favour of the Queen his Daughter, for it would not avail him Great Offers were again made to D. John Manuel for himself and his Children, to bring him over to King Ferdinand; but he had a Spirit above all that. At this time died at Valladolid Christopher Columbus, Admiral of the West-Indies, the first Discoverer of the New World. Now also the Marquess of Villena, the Christopher Columbus dies. Earl of Benavente and the Duke of Najara were come to Corun̄a, and daily more People resorted thither, and more Men of Note, as the Duke of Bejar, the Marquesses of Astorga and Aguilar, Gazilasso de la Vega and the Duke del Infantado. This encouraged the followers of King Philip. The Catholick King stayed at Astorga till the 15th of May; thence he went to Ravanal, designing to go on to Santiago, and to appoint the Interview there. Some of his Council advised him not to be too hasty, because Delay would breed Discord among the Noblemen and the Favourites of King Philip, and by that means he would be reduced to sub∣mit to his Father-in-Law. This was the Posture of Affairs in Castile. The Princes of Ita∣ly and other Nations expected the Event of King Philip's going into Spain, believing the Catholick King would be Affronted and much Weakened. This they were the more apt to give Credit to, because they saw the Great Captain contrary to his King's Orders con∣tinued at Naples, which they could not believe to be without some Mystery. But he under∣standing these Surmises, sent before his Horses and Equipage, and with it Peter Navarro, to acquaint the Catholick King with the true Reasons of his stay, which were to Order the Garrisons, and appease the Soldiers, who mutinied for want of Pay. On the other Side, John Baptista Espinelo went away at the same time for Spain to Complain of the Great Captain, and blame all his Proceedings; which was easie to do because he had much Credit with the Catholick King. Calumny often prevails above Truth, at least its first Efforts are more vio∣lent. Thus the Catholick King resolved to use all means to draw the Great Captain from Naples; and to this purpose appointed his Son the Archbishop of Zaragoça to go, and take the Government of that Kingdom upon him. At the same time he sent John Lopez de Ver∣gara, Secretary to the Great Captain, with a Note under his Hand, wherein he solemnly Swore, he would give him the Mastership of the Order of Santiago, as soon as he came into Spain. This was believed to be only a Design to intrap him, for at the same time he Ordered Peter Navarro, created Earl of Olivito, to go with the Archbishop, and Apprehend him in Castelnovo. The reason why the King changed his Mind, was because he recei∣ved a Letter from the Great Captain assuring him of his Fidelity, and swearing to stand by him and keep that Kingdom at his Devotion, besides he promised he would soon be in Spain. Thus this Storm was laid, which at that time might have been of dangerous Consequence. CHAP. IX. The Spaniards and Flemmings at variance upon their first meeting; King Ferdinand raises Forces, pretending to Rescue his Daughter; Many forsake him, and he is forced to quit Castile; An Interview of the Two Kings. NO sooner were the Noblemen come to Corun̄a but there arose Disputes and Contenti∣ons among them, nor could they agree with the Flemmings. The Marquess of Villena Flemmings and Spani∣ards dis∣agree. took Place of all others, and as Lord High Steward, when the King heard Mass, stood next the Curtin on the one Side, and Monsieur de Vere, as Steward for Flanders, on the other. They could not agree about the Interview betwixt the Two Kings. The Castilians, were for hin∣dering of it, that they might not agree; the Flemmings as the more sincere People thought it best they should meet to prevent Misunderstandings. Monsieur de Vere was he that appeared most for the Interview, yet some malicious Persons said he did it out of malice to D. John Manuel, by reason of his great Interest in King Philip. But he at this time gave greater signs of Discontent, than of being in Favour; the coming of so many Noblemen having very much startled him, fearing least some of them should step in before him, and be the cause of his fall. All of them agreed in their Complaints against the Catholick King. Some thought it hard he should take to himself half the Revenune of the Crown, and not divide the Income of the Masterships. Some said, how could Three Kings be endured in Castile; and D. John Manuel produced a Grant passed in France, wherein King Ferdinand Stiled himself King of Castile. Many reflected, that all Commands in Spain were held in the Name of the Catholick King, who was still to appoint Governors to many Cities; whereas it would not be in the power of King Philip in a long time to dispose of those Posts. Above all they exclaimed that he raised Men under Colour of setting his Daughter at Liberty; she being kept up, and not allowed to be seen by reason of her Indisposition. This Article was true, For King Fer∣dinand Forces raised by Ferdinand. had sent out Orders to levy Forces upon pretence of Rescuing his Daughter, to strengthen himself if they should come to an open Breach. The Duke of Alva had already raised a Force in the Kingdom of Leon, to stand by the Catholick King, he only, of all the Nobility adhering to him; tho' he was sensible of the Danger he exposed himself to,
since all forsook the King; even the Constable who was his Son-in Law, and the Admiral his Cousin having thought it more for their Advantage to accompany King Philip. King Ferdinand not satisfied with raising Men in Castile, sent an Aragonian Gentleman called Jaime Albion to acquaint the King of France with the Posture of his Affairs, and request him to stir up the Duke of Guelders and Bishop of Liege to make War upon Flanders, by that means to bring down King Philip to his own Terms. Still the Talk of an Interview conti∣nued, but could not be agreed upon. King Philip resolved to set out from Corun̄a towards Santiago. Before him marched the Germans with their Cannon in as good Order as if they were in an Enemies Country. The same day being the 28th of May, the Catholick King and Queen set out towards Betanços. D. John Alonso de Fonseca Archbishop of Santiago had declared for the Catholick King, which was the reason King Philip would not meet him there, nor made no long stay in the Place, but turned off to Orense, and the Catholick King staid at Villafranca. Then King Philip sent Word to the Catholick King that if he would send the Archbishop of Toledo to him, he hoped all things would be adjusted to Content. This was accordingly done, and the Archbishop laboured to reconcile all Differences, but ad∣vanced little; the Nobility opposing it, as unwilling that the Two Kings should be reconci∣led. From Villafranca King Ferdinand went to Baneza, and thence to Matilla, at which time Many forsake Ferdinand. many Prelates and other Gentlemen forsook him, being drawn away by the Nobles that had Declared against him. This made the Catholick King despair of being able to support himself, if the matter came to be decided by the Sword, which was the cause he endeavour∣ed to Compound with his Son-in-Law at any Rate. Hereupon he sent him a Letter desiring they might meet without farther delay or hearkning to ill affected Persons. His answer was only Complaints that the Catholick King raised Forces against him, and that he aspers∣ed him, giving out that he kept the Queen Prisoner, and obstructed the proceedings of the Inquisition, favouring those it had Apprehended; and that all this was Invented to render him Odious to his Subjects. The difficulty obstructing the Interview was, that King Philip's Party would before they met know whether the Catholick King would Consent to altering some Articles of the late Agreement, and which those were; but the Catholick King was very reserved, and would not lay himself open to any till he met with his Son-in-law. The Archbishop of Toledo on the one side, and Monsieur de Villar, with D. John Manuel, Ferdinand forced to quit Castile. on the other, by Commission from their Masters, Treated of Reconciling all Differences. Their Designs were nothing alike, and therefore they could not agree. The Archbishop acted sincerely, as became his Dignity, and the good Opinion conceived of his Life. The others subtilly laboured to do all things for the Advantage of their Master, or at least to protract time, hoping at length the Catholick King being forsaken by all Men, would be forced to depart that Kingdom, and retire to his own. The Archbishop despairing of coming to any Conclusion, advised the Catholick King to withdraw towards the Kingdom of Toledo. There he offered to deliver up to him all his Towns and Castles, affirming, that by reason of the great distance before King Philip's Party could come to him, the Heat and want of Provisions would disperse them, and the Enmity which daily increased betwixt the Flemmings and Castillians, would turn to his Advantage. King Ferdinand would not consent, but rather was jealous that the Archbishop designed to leave him, as the rest had done. He resolved at any rate to see his Son in Law, who was now come to Verin, and thence sent D. James de Guevara to the Catholick King, then at Rionegro, to desire he would forbear going to meet him, for so it behoved. Still King Ferdinand persisted in his Resolution. He said his Son-in-Law could not take it ill that he came to see him, since it was in a Peaceable manner, whereas he was prepared for War. Since it could not be avoided, Monsieur de Villar, and D. John Manuel, resolved to go meet him, and fix a day for the Interview. The Duke of Alva was sent to King Philip as a Hostage for D. John Manuel, tho the colour was he went to Adjust some Affairs. Mean while King Philip removed to Puebla de Sanabria, and King Fer∣dinand to Asturianos, which are but two Leagues distant. Monsieur de Villar, and D. John being come to Asturianos, the King spoke lovingly to them without the least sign of Discontent. As to the Agreement, he answered in such manner as made it appear the fault should not lie at his Door, if all things were not done to the satisfaction of his Son-in-Law. It was agreed the Interview should be the next day in a Wood, that is betwixt Puebla de Sanabria, and Asturianos, near a Farm called Ramessal. The Kings set out as had been appointed, but with very unlike Attendance. King Ferdinand, with about 200 of his Followers, mounted upon Mules, and without Arms, in Peaceable manner. King Philip in a Warlike posture. To∣ward Interview of the Two Kings. Puebla de Sanabria were drawn up about 2000 Pikemen, besides the Country People, and a good number of Horse that followed the Nobility. About 1000 Germans advanced to see the Country was clear. After these followed King Philip's Domesticks, and he after them on Horseback, Armed under his Cloaths. On his Right Hand was the Archbishop of Toledo, and on his Left D. John Manuel. Before he came up King Ferdinand placed himself on a rising Ground to see the Company pass by. The Grandees and other Nobles came to Kiss his Hand, whom he received with a pleasant Countenance. He Embraced the Earl of Bena∣vente, and feeling his Armour, said smiling, My Lord, How comes it you are grown so fat? He answered, Sir, the Times are the cause of it. To Garzilasso he said, Garzia, What are you so too? He replied, By God, Sir, we are all so. Then came King Philip, who tho he shewed
some Discontent in his Looks, offered to alight, and Kiss his Father in Law's Hand, but he prevented, Embracing and Kissing him with great Signs of Affection, and a pleasant Coun∣tenance. To Confer together they went into a Chappel that was hard by, and with them the Archbishop of Toledo and D. John Manuel. The Archbishop with his usual Freedom said to D. John, It is not convenient for Private Men to be present at the Conference of Princes, let us both be gone. D. John could not gainsay him. Being both together at the Door, the Arch∣bishop bid him go out, for he would be Porter. Then he shut the Door and sat down by it. After the usual Civilities the Kings fell to Business, and the Catholick King told King Philip, it was not for want of Business or Riches that he had pretended to govern Castile, for he had enough of both, and should advance himself little by taking from his Children, but that he had done it as being better acquainted with the Humours of the People by his long Expe∣rience, however he was willing to comply, and resign all up to him. He advised him to be careful in the Choice of his Ministers and Counsellors, and recommended to him the Arch∣bishop of Toledo, as a Man fit to be trusted. King Philip answered as he had been before in∣structed, and Thanked his Father in Law for his Advice. Thus they took Leave, having been together two hours, without so much as naming Queen Joanna. In fine, they parted more dissatisfied then they met. This Interview was upon Saturday the 20th of June. CHAP. X. The Two Kings of Spain agree, and join in League; Joanna, King Philip's Queen, Di∣stracted through Jealousie; Troubles in Castile; King Ferdinand and his Queen go to Zaragoza; Jealousies started against the Great Captain; King Philip dies. BOth Kings continued their Journey, at 3 or 4 Leagues distance from one another. King Philip came to Benavente on Midsummer-Day. King Ferdinand still pressed to con∣clude A League Defensive and Offen∣sive be∣twixt the Two Kings of Spain. in Friendly manner. At last their Commissioners agreed the Catholick King should quit the Government of Castile and retire to Aragon, still retaining the 3 Masterships, and what other Leagacies the Queen had left in her Will. Upon these Terms they concluded a League Defensive and Offensive. King Ferdinand Swore to this League on the 27th of June at Villa∣fasila, in the presence of the Archbishop of Toledo, D. John Manuel, and Monsieur de Villar. Next day King Philip also Swore it. In private they both Signed a Writing, declaring the Queen's incapacity to Govern. The Catholick King protested he consented against his Will, being in the power of his Son in Law, and then went away to Tordesillas. There on the first of July he published Declarations, declaring his Design had always been to resign up the Go∣vernment, which he now accordingly performed. How this suits with the Protestation! Before he went thence, King Philip sent to acquaint him with some things that had passed be∣tween the Queen and himself, desiring he would, as a Father, prevent the like for the future. King Ferdinand referred him to his own Conscience. From Tordesillas the Catholick King went to Tudela, a Village near Valladolid, and King Philip to Mucientes. By the way he la∣boured to draw the Nobility to consent under their Hands to shut up the Queen. The Admi∣ral being asked to Sign, desired first to speak with the Queen. It was granted. So the Ad∣miral and Earl of Benavente, went to the Castle of Mucientes, where the Queen was. They found her in a black Room, cloathed in black, her Face almost covered. At the Door stood Garzilasso de la Vega, and within the Archbishop of Toledo. The Admiral had some Discourse with the Queen, and she never said any thing from the purpose. King Philip pressed she should be shut up, the Admiral advised him to be careful what he did, for it would be of evil Consequence to go to Valladolid without her, and might be a Motive to raise Tumults under colour of setting the Queen at Liberty, That his Opinion was, he should never let her be Jealousie the cause of King Philip's Queen's Distem∣per. from him, and since Jealousie was her greatest Distemper, her being shut up would only serve to increase it. This being proposed in Council, it was decreed she should be carried to Valladolid. Before this it was agreed the Two Kings should meet at Renedo, a Village a League and a half from Tudela, and two and a half from Mucientes. King Ferdinand desired, that to avoid Scandal this Meeting might be with greater Demonstrations of Affection than the former. On the 5th of July, after Dinner, the Two Kings set out towards Renedo. King Ferdinand came first, alighted at the Church, and there expected his Son in Law. They met with great Demonstrations of Affection, Discoursed together an hour and half, then called the Archbishop of Toledo, before whom they used many Expressions full of Kindness, no Business was spoken of, nor mention made of seeing the Queen. This done they parted, and King Ferdinand went on his Journey towards Aragon. The Duke of Alva begged Leave to bear him Company to Naples, whither he intended to go, but was not permitted, the King telling him, he had rather he should attend his Service in Castile. King Ferdinand bore this shameful Expulsion out of Castile with great Resolution, and appeared always pleasant to the Nobility that came to take their Leave of him. If any charged others with Ingratitude to him, he said they had done him good Service, and he would Reward them as far as lay in his Power. In short, he went away as if he expected soon to return.
Scarce had King Ferdinand turned his Back, when there began to be great Commotions in New Troubles in Castile. Castile, which made it appear to the People what miss they were like to have of the late Go∣vernment. King Philip had summoned the Cortes to meet at Valladolid. He still urged to shut up the Queen on account of her Infirmity, and that she should not have any Hand in the Go∣vernment. The Nobility complied, and the Archbishop of Toledo made Interest to get her into his Hands. Only the Admiral of Castile opposed it, and perswaded the Commons not to con∣sent, they promised they would not if any of the Nobility would stand by them, and he so∣lemnly Swore never to forsake them. Thus most of them gainsaid it, and only Swore as they had done before at Toro, Queen Joanna Queen of Castile in her own Right, the Archduke King as her Husband, and Prince Charles Heir to the Crown after his Mother's Death. They gave 100 Millions of Maravedies, to be raised in two years, for carrying on the War against the Moors, which was looked upon as a heavy Tax by reason of the Famine then raging in Castile. Spain was supplied with Corn out of Sicily, a thing never before heard of. It was also surprizing that the Council of State began to interfere with the Business of the Inquisition. They gave Ear to those who made Complaint against James Rodriguez Luzero Inquisitor at Cordova, him and his Inferior Officers they designed to remove from their Employments. The Earl of Cabra and Marquess of Priego stood up for them. The People Mutinied, secured the Judge and a Notary of the Inquisition, and entred the Palace where the Inquisitors resided. They complained of the Archbishop of Sevil, D. James de Peza, who was Head Inquisitor, and of all the General Council of the Inquisition, which was made up of Dr. Roderick de Mercado, the Master Azpeitia, the Licentiate Ferdinand de Montemayor, the Licentiate John Travera, who was afterwards Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, and the Licentiate Sosa, all Men of known Integrity. They resided at. Toro, and had in Custody a great number of rich Jews. It was no less strange, that at once all the Governors of Towns and Forts, and Generals of the Frontiers, were changed. This Alteration was the cause of Three great Evils, one, that many Places of Trust were given to Flemings. The second, that the number of Preferments being so great, they were not bestowed on Deserving Persons, but as every Courtier or Noble∣man was in favour, or else as every one offered most Money. The third, that all those who were removed thought themselves wronged, being outed those Places without any cause, which they had obtained by their Service. This was cause of great Discontent. The Dis∣content of those who had lost their Places, the Ignorance of the new Officers, and above all, the Report that all Preferments were sold, and that the Queen was ill Treated, gave occasion to the Multitude to Mutiny and Combine together for Redressing those Grievances, and pre∣venting greater they feared were like to follow. Now, it was thought, had the Catholick King returned into Castile, all Men would have followed him, and the new King began to be held in such small Account, that when he would have made Garcilasso de la Vega President of the Council, and Tutor to Prince Ferdinand, the Nobility would not allow him either. D. John Manuel acted as President till such time as that Employment was disposed of. In An∣daluzia the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Earl of Uren̄a, the Marquess de Priego, and Earl of Cabra met, as was supposed, to Treat about setting the Queen at liberty. The King and Queen in August went from Valladolid to Segovia, on account that the Marquess and Marchio∣ness of Moya would not resign the Command of that Castle to D. John Manuel, as they were ordered. But they knowing Forces were raising against them, submitted. The King hear∣ing of it, returned to Tudela de Duero, designing for Burgos and Vitoria, because it was re∣ported the French had a Force in readiness to invade the Frontiers on that side. To secure himself on the side of Navarre, he appointed the Duke of Najara General of those Frontiers, in the place of D. John de Ribera, and concluded a League with that King and Queen, for Castile and Leon, without mentioning his Father in Law or the Kingdom of Aragon, which was contrary to the Agreement made with King Ferdinand at Villafasila, and misbecoming the Duty of a Son to a Father. The Catholick King by the way of Montagudo and Hariza, went to Zaragoça, where the King Fer∣dinand and his Queen at Zaragoça. Queen first, and then he, were received with great Joy, the People having conceived hopes that the King's Marriage would produce a King of their own. By the way, before King Fer∣dinand left Castile, he at several times pressed King. Philip to deliver up to him Duke Valentin as his Prisoner, that he might keep him in some secure place in Aragon, or carry him over to Naples, whither he designed soon to go, and to that effect was sitting out a Fleet at Barcelona. King Philip was willing to deliver him, but his Council advised, it was fit first to decide whose Prisoner he was, being taken and sent into. Spain by the Great Captain whilst Queen Eliza∣beth was yet living. This Councel was followed, which was a new Subject of Distast. The Jealousie of the Great Captain still increased. His long Delays gave Malicious Men occasion to Descant upon him. Some said he expected the coming of the Emperor, who designed to Embark in the Gulph of Venice with 8000 Germans to possess himself of that Kingdom. Jealousies raised a∣gainst the Great Captain. Some said he held Intelligence with France by means of the Cardinal d' Amboise. Others, that he Corresponded with the Pope, and designed to accept of the Command of General of the Church differed him, to expel John Bentivolla out of Bolognia, which City he had made himself Master of. Others said, he designed to Marry his Daughter to the Son of Prosper Colona, that he might support himself with the Interest of the Coloneses. Every Man affirmed as much of him as he imagined, or believed was in his Power to do. The Great Captain
sent Nan̄o de Ocampo, by the Post, to Spain, to clear him, and to assure the King of his coming. But there being so many various Reports, this was looked upon as no sufficient Security, and the King resolved to go away as soon as possible. He constituted the Archbishop of Zara∣gaça Viceroy of Naples, and the Duke of Calabria of Catalonia, but took from him his Italian Servants, and ordered some of them to go with him to Naples. He also sollicited to have the King of France send him the Duke's Mother, and her other Children, but she could not be perswaded to go, and therefore went away to the Marquisate of Mantua with Luis de Gonzaga her Nephew, the King of France promising to allow her 10000 Duccats a year. The Ca∣tholick King sent Charles de Alagon to Naples, to give Advice of his coming, and Assure the Colloneses that regard should be had to their Services. On the 4th of September he set sail from Barcelona, and with him Queen Germana, the Two Queens of Naples, Mother and Daughter, and a great number of Castilian and Catalonian Noblemen that attended upon him. The Fleet was very great, for in it were the Galleys of Sicily commanded by Tristan Dolz, and those of Catalonia by D. Raymund de Cardona, besides many Ships. The Galleys of Naples were left there for the Great Captain to come out and meet the King, which he did accord∣ingly On the 7th of September he set out from Naples by Land, the Weather being unfit for the Galleys. He stayed at Gaeta till the 20th of the month. With him was the Duke of Termens, and many Spanish and Italian Gentlemen. Prisoners he carried the Prince of Rosano, the Marquess of Bitonto, Alonso de Sanseverino, and Fabricius de Gesualdo, others he left sick at Naples. At the same time King Philip being come to Burgos, and lodged in the Constables House, immediately ordered the Lady Joanna de Aragon, the Constables Wife, to depart the Court, that the Queen might have no body to make her Complaints to. An Impeachment began to be drawn up against the Duke of Alva, and the Admiral was ordered to deliver up one of his Castles, he being grown into suspicion. He having consulted with the Marquess of Villena, the Duke of Najara, and Earl of Benavente, excused himself. This Posture of Af∣fairs seemed to threaten some great Revolution, when King Philip was seized by a Pestilential Fever, which brought him to his end in few days. Some suspected he was Poisoned, but his Doctors declared his Disease proceeded from too much Exercise. The Queen stayed by him during the whole time of his Sickness, and even after his Death could not be drawn from his King Phi∣lip dies. Body, notwithstanding that besides her ordinary Indisposition she was with Child. He died on the 25th of September, being 28 years of Age. He ordered his Body to be buried at Granada, and it was deposited at Miraflores, a Monastery of Carthusians near Burgos. Such was the end of that Prince in the very beginning of his Reign, being snatched away before he could enjoy the glory he might reasonably expect. How many ill grounded Hopes fell to the Ground upon his Death? And how many new Projects were started? He was of an indifferent Sta∣ture, of a fair Complexion, had a thin Beard, midling Eyes, long Hair, and all the Frame of his Body was comely and agreeable. His Spirit was generous, his Nature easie, (a Noble Fault) of which his Favourites made ill use, an Enemy to Business, addicted to Pleasure, and very apt to be led away by his Followers. In August was seen a Blazing Star for the space of 8 days between the West and South. After his Death it was supposed to portend the End of this Prince, and that some notable Change or Revolution would ensue in his Kingdoms. The End of the 28th BOOK.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXIX. CHAP. I. The Settlement made by the Nobility of Castile after the death of King Philip; The Ca∣tholick King goes over to Naples, his Reception in that City; No Settlement in the Government of Castile. Amidst their Confusions Duke Valentine makes his E∣scape. NO sooner was King Philip dead, but several Malignant Humours began to appear; there being no Body left to put a stop to Evils that Threatned the Commonwealth. Confusi∣ons upon the death of King Philip. The Queen to whom this principally appertained, was Incapacitated by reason of her In∣disposition. Her Son Prince Charles was a Child and Bred abroad, and if he Succeeded in the Place of his Mother, he must be governed by Strangers. Of his Two Grandfa∣thers, the Emperor was far off, and unacquainted with the Affairs of Spain. Only King Ferdinand remained, on whose Prudence they might Rely; but he was then absent, disgust∣ed, and some feared he would if he were in Power, Revenge the Affronts offered him. For this Reason many projected strange Methods of Government; and the day before King Philip died, there being no hopes of Life, there was such Contention among the Nobility as threatned a War. To prevent all Disasters, the Constable, the Admiral, and Duke del Infantado Met, and Declared for his Catholick Majesty, and joining with the Duke of Na∣jara and Marguess de Villena, the Heads of the contrary Faction at the Archbishop of To∣ledo's Lodging, they agreed that all Debates arising, should be absolutely decided by the Arch-Bishop, and 6 others chosen out of both Parties, and that their Determination should be binding. Thus on the First of October Articles of Agreement were Concluded upon among the Nobles, and they all Swore to stand by them, and they to continue in Force all the Month of December. Among other things it was Decreed, that none should presume to levy Forces. That none should Infest or Invade the Lands, Castles and Towns of another. That none Govern∣ment set∣tled for the pre∣sent. should Seize upon the Person of the Queen who was of Burgos, or of Prince Ferdinand who was at Simancas. Peter Nunez de Guzman his Governor, to prevent any surprize, had Recourse to the President and Council of Valladolid, and they went to Simancas, and brought away the Prince, Placeing him in Safety in the College of S. Gregory, Built by D. Alonso de Burgos Bi∣shop of Palencia, and given to the Dominicans. The same day the Nobility Concluded their Agreement at Burgos, the Catholick King arrived at Genoa. His Voyage was tedious, con∣trary Winds forcing him to touch at Palamos, and Toulon; and then to Coast along by Sa∣vona and Genoa. Before he came to that City, he was met by the Great Captain with the Gallies of Naples. The King received him with great Affection, being then convinced of his Fidelity; notwithstanding all Aspersions cast upon him, and spoke very much in his Com∣mendation, both before him and in his Absence. Most Men, but particularly the Italians could hardly be perswaded that so Wise a Man as the Great Captain would put himself in∣to King Fer∣dinand in Italy. the Power of so jealous a King. The City sent the King many Presents, tho' he would not Land, only advised them to preserve Peace among themselves, for he would be always ready to Assist his Brother the King of France. This made them quiet for the present, tho' soon after they obliged the King of France to come into Italy to pacifie them. Putting to Sea again from Genoa, contrary Winds forced him into Portoso, there on the 5th of October he received the News of the death of King Philip. The Archbishop of Toledo and others of his Party desired him to return with all speeed to Castile, as did also D. Alvaro Osirio who was with him, with the Character of Ambassador from King Philip. Yet he resolved to prosecute his Voyage. He writ to the Prelates and Nobility, expressing his Grief for the death of King Philip, and Recommending to them to continue Loyal to the Queen, pro∣mising to be with them as soon as he had settled the Affairs of Naples. From Portosi he went on to Gaeta, where at Puzol he spent some days to give the Neapoli∣tans time to prepare for his Reception, for they had never believed he would come, especially He comes to Naples. after the death of King Philip. From Puzol he went to Castel del Ovo, there on the First of November 20 Galleys came out of the Port, and the King went aboard the Admiral. The Cannon of the Galleys was fired first, and then that of the Castles and the Ships in the Har∣bour. This done, the Galleys laid along the side of the Mole. The King and Queen lan∣ded
by a wooden Bridge built for that purpose. The Great Captain and all the Nobility came out to meet them. Being come to the last Arch of the Bridge, the Great Captain lead∣ing the Queen, there the King swore to preserve the Privileges of that City. After which, they took Horse under a Canopy carried by the Elects of the People. Fabricius Colona carried the Royal Standard, given him by the King himself, with the Honour of Standard-bearer: Next him went the Kings at Arms, then the Great Captain, and on his Right-hand Prosper Colona: After them, the other Nobility and Ambassadors. But the pleasantest Sight of all was, the Prisoners then set at Liberty. Next behind the Canopy were the Two Cardinals of Borgia and Sorento. In this manner they were conducted through the Principal Streets, and Lanes of Gentlemen and Ladies richly clad, and great Companies of Vocal and Instrumental Musick. Being come to the Great Church, they were received by the Clergy and Religious Orders in Procession. At Castelnovo, where the Cavalcade ended, they were received by the Two Queens of Naples and the Queen of Hungary. Nextday the King rode about the City, accompanied by the Barons, and to Honour the Great Captain alighted at his House. He entred upon Business, and went about to restore Ten Barons who had Forfeited their Estates. A Parliament was held, where they took the Oath of Fidelity to the King, to his Daughter Queen Joanna, and their Heirs, without mentioning Queen Germana, contrary to the Agree∣ment made with France. The Pretence was, that she was indisposed, and had already been Sworn Queen of Naples at Valladolid. Mean while Castile was full of private Dissention, yet nothing broke out in publick. The Queen neither would nor could attend the Government; only such as would, obeyed the Orders of the Council. Some would have the Cortes assem∣bled to appoint Governours. This was chiefly urged by the Archbishop of Toledo, the Con∣stable, and the Admiral. They could never persuade the Queen to sign the Writs, and therefore the Council issued them. The Duke of Alva, tho' not at Court then, opposed it, Uncertain Govern∣ment of Castile. saying only the King could assemble the Cortes. For this reason, tho' some of the Commons met, nothing was done. All was in confusion, the Nobility at variance; but yet the most agreed that King Ferdinand ought to Govern The chief of these were the Archbishop of Toledo, the Constable, the Admiral, and the Dukes of Albuquerque and Bejar. Some of these would not allow him to Govern, unless he were present; others said he might, tho' absent. Of these was the Archbishop, who sollicited the King and Queen to give him as ample Com∣mission as when he Treated with King Philip. The Duke of Najara, D. Alonso Tellez, Bro∣ther to the Marquess of Villena, and D. John Manuel, were of Opinion that no account ought to be made of the Queen, no more than if she were dead, by reason of her Weakness; and therefore her Son Charles ought to succeed. But neither could they agree in this Point, for the Duke would have him brought to Spain. that such as the Kingdom made choice of might Govern in his Name. D. Alonso said, the Protectorship belonged to the Emperor as Grand∣father by the Father's side. This Opinion prevailed above the Duke's and the Emperour was desirous to take upon him the Government, proposing to come himself into Spain. Some there were that would commit the Government to the King of Portugal, and marry Prince Ferdi∣nand to his Daughter Elizabeth, proclaiming him King, being utterly averse to Strangers. Others were for marrying the Daughter of King Philip to the Prince of Viana, and so putting the Kingdom under the King and Queen of Navarre. These were all Chimera's, framed according to every Man's Interest. They said the Archbishop aimed at a Cardinal's Cap, and desired a Bishoprick for his Companion F. Francis Ruyz. The Duke del Infantado coveted the Bishoprick of Palençia for one of his Sons. The Duke of Albuquerque would have the Castle of Segovia restored to the Marquess of Moya. The Duke of Najara was displeased to see the Constable so great with the Catholick King, and the Marquess de Villena was envious of the Duke of Alva's Favour. The Earl of Benavente would have the Fair granted to his own Town of Villalon by King Philip, confirmed, tho' it was to the Prejudice of Medina del Campo. Others had other private Pretensions, without any regard to the Publick Good. To prevent Dis∣orders, the Archbishop of Toledo and the Deputies for deciding of Controversies, agreed that the Nobility should Swear, That before the Meeting of the Cortes, they would not call in any Prince, nor make any sort of Contract with any; and the Catholick King from Naples writ to many of the Nobility, promising to content them in their Pretensions. The Dissention among the Nobility gave occasion to many Disorders: One was, the escape of Duke Valen∣tine from Mota de Medina. He fled to the Lands of the Earl of Benavente, and thence, with the assistance of the said Earl, to Navarre. D. John de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, sent his Son Henry with Forces to besiege Gibraltar, a Place given him by King Henry, and taken away by King Ferdinand. The Governour in it defended himself; and Relief being sent by the Earl of Tendilla and the Councils of some Cities, the Siege was raised. The Archbishop of Sevill promised he would prevail with the Queen and the King her Father to stand Trial at Law with the Duke. Afterwards the Duke and Archbishop met at Toçina with the Earl of Urena and Cabra, and the Marquess of Priego, and there engaged together to stand by the Queen and Kingdom, to obey all Orders from the Queen and Council; but as for the Cortes, they protested, if their Resolutions were not for the Honour of God and the Advantage of the Queen and her Kingdom, they thought not themselves obliged to obey them. D. Rode∣rick de Mendoça, Marquess of Cenete, was upon marrying the Lady Fonseca; but some Dispute
arising about it, that Lady was by the Queen's Order secured; yet the Marquess took her by force out of the Monastery of Huelgas at Valladolid. At Toledo the Earl of Fuensalida would not allow Peter de Castilla as Governour; but the Family of the Sylva's, and some Soldiers sent by Ferdinand de Vega, standing by him, the Earl was forced to desist. At Madrid the Family of the Zapata's, and D. Peter Lasso de Castilla, took up Arms for the Catholick King, and John Arias to oppose them. At Segovia the Marquess of Moya secured the Great Church and Gates of the City, hoping to recover the Castle. Thus all the Kingdom was in a Flame, and no body to quench it. CHAP. II. Queen Joanna departs from Burgos; Is wholly incapable of having any Part in the Govern∣ment. The Affairs of Naples. Queen Joanna brought to bed of a Daughter at Torque∣mada. Great Disorders in Castile. THE Queen, by reason of her Indisposition, was rather a Hindrance than a Help to Business. Q. Joanna wholly unfit to Govern. On All-Saints-day having heard Mass in the Monastery of Miraflores, after Dinner she caused the Coffin of the late King her Husband to be opened, as was believed fearing it had been carried away to Flanders by the Flemings, who pressed to be paid their Arrears, in order to return home. This being proposed to the Queen, she gave no answer, but that she would take care to pray to God for her Husband. It was several times proposed to remove her from Burgos, but she could be persuaded to nothing that did not hit with her own Humour. Her Com∣pany she most delighted in was the Lady Joanna d' Aragon, the Marchioness of Denia, the Countess of Salinas, and the Lady Mary de Ulloa. Being very big with Child, she resolved to remove to Torquemada, and carry the Body of her Husband, in order to send it to Granada. The day before she set out, she commanded John Lopez de Lazarra her Secretary, to write an Order, by which all Grants made by her Husband were vacated. This being a thing of dan∣gerous Consequence, the Secretary delayed it, and thereupon she called Four of the Council to issue that Order. She appointed such as had been of the Council in the time of her Mo∣ther to continue, and the rest to be removed. Some of the Commons asking whether she would be pleased to send Two of them to intreat King Ferdinand to come and assist her in the Government: She answered, she would be glad of the King's coming, but said nothing as to the Government. Yet she bid them be gone, and not meddle in any thing that related to the Cortes without her Order, which was as good as dissolving that Assembly. The Queen set out by night with the Body of her late King, and came about midnight to Cavia, and thence went to Torquemada, where she stayed. At Burgos. remained the Council of State, the Archbishop of Toledo, the Admiral, and Duke of Najara. Differences arose about pro∣tracting the Term prefix'd to the Agreement made betwixt the Nobility. The Constable op∣posed, and the Admiral was for prolonging of it, and having the Council Obey till the Ca∣tholick King came. To obstruct whose coming, some proposed the Queen should marry; but the Queen would hear nothing of it. Many Ambassadors from the Princes of Italy resorted to King Ferdinand at Naples. It was contrived, with the Assistance of the King of France, to obstruct the Emperour's taking the Embassies to K. Fer∣dinand at Naples. Government of Flanders into his hands, that so neither he nor his Grandson Prince Charles might come into Spain. The King of France endeavoured to join in League with King Fer∣dinand and the Pope against the Venetians, to recover such Places of his as they possessed. The Catholick King was willing, that so he might regain what they had in the Kingdom of Naples. Yet he thought better to be at Peace with that Republick, that he might be at lei∣sure to attend the more important Affairs of Castile. Some time before died his Ambassador to that State Laurence Suarez, and his Son Gonzalo Ruyz de Figueroa succeeded him. The Pope, tho' assisted by the King of France against John de Bentivoglia, who had seized the City Bo∣lognia, yet thought good to make use of the Catholick King, who sent to acquaint Bentivoglia, That he could not but assist the Pope in recovering the Patrimony of the Church. Hereupon Bentivoglia offered to admit the Pope upon certain Conditions, which was accordingly done. King Ferdinand sent Antony d' Acun̄a to Congratulate with the Pope, and endeavour to join in a strict League with him, to the end to obtain the Investiture of Naples for himself and his Heirs, notwithstanding the Agreement made with France. For Kings regard nothing but their own Interest. At the end of the Year he sent F. Giles de Viterbo, Vicar-General of the Order of S. Augustin, to offer his Forces to the Pope for recovery of the Lands of the Church, and to make War upon the Turks. At this time the restoring of the Barons of the Faction of Anjou to their Estates was in hand, a thing very difficult, their Lands being given to those that had Served the King. He was forced to requite those that were in possession, to buy out whole Estates, and alienate part of the Crown-Lands to satisfie them all. The Chief Men restored were the Princes of Salerno, Bisignano, and Melfi, the Dukes of Tangeto and Arri, the Earls of Conça, Morcon, and Monteleon; and besides these, Alonso de Sanseverino. The Dukedom of Sessa was bought outright, and given to the Great Captain, a Reward due to his
great Services. Many Italians and Spaniards had the Lands before given them taken away, which the latter easily condescended to, being desirous to return to their Country, and content with any Recompence there. Yet even some of these had no manner of Satisfaction made them in Spain. Special regard was had to content the Ursini and Coloneses, the Two Prin∣cipal Families in Rome. Care was also taken to gain the People of Siena, and the Lord of Piombino, Two important Places for the Affairs of Italy. The Bishop of Louvain and Luke de Reynaldis came to Naples from the Emperour, about settling the Government of Castile. They having Complimented the King upon his Arrival in that Kingdom, proposed, that the Gover∣nours then in being might be continued; and also that the Barons of the French Faction might not be restored, because it was entertaining of so many Enemies. Likewise, that the King should promote the Match before agreed upon, betwixt Prince Charles and Claudia Daughter to the King of France. In order to it, they said it was convenient the King and Empe∣rour Practices of the Em∣peror. should meet. The Emperour designed to go into Italy, under colour of being Crowned; but his Design was to oppose the King of France, who it was reported would go to Rome, to be Crowned Emperour, and create the Cardinal d' Amboise Pope, of which the Emperour grievously complained in the Diet assembled at Constance. The King immediately answered the Ambassadors, That the Government of Castile belonged only to his Daughter; and in case she could not or would not manage it, then it only appertained to him as her Father, and the same if she should die; and that as yet there were no Governours chosen in Castile. As for the Barons, that he had promised, and could not avoid restoring their Estates. That in what related to the Marriage, the King of France had acquainted him how displeasing it was to his People to have Britany and Milan alienated from the Crown; and therefore desired the Princess might be married to the Duke of Angouslesme, who was Heir to the Crown. And as to the Interview, he said he should be glad of it when Affairs would permit. In a Second Audience, the Ambassadors offered, that the Emperour would give the King the Title of Emperour of Italy, resign over all his Right to it, and assist him in the subduing of it. To this he answered, it was not not convenient the Emperour should lessen his own Au∣thority; and for himself, he coveted no more of Italy than was his own. Then they propo∣sed a League betwixt the Emperour, Kings of France and Spain, and the Pope, against the Ve∣netians. To which he said, if the rest were agreed, he would not oppose it. Then the King sent D. Jayme de Conchillos, Bishop of Girachi, his Ambassador to the Emperour, on pretence of prevailing with the Flemmings to admit of the Emperour as their Governour, for Prince Charles his Grandson. But at the same time the King's Designs, were quite different, as has been said. Queen Joanna was at Torquemada at the beginning of the Year 1507. There on the 14th 1507. of January she was delivered of a Daughter called Catherine, afterwards Queen of Portugal. Q. Joanna delivered of a Daughter. She was in great danger for want of a Midwife, which want was supplied by the Lady Mary de Ulloa, her Favourite and Lady of the Bedchamber. The Council laboured to compose the Differences betwixt the Nobility; but their Orders were of small force. The Mutiny at Cordova about the Inquisitors encreased. The chief Reason was, That the Prisoners to make their Business the more intricate, had brought in many of the Nobility as accessary to their Crimes. This the People attributed to the Malice of the Inquisitors. At Toledo the Silva's and Ayala's took up Arms; the latter in defence of a Judge sent by the Council with Power to controul the Governour and his Officers. The Silva's stood by the Governour, and had se∣cured Mutiny at Toledo. the Gates and Bridges; but the People favouring the Ayala's, the Governour was tur∣ned out, and several People were killed and wounded in the Scuffle. Madrid was in a Mu∣tiny betwixt the Two Parties of D. Peter Lasso de Castilla, and John Arias, the former being for King Ferdinand. Philip Vasquez d' Acun̄a, Governour of Cuenca, kept the Council of that City under, so that they could not obey the Queen's Orders. James Hurtado de Mendoça turned him out of the City, and ordered that the Council ould chuse Two Alcaides, who should Govern the City in the Queen's Name. At Segovia the Marquess of Moya had besieged the Castle, turned out all the Citizens that opposed him, and burnt the Church of S. Romanus, where some of them made themselves strong. The Queen only served to hinder Business. To prevent these Mischiefs spreading in Andaluzia, the Marquess de Priego, the Earl of Cabra, the Earl of Tendilla Captain-General of Granada, and the Lieutenant of Murcia, associated themselves in favour of the Queen, to preserve that Country in Peace till the coming of the Catholick King. The Earl of Uren̄a coming to Court, interposed his Authority for reconci∣ling the Nobility, tho' at the same time he made his Complaint, and had his Pretensions, which tended to be restored to the Government of Carmona taken from him, and to obtain a Commendary for his Son Roderick. The Admiral raised Men to recover Villena and Villa∣vicencio, wrongfully taken from him, as he said, by the Duke of Alva. The Duke of Najara had a Guard of armed Men, and at Villamedina took up the House appointed for the Council, who thereupon removed to Palencia. D. John Manuel came to Tarquemada with 60 Horse. The Marquess de Villena and Constable levied Forces. The Archbishop of Toledo gathered 400 Men, and ordered the Ordinary Guards to be paid out of his own Revenue, and would have had them Sworn to the Queen and himself. Hereupon the Duke of Najara raised more Men, and they were near coming to Blows with those of the Archbishop. To prevent these Disor∣ders, it was desired that no armed Men but those of the Queen and Archbishop should re∣main
in the Town, upon which the Duke went away in a Passion. D. John Manuel the Ad∣miral, the Marquess of Villena, Earl of Benavente, and Andrew de Burgo the Emperour's Am∣bassador, met at Grijota, in order to hinder the coming of King Ferdinand, unless he first sa∣tisfied them in all their Demands. They met again at Duen̄as, and gave out that the Arch∣bishop and Constable kept the Queen Prisoner. Lastly, they went to Villalōn to levy Forces to relieve the Castle of Segovia; besieged by the Marquess of Moya. The King of Portugal held Intelligence with the Marquess de Villena, to obstruct the coming of the Catholick King, and promote the Emperor's bringing Prince Charles, and taking upon him the Government. At this time came from Rome D. Antony Acun̄a, being made Bishop of Zamora. He had Or∣ders to make large Promises to the Marquess de Villena, as did D. Alvaro Osorio to the Duke of Najara and D. John Emanuel, if they would take Party with the Catholick King; but all was to no effect. The Constable complained that D. Antony Acun̄a his Enemy was preferred; and the Council, because he was not presented by the Queen, sent Orders to the Chapter not to admit him; or if admitted, not to continue him. These Orders came after he was in possession, and the Alcaide Ronquillo was sent to put them in execution, but the Bishop ap∣prehended and kept him Prisoner. The Governour of Salamanca and Duke of Alva gathered a Force to revenge that Affront done to the Queen; but all in vain, for D. Antony kept his Bishoprick. All the Kingdom was full of Tumults, Oppression, Complaints, and Pretensions. The best strove to sell their Loyalty at as dear a rate as they could. The Catholick King, tho' he designed not to take Revenge of those that opposed him, thought it hard to buy what he looked upon his as Right. At this time the Council Prorogued the Cortes for 4 Months whereupon the Commons, who still continued at Burgos, returned home. CHAP. III. The Death of Duke Valentine, and Troubles in Navarre. The Treaty betwixt the Em∣peror and King Ferdinand. The Great Captain courted to Command the Venetian and Pope's Forces. King Ferdinand settles the Affairs of Naples, and departs from that City. WHilst Castile was thus in confusion, new Troubles broke out in Navarre. King John taking the advantage of the Catholick King's absence, who always was a Check up∣on him, resolved to be revenged upon his Constable the Earl of Lerin, who had offered him many Affronts, and still been protected by Castile. As soon as Duke Valentine, the King's Brother-in-Law, came into Navarre, he made him his General, resolving to seize all the Earl of Lerin's Estate, as of an Enemy to the Crown. He gathered 200 Light-Horse, 150 Men at Arms, and about 500 Foot. With this Force he sate down before Viana on the 10th of March. In this Place was Luis de Biamonte the Constable's Son. The Night following being very stormy, the Constable with 200 Horse put Supplies into the Place, leaving 600 Foot without in ambush. Being discovered in his return, he was charged by Duke Valentine with about 70 Horse, the King coming after with the other Forces. The Duke having killed and taken 15 Men, pursued to the place where the Ambush lay; there he was wounded, and dismounted by a Horseman, and those that lay in ambush rushing out, killed and stripped him to his Duke Va∣lentine slain. Shirt, without knowing who he was. He being slain, all the Forces returned to their Camp. The Constable went away to Lerin. Thus died he that had been the Firebrand of all Italy. It was observed he died in the Diocess of Pamplona, which was the First Bishoprick he had, and on the same Day he had first taken possession of it, He left only one Daughter in the keeping of her Unkle the King of Navarre, who pressed the Siege, being reinforced with some Troops from the Constable of Castile. The Duke of Najara and Archbishop of Zara∣goça prepared to relieve the Place; yet it was surrendered, and the King with 600 Horse and 8000 Foot laid siege to Raga. The Council of Castile sent to require the King of Navarre to forbear using Force for 3 Months. The King offered to condescend, if the Earl would come and beg his Pardon, deliver up the Town of Lerin, send his Sons to Court, and then K. John of Navarre subdues his Rebel∣lious Sub∣jects. himself depart the Kingdom. Still whilst they treated, the King went on, took Raga and all other Places from the Earl; only Lerin held out some time, but was at last forced to submit. Upon this the Earl went away to Castile, and thence to Aragon, having not a Foot of Land left him in Navarre, Now the Catholick King's Party, what with Promises, and what with present Gifts, was grown considerable. Many died of the Plague at Torquemada, the Infection spreading this Year through all Spain. The Queen went to Hornillos, a Village a League from that Town, resolving to expect the coming of her Father thereabouts. She had restored to the Council such as were of it in her Mother's time, and discharged the rest. It was endea∣voured to persuade her to recall that Order, but she could not be prevailed upon. At Segovia the Marquess of Moya continued the Siege of the Castle; and tho' well defended for 6 Months, it being undermined, the Besieged surrendered on the 15th of May.
The Emperor's Ambassadors at Naples pressed for an Interview betwixt their Master and King Ferdinand, and proposed Nice or Rome for the Places to meet at, saying, They could dispatch more Business in one Day being together, than in several Months at a distance. King Ferdinand gave many Excuses to avoid meeting; whereupon the Ambassadors required him not to return to Castile till all Differences were adjusted; for otherwise the Emperor would also be obliged to go thither, and then all the Mischiefs that should follow, must be imputed to him Treaty betwixt the Empe∣ror and King Fer∣dinand. that was the Cause of them. This looked more like a Challenge, than an overture of accom∣modation. Yet the Ambassadours were appointed to treat with the great Captain, the Lord Chamberlain and Secretary. King Ferdinand pleaded that being the Queen's Father he had Right to be her Tutor, besides that it was her own desire, and he had been appointed by the Will of Queen Elizabeth. For the Emperor it was urged, that the Queen being non Compos, the Prince was to succeed, and then his Grandfather by the Fathers side ought to be Tutor, be∣sides that the Catholick King was married contrary to his Promise made to Queen Elizabeth, and that the Nobility were against him. As a medium between both it was proposed on the Emperors part that the Government should be committed to 24 Persons, 16 to be chosen by the Emperor and 8 by the Catholick King that of all Preferments the King should have the Gift of one 3d part, and the other two should be in the disposal of the Governours, that the Revenue should be divided into four parts, 3 for the Queen and the 4th for the King. That to secure Prince Charles in the Succession, all Places of Strength should be put into the Emperor's hands. That some Children of the Nobility should be sent to Flanders to he bred with Prince Charles, and Security given that none should suffer for having taken part with King Philip. That the Investiture of Naples should be obtained in such manner as might not be prejudicial to Prince Charles. The Catholick King not approving of these Conditions prepared to depart, notwith∣standing the Emperor required him not to stir till all differences were agreed. Nevertheless King Ferdinand being resolved to return to Spain, sent Bernard Dezpuch Master of Montesa, Antony Augustino, and Hierome Vic his Ambassadors to do Homage to the Pope, which was done on the 30th of April, and at the same time an offer made of all the King's Forces for the Ser∣vice of the Church. The Pope was well pleased; and in Token of his Affection sent the gol∣den Rose that is blessed on Christmas Night to the King. He also offered the Great Captain to make him General of the Forces of the Church, which Employment the Venetians also offe∣red him in their Service, but the King prevented him from accepting either by promising again to make him Master of the Order of Santiago. That it might not be thought an empty Pro∣mise, the King had given Orders to his Ambassador Antony Augustino to obtain leave of the Pope to resign that Dignity into the hands of the Archbishops of Toledo and Sevil and the Bi∣shop of Palencia, that with the Pope's Commission they might confer it upon the Great Captain. The Pope was willing the Great Captain should have that Dignity, but would not agree to the Commission as a lessening of his own Authority. Hereupon the business was delayed, which made it all to be looked upon as an Artifice of the King's to draw the great Captain out of Ita∣ly. He was then Duke of Sessa and Terranova and Constable of Naples. King Ferdinand being desirous to alter the late Capitulation with France touching the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Naples in case Queen Germana had no Issue, promised to assist the Cardinal d' Amboise towards obtaining the Papacy if he would prevail with the King of France to quit his pretensions to that Crown. It was indeed but reasonable since the King of France obstructed the Marriage of Prince Charles with his Daughter Claudia and thereby cut him off the Inheritance of Britany and Milan, that he should make him amends by quitting all Claim to Naples. The King of France would not hearken to this, being offended the Nobility at Naples had taken the Oath of Fi∣delity to Queen Joanna without making mention of Queen Germana, contrary to the express Articles sworn to by the Catholick King. It was very requisite the Catholick King should hasten his Return to Spain, but the Af∣fairs of Naples detained him. He pressed the Pope to grant him the Investiture of Naples, Affairs of Naples set∣led. which the Pope at last was willing to grant upon condition he would recover for him the Cities of Faença and Arimino taken by the Venetians. This being a thing could not be present∣ly done the King resolved to depart. To oblige the great Captain the more, he caused a publick Instrument to be made in vindication of his Loyalty, Copies whereof were sent to all Princes John de Lanuça, Viceroy of Sicily, was come to Naples, him he resolved to leave with the same character in that Kingdom. But both he and his Son dying before the King embarqued, he gave that Command to his Nephew D. John de Aragon Earl of Riba∣gorça, and sent D. Raymund de Cardona to Sicily with the Title of Lievtenant General. The Viceroy was commanded not to disoblige the Coloneses and Ursini, and Bartholomew de Albi∣ano, having submitted himself to the King, was restored to his Estate. Besides the ordina∣ry Forces, 200 Gentlemen were appointed to do Duty at Court, and 150 Duccats pay al∣lowed each of them. Philip Ferreras was sent Ambassadour to Venice to assure that State, which was jealous of the Kings designs. All things being thus ordered the King set fail on the 4th of June with 16 Galleys. Eight days before the Ships set out under the Command of the Earl Peter Navarro. At this time the Kingdom of Portugal was in a most flourish∣ing condition, and famous throughout the World, for the valour and prudence of its King. On the 5th of June the Queen was deliver'd at Lisbon of a Son called Ferdinand, who died in the flower of his Age. Some Noblemen of Castile and particularly the Marquess de
Villena would have committed the Government of Castile to the King of Portugal, to exclude King Ferdinand. He thought not good to hazard any thing upon the promises of so few, tho at the same time he was willing to have had a hand in the Government of Castile that he might marry his Children to those of Queen Joanna, and make use of the Forces of that Crown for advancing his Conquests in India and Africk, or at least have conveyed that Power to the Emperour. The King of Navarre also offered the Emperour passage through his King∣dom, being jealous if the Catholick King grew so powerful he would never desist till he had deprived him of his Crown. The Nobility of the Emperor's Faction pressed him to come over: and it is certain he had possitively resolved to take a journey into Spain. CHAP. IV. The King of France enters Italy with an Army to reduce Genoa, has an Interview with King Ferdinand, who returns to Castile. The Spaniards defeated in Africk The Empe∣ror offended at King Ferdinand. The King of France was now in Italy, whither he came with a great Army to reduce the Ge∣noeses, who had mutiny'd against the Nobility, beaten down the French Arms, and cho∣sen for their Duke one Paul de Nobe a Silk-Dyer. It was agreed that as the Catholick King re∣turned to Spain he should meet the King of France at Savona. Bad Weather detained the Gal∣leys some time at Gaeta and upon the Coast of Rome and Tuscany. On the 26th of June the Catholick King came to Genoa, where Gaston de Foix, Lord of Narbonne, his Nephew and Brother∣in-law, went out to meet him with 4 Galleys. The King of France being before at Savona met the Catholick King upon the shoar, and having embrac'd him, they went together under a Canopy to the Castle where they were to be entertained, King Ferdinand on the right hand the King of France on the left and the Queen in the middle. The more to honour them, the King of France went to lodge in the Bishop's House. On S. Peter's Day they heard Mass to∣gether, Fench King in I∣taly. the Nobility of both Kingdoms vying in costly Apparel. That night the Queen sup∣ped with the King of France her Unkle, and the two Cardinals of S. Praxedes and d' Amboise with King Ferdinand. Next night the two Kings and Queens supped together and with them the great Captain at the Request of the King of France who spoke very honourably of him. King Ferdinand commended the Lord of Aubigny, who thence conceived hopes of recove∣ring the Earldom of Venafra, which he was possess'd of when the War broke out. It was the Subject of many reflections, that the Catholick King put himself into the Power of his Com∣petitor. The chief business discoursed of at this Interview was about the League against the Venetians, before designed. The Kings having taken leave of one another, King Ferdinand prosecuted his voyage which was tedious, by reason of contrary winds. He arrived at Coda∣ques upon the Coast of Catalonia on the 11th of July, but because the Plague was in that Countrey, sailed away to Valencia, where he arrived the 20th of the same Month, Peter Navarro with the Ships being there before. The King and Queen were received with great Pomp, the Queen under a Canopy it being the first time she had been there. Upon the arrival of the King Castile easily submitted, and particularly the Marquess of Villena complyed, upon promise that the King would stand Tryal at Law with him. Satisfaction in Mony and Lands was promised the Duke of Medina Sidonia for Gibraltar. The Archbishop of Toledo was pleased that besides other Favours the King had obtained him a Cardinals Cap and the Office of Inqui∣sitor. General of Castile and Leon, the Archbishop of Sevil resigning that place. F. John de Enguerra the King's Confessor was Inquisitor General for Aragon. Thus the Nobility were gained and all Castile pacified. What gave scandal was, that the King prevailed with the Pope to grant the Archbishoprick of Santiago to D. Alonso de Fonseca, a Youth of no Learn∣ing, and what is worse, his own Father resigning of that See to him upon the Title given him of Patriarch of Alexandria. True it is, they had both done good Service which might in some measure excuse this odious Succession of a Bastard to his Father's Bishoprick, but yet it was no way justifiable. It remained now to reduce the Duke of Najara D. John Manuel, and the Earl of Lemos who in Galicia had taken the Town of Ponferrada, belonging to the Crown, and most of the Marquisate of Villafranca to which he pretended a Right. The Duke of Alva and Earl of Benavente were sent against him with 2000 Horse and 3000 Foot. The Duke of Bragança would have assisted the Earl, but the King of Portugal would not permit: yet he prevailed with the Archbishop that the Earl should not be put out by force of Arms, but by regular course of Law. At last the Earl submitted, restored Ponferrada and the Marquisate of Villafrrnca. D. John Manuel being resolved to go for Flanders whether all the Flemmings were already gone, gave up the Castle of Burgos to the Duke of Najara, and that of Jaen to the Earl of Cabra. About this time the Catholick King received the News that the Alcaide de los Donzeles Gover∣nour Interview of the two Kings. of Mazalquivir having made an Incursion towards Tremezen with 100 Horse and 3000 Foot, being upon his Return with a great Booty near Oran, was overthrown by the King of Tremeçen. The Governour fought his way through with 70 Horse and got to Mazalquivir, on∣ly 400 more escaped by flight and as many were taken. Upon this News the King sent some Galleys from Valencia to the Relief of Mazalquivir. At Naples James Garcia de Paredes, James
de Aguayo, and Melgarijo turned Pyrats. James Garcia went to the Levant and did great harm there. The other two lay at Ischia and robbed all that came in their way. Michalot de Pratz a brave Commander, sent by the Viceroy to suppress them near Belveder, in the Prince of Bisig∣nano's Country, took their Vessels, and they fled to the Shore. Scarce had Michalot done this, when the Caravel he went in was lost and he drowned in a sudden Storm. About this time Alonso de Albuquerque, sent the last Year with Tristan d' Acun̄na to India to succeed Francis de Almey∣da as Governour, before he came to him, subdued the Island of Ormuz, one of the most impor∣tant Places in those Parts, lying at the Mouth of the Persian Gulph; and tho barren, extremely hot, destitute of Water, and not above 4 Leagues in Length, yet for all this, vastly rich and de∣lightful, by reason of its great Trade in the East. On the Coast of Africk, upon the Ocean, the Portugueses took Safin a large and populous City, once subject to the Kings of Morocco, but at that time to particular Lords of its own. Queen Germana was left at Valencia, as the King's Deputy, but she soon went away to Cas∣tile. King Fer∣dinand re∣turns to Castile. Count Peter Navarro set out with most of the Forces that came in the Fleet towards Alma∣cen, and the King set forwards on the 11th of August. The Archbishop of Zoragoça, and Dukes of Medina Celi, and Albuquerque went out to meet him. On the 21th of August he came to Montagudo, the first Town in the Kingdom of Castile. Thence he went to Almaçan and Aranda. All the way he was met by Prelates and Noblemen. Till this time Queen Jo∣anna stayed at Hornillos, the Roof of the Church where her Husband's Body lay was burnt, and the Body removed to the House where she lay: Hearing of her Father's coming she went to Tortolei a Village near Aranda. On the 28th of August the King came to Tortoles and the Queen falling at his Feet, he knelt down to take her up. After embracing they withdrew, and having conferred together the Queen went away to her Lodgings. Next day the King went to visit her, and after that began to dispose of all things. There they continued 7 days, and then went to Santa Maria del Campo. The King would have given the Archbishop the Cardinals Cap there, but the Queen said it was not fit she should be where there was any Rejoycings, and therefore it was given him at the Church of Mahamud. He was honoured with the Title of Cardinal of Spain, but the private Name was of S. Balbina. Andrew de Burgo, the Emperour's Ambassador, ceased not after the coming of the Catholick King, to perswade many to declare a∣gainst his Government. The King sent him away, and with him John Albion, to desire the Empe∣rour to send an Ambassador that would promote the Peace and Welfare of those Kingdoms. He undertook to reconcile the Admiral, Constable, and Duke of Alva, and secure them to his own Interest. He gave Orders for appeasing the Tumults in Andaluzia, and for securing the Sea-Ports of Biscay and Galicia, ordering the Earl of Lemos and D. Ferdinand de Andrada to come out of Galicia, where they had great Power. The same was done at Cadiz, Gibraltar and Malaga, and for more security the Moriscos, that is, those descended of Moors, were ordered to retire 2 Leagues from the Sea Coast, that all those Shores might be peopled by the antient Chri∣stian Race, but this could not be compassed. D. John Manuel had possession of the Castles of Burgos, Jaen, Plasencia, and Miravete, which the King commanded his Lieutenants to deliver. He of Burgos delayed, whereupon the King sent Peter Navarro with Forces to besiege it, and then the Lieutenant submitted, as did all the others. D. John Manuel by the way of Navarre went into France designing for Germany. There only remained the Duke of Najara, who forti∣fied that Town and levied Forces, hoping the Emperour would soon come, and therefore acted in the Name of Prince Charles, as his Viceroy. To put a stop to these troubles, the King set out towards Burgos, and from Arcos sent Ferdinand Duke of Strada to require that Duke to deliver up his Forts. The Duke excused himself. The King leaving the Queen at Arcos, because she would not go to Burgos, where she lost her Husband, went on himself in order to force the Duke. Count Peter Navarro was sent with his Forces, the Guards and Artillery, to seize all the Duke's Estate and his Person. Several of the Nobility interposed, and the Duke submitted to deliver up many Places of Strength. Hereupon, the King pardoned the Duke, and not long after by degrees, restored all those Forts to Duke Antony Manrique, Earl of Triveno, Son to the Duke. To oblige the Duke of Albuquerque the King proposed to marry the Lady Joanna de Aragon Daughter to the Archbishop of Zoragoça to the Dukes eldest Son, but this Match did not succeed, and she was afterwards married to D. John de Borgia Duke of Gandia: The Emperor was much offended at the Kings of France and Spain. He complained of the Catholick King, for that he had seized upon the Government of Castile without agreeing with The Em∣peror dis∣gusted with Fer∣dinand. him. It was reported he would send 3000 Germans to Naples, to favour the Pretensions of the Duke of Calabria; and it was also suspected that the Great Captain forwarded this Design, in hopes to marry his eldest Daughter to the Duke, and would accept of the Command of General of the Forces of the Church, with a Pension of 6000 Ducats. But those were mere Jealousies, and soon after the Emperor declared, he would break through the Dutchy of Milan and with all his Forces invade the State of Venice. The Catholick King took care to secure the Duke of Ca∣labria, who was at his Court. The Emperor was offended at the King of France, for that he sup∣ported the Duke of Guelders, and had made War in Burgundy at the time that King Ferdinand went into Italy. He did not approve of the Conference betwixt the two Kings, and took it ill that the Match betwixt Prince Charles and the Princess Claudia was broke off. At this time that Lady was contracted to the Duke of Angoulesme Heir to the Crown of France, and there∣fore the Emperor pleaded the Investiture of the Dutchy of Milan, according to the Agreement
made with King Philip, was void. The Catholick King valued not the Match, thinking by this means to secure Prince Charles the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Naples. The King of France not regarding the Emperor's Complaints, he thought of marrying Prince Charles to Mary Daughter to the King of England. This Match was so far advanced, that the Princess's Portion was assigned to be 250000 Crowns, and the Time and Place of Marriage appointed. It was concluded the Consent of King Ferdinand and Queen Joanna should be asked, but the Marriage to be consummated tho they opposed it. This Match pleased the King of England, yet he was willing to oblige King Ferdinand, in hopes himself to marry Queen Joanna: The Catholick King gave him good words to secure the Marriage of his Daughter the Princess Catherine with the Prince of Wales. But the King of England at the same time delayed, in hopes to promote the Match for himself, which was a strange Complication of Politicks. Death broke off all the King of England's designs. Many said King Ferdinand intended to marry Queen Joanna to his Brother-in-law Gaston de Foix, to put him in possession of the Kingdom of Navarre to which he pretended a Right, and by that means take revenge of the King and Queen of Na∣varre who had often offended him; and lastly, in siezing the Estate of of the Earl of Lerin, who was married to his Sister, and refusing to restore and stand Tryal with him. D. John Manuel was come to the Emperor's Court, but not so well looked upon as before, which he perceiving thought of returning to Spain. In order to it he proposed to King Ferdinand either to re∣store him to his Estate and treat him according to his quality, or else to give him leave with his Wife and Children to go to Portugal, otherwise he must like a desperate Man do all that he could against him. Nothing was granted him, and he tho out of favour, by his sharp Wit sowed Discord betwixt those two Princes. It was also believed Cardinal Bernardin de Carvajal the Pope's Legate at the Emperor's Court did King Ferdinand no good Offices there; wherefore the King requested of the Pope that he might be removed and called back to Rome, which at last he obtained. CHAP. V. The Designs of bringing Prince Charles into Spain. King Ferdinand in Andaluzia to settle that Country. Penon in Africk taken by the Spaniards, the Portugueses loosers at Aza∣mor in that part of the World, yet relieve Arzila. THe Emperor now declared his warlike Preparations were not designed against Naples, but against the French in Milan, and tho the Pope and King Ferdinand interposed for a Peace The Em∣peror pro∣ceeds a∣gainst Mi∣lan. or Truce, he would not give ear to it unless upon very advantageous Conditions. He left the Princess Margaret his Daughter to Govern Flanders, in Jan. 1508 marched towards Italy, and in February came to Trent. There he took the Name of Emperor Elect, being till then called King of the Romans. His General was the Marquess of Brandenburgh, his Forces so small, that no great matter could be expected of them. The first Hostilities were committed in the Valley of Cadoro, subject to the Venetians, and the Emperor understanding that 5000 Swiss were going into the French Service, returned into Switzerland to prevent it, and thence to Luxem∣burgh because French Forces marched that way. Upon his departure most of the Germans at Cadora disbanded, and 2000 that remained were defeated by the Venetians. The Catholick King, tho setled in the Government of Castile, thought himself not secure, knowing there were many that persisted in their aversness to him. Among the rest the Bioshps of Badajoz and Cata∣nia signalized themselves, having no hopes of Preferment unless the Government were changed. The Pope at the King's Suits, commissioned the Archbishop of Toledo and Bishop of Burgos to prosecute them, He of Badajoz, endeavouring to make his escape into Flanders, was apprehen∣ded near Santander, and after being Prisoner some time at Atiença, was remitted to the Archbi∣shop of Toledo according to the Pope's Order. D. Jayme de Conchillos Bishop of Girachi, the King's Ambassador at the Emperor's Court, pressed to have Prince Charles sent to Spain, to have him bred after the manner of the Country, and to secure his Succession; but the Emperor would never consent to it, unless he were allowed to share in the Government, and also in the Revenue; by which means he thought to supply his great wants. He endeavoured to draw into his Service 1500 of the Catholick King's Soldiers that served in France, but the Catholick King sent Alonsode Olmedes to keep them where they were. They obeyed tho' the Marquess of Brandenburgh declared them Rebels, as if they had been the Emperor's Subjects. The Empe∣ror highly resented that the Catholick King would not admit of Andrew de Burgo, whom he sent with the Character of his Ambassador. At this time King Emanuel of Portugal extended the Glory of his Name, still sending new Fleets to India, and obtaining fresh Victories. The Kings of Calicut and Cambaya were professed Enemies of the Portugueses, and therefore made War upon the King of Cochin and other Princes, who received them into their Ports, and traded with them. The Nobility of Andaluzia were offended, for that the Catholick King made not so great account of them, as of those of Castile. The chief of the Malecontents were the Marquess Malecon∣tent in Andaluzia. of Priego, D. Peter Fernandez de Cordova and the Earl of Cabra. In a Tumult at Cordova the Officers of Justice Apprehended one of the Mutineers, whom the Bishop's Servants rescued.
King Ferdinand set Fernan Gomez de Herrera an Alcalde de Corte, with some Men to punish that Insolency. He having begun to do his Duty, the Marquess of Priego sent him Orders to de∣sist and depart the City till the Kings Pleasute were farther known. He on the contrary Commanded the Marquess and his Brother in the Kings Name to be gone out of Cordova. The Marquess gathering a Force apprehended the Alcalde, but released him again upon promise; that he would not return to Cordova. This Affront the King highly resented, and set out himself to revenge it. At Arcos he took Prince Ferdinand from the Queen against her will, upon pretence of his Health. He summoned Forces to join him in order to pu∣nish that Insolence, and in pursuance thereof, the Deputy of Sevil, D. In̄igo de Velasco Or∣dered all betwixt 60 and 20 years of Age to be ready to march against the Marquess. The Great Captain writ to the Marquess his Cousin, advising him to submit; and he intended so to do. The Nobility, and particularly the Great Captain, laboured to appease the King, who was resolved not to give way to Intreaties. The Marquess came to submit himself when the King was at Toledo, and was Ordered to Wait 5 Leagues from Court, and deliver up all his strong Holds. He obeyed. With the King went to Cordova 1000 Horse and 3000 Foot. The Marquess being taken, and charged with High Treason, would make no de∣fence; but cast himself upon the Kings Mercy. Judgment was given, some Gentlemen were condemned to death, some of the Commonalty executed. The Houses of D. Alonso de Carza∣ma Punish∣ment of the Muti∣niers. and Bernardin de Bocanegra who were in Prison, were Razed. The Marquess was ba∣nished for ever out of Cordova, and out of Andaluzia during the King's pleasure; who was also to secure all his strong Holds, except his House at Montilla, which was to be de∣molished. The Great Captain, and Constable were extreamly disgusted at this Severity, insomuch that it was thought the latter would have departed the Kingdom. From Cordova the King sent D. Henry de Toledo and the Licenciat Ferdinand Tello to do Homage to the Pope, for the Queen his Daughter. At Naples died the Queen of Hungary, so very Poor, the Viceroy was forced to pay the charge of her Obsequies. She was buried in the Church of S. Peter, Martyr, where the Body of her Mother lies. King Ferdinand went to Sevil, where he was received with great Pomp and Joy. With him went the Queen his Wife, and Prince Ferdinand. Henry Duke of Medina Sidonia was left young by his Father, under the Guardianship of D. Peter Giron, to whose Sister he was contracted. The Duke was haughty, and turbulent, and had designed to assist the Marquess of Priego. To appease the King, it was offered he should deliver up his chiefest Fortresses, and the Constable would be bound for his good behaviour. Nevertheless, neither the Duke nor D. Peter Giron came to submit themselves to the King, who thereupon put D. Peter from his Guardianship, banishing him from Sevil, and all the Lands of Medina Sidonia, and the Duke was commanded to deliver up all his Places of strength. They both fled to Portugal, and the King Orderèd their Lieu∣tenants to deliver the Forts. Those of Niebla and Figueras would not submit, and there∣fore Niebla was taken by force and plundered. This Severity made all Places comply. This Estate was put into the Hands of the Archbishop of Sevil, and the Council Ordered to prosecute D. Peter Giron. The Nobility, but chiefly the Constable resented this rigorous Proceeding, yet the King was resolved to humble their Pride, and the Archbishop of Toledo advised him so to do. The Catholick King spent all Autumn in settling Andaluzia, and thence promoted the War in Africk, assisting the Portugueses who were much distressed. The King of Fez being at variance with his Two Brothers, it was thought a good Opportunity to gain some ad∣vantage in Africk, and to this purpose a Fleet was fitted out at Malaga. The Pyrates of Penon in Africk ta∣ken by the Spaniards. Velez de la Gomera did much harm at this time along the Coast of Granada. Count Peter Navarro our Admiral gave them Chase, took some Vessels, and pursued the others to an Island opposite to Velez, and the common refuge of those Corsairs. There were 200 Moors in the Fort of that Island, which they call Pen̄on; these thinking the Earl would Attack Velez, abandoned the Island, to defend the Town; but he immediately possessed himself of the Ca∣stle, which Commands the Harbour and City, and thence did them so much harm, that the Moors were forced to live under Ground. This Place was taken on the 23th of July, and Ordered to be Fortified and well Garrisoned. The Portugueses made War on the Coast of Africk along the Ocean. A Moor called Zelum, Cousin to the King of Fez, offered to put them in a way to take Azamor, a famous City on that Coast. King Emanuel giving Credit to him, fitted a Fleet which carried 400 Horse and above 2000 Foot, under the Command of D. John de Meneses. This Fleet sailed from Lisbon on the 26th of July, and found all things otherwise than they expected, for the Citizens defended themselves well, and Zelum aided them. This brought the Portugueses into great Danger, and they were forced to de∣part Portugueses sustain loss at Azamor but relieve Arzila. without doing any thing. The Weather being bad, and the Tides low, some Vessels, and among them one Gally struck, the rest came to the streights Mouth. This loss seemed to be a special Providence; for the King of Fez with a mighty Power sate down before Arzila on the 19th of October. D. Vasco Coutin̄o Earl of Borva was Governor, who the first day repulsed the Moors with much Bravery; but the next day a Breach being made in the Wall, they entred the City by Force. The Earl was wounded in the Arm with a Dart, and obliged to retire into the Castle, which was not well provided for a Siege. The Ca∣stle was battered and undermined. This News being carried to Tangier, where D. John de
Meneses lay, and to Sevil where the Catholick King was, D. John set out immediately with his Fleet. He fought Two days with the Enemy, who were already Masters of one of the Bulwarks, drove them thence, and relieved the besieged, reduced to extreamity. The King sent Orders to Peter Navarro who lay at Gibraltar to Succour Arzila. Ramiro de Guzman Go∣vernor of Xerez, with a Ship wherein were 300 Foot and some Horse, sailed first, and got into the Castle with John de Meneses. With this Relief the besieged not only defended them∣selves; but sallying, drove the Enemy from their Ditch and Out-works. On the 30th of October came Count Peter Navarro, who plaid his Cannon so furiously among the Moors that Encamped along the Shore, that they were forced to break up; and the King of Fez ha∣ving burnt the Town, retired to Alcaçarquivir. The saving of this Place contributed much to preserving of the others on the Coast of Africk. King Emanuel joyful for this good News, sent 6000 Cruzados as a Present to Peter Navarro, for his good Service, and the same Sum to the Governor of Xerez. They both excused themselves from receiving this Present, saying, they served the Catholick King, and expected their Reward from his Bounty. He returned thanks to the Catholick King for so seasonable a Relief, yet at the same time com∣plained of his taking Pen̄on as appertaining to the Conquests of Portugal, being in the King∣dom of Fez. The Catholick King pleaded that Veles was a distinct Kingdom of it self, and that Pen̄on was a Charge and no Profit, only to secure the Coast of Granada, yet offered, if it appeared to belong to the Crown of Fez, to deliver it up whensoever King Emanuel should attempt any thing on that Side. In November died the Earl of Lerin at Aranda de Xarque in A∣ragon, his Son D. Luis de Biamonte succeeded him. CHAP. VI. Discovery of Conspiracies in Spain; The League of Cambray; The Soldans Fleet worst∣ed in India; Death of Henry VII. of England; Henry VIII. succeeds him. THE Catholick King returned from Sevil to Castile in the dead of Winter for Two rea∣sons. Conspira∣cies in Castile dis∣covered. One was, that D. Peter Brother to D. James de Guevara, who was in Germany in the Emperor's Service, coming to Spain disguized in the Habit of a Footman, was taken, and being put to the Rack, declared, that many of the Nobility held Intelligence with the Emperor; the chiefest of them, were the Great Captain, the Duke of Najara, and Earl of Urena. The other was, that the Duke del Infantado and other great Men conspired against him, and the Cardinal of Spain had a Hand in those Proceedings. The Earl of Tendilla by his Wisdom drew the Duke del Infantado and others of that Family from their purposes, by his good Advice. King Ferdinand reduced the others, some by fair Promises, and some by Threats. In particular, he agreed with the Marquess of Villena, and in lieu of that City and Almansa, besides the full value of them, gave him Tolox and Monda in the Kingdom of Gra∣nada, wherewith he seemed content. The Emperor to be at leasure to Revenge himself of the Catholick King, was for composing all Differences with France, and in order to it, the Princess Margaret on his Part, and the Cardinal d' Amboise for the Pope and King of France met at Cambray. Thither repaired Jaime de Albion the Catholick King's Ambassador in League of Cambray. France, and tho' the Emperor designed to exclude King Ferdinand, the Business was so ma∣naged by the Pope, that those Three Princes joined in League with him against the Venetians for Recovery of what that State had taken from each of them. He that first recovered his own, was obliged to assist the others, and the Emperor and King of France to go in Person to this Expedition. The first day of April following, they were to commence the War. The Emeperor offered by that time to give the King of France the investiture of Milan, pro∣vided he paid him 100000 Crowns for the same, and should be obliged to assist him to Re∣cover what the Venetians had taken from him, and yet the Emperor not to be obliged to Aid, him for recovery of what appertained to Milan. That Judges should be appointed to decide all Differences betwixt the Emperor and the Catholick King, lest they should be any hindrance to their Proceedings against the Venetians. It was agreed the Duke of Savoy should be invited to come into the League, on account of the Kingdom of Cyprus, which he pretended to, and the Venetians were possessed of. Also the Duke of Ferrara, and Marquess of Mantua, who had their Pretensions. What is more, the Kings of Spain and France, to whom the People of Florence and Pisa had referred all their Differences, delivered up Pisa to the Florentines, in hopes to draw them into the League, and for the Sum of 100000 Ducats. A shameful thing for such Princes to sell the Liberty of a Republick that had put it self into their Hands; but chiefly King Ferdinand was to blame, Pisa being immediately under his Protection. This League was concluded on the 10th of December. Thence the Princess Margaret went to Franche Comte to take Possession of some Towns the King of France had ingaged to deliver to the Duke of Burgundy. This same Month died at Naples Robert de Sanseverino, Prince of Salerno. He left a young Son called Ferdinand, who was Heir of his Estate, and Hatred to the Crown of Aragon, which produced his Ruin. King Ferdinand swore to the performance of the Articles aforesaid, at Valladolid, in the beginning of the fol∣lowing Year before the Pope's Nuncio and the Emperor, and King of France's Ambassadors
Canspon Soldon of Caire, moved by the Importunity of the Kings of Calicut and Cambaya, Soldans Fleet worsted in India. but much more by the decrease of his Revenue, occasioned by the Loss of the Trade of Alexandria, resolved to ruin the Trade of the Portugueses in India. To this purpose, he first sent the Guardian of Hierusalem to the Pope as has been said: Finding this did not succeed, he fitted out a Fleet at Suez in the Red Sea, consisting of 6 Gallies, 1 Galleon and 4 Car∣racs, and in them 800 Mamalukes, which, were his best Men, being most Renegado Christi∣ans. The Command of this Fleet he gave to Mir Hozem, who sailing out of the Red Sea, directed his Course for India. Francis de Almeyda the Portuguese Governor there, had sent his Son Laurence with 8 Sail to secure the Coasts, and Convoy the Ships bound for Portugal some part of the Way. He burnt many Ships of the Moors, and was in the Port of Caul when News was brought to him of the Soldan's Fleet. Melique, Governor of Diu for the King of Cambaya had joined the Turks with 34 Sail. These small Vessels sailing under the Shore, the Portugueses descryed only 5 Ships, which they thought to belong to Alonso de Albuquerque, whom they expected. Part of the Enemies Fleet entred the Harbour, and that day was spent in Cannonading one another. Next day Laurence de Almeyda Attacks Mir Hozem's Admiral Gally, but could not grapple by reason it was Ebb, and the Enemy lay in shoal Water. He sustained much loss, because the Enemies Vessel was higher Decked, and was himself wounded with Two Darts. Pelayo de Sousa and James Perez took each of them one of the Enemies Gallies, and thus that day ended. The day following Melique came into the Port with his Vessels, whereupon the Portugueses at midnight resolved to put out to Sea. But the Enemy perceiving them move, fell upon them, and so pierced the Admiral which was the last, that she made much Water, and what was worse ran a Ground; and the Water Ebbing, none of the others could come in to assist her. The Enemy Cannonaded her till such time as Laurence de Almeyda being killed with a Cannon-shot, and 80 of 100 Men he had, the other 20 with the Ship were taken: The rest put to Sea and recovered the Port of Cananor; whence they sent advice of what had hapned to the Governor. This Battle was fought towards the end of the Year. Almeyda and Albuquerque came both to Cananor, and Albuquerque contending to take upon him the Government according to the King's Order, Almeyda sent him Prisoner to Cochin. This done, he gathered the greatest Fleet he could, at Onor burnt several Ships of Calicut, destroyed the City Dabul and many Vessels there, and on the 5th of January 1509, sailed towards Diu, a Port of Cambaya where the Enemy lay. Mir Hozem placed himself in shoal-water under the Cannon of the City. He had at this time 3 Caracs, 3 Galleons, 6 Gallies, and 4 Ships of Cambaya, besides Meli∣que's small Vessels. Almeyda had in all 19 Sail, and in them 1300 Portugueses, and 400 Malabars. The Two Fleets Cannonaded one another, but could not draw near because the Weather was calm. Next day they engaged, and after a very bloody Dispute, the Por∣tugueses obtained the Victory. Of the Enemy 4000 were slain, of which number were all the 800 Mamalucs, except only 22. Three of their great Ships were sunk, besides ma∣ny small Vessels; Two Galleons, Two Gallies and Four great Ships were taken. The Commanders Mir Hozem and Melique escaped. On our side 32 were killed and 300 wound∣ed. This done, Almeyda returned to Cochin, where there was much contention about the Government, which was ended by Ferdinand Coutinho, who this Year sailed from Lisbon with 15 Ships, and Orders to put Alonso de Albequerque in Possession of the Government, as was accordingly done. From Valladolid the Catholick King went to Arcos, where he found the Queen his Daughter so ill Lodged, that the last Winter she fell sick through the coldness of the Room she lay in. In February he removed her to Tordesillas, and with her the Body of her Husband, which was afterwards by her Son the Emperor Charles the V, buried in the Royal Chapel at Granada. The Queen lived out the rest of her days in that Town. Queen Joanna's Condition was such, she might better be counted among the Dead than the Living. Her two Sisters ran different Fortunes. The Queen of Portugal lived happy, aboun∣ding in Riches, and having a numerous Issue, and this very Year she was delivered of a Son called Alonso, who was afterwards a Gardinal, but died young. The Princess of Wales in England, neither Widow nor Wife, was hardly used by her Father-in-Law, who hoped that way to induce her Father to give him in Marriage his other Daughter Joanna Queen of Ca∣stile. The King's death, which hapned upon the 21st of April, for the present put an end Death of Henry the VII. of England, Henry the VIII. suc∣ceeds him to those Discontents: Soon after, the Match before agreed upon betwixt this Lady and the Prince of Wales, after his Father's Death King Henry VIII. was consummated. That Princess had no Inclination to this Match, but it was for the Conveniency of both Kings. King Henry was of a graceful Presence, but very Lewd, especially towards his latter days, insomuch that to gratifie his Lust, he cast off all Obedience to the Church, and made way for all the Confusion that afterwards hapned in that Kingdom. Whilst Queen Catherine was yet li∣ving, tho' he had by her a Daughter called Mary, upon pretence she had been married to his Brother, and that the Pope could not dispence to marry her, he put her away, and pub∣lickly married Anne of Bullen, whom afterwards he convicted of Adultery, and executed. By her he had Elizabeth, afterwards Queen. Next he married Jane Seymour, who died in Childbed; but her Son lived, and was called Edward VI. His Fourth Wife was Anne of
Cleves, from whom he was Divorced, and to that purpose made a Law which allowed of Divorces. His Fifth Wife was Anne Howard, who was put to death for Adultery. The last was the Lady Catherine Parr, from whom he was not divorced, nor had any Children by her, death putting an end to his wicked Courses. King Ferdinand made publick rejoycing at Valladolid, upon the News of the Marriage of his Daughter on Midsummer-day. He also agreed, that Prince Charles should marry that King's Sister, and ordered Gutierre Gomez his Ambassador to Compliment her upon the same. At Valladolid Queen Germana was delivered of a Son on the 3d of May; he was called John Prince of Aragon, but died within a few Hours. His Body was deposited in the Monastery of S. Paul in that City, and thence tran∣slated to Poblete, the ancient Burial-place of the Kings of Aragon. The Catholick King pre∣pared to make War upon the Venetians, and grounded the Justice of his Proceedings, princi∣pally upon Two Points: The first, That those Cities the Venetians were possessed of in Apu∣lia, were mortagaged to them by Ferdinand II. King of Naples, and that they neither perfor∣med the Conditions of the Mortgage, nor would restore those Places when the Money was tendred to them. The second was, That the Catholick King had been at a greater Expence either in gaining Cephalonia for that Republick, or in the War made upon France on their ac∣count, and upon promise that they would allow him 50000 Ducats a Year towards the Charge of that War, which Debt, tho' it had been demanded of them, they would never pay, nor so much as acknowledge. CHAP. VII. The Cardinal of Spain takes Oran in Africk. The War against the Venetians and their Losses; They recover Padua and other Places. GReat Preparations were made throughout all Spain for the Conquest of Africk, and the Cardinal of Spain did not only furnish Money towards it, but designed to go over in Oran in Africk ta∣ken. Person. The Rendezvous of the Forces was at Carthagena; Stores of Ammunition and Provi∣sions were made there and at Malaga. About 14000 Men were gathered, as well Horse as Foot. The Principal Commanders were James de Vera, who had charge of the Artillery; D. Alonso de Granada Vanegas, Lord of Campo Tejar, who Commanded the Forces of Andaluzia; and Colonel Hierome Vianelo, accounted an able Seaman. Count Peter Navarro was General, and there was a great Number of Gentlemen Volunteers. The Fleet, consisting of 10 Gal∣leys and 80 other Vessels, met at Carthagena the last Month. Before they set sail, some Dis∣putes arose betwixt the Cardinal and the Earl, on account that the former bestowed some Commands on his Servants, which the other had before promised to others. Some Persons interposing, the Count swore to obey the Cardinal in all things. On the 16th of May they set Sail from Carthagena, and the next day being the Feast of the Ascension, entred the Port of Mazalquivir. It was declared their Design was upon Oran, a famous City in the Kingdom of Tremecen, containing about 6000 Inhabitants, seated near the Sea, partly in a Valley, and partly on the side of a Hill, encompassed with a strong Wall, the Streets all contrived after the rude manner of the Moors, distant from the City of Tremecen 140 Miles, and opposite to Carthagena. It was once one of the most Principal Marts on that Coast, by reason of the great resort of Genoese and Catalonian Merchants, and was so rich as to maintain a small Fleet, which infested the Coast of Andaluzia. Our Fleet entred the Harbour at Night, and the next Morning began to land the Men. They drew them up in Four Bodies, each con∣taining 2500 Men, with the Horse upon the Flanks. Mean while the Cardinal was in the Church of Mazalquivir; but when they were ready to join Battel with the Moors that came to hinder their Approach to the City, he came out mounted upon a Mule, the Clergy and Re∣ligious attending him. One F. Ferdinand, of the Order of S. Francis, carried the Cross, with a Sword girt upon his Habit, as had all the others by the Cardinal's Order. He encouraged the Men, offering to lead them into the midst of the Enemy; but the Commanders begged of him to offer up his Prayers to God for them whilst they fought. He complied, and return∣ing to Mazalquivir, continued at Prayers in the Chapel of S. Michael all the time of the Bat∣tel. It was Three in the Afternoon, and the Earl being doubtful whether it were not better to delay the Fight till next day, advised with the Cardinal, who was of Opinion not to suffer, the Soldiers to cool. The Signal being given, they began to march up the Hill, and tho' the Moors, to the Number of 12000, besides the Recruits that constantly came to them, cast down all sorts of Weapons upon them, they gained Ground. Some Soldiers of Guadalajara advanced contrary to Order, one of whom was killed, and the rest forced to retire. That Man's Head being cut off, was carried to the City, and there rolled about the Streets, the Rabble crying the Alfaquin (so they called the Cardinal) was killed; till a Christian Slave, who knew the Cardinal by sight, undeceived them. Our Horse began to Skirmish with the Enemy, among whom our Cannon did some execution; and then the Foot came on, dri∣ving them, tho' the Hill was uncouth, till they came to certain Conducts of Water; There they halted a while, and removing their Cannon to the highest part of the Hill, with that
and their Swords put the Moors to flight, pursuing them beyond the City, because the Gates were shut against them. A great number of Moors sallied out, under the Leading of the Mezuar or Governour of Oran; and whilst these were hotly engaged, some of our Men at∣tempted to scale the Walls, the Inhabitants opposing them. They that were in the Galleys attacking the side next the Sea, had leisure to make themselves Masters of certain Towers and all the Alcaçava. Thus the City was entred by the Christians, and plundered. Those Moors that fought in the Field seeing the Spanish Colours upon the Walls, thought to have got into the Town; but some of our Men sallying, they were taken in the middle, and a great Slaughter made. 4000 of them were killed, and about 5000 taken. This Victory was looked upon as miraculous, because of the Disorder of our Men, but much more because immediately after the Mezuar of Tremecen came with such a Multitude, that it would have been impossible to have taken the City had he come sooner. This Success was attributed to the Prayers of the Cardinal, who entred the City with Joy, and Consecrated the Great Mosque by the Name of S. Mary of Victory. After which, he returned the next day with his Galleys to Carthagena. He left the Command of that City to Peter Navarro till the King's Pleasure were known. From Carthagena he sent the King an account of the Victory, and went himself to his Town of Alcala, where he entred more like a Religious Man than a Conqueror, nor per∣mitting any manner of Publick Reception to be made for him. By the League concluded at Cambray, it was agreed that each of the Confederate Princes Venetians set upon on all sides should begin to War upon the Venetians on his side, by the First of April at farthest. King Ferdinand sent Colonel Zamudio with 2000 chosen Foot to compleat those at Naples to 5000. All things proceeded very slowly, because the Earl of Ribagorça was looked upon as a Person unfit for that Undertaking, or for the Government, as also because it was discovered that the Barons of that Kingdom conspired to shake off the Spanish Government. Fabricius Colona also advised not to attempt any thing upon the Towns of the Venetians in Apulia, till there was a Fleet ready to hinder them from Relief by Sea, which was looked upon as Treacherous, or at least very weak Counsel. The King of France sent la Trimouille with Forces over the Alpes as soon as the Season would permit, and himself on the First of May made his Entry into Milan. Having gathered his Army, consisting of 40000 Men, he entred the Territories of the Venetians, and took several Towns. The Venetians had raised 50000 Men under the Venetian Army routed. Command of the Earl of Petillano, and Bartholomew d' Albiano, Two Great Generals of the Family of the Ursini, and Subjects to the King of Spain for their Estates in Naples. Near Ri∣volta the Two Armies met and engaged. The Fight was long doubtful, till the Venetian Foot being broke by the French Artillery, and then charged by the Horse, they were forced to fly. A great Number was killed. Count Petillano with a few escaped. Bartholomew d' Al∣biano and many more were taken. This Victory, called of Giaradada, was very Famous, and in Memory of it the King caused a Chapel to be built in that Place, calling it S. Mary of Vi∣ctory. Immediately upon it the Cities of Crema, Cremona, Bergamo, and Bressa, were surren∣dered to the French, which was all they pretended to according to the Articles of the League. The Pope's Forces took Solarolo, Frença, Arimino, Ravena, and Servia, which was all that be∣longed to him. The Earl of Ribagorça had gathered his Army by the end of May. Villamarin Earl of Capacho the Admiral was ready at Messina with 12 Galleys and 10 Ships, and only ex∣pected the French Fleet to join him, in order to go upon the Coast of Apulia; but there was no need of these Preparations: For as soon as the Viceroy of Naples laid siege to Trana, the Seigneury of Venice sent Orders to all their Governours on that Coast to deliver up the Cities. The Duke of Ferrara and Marquess of Mantua took some Places from the Venetians, to which they pretended a Title. Venice was brought so low, that it was reported the Senate designed to submit it self to the King of Hungary, to be by him protected. There remained the Emperour, who in June was 7 Leagues from Inspruck, on his way to Italy. On the 8th of that Month the Florentines subdued the City of Pisa. As soon as the Emperor came to Esternan, the Venetians proposed an Accommodation with him, and it was said they sent him a Blank signed for him to make his own Conditions, so he would protect them in that desperate Condition. As the Emperor marched all Places submitted to him, so that the Venetians had not a Foot of Land left them in Italy, except the City Venice, which the Emperor designed to besiege by Sea and Land. To this purpose he would have the French and Spanish Fleets join to shut up the Sea, whilst his and the French Forces attacked it by Land. Nay, he proposed when taken to have it divided into Four Parts, with as many Castles, whereof each of the Confederate Princes should have one. In order to it the Catholick King, tho' he disbanded all the Land-Forces save 500 which were to be transported into Spain, ordered the Fleet to stay in Italy, yet afterwards neither the Pope nor he would consent to the utter subverting of that State, considering it would redound only to the Advantage of France, by reason their Dominion of Milan lay so near, and the others so far off. Nay, they apprehended it might be a step to∣wards making that King Master of all Italy, and that then he might make a Pope according to his own Mind; which the present Pope was so apprehensive of, that both he and the Catho∣lick King laboured all that in them was to disappoint an Interview proposed betwixt the Em∣peror and King of France.
As soon as the King of France possessed himself of what he desired, he returned to Milan, Padua re∣covered by the Ve∣netians. and thence to his Kingdom. He left 1500 Horse in the Cities newly taken, and Charles d' Amboise as General. The Imperial Forces lay at Treviso and Friouli, which was all the Ve∣netians had left them in Italy. Andrew Gritti, by Intelligence he had with some of the Inhabi∣tants, recovered the City Padua for the Venetians, 42 days after it had submitted to the Em∣peror. This News being brought to him, he retired into the Country of Tirol. With the same ease the Venetians took Assula, where they put to the Sword 150 Spaniards that were there in Garrison; the same they did to 200 more they found in Castelfranco, and took Alvarado their Captain Prisoner. Most of the 1500 Spaniards that went over from the French Service to the Emperor, were thus killed or taken. Verona being about to revolt, was prevented by the Sieur de la Palisse, who secured it till the Emperor, who expected Supplies out of Germany and Flanders, sent to take possession of it. He made up an Army of 30000 Men. The King of France sent him 1300 Horse, the Pope 300, and afterwards 1000 Spanish Foot. With these Forces he laid Siege to Padua on the 5th of September. The Earl of Pitillano, and all the Chief Commanders of Venice, threw themselves into the City. Their greatest Strength con∣sisted in 2000 Albanian Horse, who did much harm among the Imperialists. A Breach being made, the City was assaulted, but the Enemy repulsed twice, fresh Supplies still coming in to the Besieged, till they made up 25000 Men. In the first Attack many of the Spaniards were killed, being blown up in a Bastion they gained. This discouraged the Imperialists so, that about the beginning of October they raised the Siege. Their Retreat soon changed the face of Affairs. The People of Vicenza being assisted from Padua, took Gaspar de Sanseverino, left in that City with 3000 Germans. The Forces of Venice recovered Este, Monfilice, and Mon∣tagnana, and then laid siege to Ferrara; but the Forces of France and the Pope coming to the Relief of the Town, and having sunk 17 of their Galleys on the Po, they were forced to draw off. Andrew Gritti had before taken the Marquess of Mantua, and was about changing him for Bartholome d' Albiano, who was in great Esteem, tho' blamed for his Rashness at the Battel of Abdua. Verona was disposed to submit to the Venetians; D. Jhen Manuel was in it with 2000 Spaniards ill paid, but some French Forces came and secured that Place. The main Strength of the French Army lay between Bressa and Verona. John James Trivulcio was in Bressa. D. John Manuel resigned his Command to one Luis de Biamonte, who had been some years in the French Service. CHAP. VIII. The Accord betwixt the Emperor and King Ferdinand. Bugia and Tripoli in Barbary taken by the Spaniards, and Goa in India by the Portugueses. AFter the Earl of Lerin Constable of Navarrè died, the Catholick King was the more pres∣sing with the King of Navarre to restore Luis de Biamonte, Son to the Deceased, and Navarrois and Arra∣gonians make War. his own Nephew. Nothing could be obtained, tho' it was pleaded the Son had no hand in his Father's Crimes. The People of Sanguessa made an Inroad into Aragon, on pretence to take Ul and Filera, which Towns they said belonged to them. On the other side, the Arago∣nians ravaged all the Plain of Sanguessa up to the Walls of the Town. These things seemed to tend to a War; but being private Grievances, they were not looked upon as a Breach. D. Luis sought to recover his Estate by force of Arms. The Emperor and King of Spain pro∣posed some means to agree about the Government. The Catholick King, tho' well fixed in the possession of it, was willing to agree to prevent Disorders which the Discontented Nobi∣lity seemed to threaten. Yet he would keep the Government as long as his Daughter lived; but if she died, then to resign to Prince Charles when he was 20 Years of Age. The King of France and Cardinal d' Amboise were chosen Arbitrators. Andrew de Burgo came to Spain to Capitulate, and was well received. The Bishop of Catania was with the Emperour upon the same account. At length these two Princes agreed upon these Articles: That the Ca∣tholick Accord betwixt the Empe∣ror and K. Ferdinand. King should continue in the Government; but in case he had any Issue Male, then Prince Charles should again be Sworn Heir to the Crown of Castile in the Cortes, and King Ferdinand should also Swear to Govern that Kingdom to the Prince's Advantage. The Em∣perour would have had the Prince receive the Revenue of the Kingdom of Asturias, but the King said it had never allowed any Prince, and therefore consented to allow him 30000 Du∣cats a year, and to add to that Sum whensoever he was married. The Emperour also de∣manded for himself 100000 Ducats, of which 50000 were allowed him to be paid by the Florentines, on account of the delivery of Pisa to them. King Ferdinand also offered to assist the Emperour against the Venetians with 300 Men at Arms, to whom he would give 4 or 5 Months Pay. It was also agreed, that whensoever Prince Charles would go into Spain, a Fleet should be sent for him, and Prince Ferdinand should go to Flanders as soon as the other was landed in Spain. Upon these Conditions they joined in League, and all Differences were re∣conciled. Because the King of France and Cardinal d' Amboise had been chosen Arbitrators, these Articles were sent to them to peruse, and they approved of the same on the 12th of
December. This done, all their Estates were restored to those who had been of the Empe∣rour's and Prince's Party; and D. Peter de Guevara was set at liberty according to Capitula∣tion. Upon which, some Gentlemen departed the Kingdom, pretending to go serve the Prince. Among these D. Alonso Manrique, Bishop of Badajoz, was most remarkable. At this time the Earl of Pitillano the Venetian General died at Lonigo in the Territory of Vincenza. King Ferdinand ordered the Earl of Lemos, who still held Intelligence in Portugal and Flanders, to deliver up the Forts of Sarria and Monforte to the Lord of Poça, then Governour of Ga∣licia. D. Raymund de Cardona, Viceroy of Sicily, was appointed to succeed the Earl of Ri∣bagorça at Naples, and D. Hugo de Moncada to be Viceroy of Sicily. Various Reports were spread abroad concerning this Change of Viceroy at Naples. Most Men said the Earl of Ribagorça was not capable of that Command: Others believed the Ursini were the cause of his removal. But who can stop the Mouths of the Multitude, or fathom the Designs of Princes? King Ferdinand being desirous to employ his Forces against the Infidels, was always for con∣cluding Ferdinand desires Peace with Ve∣nice. a Peace with the Venetians, and joining in League with them, after each of the Con∣federates had recovered what he pretended a right to. Thus he proposed with the joint Forces of them all to make War upon the Turks, the common Enemy of Christendom. It was hard to reconcile such different Interests. He proposed to join his Forces with those of the other Princes, and to go himself in Person to the Levant. This his Design he made known to the Pope, who approved of it, and offered to forward it. The Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily lay opportunely for this Enterprize. Those who well weighed the Circumstances of Things, thought it not fit for the King at his Age, and in the present posture of Affairs in Castile to absent himself so far off. It was thought more expedient to continue the Conquest of Africk so fortunately begun. Count Peter Navarro had 13 Ships well equipped in the Port of Mazal∣quivir. He sailed thence with some chosen Troops to the Island Yviça, where Hierome Vianelo expected him with another part of the Fleet. There they staid some days, it being the dead of Winter. It was declared the Fleet was designed for Bugia. They sailed from Yviça on the first of January, 1510. The Forces consisted of about 5000 Men, well provided with 1510. Cannon. Bugia is seated on the Coast of Numidia, not far from the Borders of Mauritania Bugia and other pla∣ces taken by the Spaniards. Caesariensis. First it belonged to the Kings of Tunez, then to those of Tremecen, who pos∣sessed it till recovered by Abuferriz King of Tunez. He left it to his Son Abdulhazis, with the Title of a New Kingdom. From him was descended Abdurrahamel the present Possessor, who usurped it from Muley Abdalla his Brother's Son, and the Rightful King. It is seated on the side of a high Mountain, with a good Castle at the upper part, all of it encompassed with an old but strong Wall. It used to contain 8000 Inhabitants, and was the chief University for Philosophy in Africk. The Country about it is fitter for Gardens and Orchards than to bear Corn Our Fleet came before it on the Eve of the Epiphany, but the Men could not land because the Wind was contrary. On the top of the Mountain appeared the Moorish King with 10000 Foot and some Squadrons of Horse. They began to come down to the Shoar to hinder our Men landing, but the Cannon of the Fleet made them draw back, and clear the Landing∣place. The Earl drew up his Men in Four Bodies, and began to ascend the Hill in order to fight the Moors, but they retired into the City. Our Men, some through an Ascent in the Old City which was abandoned, and others from the top of the Mountain, soon scaled the Walls. Within they found no resistance; for as they entred on the one side, the King and his Men fled out at the other. This Success terrified all Africk, and the more for that Muley Abdalla the Lawful King escaping out of Prison, fled to the Earl. He, after taking the City, attacked Abdarrahamel in his Camp 8 Leagues thence, and put him to flight, upon which many Towns along that Coast submitted themselves. The first of these was Argier, afterwards the Terror of Spain, and grown Rich with our Spoils. After Argier the King of Tunez and City Tedeliz did the same. Even the King of Tremecen and Moors of Mostagan subjected themselves to the King. Articles were concluded with them all, by which they were obliged to set free all Christians, and pay a yearly Tribute. This took up the Earl some time, yet he omitted nothing that might tend to advance the Conquest. At this time Alonso d' Albuquerque in India Goa in In∣dia taken by the Portugueses made himself Master of the City Goa, the Metropolis of the Portugues Empire in those Parts. This City stands in an Island made by a River falling into the Sea. It is about 5 Leagues in length, was subject to Zabaim Hidalcan, and at that time ill provided, he having drawn away the Garrison to serve in his other Wars. Timoja a Pirate who robbed along those Seas with 14 Vessels, gave notice of it to the Governour, and he found all his Intelligence to be true. On the 16th of February he entred that Port, and easily made himself Master of the City. Francis d' Almeyda his Predecessor, in his return to Portugal, having put in to Water at the Cape of Good Hope, was killed in a Skirmish with the Cafres, so the Natives of that Country are called. The Catholick King had made choice of D. Garcia de Toledo, Eldest Son to the Duke of Alva, to be General in Africk, designing to make use of Count Peter Navarro in his Wars in Italy. D. Garcia made some considerable stay before he departed Spain. The Earl not to lose time, as also because the Plague began to spread in Bugia, on the 7th of June set out with 8000 Men towards Favignana, a small Island off of Trapana in Sicily; thither re∣paired to him 11 Galleys, besides other Vessels of Naples and Sicily; so that he was 14000 Men strong. With this Fleet he soon came in sight of Tripoli on the Coast of Barbary, for∣merly
subject to the King of Tunez, now to a Lord of its own. Most part of it is encom∣passed by the Sea, and towards the Land it has a broad wet Ditch and a Wall with many Towers. About 14000 Moors came to defend it. The Earl landed his Men in Two Bodies, the one to engage the Moors that came down to the Shoar, the other to storm the City; be∣sides, some Soldiers and Seamen attempted to scale it on the side of the Sea. The Fight was obstinately maintained for two hours, after which the Moors that were without fled, and the City was scaled near the Gate called of Victory. John Ramirez an Aragonian was one of the first that mounted the Wall. Yet the City was not so taken, but was won Inch by Inch, the Moors defending every Street, not that they hoped to overcome, but resolving not to die un∣revenged. About 5000 Moors were put to the Sword, and their Xeque or Lord was taken. On our side many Men of Note were killed, and among them Christopher Lopez d' Arriaran the Admiral. The City was plundered. All the Booty was given to them that fought; the Captives and Merchandise were assigned to those that guarded the Fleet. This was contri∣ved by the Earl, that all might be satisfied, and reap the Profit of that Victory. CHAP. IX. The War in Italy. The Pope grants the Investiture of the Kingdom of Naples to King Fe∣dinand. D. Garcia de Toledo defeated and killed at Gelves. THE War was carried on against the Venetians but coldly; for the King of France having recovered his own, returned into France, and the Emperour into Germany before he had done what he designed. It was agreed that the Confederates, in pursuance of the Treaty of Cambray, should assist the Emperour till he were possessed of all that the Venetians held from him. The Prince of Anhalt commanded the Imperialists, but had very small Forces, and no Vincenza taken by the Impe∣rialists. Money to pay them. With the Assistance of the French he recovered Vincenza. By Order of the Catholick King the Duke of Termens carried 400 Men at Arms to his Assistance. The Pope sent no Supply, either that he thought not himself obliged any farther, or because he was offended at the King of France, for that he favoured his Enemy the Duke of Ferrara. At last the Pope absolved the Venetians of all Ecclesiastical Censures, and joined in League with them, being unwilling that Republick should quite be extirpated, wherein the Catholick King agreed with him. Besides, he designed to make use of their Forces against the Duke of Ferrara, whom he had already, as a Rebel, adjudged to forfeit his Estate. Hereat the King of France was so incensed, that he ordered all the Revenues of the French Cardinals to be stopped, and them to come to reside upon their Benefices. Still these Discontents increased, the Pope, who had an Interest at Genoa, with the assistance of the Venetian Galleys, endeavouring to stir up the Commonalty of Genoa against the French. His Design took no effect. He prevailed with the Venetious to set free the Marquess of Mantua, designing to employ him in the War against France, provided he gave his Son as Hostage for his Fidelity. The Marquess was re∣leased on the 14th of July. The Duke of Urbino was appointed General of all the Forces of The Pope seizes the Lands of the Duke of Ferrara. the Church, and took all the Territory belonging to the Duke of Ferrara in Romania beyond the River Po. Chatillon a French Commander marched thither with 300 Lances, and the Pope's Forces raising the Siege they had laid to Lugo, retired to Imola. Thus the War was carried on betwixt the French and the Pope, who aspired to restore to Maximilian Sforcia the Dutchy of Milan. The Dutchess of Terranova continued at Genon, and the Pope still ma∣king instance that her Husband the Great Captain should come into his Service, the French grew jealous of her stay there; therefore her Husband ordered her immediately to return to Spain. There arose a Dispute now betwixt the Inhabitants of Fuenterabia in Biscay, and those of Andaya in Guienne about the River Vidasoa, which parts Spain and France, each pretending Right to the said River. They came several times to Blows about it, and at last the Two Kings appointed Judges to decide that Controversie, who ordered that the River should re∣main in common; but the French were forbid to use Vessels that had a Keel: And thus the Difference ended. The Catholick King had summoned the Cortes of Aragon, Catalonia and Valencia, to meet at Cortes or Parlia∣ment held at Monçon. Monçon on the 20th of April, in order to obtain some Supply for carrying on the War in Africk, the Conquests whereof appertained to them. He set out from Madrid towards that Place in the Spring. In that Town remained Prince Ferdinand, the Cardinal of Spain and the Council. With the King went the Duke of Medina Sidonia, D. Peter Giron, the Constable, the Marquess of Priego and Earl of Uren̄a. There was a great Concourse at Monçon, that being the first time the King during his Reign had assembled the General Cortes, for before they were held apart for each of those three Provinces. Mean while the King neglected not the War in Africk, or Italy; and particularly pressed the King of France to consent to alter that Article concerning the Succession to the Crown of Naples, in case Queen Germana had no Issue. The King of France would not hearken to this Proposition, still hoping to recover that Kingdom and espe∣cially now the Cardinal de Amboise died, who had always great Influence over the King, and
made use of his Interest to promote Peace. This Affair perplexed the Catholick King, and therefore he thought fit to apply himself to the Pope, and improve his hatred to the King of France for obtaining the Investiture of Naples. At first the Pope was averse to it, but after∣wards considering the Assistance of Spain, would stand him in good stead to carry on the great Designs he had in hand, he resolved to grant the Investiture in as ample manner as could be wished. Pope Alexander having given the King of France the Investiture of that part of the Kingdom before mentioned, with the Title of King of Naples and Jerusalem, it was hard to de∣prive Investi¦ture of Naples granted to K. Ferdi∣nand. him of it without a cause shown. Therefore he declared that King had forfeited his Title for not paying the Acknowledgment he ought in so many Years, and for alienating that Feoffe of the Church when he agreed with the Catholick King, without obtaining the Consent of the immediate Proprietor. Thus the Investiture was granted to King Ferdinand and his Heirs, upon Condition he should pay every Year on the Feast of S. Peter and Paul 8000 ounces of Gold, and every three Years a white Palfrey. Besides he was for once to pay 50000 Duc∣cats, as should his Successors when they received the Investiture. These were the same Condi∣tions that had been imposed upon Charles the first of France. About the beginning of July this Grant was passed by the Pope and College of Cardinals. On the 7th of August the Pope re∣mitted the yearly Tribute and the 50000 Duccats, contenting himself with the white Palfrey and his Furniture, and 300 Horse to serve him wheresoever there was War in the State of the Church, designing to use them against Ferrara. In the time of Pope Leo there was imposed an acknowledgment of 7000 Duccats, for the leave granted to the Emperor Charles the 5th to hold that Kingdom together with the Empire, which was contrary to the antient Capitulations with the Houses of Anjou and Aragon. The King of France was much offended at this Proceeding, and by his Ambassador the Bishop of Rieux, complained grievously thereof to the Catholick King whilst the Cortes sat at Monçon. There on the 13th of August was a Subsidy granted the King of 500000 Crowns, a great Sum considering the Time and the Liberty of those Provinces. They also, in Case the King should be called away, authorised Queen Germana to preside, and even to assemble the Cortes again if broke up, provided she were commissio∣ned as Lieutenant of those Kingdoms. The Associations erected some Years before, were now dissolved. Many Ambassadors, and great numbers of Nobility were at Monçon during the Sit∣ting of the Cortes. At Malaga a Fleet was provided to carry over D. Garcia de Toledo, and the Forces for the Con∣quests of Africk. The King was earnest they should set out, yet they delayed some time be∣cause D. Garcia de Toledo sent with Forces in∣to Africk: of the Plague that was at Bugia. The Fleet sailed in the heat of Summer carrying 7000 Men. Part of the Fleet and 3000 Men were left at Bugia to secure that Place. James de Ve∣ra having put Bugia into a good Posture followed the Fleet, and they came together, being 16 Galleys, to the Port of Tripoli at such time as Count Peter Navarro had embarqued his Men to the number of 8000, designing for Gelves, the greatest and most important Island on the Coast of Africk about 100 Leagues West of Tripoli. It is plain and sandy, covered with Palm and Olive Trees, so near the Continent, that on the one side there is a Bridge to go over to it. In length it is above 16 miles, wants Water, has no Town but scattering Houses, and on the Shore a Castle where the Lord lives. It was once subject to the King of Tunez, but at this time had a Xeque or particular Lord. On the 28th of August they arrived at Gelves. The Forces landed finding no Opposition either in the Island, or on the Continent at a Town they call Puente Quebrada. All the Army was divided into 3 Bodies. D. Garcia, tho he was General, would advance before the rest, with the Gentlemen that followed him. Some say it was by ad∣vice of Peter Navarro, others affirm it was against his Will. The Xeque had about 150 Horse and 2000 Foot, but so ill armed, and so fearful, they offered good Terms rather than come to Blows. It was Afternoon when our Forces began to march, the heat of the sandy Ground was so violent as if all had been in a Flame. Scarce had they advanced 2 Leagues when some fell down dead with Drought, and all suffered extremely. The Vanguard being come to a Wood of Palm Trees, fell into Disorder to seek Water at some Wells, they imagined there were near certain ruined Houses. Here the Moors observing their Confusion, fell upon them. D. Garcia and others that were a horse-back lighted. Some advised him to retire. He answered. Ad∣vance Gentlemen, are we come hither to turn our backs? If Fortune frown on us, yet she can∣not make us forget the Duty we owe to our Birth. Having said thus, he took a Pike from an Aragonian, and fell in among the Moors. Our Men, nothing moved by the Example of their Ge∣neral, Rout of the Spani¦ards in A∣frick. fled. The Moors took the advantage, and falling on killed four of those that alighted; which were D. Garcia, Garci Sarmiento, Loaya and Christopher Velasquez, all Commanders of Note. There was no stopping of those that fled. The Count ordered the Batallions of James Pocheco and Giles Nieto which were with him in the Rear, to make head against the Moors, and by that means prevented their being all cut off. The Earl himself was in such a Consternati∣on, he was one of the first that embarqued, tho he might pretend it was to oblige the Galleys next the Shore to take in the Men, many being drowned because they would not admit them. About 4000 of our Men were killed or taken, and among them many of Note. The Body of D. Garcia was carried to the Xeque, who writ to D. Hugo de Moncada Viceroy of Sicily, that supposing that Lord to be the King's Kisman, he kept his Body in a Chest, to be disposed of as he should direct. D. Garcia left a young Son called D. Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo, who was afterwards one of the famous Generals of the World. Count Peter Navarro having sent the
King an account of that Disaster, ordered the Galleys back to Naples, and with the rest of the Fleet sailed for Tripoli, where he arrived on the 19th of December, having been 8 days in a Storm. He left James de Vera in that City with a Garrison of 3000 Men, other 3000 he disbanded, be∣ing unfit for Service; and he with 4000 more and part of the Fleet, went out to scowr the Coast between Gelvez and Tunez. Bad Weather obliged him to lie by most part of the Winter, in the Island Lampadosa near Sicily. An infinite number of Moors about the end of this Year, layed Siege to the City Safin on the Coast of Africk, and subject to the Portugueses. Atayde the Governour having received some Supplies from the Island of Madera, defended himself bravely; and the Siege being raised made an Inroad as far as Almedina, 32 miles from Safin. He had several Skirmishes with the Moors, took a great Booty, but in his return such great Num∣bers came upon him, that he was forced to quit it. He made several other Incursions and came up to the very Walls of Morocco, an Action of more Honour than Advantage. The same was done by D. John Coutin̄o Governour of Arzilla, and Peter de Sousa of Azamer; both brave Com∣manders, and ambitious of enlarging the Portugues Dominions in Africk, which might have been the more easily performed, that Country being divided into many Kingdoms, and they at variance among themselves. CHAP. X. Some Cardinals Revolt from the Pope; Bolonia taken by the French; The Revolted Car∣dinals summon a General Council. MUch about the same time the Catholick King having broke up the Cortes at Mon∣çon, returned to Castile and Pope Julius set out from Rome towards Bolonia. The King was going to the Cortes of Castile, summoned to meet at Madrid, to take care for carrying on the War in Africk, and no less to provide for the Affairs of Italy. The Pope thought being at Bolonia to advance the War against Ferrara, in which the Duke of Urbin made little Progress: On the 6th of October King Ferdinand in the presence of the Emperor's King Fer∣dinand as∣sists the Pope. and Prince Charles his Ambassadors, and of the Popes Nuncio, took an Oath at Madrid to Govern that Kingdom as became a just and rightful Tutor. He also Ordered Fabricius Colona with 300 Lances from Naples to go join the Forces of the Church, to serve against Ferrara, but not against the King of France. To oblige him, he Ordered the Admiral Villamarin with 11 Gallies that returned from Gelves to join the French Fleet at Genoa, in order to secure that City. The Duke of Termens was in Verona with 400 Lances in the Emperor's Service, and saved that City from falling into the Hands of the Venetians, who laid close Siege to it. The Pope when he set out, Ordered all the Cardinals to follow him. but some of them fled to Naples, and not being admitted there, went thence to Florence. Cardinals fall of from the Pope. There they staid, tho' the Pope pressed them to come to him. The French now attempt∣ed to have surprized Bolonia, where the Pope and Cardinals were in great Danger, but Fabricius Bolona with his 300 Lances delivered them. The Pope fell sick, whereupon some scandalous Contrivances began to be among the Cardinals; which he having notice of, as∣sembled them, and published a severe Bull against such as were guilty of Simony in the E∣lection of a Pope. The Mutinous Cardinals at Florence thought of calling a general Council to Reform the Church Discipline, and also to Depose the Pope, The Emperor and King of France joining with them, and endeavouring to draw in the Catholick King. The Em∣peror and King of France declared all the Confederate Princes were obliged to assist one another, till they had Recovered all that was detained from any of them by the Venetians. They also would have the Pope remit the business of Ferrara to be Tried by due Course of Law, and in order to it, would have all Ecclesiastical Persons, not excepting Cardi∣nals or any others, to reside at their Benefices upon Penalty of Forfeiting their Revenues. This caused the Pope to Excommunicate all the French Commanders in Italy, and all those who had any Hand in the Gallican Provincial Synods held to this effect. The Catholick King never agreed to this Decree of the Gallican Church, but laboured to reconcile the Emperor to the Pope and the Venetians. It was now proposed to Marry the Queen of Naples, Niece to the Catholick King, to Charles Duke of Savoy, and the Treaty was so far advanced, that 200000 Ducats were assigned for her Portion, and she was called Dutchess of Savoy; yet at last it broke off, and the Duke Married Beatrix Princess of Portugal. At Naples the People mutinied, because it was designed to introduce the Inquisition there, after the manner of Spain. The Tumult was so great, that the Viceroy to prevent farther mischief, commanded all the Jews who were come thither from Spain in great numbers, to depart the Kingdom by the last of March, as also that the Inquisition should not be Established. Thus the People was appeased, the Pope himself being of opinion they ought not to have been provoked by erecting that severe Tribunal. The King of France was jealous that the Catholick King would join in League with the Pope against him, and the Swisse that served the Pope gave him cause to suspect he might Jealousies of Princes intend to War upon Milan. He offered very advantageous Conditions, but the Pope
thought himself secure of all the Dukedom of Ferrara, whereof he had already taken the greatest Part. The Emperor required him to restore Modena as a Feoffe of the Empire, to which the Pope was not averse, so he would ingage not to return it to the Duke of Ferrara, nor put it into the Hands of the French. The Catholick King had bent his Thoughts against Africk, yet neglected not the Affairs of Italy. He ordered the Duke of Termens to return to Naples, there being no Service about Verona. The Duke obeyed, and by the way visited the Pope at Bolonia, by whom he was well entertained. About the beginning of January 1511. King Ferdinand went to Sevil to forward the Preparations for the War in Africk, being de∣sirous 1511. to Revenge the loss sustained at Gelves, and no less that of Hierome Vianelo, who was surprized and slain with 400 Men in the Island Querquens, between Gelves and Tunez. The Pope himself in the dead of Winter laid Siege to, and took Mirandula. Thence he re∣turned himself to Bolonia, but sent his Army to Ferrara. Both his Forces and those of the Venetians who came to his assistance were forced by the French to quit that Enterprize. In March the Pope at Ravena created 9 Cardinals. All the Cardinals in the Conclave wherein Pope Julius was chosen, before the Election had taken an Oath, that whosoever of them came up Pope, would call a general Council The Pope pressed to call a ge∣neral Council. within 2 Years after his Promotion to the Pontificate. besides it was decreed in the Coun∣cils of Constance and Basle, that general Councils should meet every 10 Years, and grievous penalties denounced to such as should obstruct them. Pope Julius after he had obtained the Papacy, made no account either of his Oath, or the Decrees of those Councils. Many were desirous to correct the Abuses crept into the Roman Court, especially during the Reigns of Alexander and Julius. The Emperor and King of France favouring this Design; the Cardinals that were withdrawn from the Pope issued out their Mandates for summoning a general Council to meet at Pisa on the 1st of September. The Emperor consented to all this Proceed∣ing, and only desired to have the Council assembled at Constance in Germany. The Catholick King declared himself against these Practices, and advised the Emperor not to have any Hand in them. He ordered Cavanillas his Ambassador at the French Court in the best manner that might be, to require that King to Restore Bolonia to the Church; not to Invade the Terri∣tories thereof any farther, and to desist from that Affair of the Council. The King of France excused himself, saying, the Pope had infringed the Capitulation made at Cambray; never∣theless he would admit of Peace upon honourable Terms. He demanded the Articles agreed upon at Cambray should be duly observed. That the Cardinals who had forsaken the Court of Rome should be Restored, even as they were before they went thence. That the Marquess of Mantua who served as General of the Venetians, should be Absolved of the Oath he took to that Republick, and have his Son Restored to him, whom he had delivered to the Pope as Hostage. That the Duke of Ferrara should be received into the Pope's favour, and the Sentence denounced against him recalled, without obliging him to resign his Lands beyond the River Po, or Cento, or Pieve, since they were his Wives Portion. The same things were required of the Pope in the Emperor's Name. But he looked on these as hard Conditions, and being of a haughty Spirit, would have no Body Capitulate with him, but submit to his Will. The Catholick King seeing there was no Expedient to prevent that mighty Breach, resolved to declare for the Pope. In order to it he altered his Design of going over himself into Africk, and sent home 1000 English Archers the King of England had furnished for that Expedition. They arrived at Cadiz in June, where he Rewarded, and Dismissed them well satisfied. Moreover he articled with that King, that in case the King of France would not Restore Bolonia to the Pope, and desist from calling a general Council; then the Agree∣ment be∣twixt K. Ferdinand and the K. of Eng∣land. Catholick King should assist the Pope, and the King of England should make War in Guiene, to prevent the French invading the Frontiers of Spain. This done, King Ferdinand went a∣way from Sevil to Burgos. From Guadalupe he sent Orders to Count Peter Navarro to go with the Forces he had to Naples, where D. Raimund de Cardona the Viceroy, under pre∣tence of the War in Africk, had all the Horse in the Kingdom in a readiness. It was or∣dered that Tripoli should be annexed to the Crown of Sicily, that the Viceroys might thence Relieve and Defend it. D. Jayme de Requesens was sent Governour thither, with a good Fleet. This was done because the King designed James de Vera the former Governor to be General of his Artillery. D. Jayme enjoyed that Command but a short time, for a mutiny happening among the Soldiers of that Garrison, the Viceroy of Sicily Removed them and their Governor, and sent his own Brother William de Moncada to succeed him in that Post. The Catholick King laboured by all means to withdraw the Emperor from his Ingage∣ments with the King of France. To this purpose he sent Peter de Urrea to him, who was to The Em∣peror can∣not be se∣parated from France. succeed D. Jayme de Conchillos Bishop of the Canaries as Ambassador at that Court. The Emperor being a Man of a various Temper, could be brought to no Resolution. At last he agreed to send an Ambassador to the Pope, and D. Peter de Urrea to Venice that they might conclude some Accord. The Pope in the Name of that Republick offered that the Empe∣ror should retain Verona and Vincenza, and the Venetians all other Places that he pretended to, yet so, that they should pay down 250000 Ducats for the Investiture, and a Pension of 30000 yearly. All other Differences he would have referred to himself and the Catholick King, to be by them Terminated. These were advantageous proposals, yet rejected by the Emperor. Nor did Peter de Urreas journey produce any good Effect, for the Venetians per∣ceived
by what was working, that all Italy would soon be in confusion, which would give them a time to Breath, and perhaps to recover their Losses. The Emperor and Princess Margaret made application to the Catholick King for Supplies, either of Men or Money, a∣gainst the Duke of Guelders, who countenanced by the French, Infested Flanders, and took some Towns, there being no body to oppose him. But the Catholick King was so intent upon Italy, that he regarded nothing else, and the Emperor himself thought fit to connive at it, rather than break with France. The End of the 29th BOOK.
The History of SPAIN. BOOK XXX. CHAP. I. Affairs of India; The Pope Summons a Council to meet at S. John Lateran; The League betwixt the Pope, King of Aragon and the Venetians; The War in Italy. THIS Summer the Affairs of the Portugueses advanced gloriously in India, throug the Valour Success of the Portu∣gueses in India. and Conduct of Alonso de Albuquerque. King Emanuel of Portugal understanding some Years before, that beyond Goa and Calicut was the famous City Malaca, a place of great Trade, he ordered James Lopez de Sequeira who sailed from Lisbon 3 Years before this with 5 Ships to discover that Place. With him went Garcia de Sousa and Ferdinand de Magallanes. He first discovered the Island Sumatra, opposite to Malaca, under the Equinoctial. It is very large and fruitful, divided into many Kingdoms, and Inhabited by Moors and Gentiles. He Traded with those People, and then sailed to Malaca a large and rich City, having a mighty Trade. Formerly it was subject to the King of Siam, at this time had a King of its own called Mahomet. With this King Sequeira Treated and they settled an Alliance. Sequei∣ra sent Roderick Aroas ashore with certain Portugueses to settle a Factory. The Moors being jealous of the Portugueses, attempted to seize the Ships, and being disappointed seized the Men that were in the City: Those at Sea were not strong enough to revenge that wrong, they hoised Sail, and having touched at Cochin, Returned to Portugal with what Loading they could get. Alonso de Albuquerque then Governor of India resolved to revenge this Injury. He ga∣thered a Fleet and sailed to Sumatra, and thence to Malaca. By the way he took a Ship; which his Men having entred, there arose such a Flame they were forced to quit her; af∣terwards it appeared that Flame was Artificial and did no harm. Soon after they discovered another Sail which after a vigorous resistance they also made themselves Masters of: It was observed that the Captain of her called Nahodabeguia, tho' he had many large wounds, did not bleed. He being stripped, and a Gold Bracelet taken from him, the blood presently gushed out. It was found that in the Bracelet was set a Stone which in the Kingdom of Siam is taken out of certain Creatures called Cabrissas, and has wonderful Virtue to stanch Blood. The Fleet arrived at Malaca on the first of July: After a vigorous Resistance made by the Inhabitants, the City submitted to the King of Portugal. Thus Christianity was dis∣fused into the utmost limits of the Earth. In Italy the Authority of the See Apostolick was much impaired by reason of the Schism that was like to be. The Pope leaving the War, Returned to Rome, and there to oppose the Designs of the Schismatick Cardinals, summon∣ed a General Council to meet in the Church of S. John Lateran on the 19th of April of the following Year. In that Council among other things he proposed to declare, that the pre∣sent Queen of France was not lawful Wife to that King, and that the Provinces of Normandy and Guiene belonged to the King of England, the People thereof being consequently absolved of their Oath of Allegiance taken to the French King. This was in order to strike a Ter∣ror into that King. He hereupon began to give Ear to a Peace with the Venetians; but at last thought better to stick to the Council of Pisa; which the Emperor desired should be re∣moved to Verona or Trent. The French King who influenced this Affair would not consent, but hastened the Cardinals to open the Council at Pisa, but they delayed, and proposed to be reconciled to the Pope. At Rome the Pope deprived the four Cardinals Carvajal, Co∣senza, S. Malo, and Bayzeux of all their Dignities, tho' at first the College opposed it, and some excused them, affirming the Pope must be deposed for opposing that Assembly, ac∣cording to the Decree of the 11th Session of the Council of Basil. The Treaty betwixt the Pope and King of Spain advanced, only the Pope was unwilling The Pope in vain la∣bours for an accom∣modation with France. to pay the Spanish Forces, and therefore had some thoughts of being Reconciled to the King of France, but that sailing, he stuck to King Ferdinand. 500 Men at Arms, 200 light Horse, 200 other Horse, and 2000 Foot were shipped at Malaga, under the command of Alonso de Garvajal Lord of Xodar, and Zamudio Collonel of the Foot. It was given out these Forces were for Africk; but it was not likely, for at the same time Count Peter Navar∣ro arrived at Naples with 1500 tattered Men, the relicks of the late Misfortunes. The King of France proposed to Marry his youngest Daughter to Prince Ferdinand, and upon the Match to quit all Claim to the Kingdom of Naples, and tho' the Catholick King liked it, yet
he pressed to have Bolonia restored to the Pope. Still that King resolved to Protect that City, whereupon the English Ambassadors formally required him to deliver that Place, which was as good as declaring War, if he did not. He answered he was resolved to defend Bo∣lonia as he would Milan. The Pope fell so sick it was thought he could not escape. The Emperor came as far as Trent, having conceived hopes of being Seated in S. Peters Chair, and possessing the Kingdom of Naples. But the King of Aragon, the Pope, and Republick of Venice on the 4th of October concluded a League for Defence of the Church, and against League for de∣fence of the Church. the Schismaticks at Pisa. By this League the King was obliged within 20 days after the pub∣lishing of it, to furnish 1200 Men at Arms, 1000 light Horse, and 10000 Foot. The Pope 600 Men at Armes, the Republick was to join their Army to the other Forces, and their Fleet to the 11 Galleys of Spain. Whilst the War lasted, the Pope and Venetians were to pay 40000 Ducats a Month to the King, and 2 Months of it advance. The King was to appoint the General, and he made choice of D. Raimund de Cardona Viceroy of Na∣ples. The Venetians gave up any Pretensions they had to any Sum lent to the Kings of Na∣ples, of the House of Aragon. The Emperor did not join in this League, but it was de∣clared that he knew of it, as did the King of England. James Garcia de Paredes who had been long a Pyrate and then went into the Emperors Service, was taken at Vincenza by the Venetians. Admiral Villamarin who was gone with the Galleys to Spain, by the King's Order returned to Naples. Berengarius de Olms was left with some Galleys on the Coast of Granada. Roderick Baçan went to burn certain Vessels at Tetuan. It was reported the King of Fez de∣signed to besiege Ceuta, both those Commanders repaired thither, and understanding he lay before Tangier where D. Duarte de Meneses was Governor, they failed to that Place. The Town was distressed, Roderick Baçan with his Men made a Sally, in which he drove the Moors from some of their Works. Next day the Portugues Horse did the like, so effectually that the King of Fez raised the Siege. This done the Spanish Commanders returned to Gibraltar with Honour. The Viceroy of Naples prepared to March. Count Peter Navarro was General of the Foot The War in Italy. and lay with them near Gaeta, the Horse being also in readiness. Prosper Colona would not go upon this Enterprize because he had no great Command, therefore Fabricius Colona was left as Governor and Lieutenant General; It was observed that the Barons who had been of the Faction of Anjou, were the forwardest to offer their Service. Count Peter Navarro march∣ed before with the Foot towards Pontecorvo. On the 2d of November the Horse followed with the Viceroy. The Emperor was now dubious which Side to incline to, the Cardinal Sanse∣verino still fed him with uncertain hopes, and the Ambassadon D. Peter de Urrea offered if he would enter into the League, that the Army of the Allies should assist him in the Conquest of Milan, as also to Reduce Guelders. He inclined to accept of the Conditions before offered by the Venetians; but it was too late, for they were now grown strong: Yet Hierome Vic Ambassador at Rome so contrived it, that a cessation of Arms was concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Republick, which proved of great moment. The King of France failed not to give Orders to his General Gaston de Foix, and send him supplies to oppose the Allies, and at the same time laboured to raise Swiss, and prevent them from joining for the defence of the Church, as was laboured by the Cardinal of Sion. He offered the Emperor to make him Pope, or give him Authority to choose one, that he would Restore to him the Lands of the Church belonging to the Empire, give him what part of Naples he would ask, and that Milan and Genoa should be obliged to assist him in his Wars, as also that the Differences about Guelders should be composed by Persons of his own choosing. The Cardinal Sanseverino seeing the Emperor unsettled, took his leave of him. The Viceroy of Naples would have marched to Florence to secure that City which held for the French, but the Pope commanded him to march to Bolonia. The Weather was Bad and the Country Rough, many of the Soldiers fell sick, but few died. At Imola the Viceroy staied for the Artillery, which came to him at the beginning of the Year 1512. Count Peter Navarro was before at Lugo and Bagna∣cavalo, and thought good to Besiege Bastida, a Fort belonging to the Duke of Ferrara upon the River Po, in which was a Garrison of 200 Italians. This Place esteemed Im∣pregnable, was taken by Assault in Five days, and most of the Defendants put to the Sword. It was delivered to Cardinal John de Medicis the Popes Legate. The King of France having got Alonso younger Son to Frederick King of Naples, gave out he would set∣tle him in that Kingdom; which seemed easie, the Kingdom being left Naked of Defence, and the People coverous of having a King of their own.
CHAP. II. The Seige of Bologna. The King and Queen of Navarre excommunicated. The Venetians recover Bergamo and Bressa and are overthrown by the French. AFter the taking of Bastida Count Peter Navarro return'd to Imola. There a Council of War was held to determin which way was best to begin the War. Fabricius Colona ad∣vised to waste the Country, and take in the weaker Places of the Country of Bologna, and leave the City to the last. Count Peter Navarro was positive for besieging Bologna, and being a bold Man represented the taking of it as a matter of no difficulty. His advice was followed, because he was in great esteem among the Soldiery, and never served well when contradicted. The Duke of Termens dying in his way from Rome and the Duke of Urbin refusing then to com∣mand the Forces of the Church, tho afterwards he sent his Lieutenant, the Pope ordered them to obey the Legate and Viceroy to whom he sent a Sword and Cap, as also the Standards he blessed on Christmas Day. The Venetians neither sent the Supplies of Mony they had promi∣sed, nor of Men, but under the shelter of the League, endeavoured to recover what the Empe∣ror and King of France had taken from them. The Viceroy encamped four miles from Bologna, and the next day being the 16th of January within Cannon shot of the Town at Belpogio a Country House of the Bentivoglios. Within the City were 500 Horse and 2000 Foot under the Command of Monsieur de Alegre. The same Day the Viceroy marched towards Bologna, the Duke of Ferrara took Bastida and rased it to the Ground. The Viceroy took up his Quarters at Belpoggio, the Marquess of Padula and Count de Populo advanced with the Foot and possessed themselves of a Monastery called S. Michael de Rosque, quenching the Fire set to it by those with∣in. There they planted some Pieces of Cannon, and the rest on a Hill hard by. Before this Advice was brought that Gaston de Foix Duke of Nemours, was at Parma gathering his Forces, which were 800 Lances, 1000 light Horse, and 3000 Foot, and was to joyn at Final 20 miles, from Bologna, the Troops of the Duke of Ferrara being 2000 Gascons and some Horse, all this in Order to raise the Siege, Fabricius Colona lay about Cento and Pieve with part of the Army to ob∣serve the passage of the French; the Viceroy ordered him to come to the other side of the City towards the Mountain. It was resolved to move the Batteries to that side, the Wall being there weakest, but soon after it was agreed the Army should lie all together to secure the Cannon, and repulse the Relief. The Artillery was planted betwixt S. Michael and the Florence Gate. On the 28th of January they began to play. Part of the Wall was beaten down and some Soldiers got into a Tower, where they displayed the Colours, but were soon drove out by the besieged. Count Peter Navarro finished a Mine, and having set Fire to it, the Wall was lifted up, so that they without saw those in the Town, and the Townsmen those in the Field under the Wall, yet it sell again in the same place and setled as fast as at first. This was looked upon as a Mira∣cle, because within adjoyning to the Wall was a Chappel held in great veneration called of Ba∣racan, which like the rest was blown up and settled again. Nevertheless the City was in great danger, when there fell a Snow for 3 Days together. This gave the French General an oppor∣tunity of throwing himself into the City with a good Body of Men, without being discovered by the Centinels. For this reason and because the Weather continued very severe, the Army of the Consederates raised the Siege and drew back to S. Lazaro 2 miles from Bologna. The For∣ces of the Pope retired as far as Imola, the Viceroy to the Castle of S. Peter, and the Forces were dispersed in the neighbouring places. This was the event ofthat so much talked of Siege. Many, as is usual in the like Cases blamed the General, for that, as they said, without regar∣ding the unseasonableness of the weather he had let slip 8 Days, in which he might have made a considerable Advance. That the Army encamped far from the place where it ought to have been. That the Trenches were not well carried on, nor the Mines rightly placed. In fine, that the Guards were so ill kept, they gave the Enemy an Opportunity of getting into the Town without being discovered. The truth is, the Weather was unseasonable, and neither the Swiss came as was expected, nor did the Venetians send any Supplies of Men. There were at this Siege among the rest Antony de Leyva, Captain Alvarado and the Marquess of Pescara D. Ferdinand de Avalos, who was afterwards a most renowned General. The King of England prepared to be in a readiness as soon as the Season would permit, to invade the Province of Gui∣enne King of England prepares to invade France. in France, those Kings of old pretending a Title to that Country, and Luiz Carroz the Ambassador pressing him to undertake that Expedition in the Name of the Catholick King. Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset the King's Cousin-german was appointed General of the Eng∣lish Army. The Catholick King thought it convenient for that time to give over the Conquest of Africk, and to draw out the Forces that were at Oran, leaving only as many as was requi∣site for the Defence of the Place. He ordered the Town should be divided. 600 Houses were appointed; 200 for Horse, and the rest for Foot. The Houses Orchards and Lands belonging to the City were distributed among the Inhabitants, that the Place might be more easily main∣tained. For the greater encouragement of People to come and inhabit there, it was granted they should be free from all manner of Taxes and Impositions, besides that they were to re∣ceive Pay. On the last of Janaary Queen Mary of Portugal was delivered at Lisbon of a Son called Prince Henry, who was afterwards a Cardinal, and lastly upon the Death of his Nephew
King Sebastian came to be King of Portugal. The same Day this Prince was born it snowed ve∣ry much at Lisbon, a thing extraordinary in that City. Curious Persons said that Snow deno∣ted the Innocence of his Life which was very holy, and the pureness of his Chastity which he preserved as long as he lived. He was in his Countenance the likest to his Father of all the Brothers. King Ferdinand was now at Burgos, there on the 16th of February, upon the Death of the Constable D. Bernardin de Velasco, he contracted the Earl's Daughter, Juliana, Grand∣child to the King himself, being born of the Lady Joanna of Aragon, to Ferdinand de Velasco el∣dest Son to D. Inigo, who succeeded his Brother Bernardin in the Lordship of Haro and the Dignity of Constable. The Absence of the Duke of Nemours gave an Opportunity and Courage to the People of Bres∣sa and Bergamo, to revolt from the French and submit themselves again to the Venetians, excep∣ting the Castles which the French still kept. This was a Thing of dangerous Consequence being a Bergamo and Bressa return to the Obe∣dience of the Veneti∣ans. Precedent for all the other Cities which had been newly conquer'd to do the like. As soon as the Duke had relieved Bolonia he resolved to repair thither, and carried along with him Monsieur d' Alegre. A French Commander called Foullette was left at Bolonia with 300 Men at Arms, and 3000 Foot to secure that City. Andrew Gritti with the Army of the Republick and the Inhabitants of Bressa marched forward to oppose the Duke. He retired to the Mountain, and after Midnight entred the City by the way of the Castle. Thence he marched out to fight the Venetians. A bloody and obstinate Battel was fought, and many killed on both sides, but the French obtained the Victory, Andrew Gritti, Antony Justiniano Governour of the City, and Paul Manfron were made Prisoners. Count Luis Bogara who delivered the City to the Veneti∣ans, Venetians over∣thrown by the French. being a Native of it and having great Power in it, was not only taken, but condemned and executed as a Traytor. After this Success the Duke of Nemours soon recovered Bergamo without any Difficulty. He left the Lord of Aubigni with a sufficient Force to secure Bressa, the rest of his Army he dispersed in the Territory of Verona, and went away himself to keep the Carnaval at Milan, and there to rejoice at his Victory. The King of France was much offen∣ded at his Departure at such a Juncture of time, and ordered him immediately to march with all his Forces and observe the Confederate Army then much weakned and in Distress. Hereupon the Council at Pisa took the boldness to appoint the Cardinals of Bolonia and Avignon their Le∣gates; and the Venetians refused to agree with the Emperor, tho the Pope urged they should ac∣cept of the Conditions so often proposed, as did the Emperor to join with the Confederates. Yet soon after, as has been said, the Republick concluded a Truce with the Emperor, upon Con∣dition to pay him down a certain Sum of Mony. The King of France fortified the Frontiers of Normandy first, and then those of Guienne for fear of the English. At the same time he labou∣red to secure the King of Navarre to his Interest, tho' under-hand he gave great Assurances to the Duke of Nemours of putting him in Possession of that Kingdom, assoon as the War in Italy were ended. This strict Alliance of the King of Navarre with France was the cause of his Ruin, which was contrived and carried on in this manner. The Pope understanding how that King favoured and assisted the Enemies of the Church, and sided with the French and the Council of Pisa, resolved with the Advice of the Colledge of Cardinals to take such course against him as was usual against schismatick Princes. On the 18th of February he pronounced Sentence of Ex∣communication against the King and Queen of Navarre, depriving them of the Regal Stile and King and Queen of Navarre excommu∣nicated. Dignity, and giving their Dominions to any that would take possession of them. It was suppo∣sed that King Ferdinand procured this Judgment to be given against them, certain it is, he Kept it for sometime private, hoping some other way to make sure of that King and Queen, To this purpose about the end of March, he sent Peter de Hontanon from Burgos where he then resi∣ded in his Name, to declare to those Princes, how much they deviated from their true Interest, and to engage them not to give any Aid to France upon that Conjuncture, nor to allow passage through their Dominions to his and the Churches Enemies. He also required them to deliver up to him their Son the Prince of Viana, promising to marry him to one of his Grand-daugh∣ters, that is either the Princess Elizabeth, or Princess Catherine. They refused to comply with any of these Demands, treated the Catholick King's Friends in ill manner, and continued to raise Men and make other Warlike Preparations. D. John de Silva who was General for Cas∣tile on the Frontiers of Navarre, omitted not to require them to forbear those extraordinary Motions, but they made no account of his Messages. They were much encouraged by the News brought from Italy, of the great Power of the French, and Distress of the Confederate Army. The Viceroy remained still in the Earldom of Bolonia, not daring to retire for fear of losing Reputation, and being too weak to advance and take any Enterprize in hand, altho the Pope pressed him to break into the Territory of Milan. The Viceroy feared to be cut off his Provisions which were sent him from Ravenna. He had lost many of his Men that hard Wea∣ther, some were dead, and others deserted. What was worst of all, at such time as the Enemy was very near, the Duke of Urbin's Lieutenant with the 600 Lances belonging to the Pope withdrew from the way, pretending they were not payed, and that they were jealous of some Spaniards. The truth was, the Duke held Intelligence with the King of France, and had Bills of his payable at Florence to raise Men for his Service. Our Army was so reduced, that the Vice∣roy and Legate resolved to take into Pay 4000 Italians, to reinforce it. The Pope would have had 8000 and paid down Mony to raise them. He was for fighting the French immedi∣ately, his great Spirit being void of all Apprehension. The Catholick King would have them
protract time, till the Forces of Venice joined them, they being now at leisure by reason of the Truce concluded with the Emperor. He also ordered a Body of Swiss or Germans to be hired, and sent Ferdinand de Valdez Captain of his Guards to propose this to the Pope, and then to go to the Army to acquaint the General with his Will. He did as ordered, and came to the Viceroy's Camp on the  of March, as such time as the two  in sight of one ano∣ther in such manner that, without great hazard and loss of Reputation, there was no avoiding a Battel. CHAP. III. The famous Battel of Ravenna; That City surrendred to the French; Scandalous Proceed∣ings of the mutinous Cardinals, and opening of the Lateran Council. THE Confederate Army still lay about the Castile of S. Peter, Butri, Cento and Pieve, Towns in the Earldom of Bolonia, where the Viceroy resolved to fight the French, because the Ground was advantageous and his Men in good heart. The French Army and Forces of the Duke of Ferrana all good Men advanced towards them. The Viceroy was willing to obey the The French ad∣vance to∣wards the Confede∣rates. Orders brought him by Ferdinand de Valdez. There the French lay till the last Day of March, when they marched away towards Ravenna, which City they desired to possess themselves of, because thence our Army was supplied with Provisions. For the Defence of that Place, the Viceroy had sent thither, Peter de Castro with 100 light Horse and Luis Dentichi a Neapolitan with 1000 Italians. That Place was of such consequence, that he resolved to follow the Enemy, and the two Armies marched at only 3 miles distance from one another. He sent before Marc Antony Colona with 100 Lances and 500 Spaniards to get into the City by night. Ravenna is sea∣ted on the shoar of the Gulph of Venice, betwixt two Rivers, both fordable. One of them is cal∣led Roneo, and the other Monton. They run close by the Walls, Monton on the left, and Ronco on the right. Upon Maunday Thursday the French encamped before the City between the Ri∣vers, and the next day gave a furious Assault, which was bravely sustained by the Defendants, and particularly Luis Dentichi, who had a Brother killed, and was himself mortally wounded. The Viceroy marched close by the City down the River Ronco, which divided the two Armies. Upon Holy Saturday he encamped and entrenched himself at a Place called Molinazzo, two miles from the Enemy. There was variety of Opinions about what ought to be done. Fabricius was for staying there, since they had their Provisions secure, and the Enemy would soon want, be∣sides that there they secured the City. Count Peter Navarro being a selfish Man perswaded the Viceroy to advance relying upon the Spanish Foot. Accordingly our Army march'd. Some French Horse skirmish'd with our Vanguard, but nothing considerable was done that day. The Enemy returned  Camp, and the Viceroy lay that night almost in sight of it. Next Day being Easter Sunday and the 11th of April both Armies drew out. The French had 24000 Foot, 2000 Men at Arms, 2000 light Horse, and 50 pieces of Cannon. The Duke of Ferrara and the Sieur de la Palisse led the Van. In the main Battel were the Seheschal of Norman∣dy, and Cardinal Sanseverino Legate of the Council at Pisa, Frederick de Bossoln brought up the Rear, the Duke of Nemours being with a Body of choice Horse as a Reserve. The Confede∣rate Army reported to consist of 18000 Foot, was not near the number. There were less than 8000 Spaniards and 4000 Italians, 1200 Men at Arms, 2000 light Horse, and 24 pieces of Can∣non. The Viceroy ought to have moved before break of day, to prevent the Enemy, as Fabri∣cius Colona advised, but he would not be perswaded, and ve the Enemy time to pass a Bridge and put themselves in good Order. Fabricius Colona led the Van consisting of 800 Men at Arms, 600 light Horse, and 4000 Foot. All the rest formed two Bodies, commanded by the Viceroy and Count Peter Navarro. In this manner both Armies advanced by beat of Drum, the Generals encouraging their Men. The Cannon began to play, and altho' that of the Viceroy at first did great Execution among the Enemies Vanguard as they passed the River, yet theirs being twice the number and planted in an open Plain, made a much greater Slaugh∣ter among the Men at Alms who stood exposed. The Marquess de Pescara gave the first Charge with the light Horse, and then the Men at Arms of both Sides mixed confusedly. For some time the Battel was maintained so, that the Success was dubious. At length the French be∣ing superiour in numbers, the Confederates began to give way. Here the Marquess of Pescara was wounded and taken ad Peter de Paz a notable Officer killed. Count Peter Navarro who had always thoughts to carry away the Honour of the Victory now advanced with the Sish Foot, backed by 300 Spanish Men at Arms he gathered. When they charged the  Foot, Collonel Zamudio who was in the first Rank saw a German Officer called James Empser, who came forward and challenged him. O King (says Zamudio) how dear  bay your Fa∣vours, and how well da Men deserve them upon these occasions. Having spoke, these words, he char∣ged his Pike and struck the German dead. The rest fell on so furiously, that they broke the Ger∣mans, then the Gascons and Italians. Most of the Germans were put to the Sword, for of 12 German Captains only 3 escaped, and all the French Foot was put to the Rout. In the same heat they took the French Cannon, but the French say Janolaço Galcoto defended it. The French Horse seeing the Slaughter was made charged our Foot, who having no Horse to sup∣port
them and being tired with fighting were quite broke. There died Collonel Zalmudi with other Officers and Count Peter Navarro was taken. The rest retired in good Order, the Foot that were in Van joining them. On one side the River secured them, and on the other the Causway. The Duke of Numours desiring to break that Body, that he might carry away a compleat Victory, advanced with a small number, contrary to the Advice of the Sieur de la Pa∣lisse, who would have had him content himself with the Advantage gained. Our Men turned upon him and being struck off his Horse, he was killed by a private Soldier, tho' he told him he was Brother to the Queen of Aragon. Monsieur d' Alegre and his Son were also killed, and Monsieur de Lautreque left for dead in the Field. Thus about 3000 Spaniards marched a∣way down the River. Fabricius Colona with what Forces he could get together, still main∣tained himself against all the French Army, till having received two Wounds and his Horse fal∣ling, he was taken by the Duke of Ferraras Men. Thus the French remained victorious, but so shatter'd, they could not prosecute their good Fortune, nor attempt any thing of Moment. Of the number of dead no certain account can be given, Authors varying very much. It is cer∣tain the Fight lasted 5 hours, and the Victors sustained most loss. Their General, many Per∣sons of Note, and almost all the Germans being killed. Whereas on our side few Horse were lost, for that night about 3000 of them fled to Arimino and Ancona, and above 4000 Spanish Foot got off safe. The Viceroy went from Pesaro to Ancona to gather the remains of his Army. After this Victory Ravenna was immediately surrendred to the French upon Articles, which were not performed, for assoon as Mark Antony Colona and D. Peter de Castro were matched away with the Garrison towards Cesena, the French plundered the City without sparing Churches or Mo∣nasteries. The French Authors lay the blame of this Disorder upon Jaquin a Captain of Foot, who being cloathed in Cloath of Gold taken from the Churches at Bressa, encouraged the Sol∣diers to do the like at Ravenna, a greater Booty was found there than had been expected; Imo∣la, Forli, Cesena, Arimino, and most of the Forts in Romania yielded to the Victors, and the Legate took possession of them for the Council of Pisa. The News of this Defeat being spread abroad, the Pope was no whit discouraged, tho' the People of Rome was ready to mutiny. The Duke of Urbino sent to offer his Service, promising to make amends for past miscarria∣ges. Julicis de Medius went to Rome to give the Pope an account of the Posture of Affairs, and encourage him to proceed. The loss was represented to the Catholick King much less than in reality it was, for in his Letters he writes it appeared by the Musters, that not above 1500 Men were lost in the whole. Yet he resolved to send the Great Captain to Italy, whose Presence alone it was thought, would make up for the dammage sustained. So the King writ to several Parts, and immediately sent the Commendary Solis with 2000 Spaniards to Naples. The King of France hearing what had hapned, said, Would to God I had been drove out of Italy, so my Ne∣phew and the other Officers were alive. God grant such Victories to my Enemies, for if we obtain one more such Victory we are vanquished. This Success so alarmed the Venetiales, that they feared the French would now make themselves Masters of all Italy, and they thought of changing Parties. The Spanish Ambassador then Resident at Venice quieted them, shewing how small the Loss had been. The Cardinal of Sorrento who governed at Naples in the absence of the Viceroy, requi∣red D. Hugo de Moncada Viceroy of Sicily, and Captain General of both Kingdoms, to come over with all the Forces he could make, which he did with those that came from Tripoli and some other Horse. D. Raymund de Cardona from Ancona repaired to Naples to recruit his Army, and make the other necessary Preparations. Before the Battel was fought, Pope Julius provided for the celebrating the Lateran Coun∣cil at the time appointed. In order to it he appointed 8 Cardinals and some other Per∣sons Prepara∣tions for the Late∣ran Coun∣cil. to attend that Affair, and reform the City of Rome and his own Court, that the foreign Prelates might not be scandalized at any Disorders. He pressed the Bishops of Naples, Sicily, and Spain, but particularly the Archbishops of Toledo and Sevil, to repair to the Council, that so he might bear down the Assembly at Pisa under the Schismatick Cardinals. They about this time removed from Pisa to Milan, and encouraged by the Success of the French, published their Declaration against the Pope: It contained, That whereas they had often intreated him to come to the Council, or at least not to obstruct the Sitting o' it; and that instead of so doing, he had caused much innocent Blood to be shed, and there was no hope of his forsaking his Vices, therefore they suspended him from Spiritual or Temporal Jurisdiction, which they ad∣judged to the Council, according to the Decrees of the Eleventh Session of the Council of Bosle, and the Fourth and Fifth of the Council of Constance. This Declaration was set up in the Churches of Milan, Florence, Genoa, Verond, and Bolonia. A Buisness that scandalized the whole World, and made the Pope the more earnest to open the Council of S. John Lateran. At length it was opened on the 10th of May. There were present the Cardinals of Rome, many Prelates from several Parts, and the Pope himself presided. Egidius de Viterbo, General of the Order of S. Augustin, made a Learned Speech upon the Subject of their being there As∣sembled.
CHAP. IV. The War in Navarre; King Ferdinand possesses himself of that Kingdom. The Affairs of Italy; The Great Captain stopped from going thither. THE Truce betwixt the Emperor and Venetians, and the Negociation of the Cardinal of Swissers descend into Italy. Sion, was the cause that on the 19th of May 16000 Swiss were come to Valcamonica, and brought with them 18 Field Pieces. Besides these, 6000 came by the way of Novara, and 2000 by Bergamo. The Baron of Altsaxe was their General, and with him came Matthew Cardinal of Sion. Most of the French Forces abandoned Italy. On the 27th of May above 20000 Swiss came to Verona, which they easily took, the French quitting both City and Castle. Here Paul Capelo with 700 Men at Arms, 800 Light-Horse, and 4000 Foot of the Republick, joined the Swiss. They together pursued the French Army, who retired to Aste, on the ut∣most Borders of Milan, the Sieur de la Palisse resolving to abandon Lombardy, being terrified that the Germans had forsaken him. Cremona, Milan, and almost all the Cities submitted them∣selves to this powerful Army, and Ravenna was delivered to the Pope. The Spaniards were for restoring that Dukedom to Maximilian Sforcia. The Schismatick Cardinals fled into France. Parma and Plasencia submitted to the Pope. In Spain the Differences continued be∣twixt the Kings of Aragon and Navarre, and the latter was fearful since the death of the Duke of Nemours, that the other would pretend to that Kingdom in right of Queen Germana. The French Ambassador in Navarre assured that King, That his Master would stand by him with Grounds of the War in Navarre. all his Forces; and offered to give his youngest Daughter in marriage to the Prince of Viana. These Promises so prevailed with that King, that he entred into a League with France, which proved his ruin. Mean while the Marquess of Dorset with the English Fleet, in which were 5000 Archers, came to Passage, a Port in Guipuscoa. D. Frederick de Portugal, Bishop of Si∣guença, who was at S. Sebastian by the King's Order, to furnish the English with all Necessaries, went to welcome him. A good Force was gathering in Castile, to join with the English, under the Command of the Duke of Alva. King Ferdinand's Design was first to invade Navarre, that he might leave a safe behind. He summoned the Corles of Aragon to meet at Monçon, appointing Queen Germana to preside, and ordered all the Forces of the Kingdom to be got together, because he intented to Command in Person. The Cortes agreed to maintain 200 Men at Arms and 300 Light Horse for the space of 2 Years and 8 Months. The King of Navarre to divert this Storm, sent his Mareschal Peter of Navarre to make some Composition. The Catholick King resolved to besiege Pamplona, and would have the Marquess of Dorset join with him; but he excused himself, saying, he had no Orders to make War upon the King of Navarre, and complained that the King's Forces were not ready to invade Guienne. He said at first it had been easie to take Bayonne, it being unprovided, which now would be very diffi∣cult, they having had time to prepare for their Defence. The Duke of Alva waited for Orders at Vitoria: His Forces, which consisted of 1000 Men The Duke of Alva enters Na∣varre. at Arms, 1500 Light-Horse, and 6000 Foot, Quartered in Alava, Rioja, and Guipuzcoa. Or∣ders were brought the Duke to march to Pamplona, and accordingly he entred the Kingdom of Navarre upon the 21st of July. D. Luis de Biamonte, who was banished Navarre, led the Van. The Queen was gone to Bearne, and the King was at Pamplona, but no hopes being left of defending it, retired to Lumbiee. Pamplona immediately surrendered to the Duke, and all other Places were for doing the same. Upon this, King John sent Three Commissioners to the Duke, who resigned up the whole Kingdom to King Ferdinand to be held in trust, and consented to deliver up the Prince of Viana the King's Son. King John withdrew over the Mountains. All Places submitted except Estela and Val d' Ezua in the Mountain. The French who came to succour. King John, were now in Bearne. The Catholick King came to Lo∣gron̄o. D. Antony d' Acun̄a, Bishop of Zamora, had been at Pamplona in the behalf of the See Apostolick, to require King John not to side with the Enemies of the Church, and was now sent to Bearne, to advise that King not to deviate from the late Articles agreed upon. He was taken at Salvatierra, and delivered up to the Duke of Longueville the French General and Governour of Guienne, who afterwards sent him back to carry on the Treaty of Peace, he leaving Three Nephews Hostages for his Return. Navarre submitting so easily, made the French jealous of some Treachery; to remove which Suspicion, King John put Salvatierra into their hands, and went himself to the King of France. He had resolved with all his Forces to secure Guienne, and on the other side King Ferdinand was making sure of Navarre. He made all the Country Swear Allegiance to him as to their King, pretending King John had broke Navarre  Fer∣dinand. the Capitulation. Tudela submitted not till the Archbishop of Zaragoça went thither with Forces. To secure the Passage into France; the Duke of Alva passed the Mountains, and took S. John de Pie de Puerto. The Marquess of Dorset was desired to join the Spanish Army, and enter Guienne. He pleaded it was then too late, the Summer being spent and his Men sick. He complained of the Catholick King, who was only intent upon his own Business in Navarre, without regarding the Conquest of Guienne. Therefore the Marquess returned into England, which gave some cause to suspect, as Antony de Nebrixa writes, that he was corrupted with French Gold.
The Affairs of the French in Italy were changed no otherwise than if they had lost the French de∣cline in Italy. Battel of Ravenna. The Pope laid an Interdict on the Kingdom of France, Excommunicated their King, and absolved the People of Guienne and Normandy of their Oath of Allegiance. The Duke of Urbin marching with the Robe's Forces towards  that Pepple set up the Pope's Colours. The Duke of Ferrara upon Composition come to Rome, and publickly begged Pardon of the Pope, who granted it, yet restored not Rhegio, but thought to have secured him, had not Fabricius Colona conveyed him away. The Viceroy of Naples soon re∣cruited his Army, and found, with the 2000 Spaniards brought by the Commendar , he had 7000 Foot, the Command of whom was given to the Marquess of Padula; and because he hurt himself in the Hand, it was transferred tothe Commendary Solis. Men at Arms there were 1200 and 550 Light-Horse. Besides these Prosper Colona got together 400 Horse and was to Command the Vanguard. This was the Viceroy's Strength when he received Orders from the Pope not to march any farther, for that Lombardy was already subdued and there was no need of more Forces. His Design was ever to expel all Strangers out of Italy, and having already drove out the French, thought to do the same with the Spaniards. Nevertheless, the Viceroy march∣ed as far as the Castle of S. Peter in his way to Bolonia, where certain Deputies from the Swis∣sers met him, requiring him not to advance any further, which if he did, they would oppose him, the French being already expelled Lombardy. These were all Contrivances of the Pope. The Viceroy answered, He was General of the League, and consequently obliged to obey the Orders of the Confederate Princes. After some Disputes betwixt the Emperor's and Catholick King's Ambassadors, as also the Venetians, it was agreed the Viceroy should restore the Family of Medicis to Florence, they being then banished. It was also decreed, That Ma∣ximilian Sforcia, who now called himself Duke of Milan, should come into Italy, in order to reduce the rest of Lombardy, where the Forces of the Pope possessed themselves of Plasencia and Parma. Sickness and other Inconveniences caused the Council then held at Rome, after Two Sessions, only to be Prorogued till the beginning of December. The Pope proposed making War upon the Turks, the Sons of Bajazet being then at variance; yet malicious Per∣sons gave out this was only a Project of his to get the Spaniards out of Italy under that Pre∣tence. The Viceroy marched towards Florence, pretending only to restore that Republick to its Florence, Siena, and Luca, join with the Confede∣rates. Liberty, and reconcile it to the Church. He came without meeting any resistance to Prato, which is only 10 miles from Florence; which Place offering to oppose him, he battered and took by Storm on the 29th of August. The Florentines immediately sent their Deputies to compound with the Viceroy, and consented to restore the Families of Medicis and Pazzis to all their Estates; as also to enter into the League, forsake the French, and put themselves un∣der the Protection of Spain. To express their Zeal, they chose the Marquess of Padula their General, and furnished some Money towards the Charge of the War. The same was done by the Cities of Siena and Luca. At same time Janus Maria de Campo Fregoso was chosen Duke of Genoa in favour of the League, and King Ferdinand, to encourage those Cities, ordered Be∣rengarius d' Olm to ply upon those Coasts with his Galleys. All things in Italy succeeded as well as he could wish, which was the cause he first delayed, and afterwards quite put off the Great Captain's Voyage thither. After the Battel of Ravenna, he had been looked upon as the only Man that could restore Affairs in Italy, whereupon the King resolved to send him thither, tho' jealous of him at the same time. He accepted of the Command, and went to Malaga to prepare for his Voyage. Vast Numbers of People flocked to him, and even the King's Guards disbanded themselves to follow him. Many of the Gentry made Preparations to bear him company upon their own Charges, all which made the King limit the number to go with him to 500 Men at Arms and 2000 Foot. Still King Ferdinand delayed the departure of the Great Captain, hoping some good Accident might re-establish the Viceroy, for whom he had so great a Kindness, that many suspected he was his Son. The Affairs in Italy being mended, as has been said, the King ordered the Great Captain to lay aside all Thoughts of going to Italy during the Winter, and to send all the Gentry that was with him to serve in Navarre. Great Captain forbid to pass into Italy. These Orders much troubled the Great Captain, and he complained grievously of it. All the Officers resented it so heinously, that never a Captain of Men at Arms went to serve in Na∣varre, except only Gutierre Quixada. The Great Captain sent to ask leave of the King to go to his Estate in Terranova in Italy, but the King persuaded him it was better to retire to his House at Loxa. He was so much out of Favour, that the King refused him the chief Commen∣dary of Leon; vacant by the Death of Garcilasso de la Vega, as he did also the Commendary of Hrnachos, both which he made suit for. Two Reasons may be ascribed for this Strangeness: One, That King Ferdinand was not well satisfied with that Gentleman, and often complained he held secret Intelligence against him. The other it common to all Princes, who when a Man has done more for them than is in their Power to requite, look upon him as the Debtor, and commonly prove ungrateful. For it is ever more certain to have Faults punished than Desert rewarded. No Recompence or Honour could have been too great for a Man so de∣serving. But who can persuade Kings to curb their own private Distate? Or who can limit their Jealousie, especially when it is daily encreased by whispering Courtiers.
CHAP. V. The Siege of Pamplona. The Viceroy of Naples takes the City Bressa. Duke Maximilian Sforcia recovers Milan. King Ferdinand falls sick. THE Duke of Alva continued at S. John de Pied de Porte, and his Forces took some small places of little Importance. Thither James de Vera with great difficulty brought the Artillery. The Dukes of Longueville, Bourbon, and Monpensier, the Sieur de la Palisse, and Mon∣sieur de Lautrec, lay at Sauveterre and the neighbouring places, to oppose our Army. Their Force was 800 Men at Arms, and 8000 Foot. The Dauphin lay at Garriz with another great Body ready to second them. This only waited the coming of King John with his Forces to march into Navarre. In hopes of their coming the People of the Valley of Salazar and Roncales revolted from King Ferdinand. The Mareschal of Navarre also, who till then had stood neuter, declared for France, and went away thither from Tudela, whither King Ferdi∣nand went to meet the Queen, after she had broke up the Cortes of Aragon at Monçon. This caused King John to hasten his march. There are two Passes through the Mountains betwixt Navarre and France; one is called Valderroncal, the other Valderronças. At the entrance of  invaded by the French. Valderronças is S. John de Pied de Porte, where the Duke of Alva then was. Through the other Pass the King led his Army about the middle of October: With him went the Sieur de la Palisse. The Spaniards were no where strong enough to give them Battel; yet several Com∣manders posted themselves in the Straights of the Mountains. Among the rest Ferdinand Val∣dez took his Post at Burgi, which place was very weak. The Enemy coming on, assaulted that place, and tho' they lost 400 Men, carried it, killing many of the Defendants, and a∣mong them Ferdinand de Valdez. It is reported he exposed himself to that Danger out of De∣spair, because when he returned after the Battel of Ravenna, the King said, The Good Men are left there. The Duke of Alva considering the danger Pamplona was in, left James de Vera at S. John de Pied de Porte with 800 Foot, 200 Horse, and 20 Pieces of Cannon, and resolved himself with the rest to repass the Mountains into Navarre. They Enemy might have pre∣vented him, but they were overseen as well in that as in not marching directly to Pamplona, which they might easily have taken. This delay gave the Duke leisure to march thither; and the Archbishop of Zaragoça to join him with 600 Men. Several Castles that had revolted were reduced. Having taken Torla, and falling to plunder it, the People of the Valley joining with the Townsmen, fell upon the Forces, killing above 2000, and taking all their Baggage, with some Field-Pieces. King John encamped at Utroz, within two Leagues of Pamplona, hoping the City would declare for him, but our Army had prevented it by expelling 200 Citizens; besides, at Puente de la Reyna, which is hard by, a great Body assembled to relieve the place if it were requisite. 1500 Men came from Trasmiera and Campos, and 900 from Bugia, which were landed at Barcelona. Soon after, the Forces of Aragon came thither. The Duke of Najara was chosen General of this Army. The French still expected more Forces from the Dauphin, and the Sieur de la Palisse was dissatisfied for that nothing succeeded to his Mind. The French encamped so as to cut off the Provisions of the City. Another Body, : left beyond the Mountains to divert the Forces of King Ferdinand, entred Guipuscoa. They passed by Fuenterabia, and sate down before S. Sebastian. Monsieur de Lautrec Commanded that Army, and resolved to attack that Town. D. John d' Aragon, Son to the Archbishop of Zaragoça, was in the place, who so encouraged the Garrison, tho' small, that the French retired into Guienne. The Duke of Calabria, upon promise of being restored to the Kingdom of Naples, designed to fly to the French, but was taken, with Four others that managed his In∣telligence. He was kept many years a Prisoner in the Castle of Xativa, and his Accomplices executed. The Season was unfit to lie in the Field, wherefore the French resolved to be the most expedite they could: They sacked two Monasteries of Nuns that are without the Walls. A German Captain opening the Tabernacle to scale the Custodium, threw out the Blessed Sa∣crament upon the Altar. The Nun that was Sacristan said, How dare you commit such a Sacri∣lege? He answered, This is not the God of the Germans, but of the Spaniards. He is said soon after, like Judas, to have burst asunder. They planted their Cannon, and gave two Assaults, but still the Defendants held out. The Duke of Najara with 600 Foot besides the Horse, appear∣ed on the top of the Mountain, designing either to fight, or else to cut off the Enemy's Provi∣sions. On the last Day of November the French raised the Siege, and returned towards France. The Constable of Navarre pursued them, and killing some, took 13 Pieces of Cannon. And thus ended that War. All the Agramonteses submitted themselves, and the City Pamplona was repaired, and a place marked out to build a Castle. D. Raymund de Moncada having fortunately settled the Affairs of Florence, marched towards Lombardy. At Modena he held a Council of War, to consult what was best to be done. The City Bressa was besieged by the Venetians, who hoped to possess themselves of it. The Empe∣peror pretended to it, and the Swisse would have it given to Duke Maximilian Sforcia, whose Quarrel they had espoused. To end this Quarrel, it was agreed the Viceroy should hold it for the League, till it could be decided who it belonged to. D. Peter d' Urrea and Andrew de Burgo went to Rome to know the Pope's Pleasure, and sollicit the Payment of some Months
Arrears. He pleaded that Obligation had ceased after the Battel of Ravenna, yet promised Bressa ta∣ken by the Viceroy. some Money if the Viceroy would quit Lombardy, and return to Ferrara, which above all things he desired to possess himself of. To this purpose the Duke of Urbin was encamped with 2000 Swiss, a small Force, and even that deserted for want of Pay. D. Peter d' Urrea and his Com∣panion fed the Pope with good Words. He resolved to send Bernard de Bibiena, who was afterwards a Cardinal, to acquaint the Viceroy with his Will. At this time the Marquess de Pescara being ransomed from the French, came to Milan, and had the Command of the Com∣pany of the Men at Arms, that had belonged to Gaspar de Pomar, killed in that City, given him. On the first of October the Viceroy passed the Po with 9000 Foot. Prosper Colona was marching with above 400 Men at Arms, and 1000 Foot, to join the Viceroy. The Pope endeavoured to hinder him, but could not. He also laboured with the Cardinal of Sion, that the Swiss should not admit the Spaniards into Lombardy. At Verona, Rocandulpho, a Commander of the Emperor's, joined the Viceroy with 2000 Germans, 400 Horse, and 27 Pieces of Cannon. M. d' Aubigni, before distressed by the Venetians, seeing this new Supply, set up the Emperour's Co∣lours. Bernard de Bibiena now coming to the Camp, the Viceroy answered, He was too for∣ward advanced to go back; but as soon as he had put an end to that Undertaking, he would obey the Commands of the Pope. Monsieur d' Aubigni had leave to march out with his Gar∣rison, Arms, Baggage, and Horses, to what part he pleased, provided it were not to the Castle of Milan, or any other that held out for the French. The Garrison of the Castle agreed to surrender upon the same Articles, if not relieved in 21 days. This same day, being the 25th of October, the Spanish Army mustered at Castanerola near Bressa: It was found above 8000 Foot strong. Commendary Solis was left in that City with 1000 Men; the rest of the Army marched to besiege the Castle of Bergamo, the City being already surrendered. Admiral Vil∣lamarin sailed from Naples with 7 Galleys, to join those of the Pope at Civita Vecchia, in order to besiege the Castle of the Lantern at Genoa, which held out for the French. They found there 3 Galleys of Venice sent to the same effect. Four other Galleys the Duke of Genoa had furnished, but ill equipped. The Siege went on slowly. At Marseilles the French had but 6 Galleys and one Galleon. The Schismatick Cardinals continued their Council at Lions, and made large Offers to several Princes. D. Hugo de Moncada, Viceroy of Sicily, sailed over to Tripoli, to give Orders for fortifying that Place. The Duke of Urbin lay between Ravenna and Bologna, with 500 Men at Arms and 1000 Swiss. His Italians, who were more nume∣rous, daily ravaged the Country, but did nothing considerable. Maximilian Sforcia stayed at Trent till the French were quite expelled the Dukedom of Milan, and the Milaneses had satisfied the Swiss, who as they stood firm to his Interest, so they would Duke Ma∣ximilian Sforcia re∣covers Mi∣lain. have their share in the Booty. The Milaneses agreed to give them 150000 Ducats in hand, and 40000 yearly for ever, and offered Three Strong-holds in that Dukedom for their Secu∣rity. The Emperor coveted that Dukedom for one of his Grandsons, but the Princes of Italy were against it. In fine, to put an end to all Disorders, Maximilian Sforcia entred that City upon the 29th of December, immediately preceding the Year 1513. He was received with the Pomp and Joy usually expressed to the former Dukes. The Swiss Ambassadors presented him 1513. the Keys with much Ceremony. Next care was to reduce those Places still held by the French. The Marquess of Padula, with the Spanish Infantry, soon took the strong Castle Trezo, on the Banks of the River Abdua. That of Novara was surrendered to the Duke's Forces. In order to conclude a Peace betwixt the Emperour and the Venetians, the Truce, which was expi∣red in January, was continued till the end of March. The Cardinal of Gurse would have the same Conditions the Pope promised the Year before to the Emperour, but the Venetians would hear of nothing, unless Verona were restored to them. It was thought convenient to make War upon them with the Forces of the Emperour, Spain, and Milan, without making mention of the Swiss, who it was believed would soon agree with the French, through the Ne∣gociation of Monsieur de la Trimouille, sent to that purpose, which was the beginning of new Troubles. The Viceroy to secure Milan, where the French had still footing, and Trivulcio, had gathered 5000 Foot, more Supplies daily resorting to them, placed Prosper Colona at Aste with a good Body of Men to secure that Pass. The Catholick King thought it convenient to make use of the Power of England against the French; and because the English were not wil∣ling to mix with other Men, he perswaded that King by the way of Calais to invade Nor∣mandy, while at the same time he undertook to conquer Guienne, and deliver it up to him. King Henry fitted out 50 Sail to transport 9000 Foot, all choice Men and well Armed; and and at the same time sollicited the Catholick King to send him 50 Ships more. It was not easie to answer in so many places at once; for besides all other things in hand, King Ferdinand was sick, and Andaluzia in an uproar. The occasion of his Sickness was a certain extravagant Potion the Queen made him drink at Medina del Campo, in hopes of conceiving; so Dr. Car∣vajal and Peter Martyr relate it, as a thing allowed by all Men. The effect of it was such, that the King grew very weak, and delighted in nothing but being in the Woods. His Disease daily encreased; he had fainting Fits, and Signs of a Dropsie. Andaluzia mutinied upon the death of Henry Duke of Medina Sidonia. He had a Sister by the same Father and Mother called Mencia, and married to D. Peter Giron; and also a Brother only by the Father's side, called D. Alonso Perez de Guzman. In his Will he appointed his Sister to Inherit, affirm∣ming the Second Marriage of his Father was invalid. Upon this account D. Peter Giron
thought to possess himself of that Estate, and secure Medina and Sidonia. The Lady Elle∣nor de Zun̄iga Stepmother to D. Mencia, and the late Duke stood up for her Son, who had the true Title; and the King favoured his Cause, intending he should marry the Lady Anne of Aragon, Daughter to the Archbishop of Zaragoça. This Dispute was like to be decided by force of Arms, both Parties having powerful Supports. Justice prevailed, and the Bro∣ther of the Duke carried the Estate. Gonçalo Marin̄o commanded at Bugia, and Martin Argote at Oran, as Lieutenant to the Marquess of Comares. Some Skirmishes hapned with the Moors, but nothing remarkable, only that Muley Abdalla with some Forces came up to Bugia and burnt the Suburbs. No part was left standing but one Tower, where the Jews saved themselves. Gon\l=c;\alo Marin̄o breaking the Articles concluded with the Moors was the cause of this Misfortune; for which he was removed from that Post, and D. Raymund Carroz sent in his Place. CHAP. VI. Pope Julius dies; Leo X. Succeeds him; The Truce betwixt Spain and France; The War in Navarre, and Revolutions at Genoa. POpe Julius being sick, and his Recovery despaired of, Advice was sent to Milan, Florence, Siena and Luca to secure the Roads, that the Schismatick Cardinals might not come to Pope Juli∣us dies, Leo X. chosen. the Conclave. At length the Pope died on the 20th of February: The People mutinied at Rome, and there was great Contention betwixt the Coloneses and the Ursini. The Mona∣stery of S. Paul of Benedictine Monks was plundered, and other disorders committed. Hie∣rome Vic the Spanish Ambassador, contributed much to pacifie the Multitude. On the 4th of March the Cardinals entred the Conclave, having first discharged the Son of the Duke of Mantua, kept as a Hostage till then; and on the 11th by Votes of almost all of them, Car∣dinal John de Medicis was chosen Pope, and took the Name of Leo X. That very day he declared he would continue in the League, and bring the Emperor and King of England into it. The Cardinals Carvajal and Sanseverino who were at Lions, but in no great Esteem, designed to go into Italy, and get into the Conclave. Prosper Colona favoured them, and de∣signed himself to go to Rome and have a Pope of his own creating. But the Viceroy would not suffer him to go, lest he should raise some Mutiny, and put a restraint upon the Conclave. The Cardinals came in a Galeon to Leghorn, but were there taken and carried to Pisa. Julius de Medicis the Popes Cousin gave him notice of it, and he ordered them to be kept in the Castle of Civita Castellana till such time as they were brought to Trial. Julius de Mediois did much Honour to the Cardinals, and to the Sieur de Soliet the King of France his Ambassador, who was with them. By them he was perswaded to declare for the King of France, which was the Original of new Troubles. During the Vacancy of the Popedom, the Duke of Milan with the Assistance of the Viceroy seized Placentia, and thought to have done the same of Parma. Thither the Viceroy repaired with his Army to oppose the French, it being no Season to make War upon the Venetians. He suffered great want of Money, and there was no way to supply it. The Discourse of concluding Peace be∣twixt the Emperor and Venetians continued, but they could not agree upon the Conditions. The King of France stept in, and agreed with that Republick. The Conditions were, That the Republick should keep all its ancient Dominions, except Cremona and Giaradada, which were Peace be∣twixt France and Venice. restored to the French, and Incorporated into the Dukedom of Milan. For Recovery of that Dukdom and of the Lands of the Venetians, the Republick was to furnish 1000 Horse, and 6000 Foot under the Command of Bartholomew de Albiano, and the King 1200 Horse and 12000. Foot, Robert de la Marc was to be Captain General of the Foot, Monsieur de la Trimoville and John James Trivulcio Lieutenant Generals. As soon as this Agreement was made publick, Trivulcio entred the City Aste with the French Forces. Bartholomew de Albiano with the Venetian Army marched to Verona intending to join the French. Hereupon, and by reason of the Viceroys absence most Towns of Lombardy declared against Duke Maximilian. The King of France was the more earnest to conclude this Treaty, because he had another in Hand by means of Cardinal Carvajal, which was for a Cessation of Arms betwixt him and the Catholick King on this side the Alpes. This Accord was convenient for both Kings, for King Ferdinand to secure Navarre, and the King of France the State of Milan, without A Truce betwixt France and Spain. any regard of the King of Navarre or Duke Maximilian. After some Difficulties and De∣bates, at last the Truce was concluded on the 1st of April, upon these Conditions. That the Cessation of Arms betwixt King Ferdinand and his Consederates, the King of England and Prince Charles on the one side; and the King of France and his Allies, the King of Scotland and Duke of Guelders on the other, should continue for a Year, reckoning from that very day That during the Cessation, there should be free Trade betwixt the Two Kingdoms on this side the Alpes. King John of Navarre was Excluded this Treaty, which was delivering him up to be devoured by his greedy Enemy. The Emperor and King of England had two Months allowed them to sign those Articles, or else to be Excluded, as in Effect they were, where at the Emperor was greatly offended. He urged it was contrary to the Catholick
King's Word, who had promised to rn the same Fortune with him. That thus the French would in 8 days recover Milan, and then being assisted by the States of Italy, must soon be Masters of Naples. Above all, he exclaimed that the Treaty was Managed by Cardinal Carvajal, who had been a Person too opposite to their Interest. This Contrivance was doubt∣less a great piece of Subtilty; but what grieved the Emperor most was, that he must thus lose all the Cities he had in Italy, tho' he pleaded other causes of Discontent. Before the Truce was concluded with France, Monsieur de Lautrec, made all necessary pre∣parations Actions in Navarre. to possess himself of S. John Pied de Port; after the taking of which Place he de∣signed through that Pass to enter Navarre. The Marquess de Comares sent some Persons to secure the Country thereabouts, and some Supplies of Men to James de Vera to defend that City. But the Cessation of Arms put an end to all these Designs. This gave our Men the opportunity not only of maintaining what they had, but of extending their Conquest, tho' King John had a Body of about 5000 Men to oppose them. He required the Bishop of Zamora according to parole to surrender himself again a Prisoner; but King Ferdinand de∣clared, he was absolved of that Promise as being taken contrary to the Law of Arms, he being an Ambassador, and in the Service of the See Apostolick, as also by the death of the Duke of Longueville to whom he had engaged his Word. The Mareschal of Navarre who stiled himself Marquess of Cortes, broke into Guipuzcoa with 2000 Men. The Country Peo∣ple, in pursuance of their Orders from D. Luis de la Cueva who commanded at Fuenterabia for his Father, took up Arms and opposed him. The strong Castle of Maya upon the Borders of Biscay, adjoining to Guienne was the Enemies Place of Refuge: Thither the Lord of Ursua, who was in King Ferdinand's Service, repaired with some Forces, understanding the Governor was out of the Place, but his strength being small and the Governor getting in, he was forced to desist from the Enterprize. James de Vera and Lope Zanchez de Valençuela were sent by the Marquess of Comares to Besiege that Caste, which they did, yet having Intelligence that King John and the Mareschal of Navarre were coming to relieve the besieged, they drew off, leaving the Cannon at Azpilcueta in danger of being lost. The Marquess marched thither himself with 2000 Men and some heavy Cannon, and the Defendants seeing there was no hope of Relief from France, and their own King was too weak to attempt it, soon surrendred. Thus all that Country lying beyond the Mountains was secured. The Earls of Foix had for many Years been possessed of Val de Andorra and the Vicecounty of Castelbo near Urgel, on the side of Catalonia; and it was now fallen by Inheritance to Queen Catherine of Navarre. All this was now by force of Arms, taken from her by the Catholick King. Admiral Villamarin was left to Govern at Naples upon the Departure of the Cardinal of Sorento to the Conclave. Cala∣bria and Apulia had no Governors, theirs being then in the Army. This, and the want of Forces in those Parts gave occasion to many Insolencies that were daily committed, there being no body to punish them. The People mutinied against the Barons on account of the Oppression they lay under, and many whole Towns Revolted: Many extravagant and hor∣rid Crimes were committed. Now also Advice was brought that the great Turk armed a∣gainst the Christians, and tho' it was given out his Design was upon Rhodes, yet it was fear∣ed. lest he should Invade Sicily, or Apulia. The Venetians also, since they were in League with France thought of recovering their Towns on the Coast of Apulia. Orders were given to Fortifie and Guard all those Coasts, and that the Fleet should be in a readiness. Beren∣garius de Olms who sailed from Sevil at the beginning of April with four Galleys, in order to destroy some Moorish Vessels, the Portuguese Commander at Tangier had given notice, lay at Tetuan, was now ordered instantly to repair to Italy and join the Admiral. At this time the State of Genoa suffered a mighty Change: The Family of Adorno who were banished that City, and had been always well affected to the House of Aragon, agreed with the King of Revoluti∣ons at Gema. France to Expel the Fregoso's that City, and bring it again under his Subjection. The Earl of Flisco and his Brothers had a Hand in this Affair, whereupon the Duke's Brothers killed the Earl in the Palace. The Earls Brothers joining with the Adornos drew near to Genoa with some Forces, and at the same time the French Fleet appeared before it at Sea. The Duke with his Galleys went out to meet that Fleet, but it durst not encounter him. Whilst the Duke pursued, the Adornos and Flisco's possessed themselves of the City, and he was forced to retire to Piombino, his Fleet putting into Porto Venere. Then was Octavian Fregoso chosen Duke to the satisfaction of the Commonalty, he being Brother to the Archbishop of Salerno, and of Kin to the Pope. This prosperity of the Adornos was but short lived, for the Fregoso's agreed with the Viceroy to restore them, and they would put that State under the Protecti∣on of the Catholick King. Articles being Signed, the Viceroy sent the Marquess de Pescara with Forces, who performed all that had been agreed with that Family. The same Duke was continued, but these things hapned somewhat later; let us turn back to what remains behind.
CHAP. VII. The Defeat given the French by the Swisse near Novara; The Viceroy Vanquishes the Venetians near Vincenza; Actions of the English and Portugueses; Venice Can∣nonaded. THE great Rendezvous of the French Army was at Aste, and in Piedmont Monsieur de la Rendez∣vouz of French at Aste. Trimouille made all necessary Preparations, and about 400 light Horse were come to him out of France. With him was John James Trivulcio, and Sacromoro Visconte, who forsaking the Duke of Milan whom he had Served, went over to the French. Bartholomew de Albiano made ready with the Venetian Army to Besiege Verona. In that City were 5000 Germans, and 600 light Horse, who ravaged all the Country as far as Vincenza, as if they had been Ma∣sters of the Field. Near Placencia lay the Viceroy with 1400 Men at Arms, 800 light Horse and 7000 Foot, all tried Men. With the Duke of Milan were 8000 Swisse, and he expect∣ed 5000 more. Nevertheless not only Milan, but many other Places Revolted to the French. Neither durst the Duke give them Battle, but leaving the Camp, retired to Novara. He entred that Place on the last of May without reflecting, that those very People had before betrayed his Father to the French. The Viceroy seemed willing to join the King; but no Money coming from Rome, as the Ambassador Vic had promised, and having received Or∣ders from Spain to Return to Naples, he was unwilling to engage to far in that War. He resolved to look on, and only encourage the Affairs of Lombardy by his presence. The Command of the Foot, Vacant by the Marquess de Padula's being preferred to be General of the Florentines, he gave to Commendary Solis, and sent Luys Icart to take charge of Bressa in his stead. He put the Forces of the Pope into Cremona, and afterwards sent thither Fer∣ramosca with 40 Men at Arms, 300 Spaniards and 500 Italians. Yet Albiano for all this, took that City, putting to the Sword all the Men at Arms to the number of 200, and disarming the Spanish Foot. This success encouraged the French to lay Siege to Novara. Their Army consisted of 800 Lances, and 8000 Foot, 3000 of them Germans, the rest bad Troops. Be∣ing about to strom the Town, news was brought them that 12000 Swisse were upon their march to relieve the Duke, and that the Baron of Altsaxe followed with 5000 more. This caused the French to return to their strength betwixt Gaya and Novara: Upon the first sup∣plies joining them, the Swisse resolved to march towards the Enemy, without expecting the Baron of Altsaxe. The French would have avoided fighting, but could not: The Men at Arms and light Horse did nothing, yet the fight lasted very hot for two hours betwixt the Foot. A most desperate Resistance was made by the Germans, but the Swisse got the day. On the side of the French above 7000 were killed, and among them all the Germans, and of People of Note Coliobano, Trivulcio and Luis de Biamonte. After the Victory came the Baron of Altsaxe, and most of the State of Milan submitted to the Duke. The Viceroy sent the Duke 400 Lances Commanded by Prosper Colona, because he was in great want of Horse, and all the Enemies Horse were left entire. The rest of the Army remained as before, near the River Trebia, not far from Placencia. Albiano's being prevented joining the French Army, made that Victory the easier to be purchased. He hearing of the Defeat, retired with his Forces which were 1000 Lances, 300 light Horse and 5000 Foot, most of them base Soldiers. That Republick was so streightned for Money, they were forced to raise the 10th of E∣states, and one in the hundred out of all Merchandize. Albiano in his march took Lignagno defended by Captain Villada with 200 Men. Thence he marched to attack Uerona; but the Garrison sallied, and cut off part of his small Forces. At this time the two Schismatick Cardinals publickly acknowledged their Crime, and Abjured the Schism they had raised, and Swisse rout the French. on the 27th of July were received into the Church, and restored to their Dignities. The Duke of Milan pressed the Viceroy to join him, because the French were with all Diligence recruting their Army. In 3 days march he came to Sarasina, thence he sent the Marquess de Pescara to Genoa, as was said before, and went himself to relieve Verona, before which Al∣biano still lay. Pontevico, Ursonova and other Places surrendred, as did Bergamo promising some supply of Money. The Viceroy went on to Pesquera, leaving Mosen Puch at Bergamo to receive the Contribution. Renso a Venetian Commander having notice of it, and some In∣telligence in the Place got into it by Night, took the Money and some of Puch his Com∣pany, he with difficulty saving himself in a strong House. The Viceroy took Pesque∣ra which is strong, and the Cardinal de Gurce joining him with some German Forces, they sat down before Padua about the beginning of August: Padua is large and strong, and Al∣biano had thrown himself into it, which obliged them to quit the Siege. During the Siege, in a skirmish Alonso de Carvajal and the Captains Cardenas and Espinosa were taken by the Albaneses. Here the light Horse sent to Genoa with the Marquess of Pescara were much mis∣sed. The Catholick King was now old, sickly, and worn out with so many Wars, and therefore thought of making Peace with France. It was proposed that Prince Ferdinand should Marry the youngest Daughter of France, and her Portion should be the States of Milan and Genoa, and King Ferdinand should give his Grandson the Kingdom of Naples. These were only Contrivances to gain time, especially on the King of France his part, who dreaded
the English breaking into Picardy by the way of Calais. King Henry laid Siege to Therouenne, and having defeated the French that came to relieve it, took and dismantled it. Then he sat K. Henry of England takes The∣ourenne and Tournay. down before Tournay, at such time as the Earl of Surry in England vanquished and killed the King of Scots, who in favour of the French invaded England. Hereupon Tournay surrendred. There the Emperor, Princess Margaret and Prince Charles came to see the King of England. Thence they went to Lisle, where it was agreed as soon as the Truce was expired, the Em∣peror and Kings of England and Spain should each on their own Side Invade France. King Ferdinand was to conquer Guienne for the English, but it appeared he did not approve of this Treaty. The Match before proposed betwixt Prince Charles and the King of England's Sister was confirmed, and it was agreed it should be Consummated the following Year. Summer being spent, King Henry returned into England. France was in distress, the Swisse having broke through Burgundy. Monsieur de la Trimoville overthrew, and yet compounded with them. The King of France ingag'd not to favour the Council of Pisa, and to withdraw his Garrisons out of the Castles of Milan and Cremona. No part of this Accord was performed, except what related to submitting to the Church. Whilst the other Christian Kings wasted their Forces against one another, King Emanuel of Portugal enjoyed Peace at home, and extended his Conquests in Africk and India. On the Western Coast of Africk stands the City Azamor, which is large and rich, and belongs to the Kingdom of Fez. The Country about it is plentiful, being watered by the River Omirabin, which runs by the Town. King Emanuel had some Years before this, as has been said, thought to possess himself of this Place, by the means of one Zeiam a Moor, who deceived him and made himself Master of it. At this time the King fitted out a Fleet, shipping aboard it, 20000 Foot, and 2700 Horse, under the Command of the Duke of Bragança. After a trou∣blesome Voyage, they landed at Azamor about Autumn. Several Skirmishes passed betwixt them and the Defendants, as also those that came to relieve the Place, but many Men of Note among the Moors being killed, the rest fled out at a Gate that could not be secured, and thus the City was taken about the beginning of September. Some neighbouring Places surrendred, and among them the Citties of Gita and Almedina. Having left a good Garrison at Azamor under the Command of Roderick Barreto and John de Meneses, the Duke returned to Portugal, tho' many advised to besiege the City Morocco, but he said he had no such Orders. This Suc∣cess encouraged King Emanuel to prosecute his Conquests, along the Coast of Africk on that side, and therefore resigned any Pretensions he might have to Pen̄on and the City Velez, upon Condition the Catholick King, should not pretend to any thing along the Coast of the King∣dom of Fez, even down to Cape Bojador. In Italy, the Viceroy entred the Territory of the Venetians, by the way he took many Boats and Carts loaded with the Goods of People that fled. Pieve de Saco. a delightful Place, where are all the Country Houses of the Venetians he plundered and burnt. He passed the River Brenta and took Mistre which is as it were a Suburb of Ve∣nice. At the end of the Channels are certain Houses which they call Palizas, within Cannon-shot of the City. Thence they Cannonaded it, the Balls flying as far as the Monastery of S. Se∣gundus, but the Affront was more than the harm done. Our Army was encompassed by Ene∣mies. On the one side was Treviso, on the other Padua and Albiano, who drew near with his Azaomr ta∣ken by the Portu∣gueses. Army being resolved to fight. The Viceroy retired towards Vincenza, and marched in one Day 14 miles, tho' above 500 Carts followed the Army, loaded with Baggage and Plunder. Paul Baillon from Treviso and the Garrison of Padua joyned Albiano. In all, his Army consisted of 7000 Foot, and 1200 Horse, besides 10000 of the Country People that appeared upon the Mountains. Albiano marched to cut off the Viceroy from Vincenza. and encamped in a nar∣row Pass near a Town called Olmo. Our Army was in great danger, it being impossible to advance, and dangerous to turn back, yet they resolved to retire, that they might draw the Enemy into the open Field. They thinking our Men had fled, pursued hastily and in Disor∣der, whereupon the Viceroy by the advice of Prosper Colona and the Marquess of Pescara, commanded his Germans to charge the Enemy; which they did with such fury, that they soon Venice Ca∣nonaded. broke them. The Marquess of Pescara pursued them up to the City, where the Gates being shut, many were drowned in the River, and among them Sacromoro Visconte. This done, the Viceroy with the Germans and some Spaniards, attacked a Body of the Enemies Horse and Foot, who fortified themselves on a Hill with 5 Pieces of Cannon. These also were easily put to flight. This Battel was fought on the 7th of October. 700 Venetian Men at Arms were killed, all their Foot dispersed. Paul Baillon and many others, and 22 Pieces of Cannon were taken. Albiano and Griti escaped. The Viceroy marched to Vincenza where he stayed some Days. At the same time the Castle of Bergamo was taken from the Venetians by Storm. Paul Baillon was released upon his Parole, that he would surrender himself again, in case the Venetians would not give Alonso de Carvajal in Exchange for him. Carvajal died in Prison, and Baillon never returned. On the 20th of November the Castle of Milan was surrendred, as was that of Cremona. Nothing was left the French in Lombardy, but the Castle of Lanterna at Genoa. The Duke layed Siege to it, and the Adornos and Fliscos encamped before Genoa, but were forced to retire leaving some of their Cannon behind. The Pope continued the Lateran Council, and admitted the French Ambassadors, they in their King's Name, renouncing the Council of Pisa, and the Protection of the Schismaticks, so the Gallican Church submitted to the Roman. The Pope was concerned to see the Republick of Venice so near Destruction, and underhand designed
to relieve it. He sent to require the Viceroy to proceed no farther against it, that some Accom∣modation might be made. Aragon was now in an Uproar, on account of some Quarrel be∣tween the Earls of Ribagorça and Aranda. At length the King interposing, the Difference came to Tryal, and the Earl of Ribagorça being found faulty, was banished the Kingdom of A∣ragon during the King's Pleasure. In the Kingdom of Naples some Towns had revolted, being oppressed by their Lords. And Peter de Castro tho' with much trouble reduced them all. The Earl of Muro Governour of Apulia, was commanded to go and reside at his Government, and Michael de Ajerve to the Mountain of Abruzzo. All had Orders to favour the Execution of Justice. CHAP. VIII. The Death of the Queen of France. Truce betwixt France and Spain prolong'd; The Affairs of Portugal ON the 9th of January, 1514. dy'd the Queen of France. Among others sent to condole with that King was F. Bernard de Mesa, Bishop of Trin̄opoli from Queen Germana; he Queen of France dies. had also Orders to sollicite for the Dukedom of Nemours and Lordship of Narbonne, to which the Queen was Heiress upon the Death of her Brother Gaston de Foix. Ramiro Nun̄o de Guz∣man was sent Ambassador to Rome by King Ferdinand. By the way on the 5th of March, he concluded a Treaty with the Genoeses; by which the King was obliged to protect that State, and they to assist the King. At the same time the Adornos were treating with the Swiss, about changing the Government of that City. In France the Bishop of Trinopoli again revived the Discourse, of marrying that King's youngest Daughter to Prince Ferdinand, in Order to a Peace, and also of matching the King of France then a Widdower, with Ellenor Sister to Prince Charles. The Emperor and Venetians at last referred the Decision of the Differences between them to the Pope; yet so that King Ferdinand should approve of his Decision. On the 18th of March the Pope Decreed, that the Emperor should keep Verona and Vincenza, and the Ve∣netians Bressa and Bergamo, they paying down to the Emperor 250000 Duccats and 30000 yearly. Before the Catholick King's Approbation could be had, the Venetians declared they would not stand to that Decision. The Truce between Spain and France was prolonged for Truce be∣twixt Spain and France pro∣longed. a Year more, in order to conclude a Peace. The Dauphin was against this Truce, fearing lest if a Peace followed. he might lose the Dukedom of Milan. The Emperor was rather for it, his Thoughts being bent against the Venetians. But the King of England was so offended, that on the 7th of August he concluded a League Defensive and Offensive with the King of France, without making any mention of the King his Father-in-Law. Luis Carroz the Spanish Ambassador at that Court, laboured to appease the King, as did Queen Catherine, but all in vain. Soon after D. Luis Carroz returned to Spain, and the Bishop of Trinopoli went over from France to succeed him. In Lombardy the Viceroy by Storm took Citadela, a very strong Town between Padua and Treviso. Prosper Colona with the Duke of Milan's Forces besieged Crema, which was well defended for the Venetians by Renço Cherri. Garcia Manrique lay at Robi∣go with some Companies of Men at Arms. Albiano who watched all Opportunities to revenge his Losses surprized them by night, the Spaniards surrendred themselves, and Garcia Manrique with the other Officers were sent Prisoners to Vincenza. Renço Cherri sallied out of Crema by Night, and setting upon part of the Duke's Forces commanded by Silvio Sabelo, put them to the Rout, and went himself to Bergamo which he took without any Resistance, the Spaniards retiring into the Castle. On the first of November came the Viceroy to their Relief, and Ren∣ço seeing no Possibility of holding out, surrendred the City upon Articles. About the same∣time the Castle of Lanterna at Gonoa, which till now had held out for the French, was delive∣red to Duke Octavian Fregoso. Let us turn back a little. The Great Turk having put an end to the War with his Brothers, and the Sofi Ismael who Preparati∣ons of the Turk a∣gainst Ita∣ly. took their part, was fitting out above 150 Galleys, and designed them against Italy. It was supposed, he woul invade by the way of Marca Ancona, which belongs to the Church. The Pope laboured to bring the Emperor, Kings of England, France, Spain, and Portugal, and the Dukes of Milan and Genoa, into a League Offensive and Defensive against the Turks; but af∣ter he had made a great Progress herein, it all fell to nothing. Private Quarrels hindred those Princes from uniting, and other Wars diverted the Turk from his Designs upon Christendom. Only the King of Portugal enjoyed Peace and Prosperity, being enriched with the Trade of India, and successful in his Conquests in Africk. About the end of the last Year, he sent a so∣lemn Embassy to the Pope, to make his Compliment of Obeisance. As a Token of his Grandeur, he also sent very rich Presents; which were, a Pontisical Vestment of Cloath of Gold, embroidered with Pearls and precious Stones, the richest that had ever been in the Trea∣sury of S. Peter. An Ounce brought from Persia, wonderfully fleet, which an Indian carried behind him on horseback; and had taught it when he made a Sign, to leap off and hunt. An Elephant covered with Cloath of Gold, and a Castle on his back, being taught, besides other things, to kneel before the Prince, to dance to a Pipe, and to fill his Trunk with Water, and sprinkle the People. Also a Rhinoceros, a Creature not seen in Italy in many Ages. It was
designed to fight with the Elephant, these Creatures being naturally Enemies. But the Rhino∣ceros was lost, the Ship being cast away upon the Coast of Genoa. Tristan de Acun̄a, a Gentle∣man well versed in the Affairs of India and principal Ambassador, made his publick Entry into Rome upon the 12th of March. On the 20th, the Day appointed to receive Audience of the Pope, James Pacheco a great Civilian, and one of Acun̄a's Companions, delivered himself to the Pope in this manner: King Emanuel of Pertugal, most holy Father, has sent us to felicitate your happy Assumption to the Pontificate, wishing you may enjoy it many Years for the good of the Church, as we all hope it will be; and also to pay his Obedience as is usual and due, yet done by him with a most ready Will, which may make amends for the Delay, caused by many great and weighty Obstacles He also humbly makes Suit to your Holiness, to cast the Eyes of your fatherly Care, upon making up the Breaches of Christendom, upon reconciling the Christian Princes, and uniting their Forces against the common Enemy, who grows upon our Losses and builds his own Grandeur upon our Ruines. For what Enterprize can be more glorious or profitable than this? Let the past Rage suffice. For they deserve no better Stile who turn their Weapons upon themselves. To this Purpose it will be very requisite the Holy Council be continued, as the King earnestly desires. For his own part, he promises not to be wanting to the publick Cause, and if requi∣site, will not spare his own Blood in this Quarrel, It is all his Study to advance the Christian Religion, as appears in India; where, to his immortal Glory, he has set up the Holy Standard of the Cross, among fierce and barbarous Nations, even as far as the utmost Bounds of the Earth. No less has he done in Africk, having there spent his Treasures, and employed the Bravery of his Soldiers. Of the Spoil and Riches of India, he has commanded me to bring a Sample, and the first Fruits: a Present to be esteemed for the Place from whence it came, and for the Zeal with which it is offered, besides, the hopes those vast Regions give us, of humbling them∣selves at the Feet of your Holiness. Instead of the Spoil of Africk, which as more common, could not be so acceptable, I present your Holiness with a Petition, in my Judgment, most rea∣sonable. It is, that in regard of the Importance of carrying on that Conquest, and that the Revenue of Portugal is not sufficient to continue it, your Goodness will assist the King my Master, with your Blessing and Indulgences; and besides, will grant that towards the advan∣cing that Enterprize, he may make use of part of the Ecclesiastical Revenues. For how can they be better spent, or more to the content of the Donors, than in destroying the Enemies of Christ? And since all are Partakers of the Honour and profit, it is reasonable all should bear a part in the Burden. We do not believe this Holy See will deny that, in such necessity, and for such a Purpose, which has been at several times granted to other Princes. The Pope heard the Ambassador with great satisfaction, and returned a favourable Answer, saying, He highly esteemed the King of Portugal, received his Presents with great Affection, and would forward his Designs by all the means that lay in his Power. He granted his Bulls for the Croisade, and al∣lowed the King for to defray the Charge of his Undertakings, to make use of the 3d part of Ecclesiastical Revenues assigned to the Churches, and the 10th of all other Church Revenues. Great Difficulties were met with in the Execution of these Orders, which was the Fault of ill Ministers. For this reason the Church compounded for 150000 Cruzado's paid down, and three Years after, all these Taxes were quite taken off. The Commonalty misliked the apply∣ing the Revenues of the Church to any other uses, and urged the Example of the Kings of Castile; who were ever poor, since they had to do with the Mony of the Church. The King's Ministers either to flatter him, or that their Opinion was really such; affirmed, that since the King defended not only the Laity, but the Clergy, it was reasonable they should all contribute to the necessary Charges of the Kingdom, the Churches enjoying a great part of the Revenue. It is most certain, that in the time of S. Ambrose, the Lands of the Church payed Taxes to the Emperors. This was the Success of that Embassy. About the same time arrived at Lisbon, one Matthew an Armenian by Birth, and by Profession a religious Man, sent Ambassador from An Am∣bassador from Ethi∣opia ar∣rives in Portugal. Prester John, the Great Emperor of Ethiopia. That Prince, called David (since the time that Peter Covillan went into those Parts as was said before) had heard of the King of Portugal, and after that of his Fleets sailing to India, and the Valour of his People. He thought good to make use of his Forces, and to that Purpose sent this Ambassador, who was well received by Alonso de Albuquerque and sent to Portugal. Those who carried him made a Jest of him by the way, and treated him very scornfully. At Lisbon they were apprehended, and had been punished, but that the Ambassador interceded for them. The King received him honourably, and was much taken with his Letters, written in the Abyssinian and Persian Languages, and also with a piece of the Holy Cross he brought set in Gold. By this Ambassador they understood the Customs of those People, odd enough for Christians. It would be tedious to speak of them at large, let it suffice to know, that the 8th Day, as well the Women as Men are circumcised, and the 40th baptized. Women after Lying in, observe the Custom of Purification. They ab∣stain from Meats forbidden in the Old Law. They fast till Sun-set. They communicate in both kinds, Their Priests marry, but not their Monks, nor the Bishops chosen out of Mo∣nasteries. They use auricular Confession, and worship Saints. Let us return to Italy. The Pope was possessed of the City Rhegio in Lombardy, and had Modena morgaged to him by the Emperor for 40000 Duccats. It was thought he designed these two Cities as also Placencia, Parma, and Ferrara, for his Brother Julian, whom soon after he married to Philiberta Sister to the Duke of Savoy, and gave her himself 10000 Duccats Portion.
CHAP. IX. The Kingdom of Navarre united to that of Castile. The Affairs of the Portugueses in In∣dia. Their Defeat on the Coast of Africk. KING Luis of France, soon after his Marriage with the English Princess, died, as is usual where there is great inequality of Years, and want of Health. His Death fell out upon Luis King of France dies. the first Day of the Year, 1515. Francis de Valois Duke of Angouslesme, the first of the Name, and a Prince of a great Spirit succeeded him. It was generally believed he would not rest 1515. till he had recovered Milan and Navarre; and he seemed to intimate as much to those Kings. His chief Care was for Italy, and therefore he sought to leave all behind secure. With England he was at Peace. He proposed a Match betwixt Prince Charles of Austria, and his Sister-in-Law Renata, which was so carried on by the Earl of Nassau, and Michael de Croy, both of the Princes Bedchamber, that they concluded it at Paris on the 24th of March. Her Portion was set at 600000 Duccats, 200000 to be paid down in Mony, and the Dukedom of Berry for the other 400000. The Prince was now come to Age, and put into the Possession of the Go∣vernment of the Low Countrys It remained to secure King Ferdinand. Monsieur de Lau∣tre Governour of Guienne, proposed to the Marquess of Comares, the Prolonging of the Truce for a Year but King Ferdinand understanding his Policy, would not grant it, unless it were for Italy as well as Spain. He pressed for carrying on the League proposed by the Pope against the Turk, and at the same time, consented to another League against the Venetians. The Conditions were, that the Emperor should be possessed of Verona, Vinzenza, Frioli, and Treviso; that Bressa, Bergamo and Crema, should be given to the Duke of Milan in lieu of Parma and Placencia, which the Pope designed for his Brother Julian. Thus King Ferdinand thought the Duke of Milan would be safe, and was willing he should marry one of the Sisters of Prince Charles, or the Princess Margaret, or else the Queen of Naples his Niece, all of them great Matches. King Ferdinand kept the Holy Week of Mejorada, designing at the same time to assemble the Cortes of Castile at Burgos, and those of Aragon to meet on the 11th of May. He sent the Queen with a sufficient Commission to preside there, and thence to go to Lerida to those of Catalonia, and o on to Valencia, to those of that Kingdom. He went himself to Bur∣gos to be there at the time appointed. His grand Design was, to raise Mony for the War which threatned on all sides. The Cortes of Burgos gave 150 Millions of Maravedies. This they did in respect that King Ferdinand then united the Kindom of Navarre to that of Castile, whereas formerly it was united to Aragon. By this it appears, the King had no Thoughts of restoring that Kingdom, but esteemed it as much his own, as any of the others, without the least remorse of Conscience upon that account, as he was often heard to say. He gave three Reasons to justifie this his Proceeding. The first, the Pope's deposing that King. The second, the free gift of that Crown to the Kings of Castile, made by the Princess Clare, first Wife to Prince Henry, afterwards the 4th King of Castile of that Name; when her Father King John of Aragon delivered her up to Gaston de Foix, and her Sister Ellenor her declared Enemies, who sought her Death, to secure themselves the Possession of that Crown, and therefore he said, it was but just, to revenge that Murder, by depriving the Grandchildren of those that commit∣ted so great a Crime of the Kingdom. His third Reason was, the Right that Queen Germana pretended to the Crown, after the Death of her Brother Gaston de Foix. Three Years after this, it appears she assigned over all her Claim, to Prince Charles then King of Castile and Aragon. It was proposed in the Cortes of Aragon, to raise a considerable Sum of Mony towards the War, but the Nobility would not consent, unless their Vassals were cut off, from having any Appeal to the King. This hindred all Proceedings for some Months. The Archbishop of Zaragoça laboured to remove these Obstacles, but perceiving nothing was done, he was of Opinion to try what every City in particular would contribute. King Ferdinand, tho' his Sickness in∣creased, so that he was given over for Dead, one night resolved to get into Aragon; believing his Presence would reduce that obstinate People, He sent for the Vicechancellour Antony Au∣gustin to meet him, and assoon as he came to Aranda, caused him to be apprehended, and sent Prisoner to the Castle of Samoncas. Every one guessed at the Cause of his Imprisonment, but nothing was certainly known. The King left the Cardinal and Council at Segovia, and hasted to Calatayud carrying Prince Ferdinand with him. He could not prevail with the Nobility to quit their unjust Pretensions. His Sickness increased, and it is reported, the famous Bell of Vililla prognosticated his Death, for in Aragon it is a received Opinion, that Bell rings of it self, before the Death of Kings or any other great Misfortunes. Thus having done nothing, he returned to Madrid in Autumn. The Queen having broke up the Cortes of Aragon, went to Lerida to those of Catalonia. At the same time these Cortes sat, the Emperor, the Brothers King Sigismund of Poland, and Ladislaus of Hungary, and his Son Luis, then King of Bohemid met at Vienna on the 17th of July. Their meeting was, to celebrate the Nuptials of Prince Ferdinand and the Princess Mary, with Luis King of Bohemia, and the Lady Anne his Sister, the Chil∣dren of the Hungarian King. Prince Ferdinand being absent, the Emperor stood Proxy for her. Thomas Cardinal of Strigonium the Pope's Legate, performed the Ceremony. It is worth observing, that as Ferdinand and Mary were Grandchildren to the Catholick King, so
Luis and Anne, were great Grandchildren to E e or Queen of Navarre, and Sister to King Ferdinand. Gatherine Daughter to Queen Ellenor was married to Gaston de Foix Lord of Can∣dale, whose Daughter Anne, was Wife to Ladislaus King of Hungary, and Mother to Luis and Anne; so far was the Progeny of King John of Aragon, the Father of King Ferdinand spread abroad. Great things had been done by Alonso de Albuquerque Governour of India, and great is the Alonso de Albequer∣que his A∣ctions in India. Obligation his Country owes him, for having Founded their Dominion in those remote Parts. He was now old, sickly, and worn out; and had many Enemies who sent Complaints against him to Portugal, it being impossible to please all Men. King Emanuel sent Lope Suarez de Albergaria, a Man well versed in the Affairs of India to succeed him. With him went Ma∣thew the Ethiopian Ambassador, and Duarte Galvam sent in the same Quality by King Emanuel; but he died by the way. Some time after Roderick de Lima was sent, who carried Mathew into Ethiopia, but he died before he could reach the Court. Now also went Francis Alvarez the Priest whose Book is extant, giving an account of his Voyage. The new Governour arri∣ved at Goa on the 2d of September, having spent but 5 Months in the Voyage, which was a very short time. On the 7th of that Month, the Queen of Portugal was delivered of a Son called Edward, an affable and mild Prince, addicted to Hunting and Musick. He died young, yet left a Son by his Wife of his own Name, and two Daughters, whereof Mary was married to Alexander Farnesius then Prince, and afterwards Duke of Parma, and Catherine married to the Duke of Bragança. When Lope Suarez arrived at Goa, Albuquerque was at Ormuz ill of his last Sickness. Having settled that Island, he embarked, being desirous to see Goa, which Place was his Delight. By the way he received advice of the coming of his Successor; he was ex∣treamly surprized, and cried out, Good God! how many Misfortunes surround me! If I please the King, Men are offended; if I satisfie them, my King is displeased. Retire to the Church, unhappy Old Man, for no other Sanctuary is left you. Soon after, being better come to himself, he said, Truly it is God that guides the Hearts of King, and disposes all things. What would become of India, if there were not one to succeed me after my Death! In how great Danger would it be! This said, he reposed; and finding his Malady encrease, ordered his Confessor to be brought to him from Goa, which was not far off. Having made his Peace with God, he gave up the Ghost. He was doubtless one of the Bravest Men that Spain ever bred. His Valour, Mildness, Pru∣dence, and Justice reigned in an equal degree. He was patient of Labour, discreet in his Resolutions, quick in Execution, amiable to his own People, and terrible to his Enemies. It was a great Mercy of God to give to the Portugueses Two such Governours at first as was he and Francis d' Almeyda being both Wise and Resolute Men, and Zealous of their Prince's Service and the Propagation of the Faith, tho' they differed in Opinions as to the Means of carrying on that Great Work: For Francis d' Almeyda, who was the first, thought it best only to make themselves Masters of the Sea, and not undertake any Conquests; whereas, on the contrary, Albuquerque was wholly for gaining Strong holds, in order to secure the Trade, and have a Retreat for their Fleets. Experience has taught how much he was in the Right. Al∣buquerque was never married, but he left a Son by a Servant, and a little before his Death re∣commended him to King Emanuel, writing to him these Words: This is my last, which I write with many Sighs, and assured Tokens of my End. I leave only one Son, who I beg may find Favour in regard to my great Services. I will say nothing of my Sufferings, but refer my self to my Actions. His Body was buried at Goa, in a Chapel he had built of the Invocation of the Blessed Virgin. His Funeral Pomp was performed with Regal Magnificence, and great Grief of all sorts of People. When the News of his Death was brought to Portugal, the King was much concer∣ned; he sent for his Son, whose Name was Blas, but in memory of his Father he would have him called Alonso d' Albuquerque, The King provided for him, and matched him Honourably. He lived many Years, and beautified the Chapel where his Father lay. King Emanuel designed to build a Fort at the Mouth of the River Mamora in Africk, about 100 miles from Arzila. He sent Antony Noronha with a Fleet of 200 Sail, and in it 8000 Men, to perform this Work. They sailed from Lisbon on the 13th of July, and came to the Mouth of that River on the 23d. As the Work began, such a multitude of Moors came upon them, that they were forced to quit that Enterprize, and return to Portugal with Dishonour, and the loss of 4000 Men, as 4000 Por∣tugueses slain in Africk. also the Cannon which they left in the Fort they had begun.
CHAP. X. The King of France recovers Milan. The Swiss overthrown. Death of the Great Cap∣tain, and of Ferdinand King of Spain. AS soon as King Francis of France found himself peaceably possessed of his Kingdom, Milan re∣covered by the French. he gathered a powerful Army, in order to go over into Lombardy. 15000 Swiss marched to the Defence of the Duke of Milan. Prosper Colona with his Men at Arms thought to secure a Pass, but was himself surprized at Supper in Villafranca, and made Prisoner by the Forces of the Sieur de la Palisse. The Viceroy lay with his Army near the River Abdua. Laurence de Medicis, Son to Peter that was drowned in the River Garellano, with the Forces of the Pope Quartered at Plasentia. It was very requisite these Forces should join with the Swiss, and the Duke of Milan earnestly pressed them so to do, and the more because the French began already to be successful; for Alexandria yielded to them, and No∣vara with the Castle was taken by the Industry of Peter Navarro, who in a Passion for that he was not Ransomed, agreed to serve the King of France, he purchasing his Li∣berty for 2000 Ducats. King Ferdinand sent to make him great Offers, but too late, for he was engaged, and therefore excused himself, resigning up the Earldom of Oliveto he had in Naples. The Viceroy was jealous that the Swiss held Correspondence with France, and no less of the Pope's Forces, fearing he should compound with the Ene∣my to save Parma and Plasentia, which the Swiss intended to take from him. He left Mark Antony Colona in Verona, and Luis Icart in Bressa, with good Garrisons, and he with the rest of the Army passed the Po, and fortified himself near Plasentia and the River Trebia. The Swiss were offended at this Delay, which proved fatal. They resolved themselves with only a few Italians to fight the French, who lay strongly encamped near Donato and Marignano. This they did to prevent Albiano joining the French with the Venetian Forces, which consisted of Nine hundred Men at Arms, One thousand four hundred Light-horse, and Nine hundred Foot. The Swiss marched out in good Order, and the French drew up to receive them. Charles of Bourbon led the Van, the Sieur de la Palisse the Rear, and the King the main Battel. The French Artillery, which was nume∣rous, did the Swiss great harm. They charged furiously to take it, and overcoming the Enemy's Works, made themselves Masters of part of it. Night came on, and yet the Over∣thow of the Swiss. Fight ceased not as long as there was Moon-light, which was till between Eleven and Twelve of the Clock. The King was so forward, that he was forced to stand upon his Guard, only reposing himself a little on a Cart. He neither took off his Helmet, nor eat a mouthful in Twenty seven Hours. Understanding the Swiss would charge the rest of the Cannon, he gave the Charge of it to the Germans. At break of day the Fight was renewed with as great Fury as before. The French Artillery playing athwart the Swiss, did great execution, and Albiano coming upon them with some Troops of Horse, they imagining his whole Army was come, retired in good order to Milan. This famous Battel was fought on the Thirteenth and Fourteenth of September. From Milan the Swiss marched away towards Lago de Como. The Milaneses delivered up the City to the King, who laid straight Siege to the Castle, whither the Duke retired with what Forces he could. After Thirty Days Siege the Duke surrendered, and was sent to France. It was Articled he should have a Pension of Thirty six thousand Crowns, up∣on condition he should not depart that Kingdom. All the other Cities and Strong∣holds of the Dukedom immediately submitted to the King. D. Raymund de Cardona the Viceroy marched in haste to Naples to secure that Kingdom. He had Orders for em∣ploying of the Soldiers to attempt the taking of Gelves on the Coast of Africk. The Pope easily temporized, and meeting the Victorious King at Bolonia, granted him all he could ask. In Spain King Ferdinand had many other Cares upon him. It was reported the Great Captain, the Marquess of Priego, and Earls of Cabra and Uren̄a, designed to go over to Flanders. The King sent Orders to secure the Great Captain, but it happened he Great Captain ordered to be ap∣prehen∣ded. fell sick of an Ague at Loxa, where he generally resided, and yet it was thought his Sick∣ness was counterfeit. The King of England's Displeasure ran very high, and it was conve∣nient at such a ticklish time to appease him. King Ferdinand sent him a rich Present of Jewels and Horses by the Commendary Luis Gilabert. He arrived at such time as it was confirmed the Queen was with Child, to the great Joy of that Kingdom. At the same time Thomas Wolsey received the Cardinal's Cap, for which there were great Demon∣strations of publick Satisfaction. This Prelate rose from a very mean Extraction to that High Dignity through the Favour of his King. His Pride and Ambition afterwards, fatal to that Kingdom, cast him down. This Cardinal and the Catholick King's Ambassador conferred together, and on the Eighteenth of October concluded a firm League betwixt
the Two Kings. Before this, Luis de Requesens, with Nine Galleys he Commanded, near the Island Pantalarea, defeated 13 Vessels of Turks that did great harm on the Coast of Sicily and all those Seas. Barbarossa, the famous Turkish Commander, with his Fleet came before Barbarossa besieges Bugia in vain. Bugia: Many Moors came down to his Aid by Land, and the Siege lasted some Months. D. Raymund Carroz, Commander of that Place, defended it with much Bravery. D. Michael de Gurrea, Viceroy of Majorca, came to his Relief, but could not raise the Siege. The Be∣sieged suffered great want of Provisions. At such time as they were upon surrendring, there came to them a Ship laden with all sorts of Victuals, sent by the Viceroy of Sardinia. This Supply lasted them till the Turk despairing of carrying the Place, raised the Siege about the end of the Year. The Catholick King's Dropsie and the Great Captains Ague increased, both of them being mortal Diseases. The Great Captain set out of Loxa upon the point of death, was carried Great Captain dies. on Mens Shoulders to Granada, and there gave up the Ghost on the 2d of December, Garibay says on the 10th. He was a Man not to be matched, being the Bravest and most Fortunate Commander that Spain had for many Years. The Severity of his Usage increased his Glory; it being very rare to Sail long in the Seas of Prosperity without some Storm. Many great Men in process of time had the Brightness of their Honour sullied. Time cut the Thread of his Life; but his Renown will endure as long as the World. Upon his death the Office of Constable of Naples was Vacant, which was given to Fabricius Colona, and continues in his Family to this day. His Estate fell to the Lady Elvira, Eldest Daughter and Heiress to her Father. The Catholick King was gone from Madrid, to Plasentia, in order to continue his Journey to Sevil, because the Air of that Place is very Wholesome. There, tho' very siick, he was nobly Entertained, and staid some days. He sent Prince Ferdinand to Guadalupe, thinking to Return thither, and so went on to Serena to divert himself with Hawking, that being a good Country for it, and he delighting in that, and the like Sports. With him went the Admiral, the Duke of Alva, the Bishop of Bur∣gos and 3 of his Council, which were Dr. Laurence Galindez de Carvajal, and the Lieutenants Zapata, and Francis de Vargas. To this Place about Christmas came Adrian Dean of Louvain, Prince Charles his Preceptor, sent from Flanders. It was agreed at his coming, that the Prince should be supplied with 50000 Ducats a Year, and King Ferdinand, altho' Q. Joanna died, should during his Life continue in the Government of Castile. They showed themselves libe∣ral to him, who according to appearance must soon resign up all to them. The King re∣turned to Madrigalejo in the Territory of Truxillo; his Disease encreased so that it was plain he had but few days to live. The Dean of Louvain repaired thither, at which the King was offended, and ordered him back to Guadalupe, whither he went to see Prince Ferdinand. He made his Will, and Confessed to F. Thomas de Matienço, of the Order of S. Dominick, his Con∣fessor. The Queen having notice of the Danger he was in, set out from Lerida, and came to him the day before he Signed his Will. Next day, being Wednesday the 23d of January, 1516. between One and Two in the Morning he gave up the Ghost. He was one of the most re∣markable 1516. Princes that ever Spain had; yet it could not be expected he should be without Ble∣mish, K. Ferdi∣nand dies. but may serve for an Example to all future Kings of Spain. He made Three Wills; one at Burgos 3 years before his Death; the second at Aranda de Duero, 2 years later; and the last when he died. In all of them he names Queen Joanna his Heiress, and Prince Charles her Son Governour. In case the Prince was not in Spain, by his first Will he ordained Prince Ferdinand should Govern in his stead; but in the other two he changed that Article, and or∣dered that during the Prince's absence the Archhishop of Zaragoça should Govern Aragon, and the Cardinal of Spain Castile. This was punctually observed as he had commanded. True it is, the Dean of Louvain producing the Prince's Commission, was admitted to the Govern∣ment together with the Cardinal. To Prince Ferdinand the King his Grandfather left in the Kingdom of Naples the Principality of Taranto, and Cities of Cotron, Tropea, Amantia, and Galipoli, besides a Pension of 50000 Ducats out of the Revenue of that Kingdom, to be paid him till such time as his Brother settled an equivalent Estate upon him. He also ordered that the Duke of Calabria, tho' his Offence was great, should be set at liberty, and charged the Prince to give him an Estate to live upon. But this Clause was never fully performed till the Year 1533. for several Reasons which are never wanting against unfortunate Men. He made no mention of the Vicechancellor Antony Augustin, whether it was that he forgot his Crime, or that he left it to another to punish, could never be known. Soon after the Cardi∣nal of Spain sent him to Flanders, where he was discharged on the 23d of September this same Year. For his Executors the King appointed the Queen his Wife, the Prince, the Archbishop of Zaragoça, the Dutchess of Cardona, the Duke of Alva, the Viceroy of Naples, and F. Tho∣mas de Matienço his Confessor, and his Protonotary Michael Velasquez Clemente. His Body was carried to his own Royal Chapel at Granada, and laid near to that of Queen Elizabeth which was deposited in the Alhambra. Of those that were present at his Death, only D. Ferdinand de Aragon, and D. Bernard de Sandoval y Rojas, with some of his menial Servants, attended the Body. By the way whole Towns came out to meet it with Crosses and in Mourning; parti∣ticularly at Cordova, when the Body passed through that City, the Marquess of Priego and
Earl of Cabra, and other Gentlemen of that Place, distinguished themselves. All past Of∣fences, and the Severity he used towards them whilst living, served only to stir up their gene∣rous Souls the more to signalize their Respect and Reverence to him dead and to his Memory. At Granada the Clergy, Citizens, and Courts, strove to outdo one another in the manner of the Reception and Funeral Rites, which were performed with all Grandeur and Mag∣nificence, as was due to the Conquerour and Founder of the Happiness, Peace, and Prospe∣rity of that City and whole Kingdom of Granada. The End of the 30th BOOK. LAUS DEO. FINIS
A Compendious SUPPLEMENT TO THE History of SPAIN; From the Year 1615, till 1521. Written by F. John de Mariana. Anno 1515. FRANCIS the new King of France having settled the Affairs of his Kingdom at home, and being a hot and fiery Youth, resolved to carry the War into French K in Italy. Italy. He passed the Alps with all his Forces, and at his first Entrance over∣threw and took Prisoner Prosper Colonna, who with the Horse thought to have stopp'd his Passage. Next he took Novara, and the Castle, wherein he was much assisted by the Industry of Count Peter Navarro, who weary of his long Imprisonment, and offended that he was not Ransom'd, had taken Service with the French. Thence the French King March'd towards Milan. With Duke Ma∣ximilian, were the Swiss, Raymund de Cardona was at Verona, and Lawrence de Medicis Ge∣neral for the Pope at Placencia. They not coming in time as they ought to have done, the Swiss marched out to meet the King; and tho the Battel was so resolutely fought, Swiss rou∣ted. that it lasted all day and part of the night, next morning the Swiss terrified with a false Rumour that fresh Supplies were coming to the King, were overcome and put to flight. The Duke was taken in the Castle whether he fled for refuge, and sent Prisoner into France as his Father had been, and continued there in like manner as long as he lived. This memorable Battel was fought on the 13th of September. The Consequence of this Victory was such in Italy, that the Spaniards, who before were Spaniards expelled Millan. absolute, being drove out of Lombardy and State of Milan, began now to be in fear for Naples. The Catholick King raised Men, and endeavour'd to have Succours from all Parts; yet at the same time he gave Orders to secure the Great Captain Gonçalo Fernandez de Cordova and other Men of Quality, because they designed to go over to Flanders, but he fell sick in October at Loxa, and died the Second of December at Granada. Anno 1516. Ferdinand the Catholick King died at Madrigalejo near Truxillo, as he was going to Sevil, K. Ferdi∣nand dies on the 27th of January, of a Dropsy which had troubled him many Months. It is re∣ported that the Bell of Velilla in Aragon which uses to denounce such Misfortunes, had al∣so been heard to ring of it self before this. He appointed his Grandson Charles of Austria his Heir. To his Grandson Ferdinand he left the City Taranto and some other Lands in the Kingdom of Naples. To govern during the absence of King Charles, he appointed the Cardinal of Spain Archbishop of Toledo in Castile, and his Son the Archbishop of Zaragoça in Aragon. Ferdinand Duke of Calabria he ordered to be set at Liberty, and to have a competent Revenue assigned him. His Body and that of the Queen his Wife, were buried in the Cathedral of Granada, as he had ordained in his Will. King Charles by his Letters Patents appointed Adrian, Dean of Lovain, to govern together with the Cardinal of Spain; and notwithstanding his Mother was still living, he took upon him the Title of King, with∣out consent of the Nobility, yet he continued to use that Stile, it being a thing of dange∣rous consequence to oppose him. Our Governours were in care for Navarre, fearing least now upon the Change of Princes that Kingdom should declare for its own antient Kings. For this reason they chose the Navarre pacified. Duke of Najara Governour and General of that Kingdom, he being a Person very fit for that Employment, by reason of the great Alliances he had among that People, his Estate
lying near at hand. Nevertheless Peter of Navarre, Mareschal of that Kingdom and Marquis of Cortes raised some Commotions, which were not of any moment, for he was taken and sent Prisoner to Simancas, where he continued in Confinement as long as he lived. Besides, all those Contrivances ended in the Death of King John d' Albret, who died in his Dominion of Bearne upon Tuesday the Nineteenth of June. Anno 1517. Eight Months after ensued the Death of the Queen his Wife. Both their Bodies were buried at Lescar, a City in the Province of Bearne, tho they in their Will had ordered themselves to be buried at Pamplona, as King and Queen of Navarre, by that means as it were to make good their Title, which was a small comfort having lost the Crown. Henry Henry King of Navarre. d' Albret their Son succeeded them in their Possessions, as also in the Pretensions to that Kingdom. At Lisbon, in March, died Mary Queen of Portugal, in the flower of her Age. She died in Labour, and was buried in the Church called de la Madre de Dios, or of the Mother of Mary Qu. of Portu∣gal dies. God, in that City. She had the following Children, Prince John the Eldest, Elizabeth, Beatrix, Luis, Ferdinand, Alonso who was a Cardinal, Henry also Cardinal and King, Ed∣ward, besides two that died young. Adrian Florencius, born at Ʋtrecht in the Low Countries, Dean of Lovain and Bishop of Cardinal Adrian. Tortosa in Spain, was at Rome chosen Cardinal on the 27th of June. Charles of Austria the new King, arrived with his Fleet at Villavicosa, a Town in Asta∣rias, the 19th of September. The Cardinal of Spain went to meet him, but died by the K. Charles in Spain. way at Roa. His Body was buried in the Colledge of S. Ildefonsus at Alcala de Henares, which he had built from the Ground, and endowed with plentiful Revenues to be a Se∣minary of Learning. The manner of it is after that of the University of Paris, if we may be allowed to compare small things to great, at least much Profit has redounded from it to Spain, a great number of Youth being there instructed, and many Persons of great Learning having been brought up there. He was Archbishop 22 Years. Cardinal Wil∣liam de Croy a Fleming succeeded him in that Dignity. This Year was remarkable, and no less Unfortunate, for two things that happened: One was the total overthrow of the Empire of the Sultans of Egypt; the other the broaching Downfal of the Sul∣tans of Egypt. of the Heresy of Martin Luther. Egypt was Subject to the Roman Empire till the time of the Emperor Heraclius, when the false Prophet Mahomet conquer'd that Province. After his Death it was possessed by the Caliphs, who as he had appointed were Supream in Spirituals as well as Temporals. These continued till the War of the Holy Land, when King Amalaricus of Hierusalem, having taken the City of Damiata formerly called Pelu∣sium, drove the Caliph to such streights, that he was forced to crave Aid of the Sultan of Siria. Sarraco was sent with these Succours. He in requital for the Assistance given possessed himself of the Kingdom of Egypt, leaving to the Caliphs only the Spiritual Juris∣diction. Saladin the Son of Sarraco was Sultan of Egypt and Siria, and having obtained many Victories over the Christians, and taken Hierusalem, reduced the Christians there to great streights. Not long after Melechsala being possessed of that Empire, finding him∣self too weak to oppose the Christians, bought of the Tartars a great number of Circassian Slaves, with whose help he did many great things, and among the rest took S. Luis King of France Prisoner at Damiata. The Slaves having murdered Melechsala, chose a King from among themselves called Turqueminius, upon condition that neither his Sons should inherit the Crown, nor the Sons of the other Slaves should be admitted into their Order, but that only those should be Soldiers and bare command who being the Sons of Christian Pa∣rents had renounced the Faith. These they called Mamalucks, and from among them the King was to be chosen. This Government flourished 300 Years, till the time of Cayer∣beyus, who obtained many Victories over the Turks, and reigned in the time of King Ferdinand of Spain. Campson his Successor, after the Turks had overthrown the Persians near the City Tarvisium, fearing they would invade Siria, marched against them with his Army, and was near Damascus defeated and slain by Selymus the Turkish Emperor. In his stead the Mamalukes set up Tomombeyus, who being by the Turks in Battel put to the Rout, and the City Caire taken, was by them impaled. Thus the Turk Selymus having conquered the Provinces of Siria and Egypt returned home victorious, his Empire being much augmented, and his strength increased by so large an Addition. Martin Luther took this Occasion to spread his new Doctrine. Pope Julius had begun Heresy of Martin Luther. the Structure of the Vatican, and Pope Leo the Tenth his Successor to finish it granted a Jubilee throughout the World to such as gave some Charity towards that Work. Albertus Archbishop of Mentz, to whom the charge of publishing this Jubilee in Germany was committed, gave it in charge to Tezelius, a Dominican Friar: Martin Luther, who was Professor of Divinity at Wirtemberg, and an Austin Friar, so highly resented that Commis∣sion was not given to him, that he immediately began to preach against it, and meeting with others that gave ear to him ran into many other Extravagancies, which soon spread abroad; the many Abuses then crept into the Church, being a motive for the People to Revolt from it.
Anno 1518. K. Charles his Sister married to Emanuel K. of Por∣tugal. Ellenor, Sister to King Charles, was Married to Emanuel King of Portugal about the end of this Year at Ocrato, a Town in Portugal, with much Pomp and Grandeur. They had afterwards Issue Charles who died Young, and Mary who lived long but was never Married. It was now proposed to divide the Archbishoprick of Toledo into several Bishopricks, because of its immoderate Greatness, and particularly Madrid and Talavera were designed to have Prelates of their own. Pope Leo granted his Bull in order to the effecting of it. He gave the Inspection of that Affair to the Cardinal Adrian, the Bishop of Cosenza his Nuncio in Spain, and D. Alonso de Manrique Bishop of Cuidad Rodrigo, who were impow∣ered to order it as they should think fit. They met with so many Difficulties that they were forced to desist. Anno 1519. Maximilian the Emperor departed this Life on the 12th of January. Soon after the Electors met at Francfort to appoint a Successor, and tho there were many Pretenders, Maximili∣an dies, Charles the Fifth chosen Emperor. and great Instance particularly made by Francis King of France, yet Charles King of Spain was preferred before them all, and declared Emperor on the 28th of June. But in re∣gard that the Kings of Naples could not accept of the Empire, they being so engaged to the Popes he obtained a Dispensation upon condition he should pay yearly 7000 Ducats, as an acknowledgment for that Kingdom, and a White Hacaney, as is done to this Day. This point was not perfectly agreed upon till some Years after. Anno 1520. King Charles received the News of his Election at Barcelona, whence crossing all Spain he went to Corun̄a, and sailed thence in May for Flanders. At Aquisgran the first Crown of the Empire was put upon his Head on the 22th of October, by the Bishop of Cologn, Charles the Fifth Crowned. whose Office it is. At the same time he freely resigned to his Brother Ferdinand all Au∣stria and the other Hereditary Dominions of his Grandfather Maximilian. Cardinal Adrian, D. Ynigo de Velasco the Constable, and the Admiral D. Henry Enriques, were left Governours of Spain. They omitted nothing that could be done to quell the Commonal∣ty, who rose in Rebellion, but could not prevent their taking up Arms, whence ensued Rebellion in Spain. the Civil Wars called Communidades, or the Commons War, Their Pretences were, that through the Avarice of the Flemmings all the Gold of Spain was carried away, and that the Liberties of the Subjects were infringed by their tyranical Government. The common cry of all rebels. The greatest Grievance was, that Charles de Gevres, the new Kings Tutor, not content that he had preferred his Nephew William de Croy to the Arch∣bishoprick of Toledo, had by many knacks and contrivances raked together a vast quantity of Spanish Pistols. The principal Heads of the rebellion were John de Padilla, one of the first Gentlemen of Toledo, and D. Antony de Acuna, Bishop of Zamora. Several Towns and Cities joyned with them. Several Engagements happened between the Loyallists and Rebells in many places, with various success, till about the end of this Year the Kings Ar∣my took Tordesillas, where the Rebels had fortified themselves and kept Queen Joanna. On the 23th of April the following Year, was fought the Battle of Villalar, in which they were totally overthrown, and the Ringleaders of them taken, which were, John de Padilla, Bravo and Maldonado, who were executed, and the Bishop was hanged at Simancas, where he was prisoner. Thus those Tumults were brought to an end by the Prudence and good Conduct of the Councel, to whom the King had wholly committed that Charge. Da Maria Pacheco, Wife to John de Padilla, in the place of her Husband headed the Rebels, and encouraged them to hold together, but could do nothing worth remembrance. The Duke of Segorbe defeated the Germanats of Valencia near unto Morvedre. So the Rebels in that part of the Country called themselves. Anno 1521. William de Croy Archbishop of Toledo, died in Germany the 11th of January, without coming into Spain, or having done any thing remarkable during his Life. D. A∣lonso de Fonseca, a Man of great Spirit at that time Archbishop of Santiago, was translated to the See of Toledo. The Archbishoprick of Santiago was given to John de Tavera, Ne∣phew to F. James Deza Archbishop of Sevil, at that time Bishop of Cuidad Rodrigo and Osma, and of the Councel of the Inquisition. The Rebellion in Castile produced a new War in Navarre. King Ferdinand to hinder Navarre over-run by the French. any Insurrection had demolished all the Castles in that Kingdom, and the last Year all the Garrisons and Artillery were drawn thence against the Mutiniers of Castile. Francis King of France desiring to restore Henry d' Albret to that Crown of Right appertaining to him, laid hold of that favourable Opportunity, and sent a numerous Army to that effect, un∣der the Command of Andrew l'Esparre, younger Brother to Odet Lord of Lautrec. He found all things easier than he could have imagined, and over-run all the Kingdom, taking the Capital City Pamplona, abandoned by D. Antony Manrique the Viceroy. Only the Castle held out, being defended by Ignacius of Loyola, a Man nobly descended in Guipuzcoa, then a Soldier, and afterwards Founder of the Order of the Jesuits. A Cannon Ball struck
up a Stone which broke one of his Legs and hurt the other, which brought him into danger of his Life. He being wounded the Castle surrendred. The French Commander not content with having recovered that Kingdom, entred Castile, and for some days lay before Logron̄o. Our Forces marching to the Relief of the Place, obliged him to quit the Siege Not long after at a place called Noayn near Pamplona, they overthrew the French and took their General Prisoner. After this Victory the Kingdom of Navarre was with the same ease again brought under the Crown of Castile. The King of France highly offended at this Disappointment, to revenge it sent a new Army into Biscay, under the Command of the Admiral of France, who took Fuenterabia, French in Biscay. a strong Town upon the Frontiers. Several Rencounters happened betwixt our Forces and those of the Enemy, but at length the Town was recovered. Beatrix, youngest Daughter to the King of Portugal, contracted to Charles Duke of Savoy, was carried to her Husband in a Fleet fitted out for that purpose. The Publick Joy for this Marriage was not lasting, for that the King of Portugal died in December. Emanuel K. of Por∣tugal dies. His Body was buried in the Monastery of Bethlem, built by himself near Lisbon, and ap∣pointed the burial Place of Kings. King John the Third of the Name his Son succeeded him. On the 2d of December died at Rome Pope Leo, whose Memory was Reverenced for that he had restored the Peace of Italy, favoured Learning, and much restored the University of Pope Leo dies. Rome, by bringing to it Professors of all Sciences from other Parts with great Expence. Nevertheless he is blamed, as having been given to his Pleasures more than became his high Dignity, and for immoderately extolling his Kindred, first his Brother Julian, and after his Death Laurence his Nephew, Son to Peter his other Brother. To raise them he designed to deprive the Duke of Ʋrbin of his Dominions, but the Death of both the Brother and the Nephew prevented the execution of his Designs. Pope Leo was of the House of Medicis, whose Genealogy s this which follows. The Great Cosmo de Mediois, who lived in Florence 100 Years before this, had a Son called Peter, and by him two Grandsons Laurence and Julian. Laurence had three Sons, Peter, John the present Pope Leo, and Julian. Julian had a natural Son born after his Fa∣ther's Death and called Julius, who came to be Pope, and was called Clement the Seventh. Peter, Brother to Pope Leo, had a Son called Laurence the Younger, who was General of his Unkle the Pope's Forces. He by a Mistriss had Alexander afterwards Duke of Florence, by his Wife Magdalen of Bolonia left Catharine, who came to be Queen of France, where∣by the House of Medicis is related to many Royal Families. The second Julian, Brother to Pope Leo, had a Son called Hypolito, who was afterwards a Cardinal, his Unkle Pope Clement giving him the Cap. Anno 1522. On the 10th of January Cardinal Adrian, tho a Fleming, and at that time absent, was by the Conclave chosen Pope. At that time he was employed in the Government of Adrian chosen Pope. Spain. The News of his promotion was brought to him at Vitoria, where he then was to give Orders for carrying on the War against France and recovering of Fuenterabia. Im∣mediately he hasted away in order to pass over into Italy, yet he came not to Rome till the Summer was well advanced. His Papacy was short, as not exceeding twenty Months, but his Learning, Wisdom and Virtue were very great. He changed not his Name, but was called Adrian the 6th. By him St. Antony Archbishop of Florence, and Benon Bishop of Misna, were Canonised. On the 3d of February the Royalists under the Conduct of the Archbishop of Bari overcame the Rebels, who were possessed of the City Toledo, and so those Tumults ended. Charles the Emperor leaving his Brother Ferdinand in January with the Title of Vicar Return of the Empe∣ror into Spain. K. Chri∣stiern ex∣pell'd Den∣mark. of the Empire, set out for Spain to settle the Kingdom, and put an end to the Troubles of it. He arrived with his Fleet at Santaren on the 16th of July. Christiern King of Denmark had married Elizabeth Sister to the new Emperor. His Un∣cle Frederick usurped the Kingdom, whereby he was obliged to retire into Flanders, where he continued in Banishment the space of 10 Years, which was as long as he lived. He left two Daughters lawfully begotten, which were Elizabeth and Christiern, the first was married to Alonso Duke of Lorrain, the other to Francis Sforcia Duke of Milan. Anno 1523. Pope Adrian granted to the Emperor Charles and his Successors Kings of Spain the full Authority of electing and presenting the Bishops within their Dominions. His Bull was passed on the 6th of September. He also for ever granted them to hold the Administra∣tion of the three military Orders, which other Popes had only granted for a time. The Pope died at Rome on the 12th of the same Month, oppressed with Care and Grief for Death of Pope A∣drian. that the Turks had the Year before possessed themselves of the Island of Rhodes, after it had endured a Siege of Eight Months. During the vacancy of the Papal. Chair died at Rome Cardinal Bernardin de Carvajal, who had been Bishop first of Astorga, then of Bada∣joz of Carthagena, of Siguença, and lastly of Plansencia. D. Gutierre de Carvajal, Bishop of Plasencia, was Nephew to the Cardinal who resigned that See up to him. This Year also
died F. James Deza Master to Prince John, successively Bishop of Salamanca, Jaen and Se∣vil, Inquisitor General and Elect of Toledo. On the 20th of December Cardinal Ju∣lius Leo the X. chosen Pope. de Medicis Cousin-German to Pope Leo the Tenth, was chosen Pope in the place of Adrian deceased, and took the Name of Clement the Seventh. He governed the Church ten Years, 10 Months, and 7 Days. He confirmed the Order of the Theatins, calling it the Congregation of Divine-Love. It was instituted by Peter Garrafa Bishop of Theatinum, and other pious Persons. Their Habit differs not from that of the other Clergy, their Life is retired, free from worldly Business, and employed in singing the Canonical Hours. Anno 1524. The French who had entred the Dutchy of Milan, and made themselves Masters of a great part of it, were this Year almost enclosed by the Imperial Army under the Com∣mand Over∣throw of the French. of the Duke of Bourbon, who took most of the Places from whence the Army was supplied, and by that means brought them into great Distress for want of Provisions. This obliged the Admiral of France, General of those Forces to endeavour to make a re∣treat, but the Imperialists were so close upon him that he was forced to fight, his Army was wholly overthrown, and only a small part of it returned home by the way of Turin. This Victory encouraged the Duke of Bourbon and Marquis of Pescara to lay Siege to Mar∣seilles, where when they had lain six Weeks, hearing that the French King was coming with a powerful Army, they sent away their heavy Cannon by Sea, and retired with great precipitation. The King not to lose this Advantage, hastned to pass the Mountains, and soon possessed himself of the Cities of Milan and other Places, and then laid Siege to Pavia. Anno 1525. King John of Portugal married Charlotte, Sister to Charles the Emperor. The Nuptial John King of Portugal marries the Empe∣rors Sister. Solemnities were performed with much Majesty at Estremoz on the 5th of February: This Lady had many Children, which were Alonso, Mary, Catharine, Beatrix, Emanuel, Philip, John and Antony. Of all these only Prince John and the Princess Mary lived to be mar∣riagable, and even they died soon after they were married. Pope Leo the same Year he died entred into a League with Charles the Emperor, for expelling the French out of Italy, upon condition that every Year upon S. Peter's Day the Emperor should for the Kingdom of Naples, besides the White Hacaney, pay 7000 Du∣cats; and that the Kingdom of Sicily should be owned as a Feoffe of the Church, paying only 15000 Ducats as it had used to do. That till such time as the Pope were repayed his Expences in that War, he should hold the Cities of Plasencia and Parma, the Profits whereof were not to be deducted out of the Principal, and that the Dukedom of Milan should be given to Francis Sforcia. Afterwards followed the expulsion of the French, and their return, as was said the last Year. The King of France lying before Pavia, in which was Antony de Leyva and a good Garison of Germans, the Emperor's Generals hasted to the Relief of the City. These were Charles de Lanoy Viceroy of Naples, Charles Duke of Bourbon, and Ferdinand Davlos, Marquis of Pescara, who overthrew the French Army, took the King and sent him Prisoner into Spain. Henry d' Albret King of Navarre was also Francis K. of France taken by the Impe∣rialists. taken, but he bribing his Keepers made his escape out of the Castle of Pavia. In this Battel was slain the Marquis of Civita de Santangel, whose Name was Ferdinand Castriot, Great-Grandson to the most Renowned Scanderberg Prince of Epirus, and Terror of the Turks. His Reins not being chained were cut, and his Horse ran with him into the midst of the Enemies, where the King of France himself killed him with his Lance. This Battel was fought upon Friday the 24th of February being the Feast of the Apostle S. Mathias. Anno 1526. Thus Europe for a while was delivered from the Desolation of War. King Francis of France was Prisoner in the Castle of Madrid. His Mother the Queen-Regent of France in his absence, earnestly desiring her Sons Liberty, sent her Daughter the Lady Margaret, who had been Married to Charles Duke of Alençon, into Spain, to treat of some Accom∣modation. She managed the business so well, that on the 14th of January an Alliance was concluded between the King and the Emperor upon the following Conditions: That Accord be∣twixt Spain and France. from thence forward it should not be allowed the Flemings to Appeal to the King of France. That the King of France should quit all his Pretensions to Milan, Genoa, and Aste. That he should restore Burgundy to the Emperor. That he should Marry Ellenor the Queen-Dowager of Portugal, the Emperor's Sister, and should have with her 200000 Duccats. That he should Pardon Charles Duke of Bourbon. And, That all other Diffe∣rences should be determined according to Equity. The Duke of Bourbon had to Wife Susanna Grandchild to Lewis the Eleventh King of France, and Daughter to Peter Duke of Bourbon and Anne the aforesaid King's Eldest Daughter. To him Charles, last of the Duke of Angers, had by his Will left his Do∣minions in France, and his Title to the Kingdom of Naples. Charles the Eighth, Son and Heir to King Lewis, left no Issue, therefore the Duke of Bourbon, tho he pretended not to the Crown as not being the next of the Male Line, yet he insisted that all the
Dominions that had accrued to the Crown by other means belonged to his Wife, as next of Blood to the late Kings. After her Death he pretended, tho he had no issue, to retain the Dukedom of Bourbon, as next of Kin in the Male-Line to his Father-in-Law. But the King's Mother urged that she was Neice to the said Peter of Bourbon, being his Sister's Daughter, and this Title prevailed. The Treaty being concluded, the King of France departed out of Spain, leaving as K. Francis released. Hostages (acording to Agreement) for performance of the Capitulation his two Sons, Francis the Dauphine, and Henry the Younger. At Sevil on the 3d of March was celebrated the Marriage of the Emperor with Eliza∣beth The Em∣perormar∣ries the Sister of the K. of Portugal. eldest Sister to the King of Portugal. D. Ferdinand of Aragon Duke of Calabria, be∣fore set at Liberty, and D. Alonso de Fonseca, who had succeeded Cardinal William de Croy in the Archbishoprick of Toledo, accompanied the Bride from the Borders of Portugal. The Emperor had deprived Francis Sforcia of the Dukedom of Milan, accusing him of being unfaithful, and holding Correspondence with France. Pope Clement to restore him, and being himself offended because it was by Law established in Spain, that Benefices should Practices against the Empe∣ror. not be given to Strangers, and that the Pope's Bulls should be examined in Council, joined in League with the French and Venetians; he also invited the King of England into the Confederacy, and promised D. Ferdinand Davalos Marquis of Pescara and Governor of Milan, if he would join with them to make him King of Naples, which Kingdom he designed to Conquer. These Practices were the cause of great and mighty Mischiefs that ensued. Mean while the Marquis of Pescara died, and leaving no Issue, his Cousin D. Alonso Dava∣los Marquis del Gasto inherited his Title and Estate. Solyman the Great Turk, Son to Selymus, overthrew in Battel near the City Buda King Luis of Hungary, and by his Death not only the City Buda was lost, but Conten∣tions Turks over run Hun∣gary. arising about the Succession, the Kingdom was brought into great distress. Part of the Nobility were for Ferdinand of Austria, because he was Married to the late King's Sister; and part stood up for John Sepusius Vayvode of Transilvania, whence ensued grievous Wars. Mary the Queen-Dowager having no Issue returned to Flanders. Anno 1527. Cardinal Pompeius Colonna and Vespasian Colonna having raised Forces in the Territory of Rome, and being joined by others sent by D. Hugo de Moncada Viceroy of Naples, they had so streightned the Pope at Rome, that he could scarce secure his Person, or prevent the Soldiers Plundering the Sacred Palace. After which Charles Duke of Bourbon with part Rome sack∣ed. of the Imperial Army marched out of Lombardy towards Rome, designing to Plunder that City. The Duke of Ʋrbin and Janetin de Medicis, Father to Cosmo who was after Duke of Florence, set out to oppose him, but were overthrown passing the River Mincius, and Janetin slain. The Duke of Bourbon assaulting Rome was killed with a Musket Shot from the Walls, nevertheless the Soldiers pursued their Design, and Sacked the City, laying Siege to the Castle of Santangelo, whither the Pope and Cardinals retired. The Emperor was at Valladolid when the News of this Disaster was brought to him, he immediately caused the Publick Feasts and Rejoicing for the Birth of his Son Prince Philip born in that City the 20th of May to cease, which was a Token of his Religious Zeal, and that so great a Disorder had not happened with his knowledge. On the other side the Florentins, who mortally hated the Pope, seeing him Distressed expelled out of their Medicis expelled Florence. City the Family of Medicis, and particularly Hippolito and Alexander, who were the Chiefs of that House, which was the Cause why afterwards they lost their Liberty. King Henry of England hearing what had happened, declared for the Pope and the League before spoken of. The King of France also upon the same News sent his General Odet de Lautrec with Forces into Italy, who joining with the Venetians took Alexandria and Pavia, two consi∣derable Cities in the State of Milan. Margaret Sister to the French King was Married to Henry d' Albret King of Navarre, and had Issue Joanna, who for want of Heirs Male inherited her Father's Dominions. This Lady most obstinately persisted in Heresie, as I suppose, because the Pope had given away the Kingdom of Navarre from her Forefathers. Anno 1528. At Madrid the Three Estates swore the young Prince Philip Heir to his Father's King∣doms. Prince Phi∣lip sworn Heir of Castile. The Emperor complained that the French King did not keep his Word, or per∣form what he had so solemnly promised when he was Prisoner in Spain. The French King sent a Herauld to challenge him to fight him Hand to Hand. This Affair was ad∣vised about with the Nobility. On the 24th of June the Emperor sent his Answer by Letter, accepting the Challenge, and appointing the Place of Combate: But the King of France was so cautious he would neither open the Letters, nor give Audience to the Herauld sent from Spain upon that Errand. Mean while Lautrec having wintered at Bolonia, marched towards Naples, laid Siege to Naples be∣sieged. that City, hoping soon to possess himself of all the Kingdom. On a sudden the Plague began to rage so violently in his Army, that great part of it Perished, and he among the
rest. Others were made Prisoners, and among them Count Peter Navarro, who spent the rest of his Days under severe Confinement. This Disaster moved Andrea Doria, a Genoese, but Admiral of the French Fleet, to go Doria quits the French tervice. over to the Emperor, and afterwards he restored his Country to its Liberty, having de∣feated and expelled the Family of Fregosa, for which and his great Virtues he gained im∣mortal Renown. Anno 1529. Charles the Emperor earnestly desired to go over into Italy by Sea, there to receive the Imperial Crown at the Hand of the Pope. To this purpose he was reconciled with him, after so many Discontents and Affronts, and promised to give his Bastard Daughter Margaret in Marriage to Alexander de Medicis, as also to restore that Family to its Coun∣try. At the same time he renewed the League with the King of France, the Embas∣sadors Composi∣tion be∣twixt Fra. and Spain. of both Princes meeting to that purpose at Cambray, on the Frontiers of France and Flanders. He sent home that Kings two Sons ransomed for Two Millions of Gold, and with them sent his Sister Ellenor who was to be Married to that King. From this time forward the Low Countries were wholly exempted from the Jurisdiction of France, and on the other side Burgundy was entirely made over to that Crown. It remained now to agree the Differences with Portugal, about the Molucco Islands. It Agree∣ment with Portugal. was concluded that the King of Portugal should lend the Emperor 350000 Ducats, upon Condition that till such time as that Sum was repayed, the Castillians should forbear Trading in those Islands, or laying any Claim to them. This done, the Emperor went over by Sea into Italy. Solyman the Great Turk, at the Instigation of John the Vayvod of Transilvania, laid Siege to Vienna, which was Vienna be∣sieged. bravely defended by Philip the Count Palatin, who was in it with a strong Garison. Anno 1530. At Rome the Citizens were disgusted and impoverished by the late Disorders and Sacking of the City, wherefore it was agreed the Coronation should be performed at Bolonia. Coronati∣on of the Emperor. The Concourse of People was incredible, the publick Demonstration of Joy extraor∣dinary, and the Majesty of the Ceremony such as passed belief. On the Day of S. Mathias, which was His Majesty's Birth-day, he was saluted Augustus, and Crowned by the Pope. His Holiness and the Venetians interceded for Francis Sforcia, that the Dukedom of Milan might be restored to him, which was done accordingly, he taking to Wife Christiern, Daughter to the King of Denmark, and the Emperor's Neice. He was ordered to pay 900000 Duccats, and the City of Como and Castle of Milan were to remain in the Empe∣ror's Hands till that were performed. The Marquis of Mantua had the Title of Duke conferred upon him. The Pope and Duke of Ferrara were at Variance about the Ci∣ties of Modena and Reggio, and the Emperor, as Umpire betwixt them, adjudged them to the Duke. After this he set out for Germany, where he had Summoned the Dyet to meet at Aus∣burg Diet at Ausburg. on the 8th of April. The principal aim was to reduce the Hereticks, as had been in∣tended at other Diets. Little was done in this Affair, only that the Hereticks presented in Writing a Confession of their Faith, which of that City was called the Ausburg Con∣fession. He that composed it was named Philip Melancton, a Learned Man. The Imperial Forces having long besieged Florence, reduced the City to such streights, that they were forced not only to admit the Family of the Medicis, but to receive Alex∣ander de Medicis for their Duke, and so lost their ancient Liberty. Philibert Prince of Medicis restor'd to Florence. Orange, and Alonso Davalos Marquis del Gasto and of Pescara, since the Death of his Cousin Ferdinand, were the Generals that commanded at this Siege. Margaret the Emperor's Aunt died at Mecklin in Brabant on the 1st Day of December. She was Governess of those Provinces, and Mary Queen Dowager of Hungary succeeded her in that Charge, which she held for the Emperor her Brother many Years. Anno 1531. By the Emperor's Order the Archbishop of Mentz, whose Place it is, Summoned the Electors of the Empire to meet at Cologn, to chuse a King of the Romans. Upon the day appointed by the unanimous Consent of them all, but one. Ferdinand Archduke of Au∣stria, Ferdinand chosen K. of the Ro∣mans. King of Hungary and Bohemia, was elected, Only Frederick Duke of Saxony, pro∣tested against their Proceedings, but the Year after he agreed with the rest at the Diet of Ratisbon, having obtained Liberty in Matters of Religion. Many Earthquakes happened, and in the Low-Countries the Dikes being shaken, the Sea broke in, and whole Towns were drowned, and some of the Steeples are yet to be Inunda∣tions in Flanders. seen above Water. Lisbon suffered extreamly, insomuch that the King fearing his Pa∣lace should fall upon him, for several Days lay in Tents in the Field. The Waters sepa∣rating in the Channel of Tagus, left a sort of an Island in the middle for some time. In England the Antient Catholick Religion was now subverted on this Occasion. King Change of Religion in England. Henry indulging his Appetite had cast an Amorous Eye upon Anne Bullen. To satisfy his desire, he put from him Queen Catharine, upon pretence that she had been Married to
his Brother Arthur, and took Anne Bullen to Wife, notwithstanding he had a Daughter called Mary by his Lawful Wife. The Pope opposed this Proceeding, and could not be brought to approve of it. Hereupon the King commanded all his Subjects to disown the Supremacy of the Pope, which was the Introduction to all the Disorders that afterwards happen'd in England. Civil Wars broke out between the Catholick and Heretick Cantons of Swisserland. CivilWars in Swisser∣land. They came to a Battel near Zurick, in which the Catholicks had the better. In this Fight Zuinglius was killed. At Basle Ecolampadius was found dead in his Bed. Both these were Heads of that wicked Sect of Sacramentarians. Anno 1532. The Emperor assembled the Diet at Ratisbon, to raise the Forces of the Empire, to op∣pose The Em∣peror arms a∣against the Turks. Solyman the Great Turk who threatned Hungary. Liberty of Conscience was grant∣ed to the pretended Reformed Religion, whereupon the Professors of it joined with the Catholicks in raising Forces. The Pope sent a Supply of Italians under the Conduct of the Cardinal Hippolito de Medicis. The King of Portugal also sent Succour. Thus about 20000 Horse and 80000 Foot were raised. They encamp'd near Vienna, whither the Turks had designed to advance. The Emperor in Person commanded this Army. The Infidels understanding the great Power of the Christians, tho they were much more numerous, durst not hazard a Battel, but contenting themselves with having ravaged Hungary, and part of Austria, returned the same way they came. At the same time Andrew Doria with the Imperial Fleet sailing into the Morea, took Coron and Modon. John Frederick Duke of Saxony, a great Favourer of Martin Luther, died, and his Son of the same Name, and no better a Christian than he, succeeded him. The Emperor having setled the Affairs of Germany passed over into Italy. At Bolonia he had a Conference with the Pope, concluded a League with him against the Turk, and Pope and Emperor meet at Bolonia. it was proposed to call a General Council, to put a stop to the growing Heresies. But the main Design of these Princes was to prevent the French returning into Italy, for it was thought that King would never desist till he had recover'd Milan. Anno 1533. It seems there was no reality in their Proceedings, for as soon as the Emperor return∣ed into Spain, the Pope and King of France met at Marseilles. This Meeting it was fear'd Pope and King of France meet at Marseilles. would produce new Commotions and Wars in Italy. The Death of the Pope, which soon after ensued, broke all those Measures. All that took effect was, that Catharine Daughter to Laurence de Medicis was Married to Henry Son to the King of France, who afterwards Francis the Dauphin his Elder Brother dying, came to be Dauphin, and at last King. She had in Dower certain Towns in Auvergn, and a great Sum of Money. Anno 1534. D. Alonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of Toledo, died the 4th of February, and the Cardinal D. Jobn de Tavera succeeded him in that Dighity. Pope Clement immediately after his return out of France, fell sick of a lingring Disease, Pope Cle∣ment dies, Paul III. succeeds. and having setled his own Affairs and those of the City, departed this Life at Rome the 24th Day of September. On the 15th of October Cardinal Alexander Farnesius, born at Rome, and well versed in all the Affairs of that Court, was chosen his Successor, took the Name of Paul the III. and govern'd the Church 15 Years and 28 Days. In his younger Days he had two Children unlawfully begotten, which were Peter Luis and Constance. Peter Luis was Father to Alexander Farnesius. Constance was Mother of Guido Sforcia. Both these were made Cardinals in the first Promotion. Alexander Farnesius had two Brothers, Octavius afterwards Duke of Parma and Raynuncius, Knight of S. John of Hierusalem, and lastly a Cardinal. In England this November it was by Law establish'd, That the Pope should have no Spiritual Jurisdiction within that Kingdom, but that the King was Head of the Church. Some who would not consent, and among them certain Carthusians, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moore late Chancellor, were put to Death. A Famous Pyrat called Ariadenus Barbarkssa, had made himself King of Argiers, and being afterwards Admiral of the Turkish Fleet, took the City Tunez on the Coast of Africk, expelling thence Muleasse the rightful King. Anno 1535. The Emperor set Sail with a powerful Fleet from Barcelona on the 30th of May to restore Muleasse, who had fled to him for Protection. Prince Luis of Portugal kept him Com∣pany with certain Galleons fitted out by his Brother to that purpose. They had a fa∣vourable Passage, and landing on the Coast of Africk, at their first arrival took the strong Castle of Goletta, and in the Month of July were Masters of the City of Tunez. Tuncz ta∣ken by the Emperor. The City was delivered to King Muleasse. D. Bernardin de Mendoça was left in the Castlc with a Garison of 1000 Men. This done the Emperor sailed over to Sicily, and thence to Naples.
Mean while the King of France passing the Alpes, took from Charles Duke of Savoy French in∣vade Savoy. the City of Turin, and many other Places in Piemont, whence ensued great Broils. To encrease which, Francis Sforcia Duke of Milan dying without Issue, appointed the Em∣peror Charles his Heir. Anno 1536. From Naples the Emperor went to Rome, where in the Presence of the Pope and Car∣dinals, he grievously inveighed against the King of France, and was so far transported with Passion, that he challenged him to Fight hand to hand upon Easter-Monday follow∣ing. Soon after departing Rome, he entred France with a powerful Army. He advanced Emperor in France. as far as Marseilles, to which he laid Siege, but was forced to return without doing any thing remarkable. In this Expedition Garcilasso de la Vega, the Famous Spanish Poet, was killed by certain Country People from a Tower, which the Emperor so highly resented, that he caused the Tower to be razed, and all those Men to be hanged. Antony de Leyva, a famous Commander and then General, died also in this Undertaking. Three things remarkable happened this Year. The first, the Death of Francis the Dau∣phin Three things re∣markable. of France, suspected to have been Poisoned. The second, a Provincial Council held at Cologn by Hermanus, Archbishop of that City, who seven years after turned Lutheran, was therefore deposed by the Pope, and Adolphus placed in his stead. The third, was the Death of Erasmus Roterodamus, who departed this Life at Basle being 70 Years of Age, a Person of great Learning, but no good Reputation. In England on the 29th of May, Anne Bullen, tho the King had by her a Daughter call∣ed Elizabeth, was accused and convicted of Adultery, and accordingly Beheaded. Jean Seymour stepped into her Place, but the Year after she died in Childbed. Her Son lived, and was called Edward. After this the King Married Anne Sister to the Duke of Cleves, from whom he was soon after Divorced, having before establish'd a Law to allow of Di∣vorces. Thus he Married his fifth Wife Catherine Howard, but her also he put to Death for Adultery, and because she had lost her Virginity before she was Married to him. Lastly, he Married the Lady Catherine Par, her he made not away, for soon after he died himself. Anno 1537. Duke Alexander de Medicis was murdered at Florence the 6th of January, by the Con∣trivance of Laurence de Medicis his Kinsman. Upon his Death the Citizens chose for their Duke Cosmo de Medicis, Kinsman to the late Duke, but at a great distance. The Emperor held the Diet of the Empire at Worms, where an Edict was published Diet at Worms. against the Lutherans, but it was of no force, those People being then in Arms. All Men wished for a General Council, but there were great Difficulties that obstructed it. How∣ever the Pope Summon'd the Council, and appointed the Cities of Mantua first, and then that of Vincenza for it to be held in, both those Places being in Italy, and not far from Germany. The Hereticks pretended that the Pope, as a Guilty Person, could not be a Judge, nor the Bishops, as being obliged to him by Oath. They required the Council should be free, and held in Germany. What they aimed at could not be any way allow∣ed; for how could they either as Persons accused or accusers, set up for Judges. To exclude the Bishops was never practiced, and even the secular Princes themselves refused to determine Matters of Faith. Their design was only to baffle and delay time. Solyman the Eunuch Bassa govern'd Egypt for the Great Turk. By his Order he fitted out a Fleet of 80 Sail in the Red Sea, and sailing into the Ocean, laid Siege to the most important Fortress of Diu in the Kingdom of Cambaya, intending to drive the Portugueses Diu be∣sieged by the Turks. out of India, and wholly exclude them their Trade in those Parts. The Siege was car∣ried furiously and with obstinacy, but the Portugueses behaved themselves with such Bra∣very, that the Turks were forced to desist and return home with great loss. About the same time the Pope appointed nine Cardinals to consider of all things that ought to be reformed. They composed a Book, containing the Heads of many things to this purpose. A League against the Turks was also proposed. It was agreed that the Pope, Emperor and Venetians should join their Fleets to this intent, and that the French League a∣gainst the Turks. King might not be any hindrance to them, they resolved to have a Conference with him at Nice in Provence. Anno 1538. This being determined, the Pope, tho then very old, made hast thither, the Emperor came from Spain by Sea, and the King of France by Land. The Meeting was in May. After a long Debate, no Peace could be concluded, but a Truce was agreed on for Ten Truce for 10 Years. Years. Neither could it be brought about that the Emperor and French King should come together. The Emperor promised to Marry his Bastard Daugter Margaret, then Widow of Duke Alexander de Medicis, to Octavius Farnesius the Pope's Grandson. However the Emperor in his Return to Spain, saw the French King at Aiques Mortes. They were together two days, and conferred in private for several times. The chief French K. and Emp. meet. thing concluded upon was, That the King of France should Pardon Andrew Doria, and receive him again into Favour.
He, with the Emperor's, Pope's, and the Venetian Galleys in the Golph of Larta, in Albania near the Morea, took Castelnovo from the Turks, but Barbarussa coming up with the Turkish Fleet near Prevesa, put him to flight without any considerable Resistance. Thus all those Preparations proved fruitless, and the next Year Castelnovo was retaken by the Turks, with great slaughter of the Spanish Garison left there. The Venetians concluded a Truce with the Turk, which produced a lasting Peace. In England the Bones of S. Thomas of Canterbury were burnt, Monasteries subverted, and Monks and Friars forced to change their Habit, and go like Laymen or secular Priests. Anno 1539. At Toledo, in the House of the Earls of Fuensalida, on the 1 st of May, died Elizabeth the Empress; Her Body was carried to Granada. The Emperor retired for some Days to The Em∣press dies. the Monastery of Sisla of the Order of S. Hierome. This Lady left three Children, Prince Philip, the Princess Mary, afterwards Married to the Emperor Maximilian the Second, and the Lady Joanna, Wife to Prince John of Portugal. Illegitimate Issue, the Emperor had D. John of Austria, got after he was a Widower, and the Lady Margaret of Austria, got before he Married. George Duke of Saxony, a great Enemy to Luther, departed this Life, his Brother Henry already a Luther an succeeded him. Maurice, of whom we shall speak hereafter, was Son to this Henry. Anno 1540. The City Ghent in Flanders was in Rebellion, on account of a new Tax laid towards de∣fraying Rebellion of Ghent. the Charge of the War. The Emperor resolving to repair thither in Person, to gain time took his way through France. Henry and Charles, that Kings two Sons, came to meet him on the Borders of the Kingdom, and the King himself accompanied him from Orleans to Paris. It was a desperate Action of the Emperor, to put himself into his Ene∣mies Power. It is reported there was a design to stop him, but God delivered him from so great a Danger. Being come to Ghent, he punished such as were most faulty, and rai∣sed a Cittadel to curb that People. About the same time died John the Vayvod, who called himself King of Hungary. He left a new-born Son called Stephen, in Defence of whom the Turks made great Havock in that Kingdom. Ebora, a City in Portugal, was at the Suit of that King made an Archiepiscopal See. The Bishoprick of Silves was made Subject to it. That Dignity was conferred upon Car∣dinal Ebora made an Arch∣bishoprick Henry, the King's Brother, who after the Death of King Sebastian his Nephew came to be King. Pope Paul the first time confirmed and approved of the Order of the Jesuits. His Bull was passed at Rome on the 27th of September. This Order was Instituted by the Holy Fa∣ther Jesuits confirmed By the Pope. Ignacius de Loyola, a Native of the Province of Guipuzcoa, and of singular Sanctity of Life. This Year, on the 12th of September, happened the memorable Battel, wherein D. Bernar din de Mendoça, General of the Spanish Galleys, overthrew the Turks near the Island of Alboran. Anno 1541. The Emperor having pacified Flanders, and punished the Rebellion at Ghent, went away for Germany, hoping to reconcile the Hereticks to the Church. Many Disputes happened betwixt the Divines of both Parties, which might have been a sure Remedy for that Disputes about Re∣ligion in Germany. Distemper, had the Obstinacy of the Hereticks been to be convinced by any Arguments. The last Year on the 25th of November, at Worms, was began a Conference betwixt the Divines, which held on till this Year, but upon the coming of the Emperor all things were referred to the Diet at Ratisbon, which was opened the 5th of April. The Divines ap∣pointed on both sides disputed, the Chief for the Catholicks was John Eccius, for the He∣reticks Philip Melancton. Cardinal Gaspar Contarenus, the Popes Legate at this Diet, granted to the adverse Party certain Points relating to Justification, and Transubstantiati∣on, for which after his return to Rome he was publickly reproved by Cardinal Peter Gar∣rafa, who was afterwards Pope, and called Paul the Fourth. All men guessed by the severity of the Reprimand that it came from the Pope, who was there present, and therefore the Reflection upon him was the greater. The Diet at Ratisbon being broke up, the Emperor went into Italy, and conferred with the Pope at Luca in September. The chief Subject of their Conference was about Assembling a General Council. Leaving the Pope, he went to Genoa, where Andrew Doria had a great Fleet in readiness to go over to Argiers on the Coast of Africk. The Season was then too far advanced, therefore the Pope and others laboured to disswade the Emperor from that Enterprize, but he was not to be moved. Being come upon the Coast of Africk about the end of October, and having lost great part of his Fleet in a terrible Storm, he was forced to retire to Bugia, whence he passed over much afflicted to Carthagena, having done nothing and sustained great loss. Ferdinand Cor∣tes, who accompanied the Emperor in this Expedition, his Galley sinking, was obliged to swim for his Life, and lost two Cups made of Emraulds, which he had tyed about him in a cloath, and were worth 300000 Duccats.
Anno 1542. The bloody Wars betwixt Christian Princes disappointed the Pope's design the last year, of assembling a General Council, but now he published a new Edict, Summoning all the Bishops to meet at the City Trent. He appointed the Cardinals, Parisius, Moron, and Council of Trent. Poole, to preside in his Name; but this design was also put off, because the French King made War upon the Emperor. The cause of this War was, that the King sent two Embassa∣dors to the Turk, one a Genoese called Fregoso, the other a Spaniard whose name was Antony Rincon. Alonso Davalos, Marquis del Gasto, was then Governour of Milan. Certain Spa∣nish Soldiers discovered these Embassadors sailing down the River Po, tho they were dis∣guised like Pilgrims, they seized and drowned them in the River. This happened the last year, and so incensed the French King, that he immediately had recourse to Arms, and with a mighty Army invaded Flanders. Besides Henry the Dauphin by his Fathers order laid Siege to Perpignan on the borders of Spain. The Garison defended themselves with such bravery, that sallying they nailed his great Guns, and Succours coming from all Parts, he was forced to raise the Siege and retire. John de Vega, Lord of Valverde, was at this time Viceroy of Navarre, whence he went Embassador to Rome, then Governed Sicily several Years, and lastly returning into Spain was President of the Royal Council of Castile, which Office he discharged with great Re∣putation. He was a Man of great Integrity, Wisdom and Piety. At the beginning of December dyed James the Fifth, King of Scotland, leaving only one Daughter called Mary, born not long before his Death of Mary his Queen, Sister to the Duke of Guise. Such multitudes of Locusts were in Germany, Italy and Spain, that Swarms of Locusts. they darkned the Sun as they flew. In Sicily a great Earthquake did much harm in several Cities and Towns, but the most mischief was done at the City Siracusa. Anno 1543. The Emperor having appointed his Son Philip Governour of Spain, sailed over to Genoa, being in care for Italy and Germany. At Busseto, between Placencia and Cremona, he met Prince Phi∣lip Gover∣nour of Spain. the Pope, there they conferred about the General Council, the Pope's Legates being already at Trent, waiting the coming of the Bishops. It was also proposed to make Peace between France and Spain, but the time was not yet come. Cosmo de Medicis, Duke of Florence, was allowed to buy out the Castles of Florence and Leghorn, then held by the Emperor, for 200000 Duccats. The Pope had given the Cities of Placencia and Parma to Peter Luis his Son, and would have had the Emperor confirm his Gift, those Cities belonging to the State of Milan, but could not prevail. The King of France Invaded the Low Countries by the way of S. Quintin. On the other side the great Pyrate Barbarussa having sacked and burnt the city Rijoles, not far from French and Turks take Nice. the Streight of Messina, ran along the Coast of Italy and put into the Port of Toulon. There joyning the Duke d' Enguien, they together attacked the City Nice near the State of Genoa, and tho they took it, could not reduce the Fortress, yet they spent the best part of the Summer before it. For this reason, and because it was reported that Andrew Doria was coming to the Relief of the Besieged, they returned to Winter at Toulon. Anno 1544. On the 4th of January this year happened a wonderful Eclipse of the Sun which last∣ed A great E∣clipse. some hours, and not long after followed 3 Eclipses of the Moon, which is said ne∣ver to have happened since the time of Charlemagne. The success of the Wars was various, for Barbarussa in his return towards the Levant Barbarussa ravages the Coasts of Italy. in several places ravaged the Coasts of Naples. The fear was greater than the harm, tho he took and plundered the City and Island of Lipari. On the Coast of Sicily he took, plun∣dered and burnt the City Pati. Many thousand Souls were carried by him into Captivity. The Duke d' Anguien with a great Army entred Milan, the Marquis del Gasto marched to oppose him. They met near a Town called Carigno, and the Battel was fought on the 14th of April which was very bloody, but the French obtained the Victory, and yet could not possess themselves of the Dukedom of Milan. The Emperor and King of England had made a League against France. The Emperor Emperor and King of England in League against France. broke into France by the way of Flanders. Took several Towns and came near to Paris. So great was the terror he spread, that many of the wealthy Citizens abandoned that Ci∣ty. This Consternation was the greater, for that at the same time the King of England possessed himself of the City of Boulogne. Under these Circumstances a Treaty of Peace was set a foot. The Embassadors of these Princes met at Soissons where they concluded a Peace upon the following Conditions. That all things taken on either side since the Truce concluded at Nice should be restored. That they should joyn their Forces in defence of the Catholick Religion against the Turks and Hereticks. That the King of France shall renounce all his Pretensions in Flanders, Aragon, or Naples. That the Emperor should give to Charles Duke of Orleans, the King of France his younger Son, one of his Daughters in Marriage, or else one of those of his Brother Ferdinand. In case he gave his own Daughter he should give her in Dower the Low Countries, with the Title of King to her
Husband. But if it were his Brother's Daughter, that the Dukedom of Milan should be her Dower. The Agreement was made on the 24th of September, but it took no effect, Charles Duke of Orleans soon after dying. Anno 1545. Prince Philip of Spain was before contracted to Mary Daughter to the King of Portugal, Marriage of Prince Philip. last Year they were Married at Salamanca with great Solemnity. The Duke of Medina Si∣donia went to the Borders of Portugal, to conduct the Bride, who soon after proved with Child, and was delivered this Year on the 8th of July at Valladolid of a Son, who was called Charles. This birth was unfortunate, as well for that the Mother died the 4th day after, which lessened the publick Joy, as for that the Prince lived not to inherit his Fathers Crown. Her Body was buried at Granada. Cardinal John Tavera died the 1st day of August. D. John Siliceus, the Bishop of Carta∣gena, succeeded him in the Archbishoprick of Toledo, in consideration for his good Ser∣vice in instructing Prince Philip, whose Preceptor he had been. Afterwards he was made Cardinal. In Germany great Application was used to reduce the Hereticks to submit to the Council of Trent, to this effect a Diet was held at Worms. The Emperor was there pre∣sent, Proceed∣ings a∣gainst He∣reticks. and Cardinal Alexander Farnesius, the Pope's Legate and Grandson. Nothing was concluded, for that Luther publishing new Books, ceased not to make the breach wider. The Hereticks demanded a Conference and to have the Points in Controversy disputed, and the Catholicks insisted to have all things referred to the Fathers at Trent, as being sensible how little good is done by private Disputes. All these things were only the preludes to the War which soon after broke out in Germany. At length about the end of this Year the Fathers assembled at Trent, opened the Council. The first Session was on the 13th of December. Three Legates of the Pope Council of Trent o∣pened. presided, which were the Cardinals John Maria de Monte, Marcellus Cervinus, and Regi∣nald Pool. The Chief of the Spanish Divines were F. James Lainez, and Alonso Salmeron, of the Society of Jesus; F. Dominick de Soto, and F. Melchior Cano, of the Order of S. Dominick; of S. Francis, F. Alonso de Castro, and F. Andrew Vega. Anno 1546. Martin Luther was found dead in his Bed at Eisleber, where he was Born, on the 18th of February. He died of Excess of eating and drinking at the Age of 63. His Body Martin Luther's death. was buried at Wittemberg, where he most resided. D. Alonso Davalos, Marquis del Gasto Governour of Milan, deceased at Vigevano, and Ferdinand Gonçaga succeeded him. The Diet was held at Ratisbon, where there was a Disputation between the Catho∣licks and Hereticks. Malvenda a Spaniard, and Chocleus signalized themselves among Disputes betwixt Catho∣licks and Hereticks. the Catholicks; for the Hereticks, Bucer and Brentius. The Emperor repaired thither in May, but all this sorted to no better effect than it had done at other times, but the differences were rather greater, for the Hereticks departed when the dispute was but be∣gun. Most of the Princes tho summoned, appeared not: the most remarkable of them were Frederick Duke of Saxony, and Philip the Landtgrave, The Emperor thought fit to have recourse to Arms, and ordered Maximilian Count de Bure to make Levies of Flan∣ders. In Germany Albertus, and John, Marquises of Brandenburg, did the same for the Em∣peror tho they were both Hereticks. The Spanish Forces marched out of Italy, and at the same time the Emperor directed his Letters to the Cities of Germany, admonishing them not to suffer themselves to be led away, for that many abusing his Patience had forc∣ed him to have recourse to Arms. Having dispatched these Letters the Emperor set out from Ratisbon for Bavaria. He encamped near Landshut, whether was come a good body of Men sent to him by the Pope, under the Command of his Grandson, Octavius, and Cardinal Alexander Farnesius. Sone after came thither 6000 Spaniards. D. Ferdinand of Toledo, Duke of Alva, was appointed General of those Forces. The Enemy with a strong Army came to Ingolstat. The principal Commanders were the Duke of Saxony, and the Landtgrave, whom many other Princes and Cities either openly or underhand supported. They encamped on a rising Ground, whence they played their Artillery upon the Empe∣ror's Army which lay below them, but the fright was greater than the harm. The Landtgrave was for assaulting the Emperor's Camp, which was not well intrenched, but the others opposed him, which proved the safety of our Army then much inferior to the Enemy, for that our Supplies were not come from Flanders. As soon as they came, the Emperor marched towards Nerling, the Enemy still following in the Rear. At the same time Maurice, Duke of Saxony, being furnished with Forces by King Ferdinand, possessed himself of the Lands of his Cousin Frederick, some whereof were engaged, and others so intermixed that it was convenient to secure them, lest his own Subjects might suffer by their ill Neighbours. To put a stop to their Proceedings, and because they wanted Pro∣visions, the Hereticks returned towards Saxony. The Landtgrave went away to his own Dominions and thence to Francford. The War continued hot, and several Princes and
Cities being sensible of their Error: Particularly Frederick Count Palatin, despairing of the Success of the Rebels, was reconciled to the Emperor. The Duke of Wittemberg and the Cities of Ʋlm, Francford, and Ausburg followed his Example, but were forced to buy their Pardon for great Sums of Money, and give Security for their future Loyalty. Anno 1547. These things were in agitation at the beginning of this Year, at the same time that Frederick Duke of Saxony recover'd all the Places taken from him by Duke Maurice, except Lipstat, which he could not reduce. This Year died Anne the Wife of King Ferdinand; and Francis King of France, having Death of two Kings and a Qu. lived 52 Years, and Reigned 32: His Son Henry succeeded him. Also Henry the Eight of England, famous for his Separation from the Church. He lived 57 Years, and Reigned 37 and 9 Months: His Son Edward, then but 9 Years of Age, succeeded him, as was Ordain'd in his Father's Will, by which his Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, were appointed to In∣herit, in case their Brother died without Issue. As soon as the Emperor had recover'd a great Fine he imposed upon the City Strasbourg, and join'd his Brother King Ferdinand, who till then stayed in Bohemia, he march'd to∣wards Over∣throw of the Saxons. Saxony. On the 24th of April he came to the River Elbe. The Enemy had pos∣sessed themselves of the farther Bank, and the River being deep it was difficult to pass it. Certain Spanish Soldiers swimming with their Swords in their Mouths, took some Boats to make a Bridge. Having pass'd the River, our Forces pursu'd the Enemy, who retired to∣wards Wittemberg. They were so eagerly pursu'd, that they could not avoid Fighting. The Battel lasted till Night, when the Duke of Saxony being taken, and many of his Men put to the Sword, the rest fled. Soon after this Victory the Landtgrave submitted, and surrendred himself up to the Emperor. These two Princes being in Custody, all the rest were soon quell'd. As a token of his Victory, the Emperor sent part of the Cannon taken to Italy, part to Spain, and part to Flanders, whither he went himself. The General Council was removed from Trent to Bolonia, and soon after broke up to the Council of Trent breaks up. great Dissatisfaction of the Catholicks. Peter Luis, the Pope's Son, was killed in his House at Plasencia, but it could never be known by whom his Death was contriv'd, but Ferdi∣nand Gonçaga, Governor of Milan, seized that City, and put a Garison into it. The Pope fortified Parma, and put Camillus Ʋrsinus into it. Afterwards that Dominion was given to Octavius Farnesius, Duke of Parma, Son to Peter Luis. Anno 1548. The breaking up of the Council of Trent was so much the more resented, for that among the other Articles of Peace with the Princes and Cities of Germany, one was, That they should submit themselves to the determination of the Fathers in Matters of Re∣ligion. Concessi∣ons for re∣ducing Hereticks. This design failing to reconcile all Matters in Difference at the Diet at Auspurb, a Book was published in Defence of the Catholick Doctrine, but allowing the Laity to communicate in both Kinds, and Priests to Marry. It was called An Interim, because to last till the Council met again, and determined what was to be done. Julius Phibug, Mi∣chael Sidonia, and Eilebius Agricola composed it. In Saxony, at the desire of Duke Maurice, the Hereticks publish'd another Book, called Adiapora, that is, Things Indifferent, Philip Melancton was the Author of it, and mentioned many things that ought to be Tolerated for the sake of Peace. Matthias Illiricus and Nicholaus Gralius, more rigid Hereticks, wrote against this Book. At the same time Muleasse King of Tunez came to Ausburg, being expelled his Kingdom, and having his Eyes put out by his own Son. Maximilian, Son to King Ferdinand, came to Spain to Marry the Princess Mary his Cousin-German, and to remain Governour in Spain, because Prince Philip was to go for Maximili∣an Gover∣nour of Spain. Flanders, as he did in November in the same Fleet that brought Maximilian. He landed at Genoa, passed through Milan and Mantua, and lastly at the beginning of the following Year came to Brussels in the Low Countries, at such time as his Father was gone to Ger∣many. At the instance of Siceleus, Archbishop of Toledo, the Pope granted his Bull, by which it was enacted, That none descended of Jews, Moors, or Hereticks should have any Li∣ving in that Church. D. James de Castilla the Dean, and some others of the Chapter op∣posed this Decree, but the most powerful Party prevailed. Joanna d' Albret, Daughter to Henry, was contracted to the Duke of Cleves, but the Match breaking off, she now Married Antony of Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, of the Blood Royal of France. Anno 1549. This Year died Margaret Queen of Navarre, and Mother to the above-mentioned Lady Joanna. In Germany some Synods were held, particularly at Treves, Metz and Cologne, by the Emperor's procurement, to bring the deluded People to the Obedience of the Church.
In Africk a Man called Xerife, the Son of a Merchant, and himself a School-Master, Rise of the Xerifes in Africk. under the pretended Veil of Sanctity, drew together a number of Armed People, where∣with he expelled the Kings of Morocco, Fez, and Veles. He of Veles fled for Refuge to the Emperor, and afterwards to the King of Portugal, of whom he received nothing but good Words. This was the beginning of a bloody War in Africk. In England, Peter Martir at Oxford began publickly to teach the Heresy of the Sacra∣mentarians, and great Tumults happened about the Change of Religion. They made Peace with the French, who had began the War in Picardy, restoring to them the City Bologn, taken some Years before. At Cigales on the first of November, was born Anne Daughter to Prince Maximilian and Mary his Wife. She was afterwards Married to her Unkle, and was Queen of Spain. Pope Paul died at Rome the 10th of November. Pope Paul dies. Anno 1550. Cardinal John Maria de Monte succeeded him by the Name of Julius the III. and lived after his Exaltation 5 Years, 1 Month, and 16 Days. Julius III. Elected. John de Vega Viceroy of Sicily, on the Coast of Africk, took the City called Africa, formerly Leptis, on the 9th of September, expelling thence the Pyrat Dragut, who used to set out thence and Ravage the Coasts of Sicily. He put a Garison into it, but soon after to save Charges utterly demolish'd it. At Ausburg in Autumn was opened the Diet of the Empire, at which the Emperor and his Son Prince Philip were present. The Emperor strove to make his Son King of the Romans, but his Brother King Ferdinand opposed it in favour of his own Son Maximilian, who was come back from Spain, being already chosen King of Bohemia, and was now with his Father at the Diet. It was proposed to assemble a-new the Council of Trent, and to make War upon Mecklenbourg, where the Catholick Religion was wholly excluded. Both these Propositions were offensive to Maurice Duke of Saxony, tho he was ap∣pointed General of that War; but what chiefly perplexed him was, that the Emperor did not release his Unkle the Landtgrave of Hesse. These were the Causes that moved the Duke to make War upon the Emperor, who being at that time unprovided for it, was reduc'd to great Extremities. This Year was remarkable for the Jubilee, and for the great numbers of People that re∣pair'd to Rome to gain it. Anno 1551. At the beginning of this Year died at Pavia, Andrew Alciatus, a famous Civilian and Humanist born at Milan, who was first Professor in France, and afterwards in Italy. Pope Julius last December summoned the Bishops to meet again at Trent. The Emperor Council of Trent a∣gain sum∣moned. caused the Pope's Edicts to be read at the Diet at Ausburg. Duke Octavius Farnesius very unseasonably put himself under the Protection of France. Ferrante Gonçaga, to put a stop to his Proceedings, besieged him in Parma. This was the cause that Council was put off for some time, but at length it was open'd in May. Cardinal Crecencius, the Pope's Legate, presided. The Ecclesiastical Electors, and many Prelates of Germany, Spain and Italy were there present. The King of France by his Embassador protested a∣gainst their Proceedings. Embassadors came from some German Princes, to ask safe Con∣ducts for the Heretical Ministers and Divines, but the Conditions they proposed were so extravagant, the Fathers thought it a lessening of their Authority to grant them. After the Diet at Ausburg broke up, Prince Philip return'd to Spain. His Cousin Ma∣ximilian bore him Company as far as Genoa, where he found the Princess Mary his Wife and his Children come thither by Sea out of Spain. With them he return'd in December to Inspruck, where the Emperor then was, that City lying near, to forward the Pro∣ceedings of the Council. King Henry of France on the sudden commenced War in Flanders and Milan. He call'd the Turkish Fleet to his Aid, which on the Coast of Sicily took the Town and Castle of Au∣gusta, War in Flanders. seated beyond the City Catania. Thence they sailed over to Malta, but not succeed∣ing there crossed the Sea, and on the Coast of Africk took Tripoli, deliver'd to them by the Knights of Malta, who had kept it ever since Rhodes was lost. Two French Knights had the greatest share in that Treachery. The Spaniards paid dearly for their Loyalty, about 400 being put to the Sword. It was given out the Turks did this in Revenge of the taking of the City of Africa; but the truth was, they undertook this War at the Instigation of the French King, whose Embassadors were aboard the Fleet. Anno 1552. Four Divines or Ministers of Wittemberg, the chief of whom was Brencius, came to Trent. Hereticks at the Council of Trent. They presented to the Council a Book called the Wittemberg Confession. All this was only to amuse the Council, till such time as Duke Maurice had raised Men, and made other warlike Preparations. On the 2d of April News was brought to Trent, that he had seiz∣ed the City Ausburg, and that the Emperor was in danger at Inspruck, which caused the Council on a sudden to break up. On the other side, Albertus Marquis of Brandenburg pos∣sessed
himself of Treves, and the French of all Lorrain. The Emperor was much perplex'd, not being able to withstand so many Enemies. He resolved to release the Duke of Saxony and the Landtgrave, which pacified Duke Maurice. On the Borders of Italy, whither in the first Consternation he retired, Forces flock'd to him from all Parts. However he par∣don'd the Marquis of Brandenburg, designing to make use of him against the French. This done he laid Siege to Metz with a great Army on the 20th of October, but many of his Men perishing, by reason of the badness of the Weather, he was forced to quit that Enterprize. On the 2d of December this Year departed this Life the Blessed F. Francis Xaverius, as he was going to China. He was a Native of Navarre, and one of the Ten first Compa∣nions S. Francis Xaverius. of S. Ignatius. He preached among the barbarous People of India, Japan, and other Parts, and was doubtless a Man of singular Sanctity, and admirable in his Life. His Body is preserved entire in the Church of his Order at Goa, he being Canonized. D. Peter de Toledo was Viceroy of Naples at such time as Ferdinand de Sanseverino, Prince of Salerno, caused the Turkish Fleet under the Command of Rustan Bassa to come against Turkish Fleet at Naples. that City. His Treason being discover'd, he fled to Venice, for which cause the Fleet re∣turned to Constantinople without attempting any thing. Only near the Island Ponça they met Andrew Doria, overthrew his Fleet, and took 7 of his Galleys. The Prince of Sa∣lerno having declared himself, went away to the Port to incite him the next Year to send another Fleet. The Emperor had put a Garison into Siena, under the Command of D. James de Men∣doza, Siena ex∣pells the Imperia∣lists. upon occasion of the Tumults and Factions in that City, and to prevent its being deliver'd to the French. D. James for his greater security raised a Fort for the Garison. The Citizens suspecting this tended to deprive them of their Liberty, put themselves under the Protection of France, and then taking Arms expelled the Garison, razing the Fort from the very Foundations, which necessitated them to prepare for the ensuing War, and for the Siege which was laid to the Place by D. Peter de Toledo, in pursuance of the Emperor's commands. This Year died at Florence, Paulus Jovius; at Ferrara, Lillus Gregorius Gi∣raldus; and at Salamanca, Ferdinand Pincianus the Greek Commentator. Anno 1553. King Edward of England departed this Life on the 16th of July, his Sister Queen Mary Edward K. of England dies. succeeded him tho opposed by many. She being possessed of the Crown restor'd the Ca∣tholick Religion. D. Peter de Toledo, lying at the Siege of Siena, died in the House of his Son-in-Law Cosmo de Medicis, Duke of Florence. His Forces return'd to Naples upon a Report of the approach of the Turkish Fleet, under the command of the afore-mention'd Prince of Sa∣lerno. This Fleet appear'd before Naples, but there happening no Mutiny in the City, it sailed on to Corsica, great part whereof the Turks possessed themselves of, it being subject to the Genoeses. This Year John Prince of Portugal Married Joanna the Emperor's Daughter with great Solemnity, but the Joy of this Match was not lasting. Anno 1554. Before a Year was gone about after his Marriage, the said Prince John died at Lisbon the 2d. of January. His Body was buried at the Monastery of Bethlem, near Lisbon. On the 20th. of January his Wife was deliver'd of a Son, who of the Day of his Birth was Birth of Prince Se∣bastian of Portugal. called Sebastian. He was of a Noble and truly Royal Spirit, but lived not long. His Mo∣ther went away to Castile to govern those Kingdoms, because her Brother Prince Philip was going away to be Married. The new Queen of England desiring to secure her self in the Throne, thought fit to chuse a Resolute and Powerful Husband, and found none fitter for her purpose than Philip Mary Qu. of England Marries Philip Pr. of Spain. Prince of Spain, to whom the Emperor his Father had on the last of October before resign'd up the Kingdom of Naples, and Dukedom of Milan. All Points being adjusted, the Prince went over into England, where the Marriage was Solemnized at Winchester on the 25th. of July, being St. James's Day. Cardinal Reginald Poole was present, being the Pope's Le∣gate, of the Blood Royal of England, and great Sanctity of Life, to reduce that Kingdom, as he did, to the Obedience of the Church of Rome. Our Forces return'd to the Siege of Siena, and the Marquis de Marignano, the Emperor's General, overthrew in Battel near that City Peter Strozzi, a Banish'd Florentin, sent by the French King with Forces to relieve the Besieged, and drive the Imperialists out of Milan. Anno 1555. Pope Julius died at Rome the 23d. of March, and on the 10th. of April Cardinal Mar∣cellus Julius dies, Mar∣cellus suc∣ceeds, he dies, and Paul IV. is chosen Pope. Gerninus, born at Montepulchiano, was chosen to succeed him, and kept his former Name. He held S. Peter's Chair only 22 days, wherefore on the 23th. of May Cardinal John Peter Garrasa, born at Naples, of noble Birth and a great Spirit, was Elected in his room. He took the Name of Paul IVth, and governed the Church 4 Years, 2 Months, and 27 Days.
At length the City Siena, tired with the Miseries of a long Siege, was surrendred to Siena sur∣rendred to the Empe∣ror. the Emperor. D. Francis de Mendoça, Cardinal of Burgos, was sent from Rome to settle the Government of that City. At the Suit and Intercession of Cardinal Alexander Farne∣sius the Emperor pardoned his Brother, Duke Octavius, but kept in his hands the Citadel of Plasencia, where a Spanish Garrison was left, which King Philip the Second some Years after withdrew. D. Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alva, was at this time Viceroy of Naples, he was order∣ed to march to Milan, to oppose the Mareschal de Brissac, who made War on that side for the King of France, tho not with much vigor. King Philip, the Summer being well advanced, departed out of England and came to Brussels, where the Emperor his Father resigned up to him all his Kingdoms, being desirous to Abdicati∣on of the Emperor. take his repose, as he accordingly did the Year following, when having given up the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, he with his two Sisters, the two Queens Ellenor and Mary, went over into Spain, and made choice for his retreat of the Monastery of S. Justa, of the Order of S. Hierome, in the territory of Plasencia. There he died two Years after, more glorious and great in despising, than in obtaining the Empire. This Year died Henry d' Albret, King of Navarre, His Daughter Joanna, an abstinate Heretick, succeeded him. Anno 1556. On the 5th of February a Truce was concluded for Five Years betwixt France and Spain. It was hoped that this Cessation might end in a lasting Peace, both Parties being worn Truce be∣twixt France and Spain. out with tedious Wars; but all fell to nothing, by reason of the War the Pope unseaso∣nably raised. At the beginning of this Year he began to persecute the Noblemen of the House of Colonna, some of them fled, others were taken, all whose Estates he pre∣sently seized. The Catholick King ordered the Duke of Alva not to suffer any wrong to be done to them. On the other side, the king of France having entred into a League with the Pope, sent a powerful Army into Italy under the Conduct of the Duke of Guise. These Forces marched through Lombardy to Rome, where they stayed some time, and then marched to the Kingdom of Naples. They did nothing remarkable, but the greatest part of them died of Sickness, and the rest returned to France. Mean while the Duke of Alva having possessed himself of most of the Pope's Dominions near Rome, marched with his Army, and incamp'd before that City. He could easily have sacked it again, but he had such respect for the Place that he forbore, and made Peace with the Pope upon very reasonable terms. But this was about the end of the ensuing Year. At the beginning of this War Cosmo Duke of Florence prevailed with the Catholick King to deliver to him the City Siena; To obtain his desire, he alledged the Charge he had been Siena giv∣en to the Duke of Florence. at in the War with that City, and that some promise had been made of delivering it to him. The King yeilded to Necessity, and put the City into his hands upon his paying a Sum of Money down, and obliging himself to hold it of the Crown of Spain. Anno 1557. The War betwixt France and Spain was not thus at an end, but broke out in several War re∣newed be∣twixt France and Spain. Parts. Success was so various, that neither side had any great advantage to boast of. Cardinal John Sicileus died the last day of May; in his place succeeded, as Archbishop of Toledo, F. Bartholomew de Miranda, of the Order of S. Dominick; He arose so high to have a greater fall. On the 13th of June departed this Life at Lisbon, John the Third King of Portugal, a John III. King of Portugal dies. very Religious and Renowned Prince. His body was buried in the Monastery of Bethle∣hem. King Sebastian, his Grandson, succeeded him. In the time of King John the Inqui∣sition was first brought into Portugal, for the punishment of Hereticks and Jews. He found∣ed the University of Coimbra, and endued it with great Revenues, bringing to it learned Professors from all Parts, and assigning them plentiful Salaries. Cardinal Henry, the Kings Brother, following his Example, some time after Founded the University of Ebora, which was wholly delivered up to the Care of the Jesuits, a heavy burden but very profitable. The Catholick King had laid Siege to S. Quintin, a strong Town on the Frontiers of Battel of S. Quintin. Flanders, seated near the River Some. The French came to relieve the Place, but were overthrown by Philibert Duke of Savoy, the Spanish General, with great slaughter, and many French-men of Note made Prisoners. The Catholick King came thither after∣wards, which so terrified the Besieged and encouraged our Men, that the 4th Day after they took the Town by Assault. Many Prisoners were taken within it, and among them Gasper Coligni the French Admiral, who governed the Town, and was soon after the grand Incendiary in the Civil Wars of France. There happened this Year mighty Floods, particularly in Italy in the Month of Sep∣tember the River Arnus overflowed its Banks, and did great harm at Florence, and all Great Floods. the Country about. The Tiber swelled to such a degree, that it drowned most part of the City. On the 14th of September, being the day after, was concluded the Peace with the Pope. At Palermo in Sicily, the great Floods overthrew many Houses, and drowned a multitude of Men and Women: It is reported 4000 Houses were thrown down. All Spain suffered this Year extream scarcity of Bread.
Anno 1558. This Year many Thousands died of the Plague. The Contagion broke out at Murcia, Plague. and thence spread to Valencia, and so at last to Burgos. It lasted some Years before it was quite allay'd. The King of France after the defeat of S. Quintin, caused the Duke of Guise to leave Calis ta∣ken. Milan, and return into France in January. The Duke having gathered a mighty Army took Calis, the only Town the English possessed in France. The same Month died Queen Ellenor, Charles the Emperor's Sister, at Valladolid. In her Will she left certain Towns she possessed in Burgundy to her Daughter Mary, whom she had by Emanuel King of Portugal. On the 18th of April, Francis the Dauphin of France Married Mary Stuard, Queen Dauphin of France Marries the Queen of Scots. Battel of Graveling. of Scotland, afterwards a most Unfortunate Princess. The Infection of Heresie spread in both the Kingdoms of France and Scotland, and many of the Nobility were tanted. The War continued very hot in Flanders. Among all other Actions, the Battel of Graveling was remarkable: There the French were defeated and sustained so great loss that they presently began to treat of Peace. On the 21th. of September the great Emperor Charles the Fifth departed this Life, at the place of his Retirement. His Body was de∣posited in that Monastery, whence some Years after, by Order of the Catholick King his Son it was translated to the Royal Monastery of the Escurial. In England Queen Mary and Cardinal Reginald Poole died both at the same time, and Mary Qu. of England dies. with them fell the Catholick Religion in that Kingdom. Anno 1559. Her Sister Queen Elizabeth being declar'd Queen, repealed all the Laws made in De∣fence Elizabeth Queen of England. of the Catholick Religion, and restor'd the Reformation began in the time of King Edward. The Pope on the 23th of January banish'd out of Rome his Nephews, the Sons of his Brother John Alonso. These were John Garrafa Duke of Paliano, the Marquis Antony and Cardinal Charles Garrafa. The Crimes laid to their Charge were very heinous, and one of the greatest that they suffer'd none to have access to the Pope, but such as pleased them, and kept Spies to observe what every one spoke. On the 5th of February, Charles Duke of Lorrain Married Claudia the King of France his younger Daughter; for her Father design'd Elizabeth the eldest should be Married to the King of Spain. The Embassadors of both Crowns met at Cambray, where they hand∣led the Business so effectually, that a Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: That Peace be∣twixt Fra. and Spain! the Duke of Savoy should be restor'd to all his Dominions, which was perform'd, and he had also the City Aste given him, tho it was the Portion of Valentina, Daughter to John Galeazzo Duke of Milan. That all Places taken during the War should be restor'd. That Corsica be restor'd to the Genoeses. That neither the Spaniard lay Claim to Bur∣gundy, nor the French to Milan or Naples. Lastly, That all Prisoners taken for 16 Years last past be set at Liberty. These Articles being agreed upon, King Philip in pursuance of them Married by Proxy K. Philip Marries his third Wife. at Paris on the 22th of June the Princess Elizabeth, the Duke of Alva representing the King. Soon after on the 11th. of July the Lady Margaret was Married to the Duke of Savoy. The Publick Joy was turn'd into extream Grief, for that King Henry himself Tilting was struck into the Eye by a Splinter of his Adversary's Lance, of which he died the day following. His Son Francis the Second succeeded him, being Sixteen Years of Age. He had three Brothers, Charles, Alexander Edward, and Hercules; His Sisters were Elizabeth and Claudia before-mentioned; the youngest of all called Margaret some Years after was Married to Henry Prince of Bearne, and King of Navarre. Pope Paul the Fourth departed this Life at Rome the 18th. of August. D. Bartholomew de Miranda, of the Order of S. Dominick, two Years before chosen Archbishop of Toledo in the place of Cardinal Siceleus, was Apprehended and made Prisoner by the Inquisitors in his Town of Tordelaguna, upon the 23th. of August. He was many Years in Prison, so great is the Power of the Inquisition in Spain. At the same time King Philip arrived Philip re∣turns into Spain. with his Fleet at Laredo, in his return from Flanders. Anno 1560. On the 26th. of December last past Cardinal John Angelo de Medicis was chosen Pope. Pius IV. chosen Pope. He took the Name of Pius the Fourth, and govern'd the Church 5 Years, 11 Months and 15 Days. Spain this Year was filled with Joy, not only for the arrival of their long∣wish'd-for King, but also for his Marriage which was consummated at Guadalajara in the Kingdom of Toledo, upon the 31th. day of January. This Joy was the greater, for that all Men hoped the Peace would be lasting. The Cardinal of Burgos and Duke del Infantado, went to the Borders of France to fetch the Bride. The great Solemniza∣tion of the Marriage was at Toledo, whither the King and new Queen went from Gua∣dalajara.
The Duke of Medina Celi, Viceroy of Sicily, took the Island of Gelves, but after he Spaniards worsted by the Turks. was Master of it, the Turkish Fleet coming upon him, he lost a great part of his own, and with much difficulty escaped himself. Among other Prisoners taken by the Turks were one of the Duke's Sons, D. Alvaro de Sande, and Sancho de Avila, brave Soldiers. In France began the Tumults and Rebellion which lasted many Years under colour of Rebellion in France. Religion. To remedy these Troubles, the Three Estates or Parliament of France met at Orleans, where several good Laws were enacted, but never observed. Francis the new King of France died in that City on the 5th. of December: His Brother Charles the Ninth of the Name, being then but nine Years old, succeeded him. Anno 1561. In Rome Pope Pius the Fourth caused the Duke of Paliano and Cardinal Garrafa to be put to Death. The Cardinal was strangled in Prison, the Duke publickly Beheaded. The Commonalty, tho they were satisfied, those Persons had deserved that Punishment, yet using their common Liberty, especially assumed by the Italians, gave out it was done to please the Catholick King. Certain it is, the Pope their Unkle had expelled them Rome for their Crimes, and now they were punish'd with loss of their Lives. In the Spring Queen Mary of Scotland, having at once lost her Mother and Husband, returned to Scotland, where she Married a second and third time. A Lady worthy a more favourable Destiny; for in England, after a long Imprisonment, she was unjustly put to Death. In France the Tumults daily encreased. To pacify the People it was resolved the Ca∣tholicks Disputes about Re∣ligion in France. and Hereticks should meet and dispute at Poissy, five Leagues from Paris. Hippo∣lito de Este Cardinal of Ferrara, and with him James Lainez, General of the Jesuits in the place of F. Ignatius de Loyola dead six Years before, were sent from Rome. The Pope's Intention was, that in case that Meeting could not be prevented, at least nothing should be positively determined in it, but all things referred to the Council of Trent, which he had summoned to meet again. The Meeting could not be prevented, the Dispute was about the Real Presence: F. Lainez when it came to his turn to speak, publickly with great free∣dom rebuked the Queen, for that she being a Woman was present at Disputes about Re∣ligion. In this Dispute he confuted Peter Martyr, always calling him Father Peter, because he had been a Friar. Anno 1562. In January the Council of Trent was again open'd. Cardinal John Moron, and three other Cardinals presided as the Pop's Legates. There was present a great number of Pre∣lates, Council of Trent again opened. 22 Gallies cast away. and among them many French, who came with Charles Cardinal of Lorrain. In the Port de la Herradura, in a violent Storm which rose in the Night, Twenty two Galleys were cast away with their General D. John de Mendoça. Great was the Desolation made in France, many stately Churches were overthrown by the Hereticks, and many Cities rebelled against the King. Among others the King of Navarre, to put a stop to these Evils, laid Siege to Roan then in Rebellion, but he was killed by a Musket-shot from the Walls on the 17th. of November, but before he expired the City was taken by his Forces. The Prince of Conde who headed the Hereticks, encouraged by the Recruits he received out of Germany, was so bold as to lay Siege to Paris. On the 8th. of December the Catholicks gave them Battel, being strengthned by a good supply of Spaniards sent by King Philip, they all behaved themselves so well that they raised the Siege, and pursuing the Enemy as far as Dreux, overthrew them with great slaughter, taking the Prince of Conde Prisoner. Anno 1563. The Strength and Hopes of France at this time was in the House of Guise. The Duke of Guise the King's Lieutenant then lay before the City Orleans seated on the Loire and in Re∣bellion. Duke of Guise mur∣der'd by the Hugo∣nots. One John Poltrot came out of the City purposely, and in the passing of the Ri∣ver shot the Duke, of which wound he died the 24th. of February. Poltrot being taken and put to the Rack confessed that Admiral Coligni, and Theodorus Beza, a principal Man among the Ministers, had put him upon this wicked Enterprise. He was at Paris publickly torn in pieces by four Horses. D. Francis of Navarre, Archbishop of Valencia, died in a Village near that City on the 16th. of April. It is reported of him, but no Proof appears, that he writ the History of Spain, which he composed with much care, tho the Stile was not of the best. The Council of Trent broke up the 5th. of December, and was soon after confirm'd by Pope Pius the Fourth. Of the Spanish Bishops those that most signalized themselves for Spaniards at the Council of Trent: Learning in this Council were, D. Peter Guerrero Archbishop of Granada, Andrew de Cuesta Bishop of Leon, D. Martin de Ayala of Segovia, D. James de Covarrubias of Cuidad Ro∣drigo, and D. Antony Augustin of Lerida. Of the Divines, the most remarkable were the Fathers James Lainez, Alonso Salmeron, and Peter de Soto of the Order of S. Do∣minick, a Learned and Pious Man: He died at Trent in his old Age; He was under a cloud at Rome.
Salarraez King of Argiers, this year laid Siege to Oran and Mazalquivir. The Earl of Alcaudete was in Oran, and his Brother D. Martin de Cordova in Mazalquivir, both of them behaved themselves with much Bravery, but the Defence of Mazalquivir, which was hardest press'd, will ever be famous. D. John de Mendoça, General of the Spanish Galleys, coming thither raised the Siege. Anno 1564. John Calvin died at Geneva the 19th. of May; Theodorus Beza succeeded him, for∣mer Calvin and Beza. wicked, but the latter if possible worse. To discover how wicked a Man Beza was, it suffices to read his Love Poems. By them it appears he was a fit Head for the Sect he professed. D. Garcia de Toledo Marquis of Villafranca, Son to D. Peter de Toledo, who was Viceroy of Sicily and Admiral of Spain, this Year on the 6th. of September, near the City Velez on the Coast of Africk took from the Moores the strong Castle El Pen̄ol, built formerly by Count Peter Navarro, but at this time possessed by the Moores. On the 25th. of July the Emperor Ferdinand died at Vienna: His Son Maximilian the se∣cond Penol in Africk ta∣ken. of the Name succeeded him. Anno 1565. D. Luis de Biamonte Earl of Lerin, and Constable of Navarre, departed this Life with∣out leaving any Issue-Male, and D. James de Toledo, younger Son to Duke of Alva, Marry∣ing his Daughter Brianda, inherited all his Estate. Thus ended that Family which for many Years had disturb'd the Kingdom, always opposing the natural Kings from whom it was descended. Elizabeth Queen of Spain, with the consent of the King her Husband, went to the Fron∣tiers of France, as far as the City Bayonne in Guienne, where she spent 17 days with her Mother and Brothers, and then returned into Spain. At the same time the Island of Malta began to be infested by the Turkish Fleet. Three Malta be∣sieged by the Turks. Months were spent in the Siege, many Knights and a great number of the Enemy were slain, and among them the Pyrate Dragut taken off with a Cannon-Ball. At last the Turks un∣derstanding that D. Garcia de Toledo, Viceroy of Sicily, was coming to the Relief of the Besieged, they raised the Siege and sailed off, having sustained great loss. In Spain, in pursuance of the Decrees of the Council of Trent, many Synods were held, Synods in Spain. the principal were those of Toledo, Salamanca and Braga. In that of Toledo was the Bi∣shop of Siguença D. Peter de la Gasca, and among the Deputies for the Church of Cu∣enca, D. Alonso Ramirez de Vergara, a Man very much noted for Learning and Piety, and extreamly Charitable especially towards the Jesuits, for whom he built at his own Cost a Colledge at Alcala, whither his Bones were translated with much Solemnity on the 25th. of October, 1621. to a stately Church there built by the Ladies Mary and Katherine de Mendoça. The Body of the Martir S. Eugenius, first Bishop of Toledo, was with great Solemnity brought from the Monastery of S. Denis near Paris, and arrived at Toledo the 18th. of No∣vember: The King was present at the Feast with all the Royal Family; the Princes Ro∣dulphus and Ernestus, Sons to the Emperor; and the Bishops who were Assembled at the Synod. Pope Pius the Fourth departed this Life the 10th. of December. Anno 1566. Cardinal Michael Gislerius, born at Boschio in the Territory of Alexandria, a City of Lombardy, and of the Order of S. Dominick, was on the 7th. of January chosen Pope: He Pius V. chosen Pope. took the Name of Pius V. and Govern'd the Church 6 Years, 3 Months, and 23 Days. His Life and Conversation were so Holy, few have been to compare to him. The Catholick King was in the Forest of Balsain, by reason of the heat of the Summer, when on the 12th. of August the Queen was deliver'd of a Daughter, called Elizabeth Clare Eugenia. Solyman the Great Turk had laid Siege to Sigeth, a strong but small Town in Hungary, before it could be reduced he died, but yet his Army afterwards took the place. He left Solyman dies before Sigeth. his Son Selymus the Second his Heir. Margaret Dutchess of Parma, the Catholick King's Sister, Govern'd the Low Coun∣tries for him, the Hereticks contemned her because she was a Woman, and consequent∣ly Rebellion of the Low Countries. those Provinces began to Mutiny. Many extraordinary Insolencies were commit∣ted in several Places, but most they raged against the Images of Saints that were in the Churches. The Queen of Scotland flying the Rebellion of her Subjects at Home, was forc'd into Queen of Scots Im∣prison'd. England, where, upon false Informations contrary to all Human and Divine Laws, she was cast into Prison. Anno 1567. The Archbishop of Toledo, after his Case had depended many Years, was by Order of Pope Pius the Fifth sent to Rome, where he arrived the 28th of May, and was sent Pri∣soner to the Castle of Santangelo till Judgment should be given.
The Rebellion in Flanders ran high, and continued for several Years. D. Ferdinand of Duke of Alva Go∣vernor of the Low-Countries. Rebels in France be∣siege Pa∣ris. Toledo, Duke of Alva, was sent by the King to quench this Fire: Soon after his arrival the Princess Margaret went away for Italy, and the Counts of Horn and Egmont were taken up by the Duke. The Rebel Hereticks in France besieged Paris. The Constable Montmorancy marched to raise the Siege. They came to a Battel near St. Denis, where the Catholicks got the Victory, but with the Death of the Constable. The Enemy with the Admiral their Ge∣neral were put to flight. Count Aremberg, who came from Flanders with 4000 Burgun∣dians to the Assistance of the Catholicks, was very instrumental in obtaining this Vi∣ctory. Anno 1568. On the 7th of March the Bodies of the Holy Martyrs, Pastor and Justus, were brought from Huesca, and interr'd at Alcala de Henares, where they suffered and were born. The principal Ring-leader of the Rebellion in the Low Countries was the Prince of Prince of Orange heads the Rebels in Holland. Orange, who fearing to meet with what he deserv'd, was fled. His Brother Count Luis with several Companies of Germans entred West-Frizeland; Count Aremberg with his Forces and the Spanish Regiment of D. Gonçalo de Bracamonte march'd against him, but being too hasty in charging, was overthrown. The Count and many more being slain, the rest fled to Groningen through the Marishes, the Country being overflow'd by reason the Dikes were broken. Count Egmont and Count Horn being convicted of Treason (as is believed very wrongfully) were by the Duke of Alva's Order executed at Brussels. They were publickly Beheaded on the 4th. of June; and to prevent the People Mutinying, they were strongly guarded to the Scaffold, and all the Streets lined. This Execution rather incensed than appeased the People. This done the Duke of Alva march'd against the Prince of Orange, who had entred that Province with his Forces, and made him retire, taking several Towns and Castles, and putting many Hereticks to the Sword. At the same time the Morisco's, that is, those descended of the Moores, rebelled in the Kingdom of Granada. These People were never Loyal, and were then incensed, for that Morisco's Rebel in Spain. certain Proclamations were publish'd against them. Many of them perish'd in the space of two Years that those Tumults lasted. The Marquis of Mondejar overthrew them seven times, tho with some considerable loss, caused by the Disorderliness of his Men. Lastly, D. John of Austria being General they were fully subdu'd. The Punishment given to those Rebels has taken from them the power of rising again, by dispersing them through∣out Castile. Almost at the same time died first Charles Prince of Spain in Prison, where his Father kept him, and then Queen Elizabeth his Mother-in-Law. She died of a Miscarriage, leaving only two Daughters, Elizabeth and Katherine, and never a Son, which was the reason the King her Husband married again a fourth time. His too much forwardness was the cause of the Prince's Death; many things were reported concerning the cause of his Im∣prisonment, and his Father's Displeasure: But there is no doubt but he was Poison'd by his Father's Command. The Prince of Orange was again this Year without any Bloodshed drove out of the Low Countries, and forced to retire into France, where he assisted the Rebels. Anno 1569. Henry de Valois, Duke of Anjou and General of the King of France his Army, twice in Battel overthrew the Hereticks. The first was on the 13th. of March at Bassac, a Village Hugonots twice over thrown. in the Province of Poitiers, where the Prince of Conde was killed, and the Admiral escap'd by flight; his Brother d' Andelot died some time after of his Wounds. The second En∣gagement was at Montcontour on the 3d. of October; the success was the same, only that of the Rebels the slaughter was greater, 16000 being kill'd. Two thousand Horse and 4000 Foot sent by the Pope did good Service here, besides the Succours from Spain, which behaved themselves well upon all occasions. These Forces, after obtaining the Victory, return'd to Italy perishing with Cold, Hunger and Sickness. Pope Pius this Year publish'd his Bull, wherein he gave the Kingdom of England to any Qu. Eliza∣beth Ex∣communi∣cated. that would conquer it; excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, and absolved her Subjects of their Allegiance. At this time the War continuing hot in the Low Countries, many Gen∣tlemen signaliz'd themselves and gained Honour there, such were Julian Romero, Sancho Davila, D. Alvaro de Sandi, Collonel Mondragon, Collonel Francis de Verdugo, and D. Lope de Figueroa. Anno 1570. Forty Jesuits going to Brasill with F. Ignatius de Azevedo, were murder'd at Sea by Jaques de Soria, a French Pyrate, and perverse Heretick. Jesuits murder'd. After the departure of the Prince of Orange, the Low Countries were more at Peace. In France a Peace was concluded with the Hereticks, upon no very advantageous Terms, so great was the desire all Men had conceived to see that War at an end.
At Rome, Cosmo de Medicis obtained of the Pope the Title of Great Duke of Tuscany, to Cosmo cre∣ated D. of Tuscany. the Dissatisfaction of other Princes, who thought his Advancement was a lessening of them. Nevertheless Maximilian the Emperor confirmed that Title to Francis de Medicis his Bro∣ther-in-law, and the Son of Cosmo. Ann Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, came by Sea from Flanders into Spain, to be married to her Uncle King Philip. This Solemnity was performed the 12th of November at Segovia. With the Queen came her two young Brothers, Albertus and Wenceslaus. About the end of this Year hapned so terrible an Earthquake at Ferrara, that the Inhabitants Earth∣quake. were forced for some days to live in the Fields in Tents, many Houses were overthrown, and many much damaged. But this Year was for nothing so remarkable as for the War in Cyprus, which produced a Christian League a∣gainst the Turk. Holy League among the Christian Princes. After the Venetians had enjoyed Peace with the Turks the space of 30 years, Selymus the Great Turk having made Peace with the Persians, sent his Embassadors to require the Venetians to deliver up to him the Island of Cyprus, which lyes near the Province of Cilicia in the lesser Asia; and in case they refused, to de∣clare War against them. This Demand being so unreasonable, a War necessarily ensued; and the Turks landing in Cyprus about the beginning of July, under the Command of Mu∣stapha, on the 9th of September, took Nicosia, one of the two principal Cities of that Island. Famagusta, formerly called Salamis, held out longer. The Venetian Fleet sent to the Re∣lief of the Besieged, arrived at Candia, where it was joined by 60 Gallies, sent by the Catholick Kings, under the Command of Andrew Doria, Prince of Melfi; but in October, the Season being too far advanced, they all returned to winter in their Ports without do∣ing any thing. Only Marius Quirinus a Venetian, with 12 Gallies, was ordered to put Sup∣plies of Men, Ammunition, and Provision into Famagusta, which he accordingly performed. At the same time, through the earnest Sollicitation of Pope Pius the 5th, a League was con∣cluded against the Turks, betwixt his Holiness, his Catholick Majesty, and the Venetians. They agreed to fit out 200 Gallies, and furnish 50000 Foot and 4000 Horse, the Charge to be defrayed in this manner: The Pope was to pay the 6th part, the Venetians one 3d, and the King of Spain one half of the Expence. Marc Antony Colonna was appointed to com∣mand the Pope's Gallies, Sebastian Venerius, those of Venice, and D. John of Austria, by common Consent of all Parties, was constituted Admiral and Generalissimo of the Fleet and Land Forces. Anno 1571. All things being ordered in this manner, Venerius and Colonna arrived first at Messina in Sicily, and after them in August came D. John of Austria. On the 9th of which Month the City Famagusta in Cyprus, having held out almost a year's Siege, was forced to surren∣der Battel of Lepanto. upon Conditions; which were not perform'd by the Barbarous Enemy, but contrary to their Faith given, they committed great Cruelties upon the unfortunate Christians. The Confederate Fleet sailed from Sicily on the 16th of September. They steered directly for the Islands Echinades, now called Cuçolares, opposite to the Gulph of Lepanto, where they had Advice the Turkish Fleet lay. Both Officers and Soldiers were eager to fight, and pre∣pared themselves with great Alacrity. The Venetian Gallies were on the left, Prince John Andrew Doria on the right, and D. John of Austria, with the Spanish Gallies in the Center, and with him Marc Antony Colonna, and the Venetian Admiral. The chief Commendary of Castile, and D. Alvaro Baçan Marquis of Sancta Cruz, with 30 Gallies, were left as a Re∣serve to send Relief where the greatest Danger appeared. The Enemy came out of the Mouth of the Gulph, and ranged their Fleet, as is their Custom, in the form of a Half-Moon. Six Galeasses made the Forelorn of our Fleet, which firing their Cannon disorde∣red the Enemy. Next to them D. John of Austria, the first boarded the Turkish Admiral, and after a doubtful Fight took her. In her was killed Hali Bassa, Admiral of the Fleet, and two Sons of his were taken, and presently Victory began to incline to the Christians. Ʋchali the Pyrat did great harm upon the right, taking 10 of our Gallies; but seeing the rest of the Fleet overthrown, he stood out to Sea, and escaped with several of his Gallies. It was a terrible Spectacle, all resounded with various Cries, and nothing was to be seen but killing, pursuing, battering, and sinking of Vessels. The Sea was covered with Blood and dead Bodies, and the Air darkned with the Smoke. 200 Turkish Gallies were either taken or sunk, 25000 Turks were killed, and 20000 Christian Captives set at liberty. Of the Christians many were killed, and among them no small number of Persons of note. In short, this was one of the greatest Victories that had been obtained in many years; and there was great rejoycing for it in all parts of Christendom, tho it was not pleasing to the Hereticks. This Battel was fought on the 7th of October, on which day the Memory of it is yearly cele∣brated as a Festival at Toledo. Anno 1572. Pope Pius the 5th desiring to carry on this good Work, the last Summer sent his Nephew Cardinal of Alexandria, Michael Gislerius, his Legate, into France and Portugal, to perswade those Kings to enter into this League. With him went F. Francis Borgia, a holy Man, at that time General of the Jesuits in the place of F. James Lainez. These Endeavours were fruitless as well for other Causes that occur'd, as because the Pope died not long after, on Pope Pius dies.
the 1st of Mary, very unfortunately for the Affairs of Christendom. Immediately after, on the 10th of May, Cardinal Hugo Bocompanus, born at Bolongna, was substituted in his Place, and took the Name of Gregory the 13th. He behaved himself so well, that the Grief con∣ceived for the loss of his Predecessor, was much allayed; for following his Footsteps, he confirmed the League with the Venetians, and with incredible Diligence furnished Men and Money for carrying on the War. He held S. Peter's Chair 13 Years wanting one Month. At the beginning of Spring Charles the 9th King of France married Elizaleth Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, a Lady of great Vertue, and extraordinary Beauty. It was proposed to marry Margaret the French King's Sister to Henry of Bourbon, Prince of French K's Sister mar∣ried to the Prince of Navarre. Navarre, by that means to allay the Tumults in France. Pope Pius laboured to hinder that Match, and offered King Sebastian of Portugal should take her to Wife; which he consented to, and even to accept of her without a Portion, provided the French King would enter into the League against the Turks. However, the Prince of Navarre was preferred. His Mother Joanna Queen of Navarre died at Paris the 10th of June; and nevertheless, the Marriage was solemnized towards the end of the Summer with a great Concourse of No∣bility, as well of the Hereticks as Catholicks. In this Concourse Admiral Coligni was shot from a Window by the Contrivance of the Duke of Guise, the Consequence whereof was a general Massacre of all the Hereticks in the City of Paris, to the number of 10000. The Heads of them were put to Death by the King's Order, having discovered a Conspiracy among them for assassinating of him, the rest were outragiously murdered by the Rab∣ble. In Flanders the last Year towards defraying the Charge of the War, a Tax was layed, be∣ing the 10th Penny of all things sold. This Imposition was so heavy to those Provinces Several Places in the Low-Countries revolt. which depend chiefly upon Trade, that many Cities rebelled, and were soon supported by Forces that came to their Assistance out of England, Germany, and France. Zeland and Holland, two inaccessible Provinces lying on the Sea, and encompassed with Water, were the first that rebelled. Mons, a strong City in Hainault, followed their example. D. Frederick, Son to the Duke of Alva, layed siege to it; and leaving a sufficient Force to secure his Works, marched to meet 4000 French who were coming to relieve the Place. He overthrew them, killing a great number, taking Genlis their Commander Prisoner, who died afterwards in the Castle of Antwerp. The Prince of Orange came also with Forces out of Germany; but the Duke of Alva had so secured all things, he was forced to retire without making any at∣tempt. These Troubles, besides the other Harms they did, were the cause the League against the League a∣gainst the Turk dis∣solved. Turks was dissolved: For D. John of Austria having gathered a mightier Fleet at Messina than the Year before, stayed there a great while, being in care for the Affairs of the Low-Countries, and the more for that it was reported the French would make War on that side. Thus the Season fit for Service being passed, he set out of that Port at the end of September to join the Venetians, and try the Fortune of another Battel. But the Enemies Fleet kept close about Modon, Coron, and Navarrino, in the Morea, refusing to come to a Battel. The Christian Fleet having lost all hopes of Fighting, and the Weather grow∣ing unseasonable, went to winter in several Ports. Anno 1573. The Venetians either in consideration of the little Advantage gained by this great Fleet, or because they had lost the rich Trade of the East, without regard to the Confederate Venetians make Peace with the Turk. Princes, made a shameful Peace with the Turks, yielding up to them not only the Island of Cyprus, but several Towns they held in Sclavonia, and paying to them 300000 Ducats. In May, Henry Duke of Anjou, the French King's Brother, was elected King of Poland. It was reported the French Gold bought the Votes; but certain it is, that as soon as the Duke heard of his Election he raised the Siege he had layed to Rochel, and went to take Possession of his Kingdom. D. John of Austria in October, with the Fleet he had prepared D. John of Austria at Tunez. against the Turks, sailed over to Tunez, and restored that Kingdom to Muleasse, Grand∣son to that Muleasse who we said was expelled his Kingdom, and his Eyes put out by his Son. Muley Hamet, the King now deposed, was sent to Sicily, whither soon after D. John of Austria, having settled the Government, and left a Garison in the City, followed. Thence he went over to Naples designing for Spain. This Winter appeared a Comet, which was only like a great shining Star, without any Tail, A Comet. near the North-Pole. What all the Astrologers admir'd in it, was, that it had no Parallaxis; but from all places appeared to be near the same Stars, and consequently must be supposed to be as high as the Stars themselves. Anno 1574. The Duke of Alva having leave to return home, D. Luis de Requesens, chief Commen∣dary A new Go∣vernor in the Low-Countries. of Castile, was made Governor of the Low-Countries. He came from Milan to Flan∣ders at the beginning of the Year, and it was hoped his mild Disposition and Wisdom would remedy all the Disorders occasioned before by too much Severity. But it fell out
otherwise than was expected; for the French, Flemish, and German Hereticks conspired to revenge the Death of the Admiral of France, and to secure Antwerp and other places. They thought it would be easy to compass their Designs, because the King of France was unpro∣vided of an Army, and in Flanders the Spanish Soldiers mutinyed for Pay, being three Years in Arrears. A great number of Horse at the beginning of Lent repaired to the Forrest of S. Germain, through which the King of France was forced with all speed to retire to Paris. Francis de Montmorency was suspected to be the Author of this Design upon the King, as also of being a Favourer of the Hereticks. The Spaniards in Flanders, tho the chief Muti∣neers were punished, were not appeased; and yet Count Luis, Brother to the Prince of O∣range, returning into the Country, was overthrown on the 14th of April. Great were the Confusions in France, when the King died on the 4th of June, leaving only one Daughter, who lived not long after, and the Crown fell to his Brother Henry then King of Poland. The Turkish Fleet came to Tunez the 14th of July, and on the 22d of August took the Castle King of France dies of Goleta: 24 Days after they took a Fort belonging to that City, in which was a Spanish Garison. D. John of Austria, tho he lay then at Trapano in Sicily, could not succour the Besieged. Most Men blamed Cardinal Granville, then Viceroy of Naples, for not furnish∣ing Men, Money, and Provisions in time. Selymus the Great Turk died, and Amurat his Son succeeded him. About this time the King's Expences being great, Duties on Goods were much raised, and with the Pope's Permission, the Towns belonging to the Church began to be sold. The King of Portugal being naturally of a great Spirit, which increased with his years, sailed over with a Fleet unto Africk, but did nothing worth remembring, his great desire of extending the Christian Dominions suffered him not to rest. In Genoa a Mutiny broke out, in which-the new Nobles expelled the old ones out of the City. To appease those Tumults, the Cardinal John Moron was sent by the Pope, a Commis∣sary by the Emperor, D. Charles de Borgia Duke of Gandia, and D. John Ideaquez Em∣bassador there, were appointed by the Catholick King. These, after the Troubles had lasted two years, adjusted all Differences. Anno 1575. D. John of Austria came out of Italy into Spain, and obtained of the King his Brother D. John made Vi∣car of Italy. to appoint him his Lieutenant over all his Dominions in Italy, with the Title of Vicar. The Design was that no advantagious Opportunity offered might be lost, as often happened by the Delays of the Viceroys. This done, in the same Fleet that brought him, he returned to Italy, to be in a Readiness to oppose the Great Turk, who it was reported was preparing a mighty Fleet against the Christians. This Report proved false. But Moluco, assisted by the Turks, took the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco from his Nephew Muley Mahomet Cheribo. He pretended to justify this Pro∣ceeding by a Law some years before established, which ordained that the King's Brothers should inherit before their Children. Muley fled to Portugal, and was the occasion of the great Loss sustained by the Portugueses, in endeavouring to restore him. The King of France kept the Dukes of Vendosme and Alençon Prisoners at Paris, that they might not have the opportunity of embroiling the Kingdom. Alençon made his Escape, and fled to Normandy, whither repaired to him not only the Hereticks, but the Catholick Malecontents, upon pretence of settling the Kingdom. Soon after the Duke of Vendosme making his Escape, came to him. Anno 1576. Pope Gregory the 13th, at Rome, at length gave Judgment against Bartholomew de Mi∣randa, Archb. of Toledo con∣demned. Archbishop of Toledo, after he had been 17 years a Prisoner. He died 18 days after in the Monastery of his Order, called La Minerva in that City. He was more fortunate while a private Man, than in his great Dignity, being a Person of Learning and Piety; if in his latter years he had not given occasion to be suspected, and even condemned as one not per∣fectly sound in matter of Religion. Dr. Martin Aspizcueta of Navarre pleaded for him, and writ in his Defence, being the famousest Canonist of that Age, as appears by his Works in Print, no less pious than learned. Maximilian the Emperor dying, his Son Rodulphus, already King of the Romans, succeed∣ed him in the Empire. The Prince of Conde and John Casimir, Son to the Palatin, entred France by the way of Lorain, with 30000 Men, in favour of the Duke of Alençon, for fear of whom a Peace was concluded with the Hereticks little to the King's Advan∣tage. D. Luis de Requesens, Governor of Flanders, dying, the States of that Country met to The Low-Countries conspire against Spain. consult what was to be done. The result was, that they conspired against their King, and resolved to expel the Spaniards, join with the Hereticks, and take the Prince of Orange for their Head. To colour their Treason, soon after they sent for Mathias, the Emperor's Bro∣ther, out of Germany; but abused him, giving him the Name of Prince, and doing what pleased themselves. Whereupon in a little time, leaving that shadow of a Principality, he re∣turned to Germany.
The Rebels in Flanders laid siege to the Castle of Antwerp, at such time as the Spaniards, Antwerp plunder'd. being without a Head, were in a Mutiny, nevertheless they assembled from all parts to defend that Place. The Garison of the Castle, with all that resorted to them, made not above 4000 Men. In the City were above 40000 able to bear Arms: Yet their Multitude no way dismayed the Soldiers; who falling upon them, killed 14000, then plundered, and set fire to that rich and beautiful City. The same Day this hapned at Antwerp, which was the 4th of November, D. John of Au∣stria D. John in the Low Countries. came to Luxemburgh, sent by the King of Spain to remedy the Disorders of the Low-Countries; and for more Expedition, he went through France in a disguise. His coming availed nothing, the Rebellion being too far advanced. Anno 1577. Catherine Queen of Portugal died at Lisbon. By her the eager Heat of King Sebastian, her Catherine Q. of Por∣tugal dies. Grandson, had bin hitherto curbed. He and King Philip had an Interview at Guadalupe, where they conferred about the Conquest of Africk; for which Enterprize the Portugues was preparing, and the Catholick King advised him not to go in Person, but could not pre∣vail. In November a Comet appeared near the Sign Libra, and the Planet Mars with a Tail of A Comet. such extraordinary length and breadth as has scarce been seen. After the Death of King Sebastian it was given out it threatned Portugal; such are the Predictions of Astrologers, and the Commonalty believe Comets portend change of Government. Anno 1578. At Madrid, on the 14th of April, King Philip had a Son born of his Wife Queen Ann, Birth of P. Philip. who was also called Philip, the 4th Child this Queen had, and out-lived the others. As this Year was happy in the Birth of this Prince, so it was unfortunate to Portugal and all Spain. For King Sebastian, carried away by the Heat of Youth, and ambitious to extend the Christi∣an Name in Africk, took into his Protection King Muley Hamet. He gathered Forces out of Germany, Italy, and Castile, to join with his own. He fitted out a great Fleet, in which he Sebastian K. of Por∣tugal slain with all his Army in Africk. shipped all his Forces; and sailing in July, arrived at Arzila, a City in Africk subject to the Portugueses. His first Design was to attack the Castle of Alarache, which is at the Mouth of the River Lucus. The Portugueses began to march up the Country, and Moluco met them with a far greater number of Men. The Battel was fought on the 4th of August, and the Portugueses overthrown. The Slaughter was great, and the number of Prisoners in∣credible, among which were many of note. No Battel in many years was so unfortunate, for three Kings died there. Moluco of Sickness, which had long stuck by him; he left his Brother Hamet his Heir. The King of Portugal was killed in the Battel, and Muley drowned in passing a River as he fled. D. John of Austria to pacify the Flemmings consented, that the Spaniards should be drawn General Defection of the Low Coun∣tries. out of those Provinces, and Garisons of the Natives put into their Strong-holds, which proved fatal. For scarce were the Spaniards gone, when the Hereticks conspired to seize D. John. He having notice of their Design, fled to Namur, began to assemble Forces, re∣called the Spaniards who were marching towards Italy, and had some Skirmishes with the Enemy, from whom he took some places. But Death taking him off in October, and in the Flower of his Age, put a stop to all his Designs. He died a natural Death in the Field. Alexander Farnesius, Prince of Parma, succeeded him in the Government of these Pro∣vinces. The Provinces being dissatisfied with the Archduke Mathias, called Francis Duke of Alen∣son to their assistance, against D. John of Austria; who having accepted of the Offer, and be∣ing D. of Alen∣son in the Low Coun∣tries. come to Mons in Hainault, they gave him the Title of Protector of Flanders. In Portugal died the Princess Mary, Daughter to Emanuel, by his last Wife Ellenor. This Lady when she died was well in years, and a Maid; for tho several Matches were proposed, never any took effect. Anno 1579. As soon as the dismal News of the Death of King Sebastian was brought to Lisbon, Car∣dinal Cardinal Henry K. of Portugal. Henry, his Great Uncle, Brother to his Grandfather, was proclaimed King, tho then very old and unhealthy. The Nobility, to secure the Succession, would have him marry; but it being unlikely he should have any Children, there were many Pretenders to that Crown. King Philip in Right of his Mother Elizabeth the Empress. Philibert Duke of Savoy, as Son to the Lady Beatrix, both which were Daughters to King Emanuel. The Prince of Parma in the Right of his Wife the Princess Mary, then dead, but had left two Sons, Ranucius and Edward. And the Duke of Bragança, in the Right of Catherine his Wife. These two Ladies were Grand-children to King Emanuel, and Daughters to Prince Ed∣ward. Mary was the eldest but was dead, and Catherine was living. Antony, Prior of Ocrato, put in his Claim, as Son to Prince Luis, and Grandson to King Emanuel. He to cover his being a Bastard, pretended his Father had been married to his Mother, but no proof ap∣peared. Catherine Queen-Mother of France claimed that Kingdom as descended from Matildis Countess of Bologn, Wife to Alonso the 3d King of Portugal, affirming they had Issue. The Portugueses urged that the Countess left no Child either by her first or second
Husband; and proved that when she died, Robert her Nephew, Son to her Sister Alicia, inherited her Dominions, from whom that Queen was descended by the Mother's side. None of these Princesses wanted the Pens of Learned Men to vindicate their Titles; but King Philip had the Power, which never fails to bear down all that the Learned can say in behalf of their Cause. In Sicily this Year a vast quantity of Liquid Fire gushed out of Mount Etna, which did Mount Etna. much harm in the Neighbouring Country. Anno 1580. King Philip prepared for the War with Portugal, and to that purpose caused several Troops of Italians, Germans and Spaniards to march towards the Frontiers of that King∣dom. To prevent Disorders, King Philip labour'd to prevail with the new King his Unkle Henry K. of Portu∣gal dies. to declare him his Heir, but at the same time whilst this was in hand, King Henry depart∣ed this Life at Almeirin, on the last of January. It appear'd a War must of necessity ensue, for that the Portugueses it could not be ex∣pected Duke of Alva re∣duces Por∣tugal. would submit to the Spaniards. There wanted a General. The Duke of Alva was then Prisoner at Ʋzeda, because he had obliged his Son Frederick to Marry the Daughter of D. Garcia de Toledo, Marquis of Villa Franca, without regard to another Lady belong∣ing to the Queen, to whom the said Frederick had before promised Marriage, and the King had commanded him not to dispose of himself till that Affair was decided. It was now thought fit to release and send him to Portugal. The King himself to be the nearer at hand went first to Merida, and then to Badajoz, a City on the Frontiers of that Kingdom. His Forces were not great, being scarce 12000 Foot and 1500 Horse, but they were the Flower of the Spanish Army, old Soldiers of great Experience. With this strength and the good Conduct of the Duke of Alva, Antony the Bastard, who with the Favour of the People called himself King, was overthrown first at Lisbon, and soon after near Porto by Sancho Davila, Camp-Master-General in that Expedition. Thus he being expelled the Country, all that Kingdom was brought under. Mean while King Philip lay at Burgos so sick, that the Physicians had given him over. Queen of Spain dies. Scarce was he recover'd, when the Queen his Wife who was with him died on the 26th. of October. He had by her four Sons, Ferdinand and Charles both dead before, James who lived not long after, and Philip then a Child and sickly, but afterwards grew healthy and lived long. He had also a Daughter called Mary, that was but short lived. About this time died Hierome Osorio, a Portugues Bishop of Silves, a great Orator (but not in his History) as appears by the Books he wrote. His Contemporary was An∣drew Resendius, of the same Nation, a great Antiquary, and imitator of Horace in the Learn∣ed Verses he composed. Emanuel Duke of Savoy also departed this Life, and his Son Charles succeeded him. In Flanders after the death of D. John of Austria, the War continued hot, and most of Alenson Heads the Rebels in the Low Countries. the Country was in Rebellion. Mathias the Archduke left the Country and returned into Germany. Those Provinces having once revolted would not return to their duty; and tho they all combin'd together, yet of themselves they were not strong enough to oppose the King, which made them send for Francis Duke of Alençon the French King's Brother, who call'd himself Hercules. He, after having imbroil'd France, making himself Head of the Hereticks, repair'd to the Low Countries, and there at his first coming possessed himself of Cambray, which till then continued Loyal. This was not all, for the following Year he went to Antwerp, and there caused himself to be declar'd Duke of Brabant, which was but a meer shadow, the Prince of Orange having all the Power. His Authority lasted not long, being at the same time disappointed of Marrying the Queen of England. Anno 1582. At Antwerp a youth a Biscainer call'd John de Xauregui, resolv'd to kill the Prince of Prince of Orange wounded. Orange. To this intent one day after dinner he fired a Musket at him, yet killed him not, but gave him a dangerous Wound in the Cheek. The young Man was presently torn to pieces, and all that knew of the design executed. A Burgundian managed his Business more successfully, for being admitted into the Prince's Family, he soon after killed him in Holland. At Toledo was held a Provincial Synod, in which were 7 Bishops and 2 Abbots, and Synod at Toledo. D. Gaspar de Quiroga, Archbishop of Toledo, presided, the Marquis de Velada assisted at it in the King's Name. This Year Pope Gregory cut off 10 days in October to reduce the Solsticies and Equinoxes Gregorian Account. to their former place. Besides the Golden Number was taken from the Calendar, and in its place was substituted the Epact, all to regulate the Observation of Times for the future, better than it was before. Mary the Empress came to Spain and went to Lisbon, where the King her Brother was The Em∣press in Spain. settling the Affairs of that Kingdom, and with him Cardinal Albertus, Son to the Em∣press, a Prince of extraordinary Parts.
Antony, who called himself King of Portugal, after he was overthrown fled into France, Antony the Bastard of Portugal vanquish∣ed. and having gathered a Fleet there, sailed over to the Islands Terceras, otherwise called Açores, which still held out for him. Near the Island of S. Michael he was vanquished in a Sea Fight by D. Alvaro Baçan, Marquis of Santa Cruz. Philip Strozzi one of the Admi∣rals of the French Fleet was killed; the Count de Brissac the other Admiral, together with Antony the pretended King, saved themselves by flight. All the Prisoners of Note to the number of 80 and many others, the Marquis put to death, the King of France con∣senting to it. Nevertheless the People of Tercera would not submit. Anno 1583. This Year the Marquis return'd, and fully subdu'd them. D. Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alva, departed this Life at Lisbon, aged 74 Years. Soon after him died there also Sancho de Avila of the kick of a Horse on the 8th. of June. He was of the House of Velada, and born at Avila. Prince James, Son to King Philip, deceased at Madrid on the 1st. of February, for which Pr. James of Spain dies. reason the Three Estates in Portugal swore his Brother Prince Philip Heir to that Crown. This Parliament being dissolv'd and Cardinal Albertus the King's Nephew constituted Go∣vernour of Portugal, King Philip return'd to Castile, to provide for the necessary Affairs there. Anno 1584. The Duke of Alençon having obtain'd his Brother's Pardon return'd into France, after Alençon returns in∣to France. he had been in England and Flanders, but going from Paris soon died either of Sickness or Poisoned, as some would have it. Death put an end to his aspiring Thoughts, which had compassed the Sovereignty of England, France and Flanders. The Prince of Orange was killed with a Musket-shot on the 10th. of June by a young Prince of Orange kil∣led. Burgundian call'd Baltasar, who had entred into his Service to that purpose. Such was the death of the Author of so many Mischiefs, but this did not pacify the Flemmings. King Philip had by his Wife Queen Elizabeth two Daughters, Elizabeth and Catherine. It was reported the eldest was kept for her Cousin the Emperor Rodulphus. The young∣est was contracted to Charles Duke of Savoy. Zaragoça, the principal City of Aragon, was the place appointed for celebrating of the Nuptials. Before the King set forward upon this Journey, the Three Estates of Castile at Madrid swore Prince Philip Heir to the Crown. This Ceremony was perform'd on the 11th. of Pr. Philip sworn Heir of Spain. November being Sunday and the day of S. Martin, in the Monastery of S. Hierome near that Town. Quiroga, Cardinal of Toledo, sang the Mass. Anno 1585. This Solemnity being performed, the King set out for Zaragoca in very rough Weather, Duke of Savoy in Spain. the Winter Season not being yet past. Thither came also the Duke of Savoy by Sea, and was received with great Honour by the King his Father-in-Law. The Marriage was ce∣lebrated with great Pomp and Ostentation on the 18th. of March. News was brought not long after that Pope Gregory, being very aged and famous for his Pope Gre∣gory dies, Sixtus V. chosen. great Wisdom, departed this Life at Rome the 12th. of April. In May following Cardinal Felix Montalto, who had first bin General of the Recolet Franciscans, then Bishop and after∣wards Cardinal, was lastly promoted to S. Peter's Chair. He took the Name of Sixtus the Fifth, governed the Church five Years and four Months, and had many good Qualities; but as there is no Man without a fault, he is blamed for being too severe and covetous, and for promoting of his Kinsmen more than was justifiable. He Canonized S. James of Alcala a Franciscan, whose Body is kept and Honour'd in the Monastery of that Order at Alcala. The Prince of Parma made War against the Rebels in the Low Countries, and having Prince of Parma suc∣cessful a∣gainst the Rebels in the Low-Countries. recover'd Gent and many other Places after a long and streight Siege he kept upon Antwerp, forced it to surrender in August. This Siege was very famous for the many extraordinary Devices used on both sides, as also for the obstinacy of the Defendants, but the Conduct of the General, and Valour of the Spaniards overcame all Difficulties. King Philip accompanied the new-Married Couple as far as Barcelona, whence they sail∣ed for Italy. In his return at Monçon he held the Cortes or Parliament of Aragon, which sate long, many difficulties arising among them. The violent heat of Summer and Au∣tumn which proved sickly, was the cause that many died there, especially of the Stran∣gers and Courtiers. At last this Parliament swore Prince Philip Heir of all those Domi∣mions. Pope Sixtus at his first Accession to the Papacy published his Bull, in which he declared Henry King of Navarre a Heretick, and Excommunicated and deprived him of the Right of Inheriting the Kingdom of France; as he did also Henry Prince of Conde his Cousin-Ger∣man, in case King Henry, Brother-in-Law to him of Navarre, died without Issue, which was likely, because till then the Queen had never been with-Child.
Anno 1586. Nevertheless the King of France labour'd to secure the Succession to the King of Navarre, without regarding the Pope's Threats, whereupon many of the French Nobility conspir'd Conspira∣cy against the French King. to raise a Rebellion under the Colour of Religion. The Ringleader was the Duke of Guise, which much perplexed the King, seeing three powerful Factions on foot, which he feared would again embroil the whole Kingdom. Yet at first he seemed to approve of the Association, and offer'd to be Head of it, till perceiving he had only the Name, and all things tended to his own Ruin, he put off that disguise. The Pope, who at first in fa∣vour of the Leaguers, had condemned the King of Navarre, now repenting, was averse to their Proceedings, and showed himself more favourable to the King. Anno 1587. Mary Stuart Queen of Scotland was beheaded on the 17th of February, in Foderingay Q. of Scots murder'd. Castle, where she had been kept Prisoner 16 years. Elizabeth Queen of England gave Sen∣tence of Death against her at London. This unfortunate Princess, by reason of the Rebellion in Scotland, retir'd into England upon Queen Elizabeth's Word given for her Safety, and nevertheless was kept Prisoner, and at last murdered. It was thought the Christian Princes would not suffer her Death to be unrevenged; but the King of France, whom it chiefly concerned, she having been Wife to his Brother King Francis, was taken up with the Tumults of his own Kingdom. King Philip was pro∣viding for this Enterprize, at the time that Sir Francis Drake, who the last Year had plun∣dered Sr F. Drake attempts Cadiz. the Coasts of America, and carried a great quantity of Gold into England, had the Boldness this Spring to attempt the Island of Cadiz; and had certainly possessed himself of it, had not two Gallies that were in the Port, kept him in play till such time as the Neighbouring People came to succour the City, and among them the Duke of Medina Sidonia. The King was then at Toledo to assist at the reception of the Body of S. Leocadia Virgin and Martyr, which had lain many Ages in a Monastery of Benedictine Monks, called S. Gil∣lain, near Mons in Hainault. The Procession and Feast were celebrated with great Pomp on the 26th of April, there being present besides the King, Mary the Empress his Sister, and Prince Philip his Son, who helped to carry the Coarse on which the Body was laid. France, as has been said, was divided into three Factions, when 30000 Germans enter'd 30000 Germans in France. it in favour of the King of Navarre, and under the Command of the Duke de Bouillon. They spread a great Terror throughout the Kingdom. The King of France on the one side, and the Duke of Guise on the other, went out to meet them; who keeping continual∣ly in their Rear, and cutting them off, and the Winter besides being severe, great part of them perished, the rest disbanded, and returned home. Soon after the Duke of Bouillon died. Thus the Catholicks began again to take heart. Spain was under no small Apprehen∣sions least that Plague should spread on this side of the Pyrenean Hills. France suffered not only by those People, but was afflicted with Plague and Famine. Great Processions were made to appease the Divine Wrath. Whole Towns went out clad in white, with their Crosses, singing Hymns, and imploring the Mercy of God. Anno 1588. King Philip had in readiness a mighty Fleet at Lisbon to revenge the Death of the Inno∣cent Spanish Ar∣mada a∣gainst England destroyed. Queen of Scots, and the many Wrongs done to himself. The Marquis of Sancta Cruz was appointed Admiral; but he dying in the midst of all these Preparations, the Duke of Medina Sidonia was substituted in his place. He set sail in June with fair Weather; and having turned Cape Finisterre, off of Corun̄a a violent Storm so scattered and disabled the Fleet, that they could not put to Sea again till September. At length it came to the Coast of Flanders, the English Fleet always hovering upon their skirts, whose Cannon, and the many Sand Banks much endangered our Fleet. Some Ships were taken by the Enemy, and many sore battered by their Shot. For which reason, endeavouring to return home round the North of Scotland, many Ships perished in that stormy Season, and long Voyage. Be∣sides, the extremity of the Cold, and want of Provisions, consumed most of the Men, so that very few Ships, and a small number of Mariners and Soldiers, returned to several Ports of Spain. Thus Humane Designs are disappointed by a superior Power. Doubtless the Flower of all the Spanish Soldiers was lost in this Expedition, and God by this Disaster punished the many Sins of this Nation. The King of France resolved to punish the Duke of Guise, as Head of the League, and by Duke of Guise put to Death. that means to curb the rebellious Parisians, who supported him. To this purpose he brought into the City 4000 Foreigners. The Duke of Guise also came, relying on the fa∣vour of the Multitude, who immediately taking Arms, drove out the Strangers, and forced the King himself to retire. Soon after the King published an Edict, approving of all that the Duke of Guise had done, and after that another for assembling the States or Parliament; and laying hold of that opportunity, put to Death the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his Brother, imprisoning several others who had a hand in the League.
Anno 1589. The Queen-Mother of France died 12 days after this Execution, and many Cities Re∣belled, but Paris fignaliz'd it self above all others. Some Months after the King laid Siege to Paris, and whilst he was before it James Clement, a Burgundian and Dominican Friar Henry III. King of France murder'd by Cle∣ment. coming out of the City upon pretence of revealing some Secret to the King, stabbed him with a poison'd Knife, of which he died. The Villain was immediately torn in pieces, a small Revenge for so detestable a Parricide. Henry King of Navarre, who was then in the Camp, as of right belong'd to him, presently entituled himself King of France, and went through many Troubles before he was setled in the quiet Possession of that King∣dom. Portugal was this Year in danger to be Embroiled; for the English Fleet came before Antony the Bastard with the English Fleet at Portugal. Lisbon upon pretence of restoring Antony the Bastard to the Kingdom of his Ancestors. He came with the Fleet himself, and landed with a good number of Men, encamped be∣fore the City, but finding there was no Commotion within, the Prince Cardinal and Count de Fuentes having secured all things, he was forced, for want of Provisions, to turn back, and soon after the whole Fleet, having done nothing worth remembring, return'd for England. Their departure deliver'd Spain from great Apprehensions. At Lisbon a Conspiracy of the Citizens was discover'd, in Favour of the pretended Prince Antony. Some few of them were Executed for a Terror to the rest. The Nobility continued very Loyal, as those who had most to lose, if any Change of Government happen'd. A Nun at Lisbon with her Counterfeit Sanctity had deceived not only the Vulgar sort, but Men of great Learning, and being now discover'd to the Inquisition, was punish'd as she deserv'd. Soon after died F. Luis de Granada, of the Order of S. Dominick, a Man well known for his Works and singular Piety. John Davila, a Famous Preacher, was his Con∣temporary. At Barcelona the Plague raged violently. Many things were said of the Cause of that Distemper, but nothing was proved. This Year in the Kingdom of Toledo was finish'd the Famous Structure of St. Laurence the Royal, which had been Thirty Years in hand, since King Philip began to build it near Escuriall finish'd. a Village called the Escuriall, in the Territory of Segovia. It consists of a Monastery of the Order of S. Hierome, a Colledge, and a Palace for the Kings to divert themselves in Summer. The Work is truly Majestick, equal to any of the former memorable Structures, and may well be accounted the Eighth Wonder. Anno 1590. This Year was remarkable for the death of two Popes, Sixtus who died the 28th. of August, and Ʋrban the Seventh, who lived but twelve days after his Exaltation to the Death of two Popes. Papacy. Neither did the Pope's Gregory the Fourteenth, and Innocent the Ninth sit above a few Months in S. Peter's Chair, till at last Clement the Eighth was elected, who held it longer and without reproach. Autumn this Year was very sickly. Many People perished in Spain, but the greatest Mortality was in the Country, either for want of Medicines, or that there was less to op∣pose Mortality. the Infection of the Air. Among the rest Dr. John Calderon, a Famous Divine and Canon of Toledo, fell sick in a pleasant place, whither he retired to pass the heat of the Summer. Anno 1591. Antony Perez, once the King's Secretary and in great Favour with him, after he had bin Prisoner the space of 12 Years, fled from the Prison in Madrid in April the foregoing Year. Antony Pe∣rez his Suf∣ferings. He went into Aragon, there to deliver himself up to the Great Justice of that Kingdom, and answer for the death of Secretary Escobedo, whom he caused to be killed one Night as he was going from Court, together with other things laid to his Charge. The Joy some People conceived at his flight was soon changed into Tears. On the 24th of May this Year the Prisoner was remov'd from the Great Justice his Prison to that of the Inquisition. The Rabble mutinying, and taking up Arms with cries of Liberty, assaulted the House of D. In̄igo de Mendoça, Marquis of Almenara, the Lieutenant. They had before conceiv'd Malice against him, and now murder'd him. With the same Fury they ran next to the Prison of the Inquisition, which they broke open and restor'd Antony Perez to the Prison where he was before. In pursuance hereof, on the 24th. of September, the People rose a∣gain, because it was design'd to carry back the Prisoner to the Inquisition, and breaking the Prison set him at Liberty. In this Tumult some were killed and wounded, Antony Perez fled to France, where he died some Years after. The Rebellious Citizens soon paid for their Rebellion; for D. Alonso de Vargas, an old Low Country Soldier, was sent thither Mutiniers punish'd. with an Army, who reduc'd the City, and put to death many of the Mutiniers, among whom was D. John de Lamuza the Great Justice, for that he appear'd in Arms against the King. D. James de Heredia and D. John de Luna, two of the chief Incendiaries, were beheaded with many more. The Duke of Villahermosa and Count de Aranda were taken and sent Prisoners to Castile, where they died not long after in Prison; but were after∣wards acquitted of the Treason. In order to settle the Affairs of that Kingdom, the Cortes met at Taraçona, at which D. Andrew de Bobadilla, Archbishop of Zaragoça, presided.
Anno 1592. The King himself by the way of Valladolid, Burgos aad Pamplona went thither at the end of this Year. With him were the Princess Elizabeth and her Brother Prince Philip, who at Pamplona and Taraçona was sworn Heir of those Crowns. Thus the Tumults in Ara∣gon were appeas'd almost two Years after they commenc'd, many of the Offenders being Tumults in Aragon appeas'd. punish'd, and Garisons put into Zaragoça and other places. After the Cortes were held at Taraçona all Men submitted themselves, being terrified with the Punishment of others and their own Losses: For tho the Fury of the Multitude be great, the Power of the King is greater, and doubtless when Kings are resolute, all the vain efforts of a tumultuous Peo∣ple are easy to be quelled, and end in their own Destruction. Anno 1593. King Henry of Navarre seemed now inclined to embrace the Catholick Religion, and desired to be absolv'd of the Ecclesiastical Censures. The Duke of Nemours sent by him to Rome to this effect, used his utmost Endeavours to obtain it of the Pope, who appear'd very rigid, and much blamed the Archbishop of Bourges, who had absolved him in France, fearing his Conversion was only feigned, but the contrary appear'd afterwards. King Philip by his Agents now labour'd hard in France that the King of Navarre, for K. Philip aspires to the Crown of France. his Religion might be excluded the Succession, and he himself elected in his stead, but that failing, he proposed Archduke Ernestus the Emperor's Brother, or any of the Princes of the House of Lorrain, offering his Daughter Elizabeth in Marriage, and many great Sums of Money, with considerable Forces to support them. All this fell to nothing, King Henry being converted, and by the unanimous Consent of all the States, after many Difficulties, proclaimed King. Anno 1594. At Rome the Pope on the 17th. of April Canonized S. Hyacinthus, a Polander, of the Order of S. Dominick. At Madrid on the 22th. of November died D. Gaspar de Quiroga, Archbishop of Toledo and Cardinal, aged 83 Years: He was buried in a Monastery of the Order of S. Augustin, Quiroga Archbi∣shop of To∣ledo. in a Town of Madrigal where he was born. He was an upright Man and of very good Parts, but there is none free from some Fault. His Revenue being very great, and his Ex∣pence small he heaped up much Money, and having made no Will, the Pope order'd it to be equally divided into three Parts, the one for pious Uses, another for himself, and the third for the King. Albertus the Archduke and Cardinal succeeded him in the Arch∣bishorick, but afterwards having obtain'd the Pope's Dispensation, by the King his Unkle's Order he quitted all his Church Preferments and Married. This Year Javarin, a very strong Town in Hungary, was besieged and taken by the Turks. Anno 1595. At the beginning of this Year died in Flanders the Archduke Ernestus, who governed that Country for the King his Unkle. On the third of April Albertus the Archduke, his Brother, took possession of the Archbishoprick of Toledo. He never went to his Church Archduke Albertus governs the Ne∣therlands. or was consecrated, because the King his Unkle gave him the Government of the Nether∣lands, for which he set out from Madrid in August. Garcia de Loaysa was left to govern the Bishoprick, and three Years after the Archduke resigning it, succeeded him in that Dignity. The Government of the Low Countries, upon the death of Ernestus the Archduke, was some time in the Hands of D. Peter Enriquez de Toledo, Earl of Fuentes, a notable Soldier. He on the 3d. of October, after a tedious Siege, took Cambray from the French, who attempted three times to relieve it, and were as often repulsed. The Pope on the 25th. of November made Valladolid a Bishops See, and the King soon Valladolid made a Bishoprick after gave it the Title and Priviledge of a City. Dr. Bartholomew de la Plaça was the first Bishop. About the end of this Year the Floods were very great, and the River at Sevill breaking into the City, did much harm at the Custom-House. The King of France being entirely reconciled to the Church, was at last absolved by the Pope, and immediately all his Kingdom submitted to him. D Peter de Toledo, Marquis of Villafranca, on the 23th. of September took and plunder'd the City Patras in the Morca, having gone from Messina with 20 Galleys upon that design. Anno 1596. Sir Francis Drake landed Men at Nombre de Dios in America, designing to march over Sir Francis Drake plunders the Coasts of America. that narrow Neck of Land and plunder Panama. The Spaniards taking the Alarm, charged and forced him to retire to his Ships about the beginning of January. He often did much harm along those Coasts, but at last died at Portobelo, and his Fleet was driven out of the West Indies by D. Bernardin de Avellaneda. Albertus the Archduke on the 17th. of April took Calais from the French, but not long after it was restor'd upon composition. At this time the King lay at Azeca near Toledo so dangerously sick, that he was given over for dead. He removed to Toledo, where News Cadiz plundred by Drake. was brought, that the English Fleet on the 1st. of July took and plundered the Island
and City of Cadiz, and burnt the Fleet that lay there bound for Mexico; which was so great a loss, that many Merchants throughout the Kingdom suffered much, and some broke. Anno 1597. Ferdinand Tello, Governor of Dourlans for the Spaniards, having Intelligence with the People of Amiens, the chief City of Picardy, suprized and made himself Master of it. The Amiens ta∣ken by the Spaniards. King of France considering the great Importance of that Place, came thither in Person, and laid siege to it. Albertus the Archduke marched with about 20000 Men out of Artois, designing to relieve the City; but finding the King too well posted, and having suf∣fered somewhat by his Artillery, and in some small Skirmishes he retired; upon which the City was surrendred, the Garison marching out with the usual Honourable Formalities. Sigismund Bator, Prince of Transilvania, who at this time with much Bravery maintained War against the Turks and Hereticks went to Vienna to attend the Emperor, who supplied him with Money, as did the Pope and Catholick King. But the hopes conceived of his Proceedings vanished; for he was taken sick, (some said he was bewitched) where∣upon he forsook the War, and left his Wife, the Daughter of Charles the Archduke, and resigning up his Dominions to the Emperor, lived a private Life at Prague, where he died some years after. Anno 1598. This Year, on the 6th of May, the King gave up all the Low-Countries to his eldest Daughter Elizabeth, in order to marry her, as was afterwards done, to her Cousin the Nether∣lands gi∣ven to the Princess Elizabeth. Archduke Albertus, who to that purpose resigned up his Cardinal's Cap, and the Arch∣bishoprick of Toledo, which was given to Garcia de Loaysa, Prince Philip's Tutor. Yet this Donation was in such manner, that those Countries were to be held of the Crown of Spain, to which also was reserved the Order of the Golden Fleece, and the Prerogative of placing Governors in certain Castles, such as Antwerp, Ghent, and Cambray. Soon after a Peace was concluded with France; in bringing the which to effect, the Pope laboured very earnestly. The King's Distemper still increasing upon him, he died at the Escurial the 13th of September, and was there buried. A Prince remarkable for some Vertues, as Libe∣rality, K. Philip the 2d dies Resolution, Vigilancy, Abstemiousness in eating and drinking. But no less for many Vices, as Lust, Cruelty, Pride, Perfidiousness, and several others. He lived 71 Years, 3 Months, and some Days, and reigned in Castile 42 Years, 7 Months, and 28 Days. Prince Philip his Son succeeded him. Anno 1599. On the 22d of February died at Alcala de Henares, Garcia de Loaysa Archbishop of To∣ledo, and with him the great hopes conceived of his Vertue and Ability. He was buried in that Town in the Chapel of the Martyrs, without any Tomb. D. Bernardin de Rojas y Sandoval, at that time Bishop of Jaen, succeeded him, and not long after had the Cardinal's Cap brought him to Toledo, the King being present at that Ceremony. The new King was before contracted to Margaret, the Daughter to Charles the Arch∣duke, who came to him by the way of Milan, with her Mother, and Albertus the Marriage of K. Phi∣lip the 3d. Archduke. The Pope was at that time in Ferrara; which City after the Death of the last Duke, who left no Heir, fell to the Church whereof it was a Feofe. Thither the Queen and Archduke repaired, and the Ceremony of the two Marriages was performed by the Pope with extraordinary Magnificence, tho the King and Princess were not there. They departed thence, and on the 25th of March arrived at Alfaques de Tortosa; thence they went to Valencia, where the King was married. The King went forward to Barcelona to bear the Archduke company, who with the Princess his Wife, imbarked for Flanders on the 7th of June. After which the King and Queen returned to Valencia, and thence to Madrid. Anno 1600. This Year was very remarkable for the Jubilee at Rome, to which a great number of Peo∣ple resorted. The Winter was so extraordinary rainy that the Tiber overflowing, Rome was Great Ju∣bilee. 3 days full of Water, and great harm done. Among 13 Cardinals promoted by the Pope, one was Robert Bellarmine, of the Society of Jesus, Nephew to Pope Marcellus, a Man of a good Life, and extraordinary Learning, as appears by the many notable Books he published. The new King of France, with the Approbation of the Pope, put away Queen Margaret his first Wife, and presently after married Mary de Medicis, Daughter to Francis Duke of Florence. Anno 1601. About March or April the Court of Castile removed from Madrid to Valladolid in favour of that Country, which was very poor; but many Inconveniences being found there, some The Court at Valladolid. years after it returned to the same place. The famous Bell of Vililla in Aragon, is report∣ed to have rung it self several times, which is accounted to portend some extraordinary Re∣volutions, or other great matters like to happen, but no such strange effects appear'd for many years after.
At Rome, on the 29th of April S. Raymundus Pen̄afort, of the Order of S. Dominick, was Canonized. On the 25th of August Prince Doria, the great Admiral, sailed to Argiers with a great Fleet, came before that City in the night unperceived, but was drove off again by con∣trary Winds. On the 22d of September was born at Valladolid the Princess Ann, afterwards married to Luis the 13th King of France, and conducted to the Frontiers by the Archbishop of Toledo. Birth of the Prin∣cess Ann. Anno 1602. The Marquis de Fuentes having corrupted the Lanskeneghts that were in Garison at Final, Final be∣trayed. made himself Master of that place, as he did also of Milesino, without any Provocation, or just cause given. Elizabeth Queen of England died at London the 23d of March, when she had lived 70 Years, 6 Months, and 16 Days, and reigned 44. Her Successor was King James the 1 st of England, and 6th of Scotland, being the Great Grandson of Margaret Sister to King Henry the 8th. His Father and Mother were Catholicks, and she a Saint; but his Tutor George Buchanan was a perverse Heretick, tho a Learned Man. This was the first sole Mo∣narch of that Island, and consequently took the Title of King of Great Britain. Anno 1603. D. John de Tarsis, Earl of Villamediana, and Post-Master General, was sent Embassador Embassy into Eng∣land. into England to compliment that King upon his Accession to the Crown. He behaved him∣self with singular Wisdom and Dexterity, and laid the Foundation of that Peace which was afterwards concluded betwixt Spain and England, in the Year following. At Madrid died Mary the Empress, who was Daughter, Daughter-in-law, Wife, and Mother to five Em∣perors, a thing never before heard of, and was her self a Person excellently qualified. She was there buried in the Monastery of the Barefooted Nuns. Anno 1604. John Fernandez de Velasco, Constable of Castile, was sent by the King Embassador into Peace be∣twixt Spain and England concluded England. He took his Journey through France, and was nobly entertained by that King at Paris; thence he went to Flanders, and so to London. There on the 29th of August he con∣cluded the Peace before agreed upon by the Marquis of Villamediana, his Catholick Majesties Embassador. Anno 1605. On the 3d of March died at Rome Pope Clement the 8th, a Person of extraordinary Piety Pope Cle∣ment dies, Leo the 11. succeeds. and Zeal. Cardinal Alexander de Medicis, succeeded him on the 2d of April, by the Name of Leo the 11th. He was very old and sickly, and lived but till the 27th of that Month; and on the 16th of May Cardinal Camillus Borgelia, born at Rome, but originally of Siena, was enthroned in his Place. He took the Name of Paul the 5th, and was at variance with the Venetians, which was so high that it threatned a War. The Difference was about certain Laws by them established; one of them was to enable the civil Magistrate to punish the Clergy, another that no Estates real might be settled upon Monasteries, which Law is called, De Manu mortuis. This Dispute was argued, and bandied on both sides, till at last by the Prudence and Conduct of the Pope, all things were pacified. Besides, because a Dif∣ference had many years depended betwixt the Dominicans and Jesuits about Matters of Grace and Free-will, he decreed, that both Parties might without reflecting upon one another, still follow their Opinions, till such time as another Decree passed to justify either the one or the other. Prince Philip was born the 8th of April at Valladolid. D Galceran de Alluanel, a Catalonian Birth of P. Philip. Gentleman of great Learning and Modesty, was appointed his Preceptor, and D. Balthasar de Zun̄iga. Anno 1606. At Valladolid, on the 18th of August, was born the the Princess Mary. At Toledo died the Lady Stephania Manrique, Great Grand-daughter to D. Roderick Manrique, Master of Santiago. Princess Mary born Her Revenue, and that of her Brother Peter, neither of them being married, were given to the Colledge and Monastery of the Jesuits in that City, where they both lye with Inscriptions up∣on their Tombs. Anno 1607. At Madrid Prince Charles was born in September. The Parliament gave the King 23 Mil∣lions, payable in 8 years. This Tax is raised out of the 8th part of all the Wine and Oyl of A great Tax. the Growth of the Kingdom. The first time it was imposed was in the Reign of King Philip the 3d, but was not laid so high as this time. Anno 1608. In the Church of S. Hierom in Madrid, upon Sunday the 13th of January, Prince Philip was sworn Heir to the Crown. The Cardinal of Toledo said Mass, and performed the Ceremo∣ny. P. Philip sworn heir of Spain. His Grand-mother by the Mother's side, the Princess Mary of Bavaria, died at Gratz, the Capital of Stiria in Germany, on the 29th of April. Her Daughters she left nobly matched.
Charles the Archduke was her Husband, her Son was Ferdinand the Archduke, Brother to Margaret Queen of Spain, and Cousin-German to the Emperor Rodulphus. About this time the Territory and Government of Cazorla was after great and tedious Disputes re∣stor'd to the Church of Toledo, through the Means and Procurement of the Archbishop D. Bernard de Rojas y Sandoval. Anno 1609. In the Netherlands on the 14th of April a Truce was concluded with the Dutch Rebels, Truce with the Dutch Re∣bels. St. Ignatius beatified. but not well observ'd, tho the King ratified it at Segovia in July. Prince Ferdinand was born at the Escurial the 17th. of May. The 27th. of June the Pope Beatified the Holy Father Ignatius de Loyola, Founder of the Jesuits. Pope Gregory the XV. Canonized him March the 12th. 1622. Anno 1610. At Paris on the 14th. of May, Francis Ravilliac, a bloody Villain, who had been a School-Master, Henry IV. King of France murder'd. barbarously murder'd Henry IV. King of France, stabbing him with a Ponyard. His Son Luis XIII. succeeded him. The Princess Margaret was born the 25th. of the same Month at Lerma. In November, by the contrivance of a certain Moor with whom private Correspondence was held, our Forces possessed themselves of the strong Castle of Alarache, a place of great importance upon the Coast of Africk on the Ocean. About it is a Bay and River called Mamora, which Alarache in Africk taken. was a Den of Pyrats. For this reason four Years after D. Luis Faxardo, Admiral of the Fleet, possessed himself of that place, and built a good Castle, in which he left a sufficient Garison. The Moores at first flocked thither to hinder this Work, but prevailed not. This Year was very remarkable for the banishing of all the Morisco's, that is those de∣scended Morisco's banish'd. of the Moores, out of Spain. This wicked Race held correspondence with the Turks, and Barbary Moores. So great a Work could not be finished this Year, but was afterwards continued; however many are said to have remain'd behind, not being well known to be such, tho the multitude of those that departed was incredible. Anno 1611. This Year was unfortunate for the death of Margaret of Austria Queen of Spain, who for her extraordinary good Qualities was entirely beloved of all her Subjects. She was de∣liver'd Queen of Spain dies. on the 22th. of September at the Escuriall, of a Son call'd Alonso, who lived not out a Year, and she died on the 3d. of October. Her Body was buried in the Escuriall. She built at Madrid a Monastery of Nuns called of the Incarnation. Anno 1612. Treaties were a-foot at Paris and Madrid for two Matches, the one between our Prince and the Lady Elizabeth Sister to the French King. The other betwixt the same King and Marriages of Princes. the Princess Anne, the Consummation was put off because the Parties were so young. Ro∣dulphus the Emperor, by reason of his want of Health, lived a long time retired at Prague, the Capital City of Bohemia. There the last Year on the 11th. of August he resigned up his Dominions of Hungary, Bohemia and Austria to his Brother Mathias, reserving to him∣self a Portion for the maintenance of his Court. After this he died in the same City the 20th. of January this Year. Soon after the Electors met at Francford, and chose Mathias, Brother to the late Emperor, his Successor. This Year on the 25th. of April died at Valencia Francis Hierome Simon, a beneficed Priest of that City, being 33 Years of Age: The People reverence him as a Saint, and have particularly signalized their Zeal herein. The Archbishop would have hindred their Pro∣ceedings as too forward, whereupon ensued many Tumults, till at last this Affair was referred to Rome. Anno 1613. About this time came into Spain the Latin History of Monsieur de Thou, President of Parliament a great favourer of Hereticks and Enemy to Catholicks. He neither spares the Popes, nor Kings of France, being an utter Enemy to the House of Guise, once the great stay of that Crown. He is sufficiently stuffed with Falshoods, and was prohibited at Rome in the Year 1610. Soon after in Spain it was order'd to be purged. A French Man writ learnedly against him, and calls himself John Baptista Gallus, which seems to be a feigned Name, none daring publickly to write against a Person so great in Power, as a President. A false Catholick does more harm than an open Heretick, as says S. Bernard. Anno 1614. Upon Saturday the 24th. of May there happened an Earthquake in the Island Tercera, which did much harm. In the Town of Playa the Mischief was greater, for private An Earth∣quake. Houses, Monasteries and Churches were overthrown. In the City Angla 11 Churches and 19 Chapels besides private Houses were destroyed. In August our Fleet commanded by D. Luis Faxardo, took the City Mamora, as was before hinted. It is seated upon the Ocean five Leagues from Tangier, and twenty-five Mamora taken: from Arzila.
Anno 1615. There had been of late War in Italy betwixt the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua. The War of Savoy and Mantua. cause of it was, that Alfonso Duke of Mantua, who Married the Duke of Savoy's Daughter, at his death left no Issue but one Daughter. His Brother Alexander the Cardinal resigning up his Cap inherited that Dominion. The Duke of Savoy pretended that his Grandchild the Daughter of the late Duke, tho as a Woman she could not be Heiress to the Duke∣dom of Mantua, yet she might to that of Montferrat, which for some Years had been united to the other. The matter came to Blows, and the Duke of Savoy by force pos∣sessed himself of a great part of that Country. The Catholick King Philip the Third, to prevent the embroyling of Italy, would have had this Difference determined by course of Law, and because the Duke of Savoy refused, took up Arms against him. After some Bloodshed it was at last agreed on the 21th. of July this Year, that both Parties should disarm, and the Difference be referred to the Emperor as the proper Judge, those Do∣minions being Feoffes of the Empire. The King approved not of this Peace, and there∣fore the War broke out again. D. Peter de Toledo Marquis of Villafranca, after a long Siege took the City Vercelli. Soon after Affairs being composed, it was restor'd by D. Goniez de Figueroa Duke of Feria, who succeeded the Marquis in the Government of Milan. It was reported the Venetians underhand assisted the Duke in this War. The Duke of Ossuna then Viceroy of Naples, armed against them, and in the Adriatick Sea took some of their Ships, besides other harms he did them. Soon after the Duke of Feria took Valtolina, a most important Place, as being the Pass between Italy and Germany, which he fortified, and put into it a strong Garison. At Burgos on the 18th of October Prince Philip was Married by Proxy to the Lady Eliza∣beth, Pr. Philip Marries the French K's Sister. Sister to the French King, who was in the same manner contracted to Anne Princess of Castile. This Princess two Days before renounced any Right or Title she might have upon the death of her Brother, to the Kingdoms of Castile or Aragon, or to the Low Coun∣tries. The two Brides were exchanged upon the River Vedaso, which parts France and Spain on the 9th. of November. The King himself was present at all these Ceremonies, and together with the Prince his Son received the Princess his Daughter-in-Law at Bur∣gos. Thence about the end of the Year he return'd to Madrid. The King of France re∣ceived his Bride at Bourdeaux, where he was with the Queen his Mother. Anno 1616. A Ship that sailed from Holland in the Month of May the last Year, after a long and New Pas∣sage into the South-Sea. difficult Voyage in January this Year, beyond the Streights of Magellan, in 57 Degrees of South Latitude discover'd another Passage into the South-Sea and to India. This Ship having gone round the Globe, return'd to Holland 2 Years and 18 Days after it set out from thence. They lost one day in their Reckning, and by that means called that Monday which was Tuesday, and so throughout the Week. Anno 1617. Upon Saturday the 15th. of April, in the Philippine Islands, a notable Victory was ob∣tained Victory over the Hollanders. over the Hollanders. D. John de Ronquillo who commanded there defeated 10 Gal∣leons of there's, some of which were sunk, others burnt, and the rest fled. These Rebels have done great harm in the Coasts of America along the South-Sea, and possess'd them∣selves of many Places in India. Anno 1618. In October the Duke of Lerma departed the Court, leaving the Government of the Duke of Lerma leaves the Govern∣ment. Kingdom, which he had chiefly managed for several Years, having a Cardinals Cap sent him from Rome before he quitted. Not long after D. Roderick Calderon his great Favou∣rite was apprehended, who after he had lain two Years and an half in Prison, was con∣demned to Death, and his Goods Confiscate. D. Bernardin de Rojas y Sandoval, Archbi∣shop of Toledo, died suddenly at Madrid the 7th. day of December. He was buried in the Chapel of our Lady, which he built and richly adorn'd. The King labour'd to bestow that Bishoprick upon his Son Prince Ferdinand, then but 9 Years of Age. Anno 1619. Mathias the Emperor had lately resign'd the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia to his Cousin the Archduke Ferdinand. The Bohemians Rebell'd, and Wars ensued. The Em∣peror died at Prague, in March, without Issue, and the Electors assembling the 23th. of August, chose the same Ferdinand, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Emperor. In April the Catholick King set out from Madrid for Portugal, and made his Entry into Lisbon on the 29th. of June. On the 14th. of July the Three Estates took their Oath to K. Philip in Portu∣gal. the Prince as Heir, and next day the Cortes were opened. The Pope in October Beatified F. Francis Xaverius, one of the first Companions of S. Ignatius, and Apostle of India. Pope Gregory the XV. Canonized them both in the Year 1622.
Anno 1620. Prince Ferdinand being before made Cardinal, in May had possession of the Archbishop∣rick of Toledo given him. The Bohemians proceeding in their Rebellion, chose the Ele∣ctor Pr. Ferdi∣nand Arch∣bishop of Toledo. Palatin for their King, who was assisted by the German Hereticks, the Kings of Eng∣land and Denmark, and the Dutch. The Catholick Electors, Kings of Spain and Poland, the Pope and Princes of Italy favour'd the Emperor. On the 8th. of November near Prague the Rebels were overthrown, and 8000 of them slain. The next day the City Prague was deliver'd to the Emperor. Anno 1621. Pope Paul the V. died the 28th of January. Cardinal Luis of Bolonia succeeded him, Philip III. dies. and took the Name of Gregory the XV. On the 15th. of March following died Philip the III. King of Spain at Madrid, at the Age of 43, and having Reign'd 22 Years and a half. His Body was buried in the Royal Monastery of S. Laurence of the Escuriall. His Son Philip the IV. succeeded him, being then 16 Years of Age. The End of Mariana's Supplement.
The SECOND SUPPLEMENT TO THE History of SPAIN, From the Year 1621 till 1649. Written by the Reverend F. Ferdinand Camargo y Salcedo Preacher, and Historiographer of the Order of S. Augustin. Anno 1621. AT the Beginning of the Year 1621, Pope Paul the 5th governed the Church; Philip the 3d was King of Spain, Luis the 13th of France, James the 1st of England, Ferdinand the 2d was Emperor, F. Alonso Vinacourt Master of Mal∣ta, Antony Prioli Doge of Venice, and Osman Emperor of Constantinople. These were the Princes that ruled at the Beginning of the Year, which be∣fore its End shewed the Instability of worldly Affairs in the Death of some of these Potentates. Pope Paul the 5th departed this Life the 28th of January, being 66 years of Age, and Pope Paul dies, Gre∣gory 15th succeeds. having reigned 15 Years and 9 Months. In his Place was elected on the 9th of February, Alexander Ludovisius, Cardinal and Archbishop of Bolonia, being then 76 years of Age, who took the Name of Gregory the 15th. D. Emanuel de Azevedo y Zuniga, Count de Monterrey, went in the Catholick King's Name to yield Obedience to him. Upon Ashwednesday, being the 31st of March, the Great Monarch Philip the 3d of Spain, Philip the 3d dies. changed this Life for a better. He was a most singular Prince for Piety and Vertue, and the best beloved of any that has held these Kingdoms. His Death was in the 43d Year of his Age, and 23d of his Reign. King Philp the 4th, as soon as he heard of his Father's Death, took upon him the Go∣vernment, Philip 4th succeeds. and began to act with greater Wisdom than could have been expected of his tender years. He ordained that all Ministers of State should give in an Estimate of what they were worth when they first came to serve. On the 22d of June he opened the Cor∣tes at Madrid, being 16 years of Age when he began his Reign, as born the Year 1605, upon Good-Friday at Midnight. Cardinal Bellarmine died at Rome September the 17th, a Person of extraordinary Piety and Learning, as appears by his Books against the Hereticks of our times, and for the use of all other Persons. Of two Galleons that came out of India, one arrived safe at Lisbon, the other fought 3 Two Sea Fights. days with several Turks, and having sunk 7, was himself at last burnt; the loss was valued at above 2 Millions, besides 600 Souls. Other 13 Sail of Infidels being met in the Streights by D. Frederick the Admiral, he sunk 9, took 2, and 2 fled. The same D. Frederick, with only 9 Ships, fought 18 Hollanders at the Mouth of the Streights with good Success. Upon the 21st of October D. Roderick Calderon was beheaded in the great Market-place of Rod. Chal∣deron be∣headed. Madrid, after he had been 2 years and a half Prisoner at Valladolid. Much has been writ about him by the Name of Marquis of 7 Churches, and his Wife had the publick Tears of all Persons to comfort her. He himself was a rare Example of Patience and Constancy, which lifted him above his Fortune.
Anno 1622. D. John Manrique, Viceroy of Oran, this Year several times defeated the Moores; by which means their Insolency was abated. At Rome, in February, 3 Suns were seen, two of which were very small. Xongusama Emperor of Japan, provoked by the Villanous Insinuations of the Hollanders, Martyr∣doms in Japan. in hatred to the Catholick Religion, caused diligent search to be made after the Preachers thereof, and put to Death 125 of them, burning alive 11 Dominicans, 8 Augustinians, 5 Franciscans, and 9 Jesuits. Osman the Great Turk invaded Poland with a mighty Army; but having lost 160000 Turks in eleven several Battels he had with Prince Ʋladislaus, re∣turned with Shame to Constantinople. There it being given out that he intended to remove his Court to Grand Caire, the Janizaries mutinying, put him into the Castle of the 7 Towers, where they murdered him; and taking out his Uncle Mustapha, who was kept Prisoner there, proclaimed him Emperor. Anno 1623. Pope Gregory the 15th departed this Life at Rome July the 8th, and on the 6th of August P. Gregory dies Ʋrban the 8th chosen. Cardinal Barberino was chosen in his Place, and took the Name of Ʋrban the 8th. This Year also died D. Peter de Castro y Quin̄ones, Archbishop of Sevil, at the Age of 102 years. Charles Prince of Wales, Son to King James of England, set out of London in a Disguise; Charles P. of Wales in Spain. and at Paris, whither he went Post, saw the King and Queen at Dinner without being known. Thence he departed, and came to Madrid by the Post March the 17th, taking up his Lodging at the English Embassador's, who gave notice of his Arrival to Count Gondamar, and he to the Duke de Olivares. That Afternoon the Marquis of Buckingham went to visit him, and gave him the reason of the Prince's coming to Spain. The King caused him to remove to S. Hierom, from whence he conducted him to the Court, giving him the right-hand. He was entertained with all the Majesty and Grandeur imaginable. The Business he came about, which was to marry the Princess Mary, was canvassed; but he pro∣posing among other Articles, the restoring of the Elector Palatin, whom the Emperor had expelled for his Rebellion, the Treaty was broke off, and he returned to England dissatisfied, but without reason. The King of Persia, with the assistance of the English, took the City Ormuz, a most im∣portant Ormuz ta∣ken by the Persians. Place in the Gulph of Persia, being the great Mart of Europe, Asia, and Africk. D. James Pimentel, General of the Gallies of Naples, near Sardinia discovered 6 Sail of Turks, whom he fought and took, but with the loss of his Life, having received a Musket∣shot, of which he died the 4th of October. Mustapha the new Sultan, being judged incapable to govern so great an Empire, the Jana∣zaries deposed him, and set up in his Place Amurat Brother to Osman, whom they had before murdered. Anno 1624. This Year the Kingdoms of Grand Cathay and Tibet were discovered. They lye beyond Discovery of Cathay and Tibet. India, bordering upon China on the North-side, and are very large, delightful, and plenti∣ful Countries. The People abhor the Mahometans, and scoff at the Pagans. They have particular Ceremonies of their own, and many Priests, whom they call Lambas; some of whom live in Communities, others by themselves. All of them profess Poverty, live upon Charity, never marry, and spend much of the day in Prayer. Such of the People as have two Sons, dedicate one to this Priestly Order. Their Churches are neat, the Walls and Roofs painted. The Images they use are of Gold, and among them one of a Woman, which they say represents the Mother of God. They acknowledge the Mysteries of the Incarnation, and blessed Trinity, and use Confession in some cases, but only to the chief Lamba. These and many other odd Rites seem to be the small Remains of the Doctrine of S. Thomas the Apostle. This Country was with incredible labour discovered by F. Antony de Andrade, a Portugues Jesuit. This Year also the Great Empire of Ethiopia was converted to the Catholick Religion, and a number of Priests and Friars of all Orders were sent for to Rome to instruct the People. Conversi∣on of E∣thiopia. Dutch in Brasil. The Dutch Rebels, always Enemies to Spain, attempted this Year the Conquest of Brasil in America. They arrived at the City S. Salvador with a Fleet of 35 Sail, and in it 3000 Men, and great store of Artillery, Provisions, and Ammunition. They landed without any oppo∣sition, and the Citizens seeking only to save their Lives, fled to the Mountains, abandoning the City. The Enemy possessed themselves of it, profaning the Churches, and plundering the Houses, where they found a great Treasure; but enjoyed it not long, being shamefully soon after expelled thence. In India the Admiral Ruy Freyre de Andrade fought the Dutch and Turks together, and de∣feated Dutch and Turks de∣feated. them. On the 25th of November came to Madrid Charles Archduke of Austria, and was received by the King, Queen, and Princes with great Demonstrations of Affection. The Joy was soon turned into Sorrow; for he was taken sick, and died within a few days.
Anno 1625. The Happiness of this Year was began by the Jubilee kept at Rome, with a mighty Con∣course Jubilee at Rome. of People. Ʋladislaus Prince of Poland, the King's Eldest Son, was there nobly enter∣tained, and presented by the Pope. James the 1st, King of Great Britain, died the 2d of March. His Son Charles succeeded him. The Marquis of Spinola, after a most memorable Siege, which alone would fill a Volume, on Breda taken. the 2d of June, made himself Master of Breda in Brabant. At Madrid the Inquisition, upon the 21st and 22d days of July, burnt Benedict Ferrer and Reginald de Peralta, both Hereticks. The City S. Salvador, and Baya de Todos Santos Brasil, being taken by the Hollanders, Brasil re∣covered. as has been said; his Majesty ordered his Fleet to put to Sea under the Command of D. Frederick de Toledo. This Fleet consisted of Castillians, Portugueses, and Neopolitans, who soon expelled the Rebels that Province. Notwithstanding the Peace with England, above 100 Sail of English appeared before Cadiz. They landed some Men, but lost most of them, to∣gether with their Reputation. The wonderful Bell of Villilla in Aragon rung of it self this Year on the 28th of August, threatning some great Misfortune to ensue. May the 17th at Valladolid the Cardinal Duke of Lerma departed this Life. A Man gracious in the height of his Fortune, and nothing de∣jected in his greatest Adversity. F. John de Mariana, of the Society of Jesus, born at Tala∣vera de la Reyna, who writ the History of Spain, to which this Supplement is added, changed this Life for a better, at the Age of 92 years, having eternized his Memory in his admirable Works. Anno 1626. His Majesty went from Madrid to hold the Cortes of Aragon, Valencia, and Catalonia; Cortes of Aragon. and having some business there, so many Affairs were at once taken in hand, that the King returned to Madrid without doing any thing. There, May the 29th, Francis Barberino, the Pope's Nephew and Legate, made his Entry, and was nobly entertained by the King, to ex∣press how much he honoured such a Guest. The Floods were so great in January, that extraordinary Harm was done, particularly at Floods. Sevil and Salamanca, the Rivers Guadalquivir and Tormes, drowning those Cities. It was pro∣posed to marry the Princess Mary of Austria to Ferdinand the 3d Emperor, and King of Hun∣gary. This Year also was the Conference of Monçon between the Commissioners of France and Spain, for reconciling the Differences about Valtolina. Count Tilli, the Imperial General, obtained a most notable Victory over the King of Denmark, upon the 27th of August. Anno 1627. The Catholick Religion at this time began to spread in China. In Japan the Persecution Persecuti∣on in Ja∣pan. continued extreamly severe, without sparing Sex or Age. This Year 10 Jesuits suffered Martyrdom, being burnt with a slow Fire after they had been long kept in Prison. But these Cruelties no way deterred those Fathers from repairing thither from sundry parts for the good of that People, and Propagation of the Faith. The Emperor having been of late successful in his Wars, published an Edict at Prague, the Capital of Bohemia, commanding all that were not of the Catholick Religion, either to con∣form, or depart the Kingdom within 6 Months. A certain Youth well born, but very leud, at Molsleim in Alsace, obliged himself to the Devil by a Note under his hand to be his at the end of 7 years, so he might obtain all he desired in the mean time; he also bound himself to read no pious Books. But God touching his Heart, he put himself into the hands of the Jesuits of that City, by whose means he was delivered, and the Devil obliged to restore both Obligations. Anno 1628. This Year was remarkable for the Siege of Cazal, layed by D. Gonçalo de Cordova; as also for that Peter Petrin, a Dutch Pyrat, seized the Fleet that lay in the Port of Matanças, without Cazal be∣sieged. any opposition. Certain Dutch Ships entred the River between Guequil, and the Island Puna in America; and landing in their Long-boats some Men, and 3 Pieces of Canon, began to batter the City Jayaqui, and fired the Suburbs, where they killed 11 of our Men; but were forced to retire, having lost 80 of their Men, 3 Boats, and leaving behind the 3 Pieces of Canon. Thence they went over to the Island Puna, in which is a small Town of the Indians. There they found a Friar of the Mercenarians, who was left to instruct the Indians. Having laid hold of him, one of them said; This Man every day eats his God, let us take him out of his Belly. Which said, they ripped him up from the Belly to the Throat, and pulled out his Heart. This Year a Proclamation was set forth for lessening the Value of the Copper-money. At Arjona, a Town of note in the Bishoprick of Jaen, were discovered many Skulls, and other Bones of Men, and about them Ashes, Coles, Tiles, Stones, and Chains of Iron. These were supposed to be the Bodies of the Saints Bonosus and Maximianus, who suffer'd Martyr∣dom in that Town in the Year 301, as also those of the Martyrs Apollo, Isacius, Crotas, and
others. Much Blood was seen to flow from those dry Bones, the Sent of them was charm∣ing, and many things supernatural have been done by them. Anno 1629. On the 17th of October the Queen was delivered of a Prince, who being Baptized by Cardi∣nal Zapata, was called Balthasar Charles Dominick. This Prince lived till the 1646, when it Birth of P. Baltha∣sar. pleased God to carry him to a better Life, depriving Spain of the great hopes it had con∣ceived of his excellent Qualities. Luis the 13th, the most Christian King of France, after he had restored the Church to its Possessions in the Province of Bearne, this Year ordered that Catholicks should preside in the Courts and Parliament at Pau. The first President by him appointed was Monsieur de la Marc, a famous Civilian, and great Historian. The said King, after he had secured Rochel and Montauban, having a Victorious Army in a readiness, resolved to turn it against the King of Spain. To this purpose he agreed with the Duke of Savoy to raise the Siege of Ca∣zal. The Marquis Spinola had distressed that Place, when the French Army surmounting many Difficulties, came before it. A Nuncio at the same time coming thither from the Pope, and the Marquis dying, nothing was done till the ensuing Year. Anno 1630. This Year the Order of the Regular Clergy, called the Theatines, was first founded in the City Zaragoza, by the pious and devout Placidus Mirtus. Theatines in Spain. At this time the joint Forces of the Emperor and Catholick King, were victorious over the Venetians, and over-run their Territories. Mantua was plundered, and Cazal so streightly be∣sieged, that if the pressing Instances of the King of France had not prevailed for a Peace, it had War in Italy. doubtless been reduced to very great streights. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, upon pretence of restoring the Palatin, and Duke of Mecklenburg, and re-establishing the former Liberty of the Circles of Ʋpper and Lower Saxony, Gustavus Adolphus. declared War against the Emperor, and invaded the Island of Riga. The Emperor solemn∣ly declared him an Enemy to the Empire. Pope Ʋrban the 8th ordained, that the Cardinals should for the future have the Title of most Eminent, whereas before they were stiled most Illustrious. King Philip, with his Brothers Charles and Ferdinand, accompanied his Sister the Queen of Hungary as far as Zaragoça on her way, as she was going to be married to the then King of the Romans. From Zaragoça his Majesty, with his Brothers, returned to Madrid, and the Queen of Hungary continued her Journey to Barcelona. D. Ferdinand Mascarenas, Governour of Tangier, obtained a notable Victory over the Moores of Morocco. Pope Ʋrban beatified John of God, the Father of the Poor. Anno 1631. The French having before possessed themselves of the Valley of Valtolina, between the Grisons and Milan, and of Pignerol and other places in Italy, now entred Lorain. All this French in Lorain. Country they brought under their Obedience, Charles the Duke, and his Brothers, being forced to fly, and the Dutchess made a Prisoner. Their chief Design was to hinder any Supplies being sent to the Emperor against Gustavus Adolphus, and to be revenged of the Duke, who refused to enter into the League the French had made with Sweden. The Hollanders gaping after the rich Trade of Brasil, set out a Fleet commanded by Henry Pernam∣buco taken by the Dutch. Lonck; who arriving at Pernambuco, had that Place delivered to him by the Governor Ma∣thias de Albuquerque, he being wholly unprovided to make any resistance. Above 80 Persons of all sorts, and among them 4 that had newly taken the Habit of S. Au∣gustin, suffered Martyrdom at Nangasaqui in Japan. Anno 1632. On the 4th of July the Inquisitor General, Cardinal Antony Zapata presiding, and both their Majesties being present, Judgment was given by the Inquisition against 7 perfidious Jews, who renewed the Passion of our Saviour in his Image. These 7 were burnt alive, and 4 in Effigie, besides others that suffered other Punishments. This Year began the Conversion of the Chaldeans at the City Baçora, by the means of an Augustin Friar, so successfully that all those ignorant People called the Christians of S. John, Conversi∣on of Chal∣deans. submitted themselves to the Pope, giving it under their hands, and sending the Instrument by F. Roderick of S. Michael, his Preacher, whom the Pope received with incredible Joy. In the time of Pope Clement the 5th, and Philip the 3d King of Spain, F. Alexius de Meneses, of the Order of S. Augustin, Archbishop of Goa, and Primate of India, had reduced Multitudes of the Nestorians of that Country, and afterwards himself instructed and baptized above 14000 Gentiles in those same parts. The Count de Lin̄ares, Viceroy of India, understanding that the King of Mombaça had re∣volted and killed many Portugueses, besides that being a Christian he had renounced the Faith, sent Francis de Mora with a Fleet of 20 Sail; who recovered the Fort, the King and his People abandoning of it.
Prince Balthasar Charles was sworn Heir to the Crown, March the 7th. at the Church of S. Hierome in Madrid, there being present the Prelates, Nobility, and Commonalty, as is the Custom upon the like Occasions. Monday the 7th. of July a Fire broke out in the quarter of the Butchery of the Market∣place A Fire at Madrid. of Madrid; It raged so vehemently, that after 33 Houses great and small were burnt, it was look'd upon as a miracle that it could be stopped. Some People were killed, and the loss sustained was very great. Prince Charles, Brother to the King and Prince Cardinal, died at Madrid the 3d. of July in the prime of his Years, and with him the great hopes conceived of his Excellent Qualities. Upon the 7th. of October the Marquis de Flores Davila, Governour and Captain-General of Oran, fought a great Battel with the Moores call'd Benarages, who live at the Mouth of the River Zahara, 20 Leagues from that City. The King at the request of the Princess of Flanders, appointed the Prince Cardinal Fer∣dinand Governour of the Low Countries, and accompanied him to Barcelona, where he took Ship, and passing over to Italy came to Milan on the 24th. of May 1633. The Catholick Imperial Army, and that of the Protestants under Gustavus Adolphus Gustavus Adolphus kill'd. King of Sweden, fought a most bloody Battel two Miles from Lipstat, in which both the King and Papenheim the Imperial General were killed; and tho the Advantage was not great on either side, the Swedes marching off by Night granted the Victory to the Im∣perialists. Anno 1633. The most Illustrious Princess Elizabeth Clare Eugenia, Governess of the Low Countries, Death of the Prin∣cess Go∣verness of Flanders. departed this Life at Brussells on the 1st. day of December, at the Age of 67 Years. She was a Lady of singular Piety, and of an Heroick Spirit. Charles Duke of Lorrain, General of the Catholick League, was very successful in Al∣sace. Count Mathias Galassus obtained several Victories in Silesia, and the Spaniards took some Places in the Archbishoprick of Cologne. A Treaty of Peace between the Em∣peror and Duke of Saxony was began by means of the King of Denmark and the Landtgrave of Hesse Darmstat, but it sorted no effect, the Rebels being too obstinate. The Duke of Feria entring Alsace with a powerful Army, raised the Siege of Constance, Duke of Feria in Alsace. recover'd Valdutz, took Laufenburg and Rhinfelt, and reliev'd Brisac, a place of great im∣portance to the House of Austria, for securing the Communication between Flanders and Italy. He passed the Alps with his Army in December, an Action surprising and even asto∣nishing at that Season of the Year. All this Year the success of the War continued dubious, Victory sometimes inclining to the one side, and sometimes to the other. Mary of Austria Queen of Hungary was de∣liver'd of a Prince call'd Ferdinand Francis. The Archduke Ferdinand Charles, Earl of Tyrol, stood Godfather for his Catholick Majesty. At Madrid on the 5th. of July died the most serene Princess Sister Margaret of the Cross, in the Monastery of the Poor Clares, where she had lived many Years with singular Piety and Virtue. F. John de Parma her Confessor writ her Life. Anno 1634. This Year began Unfortunate to the Emperor and Catholick King; a presage of their Losses was the death of the Duke de Feria, which happen'd the 11th. of January at Mu∣nich, the Court of Bavaria. Immediately upon the death of the Duke the command of his Army was given to Count John Cervellon, by the most Serene Cardinal Prince of Spain, Fer∣dinand of Austria, who then resided at Milan, Superintendent and Vicar-General of Italy. This Army consisted of 10000 Foot and 2000 Horse, most of them Spaniards. This Year the Emperor was inform'd by some of his chief Officers, that Albertus Wal∣lestein, Wallestein Executed. Duke of Fridland, his Generalissimo, had conspir'd to debauch the Army, and rise in Rebellion against him. The principal Men that made this Discovery were Count Pico∣lomini, Galassius, Aldringerius, and Coloredius. Upon their private Information the Em∣peror call'd his Cabinet Council, where it was resolv'd that Orders should be sent to the most Loyal Commanders in the Army to apprehend the Duke of Fridland, or in case they could not to kill him before the design was reveal'd. Accordingly he was invited to a Supper, and there put to death by the Officers of the Irish Regiments then in the Em∣peror's Service. The two Ferdinands, the King of Hungary and the Cardinal, joining their Forces laid Siege to Nordlingen, and the Enemy under the command of Count Gustavus Horn coming to the relief of that City, overthrew them with a great slaughter, after an obstinate Fight which lasted six hours. At Tortosa, March the 6th, Mary Ortego, Wife to John Xinto, both Inhabitants of Al∣mun̄ia in Aragon, was deliver'd in the Hospital, of a Female Child with two Heads, both Monstrous Birth. very beautiful, 3 hands and 3 feet, and 8 fingers and toes upon one of the hands and feet. This Creature lived half an hour and was Baptized.
Anno. 1635. The most Christian King this Year declar'd War against Spain and the House of Austria, War be∣twixt Fra. and Spain. publishing his Manifesto, containing his Reasons for this Breach. His Forces joining with the Hollanders took Tirlemont. Besides he possessed himself of several Places among the Grisons, to cut off the Communication between Italy and Germany. Pignerol also he seiz∣ed, by corrupting the Governour, and so open'd to himself a Passage to Susa. These and other the like Hostilities oblig'd his Catholick Majesty to declare War upon the 27th. of June. The Renown'd Marquis of Aytona died in Flanders, August the 10th. The Dunkirk Pri∣vateers took this Year many Prizes of the Hollanders. The Emperor's good Fortune was much forwarded by the Peace he concluded with the Elector of Saxony, with exclusion to all other Sects, except the Professors of the Ausburg Confession. Soon after the Arch∣dutchess Mary-Ann of Austria, the Emperor's eldest Daughter, was with great Solemnity at Vienna Married to Maximilian Elector of Bavaria, her Unkle. The most renown'd Spanish Poet, Lope Felix de Vega Carpio, died at Madrid where he was born, upon the 28th. day of August. He was the greatest Poet of his Time, writ more and better than any before him, and must be allow'd the Honour of his Country, having merited so much Fame abroad. Anno 1636. The French King having, as was said in the last Year, broke the Peace with Spain, ma∣ny learned-Pens writ in Vindication of the Catholick King's Proceedings, referring the Judgment of his Cause to the Pope; which Writings were at Paris burnt by the hands of the common Hangman. The Emperor made the greatest force he could to join with that of Spain in the Low Countries, and both together enter'd into Picardy under the command of the most Serene Prince Cardinal Ferdinand, with whom were Prince Thomas Francis of Savoy, Charles Duke of Lorrain, John Count Nassau, and Octavius Picolomini. They took Spaniards take Towns in Picardy. la Chapelle, Chates, Vervins and Noyon, obliging the French for the Security of the Coun∣try to break down all the Bridges upon the Rivers Oyse and Aysne as far as S. Clou. They had also Corbie deliver'd to them by the Count de Soyecourt. This Success of the Spanish Forces obliged the French to call the Prince of Conde, the Cardinal de la Valette and Duke of Weymar out of Alsace, leaving that Country exposed to the King of Hungary and Count Galassius. At the same time the Marquis of Grana so pressed the Landtgrave of Hesse, that he was forced to retire to take Protection of the Hollanders. Mean while the Forces of Spain, by the way of Guipuzcoa, broke into the Province of Guienne, where they possessed themselves of Andaye, Orugne, Siboure, and S. Jean de Luz, Places in Guienne taken. as also of the Port and Fortress of Zocoa. D. John Alonso Enriquez de Cabrera, Admiral of Castile and Captain-General of the Provinces of Old Castile; and D. Francis de Irracaval, Marquis of Valparaiso and Viceroy of Navarre, in his Majesty's Name publish'd a Manifesto, containing the Reasons that mov'd him to make these Incursions. The Cardinal Richlieu had perswaded the King and People, that the Forces of Spain and the Empire were so inconsiderable, the War would be kept out of the Kingdom, and al∣ways upon the Enemies Country. Now they found much the contrary, being forc'd to quit Milan and the Valley of Valtelina, and still retiring every where to leave a great part of their Kingdom exposed to their Enemies. Several Princes who were under the Pro∣tection of France, having had their Countries wasted, to prevent their utter Destruction have been forced to declare against that Crown. A Report being spread that Count Ga∣lassius was entring the Province of Bassigni with 25000 Men, and that 14000 were marching from Silesia, besides 12000 Polish Horse had-passed the Rhine; the Nobility not thinking themselves safe at Paris, removed the best of their Goods to Havre de Grace. See∣ing all things fall out far otherwise than he had expected, the Cardinal laid the blame upon the Governours of the Places that had been lost, declaring them Traytors, and accusing F. Joseph of Paris, a Capucin his great confident, of feeding him with false Intelligence from the Turks, Moores, and Protestants. The News of the Election of Ferdinand the Third, King of the Romans, was brought to Spain by D. Philip Ladron de Guevara, Son to the Count de On̄ate His Majesty's Embas∣sador Extraordinary in Germany, and upon it all imaginable demonstrations of Joy were made at Court. At Valladolid upon Monday the 4th. of February in the Morning, began a violent Storm of Wind and Rain, which lasted without intermission 48 hours, and so swelled the Rivers Storm of Wind and Rain. Pisuerga and Esgueva, that the Water rose two Fathom above the top of the great Bridge, and carried away three Arches of it, overthrowing half the Houses of that City. Had not the Court remov'd from thence some Years before, there might have been a most considerable Loss of the best of Spain. Anno 1637. The French alarm'd by the Prince Cardinal's invading Picardy the last Year, taking seve∣ral of their Towns and ravaging the Country, raised all the Power of that Kingdom to
the number of 100000 fighting Men. They stirred up the Danes and Dutch with their Fleets to scoure the Seas, and the Turks, Swedes and Transilvanians to give a Diversion to the Emperor. Luis the XIII. King of France, the last Year fitted out a Fleet of 100 sail, which set out of the Port of Toulon the 9th. of February, when the 44 Galleys commanded by the Marquis de Villafranca, and the Galleons under D. Antony de Oquendo were retired into their Ports. Twenty two of their great Ships enter'd the Port of Oristan in Sardinia, saluting the Fort with three Guns. This gave the alarm to the City, whence an Express was sent to Caller to carry the News. Soon after they understood the Enemy had landed 8000 Men, which obliged those people with all speed to gather what force they could. They behaved Defeat of the French in Sardi∣nia. themselves with such bravery that being but 900 Horse, they killed 700 French, took 36 Prisoners, and wounded many, among whom was the General. Some Field Pieces were taken, all the booty they had gather'd recover'd, and they retired so hastily that they left behind a great quantity of Ammunition, and above 700 Arms. Of the Sardinians only three were kill'd and five wounded, and had not the French retired as they did, they had all perish'd, being inclosed by the Country People. D. Lope de Hozes sailing with 8 Ships towards Rochel, was forced to lie by, the Wind Ships ta∣ken. being contrary; as he lay thus he discover'd a French Ship which he took. Next day he discover'd 5 sail, and having fetch'd them up began to play his Cannon, but they present∣ly struck and were taken, being loaded with Corn. This done, with 6 Prizes he steer'd his Course towards the Isle of Ree, where he had Intelligence several French and Dutch Ships lay: By break of day he discover'd them, and tho he had put up Dutch Colours they soon discover'd the Deceit and made away to Sea. D. Lope made all the sail he could after them, firing his Cannon upon them and sending out his Long-boats, continued the pursuit till night. There being nothing more to do he return'd to Corun̄a, having whilst he was out burnt 9 of the Enemies Ships, sunk 6, and taken 12 from 200 to 350 Tuns each, and loaden with Oil, Wine, Salt, and Whale-Oil. The Galleys of Naples and Sicily took 10 Dutch Ships in the Mediterranean, and the Dunkerkers carried home many Prizes. In June the French with a powerful Army entred the Low-Countries by the way of Landresi taken by the French. Cambray and Mons, plundering and destroying all the open Country. That done they laid Siege to Landresi, and after a vigorous defence made by the Town became Masters of it. The Prince Cardinal was then employ'd against the Prince of Orange; but when he had recover'd Venlo and Ruremond, he turn'd his Forces against the French, and suffer'd much in his march through Hainault, the Enemy having left all that Country deso∣late. The Troubles in Italy caused by the Duke of Savoy joining in League with the French still Marquis de Leganez in Savoy. continued, which obliged the Marquis de Leganes, Governor of Milan, to take the Field in June, with an Army of 16000 Foot and 5000 Horse. His first Exploit was the taking of Niza de la Palla in Montserrat. After this he laid Siege to the Fortress of Bren, and Mon∣sieur de Crequi coming to the Relief of the place was killed with a Musket-Ball, whereupon the place soon surrendred. The French understanding that the Count de Monterrey was about going from Naples, and that his Equipage was aboard certain Ships of Naples, fitted out 14 Men of War, and lay in wait for them on the Coast of Monaco. A violent Storm drove them over to Ar∣giers, where they were received as Friends; but demanding to have the French that were Captives there deliver'd to them, and being refused, they took the Turkish Governour that was returning to Constantinople, and a Judge, and carried them away. The Al∣geirines fitting out 8 Galleys fell upon a Port hard by, where the French traded, and sur∣prizing them carried away the Vessels and 600 Prisoners. The Duke of Medina de las Torres succeeded the Count de Monterrey in the Govern∣ment of Naples, which he managed with great Applause, and the general good-liking of that people. The Pope was taken with a Palsey, which together with his great Age it was thought by the Physicians would soon bring him to his end. The Cardinals hereupon began to resort to Rome, but his Holiness recover'd in a manner almost miraculous, and upon S. Peter's Day gave Audience to the Marquis of Castel Rodrigo, the Spanish Embassador, re∣ceiving of him the Hacaney in acknowledgment for the Kingdom of Naples. This Pope after adding some Saints to the Calendar, corrected the Breviary, and many Hymns before used that were of an uncouth Stile. The Duke of Savoy died in the Field on the 11th. of October, leaving the Dutchess his Dukes of Savoy and Mantua die. Wife Governess of his Dominions and Children. The Duke of Mantua was before dead the 17th. of September, leaving his Grand-Children his Heirs, under Tuition of the Dutchess their Mother. The same day departed this Life D. Peter de Contreras, who had been Mi∣nister of State under the three Philips, having lived 81 Years with such general good-liking of all Men, that no blemish was ever laid upon him. Tho last mention'd, the first in Time and Magesty that changed this Life for a better was the Emperor Ferdinand the II. at the Age of 59 Years, and having Reigned 18.
The Duke of Nochera at the beginning of the Spring was sent Captain-General into Na∣varre. Commo∣tions in Portugal. He having taken several places on the Fontiers of France, and wasted all the open Country, was called thence and order'd to march towards Portugal, where there began some Commotions, yet those being appeased for the present, he received a fresh Command to halt, which had been much better never sent or not obey'd. Eight Embassadors from the Leagues of the Grisons came to Madrid the 28th of October, and were most splendidly entertain'd by his Majesty's Order. About the beginning of May this Year a pestilential Disease first took footing at Ma∣laga, and raged violently for about 40 days, of which people died in a few hours with∣out finding any benefit by Medicines. above 10000 are said to have perished. Anno 1638. The Prince Cardinal march'd with his Army against the Hollanders, who lay at the Dutch rou∣ted. Siege of Calloo near Antwerp, and falling upon them before they could fortifie themselves, put them to the rout with great slaughter. There were taken 2500 Private Soldiers, two Colonels, two Lieutenant-Generals, 24 Captains of Foot, two Captains of Horse, 2 Stan∣dards, 50 Colours, 28 pieces of Cannon, and 81 Barques. Prince Thomas of Savoy on the other side with the same Fortune overthrew the French French twice over thrown. who lay at the Siege of S. Omer, under the Command of Monsieur Chastillon. The Prince of Conde with an Army of 20000 Foot and 2000 Horse march'd to lay Siege to Fuenterabia, which accordingly he did the 4th. of July, having defeated such Forces of the Country as offer'd to oppose him. On the 14th. of July the Admiral of Castile set out from Madrid, sending advice to D. Michael Perez de Exea, Governour of Fuenterabia, that he would relieve him with all speed. Several great Barques being provided under the command of D. Alonso Idiaquez to put in the Relief; the Archbishop of Bourdeaux came with a Fleet of 37 sail and prevented it. August the 8th. a salley was made with some loss to the Enemy, and no less to the besieged, the Governour being killed by a Musket-shot as he stood upon the Wall. Dominick de Eguia succeeded him in the command, and all Men continued resolute to hold out. The 22th. the Marquis de los Velez joined the Ad∣miral. The same day the Archbishop of Bourdeaux attack'd D. Lope de Hozes, and burnt his 12 Ships. The 30th. the Prince of Conde sent a threatning Message to the Governour, to tell him, unless he surrendred he must expect no Quarters, but his Menaces were made no account of. The 1st. day of September he sprung a Mine which made a breach of 22 foot in length. The Admiral on the 7th. attack'd the Enemy in their Works with such bravery that he put them to flight. 1500 Foot were killed and 2000 drowned: They left behind them 23 Pieces of Cannon, 54 Colours, all their Baggage, Ammunition, Provi∣sions, Money and Papers. The number of Prisoners amounted to 2000. The Admiral marched into the Town over the Breach, and commended the People who had held out a Siege of 69 days, in which time 1700 French were killed, and of the Defendants 300. The Queen was deliver'd at Madrid on the 20th. of September of a Princess, who was baptized October the 7th. and called Mary. The Duke of Modena and the Princess of Ca∣rignan being Godfather and Godmother. D. Charles Ibarra coming with 7 Galleons of Plate, was twice attack'd by 17 sail of Hollanders, and after he had defended himself till all his Powder was spent, he caused at Night each Galleon to carry a light, and his own two, which the Enemy perceiving left him. Count Maurice of Nassau arrived at Brasil with 60 sail, 6000 fighting Men, and 30 Pieces of Cannon, with which he attempted the City Bahia, but met such a brave resistance that after he had made above 1500 shot and lost 800 of his Men, he was forc'd to draw off. On the 26th. of June happen'd that wonderful Earthquake in the Tercera Islands, and An Earth∣quake. particularly that of S. Michael, the chiefest of them, which threw up in the midst of the Sea an Island a League and a half in length, and 60 Fathom in heigth, there being 150 Fathom Water in that place. Above 100 Cart loads of Fish were cast upon the shore. Anno 1639. Prince Thomas of Savoy had leave granted him to go from Flanders into Italy, where with the Marquis of Leganez he took some Forts. D. Martin de Aragon taking a view of Salçeto was killed, which was a great loss. A Cessation of Arms was concluded in Pied∣mont. The Prince of Conde with an Army of 20000 Foot and 4000 Horse broke into the Roussillon invaded by the French. County of Rousillon, and took the Castle of Opoli. He laid Siege to Salsas, which after 40 days was surrendred. Our Forces immediately sate down before the same place in which Monsieur d' Espignan was Governour for the Most Christian King. The French 3 times attack'd our Works with incredible bravery, but were always repulsed.
Anno 1640. December the 23d, the Governor articled to surrender the Place on the 6th of January if not relieved, and accordingly marched out that day with Drums beating, Colours flying, two Pieces of Cannon, and all other honourable Demonstrations. This Year the Catalonians, being debauched from their Allegiance, did not answer the Ex∣pectation Catalonia rebels, Portugal follows the Exam∣ple. conceived of them for opposing of the French. Soon after they broke out into open Rebellion; and the mutinous Rabble of Barcelona forc'd the Count de Sancta Coloma, their Vice∣roy, to fly from his Palace to the Ship-yards, thinking to imbark himself there, if speedy Death had not prevented him. Great were the Tumults and Disorders in that City, to endeavour to appease which the King sent the Duke of Segorbe and Cardona thither, with Orders to use all imaginable fair means. The Duke tho sickly, immediately set forward, and came to Barcelona; where understanding that at Perpignan the Catalonians had been at blows with the Garison, he hasted thither. Having partly composed those Affairs, his Sickness so uncreased, that on the 22d of July he gave up the Ghost, to the unspeakable harm of that Country; for soon after the French made themselves Masters of Barcelona, and his Majesty was obliged to send thi∣ther the Marquis de los Velez, with a great Power. This Flame which first broke out in Catalonia, presently spread into Portugal; which Na∣tion unanimously rising, proclaimed John Duke of Bragança King, having spread a general Cry against Evil Ministers, and particularly against Michael de Vasconcellos, whom they mur∣der'd in the Pallace on the first day of December. Anno 1641. The Catalonians having fortified Lerida, contrived to lay Siege to Tarragona. They pos∣sessed themselves of the Pass of Col de Valaguer, and intrenched. The Archbishop of Bour∣deaux The French join with the Rebels. came before it by Sea with a good Fleet; so that the Spaniards within being reduced to great Extremities, muttered against their Governor; yet hoping for Relief to be sent them by Sea, they held out till they eat Mice. The Duke of Fernandina had the Charge of the Succour, and the Duke de Maqueda commanded the Ships that carried it. Much of the Expectation conceived of this Fleet vanished, the French Fleet retiring, but the City was re∣lieved the 20th of August. The Marquis of Mortara was besieged in Colibre by the French and Catalonians; and ha∣ving defended himself with much Bravery, there being no hopes of relief, was obliged to surrender. This done, the Enemy laid Siege to Perpignan. His Majesty ordered a Fleet to be fitted out at Cadiz to succour the Place, and in the mean time commanded the Marquis of Po∣bar to try his Fortune with 2500 Horse, who were all unfortunately lost without Fighting, and the Marquis made Prisoner. This Year on the 9th of October, to the great Regret of all Spain, died the most Serene Prince Ferdinand of Austria, Brother to King Philip. He was in his Youth created Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, and afterwards Governor and Captain General of the Low Coun∣tries. He was but 31 Years and a half old when he departed this Life, but lives for ever in the Fame of the many Victories he obtained. Pope Ʋrban the 8th this Year created at once 14 Car∣dinals. Anno 1642. King Philip being in care for the Affairs of Catalonia, and desiring to reduce his Subjects in that Province, calling together the Nobility, went away to Zaragoça in the beginning of April. Mean while the Fleet set out from Cadiz, commanded by the Duke of Cuidadreal; and having met, and engaged the French Fleet, a sudden Storm arising dispersed it. This and Perpignan taken by the French the Impossibility of relieving Perpignan by Land, obliged the Marquis de Flores Davila, Go∣vernor there, to surrender upon honourable Terms, after the Town had suffered extreamly through want of Provisions. This was a considerable loss, Perpignan being the best Fortress in Catalonia against the French. The main Body of our Army having taken the Posts about Lerida in order to besiege it, Monsieur de la Motte with the French Forces, marched to the Relief of the Place; but the Marquis de Leganez attacked and forced him to retire, leaving behind him 3 Pieces of Can∣non. The Rains were so excessive about Sevill at the beginning of this Year, that the River swelled above its Banks, and the Inundation was so great, that all the Shores being stop∣ped, Great Floods. as is usual upon the like Occasions, the City was filled with the Rain. From the 17th till the 26th of January, the River never fell, nor were the Shores opened. This Flood was greater than that in the Year 1625. All Triana, and the Quarters of S. Bernard, and S. Rocque were drowned, so was that of Santelmo, the Convent of S. James and S. Sebastian, and other Neighbouring Places, yet no body perished; for the Chapter of the Cathedral gave every day the value of 2500 Ducats in Bread, besides other Charity, to relieve those that had suffered by the Inundation. The Mole, Bridge, and all the Boats were carried away. Anno 1643. Luis the 13th, the most Christian King of France, departed this Life May the 14th.
King Philip having setled the Affairs of his Court, set out again for Catalonia. Mean while the Duke and Count of Olivares, with his Majesty's leave, whose great Favourite he had been, quitted the Government he had long managed, and retired to Loeches, a Monastery of Descalced Dominican Nuns, founded by himself; where he stayed till his Removal to Toro, in which place he setled with his Wife and Family till he died. The City of Lerida taken by Monsieur de la Motte, General of the French Army, was a long Lerida re∣covered. time besieged by the Forces of the Catholick King, till the Enemy after an obstinate Defence was compelled by extream Famine to deliver it to his Majesty, who in Person took Possession of that Place to the great Joy of the Inhabitants for being restored to their lawful Soveraign. Anno 1644. Pope Ʋrban the 8th died the 29th of July, having sat in S. Peter's Chair 21 Years. Inno∣cent the 10th was chosen to succeed him, on the 15th of September. The most renowned Elizabeth of Bourbon Queen of Spain, deceased October the 6th, to the Elizabeth Q. of Spain dies. unspeakable Grief of these Kingdoms, and particularly of the Catholick King her Husband. Her Exequies were most solemnly performed in the Monastery of S. Hierom in Madrid, and in all Cities of France and Spain. She was a Princess of singular Wisdom and Judgment in matter of Government, and had by his Majesty 5 Daughters and one Son, which was Prince Baltha∣sar Charles. King Philip the 4th returned to Zaragoça, where the Prince was sworn Heir of that King∣dom, and took an Oath to preserve their Priviledges. On the 22d of July at Toro died the Duke and Count of Olivares, and was buried in the Monastery of Nuns he had built at Loeches. He also founded the Pallace called Buenretiro at Madrid, for the Diversion of the Kings. D. Luis de Haro was his Heir. Him the King sent to the Provinces of Andaluzia to obtain of them a Supply of Money, which they granted with extraordinary Liberality. The Cortes of Aragon being summoned to meet at Zaragoça in September, the King took his Cortes of Aragon & Valencia. way thither with the Prince; and having opened the Cortes, left the Bishop of Malaga to pre∣side there, and went away himself with the Prince to Valencia. There also the Cortes of that Kingdom were assembled, and swore the Prince Heir, the King honouring several Noble Fa∣milies with Titles, and other Demonstrations of his Affection. On the 4th of December his Ma∣jesty returned to Madrid, and issued his Writs for the Cortes to meet at Madrid the 22d of Fe∣bruary. Cardinal Borja having taken Possession of the Archbishoprick of Toledo, and being consti∣tuted President of the Council of Aragon, died of the Gout at Madrid the 28th of December, and was buried in his own Cathedral. The Cardinal Sandoval, then Bishop of Jaen, was by the King appointed to succeed him; and he positively refusing that Honour three several times, his Majesty prevailed with the Pope to lay his positive Commands upon him, to which he was forced to submit. Few such Prelates are now adays to be found. The Plate Fleet arrived in good time, and very rich, tho there hapned great Storms, and above 30 Ships of Strangers were cast away. This was the severest Winter that for many years had been seen in Spain, or in all Europe. A hard Winter. For above 60 days the Sun never shined out, mighty Snows fell, Rivers swelled, and the Frost was great; so that the Roads were for a time shut up to the great hindrance of Trade. It was observed that a great number of Frenchmen came to Burgos in the Habit of Pilgrims, on pretence of going to Santiago; but as it appeared, designing under that disguise to get into Portugal. Expresses were sent about to apprehend them all, and above 90 were sent Prisoners to Madrid. Anno 1645. February the 22d the Cortes of Castile, according to Summons, met at Madrid; and the Cortes of Castile. King, as is usual, having assisted in Person at the opening thereof, and recommended to them the Care of the Kingdom, referred them to the President, who was to continue at all their Sessions in his Name. The Marquis de Leganez was sent with a considerable body of Horse and Foot to command Olivença taken from the Portugue∣ses. as Captain-General in the Province of Estremadura, against the Portugueses. With him went the Marquis Molinguen, General of Horse. They in several Skirmishes worsted the Enemy, pursuing them into their own Borders, and bringing thence considerable Booties of Cattel, and a great number of Prisoners. After this the Marquis considering how prejudicial to our Affairs the Fort and Bridge of Olivença were, being upon the River Guadiana, and cutting off our Convoys of Provisions that were to march on this side the River. He marched thither with 6000 Foot, 2000 Horse, and 3 Pieces of Cannon. After our Cannon was planted, and began to play, tho they in the Fort made some shot, they surrendred the first day, as did those upon the Bridge. The Fort was easily razed, but there was great difficulty in breaking the Bridge, the Matter that cemented it being harder than the Stone it self; so that tho the Foot spent 10 days working at it with Pickaxes, they must have gone away, and left it stand∣ing, had not means been found to blow it up. All the Mills on this side Guadiana that served the Neighbouring Towns, were in like manner destroyed. Mean while Intelligence being gi∣ven that the Post was coming from Lisbon to Elvas, an Officer was sent with 6 Troopers to
intercept it; by the way they took a Soldier going to Elvas to carry the News that 1800 Foot were marching to reinforce that place, and would the next morning be near Villalvin. This Intelligence was immediately carried to the Marquis Molinguen, who ha∣ving computed the time, and finding it was practicable to cut them off, sent the two Commissary Generals with 1500 Horse, and they came so opportunely, that of the 1800 Foot they killed 500 and took 200 Prisoners, 40 of whom they left by the way, be∣ing desperately wounded. Had there not been a Mountain hard by, not one of them had escaped. It was afterwards known by some Prisoners that above 350 wounded Men returned the next day to Estremoz. In Catalonia the Marquis of Mortara, General of the Spanish Forces, having suffer'd the Count de Harcour, the French Viceroy of Catalonia, who had taken Roses, to pass the River Segre in his sight, was by him in a bloody Battel overthrown and taken Prisoner, Spaniards over∣thrown in Catalonia. with 200 of his Officers most of them Men of Quality. Andrew Cantelmo with most of the Horse fled to Balaguer, whether Harcour pursued, and laying Siege to the Town took him in it. These things-moved King Philip to recal the Marquis of Leganez out of Estremadura, and send him into Catalonia with the Title of Viceroy and Captain-General of that Prin∣cipality, and the Counties of Roussillon and Cerdagne. The Marquis of Molinguen, Gene∣ral of the Horse, was left Commander in chief in Estremadura. He, to keep his Men in Action, upon Tuesday in the Holy Week sent 900 Horse in three Bodies into Portugal to wast the Country. They march'd 8 Leagues out-right, burning and destroying all the Villages and Gentlemens Houses, and brought away 1000 Head of great Cattle, and 8000 of small. King Philip having given all the necessary Orders for the opening of the Campagne, set out of Madrid on the 14th. of April with the Prince, and came to Pamplona on the 23th. of the same Month. There he was received with all the Magnificence and Demon∣strations of Duty imaginable. D. Gregory Brito, Knight of the Order of Calatrava, a Portugues, and Governor of the City Lerida, considering of how great importance it would be to remove the French out Castle of Termes ta∣ken. of the Castle of Termes, a place of such strength that they called it Petit Rochel, being six Miles distant from Lerida, and three from Balaguer, march'd on the 6th. of April at mid∣night from Lerida with a body of Foot and some Horse towards that place. Before break of day he assaulted it with such bravery, that he made himself Master of it, putting most of the Garison to the Sword. This done he order'd his Horse to advance, and fired some Guns in hopes to draw out the Garison of Balaguer, but they stirred not. In this Ca∣stle of Termes were found 1000 Muskets, 500 Suits of Armour, 10 pieces of Cannon, 10 Boats to make Bridges with the Carts to carry them, Tents to the value of 4000 Duc∣cats, a great quantity of Merchandize, and much Ammunition and Provision; this place being one of the Enemies Magazines. The French in Garrison at Balaguer thought to carry some Timber and other Materals out of the Ruins of Termes to serve in the Forfica∣tions they were raising, to which purpose they sent thither 100 Men with Mules for car∣riage, but D. Gregory Brito having notice of it circumvented the whole Party, and made them Prisoners without any bloodshed. Italy enjoy'd Peace, but was now alarm'd with the News of the mighty Maritime Prepa∣rations made by the Ottoman Emperor, which moved the Viceroys of Sicily and Naples to put themselves into the best posture of Defence they were able. The Great Master of Malta sent all over Christendom to summon all the Knights of the Order to repair to him with what Supplies they could. The Venetians also judging all those Preparations were made against them, omitted nothing that could tend to the securing of their Dominions. At last, having held all Europe in suspence, this mighty Storm fell upon the Island of Candia, where the Infidels soon made themselves Masters of the Fort S. Theodore, and the City Canea. His Holiness this Year in March created nine Cardinals. The Duke of Arcos new Vice∣roy of Naples came to Rome, where he was honourably received, and splendidly enter∣tain'd by the Pope, after which he set forward for Naples. Prince Thomas of Savoy entring some Miles into the Dukedom of Milan, possessed himself of Roca de Bejeuen, but presently retired thence and seiz'd the Castle of Pro and some Hills about it. The Marquis of Velada, Governor of Milan march'd from Mortara with 7000 Foot and 8 Pieces of Cannon. He attack'd the Enemy with such Bravery that they were drove from their places of strength, having lost 1500 of their Foot, and a∣mong them 300 Officers. Prince Maurice of Savoy died afterwards of his Wounds, and Prince Thomas his Brother received two Musket-shots. Anno 1646. Harcour, the French Viceroy in Catalonia, laid Siege to Lerida a strong and important City upon the River Segre, and the Borders of Catalonia and Aragon. Before this place he Over∣throw of the French. lay five Months, hindring all manner of Succours from being put into it. The Marquis de Leganes the Spanish General, after he had taken several small places to give a diversion
to the Enemy, and cut off some of their Convoys, finding them not quit their Enter∣prize, being joined by the Duke del Infantado, and his Army now amounting to 25000 Men, resolved to attack the French in their Trenches, which accordingly he did, and after a hot dispute put them to flight, forcing them to take shelter at Balaguer. All their Bag∣gage, Cannon, and great store of Ammunition and Provisions were taken. This Victory cost the Spaniards much Blood, being forc'd to drive the Enemy out of their Works, but the importance of relieving Lerida made amends for all. Prince Thomas of Savoy who commanded the French in Italy in May, appear'd before French in Italy. the Ports Telamon and S. Stephen with a powerful Fleet and 20000 Men. He soon made himself Master of both those places, which done he possessed all the Posts about Orbitello, where Charles de la Gata a Spaniard commanded, and laid close Siege to it. He raised several Batteries which play'd furiously upon the Town, making large breaches in the Walls, and still carried on his Works with great Labour: But the Governour was no less industrious and vigilant, still making up what the Enemies Cannon had ruin'd, and with often sallies, firing and destroying their Works. At length the Fleet of Naples came to the Relief of the Besieged, and in some Encounters with the Enemy had always the best. The Spa∣nish Forces also of Naples and Milan being joined, and approaching to the assistance of the Besieged, Prince Thomas finding his Army much diminish'd not only by the Assaults he had given, but much more by Sickness, caused by the excessive heat of the Weather, retir'd back with his Army into Piedmont. Thus after a Siege of 60 days Orbitello was de∣liver'd from danger, whereas most Men judged it could not have held out above 20. It was not long before the French retrieved this Disgrace; for their Fleet being soon refitted, returned under the Command of the Mareschal Meleraie, who possessing himself of Porto Longone in the Island Ilva, opposite to the City Plombin, with the same ease brought that City also to Subjection. The War with Partugal was not this Year carried on with any great vigour, nor any nota∣ble Action done on that side. Several Incursions were made by our Parties with good success, defeating those of the Enemy, and bringing away great Booties of Cattel. At last the Enemy with a powerful Army took the Field, designing to besiege Badajoz, and threatning the whole Province of Estremadura. All this Preparation fell to nothing, for they compassed not the razing the Fort of Telena as they intended, but retired from before it with much precipi∣tation upon the approach of the Spanish Army, leaving the Fort as they found it. In the Low Countries the Duke of Anguien with an Army of 40000 Men, took Courtray Places in the Low-Countries taken by the French. and Winoxberg, and recover'd Mardike, before surprized by the Spaniards. This done they laid Siege to Dunkirk, which had been his principal design; this place being of great importance, as the chief Port the Spaniards then resorted to, was bravely defended by the Marquis de Lede with a Garison of 4000 Men. But the Duke having a numerous Army which he no way spared, and the Hollanders with their Fleet lying before the Harbour, so that no Relief could be put into the Place, it was at last surrendred upon honourable Conditions. King Philip having made choice of D. John Enriquez de Cabrera, Great Admiral of Ca∣stile and late Viceroy of Naples, for the Embassy to Rome, to yield Obedience to Pope In∣nocent the X. he performed that Ceremony on the 28th. of April, with the greatest Pomp and Magnificence that had been seen in Rome for many Years. Balthasar Charles, Prince of Spain, and then the only Heir of the Crown, having lain Pr. Baltha∣sar dies. sick but 3 days died the 9th. of October, in the flower of his Age, to the unspeakable Grief of all these Kingdoms. Also Mary the Empress departed this Life at Lintz in Austria, leaving 3 Children. This Year the wonderful Bell of Vililla in Aragon rung of it self three times in one day, which was Monday the 30th. of April; the first time it gave 11 strokes, the second 8, and the third 7. Anno 1647. D. John of Austria living retir'd at Ocan̄a, was this Year called thence to take the D. John of Austria at Sea. command of Generalissimo by Sea: He set sail from Cadiz with a mighty Fleet, and en∣tring the Streights took a rich French Ship, which carried Presents of great value to the Queen of Portugal. At Tarragona he landed 4000 Men for the Service of Catalonia, and sail'd thence to Naples. A Deputy sent by the City Valencia to complain of certain Grievances came to the Court of Madrid, and was received by the King with all possible Demonstrations of Ho∣nour, all the Grandees and Noblemen of the Court attending him, and his House was allow'd the same Priviledges as those of Foreign Ministers. After the defeat of Monsieur de Harcour at Lerida, the Prince of Conde was constituted Prince of Conde in Catalonia. General of the French Forces in Catalonia, and coming Post to Barcelona took possession of that Command the 15th. of April. On the 12th. of May he laid Siege to Lerida, taking the same Posts that Harcour had done the Year before, and batter'd it furiously. D. Gre∣gory de Brito, that famous Portugues, was then Governor of that City, who defended it with much bravery, making several sallies in which he kill'd many of the Enemy, and took several Prisoners. On the 18th. of June the Prince of Conde by night raised his Siege,
and march'd over the River Noguera, to a place called Las Horcas de Lerida. Next day a supply of 1000 Foot with Ammunition and Provisions was put into the City. The Mar∣quis de Aytona march'd with an Army of 12000 Foot and 3500 Horse against the Prince of Conde, who being too weak to oppose him, dispers'd his Forces into the strong Garisons, expecting new supplies from France The Constable of Castile, Governour of Milan, took Niza de la Palla, Alva, and other Montfer∣rat inva∣ded by the Spaniards. places in Montferrat, ravaging the Country, and driving the French into their Places of strength. The Duke of Arcos, Viceroy of Naples, sent him 2500 Men in 12 Galleys, commanded by Janetin Doria. He landed these Forces at Final, and in his return to Na∣ples discovering the French Fleet, consisting of 25 Men of War, 8 Fireships and 13 Gal∣leys, he retired into Savona, a Port of the Genoeses, whether the French Fleet pursued, threatning to burn all our Galleys unless they surrendred. The Governour of Savona sent to the French Admiral, to let him know if he fired a Shot, he would answer with all the Guns of the City, which made the French lie still, till hearing that the Spanish Fleet was coming they retir'd to Toulon. In the Low Countries nothing considerable was done this Year, the French appear'd about Antwerp, and thence moved to Oudenard without attempting any thing of moment. A Truce was concluded with the Hollanders, and proclaim'd at the Hague, so that a free Truce with Hol∣land. Trade was re-establish'd between them and the Spanish Provinces. After the Archduke Leopold had taken upon him the Government of the Low Countries, he assembled all his Forces, and took from the French Armentiers, Landresi, and several other Places of less Note. In June the Articles of Marriage betwixt King Philip and the Archdutchess Mary Anne, Eldest Daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand the III. were brought to Madrid, and receiv'd with great Joy and Satisfaction of the whole Court. We will end this Year with the Relation of the most wonderful Rebellion that hapned Rebellion of Naples. at Naples. After that City and Kingdom became subject to the Kings of Spain, it was for some time govern'd with great Moderation, and had very ample Priviledges granted to it, especially by King Ferdinand and the Emperor Charles the V. under whom the People paid but moderate Taxes, and that by the Name of Donatives or Free Gifts. These in process of time were infinitely increased, and the insolency of the Receivers made them more intollerable, especially those Impositions that were upon Provisions. This burthen lay heaviest upon the Commonalty, of whom there is a vast multitude at Naples. Yet hitherto they had gone no farther than Complaints; but when the last Year an Excise was laid upon all manner of Fruits and Herbs, then the Clamours of the Multitude began to be more loud, and they opposed the Collectors. Such as had any hand in these Tumults were punish'd, and others for that time deterred. At length this Year the Complaints increasing, there started up a base Fellow who took upon him to deliver his Country from those heavy Taxes. This was Thomas Aniello of Amalfi, (commonly call'd Massaniello) a bold Youth that sold Fish, of a voluble Tongue, and all ways qualified to raise a Mutiny. It happen'd that some Fish he brought to Market was taken from him, for refusing to pay the Excise, which the more incensed him, so that he ceased not to go about the Markets perswading the People not to pay the Duty, and that not in private but openly, and by his Emissaries boasting he would soon cause all the Taxes to be remitted. Most Men of sence made small account of so inconsiderable a Fellow, but he, lest his design should be pre∣vented, resolv'd to put it in Execution, and therefore upon Sunday the 7th. of June came into the Market-place with a small number of Boys following him, several of the Rabble there joining with him. A Contention arising between the Country People and the Col∣lectors about the Payment of the Duty, Andrew Anaclerius the Clerk of the Market re∣pair'd thither to appease the Tumult, but the Multitude throwing Apples and other things at him, he was forc'd to withdraw himself, and hasted away to complain of that Insolency to the Viceroy. The Multitude now gather'd not only in the Markets, but in the Streets, began with loud crys to demand the Excise might be abolish'd. Mean while Massaniello, who was still in the Market with his Gang, standing upon a Table made a seditious Harangue to the People, offering to head them, and put an end to all Taxes if they would stand by him, which if they should not, he said, at least he should have the Satisfaction of dying for his Country. All the Rabble assenting to him, he immediately set fire to all the little Offices where the Collectors used to receive the Excise. This done he goes up to the Viceroy, demanding all the Taxes should be remitted, and the Original Charters of King Ferdinand and Charles the V. produced, threatning further danger if his Demands were not granted. The Viceroy having labour'd by fair words to appease the Mutiniers in vain, scattering some Money among them made his escape. Now their num∣ber was grown up to 50000, but the next day twice as many appear'd in Arms. Then all the Nobility being fled, Massaniello was chosen their Commander with an unlimited Power. His first command was that they should all be ready in Arms. Then he set a Price upon Bread and other Provisions, after which he burnt all the other Offices of the Collectors which had escap'd the day before. Next he fell upon the Houses of all the Farmers of the Reve∣nue, some of which he burnt with all the Riches in them, out of others he brought all the
precious Furniture, Plate, and Money, which was all burnt in the Street, no Man da∣ring to take the least thing in that great Treasure to his own use; for whosoever in this or any other matter transgressed against his Orders, was instantly put to Death. No Person whatsoever was spared, which was the cause that all his Orders were most punctually obeyed. Upon the 4th day after this Mutiny broke out, the Duke of Matalone, and his Brother Joseph Caraffa, having hired 500 Banditti to kill Massaniello, and some others of the principal Heads of the Rebellion, the Design was discovered; and not only the Banditti put to Death, but strict search was made after the Duke, and his Brother being taken, was dragged along the Streets; his Head being cut off by a Butcher, put upon a long Pole, which brought to Massaniello, he scornfully pulled by the Beard. This terrified all the Nobility, but most of all the Viceroy; nor was he out of danger, for Massaniello had forbid any Provision being carried into the Castle where he was, and ordered the Conduits of Water to be cut off. In this Con∣fusion Cardinal Philomarini the Archbishop, order'd the Blessed Sacrament to be exposed in all the Churches; and after he had caused Publick Prayers to be said to appease the Wrath of Heaven, going out to the furious Rabble, began to treat with Massaniello as the chief Ringleader of the rest, of restoring the City to Peace. The People demanded the abo∣lishing of all Taxes imposed since the Times of King Ferdinand and Charles the 5th, and to have their Charters of Priviledges produced; besides this, an Act of Grace for all that had been done; which if granted, Massaniello promised to quit his Command, and that the Peo∣ple should lay down their Arms. The Viceroy, and Archbishop, finding no other Remedy left, delivered to Massaniello the Priviledges or Charters, promising to fulfil all his other De∣mands; besides, the Archbishop engaged to pay to Massaniello a Monthly Pension of 200 Crowns, which he refused. Peace thus concluded, Massaniello was brought by the Arch∣bishop to the Viceroy; and returning to the People, declared all that had been transacted, strictly enjoyning them to behave themselves in peaceable manner. Nevertheless he would not lay down Arms till such time as the Ratification of what had been concluded were brought from the Court of Spain. All these were the Transactions of one Week, besides many more too tedious for this place. Massaniello having as he thought obtained his Ends, grew distracted. Some say it was caused by a Dose given him, others ascribe it to the mul∣tiplicity of Business, which scarce allowed him time to eat or sleep. But he in his Madness contradicting his own Orders, and becoming contemptible to his own People, was by the Contrivance of four of the Nobility, who laid hold of this Opportunity, killed. His Head being cut off, was put upon a Pole, and the Body dragged about the Streets by the Rabble for several days. This was the end of Massaniello, the 10th day after he began the Rebellion. Yet tho the Head was taken away, the Multitude continued in Arms, insisting upon their Demands; but the Nobility taking Courage, had recourse to the Viceroy, and raising their Followers, undertook to quell the Multitude by force. Thus the Business was brought to a Civil War, the Commonalty keeping the City, the Viceroy and Nobility the Castle and Port. The Multitude wanted nothing but a Head, therefore not long after the Duke of Guise was sent to them out of France, and received with general Applause, and great Acclamations. The Commonalty strengthned by his coming, a long time held out against the Viceroy. But at last growing weary of the War, they again returned to their Duty. A general Pardon was granted them, and they were received to Mercy in the King's Name by D. John of Austria. The Duke of Guise endeavouring to escape, was taken by the Spaniards. Anno 1648. This Year was fatal to France for the Troubles there raised against the King in most part Troubles of France. of the Kingdom, but more especially at Paris by the Prince of Conde, and Duke of Longue∣ville, the Heads of the Rebels. The Marquis de Caracena making his Advantage of their Confusions, with 8000 Foot and 4000 Horse, invaded the Dukedom of Modena, wasting and destroying all that Country; so that the Duke, forsaken by the French, was forced to make use of the Duke of Parma to intercede for him, and adjust all matters in difference. The French Rebels having prayed Aid of the Archduke Leopold, Governor of the Low Coun∣tries, he marched with his Army as far as Senlis, which is but 10 Leagues from Paris; and having done nothing worthy that Trouble or Charge, returned towards Flanders. There ashamed of that fruitless Expedition, tho it were Winter, he ordered the Marquis Sprondiato to invest Ipres, in order to besiege it. The French Fleet, commanded by Thomas Duke of Savoy, infested the Coasts of the King∣dom of Naples, but in its return lost 4000 Men, cut off only by the Country People, as they ravaged the Country. The Marquis of Leganez, who commanded upon the Frontiers of Portugal, ordered D. Gre∣gory Ibarra, Commissary General of Badajoz, to make an Inroad into the Enemies Frontiers, Actions in Portugal. with 6 Troops of Horse, and drive all the Cattel. He in pursuance of these Orders gathered about 400 Horse at Higuera, and with them entered into Portugal on the 8th of Novem∣ber; there they spent 2 Nights and a Day, ransacking all the Houses and Villages in the Ter∣ritories of Cerpa and Moura, and gathering all the Cattel. With this Booty they returned the 18th towards Castile to lye that Night near Oliva, where all the Cattel was conveniently shut up in the enclosed Fields. The Horse being dismounted to take their Rest, Parties went
out to discover whether the Enemy moved. About 9 at night our advanced Centinels hear∣ing the trampling of many Horses, gave the Alarm by firing their Carabines. The Enemy being discovered, halted to order their Squadrons, which gave our Men time to Mount, and the Commissary-General to form them into two Squadrons, ordering the foremost when charged, to give way, as if yielding, to the Portugueses to break through, that so he might take them in the middle. His Contrivance accordingly, fell out, for they broke through to look for their Cattel; but meeting with the 2d Squadron, maintained the Fight about half an hour. Then being hard pressed both before and behind, they began to fly at the Flanks, our Men not pursuing them far, because of the Darkness of the Night. Of the Enemy 40 were taken, 52 killed, and 90 wounded, and 100 of their Horses were found. On our side D. Gregory Ibarra, and 5 Soldiers were wounded, one Captain reformed, and two Soldiers killed. They stood all night at Arms, and the next day marched to Xeres de los Cavalleros. The Booty they brought consisted of 5000 Sheep and Goats, 500 Swine, 200 Oxen and Cows, 70 Mules,  Slaves, and the 100 Horse taken in the Skirmish. This Year the satifications of the Peace betwixt Spain and Holland were exchanged at Munster in Westphalia, on the 15th and 16th of May. After which the Plenipotentiaries on both sides, in the behalf of their Masters swore the Performance of the Articles. Which done they embraced, and all the Cannon of the Town was fired to express the publick Joy. In the Spring the Plague broke out at Murcia, Origueld, and Elche, and thence diffused it self to several other places, tho not so destructive. But it was lamentable to see the mighty havock it made at Sevil, the most famous Mart of all Spain. Anno 1649. The Archduke Leopold, Governor of the Low Countries, in May took the Field with a power∣ful Army, to oppose the French; who under the Command of the Prince of Conde, had laid Siege to Ipres being informed there was but a small Garison in the Place. The Prince to re∣inforce Courtray taken. his Army, drew 2000 Men out of Courtray; which the Archduke understanding, sat down before it, and in two days, was Master of the Town, the Garison retiring into the Cittadel. His Highness attacked the Plate, which was surrendred to him upon honourable Conditions the 12th of May. The Blunder of this Town was considerable, the Country People having carried the best of their Goods thither. The Prince of Conde never stirred, thinking the Archduke would have been taken up some days before Courtray. However the Prince had Ipres delivered to him on the 15th of May, the Garison marching out in ho∣nourable Ipres deli∣vered to the French manner. The Archduke encamped hard by in the open Field to draw the Enemy to a Battel; which they refusing, he sent a body of 1000 Horse and 6000 Foot, to ravage the Countries of Picardy and Champagne. They performed what was given them in charge so effectually, that they struck a Terror into the City of Paris, whence Orders were sent to the Prince to come to the relief of the City. Mean while the French endeavoured to sur∣prize Ostend, before which appeared 6 great Men of War, and several other lesser Vessels, which immediately landed about 2000 Men. The Governor of Ostend perceiving them, sent out some Parties to keep them in play, till after long skirmishing some Supplied coming to him, and being strong, both in Horse and Foot, he charged the Enemy with such Fury, that they cryed out for quarter, which was easily granted them. 1200 Prisoners were ta∣ken, and among them 2 Majors, and 50 Captains. Many were killed and drowned. The Count de Harcourt having received strong Supplies from France, laid Siege to Cam∣bray Cambray relieved. on the 18th of June with 25000 Men, and daily carried on his Works against the Town. His Highness the Archduke kept his Horse continually in readiness, contriving which way he might put some relief into the Town. On the 2d of July he took two Sol∣diers of the Enemy, who discovered to him which was the safest way to compass his Design. He divided his Forces into three parts, with two of which he charged the Enemy, whilst the 3d commanded by Colonel Brullel, broke through their Camp, and put into the Town 800 Horse and 400 Foot, whom the Horse carried behind them. The Count de Harcourt percei∣ving the Succours were got into the Place, thought it to no purpose to spend more time be∣fore it, and drew off to Chastelet. Sunday the 4th of July the Archduke marched into Cambray; where, after the Singing of Te Deum, he was splendidly entertained by the Governor. This done, he marched with the main Army towards the Enemy to bid him Battel, but the Sum∣mer was spent without any further considerable Action. On the Frontiers of Portugal the Enemy, to the number of 400 Horse and 800 Foot, came over the Mountain Gata, and by the way of the Bridge of Perales, to Villas Buenas, which they plundered, and burnt some Houses. A Party of ours meeting them in their return, tho inferiour to them in number, easily recovered all the Booty, and destroyed about 90 of their Horses, taking several Prisoners, the rest flying without ever looking back. This Year hapned the unparallel'd Murder of Charles the First King of England; who Charles K. of England murder'd. being barbarously tryed, and condemned by his own Subjects, was publickly beheaded be∣fore his own Pallace, to the Astonishment of all the World, except his own inhumane and bloody People who were the Actors of that most villanous Tragedy. (According to the foreign Account the Murder of the King was in this Year, which they begin from New∣years-day, and not from the 25th of March, as in England.)
On the 20th of February the Cortes of Castile were opened at Madrid, in the great Hall of the Pallace, where after all the Commons had kissed the King's Hand, his Majesty re∣presented to them the State of the Kingdom, the great Wars he had in hand, and the Need there was of extraordinary Supplies to support them. The End of the Second Supplement.
THE SUPPLEMENT TO THE General History OF SPAIN, From the Year 1650 till 1669. Continued by F. Basil Varen de Soto, once Provincial of the Regular Clergy. Anno 1650. THIS Year commenc'd successful to the Crown of Spain; for Fortune, which before seem'd to have turn'd her back upon it, now thought nothing too much to bestow on it. No place was besieged but yielded, and that without great Expence or loss of Time. Major-General Francis Totavila, bravely relieved the Castle of Castil-Leon in Val de Aran, and by that means secured the Passage over the Pyreneans into Catalonia. Several Em∣bassadors came to the Court from divers Princes of Europe, and among the rest one from the King of England then in Exile. The English Parliament sent a Resident, who came to Court upon his Majesty's safe Conduct on Whitsunday, and on the Monday following six Englishmen, upon pretence of welcoming him, entred his House and killed him at Table. The strange∣ness Cromwel's Embassa∣dor in Spain kill∣ed. of the Fact alarm'd the Court. They who had committed the Fact took Sanctuary in the Hospital of S. Andrew of the Flemings, where they were apprehended by D. Ferdi∣nand Altamirano, an Alcalde de Corte, who cast them into Prison, whilst the other Alcaldes took cognizance of the Fact. The Prisoners pleaded the Sanctuary, and were restored to it. Afterward, to appease Oliver Cromwell, one of them was drawn out of the Sanctuary deceitfully, whereupon the Vicar Excommunicated the Alcaldes. After much convassing the Matter, the Prisoner out of meer State Policy was Executed in the Year 1653: For all this Time was spent in contesting between the Ecclesiastical and Secular Power. He that suffer'd was the principal Actor, though at their Examination every one of them said he himself had kill'd the Envoy. The Duke of Guize Peer of France, taken by D. John of Austria in the Troubles at Na∣ples and sent into Spain, was kept Prisoner in the Castle of Segovia with an honourable Guard as became a Prince. He was attended by Gentlemen of his own Country, had 1000 Duccats a Month allowed for his Expences, and was upon all Festivals carried out in the Governour and Mayor's Coaches, to partake in the publick Joy. The Citizens relying upon his Honour grew careless in observing him; and he, in order to make his escape, feigned himself sick, that he might not be seen by any body; and having disguised himself, on the 23d. of November made his escape out of the Castle; but being missed, and Expresses sent all ways after him, he was taken by the Governour of Vitoria: He was sent back to Burgos, and thence to Segovia, where he was more carefully observed, but still kept with the same Generosity; such was the extraordinary goodness of our King. The recovery of Portolongone, taken by the French, was a great Undertaking, and worthy Portolon∣gone taken. the Arms of Spain. D. John of Austria, Admiral of the Seas and Viceroy of Sicily, having deputed the Duke of Montalto Governor of that Kingdom, and the Earl of On̄ate left his Brother D. Beltram de Guevara to supply his place, they set sail with a powerful Fleet, and landed on the 19th. of May at a convenient place for the investing of that Town. The con∣sequence of which is well known to those who are acquainted with the Coasts of Italy, and the French had from thence put a stop to all Trade by their Privateers. Our Forces first
took Piombino, which rendred the Conquest of the other the easier, and consequently soon after it submitted to His Majesty to his greater Honour, for that his Enemies had thought it impregnable. The Duke of Bragança (King John of Portugal) drew most Garisons from the Frontiers to secure the Sea-Coasts, leaving most of the inland defenceless. He also order'd all the Biskets to be brought out of the Garisons to Lisbon, where a Bushel of Wheat was worth 150 Royals Plate. The English Fleet in June came before the Bar of Lisbon, which put the Inhabitants English Fleet be∣fore Lis∣bon. in fear of an Invasion, and obliged the Duke to draw his Forces thither. The English took 9 Ships loaden with Sugar from Brasil, two French Ships loaded with Corn, and at several times 100 lesser Vessels with other Merchandize, and sent them to Cadiz. These Misfortunes put the Kingdom of Portugal into a great Consternation. As soon as the English were gone to Cadiz to sell their Prizes, the Portugueses, who were assisted by several Princes, now made use of Prince Rupert, Brother to the Count Palatin and Cousin to the King of England. He sailed from Lisbon in quest of 5 English Ships loaded with Cloath and other things of great value. Having entred the mouth of the Streights with 12 Men of War, upon the Coast of Spain he took two of the said Ships, and understanding the other three were about Tunez, he steer'd thither with 7 sail, sending the other 5 with the two Prizes to Lisbon. The Parliament Admiral being inform'd that Prince Rupert was in the Streights, sailed after him with 9 Fri∣gats, and discover'd these 5 Ships and the 2 Prizes off of Velez Malaga. He gave them chase, they making a running fight, till such time as they could no longer avoid him, then they Canonaded one another a whole day in sight of Carthagena; and Night coming on the Prince's Ships stood in for the Harbour: For want of Pilots one of them ran a-ground, the Men got ashore and set fire to her: The other 4 with the 2 Prizes got into the Harbour with a strong gale at S. W. and coming to an anchor all the Men ran ashore and went away to the Kingdom of Murcia. 300 Irish that were among them offer'd to serve in Catalonia, and were conducted to Tortosa. No sooner had the Men abandon'd the Ships, but the people of Carthagena plunder'd them; which the English Admiral perceiving, he drew to the Mouth of the Harbour, and soon after stood to Sea after Prince Rupert. The Catalonians weary of the French and desirous to return to their Duty, had several Cataloni∣ans return to their Duty. Conferences among themselves, and with D. Balthasar Pantoja, General of the Artillery of Leon and Governor of Lerida, who gave them great Encouragement. The French having notice of it, committed many Hostilities against the Catalonians. Mean while the King appointed the Marquis of Mortara, Viceroy and Captain-General of the Principality of Catalonia, and the Marquis Alexander Borro, Major-General, ordering them immediately to their Commands. On the 26th. of May they came to Zaragoça, and the people of the Castellany of Amposta understanding the French design'd to destroy their Corn, came to beg aid. The Major General march'd with 1600 Horse and 1600 Foot, whereupon the French retir'd over Ebro, through Mora, where they committed all manner of Hostilities. Thence they march'd to Falsete, and not being admitted went on. This and the like fortunate Encounters so encourag'd the Catalonians that in several places they took up Arms, and without considering their own danger put many of the French to the Sword. Such was the posture of Affairs in Catalonia, when the Marquis de Mortara understanding it, with all speed set out of Zaragoça, and having passed his Foot over the River Ebro in Boats, and the Horse by the Ford, he came to Lerida. Thence he set out upon the 1st of September, intending to besiege Flix, to which purpose it was requisite again to ford the River Ebro then much swell'd. This was a very desperate Action, and perform'd with much resolutely and emulation, the Water being up to the Mens Breasts, and the French bravely defending their Intrenchments upon the Ford. However the Valour of our Men overcame all difficulties, and by degrees they made them∣selves Masters of all the Works, and on the 26th. of September were possessed of the place. Next day they laid Siege to Miravete and its Castle, a place thought impregnable, being seat∣ed on a high Hill so rough and uncouth there was no assaulting of it, and so rocky it was most difficult to undermine. The Walls were strong, being the antient Work of the Knights Templars built with Lime and Stone, which made the French and Catalonians within very secure. But Fortune favouring our designs, the Castle surrendred the 8th. of October, the Governor being kill'd with a Musket-shot, which quite discourag'd the Defendants. The Marquis making use of this good Fortune, march'd thence and laid Siege to Tortosa on the 10th. of October with a goodly Army, consisting of 12000 Horse and Foot, whereof 7000 were Aragonians, Catalonians, and Valencians led by the Viceroys of those Kingdoms, and paid by them. On the 19th. they took their Posts under the Cannon of the Town, the Prin∣cipal Commanders viewing them, and giving the necessary Orders. A Bridge was laid over the River Ebro above the Town, where it might be least exposed to the Enemies Can∣non. Our Army daily increasing, the Enemy sought to give a Diversion on the side of Aragon, but without any Success. On the 28th. the Trenches were open'd and carried along the cover'd Way to the Monastery of S. Blas, where a small Fort was cast up in less than 3 days. Till the 3d. of November the Approaches were carried on. Then all the Batteries began to play, and on the 9th. a Colonel was order'd with his Regiment to attack a small Fort upon the Bridge: He did so, but meeting a vigorous resistance retired with the loss of 40 Men, and 60 wounded.
Whilst the Batteries continued to Play ashoar, the brave Duke of Albuquerque General of the Spanish Galleys, with 5 of his Squadron and one of Sardinia, set out from Alfaques where he lay to hinder Relief being brought to Tortosa, and went to meet the Mareschal de Ligni, who was come out of Barcelona with 5 tall Ships laden with Provision and Ammunition for that Place. At the same time the Duke de Mercaeur lay at Cambriles, in order to attack us by Land. The Duke of Albuquerque meeting these Ships upon the Coast of Tarragona on the 24th of November Ingaged, and after a Fight which lasted from morning till two in the afternoon, made himself Master of them. This Action caused Tortosa to surrender, all their hopes de∣pending on that Relief. The besieged Capitulated and delivered the Place upon honourable Tortosa taken. Conditions, they being to be shipped off for Barcelona. On the 27th of November our Gene∣ral and the Governor of the Town signed the Articles, and on the 3d of December our Forces entred Tortosa. Thus the Two Important Places of Flix and Tortosa were Reduced, and all the length of the River Ebro Restored to his Majesty. After the surrender of these Two Places, the Catalonians desiring to cast off the French Yoke, and Return to their Allegiance to their Natural Prince, began every where to Treat the French Contemptibly. At Barcelona 8 well affected Catalonians posted themselves in the Market place in two Parties at a distance; and the one Party crying aloud, Let Spain Live, the other answered, Let it Live, let it Live. Then the first cryed, Let France and its Government die; and the others answered, Let it die, let it die immediately. Thus the Tumults increased till Night, no Body daring to oppose them. Next Day Lampoons were set up in several Parts of the City, and none offered to take them down. At Christmas came the Syndics of the Towns about Barcelona to complain of the Insolencies of the French, of whom the Ecclesiastical Deputy of the Principality asked, Why they did not kill them, for then was the time? These Tumults made the Duke of Mercaeur then Viceroy, D. Joseph Margarit, and the principal French Commanders, as also those Cata∣lonians that Sided with them, think of saving themselves from the fury of the Multitude, and accordingly they withdrew into Rousillon, some of them going to Paris to acquaint the most Christian Queen and Cardinal Mazarine with the Posture of Affairs. In France the Princes of Conde and Conti, and the Duke of Longueville being Summoned to a great Council, were there Apprehended, and sent Prisoners to the Castle of Vincennes under a strong Guard. This was the beginning of the mighty Troubles and Confusions that soon after ensued in that Kingdom. Many bloody Skirmishes hapned betwixt the Peo∣ple of Agen and the Forces of the Duke of Espernon, at last the Duke was worsted and glad to make his Escape with a small Retinue. The King still proceeding against the great Men in Prison, made the Duke of Mercaeur High Admiral of France, which Honour was before given to the Prince of Conde; and Governors were sent to the Provinces of those secured. All the Employments of those suspected to be in the Conspiracy were disposed of, Mare∣schal Turenne who Commanded the Army in Germany marched with 9000 Foot, and 2000 Horse to Release the Prisoners, many Men of Quality and Cities declaring for him. The same did the Parliament of Bourdeaux, where were many of the Nobility. Thither the King marched with his Army, and forced the City to surrender in October, upon Condition his most Christian Majesty should release the Princes that were in Prison, not Prosecute those that were absent, and give 100000. Crowns to the Parliament of Bourdeaux; put no Garri∣son into that City, and endeavour a Peace with Spain. None of these Articles were per∣formed, whereupon the Rebels took up Arms again. Leopold the Archduke, Governor of Burgundy and Flanders, laying hold of this Advantage, with an Army of 30000 Foot, and 18000 Horse entred Champagne, burning and wasting all Leopold the Arch∣duke in Cham∣pagne: that Province, and took Chatelet on the Frontiers of Flanders, as he did afterwards on the 22th of July, La Chapelle. In the following Month of August and remaining part of July, his Highness made himself Master of many other Places. About the beginning of September, Viscount Turenne defeated the Mareschal de Hoquincour killing 3000 of his Men, and took Rocroy and Laferte Milon with their Citadels. The Archduke brought all Champagne under Contribution, and having Fortified Rethel, Dam, and Rocroy, and Garrisoned other strong Places, laid Siege to Musson, an University and Place of great Importance, betwixt Luxem∣burg and Lorrain, which he took upon the 11th of November. Winter now making it im∣practicable to keep the Field, our Army was Quartered in Champagne, discharging Flanders of that heavy Burden which had not hapned before since the War betwixt Spain and France. Yet our Horse made Incursions as far as Nanci, the Court of the Duke of Lorrain, who had been outed his Dominions by the French ever since the Year 1636. After many Instances made by the Parliament, the French Princes who had been Prisoners were released, but still the Civil Wars continued bloody. Cardinal Mazarine for fear of the Rabble, retired to Havre de Grace, and still the Parliament by publick Edicts prefsed him to depart the Kingdom. A Peace with Spain was the earnest desire of them all. This was the State of France this Year 1650, famous for the Jubilee, which began at the Vespers of the Year of Jubilee. foregoing Year 1649. That day upon Christmas-Eve, after noon the Cardinals and all the Roman Court accompanied the Pope in Procession to the Chapel of the Palace, where having offered up their Prayers, they set forward with all the Princes that were in Rome, Ambassa∣dors and People of the City. The Pope was carried in a Sedan by Four Men cloathed in Crimson Damask. Being come to the holy Gate, one of those that are shut up the foregoing
25 Years, till the Year of Jubilee, the Pope alighted with a Candle in his left Hand, and the great Penitentiary gave him a Silver Hammer guilt, so he walked through a Lane made by the Cardinals, and knocked Three times at the Gate, repeating certain Verses appointed by the Church, which done, he took the holy Cross and kneeling before the Gate, began the Te Deum, then entred, ascended to the high Altar, came down again, Prayed, took his Seat and began the Vespers. At the same time the Cardinal Deacon and the Two eldest, went to open the other doors, which remain open all the Year, and are then shut up with the same Solemnity, so the holy Year of Jubilee begins and ends. The Popes, as Fathers of the Church, use upon certain days in the Year of Jubilee to visit the Hospitals, and hear Confessions, to give Absolution upon some particular Cases. Pope Innocent the X in the Hospital he had appointed for the Entertainment of Pilgrims, washed the Feet of many, some of which were Hereticks, who came out of Curiosity to make their Observations, and were Converted. The Duke of Modena being sensible how much he had been in the Wrong in taking Arms against the Catholick King, and being hard set by the Marquess of Caracena, submitted him∣self, and was received with great Honour. Anno 1651. About the middle of January this Year, the Inhabitants of Alcaraz advertised the Gover∣nor of Lerida how the Castle of that Place which commands it, might be surprized. He Castle of Alcaraz surprzed. finding it practicable, sent a Party, who in the dead of the Night scaled the Walls with∣out the lest Opposition from the French, who slept in great security, and they refusing Quar∣ter, were all put to the Sword, to the number of 200. Alcaraz is about 3 Leagues from Lerida, up the Country towards Cervera. This Castle was of great consequence, being seated on an Eminency. The Affairs of Catalonia daily were in a better Posture. About the end of January the Garrison of the Town and Castle of Scornambou deceitfully offered to surren∣der; but our Men considering the uncertainty of Martial Events, took double the number had been at first designed for that Enterprize. The Governor with his Garrison  to his plighted Faith fell upon our Men, yet the Place was taken, God justly chasti  treacherous Dealing. Scornambou lies betwixt Tortosa and Tarragona, a good  the Sea, which made its Castle and that of Alcaraz of great use for the ensuir In England the new erected Commonwealth seemed to be firmly settled,  Spanish Ambassa∣dor re∣ceived by the Rebels in England January D. Alonso de Cardenas the Spanish Ambassador had Audience of the  conducted thither with the greatest Pomp that had been seen of long time  Three Noblemen, one of which was the Earl of Salisbury, were sent  him, and with them 20 Coaches with 6 Horses each, which with Two of  and those of other Persons of Quality, made up in all 50 Coaches all with 6  Whitehall to Westminster, was a Lane of 1000 Horse, and as many Foot, throug  Ambassador passed, all the Officers Saluting him. The Throng was so great, the  dor had some Difficulty to pass to a Room richly adorned to receive him, where he  half an Hour: Upon the Ambassadors coming into the House, the Speaker and all the Mem∣bers stood up, and were uncovered, till he sat down on the Chair set for him, and made a short Speech in Spanish, which he delivered in writing, together with his Credenti∣als, the Speaker answered in English, the Parliament would consider of what he had said, and return an Answer. After this Ceremony, the Ambassador returned home in the same manner, the Cannon at the Tower firing. All Europe was surprized at this Proceeding of D. Alonso de Cardenas upon such an extraordinary Revolution of those Kingdoms. The Duke of Albuquerque, General of the Spanish Galleys went away to Port S. Mary to his Command, as did the Earl of Haro General of the Horse in Catalonia. D. Francis de To∣tavila Duke of S. German and Governor of the Frontiers at Badajoz, understanding that 50 of the Enemies Horse had forded the River at Olivença, and lay in the Woods about a Can∣non shot from the City, sent out 150 Horse in two Parties to fall upon them. This was slowly put in Execution, and after he was gone to Bed, he arose to speak with the General of the Horse. Whilst they were Discoursing, Advice was brought that the Enemies Horse drove the Cattle that Grazed within Musquet shot of the Walls: The Governor knowing the Enemy had no more Horse on the other side of the River, at one of the Clock in the morning issued out of the City with the Horse, and at about a Leagues distance recovered the small Cattle, which was about 5000 Head: Towards break of day having pursued the Enemy, he put them to flight, taking from them 300 Head of black Cattle. Our Affairs advanced in Catalonia; the Marquess of Mortara took the Field with a gallant Army, flushed with Victory. The Catalonians weary of the French, sought an opportunity French de∣cline in Catalonia. to rid themselves of them. About 2000 French Foot and 1000 Horse were marching into Catalonia, but so jealous of the Country People that they durst not straggle the least, for fear of being cut off in the narrow and Mountanous Passes. Orders were now taken by the Council of France for sending supplies to Catalonia: It was also endeavoured to obtain a Truce for a considerable time in Flanders, but our Governors being averse to it, they were glad to take other measures. It was believed the King of France would take upon him the
Government in September, tho' the Tumult ran then so high, that some great Disaster was to be feared. The Prinçe of Condé made great Demands of Satisfaction for his Imprisonment, and other Noblemen had greater Pretensions than stood with the King's Safety to grant. Car∣dinal Mazarine was at Bonne, the Court of the Elector of Cologne, and waited to be restored to the Government of France. In England a Squadron was fitting out to go against Prince Rupert, who lay at Toulon, and took many English Ships Trading to the East. Another Squadron was sailed for Newfound∣land, to Convoy the Fishing-Fleet, and chase the French out of those Seas. A third was sent to the Coast of Scotland, whither Cromwel was marching with a mighty Army to oppose the King. The Royal Sovereign with another Squadron was to cruize in the Channel. Another Squadron was designed for the Coast of Ireland. Advice being brought that 14 Sail were arrived at Tarragona in Catalonia from Naples, laden with Corn and Men, it was supposed the rest of the Fleet-might be come with D. John of Austria. At the same time there came News to Zaragoca, that 2000 Men from S. Sebastian were upon the Frontiers of Aragon. The Marquess de Mortara having sent Officers to Con∣duct them, on the 20th of June went to the Army, which was before encamped, and marched that morning with the Train of Artillery, consisting of 36 Pieces of Cannon: In the Ships came 3000 Veteran Soldiers, and great store of Provisions and Ammunition. Also 30 Neapo∣litan Horses, 12 for the King's Coaches, and the rest Pads and Hunters. D. John of Austria being at Sea with the Galleys of Naples and Sicily, was advertised by the Governour of Yviça, that about the Island Fermentera lay a great French Ship, with a Tartan, which were out a Pri∣vateering, and did great harm. D. John immediately with all his Fleet made that way, and discovered the Enemy about 9 in the morning. At 11 he came with the Admiral Galley within Cannon shot of them, and fired a Gun without Ball, which was not answered in a long time, by which he understood they made ready to fight. All the Cannon of the Galleys played upon the Ship for a good space, and then perceiving they did little execution, D. John gave the Sign to Board. The Ship was bravely defended, but at length after three hours, fight taken. It was a Ship of 500 Tun, 30 Guns, and 300 Men, called the Crowned Lion. Of the Men 50 were taken, the rest leaped into the Sea. The Tartan was sunk by the French themselves. We lost some Men, and had many wounded. The Count de On̄ate, Viceroy of Naples, hearing that two French Ships infested that Coast;  two of the Naples Squadron, which took one of them, and put the other to flight,  shattered, it was believed she could never be serviceable. The Marquess of Caraçena,  nour of Milan, had a powerful Army in readiness against this Campagne, which raised  of the Duke of Savoy, fearing the Marquess designed against Cazal. In Flanders  of Aerscot posted a Gentleman who had spoken opprobriously of Spain, but the Duel  D. John de Borgia, Governour of the Castle of Antwerp, and Brother to the Duke de , was sent his Majesty's Ambassador Extraordinary to the Crown of Poland with a  Retinue. All Spain admired its Queen Mariana of Austria, and offered up their Prayers to God for Queen of Spain deli∣vered of a Daughter: a numerous Issue. On the 12th of July, God having before heard their Request, her Majesty was brought to bed of a Daughter, for which there was great rejoicing, the Bells ringing, and the Multitude flocking to the Court with loud Acclamations. The Kingdoms of Aragon, Sicily, and Naples, sent their Deputies to Congratulate with their Majesties, as did all the Cities of Spain; and the Nobility, tho' warned to moderate their Expences, appeared in most costly Apparel. Julio Rospigliosi, the Pope's Legate à Latere, was made choice of by the King to Baptize the Princess Mary Margaret on the 25th of July, being the Feast of S. James the Apostle, Patron of Spain. All the Galleries of the Palace were hung with the richest Tapistry of Silk and Gold, and the Chapel with most costly Embroidery. In the midst of the Chapel was placed a Canopy of Silver, under which was the Font wherein S. Dominick was Baptized, kept by our Kings for the Christening of their Children. Much other costly Furniture was dispo∣sed in great order by the Patriarch of the Indies, and the Earl of Pun̄o Enrostro, Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber then in waiting. The Lady Mary Teresa, the King's Daughter, was the only Godmother. The Legate set forward from his House with a most splendid Retinue, and most rich Liveries, tho' he had new ones against the Birth of the Princess. Being come to the Royal Chapel, he blessed the Holy Water, and then all things being in readiness, and Multitudes of People having taken Places to see the Procession, they set forwards in this man∣ner: First the Spanish and Swiss Guards; then the King's Pages; next, Gentlemen of Bur∣gundy and Castile; then Noblemen; then all the Serjeants at Arms, between the Nobility and the Grandees; next, the King and Queen's, Stewards not in Waiting, with their Rods; after them the Grandees: Behind them came the Stewards that carried the Utensils for the Ce∣remony; next to them the Lady Mary Teresa; then came D. Luiz Mendez de Haro, Earl and Duke of Olivarez, who carried the Princess, and after him all the Ladies of the Court. At the Chapel-Door the Legate met the Princess, with several Bishops in Pontificalibus. Then the Ceremony began, and the Princess was called Mary Margaret: After which, the Legate hung a rich Relikary about the Neck of the Princess, and bestowed others on several of the Attendants: Which done, they returned back in the same Order they came. The King saw
all from the upper Tribune of the Chapel, as did the Ambassadors of the Emperor and Vene∣tians, being incognito in the Chancel. The Queen being a little recovered of her hard Labour, was somewhat melancholy, and the King to divert her ordered a Bull-Feast upon the 4th of September. The Day proved fair, and the King being seated, the Guards, as is usual, began to clear the Place, which was then watered by 20 Carts carrying Pipes of Water ingeniously carved. After several Bulls were killed, the next Sport was that which they call of Canes, and is in imitation of the old man∣ner of Fighting with Spears, instead of which they use Canes, which is very diverting and pleasant. To conclude the Publick Rejoycing, a few days after there was another Bull-Feast; and so ended that Great Solemnity. F. Peter Pimentel, of the Family of the Earl of Benavente, a Jesuit, set out towards Rome, in order to be there at the General Chapter of that Order; with him went his Nephew, Bro∣ther to the Marquess of Villafranca. They went aboard a Genoese, and off of Marseilles were taken by a French Privateer, and carried to Toulon, where all that were in the Ship were set at liberty, except F. Pimentel, his Nephew, and a Regent of Italy, who was bound for Sicily. The Value of Copper-money was enhanced by Proclamation one third Part; upon which several Persons, moved by the great Profit, thought it easie in remote Places' to put the Stamp upon the Coin; but many of them paid for their Presumption with their Lives in the Market∣places of Madrid, Toledo, Sevil, and other Towns. The Capuchin Church, founded at Madrid by our Queen Elizabeth of Bourbon, being now finished, the most Holy Sacrament was translated thither with great Solemnity, and the Feast of the Dedication lasted 8 days. A Portugus Baroness, Widow to George de Paz Sylveira, one of the Great Farmers of the Revenue, being left vastly rich, founded a Monastery for Carmelite Nuns, which when finished, will not be inferior for Grandeur and Revenue to the best in Madrid. That her Foundation might be the more firm, she gave half the Right of Patronship to the Town of Madrid, allowing the Council of that Town for ever the Naming of Fif∣teen Religious Women. On the 9th of May the Town of Madrid celebrated the Feast of the Translation of the Holy Image of our Blessed Lady of the Pillar. The Solemnity lasted nine Days, and the Town setled a Revenue for Building of the Chapel of that Holy Image. The Duke of Bragança (King John of Portugal) upon some Jealousie cast a Gentleman into Prison; for whose Liberty, one who had deserved well, and was a Favourite, made suit, but was refused; upon which he went to the Gaoler, and demanded the Prisoner. The Gaoler delivered him; but soon repenting, acquainted the Duke with it, who immediately ordered his Favourite to be apprehended. Upon which the People of Lisbon mutinied, and began to rail against the Duke, and that night many reflecting and threatning Lampoons were set up in publick Places. Mean while certain Portugues Troops broke into Castile; and having plun∣dered four open Towns, carried away a considerable Booty in Cattel. D. Francis Totavila, Duke of S. German, and General of the Frontiers of Estremadura, having notice of it, ordered Thomas Alardi, Earl of Tronçan, one of his Lieutenants, to gather what Horse and Foot he could, and pursue them into Portugal. The Earl having assembled his Troops, pursued them; but finding they were gone, sent after them the Commissary General Jacome Maçacan. He set forward on the 5th of March, and next morning about break of day discovered the Enemy at Ceilavin, being 250 Horse and 500 Foot, and having drove all the Cattel they found in their way. Maçacan immediately charged the Enemy with such Bravery, that they were broke, and above 150 of their Men killed, among whom was a Captain of Horse, 2 Lieute∣nants, 6 Captains of Foot, the Major, 5 Ensigns, and other Officers. 366 were taken, most of them so desperately wounded that they died. On our side one Captain of Horse, one En∣sign, and four private Men were killed. Thus the Insolency of the Enemy was somewhat suppressed, and Maçacan gained much Reputation. Advice was brought to Oran, that the Moors of Uladala and Zal had revolted; that they had fortified themselves upon a Break of the River, and thence pillaged the neighbouring Places. The Marquess of Floresta Davila, Governour of Oran, fell upon them, and brought away 200 Slaves, and their Chief, killing 100 more. Of the Alafezes and Ulizbrain, Two Heads of Families, which together make 100 Villages, he took 110 Slaves, and retired fighting all day with above 4000 Moors, of whom he killed 300. In May he made another Inroad to the River Cique, whence he took 100 Slaves, and at other times above 120 Robbers who infested the Country. He again marched against above 300 Villages at Venarasel (who are the stoutest Moors of all that Country) and in the Plain of Abora made 150 Slaves. Understanding that a Moravito had built a small Town, and fortified it about 18 Leagues from Oran, at the Mouth of the River Zara, which ran through the midst of it, the Governour sent a Brave Officer with 200 Foot and 110 Horse to plunder it. He came there at midnight, and apply∣ing two Petards to the Gate, entred the Town, sacked it, and brought off 150 Slaves, some of which were Moravito's. D. John of Austria (as was before said) in his way from Sicily having taken the French Ship D. John of Austria at the Siege of Barcelo∣na. called the Crowned Lion, came to the Siege of Barcelona, which it was not doubted would in few days be reduced. D. John being Viceroy of Sicily, left in his Place, as Governour of that
Island, D. Antony Ronquillo, High Chancellor of Milan, who dying at Palermo, the Archbishop of that City succeeded him till such time as the Duke del Infantado came thither from Rome with the Character of Viceroy. Cardinal Trivulcio was received at Rome, and acted as Ambassador from the Crown of Spain till the Earl of Oropesa came. The Count de On̄ate Governed Naples with singular Wisdom and good Conduct, as did the Marquess of Campo Reall the Island of Sardinia. The latter endeavoured to put an end to the Factions that disturbed the Quiet of that Kingdom, and banishing the Heads of both Parties, established Peace. He sent Sup∣plies to the Island Coralina de Tabarca, at the Request of the Governour of it, by which means that Place was delivered from the Danger of the Barbary Moors. The Marquess of Caraçcna Governour of Milan, having with his Army infested all the neigh∣bouring Country, retired with a great Booty taken in Piemont about Turin, the Court of the Duke of Savoy, and notwithstanding 4000 of the Enemy endeavoured to cut off his Retreat, he passed all the difficult Mountains with his heavy Baggage and Train of Artillery, without lo∣sing one head of Cattel. This done, he dispersed his Army in the Territories of Tubine, Camag∣na, Concano, and Vignuela. Here he expected the coming of 5 Regiments designed for Catalo∣nia, and hindred the French from sending Supplies to that Province. All the Cattel taken about Cazal he caused to be restored, the Governour of that Place and he of Torno, giving Security, they would for the future, no more molest, the Subjects of the Dukedom of Milan. Then ha∣ving sent 1600 Italians and Germans designed for Catalonia to Final, and made a General Mus∣ter, he put his Army into Winter Quarters. In France all things tended to Rebellion. The Queen Mother brought the King to the Par∣liament of Paris, to be recognized as their Lawful Sovereign, which they all offered to do, when as things were disposed with the usual Pomp for so great a Ceremony, but as soon as they broke up, many of them fled to Rochelle. The Prince of Conde having formed and concluded the League, demanded more than it was possible to grant him. Yet after this, the Queen, Duke of Orleans, Prince of Conde, and Parliament of Paris, were again united, but it lasted not long, for in a little time the Prince of Conde took the Field, as did also the King's Army. The Duke of Bavaria our King's Cousin died at Munich, his eldest Son succeeded him Peace was concluded betwixt the Duke of Neuburg and Elector of Brandenburg, and in the midst of the publick Joy for the same died the Duke. The Emperor summoned the Diet to meet at Ratisbon, upon the 16th of May Cardinal Mazarin returning into France, the Treaty of Peace then on Foot was broke off, ond the Prince of Conde's Forces daily increased. The Ci∣ty of London was exceedingly alarmed with the King's March out of Scotland, but Cromwel ha∣ving defeated his Forces at Worcester, returned victorious, and then marched to Scotland, where all Places submitted to him. This same Year, Casimir King of Poland, gave the Tartars a very signal Overthrow. Anno 1652. The Glory of his Catholick Majestie's Arms was much increased, by the recovery of all the Principality of Catalonia. Barcelona its Metropolis being restored to his Obedience, as shall soon appear, D. John of Austria, the Marquess of Mortara, and the Constable of Castile, Ge∣neral of the Horse, having signalized their admirable Conduct in all this Siege, which tho' it enclosed a vast Tract of Ground, was managed only by 8000 Men. But let us first say some∣what of the 3 General Chapters of the military Orders, Assembled by his Majestie's special Command. Two Months before the time prefixed for the meeting, the King sent out his Sum∣mons to all the Commendaries, Knights, Superiours, and Clergy of those Orders to meet. Those of the Order of Santingo on the first Day of July 1652, and those of Calatrava and Al∣cancara upon the 10th of the same Month. On the Day appointed, all the Members of the Or∣der of Santiago received the Blessed Sacrament in the Church of S. Hierome. His Majesty as perpetual Administrator for the Order, was seated on a Chair placed before the Altar, where a Pontifical Mass had been sung by the Prior of Ucles, the Chapter being kept within his Juris∣diction. The Knights and Friars were placed in Order according to their Seniority, the Knights with their white Cloaks, and the Clergy in their Surplices. On the King's right hand was the Prior of Ucles, and the chief Commendaries of his Precinct. The Vicar of Meri∣da who is Porter to the Order, was ordered to shut out all secular Persons, and admit none without his Majestie's special Command. The Vicar of Tudia who is Secretary, was appointed to Register all that was done. Then by direction of the Prior of Ucles, one of the Friars with a loud Voice, read the Rules of the Order, and in his Majestie's Name the Chapter was told, that all that had been read, was, what they were bound to observe, for the Honour of God, and the glorious Apostle S. James, and what had been in former Chapters established, by the Kings Ferdinand, Charles, Philip the 2d and Philip the 3d, as perpetual Administrators of the Order. To which in the Name of the whole Chapter, they all standing up uncovered, the Prior of Ucles answered. He kissed his Majestie's hands, and humbly requested of him, to take into his Royal Care, the Preservation and Increase of that Holy Order, so advantageous to all Christendom, and always so Loyal to the Kings of Castile. Some Vacancies were there filled up, and the Augustin Monastery called of the Lady Mary of Aragon, was appointed for the Chapter to be continued in. With much the like Ceremony on the 10th of the Month, be∣gan
the Chapter of the two Military Orders of Calatrava and Alcantara, the former being up∣on the right hand of the King, and the latter upon the left. The Convent of Benedictines cal∣led S. Martin was appointed for that of Calatrava to continue their Sessions, and that of S. Ber∣nard for the Knights of Alcantara. The particular Decrees of each Order made in those Chap∣ters, are to be seen in Print, particularly those of Calatrava, published by D. Hierome de Mas∣caren̄as Knights of that Order. His Majesty desirous to divert the Queen with some extraordinary Sights, brought to Court the Dedalus of our Times, who surpasses even him of Crete; this was a Florentine Gentleman well known in Germany and Italy, whose Name was Vaggio. The Theater of the Pallace at Buen Retiro was by him prepared, and there the most ingenious part of Ovid's Metamorphosis re∣presented. Fortune appeared upon her Wheel breaking from amidst the Clouds, and char∣ming the Auditory with her Lute and sweet Voice. The Heavens and Earth opened, and Jove appeared upon his Throne, the Terrestrial Gods rising out of the Bowels of the Earth. The Son of the most beautiful Goddess, appeared crossing the Ocean in a gilded Boat, surprizing their Majesties with his melodious Harmony. There were seen the famous Gardens of the Goddess and Queen of Cyprus, the noisie Workmen of the God Vulcan, wonderful Shipwrecks and terrible Storms of Thunder and Lightning. The 2d Day the Councils were admitted to this Entertainment, the 3d the Town of Madrid, and the 4th the rest of the Court, Multi∣tudes flocking from all Parts of the Kingdom, to share in this Princely Magnificence. The Count de Monterrey, considering the Destruction made by the Plague in Malaga, Sevil, Valencia, and Barcelona, and that now it began to spread in the Islands of Majorca, Minorca, Feast of S. Rosalia. and Sardinia, to prevent its further Progress, thought good to have Recourse to the Devotion of the Blessed S. Rosalia, who from her tender Years, led the Life of an Anchorit on Mount Pere∣grino near Palermo. This Saint by her Intercession, has several times delivered France, Italy, and the Empire from that Evil, and was therefore by Pope Urban the 8th, declared the Deli∣verer of Sicily from the Plague. The very Moors fearful of her Power, never sail that way, but they leave some Alms to her Chappel. The Count and supreme Council of Italy, celebra∣ted the Feast of this Saint in September at the Royal Monastery of Nuns, called of the Angels, of the Order of S. Francis. The Service of the Church was performed with Musick and great Pomp, the Night being turned into Day, with Illuminations and artificial Fire-works. At length, Barcelona after a tedious Siege, was again restored to his Majesty on the 17th of October, to the great Honour of the Generals commanding there, and universal Joy of the Inhabitants. Upon this News, his Majesty went a horseback to the Church of Atocha, the Streets were hung with rich Tapistry, for three Nights the Town was enlightened with Illu∣minations and Bonfires, and a Bull Feast was kept in the great Market-place. Barcelona sent a Gentleman to make its Submission to the King, he was introduced with as great State, as if he Barcelona recovered. had been an Ambassador from the most potent Monarch. After the King he visited the Queen and Princesses. He was nobly entertained, all things were adjusted and restored to the same Posture they were in, before the Revolt of that City. On the 3d of October happened a notable Fight, betwixt the Spanish and Portugues Horse. The General of Estremadura having ordered a Convoy for Alburea, the Night before it set out, a Party of 20 Horse was sent to discover the Convoy, which being upon the Point to march, Portugue∣ses wors∣ted. the Lieutenant who Commanded the Party, gave Intelligence, that he had spy'd 5 Squa∣drons marching towards the Field of Canes to lie in wait for the Convoy. The Troops of Ta∣lavera were ordered to join those before destined for the Convoy. Our General of Horse was desirous to meet the Enemy, and used his endeavours to that Purpose. The Scouts affirmed, the Enemies Squadrons marched towards the Watch-Tower of S. Jaspar along the side of Conchuela. Our Men marched directly towards them, and understanding they retired to the Ford of Sancha Brava, made haste to overtake them, and found the Enemy had joined the rest of their Horse. Our Troops drew up, those of Talavera were not yet come, but marched with all possible Speed. The Fight began, the Enemy who understood we had more Troops at hand, laying hold of the present Advantage, with 7 Squadrons Charged our Vanguard, which consisted of four. Our Men received them with such Resolution, that they drove them back upon their main Body, and then considering the Force they had to deal with, halted. The main Body of the Portugueses, was advancing as the Troops of Talavera came in, but had not yet time to join our Battel. Our General ordered his Troops to stand their Ground, and re∣ceive the Enemies Charge. Both Vanguards charged, and fought sometime Sword in hand, without giving Ground, till at length the Enemies Rear began to file off. Ours did the like, and having made up their Squadrons, advanced towards the Enemy, who retired precipitant∣ly, without facing about, tho' some Parties were sent after them. The main Bodies could not be brought to engage. Of the Enemy 210 were killed, on our side not above 20 killed and wounded. Here 617 of our Horse drove 1500 Portugueses. The Cortes of Madrid to express their Zeal to the Queen of Angels, sent F. Gonçalo de Cas∣tilla a Jesuit, Ambassador to Rome, to obtain of the Pope, that the Immaculate Conception might be made a matter of Faith, but he died at Rome before any thing was done in that Affair. The Bishop of Valencia was appointed to succeed him. The Military Orders of Santiago, Cala∣trava, and Alcantara, signalized their Devotion in this particular. On the 15th of December, the Order of Calatrava kept this Solemnity, and continued it 9 Days, the Members swearing
to defend and maintain the immaculate Conception. The same was afterwards done by the two other Military Orders of Santiago and Alcantara. The Council of Madrid followed the Example of the Military Orders. The Marquess de Caracena of whom the Italians confess, that no Governour of Milan ever performed so much with so small Forces, having received Orders from his Majesty to possess himself of Trin, a most important Place and then ill provided, overcoming all Difficulties, as well of want of Men to take, as Means to preserve that Place, with the greatest Secrecy ima∣ginable resolved to attack that Place. He sent the Marquess Serra Major General from Mi∣lan on the 3d of May, and on the 4th, he secured all the Avenues to that Place. The Mar∣quess having given the necessary Orders to D. John Vazquez Coronado, Governour of the Castle of Milan for remounting the Cavalty, raising the Militia, and for following him with the Ger∣man Troops that then were coming into the Dukedom, went away himself to the Siege. 400 of the Enemies Foot were sent by the River Po to get into the Place, and landed not far from it in a Wood, whereof the Governour of Milan having Intelligence, he sent the Marquess Ser∣ra to cut them off, but they retired in time to Crecentin, leaving their Boats, which were taken by our Men. The Marquess de Villar gathered 1500 Foot, and 150 Horse, thinking to break through the Marquess of Caraçena's Quarters, and make his way into the Town, but was most vigorously repulsed. Within 10 Days the Bulwarks were undermined, and so the Place sur∣rendred the 30th of May. 500 Soldiers marched out of it, besides some sick. At this Siege the Marquess of Caracena gained the Reputation of a most expert General, in all sorts of Martial Discipline and Knowledge. The Marquess encouraged by this Success, resolved to attempt Cazal. This is a Place in Ita∣ly esteemed impregnable, and much coveted by all the neighbouring Princes. Its Cittadel Cazal ta∣ken. was built by the Duke of Mantua, having obtained leave of King Philip the 2d, all Men belie∣ving it was rather raised for the Service of Spain, than of its own Prince. But time altering Mens Affections, the Owners fearful of the Power of Spain, called in the French to defend it. About the middle of September the Marquess set out to besiege this Place, and coming to Mon∣calvo stretched out his Army to the Territory of Val de Grani for want of Forage. Then having laid a Bridge over the Po, passed over the Spaniards, the Marquess de Borgameneiro's Regiment of Germans, and that of Collonel Beitin, because the Piemonteses had drawn 400 Men out of Ja∣di, and led them by the way of Clavasco, 1300 remaining still at Jadi; but they marched off by degrees, and hoped for some Succour from Verceli. The Piamonteses were much more concerned at some Passages betwixt the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, and to see the Spaniards fortifie Rosignano, Pontestura, and S. George near Cazal. The Marquess quartered the Body of his Army near Moncalvo, blocking up Cazal. The French thought to have put 400 Men into the Town, but the Marquess of Sorto Son to the Marquess de los Balbases, and General of the Men at Arms prevented them, scowring all the Country 14 miles about, for the space of 8 days. Then the Marquess of Caraçena drew near to attack the Place, and great Stores of Provisions and Ammunition were making at Milan. To hinder the French putting any Relief into the Town, the Marquess possessed himself of the Hill, placing there 4 Regiments of Foot, the Horse of Naples, that of the Commissary General Moron, and his own Troops of Guards. The Marquess of Sento lay at Pianura with 4 Regiments of Foot, the Milanese and German Horse and some other Troops. On the other side the Po, was a Regiment of German Horse, and one of Foot. Besides these, our Governour drew our Forces out of Milan, and 5 Com∣panies out of Alexandria to strengthen his Army, and gathered a great number of Pioniers to secure all the Posts. Upon the 24th of September he invested the Place, posted himself, raised his Batteries, and in 14 days began to undermine, which succeeding, overthrew two Towers of the Cittadel. Our Men gave the Assault, and carried it on with such Bravery, that they enter'd the Place before thought impregnable. The French retired to the City, and our Gover∣nour using his Victory with Moderation, gave them the usual honourable Conditions. 800 Men besides the sick, and those that guarded the Baggage, marched out with 2 Pieces of Can∣non, and were conducted to Berrua, A thousand Men were left in Garrison in the Place. The Duke of Mantua who during the Siege lay at Milan, set out thence for Cazal, and was received with much Pomp and Applause into that City. The Duke being in the City, our Governour went to visit him. and found such Entertainment, as became the Restorer of that Ci∣ty to its rightful Owner, the Cannon of the City and Army firing. Next day the Duke re∣payed the Visit, and the Marquess marched with his Army from Cazal, towards Valencia de Po, thence to Pavia, and lastly to Milan; where his Reception was in the manner of the Roman Triumphs. This good Fortune was seconded by the taking of Graveling, one of the strongest Places in the low Countreys, fortified by the Emperor Charles the 5th. It is seated on a Plain near the Taking of Gravelin. Sea side, to cover the Country from paying Contributions to the Enemy. The Duke of Or∣leans layed Siege to this Place upon the 19th of May 1644, and took it the 28th of the Month following. D. Ferdinand de Solis Governour of this Place, performed the Duty of a brave Commander, keeping the Enemy 29 Days from the Ditch of the Counterscarp, then main∣taining the Bastion 20 Days, and at last marched out with all the Marks of Honour. From hence the French at their Pleasure infested all Flanders. and added many new Works to the old. Leopold the Archduke, and the Earl of Fuensaldan̄a, thought good to lay hold of the Opportu∣nity
now offered, the Count de Grave Governour of the place being absent. Having caused the Outworks to he viewed, and got an account of the Provisions and Ammunition that were in the Place, they resolved to besiege it notwithstanding many Difficulties that appeared, and particularly the want of Forage for their Horse. It was also very hard to prevent Succours coming from Calais. On the 11th of April the Army began to march towards the Town, un∣der the Command of D. Ferdinand de Solis, Governour of Winock's Berg, with Orders to post himself as near as might be. Count Fuensaldan̄a joined the Marquess Sfrondato and the Prince of Ligni, and the Archduke marched and took his Quarters at Bourburg, the Army from all Parts repairing to the Siege. The Enemy was surprized and without hopes of Relief. How∣ever 400 Men from Bologn and Calais attempted to get in, but were so received, that only 50 compassed it. On the other side 300 from Dunkirk tryed their Fortune, and 200 of them made their way to the Place. Our Attacks were carried on in four places, and the Enemy being ill provided, and despairing of Relief, surrendred on the 17th of April, and marched out the 19th, being Whitsunday, with the usual honourable Formalities. Presently after followed the taking of Dunkirk. In order to it, the Count de Fuensaldan̄a was commanded to provide all Necessaries, which he performed with great Diligence. On the Dunkirk also gai∣ned. 25th of August the Count set out from Brussels, and came to Berg S. Winock on the 1st of Sep∣tember. There the Prince de Ligni joined him, and having taken his Post, they raised two Batteries, one on the side of Fort Lion, which was committed to Major General Baltasar Mer∣cader, and the other on the Downs, where the Prince of Ligni's Quarters were, under the care of D. Ferdinand de Solis. Both Batteries looked towards those of the Enemy, at the Gate to∣wards the Canal, which were to hinder the Approach of our Vessels, and cover their own. We soon dismounted all their Cannon, and drove those that guarded them from the Port. The next Night three Attacks were carried on with the Loss of only 12 of our Men. Major General Charles Caupi was wounded in the Leg, and the Count Moteria in the Shoulder. The Works were carried on, and other Batteries raised, then his Highness came into the Trenches, and was present at the taking of some of the Outworks. Advice was brought, that several Vessels were fitting at Calais, to put Relief into the Place; but Care being taken to obstruct them, they ap∣peared not. Our Attacks being carried on, and the Lines of Communication between them perfected, our Men lodged themselves at the Foot of the Pallisadoes. D. Baltasar Mercader gai∣ned a Post, and made a Lodgment which secured our passage to the Canal. On the 10th of September, a Deserter from the Town reported, the Governour was wounded in the Belly with a Cannon Ball, the Town Major lay sick, the King's Lieutenant was dead, the Town sickly, and the Soldiers mutinous. The same Day the besieged heing hard pressed, beat a Parley and capitulated. At the same time, the Duke of Mercaeur having gathered 18 Sail of Men of War, and 4 Fireships in Britany, with 3000 Land-men in them, for the Relief of Dunkirk, was com∣ing into the Downs, where Admiral Blake lay with 20 Sail, resolved to hinder his passage. The Archduke commanded our Fleet to set sail, and oppose the Approach of the Enemy. The French behaved themselves with much Bravery, but were utterly defeated, 4 of their Ships taken by the Spaniards, and 10 by the English. The besieged after this Loss, having no hopes left, performed the Articles before agreed upon, and on the 16th of September marched out, being 2000 Strong; and were conducted with their Baggage to Calais. Two days were al∣lowed for their March, and 150 Waggons to carry their Baggage. In France this Year happened a great Battel, betwixt the Prince of Conde who was in open Rebellion, and the King's Forces, commanded by the Mareschals de Turenne and Hocquincour, Turenne o∣verthrown by Conde. wherein the latter were overthrown, with the loss of 3500 Men, they both narrowly esca∣ping. About the end of this Year, the Earl of Fuensaldan̄a General in Flanders, the Duke of Lorrain and Prince of Conde, had a Conference in which they agreed how to Act; the Earl leaving with the Prince the most of his Troops, and some Germans with store of Ammuniti∣on, and Directions for taking of Winter-Quarters. The Prince thus reinforced, took Rhetel, S. Menehou, Barleduc, and Ligni, and other Places, whilst the Earl dismantled others; which hindred his Communication with Estaign and Mousson, into which the Prince put Garrisons. Thus having ranged in France from the 20th of October till the last of November, the Troops of Flanders began to march into the Country of Luxemburg. Cardinal Mazarine was at Sedan, and hearing that the Forces of Spain were withdrawn, sent the Mareschal Turenne to recover the Places that had been lost He marched directly towards the Prince, who having put strong Garrisons into the Towns, advanced with the Horse to meet him. The Mareschal retired, the Prince still pursuing him close in the Rear. Turenne thought to have made good an ad∣vantageous Post, but Conde still pressing, he was forced to quit it, with the loss of all his Can∣non and Baggage. In Italy, Pope Innocent the X. having caused an exact List, of all the Monasteries in Italy and the adjacent Islands, with their Revenues to be taken, he suppressed many of all Orders, converting the Revenues of them to other Pious Uses. Over the City of Naples appeared a fiery Comet, in the shape of a large Beam: Mount Vesuvius also cast out mighty Flames. The English and Dutch disputing about the Sovereignty of the Seas, fought a bloody Battel which lasted all Day, and the Victory being dubious, both sides made publick demonstrations of Joy. King Casimir of Poland was overthrown by the Tartars and Cossacks, with the loss of 12000 Men, and all his Baggage and Cannon. The Elector of Bavaria married the Daughter
of the Duke of Savoy. The Galleys of Malta being joined with the Venetians, pursued the Turkish Fleet which escaped them, yet at two several times they took 4 Ships, which they sent to the Great Master. The Duke of Albuquerque, for his good Service at the Siege of Barcelona, was appointed Viceroy of Mexico, with the Reversion of the Viceroyship of Peru, still retaining the Post of General of the Galleys of Spain, to be executed by his Brother D. Gaspar de la Cueva, and to his Mother was given a Pension of 4000 Ducats. The Marquess Francis Serra, who had been Major-General at Milan, was constituted General of Catalonia, but subordinate to D. John of Austria. Anno 1653. This Year the King of France being sensible of how great Consequence it would be to reduce Bourdeaux the Nest of Rebellion, sent to offer that City a General Pardon, and many Succours sent the French Re∣bels by the Spani∣ards. other advantageous Conditions, to which the Inhabitants were inclinable enough, but that they were overswayed by the mutinous Princes. Upon which the King's Fleet entred the River of Bourdeaux, under the Command of the Duke of Vendosme, and consisting of 16 Men of War, 2 Galleys, 2 Galleots, 14 Brigantines, 2 Pinks, and 23 Fireships. This Fleet lay to cut off the Trade of Bourdeaux; and not to lose time they laid siege to Bourge, seated on the Banks of the River, which they took. The Spanish Commander that was in it being tried for the loss of the Place, excused himself with the Mutiny of the Irish who were in Gar∣rison. K. Philip understanding the Danger of the Discontented Princes at Bourdeaux, ordered the Mar∣quess of Santa Cruz, with the Fleet of the Ocean, to endeavour to remove the French Fleet. His Force consisted of 15 Men of War, 12 Fireships, and 22 Pinaces. The Marquess de Santa Cruz sailed from Passage about the beginning of July, and was by bad Weather drove to the Coast of Saintonge. On the 17th of July he sailed to the Mouth of the River of Bourdeaux, where he lay till the 27th, and then entred 2 Leagues and a half, coming to an Anchor within sight of Royan, 4 Leagues from the Enemy. Here they lay till the 4th of August, the French never offering to come out to fight them, still keeping within the covert of their Fortifications. The Marquess ordered the Vice-Admiral, with all the Fleet except 5 Men of War and 6 Fireships, to go Water at a Place called Povillac, near where the French lay; who never moved from their Place. Here a Servant of the Princess of Conde advertised the Vice-Admiral, that the People of Bourdeaux, had submitted to the King on the 2d of August, and desired the Fleet might return to a place called Castillon, where she would be ready to embark. The Admiral received the same Advice at Royan, and immediately sailed after his Vice-Admiral, who at his coming he found had already taken aboard the Princess with her Children, and 14 Men and Women of Quality, besides many Servants. After much courteous entertainment, the Prin∣cess was sent away to Dunkirk, with two Men of War for her Convoy, and arrived there in safety to her Husband. The Marquess still lay in the River of Bourdeaux, keeping in the French Fleet, and a good number of Horse and Foot that lay to hinder the Spaniards from landing, they having already done much harm along the Shoars, and taken 5000 Head of Cattel. Sailing up the River he discovered 3 Galleys and 8 Brigantines that brought Provi∣sions for the French Fleet; these he attacked, having landed 3000 Men. They that were in them fled to Mortag, leaving all those Vessels which were taken, and about 30 others burnt. The Soldiers that were a-shoar plundered the Town and got an exceeding rich Booty, setting fire to great Magazines of Ammunition and Provisions, and staving a vast quantity of Wine in the Streets. D. Joseph Margarit, who was in Rebellion against his Prince, by the way of Constans entred French in∣vade Ca∣talonia with the Rebels. Catalonia, as Lieutenant-General to the Mareschal de Hoquincour, who led 6000 Men, being persuaded all Catalonia would submit to him. Some open Towns on the Mountains, inhabi∣ted by that rude People called the Miquelets, took Party with them. Certain Regiments of Militia that lay thereabouts, being dispersed as too weak to oppose the Enemy, were surprised in the Night, and sustained great loss. This Lett being removed, the French passed on to Ca∣stillon de Ampurias, and finding there more Resistance than they expected, laid siege to it. In the Place was a Garrison of Neapolitans, Commanded by Horatius Alon, who defended it bravely, killing above 500 of the Enemy, but was at last forced to surrender upon honourable Conditions. Girona was now in great danger, being weak and ill Garrisoned; upon which the Marquess Serra, the Constable of Castile, and the Baron of Saba threw themselves into it; whose presence so encouraged the Inhabitants, that they resolved to sell the Town at a dear rate. The French sate down before the Town, not doubting to be soon Masters of it. Our Great Officers consulted how they might confer with D. John of Austria, and it was proposed that the Marquess Serra should go out in the Habit of a Peasant; which he refused, saying he would do it like a Gentleman with his Sword in his Hand. It was agreed he should set out with 150 chosen Horse. By the way he defeated 200 Miquelets, killing 60 of them; but the French hearing the Marquess was gone out, pursued him with 800 Horse, which made him hasten to the Protection of the Cannon of Palamos; upon which the French passed on further. In this Town were 500 Foot of the Marine, with whom the Marquess set out again towards the Enemy, whom they totally routed, most of the Commanders being killed or taken; and so
the Marquess came Victorious to Barcelona. 200 Irish having seized the Castle of Ostalric, had agreed for a Sum of Money to sell it to the French; but an Ensign of theirs prevailed with them to receive the same Sum from the Town, and depart; which was accordingly done. The other Irish who served in Catalonia, offended at this Perfidiousness of their Country men, posted them as Traitors, challenging them to fight either Man to Man, or in such Numbers, with such Weapons, and in such Place as they should make choice of. This done, they all took an Oath of Fidelity to the King of Spain. His Majesty rewarded the Ensign that indu∣ced the Irish not to betray the Castle, with a Company of Spanish Foot effective, and 6 Crowns extraordinary above his Pay, and 200 Crowns ready Money: Those Four that assisted him had their Pay advanced. The Miquelets siding with the French, ranging the Mountains in Parties, made great havock of all the Country-Towns that continued Loyal to his Majesty: Among these, Ripol held out a Month's Siege, till Monsieur de Tilli coming with 400 French Foot and 18 Horse, they were so streightned that they surrendered upon honourable Conditions, which were Signed, as is usual, on both sides. As the French and Miquelets entred the Town, one Sagarra a Ca∣talonian Lawyer said, There were no Articles to be allowed betwixt the King and his Subjects, as if Ripol had belonged to France. Upon which, the Soldiers fell to plundering without sparing the Churches, or refraining from the Ravishment of Women. Our Frontiers upon Portugal being of so great a length, it was impossible to prevent the Small En∣counters in Portu∣gal. Enemy making some Incursions, which tho' they were not of any great moment, the Duke of S. German; who Commanded on that side, resolved to Revenge: To this purpose he ordered the Commissary-General D. Christopher de Bustamante, to march with 500 Horse to a place appointed near Aronches, where the Lieutenant-General of Horse, D. Gregory Ortiz de Ibarra, and the Earl of Amarantes, were to join him with 900 Horse more, and then to send out some Parties towards the Town, to endeavour to draw out the Enemy's Horse, which was about 400 strong. The Commissary General being come as far as S. Vinoent, heard the Trumpets sound, and found that the 400 Horse of Aronches having taken a Prey in sight of Valencia, were upon their return home, drawn up in 7 Squadrons. He fell upon and put them to the rout, taking 200 Prisoners, and killing all their Captains, except 2 taken, with most of the other Officers. This done, he stayed all night at Valencia without going on to Aronches, as was ordered. Next morning the Lieutenant-Generals came before Aronches, where a Party sent by the Commissary acquainted them how the Enemy's Horse had been de∣feated. Upon which, he directed their March towards Albuquerque, and towards noon disco∣vered about 800 Horse and 200 Foot of the Enemy, who endeavoured to cut off their Re∣treat, placing their Foot among certain old Walls, and drawing up their Horse in 11 Squa∣drons, as ours did in 14. Our Troops charged, and broke the Enemy's Vanguard; then the two Bodies advanced, and after a fierce Dispute, the Portugueses were totally defeated. Only two Squadrons stood under the shelter of their Foot, which did us much harm when we charged them. Under that covert the Enemy rallied again but offered not to stir from their Musqueteers, and so our Horse marched away towards Campo Major. Of the Enemy D. Andrew de Albuquerque; General of Horse, and a French Commissary-General, 3 Captains of Horse, with many other Officers and Soldiers, were killed, and above 170 wounded. On our side was lost the Count de Amarantes, Lieutenant-General of Horse, 2 Captains, 8 Soldiers, and 100 Horses, besides the Wounded. This Year the Earl of On̄ate came to Court from his Government of Naples, where he gained much Honour in settling of that Kingdom. He took great care to send timely Sup∣plies to Milan, Flanders, and Catalonia. He also sent 300 Statues of Marble, Brass, and other Metal, for the King's Gardens, was himself graciously received by his Majesty, and sworn Councellor of State. The French, to open themselves a Way to Aragon and Catalonia, laid siege to the Citadel of Casticon in the Valley of Aran. This Valley lies between Aragon, Catalonia, and the Pro∣vince of Gascoigne in France, and on the other side the Pyrenean Hills. It is about 7 Leagues in length, and 6 in breadth, has 5 Passes into Spain, about 30 Valleys, and 6 Towns, 5 Castles, and 23 Towers. The chief Strength of the Valley is in the Castle of Castiçon, where lay 500 Men, whose Commander is Governour of all the Valley. The reason why there are so many Towers, is the continual Wars with France. To this Place the French laid siege. The Garri∣son defended the Place with much Bravery, till Colonel Poul de Parada coming to their Relief, the Enemy drew off with such precipitation, that they left many of their Arms about the Mountains. Parada having relieved and supplied the Castle, returned to the Army. The Marquess of Caraçena having forced the French out of the Dutchy of Milan, lay at Querriola in Piedmont to observe the motion of the French General Grance, who had taken the Repulfe of the French. Command of that Army, having recruited it with above 3000 Men. Grance marched towards Aste, and the Marquess into Montferrat, designing to pass the River Tanar, and so to cover the Dukedom. Being come to Roqueta de Tanar on the 23d of September, he staid there two hours for Boats to make a Bridge. Mean while he sent a Company of Musqueteers over the Ford to discover the Enemy, because he had no certain advice of their March. Soon after came a Man who brought Intelligence the French were at Aste, and intended to Muster at
Bersa. Mean while the Boats coming, the Marquess laid a Bridge, which the Foot began to pass, the Horse at the same time fording. As they began to pass, a Country-man brought word that the Enemy marched towards Anon, and immediately appeared a Company sent to discover, retiring before a Body of the French, after which followed their whole Army, with a Resolution to attack the Marquess. He considering that so many were passed that he could not avoid fighting, hastned those that were behind, and posted himself in a place where the River fetches a compass in form of the Letter C. In the narrow of it he drew up his Men, placing 3 Regiments on a rising Ground on the Left, and as many on the Right, which be cause it was not so advantageous a Post as the other, he fortified the best the time would per∣mit. It being impossible by reason of the River to attack him any way but in the Front, he drew up the Foot before the Horse: This done, he advanced himself to view the Enemy, whom he discovered ranging his Battel about a Cannon-shot from him; and leaving two Com∣panies to advertise him of their Motion, he returned to the Army. He was scarce come to it, when he perceived the two Companies retire, the Enemy advancing with all speed to at∣tack him. Three Charges the Enemy gave upon the Right and Left Wing, but the fiercest on the Right, as being the weakest; but our Foot behaved themselves with such Bravery, that Grance was forced to retire, having about 600 Men killed or wounded, besides the Prisoners taken. Next day the Enemy marched away towards Montferrat, the Marquess, tho' inferior to him in number, keeping close after him. Several days passed in this manner, and the Mar∣quess perceiving Grance's Design was to get Quarters in the rich Country up the Upper No∣vara, he prevented him only by two hours. The Floods now rising, gave them a good Pre∣tence to retire out of the Country, and were a convenient Excuse for us to suffer them so to do without molestation. Christina Queen of Sweden, who inherited her Father the Great Gustavus Adolphus's King∣dom and his Wars, sent this Year an Ambassador to the Court of Spain, to settle Peace and Commerce between the Two Crowns. He was favourably received, and having concluded the Business he came about to his Satisfaction, returned home to give an account of his Nego∣ciation. Soon after, King Philip to make his Peace the more firm and permanent, sent D. Antony Pimentel y Prado his Ambassador to the Court of Sweden, where he was received and entertained with all the Honours due to his Character. In England the Usurper Oliver Cromwell this Year settled the Council of State: Next he made War upon the Hollanders. Then he marched into London with his Army, formed a House of Commons to his own Mind, and was at last declared Protector of the Commonwealth of England, wanting nothing but the Title of King, which he also aspired to. His wonderful Fortune had raised him to that pitch, that all Princes sought his Friendship, and were jealous of his Power. Anno 1654. Now was the Pantheon at the Escurial, designed for the Burial of the Kings of Spain, and Pantheon finished. began by King Philip II. finished by King Philip IV. All things being prepared with Magni∣ficence for the Ceremony of Translating the Bodies, on the 16th of March King Philip, atten∣ded by a great number of the Nobility and Prelates, repaired thither to be present at the So∣lemnity. Each Body was carried by 3 Noblemen, and 3 of the Religious of that House, and were those of the Emperor Charles V. and his Empress, King Philip II. and his Queen, Philip III. and his Queen, and Queen Elizabeth of Bourbon, who had been Wife to Philip IV. then reigning. The French passing the Mountains, entred the County of Pucerdan, and laid siege to the French pass the Pyre∣neans. City of that Name, a strong and populous Place, and at that time well provided. There they understood that our Horse had blocked up Roses, in order to besiege it, hereupon they rose, and in 3 days came to Lampurdan, which is usually 7 days march 400 of our Horse, and 500 Foot lay at this Place. Upon the approach of the Enemy our Foot retired, but the Horse stood upon their Guard. The Enemy's Vanguard, consisting of 1000 Horse, charged them, and were so well received, that they retired with loss; but their main Body coming up, our Men drew off in good Order. At the same time 3500 Foot and some Horse were coming from Girona; but perceiving the French went into Roses, they turned back. The Queen's Re∣giment, consisting of 1000 Foot, and a Body of 1300 Horse, came now out of France to re∣cruit their Army, and entred by the way of Cabsir, which is opposite to Cerdagne. D. Tho∣mas Ban̄uales, a Catalonian Gentleman, having notice of their coming, gathered 500 of the Country-People, and giving D. Peter Valencuela an account of his Design, marched to meet them. D. Peter followed them with 600 Men, and finding the Catalonians already engaged, so encouraged them and dismayed the Enemy, that the Queen's Regiment was broke, and above 600 of them taken, as was most of the Horse, and all their Baggage, which the French affirmed to be worth 80000 Ducats, there being a great quantity of Merchan dize. King Philip being well satisfied of the great Abilities of D. John Francisco de Montemoyor y Cuenca, and being sensible of the great Losses the Island Hispaniola has always sustained by Pi∣rates, constituted him Governor and Captain-General of that Island, that with his Conduct
he might Redress those Evils. He perceiving the Island of Tortuga was their chief Resuge, fitted out a Fleet for the Reducing of it. At Monte Christi they met 3 French Ships come from Tortuga, which being hard chased ran ashore, where Two of them were taken, and the other cast away. The Fleet holding on its Voyage, on the 8th of January 1654 came to Tortuga, and landed the Forces at a Creek beyond the Fort. They marched forwards, and possessed themselves of some Hills that Commanded the Fort, which were vigorously defended by the Enemy. On the 12th the Fleet drew near to Cannonade the Fort. Mon∣sieur de la Fontain was Governor of the Island for the French, he being summoned to surrender, answered, He would die rather than betray his Trust: Yet seeing 16 Pieces of Cannon mounted, and all hopes of Relief cut off, he capitulated. On the 19th of January about 500 Men, Women, and Children came out of the Fort, and were shipped for their Plantations, our Men at the same time taking possession. This was the common Resuge of the Pyrates, whence they went out to Rob all those Seas: In the Castle were found 74 Pieces of Cannon. Many Indian Slaves taken by the Enemy in the Year 1652 were set at liberty. Two Ships, one small Frigot and other lesser Vessels were taken: After the reducing of the Fort, another Vessel laden with Salt, not knowing what had hapned, came into the Harbour and was seized. The Salt was divided among the owners of the Flocks of Basaha to salt meat for the Garrison, in which were left 100 Spaniards, and some Irish. Ferdinand King of the Romans and of Hungary, and Bohemia, Son to the Emperor Fer∣dinand III died at Vienna upon the 4th of July of the small Pox: Leopold of Austria his Brother succeeded him in the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, and afterwards in the Empire which he still enjoys. The Duke of Bragança (King of Portugal) pressed the Pope to fill up the vacant Sees of that Kingdom, there being then but one Bishop in all Portugal. But the Pope refused, say∣ing, Bulls for Portugues Bishops refused by the Pope. the Nomination of those Bishops belonged to the King, and that he knew no other King of Portugal, but King Philip. Nevertheless the Duke did not desist from prosecuting his Suit. His Majesty made the Marquesses of Leganes and Almacan Grandees of Spain and of his Bedchamber. The Prince of Astillano Son to the Duke of Medina de las Torres married the Daughter of the Marquess de Villanueva del Rio, and Grandchild to the Duke of Alva. Up∣on the last day of Novembet hapned a great Fire in the House of the Duke of Uzeda, then Inhabited by the favourite D. Luis de Haro. On the 2d of June the Prince of Conti came to Pergignan, the capital City of Rousillon and Cerdagne, and there as Governor of that Province took the usual Oath to the King of France, Prince of Conti takes Ville Fran∣che. On the 28th he laid Siege to Ville-franche, and after 8 days it was surrendred to him. There he staid till the 22th of July, when Monsieur Marin Lieutenant General of Foot joined him; and having Mustered their Forces, and in vain attempted Lampurdan, the Prince of Conti marched to S. George, and the other Forces to the Towns along the River Ter. The Prince sent 300 Foot to Perpignan, and 600 Foot and 1000 Horse to Roses: Then he marched with 1000 Horse to Puçerdan. D. Joseph Margarit and the Duke of Candale at the same time directing their Course to Zardan̄a with the rest of the Army by the way of Ban̄las: On the top of Mount Ribas these Commanders leading 1400 Horse, and 1500 Foot, were set upon by our Forces, which tho much inferior in numbers, killed and took 600 of their Foot, and 400 Horse The Prince of Conti by the way of Villafranca, and Colde Perra went to Hibra, expecting there 4 Pieces of Cannon that were at Caragut, a Town of the French, 6 Leagues up the Country. F. Peter de Valencuela of the Order of S. John, General of the Artillery of Puçerdan, having Intelligence that 500 of the Enemies Foot, and 1000 Horse lay at Lapsirt, put Garrisons into Villar and other Places in the way to Conflans. 200 French Horse, and 400 Foot marching towards Conflans, and plundring the open Towns, upon their return were set upon by Captain Francis Rodriguez, who killed the French Commander, and took many Horses and Mules loaden with the Booty. Valençuela the Governor, sent Colonel John Baptista Cataneo a Milonese with 200 Foot, and 25 Horse to nail the 4 Pieces of Cannon that lay at Caragut: He set out the 26th of September at Night, lay in a Wood all the next Day, and marched again at Night; so that on the 28th by break of day, they surprized 500 Foot and 50 Horse that guarded the Cannon: They burnt the Houses where any opposition was made, took the Marquess of Virague, General of Artillery, and his Lieutenant, nailed the 4 Pieces, carried away 100 Mules belonging to the Train, and re∣tired in time, knowing that 300 Horse and as many Foot were coming upon them: This made them march over the tops of the Mountains, whence they could discover the Enemy, and so returned safe to Puçerdan. D. John of Austria advanced with his Army as far as Vique, but the great Snows obliged him to return to Barcelona, leaving 6 Regiments at Vique, who defended that Place with in∣credible bravery. Both Parties being by stress of Weather forced into Winter Quarters, the Season seemed to have made a Cessation of Arms betwixt them. The French threatning some extraordinary Action the next Spring, his Majesty made mighty Preparations to oppose them, drawing together Forces from all Parts, and laying up great Magazines of Provisions and Ammunition.
The Duke of Lorrain who being outed his Dominions by the French, had retired to Flanders Duke of Lorrain appre∣hended. and served there with great Reputation, was of late grown very slack in the Service, and no less burdensome to the Country, of his Friends, than that of his Enemy. For this reason it was thought fit to remove him from his Command; yet so as it might seem done rather to honour than offend him. The Count de Garces was apppointed to manage this Affair with the Duke, and performed it with singular dexterity, conducting him first to Antwerp, and thence sending him to Spain, where he was Received and Entertained in the Castle of Toledo with all Princely Grandeur and Magnificence. This most splendid Entertainment was the cause that many could not see into the true cause of his Removal; but the sharpest sighted believed he held correspondence with France, in order to be restored to his Dominions. In England D. Pantaleon de Say Meneses Brother to the Earl of Penaguiao, Envoy from the King of Portugal, having affronted and wounded a Gentleman in the Exchange in London, he Portugues Ambassa∣dor's Bro∣ther in England beheaded. and some other Porugueses with him, were by other Gentlemen coming in, turned out of the Exchange. This Disgrace he so hainously Resented, that the next Night he came to the Ex∣change with about 60 others, all Armed with Swords and Pistols, and Coats of Mail, where they killed one Gentleman, and raised great Tumults; which done, by the favour of the night they got to the Envoy's House. Next day D. Pantaleon and some others were Ap∣prehended, and he being brought to his Trial, was condemned to be Hanged, which Sen∣tence after very great Intercession made, was changed to Beheading, and he accordingly Executed. Oliver Cromwell the Protector sent out two Squadrons, one to the Streights, and the other to the West Indies, in both which Places he did much harm to the French. Pope Innocent X. about the beginning of September was taken sick of a violent Flux, which Pope In∣nocent X. dies. never left him till he died on the 7th of January following, which was the year 1655. The Archbishop of Paris, who had been a Prisoner in France Two years, as if he had foreseen the death of the Pope, made his escape to S. Sebastian in Biscay, whence he made his way to Rome, and was there favourably received by the Pope, had the Cardinals Cap given him by his own Hand, and a Present of 3000 Crowns in Gold: Thus of a Prisoner he came to be a Cardinal, and to have a Vote in the Election of the ensuing Pope. Before the Pope, died at Rome Peter Mazarine Father to the Cardinal of that Name, Ambassador from the most Christian King, and was buried with the Honours due to a Duke and Peer of France, the Patent having been sent to him just before. The Duke of Guise who (as was said in the year 1650 more at large) was Prisoner in Spain on account of the Troubles by him raised at Naples, having at length in Compliance to many Duke of Guise set at liberty. Princes who made Suit for his Liberty, been Enlarged, taking a solemn Oath never to bear Arms against Spain, returned to France. There, after kissing the Kings Hand, he asked leave (without regard to his Oath) to fit out a Fleet upon his own proper Cost, and Charges to be a Terror to all the Dominions of the Spaniards in Italy. The King easily granted his Request and promised to assist him with some of his Men of War. He went away to Marseilles, and there gave Orders for the fitting out of this Squadron at Toulon, whis was performed with such Expedition, that by the middle of October it was in a Readiness to sail. It consisted of 23 great Ships, 6 Galleys and other small Vessels well Manned, and stored with all Necessaries; the Duke himself Commanding in Person. About the beginning of November the Fleet hoised Sail, and came in sight of Sardinia, but was by the Weather drove to Cape Polo, in the Island of Corsica. The Earl of Lemos gave notice of it to the Viceroy of Naples: The Weather clearing up, the Duke of Guise scoured all the Coast of Naples, till the Wind again carried him to Sicily, to the Island-Fabiana near Trepano, where he took 300 Head of great Cattle, 1000 of small, 1000 Barrels of Tunny Fish, and all the fishing Tackle. Hereupon the Duke del Infantado Viceroy of Sicily sailing close under the shore, in a Gally, got into Trepano to encourage the People. The Enemy by stress of Weather was drove to the Channel of Mal∣ta, whence they were forced by the Cannon of that Place, and entred the Gulph of Venice, and came before Castelamar. The Viceroy of Naples understanding that the French were plying upon the Coast so that no Body could judge of their Design, sent some Forces with Cannon to Bain and Puzol to secure those Places. At the same time he sent out 15 Galleys to observe the Enemy, but a sudden Storm arising, forced them back not without great Danger of being cast away. Two Expresses came to the Viceroy, one from Lieutenant General Amadee, to acquaint him he had been summoned by a Trumpet from the Duke of Guise, and had answered, he would defend that Place to the last. The other brought the same News from the Earl of Chelano. Tho' it was thought unlikely that the Enemy would attempt any thing against Castelamar; both because it was an open Town, not fit for them to keep, as also for that there were then in it 800 Foot and two Troops of Horse, besides a great number of Gentlemen and other People fit to bear Arms, yet the Viceroy sent thither 4 Troops of Horse, 150 Spanish Foot, and near 50 reformed Officers, a good Quantity of Ammunition and 4 Pieces of Cannon: Besides he sent a Gally with supplies thither by Sea, and ordered General Frangipani then at Salerno to march with all Expediti∣on to Castelamar. But scarce had the Duke of Guise received the Answer sent him by the Lieutenant General Amadee, when he landed his Men, which done, he began from from the Fleet furiously to Cannonade the Town, those that were landed at the same time assaulting it in three Places. It was Night, and the Foot of the Regiment of Calabria per∣ceiving
a great number of French come down the Mountain, fled: the Governor thus for∣saken, Capitulated. The Troops sent by the Viceroy came after the Surrender, and the Gally could not get in, the Place being surrounded by the Enemies Fleet. Having taken the Town, the French plundered it, shipping all the Booty, which the Duke of Guise after∣wards excused, saying, It was done without his Orders. The Viceroy not knowing the Place was taken, had ordered General Charles de la Gata to march thither with all the Force he could from Sessa. As soon as the News of the Surrender was brought, the Nobillity and Commonalty of Naples offered the Viceroy to serve his Majesty with their Lives; so that a good Army was formed of only private Persons. The Duke of Guise landing with 1500 Horse, was met by 500 Spanish Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse, who obliged him to retire with some loss. He cut over another way towards the Tower of Annunciada, and meeting there with another Party, was in like manner repulsed, and forced to fly. Another party of French was routed upon the Mountain at Gragnano: All the rest of the Forces drew off, 400 of them delivered themselves up to General Charles de Gata, and declared that 1500 had been killed. The Night of the 21th, the Fleet was in a great Storm, which drove a Ship of 40 Guns ashore at Castelamar, where she was lost with 5 Tartans; so that nothing suc∣ceeding, they abandoned the City; but as they went aboard, Captain Matelle fell upon them and made a great slaughter. They sailed in great Danger, the Ships being much shattered by the shot of our Galleys, and to Crown their Misfortune, a Ship in which were 600 Men, stuck upon the Rock of Montaragone, and 3 others laden with Ammunition, were drove up∣on that Shore. This was the Success of the Duke of Guise his Expedition. The Venetians now made great Levies, the Turks Army that lay before Candia, having re∣ceived Turks be∣fore Can∣dia. fresh Supplies of Men and Money from Constantinople. The King of France his Coffers being exhausted with continual Wars, sold the Territory of Fera, and Marquisate of Neste to Cardinal Mazarine for 2 Millions of Livers, and made the Marquess de Normentiers Mare∣schal of France for 200000. Cardinal Mazarine reformed a great number of Army Officers, whereupon many of them being discontented, went over to the Prince of Conde. Tho' so sparing of the King's Money, with his own or rather the King's, he bought the Dukedoms of Humene, Nivers and Rhetel of the Duke of Mantua, and thus became one of the greatest Subjects in France. Casimir King of Poland fought a bloody Battle with the Muscovites, Tar∣tars and Cossacks, and was overthrown, yet he soon gathered a numerous Army to make head anew against the Enemy, who were said to be 500000 Men. On Friday the 25th of May died Margaret Dutchess of Mantua Grandchild to King Philip II. at Miranda de Ebro, being on her way to Italy. After the death of the Duke of Mantua her Husband, King Philip the IV. brought her to his Court, and having there nobly enter∣tained her, made her Governess of Portugal, and all the Dominions depending on that Crown, which Office she executed with great Wisdom and general Satisfaction till the Re∣volt of that Kingdom. Her Body was deposited in the Royal Monastery of Huelgas at Burgos, and her Obsequies performed in the Royal Monastery of the Discalced Nuns. This Year the Portugueses committed a perfidious Act of Barbarity: Their Governor of the Castle of Salvatierra, for that Town tho' it be in Estermadura was then in their Hands, Perfidious Act of the Portu∣gueses. Articled to surrender that Place to our Forces. To this purpose the General repaired thither from Badajoz with 400 Horse, and sent before 25 of his best Men to take possession. They being admitted, were made Prisoners, and their Brains beaten out with an Iron Bar. The Officer that Commanded them was torn to Pieces at the mouth of a Gun: Our Forces un∣derstanding this Treachery retired, as also because they were informed that 8 Musquetiers lay in every House of the Street that leads to the Castle. Anno 1655. Tetuan a strong City on the Coast of Barbary not far from Ceuta, was distressed by the Moor Geilan. The Governor implored the assistance of Benbucar, who finding it difficult to relieve the Place by force, made the Governor and Geian friends, and put his own Brother called Benbucar the younger, Governor into that City. The Moor desiring to do something remarkable, marched thence to Ceuta thinking to surprize it, or at lest to cut off such as were abroad in the Country, knowing the Inhabitants used to go out for Water, and to cut Wood in the Forrests of Tetuan. The Marquess de los Arcos famous in Flanders and Catalonia, by the Name of Count Tenorio, was then Governor of Ceuta, who understanding Benbucar was coming to besiege him, drew out his Force which amounted not to above 300 Men into the Trenches. Benbucar perceiving he was discovered, drew up 20000 in 4 Bodies, and attack∣ed the Trenches; but after giving 3 Assaults which lasted 3 Hours, was glad to retire, leaving 2000 dead Men, besides the wounded. This Action hapned on the 10th of June. Peace and Friendship seemed to be well Established betwixt this Crown and England. Peece with Oli∣ver Crom∣well. To make it the more firm, his Majesty, ordered the Marquess de Leite Admiral of Flanders, and Governor of Dunkirk to go over with the Charcter of Ambassador Extraordinary to O∣liver Cromwell then Protector. He made a stately publick Entry, was honouraby Received, and Entertained at the Charge of the Protector for 8 days, after which he Resided at the House of the Ambassador in Ordinary D. Alonso de Cardenas, till his Return to Flanders. Not∣withstanding
all these exterior Demonstrations, our Jealousies ceased not, the Protector having sent out two great Squadrons: One Commanded by Admiral Pen, and consisting of 40 Sail, steered away to the Ocean, upon Pretence of suppressing of Pyrates. The other of 30 Sail under Blake went for the Streights. That Squadron under Pen being come to Barba∣does, met there 30 Sail of French and Dutch, all which he took. Then joining 20 of those Ships to his own Fleet, he put to Sea again, none being able to guess at his Design. Upon the 23th of April 1655, this Fleet appeared before the Port of Santo Domingo in the Island Hispaniola, at whose sight D. Bernardin de Meneses Earl of Penalva, Governor and English in∣vade Hi∣spaniola. Captain General of the Island, gave the Alarm, and gathered all the Forces. Perceiving the Fleet to divide it self into two Squadrons, one plying to Windward, and the other sailing to the Leeward, he sent a Company to Xaina, where they might land, and some Foot with Cannon and Ammunition to the Castle of S. Hierome. And seeing the Squadron to the Leeward make the Land, he sent a Reinforcement to Xaina, and threw up some Trenches. He also sent 50 Men to Caucedo, which lay to Windward, and where there was only a Creek to land, all the rest of the Coast being high and rocky. Upon Sunday the 25th of April, the Enemy landed 600 Men on the side of Nisao, 10 Leagues from the City; therefore Orders were sent to Captain Damian del Castillo who was at Xaina, with what Forces he could, to hinder the Approach of the Enemy, laying Ambushes and cutting them off Collonel John Morfa was commanded to second Castillo, and to endeavour to take some Prisoner, of whom they might have Intelligence. Both these Commanders obeyed their Orders, leaving Captain Alonso Garavito at Xaina, where the Enemy landed another Regiment of Foot, which joining those before ashore made up above 7000 Men, who all giving one Volley marched towards the City then strengthened by supplies come from se∣veral Places. A Prisoner taken gave an account that Fleet was sent by Oliver Cromwell, and brought betwixt 8 and 10000 Men to subdue that Island, and thence to pass over to Jamaica, Cuba, Cartagena and other Places. He further said the Fleet would not enter the Port till the English Colours were set upon the Walls, for fear of the new Platform of 6 Pieces of Cannon, All things being disposed for the Defence of the City, 200 Men were sent towards Xaina, to cut off the Enemy in Ambuscades; but they not appearing, our Men retired to the Walls next the Plain. Fresh Advice being brought of the Approach of the English, 150 of our Foot lay close about the foot of the Mountain, which is very rough and uncouth. These be∣haved themselves so well that they obliged all the Enemies Army to Retire, because they sustained great loss from the Fort S. Hierome, Elmatadero, Fort Grande, and the Wall, all which commanded the Plain. The English retired to the mouth of Xaina, leaving behind them Provisi∣on, Ammunition and Arms. Next day all the Fleet came up, and Cannonaded the City, and Castle, and 14 of them came to an Anchor at Traquia, whence they continued their Fire against the City; but they received so much harm from thence, that they were glad to stand out again. On the 20th of Aprill 306 of our Men went abroad to discover, and laid several Ambushes, then Advice being brought by a Spie that the Enemy advanced, they were so hotly received, that they were again driven back to Xiana. On the 5th of May the Enemy marched the way of Esperilla, and falling into one of our Ambuscades, lost 800 Men, and retired, leaving behind their Arms, Baggage, Colours, sealing Ladders and Drums. Having lost many Men, and many more wounded, on the 14th of May the whole Fleet sailed away, and our People went to give God Thanks for their Deliverance. Our Council of the Indies spent the time in debating how to oppose this Squadron, and daily sent out Vessels to get Intelligence of their Designs, who brought no other Account Ships ta∣ken. but what their own Fear suggested. One of these belonging to the Count de Molina return∣ing to Cadiz, took a Moorish Setie with 40 Men in her, and brought her in. Another of the Duke of Medina Celi made up to a French Ship, who believing she came to Trade, suffered the Men to come aboard, and they presently made themselves Masters of the Ship, which was valued at 20000 Ducats. The Royal Galley being bound for Carthagena to load Powder, by the way took a Turkish Man of War, and brought him into that Port. Mean while the City of Sevil upon its own Charge in the space of 40 days fitted out a Fleet of 28 Sail, carrying 316 Brass Guns, and 512 of Iron, and 6228 Men as well Mariners as Land Soldiers, including Voluntiers. D. Paul Contreras was Admiral, who set sail on the 15th of August, to secure our Plate Fleet. On the 25th they discovered the English Fleet consisting of 25 Sail, who were to the Windward, and after plying in sight for some time, stood away to the Northward. The Galleons being 8 in number, thinking the English had been gone off the Coast, adventured towards Cadiz; but were met by Captain Stainer with 7 Ships, who took 2 of them, sunk 2, forced 2 ashore and and the other 2 got into the Harbour. His Ma∣jesty Galleons destroyed. offended at the Treachery of the English, who under colour of Friendship, Invaded our Plantations and lay in wait for our Plate, gave Orders for making Reprizals upon the Goods of the English. Amaro Diaz a Portugues by Extraction, but Born at Centa, fled to Timez, where he re∣nounced the Christian Religion and became a Mahometan. This done, he turned Pyrate, and had the Command of a Frigat with 50 Men. He commonly put up Spanish Colours when he discovered any Ship, which if too strong for him he fled, if inferior he took. Among Portugueses he feigned himself a Catalonian, to the Catalonians owned himself a Portugues.
To the English, Italians, Dutch and Flemmings he said he was a Castillian, and to them, that he was of Majorca, and had Colours of all Nations, to put up as Occasion served. He scow∣red the Coast of Spain under Spanish Colours, and going ashoar in the disguise of a Beggar, discovered where any People were, then came with his Moors, and carried them away. At length he grew to that Degree of Impudence, that on the 18th of September this Year, he came within the Mole of Malaga, where 16 Dutch Men of War lay at Anchor. He went a∣board the Admiral, who was the famous Ruiter, to whom he feigned himself a Merchant of Majorca, but as soon as he got aboard and out again, put up Turkish Colours, in scorn to the Hollanders. A light Friggat was immediately sent out, which soon came up with him, and af∣ter a Dispute of half an hour, took him with 30 Moors, who being brought to Malaga were all sold. The Renegado was hanged at the Yard-Arm, having first obtained leave to consess, which he did with great signs of Repentance. Among other things he declared, he had taken and made Slaves of 2500 Christians, and was then come to Malaga to discover the Force of the Dutch, and report it in the Ports of Barbary, where it was seared, they would go to demand the Dutch that were Captives, without paying their Ransom. Berga a small Town in Catalonia seated on a Hill, and containing about 400 Houses, whose Parish Church and a small Castle, serve instead of a Citadel, was taken by the French the last Berga in Catalonia. recovered. Year. D. Joseph de Pinos Governour of Vich on the 29th of September, this Year marched thi∣ther, with 400 Foot and 50 Horse, and having summoned the Town, which refused to surren∣der, the next Day he scaled and plundered it. Then he laid Siege to the Fort and Castle, having received a Supply of 300 Horse, and after some time spent, the Besieged surrendred, not knowing they had Relief within 2 hours March of them. All Necessaries being put into the Fort, and a Garrison under the Command of Captain John de Mira, the rest of our Troops that Night marched away, and came safe to Vique. On the 10th of October, the Enemy again layd Siege to the Place, and having given 3 Assaults, were repulsed with the loss of 80 Men, which made them begin to work upon a Ruin on the West-side. D. Joseph de Pinos resolving to relieve the Place, got together 1400 Horse, and 1000 Foot, with which Forces he came before the Fort at such time, as the Enemy having sprung the Mine, assaulted and carried the Castle, the Garrison retiring into the Church. The Enemy had posted their Foot to the number of 2500 in the advantageous Posts and 800 Horse in a Plain, surrounded with Moras∣ses, and guarded by a Chappel, in which were some Foot: D. Joseph de Pinos attack∣ing their Foot, drove them from all their Posts, and from the Castle, making his way to the Church. Mean while our Horse charging that of the French, overthrew and drove them into the Town, whether the Spaniards pursuing them, most of the Foot threw down their Arms, and took Quarters, as did many of the Horse. About 600 French fled to the Mountain, and thence to Borreda, leaving all their Baggage, and 1500 Men killed or taken. On the 30th of October, the Prince of Montesarcho and Collonel John Salamanques, took Las Medas and the Tower of Bagur abandoned by the French, who had nailed the Cannon. After the Defeat of the French at Berga, and the taking of las Medas and Bagur, with other D. John of Austria takes Sol∣fona. Places in that mountainous Country, D. John of Austria resolved to reduce Solsona. To this effect he caused 2000 Spanish Foot to be landed out of the Fleet, which joined with the other Forces he had, made up 4000 Foot and 2000 Horse, wherewith he sat down before Solsona, upon Sunday the 26th of November, and presently sell to work, carrying his Trenches up to the Wall. During the Siege, which lasted 11 Days, the Townsmen defending themselves with great Resolution, several Sallies were made, and pushed with much Bravery. The Be∣sieged expected Relief from the Prince of Conti, but the Count de Morenville sent to that Pur∣pose, finding our Forces strongly entrenched, marched off to the Country of Urgel, to secure the Places the French possessed there D. John of Austria sent to summon the Townsmen, who would not give ear to any Conditions, but rather encouraged the French to hold out to the last They seeing all things disposed for an Assault, on the 7th of December capitulated for themselves, excluding the Townsmen, and marched out accordingly 400 Strong. The Town was plundered which enriched our Soldiers, who had Orders not to kill any Catalonian, nor touch Churches or Monasteries, but 600 of the Inhabitants who bore Arms, were carried away Prisoners to Barcelona. After the taking of the Town, D. John having put a sufficient Garrison into and given Orders for fortifying of it, marched with the Army to the Plains of Urgel, to fight the French Troops under the Count de Morenville. On the 7th of December, the Queen was delivered of a Princess, who was baptized by the Patriarch of the Indies. She lived only till the 28th of the next Month. At Rome on the 18th of January this Year, the Cardinals having according to Custom heard the Mass of the Holy Ghost, in S. Peter's Chappel, went thence to the Vatican, and took Pope Alex∣ander VII. chosen. their Cells in the Conclave. That afternoon, before the Colledge was shut up, it was visited by the Ambassadors of foreign Princes, Barons of Rome, and a great number of Prelates. On the 20th of January, the Colledge was shut up. After much Contention and making of Interests, on the 7th of April Cardinal Guisi was chosen Pope, and called himself Alexander the 7th. Immediately all the Cardinals made their Obeisance to him in the Chappel of the Colledge, the same they did again in the Chappel of Sixtus, and the third time in that of S. Pe∣ter, the new Pope sitting on the left side of the Altar, whereas others had used to sit in the middle.
Anno 1656. D. John of Austria having received Orders from his Majesty to go Post to Flanders, with all possible speed sailed from Barcelona on the 4th of March, with only 2 Galleys and 9 of his Ser∣vants. D John of Austria sent for Flaudert. Near Majorca they discovered 3 Sail, which proved to be Turks, by whom they were so closely pursued, that they poured several Volleys of small Shot into them, killing the Mar∣quess Serra, and some other Persons of Note. At last a Storm arising in the Night, parted them, and the Galleys drove almost to the Coast of Barbary. On the 13th, they returned to the Coast of Genoa, and D. John taking Post-horses rid away to Milan. Thence through Ve∣nice and Trent, he passed to Inspruch, and crossing Germany, came the first Day of May to Col∣len. Here the Prince de Isinguien Governour of Guelders, the next Province of his Catholick Ma∣jesties Dominions, expected him by Order of the Count de Fuensaldan̄a, with 800 Horse to at∣tend him, half of them belonging to his Majesty, and the other half to the Prince of Conde. The Count de Fuensaldan̄a met D. John at Ruremond, with most of the Officers of the Army, and near Lovain the Prince of Conde. On the 11th of May, D. John entred Brussels, the Burger∣masters at the Gates presenting him the Keys; an the 12th, he was Complimented by all the Courts of Justice. About the middle of June, D. John set out of Brussels to relieve Valenciennes, and with him the Prince of Conde and Marquess of Caraçena. The French had already gained the Ditch of Defeat of the French at Valen∣ciennes. the Town, and a Half Moon, and lay so securely intrenched, that it seemed not practicable to force their Lines. But the danger the Town was in, and the great Consequence of losing it, caused all Difficulties to be little regarded. On the 16th of July, the Attack was given with such Success, that we forced the Line, making a great Slaughter of the Enemy, taking their Baggage, several Colours, and many Prisoners of Note, a List whereof was sent to Court. 500 of the Enemy were killed, and above 800 wounded. The Mareschal de Turenne with the Forces that lay on the other side, and had not suffered, retired to an advantageous Post near Quenoy, whether the dispersed Troops assembled to him, our Army encamping close by, ex∣pecting he should decamp, as needs he must very soon for want of Forage, when D. John hoped to obtain yet a greater Advantage, than he had done at Valenciennes. D. Alonso de Car∣denas, who had been 16 Years in England, with the Character of Ambassador, was now at Brussels, and by his Care and Industry, the Army was supplied with Money and other Necessa∣ries to take the Field, and subsist there; for which D. John of Austria and the Marquess of Cara∣çena returned him due thanks. Te Deum was sung at Madrid, for the relieving of Valenciennes one of the Consequences whereof, was the surrender of Conde, a Place of it self strong, and more by a Garrison of 4000 Men, that marched out of it, without the loss of a Man on our side. About the same time, certain Troops of ours, defeated 5 Squadrons of the Enemies Horse, and in another place, a Regiment of Lorrainers. The Mareschal Turenne retired under the Cannon of Arras, scarce thinking himself secure there, his Army which consisted of 30000 Men at the beginning of the Siege of Valenciennes, being reduced to only 4000 Foot besides the Horse. Our Army was at Cambray threatning to enter France, that way to draw away Turenne, but things fell not out as was expected. Tu∣renne with 4000 Horse and some Foot, drawn out of Garrisons, marched towards S. Venant, thinking to surprize that Place. The Governour having timely notice, had drawn to∣gether 1000 Men from other Garrisons for his Security, so that Turenne having given four As∣saults, in which he lost 700 Men, and had above 1000 wounded, returned to Arras, leaving two Pieces of Cannon behind him. This is what Turenne did after his Retreat from Valencien∣nes. The News of the Surrender of Conde, was joyfully received at Court, it was delivered upon the 18th of August. To the Intent the Garrison which was above 4000 strong, might not joyn Turenne; according to Articles, they were conducted 100 Leagues about. D. John of Au∣stria to prosecute his good Fortune, laid Siege to the strong Fort of S. Gillain, and at the same time the Enemy sate down before la Chapelle. It was thought fit to attempt the Relief of it, and by that means, the one was lost, and the other not taken. Our Army being put into Win∣ter Quarters, the Province of Flanders consented to the raising of 2400000 Florins for the Sup∣port of it that Winter. Anno 1657. To begin the Campaign on the 12th of March, the Marquess of Caraçena marched towards S. Gillain, and on the 14th, D. John of Austria and the Prince of Conde followed him, the Ar∣my D. John takes S. Gillain. being there before according to Order. The Design was to prevent the Succours the Ene∣my designed to put into that Place, or if that failed, to carry it by main Force; Provisions were scarce within, and there was no likelihood of its being relieved for want of Forage. On the 17th the Redoubts and a Horn-Work which covered the Sluces were attacked, the Inhabi∣tants having already drowned the Country about, so that there was no approaching, but along a narrow Dike; however in a little time, our Men made themselves Masters of all those Posts. The 21th at Night we gained the Pallisadoes, our Men attacking with the Water up to their Breasts. The 22d, the Garrison capitulated, and on the 23d, his Majestie's Forces took Pos∣session of the Town, having lain but 7 Days before it.
The ill Success of the French Forces, moved them to join with the English, who sent con∣siderable Troops to their Service, and the most Christian King went as far as Abeville to view French and English join. them. Turenne at the same time making Show, as if he intended to march that way. In his Army were 18000 Foot, and 8000 Horse, with which on a sudden, he turned and marched Fifteen Leagues to Cambray, without halting more than an hour or two to refresh his Men. At Four of the Clock in the Morning on the 29th Day of May, his Horse In∣vested the Place, and at Eleven, the Foot took their Posts before it, pushing on the Works with great Vigour. That same Day the News was carried to Brussels. The Place was ill pro∣vided, having in it only the ordinary Garrison; and it being very difficult to assemble our Army for want of time, which put our Generals to a Non-plus. But the Prince of Conde who had before receiv'd Orders to go to Valenciennes, whence he might cover Cambray, Bouchain̄, and Doway, an Express coming to him now, from D. John, and another from the Gover∣nour of Cambray, immediately marched to Bouchain. Here having ordered the Men and Hor∣ses to refresh themselves, a Council of War was held, in which it was agreed on all hands, that if 1000 Horse were ent to Cambray, 300 could not get in, which would be of no Mo∣ment; the Prince of Conde resolved at all hazards himself to attempt the Relief. At 10 at Night he set out from Bouchain, and at 12 came to the Line which had been hastily thrown up. Here he drew up his Men, and ordering the Governour of Bouchain to make a false Attack at a Place far distant, and upon Pain of Death, forbidding any Man to fire Pistol, or take Prisoner, at one of the Clock he assaulted the Mareschal de Turenne's Quarters, and by two, was in the Town with 4000 Horse, whence he sent to acquaint D. John with his Success. Had this Relief been delayed but 24 hours, it had been difficult to effect it without a great Army, and at that time there were but 500 Men in the Place, which requires 4000 to make a Defence. The Enemy immediately drew off, and encamped a League and a half off, be∣tween Cambray and Chastelet. Next Day D. John went to Mons in order to meet the Prince of Conde, and consult about the further Operations of the Campagne. The French having quitted their Design upon Cambray, marched and layd Siege to Montmi∣dy in the Province of Luxemburg, a Place with much Difficulty to be succoured by us, because of the Barrenness of the Country, and want of Forage, and where they might easily subsist, Montmidy surrendred to the French. being supplied from Lorrain. On the 10th of June, the Mareschal de la Ferte invested this Place, which was bravely maintained by the Garrison, consisting of 700 Men, without losing a foot of Ground till the 3d of July. Relief was designed, but failed, and the Place was at length delivered up to the French. In February this Year; the most Christian King, voluntarily caused the Cittadel of Turin, to be delivered up to the Dutchess of Savoy. Soon after the Differences betwixt the Catholick King and Duke of Mantua, being reconciled by the Emperor Ferdinand the 3d, upon Condi∣tion the Duke should admit a Garrison of Germans into Cazal, to be paid by the King of Spain; the King of France grew so jealous, that this might be destructive to his Designs upon Italy, that he again attempted to recover the Cittadel of Turin, he had so generously delivered. This Design was managed in the Night, by way of Escalade; but so unfortunately, that the French were forced to desist, after losing 800 Men This Year the Plague raged at Naples in so extraordinary a manner, that 500000 Persons are said to have died of it. Mighty Alms were given, and publick Examples of Penance made Plague at Naples. to appease the Wrath of Heaven; and the Pestilence at last ceasing, it is reported, above 15000 Couple were married in a very short space. This Contagion extending to the City of Rome, his Holiness forbid all great Assemblies of People, even in the Churches, and on all o∣ther accounts, and to prevent any mighty Concourse, received the Hacaney at the hands of the Spanish Ambassador, the Duke of Tursis in private. On the 2d of April died Ferdinand the 3d, Emperor of the Romans at Vienna, in the 49th Year of his Age, and the 20th of his Reign. On the 17th of February this Year, the prodigious Bell at Velilla in Aragon, rung out of it self, without the help of Man. This Bell has been famous in all Ages, for its wonderful manner of Ringing, a Prodigy none could ever dive into, tho' many have said much concerning it; and this very Year was Printed at Madrid, a particular Description of its Wonders. The Duke of Lorrain who (as has been said) was kept at Toledo, as an honourable Prisoner, ha∣ving the Liberty of the Town and Country about for his Diversion, had contrived to make his Escape; but his Design being discovered, he was privately advertised, it would be in vain to at∣tempt any such matter; whereupon he desisted and was continued, upon the same Foot as before. The French being joined in League, with the Dukes of Savoy and Modena, took the Field about the middle of July. The Prince of Conti was General of the French. Duke Picolomini of French o∣bliged to quit the Siege of Alexan∣dria. the Savoyards, and the Duke of Modena of his own Forces. They entred the State of Milan all together, to the number of 11000 Horse, and 7000 Foot, with all Necessaries to besiege Alex∣andria la Palla. Upon the 17th of July they sat down before the Town, drew their Lines and began their Attacks. D. James de Rabanal, was Governour of the Town, who behaved him∣self with much Bravery, making several Sallies, in which he killed some number of the Enemy, and ruined part of their Works. The Count de Fuensaldan̄a then Governour of Milan, march∣ed with his Army to the Relief of Alexandria. At the same time the Governour of the Town, and the Forces without, attacked the Enemy with singular Resolution, but the Enemies Horse coming down, obliged the Count to retire. The Count intrenched, and regularly made his
Approaches to the Enemies Works, and being come within 60 paces of them, they not able to withstand the Enemy, both in Front and Rear, sent their Baggage over the River Tanor; and drew off themselves in the Night to Aste. The Great Master of Malta died on the 14th of August, after having for many Years perfor∣med noble Actions in his continual Wars with the Turks. On the 17th, the Order elected D. Martin de Redin then Viceroy of Sicily, Great Master. He was the 4th Spaniard that ar∣rived to that Honour, two of the former were Portugueses, the other an Aragonian. and this a Navarrois. King Philip desiring wholly at once, to cut off the bringing in of Contraband Goods, forbid by several former Proclamations, Issued another on the 11th of September, by which all Licen∣ces before granted, for importing of such Goods are declared void, tho' the time by the said Licences prefixed, were not expired. And for the better preventing any under-hand Trade for the future, absolutely forbid the wearing of Cloath of Gold, or Silver, all Laces of Gold, Sil∣ver, or Counterfeit, Pearls and Jewels; whether true or false, allowing only of Plate Buttons. always excepting the Service of Churches, and the Persons of such, as are actually in Military Employments. About the beginning of this Year, two Ships failed from Majorca, and performed many no∣table Exploits which merit the Remembrance. First they gave Chace to the Admiral of Ar∣giers, Exploits of Mallor∣quins. forcing him to retire for safety, under the Cannon of Goleta. Thence they stood over to the Coast of France, where they plyed a long time, before the Harbour of Marseilles, obstruc∣ting all the Trade of that Port. Two French Masters of Seties, attempting to get in, were ta∣ken, and the Prize valued at 4000 Pieces of Eight. Sailing towards Cyprus. they met a Vessel of Malaga, and another of Sardinia, with whom they joined. On the 7th of April they dis∣covered a great Ship on the Coast of Cyprus, which they took after a Fight of Four hours. It was loaded with Flax and Cotton, and esteem'd worth 20000 Pieces of Eight. Then stan∣ding towards Tunez near S. John of Acre, they took a smal Vessel of the Moors, which they call a Saique, laden with Rice, and having divided it among the four Ships, sunk the Vessel. Near Alexandria they took a French Setie laden with Flax and Hides, worth 15000 Pieces of Eight Here they discovered an English and a French Man of War, both which to shun them ran a∣ground, the Men getting ashoar, the Ships were fired by our Men. Near the Island Lampado∣sa, they had a sharp Engagement with an English Ship, which being totally disabled, and no hope of escaping left, blew it self up. After this, on the Coast of Barbary, they took an Eng∣lish Ship worth 25000 Crowns, which defended it self with great Bravery. About the same Place, they had so furious an Engagement with a Turkish Ship, that one of ours had been lost, if not relieved in time: the Turk was so battered She sunk downright; only 18 of her Men be∣ing saved, and about 300 drowned. Not far from Candia they took an English Merchant Ship valued at 20000 Crowns. About the Far of Messina after a bloody Fight, they made themselves Masters of a Privateer, belonging to certain French Knights of Malta, but the Great Master demanding them, they were delivered to him. In their Return homewards, they met an Eng∣lish Ship from Portugal, loaden with Spice, which they possessed themselves of, and it was es∣teemed at 50000 Ducats. Lastly, on the Coast of Tunez, they drove ashoar a Turkish Py∣rate, the Men saving themselves upon Land. After they were in Port at Majorca, they disco∣vered at Sea, a Turk giving Chase to a Vessel, which laboured to get under the Cannon of dur Forts, but in vain; whereupon the biggest of the four Ships, put to Sea again, and re∣scued the Ship, which they found to be a Hamburgher, carrying Presents from King Philip, to the King of Hungary, and several Prelates and other Passengers to Rome. On Wednesday the 20th of November the Queen was delivered of a Prince; he was Baptized on the 13th of December by Baltasar de Moscoso, Cradinal and Archbishop of Toledo, and cal∣led Philip Prosper. About the beginning of April this Year, Blake the English Admiral lying upon the Coast of Spain, had Intelligence that the Spanish West-India Fleet was put into the Bay of Santa Cruz, in Spanish West In∣dia Fleet burnt by Blake. the Island of Teneriff, one of the Canaries: On the 13th he set sail towards them, and upon the 20th discovered them in the Haven, drawn up in a Half-moon, and well guarded. At the Mouth of the Harbour is a strong Castle, with many Pieces of Cannon to secure the En∣trance, and round the Bay 7 small Forts, with 4 or 5 Guns each, besides the Lines of Com∣munication between them lined with Musqueteers. D. James Diagues the Spanish Admiral, had moored the lesser Ships, being 10 in number, close under the Shoar, 6 great Galeons lying farther out at Anchor, with their Broad sides towards the Sea. The Master of a Dutch Mer∣chant-ship that lay in the Bay perceiving there would be Mischief, and fearing to partake of it, asked leave of D. James to depart; who answered him, Do you go if you will, and let Blake come if he dares. Blake sent in a Squadron under Captain Stainer, who not regarding the Forts fell in suriously upon the Ships; but Blake soon following, placed some Ships to Canno∣nade the Forts, which they did so effectually, that the Defendants were forced to abandon them, and himself with the rest of the Fleet joined Captain Stainer. After some hours fight, the Spaniards abandoned the Ships, as the others had done the Forts, and Blake seeing no pos∣sibility of carrying them off, burnt them all except two, which sunk so deep that nothing but the Tops of the Masts appeared above water. This done, Blake sailed out without losing a Ship, and returned to his former Post at Cadiz.
To conclude this Year's Campagne, the Mareschal de Turenne being joined by the English Forces, laid siege to S. Venant, where the English having by main force taken a Half-moon, the Town soon surrendered. Hence they removed before Mardyke, and having by continual Battery drove the Defendants out of the Wooden Fort, the Town was delivered the 23d of September upon Discretion. The Fort was put into the hands of the English, some French being joined with them. D. John of Austria considering how great a Check that Place was upon the Garrison of Dunkirk, resolved to attempt the recovery of it by Escalado in the Night. On the 22d of October 4000 English, Scots, and Irish, with some Spaniards, Comman∣ded by the Duke of York and Marquess of Caraçena, in the dead of Night gave the Assault, and having passed the Ditch laid their Scaling-Ladders to the Wall; but the English within being in a readiness to receive them, and the Guns from the Fleet siercely firing being directed by 4 Torches set upon the Angles of the Fort, the Assailants were repulsed with great loss. Nevertheless, about 4 of the Clock the Assault was renewned with greater Fury, but no better Success. Day approaching, they retreated, carrying off the Dead in Carts, so that the Num∣ber was not known. Anno 1658. The Mareschal de Turenne, with the French and English Forces, laid siege to Dunkirk, which Dunkirk taken by the French and Eng∣lish. extreamly alarmed D. John of Austria, considering the great Importance of that Place, and therefore he resolved at any rate to relieve it. Mean while the Enemy carried on their Works vigorously, and had advanced their Trenches to the Counterscarp of the Place; so that if the Relief was delayed, the Place must of necessity fall into the hands of the Enemy. D. John therefore having drained his Garrisons to make up an Army of 15000 Men, marched with all possible speed through Furnes, and encamped on the Sandy Hills about a mile and half from the Enemy. The English and French Officers having met in Council to consider of removing the Spaniards, resolved not to delay it any longer, but give them Battel the next morning. A sufficient Force being left to keep in the Besieged, most of the English were drawn out, and joined with the French Horse. D. John kept his Men upon the Defensive, as having the Ad∣vantage of the Ground; but the English advanced with all speed, thinking to come in to the Butt-end of their Musquets, our Men pouring in their Volleys upon them so hotly, that those first Battalions were forced to make a Halt; but a Reserve of theirs coming up fresh, they gained the Hills, and falling to Club-musquet, put the Spanish Foot to flight. The French Horse seeing the Success of the English, gave a Charge upon our Cavalry, who disheartned upon the Flight of their Infantry, took to their Heels, the French furiously pursuing them. Above 1000 of our Men were killed, and 1500 taken, besides 800 Officers, all the Ar∣tillery and Baggage. The French refused to ransom or exchange the Prisoners, because the Number of Officers being so great, D. John would be at a loss to recruit his Army. Af∣ter this Victory, the Enemy returned to the Siege of Dunkirk, where the Marquess de Lede, Governour of the Place, making a desperate Sally, was killed with a Musquet Ball. The un∣fortunate Death of the Governour so discouraged the Garrison, that they immediately capi∣tulated, and having obtained the usual Honourable Conditions, marched out 1000 strong, on the 23d of June about 700 sick and wounded following them as they recovered. This Year was remarkable and fatal for the continual Rains and vast Floods that ensued, which destroyed multitudes of Cattel and many Buildings. At Sea there were prodigious Great Floods. Storms, and a great number of Ships cast away. Winter being farther advanced, the Frost was so severe, it destroyed all Plants and great numbers of Fruit-Trees. This mighty Frost gave occasion to Charles Alonso, called first the Palatine of Deuxponts, and afterwards King of Sweden, to perform the boldest Action that ever was attempted by Man. This Prince, about the end of November, marched his whole Army, in which were 5000 Horse, with all the Artil∣lery and Baggage over the Sea upon Ice, from Jutland in Denmark to the Island Alsen, and thence to Langelandt, which is 8 miles distant from the other. From Langelandt he marched still over the Ice to Laland, thence to Falster, and so to Zeelandt, the greatest Island of Denmark, in which is the Court of that Kingdom at Copenhagen. In the Spring of this Year came to the Court of Madrid an Ambassador of the Black King Embassie from a Black King. of Arda, a Heathen. The Ambassador's Name was Abani; he was received and entertained with all possible Grandeur, the Design of his coming being to obtain Preachers for the intro∣ducing the Christian Religion into that Kingdom. Twelve Capucins were appointed by the King for that Mission, and in his Letters to that Prince he promised if the Faith were once settled in his Dominions, he would erect Seminaries of that Nation not only in India, but in Spain also, for the Education of the Youth of Arda, who having received Holy Orders should be sent home to instruct the People. In Catalonia the Marquess of Mortara, Viceroy and Captain General of that Kingdom, un∣derstanding the French had laid siege to the Castle of Canderon, marched from Vich with 1800 Marquess of Mortara attacks the French, and is re∣pulsed. Horse and above 1000 Foot, and encamped not far from Canderon, in sight of the Enemy, upon a Hill. The Enemy seeing him, pushed on their Attacks, and at the same time in a small Plain drew out 2300 Horse, and about 4000 Foot, leaving enough to secure their Works. Joseph de Tapia, Governour of the Castle, having by Signs given the Viceroy to understand
that he could not hold out above two days, his Excellency resolved to relieve him. In order to it he sent down D. James Gavallero; with the best part of our Forces, to ford the River Ter, which runs through the Valley on that part opposite to the Enemy's Right Wing. Mean while the Viceroy himself drew up the rest of his Troops, and marched down on the Right opposite to the Enemy's Left Wing. D. James took no notice of 30 French that were in a Tower that stood in his way, but passing by it, charged the Enemy with such Bravery, that he obliged them to fly in great Disorder. At the same time D. Marco Alexandro Borro fell on upon the other Flank, so that he gave them no leisure to succour their Wing that gave way. D. James still advancing to the Enemy's Works, found they kept close within them, and therefore he sent D. Alexander Morera and D. Alonso de Villar to dislodge them, who executed it, killing a great number, and taking two Pieces of Cannon that battered the Castle. Our Foot on the Left Wing advanced to the Regiment of Champagne, and put it to the rout. D. James Cavallero pursued the flying Enemy, thinking to cut off their Retreat; but tho' he took several Prisoners, he could not compass his Design, the Horse being of little use in the Mountain. We had not above 100 Men killed and wounded. Of the Enemy a great number was killed, and 1600 taken, and among them the Marquess of Montnegre, Ge∣neral of the Horse, his Brother, 7 Colonels, 80 Captains, several Colours, and all the Baggage. This Year a small Squadron of Privateers sailed from Majorca to the Westward, under the Command of Jaime Llorens. They scoured all the Mediterranean to the Streights of Gibraltar, taking several Prizes of great Value, and then failing into the Ocean, ran all along the Coast of Portugal as far as Cape Finisterre, alarming all those Coasts; but meeting with no Booty, they returned into the Streights. The Duke of S. German had taken Olivença from the Portugueses, who could not relieve it Emanuel de Saldana the Governour marched out with the Garrison, and was Prisoner afterwards at Lisbon, as not having performed his Duty. After this it was proposed to take Elvas, a City 3 Leagues distant from Badajoz, seated on a rising Ground, which is all taken up with it and the Citadel, there being no other Hill near it. Its ancient Walls are enclosed within new ones, strengthened with Bulwarks, Ditches, Ravelins, and a covered Way; so that it is ac∣counted one of the strongest Places in Christendom. D. Luis de Haro resolved to carry this Place by starving it. He encamped before it, and took his Quarters near the Conduits that carry the Water into the City, which were immediately cut off. The Town was much strait∣ned for want of Provisions, and it was thought might have been taken but that our Officers were not unanimous, and envied D. Luis de Haro the Honour of reducing that Fortress. Dis∣cord so prevailed with them, that they suffered the Enemy to relieve the Place, and so they were forced with Disgrace to quit that Enterprize. The Duke of Ossuna. General of the Horse in Estremadura, understanding that the Enemy Duke of Ossuna makes an Irruption into Portu∣gal. gathered Forces about Elvas to break into his Province, broke in himself with 5000 Horse that way, burning the Country, and driving a great Booty of Cattel. The Enemy posted themselves with a Body of Horse and Foot on a Hill in the Duke's way, and he finding it not practicable to attack them there, endeavoured to draw them into the Plain, but could not. This moved the Duke to march another way, the Portugueses keeping still within view, whilst he burnt all the Country, and retired without any loss. The Duke of S. German, upon the news of the Enemy's Preparations at Elvas, resolved to send the Duke with 2000 Horse to make another Incursion higher into the Country. On the 13th of April he set forwards, and the next day was betwixt Portalegre and Aronches, having all that way burnt the Villages, drove the Cattel, and cut down the Corn. To put a stop to these Mischiefs, the Enemy, to the number of 1500 Horse and 800 Foot, posted themselves in an advantageous Ground, where it was impossible to attack them, by reason of the difficult access to them. The Duke seeing they did not offer to molest him, continued his march, and having burnt all for the space of 22 Leagues, returned with 8000 Head of small Cattel, 1000 of large, and 300 Horses and Mules. On the 30th of May the Duke of Ossuna marched with 1300 Horse and 200 Foot, to take a strong Watch-Tower within half a League of Elvas. Having viewed the Place, he placed 200 Horse in the Road to Campomayor, to hinder the Enemy's Retreat on that side, and as many more in the way to Elvas. He lay with the rest of the Troops betwixt both Places, ready to relieve either. 300 Men were in the Watch-Tower, well provided with all things for their defence. Our Troops beset it at the same time that 3 Regiments of Foot and 17 Squadrons of Horse, with 5 Pieces of Cannon, came out of Elvas to relieve those in the Tower. The Duke having drawn up his Horse in the Plain, with his 200 Foot, assaulted the Tower Outworks, and carried them, and then began to undermine the Tower. Mean while the Enemy's Troops posted themselves among certain old Walls, and Olive-Gardens, playing their Cannon thence; and the Duke perceiving they could not be drawn to Battel, filed his troops off from the Rear and possessed himself of a Post a Musquet-shot from them. The com∣mander of the Tower for fear of being blown up, surrendred upon discretion. The Tower and another strong House were blown up; which done, the Enemy retired, and the Duke returned with Honour to Badojoz.
The Duke of S. German being well assured that the Portugueses intended to besiege Badajoz, Badajoz besieged by the Por∣tugueses. had pressed for Succours to enable him to oppose them, but all in vain. He had in the Town 2000 Horse and about 300 Foot, and scarce Provisions for 6 days, at such time as the Enemy approached with an Army of 16000 Foot, and 3500 Horse. The Town was in a manner open, having no Defence but an Old Wall scarce a Yard thick, and that in many places ruinous, without Ditch, Palisade, or any other Outwork. All its Strength consisted in a Fort called S. Christopher, on the side next to Portugal, but that not fit to make any considerable Defence. Badajoz stands on the Banks of the River Guadiana, by which it is divided from Portugal, and over which it has a strong Stone Bridge. The Channel is broad and muddy, but not deep, so that at that time, being the 13th of June, when the Enemy appeared it was fordable in several places. John Mendez de Vasconcelos, who had served well in Flanders, was General of the Portugueses. Their ready way to gain the Town without expence had been to find out the Fords, which were but weakly guarded, without staying to possess themselves of Fort S. Christopher. The Duke of S. German well knew that the only way to preserve the City was to divert the Enemy, but busying him on the otherside in taking the Fort, so to gain time. D. Ventura de Tarragona, General of the Artillery, and Governour of Fort S. Christopher, being an Enginier, threw up certain Redoubts in the Valley at 30 paces distance from the covered way, which put a stop to the Enemy's course, who had they at first possessed themselves of the Valley, they might in two days have lodged themselves on the covered way. Fort S. Christopher is opposite to the Castle of Badajoz, and commands it and the City; but on the side next to Portugal is not so high. Its Fortification at that time con∣sisted in two Bulwarks, and a half Bastion very narrow in the neck, all the compass of the Fort being so small, that the Garrison might easily have been dislodged with only Bombs: The Ditch was narrow, and but a yard deep, and the Palisades were all gone to decay. This was a poor Defence against so considerable an Army. The Duke had before sent for two Re∣giments out of Andaluzia, one of Spaniards and another of Irish, who understanding the dan∣ger the place was in, marched 26 Leagues in two days without leaving a Man behind, and on the 22d of June they entred Badajoz, The Spanish Regiment, Commanded by the Mar∣quess de Lançarote, consisted of 550 Soldiers, besides 150 Reformades. The Irish, whereof Sir Walter Dungan was Colonel, contained 450 Men. This Succour much encouraged the Duke; but because the Men were extreamly harassed with that precipitate march, he caused them immediately to go to rest, resolving the Marquess should the next day go into the Fort. At midnight the Alarm beat; for the Portugueses hearing the Two Regiments were got into the City, and having made a sufficient Breach, decreed immediately to give the Assault. John Mendez their General chose 6000 Men for the Attack. There was a Line of Communica∣tion from the foot of the Bridge to the Fort, this was first assaulted and forced, all the De∣fendants being put to the Sword. The same hapned at the Redoubts and covered way, and the Enemy lodged themselves upon the Breach. After much debating among our Chief Offi∣cers, at the instance of the Marquess Lançarote, whose Name was D. Peter Paniagua, it was resolved to send the Marquess his Major and two Captains, whereof one was his Eldest Son with 70 Foot, and two Squadrons of Horse to the relief of the Fort. These Men were looked upon as lost, the Action was so desperate; yet tho' their Horse forsook them, the Enemy's Cavalry being bent upon pursuing of them, the Foot broke through 300 of the Enemy, and got into the Fort with the loss of only one Reformed Captain. D. Ventura de Tarragona, who Commanded in the Fort, ordered the Major that got in with his 70 Men to attack the Enemy, who were making their Lodgments on the Breach and in the Redoubts. The Major con∣sidering it was a rashness for 70 Men to assault 2000 who were fortified, represented it so to the Governour, who still insisting upon his Order, the Major obeyed. First he drove the Enemy from a Line whence they did much harm to the Fort, and passing on to the Redoubts, the Major was killed, and of the 70 only 16 remained, whereof one was the Marquess's Son, who never looked back, tho' struck through the Arm with a Spear, till D. Ventura sent him a positive Command to retire. He thought fit to make good the Line taken at first, because it commanded the Redoubts, and being supplied with 70 Fire-Arms, he made great havock in the Redoubts, where the Men standing thick, never a Shot was lost. D. Ventura acquainted the Duke with all that had hapned, affirming the Fort was not to be maintained, unless the Enemy could be bearen from the Breach, and he must be forced to abandon it by break of day, because the Breach commanded all the Parade, which the Enemy had not discovered in the night, but as soon as it was light had all the Garrison at their mercy. A Council was again called to consider whether the Place ought to be relieved, and the Marquess D. Peter Paniagua again prevailed for it, undertaking the Action himself with 300 Men, reposing more Considence in their Valour than Number. Before break of day he was at the foor of the Bridge, and attacked the Enemies Trenches with such Resolution, that he himself was the first that entred them. This no way dismayed the Portugueses, who tho' they had lost their Trenches, confiding in their Numbers, being then ten to one of outs made such a furious Fight in the Redoubts, that the Victory was long doubtful. The Marquess went from place to place to encourage his Men, till he was shot through with a Musquet-Ball, and stri∣ving to rise up, could only recover his Knees. Captain Antony Paniagua the Marquess's Son, at the same time with his Father had assaulted the Enemy on the other side, and entring the
Redoubts, came to the place where his Father was almost dead, but not overcome. The Marquess seeing him come to his assistance, said to him, Charge, and mind nothing else. He did so; and the Marquess seeing his Men discouraged, said to them, Go to Badajoz, and carry the News of the Death of your Officers, for it is Satisfaction enough for me to die with them. These Words so inflamed the Soldiers, that they charged again with such fury, that they put the Portugueses to flight, killing 600 of them, and pursued them in hopes to gain the Battery. Here Captain Antony Paniagua was again wounded in the left Arm with a Spear, but gave no ground, tho' he lost much Blood. Perceiving the whole Body of the Enemy's Army coming down upon them, the Spaniards retired to make good the Posts they had gained, and the Por∣tugueses enraged to be so worsted by such a small Number, gave three Assaults to the Redoubts, and were still repulsed with great Slaughter. In this Attempt they lost 1800 Men, and the Hopes of taking Badajoz, which now began to think it self secure. Of the Castilians 150 were killed, and 80 wounded. The Marquess lived but 10 hours after he received the Shot, and was Buried with great Honour. His Regiment was given to his Son, who had so bravely Revenged his Death, tho' he was then but Eighteen Years of Age. This ill Success rather enraged than discouraged the Portugueses; so they continued their Attacks, but to very little purpose: Wherefore after having spent 33 days before the Place, they drew off their Cannon to the Body of the Army. It was thought they would have quit∣ted the Siege; but they leaving a sufficient Force to guard their Line on that side Guadiana, passed the River, which they ought to have done at first. The Siege of Fort S. Christopher was one of the most remarkable Actions that hapned in the 28 Years War between Castile and Portugal. Having passed the River, the Enemy drew a Line 3 Leagues in length, enclosing the City, and worked at it 4 Months, where they consumed above half their Army, consist∣ing, as has been said, of 16000 Foot, and 2500 Horse, at the beginning of the Siege. This Enterprize so alarmed the Kingdom, that it obliged the great Favourite D. Luis de Haro to ex∣pose himself to the Danger of the War. During the Siege, the Duke of Ossuna went out to have intercepted a Convoy that was coming to the Enemy's Camp, but being discovered, retired, dividing his Horse into several Squadrons, that they might take sundry Fords. The Portugueses pursued with all their Horse and Foot, and the Duke's Guide having missed the Ford, he was forced with only 400 Horse to face the Enemy. In the heat of the Action his Horse sunk in a Bog, and altho' almost stifled himself in the Mire, he mounted another Horse, and broke the first Battalion of the Portugueses, receiving two Thrusts, which pierced his Ar∣mour and Doublet. One of the Enemy's Soldiers laid hands on him, whom he killed, and seeing himself and all his Horse in danger of being lost, he commanded them to take the River, where 40 of them were drowned. Next night he attacked one of the Enemy's Quarters, killed 200 of them, and brought away 40 Horses. On the 22d of July the Enemy attacked Fort S. Michael with 6000 Foot sustained by Horse. The Duke of Ossuna drew out his Horse, and was ordered with certain Platoons of Musqueteers to charge the Enemy. D. John Pacheco, Lieutenant-General of Horse, led the Van, and fell on; but being over-powered by the Portugues Horse and Foot, was beat back. The Duke came on with his Troops, and repulsed the Enemy, giving time to D. John Pacheco to rally his Men, and charge again, but was still forced to give way to the Multitude. The Duke being still at hand in good Order, suffered not the Enemy to pursue our Vanguard when broken, but advancing took the Ground where the Enemy had stood, which was within Pistol-shot of the Enemy's Battalions, who fired upon him two hours, killing above 17 of his Squadron, and above 120 of the others, and yet no Man broke his Rank. In this posture he continued exposed to the Enemy's Fire, having his Horse killed under him, till the Fort being taken, he was ordered to retire. This Action lasted 5 hours, with considerable loss on our side, and of above 800 of the Enemy, On the 6th of August 1200 of our Horse broke through the Enemy's Line between two Forts, the Duke of Ossuna attacking them in the Rear, and the Duke of S. German in the Front, driving them 6 Leagues as far as Albuquerque, where they halted. On the 22d of August the Enemy planted a Battery of 6 Cannon on the Hill called Cerro del Viento, where we had a Half-moon Palisaded with Redoubts and Flan∣kers, which would contain 2000 Foot and 1000 Horse. Upon the 24th they began to play those 6 Pieces, and 2 from Fort S. Michael, and that day threw above 150 Bullets, but with∣out doing any considerable execution. On the 30th they fired upon Fort S. Christopher, and blew up the Mills; then they cast Bombs into the Quarters of S. Andrew and the Potters. From the 10th of October the Fury of their Batteries began to slacken. That very day D. Luis de Haro set forward from Merida with 12000 Foot and 4500 Horse; which the Portugueses under∣standing, Badajoz relieved: drew off so silently in the Night, that their March could not be discovered, till Morning showed their Army on the other side Guadiana, and they encamped under the Can∣non of Campo Mayor on the 14th. The same day D. Luis de Haro entred Badajoz. Our Army passed the River, and followed the Enemy to the River Gayo, which divides Castile and Por∣tugal, and so held on to Elvas, burning all the Country. The Defence of Badajoz was one of the most Glorious Actions during the War with Portugal, and in which the Duke of Ossuna gave most signal Proofs of his Bravery and Conduct.
Anno 1659. The little Spuadron of Majorca mentioned in the foregoing Year, this Spring took 3 Eng∣lish Ships richly laden from Venice, but in the Fight with them, Jayme Llorens Admiral of the Privatiers had an Arm taken off by a Cannon Ball, of which he soon after died at Maloga. Two other small Squadrons had sailed from Majorca to the Eastward, who scoured the Coasts of Africk and Archipelago, and brought home Prizes. On the 6th of May a Proclamation was published at the Court of Madrid, for lowering the value of Copper Money one half. There died the Archbishop of Besançon, a Prince of the Empire, and Ambassador from the Province of Burgundy. The Spring seemed to threaten great destruction in Flanders. The Marquess de Caraçena Governour of Flanders, (D. John of Austria being gone to Spain) and the Prince of Conde pre∣pared Posture of Affairs in Flanders. to take the Field with a powerful Army of Horse and Foot, and the mean while took care to keep in the French Garrisons from making Incursions towards Gaunt, Bruges and Brussels. Most of the Horse were in Quarters towards Germany, to meet the Archduke Sigis∣mund the new Governour of the low Countries, who brought with him 12000 Foot. The Marquess de Caraçena had taken the Field with 6000 Foot and 7000 Horse, the Prince of Conde had 4000 Foot and 5000 Horse. In France we had at that time the Towns of Rocroy Hedin, Linchen, and Chastelet, whose Garrisons ranging abroad, gathered Contributions of all the Country about. In this Posture were our Affairs when the Enemy began to advance with above 20000 Men. All Europe was in Suspence, expecting the Event of so many Treaties and Overtures of Peace as had been made, and were still delayed and broke off on account of private Interest, Cessation of Arms betwixt France and Spain. when at length about the middle of May by Consent of both Kings of France and Spain, a Cessation of Arms was agreed upon for Two Months, and Expresses sent to all Parts to for∣bid any Hostilities during that time. This news was received with general Joy an Satisfaction, which was increased upon the Prolonging the said Truce, and assured Hope of an ensuing Peace. Irun a small Town in the Province of Guipuzcoa adjoining to France was the Place appointed for to Treat. King Philip made choice of D. Luis Mendez de Haro a Grandee of Spain and his Majesties prime Minister and Favourite for his Plenipotentiary, and the King of France deputed the Cardinal Mazarine his first Minister to bear the same Character on his Part. D. Luis de Haro set forward from Madrid about the beginning of July with a Princely Retinue: Before him went 40 led Horses, then followed 12 Coaches, next, above 40 Sump∣ture Mules, all their Cloaths Embroidered with Gold and Silver. He was attended by a great Number of Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, all Knights of the 3 Military Orders, 24 Pages, as many Valets and Footmen. All the way D. Luis went, he left Marks of his Gran∣deur. At Burgos he gave 1000 Ducats to make a Silver Lamp to hang before the famous Crucifix of that City, he gave Liberty to the Prisoners, relieved many Widows and Or∣phans. At Vitoria he was nobly Entertained by the Gentry, and above 60 of them with their Servants in rich Liveries followed him. At S. Sebastian he staid for the Cardinal, who was not yet come. On the 25th of July the Cardinal came to Bayonne, and on the 28th to S. Jean de Luz the last Town of France, whence he sent a Gentleman to agree with D. Luis de Haro about the Ceremony of their Meeting and Conferences. Besides the many Persons of Quality that accompanied the Plenipotentiaries, each King had sent Two able Civilians to determine all Matters that should be disputable in point of Law. Sir Henry Bennet Ambas∣sador Extraordinary from his Majesty of Great Britain was admitted to the Conference, as was also Monsieur de Leni a Gentleman sent by the Prince of Condè. The King of Great Britain come through France Incognito, and to prevent Suspition entred Spain by the way of Aragon, whence he came through Navarre to the Conference, and was there attended with all the Respect due to his Person, being Served by the King of Spain's immediate Servants and Officers. The Plenipotentiaries sent Presents to one another, and D. Luis understanding that the Cardinal was desirous to see Spanish Plays, caused a Company of Actors to come from Ma∣drid Conferen∣ces for Peace. to satisfie his Curiosity. Some days were spent in adjusting the Place and manner of their meeting. At last it was agreed that a House should be Built in a small Island that lies in the middle of the River Vidasoa which parts Spain and France, one half of it was Built by the French; and the other half by the Spaniards. On the 13 of August the Plenipotentiaries met in this House, where after Embracing, and other Acts of Civility, they sat down, and the Conference lasted from Noon till half an Hour past Four, when they parted, appoint∣ing the next Meeting on the 16th. On the 2d of September, when the 8th Conference was held, came thither the Duke d' Agremont Ambassador Extraordinary from the most Christian King to his Catholick Ma∣jesty. He came to Madrid on the 16th of October: The end of his Embassy was, to ask the Princess Mary Teresa in Marriage for the King his Master. His Reception and Enter∣tainment were greater and more magnificent than any had ever been before. His stay was short, for having obtained what he came to ask, he returned home richly presented, and satisfied with the Success of his Negociation. The Treaty of the Peace went on slowly, but
at last it was concluded on the 7th of November, and an Express carried the News of it Peace Conclu∣ded. to Madrid. The Marriage of the Most Christian King with the Princess, was the Bond to make this Agreement Firm, and Lasting. In this Treaty King Philip had special Re∣gard to the Restoring of the Prince of Conde, in regard to the great Fidelity wherewith he Served Spain for many Years. Hereupon the Prince returned to Court, was graciously Re∣ceived by the King, and again admitted to his Favour. By this Treaty also the Duke of Lorrain was set at Liberty, and went over to France. On the 15th of November between 5 and 6 in the afternoon at Velilla de Ebro, in the A Bell Rings of it self. Church of S. Nicholas seated on a Mountain that Encompasses the Town, a Bell was seen to Ring of it self without the help of any Body. This Bell was called Mary Nicholas, and was cast in the Year 1655. The manner of its Ringing was, that the Clapper moved, and gave 3, or 4, or 6, even to 10 Stroaks, sometimes more, sometimes less, on the East-side, and one or two on the West-side; this by Intervals or Intermission of about half a Minute. The strokes were Vigorous, as if guided by a strong Arm, and lasted the space of Two hours; many of the Townsmen being Eyewitnesses to it. In that Steeple there are 3 Bells, which hang along one side of the Wall, in Three Arched Windows. That which is to∣wards Zaragoça is the ancient Bell so much spoken of by our Historians. Next to it in the mid∣dle hangs another called S. Agatha, which has been also heard to Ring of it self. and next to it is the last I now speak of. Strange and Remarkable accidents have happened after this sort of Ringing; which sometimes have proved unfortunate, and other times prosperous. This Year the Knights of Malta took 7 Ships of Argiers and Tunez, of a very great Va∣lue. A most notable Victory was obtained by the Poles and Brandenburghers, over Charles Adolphus, the Palatine of Deuxponts who had lain long at the Siege of Copenhaguen, the Me∣tropolis of the Kingdom of Denmark. He had 3000 Men killed, besides a great number of Officers. The Poles took 1750 Prisoners, 102. Pieces of Cannon, 112 Colours, a great quantity of Ammunition, and all the Baggage. Of the Victorious Army many were killed and wounded, as may be supposed in so great an Action. Anno 1660. King Philip designing to forward the Marriage of the Princess, in order to the Perpe∣tuating the Peace Concluded betwixt the Two Crowns, declared his Resolution to go in K. Philip goes with the Prin∣cess his Daughter to the Frontiers. Person to the Province of Guipuzeoa, to be present there at the Solemnization of his Daugh∣ters Nuptials, and at the same time to visit his only Sister, the Queen Mother of France; who that she might obtain a sight of him, had earnestly sollicited that the Two Kings might meet. His Journey wat fixt for the 15th of Aprill, and a vast Number of Mules and Carts was sent from both Castiles, Andaluzia, Aragon and Valencia, for the carrying of all the Bag∣gage of the Court, whereof this was some small part. Twelve Trunks lined and covered with Crimson Velvet, the Hinges, Bars, Locks and Keys of Silver, in which were 23 whole Suits for the Princess, all extraordinary rich. Twenty other Trunks covered with Russia Leather, all the Iron work guilt, filled with a mighty quantity of all sorts of fine Linnen. Six other Truncks covered with Amber-leather, lined within with Crimson Sattin, with Hinges Locks and Bars of Gold Enameld: Two of them full of Amber Gloves, whisker Cases, Purses, and other curiosities were for the Duke of Anjou: The other Four carried great Riches for the Princess to bestow among the French Ladies. Fifty Sumptures carried the Princesses dressing Plate, and the rest for her ordinary use, besides an infinite quantity of Perfumes to present. Other 25 Sumptures contained most exquisite rich Hangings and Tapistry. For her Entrance into Paris there were 18 Sumpture Cloths most costly Embroi∣dered with Gold and Silver, and many Liveries for the Men that were to lead the Sumptures. For the Princesses use in Paris there was carried a Sedan adorned with Silver, wrought in the manner of a Flanders Lace. For to give Charity, and other Gifts she had 50000 Pistoles, the King had laid aside for his own use a greater Sum. The 14th of April being come, their Majesties after Visiting the Church of our Lady of Atocha, and that the King had made his will (as is usual before the Monarchs of Spain un∣dertake any Journey) gave leave for the Ladies of the Court to come and take their Conge of the Princess: As they came in his Majesty Received them with his Hat in his Hand, the Queen and Princess Embraced them, and so they went out at another Door, making way for those that came after them. Thursday the 15th of April the King and Princess set out with such a numerous Train of Coaches, Horse litters, and Horses, that they extended 6 Leagues before them. Before the King went 8 of the Town Trumpets, cloathed in Red and Yellow, their Trumpet-cloaths richly Embroidered with the Arms of France and Spain. Next followed Four State Coaches and as many Horse-litters, then Two Coaches with the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, then several other Litters and the State Horses: Then a great number of the Nobility and Gentry, and after them the Grandees, each of whom had several Coaches, and Gentlemen attending them, and a great number of Servants in rich Liveries; of which every one had 3 Suits, one for this Day, another to Travel, and a Third for the Wedding Day. Above all, the Duke of Medina de las Torres had 140 Servants, with
each 3 Suits of Liveries for the 3 Days, besides that, brought him from Naples, which Cost 40000 Ducats. After these were, his Majesties Pages and other Servants a Horseback, car∣rying rich Portmanteaus of Crimson Velvet, laced with Gold. After them was the King's Coach, in which was he and the Princess, followed by the Ladies, then the Sumpture Mules, and next after them 72 long Waggons. His Majesty had in his Journey 18 Horse-litters, 70 Coaches of his, and the Nobilities, 2100 Sumpture Mules, 70 State Horses, 12 Pads, 500 other Mules for Carriage, 900 saddle Mules, 32 long Waggons. Officers were sent before to repair the Ways, and others to make the necessary Provision at all Places where his Majesty was to Bait. He took his Way through Alcala de Henares, Guadalaxara, Hita, Xadra∣que, Atiença, Berlanga, S. Estevan de Gormaz, Aranda and Lerma, where he made some stay to see the Fire-works and Bull-feast prepared for his Entertainment by the Duke of that Name. Next day he came to Burgos, and staid there till the 30th, that City spending 20000 Ducats to Entertain him. Thither also came Two Gentlemen, sent by the King of France to Com∣plement his Majesty, and Acquaint him with the death of John Baptist Gaston Duke of Orleans commonly called in France the Great Uncle, because he was so to the most Christian King, to the Princess he was going to Marry, to the King of England, the Duke of Savoy, the Dutchesses of Bavaria and Parma, and the Princess Dowager of Orange. Upon this News his Majesty Commanded the publick Rejoicing to cease, the Court to go into Black. On Friday the 30th of April he set forwards from Burgos, and on the 3d of May came to Vitoria, the chief City of the Province Alova: Here he was Royally again Treated, and the City Presented him with 10000 Ducats in Gold. Here another Gentleman met him from the Queen Mother of France, desiring him to hasten his Journey, for the great desire she had to see him and the Princess. To be short he passed through Salinas, Villareal, Villafranca, Tolosa, and on the 11th of May came to S. Sebastian. On the 14th, he went to Los Pas∣sages, Two little Towns upon a Creek that runs into the Bay of Biscay, where in a rich Barge he took a view of all the Men of War that lay in that Place. Upon the 2d of June the Princess Solemnly Renounced all Right and Title to the Crown of Castile, upon Oath for her self and her Heirs. D. Ferdinand Ruiz de Contreras, Secretary of State, read aloud the Form of Renunciation, and the Oath to the new Queen of France, which done, the Bishop of Pamplona took the Holy Gospel, and Presenting it to the new Queen, she took her Oath to perform all that had been read by the Secretary. Next day their Majesties having heard Mass in the Church which was Adorned in all costly manner, the Bishop of Pamplona who had Officiated, turned to the Princess, and asked of Ceremo∣ny of Contract∣ing the Princess. her, if she would have to her Husband Luis of Bourbon, the most Christian King of France; then the Princess kneeling before her Father, asked his Consent, which granted, she stood up, and the Bishop repeated the same Words; but she answered not till he asked the Questi∣on the 3d time, and then gave her Consent. Then laying her right Hand upon one side of a great Gold Bason, D. Luis de Haro laid his Hand on the opposite Part, and being asked by the Bishop, whether by Virtue of the Commission he had of the most Christian King, he would in his Name take to Wise the Lady Teresa of Austria, Princess of Spain, he answered he would, and taking a Ring of Inestimable Value, stretched it towards the new Queens Hand without touching her, which his Majesty taking up, put upon the 3d Finger of her left Hand. After this Ceremony, Te Deum was Sung, and all the Cannon Fired. On the 5th of June the King privately saw his Sister, the Queen Mother of France, and on the 6th, both the Kings met in the House on the Island of the River that parts Spain and France. In this Congress they testified all possible Affection one to another: Their Majesties being Seated, Cardinal Mazarine brought a Mass Book, on which the King of France took his Oath to Observe all the Articles of the Peace lately Concluded. The Catholick King did the same, the Patriarch of the West-Indies holding the Book: This done, all the Company voided the Room, and their Majesties remained alone for Four hours. In the afternoon both Kings Rode out along the Banks of the River: After this they sent Presents to one another of inestimable Value. On the 7th, the Two Kings met again in the House of the Confe∣rence, with a multitude of Attendance in most costly Attire, they were above an hour in Private and then the Doors being set open, all the great Men of both Kingdoms came in, and kissed their Hands. This Ceremony being over, King Philip took leave of his Daughter, and both Kings parted. King Philip the next day set out towards Madrid, whither he came on the 2oth, having by the way been Entertained with all Princely Grandeur at Val∣lladolid. The Marriage of the most Christian King and Queen was Celebrated in the Church of The mar∣riage of the Prin∣cess. S. John de Luz on the 9th of June. On the 12th, their Majesties gave Audience to the Ambassadors of Poland, Sweden, Ve∣nice, Gema and Savoy, who came to Congratulate their happy Conjunction. That same day arrived at that Town the Count de Fuensaldan̄a, with a mighty Train of Spanish and Italian Gentry, 36 Sumptures, 20 State Horses, 8 Coaches, and 100 Footmen, their Live∣ries Embroidered with Gold and Silver. Some Persons of Quality, and the Introductor of of Ambassadors went out to Meet, and Conducted him to the Palace, where he was Vi∣sited by at the Nobility. Next day he had Audience of their most Christian Majesties. The King and Queen Departing towards Paris on the 2d of August, came to Fontainbleau, a
most delightful Palace. On the 10th they went to Bois de Vincennes, where they stayed, that all things might be in a readiness for their Reception at Paris. Hence they set out the 26th, and in the Suburb of S. Antonie of Paris, stopped in a stately Hall built on purpose, and rich∣ly adorned to receive the Compliments of the Clergy, Magistrates, and University. From this Place to the Palace of the Louvre, was made a Lane of the 16 Regiments of Militia of that City, each consisting of 700 Men, in all, 11200, richly clad, through which the King and Queen passed to the said Palace. Thus Peace was restored not only to France and Spain, but almost to all Europe, this most memorable Year 1660, and Germany had leisure to provide, to oppose the Designs of the Ot∣toman Emperor, whose mighty Army was coming into Hungary, threatning Destruction to all those Countreys. Venice still continued the War against the Infidels in Candia. England rejoiced in the Restoration of as rightful Sovereign. Anno 1661. D. John of Austria being Commissioned to command the Army against Portugal, came to Zafra upon the 21th of March, where he made a Review of all the Forces, and visited the D. John of Austria commands against Portugal. Magazines and Stores, all which he found better provided, than had been imagined. The Horse mustered at Truxillo, and were found 6300 strong, of whom D. James Cavallero their General took Charge. Soon after, 500 of our Horse took 50 Mules loaded with Arms and Ammunition, that were going from Elvas to Campomayor, without lossing a Man. D. John of Austria marched from Badajoz on the 15th of June, with 15 Battalions of Foot, consisting of 9560 Men, and 5200 Horse. The same Day he came in Sight of Campomayor, which fear∣ing a Siege, was well provided for its Defence. By the way the Watch-Towers, and the Cas∣tle of Origuela were blown up, and the Town destroyed, and at Night the Army posted at self in order to lay Siege to Aronches. Next Day they began their Approaches, and cast in some He takes Aronches. and other Places. Bombs. The 17th, four-Pieces of Cannon began to batter the Place, and the Portugueses per∣ceiving a Breach would soon be made, capitulated; and a Garrison was put into it. Such as would stay in the Town, were allowed to possess what they had, the rest to depart within 8 Days. Aronches is a Town of about 500 Houses, standing on the River Alegrete, has good Walls and a Castle, sends a Representative to the Cortes or Parliament. Its Trade is Cloath, it lies near Portalegre, and 3 Leagues from Albuquerque, and by this means, all Re∣lief was cut-off from Elvas and Campomayor, on that side. The Enemy having assembled their Army at Estremoz, and finding it too weak for ours, broke it up, and dispersed it into Garisons, our Horse the mean while wasting all the Coun∣try 3 Leagues round Aronches. D. John upon their breaking up, with 4000 Horse marched to Estremoz, and no Enemy appearing in the Field, turned off to Veiros. He sent a Trumpet to summon this Place, and having received an ill Answer, caused part of the Cavally to dismount, who assaulted the Town and entring it put all to the Sword, who had not time to flie to the Castle, and then plundered their Houses, which afterwards they set fire to, as they did to all the Villages, Corn and Trees about it. D. John resolving to make Aronches his chief Maga∣zine and Place of Rendevouz; for the Province of Alentejo repaired the Walls and Castle, for∣tified the Parish Church, raised 5 Bastions, 4 Ravelins, two great Platforms, and a Half Moon, made a Dih 40 Foot wide, and 20 in depth, and a covered way to the Ditch palizaded. This obliged the Enemy, to fortifie and Garrison several Places; as Estremoz, Villavicisa, Ale∣grete, and others. The Fortifications being ended, and all the Country ravaged, D. John garrisoned the frontien Towns, and put 1000 Foot and 400 Horse, into Aronches with Provision for 6 Months, and 11 Pieces of Cannon, leaving D. Ventura de Tarragona Gover∣nour; which done, he returned to Badajoz, and put his Army into Quarters, designing to take the Field again about the end of September. As our Army was marching to Quarters, the Earl of Cantaneda, the Enemies. General, came out of Estremoz, with 1000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and took a view of Aronches, whence the Cannon made him remove, having killed 18 of his Horse, and the chief Ingineer of Portugal. D. John hearing of this their Motion, marched towards them with his Army, but they retired under the Cannon of  and Elvas, where they continued some Days, our Army lying in sight of them, till they not able to endure the heat of the Dog-Days, dispersed into their Garrisons, and D. John quartered his Men as was before designed. Our Horse lest at Aronches, made an Incursion towards Por∣talegre, and brought away 7000 head of Cattle. Count Sohomberg one of the Enemies Generals, with 16 Squadrons of Horse attacked the Enterpri∣zes on the Frontiers of Portu∣gal Guard of the Bridge at Badajoz, to whose Assistance D. John Pacheco Lieutenant General of Horse, was come with 5 Squadrons out of the Town. They had a sharp Dispute but our Lieutenant General being killed, his Men discouraged retired to the Town, 600 Horse of Aronches made another  towards Portalegre, took 5300 head of Cattle, plundered many Gentlemen's Houses, I made a Party of 60 of the Enemies Horse Prisoners, and retired without meeting any Opposition. The harms done by the Garrison of Aronches were so great that the neighbouring Towns, petitioned the Queen, either to reduce that Place, or  them to pay Contributions that they might be able to subsist. D. John of Austria marched out of Zia∣fra with 3000 Foot; 2000 Horse, and 4 Pieces of Cannon; and on the 5th of December, sur∣prised
Alconchel, with the loss of only 5 Men. This is a strong Castle, on this side Guadiana, whence the Enemy used to infest all the Country about. There were in it when taken, 90 Foot, and 30 Horse, much Cattle, other Provisions and Ammunition. D. John having put 160 Horse and Foot under the Command of a Major into this Fort, with all Necessaries for their Subsistence returned to Zafra, and sent his Forces into Quarters. The Portugueses hired 6 English Merchant Ships, and sent aboard them to the Jews of Leghorn 3200 Chests of Sugar, much Brazil Wood, Spice and other Goods, to the Value of 600000 Ducats. These Ships were taken by the Algorines, who having lightned them of all the Merchandize, and made Prisoners of 140 Portugueses and Italians, dismissed the English with their Vessels, being then at Peace with them, and gave each of the Masters 25 Chests of Sugar, to pay their Freight. The Duke of Ossuna being come to the Frontiers of Castile, with the Post of Captain Gene∣ral, encamped beyond the Bridge of Guidad Rodrigo with Two Thousand Four Hundred Foot, Four hundred Horse, and 4 Pieces of Cannon. Thence he warched to Gallegos, a strong Gar∣rison Duke of Ossima his Actions in Portugal. of ours, 2 Leagues and a half from Guidad Rodrigo, and so passed on Two Leagues and a half farther to Valdelamula, the first Town of the Enemy, a Place well fortified, and seated on a rising Ground. He sent to summon the Garrison, who returned a resolute Answer. The Duke appointed 4 Captains with each 100 Men, at once to scale the Walls in as many places, who advanced courageously, and tho' the Enemy made a hot Fire, breaking down the Pallisa∣does, layed their Ladders to the Walls, and mounted, making themselves Masters of the Fort. Many of the Defendants were killed, one Captain, some other Officers, and 60 Men made Prisoners. The Governour fled casting himself off the Wall, and Night favouring his Escape. Of our Men only 4 were killed, and as many wounded. The same Day, the Duke sent a Sum∣mons to the Town and Castle of S. Peter, half a League from Valdelamula, and as much from Almeyda, but the Garrison refusing, he marched thither with a Regiment of Foot, and at first sight the Place was surrendred, upon Condition, the Inhabitants might depart with their Goods. Three Watch Towers in sight of Almeyda were taken and burnt, as were the Towns of Juncia and Malpartida. S. Peter's Fort was demolished, being so near Valdelamula. Almo∣sala was also burnt, after the Inhabitants had made some Resistance. Much Corn was found in all these Places, which served the Horse for Forrage, and all the rest was burnt. D. Roderick de Castro Count of Amezquitela, and General of the Province Tralosmontes, was now marching towards these Frontiers, with 5000 Foot, and 6 Troops of Horse. The same did D. John de Melo, Governour of the Province Beira, with other 5000 Foot and some Horse. D. Sancho Manuel was also ordered this way with 3000 Foot, and 1500 Horse. The Duke of Ossuna finding himself too weak, to oppose so great a Power, demolished the Fort of Valdelamula, blew up the Tower, and burnt the Town, there being no possibility of relieving it if besieged. This done, he fortified Gallegos, and then marching to Albergaria layed Siege to it. He had but 4 Pieces of Cannon, the 2 biggest of which burst at the beginning of the Batte∣ry; yet he brought the other two nearer to the Wall, and having made a Breach, the Garrison Capitulated, and delivered the Place upon honourable Conditions. Hence he removed, and by Force took Soto and Quadrasa, both which he hurnt, overthrowing all the Works about them. In these three last Towns were taken from the Enemy, above 20000 bushel of Corn, and 30 Horses, and all the Mountain Gata with the Country about, were cleared of Enemies, for Albergaria and those other Towns, kept all that Country in awe, so that there was no Traffick, nor Security in any part. On the 1st of November, it pleased God to take away Prince Philip Prosper. He died of Con∣vulsion Fits, which he had been subject to since his Birth. To make up for this Loss, the Queen Prince Philip dies. was happily delivered on the 6th of November of another Prince, who was baptized the 21th of the said Month, in the Royal Chappel; by D. Alonso Perez de Guzman, Patriarch of the Indies, and called Charles Joseph, with 15 other Names. The publick Joy for the Birth of this Prince, was redoubled with the News brought to Court, that on the 1st of November, was born the Dauphin of France, Grandson to his Catholick Majesty. At Malaga on the 22d of September between 7 and 8 in the Morning, all that City and the Country about, was so darkened with black Clouds, that every body foresaw some Destruction A terrible Storm. like to follow. At 9 it began to thunder, lighten and rain, with such violence, that the Gutters could not carry the Water off the Houses, nor the Streets deliver the great Flood. This lasted till Noon, when the Rivulets that fall from the Mountain of Gibraltar swelled so high, that they filled the Houses in those Streets near them; and those Waters meeting with the Flood, issuing from Guadalmedina, which comes from the Hills of Casavermeja and Zambra, broke down the wooden Bridge opposite to the new Gate, carrying it away, till it stuck a cross the great Arch of the Stone Bridge, over against the Monastey of S. Dominick. That being a stop to the pas∣sage of the Waters, they bore down the Bridge with its Towers, and carried all away to the Sea, which at that time ran in Mountains, casting up its broken Waves to the Clouds. The Inundation bore away all the Houses from the Orchards of the 13 Crosses, as far as the Slaugter∣house Gate, scarce leaving any Monuments that there had been Buildings there. It also bore down the Wall at the new Gate, and broke into the City, filling several Streets, and finding no way out, still rose, drowning some Quarters of the City, and in S. John's Street, came up to the Floors of the second Stories. All the Street de los Almaçnes, or of the Storehouses, was drowned, and all the Provisions and Merchandize laid up there were lost. Several Quar∣ters
of the City were totally ruined, as were the Monasteries of S. Dominick and S. Francis, be∣ing so shaken, they were rendred uninhabitable. Great numbers of People fled to the tops of their Houses, which falling; they were carried away into the Mediterranean, or buried in the Ru∣ines. Among the other Destruction made by the River Guadalmedina, it was observed, to take one corner House away intire, and carry it so for a great space, till at last it fell in pieces, with the death of 16 Persons that were in it. At 3 in the Afternoon, the Storm ceased, and at 5, the Water was gone out of the Streets, at which time the Bishop and Governour gave great Alms, among the poor People that were found alive in the ruinated Houses. Above 1600 Houses were utterly destroyed, 3000 so shaken, that they threatned Ruine, above 2000 Per∣sons lost, and the whole Dammage was computed at, above 3 Millions. A Ship of the Biscainers putting out of S. Sebastian, met a Vessel of 28 Guns, bound from Bayonne to Portugal, which refusing to produce any Pass, was sunk, and in it 35 Men, only 17 being saved by the Biscaniers, among whom were 3 Portugues Fidalgos, or Noblemen. There was also taken a Trunk with Letters in it, from the Envoy in England, to the King of Portu∣gal, which were sent to Court. On the 26th of September arrived at Corun̄a, our Squadron Riches of the Spanish Fleet. that was out to secure the West-India Fleet, with the Ships of the firm Land and new Spain, be∣ing 34 Sail. These Ships, besides a Chest of Pearls, of inestimable Value, brought for his Ma∣jesty, 3247460 Pieces of Eight, and for private Persons, 6476690, in all, 9724150 Pieces of Eight. The Fleet having landed the Plate there, sailed again with the other Merchandize, and arrived at Cadiz on the 13th of November. Amar Aga Alcaide and Governour of Tremecen, had destroyed all the Corn belonging to those Moors that lived about Oran, and had submitted themselves to the Spanish Governour of Marquess de Lega∣nez de∣stroys ma∣ny Moors about O∣ran. that Place, who was then the Marquess of Leganes. These Moors used to bring their Corn to sell to that City, and the Garrison subsisted upon it. The Marquess finding that no fair Means, or Threats prevailed upon those People to reduce them, marched out with 350 Foot, and 180 Horse, and forded the River Cid Soliman, six Leagues from Oran; then falling upon the Moors who live along that River, he took 64 Slaves, 12 Horses, and a great number of Cattle, whereof notice was immediately given to Amar Aga. He gathering his Turks, lay in wait for the Marquess in his Return, at the Ford of the River Cique, where they engaged, and 15 Turks were killed, among whom was Xeque Salem Beniahim. Amar Aga was in danger of be∣ing taken, having his Horse killed, and escaped upon another, given him by his Guards. The Turks retired to Tremecen, and the Marquess returned victorious to Oran. Not content with this, he went out again with the same number of Horse and Foot, and marching 7 Leagues to Zanua, Zafa, and Mediona brought under 9 Hords of Arabs, containing 986 Moors, 132 Tents, and 16000 Head of Cattle. Thus all those neighbouring Moors were again brought under Subjection, and the Turks disappointed, to the great Honour of the Mar∣quess of Leganes. Three Ships sailed from Alicant richly Laden with Merchandize for Venice, and had aboard, the Servants and Equipage of the Cardinal D. Pasqual de Aragon, and other Passengers. Near the Island of S. Peter they met 5 Turkish Pyrats, and after Cannonading one another above 3 hours, one of the 3 Ships which was French sunk, another which was a Hollander, being in danger to be taken burnt it self, the 3 getting off in the Night, arrived safe at Leghorn, with 7 Turks that remain'd alive, of above 100 that Boarded her. Cardinal Pasqualis of Aragon made his publick Entry into Rome on the 7th of June, and on the 29th after the Pope had heard Mass, presented him the Hacaney and Purse, with 7000 Du∣cats, which our Kings every Year pay, as an Acknowledgment for the Kingdom of Naples, and that Night there was publick Rejoicings throughout the whole City. Cardinal Mazarine, prime Minister of France, died the 9th of March. A violent Storm of Wind on the 30th of March overthrew above 150 Houses in the City Pau, in the Province of Bearn. On the 31th, the Duke of Orleans only Brother to the most Christian King, married his Cousin German Henrietta Maria, Sister to the King of England, and on the 18th of April, the Lady Luisa of Bourbon, 2d Daughter to the Duke of Orleans was by Proxy contracted to Mathius, eldest Son to the Duke of Florence. The Pope's Bull was published at Paris the 19th of June, absolutely forbidding the Doctrine of Jansenius. Queen Christina of Sweden, who resided at Rome, having abdicated that Kingdom, hearing of the Death of her Cousin King Charles Adolphus, returned to Sweden, and made a solemn En∣try into Stockholm, where complaining, that her Pension of 200000 Rixdollers was not duly paid her, it was agreed in the Dyet, She should have, 150000 paid every Year, provided She retired to some part of the Kingdom, or else to Rome, where She was before. Such was the hatred conceived against her, for embracing the Catholick Religion. The War still continued hot, betwixt the Venetians and the Turks in Candia, and other Parts, 15 Turkish Galleys were cast away in the Euxine Sea, and 5 others on the Coast of Mo∣rea, War be∣twixt the Venetians and Tarks. as also three Barbary Pyrats on the Coast of Sicily. A great Earthquake hapned at Con∣stantinople, which overthrew many Buildings, and killed a great number of People. The Ve∣netian Fleet had a sharp Engagement with 18 Turkish Ships that were carrying Supplies to Candia, but a sudden Storm parted and dispersed them into several Ports. The Turks entred Transilvania with an Army of 60000 Men, and laid Siege to Plasemburg, near Hermanstadt the chief City. Ragotzi Prince of Transilvania, attempted to put Relief into Turks en∣ter Transil∣vania.
the Place with only 4000 Men, and tho' heexecuted it, with the loss of only 700 of his Soldiers, and the Destruction of 6000 of the Enemy, yet he having received 14 Wounds, and soon af∣ter dying, the City was taken by the Infidels. Hence the Turks began to spread into Hungary, doing much Mischief; but the Counts Herberstein and Serini, gathering 12000 Men, killed 800 of them, took 700 Prisoners, and returned with a great Booty. After this the Turks made vast Preparations in all Parts, and brought the Asian Forces into Europe, in Order to invade the Dominions of the Christians. This moved the Emperor to send Ambassadors to all Chris∣tian Princes, praying Aid against the common Enemy. He had then an Army of 30000 Men, commanded by Count Souches, in readiness to repel the Incursions of the Infidels. In Germany this Year it is reported, there appeared near the Circle of the rising Sun, a Star like a Comet, of such brightness, that it darkned that glorious Planet; and not far from the Comet, a Scimiter of a fiery Colour, and under it a Cross with Arms, very bright and glori∣ous. A Prodi∣gy. Three other Scimiters are said to have been seen, one over the Kingdom of Persia, ano∣ther over Sweden, and the third over Dalmatia. In the Air was heard strange noise as of Bat∣tel, with Shouts, and other warlike Sounds. Anno 1662. Our Army on the Borders of Portugal, rendevouzed on the 2d of May at Talaveruela, Mon∣tijo, Lobin, and Badajoz; and having made Provision of Victuals and Ammunition, passed over the River Guadiana upon the 7th, at the Bridge of Badajoz with all their Cannon and Train. They drewup between Caya and Fort S. Christopher; facing Campo-mayor and Elvas, and march∣ing D. John of Austria en∣ters Portu∣gal. along the River Caya, encamped within half a League of Elvas. All the Army being there joined, on the 8th D. John of Austria came thither from Badajoz, and was received with Volleys of great and small Shot. Next Day, upon their March they mustered, and found 5000 Horse and 9000 Foot effective, beside Officers, the best Troops that had ever been in that Army. Having laid a Bridge over Cayn, they marched by the side of Elvas, blew up 3 Watch-Towers that lay towards Campo-Mayor, and encamped half a League beyond Eluas. On the 10th, the Train marched along the great Road to Lisbon, Orders being given to de∣stroy all the Country Houses in the way. A small Tower offering to make Resistance, was forced by D. James Cavallero, and the Commander of it hanged for an Example. This made the next, called de los Zapateros immediately submit upon honourable Conditions. A Trum∣pet was sent to summon Villabuy, which was a quarter of a League distant, the Soldiers answered, they were paid and would fight. D. James Cavallero, was sent with 4 Pieces of Cannon, and 2 Regiments of Foot, and Orders, if they did not surrender, to give no Quarter. The Gar∣rison which consisted but of 62 Soldiers and some Peasants, seing the Danger capitulated. Two Towers were there blown up, and all the Orchards and Corn destroyed. The 11th, the Army continued its March in the Lisbon Road burning the Country. An Express was taken going from the Portugues General to Elvas, with Letters encouraging the Governour to behave him∣self manfully, for that he had 8000 Foot, and 3800 Horse, and expected more Troops to fight the Enemy. D. John having read the Letters, ordered the Express to return, and tell the General, he would endeavour to see him next day by Noon. Our Forces advancing to∣wards Estremoz, some small Skirmishes hapned by the way. The 12th, D. John understand∣ing that the Enemies Army lay within half a League of Estremoz, in the Olive-Gardens, he marched that way, to be as good as his word, but the Enemy retired under the Walls of Estre∣moz, and entrenched themselves. Their Force was 8000 Foot and 3000 Horse. Ten Pieces of Cannon were planted on a rising Ground and played upon them, they answering with four, and some Men were killed on both sides. All the Country about was burnt at Night, our Army encamped within half a League of the Town in the way to Borba. The Baggage on the 13th was sent before towards Borba, the Army still standing in array, facing the Enemy. Borba has above 500 Houses, two Convents, two good Churches, and se∣veral He takes Borba and Juramen∣ha. pleasant Country Houses about it. The Town was walled, and the Streets Barridaded, and in the midst of it stood a Castle. Our Army coming before this Place, battered it with four Pieces of Cannon, and to Regiments of Foot giving the Assault entred it. Then they assaulted the Castle, in which were 500 Men, and forced the Palizades, but lost a Colonel, two Majors, four Captains of Foot, and about 100 Men. The Town was plundered, and all the Garrison and Inhabitants made Prisoners. On the 14th, the Army halted in the Or∣chards of Borba, burning and destroying all the Town and Country, and in the Market-place, hanged the Governour called Emanuel de Acuna and two Captains. Next day the Forces mar∣ched by Villaviciosa, and killed many Deer in the Duke of Braganca's Park, a very delightful Place; whence they continued their March four Leagues, as far as Jurumenha. A Soldier of that Garrison being taken, reported there were in the Place, 3 Regiments of Foot. The 16th was spent in making Fascines to attack the Town, because the Enemies Army was mar∣ching with all speed to relieve it, for that it was one of the principal Inlets into Portugal on the side of Alentejo, which is the richest Province of that Kingdom. The Enemy being within half a League of our Army D. James Cavallero advanced with part of it to offer them Battel, but they Intrenched and covered themselves with their Carriages. Emanuel Lobato Pinto Go∣vernor of the Place perceiving them intrench, capitulated; and delivered it upon honourable Terms.
Anno 1663. This Year our Army in Estremadura, under the Command of D. John of Austria, being very numerous, pierced into Portugal as far as Evora, which was surrendred without any D. John takes Evo∣ra, and i afterwards routed. Bloodshed. This struck a Terror into the City of Lisbon, as being so near, and the King had thoughts of withdrawing from thence to some Place of more Safety. D. John retiring towards Badajoz, to join a Body of Foot that was there ready, and so to continue what he had so well began, was charged by the Enemy's Forces near Estremoz, in a place where the Horse could do no Service. The Enemy at the first onset broke our Cavalry, and they disordering the Foot, the whole Army was put to the rout, losing all their Baggage, and several Persons of Note were taken Prisoners, among whom was the Marquess of Liche, and D. Anelo de Guz∣man, Son to the Duke of Medina de la Torres. Evora being not yet fortified, fell immediately into the hands of the Victorious Portugueses. The Duke of Ossuna being declared General of the Frontiers about Cuidad Rodrigo, was at Madrid, without any Inclination to return to that Command; but having received repeated Duke of Ossuna a∣gain in Portugal. Orders to go to his Post, obeyed. Immediately upon his arrival there, he appeared before Valdelamula with 2000 Foot, 800 Horse, and 8 Pieces of Cannon. That Night he encamped about the Fort, and raised a Battery, which he next morning began to play upon the Place. The Governour, who was no great Soldier, at Noon beat the Chamade, and surrendred, having at that time 250 Men, and the Fort in good Condition, with 4 strong Bastions. The Duke finding it not practicable to fortifie that place, made choice of a rising Ground hard by it, on which, with the Advice of Monsieur Locquet, a French Enginier sent him by D. John of Austria, he resolved to build a Fort Royal. The Work being drawn out, and fresh Supplies coming in, so that the Duke had 4000 Foot and 1200 Horse, more was done in a Month than could reasonable have been imagined, all the Officers and the Duke himself being con∣tinually present, and encouraging the Men. The Portugueses fearing the raising of the Fort might prove of ill consequence to them, gathered a Body of 10000 Foot and 1600 Horse, resolving by the way to take Albergaria. Their Design being discovered by the Duke, he sent at midnight D. Antony de Isasie, Lieutenant-General of Horse, who put some Companies of Foot and other necessary Supplies into the Town; which being known to the Enemy, they drew back the Troops sent to invest it. Being disappointed of that Enterprize, they ad∣vanced towards the Duke, who being far inferior in Number, thought not fit to expose his Men in open Field, but drew into the Fort, which was now in a good posture of defence. He caused a Tenail, which was joined to the Fort by a Covered way, to be finished, and pla∣ced therein 1000 Foot and 200 Horse. The rest of the Foot he drew into the Fort, placing the Horse on the Flanks, and expected that Night the Enemy, who lay within Musquet-shot, should make some attempt. They stirred not, but kept the same Ground two days, the Can∣non playing on both sides. The Portugueses having Intelligence that 250 Horse and 300 Foot were on their way to reinforce the Duke, sent out 1000 Horse to intercept them; but the Duke sent them Orders to march another way, and he at the same time alarming the Enemy's Camp, they came safe to him. The Duke hearing a Shot from Almeida, guessed it to be a Signal of some Convoy that was coming to the Enemy, he therefore commanded the Lieute∣nant-General of Horse with all the Cavalry and 500 Fire Arms to march out and intercept it. He followed himself, having advanced two Castilians to discover the Convoy; they met two Battalions of the Enemy, which retired hastily to their Body. The Portugues marched ano∣ther way than the Duke had thought, who readily formed 6 Squadrons in the Vanguard, and drew them off to receive them. Our Vanguard charged theirs, which also consisted of 6 great Squadrons, and both Parties fought with such Courage, that they changed their Ground, ours being over-powered by the Multitude. The Duke, who was in the midst of them, hasted to his main Battel, where his Horse received two Carabine Shots, and ordering them to charge the Portugueses in Flank, broke both their Vanguard and main Battel, pursuing them to their Foot with great Slaughter. They rallied under the covert of their Musqueteers; and that ours might have time to make up the Disorder caused by the Charge, the Duke ordered the Re∣serve of the old Guards and Companies of D. Antony Ramirez, and the Count de Bueto to ad∣vance. The Enemy retired within their Lines, having lost 700 Horse, and among them many Persons of Note. Their speedy retreat by Night sufficiently testified the loss they had sustained. The great advantage of raising that Fort was, that it covered all our Country, and commanded a great part of the Enemy's, above 40 Towns in a rich Soil being thereby brought under Contribution, and the Enemy obliged to maintain great Garrisons in Alfayates, Almeyda, Castel Rodrigo, and other Places. In the Place where Fort Valdelamula stood, was erected a Watch-Tower to hold sixteen Men, who could thence discover all the Country about. This Year came to Madrid Sir Richard Fanshaw, Ambassador from his Majesty of Great Bri∣tain, The K.'s Daughter Margaret married to the Em∣peror. with his Wise, and a great Retinue. The Count of Peting also came from the Emperor to ask the Lady Margaret of Austria, Daughter to King Philip IV. in Marriage. The Articles being agreed upon, were read in Council upon the 18th of December, which was celebrated with great Demonstrations of Publick Joy and Satisfaction.
The Duke de Crequi, the most Christian King's Ambassador at Rome, having one of his Servants killed by some of the Pope's Guards by his Wife's Coach-side, complained to the King his Master of this Affront, who so highly resented it, that the Pope was forced to give him all the Satisfaction he could demand. In Denmark a Conspiracy was discovered against that King, for which some Persons suffered death, and others fled. The King of Poland ha∣ving broke off the Treaty of Peace with the Muscovites, invaded their Territories, doing great harm, and taking many Towns. The Turks entring Hungary with 150000 Men, laid Siege to Newhausel, which tho' well defended, was at last forced to surrender, after which several other places were taken. They in vain attempted the Island of Schuts, which was made good against them by Count Serini. The Grand Visier, after this prosperous Expedi∣tion, leaving the Bassa Hali with sufficient Force upon the Frontiers, returned to Con∣stantinople. Anno 1664. This Year not being remarkable for any Action at home, because the War with Portugal was for the most part defensive, and nothing considerable hapned therein, it will not be amiss to make it up with something not altogether foreign, that is, the Success of the Wars betwixt the Emperor and the Turks: I account this Relation not so much from our purpose, in re∣gard it belongs to the House of Austria, and also that King Philip sent considerable Supplies in fa∣vour of his Imperial Majesty. Leopold the Emperor on the 5th of January gave Audience to the Ambassador of the Most War be∣twixt the Emperor and the Turk. Christian King to the Diet of Ratisbon, where his Imperial Majesty then was, and the next day heard the Pontifical Mass, and performed his Devotions to beg of God the Union of Christian Princes, and Success of their Arms against the Turks. It appeared Almighty God heard his Prayers, for that very Day he obtained a compleat Victory over his Enemies, under the Conduct of the Noble Count Serini, who after a Peace was concluded betwixt the Two Empires, was unfortunately killed by a Boar in Hunting. The Count joining his Forces with Count Hohenloe, marched out of Croatia with 12000 Horse and Foot, and lay close in ambush in the Mountain, for a Convoy of Provisions and Ammunition that was going to Newhausel, guarded by 10000 Turks. He fell upon them so successfully, that he killed 4000, took 2000 Prisoners, and carried away the Convoy to his own Castle of Serin. Not above 60 Christians were lost in this great Action. For this and other his good Services, his Imperial Majesty de∣clared Count Serini Generalissimo of all his Forces in Hungary. He not enduring to be idle, tho' never so short a time, on the 18th of January marched again with 20000 Horse and Foot, passed the Drave upon the Ice, making himself Master of several of the lesser Strong Holds, and burning and bringing under Contribution a great number of Villages. On the 28th of the Month he came before Sigeth, and leaving Count Hohenloe with his Troops to befiege it, marched on himself to the Bridge of Esseck: To reduce the Castle at the Foot of it, he sent Colonel Sirgats with 3000 Croats and 2000 Dragoons. He meeting 6000 Turkish Horse and Foot, overthrew them, killing 1800. The Fort immediately surrendred, and that wonderful Bridge was broke down, which would oblige the Turks to fetch a compass of 80 Leagues to relieve their Garrisons on this side the Drave. This done, the Colonel returned to Count Serini, who sent a Summons to the Governour of Five-Churches, and he offered to deliver up one of the Gates: But 500 Men approaching to take possession of it, he caused such Volleys of great and small Shot to be poured upon them, that above 260 were killed or wounded. This so irritated the General and all his Army, that they unanimously gave a general Assault to the Town; and tho' it was valiantly defended by the Turks, entred it by force, putting all to the Sword, except 2500 Women and Children, saved by the General. The Soldiers had the Plunder of the Place for three days, all the Booty being valued at above 2 millions of Ducats, for that there was found 2200 Horse, a great quantity of Provisions and Ammunition, and abundance of Cloth laid in to cloath the Turkish Army, insomuch that after the Count's Army was plentifully furnished, there remained 300 Waggon-Loads. The Count, no longer able to keep the Field, by reason of the Extremity of the Weather, set fire to the City, but left 3000 Men, with Provisions for 5 Months in the Citadel, and then marched to Sigeth, where joining Count Hohenloe, he returned laden with Booty to Croatia. This Expedition so sensibly touched the Ottoman Emperour, that he vowed the next Campagne to invade Hun∣gary with 250000 Men, and to demolish the Castle of Serin so as no Memory of it should re∣main; besides, he offered great Rewards to any that should deliver the Count to him dead or alive. Baron Souches, General of Silesia, at the same time demolished several Forts of the Enemy, burnt many Villages, and took by Assault the strong Fortress of Neutra, so that the Infidels had nothing left them from Newhausel to Canisa. Newhausel was not besieged, because the Plague raged so violently there, that the Garrison, which at first consisted of 6000 Men, was reduced to 600. But a Party of Hussars took 30 Waggons carrying Provisions to Newhausel; and 200 Turks that guarded it escaping that Danger, fell into the hands of Baron Perceni, who was abroad with 300 Horse, and killed 100 of them, taking 18 Prisoners. Count Serini laid siege to Canisa, of which the Grand Visier having notice, sent 600 Carts guarded by 8000
Men, most of them Janizaries to relieve the Place. The Count met them with 12000 Horse and Foot, and killing 1800, took the whole Convoy. Soon after, as he lay before the Town with 20000 Men, and had almost reduced it to surrender, Intelligence was brought him that the Grand Visier was marching with 80000 Men to the Relief of Canisa. Count Strozzi im∣mediately marched with 10000 Men to prevent his passing the River Mur which falls into the Drave, and on the 7th of June the Turks attempting to Ford the River, it was so desperately disputed on both sites, that the Fight continued after Night by Moon-light. At last the Turks having lost 2300 Men, desisted. Of the Christians 400 were killed, and among them Count Strozzi. Mean while Count Serini raised the Siege of Canisa in great disorder, his Men be∣ing in a Consternation, apprehending the approach of the Enemy. The Turks attacked the Island of Serin, which tho' bravely defended, was at last abandoned, the Governour and most of the Men retiring over the Bridge, and all had been saved but that it broke as they were passing. The Enemy having razed the Castle of Serin, again attempted to pass the River Mur, but were still repulsed by the Counts Serini and Hohenloe, who had built Forts along the Banks, and with their Cannon did great execution. The Bassa of Buda with 25000 Men laid siege to Lewentz in the Upper Hungary, but the Count de Susse coming to the relief of the Place with only 10000 Foot, totally routed him, killing 12000 of his Men, and taking 1500 Prisoners, above 100 Colours, 2000 Waggons, a great quantity of Provision and Am∣munition, 200000 Chequins in Gold, 20 Pieces of Cannon, much Baggage, and many Horses and Mules. The Prince of Transylvania hearing of this Victory, cast off the Turkish Yoke, and submitted himself to the Emperor, aiding him with 25000 Transylvanians. Baron Souches took and burnt the Town and Castle of Barkan and many other Places, putting to the Sword many of the Enemy that were scattered after the late Rout. Others of them repaired to another Body of theirs upon the River Raab, and being increased to the number of 30000, thought of besieging the strong Town of that Name. The Marquess of Baden being reinfor∣ced by the Auxiliary Forces that had joined him, and now having an Army of 38000 Men, marched towards the Enemy, whom on the 21st of July he found encamped on the other side the River Raab. The Christian Army posted themselves near the Town of S. Gothart, their Cannon playing upon the Enemy. Next a Party of Turks and Tartars being discovered ransacking the Country, they were entirely cut off in sight of their Army by 2000 Christians, who recovered a great Booty. The whole Body of the Enemy advanced in the Figure of a Half-moon, and attacked the Troops of the Empire that were in the Body of the Christian Army, which after a vigorous Resistance were forced to give way, till fresh Supplies coming in, they drove the Infidels back to the River. By this time both the main Battels came to engage, which was done with great Fury by the Christians, that they forced the Enemy with great Slaughter into the River, where many that had escaped the Sword, or Shot, pe∣rished in the Water, being born down in that confusion. The Imperial Horse pursuing their Victory, made mighty havock, obliging the Infidels to quit their Camp, leaving a great number of Horses, Camels, Arms, much Provision and Ammunition, and all their Baggage, which became a Prey to the Victorious Army. This Battel was fought the First Day of August; it lasted from Nine in the Morning till Four in the Afternoon. Of the Enemy above 6000 were slain, whereof many of Note; of the Imperialists 1500 died in the Action. These great Losses moved the Turk to desire Peace, which was concluded, or rather a Truce for Twenty Years, by the Emperor's Ambassador, who all this while resided at Constantinople, and Signed by the Great Turk at Adrianople, who thence sent a Chiaux to Vienna the 6th of October. For the carrying on of this War, his Imperial Majesty was assisted by all the Princes and States of the Empire, who sent their Quota's of Men at their own Charge, as did the Kings of France, Sweden, and Denmark. King Philip IV. being taken up with the Wars in Portugal, could send no Forces of his own, but sent the Emperour 300000 Ducats, and allowed 12000 Men to be raised in Germany, and maintained at his cost. To the Venetians he gave 100000 Ducats a Year, and sent them 4000 Men for Defence of the Province of Friuli. In France this Year the Queen was delivered of a Daughter, who lived but a few days, and her Majesty was in extream Danger but recovered. The Duke of Beaufort, Admiral of France, sailed with a Fleet provided at Toulon and Marseilles, and consisting of 14 Men of War, 8 Galleys, 5 Fireships, 10 Brigantines, 10 other Vessels, and 30 Barks laden with Pro∣visions, Ammunition, Lime, Brick, and other Necessaries for Building. In this Fleet were 1500 Seamen, and 5000 Land-Soldiers, besides 500 Voluntiers of Quality. In Port Maon in the Island Minorca, he stayed till the Galleys of Malta joined him on the 17th of July, and then they sailed together for the Coast of Barbary, where they spent some Shot against Bugia, but to little effect. On the 22d they Anchored before Giguieri, about 60 Leagues Eastward of Argiers; and notwithstanding the Opposition made by the Ene∣my, landed their Men, as they did at Night 30 Pieces of Cannon. Three Batteries be∣ing raised, played seven days and nights, at the end of which the French made them∣selves Masters of the Place, having only 300 Men killed and wounded in the Action. This Place is subject to the Government of Argiers, and the Country about it has plen∣ty of Cattel. The Algerines having gathered 20000 Men, on the 20th of October ap∣peared
before this Place, and that Night attacked a Redoubt of the Castle; but were so well plied with the Cannon from the Sea and the Works, that they drew off with great loss. Again, on the 23d before day, they gave a furious Assault, and were again re∣pulsed, leaving behind 1000 of their Men killed and wounded. The Infidels being with fresh Supplies now 40000 strong, gave a third Attack on the 27th, and possessed themselves of the Redoubt; then following their Success, they made themselves Masters of the Lines and Outworks, tho' bravely defended by the French. The Duke of Beaufort finding it impossible to maintain the Place, the Outworks being lost, shipped his Men the 30th of October, and returned to France. Another Squadron of 10 Ships sailed from Rochel, carrying 1600 Men, with Masons, Carpenters, and all manner of Necessaries for erecting a Colony, which they accordingly performed, 4 Degrees Northward of the River of the Amazons in America, having found there an old Fort, which they repaired and fortified with new Works. The English having built several Forts about Tangier, Gailan the Moor many times Slaugh∣ter of the English Ga∣rison at Tangier. had attempted to gain them, but still came off with loss, and among others had his own Brother killed. To revenge his Death, and so many Disappointments, he lay in ambush with Eight thousand Men, and the Governour the Lord Tiveot marching out of the Town with the best of the Garrison to take a Prey, encompassed them, and cut off the greatest part. Anno 1665. King Philip considering the great Harm the Portugueses did upon the Frontiers, com∣manded the Marquess of Caraçena, before appointed General, to repaire speedily to his Marques de Carace∣na General against Portugal. Command: He obeyed, and came to Badajoz the beginning of this Year. The Duke of Aveiro went away to Cadiz, where the Fleet was in a readiness, and waited his co∣ming, he being appointed to Command. The Duke of Osuna being accused of not ha∣ving done his Duty at Cuidad Rodrigo went, with Twenty four others, a Voluntier into the Army; which being ready to take the Field, the Marquess of Caraçena commanded him to retire, because he had no Order of the King for him to serve. He had such small Suppires from Court, during his Command at Cuidad Rodrigo, that he was forced to raise Contributions; which caused many Complaints to be made against him; but upon Exa∣mination he was cleared, and the King to restore his Honour, made him Governour of Catalonia, when the War was declared against France. Great Preparations were made against Portugal; but all came to nothing, by reason of the Discourse of a Truce or Peace. King Philip fell sick of his last Disease, and died the 17th of September. He made his Will, providing for the good of the Kingdom, and Education of his Son, their not Four K. Phil IV. dies. years of Age. He appointed Governors of his Son and Kingdom, D. Garcia de Avellaneday Haro, Count de Castrillo and President of Castile, D. Christopher Crespi de Valdaura Vicechan∣cellor of Aragon, the Count de Pen̄aranda as Counsellor of State, the Marquess de Aytona as Grandee of Spain, and the Cardinal of Spain, Archbishop of Toledo, which, the Cardinal D. Baltasar de Moscoso dying the same day as the King, was Interpreted in favour of D. Pas∣qualis of Aragon, then at Rome. From Rome he went to Naples, to take Possession of the Viceroyship of that Kingdom, and being desirous to Return to Spain, obtained leave of the Queen to resign that Command to his Brother D. Peter of Aragon. The Inquisitor General for the time being, was also appointed one of the Governors, and the Queen as Governess to the King her Son, Superior to them all. Her Majesty out of her great Respect to F. Everard a German, her Confessor, and a Jesuit, raised him to the Honour of Counsellor of State and Inquisitor General, by which he also became one of the Governors. After the death of King Philip, all the Counsels went to Kiss the New King Charles the 2d his Hand, and to Recognize him as their Lawful Sovereign, the day after his Fathers death. On the 27th, they conducted the Royal Body to the Escurial with due Pomp and Magnificence, many Noblemen, and the Horse guards attending, till they delivered him to the Prior of the Convent. There he lies in one of those stately Urns, which whilst living he Erected in Honour of his Predecessors. A few days after the Town of Madrid resolved to be the first in Proclaiming his Majesty King Charles II. and made choice of the Duke of Medina de las Torres to display the Standard K. Charles II of Spain proclaim∣ed. in his Name, as the Custom of Spain is. On the 8th of October the Duke accompanied by many of the Nobility, went on Horseback from the Count de Onies's House to the Town Court house, where they alighted, and were received by the Mayor and Aldermen and o∣ther Officers of the Corporation. The Duke went up to the Council Chamber and sate down on the right Hand of D. Francis de Herrera Enriquez Knight of the Order of Calatrava, Corregidor of the Town. After a short Consultation, they both stood up at once, and the Corregidor taking the Standard, bid the Secretaries and Notaries give it him under their Hands, that he deliverd it to the Duke, that the Town might display it in the Name of King Charles II. The Duke courteously received it, and mounting on Horseback the Caval∣cade began in manner following.
First went the King's Trumpets and Kettledrums, then the Town Musick, then 16 Algua∣ziles of their Liberty, and after them, some of the Spanish and Swiss Guards, with their Lieu∣tenants. At a small distance followed the orderly Troop of Noblemen and Gentlemen be∣longing to the Court, and the Captains of the Guards. Next them were the Four Mace∣bearers with short Roman Crimson Coats and Gilt Maces on their shoulders: Then came the Regidores, and next them the Kings at Arms with their Embroidered Coats, and lastly the Corregidor and Duke of Medina on the right Hand carrying the Standard. In this man∣ner they came to the grand Market Place, which tho large, was then too little to contain the Multitude: In the midst of it was raised a Scaffold covered with rich Carpets, about 5 or 6 Foot high, 30 in length and 20 in breadth, with a Staire-case 12 Foot wide and Railed. The Duke and Corregidor, the Secretaries and the 4 Kings at Armes on both sides of them, facing the Windows where the Kings use to see publick Spectacles; then the eldest King at Arms, who was then D. John de Mendoza with a loud Voice Three times Cried, Silence, si∣lence, silence, Hear, hear, hear. Then the Duke also with a loud Voice, said Three times. Castile, Castile, Castile, for the Catholick King Charles II, of the Name, whom God preserve The Multitude unanimously shouted, Let him Live, let him Live, let him Live. This Cere¦mony being ended in the Market Place, all the Company went to the Palace, where the King was Seated in the Chair of the Emperor Charles V. thence he went and did the same in the Town. All this being performed, the Duke required of the Secretaries and Notaries to give it him under their Hands, that he again Restored the Standard to D. Francis de Her∣rera Enriquez, Corregidor of the Town. The Corregidor having received it, went up to the Council Chamber of the Town, and fixed it in the Balcony under a rich Canopy, there to remain 8 days and nights, the continual lights in the Streets displaying the richness of it. On the 2d of July, being the Feast of the Visitation, D Luis de Aragony Cardona, Duke of Segorve, and Cardona the eldest Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece was Command∣ed to go and gird on the King's Sword. The Duke came to the Kings Appartment with a great Retinue, and there Knighted the King, girt on his Sword and kissed his Hand. Up∣on the 8th of the Month the Duke of Cardona as eldest Knight of the Golden Fleece, Sum∣moned the other Knights to meet in the Queen's Apartment. There met the Duke of Montalto, the Princes of Avelino, Astillano, and Barbançon, and the German Ambassador, all Knights of the Order, the Secretary of the Order being also present; in the presence of whom, the Duke put the golden Collar with the Fleece hanging to it, about the King's Neck, the Knights there present doing Homage to him, in the Name of the whole Order, for the Provinces they represented. Astillano, Avelino, and Montalto for Italy, Barbançon for Flanders, the Ambassador for Germany, and the Duke of Cardona for Spain, in Virtue of the Popes Bulls granted the Kings of Spain as Administrators of the Military Orders within their Dominions. Anno 1666. This Year began with a Treaty of Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal: Some proposals were offered by the Military Commanders of both Kingdoms to the Two Queens, then Go∣verning Overtures of Peace betwixt Spain and Portugal. for their Sons, who were both under Age. These proposals being altogether ma∣naged at a distance by 3 Persons, they could not come to any Agreement, and both Parties were still in Arms. It pleased God to take to himself the Queen Mother of France, Ann Mauricia of Austria; upon whose death the King her Son began new Commotions, there being none to allay Resentments betwixt the Two Nations. No Body could guess what his great Preparations tended to, for he like a good Soldier kept his Counsels secret; raising great jealousies in all the Neighbouring Princes. The Queen Regent of Portugal also departed this Life on the 25th of February. On the 25th of April the Princess Margaret of Austria, was Contracted to her Queen Regent of Portugal dies. Uncle Leopoldus Ignatius the Emperor. Her departure was fixed for the 28th of the same Month: She Travelled to Denia thinking to Embark there; but being disappointed, went thence to Barcelona. Her Imperial Majesty came the 18th of July to Monjuy, distant half a League from Barcelona, whither she came by Sea. D. Luis Gonzaga the Viceroy first, then the Bishop, Chapter, and Magistrates went out to welcome, and kiss her Hand; which Cere∣mony lasted from 6 in the Morning, till Noon. All this while she was upon the Sea in the Admiral Gally, encompassed by 27 others, and much bigger than any of them, being guilt all over even to the Oars, the Stem and Stern set round with Christal Glass, through which appeared her Majesties Bed. At Noon she came to the Mole of the City, and all the Cannon was Three times fired round, the Gallys answering. She stept out of the Gally upon a Bridge made on purpose, that ran 200 yards into the Sea, was Railed on both sides, the Rails covered with Crimson Damask, and the Ground with Red and Yellow Bays. The Duke of Albuquerque handed her out, then followed the Dutchess, the Ladies, Cardinal Colonna, Two Bishops and the Dukes Two Brothers. These were covered, but the Viceroy and other Nobility had their Hats in their Hands. At the Foot of the Bridge were Two rich Chairs, which took up the Empress and Dutchess, the rest went a-Foot to the Mole;
where they again came out of their Chairs and went into a Coach, the Cannon now Firing the 4th time. The Empress spent 3 days in Visiting the City and Churches, all which time there were Fireworks and Illuminations at Night, other sports being forbidden on account of the King's death. Six days before her Majesty Embarked, came 7 Galleys of Malta, which Saluted 7 times with Vollies of small, as well as great Shot. Every Salute was answered by the City, and the Rejoicing lasted Two Hours. The 10th of August her Majesty Em∣barked, being 3 times saluted by the Cannon of the Town, her Fleet consisted of 34 Gal∣leys. Contrary Winds obliged them to put into Roses and Cadaques, at length they arrived at Final, where Cardinal Nepos the Pope's Legate, the Duke of Savoy, the Duke of Modena, the Duke of Florence his Brother, with other great Men expected her Majesty, accompanied by 10000 Men to guard her to Trent. There the Duke of Albuquerque delivered her to the Im∣perial Ministers sent to Receive her, and taking his leave, returned with all the Spaniards, going over to Sicily to take Possession of the Viceroyship of that Island. Cid Hamet the Moor after having been several times assisted by King Philip IV. and recei∣ving Alarache in vain at∣tempted by the Moors. many Favours at his Hands, in Requital for all those Obligations resolved to surprize the Town of Alarache, and to that effect provided all things necessary for an Escalade. A Chri∣stian Captive understanding the Design, fled with danger of his Life the 24th of February, and the 26th came to the Bank of the River, opposite to the Water Gate, where fearing lest his Intelligence should come late, he called out to Arms. Immediately some of the Garrison ran out, and meeting no Body, thought it had been some unlucky Moor had given the Alarm. Day appearing, discovered the Christian on the other side the River, who be∣ing brought over, acquainted the Governour D. John de Alvarado Bracamonte and Sarabia, that the Moor had 4000 Men with all necessaries, ready to Assault the Town, and had ordered 3 Ships to Sea to hinder any Advice being sent to Spain. Soon after the 3 Ships were dis∣covered, which confirmed what the Captive had said, and the Governour sent Alonso Belin∣ches Lieutenant of the Ordnance in a Tartan over to Spain to acquaint the Duke of Medina Celi who was General of the Coasts of Andaluzia, and desire Succours of him. The 27th, the Governor Posted all his Men, Assigning every Officer his Charge, reserving him∣self with a Party to be ready wherever the greatest danger called, On the 1st of March after midnight the Enemy began to draw near, which our Centries perceiving, made several shot, and about 4 in the morning the Moors gave the Assault upon all Sides at once with hideous Cries. Those that Attacked on the Side of the Land Gate possessed themselves of the Ra∣velin that covers the Gate, filling all the Place with their Multitude. Here the Vollies of small shot and the Pedreroes from the Flanks, made such Havock, that they were at length forced to abandon the Place, leaving it covered with dead Bodies, tho' they carried off ma∣ny. The same Fate followed them attempting to Scale the Wall on the Side of S. Francis, whither the Governor himself repaired, encouraging his Men; as finding the Moors made their greatest Efforts on that Side. Another Party cut down the Barrier before the Ravelin at the Foot of S. Martins Castle, yet found such Opposition, that tho' they kept their Ground till it was broad day, they then quitted it with great loss: Not were the Redoubis of S. Antony and Santiago forgotten by the Enemy, who made their utmost Efforts there, tho' with as little Success as in the other Places. At the same time that the Moors gave the As∣sault by Land, 5 Barques came up the River full of Men, to Scale the Walls on that Side. They thinking it convenient first to secure a Genoese Setie that had brought Provisions, board∣ed her all at once, but were received with such bravery that they were obliged to draw off, leaving many dead in the River, and one of the Barques aground, most of the Men in her being killed. When it was open day the Colours were displaied upon the Walls, and the Garrison went out to strip the dead. We lost but 11 Men, it was reported the Enemy had 4000 killed, and a greater number wounded. In the afternoon the Enemy put up a white Flag, which was for leave to bury their dead, and was granted. Bernardin Gosbert, Quartermaster to the Guard of Archers, being in the Palace upon the A murder commit∣ted by a Woman. 7th of July, a Woman came up, and viewing him well, drew a Pistol from under her Veil and shot him in the Head, of which he died within Two Hours. She was apprehend∣ed for the Murder, and passing by the Church of S. Saviour, pleaded Sanctuary, tho' carried in a Sedan, and Persons above Exception gave their Opinions for her. All the Kingdom being in great Apprehensions of the Turkish Pyrates, and no less of the French, En∣glish and Portugues Fleets then abroad, the Spanish Plate Fleet arrived safe at Sanlucar the 16th of August. At Ruremond in the Province of Guelders, in May a Magazine of Powder took Fire, and Destroyed 4000 Houses, 8 Parish Churches and Monasteries, the Bishops Palace, the Town House, and 35 Persons. In Holland a small Town of 200 Houses was burnt. Such like misfor∣tunes hapned in many other Places, as at Bouraeaux, Tours, Nantes; S. Malo, Blois, Roan, and several Parts of France. Many French Ships were cast away, and above 6000 Souls lost: Besides there were Earthquakes and great Floods. The Canal of Brussels was this Year carried on as far as Ostend. The Venetian and Malta Fleets lay before Constantinople, whither the Turkish Fleet also came, Turkish Fleet beaten. and Anchored under the Cannon of the Forts. The Christians did all they could to draw them out, offering Battle; the Enemy never stirring till Midsummer-day, when overcome
with shame to be so dared, they weighed, and stood out. Their Fleet consisted of 34 Men of War, 66 Galleys, 9 Galleases, and 30 small Vessels. The Christian Fleet consisted of 28 Men of War, 9 Galleys, 7 Galleasses, 10 Brigantines and 30 other small Vessels. The Venetian Admiral sent to ask Advice of the Maltese, what was best to be done, for he had never imagined the Enemy was so strong. He answered it was then no time to Consult, but to Fight. They fell on with such Fury, that it was not long before the Turks began to give way, and their whole Fleet was totally Destroyed, excepting only 8 Galleys which Red at first. Two Galeasses and 9 Galleys were taken, the rest all burnt or sunk. Of the Christi∣ans 1500 Men were killed, and among them the Venetian Admiral taken off by a Cannon shot. What number of Men the Turks lost could not be known. Anno 1667. The great Preparations made by the French without declaring for what Design, this year appeared to be bent against the Low Countries, which obliged the Marquess of Castel Rodrigo, The French be∣gin the War in Flanders. Governor of those Provinces to form an Army of 30000 Men, besides the Auxiliary Troops that were expected from the Empire. He Fortified such Places as were most exposed to the Attempts of the Enemy, all Men and even the Clergy putting their Hands to the work. Ar∣mentiers, la Basse, and Charleroy were dismantled, being Places much exposed, and to lessen the Number of Garrisons. The Mareschal  de Turenne led the French Army into Flanders, and came to Enguien and Doway, wasting all the Country before him. Our Parties had seve∣ral skirmishes with them, and were not unsuccessful. The Swedish Ambassador staid at Brussels expecting a Pass to go through France into Spain. The States of Holland being jealous of the French, offered the Marquess Castel Rodrigo to furnish him with Ammunition and all sort of Arms, which offer he thankfully Embraced; and being scarce of Pouder took up a great Quantity of them. The French Fleet was in S. George's Channel, and the Dutch say in the Downs. The most Christian King recalled his Ambassador out of Spain, who having obtained leave of the Queen to Return Home was Honourably conducted to Irun by D. Hierome de Be∣navente de Quinnes, Knight of the Order of Santiago. The most Christian King went to Flanders in Person, with an Army of 60000 Men, divi∣ded into several Bodies. He possessed himself of Charleroy, Armentiers, La Busses, and Berg French Kingtakes Towns in Flanders. S. Winock. Our Army increased, the Walloon Regiments being recruited; besides 10000 Men were expected, which the Province of Brabant had undertaken to raise, 8000 from the Empire, and 5000 from England. A covered way was made at Brussels, and 6000 Men put into Gar∣rison there, whereof 2000 were Spaniards. The Emperor made a League with the German Princes. The Cantons of Switzerland, promised to assist his Catholick Majesty with each 1000 Men. At the same time, the Ministers in Spain, spent their time, in debating how to have a numerous Army in the low Countreys. D. Luis Ponce Governour of Milan, perceiving the great Warlike Preparations made by the French and guessing what their Aim might be, visited all the strong places of his Govern∣ment, repairing the Dammage done by the violent Rains the Winter before, and putting them in a Posture, to oppose the Designs of the French. The Marquess of Astorga S. Roman and Velada, Ambassador from his Catholick Majesty, Pope Alex∣ander the 7th dies, Clement the 9th chosen. made his public Entry into Rome with the usual Splendour, but had not Audience. Pope Alexander the 7th being then sick, and soon after dying. Upon his Death the College of Cardinals, elected Cardinal Julius Rospigliosi to succeed him, who took the Name of Clement the 9th. His Promotion was highly applauded at the Court of Madrid, where he was ac∣quainted, having been Nuncio there, and being known to be well affected towards the Crown of Spain. Publick Prayers were made at Vienna for the happy Deliverance of the Empress, who soon after was brought to bed of a Son, to the great Joy of the Imperial and Spanish Courts. The Ve∣netians understanding the great Preparations the Turks made against Candia, sent three Ships la∣den with Ammunition and other Warlike Stores, to the Relief of the Place. Mean while the Batteries of the Infidels, had made great Havock in the Town, beating down many Houses and Churches. The besieged in Revenge hung out a white Flag, and the Turks flooking to the Walls, they sprung three Mines, and sallying killed above 3000 of them. The prime Vizier caused the Bassa of Anatolia to be strangled, because he had not sent him such Supplies of Men as he expected. Upon the Gulf of Venice, stands the rich City Ragusa, the Head of a small Territory, governed in the nature of a Republick, but paying Tribute to the Turks. It is strong, Rogusa de∣stroyed by an Earth∣quake. populous, and abounds in Wealth. Simon Lascari Archbishop of Durazzo, a Monk of the Or∣der of S. Basil, sent this Year a Relation to the Monks of his Order, of the utter Desolation of this City by an Earthquake, which overthrew all the Houses, Churches, and other Buil∣dings whatsoever, overwhelming all the People in such manner, that only 18 Gentlemen who hapned to be abroad escaped. All the Castles and other Fortifications were cast down, and among them a new Fort, raised by the Turks to command the City.
Anno 1668. All the Discourse at the Court of Madrid was, that D. John of Austria would go to Corun̄a, there to take Shipping for Flanders, where it was thought he was to Command. There arose many Differences about his Departure, and great Offers were made him, however, it took no effect. This Rumour, moved the King of France, who had a Squadron abroad infesting our Coast, to order his Admiral to search all Ships, and endeavour to intercept him. This Year came to Court an Ambassador from the Great Duke of Muscovy, the first that was seen here, and therefore much admired. His Retinue was great, and his Entertainment magni∣ficent. Now at length the Peace was concluded, betwixt Castile and Portugal, by the Mediation of the King of Great Britain, who had often proposed it to King Philip the 4th, but without Suc∣cess. Peace con∣cluded with Por∣tugal. The Marquess del Carpio who was Prisoner at Lisbon, ever since the Defeat of our Forces at Ebora, was a great Instrument in promoting this Treaty. However it had not been conclu∣ded, but that the King of France invading the Low Countreys, the Power of Spain was not then such as to oppose both Enemies, and therefore chose to compound with the nearest, to be at better leisure to withstand him that was farthest off. The Count de Castrillo resigned the Office of President of Castile, his Majesty consenting on Account of his continual Infirmities. D. James Riquelme Bishop of Plasencia, was chosen President of Castile in his Place, and he dy∣ing soon after, D. James Valladares then Bishop of Oviedo, and afterwards of Placencia, succee∣ded him. This Year Portugal was threatned with a Civil War, for Prince Peter younger Brother to Alonso King of Portugal, not only revolted from him, but cast him into Prison, upon pretence, Alonso K. of Portu∣gal impri∣soned by his Bro∣ther. that he was not of Capacity to Govern the Kingdom. Not content with his Crown, he also charged him of being impotent, and thereupon took from him his Wife whom he also married, having to authorise this Act (God knows by what Practices) obtained a Dispensation from the See of Rome. It was reported the King had made his Escape out of Prison, which had it been true, would have turned to the Destruction of that Kingdom, for doubtless he could not among forreign Princes, have failed of Succours, and he had many Friends at home, who would have shown themselves, if an Opportunity had presented, but better Care was taken, to secure that unfortunate King. The Great Turk after the Defeat of his Fleet, and the Loss sustained by the prime Vizier at Candia, prepared to set out another numerous Fleet, and to that effect, sent Orders to all his Bassa's to gather all the Vessels they could, in order to send powerful Succours to the Vizier at Candia. In Poland the Diet was all in Confusion, about the Election of a new King. Some of the Electors refused to sit, till all forreign Ministers were departed from Cracow, and particu∣larly the French Ambassador, but he had too many Friends among the Palatines who stood by him, and therefore the opposite Party could not prevail. Anno 1669. Prince Peter of Portugal to rid himself of King Alonso his Brother, who being near at hand, might cause some trouble, gave in Charge to a Gentleman, in whom he reposed great Confi∣dence, K. Alonso of Portu∣gal sent to the Island Tercera. to carry him to the Islands Terceras. This Gentleman the Day before he was to have departed, entred himself among the Jesuits, and took the Habit. The Prince caused the Mo∣nastery to be beset, and taking him forcibly out, cast him into Prison. Many Judgments were made upon his Imprisonment, and the Courtiers who pretend to see farther than other Men, suspected the Gentleman had Orders to kill the King by the way, and to give it out, that he had dy'd a natural Death. How true this was, is not ours to decide, God who suffers none to pass unpunished will judge of it. Her Catholick Majesty having regard to the great Merits and extraordinary Services of D. John of Austria, was pleased to Constitute him Lord Lieutenant, and Captain General of Ara∣gon, D John of Austria Ld. Lieu∣tenant and Capt. Ge∣neral of Aragon. and Vicar General of Valencia, Sardinia, Majorca, and the adjacent Islands of the Principa∣lity of Catalonia, and Earldomes of Rousillon and Cerdagne, with all other Dependencies upon the Crown of Aragon. F. Everard Nitard the Queen's Confessor, and a Jesuit, being a Stranger, had many Enemies at Court, by Reason of his too great Authority and Power. Particularly D. John of Austria by Letter, ceased not to press the Queen to remove him from Court, and She to give satis∣faction F. Nitard sent from Court. to all that were discontented upon his Account, complyed, giving him a most honoura∣ble Discharge in such manner, as if it had been granted at his own Suit, and the Choice of being Ambassador either at Vienna or Rome. He departed the Court on the 26th Day of February, to the great Joy of many. Had he made this Retreat voluntarily, and of his free Choice, he had gone off with Honour, but staying to be thrust out, went away hated and in disgrace. The Translation of S. Isidorus the Patron of Madrid, to a Rich Chappel built for that pur∣pose, was performed with all Pomp and Magnificence. The Feast of the Canonization of S. Peter de Alcantara, the Reformer of the Franciscans, was celebrated by that Order, during the space of 16 Days. With him was also Canonized S. Magdalen of Pazzis, a Carmelite Nun, born at Florence.
This Year at the Sollicitation of the Pope, a League was concluded among several Christi∣an Princes, for the Defence of Candia against the Turks. Also another in Flanders, betwixt the English, Swedes, and Hollanders, for the Defence of the low Countreys. The Count de Oropesa, President of the Council of Orders, was preferred to that of Italy The Duke of Ossuna, was appointed Governour of Milan, and the Duke of Sessa, of Catalonia. D. Ambrosio Spinola Archbishop of Santiago, was Translated to the Archbishoprick of Sevil. Collation rf great Officers. The Count de Medellin, was made President of Orders, and his Place of Master of the Horse, was given to the Marquess de Caslel Rodrigo. Three new Counsellors of State were created, which were the Constable of Castile, who then governed the Low Countreys, the Marquess de Astorga Ambassador at Rome, and the Admiral of Castile. The most sumptuous Palace begun at Barcelona by the Marquess de Castel Rodrigo, one of the most Beautiful Structures in all Europe, was this Year finished by the Duke of Ossuna. He also raised the Citadel at Palamos, a most important Sea-Port on the Coast of Catalonia, and a great Inlet into that Principality. FINIS.
THE INDEX TO Mariana's History of Spain. A. ABdalasis Son to Muza his Actions. Pag. 100 He marries the Widow of King Rode∣rick. 101 Abdalla dies, Abderhaman succeeds him. 116 Abderhaman first Moorish King in Spain. 107 —His Death. 113 Abderhaman calls himself King of Murcia. 132 Abderhaman inthron'd by the Abenhumey∣as. 133 Abides his Birth, Education, and Reign. 9 Accommodation betwixt Castile and Leon. 151 Accord betwixt Castile, Portugal, and Ara∣gon and Portugal. 254 —Betwixt Castile and Aragon. 346 —Betwixt France and Spain 480 —Betwixt the two Kings Ferdinand and Phi∣lip. 514 —Betwixt the Emperor and King Ferdinand. 536 Actions on the Frontiers of Castile and Por∣tugal. 433 —In Navarre. 554 Acts of the Cortes of Castile. 305 —At Madrid. 254 Act of Justice. 173 Adrian the Emperor reigns 21 years. 56 Aelius reigns 22 years. 56 Aemilianus reigns 4 months 58 Affairs of the Infidels. 106 and 107 —Of Aragon. 202 —Of Navarre 240 —Of Aragon and Sardinia. 288 —Of Aragon unsuccessful at Naples. 345 —Of Naples. 371 —Of Portugal. 375 —Of Britany in France. 460 —Of Naples settled. 527 Afranius. 45 Agila reigns, is kill'd having reign'd 5 years and 3 months. 76 Agreement betwixt King John of Castile, and his Rebels. 365 —Betwixt the Duke of Milan and French King. 470 —Betwixt King Ferdinand and the King of England. 541 Alans and Vandals call'd in by Stilico. 67 Alans who they were, 67 —They come into Spain. 68 —Their Progress. 69 —They and the Silingi, subdu'd by the Goths. 69 Alaricus proclaim'd King. 74 Albarazin taken by the King of Aragon. 226 Alcala de Henares made an University. 234 Alcazar in Africk taken by the Portugueses. 385 Alexander Severus reigns 13 years, 57 Alexandet the 5th chosen Pope. 328 —Dies. 330 Alexander the 6th Pope. 332 Algezira besieg'd. 263 —Siege continu'd. 264 —Surrender'd. 264 Alhaca the Moor dies, Abderhaman the 2d succeeds him. 111 Alhama taken by the Christians 440 —In vain besieg'd by the Moors. 441 Aljubarrota famous Battel. Pag. 303 Alliance betwixt Portugal and Aragon. 289 All Spain in Peace except Castile. 418 Almenon the Moorish King of Toledo, and Ramon Earl of Barcelona die. 148 Almeria taken. 171 Almohades, a Family of Moors invade Spain. 172 Almoravides, the Moorish ruling Family; come into Spain. 153 Alonso, the first King of Oviedo, takes many Towns. 106 —His Death. 106 Alonso, the 2d King of Oviedo. 108 —Is expell'd by Mauregatus. 108 —Is restor'd. His Sister debauch'd by a Count. 109 Alonso the 3d, call'd the Great. 114 —Expell'd, and recovers his Kingdome. 114 —His publick words. His Son rebels. He re∣signs the Crown. His Death. 116 Alonso the 4th. calls himself King of Leon. 121 —Becomes a Monk, and leaves the Crown to his Brother Ramiro. 122 Alonso the 5th, King of Leon, under the Tu∣ition of the Earl of Galicia, and his Wife. 131 His Actions. Is kill'd at the Siege of Vi∣seo. 134 Alonso the 6th, King of Leon, flies to the Moors. 144 —Returns from among the Moors, and resumes the Crown. Imprisons his Brother Garcia. Takes an Oath for the Crown of Castile. Aids the Moorish King of Toledo. 146 —Stiles himself Emperour. 151 —His Wife and Issue. 153 —His Forces overthrown by the Moors, and a second time Marries his 3 Daughters to Strangers. 154 —His Works of Piety. 158 —His Death. 159 Alonso the 7th. proclaim'd King of Castile. 162 —Aspires to the Crowns of Aragon and Na∣varre. 167 —Invades them. Stiles himself Emperour. 168 —He and his Daughter both married. 173 —Breaks into Andaluzia and dies. 175 Alonso the 8th, the young King of Castile se∣cur'd by some Nobles. 177 —Receiv'd as King by his People. 178 —Toledo declares for him. 178 —Is overthrown by the Rebels. 178 —Assembles the Cortes or Parliament. 179 —Meets the King of Aragon. 179 —Concludes a League with him. 179 —Marries Ellenor the Daughter of King Hen∣ry the 2d of England. 179 —Invades Leon. 181 —Overthrown by the Infidels. 185 —His two Daughters marry'd to the Kings of France and Leon. 187 —His Death. 195 Alonso the 9th. —Is divorced. 186 —Overthrows the Moors, and takes Merida, and Badajoz. Fol. 205. p. 2 —His Death. Ibid Alonso the 10th. 212 —Chosen Emperour by part of the Electors, and Richard Duke of Cornwal by the rest. Fol. 212 p. 2 —His Qualities. 213 —Aspires to the Empire. 216 —His Progress. —Meets the Pope in France. —Returns home. Fol. 216 p. 2 —Curses and disinherits his Son Sancho. 222 —Dies. 225 Alonso the 11th his Birth. 245 —Is proclaim'd King being under 13 Months old. Is kept by the Citizens of Avila. 246 —Enters upon the Government. 251 —Dies. 268 Alonso the 1st King of Aragon. 159 —Is belov'd of all Men. 160 —Is kill'd by the Moors. 167 —Leaves his Dominions to the Templers, and other Knights. 167 Alonso the 2d King of Aragon. 178 —His Death. 185 Alonso the 3d King of Aragon Crown'd. 226 —Dies. 333 Alonso the 4th King of Aragon. 253 —Dies. 259 Alonso the 5th King of Aragon, adopted Heir of Naples. 143 —Besieges the Queen of Naples. in her Pa∣lace. 344 —Supports an Anti-Pope. 345 —Again invited to Naples. 357 —Dies at Naples. Ibid Alonso the First King of Portugal his Birth. 155 —He governs as Earl of Portugal. 156 —Actions of his. 169 —Gives the Moors a great overthrow. 169 —Marries. 169 —His further Success. 172 —Title of King confirm'd on him by the Pope. 172 —Taken by King Ferdinand of Leon, and set at liberty. 182 —Besieg'd by the Moors, and deliver'd by the King of Leon. 183 —Vanquishes the Moors. 183 —Dies. 184 Alonso the 2d King of Portugal. 188 —At War with his Sisters. 195 —His unjust Proceedings. Fol. 213 p. 2 —His Death. 220 Alonso the 3d King of Portugal. —Dies. 276 Alonso the 4th King of Portugal. 252 Alonso the 5th King of Portugal, Proclai∣med King of Castile, being contracted to the Rightful Heiress. 424 —Passes over into Africk, and thence into France. 428 —Resolves to go in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and resigns his Crown to his Son. 431 —Dies. 437 Alonso King of Naples abdicates. 467 Alonso Prince of Portugal his Death. 455 Alonso de la Cerda, the Rightful Heir of Castile, submits to Alonso King in Posses∣sion. 256 Alonso de Albuquerque, his Actions in In∣dia. 560
Alora taken from the Moors. Pag. 446 Alva Duke enters Navarre. 549 Alvaro de Luna; who he was. 327 —Becomes the great Favourite. 340 —Made an Earl. 342 —Banish'd the Court. 348 —Returns to Court. 349 —Chosen Master of the Order of Santiago. 372 —His Character and fatal End. 378 Amalaricus his Reign. His Death. 75 Anintosities against Prince Ferdinand. of Cas∣tile. 328 Ancinting of Kings first used in Spain. 161 Antequira taken by Storm. 331 The Castle surrendred. 331 Antient Inscriptions. 36 Antioch in danger of-Destruction. 66 Apparitions in the Air, and other Prodi∣gies. 357 Application for uniting the Church. 335 Aragon left without Heirs. 325 —Divided about the Succession. 332 Aragonians rout the Mallorquines. 205 —Destroy the French Fleet. 227 —Successful in Italy. 229 —Successful against the Moors. 180 —Invade Castile. 353 —Decline at Naples. 356 —Gain two Victories at Sea. 225 Arcadius and Honorius. 66 Archbishop of Toledo chosen. 151 —Chancellour of Castile 194 —Arrested by the King. 311 Archbishop of Santiago flies to Portugal. 317 Archduke comes into Spain. 489 —He and his Princess sworn Heirs of Ara∣gon. 492 —Returns to Flanders. 492 —Concludes a Peace betwixt Spain and France. 496 Archimbaud Earl of Faux, his Death and Is∣sue. 334 Argantonius his great Age. 11 Argonauts in Spain. 8 Arian Heresie. 61 Armengaud Earl of Urgel, slain. 183 Arms of Aragon. 174 —Of Toledo. 168 —Of Navarre. Articles betwixt Aragon and Navarre. Fol. 216. p. 2 —Betwixt France and Castile. 230 —Betwixt King Peter of Castile, and the Prince of Wales. 284 —Betwixt Castile and Portugal. 298 Asdrubal succeeds Hamilcar. 18 —His Death. 19 Asdrubal the 2d, and Mago routed, and 37000 of their Men killed. 26 Asdrubal Barchinus routed by Scipio. 28 Asdrubal the Son of Gisgo entirely defeated by Scipio. 28 Asinius Pollio, and M. Lepidus Govern Spain. 48 Asturians forced to submit. 50 Ataultus and Sigericus, Kings of the Goths murder'd. 69 Athanagildus ascends the Throne. 77 —Unfortunate Marriages of his two Sisters. 77 Atilius 34 Atlas expels Hesperus, and reigns. 7 Attempts of the Infidels, to murder the King of Castile. 264 Attila King of the Huns in France, defeated by the Romans, Francs and Goths and 180000 of his Men slain. 71 Aubigni defeated and taken. 497 Aucupa governs Spain. 106 Augustus set up in the Place of Julius Cae∣sar. 48 —Becomes sole Lord of the World. —Comes into Spain. 49 —Returns to Rome. 50 —His Death. 51 Aurelius Antoninus, and Antoninus Verus, Reign 19 years. 56 Aurelius Commodus, Reigns 12 years and 8 months. 56 Aurelius Probus, reigns 5 years and 8 months. 59 Aurelius Carus, reigns 2 years. 59 Aurelius King of Oviedo, during his Reign, does nothing honourable. 108 Aza or Adham, Governs Spain. 104 Azamor in Africk, submits to the Portugue∣ses. 448 —Is taken by the Porugueses. 556 B. Babel built. Pag. 1 Bacchus builds Nebrixa. 8 Bada Wife to Recaredus. 79 Badajoz mutinies. 312 —Taken by the Portugueses. 318 Baeca taken. 171 Baleares Islands. 11 Balbinus and Pupienus, reign not out a Year. 58 Banish'd King of Granada restor'd. Barbarous Action of a Roman. 41 —Treachery. 129 Barbarosla besieges Bugia in vain. 562 Barcelona, Earidome hereditary. 119 —Its Earls. 122 —Taken by the Moors. 128 —Surrendred to the King of Aragon. 417 Battel that lasted 8 days. 98 —Undecided. 177 —De la Higuera, or of the Fig-Tree. 355 —Of Olmedo. 371 —Of Cirinola. 497 —Of Salado. 262 —Of Munda. 47 —Of Najara. 253 —Of Ravenna. 548 —Of Blavio: vid. Memorable. —Of Collejares. 323 —Of Aljubarrota. 303 —Of Cannas. 23 Baucius Capetus General of the Spaniards. 12 —Chosen a 2d Time against the Carthagini∣ans. 13 Beltran de la Cueva, Favourite to King Hen∣ry the 2d of Castile, Created a Duke. 406 Benedict the 11th Pope. 241 Benedict the 13th. Chosen Pope. 316 —Forsaken, 327 —Disown'd in Aragon. 328 —Dies. 344 Berengaria, Heiress to the Crown of Castile, resigns her Right to her Son Ferdinand. 199 Berenguel or Berengarius, Earl of Barcelo∣na. 134 Berenguel Earl of Barcelona his Actions. 140 Bergamo and Bressa, return to the Obedience of the Venetians. 546 Bermudo King of Leon, succeeds Maurega∣tus. 108 Bermudo, the 2d King of Leon, 127 —His Death, Wives and Issue. 130 Bermudo the 3d King of Leon. 134 —His good Government. 135 Bernard first Archbishop of Toledo, when re∣cover'd from the Moors. 151 —Sets out for the Holy Land. Is sent back by the Pope. 157 —His Death. 165 Bernard de Cabrera, cruelly put to Death. 283 Bilbao City built. 112 Biscay rebels. 116 —United to the Crown of Castile. 260 Biscainers and Navarrois at War. 251 Biscainers invade the Canary Islands. 113 —Bishop murder'd. 412 Blanch and Berengaria, Sisters to King Henry of Castile. 199 —Blanch Queen of Aragon dies. 244 —Blanch Daughter to the Duke of Bourbon, Contracted to King Peter of Castile, 269 —Dies. 279 Bloody Battel betwixt the Spaniards and Moors. 13 —Rain. 172 —Mutiny at Lisbon. 519 Boabdil the Moorish King, flies to Cordo∣va. 446 Bolonia its Siege. 560 —Rais'd. Boniface, Pope dies. 322 Bravery of a Woman, Fol. 208. p. 2 Bresta taken by the Viceroy. 552 Broils among the Suevians. 73 —In Navarre and Biscay. 384 Bruneclulda by the French call'd Brunc∣hault. 77 Mariana deceiv'd concerning her life. 77 Bugia and other Places in Barbary taken by the Spaniards. 537 Burgundians, who they were. 67 C. Caesar in Spain the first time. His 2d Co∣ming. 44 —Kills 36000 Spaniards in Gaul. Returns into Spain, and expels Pompey's Party. 45 —Returns again into Spain. Reduces Cor∣dova. 47 —Returns to Rome. Is murder'd in the Se∣nate. 48 Caius Catinius. 32 Calamities of Princes. 510 Calatrava taken and given to the Knights Templers. 166 —Defended by two Monks, and given to their Order. 175 Caligula succeeds Tiberius, and reigns 3 Years, 10 Months, and 8 Days. 52 Calixtus Chosen Pope. 383 Calpurnius Pilo. 32 Canary Islands, 266 —Conquer'd. 339 Cantabri who they were. 49 —They are routed, 49 Cape of Good Hope discover'd, 380 Caracalla reigns 6 Years and 2 Months. 57 Carcastonne lost, and recover'd by the Earl of Barcelona. 162 Cardinals fall off from the Pope. 540 Carmona Besieg'd, and other Towns taken. Fol. 210 p. 2 Carmona surrendred to the Christians. 211 —Besieg'd by the Usurper. 289 Carthaginians, their Undertakings. 10 —Their first coming into Spain. 12 —They make War on the Phoenicians. 13 —Discover a new Island. 16 —Routed. Forced from the Siege of Ilitur∣gum. Their Army again Defeated. 24 —Attack the Roman Camp and are repuls'd. 26 Carthusian and Cestercian Monks. 163 Castile its Earls Executed. 820 —Invaded by the Infidels. 123 —Its Earl reconciled to the King of Leon. 124 —Its Earl imprison'd in Leon, escapes by the Contrivance of his Wife. 125 —In League with Aragon against Navarre. 170 —Again. 173 —Commences War with the Moors. 185 —Reconcil'd to Portugal. 238 —In League with Aragon against the Moors. 243 —At War with the Moors. 253 —In League with Aragon. 267 —In League with Navarre. 281 —In League with England. 281 —Divided. 283 —At variance with Navarre. 294 —Makes Peace with Aragon. 362 —Still at variance. 373 —Divided betwixt the Rightful Princess, and Elizabeth the Usurper. 422 Castilian Fleet ravages the Coast of Brita∣ny. 296 —Ravages the Coasts of Portugal. 301 Castilians vanquish the Moors. 124 —Gain another Victory. 124 —And Aragonians make War upon the Moors. Fol. 206 p. 2 —Overthrow the Portugueses at Sea. 259 —Overthrow the Aragonians and Navarrois. 258 —Defeated. 302 Catalonia reduced. 416 Catalonians, their Actions in Asia, and Greece. They overthrow the Turks. Their General put to Death. They defeat the Greeks. 249 Cathedral of Burgos built by an English Man. 201 Catherine Queen of Castile dies. 739 Cato the first Consul in Spain. 30 —Kills 40000 Spaniards. Returns to Rome and Triumphs. 31 Cause of the Wars betwixt Castile and Ara∣gon. Cefalonia taken by the Turks. 485 Caelestin the 5th Pope Abdicates. 235 Celts People of France, come into Spain. 10 Ceuta taken. 243 —Taken by the Portugueses. 337 Challenge betwixt the Kings of France and A∣ragon. 223 Charlemain in Spain. 110
Charles; Brother to the King of France, Crowned King of Sicily and Naples. 215 —Dies. Ibid. Charles; Prince of Salerno, made King of Apulia and Sicily. 228 Charles the V. of France Dies. 250 Charles VI. succeeds. 296 Charles Inherits the Crown of Navarre. 304 —Dies. 347 Charles II. King of Navarre. 367 Charles; Duke of Durazzo Crowned King of Naples. 297 Charles; Prince of Viana Dies. 403 Charles; King of Naples Dies. 226 Charles VII. King of France Dies. 481 Charles V. Emperor, his Birth. 484 Chindasuinthus; Usurps with the assistance of the Army. 89 Chintila; Ascends the Throne by Election. 88 Christ our Lord Born 752 Years after the Building of Rome, and in the 42th Year of the Reign of Augustus. 51 Christian Princes united; defeat the Infidels. 130 Christian Dominions in Spain; united under one Head. 135 Christian Army advances against the Infidels. 189 Christian Nobles; perswade the Infidels to Revolt. F. 215. p. 2 Christian Kings of Spain; at variance. 258 Christian Fleet destroyed by the Moors. 261 Christians overthrown. 99 —Defeated. 117 —Suffer under the Moors. 128 —Spoil the Territories of the Moors. 133 —Join with Infidels to raise the Siege of Hu∣esca. 156 —Succesful. F. 209. p. 2 —Defeated. 447 Christopher Columbus Dies. 517 Cimbri; enter Spain. Return with the Ger∣mans, and are again Repulsed. 41 Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey. 45 —Of Rome. 48 —In Aragon. 200 —In Navarre. 403 Claudius Centho. 32 Claudius Caesar; Reigns almost 14 Years. 52 Clement V. chosen Pope. 242 Clement Pope; owned in Castile. 297 Clement; the Pope Dies. 316 Coimbra; taken from the Moors. 137 Combat; betwixt 13 French, and as many Italians. 494 Commotions among the Spaniards. 23 —In Castile. 201 —In Catalonia. 220 Competitors; for the Kingdom of Naples. 342 Conditions of Peace betwixt the Kings of Le∣on and Navarre. 135 Confederacy against Castile. 236, 282 —Against the Aragonians. 362 Conference of the Kings of France, and Ca∣stile. 404 —Of the French and Spanish Generals. 491 Confusion of Tongues. 1 Confusions in Africk. 267 —In Aragon. 333 —In Castile. 408 —In Biscay. 413 —Upon the Death of King Philip. 522 Conquest of Majorca; resolved upon by the King of Aragon. 204 Conspiracy detected and punished. 115 —Against the French in Sicily. 222 —Against D. Alvaro de Luna. —Of the Nobles. 347 —To Destroy D. Alvaro de Luna. 365 —Against K. Henry IV. of Castile. 383 —In Castile discovered. 532 —Conspirators apprehended; others fly. 374 Constance; the King of Aragon's Daughter, Married to the King of Sicily. 279 —Dies. 282 Constans; Murdered. 62 Constantine the Great; Reigns 32 Years, 9 Months, and 27 Days. 60 —His Death. 61 Constantine, Constantius, and Constans; Reign. 62 Constantine; Murdered. 62 Constantius; Reigns 1 Year and 10 Months. 59 Constantius; sole Monarch. 62 —His Death. 62 Constantinople; taken by the Turks. 379 Contests about the Imperial Crown. F. 212. p. 2 Controversies betwixt Castile and Portugal, about their Discoveries. 462 Conversion of Two Moorish Princes. 140 Cordova; taken by the Christians, and Re∣volts. 171 —Part of it taken by a handful of Men. F. 206. p. 2 —Described. Besieged. Surrendred. 207 Cortes of Castile raise Money. 237 —Cortes of Castile; Summoned by the King, and his Son follow the latter 222 —Settle the Government of Castile. 247 —Held at Alcalâ. 267 —Settle the Government of Castile. 309 —Meet at Madrid. 313 —Held in Castile. 323 —Grant Supplies for War with the Moors. 327 —Held at Burgos; by K. Ferdmand. Cortes; meet in the Kingdom of Aragon. 224 —Held at Moncon. 538 —Held by the Queen. Council of Constantinople; General. 64 —Of Nice; General. 61 —Of Toledo; the first. 66 —Of Chalcedon; General. 67 —Of Tarragona. 75 —Of Toledo; the Second. 75 —Of Constantinople; the 5th General. 77 —Of Braga; the First. 77 —Of Braga; the Second. 78 —Of Toledo; the Third. 84 —Of Toledo; the Fourth. 86 —Of Sevil. 87 —Of Toledo; the Fifth. 88, 89 —Of Toledo; the Sixth. 89 —Of Toledo; the Seventh. 89 —Of Toledo; the 8th, 9th, and 10th. 90 —Of Toledo; the 11th. 94 —Of Toledo; the 12, 13th, and 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, and last. 95 —Of Constantinople VI. of the General. 95 —Of Florence; General 141 —Of Valencia. 116 —Of Rheimes; General. 172 —Lateran General. 197 —Of Lions; General. 210 —Of Vienne in Dauphinê; General. 244 —Of Constance; General. 336 —Of Basil; General. 358 —Of Mantua; General. 401 —Of Pamplona. 136 —Of Compostella, Jaca and S. John de la Pe∣na. 142 —Of Burgos. 147 —Of Tarragona. 183, 350 —Of Toledo. 240 —Of Valladolid. 251 —Of Barcelona. 261 —Of Coyenca. 140 —Of Leon. 152 —Of Aranda. 419 Countess of Medellin; a Turbulent Woman. 434 Country of the Moors wasted. Cruel Action of the Earles of Carrion. They are overcome in Combat. 157 Cruel Murder. 135 Cruzadoe's first Coined in Portugal. 380 Cuenca; its Conquest resolved upon. Its Description. The Siege; taken 181 Cuidad Real Built. F. 214. p. 2 Cuidad Rodrigo; Built. 179 Customs of the Spaniards. 5 D. Davalo's Family, Pag. 349 Deacon; zealous against Hereticks, 192 Death of the Kings of Portugal, and France. 202 Of the Queen and Prince of Aragon. 213 —Of Four Popes 218 —Of 3 Kings. 304 Of the Princes of Castile; Peter and John. 250 —Of the Queen of Castile. 298 Decay of the Moorish Kingdom 130 Of the Power of the Kings of Navatre. 377 —Decius Reigns 2 Years. 58 Defeat of the Moors. 444, 203 Of the Christians. 209 Of the Portugueses. 426 Of the French. 504, 505 Of the Infidels at Sea. 263 Of the Spaniards in Africk. 450 Of the Confederates. 511 Denis; succeeds to the Crown of Portugal. 220 —Marries Q. Elizabeth. 222 —His Issue. 230 —As Arbitrator, Reconciles Castile and Ara∣gon. 242 —Dies. 252 Dep orable State of Spain. 101 —Description of Spain. 1 Of India. 476 Of the Kingdom of Naples. 488 Of Granada. 456 Of Africk. 256 Of the City Albis. 191 Of Majorca. 205 Of Spain, vid. Spain. Differences betwixt Castile and Aragon Composed 357, 213 —Betwixt the Knights of Alcantara and their Master. 413 —About the Government of Castile. 510 Digitius. 31 Dioclelian and Maximilian; Reign 20 Years. 59 Disagreement betwixt French and Spaniards. 488 —About the Division of Naples. 491 Discontents among the Nobility of Castile. 314 Discord betwixt the King of Leon, and Earl of Castile. 128 —In Aragon and Catalonia. F. 209, p. —Among the Aragonians. F. 211, p. 2 —Among the Moors. 243 —Continues in Castile. 310 Discoveries by Henry Infante of Portugal. 341 —Of the Portugueses. 451 —And Conquests in the West-Indies. 461 Disorders caus'd by Hereticks in the City Le∣on. 192 —In Sicily and Sardinia. 431 —In Aragon. F. 216; p. 2. Dispute concerning the Crown of Aragon. 329 Dissention among the Moors. 132 —Among the Knights of Calatrava. 266 Division of Spain. 56 Divisions among the Infidels. 113 —Among the Moors. 127 —Among the Moors and Christians. 170 —Among the Moors. F. 206, p. 2 —Among the Infidels. 448 —In Portugal; about the Succession of the Crown. 299 Domitian Reigns 15 Years and 5 Months; Is Murdered. 55 Domitius Aurclianus; Reigns 4 Years, 11 Months, and 7 Days. 59 Domitius Calvinus; Triumphs over the Ce∣retani. 48 —Drawn Battle. 69 Dukes and Counts; their Original. 85 Duke of Anjou; in Naples. 364 —Of Gandia; Murdered. 473 —Of Milan; Expelled his Dukedom. 482 E. Earl of Tonlouze; Routed by him of Poiti∣ers. 162 Earl of Gijon; declared Traitor. 317 Earl of Faux; Invades Aragon. 317 Earl of Urger's; pretensions to the Crown of Aragon. 333 —Surrenders himself. —Dies. 363 Earl of Luna; his end. 358 Earl of Benavente; escapes, and raises new Troubles. 374 Earthquakes and Famine. 261 Earthquakes. 17 Earthquakes and Floods. 179, 201 Earthquake at Lisbon. 265 Ecclesiastical Affairs under the Popes, Luci∣us, Stephen, and Sixtus. 315 Eclipse of the Sun. 122 Eclipse of the Sun, and Floods. Edward King of Portugal. 240 —Dies. 305 Egica; anointed King. 95 —His Death. 96 Elizabeth; Princess of Castile, married to Alonso Prince of Portugal. 454 Elizabeth; Sister to the King of Castile, her Traiterous Practices. 419 —Her counterfeit Reconciliation to the King; her Brother. She openly Aspires to the
Crown. 42 —Her Character. 458 —Her Death. 510 Ellenor Queen of Castile; her Death, and of others. 195 Ellenor Queen of Navarre; Returns to her Husband. Emanuel King of Portugal; settles the Go∣vernment. 417 Ambassador from Ethiopia; arrives in Por∣tugal. 558 Embassy to Alexander the Great. 17 —To the King of Castile; from the Soldan of Egypt. F. 213, p. 2 —From Tartary. 216 —Betwixt Tamerlan, and the King of Ca∣stile. 321 —To the King of Aragon; for Aid against the Turks. 377 —To King Ferdinand; at Naples. 524 —Sent to the Pope with Presents, by the King of Portugal. Emperor of Morocco; called into Spain. 217 Emperor; disgusted with King Ferdinand. 529 —Proceeds against Milan. 530 —Cannot be separated from France. 541 —Besieges Leghorne in vain. 472 —Joins in League with the Archduke, and King of France. 509 —He and King Philip of Castile Ratifie the Peace with France. 511 Empress of Constantinople, in Spain. F. 215 p. 2 Empurias; built by a Colony sent from Marse∣illes. 17 Endeavours for an Accommodation betwixt France and Aragon. 234 —To Pacifie Navarre. England; enters into a League against France. 317, 472 English and French in the Holy-Land Ex∣pedition. 216 English; pass the Pyreneans, in Defence of King Peter. 285 —Join with Portugal against Castile. 297 Enmity; betwixt King Alonso of Castile, and his Son Sancho increases. 224 Era Caesaris. 48 —Abolished. 277 Ermenegildus; Son to King Leuvigildus, converted. Messages betwixt his Father, and him. 79 —Beginning of the War betwixt them. 79 —His Death. 80 Ervigius; usurps the Crown. Governs well. 94 Estates of the Princes of Aragon, Confiscated. 353 Eugenius; a Schoolmaster, stiles himself Em∣peror. 66 Eugenius IV. Pope. 354 —Expelied Rome by the People. 359 Eugenius the V. Pope; deposed by the Council of Basil. 366 Evil practices of a Legate. 417 Euricus; King after Theodorick. 73 Expedition against Sardinia. 271 —Of King Peter by Sea. 277 F. Fabius Buteo. 32 Fabius Maximus; overthrows Viriatus. 36 Fabius Servilius; the Consul streightens Vi∣riatus. 37 Fabulous Kings of Spain. 6 Fabulous Story applied to several Persons. 165 Factions among the Moors. 171 —Of the two Houses of Castro and Lara. 177 —In Castile. 347 —In Navarre. 428 —Continue in Navarre. 434 Fames Calagurritana; whence the Proverb. 44 Famine and Earthquakes. 14 Famine and Plague. 23, 68, 186 Famine; looked upon as a Judgment for the Imprisonment of a Bishop. 130 Famine among the Moors. 132 Famous Men in Spain. 369. Famous War; with the Moors of Granada. 440 Fatal overthrow of the Portugueses in Africk. 363 Javila succeeds; Pelayus, is killed by a Bear. 105 Favourers of the Albigenses. 193 Felix V. chosen Pope. 210 Ferdinand; the first King of Leon. The most Powerful King of Spain, overthrows the Moors, and takes several Towns. 138 —His Progress. 139 —His Death; Leaves by Will to each of his three Sons a Kingdom, and Towns to his Daughters. 143 Ferdinand; the II. King of Leon. —Enters Castile. 177 Ferdinand III. of Castile. 199 —Marries Beatrix; Daughter to the Emperor, Philip. 201 —His Issue. 201 —He makes War upon the Moors. 202 —Hastes to secure the Conquest of Cordova. F. 206. p. 2 —His 2d. Marriage. F. 208, p. 2 —Prepares to Besiege Sevil. 210 —Takes many Places. —His Death. —His good Ordinances. 212 Ferdinand IV? of Castile, Born 226 —Comes to the Crown. 235 —His Marriage. —His Death. 245 Ferdinand; King of Aragon, his Birth. 297 —His wonderful Modesty in refusing the Crown of Castile. 324 —His Government of that Kingdom. 325 —Marches against the Infidels. 329 —Is declared King of Aragon by the Judges. 333 —Proclaimed at Zaragoca. Settles the Af∣fairs of Aragon. His Actions. 334 —He and Pope Benedict meet. He Besieges the Earl of Urgel in Balaguer. 335 —Is Crowned at at Zaragoca. Confers with Pope Benedict. 336 —Dies. 338 Ferdinand; King of Portugal. 285 —Marries the Lady Ellenor de Meneses. 290 —Dies. 299 Ferdinand; King of Sicily, marries Eliza∣beth, Sister to the King of Castile. 414 —Received as King of Castile; and IV. of the Name. 422 —Labours to gain the Nobility of Castile. 424 —Goes into Aragon. 435 —His Son Sworn Heir of Castile, Aragon and Catalonia. 436 —Takes Mallaga and other Places 450 —Builds a Town to lie in during the Siege of Granada. 457 —His Character. 458 —Called Catholick King by the Pope. 471 —Two of his Daughters matched. 480 —Perplexity he is in. 482 —His double dealing. 486 —Becomes Odious to the People. 511 —Agrees with the French King. 512 —Little Faith in him. 515 —Marries Queen Germana. 516 —Forces raised by him. 517 —Many forsake him. —Is forced to quit Castile. 518 —He and his Queen at Zaragoca. 520 —In Italy. 522 —Comes to Naples. 522 —Returns to Castile. 529 —Desires Peace with Venice. 437 —Assists the Pope. 540 —Dies. 562 Ferdinand; King of Naples Dies. 465 Ferdinand; King of Naples, succesful against the French. 469 —Dies. 472 Ferdinand; Prince of Castile Dies. 218, 188 Ferdinand; Infante of Portugal, left a Ho∣stage with the Moors. 363 Fernan Gonzalez; Earl of Castile. 121 —His Death. 126 Fidelity of a Servant. 349 Fifty thousand Infidels Slain. 107 Fight in which 70000 Infidels were Slain. 109 —Betwixt the Portugues and Castilian Ar∣mies. 426 Fire rises out of the Sea, and does great harm. 125 First Roman and Carthaginian War. 17 Flaminius. 31 Flavius Claudius; Reigns one Year, 10 Months and 15 Days. 59 Flemmings and Spaniards disagree. 517 Floods. 17 Florence, Siena and Luca join with the Con∣federates. 550 Florentine War. 373 Florianus; Reigns 3 Months. 59 Fonteyus Balbus. 32 Forces of Castile; Routed by the Aragonians. And a Second time. 161 Form of Government in Castile; during the Kings Minority. 308 Form of the Rebels Association. 252 Forreigners come to serve Count Henry. 283 Forreigners did King Alonso; the First of Portugal. 172 Four Kings in Spain; meet to conclude Peace. 188 Fraga; besieged and quitted. 166 —Again Besieged. 167 France and Navarre; join with Castile. 303 France and Aragon; make Peace. 235 Franciscan Friars; Preach to the Moors of Granada. 319 Francis Phebus; Crowned King of Navarre. 437 Francs; Invade Spain. 76 —Defeated by the Goths. 83 —Overthrown in Italy. 81 Frederick; King of Sicily, beaten at Sea. 239 —Dies. 259 Frederick II. King of Sicily, Dies. 293 Frederick King of Naples, puts himself in∣to the Hands of the French. 488 —Dies. 510 French Army enters Catalonia. —Invade Aragon. 37 —Expelled Aragon. 320 —Support Henry the Bastard. 286 —And Spaniards besiege Bayonne. 292 —Invade Navarre. 294 —And Portugues Forces; Invade Castile. 425 —And Aragonians at variance. 421 —Invade Naples. 465 —Possess themselves of the D. of Milan. 484 —Perish by Pestilence and stress of Weather. 489 —In Rousillon. 502 —Advance towards the Confederates. 547 —Decline in Italy. 550 —And Spaniards Conquer Naples. 486 French Army; enters Catalonia: 226 French Army marches through Italy. 503 French King at Rome. 466 —Returns Home. 468 —In Italy. 528 Fresh Troubles in Castile quieted. 315 Friar; stirs up the People of Navarre, to Re∣bellion. 403 Friars, Preachers and others, oppose Hereticks. 192 Froyla or Fruela; succeeds King Alonso I. 106 —Is murdered. 107 Fruela II; King of Leon. 107 Fulvius Nobilior. 31 Fulvius Flaccus. 32 Fulvius Nobilior; comes into Spain. 33 —Is repulsed at Axena. 34 Furius Philo. 32 Furius Philo; the Consul governs Hispania, Citerior. 39 Further Actions of the Christians. 190 G. Gaeta Besieged. 501 —Surrendred to the Great Captain. 505 Galba; the Pretor's barbarous Treachery. 35 Galba; governs Spain. Is Proclaimed Em∣peror. Reigns 7 Months, and is slain. 53 Galicians destroyed. 47 Galienus; Reigns 15 Years. 58 Gallerius; raised to the Empire. 59 Garcia; Earl of Castile. 134 Garcia; King of Navarre Imprisoned by his Brother Ferdinand. Makes his escape. Is overthrown and killed by King Ferdinand of Leon. 140 —His Issue. 141 Garcia; the II. King of Navarre. 167 —Killed by a fall from his Horse. 173 Garcia; King of Galicia, bleeds to death in Prison. 140 Garcia de Toledo; sent with Forces into A∣frick. 539 Garci Fernandez; Earl of Castile, his Son, Rebels against him. Is killed by the Moors. 131 Garci Lopez de Padilla; Master of Calatra∣va deposed. 240 Garci Sanchez; King of Pamplona, and Na∣jara. 122 Garci Sanches; Earl of Castile. 128 Garci Sanches; King of Navarre. 129 Gargoris or Mellicola Reigns. 9 Gaston; Heir of Navarre, Born. 343 Genealogy of the Kings of Spain. 85
General Peace in Spain. 249 Generosity of the Duke of Milan. 361 Geneoses; join the Catalonians. 162 —Rebell; and join with Pope Eugenius, and the Duke of Anjou. 362 Gensericus; succeeds Gundericus; Passes over into Africk. 70 Gesaleycus; advanced to the Throne. —His Death. 74 Gerion; the First known King. 6 Girona; besieged by the French, and taken. 227 Gibraltar; taken. 243 —Besieged. 267 Gneius Fulvius. 32 Gnosticks; their Heresie. 56 Goa; in India, taken by the Portugueses. 537 Godigisius; King of the Vandals, makes Peace with the Romans. 69 Goths; who they were. 67, 68 —Their Religion. 68 —Two great overthrows given them by the Franks. They overthrow the Franks, and kill 20000 of them. 82 —Their Conversion. 82 —Thrice defeated. 95 Government of Castile divided betwixt the Queen Mother, and Prince Ferdinand. 325 —Of Toledo; altered. —And of Pamplona. 343 —Settled for the present. 522 Gracian and Valentinian; Emperors. 64 Gracian; the Emperor murdered, when he had Reigned 7 Years, 9 Months, and 9 Days. 65 Granada; City surrendred to King Ferdi∣nand. 458 Grants made by King Henry of Castile, Va∣cated by the Cortes. 436 Great Captains Actions at Naples. 490 —Subdues almost all Naples. 498 —His Reception at Naples. 499 —Contrary to his Faith Given; sends Duke Valentine into Spain. 507 —Is ill Represented to the King. 508 —Jealousies raised against him. 520 —Forbid to Pass into Italy. 550 —Ordered to be Apprehended. 561 —Dies. 562 Great Preparations for the Holy War. 156 —Victory obtained by the Christians. 117, 189 —Fleet of Saracens destroyed by the Goths. 94 —Overthrow of the Moors. 113, 123 —Slaughter of Infidels. 115 —Earthquakes. 115, 296, 355 —Overthrow of the Infidels. 125 —Faith. 192 —Plague. 76 —Famine and Plague. 194 —Floods. 296, 321, 360 —Famine and Earthquakes. 507 —Booty taken by the Spaniards. 494 —Year of Jubilee. 484 —Disorders throughout Castile. 426 —Eclipse and Floods. 187 Gregory XI. Pope returns to Rome, after the Papal Chair had been 70 Years at Avig∣non. 293 Gregory XII. chosen Pope at Rome. 323 Gregory the Great; Pope. 84 —Several Letters from him. 85 —His Books sent for to Rome, Grounds of the War in Navarre. 548 Of new Troubles in Castile. 387 Gundemarus; his Reign. His Death. 86 Gundericus; King of the Vandals, aspires to the Sovereignty of all Spain. 70 H. Hali sent to assist the King of Sevil; over∣throws and kills him. 153 Hali; the Moor ravages the Country, and lais Siege to Toledo. 160 Hamilcar; sent to Conquer Spain. 17 Hannibal; the Elder, sent to govern Spain. 15 Hannibal; Governs in Spain. 19 —Marches through France towards Rome. 21 —His Progress in Italy. 22 Hanno; His Voyage to the Southward. He, and Hunilco Return to Carthage. 15 —His Actions in Spain. 16 Hanno in Sicily with 21 Spaniards, and 10000 Africans. 16 Hegira; the Mahometan Computation of time used in Spain. 100 Heir of Castile, made Prince of Asturias. 305 Heliogabalus; Reigns 3 Years and 9 Months. 57 Helvius Pertinax; Reigns 2 Months and 28 Days. 57 Helvius; recovers Illiturgum, and routs the Spaniards. 31 Henry I. King of Castile, but 11 Years of Age. 196 —Is Married; Parted from his Wife on ac∣count of consanguinity. 197 —His Death. 399 Henry; the Bastard Proclaims himself King of Castile, and is the 2d of the Name. 283 —Is routed. 285 —Returns into Spain. 286 —Finds many Enemies; Takes Carmona, and breaks the Articles. 289 —His Death. 295 Henry III. Proclaimed King of Castile. 307 —Takes upon him the Government. 313 —Dies. 323 —Anotable Action of his; His Will. 324 Henry IV. of Castile, his Birth. 346 —Rebels against his Father. 372 —Reconciled to him. 376 —Proclaimed King of Castile. 381 —How disposed. 381 —Ravages the Territories of the Moors; and Marries Joanna, Sister to the King of Por∣tugal. 383 —Raises mean Persons in opposition to the No∣bility. 386 —Proclaimed Earl of Barcelona; by the Re∣bels there. 404 —Supposed to be Poisoned. 420 —Dies. 422 Henry V. King of England; Invades France. 339 Henry VII. King of England, his Death. 533 Heny VIII. King of England. 533 —Takes Therouenne and Tournay. 556 Henry; King of Navarre. F. 216. p. 2 —Dies. 216 Henry; Prince of Castile, Governs. 236 Henry; Earl of Portugal Dies. 165 Heresie of the Albigenses; its Original. 191 —Of Nestorius revived. 109 Heretical Opinions Condemned in Spain. 434 Hereticks; expelled Leon. 192 Herminij; entirely subdued. 44 Hesperus, Reigns. 7 Hierome Savonarola; a famous Preacher in Florence, burnt. 481 Hierusalem; lost. 184 —Taken by the Christians. 158 Himilco and Hanno. 14 Himilco Sails along the Coast of Spain. 14 Hirtuleyus; General for Sertorius, twice routs the Romans. 42 Hispalus; King. 7 Holy War in the East. 155 Honorius; the Emperor Reigned above 28 Years. 70 Honours done to the Archbishop of Toledo. 196 Horrid Treason of a Bishop. 99 Houses of Haro and Lara; reconciled. 242 Huesca; besieged. —Surrendred. 156 I. Jaen; City described. —Besieged. Surrendred. F. 209, p. 2 Jayme, or James; I. King of Aragon. 194 —Comes into Spain. 195 Escapes from his Keepers. 198 —Marries Ellenor of Castile. 201 —A Conspiracy against him. —He is Seized. 202 Escapes; and invades Valencia. 203 —Kills the Rebel Peter de Ahones. 203 —Lands in Majorca. 205 —Wounded at the Siege of Valencia. F. 217. p. 2 Marries his Son to the Daughter of the King of Sicily. F. 213, 2 —Goes to Toledo. 215, 2 —Imbarks for the Holy Land. 216 —Dies. —His Issue. 219 Jayme or James the 2d. King of Aragon. Pag. 233 —Proclaim'd King of Sardinia and Corsica. 238 —Dies. 252 Jayme Heir of Aragon Abdicates. 250 Jealousies of Princes. 540 Jealousie the Cause of King Philip's Quen's Distemper. 519 Jews banish'd Spain. 83 & 460 —Converted. 336 —Murder'd in Sicily. Jews and Moors distinguish'd in Castile. 323 Infamous Life and Death, of the Queen Mo∣ther of Castile. 274 Infidels, twice defeated. 176 —Victorious. 159 —Divide and overrun Spain. 99 —Twice overthrown; 243 —Defeated by Prince Peter of Castile. 249 —200000 slain in one Battel. 190 & 262 Ingundis Wife to Ermenegildus, persecuted for the Catholick Religion. 79 Inigo Arista, King of Navarre. 119 Innocent the 7th, Chosen Pope of Rome. 322 —Dies. 323 Innocent the 8th Pope. 445 —Dies. 461 Insolency of the Moors. 205 Intercasia surrendred. 35 Interdict in Castile and Aragon at one time. 224 —Interregnum. 77 Inquisition first setled in Spain; 432 Interview of the King of Aragon and Na∣varre. Fol. 205 p. 2 —Of the Kings of France and Castile. 231 —Of Princes at Perpignan. 337 —Of Kings. 269 —Of the Kings of Castile and Navarre. 384 —Of two Kings. 518 & 528 Invasion of the Normans. Investiture of Naples granted to King Ferdi∣nand. 539 Joanna Daughter to King Henry, Heiress of Navarre. 216 Joanna Queen of Naples dies. 359 Joanna Princess of Castile, Contracted to the Duke of Guienne. 414 Joanna Queen of Castile, wholly unfit to go∣vern. 524 —Deliver'd of a Daughter. 525 John the first King of Castile. 296 —Proclaim'd King of Portugal. 299 —Makes his Will. 301 —Kill'd by a Fall from his Horse. 306 —Contents of his last Will. 308 John the 2d an Infant, Proclaim'd King of Castile; 325 Govern'd by the Archbishop of Toledo; 339 —His Character; Is under Restraint. 340 —Makes his Escape. 342 —Breaks into Aragon. 352 —Invades Granada. 355 —Drives the Moors into that City; gives them a great Overthrow. 355 —Made Prisoner by his Rebds. 367 —Makes his Escape. 370 —His Designs. 380 —Dies. 381 John the first Crown'd King of Aragon. 304 —His Qualities. 307 —His strange Death. 317 John the 2d King of Aragon, dies. 433 John King of France dies; Charles the 5th succeeds. John King of France dies. 281 John Proclaimed King of Navarre. 347 —Crown'd. 351 —Subdues his Rebellious Subjects. 526 John Master of Avis a Bastard, aspires to the Crown of Portugal. 300 —Is Proclaim'd King. 301 —All Portugal submit to him. 302 —His Issue. 310 —His Government. 332 —Dies. 358 John the 2d of Portugal while Prince, comes to his Father's Assistance into Castile. 426 —Restores the Crown to his Father. 313 —His Accession to the Crown. 473 —Dies, 455, & 469 John King of Hierusalem, comes into Spain. 206 John Prince of Castile, usurps the Title of King of Leon and Galicia. 236 —Is reconcil'd to the King. 239 John Prince of Castile born. 432 —Dies. 480 John the 20th Chosen Pope. 249 John the 23th Chosen Pope. 330 —Forced to quit the Papacy. 336 John Duke of Lorrain in Catalonia, for his Father. 410
D. John Nunez de Lara, revolts from Cas∣tile. 232 —Is reconcil'd to King Sancho, and again rea∣dy to flie from him. 232 John Hus and Hierome of Prague burnt. 338 Joseph the Miramamolin, comes out of A∣frick. 154 —His Death. 158 Joseph governs Spain. 106 Joseph King of Granada dies. 311 Joseph the 2d King of Granada, his strange Death. 318 Joseph the 3d King of Granada, dies. 344 Jovianus reigns 7 Months, and 22 Days. 63 Irruption of the Moors into France. 102 —Of the Goths. 64 Italy in War. Jubilee first Instituted. 239 Judges appointed to decide the Right to the Crown of Aragon. 333 Julian the Apostate Chosen Emperor. Reigns one Year 7 Months, and 27 Days, 62 —Is kill'd. 63 Julian the famous Count, that betrayed Spain to the Moors, 97 —Invites the Moors into Spain. 98 —His and his Families End. 101 Julianus Reigns 6 Months. 57 Julius Pope dies. 553 Julius the 2d Pope. 503 Just Reward of Treachery. 179 K. Kingdom of Aragon under an Interdict. Fol. 210 p. 2 Kingdoms of the Moors. 138 King of Aragon in Danger. Fol. 207 p. 9 King of Aragon with 3 Princes in League against France. 209 King of Aragon makes Peace with Sardinia. 272 —Seeks Aid against the French. 226 King of England Prepares to invade France. 545 King of Granada murder'd. 251 King of Leon makes War upon his Son, the King of Castile. 199 King of Majorca delivers himself to the King of Aragon. 205 King of Morocco, comes to assist King Alonso of Castile, 222 King of Navarre, murders the Cnostable of France. 273 —Uses Means to recover his Possessions in France. 322 King and Queen of Navarre Excommunicated. 546 King of Portugal invades Castile. 237 —Sworn Heir of Castile. 481 Kings alike in the manner of their Death. 144 —Of Aragon and Castile, join againd Na∣varre. Of Aragon and Navarre Prisoners. Set at Liberty. 361 —Of Castile and Aragon meet. —Of Castile and Aragon Invade the Moors. 215 —Of Castile and Navarre meet. 305 —Of Castile and Portugal after their Victory return to Sevil; 264 —Of France and Aragon meet, and are recon∣cil'd. 213 —Of Portugal and Castile meet. 416 —Of the Moors. 116 Knights of Alcantara. their Original. 194 —Of Calatrava their Original. 176 —Of Montesa in Aragon, and of Christ in Portugal Instituted. 249 —Of Santiago, or S. James the Apostle. 244 —Increase of these Knights. 245 —Templers, Hospitallers, &c. 103 —Templers destroy'd. 244 —Their Possessions in Spain, 245 L. Lancaster Duke, lands at Coruna. 303 Lara's Family. conspires against the young King of Castile. 196 —Seize the Government into their hands. The Archbishop obliges them to take an Oath. Alvaro the Elder of them Excommunicated. Seizes upon the Queen's Lands, and ba∣nishes her. 198 —Is taken by the King, and set at Liberty. 199 —His and his Brother Ferdmand's Death. 200 Lautrech in Guipuzcoa. 551 Laws establish'd by King Wamba. 94 League betwixt Castile and Aragon. renew'd. 174 & 176 —Against Peter Ruiz de Azagra. 180 —Against Castile. 184 —Betwixt Castile and Aragon. 233 & 221 —Against the French. 468 —Against the Venetians. 509 —Offensive and Defensive, betwixt the two Kings of Spain. 519 —Of Cambray. 532 —For Defence of the Church. 544 Learned Spaniards. 50 Legate makes Peace among Christian Princes. 183 Lelius successful against Viriatus. 36 Leo King of Armenia in Spain. 297 Leo the 10th Chosen Pope. 553 Leon City built. 55 —Taken with other Places by the Infidels. 128 —Taken by the Christians. 104 Leon Kingdom rebels. 128 Lepidus the Consul routed, with the Loss of 6000 Romans. 39 Leuvigildus drives the Romans out of Spain. Chooses his two Sons Companions with him in the Throne. 78 —Besieges Sevil. 80 —Persecutes the Catholicks. His Death. 81 —Causes of his Conversion. He was the first Goth, that us'd the Royal Ornaments. 82 Liberty of Conscience. 62 Licinius Nerva. 32 Licinius Lucullus. 34 —His Barbarous Cruelty. 35 Licinius Larcius Governs Spain. 54 Lisbon taken by King Alonso the 2d of Leon. 109 —Besieg'd, taken by King Alonso, the first of Portugal. 171 —Besieg'd, and the Siege rais'd, 300 Liuva succeeds his Father Recaredus. —Is murder'd; 86 Longin us in Danger of being murder'd for his Avarice and Cruelty. Is cast away go∣ing to Italy. 46 D, Lope de Haro, Favourite to King Sancho thi 3d of Castile. 229 —Is kill'd at Court. 230 Love Adventure. 331 Loxa City besieged by the Christian without Success. —Taken with other Places. 449 D. Lucas de Tuy, a famous Writer. 204 Lucius Canulcyus. 32 Luis the younger King of France, comes into Spain. His Entertainment. 174 Luis the 9th King of France, sends Presents to Toledo, and undertakes the Conquest of the Holy Land. Fol. 211 p. 2 —Dies, and Philip succeeds. 249 Luis the 10th, King of France dies. 559 Luis the 11th, King of France dies. 436 Luis the 12th, King of France dies. 481 Luis Duke of Orleans murder'd. 326 Luis Duke of Anjou, Adopted Heir of Naples. 344 Luis Sforza, Duke of Milan. 466 Luna Town built. 155 Lusitani, so call'd from Lusus. 8 M. Macedonius his Heresy condemn'd. 65 Madrid taken and ruin'd. 122 Mahomet, the Founder of Mahometisme born, A. M. 5800 79 Mahomet usurps the Kingdom of Cordova, and secures Hissem. Is overthrown, and 30000 of his Men slain. 131 Mahomet inthron'd, by the Abenhumeyas. 133 Mahomet King of Granada in Africk. 256 —Is murder'd. 257 Mahomet King of Granada dies. 295 Mahomet King of Granada, expell'd by his Subjects. 341 —Restor'd. 348 —Again expell'd and restor'd. 356 —Imprison'd. 372 Mahomet usurps the Crown of Granada. 318 —Is depos'd. 380 Mahometan Power, its Increase. 90 Majorca City taken by Storm. 205 Majorca sabdned by the Aragonians. 265 Malecontents in Andaluzia. 530 Mancmus succeeds Pupilinus. 38 —Concludes a dishonourable Peace with the Nu∣mantians, and is deliver'd up to them. 39 Mandonius and Indibilis revolt. 30 Manlius Acidinus. 32 Many Towns built and repair'd. 123 —Towns taken. 151 —Roman Colonies planted in Spain. 50 —Places taken by the Aragonians from the Moors. 174 —Nobles reduced. —Places taken by the Christians. Fol 206 p. 2 Marcellus suceeds Fulvius. 34 Marcius restores the Roman Power in Spain. 26 Marcus Marcienus. 32 Marcus Junius. 32 Marcus Marcellus. 32 Marius and Cinna. 41 marquess de Villena, his double Dealing. 423 Marquess del Gasto comes over to the Spani∣ards, 493 & 495 Marriages. 187 —Of King Henry's Bastards. 295 —King Ferdmand of Castile, with the Princess of Portugal. 240 —Of Princes. —Of the Prince of Aragon, with the Princess of Castile. 337 Marseilles taken by the Aragonians. 345 Martin de Freitas, the Famous Loyal Gover∣nour of Coimbra. 210 Martin the 4th Pope, and the King of Ara∣gon at variance. 223 Martin the 5th, Chosen Pope. 338 —Dies. 354 Martin Lopez Master of Calatrava, faithful to King Peter. 288 Martin King df Aragon. 316 —Marries. 329 —Dies. 330 Martin King of Sicily dies. 328 Mary de Padilla, Mistriss to King Peter. 269 —Dies. 280 —Declar'd by King Peter his lawful Wife. 281 Mary Princess of Castile, contracted to the King of Portugal. 486 Mary Queen of Sicily dies. 321 Mallacre of the French, call'd the Sicilian Vespers. 123 Massinissa joins with the Romans. 29 Master of Alcantara cut off by the Moors 314 Master of Santiago strengthens himself against his Enemies. 416 —Dies. 421 Masterships of Military Orders annex'd to the Crown. 453 & 464 Mauregatus the Bastard aspires to the Crown, assisted by the Moors. 108 —Reigns, expelling King Alonso; 109 Maxentius usurps the Empire. 60 Maximilian Storcia Duke, recovers Milan. 552 Mazalquivir in Africk taken. 513 Mecma besieg'd by the French. 223 Memorable Siege of Astapa. 29 Memorable Battel betwixt Christians and Infi∣dels. 111 —The same renew'd. Takes Name from the Town of Clavijo. 112 Men famous for Learning and Sanctity. 105 Merida reduced. 100 Merines, a Family among the Moors, obtains the Empire of Africk. 214 Method of reducing the rebellious Prelates. 415 Metellus subdues the Celtiberi. 37 Metellus sent by Sylla into Spain. 42 —Kills 20000 of Sertorius his Men. 43 Mighty Army of Christians in Castile. 189 —Divisions throughout Spain. 241 Floods. 354 Milan recever'd by the French. 561 Minorea and Yvica Islands conquer'd. 206 Miraculous Victory of 1000 Christians. 103 Miraculous Tryal of a Bishop. 113 Miserable Slaughter. 92 Mithridates sends Ambassadors to Sertorius. 40 Monasteries founded. 89 Monks cast off their Subjection to the Bishops. 155 Moors, 12000 of them pass over into Spain. their 2d Coming. 98 —Their Progress in Spain. 99 —From Spain they invade France. 104
—37000 kill'd in one Battel by Charles Mar∣tel. 105 —In Rebellion at Toledo, and at Cordova. 111 —Overthrown. 30000 of them kill'd in a Battel. 122 —Their Kingdom divided into many small Principalities. They buy a Peace. 133 —Rise against King Ferdinand, and are sup∣press'd. 143 —Intercede for the Queen and Archbishop. 152 —Routed by the Christians. 156 —60000 of them kill'd. 199 —20000 overthrown. Fol. 208 p. 2 —Vanquish'd in a Sea Fight. 210 & 234 —Banish'd Valencia. Fol. 212 p. 2 —Begin the War. Fol. 214 p. 2 —Of Granada. expell their King. —10000 of them slain with their King. 246 & 268 470000 invade Spain, 261 —20000 slain. —Call'd by the Christians to their Assistance. 277 —Overthrown. 332 —Ravage Andaluzia. 376 —Of Granada, break the Peace. 402 —Of Granada. invade Murcia. 430 —Recover the lost Towns. 453 —In the Mountains rebell. 483 Moorish Fleet perishes by Storms. 116 Moorish King baptiz'd. 207 Moorish Kings of Loragoca. 159 Moorish Kings in Spain revolt; 214 Moorish King of Granada depos'd. 244 Moorish King of Granada, wrongfully put to Death. 280 Moorish King taken, and set at liberty. 444 —Submits himself. 454 —Besieg'd by his own People. 555 More Troubles in Gastile. 241 Most villanous Action of Castilian Rebels: 407 Mountain falls. 103 Mozambique discover'd. 475 Mummius defeated, and 10000 of his Men slain. He Triumphs over the Lusitani. 34 Murcia Kingdom deliver'd up by the Moors. 209 Murcia City taken by the Aragonians. 215 237 Murder of 7 Brothers, call'd the Infantes of Lara. 129 Mutinous Lords in Castile submit. 315 Matiny in Rome, about choosing a Pope. 63 —In Sevil. 309 —In Toledo. 525, & 375 —At Segovia. 376 —About Taxes. 404 —At Toledo and Sevil. 415 —At Badajoz. 231 —In the Spanish Army. 504 Muza the Moor comes into Spain. Takes se∣veral Towns. He and Tariff at variance. 100 —His Death. 103 N. Naples besieg'd by the Aragonians. 364 —Taken by the Aragonians. 368 Navarre revolts. 91 —Brought under by the French. 219 —Makes Peace with Castle. 295 —Its Kings▪ Fictions concerning them. Un certainties concerning that Country abridg'd. 121 —Its King defeated, and taken by the Earl of Castile. 125 —Over-run by the Kings of Aragon and Cas∣tile. 187 —United to Castile. —Invaded by the French. 551 —Swears Allegiance to King Ferdinand. 549 —Pacifi'd. Navarrois and Arragonians make War. 536 Navarrois twice defeated. 175 Navas de Tolosa Battel, why so call'd. 190 Nebuchadnezzar said to conquer Spain. 11 Nero reigns 14 Years. Kills himself. 53 Nerva reigns 16 Months. 55 New Debate in Aragon Fol. 215 p. 2 —Trouble in Castile. 338, & 520 —And Breach of Peace, betwixt Castile and Aragon. 352 —Commotions in Castile. 366 —War in Naples. 386 Nicholas Pope dies. 383 Nigidius routed by Viriatus. 36 Nineteen Sail of Infidels destroy'd. 503 Nobility of Castile raise Tumults. 340 —Supported in Rebellion by the King of Na¦varre. 375 —Conspire against their King. Fol. 216 p. 2 —Reconcil'd. 311 Nobility of Naples favour the Aragonians. 359 —Swear Fidelity to Spain. 506 Noblemen secure to themselves, all strong Holds. 430 Nobles of Castile reconciled to King Alon∣so. 216 Nobles of Castile join with Portugal, in fa∣vour of the rightful Heiress. 423 Nobles in Castile, for and against King Phi∣lip. 514 Norbanus Triumphs over Spain. 49 Normans infest the Coast of Spain; 114 & 126 —Their Actions in Italy. Their Earls and Kings. 148 Notable Combat of 11 Persons on each side; 493 Notable Valour of a Spaniard 504 Notes of the Translator; 107 & 110 Numantia, its Description. Terms of Peace it made with Sempronius Gracchus. 33 —Prosecrtion of the War. 34 —Revolts again. Is besieged by Pompey. 38 —Destroy'd by Scipio. 40 —Nuptials in Germany. O Obeydalla calls himself King of Toledo. 132 Occasion of the barbarous Nations coming into Spain. 68 —Of the Wars betwixt France and England. 253 Odd Project, if true. 100 Olmedo, doubtful Fight betwixt the King and the Rebels. 409 Opilius Macrinus reigns 3 Months, and 28 Days, 57 Oran in Africk taken. 534 Order of the Belt Instituted; 257 Orders of S. Dominick & La Merced of Re∣demption of Captives. 200 Of S. Hierome and S. Isidore. 292 Ordono King of Leon, his Reign; 113 Ordono the 2d succeeds. 117 Ordono the 3d inherits the Crown; Is di¦vorced from his Wife, and Marries ano∣ther; 123 Ordono usurps, and expells King Sancho. flies to the Moors. Original of the Division of the Goths. 97 —Of the several Kingdoms of Spain. Of the Kings of Navarre; Of the Earls of Ara∣gon; and those of Barcelona. 117 —Of the Neapolitan War. 464 Orus or Hercules, kills the 3 Sons oof Geri∣on. 7 Osiris the Egyptian, kills Gerion. 6 Otho joins Galba, Reigns 95 Days. 53 —Is defeated, and kills himself. 34 Ottoman Founder of the Empire of that Name. 247 Overthrow given the Infidels. 149 —Of the Christians. 217 —Of the Moors. 253 —Of the Rebels in Catalonia. 406 —Of the Portugueses. 455 —Of the Swissers. 561 —Of the Castilians. 303 P. Pacification in Aragon. 204 Padua recover'd from the Venetians. 536 Palencia rebuilt. 136 Palma one oof the Canary Islands conquer'd. 464 Particulars of the Christians Success. 262 Paul, General for King Wamba takes part with the REbels. Is declar'd King. 91 —Taken Prisoner. 93 Paul the 2d Pope dies. 415 Paul de Cartagena, famous for Learning. 319 Paulus Hypseus. Peace in Spain. 40 —Broken by the Infidels. 126 —Betwixt the Moors and King of Leon. 126 —With the Romans. 87 —With the Moors. 227 Betwixt France and Aragon. 333 —Betwixt Sicily and Naples. 240 —Betwixt Castile and Aragon. 164 168 260 279 —For some time with the Moors. 208 —Betwixt the English and Castilians 355 —Betwixt Castile, Aragon, and Navarre. 351 —Betwixt Castile and Portugal, 290 435 291 336 —Betwixt France and Castile. 433 —Betwixt France and Spain. 485 —Betwixt France and Venice. 553 —With France takes no effect. 496 Pelayus or Pelagius, flies too Biscay. 99 —Undertakes to oppose the Infidels. Cause of his taking Arms. Is declar'd King. 102 —With 1000 Christians miraculously overcomes a great Power of the Infidels, 103 —His Power increases. 104 —His Death. 105 Penon in Africk taken by the Spaniards. Perfidiousness of Duke Valentin. 507 Perpenna succeeds Sertorius. Is kill'd. 44 Perpignan built. 144 Persecution under Severus. 57 —Under Decius. 58 —Under Dioclesian. 59 —At Cordova. 112 —Under the Moors. 173 Peter declar'd King of Castile; Is sick and recovers. 268 —Marries. 270 Forsakes his Queen, for the Lady Mary de Padilla. 270 —Changes his Officers. Punishes Rebels. Mar∣ries another, and forsakes her his first Wife, still living. 271 —Punishes Rebels. 273 —Expell'd the Kingdom. 283 —Flies to the English; 284 —Restor'd; 285 —Excommunicated and absolv'd. 286 —Provides for his Defence; Is overthrown. Betray'd and Murder'd by his Bastard-Bro∣ther; 287 Peter the 1st King of Aragon, succeeds his Father. 156 Peter the 2d King of Aragon. 186 Peter the 3d King of Aragon. 219 Peter the 4th King of Aragon. 266 —Dies; Peter Prince of Portugal, Marries the Lady Agnes de Castro, and She is murder'd; 273 —Is Proclaim'd King. 276 —Executes the Murderers of the Lady Agnes de Castro. 279 —Declares his Children by her Legitimate. 280 —Dies. 285 Peter Insante of Portugal, a great Travel∣ler. 349 —His Death. 408 Petreius. 45 Phanatick Moor. 467 Phoenicians build Towns, and settle in Spain. 10 —Are driven into the Island of Cadiz. 12 —Crave Aid of the Carthaginians, 13 Philip the Emperor Reigns above 5 Years. 58 Philip the Fair, King of France dies; 226 Philip the 1st King of Spain in England. 515 —Lands in Spain. Declares against the Trea∣ty with King Ferdinand; 516 —Dies 521 Piso succeeds Furius, and isworsted. 39 Pious Gifts of the King of Castile. 306 Pius the 3d elected Pope. 502 Places that send Representatives to the Cor∣tes or Parliament. 267 Plague and Famine in Portugal. 186 Plague at Madrid. 314 —In Spain and France with great Floods. —In Spain. 320 —In Portugal. 365 Plain of Granada wasted. 455 Plaucius twice defeated by Viriatus. 36 Plot to rescue King John of Castile; 370 Pompey the Great in Spain. 37 —Treats with the People of Numantia frauau∣lently, 38 —Comes again into Spain. 42 —His Sons in Spain. 46 Pompey Cn. His Death. 47 Pompey Sext: renews the War in Spain. Defeats Pollio. 48 Pope Invades the Land of the Ursini. 473
—Returns to Rome. 290 —Seizes the Lands of the Duke of Ferrara. 538 —Press'd to call a General Council. 541 —In vain labours for an Accommodation with France. 543 Popes Legate, his unjust Proceedings. 152 Pope's Legate in Aragon. 205 Pope's Legate a fronted by the Rebels. 409 Popilius the Pretor sent into Spain. 36 Popilius the Censa, defeated by the Numan∣tians. 38 Portugal; Original of that Kingdome. 134 164 —Descrivd. 164 —Under on Incrdict. 169 & 213 —Made Independant of Castile. Fol. 216 p.2 Portugueses overthrow the Castilians. 165 —That favour'd the King of Castile. 300 —Sustain loss at Azamor, but relieve Arzila. 631 —4000 of them stain in Africk. 560 Posthumius Alomus. 32 Posture of Affairs in Spain. 137 Potter's Son, set up King of the Moors. 173 Practices against the Earl of Castile. 125 —Of the Spaniards. 501 —Of the Emperour. 525 —Preaching among the Tartars. 216 Prefect of Rome, submits to Spain. 506 —Preparations for War. 260 —For War with the Moors. 441 —For the Lateran Council. 548 —Of the Turks against Italy. 557 —For War in Aragon. 349 Presumption of a Legate 280 Pretenders to the Crown of Aragon. 329 Prince Henry in open Rebellion. —Imprison'd 342 Prince of Viana flies to Naples. 384 Prince of Salerno expell'd Naples. 480 Prince of Segorve, come into Castile. 418 Princes of Aragon join with the Rebels of Cas∣tile. 365 Priscilian's Heresie. He and his Adherents Condemn'd to Death. His Errours. 65 Proceedings of the Catholikes, against the Al∣bigenses. 193 —Of the Rebels in Catalonia. 406 Prodigies. 21, 22, 341 388 411 Progress of the Rebellion in Castile. 272 & 366 —Of the Christians against the Moors. 262 —Of the War in Naples. 368 —Of the Aragonians at Naples. 360 —Of the Affairs of Italy. 470 —Of Portugues Discoveries 474 —Of the Siege of Saulses. 502 Proposals concerning the Kingdom of Naples. 473 Proscription. 48 Prosperous Expedition. 202 Publius Manlius. 32 Punishment of Mutineers. 531 Q. Queen of Portugal delivered of a Son; Dies. 482 Queen of France Dies. 556 Queen of Navavre accused of Adultery by her own Sons; is defended by a Bastard 136. Queen Mother of Castile joyns the Rebels. 273 Queens of Castile and Portugal Dies. 370 Quintilianus; Reigns 17 Days. 59 Quintius Crispinus. 32 Quintius defeats; and is again worsted by Viriatus. 37 Quintus Caecilius; overthrown by the Vacei. 45 Quintus Fontlius. 32 Race of Earles of Barcelona; extinct. 330 Raymund, or Ramon; Earl of Barcelona. 131 —Dies. 137 Raymund Earl of Barcelona; Son in Law to King Ramiro II. upon his resignation, Governs that Kingdom. 169 —Makes War in France. 170 —Successful against the French, and Moors. His Death. 177 Raymund III. Earl of Barcelona murdered, and his Son Raymund succeeds him. 149 Raymund or Ramon IV. Earl of Barcelona. Raymund; Earl of Toulouze, a Heretick, reduced. 204 Ramundus Lullus. 240 Ramiro I. King of Leon. 111 His Death. 112 Ramiro II. King of Leon, his Religious Works. He resigns the Crown and Dies. 123 Ramiro III. King of Leon, under the Tuition of his Mother and Aunt. 126 Ramiro; King of Aragon, Wars on his Bro∣ther of Navarre. 139 —Recovers his Dominions. 141 Ramiro II. King of Aragon. 167 —Puts to Death 15 Noblemen. 168 —Resigns the Government. 169 Ratification of the Peace betwixt Castile and Portugal. 438 Ravenna; surrendred to the French. Rebellion in Gallia Gothica. 91 —Among the Moors. 115 —In Auiturias. 122 —Against the King of Leon. 127 —Suppressed. 298, 111, —Of Castro and Albuquerque; in Castile 259 —In Navarre. 205, 445 —In Old Castile. 315 —In Catalonia. 402 —In Naples. 447 —In Castile. 224, 236 —In Biscay. 368 —Of the Bastards of Castile. Rebellious Moors defeated. 412 Rebels every wheee worsted by Wamba. 92 —Of Castile hardened. 259 —Suppressed in Castile. 258 —Of Castile; associate; are Punished. 252 —Punished. 277 —Defeat the Royalists. 278 Of Castile; join with the King of Aragon. 405 —Disband. 408 —In Catalonia; choose the Duke of Anjou for their King. 408 —Excommunicated. 410 —Reduced. 412 Recaredus; King of Spain, makes War in France. 81 —His Reign; and Troubles on account of his Conversion. 82 —Reslores the Church Possessions. Overtbrows the Francs. Hereticks Conspire against him. He Punishes the Conspirators. His General, Claudius overthrows the Francs. 83 —He Marries Clodosinda; Sister to Childe∣bert, King of Lorrain. His Death, 85 Recaredus II. Reigns but 3 Months. 87 Recaredus and Alonso; the First Kings of Spain, had the Title of Catholick. 105 Reception of a Legate in Castile. 417 Recesuinthus; advanced to the Crown by his Father. His Actions and Death. 90 Rendevouz of the French at Aste. 555 Revolutions at Genoa. 554 Rhodians; their coming into Spain. 10 Rightful Princes of Castile; Prisoners. 227 —Released. 231 Robert; King of Naples Dies. 264 Roderick; King of Spain; ravishes Count Julian's Daughter. 97 Roderick Diaz de Bivar; called Cid, who he was. Many Fables concerning him. 141 —His Opinion touching the subjection of Spain to the Empire. The whole Relation suspect∣ed to be Fabulous. His Original. 142 —Ravages the Dominions of the Moors. Is Banished. 147 —His further Actions. 148 —Takes Valencia Marries his Daughters to the Earls of Carrion. 157 —His Death. 158 Roderick Archbishop of Toledo; invades the Moors. 206 Rodulphus of Ausburg; chosen Emperor. 216 Roger Lauria; the great Aamiral, Dies. 242. Roman Army mutinies. 46 Roman Missa ana Broviary introduced. 152 Romans declare War the 2d time against Carthage. 21 —Successful in Spain. 22 —Overthrown. 25 —Defeated. 85 —Quite expelled Spain. 88 Romantick Relation about Spain being exemp∣tea from the Roman Empire. 141 Rome taken by Alarick; King of the Goths, in the Year 410. 67 Ronda taken. 446 Rousillon and Cerdagne; Restored to King Ferdinand. 463 Rout of the Spaniards in Africk. 539 S. Saguntum; Built by the Greeks. 8 —Besieged. 20 —Destroyed. 21 S. Dominick; Preaches to the Albigenses. 193 S. Elizabeth; Queen of Portugal. 300 S. Francis; of Assis. 200 S. German taken. 501 S. Gregories Books sent for to Rome. 89 S. James; Apostle of Spain. His Martyr∣dom. His Body brought into Spain. 52 —His Church made an Archipiscopal See. 115 —Miracle at his Tomb. 129 S. Isidorus; his Body Translated from Sevil, to Leon. 140 Salamanea; made an University. F.208, p.2 Sancha; Wife to King Ferdinand the First of Leon, her Death. 143 Sancho the First of Castile. Is Restored af∣ter having been expelled. 124 —Is Poisóned. 126 Sancho II. of Castile. 143 Wars upon his Brothers. 144 —Expets his Brother Garcia. Besieges Za∣mora. Treacherousiy Murdered there. 145 —A Combat about his Death. 146 Sancho III. of Castile. 175 —His Death. 176 Sancho IV. his Father living, aspires to Usarp the Crown of Castile from his Ne∣phews. 218 —His Practises to gain the Affections of the People. Rebels against his Father. 221 —Usurps the Crown of Castile. 225 —Dies. 235 Sancho I. King of Navarre, called Abarca, and why. 121 Sancho II. Inherits the Crown of Navarre. 125 Sancho III. King of Navarre. 131 —Inherits Castile. 135 —Divides the Dominion of Spain among his Sons. Settles matters of Religion. 136 —Is Murdered. 137 Sancho IV. King of Navarre. 140 Sancho V. King of Navarre. 147 —Breaks into Castile. —Dies. 185 Sancho VI. King of Navarre, Dies. 206 Sancho; King of Aragon. His Actions a∣gainst the Moors. 155 —Is killed. 156 Sancho; Son to Alonso the First King of Portugal, sent to besiege Cuidad Rodrigo, defeated. 182 —Succeeds to the Crown of Portugal; and is the first of the Name. 184 —His Death. 188 Sancho II. King of Portugal expelled the Kingdom by his Rebellious Subjects. F. 209, p. 2 —Dies at Toledo. 210, 213 Sancho; Earl of Castile. 131 —Makes his Mother drink Poison, she had prepared for him. 133 —His Issue. 134 Sancho; Prince of Castile, killed by the Moors. 158 Sappho; the Carthaginian. 14 —Sarazens; their great Power. Sardima; Conquered by the Aragonians. 252 —Reduced. 431 Saxons first mentioned in Roman History. 63 Scanderbeg; comes to the Assistance of Fer∣dinand, King of Naples. 402 Schism in the Church. 163, 295, 297, 316 —Ends. 350 Schismatick Cardinals; submit. Scipio Gneius; passes into Spain. 21 —Overthrows the Carthaginians. 26 Scipio Pub. Corn. sent to assist his Brother. 22 Scipio's; defeats Asdrubal. 23 —Stain. 26 Scipio Pub. Corn. Proconsul of Spain; takes Carthagena. 27 —Gains the Africans. 29 Scipio Nasica. 31 Scipio Corn. 34 Scipio Africanus; sent against Numantia. 36 —Triumphs over Numantia, and is called Numantinus. 40 Sea Fight; the Aragonians defeated by the Genoeses. 361 Seditions in the Dominions of Castile. 269 Seeds of Discord in Castile. 230
Siege of Saulses; Raised. 503 Sempronius Gracchus. 32 Sempronius Longus. 32 Sergius Galba. 34 Sertorius.; his Actions. 41 —Founds an Ʋniversity at Osca. 42 —His last Exploits, and Death. 43 Servilius Cepio. 32 Servilius; breaks the Peace, and Routs Vi∣riatus. 37 Several Provinces submit to the Romans. 31 —Governors of Spain. 31 —Synods. 85 —Towns taken from the Moors. 104 —Governors in Spain. 104 —Towns Rebuilt. 114 —Towns Conquered. —Towns in Navarre; taken by the Castilli∣ans. 182 —Towns taken from the Moors. 166, 208 —Exploits against the Moors. —Places taken from the Moors. 250, 255, 452 Governors chosen in the Provinces of Castile 250 —Places in Castile Rebel. 454 —Pretenders to Castile. 288 —Towns taken by the Christians. 330 —Losses of the French. 493, 495 —Cities in Italy; sue for the Protection of Spain. 506 Severus; Reigns 17 Years. 57 Sevil; described. F. 210, 2 —Besieged. —Siege; Reinforced. —Bridge broken. —Delivered. 211 Sicily; Reduced under the Dominion of Ara∣gon. 311 Siculus; Son to Atlas, Inherits the Crown. 7 Signal Loyalty of Peter Peralta. 418 Silingi; who they were. 67 —They come into Spain. 68 Silon and Adosinda; King and Queen. 108 Simon; Earl of Montforte, General of the Catholicks. 198 —Is killed. 199 Sintra; taken from the Moors. 170 Siracusa; in vain besieged, by the Aragoni∣ans. 239 Sisebutus; Elected King. 86 —Subdues the Asturians. Overthrows the Romans. Dies. 87 Sisenandus; Usurps the Crown, having ex∣pelled Suinthila, and his Son. 88 Sixteen put to Death for Treason. 286 Sixtus IV. chosen Pope. —Dies. 415 Slaughter of Moors and Christians. 313 —Of the Christians. 443, 360 Of Aragonians. 219 Small Body of Christians; deseats a great one of Moors. 360 Soldans Fleet worsted in India. Some Rebels submit; but fresh Troubles ensue in Castile. 411 Spain; its Description. 1 —Its Form, and Situation. 2 —Its Rivers and Mountains. 3 —Its Ancient and Modern division. 3 —Its Language. 5 —Divided betwixt Caesar and Pompey. 46 —Entirely subdued by Augustus. 50 —How divided and governed. 54 —True Religion flourishes there. 84 Spaniards; Revolt from the Romans, who kill 15000 of them. They Revolt again. 30 —Honoured; to incline them to serve the Ro∣mans. 25 —Decline in Calabria. 470 —Defeated. 482 —Their Practices. 489 Spurius Lucretius. 32 Storms. 17 Strange Custom. 49 —Way of Adoption. 129 —Prodigy. 159 Fondness betwixt King John and D. Alvaro de Luna. 348 Strangers come to serve against thr Moors. 154 Strife among the Nobility of Castile. 308 Success of the Aragonians. 164 —Of the Castilians. 164, 203 Of the Aragonians against the Moors. 166 Of the Aragonians at Naples. 369 Of the Portugueses in In India. 533, 543 Succession of the Moorish Monarchs. 108 —Of the Moors. 148 —Of the Earls of Barcelona. 148 —In Sicily. F. 213, p. 2 Succours from England, and other Parts. 264 Succours from Spain, land in Naples. 497 Suevians who they were. 67 —They come into Spain. 68 —Are Converted. Cause of their Conversion. 77 —Reduced under the Dominion of the Goths. —Their Kingdom abolish'd. 81 Suinthila Chosen King. 87 —Causes of his Ruine. Is expell'd by his own Subjects and the Francs. 88 Swisters descend into Italy. 549 —Rout the French. 555 Synods. Vid. Councils. Syphax routed by Massinissa. 25 T. Tacitus Reigns 6 Months and 20 Days. 98 Tahuste and other Places taken. 163 Tamerlan the Tartar, his Exploits. 321 Tangier and Arzilla, taken by the King of Portugal 415 Tarifa besieg'd by the Moors. 234 237 & 261 Terentius Varro. 32 Teresa, Countess Dowager of Portugal Go∣verns. 165 Territories of the Infidels ravag'd. 139 & 260 Theobald the first King of Navarre, ingages in the Holy War. 208 —Dies. 212 Theobald the 2d, King of Navarre. 212 —Marries. Fol. 213 p. 2 —Dies. 216 Theodoredus, King of the Goths. 71 Theodorick King of the Goths. Invades Spain. 72 Theodorick by the French call'd Thierri. 77 Theodosius declar'd Emperour in the East. 64 —Excommunicated for his Cruelty at Thessa∣lonica. Dies at Milan. Reign'd 16 Years and 2 Days. 66 Theudis, King by Election. His Death. 76 Theudiselus elected King. Is murder'd. 76 Three Synods. 75 —Remarkable Things. 17 —Legates sent to govern Spain. 45 —Cities and other small Towns taken from the Moors. 454 —Defeats of the Infidels at Sea. 357 —Great Men die. 437 Tiberius Reigns 22 Years. 51 —His Death. 52 Titinius Curvus. 32 Titus Reigns 2 Years. 2 Months, and 20 Days. Is call'd, Decus & Deliciae Generis humani. 54 Toledo and other Towns, whence so call'd. 12 Toledo, a new Wall about it. 94 —Taken. 99 —Its Conquest resolv'd upon. The Country about it wasted. 149 —Closely besieg'd. The manner of inclosing it. —Its Surrender. 150 —An Archbishop Chosen. 151 —Its Cathedral taken forcibly from the Moors, contrary to Articles. 152 —How its Archbishops came to be Primates of Spain. 152 & 174 Torismund succeeds Theodoredus. 71 —Is murder'd. 72 Toro taken by King Peter. 273 —Surpriz'd by the Castilians. 429 Tortosa, Lerida, and Fraga taken. 171 Towns taken by the Christians. 203 —In Andaluzia taken. 213 —Recover'd by the Christians. 214 —Taken on both sides. 276 —Taken by the Moors. 373 Trajan Reigns 19 Years and a half: Persecu∣tion under him. His Death. 55 Treachery rewarded. 289 Traytors punish'd in Portugal. 437 Treaty betwixt the Emperour and King Ferdi∣nand. 527 —Betwixt the King of Castile and his Re∣bels. 272 Trebonianus Gallus Reigns 18 Months. 58 Trojans come into Spain, 9 Troubles in Castile and Aragon, upon the oc∣casion of two Children. Henry and Jayme, or James to those Crowns. 195 Of Castile, break into open War. 198 —In Aragon. 170 265 214 —In Navarre. 219 —In Portugal. 395 —Among the Moors. 310 —In Naples, 343 —In Castile, and in the Church. 363 —Increase in Castile. 407 —In Aragon, Sardinia, and Navarre. 414 —In Galicia. 443 —In Aragon, stop the Progress of the War in Granada. 452 Truce for 3 Years. 115 —Betwixt Aragon and Navarre. 171 —With the Moors. 186 —With Portugal. 305 —With the Moors of Granada. 306 —With Portugal for 15 Years. 311 —With Portugal Renew'd. 319 —Betwixt Castile and Portugal. 343 —For 5 Years. 354 —For 3 Years betwixt France and Spain. 506 —Betwixt France and Spain. 553 —Betwixt Spain and France prolong'd. 557 True Heirs of Castile Imprison'd. 220 Truxillo recover'd by a strange contrivance. 353 Tryal by Ordeal, 75 Tubal the first that Peopl'd Spain. 1 Tulga made King. 89 Tumults in Aragon and Catalonia. 448 —In Aragon. 322 Turbulent State of Christendom. 332 Turks; their Original, and Growth. 247 —Pass over into Europe. 318 —Take Otranto, in Italy. 420 Two Engagements. 34 —Christian Ks. make War upon the Moors. 164 —Archbishops Murdered. 180 —Holy Men. 160 —Synods. 161 —Uncles strive to Ʋsurp the Crown of Aragon. 195 —Ecclipses. F. 208, p. 2 —Moorish Kings at Granada; destroy one a∣nother. 444 —Several Rebellions quelled. 201 —Extraordinary accidents. 246 Factions in Navarre. 377 —Defeats of the Moors. 377 V. Valencia, where Seated; Besieged, and Re∣lieved. 157 —Abandoned by the Christians. 158 —Its Siege resolved on. Its Description. Be∣sieged. F. 207, p. 2 Delivered up to the Christians. 208 Valens; Emperor of the East. Persecutes the Catholicks. 63 —His Superstitious Practices. 64 Valentine; Duke slain. 526 Valentinian the Emperor; Reigns 11 Years, 8 Months, and 22 Days. His Death. 63 Valerianus; Reigns 7 Years. 58 Vandals; who they were. 67 —They come into Spain. 68 Various Accidents. 278 Varro. 45 Vasco de Gama; Discovers India. 474 —At Calicut. 476 —Returns to Portugal. 477 —Account of his Navigation. 478 Vascones subdued. 85 Vast Multitude of Infidels comes into Spain. 185, 217 —Army of Foreigners comes into Spain; to the Assistance of the Christians. 188 Venetians overthrown by the French. 468, 546 —Set upon, on all Sides. 535 —Their Army Routed. 535 —Overthrown by the Viceroy of Naples. 558 Venice; Cannonaded. 556 Vespanan; chosen Emperor, Reigns 10 Years. 54 Victory of the French and Spaniards at Sea; over the English. 291 —Of the English at Poitiers. 275
—Of the Christians by Sea. 326 —Obtained by the Queen of Naples. 346 —Of the Moors over the Christians. 280 Vmcenza; taken by the Imperalists. 538 Violante; Queen of Castile, proves with Child, and prevents being divorced from the King. F. 212, p. 2 —Flies to Aragon with her Grandchildren. 219 Violante; Daughter to the King af Aragon, Married to Luis Duke of Anjou. 321 Violent Winter. 368 Viriatus; his Original and Life. 35 —His Actions. 36 —Defeats the Romans, and makes Peoce with them. His Death. 37 Vitellius; his Army routed, and he slain. 36 Vitellius; the Emperor enters Rome. Reigns 9 Months. 54 Vitoria; City Built. 183 Uncertain Government of Castile. 523 Unimanus; vanquished and slain by Viria∣tus. 3 Union of the Crowns of Castile and Leon. F. 205, p. 2 Universal Plague. 15, 266 University of Alcalâ; founded. 483 Ufracâ; Queen of Castile, a dissolute Wo∣man. 160 —Her Death. 165 W. Walia; Ring of the Goths, agrees with the Romans. 69 Wamba; his accession to the Crown. 91 —Marches against the Rebels. Recovers very many Towns. Takes Narbonne, Reduces other Places. Enters Nismes by assault. 92 —Returns to Spain. His publick Works. 93 —Is deposed. Reigned 8 Years, 1 Month ana 14 Days. 94 War in Sicily. 16 —Among the Moors. 109 —Betwixt the Kings of Castile and Leon. 138 —Of Majorca and Zaragoca. 162 —Betwixt Navarre and Aragon. 170, 180 —Betwixt Castile and Navarre. 175 With the Moors. 194, 204, 245, 354, 257, and 456 —In Italy. 215, 382, and 544 —Betwixt Castile and Aragon. 231, 275 —In Sicily. 238 —In Navarre. 284 —Betwixt Castile and Portugal. 291, 309 —Betwixt Castile, Aragon and Navarre. 351 —At Naples; betwixt the Aragonians and House of Anjou. 401 —Breaks out inseveral Parts of Castile. —With the Infidels; put off for some time. 442 —Betwixt the French and Spaniards; at Naples. 492 Wicked contrivance of Sons against their Mo∣ther. 136 Witericus; the Murderer of Liuva, Usurps the Crown. Is killed and dragg'd about the Streets. 86 Witiza; made his Fathers Companion in the Throne. His Reign: He Murders Favila. His Death. 96 Wonderful Dearth. 9 —Providence. 128 —Defeat of of Hereticks. 194 —Judgment. 245 Works of Peter Tenorio; Archbishop of To∣ledo. 320 X. Xeres; Besieged by the Moors, and the Siege raised. 227 Z. Zahara; surprized by the Moors. 440 Zama; governs Spain. 104 Zamora; made a Bishoprick, and Compo∣stela, an Archbishoprick. 164 Zanelus; the Pope's Nuncio in Spain. 117 Zaragoca; Besieged in vain. 116 —Besieged by the Christians. Taken. 163 THE INDEX TO THE SUPPLEMENT. A. ACeord betwixt Spain and France. Pag. 5 Actions in Portugal. 48 Adrian; Cardinal. 2 —Chosen Pope. 4 Agreement with Portugal. 7 Alarache; in vain attempted by the Moors. 92 —Taken. 32 Albertus; the Archduke, governs the Ne∣therlands. 29 Alcaraz; Castle Surprized. 58 Alenzon; Duke in the Low Countries. 24 —Heads the Rebels there. 25 —Returns into France. 26 Alexander VII. chosen Pope. 72 —Dies. 93 Alonso; King of Portugal imprisoned by his Brother. 94 —Sent to the Island Tercera. 94 Alva; Duke, Governor of the Low-Coun∣treys. 20 —Reduces Portugal. 25 Amiens; taken by the Spaniards. 30 Ann; Princess, her Birth. 31 Antony Perez; his Sufferings. 28 Antony; the Bastard of Portugal, vanquish∣ed. 26 —With the English Fleet in Portugal. 28 Antwerp; Plundered. 24 Archbishop of Toledo; Condemned. 23 B. Badajoz; Besieged by the Portugueses. 78 —Relieved. 79 Baltazar; Prince, Born. 38 —Dies. 46 Barbarossa; Ravages the Coast of Italy. 11 Battle of S. Quintin. 16 —Of Gravelling. 17 —Of Lepanto. 21 Bell Rings of it self. 89 Berga; in Catalonia, recovered. 72 Brasil; recovered. 37 Breda; taken. 37 Bulls for Portugues Bishops; refused by the Pope. 68 C. Cadiz; Plundered by Drake. 29 Calais; taken. 17 Calvin and Beza. 19 Caracena; Marquess, General against Por∣tugal. 90. Catalonia Rebels; Portugal follows the Ex∣ample. 43 Catherine; Queen of Portugal Dies. 24 Cazal; Besieged. 37 —Taken. 63 Ceremony of Contracting the Spanish Princess to the King of France. 90 Cessation of Arms betwixt France and Spain. 80 Chaldeans; their Conversion. 38 Change of Religion in England. 7 Charles I. in Spain. 2 —His Sister Married to Emanuel King of Portugal. Is chosen Emperor, Crowned. 3 —Returns into Spain. 4 —Marries the Sister of the King of Portugal. 6 —Crowned Emperor. 7 —Arms against the Turks. 8 —In France. 9 —Abdicates. 16 Charles II. King of Spain, Proclaimed. 98 Charles; Prince of Wales, in Spain. 36 Christian League against the Turk. 21 Christiern; King of Denmark expelled. 4 Civil Wars in Swisserland. 8 Clement; Pope Dies. 8, 31 Clement IX. chosen Pope. 93 Collation of great Offices. 95 Comet. 22, 24 Commotions in Portugal. 42 Composition betwixt France and Spain. 7 Concessions for Reducing Hereticks. 13 Condê; Prince, in Catalonia. 46 Conferences for Peace. 80 Conspiracy against the French King. 27 Conti; Prince, takes Ville-Franche. 68 Conversion of Ethiopia. 56 Cortes of Aragon. 37 —Of Castile. 44 —Of Aragon and Valencia. 44 Cosmo; Created Great Duks of Tuscany. 21 Council of Trent. 11 —Openea. 12 —Breaks up. 13 —Sunnnoned again. 14 —Opened again. 18 Court at Valladolid. 30 D. Dauphin of France; Marries the Queen of Scots. 17 Death of 2 Kings and a Queen. 13 —Of 2 Popes. 28 —Of the Princess; Governess of Flanders. 39 Defeat of the French in Sardinia. 41 —Of the French at Valenciennes. 73 Diet at Ausburg. 7 —At Worms. 9
Discovery of Cathay and Tibet. 36 Disputes about Religion in Germany. 10 —Betwixt Catholicks and Hereticks. 12 —About Religion in France. 18 Diu; Besieged by the Turks. 9 Downfall of the Sultans of Egypt. 2 Drake; attempts Cadiz. 27 —Plunders the Coast of America. 29 Dukes of Savoy and Mantua Die. 41 Dunkirk gained. 64 —Taken by the French and English. 76 Dutch and Turks Defeated. 36 Dutch in Brazil. 36 —Routed. 42 E. Earthquake. 21, 32, 42 Ebora; made an Archbishoprick. 10 Edward; King of England Dies. 15 Elizabeth; Queen of England. 17 —Excommunicated. 20 Elizabeth; Queen of Spain Dies. 44 Emanucl; King of Portugal Dies. 4 Embassy into England. 31 From a Black King. 76 Emperor and King of England; in League against France. 11 Empress Dies. 10 Empress in Spain. 25 Enterprizes on the Frontiers of Portugal. 83 English Fleet Invades Hispaniola. 71 Escurial finished. 28 Etna; Mount. 25 Exploits of Mallorquines. 75 F. Ferdinand; King of Spain Dies. 1 Ferdinand; chosen King of the Romans. 7 Ferdinand; Prince, Archbishop of Toledo. 34 Feria; Duke in Alsace. 39 Final betrayed. 31 Floods. 37 Francis; King of France, taken by the Im∣peralists. 5 —Released. 6 French King in Italy. 1 French King and Emperor meat. 9 French King's Sister; Married to the Prince of Navarre. 22 French King; takes Towns in Flanders. 93 French and Turks; take Nice. 11 French in Biscay. 4 —Invade Savoy. 9 —In Lorrain. 38 —Overthrown. 42 —Join with the Rebels. 43 —In Italy. 46 —Decline in Catalonia. 58 —In Catalonia; with the Rebels. 65 —Pass the Pyreneans. 67 —Join with the English. 74 —Obliged to quit the Siege of Alexandria. 74 —Begin the War in Flanders. 93 Galeons; destroyed. 71 General defection of the Low-Countries. 24 Great Eclipse. 11 Great Flooas. 16, 43, and 76 Great Jubilee. 30 Great Tax. 31 Gregorian Account. 25 Gregory; Pope Dies. 26 Gregory; XV. Pope. 35 —Dies. 36 Guize; Duke, Murdered by the Huguenots. 18 Guize; Duke, put to death. 27 Guize; Duke, set at Liberty. 69 Gustavus Adolphus. 38 —Killed. 39 H. Hard Winter. 44 Henry; King of Navarre. 2 Henry; the Cardinal, King of Portugal. 24 —Dies 25 Henry III. King of France Murdered, by Clement. 28 Henry IV. King of France, Murdered by Ravillac. 32 Heresie of Martin Luther. 2 Hereticks; at the Council of Trent. 14 Huguenot Rebels; twice overthrown. 20 James; Prince of Spain Dies. 26 Jesuits; Confirmed by the Pope. 10 Jesuits; Murdered. 20 Innocent X. Pope Dies. 69 Innundations in Flanders. 7 John III. King of Portugal, Marries the Emperors-Sister. 5 —Dies. 16 D. John of Austria; at Tunez. 22 —Made Vicar of Italy. 23 —In the Low-Countries. 24 D. John of Austria; at Sea. 46 —At the Siege of Barcelona. 53 —Takes Solsona. 72 —Sent for Flanders. 73 —Takes S. Gillain. 73 —Commands against Portugal. 87, 83 —Takes Aronches, and other Places. 83 —Enters Portugal. —Takes Borba and Iurumenha. 86 —Takes Ebora; and is Routed. 95 —Is Lord Lieutenant, and Captain General of Aragon. 94 Jubilee Year at Rome. 37, 57 Julius III. Elected Pope. 14 —Dies. 15 K. King of France Dies. 23 L. Landresi; taken by the French. 41 League against the Turks. 9 —Dissolved. 22 Leganez; Marquess in Savoy. 41 Leganez; Marqess, destroys many Moors a∣bout Oran. 15 Leo IX. Pope Dies. 4 Leo X. chosen Pope. 5 Leo XI. shosen Pope. 31 Leopold; the Archduke in Champagne. 57 Lerida Recovered. 44 Lerma; Duke, leaves the Government. 33 Low-Countries; Conspire against Spain. 23 M. Malta; Besieged by the Turks. 19 Mamora; taken. 32 Marcellus; chosen Pope, and Dies. 15 Margaret; King Philip IV. Daughter, Mar∣ried to the Emperor. 95 Marriages of Princes. 32 Marriage of the Princess of Spain to the Fr. King. 90 Martin Luther's Death. 12 Martyrdoms in Japan. 36 Mary; Queen of Portugal Dies. 2 Mary; Queen of England, Marries Philip Prince of Spain. 15 —Dies. 17 Mary; Queen of Scots imprisoned. 19 —Murdered. 27 Mary; Princess. Born. 31 Maximilian; the Emperor Dies. 3 Maximilian; Governour of Spain. 13 Medices; expelled Florence. 6 —Restored. 7 Monserrat; Invaded by the Spaniards. 47 Monstrous Birth. 39 Montmidi; Surrendred to the French. 74 Moriscoes; Rebell in Spain. 20 —Banished. 32 Mortara; Marquess, attacks the French, and is repulsed. 76 Mortality. 28 Murder Commited by a Woman. 92 Mutiniers Punished. 28 N. Naples; Besieged. 6 Navarre; Pacified. 1 —Over-run by the French. 3 Netherlands; given to the Princess Eliza∣beth. 22 New Governour in the Low-Countries. 22 New Passage into the South Sea. 33 F. Nitard; sent from Court. 94 O. Olivenca; taken from the Portugues. 44 Orange; Prince, Heads the Rebels in Hol∣land. 20 —Wounded. 25 —Killed. 26 Ormuz; taken by the Persians; 36 Ossuna; Duke, makes an Irruption into Por∣tugal. 77 —His Actions there. 84 —Again in Portugal. 95 Overthrow of the French. 5, 45 —Of the Saxons. 13 Overtures of Peace; betwixt Spain and Por∣tugale 91 P. Pantheon; finished. 67 Parma; Prince, successful against the Rebels in the Low-Countries. 26 Paul III. Pope, Dies. 14 Paul IV. Pope. 15 Paul V. Pope Dies. 37 Peace; betwixt France and Spain. 17 —Betwixt Spain and England. 31 —With Oliver Cromwell. 70 —Concluded. 89 —Concluded with Portugal. 94 Penol; in Africk taken. 19 Perfidious Act of Portugueses. 70 Pemambuco; taken by the Dutch. 38 Perpignan; taken by the French. 43 Persecution in Japan. 37 Philip II. Sworn Heir of Castile. 6 —Governour of Spain. 11 —His Marriage. 12 —Marries a Third Wife. Returns into Spain. 17 —Aspires to the Crown of France. 29 —Dies. 30 Philip III. Born. 24 —Sworn Heir of Spain. 26 —His Marriage. 30 —In Portugal. 33 —Dies. 34, 35 Philip IV. Born. 31 —Sworn Heir of Spain. 31 —Marries the French Kings Sister. 33 —Goes with the Princess his Daughter to the Frontiers. 89 —Dies. 90 Philip; Prince of Spain, Dies. 84 Pius IV. chosen Pope. 17 Pius V; chosen Pope. 19 —Dies. 21 Places in Guienne taken. 40 Places in the Low-Countries, taken by the French. 46 Plague. 17 —At Naples. 74 Pope and Emperor at Bologna. 8 Pope and King of France at Marseilles. 8 Portugues Ambassador's Brother; beheaded. 69 Portugueses; worsted. 62 Posture of Affairs in Flanders. 80 Practices against the Emperor. 6 Proceedings against Hereticks. 12 Prodigy. 86 Q. Queen of Spain Dies. 25, 32 Queen of Spain; Delivered of a Daughters 60 Queen Regent of Portugal; Dies. 91 Quiroga; Archbishop of Toledo; 20 R. Ragusa; destroyed by an Earthquake. 93 Rebellion in Spain. 3 —In Ghent. 10 —In France. 18 —In the Low-Countries. 19 —In Naples. 47 Rebels in France; Besiege Paris. 20 Riches of the Spanish Fleet. 85 D. Roderick Calderon; behended. 35 Rome; Sacked. 6 Rousillon; Invaded by the French. 42 S. S. Francis Xaverius. 15 S. Ignatius Beatified. 32 S. Rosalia; her Feast. 62 Savoy Duke; in Spain. 26 Sebastian; King of Portugal, his Birth. 15 —Slain; with all his Army in Africk. 24 Several Places in the Low-Countries, Revolt. 22 Ships taken; 41, 71
Siena; expels the Imperalists. Surrendred to the Emperor. Given to the Duke of Flo∣rence. 16 Sixtus V. chosen Pope. 26 Slaughter of the English Garrison of Tan∣gier. 98 Solyman; Dies before Zigeth. 19 Spaniards; expelled Milan. 1 —Take Towns in Picardy. 40 —Overthrown in Catalonia. 45 —Worsted by the Turks. 18 —At the Council of Trent. 18 Spanish West-India Fleet; burnt by Blake. 75 —Armada against England destroyed. 27 —Ambassador; Received by the Rebels in England. 50 Storm of Wind and Rain. 40 Succours; sent the French Rebels, by the Spa∣niards. 65 Swarms of Locusts. 11 Swisse; Routed. 1 Synods; in Spain. 19 —Synod at Toledo. 25 T. Termes; Castle taken. 45 Terrible Storm. 84 Theatins in Spain. 38 Thirty Thousand Germans in France. 27 Three Remarkable things. 9 Tortosa; taken. 57 Troubles; in France. 48 Truce; for Ten Tears. 9 —Betwixt France and Spain. 16 —With the Dutch Rebels. 32 —With Holland. 47 Tumults; in Aragon, appeased. 29 Tunez; taken by the Emperor. 8 Turenne; overthrown by Condê. 64 Turks; over-run Hungary. 6 —Before Candia. 70 —Enter Transilvania. 85 Turkish Fleet; at Naples. 15 Turkish Fleet; beaten. 92 Twenty two Galleys cast away. 18 Two Sea Fights. 35 V. Valladolid; made a Bishoprick. 29 Venetians; make Peace with the Turk. 22 Victory; over the Hollanders. 33 Vienna; Besieged. 7 Urban VIII. chosen Pope. 36 W. Wallestein; Executed. 39 War; in Flanders. 14 —Renewed; betwixt France and Spain. 16 —Of Savoy and Mantua. 33 —In Italy. 38 —Betwixt France and Spain. 40 —Betwixt the Venetians and Turks. 85 —Betwixt the Emperor and the Turk. 96 X. Xerifes; of Africk, their Rise. 14
FINIS.
