O590D 99826671 31076
A COPY OF VERSES, HUMBLY PRESENTED To all his worthy Masters and Mistrisses In the Town of Lambeth. By THOMAS OULDMAN, Belman. depiction of a bellman The PROLOGUE. I walk my Rounds, kind Sirs, as you can tell, And very seldome fail to Ring my Bell; The Winter Frosts I value not, but take A pleasure in my Labours for your sake. And now the time o'th' Year commands to bring My Verses to you as an Offering, I hope that every one will mindful be Of all my Pains, my Christmas-Box and Me. On St. Thomas's Day. WHen as St. Thomas heard that Christ did live, Whom he saw dead, no credit could he give To that report, till he his hand did hide In the wide wounds made in Christ's side. Oh weak of Faith, to think he should not give Life to himself, who made the Dead to live! But this declares Man's frailty; Then let's cry, Encrease our Faith, good Lord, or else we dye. On Christmas day. VVHen great Augustus Caesar reign'd on Earth, Then was the time of our great Saviours birth: Which Angels caus'd from Heaven to descend, That they to th' world glad tydings might commend, Singing this Song, Glory to God on High, And Peace on Earth; thoughts from Eternity Of good will towards Men, is now made known, Believing in him, Heaven and all's our own. On St. Stephens day. SAint Stephen was King of Martyrs, he did see The Heavens to ope, and Jesus Christ to be Set on his Fathers right hand, there to make Prayers and Intercession for Man's sake. Awake, O man, awake, arise and pray, Call on the Lord while it is call'd to day; For if the Bridegroom (entring) shut the Gate, Then may you call, but it will be too late. On St. Johns day. SAint John was chief Apostle of the rest, Christ gave him leave to lean upon his breast; He in a Revelation saw all should come Upon the World until the Day of Doom; Which how nigh 'tis no mortal man can tell; Then whilst thou liv'st, endeavour to live well; That when Christ comes, these words be said to thee, Come now, ye Blessed, come and live with me. Ʋpon Innocents day. OH, what a Crowd of little Martyrs went Upon that day to Heaven, whom Herod sent! When he did cause the Children to be slain, His malice was to Christ, but was in vain; Man's Will cannot the Lords Decree prevent; That labour's lost that is so vainly spent. PUt not thy trust in Man, which lives on Earth, But in the Lord, which gave thee life and breath; For he is him whom thou mayst alwaies trust, A gracious God, both merciful and just. For the Winter. HAppy remain my Benefactors all, That nightly hear my voice, my joy's not small That I once more have leave for to present My faithful service, in hopes 'twill give content. And since the Season it doth me invite, I am resolved (with God's leave) each night To walk my Rounds, with Lanthorn, Staff, and Bell, To see (kind sirs) all things is safe and well; Your doors and windows, locks and lights shall be Chiefly my care through all my liberty; And least dread danger it should come to you, You shall have both my Pains and Prayers too. IN worst of times 'tis good to serve the Lord, Though troubles come, yet he will still afford Help and Relief to those that fear his Name, Therefore with me extol and laud the same: For by that means you will more comfort find Than all the World can give unto your mind. AWake from sleep, afford your souls relief, And mind how death comes on you like a thief: Who is so courteous, with none for to advise What time he'l come, what hour he will surprize; Each hour prepare you, then wail for your sins: Where Death doth make an end, Judgment begins. KNow sinners, know, how great soe're you are, That you must stand at Christ's Tribunal Bar, To answer for the crimes that you have done, Before Christ Jesus, Gods beloved Son: And if he prove thy Advocate to be, Then thou art blest to all Eternity. And if he do refuse to be thy friend, Thy pains and miseries shall never end. GIve us (good God) all new minds, and inspire Our frozen hearts with thy most Holy fire: Guide thou our foot-steps, and rectifie our waies; Lord, teach us still to number all our days. LOrd, grant that here thy Gospel still may shine, And all our hearts may to thy Laws incline, To mind thy Word and Holy Sacrament, That while we live, we daily may repent. HOw frail is Man! how uncertain are his daies! How is his Life incumbred many ways With care, vexation, grief and sorrow! Alive to day, yet may be dead to morrow. Death is a Messenger with flying wings, That strikes at poor mens Tents as well as Kings; O mortal man, Death alwaies skulks behind you, For as Death leaves you, so shall Judgment find you. IT's good for us to keep in heart and mind The works of God, which was to us so kind. Then let us all, before our days are spent, Both great and small, now labour to repent, That when we shall resign our mourning breath, We may with smiles embrace the thoughts of death. Lord, grant that we our lives may all amend, While here we live, before this life doth end. NO mortal man at all times wise can be, The best of men delight in Vanity; What pitty 'tis that man, who this doth know, Should fancy that which works his overthrow; But man by Nature sinful is and frail, And sin o're him doth powerfully prevail; Then let Us poor distressed sinners all With contrite Hearts for Gods assistance call. The EPILOGUE. Now having brought my Sheet near to an end, In which there's nought, I hope, that can offend; Sirs, 'tis my drift unthought, my Learnings small, With wholsome Lines still for to please you all. But yet I fear there's some will take offence, Because they find in them small Eloquence; I am not of such quick ripe-witted Brains, As to produce high-flown Poetick Strains: And yet I hope you will accept my Rhimes, But to please all, poor Tom must rise betimes. LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1688.
