O746 99826701 31106
Eshcol: A Cluster of the fruit of Ca∣naan; brought to the Borders, for the encouragement of the Saints, travelling thither∣ward, with their faces towards Syon. OR. Rules of direction, for the walking of the Saints in Fellowship, according to the order of the Gospel. Collected and explained for the use of the Church at Coggeshall, By John Owen their Pastor. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. 1 Pet. 2. 15. LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the gilded Lyon in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1648.
An advertisement to the Reader. THERE are (Christian Reader) cer∣taine princi∣ples in Church affairs, ge∣nerally consented unto by all men, aiming at refor∣mation; however diver∣sified among themselves by singular perswasions, or distinguished by impo∣sed
and assumed names and Titles; Some of these, though not here mentio∣ned, are the bottome and foundation of this follow∣ing collection of rules for our walking in the fellow∣ship of the Gospel: a∣mongst which, these foure are the principall: First, That particular Congregations or Assem∣blies of believers, gathe∣red into one body, for a participation of the ordi∣nances of Jesus Christ, under officers of their own, are of Divine insti∣tution. Secondly, That every
faithfull person is bound by vertue of positive pre∣cepts, to joyn himself to some such single Congre∣gation, having the notes and marks whereby a true Church may be knowne and discerned. Thirdly, That every man's own voluntary con∣sent, and submission▪ to the ordinances of Christ in that Church whereunto he is joyned, is required for his union therewith, and fellowship therein. Fourthly, That all be∣lievers of one place, are bound to joyn themselves in one Congregation, un∣lesse
through their being too numerous, they are by common consent distin∣guished into more: which order cannot be distur∣bed without the guilt of Schisme. These principles, evident in the Scripture, cleer in themselves, and own'd in the main by all pretending to regular Church-refor∣mation, were supposed and taken for granted, at the collection of these en∣suing rules. The Apostolicall di∣rection and precept in such cases is, that where∣unto we have attained, we
should walk according to the same rule; unto whose performance the promise annexed is, that if any one be otherwise minded, God will also reveale that unto him. The remaining differences about Church Order and Discipline, are for continuance so Anci∣ent, and by the disputes of men, made so involved and intricate; the parties at variance so prejudiced and engaged, that al∣though all things of con∣cernment appeare to me, as to others, both consen∣ting with me, and dissen∣ting from me, cleer in the
Scriptures; yet I have little hopes of the accomplish∣ment of the promise in revelation of the truth, as yet contested about in men differently minded; untill the obedience of walking sutably and an∣swerably to the same rules agreed on, be more sin∣cerely accomplished. This perswasion is the more firmly fixed on me every day, because I see men, for the most part, to spend their strength and time, more in the oppo∣sing of those things wherein others differ from them, then in the practice
of those which by them∣selves and others are own∣ed, as of the most necessa∣ry concernment; so that, though the Lord hath ina∣bled me with some pains and difficulty, to compose an Irenicum in the Theory of Ecclesiasticall Disci∣pline; yet perswaded by my own judgment, I wil∣lingly lay it aside, lest it should provewith others, a wandring Raven, and choose rather to send forth this Dove, to direct the poor of the flock in the practice of those Christian duties, which are answe∣rable to the rules by all
agreed upon, ayming in the first place at the edifi∣cation of the flock com∣mitted to my own care; and in the next, to allure all lovers of Christ in sin∣cerity, to walk in those wayes which are attended with mercy and peace, not wanting a promise of the revelation of hidden truths; and in this I am fully resolved, that the practice of any one duty here mentioned, by any one soul before neglected, shall be an abundant re∣compence for the publish∣ing my name with these papers, savouring so little
of those ornaments of Art or Learning, which in things that come to publick view, men desire to hold out.
Imprimatur, Ja: Cranford. Decemb. 30. 1647.
Rules of walking in fellowship, with re∣ference to Pastor. RULE I. THe word and all ordinan∣ces dispensed in the admi∣nistration to him committed, by ver∣tue of Ministeriall autho∣rity, are to be submitted unto, with ready obedi∣ence in the Lord.
1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Mini∣sters of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 20. God hath committed unto us the Ministe∣ry of reconciliation: now then we are Embassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us; See 2 Cor. 6. 1. Gal. 4. 14. You received me as an Angell of God, even as Jesus Christ, 2 Thess. 3. 14. and if any man obey not our words, note that man, and have no company with him. Heb 13. 7. Remember them that have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of
God: V. 13. Obey them that have the rule over you, and sub∣mit your selves, for they watch for your soules, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. EXPLICATION I. THere is a two-fold power for the dispensing of the Word, 1. , or ability. 2.  authority: the first with the attending qualificati∣ons mentioned and recounted, 1 Tim. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8. and many other places, is required to be previously in those, as bestowed on them, who are to be called to office of ministration, and may be in severall degrees and mea∣sures
in such as are never set a∣part thereunto, who thereby are warranted to declare the Gospel, 1 In cases of ne∣cessity.Touching these cases, see my Treatise of the Duty of Pa∣stor▪ and peo∣ple distinguish∣ed. 2 Occasionally. 3 Desired by the Church, and not o∣therwise solemnly. The second, or authority proper to them who orderly are set apart thereunto, ariseth from 1. Christs institution of the office, Eph. 4. 11. 2. Gods designation of the person, Mat. 9. 38. 3. The Churches acceptati∣on, election, submission, Gal. 4. 14. Acts 14. 23. 1 Thess. 5. 12, 13. which doth not give them dominion over the faith
of believers, 2 Cor. 1. 24. nor make them Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3. but en∣trusts them with a stewardly power in the house of God, 1 Cor. 4. 12. that is, the pecu∣liar flock over which, in parti∣cular, they are made overseers: Acts 20. 28. of whom the Word is to be received, 1 As the truth of God, as also from all others speaking according to Gospel-order in his name. 2 As the truth held out with ministeriall authority to them in particular, according to the institution of Christ, which in other is not so. Motives to the observance of this rule, are; 1. The name wherein they speak and administer, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
2. The work which they do, 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 1. 1 Tim. 4. 16. 3. The return that they make. Heb. 13. 17. 4. The account that the Lord hath of them in his em∣ployment, Matth. 10. 40, 41, 42. Luke 10. 16. RULE II. HIs conversation is to be observed, and di∣ligently followed, so farr as he walks in the steps of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 4. 16. I beseech you be followers of me, Ch. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. Heb. 13. 7. Remember them
who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their con∣versation. 2 Thes. 3. 7. For your selves know how you ought to follow us, for we behaved not our selves disorderly among you. Phil. 3. 17. Brethren be fol∣lowers together of me, and mark them which walk so as you have us for an example. 1 Tim. 4. 12. Be you an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in chari∣ty, in spirit, in faith, in purity. L Pet. 5. 3. Be ensamples to the flock. EXPLICAT. II. THat an exemplar conver∣sation was ever required in the dispensers of holy things,
both in the Old Testament and New, is apparent: the glorious vestment of the old ministring Priests, Vrim and Thummim, with many other ornaments, though primitive∣ly typicall of Jesus Christ, yet did not obscurely set out the purity and holinesse required in the administrators them∣selves, Zech. 3. 4. in the new, The shining of their lights in all good works, Matth. 5. 16. is eminently exacted: and this not only, that no offence be taken at the waies of God, and his worship by them admini∣stred, as hath fallen out in the Old Testament, Jam. 2. 17. and in the New, Phil. 3. 18, 19. but also those who are without may be convinced. 1 Tim. 3. 7: and the Churches directed in the practise of all the will and
mind of God by them revea∣led; as in the places cited, a Pa∣stor should be vocall, Sermons must be practised as well as preached; Though Noahs Work-men built the Arke, yet themselves were drowned; God will not accept of the tongue where the Devill hath the soule. Jesus did do and teach, Acts 1. 1. If a man teach uprightly, and walk crookedly, more will fall down in the night of his life, then he built in the day of his Doctrine. RULE III. PRayer and supplicati∣ons are continually to be in his behalf, for assi∣stance
in the Work com∣mitted to him. Ephes. 6. 18, 19. Pray al∣waies with all prayer and sup∣plication in the spirit, for me, that utterance may be given me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the my∣stery of the Gospel, for which I am an Embassador. 2 Thes. 3. 1, 2. Brethren pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, and that we may be delivered from the hands of unreasonable and wicked men. 1 Thes. 5. 25. Col. 4. 3. Praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, Heb. 13. 18. Act. 12. 5. Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him, Heb. 13. 7.
EXPLICAT. III. THE greatnesse of the work, for which who is sufficient? 2 Cor. 2. 16. The strength of the opposition, which who almost can resist? Which are incumbent on, and maintained against the Mini∣sters of the Gospel, call aloud for the most effectuall daily concurrence of the Saints, for their supportment, and that love, thank fulnesse, and justice, do almost extort deserved prayers. That these are to be for assistance, incouragement, abilities, successe, deliverance, and protection is proved in the Rule. Motives. 1. The word will doubt∣lesse be effectuall, when ability for its administration is a re∣turn
of prayers, Acts 10. 30, 31. 2. The Ministers failing is the peoples punishment, Acts 8. 11. Isa. 30. 20. 3. His prayers are contin∣ually for the Church. 4. That for which he stands in so much need of prayers, is the Saints good, and not peculiarly his own. Help him who carryes the burthen, 1 Tim. 3. 8. Phil. 2. 17. Col. 1. 24. RULE IV. REverentiall estimati∣on of him with sub∣mission unto him for his works sake. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so ac∣count of us as of the Ministers
of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. 1 Thes. 5. 12. And we be∣seech you Brethren, to know them which labour among you and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, ver. 13. And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the El∣ders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour, espe∣cially they who labour in the word and doctrine. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Submit your selves to the Elders. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and sub∣mit your selves. EXPLICAT. IV. THE respect and estima∣tion here required, is civil,
the motive sacred; honor and reverence is due only to emi∣nency in some kind or other; prelation is Gods stamp upon any person, this is given to Pastors, by their employment; proved by their Titles,; they are called Angels, Revel. 1. 20. Heb. 12. 22. Bishops or O∣verseers, Ezek. 3. 17. Acts 20. 28. They are the Lords Bi∣shops. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Titus 1. 7. Men of God. 1 Sam. 2. 27. 1 Tim. 6. 11. Rulers, Heb. 13. 7, 17. Lights, Mat. 5. 14. Salt, Math. 5. 13. Fathers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. And by many more such like terms are they descri∣bed; if under these notions they honor God as they ought, God will also honor them as he hath promised:
And his people are in consci∣ence to esteem them highly for their works sake; but if any of them be fallen Angels, thrown∣down Starrs, negligent Bi∣shops, treacherous Embassa∣dors, Lordly-revelling-Stew∣ards, Tyrannicall or foolish Rulers, blind guids, unsavory Salt, insatiate doggs, the Lord and his people shall abhorr them, and cut them off in a moneth, Zech. 11. 8. RULE V. MAintenance for them and their Fa∣milies, by the administra∣tion of earthly things, suteable to the state and condition of the Chur∣ches, is required for their Pastors.
1 Tim. 5. 17, 18. Let the Elders who rule well be counted wor∣thy of double honor, especially they who Labour in the word and doctrine. For the Scripture saith, thou shalt not muzzle the oxe that treadeth out the corne, for the laborer is worthy of his reward. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, communi∣cate to him that teacheth in all good things: vers. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for what a man soweth, that shall he reap. 1 Cor. 9. 7. Who goeth a war∣fare at any time at his own charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? Who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock? vers 9. It is written in the Law of Moses,
Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Oxe that tread∣eth out the corne; doth God take care for Oxen? vers. 10. Or saith he it altogether for our sakes; for our sakes no doubt, this is written, that he that ploweth should plowe in hope, and he which thresheth in hope, should be made partaker of his hope, vers. 11. If we have sowen unto you spirituall things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnall things? vers. 13. Do not you know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar, vers. 14. Even so hath the Lord appointed, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, Matth. 10. 9, 10. Provide nei∣ther
gold, nor silver, nor brasse in your purses; Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: for the Workman is worthy of his meat. Add to these and the like places, the Analogie of the Primitive allowance in the Church of the Jews. EXPLIC. V. IT is a promise to the Church under the Gospel, that Kings should be her nur∣sing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers, Isa. 49. 23. To such it belongs principally to provide food and protecti∣on for those committed to them; the fruit of this promise the Churches in many ages enjoyed: Laws by supream and Kingly power have been enacted; giving portions and
granting priviledges to Chur∣ches and their Pastors. It is so in many places, in the dayes wherein we live; on this ground where equitable and righteous Laws have allowed a supportment in earthly things, to the Pastors of Churches, arising from such as may re∣ceive spirituall benefit by their labor in the Gospel; it is thankfully to be accepted and embraced, as an issue of Gods providence for the good of his. Besides, our Saviour war∣ranteth his Disciples to take and eat of their things, by their consent, to whomsoever the word is preached, Luk 10. 8. But it is not alwaies thus, these things may sometimes fail; wherefore the continu∣all care, and frequently the burden, or rather labor of love
in providing for the Pastors, lies, as in the Rule, upon the Churches themselves, which they are to do in such a man∣ner as is suitable to the condi∣tion wherein they are, and the increase given them of God. This the whole in generall, and each Member in particular is obliged unto; for which they have as Motives, 1. Gods appointment, as in the Text cited. 2. The necessity of it; how shall he go on warfare, if he be troubled about the ne∣cessities of this life: They are to give themselves wholly to the Work of the Ministry, 1 Tim. 4. 15. Other works had need to be done for them. 3 The equity of the duty; our Saviour and the Apostles
plead it out from grounds of equity and justice, Matth. 10. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 10. Allowing proportionable rectitude in the way of recompence, to the wages of the Laborer, which to detain is a crying sinn, Iam. 5. 4. RULE VI. ADhering to him, and abiding by him in all trials and persecutions for the Word. 2 Tim. 4. 16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsooke me, I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. 2 Tim. 1. 16. The Lord shew mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he oft refresh∣ed
me, & was not ashamed of my chains. V. 17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. V. 18. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy in that day; and in how many things he mi∣nistred to me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well EXPLIC. VI. A Common cause should be carried on by common assistance; that which concer∣neth all should be supported by all; when persecution ari∣seth for the words sake, ge∣nerally it begins with the lea∣ders; the common way to scatter the sheep, is by smiting the shepheards. The best of them is but a brier, and who will leave their Pastor in such
briers? It is for the Churches sake he is reviled and persecu∣ted, and therefore it is the Churches duty to share with him, and help bear his burthen. All the fault in scattering Con∣gregations, hath not been in Ministers: The people stood not by them in their triall; the Lord lay it not to their charge. The Captain is betrayed, and forced to mean conditions with his Enemy, who going on, with assurance of being followed by his Souldiers, looking back in the entrance of danger, he finds them all run away; in England usually, no sooner had Episcopall persecu∣tion laid hold of a Minister, but the people willingly recei∣ved another: perhaps a Wolf instead of a Shepheard; should wife forsake her husband be∣cause
he is come in trouble for her sake? Would not such a thing be called villany? Is the crime of a back-slider in spiri∣tuall things less? Surely whilest a Pastor lives, if he suffer for the truth, the Church cannot desert him, nor cease the per∣formance of all required duties, without horrid Apostacy. RULE VII. GAthering together in the Assembly upon his appointment, with theirs, joyned with him. Acts 14. 27. When they were come, and had gathered the Church together. These are the Heads where∣in the Churches duty consisteth towards him or them, that are
set over it in the Lord; by all means giving them encourage∣ment to the work, saying also unto them, take heed to the Ministry you have received, that you fulfill it in the Lord, Col. 4. 17. For what concern∣eth other Officers, may easily be deduced hence by analogie and proportion.
Rules to be observed by those who walk in fellowship, and con∣sidered to stirre-up their remembrance in things of mutuall duty one towards another, which con∣sisteth in, RULE I. AFfectionate love in all things to one ano∣ther,
like that which Christ bare to his Church. Jo. 15. 12. This is my com∣mandement, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. Jo: 13. 34. A new Com∣mandement I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. V. 35. By this shall all men know, that you are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Rom. 13. 8. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one ano∣ther, he that loveth another fulfilleth the law. Eph. 5. 2. Walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us. 1 Thes. 3. 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound
in love one towards another. 1 Thess. 4. 9. Your selves are taught of God to love one another. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing ye have purified your soules in obeying the truth through the spirit, un∣to unfaigned love of the bre∣thren, see that ye love one ano∣ther, with a pure heart fervent∣ly. 1 Jo: 4. 21. And this com∣mandement we have from him, that he who loveth God, do love his brother also. Rom. 12. 10. Be kindly af∣fectioned one to another in bro∣therly love. EXPLIC. I. LOve is the fountain of all duties, the substance of all
rules, that concern the Saints; the endless bond of communi∣on; the fulfilling of the Law; the advancement of the honor of the Lord Jesus, and the glory of the Gospel. The pri∣mitive Christians had a pro∣verbiall speech, received, as they said, from Christ; never re∣joyce but when thou seest thy brother in love; and it was common among the Heathens concerning them; see how they love one another, from their readiness for the accom∣plishment of that royall pre∣cept of laying down their lives for the brethren; its the foun∣tain-rule, scope, ayme, and fruit of Gospel-communion: and of no one thing of present per∣formance, is the doctrine of the Lord Jesus more eximious,
and eminent above all other directions then in this, of mu∣tuall, intense, affectionate love amongst his followers, for which he gives them innume∣rable precepts, exhortations, and motives, but above all his own heavenly example: to treat of love in its causes, nature, subject, fruits, effects, tenden∣cy, eminency, and exaltation, would not suit with present intention; only it may be plainly affirmed, that if there were no cause besides, of re∣formation and walking in fel∣lowship, but this one, that thereby the possession and practice of this grace, shame∣fully to the dishonor of Christ and his Gospel lost amongst those who call themselves Christians; it were abundant∣ly
enough to give encourage∣ment for the undertaking of it, notwithstanding any oppo∣sitions; now this love is a spi∣rituall grace▪ wrought by the Holy Ghost, Gal▪ 5. 22. in the hearts of believers, 1▪ Pet. 1. 22. whereby their soules are car∣ried out: 1 Thess. 2. 8. to the good of the children of God, as such, Phil. 5. Eph. 1. 15. Heb. 13. 11. uniting the heart un∣to the object so beloved, at∣tended with joy, delight and complacency in their good: Motives unto love are propo∣sed from, 1. The example and com∣mand of God and Christ. 2. From the nature, use, and end of love it self. 3. From the state and con∣dition of the persons to be be∣loved,
and that so variously, as they are too long for the pre∣sent to be insisted on. Love, which is the bond of commuuion, maketh out it self, and is peculiarly exercised in these things following; II. RULE. COntinuall prayer for the prosperous state of the Church, in Gods protection towards it. Psa. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Phil. 1. 4. Alwayes in eve∣ry prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy, ver. 5. For your fellowship in the Go∣spel
from the first day untill now. Rom. 1. 9. Without ceasing I make mention of you all in my prayer. Acts 12. 5. Peter was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. Isa. 62. 6. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not si∣lence: ver. 7. And give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Eph. 6. 18. Praying alwayes with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. Col. 4. 12. Epaphras who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, alwayes labou∣ring
fervently for you in pray∣ers, that you may stand perfect and compleat in all the will of God. EXPLIC. II. PRayer, as it is the great en∣gine whereby to prevail with the Almighty, Is. 45. 11. so it is the sure refuge of the Saints at all times, both in their own behalf, Psal. 61. 2. and also of others, Acts 12. 5. It is a benefit which the poorest believer may bestow, and the greatest Potentate hath no power to refuse; this is the beaten way of the soules com∣munion with God, for which the Saints have many gracious promises of assistance, Zech. 12. 10. Rom. 8. 26. innumerable
precepts for performance, Matth. 7. 7. 1 Thess. 5. 17. 1 Tim. 2. 8. with encourage∣ments thereunto, Ja: 1. 5. Luk. 11. 9. with precious promises of acceptance, Matth. 21. 22. Jo. 16. 24. Psal. 51. 15. By all which, and divers other wayes, The Lord hath abun∣dantly testified his delight in this sacrifice of his people; now as the Saints are bound to pray for all men, of what sort soe∣ver, 1 Tim▪ 2. 1, 2. unless they are such as sin unto death. 1 Jo. 5. 16. yea for their persecu∣ters, Matth. 5. 44. and them that hold them in bondage, Jer. 29. 7. so most especially for all Saints, Phil. 1. 4. and peculiarly for those with whom they are in fellowship, Col. 4. 12. The Lord having
promised, that upon every dwelling place, and all the assemblies of Mount Syon, that there shall be a cloud of smoke by day, and a shining of a flaming fire by night, Isa. 4. 5. it is every ones duty to pray for its accomplishment; he is not worthy of the priviledges of the Church, who continues not in prayer, for a defence upon that glory: prayer then for the good, prosperity, flou∣rishing, peace, increase, edifica∣tion, and protection of the Church, is a duty every day required of all the members thereof; 1. Estimation of the Ordi∣nances. 2. Concernment of Gods glory. 3. The honour of Jesus Christ.
4. Our own benefit, and spirituall interest. With the fourth, expresse∣ness of the command, are suf∣ficient Motives hereunto. III RULE. EArnest striving and contending in all law∣full wayes, by doing and suffering for the purity of the ordinances, honor, li∣berty and priviledges of the Congregation, being joyntly assistant against opposers, and common adversaries. Jude 3. And exhort you, that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.
Heb. 12. 3. For consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, lest ye he wearied, and faint in your minds. V. 4. ye have not re∣sisted unto blood, striving a∣gainst sinne. 1 Jo. 3. 16. Hereby per∣ceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast there∣fore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not intangled again with the yoke of bondage. V. 13. For Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the ser∣vants of men. Cant. 6. 4. Thou art beau∣tifull
O my love, terrible as an Army with banners. 1 Pet. 3. 15. be ready al∣wayes to give an answer to eve∣ry man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. EXPLIC. III. THe former Rule concern∣ed our dealing with God, in the behalf of the Church; This our dealing with men, to the right performance hereof many things are required; as 1. Diligent labouring in the Word, with fervent pray∣er, to acquaint our selves with the mind and will of God, concerning the way of wor∣ship which we profess, and the
rules of walking, which we desire to practise, that so we may be able to give an account to humble enquirers, and stop the mouths of stubborn opposers; according to our knowledge, such will be our valuation of the ordinances we enjoy: a man will not contend unless he knows his title. 2. An estimation of al the asper∣sions cast on, and injuries done to the Church to be Christs, and also our own; Christ wounded through the sides of his servants, and his wayes; and if we are of his, though the blow light not immedi∣ately on us, we are not with∣out pain: all such reproaches and rebukes fall on us. 3. Just vindication of the Church against calumnies, and
false imputations; who can endure to hear his parents in the flesh falsly traduced? And shall we be senseless of her re∣proaches who bears us unto Christ? 4. Joynt refusall of sub∣jection, with all Gospel-op∣position to any persons or things; who contrary to, or besides the word, under what name soever, do labour for power over the Church, to the abridging of it, of any of those liberties and priviledges, which it claimeth as part of the pur∣chase of Christ; to them that would enthrall us, we are not to give place, no not for an houre.
RULE IV. SEdulous care and en∣deavouring for the preservation of Unity, both in particular and in generall. Philip. 2 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; ver. 2. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind▪ vers. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or vain-glory, but in lowlinesse of mind, let each esteem others better then themselves.
Ephes. 4. 3. Indeavouring to keep the Vnity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace. vers. 4. There is one body and one spi∣rit, &c. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I be∣seech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions a∣mong you; but that ye be per∣fectly joyned together in the same mind and in the same judgement. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with . Rom. 14. 19. Let us there∣fore follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edi∣fie another.
Rom. 15. 5. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one towards another, &c. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren, but brother goeth to law with brother; Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you. Acts 4. 32. And the mul∣titude of them that believed, were of one heart and one soule. EXPLIC. IV. VNnion is the main aime and most proper fruite of love, neither is there any thing, or duty, of the Saints in the Gospel, pressed with
more earnestnesse, and vehe∣mency of exhortation, then this. Now Vnity is three-fold, First, purely spirituall, by the participation of the same Spirit of Grace; Com∣munication in the same Christ, one head to all. This we have with all the Saints in the world, in what condition soe∣ver they be; yea, with those that are departed, Sitting down in the Kingdome of Heaven, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Secondly, Ecclesi∣astical or Church-communion; in the participation of Ordi∣nances, according to the or∣der of the Gospel: This is a fruit and branch of the for∣mer; opposed to Schisme, Di∣visions, Rents, evill surmisings, self-practises, causlesse diffe∣rences
in judgment in spiritu∣all things concerning the Kingdome of Christ, with whatsoever else goeth off from closenesse of affection, onenesse of mind, consent in judgement to the forme of wholesome words, conformi∣ty of practise to the Rule; and this is that which in the Chur∣ches, and among them, is so earnestly pressed, commanded, desired, as the glory of Christ, the honour of the Gospel, the joy and Crown of the Saints. Thirdly, Civil Unity, or an a∣greement in things of this life, not contending with them, nor about them, every one seeking the wellfare of each other. Striving is unseemly for Brethren; why should they contend about the world, who
shall joyntly judge the world? Motives to the preservati∣on of both these, are 1. The remarkable earnest∣nesse of Christ and his Apo∣stles in their prayers for, and precepts of this duty. 2. The certain dishonour to the Lord Jesus, scandall to the Gospel, he to the Chur∣ches, shame and sorrow to the Saints, that the neglect of it is accompanied withall, Gal. . 15. 3. The gracious issues, and sweet heavenly consolation, which attendeth a right ob∣servance of them. 4. The many fearefull ag∣gravations wherewith the sin of renting the Body of Christ, is attended. 5. The sad contempt and
prophanation of Ordinances; which want of this hath brought upon many Churches; For a right performance of this duty, we must, 1. Labour by Prayer and Faith, to have our hearts and spirits throughly seasoned with that affectionate love, which our first Rule requireth. 2. Carefully to observe in our selves or others, the first beginnings of strife, which are as the letting out of waters, and if not prevented will make a breach, like the Sea. 3. Sedulously to apply our selves to the removall of the first appearance of divisions; and in case of not prevailing, to consult the Church. 4. Dayly to strike at the root of all dissention, by la∣bouring
for Universall confor∣mity to Jesus Christ. V. RULE. SEparation and seque∣stration from the world and men of the world, with alwayes of false wor∣ship, untill we be appa∣rently a people dwelling alone, not wicked among the Nations. Numb, 23. 9. Loe the peo∣ple shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the Na∣tions. John 15. 19. Ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.
2 Cor. 6. 14. Be not une∣qually yoked with unbelievers, for what fellowship hath righ∣teousnesse with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? ver. 15. And what concord hath Christ with Belial; or what part hath he that believeth with an Infidel; and what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols, for ye are the Tēple of the living God? v. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you: ver. 19. and will be a Father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daugh∣ters, saith tbe Lord Almightie. Eph. 5. 8. Walk as children of light. v. 11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darknesse.
2 Tim. 3. 5. Having a forme of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away. Hosea 4. 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not ye to Gilgal, ueither go ye up to Beth-aven. Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye partake not of her plagues. Prov. 14. 7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. EXPLIC. V. SEparation generally heares ill in the world; and yet there is a separation suitable to
the mind of God: he that will not separate from world, and false-worship, is a Sepa∣rate from Christ. Now the separation here commanded from any persons, is not in respect of naturall af∣fections, nor spirituall care of the good of their souls, Rom, 9. 3. nor yet in respect of duties of Relation, 1 Cor. 7. 13. nor yet in offices of love and ci∣vill converse, 1 Cor. 5. 10. 1 Thess. 4. 12. much less in not seeking their good and pro∣sperity, 1 Tim. 2. 1. or not communicating good things unto them, Gal. 6. 10. or living profitably and peaceably with them, Rom. 12. 18. but in 1. Manner of walking and con∣versation, Rom. 12. 2. Ephes. 4. 17, 18, 19. 2. Delightfull
converse and familiarity where enmity and opposition ap∣pears, Ephes. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10▪ 11. 3. In way of wor∣ship, and ordinances of fellow∣ship, Rev. 18. 4. not running out into the same compass of excess and riot, with them, in anything; for these 3. and the like commands and discoveries of the wil of God, are most ex∣press: as in the places annexed to the Rule; necessity abun∣dantly urgent; spirituall pro∣fit and edification, no less re∣quiring it: causeless separation from established Churches, walking according to the or∣der of the Gospel, (though perhaps, failing in the practise of some things of small con∣cernment) is no small sin: but separation from the sinfull pra∣ctises,
and disorderly walkings, and false unwarranted wayes of worship in any, is to fulfill the precept of not partaking in other mens sins; to delight in the company, fellowship, socie∣ty, and converse of unsavory disorderly persons, proclaimes a spirit not indeared to Christ. Let Motives hereunto, be, 1. Gods command. 2. Our own preservation from sin, and protection from punishment; that with others we be not infected and pla∣gued. 3. Christs delight in the purity of his ordinances. 4. His distinguishing love to his Saints; provided, that in the practise of this Rule, abundance of meekness, pa∣tience, gentleness, wisdome
and tenderness be exercised; let no offence be given justly to any. RULE VI. FRequent spiritual com∣munication, for edifi∣cation according to gifts received. Mal, 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spake often one to another, and the Lord heark∣ned and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written be∣fore him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name. Job 2. 11. Now when Jobs three friends heard al of this evil that was come upon him, they ame every one from his owne
place, for they had made an appointment together, to come to mourn with him, and to com∣fort him. Ephes. 4. 29. Let no cor∣rupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may administer grace to the hearers. Col. 4. 6. Let your speech be alwayes with grace, seasoned with salt, that you may know how to to answer every man. Eph. 5. 4. Neither filthiness nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks. 1 Thess. 5. 11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edifie one another, as also ye doe. Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one ano∣ther
daily, whilest it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnesse of sinne. Jude 20. Building up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost. Heb. 10. 24, 25. Let us con∣sider one another, to provoke unto love and good works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together us is the manner of some; but exhorting one ano∣ther, and so much the more, as you see the day approaching. Acts 18. 23. Whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly. 1 Cor. 12. 9. For the mani∣festation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withall.
EXPLIC. VI. THat men not solemnly called and set apart to the office of publick teaching, may yet be endued with usefull gifts for edification, was before de∣clared; the not using of such gifts, in an orderly way, ac∣cording to the rule and cu∣stome of the Churches, is to napkin up the talent given to trade and profit withall; that every man ought to labour, that he may walk and dwell in knowledge, in his family, none doubts; that we should also labour to do so in the Church or Family of God, is no lesse apparent. This the Scriptutes annexed to the rule declared, which in
an especial manner hold out prayer, exhortation, instructi∣on from the Word, and con∣solation; now the perfor∣mance of this duty of mutuall edification, is incumbent to the Saints divers wayes; 1. Ordinarily, Ephes. 4. 29. chap. 5. 3, 4. Heb. 3. 13. believers in their ordinary daily con∣verse, ought to be continually making mention of the Lord; with savoury discourses ten∣ding to edification, and not upon foolish, light, frothy spee∣ches that are not convenient. 2. Occasionally, Luke 24. 14. Mal. 3. 1. 6. if any thing of weight and concernment to the Church, be brought forth by providence; a spiritual im∣provement of it, by a due con∣sideration amongst believers, is required.
3. By assembling of more together by appointment, for prayer and instruction from the Word, Acts 18. 23. Acts 12. 12. Job 2. 11. Ephes. 5. 19. James 5. 16. Jude 20. 1 Thess. 15. 14. This being a speciall ordinance and appointment of God, for the increasing of knowledge, love, charity, ex∣perience, and the improving of gifts received; every one con∣tributing to the building of the Tabernacle; let then all vain communication be farr away: The time is short and the daies are evill; let it suffice us, that we have neglected so many precious opportunities, of growing in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and do∣ing good to one another: let the remainder of our few and
evill dayes be spent in living to him who dyed for us; be not conformed to this world, nor the men thereof. RULE VII. MUtually to bear with each others in∣firmities, weaknesse, ten∣dernesse, failings, in meek∣nesse, patience, pity, and with assistance. Eph. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgi∣ving one another; even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you. Matth. 18. 21. Then came Peter to him, and said, how oft shall my brother sin against me,
and I forgive him. 22. Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee seven times, but untill seventy times seven. Mark. 11. 25. And when you stand praying, forgive, if you have ought against any, that your Father which is also in Heaven may forgive youy our trespasses. v. 26. And if you do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in Heaven, forgive you your trespasses. Rom. 14. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his bro∣thers way; seever. 3. 4. Rom. 15. 1. We then that are strong, ought to beare the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. v. 2. let
every one please his neighbor for the good of edification. 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity suffe∣reth long, and is kind; charity envieth not, charity is not rash, it is not puffed up: ver. 5. Doth not behave it self unseemly, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evill: ver. 6. Rejoyceth not in iniquity, but rejoyceth in the truth: v. 7. Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be taken in a fault, ye which are spirituall restore such a one in the spirit of meeknesse, v. 2▪ considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Col. 3. 12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved (bowels of mercies, kindnesse, humblensse of mind,
meeknesse, long-suffering, vers▪ 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. vers. 14. And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfection. EXPLIC. VII. IT is the glory of God, to co∣ver a matter, Prov. 25. 2. free pardon is the substance of the Gospel; the work of God in perfection, Esa. 55. propo∣sed to us for imitation, Matth. 18. 26, 27, 28. Whilest me are cloathed with flesh, we do all things imperfectly; freedome from failings is a fruit of glo∣ry; we see here darkly as in a
glasse; know but in part, in many things we offend all: who knoweth how often; mutuall failings to be born with, offences to be pardoned, weaknesse to be supported, may mind us in these pence, of the Talents forgiven us: Let him that is without fault throw stones at others; Some men rejoyce in others failings; they are malicious and fail more in that sinfull joy, then their bre∣thren in that which they re∣joyce at. Some are angry at weaknesses and infirmities; They are proud and concei∣ted; not considering that they themselves also are in the flesh. Some delight to dwell alwaies upon a frailty; they deserve to find no charity in the like kind: For injuries, who al∣most
can bear untill seven times? Peter thought it much. Some more studie revenge then pardon; some pretend to forgive, but yet every slight offence makes a continued ali∣enation of affections, and se∣paration of converse; Some will carrie a smooth face over a rough heart. Christ is in none of these waies; they have no savour of the Gospel; Meeknesse, patience, forbea∣rance and forgivenesse, hid∣ding, covering, removing of offences, are the foot-steps of Christ; seest thou thy Brother fail, pitty him; doth he con∣tinue in it, earnestly pray for him, admonish him; Cannot another sinne, but you must sin too? If you be angry, vexed, rejoyced, alienated
from, you are partner with him in evill, instead of helping him; Suppose thy God should be angry every time thou givest cause, and strike every time thou provokest him? When thy Brother of∣fendeth thee, do but stay thy heart, untill thou hast taken a faithfull view of the pati∣ence, and forbearance of God towards thee; and then con∣sider his command to thee, to go and do likewise: Let then all tendernesse of affecti∣on, and bowels of compassion towards one another, be put on amongst us, as becometh Saints. Let pitty, not envy; mercy, not malice; patience, not passion; Christ, not flesh; Grace, not; nature pardon, not spite or revenge, be our
guides and companions in our conversations. Motives hereunto are, 1. Gods infinite Mercy, Patience, Forbearance; Long-suffering, and free Grace to∣wards us, sparing, pardoning, pittying, bearing with us, in in∣numerable, daily, hourly fail∣ings and provocations; espe∣cially all this being proposed for our imitation, in our mea∣sure, Matth. 10. 28. 24. 2. The goodnesse, unweari∣ed and unchangeable love of the Lord Jesus Christ, putting in every day for us; not cea∣sing to plead in our behalf, notwithstanding our continu∣all back-sliding, 1 John 2. 1. . 3. The experience which our own hearts have of the need, wherein we stand of o∣thers
patience, forbearance and pardon, Eccles. 7. 20, 22. 4. The strictnesse of the command, with the threat∣nings attending its non-per∣formance. 5. The great glory of the Gospel, which is in the walk∣ing of the Brethren with a right foot, as to this Rule. RULE. VIII. TEnder and affectio∣nate participation with one another, in their severall states and condi∣tions, bearing each others burthens. Gal. 6. 2. Bear you one anothers burthens, and so fulfill
you the law of Christ, Heb. 13. 3. Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them that are in ad∣versity, as being your selves also in the body. 1 Cor. 12. 25. That there should be no schisme in the body, but that the members should have the same care one for ano∣ther. vers. 26. And whether one member suffer, all the mem∣bers suffer with it, or one mem∣ber be honored, all the members rejoyce with it. 2 Cor. 11. 29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is of∣fended, and I burne not? James 1. 21. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherlesse and widowes in their affliction, &c.
Matth. 25. 35. I was an hungred and ye gave me meat: I was a thirst, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked and ye clo∣thed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. vers. 40. For inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. 2 Tim. 1. 16. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesi∣phorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chaine. vers. 17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. Acts 20. 35. I have shewed you all things, how that so la∣bouring ye ought to support the weak, &c.
EXPLIC. VIII. THe former Rule concer∣ned the carriage and frame of our spirits towards our Brethren in their failings, This in their miseries and af∣flictions; In this also, confor∣mity to Christ is required, who in al the afflictions of his people is afflicted, Esa. 63. 9. and persacnted in their distres∣ses, Act. 9. 4. could we bring up our spiritual union, to hold a∣ny proportion with the mutual union of many members in one body, to which it is frequently compared; this duty would be excellently performed: no man ever yet hated his own flesh; if one member be in pain, the rest have little com∣fort or ease; it is a rotten mem∣ber
which is not affected with the anguish of its companions; they are marked particularly for destruction, who in the midst of plentifull enjoy∣ments, forget the miseries of their brethren, Amos 6. 6. if we could not feel the weight of our brethrens affli∣ctions, burdens, and sorrow; it is a righteous thing that our own should be doubled; the desolations of the Church makes Nehemiah grow pale in the Court of a great King, Neh. 1. 10. he who is not concerned in the troubles, sorrows, visi∣tations, wants, poverties, per∣secutions of the Saints, and so farr as to pity their wound dings, to feel their strokes, to refresh their spirits, help beare their burthens upon their own shoulders, can never assure
themselves, that they are uni∣ted to the head of those Saints; now to a right performance of this duty, and in the discharge of it, are required; 1. A due valuation, strong desire, and high esteem of the Churches prosperity in every member of it, Psal. 122. 6. 2. Bowels of compassion, as a fruit of love, to be sensible of, and intimately moved for, the severall burthens of the Saints, Col. 3. 19. 3. Courage and boldness, to own them without shame in all conditions, 2 Tim. 1. 16, 17. 4. Personall visitations in sicknesses, troubles, and re∣straints, to advise, comfort and refresh them, Matth. 25. 36.
5. Sutable supportment by administration of spirituall, or temporall assistances, to the condition wherein▪ they are. The Motives are the same as to the former rule. RULE IX. FRee contribution, and communication of temporall things, to them that are poore indeed, su∣table to their necessities, wants, and afflictions. 1 John 3. 17. Who so hath the worlds goods, and seeth his Brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him. V. 18. My
little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now con∣cerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye; Vpon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store as God hath pro∣spered him. 2 Cor. 9. 5, 6. Let your gift be ready as a matter of bounty not covetousnesse; he that sow∣eth sparingly, shall reap sparing∣ly: ver. 7. Every man, accor∣ding as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loveth a cheerfull giver; so the whole 8 & 9. chap. of this Epistle. Rom. 12. 13. Distributing to the necessity of the Saints,
given to hospitality. Gal. 6. 10. As we have there∣fore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the houshold of faith. 1 Tim. 6. 17. Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us all things richly to enjoy. ver. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to di∣stribute, willing to communi∣cate, ver. 19. Laying up in store for themselves, a good foun∣dation against the time to come. Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
Levit. 25. 35. And if thy Brother be waxen poor, or fallen into decay with thee, then thou shalt receive him. Matth. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. vers. 35. For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat, thirstie, and ye gave me drinke; I was a stranger, and ye took me in. vers. 36. Naked and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. vers. 40. Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it unto me.
EXPLIC. IX. THE having of poor al∣wayes amongst us, and of us, according to our Saviours prediction, Matth. 26. 11▪ and the promise of God, Deut. 15. 11. serves for the triall of themselves and others, of their own content, with Christ a∣lone, with submission to the all-disposing▪ Soveraignty of God; of others, how freely they can part for Christs sake, with those things wherewith their hand is filled: when God gave Manna, for food unto his people, every one had an equall share, Exod. 16. 18. and he that gathered much, had had nothing over, and he that gathered little, had no lack,
2 Cor. 8. 15. This distribution in equality, was again for the necessity of the Church, redu∣ced into practise, in the dayes of the Apostles, Acts 14. 35. of the totall summe of the pos∣sessions of believers, distribu∣tion was made to every man according to his need. That every man by the ordi∣nance and appointment of God, hath a peculiar right to the use and disposall of the earthly things wherewith he is in particular intrusted, is un∣questionable: The very pre∣cept for free distribution, and communication, are enough to prove it; but that these things are altogether given to men, for themselves and their own use, is denyed; friends are to be made of Mammon. Christ
needs in some, what he be∣stowes on others; if he hath given thee thine own, and thy brothers portion also to keep, wilt thou be false to thy trust, and defraud thy Brother? Christ being rich, became poor for our sakes; if he make us rich, it is that we my feed the poor for his sake; neither doth this duty lie only (though chiefly) on those who are greatly increased; those who have nothing but their labour, should spare out of that for those who cannot work, Eph. 4. 28. The two Mites are re∣quired as well as accepted. Now the reliefe of the poore Brethren in the Church, hath a two-fold Rule, First, Their necessity. Secondly, Others abilities.
Unto these two must assi∣stance be proportioned; pro∣vided, that those which are poore walk suitably to their condition, 2 Thess. 3. 10, 11. And as we ought to relieve men in their poverty, so we ought, by all lawfull means, to prevent their being poor; to keep a man from falling, is an equall mercie to the helping of him up when he is down. Motives to this duty are; 1. The love of God unto us, 1 John 3. 14. 2. The glory of the Gospel exceedingly exalted thereby, Titus 3. 8. 15. Matth. 5. 6. 3. The Union whereunto we are brought in Christ; with the common inheritance pro∣mised to us all.
4. The testimony of the Lord Jesus, witnessing what is done in this kind, to be done unto himself, Matth. 25. 35, 36, 37. 5. The promise annexed to it, Eccles. 11. 1. Prov. 19. 17. Deut. 15. 10. Ma. 10 4. 2. The way whereby it is to be done, is by appointing some, Acts 6. to take what is vo∣luntarily distributed by the brethren, according as God hath blessed them; on the first day of the weeke, 1 Cor. 16. 1. and to distribute to the necessity of the Saints, according to the advice of the Church.
RULE X. TO mark diligently, and avoid carefully, all causes and Causers of Divisions; especially to shunn Seducers, false-Teachers, and Brochers of Heresies and Errors, con∣trary to the forme of wholsome words. Rom. 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and a∣void them: For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple. Matth. 24. 4. Jesus said un∣to them, Take heed that no man deceive you: vers. 5. For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ,: and shall deceive many. vers. 23. Then if any man shall say unto you, Loe, here is Christ, or there: believe it not. vers. 24. For there shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets and shall shew great signes and wonders: insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. vers. 25. Behold I have told you before. 1 Tim. 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholsome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godlinesse: vers. 4. He is
proud, knowing nothing, but do∣ting about questions, and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evill surmi∣sings: vers. 5. Perverse dis∣putings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute, of the truth: From such withdraw thy self. 2 Tim. 2. 16. But shun pro∣phane and vain bablings, for they will increase to more un∣godlinesse. vers. 17. And their word will eat, as doth a canker. Titus 3. 9. But avoid foo∣lish questions and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain. vers. 10. A man that is an Heretick, after the first and second admo∣nition, reject: vers. 11. Know∣ing that he that is such, is sub∣verted,
and sinneth, being con∣demned of himself. 1 John 2. 18. Little Chil∣dren, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last times. vers. 19. They went out from us▪ but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made mani∣fest, that they were not all of us. 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, be∣lieve not every spirit, but try the spirit? whether they are of God; because many false Pro∣phets are gone out into the world. 2 John 10. If there be any that come unto you, and bring
not this doctrine, receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God speed: ver. 11. For he that biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Acts 20. 29. For I know this, that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves enter in among you; not sparing the flock, ver. 30. Also of your own selves, shall men arise, speaking per∣verse things, to draw away Di∣sciples after them: ver. 31. Therefore watch. Rev. 2. 14. I have a few things against thee, becausè thou hast there, them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, ver. 15. So hast thou also them, that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. ver. 16. Re∣pent, or else I shall come to thee quickly, and will fight against
thee with the sword of my mouth. EXPLIC. X. THE former part of this rule was somthing, spoken to rule 4th. If the preservation of amity ought to be our aime, then certainly the causes and Causers of Division, ought to be avoided; From such turne away. There is a generation of men, whose tongues seem to be acted by the Devill; James calls it, Set on fire of hell, Chap. 3. 6. As though they were the meer of-spring of Serpents, they delight in no∣thing but in the fire of conten∣tion; disputing, quarreling, backbiting, endlesse strivings, are that they live upon. Note such men and avoid them; Ge∣nerally
they are men of private Interests, fleshly ends, high conceits, and proud spirits; from such turn away: So the latter part of the Rule in par∣ticular, concerning Seducers; That a judgement of discer∣ning by the spirit, rests in the Church, and the severall Mem∣bers thereof, is apparent, 1 Joh. 2. 27. 1 Cor. 2. 15. Esa. 8. 28. To the exercise of this they are commanded, 1 John 4. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 15. So its commen∣ded, Acts 17. 11. And here∣unto encouraged, Philip. 1. 9, 10. Heb. 5. 14. If the blind lead the blind, both will into the ditch: That gold may be suspected, which would not be tryed. Christians must chuse the good, and refuse the evill. If their Teachers could excuse
them, if they lead them aside, they might well require blind submission from them. Now that the Brethren may exercise this duty aright, and performe obedience to this Rule, it is required, 1. That they get their senses exercised in the word, to dis∣cerne good and evil, Heb. 5, 14. Especially, that they get from the Scripture a forme of whol∣some words, 2 Tim. 1. 13. of the main Truths of the Gos∣pel, and fundamentall Articles of Religion; So that upon the first apprehension of the con∣trary, they may turne away from him that brings it, and not bid them God speed, 2 Epist. Iohn vers. 10. 2 To be sure to attend and hearken to nothing, but what
comes to them in the way of God: Some men, yea very many in our dayes, have such itching ears after novelty, that they run greedily after every one that lies in wait to deceive, with cunning entising words; to make out some new pretended revelations, and this from a pretended liberty, yea, duty of trying all things; little consi∣dering that God will have his own work done, onely in his own way; How they come it makes not, so they may be heard: Now whereas most of the Seducers and false Pro∣phets of our dayes, are men apparently out of Gods way, leaving their own callings, to come without a call, ordinary or extraordinary, without providence or promise; none
can put himself upon hearing of them, without tempting God, with whom it is just and righteous, to deliver them up to the efficacie of Error, that they may believe the lies they heare. Attend only then to, and try only that which comes in the way of God, to others bid not God speed. 3. To be alwaies ready fur∣nished with, and to bear in mind the Characters, which the Holy Ghost hath given us, in the word, of Seducers; which are indeed the very same, whereby poor unstable souls are seduced by them; As first, that they should come in sheep-cloathing, goodly pre∣tences of innocency and holy∣nesse. Secondly, with good words and fair speeches, Rom.
16. 17, 18. Smooth as butter and oyl. Thirdly, answering mens lusts in their Doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 3. Bringing Do∣ctrines sutable to some beloved lusts of men; especially a broad and easie way of salvation. Fourthly, pretences of glori∣ous discoveries and revelati∣ons, Matth. 24. 24. 2 Thes. 2. 2. Now I dare appeal to any, whether these Characters and Signes, which the Holy Ghost hath given us of Seducers, have not bin the very meanes, whereby men have bin sedu∣ced. Let then the Brethren be acquainted with these things, that they be not pre∣vailed against. 4 Utterly reject and sepa∣rate from such as have had means of conviction and ad∣monition,
Titus 3. 10. 5. Not to receive any with∣out testimony from some of the brethrens of known integri∣ty in the Churches; such is the misery of our daies, that men will run to heare those, that they know not from whence they come, nor what they are; the laudable practise of the first Churches, to give testimonials to them that were to passe from one place to another, 1 Cor. 16. 3. and not to receive any without them, Acts 9. 26. is quite laid aside. 6. To walk orderly, not attending to the doctrine of any, not known to, and ap∣proved by the Churches. 7. To remove farr away all delight in novelties, disputes, janglings, contentions about
words not tending to godli∣nesse, which usually are begin∣nings of fearfull apostacies, Tit. 3. 9. 2 Tim. 4. 3. 1 Tim. 2. 3, 4, 5. RULE XI. CHeerfully to undergo the lot and portion of the whole Church in pro∣sperity and affliction, and not to draw back upon a∣ny occasion whatever. Math. 13. 20. But he thta re∣ceiveth the seed into stony pla∣ces, the same is he that heareth the Word, and anon with joy receiveth it, ver. 21. Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribula∣tion
or persecution ariseth be∣cause of the word, by and by he is offended. Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith with∣out wavering, for he is faithful that promiseth. ver. 24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works, v. 25. Not forsaking the assembling our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you see the day approaching. ver. 32. But call to remembrance the former dayes, in which after ye were il∣luminated, ye endured a great fight of affliction. v. 33. Partly while ye were made a gazing stock both by reproaches and af∣flictions, and partly whilest ye became companions of them that
were so used. ver. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoi∣ling of your goods: knowing in in your selves, that ye have in Heaven an enduring substance: ver. 35. Cast not away there∣fore your confidence, which hath great recompence of re∣ward. ver. 36, For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promises. ver. 37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. ver. 38. Now the just shall live by faith, but if any man draw back, my soule shall have no pleasure in him. ver. 39. But we are not of them which draw back to perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the fonte.
2 Tim. 4. 10. For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world. ver. 16. At my first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me; I pray God that it be not laid unto their charge. EXPLIC. XI. BAck-sliding from the pra∣ctise of any way of Christ, or use of any ordinances, taken up upon conviction of his In∣stitution, is in no small degree an Apostacy from Christ him∣selfe. Apostacie, in what degree soever, is attended with all that aggravation, which a re∣nuntiation of a tasted sweet∣nesse and goodnesse from God for transitory things, can lay
upon it; seldome it is that back-sliders are without pre∣tences commonly of what they forsake; in respect of what they pretend to reteine: they say, as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? But yet we see (without exception) that such things universally tend to more ungodlinesse: Every un∣recovered step backward, from any way of Christ, maketh a discoverie of falsenesse in the heart, what ever former pre∣tences have been. They who, for Motives of any sort from things that are seen, which are but temporall, will seek for, or imbrace being presented, colours or pretences for declining from any Go∣spel-duty, will not want them for the residue, if they should
be called thereunto. The beginnings of great e∣vils are to be resisted: that the neglect of the duty whereof we treat, which is alwayes ac∣companied with contempt of the communion of Saints, hath been a main cause of the great dishonour & confusion where∣unto most Churches in the world are fallen, was in part touched before; it being a righ∣teous thing with God, to suffer the sons of men to waxe vain in their imaginations; in whom, neither the love of Christ, nor terror of the Lord, can prevaile against the feare of men. Let this then, with the dan∣ger and abomination of back-sliding, take such an impression on the hearts of the Saints, that
with full purpose of heart, they might cleave unto the Lord, fol∣low hard after him, in all his ordinances; that if persecution arise, they may cheerfully fol∣low the Lamb whithersoever he goes; and by their close ad∣hering one to another, receive such mutuall assistance and supportment, as that their joynt praisers may prevail with the goodnesse of God, and their joynt sufferings overcome the wickednesse of men. Now to a close adhering to the Church wherein we walk in fellowship, in all conditions whatsoever, without dismissi∣on attain'd upon just & equita∣ble grounds, for the imbracing of Communion in some other Churches.
Motives are; First, The eminency and excellencie of the ordinances enjoyed. Secondly, The danger of back-sliding, and evidence of unsoundnesse in every degree thereof. Thirdly, The scandall, con∣fusion, and disorder of the Churches, by neglect there∣of. RULE. XII. IN Church affaires to make no difference of persons, but to con∣discend to the meanest persons and services, for the use of the Brethren.
James 2. 1. My Brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. ver. 2. For if there come one unto your assemblies, a man with a gold ring in goodly apparrell, and there come in also a poore man in vile raiment; ver. 3. And ye have respect to him that wea∣reth the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place: and say to the poore man, stand thou there, or sit here under my foot-stoole: ver. 4. Are ye not then partiall in your selves, and are become Judges of evill thoughts? ver. 5. Hearken my beloved Bre∣thren; Hath not God chosen the poore of this world, rich in faith, and heires of the Kingdome, which he hath promised to them
that love him? ver. 6. But ye have despised the poore, &c. Matth. 20. 26. But it shall not be so amongst you, but who∣soever will be great amongst you, let him be your Minister. vers. 27. And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Rom. 12. 16. Be of the same mind one towards another; mind not high things, but con∣discend to men of low estate; be not wise in your own conceits. John 13. 12. So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? vers. 13. Ye call me Ma∣ster, and Lord, and ye say well; For so I am. vers. 14. If I then, your Lord and Master have
washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one anothers feet. vers. 15. For I have given you an example, that ye should do even as I have done▪ vers. 16. Verily; verily, I say unto you, The ser∣vant is not greater then his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater then him that sent him. EXPLIC. XII. VVHere the Lord hath not distinguished, nei∣ther ought we; in Jesus Christ, there is neither rich, nor poor; high, nor low; but a new crea∣ture: generally, God hath cho∣sen the poore of this world to confound the mighty. Experience shewes us, that not many great, not many
wise, not many mighty after the flesh, are partakers of the heavenly calling; not that the Gospel of Christ doth any way oppose, or sever; those many differences and distinctions a∣mong the sons of men, caused by power, authority, relation, enjoyment of earthly blessings, gifts, age, or any other emmi∣nency whatsoever, according to the institution and appoint∣ment of God, with all that respect, reverence, duty, obedi∣ence, and subjection due unto persons in those distinctions; much lesse, pull up the anci∣ent bounds of proprietie, and interest in earthly things; but only declares, that in things purely spirituall, these out∣ward things, which for the most part, happen alike unto
all, are of no value or esteem; men in the Church are conside∣red as Saints, and not as great, or rich; all are equall, all are naked before God. Free-Grace is the only di∣stinguisher, all being Brethren in the same Family, Servants of the same Master; imployed about the same work; acted by the same precious Faith, en∣joying the same purchased Priviledges; expecting the same recompence of Reward, and eternall abode: Whence should any difference arise? Let then the Greatest account it their greatest honour, to per∣forme the meanest necessary service to the meanest of the Saints; a community in all spirituall advantages, should give equality in spirituall af∣faires;
Not he that is richest, not he that is poorest, but he that is humblest, is excepted before the Lord. Motives hereunto, are 1. Christs example. 2. Scripture-precepts. 3. Gods not accepting persons. 4. Joynt participation of the same common Faith, Hope, &c. 5. The unprofitablenesse of all causes of outward diffe∣rences in things of God. RULE XIII. IF any be in distresse, persecution or afflicti∣on, the whole Church is to be humbled, and to be
earnest in prayer in their behalf. Acts 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayers was made withont ceasing unto God for him. vers. 7. And be∣hold, the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and rai∣sed him up, saying, Arise up quickly; And his chains fell off from his hands. vers. 12. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the Mother of John, whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together praying. Rom. 12. 15. Rejoce with them that do rejoyce, and weep with them that weep.
1 Cor. 12. 26. And whe∣ther one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it, or one Member be honored, all the Members rejoyce with it. vers. 27. Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in par∣ticular. 2 Thes. 3▪ 2. Pray for us Brethren, that we may be deli∣vered from unreasonable and wicked men. EXPLIC. XIII. THis duty being in gene∣rall made out from, and included in other former rules, we shall need to speak▪ the lesse into it; especially, seeing that upon consideration and suppo∣sition of our fellow-Member∣ship, it is no more then very
Nature requireth and calleth for. God delighteth, as in the thankfull prraises, so in the fervent prayers of his Chur∣ches; Therfore he variously cal∣leth them by severall dispensa∣tions to the performance of these duties: Now this oft∣times, to spare the whole Church, he doth by the afflicti∣ons of some one or other of the Members thereof; Know∣ing that, that neer relation, which by his institution and Spirit is between them, will make the distresse common, and their prayers closely com∣bined. Spirituall union is more noble and excellent then naturall; And yet in this it were monstrous, that either any Member in particular, or the whole in generall, should not
both snffer with, and care for the distresse of every part and Member. That Mem∣ber is rotten and to be cut off, for feare of infecting the bo∣dy, which feels not the pain of its associates: If then any Member of the Church, do lie under the immediate afflicting hand of God, or the persecu∣ting rage of man, it is the duty of every fellow-Member, and of the Church in generall, to be sensible of, and account themselves so sharers therein, as to be instant with God by earnest supplication, and help∣full to them by sutable assist∣ance, that their spirituall con∣cernment in that affliction, may be apparent; and that because, First, the will of God is thereby fulfill'd. Secondly,
The glory of the Gospel is thereby exalted. Thirdly, pre∣servation and deliverance to the whole Church procured. Fourthly, conformitie with Christs sufferings in his Saints attained. Fiftly, an inesti∣mable benefit of Church-fel∣lowship injoyed, &c. RULE XIV. VIgilant watchfulnesse over each others conversation, attended with mutuall admonition, in case of disorderly wal∣king; with rendring an account to the Church, if the party offending, be not prevailed with.
Matth. 18. 15. If thy Bro∣ther shall trespasse against thee, goe and tell him his fault, be∣tween thee and him alone: if he shall heare thee, thou hast gained thy Brother: ver. 16. But if he will not heare, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be established: ver. 17. and if he shall neglect to heare them, tell it unto the Church. 1 Thess. 5. 14. Now we ex∣hort you, brethren, warne them who are unruly. Heb. 3. 12. Take heed bre∣thren, lest there be in any of you an evill heart of unbeliefe, in departing from the living God. ver. 13. But exhort one another daily, whilest it is cal∣led to day; lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitful∣nesse of sin. Heb. 10. 24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good workes, exhorting one another, and so much the more, because you see the day approaching. Heb. 12. 13. Make strait paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but rather let it be hea∣led. ver. 15. Looking diligent∣ly, lest any man faile of the grace of God, lest any root of bitternesse springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defi∣led: ver. 17. Lest there be a∣ny fornicator, or prophane per∣son among you, like Esau, who for one morsell of bread, sold his birth-rigbt. Levit. 19. 17. Thou shalt
not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shalt in any wise re∣buke thy neighbour, and not suf∣fer sin upon him. 2 Thess. 3. 15. Yet account him not as an enemy, but admo∣nish him as a brother. Rom. 15. 14. And I my selfe also am perswaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodnesse, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another. James 5. 19. Brethren, if any of you doe erre from the faith, and one convert him, let him know, that he which con∣verteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soule from death, and shall hide a mul∣titude of sins. Prov. 29. 1. He that being often reproved stiffeneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroy∣ed, and that without remedy. EXPLIC. XIV. THere is a three-fold dutie included in this rule, the maine whereof, and here cheif∣ly intended, is that of Admo∣nition; whereunto the first is previous and conducing; the latter, in some cases conse∣quent, and attending Chri∣stians conversation; whether you consider the glory of God, and the Gospel, therein con∣cerned; or the bonds of relati∣on, with those mutnall en∣dearments wherein they stand ingaged; and obligations that are upon them for the generall good, and spirituall edificati∣on one of another, ought to be
watched, marked, and consi∣dered by each other: not that we should curiously prie into one anothers failings; much lesse maliciously search into doubtfull unknown things; for the trouble, or disparagement of our brethren; both which are contrary to that love; which thinketh not evill, but covereth a multitude of faults, but only out of a sense of the glory of God, the honour of the Go∣spel, and care of each others soules; to observe their wal∣king, that what is exemplary therein, may be followed; what faileth may be directed; what is a misse may be reproved, that in all things God may be glo∣rified, and Christ exalted. Now admonition is two-fold; 1. Authoritative, by
the way of power; 2. Fra∣ternal, by the way of love. The 1. again is two-fold; 1. Do∣ctrinall by the way of tea∣ching. 2. Disciplinary, which belongeth to the whole Church; Of these we do not treat. The latter also is two-fold; Hortatory, to encourage unto good; and Monitory, to reprove that which is amisse: It is this last which is peculiar∣ly aimed at, and intended in the rule. This then we assert, as the duty of every Church-member towards them with whom he walks in fellowship; to admonish any from the Word, whom they perceive not walking in any thing with a right foot, as becom∣meth the Gospel, thereby to recover his soule to the right
way; that much caution and wis∣dome, tendernesse and moderati∣on is required in the persons per∣forming this duty; for want whereof, it often degenerates from a peaceable remedy of evill, into fuell for strife and debate. Let them then, who are called to perform this duty, diligently con∣sider these things; 1. That in the whole action he transgresse not that rule of charity which we have, 1 Cor. 13. 7. Gal. 6. 2. 2. Let him have peace at home, by an assurance of constant labouring to cast out all beams and moates from his own eye, Mat. 7. 5. 3. Let him so perform it, that it may e∣vidently appear, that he hath no other aime, but the glory of God, and the good of his brother re∣proved; all envy and rejoycing in evill being farr away. 4. Let him
be sure to draw his admonitions from the Word, that the autho∣rity of God may appear therein, and without a Word let him not presume to speak. 5. Let all cir∣cumstances attending, time, place, persons, & the like, be duly weigh∣ed, that all provocation in the least manner, may be fully avoi∣ded. 6. Let it be considered as an ordinance, whereunto Christ hath an especiall regard. 7. Let him carefully distinguish between personall injuries unto himselfe, whose mention must have farr more of forgivenesse, then re∣proof, and other offences tending to publick scandall. Lastly, Let self-examination concerning the same or the like miscarriage, al∣waies accompany the brotherly admonition. These and the like things being duly weighed, let every brother,
with Christian courage, admo∣nish from the Word, every one whom he judgeth to walk disor∣derly in any particular whatsoe∣ver; not to suffer sin upon him, being ready to receive content and satisfaction, upon just de∣fence, or promised amendment: and without this, in case of just offence, a man cannot be freed from the guilt of other mens sins. Let also the person admo∣nished, with all Christian pati∣ence, accept of the admonition, without any more regret of spi∣rit, then he would have against him who should break the wea∣pon wherwith he was in danger to be slain: Considering, 1. The authoritie of him who hath appointed it. 2. The priviledg and mercy he enjoyeth by such a spirituall pre∣vention of such a danger, or cur
of such an evill, which perhaps himself did not discern. 3. The dreadfull judgements which are every where threatned to dispisers of reproofs, Prov. 29 . and so thankfully accept just admonition from the meanest in the Congregation. For the last, or repairing unto the Church in case of not prevai∣ling by private admonition; our Saviour hath so plainly laid down both the manner and end of pro∣ceeding in Matth. 18. that it needeth no explanation; only I shall observe, that by Church there, ver. 17. cannot be under∣stood the Elders of the Church alone, but rather the whole Con∣gregation; for if the offended brother should take with him two or three of the Elders unto the offender (as he may) then
were they the Church, and the Church should be told of the offence before the reproof hath been managed by two or three, which is contrary to the rule. RULE XV. EXemplary walking in all holinesse, and godlinesse of conversation, to the glo∣ry of the Gospel, edification of the Church, and con∣viction of them which are without. Psal. 24. 3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shal stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lift up his soule unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.
Matth. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. ver. 20. For I say, unto you, except your righteousnesse shall exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdome of heaven. Matth. 21. 19. And when he saw a fig-tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, let no fruit grow on thee hence for∣ward for ever, &c. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all fil∣thinesse of flesh & spirit, perfecting holinesse in the fear of God. 2 Tim. 2. 19. And let every one that nameth the Name of
Christ, depart from iniquity. Tit. 2. 11, 12. For the grace of God that bringeth salvation, hath ap∣peared unto all men; teaching us, that denying ungodlynesse and worldly lusts, we should live so∣berly, righteously, and godly in this present world. ver. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Ephes. 4. 21, 22, 23. If so be that ye have heard him, and have beene taugt him, as the truth is in Jesus, That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitfull lusts; And be re∣newed in the spirit of your mind. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. Likewise ye wives, be in subjection to your own hus∣bands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may without the
word be won by the conversation of the wives; While they behold your chast conversation coupled with feare. Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. Ephes. 5. 15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; Redeeming the time, because the dayes are evill. 2 Sam. 12. 14. Howbeit because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also, that is borne unto thee, shall surely die. EXPLIC. XV. HOliness becometh the house of the Lord for ever, without it none shall see God: Christ died to wash his Church, to present it before his Father without spot or blemish, to purchase unto him∣self
a peculiar people, zealous of good works. It is the King∣dome of God within us, and by which it appeareth unto all, that we are the Children of the King∣dome. Let this then this be the great discriminating of the Church, from the world, that they are a holy, humble, self-denying people: Our Master is holy, his Doctrine and Worship holy; Let us strive that our hearts may also be holy. This is our wisedome towards them that are without, whereby they may be gained, or convin∣ced; this is the meanes whereby we build up one another most ef∣fectually. Examples are a shar∣per way of instruction then Pre∣cepts; Loose walking causing the Name of God to be blaspemed, the little ones of Christ to be of∣fended,
and his enemies to re∣joyce, is attended with most dreadfull woe boh, that all who are called to an holy pro∣fession, and do enjoy holy Ordi∣nances, did shine also in holynesse of conversation, that those who accuse them as evill doers, might have their mouths stopt, and their hearts fil'd with shame, to the glory of the Gospel. To this generall head belongeth that wise walking in all patience, meeknesse, and long-suffering to∣wards those that are without, untill they evidently appear to be fighters against God; when they are to be prayed for. Hi∣ther also might be referred the patience of the Saints in all tri∣bulations, sufferings, and persecu∣tions for the Name of Christ. Motives for the exercise of
universall holinesse in acts inter∣nall and externall, private and publick; personall, and of all re∣lations, are, 1. The utter unsufficiency of the most precious Ordinances, for any communion with God, without it. 2. The miserable issue of de∣ceived soules, with their barren emptie, fruitlesse Faith. 3. The glory of the Gospel, when the power thereof hath an evident impression on the hearts, thoughts, words, actions and lives of Professors. 4. Scandall of the Gospel, the advantage of its adversaries, the shame of the Church, and fierce wrath of God, following the un∣suteable walking of the pro∣fessors. 5. The sweet reward which
the practice of holyness bringeth along with it, even in this life▪ with that eternall weight of glory, whereunto it leadeth here∣after; unto which, the holy Son of God bring us all, through the sprinkling of his most holy bloud. And these are some of those Rules, whose practice is required from the persons, and adorneth the profession of those who have obtained this grace, to walk together in Fellowship, accord∣ing to the Rule of the Gospel; Towards others also ought they, with severall limitations, and in the full latitude towards the Brethren of the Congregations in commrnion with them. FINIS.
