P2282A R218253 99829863 34309
A PIOUS COLLECTION Of severall profitable directions fitted for the English POORE CLARES IN GRAVELING In Order to the better observance of their Institute. Very usefull and profitable for all Religious women. This shall be unto you a direct way. Isaie 35. v. 8. You shall not decline, either to the right hand or to the left. Deut. 5. v. 32. Printed at Doüay by M. MAIRESSE.
Imprimatur, actum in Vicariatu Audomarensi, die tertia Novembris 1684. De Mandato B. DE LARRE Secret.
THE PREFACE TO ALL TRUE POORE CLARES. S. JOHN in his Apocalypse saw of old a woman, that was newly brought to bedd, and who was mightily persecu∣ted by a Dragon that sought to devoure the fruict of her wombe, but two wings was given unto her like those of an Eagle, to flye into the desert (her proper place) to save her fruict, and to putt her selfe into securitie. True poore Clares, you, who like legitimate children, sigh after the spiritt of your holy Mother, nor ever cease to bring forth new resolutions to live according to the perfection of your Holy Rule. That mysterious woman was a figure and embleme of you, for our Saviour in his Gospell, compares you to women in childbirth by reason of the
great paines and labours which the Devill that true infernall Dragon, and much more desirous to stifle and devour your little ones, then ever Pharao did to ex∣terminate male-children of the Hebrews, makes you suffer in the execution of your holy designes: thus S. Clare your well beloved Mother in her holy Rule, and your dear Foundresse Marie Gouge of hap∣py memorie in these her pious directions have not left you in this distresse, but given two wings, as it were, of little Eagles, to assist you to avoide this dan∣ger, viz: mortification and devotion, which may carry you to a holy denuda∣tion and disengagement from your selves and all created things, which is, as it were a spirituall desert, and bring you all to God, the true place where the greatest Eagles build their nests, that is, soules advanc't in Vertue; they shew you with the fingers of their holy lives and celestiall instructions, that sinn ha∣ving remou'd you from God, you must return to him again with the Spouse in
the canticles by the mountaine of myrrh and hill of incense, that is in practising mortification, and exercising your selves in devotion; tis your dutie to incline the interiour ears of your hearts to the sweet and gracious summons of Patronesses so holy and so zealous of good; tis your duty to make stepps in the interiour of your soules up towards this holy moun∣taine and hill, by which they desire to make you return again to your first ori∣gine; this is their marke and butt, this is the end which they propos'd to them∣selves, they aym'd to lead you to God, by the way of mortification and devotion. Accept then of this pious Collection, and make use, of them to the greater glorie of God and the spirituall good of your own soules; which shall be the dayly wishes of your unworthy Father in Christ. WILLIAM WARREN Confessarious.
A PIOUS COLLECTION Of severall profitable directions and deuotions fitted for the English POORE CLARES In Order to the better observance of their holy INSTITVTE. Very usefull and necessary for all Religious Persons both men and woemen. A Morning Exercice, on Sunday. CALL to mind this sentence: Haec dies quam fecit Dominus, exultemus & laetemur in eâ. This is the day that our lord hath made let us rejoyce and be glad in it. Remember your duty and obliga∣tion
unto Almighty God, being care∣full to spend the day wholly in his ser∣vice and prayse, and particularly this day honour the most Blessed Trinity, thanking those three divine Persons for the benefit of our Creation, and for all others bestowed either upon your self, or any other in the behalfe of man. On Munday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, cur jaces pronus in terram. Arise, why lyest thou groveling on the ground. Remember your banishment and pu∣nishment or suffering of being deprived of the presence of Almighty God, and the company of the Angels, and pray that after your death you may be united unto them offering this day to honour them, but especially your good Angel, beseeching him and all the others to pray for the state of the Holy Church and that we may so use this our warfare that after death we may reign with them in all eternity.
Tuesday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge qui dormis, & exurge à mortuis, & il∣luminabit te Christus. Arise thou that sleepest with the sleep of death and Christ will illuminate thee. Remember that Christ and his holy Ghospell are the lights of the Church, and endeavour you to follow the same better than you have hitherto done: offering this day to honour the holy Apostles, Patriarks and Prophets, beseeching them to pray for all those that are out of the Catho∣lick faith, particulerly in England. Wensday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence: Surge & comede, grandis tibi restat via. Arise and eate, thou hast yet a great way to go. Think how farr you are from ver∣tue and the perfection of your holy Foundress and Saints of your Order, and
pray them that they wil obtain you strength and force to follow their exam∣ples with greater fervour then you have hitherto done, offering this day wholy to their honour, beseeching them to pray for the good and reformation of the whole Order, and for all Holy Orders. Thursday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surgite, quid' dormitis, surgite & orate ne intretis in tentationem. Arise why do you sleep. Arise and pray least you enter into temptation. Consider what occa∣sion you give your self to enter into temptation in negligently employing your time, and being slothfull and dull in holy prayer and spirituall Exercises, offering this day in honour of the Con∣fessours, beseeching them to obtain for you new fervour of spirit and constancy in the service of Almighty God, and to pray for the comfort and releasment of the souls in Purgatory.
Friday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, propera amica mea & veni. Arise, make hast my beloved and come. Think that our sweet saviour calleth you to shew you what he hath suffered for you, out of the great love he beareth you. Desire gratitude for the same. Resolve that you will with patience suffer all such temptations and contempts as it shall please him to send you: And offer this day wholy in honour and memory of his bitter Death and Passion, the sorrowes of his holy Mother, and beg the suffra∣ges of all the holy Martyrs beseeching them to pray for all those who are in any affliction, or desolation be it cor∣porall or spirituall. Saturday Morning. CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, redde quod debes. Arise & render
what thou owest. Think what you owe unto Almighty God by the vowes of Poverty, Chastity, and obedience, and what you do not pay in this world you must satisfy in the next. Wherfore of∣fer your self this day wholy to honour the most glorious Virgin Mary with all the other Virgins beseeching them to obtain grace that you may be more diligent in the observance of your vo∣cation, and also to pray for the com∣fort and constancy of all the Catholicks in England, and the conversion of the same. From your rising till you go to the work-house. HAving said one of the foresaid sen∣tences that befitteth the day; you must rise with all speed offering your intention according to the same and im∣mediatly being risen, kneel down, and Kiss the ground with an Elevation of heart unto Almighty God, giving him
thanks for having preserued you that night, and brought you unto the be∣ginning of the day, beseeching him you may employ it in his service. In dressing your self say these senten∣ces following as they are set down. In putting on the Habit, say. INduat me Dominus novum hominem qui secundùm Deum creatus est in ju∣stitia & sanctitate veritatis. O Lord cloathe me with the new man, who according to God is created in justice, and sanctity of truth. In putting on the cord. CIngat me Dominus Jesus cingulo for∣titudinis, ut viriliter perseverem in Dei servitio. O Lord gird me with the girdle of fortitude & strength, that I may per∣sever couragiously and with alacrity in thy holy service.
In putting on the Scapular. POnat Dominus in corde meo jugum in memoriam Passionis & Sanguinis ejus, Our Lord lay his yoke on my heart as a memoriall of his Passion and blood. In washing your hands or face. AMplius lava me Domine ab iniqui∣tate mea, meritis Domini nostri JE∣SƲ CHRISTI filii tui qui dilexit nos, & lavit nos à peccatis nostris in sangui∣ne suo. Wash me O Lord yet more from my iniquities, and from my sin make me cleane through the merits of JESUS CHRIST thy only son, who hath lo∣ved us and washed us with his precious blood.
In putting on the Cloake. COoperiat me Dominus JESƲS cla∣myde munditiae & castitatis, ut nul∣lum praeter Jesum amatorem admittam. Cover me, O Lord, with the mantle of cleanlines and chastity that I may admit of no other lover then my sa∣viour JESUS. In putting on the Kercher. TEgat me Dominus tegumento paeni∣tentiae contra insidias Diaboli, ut non praevaleat inimicus contrà me. Cover me, O Lord, in the shrowd of Pennance against the snares of the Divell, that my enemy may not pre∣vaile against me. In putting on the veyle. ACcipiam velamen sacrum quod fe∣ram usque ad Tribunal aeterni Ju∣dicis,
cui omnia flectuntur genua: recorda∣bor meipsam, mundum, & sprevisse & poenitus reliquisse, ac in veritate me Do∣mino Jesu subjecisse, eique tamquàm sponso me conjunxisse. Ille contra adversa om∣nia me defendat, & secum in vitam aeternam recipiat. Amen. I will put on the sacred veyle, which I shall appeare in before the Tribunall of the Eternall Judge, to whom all knees do bow. I will call to mind, that I have despised, & forsaken both the world and my self, to be subject in reall truth to my Lord JESUS-CHRIST, and to joyne my self unto him as to my spouse. May he defend me in all adversities, and receive me to himself into life everlasting. Amen. After: or, in saying each one of these sentences reflect either on your in∣tention in directing your works that day. Or, consider how great a bene∣fit Almighty God hath bestowed on you in giving you that day to spend in his service, wherby you may glorify
his divine Majesty, increase your own merit, and satisfy for your negligen∣ces past. Call to mind what the souls in Purgatory and thousands in the world would do if they had the same means: and also think that it may be the last day that shall be granted you in this life. Being drest, make hast unto the Quire, with out forrein cogitations, recollecting your self, and keeping di∣ligently your sight, and at the entring into the Church, after the saying. As∣perges me &c. Thou shalt sprinkle me &c. In the taking of holy water. Say, Do∣mine in multitudine misericordiae tuae in∣troibo in domum tuam, adorabo ad tem∣plum sanctum tuum in timore tuo. Lord in the multitude of thy mercy I will enter into thy house: in thy feare will I adore thee in thy holy Temple: and kneeling downe at the Perentory say. Adoramus te sanctissime Domine Iesu Christe, hic & ad omnes Ecclesias tuas, & benedicimus tibi, quia per sanstam
Crucem tuam redemisti mundum. we adore thee ò most holy Lord JESUS-CHRIST, here, and in all thy Chur∣ches, and we bless thee, because by thy holy Cross thou hast redeemed the world. After, being in your place, or be∣fore the B. Sacrament, imagin Al∣mighty God present, as indeed he is, and adore him with the greatest reve∣rence and humility you can, represen∣ting unto your self his Majesty, Power, and Goodness. Accustome your self to this in all your Examins, especially that of the morning, noon, and night: and as much as you can in whatsoever exercise you undertake. A Morning purpose. FIrst: give thanks unto Almighty God for having preserved you that night, and delivered you from so many misfortunes both spirituall and corpo∣rall which since your going to bed thou∣sands have fallen into.
2. ly. Examin your conscience, and see wherein you have offended that night, and if you find any thing, humbly crave pardon, begin by Gods grace to amend, and to spend the day wholy in his service. 3. ly. Offer your self in all that you are, or may be able to perform by your corporall forces or spirituall po∣wers unto Almighty God, especially that which you shall do that day with the intention for which you offer your actions, in union of the life, death, and Passion of our blessed saviour CHRIST JESUS, the merits of his most glorious Mother, beseeching his divine goodnes to dispose wholy and entirely of you, as may be most to his honour, and the good of your soule in confidence of which resolve and endeavour to receive all things that day from his holy hands with equall indifference, beholding them as coming from his fatherly hands and providence, and the love with which he sendeth them.
4ly. Make a renunciation of your proper will passions, and wicked in∣clinations, or what soever may hinder you in the way of perfection and true conformity to the divine will. 5ly Call to mind what your Obe∣diences at like to be, and with whom you are to converse and how you ou∣ght to carry your self for the gaining of vertue and overcoming of imper∣fections: but particularly bend your spirituall forces against that vice which you find most to hinder you, and that you are most apt to fall into, purpo∣sing and resolving on such means as when the occasion presenteth it self, you may by the grace of God over∣come it, calling to mind at that present your good purpose. Offer these your good desires unto Almighty God acknowledging that without his grace you could not have made them, confessing your own weak∣ness, and force of your externall and internall enemies. Wherfore earnestly
and humbly beg his assistance by the in∣tertercession of his holy and blessed Mother, whose help instantly crave, as also the aide of your good Angell, with the Saints you are most devoted unto, and if you have laisure say the prayers following. O Domina mea &c. O my lady, &c. as in the Primer. The obla∣tion of the 7. Aves, with this Prayer unto your Angel Custos. O Most loving Angel, my Gardian, Tutour, Maister, Guide, Governour, and defender, wise Counselour, and my most faithfull friend, to whom J am commended by the goodnes of God our sweet Saviour from the instant of my birth unto the last period of my life: What reverence do J ow you, knowing that you are present with me? And with what devotion ought J to serve you in respect of the great care you have of me? and what confidence ought J to have, having you at my side in all oc∣casions to defend me. Teach me then, O holy Angel: chastise me, conserve,
and conduct me the right and assured way unto the heavenly Jerusalem wi∣thout permitting me to do any thing in your presence which may be offensive in your sight, and which J dare not undertake before another without sha∣me. J beseech you present unto our Lord my miseries and wants, & obtain me a remedy of his infinit goodnes. Watch when J sleep, and be not wea∣ried when J am tired: stay me when J am ready to fall: raise me up when J am fallen, direct me when I am gon astray: fortify me when I am weak: illuminate me when I am as∣saulted: check the rage of my suttle enemie, and at the houre of my death defend me from the infernall dragon, that being guided and assisted by thee I may arrive unto the glorious dwel∣ling place, and thou rejoyce in my good, and I in thy glory, & our Lord King of all glory be honored in us world without end. Amen. These Prayers being ended prepare
your self to Prime according as it is set down in the direction for the Di∣vine Office, being carefull to carry your self with all fervour and devo∣tion, observing well your thoughts: considering that you are not only in the presence of Almighty God, but also exercising the office of Angels in singing his holy prayses. Having done this; exercise your self as you have been taught untill it ring to Mass, and be carefull to observe this manner in all other houres. When the Litanies are red do not sit fiddling with your fingers, turning the leaves of your book, or looking about you, but imagin you are a poor beggar full of miseries, afflictions and necessities, and that for your greate unworthines to present your self before the divine Majesty of God, you beg an almes through the intercession of his Angels and Saints, considering that one of them alone is able to strike down in∣finit men. Likewise you are not only
to pray for your self, but also our Benefactours, and our poor Country: wherfore endeavour to read them with great devotion, and when thay are fi∣nished make a short examin as you did after Mass: and prepare your self to go to Sext: In the reading of which, exercise your self in the way to Jeru∣salem, observing the same directions, which where set down for Prime. When Office is ended make your Exa∣min again, and when the signe is gi∣ven read the Pater noster with great devotion and attention for the Bene∣factours, which being done the sign will be given to go forth of the Church: then observe that modesty and reverence which you have been taught. At the first entrance being in your cell kneel down, and Kiss the ground, offering your little work of Obedience of making your bed unto Almighty God, and exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem untill it ring to the Work-house, and then take a
point therein which is ordained for that time. From the work-house till dinner. BEing come unto the work-house and Veni Creator, being said, Pre∣pare your self to read the dirge with all devotion and attention. Consider in what great necessity the soules in Purgatory are, what paines they suf∣fer. and that if you be diligent in praying for them, you may be a means to release them: Almighty God having perhaps ordained you for that end: but if you be unmindfull and negligent in the performance thereof, they may be detained from his divine presence through your fault, and also he will permit others when you are in the like case to for∣get you, and neglect to assist you: wherfore endeavour to be very atten∣tive, and devoutly recollected in rea∣ding. After the Dirge, the beads are
read, unto which give great atten∣tion, and read them with devotion: the rest of your time in the Work-house exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem, carrying your self with all modesty & stillness. When, it rin∣geth to the second Mass. (Signum ma∣gni Regis est) (Tis a signe that a great King is at hand) being come into the Church offer your self unto Almighty God, & make some reflexion on your Exercise & carriage in the work-house. In time of the 2. Mass Exer∣cise your own devotions. When you go to None observe the directions which were set down for Prime ex∣ercising your self in the way to Jeru∣salem. None being read make your Examin how you have spent your whole forenoon: for better doing of which crave the assistance of our sweet saviour, begging pardon where you have failed, and make new re∣solutions for the performance of what you purposed in the morning, and
the exercising vertue in all occasions. After which consider that it is a pu∣nishment due to sin that you must now leave the bread of Angels which is holy meditation and Prayer to feed upon corporall meats: which punis∣hment is due unto the children of Adam: wherfore humbly submit your self unto it, considering the great hunger, which the poore soules in Purgatory do sustain in being depri∣ved of the presence of Almightly God, and with hearty compassion and great devotion read the Deprofun∣dis for them. Going down, with Gra∣ce use what is appointed in the way to Jerusalem. When you sit down at the table you may behold our B. Sa∣viour according to that foresaid exer∣cise, who lived in this world 33. years, and humbly submitted himself unto all pennances due unto men for their sins: wherfore beg grace to use this Corporall food, because it is his blessed will and give your body its ne∣cessities,
not using therein superflui∣tie to please nature or sensuality: but season your meat in the wounds of our B. Saviour: and drink from the delicious fountain of his sacred side, mingled with the gall and vinegar which he drank for your sake, Being at dinner give your attention wholy to that which is read at the table. At twelve of the clock exercise that which is appointed in the way to Je∣rusalem, saying. Christus factus est pro nobis obediens: After which you may return to that which is read at the ta∣ble. When you have dined, make some little reflexion how you have behaved your self: if you find to have fallen, humbly crave pardon, purpo∣sing to amend. At the going up, with Grace exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem. From Dinner untill the Examin at night when Grace is finished read your Pater nosters for your benefa∣ctours; When you come to your Cell
you may stay there untill it ring to the Work-house, employing your self in reading, writing, or keeping your devotion, or doing some other thing which you desire. When the Bell calleth you to work, exercise your self there according to the same directions, which are set down for the forenoon, using the Way to Je∣rusalem, After your beads are read until it ring to Evensong. And then leave your work saying. Hoc fignum &c. And making what hast you can into the Church, being kneeled down either in your place, or elswhere, make your short Examin; which being done read the little office, if you have not read it before, Keeping your Devotion until it ring up to Even∣song: in the reading of which obser∣ve well your thoughts, and the man∣ner which was set down from Prime. The Office being ended prepare your self to Meditation, and afterwads the signe being given, make your short
Examin, as it is set down in the di∣rections for mentall prayer. When you go forth of the Church, employ your self in the way to Jerusalem un∣til you go to Collation, where when you have time in considering the My∣stery of the washing of the feet give your attention to that which is read at the table. when you have ended Collation, you may read that which you meane to make your Meditation of, if you have not read it before, or do not take that which is read at the table: being-sure never to omit the matter before Meditation. The best time to read it is the quarter be∣fore five. When the signe is given after Meditation, going up from Colla∣tion use the way to Jerusalem, and continue the same untill Recollection: then kneeling in your place, make your Examin: First, present Your self before Almighty God and give him thanks for all the benefits you have received that day: in particular
esteeming your self as unworthy of them as any creature on earth, or the soules in Hell: as also the miseries both spirituall and temporall, from which he hath delivered you, to be as many and as great as are, or might have fallen upon any in the world. Secondly, begge grace to see the of∣fences committed that day acknowle∣dging your unableness to do the same without his speciall assistance. Thirdly: how you have spent that day with obedience, and exercises you have had, weighing wherein you have failed by omission or commission, in thought, word, or work, towards Almighty God, your sisters and your self: how you have exercised your interiour powers, your sences, parti∣cularly your sight, and specially how you have observed the services and exercises of your Religion, whether you have governed your exteriour with that modesty, mortification, submission and mildnes, that you are taught.
Fourthly: if you see your self to have overcome any imperfection, give thanks unto Almighty God, and where you find to have failed and of∣fended, humbly crave pardon. Fiftly: purpose with his holy gra∣ce to be more carefull and watchfull over your self the day following, making such resolutions as may help you most for the overcoming of that vice wherein you find your self that day to have sinned in. Then say the Prayer following. I Confess unto you, O Lord God Creatour of heaven and earth, all my sins which ever I have committed even from my infancy untill this pre∣sent houre wittingly or ignorantly, and particularly this day in thought word, or work. To you, O Lord only I confess my offences and beg pardon for them as being innumera∣ble: therfore I humbly beseech thee
to forgive and forget all, whereof thou knowest me guilty in all my life past, and enkindle in me a fervent amendment with faith, hope, and charity, O mercifull, O pittifull o sweet JESUS sonne of the B. Virgin Mary. Going to your cell make use of that which is ordained in the way to Jerusalem, and during that time you are undressing your self, call to mind the strict account, which you are to render unto Almighty God when the day of this life is ended: also of the uncertaintie to live untill the next morning, much less any longer, re∣flecting how many miseries may and wil fall upon thousands before your uprising: and alwaies before you go to bed kneeling commend your self to our sweet saviour, and his blessed Mother with your good Angell, Kis∣sing the ground and the Crucifix. Being laid in bed, think you lay your mouth to the sacred side or feet
of our sweet Saviour, saying the prayer following. O most sweet JESUS-CHRIST in union of the love which caused thee to create for us this corporall rest, and disdainedst not thy self to take the same whilst thou livedst here on earth: I do make use of the same to fulfill the necessity of my body, that it may be more prompt and ready to serve thee. Amen. Before sleeping say thus. O Most sweet JESUS let me now rest upon thy sacred breast, and grant me to fetch my breath out of thy most sacred heart, that thy sweet spirit may flow into my soul, vivi∣ficate my mind and unseparably unite me unto thee sweet JESUS; so often as this night I do fetch my breath, so many milions of praises I beseech thee receive from me.
Vnto your good Angel say, O Angel of God who art my keeper, illuminate, preserve, rule, and govern me committed to thy charge by the supernall power this night and evermore. Amen. A direction how to say the way to Jerusalem. 1. AT five a clock when Medita∣tion is ended going to put off your cloake, take the Mystery whe∣rein our saviour took leave of his B. Mother. 2. When it ringeth to Collation, that which is then present, his going unto the place where he made his supper. 3. When you are at Collation, the washing of the feet. 4. That of the Institution of the most B. Sacrement, the which con∣tinue
till the end of Compline. 5. Then take our saviour's going into the garden with his disciples. 6 When the B. Sacrement is seen, the three prayers which he made in the garden. 7. Going forth of the Church, his betraying. 8. In your cell his being at Annas's, and leave him there untill Matins; at which time go with him to Caiphas, and find him there at Prime. 9. Under which go with him to Pilate, and from thence to Herod. 10. At Terce take the Mystery of the white garment. 11. At Sext the whipping and crowning with thorns, Going forth of the Church, our saviour's being ledde and shewed to the people. 12. Making your bed, remember the three sentences of death which were given against him. 13. Going to the Work-house his going with his Cross to be crucified,
and passing through the golden gate. 14. In the workhouse the three falls: the meeting of our sweet savi∣our with his holy Mother, Simon Cyrenean, & Veronica. 15. Going forth from the Work-house, the carrying the Cross up Mount Calvary. 16. Between the two peales to None, his sitting naked upon the stone. 17. At None, the nailing to the Cross. 18. Going down to Grace, how the Cross was reared up and set in the place where it was to stand. 19. At twelve a clock behold our saviour hanging on high upon the Cross, saying these first words, Father forgive them for they know not what they do. 20. From evensong, exercise your self in the 7. words: the piercing of our Saviours side: his taking down from the Cross, and lying in the lap of his Mother, his buriall, and des∣cending into Limbo.
How to apply the seaven Words. 1. FAther forgive them for they know not what they do. Here pray for all those that are in mortall sin: for all Heathens, and Hereticks, and beseech Almighty God to illuminate their hearts, and pardon their off∣ences. 2. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Pray for the happy depar∣ture of all faithfull Christians, and releasement of the soules in Purga∣torie. 3. Son behold thy Mother: and again, Woman behold thy son. Recommend to our B. Lady your self, your Par∣ents, kinred and Benefactours and the state of the whole church: besee∣ching our sweet Saviour to give her unto us for Patronesse, Mother, and Advocate, and graunt us grace to ser∣ve, honour, and obey her. 4. I thirst. Pray that wee, and all
creatures may continually thirst after justice and the perfect love of God. 5. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Here pray for the com∣fort and assistance of all in tempta∣tion or affliction, either spirituall or corporall. 6. It is consummated. Beseech Almi∣ghty God that his holy will may be accomplished in you, and all creatu∣res to the perfect praise of his most holy name. 7. Father, into thy hands I com∣mend my spirit. Pray that as he re∣commended his to his heavenly Fa∣ther, our soules may be protected by him in this life by the fruition of his holy grace, and in the next recei∣ved to that beatitude which by his death and Passion he ha's purchased, for us.
The 7. Ave's which are to be read for the 7. sorrowes of our B. Lady; you may take according to your de∣votion, or these following. 1. THe departure of our sweet Sa∣viour when he went to make his last supper. 2. When S. John brought her word of our Saviours being apprehended, and his cruell usage. 3. When shee mett him bearing his Cross. 4. When shee beheld him crucified upon the Cross. 5. The cruell piercing of his sacred side. 6. When shee had him dead in her lap. 7. When shee parted from the bo∣dy of her deare son at his buriall.
Considerations on the 3. Pater nosters, and Aves which are said at the she∣wing of the B. Sacrament: in ho∣nour of the Prayer in the Garden, offering your intention to gain the Pardon. 1. SAy the first Pater and Ave, in honour of the unspeakable love with which our sweet Saviour made oblation of his dolorous agony, cra∣ving by the merits of the same, that our sins may be forgiven us, and that we be reconciled to his heavenly Fa∣ther, and obtain strength and comfort in our temptations and afflictions. 2. The 2. Pater and Ave, in ho∣nour of the entire resignation with which our B. Saviour offered his Pra∣yer: crave therby grace to conform our selves unto the divine will, and attain perfect union with Almighty God. 3. The 3. Pater and Ave, say in ho∣nour
of our sweet Saviours perseve∣rance in his most painfull prayer, be∣seeching him that by the merits of the same wee may not leave of the good once begun for the repugnance wee feel, or want of consolation therein, but with love and confidence perse∣ver to the end. After your Examin at night, you may salute our B. Lady with these 3. Aves. 1. BY the first beseech her that she will obtain for you pardon of all your sins, and especially those you have committed that day. 2. That shee will please to present all your works unto her blessed son, rendring them agreable by her merits in whatsoever is wanting on their part. 3. Recommend your self unto her, and beseech her that shee will preser∣ve you from all sin, deceits, and illusions of the divell, and particularly from all evills
How to say your Pater noster's and Ave's in thanksgiving unto Almighty God for his benefits either for night or any other time. 1. THe first Pater and Ave address to the right hand of our sweet Redeemer offering to his Eternall Fa∣ther, the precious blood which issued out of his most sacred wound in thanksgiving for the benefit of your Creation and the Creation of all o∣thers, as also of all things created for mans use. 2. The 2. address unto the sacred wound of his left hand in thanks giving for the benefit of conserving you from evils, and the like for o∣thers. 3. The 3. address unto the wound of his right foot in thanksgiving for the benefit of your Redemption, and the like for others. 4. The 4. address unto the sacred
wound of his left foot in thanksgi∣ving for the benefit of your vocation, and all others on whom he hath besto∣wed the like. 5. The 5. address unto the sacred wound of his blessed heart, for all ge∣nerall and particular benefits, either spirituall or corporall, which with so great love he hath bestowed on you, and all creatures. An Exercise for Mass. FIrst know that Mass is a sacrifice, wherein is offered the very same body and blood of our Saviour, that was before offered upon the Cross, and was infinitely able to redeeme in∣finit worlds: and sith the world is sufficiently redeemed with one re∣demption, he gives unto every one such and so great, as he hath prepa∣red himself to receive: therfore, like as a man that fetcheth water forth of the sea cannot want for any scarcity
that is there, yet he may want by reason of the littleness of his vessell: even so no man needeth want grace coming unto this holy sacrifice if the vessell of his heart be of sufficient bignesse. Wherfore prepare your self worthily, and beg such grace, devo∣tion, reverence and attention, as the worthines of the sacrifice following requires. The Exercise. THe Priest signifieth God, the Altar the church: and as the Al∣tar is of many stones, so is the church of God, of many people. Wherfore you must not heare Mass for your self alone, but for the whole church: for since he is a common Lord, he is not delighted with particular ser∣vice. A Prayer before Mass. O Good JESUS vouchsafe me the vertue of your holy grace,
and grant J beseech you that J may purely assist at this divine sacrifice of the holy Mass to the eternall praise of your holy name in memory of all that you have been pleased to suffer for my sake, and for all mankind. When the Priest saith the Confiteor. COnsider the offences of our first parents with those of the whole world, and in particular those which you have your self committed, and at the Kyrie eleison, aske most hum∣bly pardon for them, and beg grace for amendement. At Gloria in excelsis. COnsider how the Angels in hea∣ven rejoyce at the conversion of a sinner, wherfore beseech them through the great desire they have of mans salvation to aid and assist us, and all creatures to obtain the same.
At the Epistle. COnsider that this World is a pla∣ce of Pennance, and be sorry that so few do embrace the same, but follow vain pleasures and delights: and beseech Almighty God to enligh∣ten their hearts, and offer your self to suffer whatsoever it shall please him to lay upon you, begging grace for the same. At the Ghospell. COnsider what pains our Saviour took in this world going from one place to another, preaching and inviting all men to follow his most perfect example and doctrine, beg∣ging by the merits of his pains and labours, that you may be a true fol∣lower thereof.
At the Creed. THink what a multitude of peo∣ple were converted by the holy Ghospell; and nevertheless how ma∣ny there are which remain in blind∣nes, and wil not be lightned, for which be heartily sorry, and beseech God to convert them, but princi∣pally pray for the conversion of En∣gland. At the Offertory. COnsider the promptitude with which our sweet Saviour offered himself into the hands of his heavenly Father to suffer his bitter death and Passion for your Redemption, and all mankind. Wherfore offer your self wholly to his divine goodness with your vowes of obedience, Po∣verty, and Chastity, purposing from thence forward to be crucified by these three nailes to the Cross of all mortification.
At the Preface. COnsider how our sweet Saviour raised Lazarus after he had been dead four daies: and thence you may draw comfort and confidence, that although you find many evil custo∣mes in your self, all hindering you from the true service of God: yet acknowledge that he is able to raise and deliver you from them all. Wher∣fore you must purpose strongly to resist them according to the grace and strength, which it shall please him to give you. At Sanctus. COnsider how the Angels in hea∣ven do continually praise Almi∣ghty God, and how pleasing their service is unto him: wherfore pray unto them to obtain for you such fer∣vour of spirit in this life that at your death you may be worthy to be as∣sisted by them in heaven.
At the Canon. COnsider the unspeakable love of our Saviour in offering himself for you in this most holy Sacrifice: weighing his Majesties greatnes and Omnipotency, which is therein con∣tained: and here you may pray for the intention of the whole church, and for all those you are to pray for that day. A prayer at the Elevation of the most B. Host. ADoro te Domine Iesu-Christe & benedico tibi, qui pro nobis in cru∣ce moriens redemisti mundum. Ave caro Christi immaculata Crucis hostia, morte tuâ nos amarâ fac redemptos luce clarâ tecum frui gloriâ. Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori, Aufer à me quic∣quid tibi displicet. Infunde in me quic∣quid tibi plàcet. Converte me totum tuum, dulcis Iesu, Deus meus. Amen.
J adore thee o Lord JESUS-CHRIST, and J bless thee who dying on the Cross for us, hast redeemed the world. Haile holy flesh of CHRIST, immacu∣late host of the Cross, Make us, re∣deemed by thy bitter death, to enjoy with thee in glory, eternall light. God be mercifull to me a sinner. Take away from me all that is displeasing to thee. Convert me wholly to thee sweet JESUS my God. Amen. A Prayer at the Elevation of the Chalice. SAnguis tuus Domine Jesu Christe pro nobis effusus, sit nobis in remis∣sionem omnium peccatorum nostrorum, negligentiarum, & ignorantiarum no∣strarum: in robur & augmentum fidei, spei, charitatis, gratiarum, & vir∣tutum: in cautelam vitae, in adoptio∣nem gloriae aeternae in absolutionem om∣nium fidelium defunctorum & omnium pro quibus orare tenemur. Amen.
Let thy blood, O Lord JESUS CHRIST, which was shed for us, be a remission of all our sins, negli∣gences and ignorances, a strength∣ning and encrease of faith, hope, charity, graces, and virtues, a cau∣tion to my life, an adoption to eter∣nall glory, an absolution of all the faithfull departed, and of all for whom we are bound to pray. Amen. Whilst the Pater noster is said. COnsider who made this Prayer, and joyne your intention with the Priest's, who repeateth it for the necessities of the whole church. An Exercise for the 5. Pater nosters after the Elevation. 1. FIrst you make a particular in∣tention to get pardon, and to dispose your self to receive the Bles∣sed Sacrament, either corporally or
spiritually for the which observe this exercise. The first Pater and Ave, address to the right hand of our B. Saviour beseeching him that the pretious blood which issued out of this his sacred wound may serve you for a bath to wash and purify you from all staines and spots of your sins, and particu∣larly those which you have commit∣ted since your last confession. The 2. address to the left hand, beseeching him that the sacred blood which issued from the same may serve for a spirituall balsome to cure all your infirmities, and spirituall sick∣nesses. The 3. address unto the wound of his right foot, beseeching him by his sacred blood which issued forth thereof, that it will please him to adorn you with the garment of charity, and purity of heart and mind. The 4. address to his left foot, beseeching him that his sacred blood
which issued forth of this wound may lighten the eyes of the soule to know his greatnes, feare his justice, and love his goodnes. The 5. address unto the sacred blood which issued from thence that he will pardon and extinguish all your inordinate desires and affections and unite your heart to his through per∣petuall love and continuall memo∣rie of him. A Prayer before spirituall Communion. OPie Domine Jesu Christe, qui huc propter me venisti, & te mihi in panem quotidianum, imo in om∣nem desiderabilem usum tribuisti; vel∣lem te libenter etiam in Sacramento suscipere, sed heu non audeo, nec pos∣sum accedere, quia timeo te offendere propter indispositionem meam inimicam & tamen scio quod sine te vero cibo non possum vivere: quare humiliter te rogo ut licèt non sumam te sacramen∣taliter,
me tamen reficias & ad me des∣cendas spiritualiter & velis mihi gra∣tiam impertiri, quam te devotè sumen∣tes debent sentire. O bone Jesu noli me despicere, noli me indignam famu∣lam tuam transire; sed digneris ad me venire, mecum manere, & effectus tuos in me operari. Amen. O most pious Lord JESUS CHRIST, who camest hither for me, and hast given thy self to me for my daily bread, yea to every desirable use. J would willingly receive thee even in the Sacrament: but alas J dare not, nor can J approach, because J am afraid to offend thee by reason of my in∣disposition offensive to thy eye: and yet J know that J cannot live wi∣thout thee the true food: Wherfore J most humbly beseech thee, that althô J do not receive thee Sacramen∣tally, yet that thou wouldst refresh me, and come down to me spiritually, and impart unto me that grace, which those that receive thee devoutly must
feel. O Good JESU despise me not, and pass not by me thy unworthy servant, but vouchsafe to come to me, and to remain with me, and work thy effects in me. Amen. An Exercise to be said by word or heart when you Communicate spiritually or corporally. 1. WHen the Priest saith Domine non sum dignus, say inte∣riourly at the 1. time. O my God J am not worthy for the multitude of my sins that the earth should beare me. 2. At the 2. O my God J merit not to lift up my eyes to behold the heavens. 3. At the 3. O my God, J am she who for my iniquities merit no other then hell; but notwithstanding, O infinit goodnes, leave not to visit me.
A devout Prayer to be said in time of Communion. OBone JESU dilecte mi, charis∣sime mi, amor meus, dulcedo cordis mei, vita animae meae O aeter∣num bonum meum, melliflue JESU, mi∣serere mei, uni me tibi intime ad glo∣riam nominis tui. Amen. O good JESU, my beloved my dearest, my love, the sweetness of my heart, the life of my soule. O my Eternall good, mellifluous JESU have pitty on me, unite me to thy self most intimately, to the glory of thy name. Amen. Another. O Light increated, illuminate my darkness, illuminate my under∣stāding with a pure knowledge, reple∣nish my memory with holy remem∣brance and chast thoughts, set my
will on fire with a holy and enfla∣med love, quicken my soule and make that J may tast the vertue of your holy presence, and by the same ever remain in me, and let me re∣main in you. Amen. A Thanksgiving after you have Commu∣nicated spiritually or Corporally. GRatias tibi ago Domine JESU CHRISTE, qui me tantis Sa∣cramentis spiritualibus refecifli; indul∣ge Domine obsecro reverentiam, mane mecum per gratiam, & fac me hodie & semper tuis obedire mandatis, ut effectus & virtutes hujus Sacramenti sentiam. Amen. J give thee thanks. O Lord JESU CHRIST, who hast refresht me with such great spirituall Sacraments: grant me, J beseech you, reverence; stay with me by your grace, and make me this day, & alwayes obe∣dient to your commands, that I may
feel the effects and vertues of this Sacrament. Amen. When the Priest sayes Agnus Dei. COnsider how your sweet saviour is the lamb of God who hath offered himself for all the sins of the world, and is now at the right hand of his Father to be the Advocate and Judge of sinners. Pray him humbly to pardon you your offences, and make you worthy spiritually to recei∣ve him, which indeavour to do with the Priest in the devoutest manner you can, and with the greatest affe∣ction you are able. When the Priest saith the last Collect or Prayer. GIve thanks unto the most holy Trinity for having granted you so great a benefit as to be present and partaker of so worthy a Mystery.
At the last Dominus Vobiscum. IMagin as if you heard the sound of the Angels trumpet, wherwith our Lord at the end of the world will call to Judgment, and beseech him to give you grace to be ready and prepared against that day. When the Priest saith Ite Missa est. COnsider that at the last day of Judgment the wicked shall be condemned to everlasting pain and torment, and perpetually deprived of the presence of Almighty God. At the last Benediction. COnsider the Benediction which Almighty God will give to all the Elect, and will lead them unto everlasting rest: wherfore beseech him so to bless you and all creatures
both in this life and in the next as you and all other may perpetually bless his holy Name. Amen. At the End of Mass, say the Prayer following. Sweet JESUS I offer unto thee the sacrifice of this holy Mass, and of all the Masses which shall be said throughout the whole world, by means whereof I beseech you to give me knowledge of my sins and mise∣ries, as also to restore the ruins and defects of my poor soule, and to supply my wants and unworthiness: mortify in me whatsoever is displea∣sing unto your divine Majesty and make me one according to your own heart: conform my spirit, soul, and body to that of your sacred humani∣ty, and alwayes illuminate and direct me by the sight of your incompre∣hensible Divinitie. Amen. Having said this Prayer under the
Ghospell Examin how you have be∣haved your self in this holy Mystery, and if you find your self to have fai∣led humbly crave pardon of Almighty God, purposing by his holy grace to amend, & be more diligent the next day. DEO GRATIAS. Certain intentions or Meditations which we ought to have when we Com∣municate: out of S. Bonav. 1. FIrst to unite out selves more & more to Almighty God. 2. To gain therby some vertue or grace. 3. To acknowledge his benefits which we cannot do in any thing which is more pleasing and agreable to him then by worthily frequenting this holy Sacrament. 4. The desire of the praise of Al∣mighty God, and his goodness, the same being a Sacrifice of praise. 5. To receive the spirit of Christ
Jesus, & live in humility, charity, Obedience, Poverty of spirit. mor∣tification of body, and contempt of the world, that thy Redeemer may live in thee, who is thy finall end. 6. To renew the memory of the Passion of Christ Jesus. Considerations before Communion taken out of the same Saint. 1. WEe are to meditate what wee are about to doe; which is to re∣ceive Christ Jesus, true God and true man, who died upon the Cross for us. 2. That we are to receive the Holy of Holies: for which cause, it beho∣veth that we approach thereunto, without sin; purging our selves by true Contrition. 3. Consider the divine Excellency and our own misery: how great this Lord is, and how meane the servant. Ponder that his goodness is much mo∣re than our offences, or vertues.
4. Stirr up in your self a most fer∣vent desire to harbour in your heart such a loving Lord: The holy Doc∣tour saith it is a very strange thing that man receiving into his soule Al∣mighty God in the most B. Sacra∣ment, his heart does not even faint, yea even burst through vehemency of love. Foure considerations of S. Mathildis before Communion. 1. THe great love of God who had remembrance of her from all Eternity. 2. That he created her Knowing how ungratefull shee would be unto his divine Majesty. 3. That he would dy for her, upon the Cross, and with his sacred blood satisfy his Eternall Father for her de∣merits. 4. That for her love he would re∣main in the holy Sacrament to feed
her with his own blessed body and Cleanse her with his owne sacred blood. A Prayer before receiving the B. Sacrament. O Sweet JESUS I most ardently desire to receive you Sacramen∣tally and spiritually: although I know my self to be most unworthy you should enter into the house of my sou∣le; be favorable unto me wretched sinner, and take from me whatsoeuer is displeasing unto you: prepare in me, and in all hearts a habitation a∣greable unto your divine Majesty. Would to God, O my sweet Saviour JESU, would to God J were wholy enflamed with an ardent desire and love of you. Behold I here renounce, and give up to you all things, O sweet JESU, O JESU, my love for ever.
A Prayer after receiving the B. Sa∣crament. O Most sweet Lord JESUS CHRIST, I humbly beseech thy unspea∣kable mercy, that this holy Sacra∣ment of thy pretious body and blood which I unworthy have received, may be to me and to all sinners a full pur∣gation of all our offences, a strength against frailties, a fortress to defend us against all perills both of soul and body, an entire pardō and establishmēt in all grace, an amendement of life, a continuall memoriall of thy sacred Passion, a nourishment against all spirituall weakness and a staff of our Pilgrimage: let it, my sweet Saviour JESUS, guide us going, reduce us straying, receive us returning again, hold us up stumbling, lift us up fal∣ling and persevering bring us to glory. O highest God let the reception of this most worthy Sacrament so alter
the tast of our hearts, that at no time we feel any sweetness, love, or desire, or consolation, admit any delight, esteem any honour, feare any adver∣sity, or even live but for thee, and to accomplish thy blessed will, which may ever be perfected in us. Amen. Another Prayer. O Most glorious and ever blessed Virgin Mary, O holy Father S. Francis, O holy Mother S. Clare, S. Michaël, Angels, Archangells, Vertues, Powers, Principalities, Do∣minations, Thrones, Cherubins, Se∣raphins, and all celestiall Spirits, I beseech you to prostrate before the face of my God, and beseech him in favour of his most deare son, my Sa∣viour and Redeemer CHRIST JESUS, that it will please him to pardon the unworthines and indevotion where∣with I have received the most bles∣sed and dreadfull Sacrament, and do
not permit the same to cause that the spirit thereof be not communicated unto me also, that by the vertue and efficacy of this holy Communion I may feel the effect of his divine mer∣cy: that I may receive this day a full remission of all my sins, true light and knowledge of his grace, which is in me: that he reduce and put me in such an estate as shall be most plea∣sing unto his divine Majesty: augment in me faith, hope, charity, obedien∣ce, chastity and patience, with all other vertues and gifts of the holy Ghost, necessary to procure the glory of his divine Majesty, and the salva∣tion of my soule to the honour and praise of his holy name. Amen. What we ought to do the day we cimmunicate. WEe must be very careful to govern our sences, especially our tongue; and if it happen we fall by frailty, we
ought presently to crave pardon and beseech our sweet Saviour not ther∣fore to absent himself from us. 2. To render to this blessed guest all the best services we are able, he being infinitely worthy to be served, loved, and adored of all creatures. Wishing above all things his holy ho∣nour and pleasure. 3. Seek still to entertain this bles∣sed spouse with holy thoughts and de∣sires, beseeching him to give you and all others, whatsoever he knoweth to be needfull for his love and servi∣ce, beleeving that he is inestimably rich. and a most liberal giver. 4 Do nothing that day without considering first whether the thing you do will be pleasing and agreable unto him, and demand his permission and leave. 4. Make fervent aspirarions, cast forth arrowes of divine love towards that most amiable and sweet Lord with a vehement desire of loving him
infinitely, and be wholy transformed into him by conformity of will. Deo gratias. A Prayer before Confession. O Souverain Creatour of heaven and earth, and of all things which in them are: I worm and mi∣serable wretch have offended your di∣vine Majesty, I wonder at my folly, detest my ingratitude, and lament my offences, craving through the merits of the bitter Passion and death of your onely begotten son, and the infinite love, with which he did both offer and suffer them for my sake, and for the whole world: grant unto me and all sinners true knowledge and perfect contrition of our sins and of∣fences with entire remission of them all, loose us from the chaines of our imperfections, and heale the wounds of our soules: grant us ever to be purged and refreshed in the fountain of his holy wounds. Amen.
A Prayer after Confession. O Good JESUS let this my Confes∣sion be gratefull and acceptable unto you by the merits of your admi∣rable life and painfull death, with all the labours, anguishes, and sor∣rowes, which you suffered for man∣kind, together with those of your B. Mother, and all your holy Saints supplying whatsoever is wanting in me, either now or any other time, through want of true contrition, en∣tire confession, or full satisfaction: beseeching they may also be unto me light, direction and strength in all my wayes unto the perfect possession of you my sweet JESU in eternall glo∣ry Amen. Directions how to say the Divine Office with due devotion and attention. WHat care we ought to have in saying the divine Office accor∣ding
to the examples of the holy men, is witten in the 27. Chapter of Para∣lipomenon, Despise not your self, our Lord hath chosen you to stand before him and adore him. Wherfore since God hath chosen man to so high a preferment, it is very requisit we should know how, and in what man∣ner humble service doth consist. The holy man Gerson affirmeth that in saying your Mattins and other hou∣res, carefully and studiously, leasurely and distinctly, consisteth the greatest exercise of a Religious man, and is so fit for him as nothing more. S. Be∣nedict doth call this the worke of our Lord, especially because it is the chiefest office that any man can per∣form gratefull to the divine Majesty. S. Jerome doth affirm that to offer up Hymns, Psalmes, and spirituall pra∣yers, and to shed teares for our own offences, and those of our neighbour, is to reconcile the people to God, and to pacify our Lord with his flock:
all which things are to be accomplis∣hed in the divine office. Wherfore we ought very diligently to apply our whole study, and inward powers to the due execution thereof: least per∣haps that dreadfull sentence pronoun∣ced by the Prophet Jeremy c. 48. v. 10. fall upon us, Maledictus qui facit opus Domini fraudulenter. Accursed be he who do's our lords worke negli∣gently. Three sorts of preparation for saying the Divine Offices. THe first of living well, which is to be exercised in doing all pious works, to restrain our selves from all vanities, and daily to keep our hearts free and pure from all things that may in the least sort soyle them, alwaies directing our thoughts and works whatsoever unto Almigh∣ty God and his honour. The 2. is, that before we begin
the Divine Office, we be carefull to recollect our spirits, excluding all forrain thoughts, or whatsoever may give us distraction in our Divine Office, considering serioussy what wee are going about. It behoveth us also diligently to weigh these things following. That we come To worship God. To thank God. To intreate God. First we come to worship God in three persons and one essence with the worship of Latria which is due to God alone, for the benefit of justi∣fication, that is the Incarnation of his only son, our B. Saviour his life, death, Resurrection, and Ascension; which Mysteries we ought carefully to consider, and ponder with great de∣votion and reverence. 2. We come to thank God in pray∣sing him for the great benefits which we have received and do momentarily
receive, and hope to receive hereafter. Therfore it is requisit that we behold an renew the same every houre and moment of our life: but especially when we are so particularly employed in a worke that hath so great relation and adherence thereunto. 3. We go to intreat God, in besee∣ching his most immeasurable clemen∣cy for our own necessities and those of the whole Church: but to bring all these particulars with more facility to our mind it will assist us much, at∣tentively to think that nothing is mo∣re necessary or profitable for us then God. The 3. Preparation is a zealous prayer, which we must make to the end we may worthily finish the task of our devotions, and in imitation of the three Kings offer to his divine goodnes the gold of devotion, the frankincense of attention, and the Myrrhe of constant perseverance. Being to begin the Office you may
say. I adore thee O Christ, and bless thee O Lord, for by thy Cross and Passion thou hast redeemed the world. Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee; To thee be praise. To thee be glory. To thee be thāks giving forever. May all creatures worthily worship thee; praise, glorify, and adore the most high and undivided Trinity, and the humanity of my blessed Lord Jesus, who in time past was conver∣sant with men upon earth, and now sits at the right hand of his Eternall Father: I beseech the Holy Virgin with the holy Angels and Saints, and those whose feasts are celebrated this day throughout the whole Church, that they will all help me with their aid and furtherance, to the end I may finish this my office worthily to the true praise of Almighty God, and the profit of my soule. Amen.
For the Prayer before the lesser Houres take either REX CHRISTE &c. or the Prayer following. O Good Jesu I desire for the love and honour which I owe unto you, humbly to obey you, faithfully to serve you, and purely to love you, in union of that most perfect atten∣tion, which you being here on Earth prayed and praised your heavenly Fa∣ther. Help me Lord Jesu with your holy grace, for being left by you, I shall be able to do nothing. Amen. Devout Meditations at Gloria Patri. GLory be to the Father, who when I was not, hath created me. Glory be to the son, who when I was lost hath redeemed me. Glory be to the Holy Chost, who hath sanctified me, and the elect of God.
Here ensue certain holy Meditations of the 7. Effusions, distributed for the Canonical Houres. At Matins. COnsider with devotion, and yield manifold thanks to our B. Saviour for the effusion of his pre∣tious blood, and sufferings in his Circumcision, offering the dolours and pains of the said effusion to God the Father for all those that are in state of mortall sin, that it would please his divine goodnes to give them a perfect knowledge of their offences with contrition, confession, satis∣faction and amendment. At Laudes. POnder and give thanks for the do∣lorousness, pain and effusion of blood, which our Saviour CHRIST
JESUS endured in the garden a little before he was apprehended and taken, where with great pain and agony he sweat blood and water: offering this spiritually unto God the Father for those that are in the state of grace, favour and loue of God, and his holy name, that it would please him to conserve them in that state and purity. At Prime. YIeld many thanks for the pain and effusion of blood, which our B. Saviour CHRIST JESUS suffered in his flagellation, offering it up unto God the Father, for all those that are in any affliction or tribulation, be it spirituall or corporall, beseeching his divine Majesty to conserve each one of them, as he knoweth to be most to his honour, and the health of their soules.
At Tierce. IN devout contemplation give Ma∣ny thanks unto God our sweet Sa∣viour CHRIST JESUS for the effusion of his most precious blood which he endured in his crowning with thorns: offering it to God the Father for our parents, kinred and benefactours, and all for whom wee are any wayes obliged to pray: beseeching him to give them his holy grace to live in his true love and feare, and at their death to possess everlasting life. At Sext. YIeld manyfold thanks unto our B. Saviour JESUS for the paines and effusion of his pretious blood, which issued forth of his hands and feet, being nailed on the Cross; of∣fering it to God the Father for the state of our holy Mother the Church,
that the Popes holines, and all Eccle∣siasticall Powers my be exalted, to the increase of his honour, and have gra∣ce strength and ability, well to dis∣charge what is committed to them therein. At None. GIve manifold thanks unto our B. Saviour for the effusion and shedding of his sacred blood when nayled to the Cross his most holy side was pierced with a launce; offering it to God the Father for the Conver∣sion of all Hereticks: particularly for England, that it would please him to enlighten them with his holy, grace to know and embrace the truth, that they with all others may in union and perfect charity, love, praise and ma∣gnify him everlastingly. At Evensong. CAll to mind the dolorous Mys∣tery of our B. Saviours taking
from the Cross and lying in the lapp of his Mother, offering it to God the Father for all religious persons who are especially dedicated unto his holy fervice, beseeching his divin goodnes to give each one of them grace perfectly to perform his holy will even unto death, & to live ver∣tuously in the observance of their in∣stitutes, and persever therein untill the end. At Compline. COnsider how our B. Saviour being dead and his holy body takē down from the Cross, it was by our B. Lady, S. Mary Magdalen and o∣ther holy persons laid in the sepulcher whilest his glorius soul descended into Limbo, where he delivered the just: all which with devotion wee may pre∣sent unto God the Father for the com¦fort and releasement of the soules de∣tained for the purging of their sins in Purgatory, beseeching him mercifully
to receive them unto his happy rest, that they may eternally praise him. Amen. A Prayer after the Divine Office. O Good JESUS be propitious un∣to me a miserable sinner: unto thy goodnes do I commend this my office most coldly and distractedly ac∣complished, beseeching that through your merits it may be amended and perfected. Unto you good Jesu I of∣fer it for the good of the whole church, and the salvation of my sou∣le, in union of that most perfect at∣tention, with which here on earth you did pray unto your heavenly Father; Answer I beseech you, and Satisfy for me. Amen. A Direction for Mentall Prayer. THose who desire to increase and go forward in a spirituall life,
let them go that certain way, which is the interiour and mutuall commu∣nication with Almighty God, per∣formed in this holy Exercise. Because in Prayer vertues are received, obtai∣ned, and augmented. Prayer, as the holy Apostle S. James saith, availeth much, ascendeth to heaven before the tribunall seat of Almighty God, and bringeth unto men every good and perfect gift; causeth such a league and union betwixt God and them, as it maketh their soules apt to receive in-infinite grace from his divine Majesty. Daniel by Prayer converted the fier∣ceness of Lions into the meekness of Lambs. Prayer made the fire loose its force, being not able to burn the three children in the midst of the flaming furnace. Prayer likewise stayed the course and altered the uniform mo∣tions of the heavens, giving power to the voyce of man to stop and detain the sun for as many howers as was necessary for the obtaining the victo∣ry
against his enemies. Jacob through the vertue and efficacy of Prayer pre∣vailed against the Angell. Yea Prayer tyed the hands and infinit power, (if we may so say) of the Lord of An∣gels: for by the Prayer of Moyses Al∣mighty God seemed to be as it were disabled to chastize the people, when he said unto this faithfull servant of his. Suffer me that my fury may be angry against them: as if he should have said: Detain me not with thy Prayers. Prayer finally obtaineth par∣don for whatsoever offences: the Pu∣blican getteth remission of his sins, and the Prodigall child pardon, and returns again into favour by Prayer. Therfore it being so profitable and necessary for a spirituall life, obtai∣ning by the vertue thereof whatsoever it will in heaven or Earth? it is requi∣sit that all Religious persons, spend as much time as their state and leisure will permit them in this kind of Prayer: which rather consisteth in
the actions of the will then the long discourse or speculation of the under∣standing, sensible gifts, or consola∣tions: for that is not in our own hands. The fruit of Prayer is, that we raise from the same, humility, patience, obedience, indifference &c. This is alwaies in our power, (the grace of God presupposed.) To the end that Prayer be performed with Recollection and attention, it is ne∣cessary that we do not take it in hand as a thing of small moment, not ras∣hly, but advisedly; not with a slow and dull heart, but with a lively at∣tention, and undaunted courage: for otherwise we may incurre the curse of the Prophet Jeremy, who saith, Cursed is he that doth the worke of our Lord negligently. Neither is so great attention and force to be used as therby to weary and break our heads, and hinder our health: for so, insteed of pleasant and sweet milk we should wring forth blood, (as the wisdom
of God signifieth in Proverbs) cause a feare and horrour to undertake this holy Exercise. wherfore to avoid these extreams, Moderation is to be used in such sort, as by over much striving therein we hurt not our selves, as was aforesaid, nor through too much carelesness let our mind be carried away with unprofitable matters. Let not wandring thoughts trouble you, but put them away sweetly: for you merit more by patient resistance then in having great comfort and consola∣tion. Humble and accuse your self in the sight of God, that you cannot be so long in his presence without so ma∣ny earthly cogitations: beseeching our B. Lady, your holy Angel, and all others with the Saints to pray for you and supply your wants in due praise and love of his divine Majesty. For scruples and temptations, which happen in Prayer, the first remedy, is not to hearken, or give eare unto them.
An Instruction for mentall Prayer to which are required 5. Conditions. To wit. 1. Preparation. 2. Meditation. 3. Pream∣bles. 4. Colloquie. 5. Recollection. 1. PReparation hath 4. conditions. which is universall to all piety, Purity of heart and calmness of pas∣sions, and affections, and Recollec∣tion both of senses and fancies: but aboves all things, that the intention be pure, and that you undertake this vertuous Exercise sincerely for the love of God to please him, and reform your life and manners according to his most blessed will and not for hopes of con∣solations or divine lights; which we∣re an intention proper to hirelings, and not fit for his children, nor gra∣tefull to our heavenly Father, who desires above all things a pure inten∣tion
2. The 2. is Reading, which you may accustome in this manner: read those points you intend to make your Meditation upon after evēsong, before or about dinner: and that which you purpose to meditate on after Mattins the night before. Ruminate the matter divers times before you meditate, mo∣ving your self to tast and feel those good motions and affections, which you think the matter will yield you to draw forth. For if in an affaire of importance which we handle with ear∣thly creatures, we seriously think and consider thereof before: how much more ought we to do it in this so spi∣rituall an Exercise and the greatest which can possibly be undertaken, being we are therein to treat with Al∣mighty God about the good and sal∣vation of our soule. The 3. condition, is the Presence of God, Coming to the place where you purpose to meditate consider the presence of Almighty God comparing
his greatness and goodness, with your own basenes and vileness and imagi∣ning our sweet Saviour calleth you to shew you what he hath done, said and suffered for you. Or consider your self a beggar, sick, and guilty, to crave of your benefactour an almes, of your Physitian health, and of your Judge pardon; beseeching your good Angel, and some of your Patrons to accompany and assist you therein. 4. The 4. and last condition of pre∣paration. is the Prayer preparatory, wherein you crave grace affectuously in generall to perform your Medita∣tion to Gods honour and glory, and the good of your own soule, remem∣bring that sentence. Omnis nostra suf∣ficientia à Deo est. All our sufficiency is from God: beseeching your hea∣venly Father who is a sea of mercies to rain down by his power plenty of pious thoughts to possess your me∣mory: God the son the true light and wisdom to illuminate and instruct
your Understanding whith heavenly knowledge; God the Holy Ghost, who is an infinit burning fire of cha∣rity, to enflame your will with pious affections. The 2. Condition of Mentall Prayer is Preambles, which are for the most part three. 1. THe fitst whereof is a repetition to your self as you would to another, of the matter, sentence, or verse, of which you are to meditate. 2. The 2. if the matter be Histori∣call, is to represent unto your self the place and persons present. As for example: Meditating some Mystery of Christ, put before your eyes some mountain, citty, or desert, fitting the place to the Mistery or sentence, which you are to consider. If what you purpose to meditate be spirituall matter, void of such similitude, ab∣stain from the 2. Preamble according∣ly.
If of Hell: think of the length, breadth, and depth of that horrid pla∣ce, with all things that may give hor∣rour unto man. If of Heaven: repre∣sent the specious pleasantness of that Celestial Country. If on death: your self lying on your death bed, or laid in your grave. If on Judgement: our sweet Saviour sitting on his Judgment seat. If on sin: your soule to be held prisoner in your body, fettered with chaines of disordered passions, and clogged with the burden of the flesh. But if the sentence of your Meditation be such, as cannot make these nor the former similitudes: call to mind who spoke or did it, in what manner, sort, or with what intention: reciting that sentence two or three times unto your self: which manner you must also accustome in all sorts of Meditations, expecting what it shall please God to teach you: therfore saying: Speak Lord thy servant heareth. 3. The 3. Preamble, or petition is
briefly to crave light and knowledge of the Mystery you meditate on, and grace to stirr up in your self such particular good affections of this or that vertue as you shall see the matter is most apt to minister occa∣sion, for your spirituall profit. The 3. Condition of mentall Prayer, is Meditation, which consisteth in the three powers of the soule. 1. FIrst: let the memory remem∣ber to call to mind the pre∣sence of Almighty God, before whom you are to chuse the matter whereon you are to meditate, in what manner you are to do it, and wherfore. 2. Secondly: the Understanding must discourse of the matter, whe∣ther, it be of some person, as of our Saviour: some words of holy scriptu∣re, some actions, as of the Passion of CHRIST JESUS, or the suffering of his Saints: the verity, cause, properties,
effects, conveniences, and circum∣stances, as, WHO, WHAT, WHY, WHERE, WHEN, BY WHAT MEANS: And this is not to be done slightly, but very seriously, so as they may move the will, pondering and as it were shewing them again. 3. Thirdly: the will must stirr up in it self these affections, and make such good purposes as the subject doth require, and the understanding hath before approved for good: see∣king to perform towards God: 1. The affections of praise of his holy name. 2. Love of his goodness. 3. Confidence in his mercy. 4. Faith in his verity. 5. Feare of his justice. 6. Gratitude for his benefits. Towards your self, affe∣ctions of love or hatred, desire or disdain, joy or sorrow, conversion, or aversion feare or hope, dislike or pursuit of the matter which you have discovered: and in these of the will you must incite and stay your self in every point of your meditation.
How to proceed with fruit in every point of your Meditation. FIrst the memory is to present the matter unto the understanding, as is above said, and that is to consider the persons, actions, and circumstan∣ces as is set down: and when by dis∣course and particular view of the matter, you shall sufficiently under∣stand any speciall point to move af∣fections: as to discover Gods good∣ness, love, or any benefit, done to∣wards us by him, example of vertue, or difformity of vice, then stay that discourse, and seek to stirr up such good affections, as the matter will most aptly afford. As for example; when by discourse you have found the goodness of God, or some great benefit of him to us; then stay, lo∣ve, view, and admire him for the greatnes thereof: inciting your self to have a perpetuall memory and ack∣nowledgment
of them, drawing somthing for your instruction and encouragement to his most perfect service and your own progress in ver∣tue. This is a great part of the fruit, which you are to reap of Meditation, the which you must perfect by collo∣quy and Prayer. Helps, if the will do's not yield unto those affections which you desire. REflect with your self what affe∣ctions such considerations ought to move in you towards God, who∣se love, goodnes, and benefits you see to be so great, and you have deserved so little: the which conside∣ration ought to produce in you ex∣ceeding great love, praise, gratitu∣de, obedience, confidence &c. Then come to your will again, and see whether it will yield to those affec∣tions. If it do not, then labour to move it either by such persuasions as
you would give to another, whom you desire to incite to the same affec∣tions: Or else, reprove your dulness; or ask your self the question why you should not yeld thereunto: seeing that you can remember your self and others to be exceedingly moved unto such affections towards creatures for less motives. And again say. Why should not I feel the like to my Creator, or at least yeld with my will to desire it, and purpose the same? Then have recour∣se to Prayer and say. O my God, I will purpose &c. I desire you to assist me with your grace: confessing your misery and unworthines, beseeching him to be your help. And somtimes say those words of Jacob: I will not leave thee O Lord untill thou givest me thy blessing: or those of the Cananean woman. Yes Lord I am a dog, yet doggs eate, the crums which fall from their Maisters table: or other such li∣ke. And thus, having at least by some meanes or other stirred up the foresaid
affections, though not so fervently as we desire, persever in exercising the will, drawing forth somthing for your profit. This example, in due propor∣tion may serve to teach you how to proceed upon any other matter: as when you have by discourse discove∣red any vertue or vice in some word, deed or thought, or some person who is presented in the Meditation: first by staying or pondering, or someti∣mes admiring how worthy a thing that vertue is, in that person, and how foule the vice: the fruit and the losse and shame of the other. Then proced as you will to move and stirr up the affection you seek; never con∣tenting your self with generall affec∣tions, be they never so fervent, nor spend to much time in them, but make some particular resolutions, of which you stand in most need for the advan∣cement and correction of your life, which having stirred up, confirmed, and resolved to practice, conclude al∣waies
the part, and much of the whole Meditation with devout colloquies or speaches of heart unto Almighty God. The 4. Condition of Prayer, or Collo∣quy to be said at the end of Me∣ditation or part of them during the same. 1. THe first is to give God thanks for the holy affections, reso∣lutions, and purposes, which he hath inspired into you, as also for his good∣nes and mercy which you have dis∣covered in the discourse of your Me∣ditation. 2. Secondly, by way of oblation, wherein you present unto God the self same goodnes and mercy of his, you have tasted in Meditation toge∣ther with the death, Passion, vertues and merits of his holy son our Re∣deemer, and consequently with all the affections and resolutions which
by his holy grace you made in your Meditation. 3. Thirdly by Petition or Obse∣cration, which you demand of God, and earnestly conjure him, as it were through the death and Passion of our sweet Saviour; the merits of the glo∣rious Virgin Mary, the intercession of your good Angel, and all the ho∣ly Saints to bless your affections and resolutions, which to his honour and glory you have made, to the end you may faithfully put them in execution, and for making your self more ca∣pable of his grace, crave pardon for your sins and offences committed a∣gainst his divine Majesty, with re∣medy of some vice and augmentation of some vertue, offering your self wholy unto his holy service with a firme purpose to avoid whatsoever may offend him. 4. Fourthly; besides these parti∣cular petitions which appertain unto your self, it is very good to make a
generall suite for all both living and dead, but especially for those who have most need. and to whom you are most obliged, and particularly for the soules in Purgatory. The 5. Condition of Mentall Prayer is Recollection. FIrst, your Meditation being ended, it is very profitable to ponder well and consider how it succeeded; whether you followed the method that was taught, in the preparation, Preamble, Meditation and all the rest, and what point moved you most, and how you have exercised your self therein, craving pardon for your de∣fects, and giving Almighty God thanks for what was well, resolving to fol∣low what you see to be profitable unto you, and avoid the contrary. 2. You must have a particular care to conforme your self unto those good motions, which Almighty God shall
give you in Prayer: for, so to do, is a most speciall means to obtain the increase of grace: for the contrary would be an ingratitude and contempt of Gods graces, which deserveth not to have the like hereafter: a princi∣pall help for the same is to have care to remember them: and for that end it is good at Mass, and the Divine Office to renew and offer them to Almighty God, and divers times in the day to do the like. 3. Thirdly and lastly, if at any time it happen that through ill dis∣position, want of due Preparation, or yielding to temptation, your Me∣ditation doth not succed; be not dis∣mayed or discouraged, but humbling your self in Gods sight, acknowledge your imperfections and negligences, crave pardon of his divine Majesty, purposing by his holy grace to be more carefull and diligent the next time: for the obtaining of which, have confidence in his divine goodnes,
and thank him that he hath vouchsa∣fed to permitt you the favour to be so long in his presence. And if it were to have the least good affection in all the time of your meditation, or but a remembrance of Almighty God, think not the time lost, and labour fruitless, but rather if you wil make use of that little you have by often remembring it, doubt not but that little spark by laying wood to it, and often blowing the coales will turn to a great fire of the love of God. An advice how to overcome some diffi∣culties that fall out in Meditation. THe first is when you find your self without gust of devotion, and so dry that Meditation will not only seem to be cumbersom unto you, but also time lost. To overcome this difficulty: you must understand, that aridity and driness may come somti∣mes out of your own fault; as when
you used not that diligence you ought either in meditation, or in preparing your self, by foreseeing what you are to meditate on, according as hath been said, whereof it cometh, that you do it with negligence, & dryly: and Almyghty God in punishment thereof doth worthily deprive you of the consolation and tast of Medita∣tion. The remedy to rid your self of this punishment, is to take away the cause. At other times this aridity cometh without fault; and we must not therfore leave Meditation: for as a time of consolation doth please you, when our Lord like the sun in the spring cometh neare ro you, and mak's you have gust in meditation: so you must not be displeased or leave your Exercise, when the self same saviour as the sun in winter doth go from you, which he also doth for your good, that you may plant roots of humility, exercise patience and re∣signation, knowing that when he
goeth from you, you remain dry without devotion, having confidence that God will accept of your Medi∣tation and endeavours, and send you consolation when he thinketh most fitting; and persevering with courage and hope, remember the words of Tobias. Qui post tempestatem, tran∣quillum facit. Who after a storme mak's a calme. As also that of Job. If we have received good things, why should not we beare with the bad. It may be also that Almighty God suffereth you to be dry in Prayer, to try with what intention you come to so holy an Exercise: proving whether you be his souldier for payment, expecting he should reward you with gust and devotion: or else to make you know that your tast and comfort in medi∣tation is his gift, which he bestoweth on whom, and when he will, that by this means you dispose your self to ask humbly of him, and with con∣fidence expect what you aske. When∣soever
you pray to please God therby as you ought to do; you may say: I did not begin my meditation to feel gust or devotion, but for the love of God, my sweet saviour JESUS, & for his love I will continue it. Another difficulty is, that the divell will represent Meditation unto you, as very hard and difficult, so to make you differr it, and afterwards wholy forsake it. But if you have a true de∣sire to do a thing acceptable to your Creatour, either Meditation will not seem so tedious or you will hold all well employed for is love. How ma∣ny courtiers do you see going a hun∣dred times a yeare unto the Princes chamber without hopes of once spea∣king unto him, onely to be seen by him, that he may take notice how they endeavour to shew their duty unto him: so must you come to the Exercises of Prayer, which is as it were Gods Chamber of Presence purely and meerly to do your duty and testi∣fy
your fidelity. And if it please him not to speak to you, no otherwise then if he saw you not, or if you were not in his presence, you must not for all that go away discontented, or discomforted, but continue still with patience and a devout behaviour in the presence of his soverain good∣nes: and without doubt your service will be acceptable to him, and at last he will take notice of your constan∣cy and diligence. Colloquies or speeches, part in Medita∣tion and part in Prayer; Praising Almighty Gods Excellency, goodness, holiness, worthiness &c. TO THE SOULE. EXhorting it to some vertuous action: somtimes reprehending her vices and faults, little zeal, im∣perfections &c.
PURPOSES. Purposing to Gods honour, Obe∣dience, Humility, Resignation, Mor∣tification &c. AFFECTIONS. More affections towards God, in∣crease of his honour, augmentation of the Church, &c. SUPPLICATION. Make supplication unto God, as a son does to his father, a beggar to his benefactour, a sick man to his Physitian, a schollar to his Master, and a spouse to her bridegroome. TO OUR B. LADY. Alleadging that shee is our mother, Mistris, Queen and Advocate, and
therefore ought and doth love us, de∣fend, protect, and pray for us. TO OUR GOOD ANGEL. Alleaging his office, charge, and power to help us: his honour to de∣fend us. TO THE SAINTS. Especially those to whom you are most devoted, alleadging their affinity to our nature, their tryalls of our ne∣cessities, their security in glory, and their ability and willingnes to help us. CAUSES OF DISTRACTIONS. 1. First from the Divell who doth still endeavour to hinder us from the fruit of Prayer. 2. It proceedeth from our own ima∣gination which is free, untamed, and ill governed. 3. From some affections unmorti∣fied,
which draw our thoughts after them, for where the treasure is, there is the heart. 4. From cares which sting, and di∣vide the heart into a thousand parts. 5. From coldnes in enforcing our selves to this so noble an Exercise. 6. From ignorance, not knowing how to discourse or meditate, or sear∣che into hidden verities, and ponder them in such sort as may move the will and stirr up affections of devo∣tion. This ignorance by the grace of God will be remedied by this form, and method following. The meanes to resist distractions of heart and tediousnes of spirit, are prin∣cipally foure 1. FIrst, profound humility, acknow∣ledging our weakness and mi∣sery; being ashamed to stand before God with such distractions, accusing our selves of our offences both past and present.
2. The second, fortitude of mind, resolving not to admit any distraction, although it administer matter of con∣tent, or seem of much importance; for nothing behoveth us so much as to tend to Prayer and to God, before whom we are. Wherfore if a thou∣sand times we should be diverted, we must turn again as many times more, without loosing courage. 3. The third remedy, Prayer it self: beseeching our saviour to re∣collect our thoughts and wandring affections, that wee may use at∣tention and devotion: craving the help and intercession of his glorious Mother with the holy Angels and Saints, who are willing to assist all those that pray: saying somtimes with David. My heart hath forsoken me, may it please you Lord to deliver me from the violence which I suffer, and have respect to help. Other times with the Prophet: My soule is as earth wi∣thout water. Again: with the blind
man in the Ghospell. O son of David have mercy on me. Or with the Psal∣mist. Depart from me o yee malig∣nants, and I will search the commande∣ments of my God. 4. The fourth is Confidence in Al∣mighty God: persuading our selves, that being he commandeth us to pray, he will give us grace wherby we may resist the divell, bridle our imagina∣tions, restrain our passions, moderate our cares, cast from us our coldness: But with this confidence wee must adjoyne diligence, as Cassian saith, re∣moving before Prayer whatsoever you think may distract you therein: imitating in this the subtility of our adversary; who as S. Nilus Abbot saith, ordaineth all his temptations, wherwith he tempteth spirituall persons, to hinder them from Prayer & the fruit thereof: tempting them with impa∣tience to disquiet them, curiosity to dis∣tract them, multitude of busines to dis∣turbe them, pride and ingratitude to
make them barren and dry &c. By this we may learn to be no less provident and carefull of our good than the divell is of our harm, ever governing our selves in such sort as may most for∣ward our Prayer, remembring the words of our sweet saviour in S. Luke. It behoveth us alwaies to pray, and ne∣ver to be weary. The chiefest effects of Prayer. ARe particular lights, affections, and resolutions. And whatsoever else is needfull for a large Examin af∣ter Meditation, is set down in the end of the book of the practice of Medi∣tation. 1. Consolation is an inward motion unto the more perfect love of God, and withdraweth our affections from all earthly creatures. 2. Teares, springing of love or sor∣row, rightly ordained to the honour of God.
3. Increase of hope and Charity. 4. Joy and devotion, which incites the soul unto greater perfection. 5. Illuminations of the understan∣ding, wherby it understandeth some things anew or better, and more per∣fectly than before. 1. Desolation is that which vaileth the eyes of the soul, that it may not behold that which appertaineth to the glory of God, and the perfection of the soule. 2. That which troubleth, and mov∣eth us to earthly and outward things. 3. That which draweth us to the distrust of obtaining perfection, or what may help us. 4. That which driveth away Hope and charity. 5. That which bringeth the soule to a certain tepidity, heavines, and tediousnes of mind. S. Bernard speaking of the devout Meditation upon the Passion of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, saith
thus. If thou desirest perfectly to be purified from all thy sins and vices, if thou would'st be nobly enriched with ver∣tues, illuminated in holy Scripture: if thou would'st gloriously triumph over thy enemies: if abundantly be confor∣ted in adversities; if often, to have compunction and shed teares of devo∣tion: if to obtain the burning fervour of spirit in Meditation: if to be reple∣nished with spirituall joy, if to persever in well doing, if in the end well and blessedly to dy, and reigne in heaven eternally: and finally to be beloved and crowned by our Saviour Jesus, everla∣stingly, exercise thy self in the holy Meditation of the blessed life and Pas∣sion of Jesus, and often reduce the same unto thy heart and memory. Things to be considered in Meditating the Passion of our Saviour. 1 Who it is that suffereth. 2. What it is he suffereth. 3. How he suffe∣reth.
4. For whom. 5. To what end he suffereth. Severall Affections to be draw'n from the consideration of the same Passion. 1. To have compassion on the great∣nes of his pains. 2. Contrition for the sins, which were the cause of his sufferance. 3. Imitation in following his exam∣ples. 4. Gratitude for the largeness of our Redemption. 5. Hope he dyed to save us. 6. Love in seeing the greatness of his love. 7. Admiration in beholding his unspeakable bounty and goodnes. It is written of him, dixit multa, fecit mira, pertulit dura. Considerations of the knowledge of ones self. 1. Consider what you have been,
what you are, and what you shall be. 2. Ponder what you are by nature: by fault, what you have deserved; and what you may do by grace. 3. The effectuall cause of your Being, is God. 4. The matter of which you are made is Earth, agreeing with the na∣ture of beasts. 5. Our soules to the image of God. 6. Our end to serve him, and live eternally with him. Considerations of sin. 1. How much it displeaseth Al∣mighty God and hurteth man. 2. How contrary to his justice, dis∣pleasing, and disedifying to our neighbour. 3. God's severe punishment of it, and what wee loose therby. 4. The disgust that followeth sin, and dishonour that accompanieth it. 5. The grief of God, his Angels,
and Saints, with the joy of the Divell. 6. The difformity of sin, and the disagreement between men and it, according to the nobleness of the soul. How to consider Death. 1. That all must necessarily dy, and then be deprived of all things. 2. Onely accompanied with grief and sicknes of the body, with temp∣tations and feares of the soule. 3. And nothing will confort you at that houre but only good works. 4. Death ought not to be feared, contemned, or desired. Of the Pains of the damned. There are many waies to meditate of this, as in that which followeth of glory, only changing the good for the evill.
1. Consider the dowries of the soule, which are the vision, possession and enjoying of God. 2. The dowries and perfections of the body: Impassibility, Brightnes, Agility, Subtility. 3. The place: most excellent, most large, most beautifull and most rich. 4. The company of the Angels and Saints with the Blessed Mother of God, which shall endure for all Eternity. How to consider vertue. 1. In what vertue consisteth. 2. What examples and doctrine your sweet Saviour hath given you thereof. 3. How beautifull, excellent, ne∣cessary, and profitable it is: how plea∣sing unto God, and maketh man agrea∣ble to him. 4. How much it edifieth and pro∣fiteth your neighbour. 5. The spirituall joy it bringeth with many benefits.
6. The victory we gain therby over our selves. 7. How farr we are from the per∣fection thereof and what you ought to do hereafter. 8. The power we gain therby, in presenting our Prayers to God. How to consider the Feasts of Saints, 1. In what place they are now and with what glory they are crowned. 2. How much they may help us by their Prayers and merits. 3. By what works, Prayers, and vertues they have attained such glory. 4. If you will come where they are, do as they have done. To meditate on the Perfections of Almighty God. 1. His infinite Essence. 2. His Po∣wer. 3. His Wisdome. 4. His Bounty. 5. His Goodnes 6. His Love. 7. His
Mercy. 8. His Justice. 9. His Provi∣dence. 10. His Omnipotency: concer∣ning which weigh this sentence of holy scripture, or what himself hath done in testimony thereof. Caelum & cerram ego impleo. In ipso vivimus, movemur, & sumus. I fill heaven and Earth. In him we live, move, and are. For his power. Dixit, & facta sunt. He said, and they were made. Considerations of the creatures of Al∣mighty God, & first in generall. 1. By the largeness of the world, consider the greatnes of Almighty God. 2. The multitude and variety of things with the infinit perfections of God. 3. His bounty in the profit they bring unto us. 4. His beauty by the beauty of the creatures.
5. His wisdom in the well orde∣ring of all things. 6. His Eternity, in the roundness, which hath neither beginning nor end. 7. The unity of the world, she∣wing that God is only one. The creatures in particular, their be∣ginnings and continuance which is of God. 1. The end thereof, to wit his honour, and the service of crea∣tures. 2. Of what and how they were made by his only word and power. 3. The qualities and effects of these creatures, the reverence they use unto God and his perfections. The benefits in brief of Almighty God. 1. Who hath done you the benefit. 2. Who hath moved him to do it.
3. Wherfore he hath done it unto you. 4. How great the benefit is. 5. How much you are obliged ther∣by, 6. How ungratfull you have been. What you ought to do in the time to come with the benefits of Almighty God in particular. 1. First how God hath predestina∣ted us in perpetuall love before the world was. 2. How he hath made man like to himself. 3. Given you a body of most seem∣ly features void of all defformity. 4. Made your soul immortall, and adorned it with three powers. 5. Appointed an Angell to keep and defend you. 6. Made you to be born of Christian parents, and members of the Church.
The benefit of our Redemption. 1. First sent us his well beloved son to be our Redeemer and example. 2. By Baptisme purged you from original sin and restored you the ves∣ture of originall justice. 3. Fortified you with the Sacrament of Confirmation, wherby he hath ar∣med you against your enemies. 4. Made you a Christian, and ther∣by the child of God and coheire of his Kingdome. 5. Hath given the holy Ghost in token of adoption of love, commu∣nicating unto you his benefits inspi∣rations and fruits. 6. Lastly the Sacraments of Con∣fession and Communion, as a refuge in all Spirituall relapses and necessi∣ties. The benefit of vocation. 1. First the patience of Almighty
God with you: you falling so often after so many great benefits received, long expecting your return, and not letting you dy in an evill state. 2. Sought to recall you by inward inspirations admonitions, and exhor∣tations. 3. Mollified your heart, giving you a good will to vertue, and removed such impediments as might withdraw you from him. 4. Lovingly received you at your returne, as the Father did his prodigall child, putting on you the stole of in∣nocency, which you had lost by sin. 5. Hath called you from the vani∣ties and miseries of the world, as he did Lot from Sodom. 6. What great plenty of means he hath given you in Religion, wherby you may satisfy for your sins, increa∣se your crown and merit. The benefit of justification. 1. First how God hath changed your
will, and moved you to do pennance, made bitter things sweet, and that which was unsupportable to be easy unto you. 2. Secondly, he hath given unto you perseverance in his feare and love: many beginning well have failed in the end to their condemnation. 3. Thirdly he hath given to you the Evangelicall vertues of hope and gra∣ce, to persever in your good purpo∣ses to avoid vice and labour for ver∣tue. 4. Fourthly hath left the holy scri∣ptures and devout books, wherein as in a glass you may behold your defects and imperfections. 5. Fiftly, the examples of Marty∣res, Confessours, Virgins, and the daily edification of those with whom you live. The henefits of donation. 1. FIrst the gift of nature, fortune, and grace: as the five sences
with the three interiour powers of your soul, health, strength, &c. 2. God brought you back when you were astray, instructed you when you were ignorant, and lifted you up when you were fallen. 3. Thirdly enlightned your under∣standing when it was in darkness of sin, and stirred up in you many good motions and desires. 4. Moved your will and affections to spirituall works and exercises. 5. Preserved you from many enor∣mous sins, taking from you the oc∣casions, and giving you grace to per∣sever and resist them. 6. Delivered you from divers sorts of temptations, drawing you forth when you were overwhelm'd in them, and given you greater force to resist them The benefit of Preservation. 1. PReserved you both spiritually and corporally in a good state,
with increase of good desires, to ex∣ecute good purposes. 2. From the cradle to this moment preserved you from many enemies, diseases, dangers, &c. 3. Hath hitherto furnished you with all necessaries both spirituall and corporall. 4. Ordained for you succession of times, as day and night, winter and summer &c. 5. Directed you in prosperity and adversity, in sicknes and health, and in the whole course of your life. The bonefit of Glorification. 1. THe fruition of the divinity with the vision of God, and his B. Mother. 2. The company of your good An∣gel with the Martyrs, Confessors Vir∣gins, &c. 3. The dowry of the soule: the glorification of the body more bright
and cleare then the sun it self. 4. The place of the blessed, the delights af the senses, the riches, and abounding pleasures of the in∣habitants, which are innumerable, inestimable, and immeasurable. 5. By the grace of God you shall scape the torments of Hell: the miseries of this life: the hurts and cruelties of your mortall enemies. These Meditations are as it were a cord to draw you unto Almighty God. Gratitude is a great part of justice, and amongst all Christian ex∣ercises none is more easy, if you be willing: none more needfull, if you regard your duty: none more profi∣table, if you desire reward, then of∣ten to look over the great and ma∣nifold benefits, which we have re∣ceived of Almighty God. The eight Beatitudes. 1. BEati pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Poverty of spirit Acknowledged her sins. Cōtemneth her self. Despiseth none. Honoureth all. Beati mites quoniam ipsi possidebunt terram. Blefsed are the meke, for they shall possess the land. Meeknesse Answereth sweetly. Ad∣monisheth benignly. Is mild being reprehended. Behaveth her self piously. 3. Beati qui lugent quoniam ipsi con∣solabuntur. Blessed are those that mourn for they shall be comforted. Sorrow Excludeth all glory. Abideth in misery, For the love of her neighour. For her own sins. 4. Beati qui esuriunt & sitiunt ju∣stitiam quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. Bles∣sed are they that hunger and thirst justice for they shall be satiated.
Hunger and thirst Hath horrour of vice: A fervour of spirit? Te∣diousnes of temporal things: desire of Eter∣nall. 5. Beati mundo corde, quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt. Blessed are the Cleane of heart, for they shall see God. Purity of heart Is sincere in intētion: Right in works: Ex∣cludeth pervers co∣gitations: Assiduous in contemplation. 6. Beati misericordes, quoniam ipsi misericordiam consequentur. Blessed are the mercifull, becaus they shall find mercy, Mercy Hath cōpassion in tribulation Succoureth in necessities. Delighteth in liberality. Is benigne with affability. 7. Beati Pacifici, quoniam filii Dei vocabuntur. Blessed are the Peace ma∣kers for they shall be cal'd the chil∣dren of God.
Things which worck Peace Silence and solitariness. Frequent and devout Prayer. Fervent contemplation. To admit no interiour trou∣ble. 8. Beati qui persecutionem patiun∣tur propter justitiam, quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum. Blessed are they shat suffer persecution, for theyr's is the kingdome of Heau'n. Things which produce Patience. Feare of eternall souffrāce. Fervent love of God. Memory of the Passion of our Saviour. Hope of Eternall joy. A Religious person ought often to con∣sider the benefit of his vocation by the circumstances following. ƲNDE ES? Quo? Quomodo? Quan∣do? Quo fine vocatus? 1. FROM WHENCE, God, to wit, hath called you? From the world, the gulfe of sin and evils.
2. WHITHER? TO holy Reli∣gion, the house of God, the school of vertue, the gate of consolation, and the pourtrait of the celestiall Jerusalem. 3. HOVV? With what love, wisdom, and power he called? without your own merit. 4. WHEN? In your youthfull, or old age, when you least desired or sought after such a course. 5. Lastly for what END? 1. To serve God perfectly, and forsake all things to accomplish it. 2. To do pennance, beare your Cross, and follow the steps of Christ Jesus. 3. To work your salvation and to gain perfection. 4. To help your neigh∣bour as much as is possible according to your vocation and institution by good example and prayer. S. Bernard had this sentence alwaies in his heart. Bernarde ad quid venisti? Bernard, to what end didst thou come hither?
The Priviledges and benefits of a Reli∣gious person. Homo vivit puriùs, cadit rariùs, surgit velociùs, incedit cautiùs, quiescit securiùs, irroratur frequentius, mo∣ritur confidentiùs, purgatur citius, remuneratur copiosiùs. A Religious person. 1. LIveth more purely: by the ob∣servance of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience. 2. Falleth more rarely: by flying the occasions of sin and perverse con∣versation. 3. Riseth more quickly: by consi∣deration of holy scriptures; the lives of Saints, and example of those with whom we live. VVaketh more warily: by medita∣ting their sins past, imperfections pre∣sent, and the joy which cometh of vertue.
5 Resteth more securely: by attai∣ning the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and interiour consolation. 6. Receiveth more grace: by bette∣ring their disposition, and becoming more familiar with God. 7, Dyes more confidently: by the efficacy of Priviledges in Religion, meritorious works, and help of Com∣munity, with the imitation of their spouse CHRIST JESUS. 8. Is sooner purged: by the many remedies to make satisfaction, by the multitude of holy inspirations, and frequent exhortations. 9. Is rewarded more abundantly: be∣cause a Religious life is victorious over her enemies the FLESH, the VVORLD, and the DIVELL.
JESUS MARIA. Certain aspirations for every day in the weeke, Munday, Humility. 1. WHen shall it be my God, that I shall be so odious, execrable, and insupportable to my self, as I desire to be aflicted and punished of all creatures. 2. O sweet Saviour, when shall it be, that I shall have such a true con∣tempt of my self, as with all my heart I wish to be contemned and repu∣ted of every one, most vile. 3. When shall I, deare JESUS, for the love of you, desire in such sort to be humbled, as that I be ever reduced to nothing. 4. O most meek Lord, I confess before thee, and will acknowledge to all the world, that I am the most
vile and unprofitable of all creatures. 5. O my God there is not on earth to be found a creature so disloyall and ungratefull as I am unto thee. 6. I am not worthy to look up to heaven, and much less to possesse the same. 7. If the greatest sinner in the world had those inspirations, and daily means of vertue, which I, o Lord, confess to have: I verily think he would not be so wretched as I am. Tuesday, Confidence. 1. ALthough every moment, deare JESUS, I commit many im∣perfections, yet I hope by thy help to attain to Christian perfection. 2. My sweet Saviour, if J com∣mitted all the sins and crimes, which have been from the beginning of the world, yet would I be confident of pardon. 3. I hope most firmely, O son of
God, my Redeemer, by thy holy merits and Sacraments to enjoy eter∣nall life. 4. O infinit clemency! was there ever any sinner that truly asked par∣don, to whom you denied it? 5. My sweet Saviour: if all crea∣tures both in heaven and earth should tell me that thou hadst forsaken me, and didst refuse to help me, yet I would not beleeve them. 6. O sweet JESU; albeit the fu∣ries in Hell, together with all the afflictions of this life should torment me, yet would I trust in thee. 7. O good JESUS: thou that said'st. Aske and it shall be given: beleeve, and you shall receive: J hum∣bly beg, and unfainedly confide in thy goodnes, whatsoever is necessa∣ry for me, either spirituall or cor∣porall thou wilt give me.
VVednesday, Poverty. 1. O My Lord, J desire no riches. ease, or sensuall dilights, but only the love of thee. 2. O that J had a thousand worlds, with all the fained pleasures thereof, not to possesse, but willingly to lea∣ve for the love of thee. 3. Most deare Lord, J will possess nothing but thee, and what J have, only for thy sake. 4. O dearest spouse all riches wi∣thout thee are unto me unsupporta∣ble poverty: joy, sorrow, ease, paine, consolation, a consuming grief. 5. O my sweet Saviour who was't both in life and death so poor and naked of all things: for thee I most willingly embrace the want of what is necessary for corporall life and health. 6. My sweetest JESU, which was't so poor and free from the
posession of your will even in the repugnance of death: for thee, I entirely forsake my own will and sence to the consummation of my life. 7. O my dearest Saviour that Wouldst not admit in all thy tor∣ments the least comfort, I beseech thee make me so perfectly poore as for thy love I entertain no unneces∣sary consolation. Thursday, Gratitude. 1. O My good God I render thee eternall thanks for all thy gifts both of grace and nature bestowed on me and on all creatures. 2. O most liberall God thou hast do∣ne to me above all I can ask or desire. 3. O my Saviour what shall I ren∣der for all those numberlesse benefits, which I have and continually do re∣ceive from thee? 4. O deare Saviour in gratitude
for all thy mercies towards me, I offer and beseech thee to accept of my heart and soule, with what else thou hast bestowed on me. 5. O my Creatour and deare Re∣deemer, that I could be gratefull unto thee. 6. Teach me, my God, to render thee such thanks as may be most ac∣ceptable unto thee. 7. O would to God J had the gra∣titude of creatures both in heaven and earth to offer up unto thee my onely good: but all being too little, J beg thou wilt thy self supply these wants. Friday, Obedience and Resignation. 1. O Most benigne Lord, let me but know what you would have me to do. 2. Sweete JESUS J offer my self both in time and Eternity, most entirely to accomplish thy will.
3. Although J should be lost, yet if it be thy will: for love of thee J most willingly yeeld to live in con∣tinuall affliction and torment. 4. J offer my self with all my heart, my sweete Saviour, in what J may possibly, in body, life and soule to be disposed of, by thy blessed will and pleasure. 5. Behold, sweeet Lord for love of thee, J abandon and deny my senses, renounce my understanding, and wholy forsake my self to pro∣ve, and accomplish thy holy will. 6. Most deare God, for thy sake J firmly purpose, rather to dy a thousand deaths than once to be disobedient to thee. 7, O good JESUS, when shall I see that happy houre, wherein by perfect obedience and entire Resig∣nation I shall wholy live in thee, and thou in me.
Saturday, Love of neighbour. 1. MOst mercifull Lord, I beseech thy infinit goodnes, so to il∣luminate the hearts of al sinners, that they may be truely penitent for their sins, to seek thee with all care who art the onely God. 2. I beseech thee my sweet Lord by the bowels of thy infinit mercies, that all such as seek after ambition and earthly delights, may turn all their affections to love thee. 3. Grant sweet Jesus through the merits of thy bitter Passion, that all those for whom thou hast suffered, may reape the benefit thereof 4. Most mercifull Lord, I humbly beseech thee to comfort all afflicted soules. 5. Most sweet Saviour, give such grace and vertue unto all creatures, as they may be truly conformable unto thy holy will.
9. Most mercifull God, release for thy own sake, and thy B. Mo∣ther's, all those whom either in Earth or Purgatory, thou dost by justice punish. Sunday, Love of Almighty God. 1. TAke form me. O sweet Sa∣viour, that which separateth me so farr from thee. 2. Purge my soule. O Lord, from all sin, and imperfection, by which it is defiled, and made unworthy of thy Image. 3. Behold, O my God, I hate and detest with all my heart, even the least offence that ever I have com∣mitted against thy divine Majesty. 4. Forgive, sweet Saviour, all that which justly thou mightest lay to my charge: for that now I desire to be perfectly united unto thee. 5. My sweetest Lord, as a chan∣nell of all uncleannesse desiours to be
purified, I present my self unto thee. 6. O Eternall God, I beseech thee, that I who am the least of all creatures, may by perfect love of thee, be elevated above all created things, and my spirit only satisfied in thee. 7. What shall I render thee my beloved Lord for all thou hast besto∣wed on me, that am but dust and ashes, yet thou hast made all things for me. Aspirations for every day in the Weeke upon the Passion of our blessed Saviour. Munday, Contrition. 1. O Vile and most detestable sin, by which I have so oft be∣trayed and sold thee my Eternall Fa∣ther: yea even for a momentary pleasure. 2. O that I had never by ingrati∣tude bound thy liberall hands, and therby deprived my self of thee, and
of thy will, and mercifull pleasure in me. 3. O my soule unto what streights have thy sins and offences brought thy Saviour: would to God I had some seas of teares to shed for ha∣ving thus often cruelly tormented thee. 4. O, if it had been thy will, my sweetest Jesu, I wish I might have endured, not only temporall but endless pains, rather then have cau∣sed the least part of thy affliction. 5. O Sacred wounds of my dearest Saviour in revenge of my cruelty, wound my heart with ten thousand darts of true remorse. 6. O sin how deformed and unjust art thou, that thus has't defiled the beauty of heaven and crucifyed my Immaculate Jesus. 7. O that I might with a thou∣sand millions of lives, and infinit seas of blood, blot out of my soule the guilt of thy death and Passion.
8. Sweet Jesus ingulfe and drown me in thy sacred wounds, that there I may learn to love. Tuesday, Compassion. 1. O That I could shed for thee my Lord so many teares as the sea contains drops of water, in true compassion of thy torments. 2. O who will give water to my head, and a fountain of teares to my eyes, to weep upon thee, the love of my soule. 3. O love, and only comfort of my heart, what consolation hadst thou in all thy torments? 4. Alas, my well beloved; why am not I alwaies present to suffer with thee, at least by compassion on thy pains. 5. My sweet JESUS, O that I might be crucified with thee. 6. O love of my soule, that I might have had the priviledge of the
launce to have rested in thy heart. 7. My dearest Saviour permit me the favour to remain at the foot of thy Cross, to the end that I may weep continually, sigh, bleed, cry, and consume in compassion of thee. 8. Give me an endless spring of teares, to wash away the sacred blood of my sweetest love, which still issueth as flowing rivers from thee. Wenesday, Imitation. 1. O Most sweet JESUS: give me grace in imitation of thy sa∣cred Passion, most willingly to un∣dergoe the burthen of this transi∣tory life. 2. For that thou hast suffered so many and cruell torments for my sake; let me never, O mercifull God, fly any tribulation, which thou shalt vouchsafe to send me by thy self or others. 3. My Jesus, to accompany thee
in thy manifold afflictions, I would be glad, not onely to endure the wants which thou sendest me, but seek others, and never be satisfied in suffering with thee. 4. In imitation of thy nakedness, reproaches and whippings at the pil∣lar; I will endeavour ro strip my self of all inordinate desires and affec∣ctions. 5. I will continually follow thee my dearest Saviour with the Crosse of perfect obedience, and never for any difficulty leave the same till I co∣me to dy with thee. 6. O my Eternall God, that wouldst for my sake be nailed to the Cross: let me by true mortification be al∣waies crucified with thee. 7. My loving spouse; I beseech thee, that with a full renunciation of my self, and perpetuall death to all earthly things I may irrevocably dy with thee.
Thursday, Thanksgiving. 1. WHat thanks shall I yeeld unto thee my Eternall life, who wouldst endure unspeakeable torments to free me from the snares and fetters of death. 2. All you seraphins, and cele∣stiall Spirits, with whatsoever hath been created praise my Redeemer for the unspeakeable price of my Re∣demption. 3. O my soule: how can'st thou devise to render the least part of due gratitude unto thy Jesus; who hath by his own humility so much exalted thee. 4. O let me ever acknowledge, my deare Saviour, that endless bond of gratitude, which thy Passion alone exacteth of me. 5. Sweet JESUS, that I could incessantly love thee, for these ine∣stimable treasures, which thou by
thy torments hast purchased unto me. 6. Good JESUS; since I have no∣thing but my self to offer in requitall of thy infinit love: I beseech thee to accept in love and gratitude what by right is thy own. 7. O eternall God, that I had a thousand hearts and lives to offer unto thee, who by thy death hast given and bequeathed thy self to me. 8. Grant, sweet JESUS, that thy dolorous death and Passion be ever imprinted in my heart by true thank∣fulness and imitation thereof. Friday, Admiration. O My God, who art thou, who hast endured so many and cruell torments? sweet and dearest love hast thou forgotten thy Majesty and glory? 2. O light of heaven, and splen∣dour of thy Fathers glory, unto what art thou now reduced?
3. Alas, my Saviour, what art thou who art so despightfully treated? 4. O love of loves, that through the excess of thy love, thou wouldst for me endure so bitter a death. 5. O love how strong art thou, which with thy force surmounted'st him, that by no other means may be overcome. 9. O incomprehensible God, for whom dost thou suffer, but for mi∣serable sinners, ungratefull creatures, thy enemies, children of the divell, and those who contemn thee. 7. O dearest love; that my heart is not pierced with thy dolours. 8. What were it O Lord, if I had all the loves of the world to unite and offer unto thee? 9. My sweet JESUS, if I could reduce all thy drops of blood into teares of love, what were it compared unto thy love?
Saturday, Ioy. 1. MY heart and soule rejoyce and praise the mercies of my God who out of his infinit love hath died to give thee life. 2. O my delight, what joy will it give to my heart to receave that life, that infinit good, through the merits of thy most bitter and dolo∣rous passion. 3. Sweet JESUS, J praise thee with eternall joy for having in thy most cruell death so perfectly accom∣plished the work of our Redemp∣tion. 4. It was by thee, O beloved Cross, that peace hath been established between God an man. 5. O triumphant glory, and most puissant King who by thy most sa∣cred death, hast overcome the Prin∣ce of Hell, and delivered our soules out of his bondage.
6. O Heaven, Earth, sea, and all things therein; yeeld praises in our behalf unto the Saviour of our soules; and let us rejoyce in the me∣rits of his sacred passion. 7. If al my members were tongues, O how willingly would I employ them in the praise of thee my sweet Saviour, and thy health-bringing wounds. 8. O all yee celestiall spirits assist me to love and praise my God, by the vertue of whose Passion your ruins are repaired. 9. Sweet JESUS, what glory and comfort is it unto human nature to be exalted in thee, unto the right hand of thy Eternall father. Sunday, Love. 1. WHen shall it be, my crucified JESUS, that both the senses of my body, and powers of my sou∣le shall be wholly employed in thy praiss.
2. O my JESUS when by perfect love and imitation shall I be daily crucified, and continually dy with thee. 3. O my beloved JESUS, when shall I love thee in such sort, as that thy sacred wounds be by burning lo∣ve imprinted in my heart. 4. O my beloved JESUS, when wilt thou bring me into the wine cellar of thy blessed side and make me wholy drunke with the most sa∣cred wine, which, floweth from thy loving heart. 5. O when, shall it be, my dea∣rest JESU, that the flame of thy lo∣ve shall pierce and wound my heart, that I may be wholy conformable unto the. 6. Sweet JESUS let me love thee so unfainedly as that by force of thy love, I neither feel, see, not take comfort in any thing, but accom∣panying thee my afflicted Lord. 7. My sweetest Saviour, when shall
I have my full and wisht repose wi∣thin thy crucified armes. 8. O sacred wounds of my IESUS, especially of his tender side, and most amourous heart, why do you not burn and consume my soule in the delightfull flames of his love. An Oblation unto our B. Lady to say on any one of her Feasts 70. Ave Maries, and then every day 5. Av'es and these Prayers sollowing. 1. O B. Virgin Mary, and Eternall Queen of Angels, I offer my self unto you in all that I am, or ever shall be, beseeching you to re∣ceive me as your own. 2. O B. Virgin, Mary, preserve me living and dying from all evill, for I am your own. 3. O B. Virgin Mary, receive me for your own, ever govern, and protect me as your own and have mercy on my soule, when it shall part out of my body.
4. O mercifull Mother, through your holy departure, make joyfull my departure, and in the houre of my death, receive my soule. A Prayer to Jesus Christ. ANima Christi sanctifica me, Corpus Christi salva me, Sanguis Christi inebria me, Aqua lateris Christi lava me. Passio Christi conforta me, O bone JESƲ exaudi me, Intrà tua vulnera absconde me, Ne permittas me separari à te, Ab hoste maligno defende me, In hora mortis meae voca me, Et jube me venire ad te, Ʋt cum Sanctis tuis laudem Te In saecula saeculorum Amen. In English thus. SOule of Christ sanctify me, Body of Christ save me,
Blood of Christ inebriate me, Water of Christ's side wash me, Passion of Christ comfort me, O good JESU heare me, Within thy wounds hide me, Suffer me not to be separated from thee, From the malignant enemy defend me, In the houre of my death call me, And bid me come to thee, That with thy Saints I may praise thee For ever and ever, Amen. When you passe by the B. Sacrament. DƲlcissimum nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi, & gloriosae Virgi∣nis Mariae Matris ejus sit in aeternum be∣nedictum. In English. Let the B. Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and the glo∣rious
VIRGIN MARY, his MOTHER be blessed for ever and ever. And then offer your intention he∣rein to get the pardon which is granted. When you take Holy water. Aqua benedicta, sit nobis salus, pro∣tectio & vita. Asperges me Domine hissopo, &c. In English. May this holy water be to us health, protection and life. Thou shalt sprinkle me o Lord with hissope, &c. How we may honour the most holy and B. Name of the most glorious Virgin Mary, by sayng these 5. Verses with 5. Psalmes. 1. MAter amabilis Maria nomine, Multò nobilior quocun{que} lumine.
Muni me miserum in tuo nomine, Malignis obvians tuo juvamine. Magnificat. 2. Aurora rutilans lunáque pulchrior, Astris fulgentior, & luce clarior, Afflictum respice qui nimis crucior, Averte jaculum hostis quo ferior. Ad Dominum cum tribularer. 3. Regina nobilis, filia filii, Rosae consimilis & flori lilii, Refove flebiles lacte consilii, Ruentes per dies hujus exilii. Retribue servo tuo. 4. Iesse tu congruè vocata virgula Immarcessibilis & sine macula, JESƲ jam florido qui regit saecula, Ipsa tu suggere ut solvat vincula. In convertendo. 5. Ancilla Domini sumens tam nobilis. Ave, quod Gabriel dedit mirabilis, Accipe canticum servi inutilis,
Adsis in omnibus mihi placabilis. Ad te levavi. ℣. Dignare me laudare te Virgo sacrata. ℟. Da mihi virtutem contra hostes tuos. OREMUS. Concede nos famulos tuos, quaesu∣mus Domine Deus, perpetuâ B. Mariae Virginis intercessione, â prae∣senti liberari tristitia, & aeternâ per∣frui laetitiâ. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. The 5. Verses Englished. 1. O Amiable Mother ô Mary hail by name, More noble then the light of natur's frame, Defend me, by your meanes, which way so'ere J goe, And by your shelt'ring help, preserve me from my foe. 2,
Bright shining dawn, fairer then the moon, More sparkling then the starres, and brighter then the sun, Look on me, wretch afflicted, and tormented, so, As to put by those darts, my foes do at me thr'o. 3. O noble queen, and daughter to thy son, Like to the Rose and Flower-de-Luce at noone, Tis milk of your good counsel, must cherish us that weep, Tis you that from all banish't ruin's, must us keep. 4. You are the rod of Jesse fittly nam'd, You neyther wither, nor with spot are sham'd, Pray to our Jesus, who the world doe's rule That J from bonds of sin, may save my soule. 5. O handmaid of our Lord, who
took the noble haile From wond'rous Gabriel's mouth, the world's great baile Receive the sacred Cantick, your worthless servant sing's, And gratious be to me, sweet Mary in all things.
A DAYLY EXERCISE OF PRAYERS With weekly Meditations upon the Passion. IN THE MORNING. IN nomine Patris † &c. Pater: Ave: Credo: Confiteor: &c. I adore thee most blessed Trinity, & give thee thankes for all benefits bestowed upon me, especially, for my Vocation to this State, the use of Sacraments, & other Divine hel∣pes; & particularly, that thou hast preserveed me this night, wherein perhaps many have been summoned before thee, to give an account of
their lives; The living O God shall bless & glorify thee, as I will this day. O Eternall Father, to thee I offer up my self, with whatsoever I am able to doe; admit O Gracious Fa∣ther, these first fruites of my love, united with the merits of thy belo∣ved Sonne. O B. JESUS, I purpose through thy Grace, to walk the paths of thy H. Commandements, performing the duty of a good Christian by the practise of all Vertues, especially of N. Grant O Lord, that I may doe & suffer all things, according to thy Holy will. Come O Holy Ghost, direct, assist & comfort my distressed Soul, with thy Grace, that I may shun all Sin, especially N. I have hitherto greviously offended thee, but I will be more
watchfull over my wayes; Help me I beseech thee in this my spirituall warfare, for thou hast promised, that I shall walk amongst Serpents & Ba∣silisks, & trample over Lyons & Dragons. Help me also O Holy Angels & glorious Saints, thou especially O Sa∣cred Virgin Mother, with thy chast Espouse S. JOSEPH. Protect me O Angell Guardian, & Yee O Holy NN. my Patrons for this day; that I fall not into the snares of Satan. But thou O my God & my All, art my cheife hope; let the flames of thy Divine Love consume all evill affe∣ctions in me, that I may for ever love & obey thee. AN OBLATION. O B. JESUS, in union of thy N. I offer up all my thoughts, words & deeds, purposing to practise the
Vertue of N. & shun the Vice of N. beseeching thee, that all I doe or suffer, may be acceptable to thee, for NN. through the mediation of my glorious Patrons NN. Amen. BLess me O JESU, with thy Sa∣cred Virgin Mother † Bless me all yee Holy Saints & Angels, espe∣cially my Angell Guardian, & Ho∣ly Patrons NN. †. O Eternall God, Father, Son, & H. Ghost, bless † & keep me, now & for ever. Amen. IN THE EVENING. IN nomine Patris &c. O Most Blessed Trinity, I glo∣rify thee with all the Saints & An∣gels, for all favours, at all times bestowed upon me, especially this day. (make a survey of Gods favours to thee) Alas what thankes can I return to thee, for these, & all thy gracious benefits?
O God who hast observed all the motions of my heart, & all my words & actions, Enlighten me, that I may know wherein I have offended thee, & what is wanting to me, that I may bewayl my sins, & through thy Grace amend my life. (Examine thy conscience through all houres & duties of that day, towards God, thy Nei∣ghbour, & thy selfe; considering whe∣rein thou hast offended by thought, word or deed.) Lord be mercifull to me a sinner! Behold here my God, what sins I have rendred thee for thy gracious gifts; It greives me, that, I have offended thee; Pardon me O my God, through the Cross & Pas∣sion of thy dearest Son, the merits of the Sacred Virgin, & all Angels & Saints, especially NN. I purpose hereafter never more to offend thee, & to undergoe all Crosses for the satisfying my transgressions against thee, & purchasing Grace, for the amendement of my life.
AN OBLATION. O B. JESUS, I offer up to thee, thy N. as a propitiation for all my sins, especially of this day; Uniting therewith the merits of thy Sacred Mother, & all Angels & Saints, es∣pecially my Patrons NN. to whose protection I now & for ever com∣mend my self. Bless me O JESUS &c.
MEDITATIONS UPON THE PASSION. For every day of the week. SUNDAY. Washing of the Feet. CONS. Who washeth? God, thy Creatour, Redeemer & gi∣ver of all good things. 2. Whose feet he washeth? of ig∣noble persons, great sinners, & his own betrayer. 3. Why he washeth? to give exam∣ple of meekness, & teach us to clean∣se
our Soules, ere we approach his Altar. Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could love thee & all creatures, as I ought, & thou desirest! Resolve, To practise the Vertue of Charitie & shun the vice of Envie, in occasions best known to thy self. MUNDAY. Prayer in the garden. CONS: 1. How CHIST prayeth, kneeling, prostrate, & with in∣stancy: & thou how tepid. 2. What's his prayer? That his Chalice may passe, yet with resigna∣tion to obey his Fathers will: doe thou pray thus. 3. How he sweats, bloud, in
great drops, in great sorrows; wilt thou rely on thy own strength? Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could humble my self to Thee, & all creatu∣res for thee. Resolve, To practise Humilitie & shun Pride, &c. TUESDAY. Mocking before Herod. CONS: 1. How JESUS betrayed, apprehended, & manicled, is led to Annas, Caiphas, Pilate & Herod: Follow him in this sorrow∣full Pilgrimage. 2. How he is every where falsly accused, & yet is silent; be silent too, when injur'd. 3. How before Herod, he is cloa∣thed
& mocked as a Foole; if thou beest a Christian, imitate CHRIST'S self-denyall. Affect: Oh my JESU that I could con∣temne my own will for thy sake. Resolve, To practise Self denyall, & shun self-love, &c. WENDESDAY. VVhipping at the Pillar. CONS: How JESUS led back to Pilate, is there accused as a Blasphemer, Seducer & Traitor; Ba∣rabbas though a Murderer, is preferr'd before him, can'st thou repine, when vilified? 2. How that Innocent Body un∣cloathed, & bound to the Pilar, is whipt for thy sins: thou sin'st, & he suffers. 3. How barbarously those Soldiers
treat thy JESUS; Oh cruelty! this he suffers for thee: Bath thy heart in his saving bloud. Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could beare all Crosses, from all persons, for the love of Thee. Resolve, To practise Patience, & shun Anger, &c. THURSDAY. Crowning with Thorns. CONS: 1. JESUS thus bleeding, is crown'd with sharp Thorns; this Crown is instead of a Crown of Glory. 2. How they cloath him in scarlet, put a reed in his hand for a Scepter, & then kneeling deride Him. O my JESU thou art a King indeed; reign for ever in my heart.
3. How JESUS, thus adorned is led forth by Pilate, & shown to the Jewes, with, Behold à Man: O sad Spectacle! Yet still, they cry, Cru∣cify Him: Oh! the heavy weight of my sins. Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could obey Thee, even to loss of life. Resolve, To practise Obedience & shun Sloath, &c. FRYDAY. Carrying the Cross. CONS: 1. How JESUS thus derided, whipped & crowned, goes forth carrying the Cross, whereon he is to be sacrifized for thy Sins. 2. What shouts of joy the Jewes make after Him, through the streets of Je∣rusalem; thus is Innocency despised.
3. How the devout woemen meet & bewaile Him: thy hard heart sheds not one Teare amidst these his sorows, or for thy own sins. Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could abandon all sensuall satisfactions for the Love of Thee! Resolve, To practise Temperance, & shun Gluttony, &c. SATURDAY. Crucifying of Jesus. CONS: 1. How JESUS with much pain & shame, arrived to Mount Calvary, is again uncloath'd, & thus all his soares are renewed: My Sins not blotted out by Repentance, shall one day be disclosed to the whole World. 2. How they streach thy JESUS upon
the Cross, fastning him with nayles therunto, & then raise him up, where he hangs between two theeves: Oh what ignominy! 3. How He there hangs for the space of three houres, reviled by Jews & Gentiles, forsaken by his Disciples, drenched with gall & vineger, peirced to the heart with a speare, yet He prays for his Enemies: Enter, & make thy aboade in that love-wounded-Heart. Affect: Oh my JESU that I could imitate Thee in the purity of thy Life & Doctrine. Resolve, To practise Modesty & shun All contrary Therunto, &c.
A Method for Meditation. 1. PReparation hath 3. parts. Presence of God, Choyce of matter, and Invoca∣tion. 2. Meditation it self hath 3. parts. Consideration, Affection, and resolution. 3. Conclusion hath 3. parts. Tanks-Giving, Obla∣tion and Prayer.
A Prayer before Meditation. O my God, my Sovereign, my Creatour and my All; I here most humbly prostrate my self with the profoundest adoratiō J am possibly capable of, before your devine Ma∣jesty, earnestly imploring à continuan∣ce of your blessings upon me, your poor needy Creature, and that you would be pleased out of your infinite bounty, by meanes of your holy spi∣rite so to illuminate my understan∣ding, inflame my will, recollect from distractions and strengthen in good re∣solutions all the powers of my soule, as that J may worthily, attentively and devoutly performe this sublime exercise of mentall prayer J am now undertaking, to your honour and
glory, the comfort of my own di∣stressed soule, the joy of the Saints in heaven, and the edification of men on earth, thro' your mercyes, the me∣ritts of my Blessed Saviour, and the inspirations of your Coelestial Pa∣raclet Amen. A Prayer after Meditation. BEhold O my God, Behold, o my most patient and merciful Lord, how J have passed over this time of Meditation, and treating with thee; with how much negligence, sloth, coldnes, and distraction, and with how litle feeling of thy good mo∣tions within me: but thou O Lord knowest all my infirmities and Mise∣ries and therfore J crave of thee par∣don for them. J thank thee also most heartily and humbly, for all the good thoughts and suggestions, which ha∣ve
presented theselves to my mind, in time of this my meditation, as most holy Embassadours sent from thy hea∣venly Throne, to deale with me for the gaining of thy kingdome; whose blessed voices and most profitable spee∣ches, J beseech thy divine goodnes, to give me grace to imprint in my heart, and seeke to put in execution, in the course of my life to come: to the end that my judgment and Dam∣nation, be not the more grievous in respect of these thy Benefits, but ra∣ther that my life being mended therby, and my soul stirr'd up to more zeale of thy service, I may be finally made partaker with thy true Children, of that eternall bliss which thou hast prepared, for such as love, feare and serve thee and yeeld obedience to those holy inspirations which thou sen∣dest them for their eternal happiness, Amen.
A TABLE Of dayly Patrons, Meditations. Day. Patron. Meditations. Sund. H. Angels. washing feet. Mund. Apostles. Prayer in the Garden. Tuesd. Martyrs. Mocking. Wednesd. Bishops. VVhipping. Thursd. Doctors. Crowning, Frid. Confessors. Carrying the Cross. Saturd. Virgins. Crucifying.
Vertues, vices, and Intentions. Vertue. Vice. Intentions. Charity, Envie. For the H. church. Humility. Pride. For union of Christiā Princes Self denyall. Self love. For Benefactors Patience. Anger. For Religious orders. Obedience. Sloath. For conversiō of Infidells. Temperance. Gluttony. For soules de∣parted. Modestie. Impurity For distressed persons.
