P260 12368119 60472
PANEGYRICK On the Author of Absolom and Achitophel, occasioned by his former writing of an Elegy in praise of Oliver Cromwel, lately Reprinted. WHEN Old Philosophers wrote the Worlds Birth, And from wild Chaos brought great Nature forth; The self-same Atoms as they different ran, Club'd to a Lyon, Monky, Bear or Man: From such thin Sires such solid Off-springs grew, So Divine Wite, like the First Matter Thou: Thy subtle Sparks do such strange Products make, That Thou just nothing, yet all Forms canst take. So justly thou hast deserved thy long-worn Bays, That as a Trophy to thy Endless Praise, Let that great Poem its long Silence break; The worthyest of thy vast Creation speak. Methinks I fancy how bold Mu Dart Was levell'd at Porsenna's Royal Heart, And in defeated Rage I see him doom His erring Hand t'its flaming Martyrdom. Let his poor Deeds in dull Oblivion dye; Thy Vengeance with a surer Aim lets fly: In keen Iambicks 'gainst thy Sovereign Lord, Thy Pen was more Successful than his Sword. So vast a Pile thy lofty Numbers raise Those Babel-Builders to great MOLOCHS praise; A Pile which to thy Honour will surpass Even thy own Corah's Monumental Brass. Thou writest with so much Flame, Flame so refined, That Poetry's the Feaver of thy Mind: And Feaver-like in those bleak days of Yore, When Loyalty was Naked left and Poor, Thy Aguish Veins Chill'd at a Starving Door. But Burning high thy active Spirits run At prosperous Rebellions warmer Sun. When Phaeton misled the Day, and hurl'd His scatter'd Fires around the scorching World: How would his Glories in thy Meeter Chime, The Groans of Worlds thus softned into Rhime? Or when great Nero set his Rome on Fire, And Tuned its Ruine to his jocund Lyre; How with his Musick would thy Notes agree, A Song, great Bard, fit to be Set by Thee. Such VVonders have thy powerful Raptures shown▪ Pythagoras Transmigration thou'st out-done. His Souls of Heroes and great Chiefs Expired, Down into Birds and Noble Beasts retired. But thou to Savages and Monsters dire, Canst infuse sparks, even of Coelestial Fire:
Make Treason Glory, Murderers Heroes live; And even to REGICIDES canst GOD-HEADS give. Thus in thy Songs, the yet warm Bloody Dart, Fresh raking in a Martyr'd Monarchs Heart, Burnish't by Verse, and polisht by thy Lines, The Rubies in imperial Crowns out-shines, Whilst in Applause to that sad days Success, So Black a Theme in so Divine a Dress; Thy Soaring Flights Prometheus Thefts excell; Whil'st Thou Steal'st Fire from Heaven t'enlighten HELL. But stay, my Muse, here change thy gawdy strain, And shew a New, no less Prodigious Scene. That Lawrell'd Head, whose sweet Melodious Tongue, To Curse ye Meroz IO PAEAN Sung, A Bag-pipe Drone to the old Priestcraft Cant: Who once did Consecrated Daggers chant, And Englands great Ravilliac sung before; Now Tunes his Pipe to David's Righteous Lore. In Scaevolas Stump the Convert Pen he brings, And his Burnt Hand now writes the Praise of Kings. Thus Bold, thus Great, and all in the Extream, His Panegyricks are like Daniel's Dream; This Tribute now to David's Glory pay. A Head of Gold to his old Feet of Clay. No wonder then so Feelingly he tells Of Corahs, Shimeis and Achitophells. Such Characters he may well gild so fine, VVho 'has their Rich Ore from his own Native Mine. How vast an Orb has a Poetick Soul? Grasps all from East to West, and Pole to Pole. Its warbling Voice, Right, Wrong, Truth, Falshood Sings. Tuned to all States, Religions, Gods or Kings. Oh Wit how wide is thy Circumference? Where thy Attractive Center's Bread and Pence. Pence did I say! oh they have charming skill, To rowze the Gall of an Heroick Quill. Is there not mighty sound and mighty sence, In great Iscariots thirty chinking Pence! By this Lucina hast thou born with pain, The numerous Off-springs of thy teeming Brain: More various Issues in Nile's slimy Bed, Not thy own Patron Phaebus ever bred. Thy pregnant Heats, like Israels wanton Lust, First mould thy Golden Calves, then pound e'm into Dust. Write on, and more then Winds or Frenzy Range, Keep still thy old Prerogative to Change. 'Tis poor Humanity that's kept in bound, Whilst power unlimited is God-like found: Then thy Great self, thou wondrous Poet show: Honour and Principles disdain; for know Thy Mercurye's too proud to fix so low. All Laws and Bounds let thy wild Muse despise, And raign the Prince oth'Air, in which it flyes. London, Printed for Charles Leigh. 1681.
