p2694 09146203 42520
A POEM On the EFFIGIES of Sir EDMUND-BURY GODFREY, UUho was Barbarously Murthered. LICENSED, November the 20th. 1678. A Lasting MONUMENT Erected To the Memory of Sr Edmond Berry Godfrey one of his Majesties justices of the Peace. portrait of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey NOr shall Antiquity out-brave our Zeal To Generous Patriots of the Publick Weal. Tho They with Massie Statues might contrive, And Lasting Brass, to keep the Fame alive Of well-deserving Hero's;—This mean Plate, Which to a Greater Worth we Dedicate, Shall all their Glorious Monuments out-date, And last till Bankrupt-Time's swallow'd by Fate. Let no bold Eye approach this Reverend Shade, Till first a Tribute of Just Tears be paid (The dear Resemblance of that Noble Knight,) Who by Romes Restless Rage, and Barbarous Spight, Did lately Fall, (Ah, Treacherous Surprize!) Religion's Martyr, the State's Sacrifice! Godfrey! A Name, that shall Embellish Story, The Shame of Popery; But lasting Glory Of Loyal Protestants: He that to save Three Kingdomes, met with an Untimely Grave. View here his Serious Look, and you may find All the Fair Marks of a Judicious Mind; A Solid Goodness, Temperate, and Grave; Mixt with a Modest Sweetness, and yet Brave. But, what is This?—Alas! The Graver's Art Pretends not to Express his Better Part: Could we have Limn'd his Soul, then you had seen All the Rich Gifts and Graces shine within, In Native Lustre; such as might Inspire Next Age thought to Despair of, yet Admire! But Best Men Here are not Most Fortunate, Where Greatest Vertue attracts Greatest Hate, And Just Rewards attend a Future State. Whil'st to Preserve his Sovereigne's Lise, h' had shown His Zealous Care, basely he Lost his Own. See how the Villains first Trepan him in! Hypocrisie cloaks the most Horrid Sin! But soon as in their Clutches he was got, Those Blood-Hounds Murther him upon the Spot: With Barbarous Hands, they Stop his Generous Breath; And that they might be sure t' Effect his Death, Strangle him too: Whence closely they convey, And in a Ditch the Slaughter'd Body lay, Transfixt with his Own Sword: Ah, Barbarous Crew! That thought to Stabb his Reputation too: But that's beyond their Reach, and shall survive As long as one Good Protestant's Alive. The Cursed Fact is now Expos'd; and All Good Men for Vengeance on the Actors, Call. See, what a Loyal Crowd attends to pay Their last Respects unto his Martyr'd Clay. His Mourner's, the whole Nation ought to be; Whose Fate revers'd a General Tragedy: For, had their Malice not on him been shown, Their Hellish Plot had not so well been known; By Godfrey's Death, each Good Man scap't his own. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cross, in Little-Brittain, 1678.
