p339A 12589045 63817
A Parallel of TIMES: Or a Memento to the WHIGGS. O horrible murder But lo a Charg is drane a day is set The silent lamb is brught, the wolves are met; And where's the Slaughte-house? Whitehall must be, Latlely his Palace, now his Calvarie And now ye Senators i this the thing. So oft declar'd is this our glorious King? Religion vails her self d mourns that she Is forc'd to own such Horrid Villanie. WHat dare not England's Monsters had they pow'r? What did they not, when with a Sanguine Showr The Nations were bedued? The Dog-stars heat Had put Three Kingdoms in a Bloody Sweat. Then was the Time when Murder knew no bound, Death and Destruction every where were found. Fate's boding Omens still presaging Grief, Widdows and Orphans crys had no relief: The Hell-inspired Hounds had scented Blood, And could not be by force of Law withstood. No Sacred Ties had aw enough to bind Those whom Religions ruine were design'd, By Hells dire darkness who with them had joyn'd, If possible t'unhinge the mighty Frame Of Brittain's Empire, and eclipse the name Of her Great Monarch whom the Trump of fame Renders Immortal here; whilst he above Triumphs in Glory and his Makers Love. Law and Religion were pretences made To mount the Rebels, till they both betray'd, And in their Soveraigns Wounds them bleeding laid. No less than Royal Blood must seal their crimes, Murders were sports in those dire dismal times, Infamous Canters who ne're utter'd sence, With England's great affairs durst then dispence: And judge of those who had the Care of Souls, The Reverend Clergy, each vile wretch controuls. Reason was stager'd, Learning tumbled down, When the back'd Rable once had brav'd the Crown. When the black Tribe had Treason made no sin, And let destruction like a deluge in, By pulling up the Sluces of the State, Which the long bellowing Surges did rebate; And all into disorder'd ruine set, Whilst they in troubled Waters cast their Net: Fishers of Men in one sence term'd they are, Who did Mens Lives and Fortunes both insnare. Then England groan'd in see her Breast so red, With Blood of her dea dying Children shed, By Murthering Villains that her face o're-spread. 'Judgement was turn'd to Wormwood in that day, 'Nor Truth nor Justice challeng'd any sway: 'Twas the devouring Sword they made their Law, Which Gold or Blood from Loyalist must draw. The Children Banish'd, and the Father Slain Did not suffice: Their rage to all his Train Of Nobles did the Monsters soon extend, As if with him Nobility must end; 'Twas Treason then to be their Soveraigns Friend. The basest of all Man-ind mounted high By this mad Rout, fill all with Tyrany: In every place Death and Oppression raves, All were enslaved to the worst of Slaves: Unless those mighty Souls who scorn'd to be Connivers at his horrid Villany; But with a brave disdein contemn'd his rage, To Heaven ascending from the Crimson Stage, To meet their Royal Master in that bliss, Which has no end but endless happiness. But thanks kind Heave the Storm at length gave way, The gloomy Clouds gave back, long absent Day Rose glorious to refre our drooping Isle, And made the mournful Nation once more smile. The best of Kings did avour to that earth, Render'd thrice happy by his Reign and Birth: Before whose Face the conscious Rebels fly, Not daring to behold that Majesty In whom Afronts might justly kindle Ire, Fierce as a Whirlwind or devouring Fire, To overwhelm or drive them from that Earth, Which is polluted only by their birth: But see Heavens Pattern—All that's good and great, A King whose Mercy stays the wheel of Fate; He pities those that thirsted for his Blood, And will not add to the too Crimson Flood. But what avails Royal trancendent Grace Where black Ingratitude has fix'd her place? Unless to warm the Monsters, till they grow Impious as that dire Snake found in the Snow; For they no sooner found deaths terror past, But from their holes without a blush they hast: And Croak aloud, their practices renew, Rant at their Rulers, and would Rule them too. The many-headed Monster they revive, And it, like Jehu, furiously they drive: Once more a madding, no ways left untri'd To find a Saddle Monarchy to Ride. How with Petitions, how with Juries pack'd, Have they the Bosoms of the people Sack'd, To know the strength of Faction, how it grows? What Loyalist was safe, when they suppos'd The giddy multitude had with them clos'd? To such stupendious Insolency grown, Their black mouths spar'd not to asperse the Throne. At Regal Power they did presume to strike, And durst a Damn'd Association like. What Shoals of Evidence like Locust swarm'd, With Stings as sharp as Fellest Scorpions Arm'd, Who must Infallible be deem'd, till they The dire Dark Mischief of the Whiggs bewray? But then the Scene is chang'd; none must believe They can speak Truth: And then the busy Sheriff Must us with Ignoramus undeceive. These and a Thousand more their projects are, Who would our Lives and Fortunes once more share; And where their Will their Pow r they'd no Man spare. Then let the Royal Martyrs Fall remain Fresh in our minds, the Shambles of the slain Who guiltless fell; yet let's forgive that score, Pardon what's past; But never Trust them more. FINIS. LONDON: Printed, by J. Grantham, in the Year, MDCLXXXIII.
