p341 12589116 63820
A PARAPHRASE ON THE Clergies Address TO THE KING, upon Occasion of His Order in Council for Reading His late Declaration For Liberty of Conscience In all CHURCHES. With allowance. The Text. The Paraphrase. We are not averse to the Publishing of the De∣claration, for want of due Tender∣ness towards Dissenters, with rela∣tion to whom we shall be willing to come to such a Temper as shall be thought fit, when the matter comes to be considered, and setled in Par∣liament and Convocation. But the Declaration being found∣ed upon such a Dispencing Power, as may at pleasure set aside all Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, ap∣pears to us Illegal, and did so to the Parliament in 1672. And it is a Point of such great Consequence, that we cannot make our selves Par∣ties to it, so far as the reading of it in the Church in the time of Divine Service will amount to. We, who without any Bowels of tenderness, have hitherto exercised many in∣human Cruelties upon Dissenters, observing the favorable regard that the Government has now to∣ward them, do promise, that We will hereafter come to such a Tem∣per in those Matters, as shall be setled by our Selves in Convocati∣on, and by a Parliament of our own Party. But tho we suppose the King's Declaration for Liberty of Consci∣ence to be founded upon that Ar∣bitrary Power which we have vi∣gorously endeavored to advance a∣bove all Law, when it could be strained to the Oppression of Dis∣senters, and to the Establishment of our Greatness; yet finding it to be now Calculated, for a more Equal and Impartial end, and destitute of those private Considera∣tions which have formerly animated Us, We are desirous in this Conjuncture (as We were formerly, in the Year 1672) that those Laws for Persecution, by which our Ecclesiastical Empire has been maintained should retain their Force, and do by no means think fit to countenance the dispencing with them, upon that single Motive of General Good which the Declaration carries along with it. Printed for R. C. and H. L. 1688.
