R1385 11790817 49194
CHOICE OBSERVATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS Upon the Old Testament. Containing in them many remarkable matters, either not taken notice of, or mistaken by most, which are Additionals to the large ANNOTATIONS made by some of the Assembly of DIVINES. To which are added some further and larger OBSERVATIONS Of his upon the whole BOOK of GENESIS Perused and Attested by the Reverend BISHOP of ARMAGH, And Mr. GATAKER Pastor of REDERITH. By the Learned and Industrious JOHN RICHARDSON, Bishop of Ardagh in Ireland, one who had a considerable hand in the fore∣named large ANNOTATIONS. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Beare in the Gold∣smiths-Row in Cheapside. Anno Dom. 1655.
Reader, THou art seriously to consider, that the Reverend Au∣THOUR did not cite Scriptures by number, but weight: He did not jumble Scriptures together fortuitously, (as too many do, as Democritus did his atomes) but judiciously selected out those which were most apposite. And surely, no∣thing is more helpful to the right understanding of Scri∣pture, then comparing it with it selfe: do not therefore sleight∣ly passe over his Scriptures, as if they were of no moment, but diligently peruse them, and let it not be grievous to turne to the places cited, for the marrow of this Book consists in the Authours dexterous paralleling of Scriptures to∣gether, Farewell.
To my REVEREND and LEARNED Brother, Doctor Richardson BP. OF ARDAGH IN IRELAND Right Reverend and Worthy Brother, YOu know that out of that intimacy which hath ever been betwixt us from our youths, I can∣not be unacquainted with the course of your studies. And you being now entred upon the last Scene of your life, as well as I, thereupon I would willingly become a Perswader of you, not to let your Labours be lost, and die with you; but to publish some or most of them to the view of the World, for the benefit of the Church. The last thing I viewed of yours were your An∣notations upon GENESIS, having before perused your other Explanations and Observations upon the Old Testa∣ment, though sleight and suddenly done, as you say, yet think them not unworthy of the Presse. For I finde therein divers things of moment, which I meet not withal in others. And to prevail with you herein, let this finde some place, That it is the judgment and desire of Your endeared Friend and Brother, JAMES ARMAGH.
The EPISTLE Dedicatory, to the REVEREND BISHOP of ARMAGH. Most Reverend, and my very good Lord, YOur word shall be my warrant, and your desire my duty, to publish my Annotations upon GENESIS, together also with my Explanations and Observations upon the Old Testament, yet I would be loth your Lordship should beare any share of the blame, or harsh censure that may hap to passe upon them, Coming abroad, I know not to whom I may rather dedicate them, then to him who is the cause that they see the light. And the inscri∣bing of whose name, will bring lustre and credit to the Work it self, however otherways but too weak and unworthy. To speak much in this kinde of your selfe to your selfe, suits not so well, with that hu∣mility and modesty which befitteth us both. And in so doing I should but light a candle before the Sunne. Yet you will give me leave to enjoy, and make this expression of mine own comforts, which I have still derived from all those endearments, wherewith you have vouchsafed to oblige and honour me, even from our young∣er years, in our joynt Educations and first Employments, until now that we both are ready to leave the stage of this life. My thank∣fulnesse for your favours may haply receive some piece of emprove∣ment hereby. And my Prayers shall still be continued, for the Pro∣longation of your dayes, to the further good and glory of the Church of God. This tribute you may duly and daily expect from Your obedient Servant, Suffragane, and Loving Brother, JOHN ARDAGH.
Mr. GATAKER'S EPISTLE to the Bishop of Armagh, wherein is his Attestation upon the Reverend BISHOP RICHARDSONS Observations and Ex∣planations upon the OLD TESTAMENT. Right Reverend, I Acknowledge my self, besides many other fore-passed real fruits  fa∣vour, much beholden to your Lordship, for your late kinde  and the addition unto it, in imparting unto me those learned and  Ob∣servations of that Worthy Bishop, whose eminent parts I had formerly ta∣ken notice of, and upon occasion given testimony of to others, in his Anno∣tations on a great part of the Prophets, whereunto he herein sometime re∣ferreth himself. Now albeit when your Lordship left them with me, you were pleased to af∣ford me a longer space of time for the perusal of them, which I was willing to accept, not knowing what leisure I should have for them in regard of some present distractions; yet I could not forbear to lay hold on all opportunities, to enjoy the view of them; which I much thirsted after: which upon serious survey I found to be answerable to my pre-conceived expe∣ctation of them, and well-worthy their Authour, containing in them many remarkable matters, either not commonly taken notice of, or mistaken by the most. In the Computation of times, your Lordship well knoweth, and much better then my self, that there are divers difficult points much disputed and debated among the grand Masters of that part of learning, in which being not so exactly versed in such Accounts, I dare not take upon me to determine ought. I have drawn up here a short note of some things of no great moment, which meeting with, I stick at, or have doubt of, that it may appear to your Lordship, that I have not slighted or laid it by me, but have advisedly run it over: which having dispatched, I was the rather willing to return it to your Lordship by the hands of my sonne Tayler, who was willing to take thereby occasion to wait upon your Lordship, to present you with a sorry fruit of my fruitlesse labours, which I shall intreat your Lordship to accept, and to look on with a favourable eye. This short list of my work and undigested thoughts, your Lordship may be pleased, if you shall think good, and deem them worthy of his consideration, to impart unto the Venerable Bishop, with recommendation of my due respects, and sincere affection to him, whom I should be right glad to be better acquainted withal, together with my humble request to him, that he will par∣don my boldnesse, and bear with my weaknesse, which in these scriblings I doubt I have too much discovered. So with sincere acknowledgement of your Lordships manifold favours, and my deep engagements; in lieu whereof I have nothing of worth to return, but thanks to you, and prayers unto the Lord in whose work you labour, for his gracious and powerful support of you therein, I take leave, craving liberty to subscribe my self Your Lordships weak and unworthy, but sincere well-wisher, much obliged in him, THO. GATAKER. Roderith, June 1652.
TO THE Reader. THE first draught of these Observations was ready for the Presse before the Great Annotations upon the Bible, printed in Anno 1651. did come forth. Afterwards perusing them, I found some differences between those Annotations, and these Observations; which did minister some occasion of enlarging my first draught; chiefly by noting and insisting upon these differences: yet rarely naming the said Annotations; but leaving rather the full animadverting, comparing and judging of them, to the judici∣ous Reader. Thereafter I committed these to the Presse. And after a good progress had been made by it, for some reasons, not so fit to trouble thee withal, I was again indu∣ced, and over-ruled, to enlarge my self yet much more; and to descend to very many Particulars, by way of Exposition and Explanation in some of the ensuing Books of Scripture, much beyond what was my first Proposal and Intendment. Which thing, I conceive, will dim the light and lustre of those choice places and Observations, which primarily were my only aime. Yet, I hope, to the Candid Reader, These larger additi∣ons will not seem altogether impertinent, or improfitable; as to the speedier under∣standing of Gods Holy Word. Neverthelesse I never undertook or intended to meddle with, or mention all the difficult places of Sacred Scripture. For them, in general, I refer thee to the said Great Annotations, as the best extant in that kinde. Neither do I here touch upon the New Testament, save only when, and where, the Text or the Old Testament doth crave for the quotation of it. In this Collection of Observations and Explanations, I follow the Order of the Books and Chapters of the Bible. And I heartily wish, that the holy Text were alwayes before their eyes, who shall vouchsafe to read them; without which the life of them, or of many of them will be lost. And the numerous quotations therein used will really appear, specially to Divines, to be of good concernment to them, and who shall have occasion to use them, and will take the paines to turne unto them. Be pleased not to think that I am too curious, or thy self can be too ambitious, of knowing any truth revealed in the Scri∣ptures. Thou canst not search them too much, nor can the Word of God dwell too richly and plentifully in thee. Indeed the substantial and essential matters therein, must first be known and cared for. Yet these may help to bring divers remarkable Places and Passages of Scripture into more common knowledge, and familiar notion, then I suppose yet they are. Such as they are, yet now at the last, though the Presse much retarded them, if they may any wayes make for thy spiritual use and profit, that same is the earnest desire of Thy Servant in Christ J. A.
A TABLE Of such things as are occasionally discoursed of in this Book; But for the maine things, the whole Book is a TABLE to it selfe. For the larger ANNOTATIONS upon GENESIS, the INDEX referres you to the Chapter and Verse. A. THe Ark, its mansions. pag. 76, 77 B Baal and Baalim. p. 62, 63 Of Bethel. Gen. 28. 19. Branch taken for the Messias. 423 C Covenant, how it is new under the Gospel. 424 To be cut off, to what sins threatned, and what it is, Gen. ch. 17. 14. 21 D Day, when it begins. p. 1. Gen. 1. 5. Christs Descent into hell, in what sense it is to be taken. 181 E Egypt. 5 Ephod. 81 Places of Esay cited in the New Testament. 352 Evening, diversly taken. 12 For ever, a phrase diversly taken. 40 F Solomons foole, who. 298 The foure hundred years of Israels bondage, how accounted. 15, 13 H God how he hardens, without being the Authour of sin. 359 High places. 90, 91 Hyperbolies much used in Scripture. 52 I. Jacob marries Leah at or before the beginning of the fourteen years service. 8 Of Jerusalem. 50, 51 Of imprecations. 195 Isreal, how foure hundred years strangers, and where 5 Israels number when they came into Egypt. 9 K Kings of Israel and Judah, their names, reignes, &c. 100. to 104 M Hebrew-measures. 6, 14 Melchizedech, who he was. Gen. 14. 18. 254, 255 Ministers among the Jewes, what a liberal main∣tenance they had. 32 N Of Names. 3 O Of Oathes. 138 Of the Oath with the Gibeonites. 50 Oathes are to be kept. 435 P Passeover, whether Christ kept it on the day with the Jewes. Passeover, when kept by Christ, when by the Jews, and how the difference of their dayes Gen. 1. 5.
Of Prophets. 80, 81 Psalmes, their division. 172. the musick mention∣ed in them. 173 Psalmes, cited in the New Testament, 175, 176 R Red sea, why so called. 11 Repentance, how a scribed to God. 422 S Scribes. 129, 130 Seven yeares Jacob served for Lea, and seven for Rachel, when and how, Gen. 29. 20. Shkel. 16 Shihor. 115 Of Christs sitting at his Fathers right hand. 251 The Sluggard, how described in the Book of the Proverbs. 274, 275 Sun, how it returned ten degrees. 389 Of swearing and forswearing. 434, 435 Gen. 24. 3. Swearing, a duty. 434 T Temple described. 92, to 96 Tempting▪ how ascribed to God, how to men ch. 22. 1. Of tithes among the Jewes. 31, 32 V About various readings in Scripture. 106, 107 Of vowes, Gen. 28. 20. Y Yeare, when begins. 11, 12
ANNOTATIONS ON Genesis. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. IN the beginning,] Of the Crea∣tion which God created, Mark 13. 19. and so in the beginning of the world then not eternal, nor the matter of it, but God only eternal. And this beginning most pro∣bably was at the Autumnal, Equinoctial, or Spring, and that for the Ecclesiastical accompt only▪ upon, and because of Gods mraculous bring∣ing them out of Egypt at that season of the year, from whence Gods people constantly began their year, till the change made to the vernal Equinoctial. God] Elohim in the plural number, intimating a plu∣rality, not of Gods, Exod. 12. 2. 23. 11, 16. 34. 22. Lev. 25. 9, 10. Deut. 16. 13, &c. but therefore of per∣sons in the Deity. The word Creators, Eccles. 12. 1. hath a singular number, viz. El. Gen. 14. 8. and Eloah, Job. 12. 4. And it signifies Strong, Almighties, powers. Some∣times it is used, but improperly, to signifie false gods, Exod. 20. 3. Angels, and Magistrates among men, Ps. 8. 5. 82. 1, 6. created] Bara. This word is proper to God, and a word in the singular number: importing the singular unity of the Deity. And that God had no Assistants, Co-adjutors, or subordinate Agents and Instruments in the work of Creation. But the Angels themselves are his Creatures, Col. 1. 16. A God, and He the Creator of the World; are acknowledged in a manner by all Heathen Writers, if not by all men. the heaven] Or heavens, and the earth,] Heaven and Earth here may be taken as a summary proposition of the whole Creation; as, ch. 2. 1. and, Exod 20, 11. And the rather considering the Hebrew Articles here used, ETH, and HA, as pointing to these now in being. And yet as probably and more, of the common Chaos, and Masse, and Stock of both, as seeming to be included within the work of the first day: and so it will seem to have the best coherence, with the words next following, and the story ensuing of the Creation of the Heavens and Earth, the second and third day. light day] Strictly and usually so taken; otherwise called an Artificiall day, consisting of about twelve houres, John 119 As the natural day consists of 24. houres. Both there are mentioned, ch. 7. 12, 17. V. 5. And the evening, &c.] The Evening, which is the beginning of the Night; and the Morning, which is the beginning of the Day, are called the first day; largely taken, the Day natural of 24 houres. And here observe, that as Darknesse was before Light, v 2, 3. so the Even∣ing and Night is made, and reckoned the beginning, and first part of the natural day, or large day of 24. houres. And accordingly the large Day is called an Evening Morning, Dan. 8. 14, 26. And by Paul, , a Night-Day, 2 Cor. 11. 25. And as Moses doth here, so God commanded it, and the Jewes observed it, to reckon the beginning of their large Day at the Evening, Lev. 23. 32. From evening to evening you shall celebrate your Sabbath. And so for eating unleavened bread at the Passeover. Exod. 12 18, In the first moneth, on the fourteenth day of the moneth at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread untill the twenty one day of the moneth at even. And ye we finde in the dayes of our Saviour, the reckoning altered, that they began their natural and large Day in the Morning, as appeares in the Evangelists, re∣cording the History of our Saviours Resurrection, Mat. 28. 1. Mar. 16. 1, 2, 9. & ch. 15. 42. Luke 24. 1 Joh. 20. 1, 19. Which alteration might haply be occasioned by the accompt of the Romans, and complyance with them, who then had the sovereignty and dominion over them. Now these two things well observed, may haply serve to assoyle a doubt, and clear a difficulty. The case is this; Our Saviour did eat the Passeover twenty foure houres be∣fore the Jewes did eat it. And this is clear out of the Go∣spels, Matth. 26. 17, 18, 19, 20, 47. Mark 15. 42. Luke 23. 54. Joh 18. 28. and 9. 14, 31, 42. That our Saviour did not anticipate the day by reason of his future Passion; But kept the right day appointed in the Law, we are not to doubt of it; Considering the strictnesse of the Command for the day, Exod. 13. 10. And Christs com∣ing
to fulfil all righteousnesse, to keep the Law both Moral and Levitical. And that he did so in this point and parti∣cular, appears also, Matth. 26. 17. Marke 14. 12. Neither do those words in Joh. 13. 1, 2. disagree from it; The words there mentioned, before the feast of the Passeover, ap∣pearing to be understood of two dayes before the Passeover, Mat 26. 2. And being spoken on the Mount of Olives, Mat. 24. 3. And the Supper there mentioned, being to be under∣stood of the Supper in the night of the Passeover, which was kept in Jerusalem, Mat. 26. 17. And those loavs of bread in the Gospel, Matth. 16. 9, 10. could make and multiply the wa∣ters of the Deluge, to rise to such an height; and that as little by miracle, as the other way must needs imply. Now the right day was the fourteenth day of the first moneth, Abib, or Nisan, in the evening, or betweene the two evenings, Exod. 12. 6. i. e. betweene the two extremi∣ties of the evening-tide, whereof the former belonged to the end of the declining day the ending, which was the thirteenth day, (not the fourteenth, as in the late learned and large Annotations on Matth. 26. 17) the latter be∣longed to the beginning of the night, when the day follow∣ing is said to begin, Gen. 1. 5. which was the fourteenth day, at the beginning and evening whereof the Passeover was to be eaten, as appears, verse 18. Now how it came to passe, that the Jews kept the wrong day, and why so, is the question and difficulty remaining. Some speak of a Jewish Tradition; That after the returne from the Babylenian captivity, They ordered and altered the time so, as the day of eating the Passeover might not fall on the Munday, Wednesday, or Friday; but then they put it off to the day following. The truth of this Tradition I am ignorant of: much more, of any reason why they should dare to have such a Tradition and Order. But finding in the Gospels, The Accompt for the Beginning of the natural & large day of twenty four hours altered from the Evening to the Morning, as was formerly observed; I rather conceive that both our Saviour, and the Jewes may be said to eat the Passeover on the same day, viz. both on the Friday, and at the evening too; so it be understood according to their own several mindes and meanings, reckonings and ac∣countings: Our Saviour rightly beginning and ending the day, from evening to evening, and the Jews erroneously, from morning to morning. The issue so, wil be this; That on the thirteenth day, consisting of twelve hours, from morn∣ing to evening, called an artificial day, the Disciples prepa∣red the Passeover for our Saviour; which is therefore cal∣led the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, Matth. 26. 17, 18, 19. And when the ven was come, which was the true Beginning of the fourteenth day, Jesus sate down with the twelve to eate the Passeover, Matth. 26. 20. according to the Law; The Morning after, and so on till the Even∣ing, making an artificial day, which indeed was the true la∣ter part of the fourteenth natural day, our Saviour was ex∣amined, condemned, and at last suffered. And that time is called the Jewes Preparation, Luke 23. 54. John 19 31, 42. the Preparation of their Passeover, John 19. 14. the Prepa∣ration before the Sabbath, Marke 15. 42. And the Even∣ing following, which was the later part of their fourteenth day in their account, they did eat their Passeover. And the day following, which was the Sabbath, is called the day af∣ter the Preparation, Matth. 27. 62. And whereas, to coun∣tenance that pretended Jewish Tradition, for putting off the eating of the Paschal Lamb from the Friday, to the Sa∣turday, which was their Sabbath-day, those words of John are alledged, for that Sabbath was an high day, John 19. 31. I answer, That it is called an high day, because it was the Sabbath that fell within the compasse of that high and so∣lemne Feast. But all this I propound and submit to the judgement of the learned. And again, This Observation of the true Beginning of the day at the Evening; Together with the Alteration of it from the Evening to the Morning in the dayes of our Sa∣viour, may help to quiet that controversie which of late, hath troubled too many, about the Beginning and Ending of the Christian Sabbath, or Lords day rather. For, if we will begin it as the Jewes began their Sabbath, by Gods own appointment; and as the Beginning of the natural day of twenty four hours was reckoned from the Creation, Then sure we must begin it at the Evening. But if we will begin it, according to that alledged Alteration we finde in our Sa∣viours time, Then we must Begin it in the Morning, which later is favoured the more by our Saviours Resurrection ve∣ry early in the morning, Matth. 28. 1, 6. Marke 16. 2, 6. Luke 24. 1, 6. John 20. 1. To the memory and honour of whose Resurrection as the day of Rest was changed, so it accords well, and suitably seems to require the same change for the beginning of that day; agreeing therin with the afore∣said Alteration. However, the Point Material is, That it must comprehend twenty four hours. V. 6. Firmament] By Firmament here generaly by all is understood whatsoever is to be seene in that vast space a∣bove the earth, from the surface of it, to the uppermost vi∣sible Orbs: As conceiving, and that justly, That the Aire, or lowest region of it, betwixt the Earth and the Clouds, were alone too smal a thing for the whole work of the second day. In the midst of the waters, and let it divide the wa∣ters from the waters: the waters which are under the firma∣ment, from the waters which are above the firmament;] Di∣vers ancient and learned Fathers have conceived hereupon, and upon the words of the Psalme 148. 4. That a great, or the greatest part of those waters that covered the face of the , verse 2. were lifted up and spread as an Orbe of wa∣ters above, and about the highest part of the starry heavens, and so there remaine. And from those windowes of heaven opened some would fetch the greatest part of those waters in the Deluge, that covered all the high hills that were un∣der the whole heaven fifteene cubits upwards. Yet all this seemes too weak a foundation whereon to build that Orbe of supercelestial waters. For plaine it is, that the lowest re∣gion of the aire is called heaven, and the firmament of hea∣ven, even that wherein the winds, clouds, and fowles do flie, verse 20. Jer. 51. 16. Dan. 7. 2, 13. And indeed as e∣very part of the water is truly called water, so every part of the heaven, and firmament may be, and is called heaven, as well as the whole, or the highest parts of it the starry hea∣ven, and the third heaven, chap 1. verse 14, 15, 16, 17. Gen. 22. 17. 2. Cor. 12. 2. And if such a division were meant, as they pretend to, where then would be the division betweene the waters of the seas, and the watery clouds; without which division, and the use of it, the earth could not bring forth sustenance for Man, or Beast? And as for the windowes of heaven, they are understood of the region of the aire, as Psal. 78. 23. Mal. 3. 10. And the same God who rained down fire and brimstone on Sodm, and made or multiplyed the widowes oyle, 2, Kings 4. 2. V. 8. the firmament heaven] All above us so called. And the Angels this day most likely were created: considering the words of the Lord, Job 38. 4, 5, 6, 7. that all the sonnes of God shouted for joy, when he laid the foundations of the earth. Though Moses mentions not their creation, as puposely intending to relate only the creation of things corporal and visible; and that haply a having regard there∣in
to the rudiments and weaknesse of that Infant-Church of the Jewes, to whom immediately he wrote this History. second day] Without that approbation, And God saw that it was good, which yet is doubled, on the third day: (haply because the separation of the waters begun this day, was not perfected till the third day) And it is once repeated on each of the other four dayes with the addition of very good, in the end of all. V. 20. and fowle] Out of the waters, and the ground also, chap. 2. 19 V. 26. Let us] Intimates a Plurality of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence. And so pluraly, chap. 3. 22. 11. 7. Esay 6. 8. V. 27. created he them] Both this day, chap. 5. 2. though the maner of her creation, be more fully related, chap. 2. v. 18, to 23. V. 29. to you it shall be for meat] Living things are not here mentioned for meat▪ till after the flood, anno mundi, 1657. and no more are corne, bread, drink, and other things named, which yet no doubt were in use before the flood, Cain being a tiller of the ground; And el being a keep∣er of sheep, was not likely to leave their flesh to be devour∣ed of wilde beasts, or to rot, either above, or under ground: And mans body being in a dying condition since the Fall, stood in more need of nourishing meats, then whiles he a∣bode in Innocencie. Neither were the herbs, trees, ground after the Curse, of that vertue and vigour for his nourish∣ment and sustenance, as formely. It is nothing likely then that man should want so needful a nourishment as flesh or fish for so long a time, so many ages of the world; because they were not haply so necessary for him in the time of In∣nocency; or not expressed by name for food at the time of his Creation. But after the Fall, being killed for cloathing; and offered in sacrifices to God, even by Abel himself; It is not to be imagined but that they did eate of the flesh of them, as in sacrifices was ever usual. And therefore also, for those ends and uses the distinction of them, into cleane and un∣cleane, was made, even before the flood; And seven of the Cleane reserved, for sacrifice, and food, whereas two sufficed, as in the Uncleane, for preservation of Seed, Gen. 7. 2. And the words of our Saviour noting the old world for their eat∣ing and drinking before the flood came on, Matth. 24. 38. implies rather an abuse in the excesse, then an abstinence from the use of flesh and other delicacies. V. 30. Every green herb for meat] But after the Fall of man, beasts, and birds of prey, and fishes eate and devour one another. CHAP. II. Ver. 3. BEcause that in it] This being alledged as the Reason of the Sabbath, Exod. 20. 11. 31. 17. shews it to be here instituted before the Fall And then no doubt but Gods people had more need or the same Ordi∣nance and Help in Religion ever since the Fall. And the Rulers Narrative to Moses speech or question Exod. 16. 22, 23. seems to me to imply the keeping of the Sabbath by the Jewes before the giving of Manna in the Wildernesse, Exod. 16. 5. not appearing to be made known to the people till after the Rulers relation of sin; And Gods direction to Moses▪ And apparently it was kept before the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. V. 4. the Lord God] Here first the word Jehova is used. And after often in this Chapter, Gen. 15. 7. 22. 14. 26. 24. 27. 20. 28. 13. and in many places more. And there∣fore, Exod. 6. 3. But by my Name Jehova was I not known to them, is spoken comparatively; not known so fully, in making good my promises by answerable effects, as now I will be, in my bringing of them out of Egypt, notwith∣standing all Pharaohs obstinacie. V. 7. breathed] To shew that mans spirit is not of the earth. as his body; but of nothing by the insufflation of God: and so differing from the spirit of beasts, Job 33. 4. Eccles 3. 21. It hath is immediate original from the Fa∣ther of spirits, who did by creating infuse it, or by infusion create it. V. 8. planted] On the third day, chap. 1 11, 12. Eastward] From Moses, in the wildernesse, where he wrote this History. in Eden] A part of Mesopotamia. V. 9. tree of life] Because naturaly much; but sacra∣mentaly more, it conduced thereunto. tree of knowledge] From the event, in respect of our first parents. V. 10. went out of Eden] Flowing into it from above. V. 11. Pison] A part of Tygris, Paitygris, or Pisoty∣gris. Havilah] From Havilah the sonne of Cush, Gen 10. 7. 25. 18 1 Sam. 15. 7. V. 13. Gihon] The lower part of Euphrates. Ethiopia] Cush, i. e. the Westerne Ethiopia, adjacent to the Desert Arabia. V. 14. Hiddekel] The upper part of Tygris. Euphrates] Called the river, the great river, Deut. 1. 7. 11 24. Rev. 9. 14. V. 17. Thou shalt not eate of it] The thing in it selfe indifferent; but made unlawful to him by Gods command; both she the Lords absolute dominion over him; and his sin to be the greater and more notorious, if he disobey∣ed it. surely die] Be subject to mortality, misery; death, and to him which hath the power of death that is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. A man sentenced to death we count him a dead man, dead in Law, though he and his execution be re∣prieved for a time. If he had not sinned, he had continued in a safe and blessed condition, free from death, and all ma¦ner of evil. V. 19. and brought them unto Adam] Gen. 7. v. 8. 9. V. 20. And Adam gave names] Not that the names must needs be given according to their natures, V. 21. ribs] With the flesh, v 23. The want of which rib, God could, and easily did sufficiently supply, by closing up the flesh instead thereof. V. 22. made he a woman] 1 Cor. 11. 8. brought her to the man] As to her husband. Thus the married estate honourable in the state of Innocency, Matth 19. 4, 5, 6. V. 23. This is now bone &c.] He knew it partly of him∣self; but more by divine revelation. V. 24. Therefore shall a man leave, &c.] These seeme to be rather the words of God, Matth. 19. 4. 5. then of Adam or of Moses. And are spoken both simply, Gen. 24. 58, 59. and comparatively; rather leave the duty of children to parents, then of husband to wife, when any such case of necessity shall fall out. And they] Explained by twaine, Matth. 19. 5, 6. by two, 1 Cor. 6. 16. Against Polygamy; and unlawful di∣vorces; and carnal copulation out of marriage. V. 25. both naked &c.] That shameful through sin since the Fall, Rom. 6. 21. which was not so before: not shall be
after the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 43. CHAP. III. rs. 1. SErpent] Divers sorts are of them Some specious, and beautiful to the eye. subtil] Prudent, Matth. 10. 16. crafty, 2. Cor. 11. 3. and so the fitter instrument for Satan. he said] Many Angels fell, Mar. 5. 9, 12. 2 4. Pet. 2. Jude v. 6. having one for Principal, Matth. 25. 41. And they fell from the beginning, 1 John 3. 8. Now they are called Devils or Daemons, of their knowledge and cun∣ning still remaining. One of them, if not the Princi∣pal, opened here the Serpents mouth, and caused it to speak with mans voice, 2 Cor. 11. 3. as the Lord did with Balams Asse. And the Devil did this speedily after mans creation: Whence he is called a Murtherer from the begin∣ning, Joh. 8. 44. and that old Serpent, which deceiveth the whole world, Rev. 12. 9. yea, hath God] This would be an abrupt beginning. But it seemes to presuppose a Precedent parley in a more cunning and winning way. V. 2. And the woman said] She wonders not at the Serpents speaking: and speaking so, or it may be, she did at the first, for a while at least; though it be not here ex∣pressed: yet haply conceiving that her knowledge in some things was to increase by experience, as our blessed Savi∣our did, Luke 2. 52. He came to finde fruit on the fig-tree, when the time of figs was not yet, Mar. 11. 13. And she being not apt, b able to suspect any evil or sinne, as not knowing the fall of the Angels; or any evil to be in the world, she might the rather entertaine this conference. V. 3. Neither shall ye touchit, lest ye die] These words may be uttered with a good intention, and receive a good interpretation, in answer to the Serpents question: she here∣by heightening Prohibition to the utmost, to put the great∣er ie upon her obediente; and averring, and ascertaining the danger and death, which otherwise would ensue; as, Matth. 15. 32. compared with, Marke 8. 3. V. 4. ye shall not surely die] Thus the Devil is a liar, and the father of it, John 8. 44. V. 5. as Gods] Satan might be pretend to meane it of the Angels. But the woman conceived it of the true God, in plurality of persons, as appears, v. 22. Knowing] Satan abuseth the name of the tree to a wrong sense: pretending all good, but intending all wo∣full knowledge of sinne and misery by it, experimen∣tally. V. 6. And when the woman saw, &c.] Here was the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John 2. 16. And thus through his eating, by one man sinne and death entered into the world: In Adam all his posterity sinned, being then in his oines, Rom. 5. 12, 19. And in Adam all die, 1 Cor▪ 15. 22. Rom▪ 5. 15, 16, 17, 18. and he did eate] Yet it is said Adam was not de∣ceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the trans∣gression, Tim. 2. 14. She first and deepest in the trans∣gression; and she, not the Devil immediately, the meanes to induce her husband to sinne, she giving the forbidden fruit to him; with words to perswade him, v. 17. though she did not purposely deceive him, as the Devil did purpose∣ly deceive hee. V. 7. And the eyes of them both] Small distance then betweene the time of both their eating. naked] In body before, without shame, while without sin, chap. 2. 25. But now experimentally they know that they were naked, both in body and soule; with shame; as, Exod. 32. 25. through guilt of sinne, and sting of conscience. they sewed] A silly shift. And therefore notwithstand∣ing this, they seek to hide themselves, v. 8. But for their souls, they did not, nor indeed could make any shift at all. aprons] To cover especially those parts, of all most uncomely now, which serve for generation; By which sinne hath its derivation to all mankinde. V. 8. voice of the Lord God walking] Either in an hu∣mane shape, or otherwise without that, making this voice, and noise by his Almighty power. in the coole of the day] Coole winde, at evening tyde; which brought the voice and noise to their hearing. hid themselves] With as much folly as faultinesse: through the horror and amazednesse wherewith they were stricken at Gods approach. V. 10. I heard] He toucheth not, but dissembleth the true and maine cause. V. 11. hast thou eatn, &c?] q.  I appeale to thy con∣science, whether this be not the true cause of thy fear, and present shame at thy nakednesse now. V. 13. What is this, &c?] How heynous an offence? as, chap▪ 44. 15. V. 14. unto the Serpent] Curseth him, as the Devils in∣strument. Such is Gods hatred of sinne, punishing the bare instruments of it: as in Exod, 32. 20. Levit 20. 15, 16. as a father breaks the sword wherewith his childe was shine. Yet this curse upon the Serpent is so expressed, as fitly in a Mystical sense, relates to, and includes the curse inflict∣ed on the Devil, the chief agent and author. upon thy belly] This going on his belly, and feeding on dust, was not the natural gate and food of the Serpent be∣fore. For he is numbered among the beasts, chap. 3. 1. di∣stinguished from creeping things, chap. 1. 25. And the greene herbs was given him for meate, chap. 1. 30. But now he is adjudged to go on his belly and breast; and that with more paine and difficulty, then other creeping things: As to Adams labours, and Eves conception, and sujection to her husband, paine and orrow were added for their sinne. And for meat, he must lick the dust, Mih 7. 17. Esay 65. 22. Whence they are called Serpents of the dust, Deut. 32. 24. The Sovereignty of Gods power and authority over all his creatures doth clear the justnesse of his proceed∣ing and doome here against all Serpents. V. 15. enmity] A natural antipathy betweene Man∣kinde and Serpents. A greater enmity betweene Mankinde and the Devil; His enmity to Mankinde is too apparent; And mans to him, so farre as he is rightly knowne and discerned to be the Devil: though by his cunning▪ convey∣ances, as here with Eve, he reignes since the fall, as a God over a great part of Mankinde, 1 Cor. 4. 4. It] Or, He; the World for Seed, and the Verb for shall break, being both in the Hebrew of the masculine gender, pointing to Christ, the Seed of a woman, Gal. 4▪ 4. Luke 1. 42. 2. 7. the promised Seed, Gal. 3. 16. who destroy∣ed the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. John 12. 31▪ and his works, 1 John 3. 8. triumphing over him on his Crosse, Col. 2. 15. And in Christ our Head, we resist and overcome the Devil, 1 Pet. 5. 9. 1 John 2. 13, 14. The God of Peace bruising Satan under our feet, Rom. 16. 20. V. 16. thy desire] Shall be subject to thine husband, as, Gen. 4. 7. As Abels to Cain, as the first-borne.
and he shall rule over thee] By Creation she was to live in subordination to man, 1 Tim. 2. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 9. But now a further rule in the man, and desire of subjection in the woman is required here, as a punishment or chastise∣ment on her then he had over her by Creation; and with more grief unto woman-kinde, 1 Tim. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 14. 34. Tit. 2. 5. V. 17. Cursed is the ground] The earth which he gave to the children of men, Psal. 115. 16. and to their use, is now by Curse made more unprofitable to them and their use, verse 18, 19. chap. 5. 29. Yea, the Creature was made subject to vanity by mans sin; subject to a vanishing, flit∣ting, and perishing estate; subject to the corruption and abuse of man; subject to serve for the object and instru∣ment of sin, Esay 24. 5. And therefore the heavens and the earth, which are now, are reserved unto fire against the day of judgement, 2 Pet 3. 7, 10. And the whole Creation groan∣eth, and travelleth in paine together untill now: The earn∣est expectation of the creature waiting for the manifestati∣on of the sonnes of God; that it may be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the chil∣dren of God: that all the steps and traces of that maledicti∣on put upon it for mans sin, may be utterly rased out of the world; and new heavens, and a new earth created, as the Scripture phraseth it; every creature according to every ones degree and nature partaking of that glorious liberty of the children of God; being fully delivered from all va∣nity, slavery, abuse, and evill, Rom. 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. V. 18. the herb of the field] Not the herbs and fruits of Paradise, v. 23, 24. V. 20. Eve] Here first so called. God calls her Adam, chap. 5. 2. because she was] To be; thus Propheticaly he foretels it: else it is Moses that gives the reason of the name. V. 21. coats of skins] In likelihood of the skins of beasts, which God taught him to kill for sacrifice: being that Abel did so soone sacrifice, chap. 4. 4. V. 22. And now lest, &c.] Spoken by an ironie. For it was not the eating of the fruit, that could recover him, or preserve him from the sentence of death, whereun∣to God for his sin had now doomed him? Both the Trees were Sacraments of the first Covenant of works to confirme the Promise, and threatening there unto appertaining; which Sacramental tree of Life he had now nothing to do withal, no right to it, having broken the Covenant, and incurred the Curse; no more then he ought to have med∣led with the other Tree, in the state of innocencie. V. 24. drove out] The day not so certainly knowne; But in all probability, the same day of his creation. For Satan would omit no time. The woman, if she had beene better practised, and not taken at the first, would not so soone have red: or if she had knowne the Fall of the An∣gels, she would have suspected the more. Her speech, v. 2. We may eate seemes to shew, that no fruit had been eaten before. And doubtlesse she fell a Virgin. And according∣ly Jewes, Caldeans, Aabians, Greeks, Latines, Barba∣rians, hold that they fell the day they were created. at the East] Where the entrance was into Paradise. Cheruims] Angels. Moses in the use of this word ap∣plying himself to the capacity of the people, to whom the Cherubims in the Tabernacle were well known, represent∣ing the Angels. In Ezekiels Vision, we read of Cheru∣bims as living creatures, with wings, chap. 1. 5. and 10. 1, 15. In Daniel, the Angel Gabriel flying. and a flaming sword] Haply to each, if there were more Angels then one, Cherubims being of the plural number. We read of an Angel with a drawn sword in Davids time, 1 Chron. 21. 16. which turned every way] All for the more terror, that man should not dare to attempt re-entrance. CHAP. IV. Verse 2. ABel] So the New Testament writes him, Matth. 23. 35. Luke 11. 5. Heb 11. 4. and 12. 24. The Hebrew still is Hebel. Saith David, Psal. 39. 5. Verily every man at his best estate is altogether A∣bel, i. e. vanity. And so indeed Abel was, being slaine by his brother. V 3. of the fruit of the ground an offering] An Obla∣tion, or Meat-offering of fine flower, or first-fruits in the eare, in Levit. 2. and chap. 22. 14. Exod. 22. 29 23. 19. The Heathen Greeks and Romanes, in their times did likewise: Likely by an imitation of the Jewes. V. 4. firstlings] This afterwards by a special Law, upon a special reason, prescribed to the Jewes, Exod. 13. 2. Num. 3. 13. and of the fat thereof] In Moses time this expressely com∣manded, Exod. 20. 13, 22, 25. Levit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17. The fat is the food of the offering made by fire, for a sweet favour unto the Lord. All the fat is the Lords: neither Offerer, nor Sacrificer; nor yet in Civil use was any Jew to eate of it; at leastwise of the fat of such cleane beasts as were fit for sacrifice, Levit. 7. 23, 24, 25. The fat of the oile is mentioned, Num. 18. 12. mean∣ing the best of it; And so of all things offered to the Lord, the best is required, which it seemes also that Abel here performed. Not as those did, Mal. 1. 13. By Faith Abel offered this Sacrifice, Heb. 11. 4. And therefore it was no will-worship, but grounded on Gods Word for his warrant; revealed to Adam, and by him like∣ly to his sonnes. had respect] This was seene of Cain. It is likely there∣fore that God shewed it by some visible signe, as by fire from heaven consuming the Sacrifice; as, Levit. 9. 24. Judg. 6. 21. 1 Chron. 21. 26. 2 Chron. 7. 1. 1 Kings 18. 38. or it might be by some other wayes. unto Abel, and to his offering] To the man first, to the Offering for the mans sake, as a fruit of his faith. He righ∣teous, Matth. 23 35. V. 5. not respect] Through his want of faith and since∣rity in this service of God, 1 John 3 12. very wroth] At God, and Abel both. V. 7. Sinne lieth] Sinne is anome, or enormity; and the punishment of sinne, which like a Serjeant, or they, is couching, and lieth watching, ready to seize upon thee, and tear thee. And unto thee shall be his desire] Subject to thee, as to the first-borne, as, chap. 3. 16. This is to allay his wrath and incensed spirit. V. 8. talked] In a brotherly maner, dissembling his ha∣tred, that he might get the better opportunity to kill him, when Abel should not think of it. See the Annotations on chap. 35. 22. V. 11. Cursed from the earth] The earth shall plague thee, that received thy brothers blood; as is shewed in the next words. V. 12. when thou tillest] A punishment, the more pro∣per, because he was a tiller of the ground; and proper to Cains portion, where ever he was; not a second general curse upon all the earth.
a fugitive] Cast out from society with thy kindred and acquaintance; from Gods presence, and the communion of his Church, and pursued still with a guilty conscience. So in ver. 14, 16. V. 14. Of the earth] Of this earth where I now dwell with my Parents and Kindred. Else he speaks like a man distracted by a guilty conscience. He dilates his punish∣ment that denied his sin. Every one that findeth me shall slay me] There might be many living by this time of Abels murther, of whom he might stand in feare, yea, of them as yet unborn. And his guilty conscience now feares every one, as having made himself odious to every one. And such flee when none pursueth; yea, the sound of a shaken leaf doth chase them: And he might justly fear the beasts of the field. Amongst the ancient Romanes, Greeks and others, such notorious offendors, whosoever would, might surely kill them. And what large power is given to the revenger of blood by Gods Law, we may see in Numb. 35. 19, 21. V. 15. Seven fold] God would have him preserved a∣live, (though a life likely worse then death,) as a monu∣ment of his justice against murder and tratricide, Psal. 59. 11. Not for love to Cain, but to prevent future murder. Mark] a mark of protection, and of ignominy too; like∣ly a kinde of palsie and ghastly look; or some worse mark, that made him an horrible spectacle of Gods ven∣geance against so hainous a crime. V. 16. From the Presence of the Lord] not of his ge∣neral Providence, but of his special Presence, by grace, in the place of his Worship and Service; of which place, and the Presence of the Lord there, with Adam and his godly seed, it might be said, as, Gen. 28. 17. This is no o∣ther but the House of God, and this is the gate of Heaven. Nod] so called by Anticipation, from his wandring there. V. 17. Builded a City] at last; builded, or rather was building, began to build, as the builders of Babel, Gen. 11. as in many hundred years after he and his posterity well might, and yet he be a vagabond in body and minde ne∣verthelesse. V. 19. Two wives] The first bigamist, and corrupter of wedlock. V. 23 I have slain, &c.] Beastingly he speaks of his valour and wrath, to asray and appease the brawles of his wives between themselves, and the vexing of him; that he was a man that would not suffer the least injury of them, or of any man, but he would avenge himself, and that fully: Or vaunting himself to his wives of his valour, to appease their feare of him, lest hurt should come to him from others, through his fiercenesse and boisterous violence; bragging what heavy vengeance he would take of him that should set upon lamech, many times more then God himself appoint∣ed to be taken for the avengement of Cain. Or, if he had slain a man, and was wounded himself, and thereupon his wives afraid of his life, he seeks to appease them, but in a fierce and insolent manner, as scorning their feare of his danger, and thinking it a disparagement to him and his valour, and upon this reason too; That he had a juster cause for what he had done, then Cain had, and therefore might be the more secure, that if Cains death should be avenged, much more his; or rather in an Athe¦istical scorne, vaunting, That if God did set such a guard upon Cain, surely Lamech they needed not to doubt, should scape well enough; Cains impunity might well serve for his security. Thus variously may these vaunting words of this wrathful, lustful man, be understood and taken; bearing himself haply the more proudly upon his sons in∣ventions, v. 20, 21, 22. V. 25. Seth] borne, when Adam was 130. years old, ch. 5. 3. Therefore in all probability Cain slew Abel, not long before that time. For God] Eve rejoyceth, that her whole number of chil∣dren in him was filled up again. For it is not imaginable, that she had no more then Cain and Abel in all that time And it might be she foresaw by the Spirit of God, that Seth should be like righteous faithful Abel, and the roo of that holy progeny, wherein the Church was afterward esta∣blished. V. 26. Enos] Sorrowful, Psal. 9. 20. that the Na∣tions may know themselves to be but Enos, i. e. woful men. Then began men to call] the Worship of God grew more publick and solemne, and in a sort restored and revived again, in the persons and families of Seth and E∣nos, having bin almost buried in the paucity and privacy of the godly before this time; a separation now being made by them from the profane society of the wicked; such as were generaly the posterity of Cain. CHAP. V. Ver. 3. IN his own likenesse after his image] such as he was now sinful; not as he was created Holy. Yet still God was the Father of spirits, the God (and Cre∣ator) of the spirits of all flesh, Heb. 12. 9. Numb. 16. 22. V. 4. And he begat sonnes and daughters] after Seth; yet not excluding some to be begotten before Seth; as Cain and others. And the same is likely to be understood of the rest of the ten Patriarches in this chapter before the flood; That they begat sons and daughters, as well before as after the birth of those Patriarchs, by whom the line of the Genealogy and Chronology is drawn. For it is scarce probable, that in this first Age of the world before the flood, wherein mankinde had most need of multiipli∣cation, the Patriarchs should be so old, as the half of them above 100. yea, Jared 162, Lamecb, 182. Me∣thusalah 187. Noah 500. before they had any children: though indeed Noah for his part, had no more then three, when the flood came, 1 Pet. 3. 20. But so old they were before that sonne was borne who was the Progenitor of our Saviour, and in whose race the main progresse and suc∣cession of the true Church did consist. V. 5. All the dayes] Adam was living in Lamechs dayes. V. 21. Enoch walked with God] the seventh of Adam followed not the wickednesse of his age; But pleased God, prophesied, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his Sants, to execute judgement upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude ver. 14, 15. And Henoch was not; died not as others: but was translated by faith; God took him, body and soule, as after he did Elias, that he should not see death, and he was not found, Heb. 11. 5. after he had lived on earth so many yeares as there are dayes in our yeare; Thus was he a pledge and pawne of
the Resurrection, and life eternal and celestial, and pro∣phesied of the last and general judgement; Adam and Me∣thusalah, and five Patriarchs between them were living witnesses of his Translation. V. 27. All the dayes of Methusalah] the longest liver, and died the last of the nine Patriarchs, in the beginning of the yeare of the flood. V. 29. Noah] Thus Lamech his father prophesied of him at his birth, presaging comfort and rest by him, in the midst of all miseries, in those evil and uncomfortable times. V. 32. And Noah begat] i. e. began to beget. So, chap. 11. 26. and, chap. 7, 10. Japheth the eldest, Sem the se∣cond, Cha youngest. Of the LXX-Chronology in this Chapter. They ex∣tend the age of Methusalah beyond the flood, contrary to Scripture, and adde almost 1600. yeares, to the true Chro∣nology, in this and the eleventh chapters. Haply out of some considerations touching the Heathens, for whom that Greek Translation was made. But the LXX. now is no where extant, but patched infinitely. CHAP. VI. Ver. 1. WHen men began to multiply] very greatly; and specially Cains wicked progeny, and wickednesse with them. and daughters] the occasion both of the corruption and calamity set forth in the ensuing story. V. 2. That the sonnes of God] Professors of the true Worship of God, Deut. 14. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 18. 1 John 3. 1. Which here grew remisse in Religion. Daughters of men] of the profane race of Cain, that had little of God or his image in them, in their mindes or manners, but were meer men, 1 Cor. 3. 3. natural men, unregenerate, and out of the Church; and such these their daughters were. Faire] without respect to spiritual beauty, not minding at all what they were for Religion and manners. Thus beauty intangleth the fond and fleshly affection. Wives] Loved, liked, and chosen only for Beauties sake. Gods Law after forbade such marriages with those out of the Church, Deut. 7. 3, 4. Exod. 34. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 14. V. 3. My spirit] In the Patriarchs, and specially in Noah, a Preacher of righteousnesse, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. 2 Pet. 2. 5. And by good motions and checks of consci∣ence in the men of these times. As, Nehem. 9. 30. For that he also is flesh] even my people also; all man∣kinde, v. 12. are fleshly, not having the Spirit, Jude v. 19 Rom. 8 8, 9 Gal. 5. 16, 17. 120 years] granted for trial of their repentance, the long suffering of God waiting, whether in this space of time, while the Ark was a preparing they would repent, 1 Pet. 3. 20. by mortification of the flesh, and vivificati of the Spirit, or, as St. Peter expresseth it, be judged accord∣ing to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit, ch. 4. 6. agreeing with that of Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 5. This was twenty yeares before the birth of Japheth. V. 4. Giants] Men of huge stature and strength, be∣yond others in those dayes, such as Og was, of the race of giants, and the Anakim in Moses time, Numb. 13. 33. Amorites, Amos 2 9 Deut. 3. 11. Goliath, Isbbi-be∣nob, Saph, Lahmi in Davids time, 2 Sam. 21. 16, 18. 1 Chron. 20. 5, 6, 8 Men, who in the pride and confi∣dence of their bodies greatnesse, were apostates from God, oppressors of men, fierce and cruel. And also after that] After those unlawful mixtures and marriages, v. 2. many of their seed became such Giants: and after that destruction threatened, v. 3. V. 5. Every imaginarin] This heightens the sinful∣ness of this age, Mic. 7. 3. But Gen. 8. 21. More strongly proves the universal corruption of mans nature by the fall. V. 15. 300 cubits] The length is ten times the height, and six times the breadth; resembling for the fashion of it a mans coffin. V. 16. In a cubit shalt finish it] The Ark, not the window. Doore] Wide, to receive an Elephant, closed up, and pitched belike, when all were in, and that by God him∣self. ch. 7. 16. With lower, second and third stories] These stories, considered with the quantity and kinde of the cubits, a common cubit then being longer then our cubits, now and the sacred cubit being double to the common cubit, as appears by comparing 1 Kings 7. 15. with 2 Chron. 3. 15. (not to speak of a Geometrical cubit, six times, as some alledge, as great as a common cubit;) we may ea∣sily conceive the capacity of the Ark, to be fully sufficient to hold whatsoever was required to be contained in it; spe∣cially if we understand here, where no kinde is nomina∣ted, the sacred cubit. V. 18. My Covenant] For thy preservation, Typify∣ing our spiritual preservation and salvation by Christ, from the deluge of Gods wrath, 1 Pet 3. 21. Thou] Eight in number, 1 Pet. 3. 20. V. 19. Two of every sort] Paires of every sort. And here only the kindes are named, the number in chap. 7. v. 2, 3. V. 20. Shall come unto thee] Of their own accord, by my instinct, not else so freely, as, ch. 2. 19. V. 22. Thus did Noah] By faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with feare, prepa∣red an Ark to the saving of his house, by the which he condemned the world, and became heire of the righteous∣ness which is by faith, Heb. 11. 7. So, Exod. 39. 43. and, 40. 16. CHAP. VII. Verse 1. ANd all thy house] Thy children; specified, v. 13. No doubt, but he had more of his fa∣mily; men-servants and maid-servants. But they, and the Shipwrights all drowned. in this generation] Called by St. Peter, the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet 2. 5. V. 2. Of every clean beast] Here is the distinction of clean and unclean beasts, and fowles in Noahs time and before, even soon in all likelihood after the fall of man. Long then before Moses time. In Moses time the distin∣ction of beasts and fowles, clean and unclean for sacrifice was this, that of all beasts, only Beeves, Sheep and Goats were counted clean for sacrifice; and of Fowles
only the turtle-Doves and Pigeons, Levit. 1. And the Sparrow was used in the clensing of the Leper and Leprous house, Levit. ch. 14. 4, 5. But for meat to the Jewes there was a further distinction of clean and unclean beasts, fishes, fowles and creeping things, Lev. 11. The distin∣ction here at the flood is not particularized; and therefore we cannot be so certain, but guesse only by Moses, which were clean, which unclean. by sevens] Not two sevens. The use of the seventh is set down for sacrifice, ch. 8. 20. of other foure, likely for meat; and of the other two, for preservation of seed, as is here commanded, concerning the unclean beasts and fowle. Or more then two of the seven, might be for the greater increase of those which were of most use and com∣fort to mankinde, and the rest, for present food and for sacrifice. V. 10. Were] Began to be. V. 11. In the second moneth] Bull; about our October, 1 Kings 6. 38. which is the eighth moneth of the yeare, according to the Ecclesiastical account, first commanded by God to the Jewes, at his miraculous bringing of the children of Israel out of Egypt, Exod. 12. 2. The civil account, and the civil yeare, even then and still after con∣tinuing with them, the same beginning, as it ever had from the beginning; in the moneth Tizri or Ethanim, about our September, 1 Kings 8. 2. I can see no just cause why we should not follow the civil Account of the yeare here in Noahs time. Though the other reckoning of the moneths be most followed in Scripture, after the time of the change aforesaid, 1 Kings 6. 1537, 38. Ne∣hem. 2. 1. 6. 15. Esther 2. 16. 3. 7. 9. 15. Zach. 1. 7. 7. 1. V. 17. And the flood was fourty dayes, &c.] It rained so long, till the twenty seventh day of the third moneth Chisleu: which is the nineth moneth according to the Ec∣clesiastical Account, Zach. 7. 1. and falls in, with, or about the middle of our December; and it prevailed upon the earth 150 dayes, v. 24. V. 20. Fifteen cubits upward] Above all the high hills that were under the whole Heaven; whatsoever we heare true or fabulous by Writers, or reports of the height of the hills of Olympus, Atlas, Athos, Caucasus, Pike in Tenerif, or any other. V. 22. Died] But yet small charity to judge the In∣fants, and all of them to be damned. Cham in the Ark cursed: and many out of it in the time of the lingring de∣luge, might repent and be saved; though not from the tem∣poral death, yet from that which is eternal. V. 24. One hundred and fifty days] Reckoning from the first day of the raine falling, viz. seventeenth day of the se∣cond moneth, to the seventeenth day of the seventh moneth, whereon the Ark rested on the mountaines of Ararat, ch. 8. 4. are one hundred and fifty dayes. Heathens in the deluge of Deucalion, shew they had some inckling and hint of this sacred history. CHAP. VIII. Ver. 1. A Winde] To asswage; not inrage. V. 4. Rested in the seventh moneth] Called Nisan by the Chaldees, and Abib by the Hebrewes, an∣swering to part of our March and April. On the seventeenth day] About the beginning of our A∣pril; where ended the one hundred and fifty dayes. mountaines of Ararat] An hilly tract of land in Arme∣nia the greater, not far from the Caspian sea, and near to Assyria and Mesopotamia, 2 Kings 19. 37. Esay 37. 38. Jer. 51. 27. Some take these for the Gordean or Cordean mountaines. Some for the hills of Taurus or Cau∣cusus. V. 5. In the tenth moneth, on the first day] Called Tha∣mus, answering the middle of our June, beginning still the reckoning from September, the beginning of their ci∣vil yeare. Thus after seventy three dayes since the Ark first rested, and two hundred twenty three dayes since the flood first began, were the tops of the mountaines seen. To determine the gradual abatements of the waters day by day, is vain curiosity, and foolish presumption, upon uncertain grounds. V. 6. At the end of fourty dayes] After the mountaine∣tops were first seen. This makes up the number of two hundred sixty three dayes since the flood began, and one hundred and thirteen days since the Ark first rested; and falls on the eleventh day of their eleventh moneth, called Ab, and towards the end of our July and not as the great Annotators have it on this place, on the eleventh day of the eleventh moneth, called Sebat, Zach. 1. 7. the same which we call January. But to reckon thus were to reckon the yeare according to the Ecclesiastical Account, contra∣ry to their own minde set down in their Annotations, up∣on the fourth verse of this same chapter. V. 8. A Dove] seven dayes after the Raven, v. 10. on the eighteenth day of their eleventh moneth, about the beginning of our August. The sending out of the Dove is mentioned in Dcucalions history. V. 9. Found no rest] Though the tops of the mountaines were seen fourty seven dayes before. V. 10. And again he sent] On the twenty fifth of their eleventh moneth, called by some Ab, about the tenth of our August. V. 11. In the evening] Spending the day a∣broad. pluck't off] Not floating on the waters; so now grow∣ing trees were discovered. The Dove found a place of rest to her feet; but not yet food fit for her. V. 12. Yet other seven dayes] On the second day of the twelfth moneth, called Elul, Nehem. 6. 15. About the se∣venteenth of our August. She met with her mate after. Thus there are twenty one dayes from the opening of the window, for the sending out of the Raven, and the Dove. V. 13. First moneth, first day of the moneth] Twenty nine dayes after the last sending forth of the Dove, to this time. This moneth is the moneth Tizri or Ethanim, 1 Kings 8. 2. though there called the seventh moneth, according to the Ecclesiastical Account. And the first day if it is about the sixteenth of our September: but we must not here make this the first moneth, according to the Ec∣clesiastical account; which would be the moneth Nisan or Abib; the first day of it answering to the middle of our March. covering of the Ark] v. 6. He opened the window of the Ark. was dry] Yet soft and muddy. V. 14. Second moneth] Not Jiar or Zif, the second moneth according to the Ecclesiastical Account, 1 Kings 6. 1, 3, 7. answering to part of our April, and part of our May: but the moneth Bull, according to the Civil Ac∣count and yeare; according to the Annotations on the fourth verse of this chapter. And answering to part of
our October, and of our November. Twenty seventh day] The second of our November. And thus there are fifty seven dayes from the first moneth, first day to this time. And here is the end of the flood, continuing from first to last, one yeare and ten dayes. The Account whereof must no wise be cast, as in the said An∣notations on this fourteenth verse: But thus, beginning on the second moneth, seventeenth day, thence to the se∣venth moneth, seventeenth day, are one hundred and fifty dayes, reckoning in them the fourty dayes of raine, as is confessed on ch. 7. ver. 24, and as according to the truth it must needs be. And the Ark then rested on the moun∣taines of Ararat. Thence to the tenth moneth, first day, whereon the tops of the mountaines were seen, are seventy three dayes. Thence fourty dayes, at the end whereof Noah opened the window of the Ark. Thence twenty one dayes of the sending out of the Raven and the Dove. Thence twenty nine dayes reacheth to the first moneth, first day, when the ground was dry. Thence fifty seven dayes, to the second moneth, twenty seventh day, when Noah came out of the Ark. The total summe of this reck∣oning ariseth to three hundred and seventy. And the com∣passe of the yeare, reckoning twelve moneths to the yeare, and thirty days to the moneth, ariseth to three hundred and sixty dayes. And the other ten dayes were those ten, wherein he continued in the Ark more then one year. V. 20 And offered burnt-offerings on the Altar] In this verse is an Altar first nominated, and burnt-offer∣ings, or whole burnt-offering, Lev. 6. 9. And this so long before Moses and the Levitical Law, an Altar likely of earth or turf. V. 21. In his heart] After spoken to Noah, chapt. 9. 11. not again curse the ground] This is opened more in this and the next verse, not as formerly, with an universal de∣luge. Though particular inundations may be. for the imagination, &c.] This in part moved God to destroy the world, ch. 6. 5, 6. This here is brought in as a motive to mercy, as, Psal 103. 13, 14. A like plea Da∣vid makes, Psal 25. 11. and God himself, Esay 48. 8, 9. Though sin abound, Gods mercy superabounds, mercy rejoyceth against judgement. V. 22. While the earth] God restores and repaires the natures of things corrupted by the flood. This hinders not Peters fiery Prophecie of the end of the world, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Esay 54. 8, 9, 10. Seed-time, &c.] Generaly so, which hindereth not par∣ticular judgements upon particular places to the contrary, as, 1 Kings 17. 1. God will henceforth deal more particular∣ly with men, and not overturn the general course of nature any more. CHAP. IX. Verse. 1. BE fruitful, &c.] Though we reade not of any more children of Noah after this time: yet it is not likely but he had more; Gods Word and his Work go together. In three hundred fifty two yeares; viz. from the flood to the birth of Abraham mankinde was wonderfully multiplied, and yet mans life in that time mightily shortened. V. 2. The fear of you] Though not your dominion o∣ver them, as it was before the fall; yet the fear and dread of you shall upon them: even to the taming, or over∣awing at least, of the wildest, fiercest and strongest of them by force or cunning, Psal 8. 6, &c. 104 20, 21, 22, 23. Jam. 3. 7. Though God can arme even the least of them, to execute his judgements upon man. V. 3. That liveth] Likely, not dying of it selfe, or torne by beasts, as, Levit. 17. 15. and 22. 8. Exod 12. 31. For many of the Mosaical Lawes were in use long be∣fore. meat for you] See Annotations on ch 1. 29. meat] Such as were fit for meat: and even those that were not fit for meat and sustenance, yea, poisonous, yet might serve for Physick or otherwise, for the maintenance and preservation of the life of man V. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, the blood] The blood of these creatures in called the life of them; and their life is said to be their blood, and in their blood, Lev. 17. 11. 14. because the spirits, which are the most lively parts of them, are produced of the purest part of the blood, and with it diffused in arteries throughout the whole body: without which vital spirits, though blood be in the body, yet the body may be dead, as in things strangled. Now with the blood, or in the blood, the flesh was not to be eaten; but first it must be killed and cleansed of the blood. A restraint, no doubt, to make them the more fearful of shedding mans blood, as the words following do declare. But yet thus the sense of the place seemes not so full, as when the blood is forbidden, not on∣ly with the flesh in the veines, (for who desires so to eat it) but also poured out by it self alone. And thus the prohibition was given by Moses to the Jewes, who decla∣red at large the various manner of the use of blood, in their several kindes of sacrifices; but inhibits the eating of it, rather then, or at any other time. In their sacri∣ces, sometimes some of it was sprinkled upon the side of the Altar, and the rest of the blood wrung out at the bot∣tome of the Altar; as when turtle-Doves or Pigeons were sacrificed, Lev. 1. 15. and 5. 9. sometimes it was sprinkled round about upon the Altar; as in the burnt-offerings, and peace-offerings, Lev. 1. 5, 11. and, chap. 3. 2, 8, 13. sometimes with the finger dipped in it, some of it was put upon the hornes of the Altar, and the rest poured out at the bottome of the Altar; as in the sin-offer∣ing for the Ruler, and for any one of the common peo∣ple, Lev. 4. 25, 30, 34. sometimes with the finger dip∣ped in it. some of it was to be sprinkled seven times before the Lord, before the vaile of the Sanctuary. And then some of it to be put upon the hornes of the Altar of sweet incense before the Lord, and the rest of the blood to be poured out at the bottome of the Altar of the burnt-offer∣ing; as in the sin-offering of the Holy Priest, Levit 4. v. 5, 6, 7. And of the whole Congregation, ch. 4. v. 16, 17, 18. Sometimes it was to be put upon the tip of the right eare, and upon the thumb of the right hand, and up∣on the great toe of the right foot; and some of the blood upon the Altar was to be sprinkled upon the garments, as Moses did at the consecration of Aaron and his sonnes, Levit. 8. 23, 24, 30. all which was typical and ceremo∣nial. In summe, it was given upon the Altar, to make an atonement for soules; for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soule, Lev. 17. 11. and almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. But with them blood was never at any time, or upon any occasion to be eaten, Lev. 7. 26, 27. 1 Sam. 14. 32, 33, 34. And the Apostles make a decree for the forbearance of eating things stran∣gled, and blood, Acts 15. 20. yet now the ceremonial
Law being expired; and the restraint in this text, not so clear and full, or, not reaching to all people in all ages; out of the case of scandal, which occasioned the Apostles necessary, 1 Cor. 8. 13. though temporary decree; I see no necessity enforcing the contrary, but that Christians may use their Christian liberty, knowing that to the pure all things are pure, that meat commends us not to God, that whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that we may eat, asking no question for conscience sake. V. 5. And surely your blood of your lives] Your life∣blood. The reason of the former prohibition. Of every beast] Exod. 21. 28. mans brother] All men are brethren, Act. 17. 26. V. 6. Whoso sheddeth] Wittingly and wilfully, Numb. 35. 31. else Cities of Refuge weee appointed, as may be seen, Numb. 35. 11, 15, 22, 23. Deut. 29. 3, 6. by man] Magistrate. Revenger of blood, Numb. 35. 19, 21, 27. for in the image] This reason sheweth death to be due for murther before the flood, and from the beginning, though God extraordinarily suffered Cain to live (a life likely worse then death) as a spectacle of his wrath all his age. To deny the legal and military use of the sword to Christians, is an Anabaptistical faucie. V. 10. And with every living creature] For mans sake, for whom they were made, and in the flood for his sin destroyed. V. 11. All flesh] No universal deluge, though particu∣lar countreys may be drowned. by the waters of a flood] Yet in the end by fire, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10. the earth] As, ch. 6. 11. V. 13. My bowe] Wittily say some, bended upwards; and withot any arrow in it. This was in the clouds be∣fore, naturally; But now significatively instituted to this use, to be a token of this Covenant, for the assurance of the truth, and performance of it, and Gods oath annexed to it, Esay 54. 9. V. 14. When I bring a cloud] At sometimes. V. 18. And Ham is the father of Canaan] So againe, v. 22. To imply the reason why Canaan is cursed, v. 25, 26, 27. And that the Israelites, who in Moses time and after, were commanded to root them out, might know, that they were of an accursed race and off-spring. V. 20. Began] In the new world a new beginner, yet some yeares after the flood. V. 21. Uncovered] Likely wearing long and loose gar∣ments, without breeches. As likely David did, when Mi∣chal mocked him, 2 Sam. 6. 20. To prevent which, lin∣nen breeches were commanded to Priests, Exod. 28. 42. Ezech. 44. 19. and Gods Altar was to be builded without steps, Exod. 20. 26. V. 22. And told] He should have concealed it from his brethren, and covered it himself. V. 24. And knew] Upon enquiry, or otherways, by relati∣on or revelation. V. 25. Said] Prophetically, both in his cursing and blessing, by warrant of Gods Spirit. V. 25. Cursed be Canaan] Not naming Cham. But shewing thereby the curse to be entailed on him, and on Canaan his fourth sonne, ch. 10. 6. then borne, and haply a Partner in his fathers sinne, and on his posterity after him, Prov. 30. 17. a servant of servants] Thus fore-doom'd to a most servile slavish estate and condition. This most seen long after in the Gibeouites, Josh. 9. 21. and in the Canaanites. As the blessing on Japhet was long after fulfilled, when the Gentiles became Christians. V. 26. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem] Shem blessed; because God is called his God, Psal. 144. 15. He na∣med before Japheth his elder brother, in covering his fa∣thers nakednesse, v. 23. and Canaan shall be his servant] So to Chadoraome of Shems progeny, being King of Elam; ch. 14. 1, 4, &c. and; ch. 10. 22. so in the times of Joshuah, Judges, and Kings of Judah and Israel. V. 27. In the tents of Shem] In the Church, become Converts and Christians, Eph. 2. 13, 14, 19. 3. 6. even when Shems posterity, the natural branches, was much out off, Rom. 11. 11. and Canaan shall be his servant] Alexander the Great, and the Romanes subdued them. V. 29. And he died] living almost to the birth of Abram. CHAP. X. Verse 1. JAphet] He is renowned, in the ancient Greek Writers, called Iupetos. V. 2. Madai] Of him the Medes. Javan] Of him the countrey Ionia, the Grecians. V. 5. Isles] Properly; or improperly such countreys, whereto the Jewes from their land could not passe but by shipping: the Province of Europe here meant. every one after his tongue] As it fell out after that divi∣sion of tongues, ch. 11. 9. V. 6▪ Cush] Cushians, or the Ethiopians near the Arabian sea. Mizraim] Egyptians. Mizraim in the Old Testament is alwayes called Egypt in the New Testament. V. 7. Seba] Whence came the West-African-Ethiopi∣ans, and likely the Queen of Shebah, 1 King. 10. 1. cal∣led the Queen of the South, coming from the utter∣most parts of the earth, Matth. 12. 42. And the E∣nuch of Candac, Acts 8. 27. Havilah] In Arabiah. V. 8. And Cush begat Nimrod] Reserved here to the last place, because Moses meant to speak most of him. a mighty one] Usurped by violence a more imperious Power and Government, then formerly was used, and en∣larged his dominions. V. 9. A mighty Hunter] Hunter of men, Tyrants and Oppressors are called Hunters, Jer. 16. 16. before the Lord] Openly, without feare of God. V. 10. Babel] ch. 11. 9. Semiramis, then the wife of Ninus sonne to this Nimrod or Belus, as profane Authors have it, founded not this City, but repaired it. After Nim∣rods time it seems, the seat of that Monarchy (being the first,) was translared to Nineveb in Assyria, Micah 5. 6. And after many ages Babylon rebuilt by Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30. Shinar] Comprehending Mesopotamia, situate between the two rivers Tygris and Euphrates, and the countreys ad∣jacent, ch. 11. 2. V. 11. Out of the land went forth Ashur] He Shents sonne, v. 22. went out of Shinar by Nimrods invasion, and built Nineveh, and gave the name to the Assyrian Mo∣narchy. Or else Nimrod inlarging his Conquests and Dominions, went from Shinar to Ashur, and built Ni∣neveh.
V. 12. The same is a great city] Not Calah, but Ni∣neveh, Jonah 1. 2. 3. 2. 3. 4. 11. specially in the Pro∣phet Jonahs time, who lived in the dayes of Jeroboam the second, the son of Joash, 2 Kings 14. 25. 14. Out of whom came Philistiim] The Philistines, not of the off-spring of Canaan, but expelling some of them, made roome for themselves in part of the land of Canaan, Amos 9. 7. Jer. 47. 4. V. 15. And Heth] Whence come the Hittites, ch. 23. 3, 5, 7, 10. Girgasite] Mat. 8. 28, 34. Gadarenes, Luke 8. 26. V. 16. Jebusite, 2 Sam. 5. 6. 1 Chron. 11. 4. V. 19. The border of the Canaanites] Set down particu∣larly, because it was promised to Abraham, and his seed the Israelites. V. 20. These are the sounes of Ham] Many more of them are set down here, then either of Shem or of Japheth. But most likely it is, that all these children or Grand-chil∣dren of Shem, Cham and Japheth, are not here set down, but only such as were famous, and by their several Planta∣tions gave names to several Nations descending from their loines. V. 21. Unto Shem also the father of all the children of Eber] Great Grand-father to Eber; yet Eber thus men∣tioned, because of him afterwards they were called He∣brewes; so Abraham, ch. 14. 13. so, ch. 40. 15. Phil. 3. 5. and so frequently. of Japhet the elder] Because Shem was begotten in the five hundred and second yeare of Noah's life, he being one hundred yeare old, two yeares after the flood, ch. 11. 10. Therefore Japhet was two yeare older. V. 22. Elam] Hence came the Elamites or Persians, Acts 2. 9. Aram] From him came the Aramites, Syrians. There is Padan-Aram, ch. 25. 20. Aram-Naharaim ch. 24. 10. Aram-Dammesek, 2 Sam. 8. 5, 6. Ara-Zobah, Psal. 60. tit. Aram Maachah, 1 Chron. 19. 6. Aram-Beth-Rehob, 2 Sam. 10▪ 6. all these being several Provinces of Syria. V. 23. Uz] Job 1. 1. There dwelt the Edomites or the Idumeans, Lam. 4. 21. V. 25. For in his dayes was the earth divided] About the time of his birth was the division of tongues, at the building of Babel, which occasioned their dispersion into several parts of the earth for habitation. And the lan∣guage before used of all, continuing in Eber the father of Peleg, might occasion his posterity to be distinguished from all others by the name of Hebrewes. V. 29. Ophir] From this mans land in India, it is likely Solomons ships fetched fine gold, 2 Chron. 9. 10. called also gold of Parvaim, 2 Chron. 3. 6. This is sup∣posed to be in Havilah near Ophir. See the Tree in the beginning of Speeds Genealogies. CHAP. XI. Ver. 1. OF one language] Since the flood, no doubt. Whether the Hebrew language, which was Adams continued the same among all men, for the space of one thousand six hundred fifty six yeares before the flood, may be more questionable. And it came to passe] One hundred yeares after the flood, v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and ch. 10. 25. V. 2. They journeyed] Nimrod and his company. Not Noah, Shem, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber, and their godly po∣sterities. from the East] Likely from about the mountaines of A∣rarat; which parts are much North-eastward from Shi∣nar, or Chaldea, or Mesopotamia. Or from other Easterne parts. Shinar] Containes Babylon, Mespotamia, and the Countries adjacent, foure Cities, afterwards built there by Nimrod, ch. 10. 10. V. 3. Slime] A pitchy slime. V. 4. Unto Heaven] An Hyperbole, for the chief, hap∣ly to escape another flood. lest we be scattered] Lest this company be the sooner dispersed. Or when by multiplication they should in af∣ter-times be scattered, yet this might remaine as an ho∣nourable monument and memorial of their former co-ha∣bitation. V. 6. And now nothing] Ironically, as, ch. 3. 22. V. 7. Let us go down] See, ch. 1. 26. God speaks of himself after the manner of men, for mans better under∣standing. A while he suffered them to go on in build∣ing. and confound their language] The number of the seve∣ral languages now made is uncertain. V. 8. Scattered them] The thing they sought to pre∣vent by their proud project, v. 4. God for it brings up∣on them presently. V. 10. Generations of Shem] Those, ch. 10. 22, &c. were without any mention of the age of the Patriarchs de∣scended from him, when they begat their eldest sonnes, or those by whom the holy line is drawn, and of whom our Saviour descended. And if they had been passed over so, the Chronology of the world had beed lost. But now here they are resumed, and the chaine of Chronology carefully continued. And as there were ten Patriarchs be∣fore the flood, counting in Noah, so there are ten after the flood, from Shem to Abraham inclusively. The yeares of the world, in the former ten to the six hundredth yeare of Noah, when the flood came, amounted to the number of 1656. The years from the flood, which was in the nine∣ty eighth yeare of Shems age, to the birth of A∣bram the tenth Patriarch after the flood, came but to the number of three hundred fifty two yeares: For mans age was shortened about the half at the time of the flood. And again shortened about the half in Pelegs time, at the building of Babel. And yet the third time shortened somewhat near the half in the time of Nahor, as may be seen and observed in the ages of the Patriarchs at their deaths in this chapter. Arphaxad] The third son of Shem, 1 Chron. 1. 17. V. 12. Arphaxad begat Salah] Betwixt these is inserted Cainan, as the sonne of Arphaxad, and father of Salah; Luke 3. 35, 36. which would break the chaine of Chro∣nology, and leave unknown the age of the world. The LXX-Translation hath here in Genesis put in that Cai∣nan. And that Translation was much more known, & much more in use in publick Synagogues, in private Libraries and Houses in our Saviours time, then the Authentical Hebrew Text was; yea, thereupon the Holy Writers of the New Testament, in their quotations out of the Old Te∣stament, do follow much the said Translation, even with some variation from the Hebrew Text, though not in any material thing, as the learned well know. This may seem to occasion St. Luke in this of Cainan, to follow the LXX. Translation, though he knew that this Cainan was never in the world, condescending so to the times and weakness
of men therein, lest otherwise he might have given occa∣sion of offence, or rather they have taken it. V. 22. Nahor] The first idolater of the line, ch 31. 53. Josh. 24. 2. And so after him were Terah and Abraham, till God called him out of that place, chap. 11. 31. 12. 1. Rom. 4. 2, 5. V. 26. Begat Abram, &c.] Began to beget, as, Gen. 5. 32. For Abram was borne in the one hundred and thirtieth yeare of his father Terah; Terah dying at the age of two hundred and five in Haran, ch. 11. 31, 32. and Abram being then seventy five years old, as appears, ch. 12. 4. Acts 7. 4. Likely Haran was the eldest, Nahor the second, and Abram the youngest; as the eldest likewise is named last, ch. 5. 32. V. 28. In Ur] Nehem. 9. 7. Acts 7. 4. Ur signifi∣eth fire, which likely was worshipped by the idolatrous Chaldeans; and some place or city received denomination from that idol. Heathen Writers call it Orchoe, it is the Easterne part of Mesopotamia, when Mesopotamia is taken in a large sense, comprehending haldea in it. of the chaldees] Given much to Astrology, whence such are called Chaldeans, Dan. 2. 2, 4, 5. Ur of the Chaldees] Called Mesopotamia, Acts 7. 2. V. 29. Milcah the daughter of Haran] Not another Haran, but Abrams eldest brother, as appears by the next words. He was elder then Abram sixty yeares. the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah] This Mil∣cab was Grand-mother to Rebecca Isaacs wife, Ge. 22. 2, 22, 23. great Grandmother to Rachel and Leah, Gen. 29. 10, 12, 13, 16. This Ischa is Sarai the daughter, i. e. the Grandchilde of Abrahams father, but not the daughter, i. e. the Grandchilde of his mother, Terah ha∣ving Haran her father by another wife then he had Abraham, Gen. 20. 12. Nahor and Abraham marry their Neeces, their brother Harans daughters, and so Amran takes Jochebed his father Kohaths sister to wife, Exod. 6. 20. Such marriages are forbidden, Lev. 18. 12, 14. however here by divine dispen∣sation tolerated, or not condemned. V. 31. And Terah took Abram] Abram first motioned this remove; God having appeared to him in Ur of the Chaldees, Acts 7. 2. Gen. 15. 7. And here begin the foure hundred and thirtie yeares, at the end whereof the Israelite, came out of Egypt, Exod. 12. 41. Gal. 3. 17. Nahor came too, though not mentioned here. For he set∣led in Haran, whence it is called Nahors City, ch. 24. 10. 29. 4. 28. 2, 10. to Haran] A City of Mesopotamia, but not taking Me∣sopotamia in a strict sense, as it is taken, Act. 7. 2, 3. Gen. 24 10. 28. 2, 7, 10. and dwelt there] Likely, through Terahs old age and sicknesse so long, till they got substance and soules there, ch. 12. 5. See, Judeth 5. 8, 9. even five yeares, as may be gathered out of the thirty yeares, between Abrams cal∣ling out of Ur, and the birth of Isaac. See, Annot. on ch. 15. v. 13. CHAP. XII. Ver. 1. HAd said] For this seemes not to be a se∣cond Call; But the Narration of the first Call out of Ur, and the cause of their going forth of Ur, ch, 11. 31. and thy kindred] If they had rather stay behinde thee then remove with thee. will shew thee] As he raised this righteous man from the East, so he called him to his foot to follow him and his direction, Esay 41. 2. Likely, God bade him go to Ca∣naan, but told him not that that was the land intended for him, till he came thither, Heb. 11 8 Gen. 12. 7. And this was for the greater trial of his faith. V. 2. A great Nation] Yet Sarah now at sixty five was barren. And under this is also a spiritual seed promi∣sed, Rom. 4. 11, 12. Gal. 3. 7. blesse thee] Spiritually also, Gal. 3. 14. thou shalt be] Or be thou a blessing. God will command a blessing, as, Ps. 42. 8. 44. 4. and so, 133. 3. V. 3. And I will blesse] Like to this is that of Isaac to Jacob, Gen. 27. 29. and that of Balam to Israel, Numb. 24. 9. in thee] In thy seed Christ, Gen. 18. 18. 22. 18. Acts 3. 25, 26. Gal. 3. 8, 14. Thus the Gospel was preached unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8. From this Promise and Cove∣nant made in Ur of the Chaldees, to the giving of the Law which could not disannul it, were foure hundred and thir∣ty yeares, Gal. 3. 17, 18. V. 4. Departed] Went out by faith, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11. 8. and Lot went with him] Terahs family and Nahor stay∣ed here. See Annotations on ch. 11. 3. Here they left fol∣lowing God, and fell again to idolatry, ch. 31. 30, 53. Josh. 24, 2. Seventy five] He lived one hundred yeares after, ch. 25. 7. And Isaac his sonne, then seventy five yeares old, being borne in the one hundredth yeare of Abrahams age, ch. 21. 5. is left heire of Canaan. V. 5. Soules] Likely divers were converted Proselytes, considering his care of his family, ch. 18. 19. and their ready obedience to him, ch. 14. 14. and to Gods Or∣dinance of Circumcision, ch. 17. 23. Canaan] Deut. 8. 7, 8, 9. This was the type of an Heavenly, which Abraham looked for, Heb. 11. 9, 10. And in Salem a City of Canaan, Melchisedech dwelled, and reigned a Priest of the most High God. V. 6. Sichem] Where after the City Sichem was, chap. 33. 18. about the midst of the countrey called Sichar in our Saviours time, Joh. 4. 5 unto the Plaine] Set with a grove of oakes, Deut. 11. 30. the Canaanite] When God promiseth the cleansing of his Church, he saith, the Canaanite shall be there no more, Zach. 14. 21. V. 7. Unto thy seed] Here he tells him this is the land intended for him, and now doth promise it; whereupon it is called the Land of Promise, Heb. 11. 9. the Lords Land, Hos. 9. 3. the Holy Land, Zach. 2. 12. the Land of Immanuel, Esay 8. 8. thy seed] When as yet he had no childe, Acts 7. 5. an Altar] As, Gen. 8. 20. V. 8. Bethel] After so called, at this time Luz, ch. 28. 19. Moses calls many places by the names which were after∣wards given to them, sitting his speech to the men of that age wherein himself lived. West] Sea is here put for the West, as Desert for the South, Ps. 75. 6. V. 9. South] Next Egypt. V. 10. Into Egypt, Ps. 105. 13. V. 11. Faire] Very faire, v. 14. in her self, but more comparing her with the Egyptian women, though now she was sixty five yeares old. V. 13. My sister] Neece; she being his brothers
daughter, his fathers Grand-childe, persons so near of kin are usually called brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, Gen. 31. 28. Exod. 2. 18. which makes him say to Abi∣melech, ch. 20. 12. Indeed she is my sister. But Abram, praying her to conceale part of the truth, and purposely that the Egyptians might not conceive her to be his wife, bewrayeth weaknesse of faith and humane frailty, fearing perhaps, that if he should die without issue, Gods Pro∣mise should not have taken place, and therefore he expo∣seth her to danger to save himself, though withal he might have some hope that God would prevent that mischief. V. 15. The Princes] Courtiers. Pharaoh] The common name of the Egyptian Kings, as Abimelech of the Philistines, and Caesar of the Roman Emperours. They had other proper names, as Pharaoh Neco. 2. Kings 23. 29 Pharaoh Hophra, Jer. 44. 30. In the Grecian Monarchy they were called Ptolemies. Pharaohs house] Likely stayed there a while. V. 17. Plagued.] Psal. 105. 14. 1 Chron. 16. 21, 22. V. 20. And Pharaoh commanded] The King being angry, expects no answer. sent him away] Haply with Honour, as, Exod. 18. 27. and safe conduct. CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. SOuth] Canaan is South from Egypt. V. 2. Very rich] Ch. 12. 2. 24. 35. Prov. 10. 22. V. 5. And Tents] Which implies also many servants that dwelt in those tents. V. 6. To beare them] But they wanted pasture and wa∣ter for so many flocks and herds, whence the strife rose, v. 7. V. 7. And the Canaanite] Had taken up the better part of pasturage; neither were they to have a scandal given them by any dissensions and discords between Abram and Lot. V. 8. And Abram said to Lot] The Uncle and Superi∣our condescends herein, and chooseth rather to take wrong then to contend, 1 Cor. 6. 7. V 9 If thou wilt take] By consent of the Canaanites. Abram had no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on, Act. 7 5 Nor did he, or could he give to Lot any title to the land, but such an use of it, as upon faire and reasonable termes he might obtain and enjoy. Abram af∣ter bought a burial place, ch 23, 11, 12, 13. V. 10. Zoar] Afterwards so called, but then called Be∣lah, ch 14. 2, 8. 19. 22. The meaning is, all the Plaine of Jordan, even to Zoar was such. V. 13. Sinners] ch. 19. 5. Ezech. 16. 49, 50. Lot thinking to get Paradise found hell. V. 15. Which thou seest] Part whereof each way thou seest. So Moses viewed the land, but possessed it not, Deut. 34. 1. 4. and to thy seed] For thy sake. The heavenly Canaan to thy spiritual seed, Christs mystical body for Christs sake, Gal. 3. 16. Rom. 9. 6, 7, 8. Gal. 4. 22, 23. for ever] if they obey and keep my Covenant, Esay 65. 9. Psal. 69. 35, 36. degenerate not, John 8. 39 But else not. Deut. 4. 25, 26. Lev. 26. 33. 18. 28. Ezech. 33, 24, 25, 26. But I will give the heavenly Canaan, typified by this, Heb. 11. 10, 16. to thy spiritual seed to all eternity, Gal. 3▪ 6, 26, 28, 29. V. 16. as the dust] Ch. 28. 14. 32. 12. so Balaam said▪ Numb. 23. 10. V. 18. Plaine of Mamre] Ch. 14. 13, 24. The Plaine of Morch differs from this, and joyes to Shechem, chap. 12. 6. which is in Hebron] It had this name afterward, before it was called Kiriath-Arba, ch. 23. 2. 35 27. Josh; 14. 15. 15. 13. It was after a famous burial place, ch. 49. 31. sometime possessed by Gaints, Numb 13. 22. and driven out by Caleb, Josh, 15. 13, 14 and given to him, Josh. 14. 14. a City of Refuge in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15. 54. 20. 7. David first reigned in it. And thither most likely went the blessed Virgin to visit her Cousin E∣lizabeth, Luke 1. 39. an Altar] To sacrifice thankfully to God, and to san∣ctifie his viewed heritage. CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. IN the dayes] This falling out a little before Abram took Hagar, as the sequence of the story sheweth, and he taking Hagar in the tenth yeare after he left Haran, and came into Canaan, ch. 16. 3. He being then seventy five yeares old, ch. 12. 4. must be now eigh∣ty foure at the time of this battel. Shiaar] Chaldea. ch. 10. 10. Chedorlaomer] The chief in this expedition, though two other Kings named before him, v. 4, 5. Elam] Or Persia, ch. 10. 22. And so Chedorlaomer of Shems Progeny, had Chams and Canaans posterity for sub∣jects and servants, ch. 9. 26. who these Kings were, and what their Kingdomes cannot certainly be deter∣mined. V. 2. With Bera King of Sodom] These following were but petty Kings, Kings of Cities: which were burnt, ch. 19. Deut. 29. 23. except Zoar, fifteen yeares after, when Sarah was with childe of Isaac, as appeares, chap. 18. 10, 20, &c. V. 3. The salt sea] Josh. 3, 16. called so afterwards, the dead sea, or ake Asphaltites, of which many strange things are reported by Authors. V. 5. Rephaims] Ch. 15. 20. in Ashteroth] A City in Bashan, where Og after reigned. Emims] Where the Moabites after dwelt, Deut. 2. 9, 10, 11. V. 6. Horites] In Mount Seir, till the Edomite drove them out, Deut. 2. 22. Elparan] Gen. 21. 21. V. 7. Kadesh] So called in Moses time, it was in the de∣sert of Zin, Numb. 20. 1, 14, 16. 13. 26. 33. 36. Deut. 1. 2, 46. Amalekites] The people of that countrey, where after∣wards the Amalekites did dwell. For Amalek the Grand∣childe of Esau was yet unborn, Gen. 36. 12. Hazezon-Tamar] Which is Engedi, 2 Chron. 20. 2. which fell afterwards to the tribe of Judah, Josh. 15. 62. V. 10. Fell there] Their armies, rather then their per∣sons. For the King of Sodom escaped, meeting Abram, v. 17. V. 13. Confederate] So Abimelech and Phicol with
Abraham, ch. 21. v. 22, 23. and after with Isaac. ch. 26. 26, &c. Such confederacies with Infidels, not simply in themselves unlawful, Though specially forbidden with the Canaanite, Exod. 34. 15. Deut 7. 2. And Jeho∣shaphat justly reproved for his needlesse familiarity and as∣sociation with wicked Ahab, 2 Chron. 19. 2. V. 14. Brother] Being his brothers sonne, v. 12. trained servants] In militaty and religious disci∣pline. three hundred and eighteen] A mighty Prince, chap. 23. 6. pursued] Justly for Lots sake, though haply Chadorlao∣mers cause and quarrel might be just, v. 4. unto Dan] One of the two springs of Jordan, at the foot of Lebanon, in the North of Canaan, where was a town of that name, called Leshem or Laish, Josh. 19. 47. Judg. 14. 29. V. 15. Unto Hoba] Thus God gave the Nations be∣fore him, and made him rule over Kings: He gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bowe, he pursued them and passed safely, even by the way which he had not gone with his feet, Esay 41. 2, 3. V. 17. The Kings Dale] So called in after-times, where likely Absalom set up his pillar▪ 2 Sam. 18. 18. V. 18. Melchisedech] That this Melchisedech had fa∣ther and mother, descent or pedigree, beginning of dayes, and end of life is not to be doubted. But the Scripture presents him to us as such, no where telling us of his Pa∣rents, descent, birth or death: and so in this, and in his name Melchisedech, and in his title of Office, King of Salem; and in his Offices themselves, being both King and Priest, the Priest of the most High God, and that without being successour to any, or having any successour to him, and so as one that typically abideth for ever; and as one that is far superiour to Abraham, who blessed A∣braham, and to whom Abraham the Patriarch gave tithes; therefore in regard of all these, the Apostle makes him a notable type and figure of Christ, of his Person and Offi∣ces, of his Kingdome and Priesthood especially, as we see at large, Heb. 7. and David did so before him, Psal. 110. 4. Now who this Melchisedech should be, whe∣ther Shem, who being borne before the flood, lived seven∣ty five yeares after Abrams coming into Canaan, and about sixty five after the time of▪ history of his meeting A∣bram, who though his Parents, Birth and Death be known to us, yet not as here brought in under the name of Mel∣chisedech; or whether it were some neighbouring King of Canaan, of another Kindred from that of Abraham, Heb. 7. 6. extraordinarily raised up and sanctified by God to this purpose, though haply it may be probably, yet it can∣not certainly be defined. Melchisedech King of Salem] Heb. 7. 2. Thus righte∣ousnesse and peace do kisse each other, Psal. 85. 10. Esay 32. 17. Salem] Not Salim, mentioned, John 3. 23. But Salem, Ps. 76. 2. Jerusalem. brought forth] Not for sacrifice, but to refresh Abram and his army, as, 2 Sam. 17. 27, 28, 29, The neglect whereof was punished in the Moabites and Ammonites, Deut. 23. 3, 4. and he was the Priest] King and Priest; both offices concurring in one Person. It was an ancient manner a∣mong Heathen Nations, Rex Anius Rex idem hominum, Phoebíque sacerdos. And how much short was it with the Patriarchs, and first-borne in Israel, before the Levites supplied their place? V. 19. And he blessed him] A part of the Priests office, Numb. 6, 23, 27. 1 Chron. 23 13. Heb. 7. 6, 7. The lesse is blessed of the greater. V. 20. Blessed be God] Thanked and praised. and he gave him tithes of all] Abram gave Melchize∣dech, Heb. 7. 2, 4. 9, 10, 11. And Levi in Abrms loines. Tythes are due as an homage to God: as tribute is to Kings. They are called holy, an heave-offering to the Lord, Lev. 27. 30 Numb. 18. 24. As here Abram, so Jacob also paid them to the Lord, before the Levitical Law, Gen. 28. 22. In the Law of Moses they are strict∣ly enjoyned, Numb. 18. 20, 21. yea, if redeemed, a fifth part must be added to it; if changed, both it and the change thereof shall be holy, Lev. 27. 31, 33. yea, Heathen paid tithes both Greek and Latine. And here, being paid to Melchizedech, a type of Christ, they are not abolished by the Gospel. of all] Of all the spoiles, of Sodoms too, and of all the vanquished. So of the Midianites, Numb. 31. 28, 29, 30. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. V. 22. I have lifted up my hand] He had sworne or vowed, when he went forth to this war, and implored Gods aide, Deut 32. 40. Dan 12. 7. Rev. 10. 5, 6. V. 23. Lest thou shouldest say] Thou or any man should say, that covetousnesse of the prey drew me to this warre, or that this victory, or any thing else enriched me, but Gods extraordinary blessing, Esther 9. 15, 16. CHAP. XV. Ver. 1. AFter these things] Spoken by Abram to the King of Sodom. in a vision] Of the night, v. 5. Numb. 22. 19. 20, There are nightly visions by dreams in sleep, ch. 31. 11. 46. 2. 1 Kings 3. 5. And so God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, Gen. 20. 3. and secret revelations came to Eliphaz, Joh 4. 12, 13. whereupon the false Pro∣phets counterseited false dreams and visions in them, Deut. 13. 1. Jer. 23. 25, 28, 32. And there are also visions to men waking, as, Ezech. 1. 1. Dan. 8. 2. 10. 4, 7. 2 Cor. 12. 2. Acts 2. 17. Both wayes God made himselfe known to his Prophets, Numb. 12. 6. whence Prophets were called Seers, and Prophecie is named a vision, Esay 1. 1. Here is meant an open apparition, which Abram a Prophet, ch 20. 7. beheld waking with the eyes of his body. For v. 9, 10. shewes, he was waking, and a deep sleep is said to fall upon him after this vision, v. 12. In what manner, and how glorious this vision was is not set down particularly. feare not] The Prophets were sometimes terrified with visions, at the visible appearance of the Majesty of God So, Dan. 10. 7, &c. feare not] For the presence of my glory, for thine ene∣mies, for any discomfort whatsoever. I am thy shield] Against thine enemies, those vanquish∣ed Kings, and all else. reward] Beyond all merit and measure. I go] Am going on, going away, mine age going on towards mine end. V. 2. Childlesse] Yet he rejects not the Promises of God concerning his seed, but as perplexed between feare and hope he bemoanes his sad state and condition, inti∣mates and commends his desire to God, that he would at length remember his Promise made to him concerning his seed.
and the steward] He most likely mentioned, ch. 24. 2. He now is the guide and stay of my family. Here Abram complaines not of his steward, but commends him ra∣ther. of Damascus] By his Ancestors, though he borne in Abrams house, v. 3. V. 3. Is mine heire] Likeliest for the present, in my thoughts, if I go on and die childlesse, my Nephew Lot having no sonnes but daughters: and Eleezer having all under his charge. V. 5. And tell the stars] This rherefore was in the night. if thou be able to number them] Now at this view: though haply it were possible for Astronomers by much Art, to at∣tain to the number of the visible stars. God speaks, as often, according to common account. Jer. 3. 22. so shall thy seed be] Innumerable, Deut. 1. 10. specially counting his spiritual seed, children by faith, according to the Promise, Rom. 4. 11, 12, 13. Rom. 9. 8 Gal. 3. 7, 29. innumerable as the dust of the earth, ch. 18. 16. as the sand on the sea-shore, ch. 22. 17. V. 6. And he believed in the Lord] For the innume∣rablenesse of his seed, and principally for the promised seed, wherein all the Nations of the earth should be blessed. Believed] Here is belief or faith first named in the Old Testament, whence Abram is called the Father of all Believers, Rom. 4. 11, 16, 17. And this before either Circumcision was ordained, or the Law given, Rom. 4. 9, 10 Gal. 3. 17. Now the word belief or faith signi∣fies a lively motion of the heart and spirit, firmely resting in the things spoken. For which this belief or faith in Abram is much commended, Rom. 4. 18, to 22. Counted] Imputed, thought, esteemed. for righteousnesse] Ps. 106. 31. Rom. 4. 3, 9. Now of this the Apostle inferreth justification by faith without works, both to Abram, Rom. 4. 4, 5. as having been an idolater, Josh. 24. 2. and still without glory of works be∣fore God, Rom. 4. 2. and also to all believers, Rom. 4. 23, 24. V. 8. Whereby shall I know?] This he asked to be strengthened against humane infirmity, and to know somewhat more particularly of the manner of performance: and likely it was by a special motion of Gods Spirit, as that also of Gideon, Judg. 6. 17, 37. and of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 8. And others like by divine instinct, Gen. 24. 13, 14. 1 Sam. 14. 9, 10. without which such qaestions are not so lawful, Luke 1. 18. V. 9. Take me an heifer] Not for sacrifice, though all sorts here commanded to be used were fit for sacrifice; But for confirmation of this Promise and Covenant, as, Jer. 34. 18. V. 12. And when the Sun was going down] By compa∣ring this with the fifth verse, it seemes the day was spent by Abram in preparing and doing according to that com∣mand, v. 9. a deep sleep] As, ch. 2. 21. extasie or trance. an horrour] See, Dan. 10. 8, 9. Here shadowing out the great distresses Abrams children should have through vexation of their enemies. V. 13. In a land that is not theirs] In Canaan and Egypt. and they shall afflict them] Not all that time, nor the greater part, but upward of the last hundred years. Foure hundred yeares] Acts 7. 6. From the birth of I∣saac to their going out of Egypt: Thus, From the birth of Isaac to the birth of Jacob sixty yeares, Gen. 25. v. 26. Thence to the birth of Joseph ninety yeares: Jacob being so old at Josephs birth, which is collected thus; Jacob was one hundred and thirty when. Joseph was fourty, viz. thirty when Pharaoh advanced him, ch. 41. 46. after which passed seven yeares of plenty, and three of famine, when Jacob came down, ch. 47. 9. Now Jacob was fourteen yeares with Laban before Joseph was borne, ch. 30. 25. de∣ducting then those fourteen yeares before Joseph was born, and fourty yeares of his age out of Jacobs one hundred and thirty, and so will remain seventy five or seventy six, for the age of Jacob when he came to Laban, and so ninety yeares old he was when he had Joseph. Now Joseph lived in Egypt after his father came thither seventy yeares, Gen. 50. 26. Between the death of Joseph and birth of Moses were sixty yeares, as the undoubted beginning, and un∣doubted end of the foure hundred yeares, do clearly and necessarily evince and enforce. Thence to the Israelites going out of Egypt, in the eightieth yeare of Moses age, eighty yeares, Acts. 7. 23, 24, 30 Now these several summes cast up come to foure hundred 60 90 110 60 80 400. In Exod. 12. 40, 41. and Gal. 3. 17. are foure hundred and thirty years reckoned. But that is from the first giving the Promise and Covenant to Abram, which was in Ur of the Chaldees, to the foresaid time of their coming out of E∣gypt, which thirty yeares are thus made up; viz, five yeares in Haran, at the end whereof Abram was seventy five, ch. 12. 4. Thence ten yeares to the taking of Hagar, ch. 16. 3. Thence fifteen to the birth of Isaac when A∣bram was one hundred yeares old, ch. 21. 5. And thus from the first Promise to their coming into Egypt were two hundred and twenty yeares. And their time in E∣gypt two hundred and ten yeares. And this I take to be the true and clear Account of these times. The particu∣lars wherein I differ from the great Annotations and o∣thers, in this Account I do willingly submit to the judge∣ment of the learned. V. 14. Will I judge] Exod. 7. 8, 9, 10, 12, 14. cha∣pters, and Psal. 78. 43, to 52. and 105. 27, to 37. with great substance] Exod. 3. 21, 22. 12. 35, 36. 38. V. 16. In the fourth generation] Caleh the sonne of Hezron was the fourth generation from Judah, 1 Chron. 2. and Aaron and Moses were the fourth from Levi, Exod 6. 16, 18, 20. V. 17. A smoking furnace, and a burning lamp] By which God did passe between those pieces, Jer. 34. 18, 19. haply shadowing hereby their afflictions in the furnace of Egypt, Deut. 4. 20. and the burning bush, Exod. 3. 2. V. 18. Have I given] By Promise already, or this shewes the certainty of the Promise. from the river of Egypt] Sichor, Josh. 13. 3. Jer. 2. 18. Euphrates] The Lands so far became Tributary in Davids and Solomons dayes, 2 Sam. 8. 3, &c. 1 Kings 4. 21. 2 Chron. 9. 26. If they possessed not all that was promised, the cause was in their breach of Covenant with God, not in Gods with them. V. 19. The Kenites, &c.] Here are ten Nations reck∣oned. After usually reduced to seven, Deut. 7. 1. Acts 13. 19.
CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. NOw Sarai] Being seventy five years old, and Abram being eighty five when he took Hagar, ch. 12. 4. ch. 16. 3, 16. Fifteen yeares after, Sarai beiug then ninety, and Abraham one hundred they had Isaac, ch. 17. 17. an handmaid] Or bondmaid, ch. 21. 10, 12. Opposed to a free-woman, Gal. 4. 22. an Egyptian] Of Chams posterity. Hagar] The Apostle allegorically makes her a figure of the Covenant of the Law on Mount Sinai, and of the earthly Jerusalem, gendring to bondage; and Sarah of the Covenant of the Gospel, and of Jerusalem which is a∣bove, gendring to freedome, Gal. 4. 22, to the end of the chapter. Gal. 3. 12, 14, 18, 22, 29. V. 2. Restrained me] Ch. 20. 18. God had pro∣mised a seed to Abram, but not as yet unto Sarai; there∣fore doubting whether she should be the mother, she sets on foot this course; not lawful in it self, Mal. 2. 15. The impediment she alledgeth, why she was out of hope of bearing childe, ch. 18. 11. was fifteen yeares after. it may be] No certainty. But after Sarah had a Son by Promise. ch. 18. 10. Gal. 4. 23. Rom. 9. 9. I may obtain] Thus Rachel and Leah did, and said, ch. 30. 3, 6, 9. by the Law, Exod. 21. 4. Bond-servants-children were their Masters. V. 3. Ten yeares] Since he left Haran. to be his wife] A secondary wife, a Concubine, ch. 25. 6. so Keturah, Gen. 25. 1. 1 Chro. 1. 32. so Bilha and Zil pa, Gen. 35▪ 22. yet called wives, ch. 37. 2. inferiour to a lawful wife. This a fault and infirmity of faith in Abra∣ham too. V. 4. Conceived] Quickly, v. 16. despised] Prov. 30. 21, 23. it seems by Saraies words, v. 5. in an high degree. V. 5. My wrong] Likely Abram bear too much with Hagars insolencie, and was the more tender of her because she was with childe by him. So the Israelites too passion∣ate against Moses and Aaron, Exod. 5. 21. and Zipporah against Moses, Exod. 4. 26. either right thou my wrong, or beare the punishment thereof from God, yet otherwise she made a patterne of wively obedience, 1 Pet. 3. 6. V. 6. Thy maid] So he calls her still, and so Hagar calls her Mistresse, v. 8. in thine hand] To correct her for her fault. V. 7. And the Angel] Christ the Angel of the Cove∣nant, Mal. 3. 1. called here Jehovah, v.  speaking as God, v. 10. called an Angel, Exod. 14. 19. 13. 21. 23. 20, 21, 22, 23. Esay. 63. 9. Shur] Towards Egypt her countrey, Exod. 15. 22. In this wildernesse her posterity after dwelt, chap. 25. 17. 18. V. 8. Whence] As, ch. 3. 9. V. 11. Thy affliction] Though her self the cause of it. V. 12. A wilde man] He after dwelt in the wilder∣nesse as a Salvage, and was a warlike man, fierce and un∣ruly, rough and rude, of such courage, as to match all his opposers, ch. 21. 20. his hand] A quarrelsome man: he for booty by prey and pillage, they most to defend themselves. and he shall dwell] His seed be a several Nation from his brethren, border upon them, and they not able to o∣verbear him, ch. 25. 9, 18. 37. 23. V. 13. Have I also, &c.] Magnifying Gods mercy, for his careful eye and providence over her, for vouchsafing her so clear a sight of him, and that even here in the de∣sert, which was more marvell then if it had been in her holy Masters family, and that after her so ill carriage of her self, and letting her yet live after it; many after the sight of God were afraid, yea, some that they should die, Gen. 3. 10. 32. 30. Exod. 3. 9. 24. 12. 33. 20. Deut. 4. 33. and, 5. 24. Judg 6. 22. 13. 22, Esay 6. 2. 5. Luke 5. 8. V. 14. Beerlehai-roi] i. e. The Well of him that liveth and seeth me. Kadesh] Kadesh-barneah, Numb. 32. 8. 13. 26. Deut. 1. 19. 9. 23. Josh. 14, 6, 7. V. 15. Abram called his name] Therefore Hagar re∣turned as the Angel commanded. Ishmael] Likely upon Hagars relation. V. 16. Eighty six] See Annot. on v. 1. For the space of thirteen yeares after this God keepeth silence, and speaketh not to Abram, ch. 17. 1. CHAP. XVII. Verse 1. APpeared] In a visible forme, v. 22. before me] As alwayes in my presence, Gen. 5. 22. 48. 15. 1 King. 2. 4. 3. 6. 2 Kings 26. 3. V. 2. Make] Renew or stablish, it being made, as, v. 7. multiply] ch. 12▪ 2, V. 3. Fell on his face] v. 17. In way of feare and reve∣rence of gratulation and rejoycing. and God talked with him] After he had lifted him up, as may appear out of the seventeenth verse, where he is said to fall upon his face again. V. 4. My Covenant is with thee] Ch. 12. 2. a father of many Nations] Rom. 4. 16, 17. even all believ∣ing Christians, Gal. 3. 28, 29. following Abrahams do∣ctrine and example. V. 5. Abraham] i. e. a high father of a multitude, Ne∣hem. 9. 7. so Jacobs name changed to Israel, ch. 32. 28. E∣say 6. 2. Rev. 2. 17. a father] Rom. 4. 17. Gen. 17. 6. have I] Ch. 15. 8. V. 6. Kings] As Saul, David, Solomon, &c. of the Ishma∣elites, Midianites, and Idumeans. Also the faithful Kings of the Gentiles, Rev 21. 24. V. 7. And thy seed] Specially Isaac, v. 19. ch. 21. 12, 22. 7. 18. Rom. 9. 8. everlasting] In respect of the long continuance of the outward ceremony of Circumcision; but for the spiritual part literally everlasting in Christ, Heb. 13. 20. 9. 15. Luke. 1. 71, 73. 1 Pet, 1. 4. a God unto thee] Herein consisteth the summe and sub∣stance of all; God himself wholly being applied to man for blessing and salvation. Ps. 144. 15. exercising his per∣fections for mans happinesse. V. 8. Wherein thou art a stranger] Acts 7. 5. Hebr. 11. 9. everlasting] So, Esay 60. 21. which for the earthly Ca∣naan is to be understood conditionally, if his seed keep the Covenant, which they brake, and so kept it but for a time; Though the outward signe is changeable, yet the Cove∣nant
it self remaineth one in substance for ever, Esay 63. 18. Lev. 18. 28. 20. 22. V. 10. My Covenant] Token of it, v. 11. so Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7. 8. so the Lamb is the Lords Passeover, Exod. 12. 11▪ the bread the Lords body. It is called the seale of the righteousnesse of faith, Rom 4. 11. sealing on Gods part, that he would give them that promi∣sed seed the Messiah, and in him accept them, pardon and cleanse them; and on their part, that they would believe in the Messiah, and as Gods peculiar people, mortifie their usts, and be new creatures. Everyman-childe] The man is the head of the woman, from him the generation proceedeth, 1 Cor. 11. 3, 8. wo∣men are baptized, Act. 8. 12. Circumcised] With shedding of blood, with shame and much paine, Exod. 4. 25, 26. Gen. 34. 25. It figured morti∣fication, Deut. 10. 16. 30. 6. Rom. 2. 25, 29. 4. 11. Phil. 3. 3. Col. 2. 11, 13. See, Lev. 26. 4I. Esay 6. 10. Jer. 4. 4. 6. 10. Lev. 19. 23. Heb. 9. 22. Circumcised] By whom it is not specified. Abraham did it, v. 23. And likely the Parents, Masters or Magistrates did in case of neglect Zipporah did it, Exod 4. 25. V. 12. Eight dayes old] Though it fell on the Sabbath∣day, Josh. 7. 22. Creatures till eight dayes old were un∣clean, not fit for sacrifice, Lev. 22. 27. And so in man∣kinde, Lev. 12. 2. The same number of dayes in many o∣ther Levitical rites, Lev 8. 33, 35. 9. 1. 14. 8, 9, 10. 15. 13, 14. Numb. 6. 9, 10. Ezech. 43. 26, 27. And yet we reade, Josh 5. 2. &c. the day and Sacrament it self neglect∣ed; and the Lord commanding Joshuah, to circumcise all the males borne in the wildernesse, in that space of fourty yeares wandring, at Gilgal. And haply sicknesse might put off circumcision till time of health, Hos. 6. 6. V. 13. Bought with thy money] Heathen Proselytes and their Infants, were hereby made capable and partakers of Gods Covenant. in your flesh] Genital part. To teach regeneration of na∣ture, Psal. 517. to make an holy seed, Ezra 9. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Thus honouring that uncomely part, to beare the mark of the heavenly Covenant. Thus the foolishnesse of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor 12. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. V. 14. Cut off from his people] The Infant here can be in no fault, as not capable either of the command or contempt; He cannot be said to break the Covenant, in the end of this verse) that can do nothing that belongeth to the keeping of it. Neither was Moses childe in danger of it, but the father, Exod. 4. 24. neither was the want of Circumcision so prillous, except in case of contempt or wilful neglect, Josh. 5. 7. As likewise it was with the Passe∣over, enjoyned upon the same danger and penalty, Exod. 12. 14, 15. And yet omitted in the wildernesse, and put off upon occasions to the second moneth, Numb. 9. v 10, 11. 2 Chron. 30. 2, 3. The penalty here then is laid upon that man, who not being circumcised in his Infancy, should afterwards also wilfully and contemptuously neglect it; and upon those by whose default Circumcision of the In∣fant is omitted, as Ezech. 18. 20 Now the penalty of cut∣ting off from his people here; is elsewhere in Scripture ex∣pressed in other cases, with this variety; shall be cut off, Lev. 17. 4. utterly cut off, Numb 15. 31. cut off from Is∣rael, Exod. 12. 15. cut off from my presence, Lev. 22. 3. from the Congregation of Israel, Exod. 12. 19 from among the Congregation, Numb. 19. v. 20. from the midst of my people, Ezech. 14. 8. in the sight of their people, Lev. 20. 18 as in the case of Moses before mentioned, cut off from the earth. And it is used as a threatening and penalty a∣gainst divers sorts of sins and sinners, against such as eate leavened bread in the feast of the Passeover, Exod. 12. 15, 19. or forbear to keep that feast, Numb. 9. 13. or that eate fat, Lev. 7. 25. or blood, Lev 7. 27. 17. 10, 14. or that eate of the flesh of the peace-offering on the third day, Lev. 19. 8. or that eat of the flesh of sacrifice, having their uncleannesse on them, or being uncleane, do not purifie themselves, Numb. 19. 13, 20. or ha∣ving touched any unclean thing, Lev 7. 20, 21. 22. 3. or that bring not their sacrifice to the door of the Taber∣nacle of the Congregation to be killed there, and not else∣where, Lev 17. 4, 9. or that shall not afflict his soule on the fast-day, the tenth day of the seventh moneth, Lev. 23. 29. or doth any work in that same day, or that defi∣leth the Sabbath to do any work therein, Exod. 31. 14. or that lieth with a woman in her sicknesse, Lev. 20. 18. or with a sister, Lev. 20. 17. or an idolater, Ezech. 4. 8. or that gives of his seed to Molech, Lev. 20. 2, 3, 4 or that turneth after wizards and such as have familiar spirits, ev. 20. 6. or that doth ought presumptuously, Numb. 15. 30, 31. All these are expressely threatened with, and sen∣tenced to this punishment. And the meaning of the phrase is most usually taken to signifie a cutting off by death, and it is so expressed, Exod. 31. 14. Lev 17. 4 20. 2, 3, 4. 5. And must needs be so understood when it is used against grievous sins and crimes, as against idolatry, witchcraft, incest, and sins done presumptuously, despising the Word of the Lord, and reproaching him. This penalty is to be inflicted by the Magistrates power no doubt: And in case of his faile, God himself threatens and undertakes to do it, Lev. 17. 10, 20. 2, 3, 4. 5, 6. 23. 30. And for the lesser offences mentioned, they being wittingly and wilfully done in Gods Worship and service, and against his plaine and peremptory command; I see not how they come short of sins of presumption, Numb. 15. 30. which are doomed to death in the judgement of the learned upon that place. I conceive therefore that they fall short, that by this pe∣nalty here, will understand no more, but that such an offender is to be cast off, and held for no Jew, but as an Heathen man. And they also that would apply this phrase here, and in other places of the Old Testament, for the maintenance of Ecclesiastical Excommunication among the Jewes. The doubtfulnesse of the meaning of the phrase hath made me the more inquisitive into it, I con∣fesse, if not too tedious in it. However I leave all to bet∣ter judgements. And for my part like not in things dubi∣ous to be too definitive. V. 15. Sarah] Yet in the New Testament it is written Sara, without the [h] the Greek tongue having no [h] at the end of words. V. 16. Nations] 1 Pet. 3. 6. Jerusalem, which is above her answerable type, is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. V. 17. Laughed] For joy and wonder, Rom. 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. as over-joyed and amazed at the promise which he believed, Heb. 11. 12. rejoycing even at the promised seed, Joh. 8. 56. an hundred yeares old] Rom. 4. 19, 20. he did hope a∣gainst hope. If Abraham married Keturah thirty seven years after this time, and had six children by her, then surely God shewed his power in renewing Abrahams vigour and strength of body as the Eagles, Psal. 103. 5. or it may rather seem that Abraham took Keturah in Sa∣rabs life-time, within those thirty seven yeares between the birth of Isaac and her death, seeing Keturah is called his Concubine, 1 Chron. 1. 32. V. 18. Oh that Ishmael] Ch. 16. 10.
V. 19. Isaac] Laughter, Chap. 21. 6. V. 21. My Covenant] Thirteen times named in this chapter, Luke 1. 72, 73, 74. with Isaac] Ch. 21. 12. Rom. 9. 7, 8. Gal. 3. 29. at this set time] Ch, 18. 10. This was just a yeare before Isaacs birth. V. 22. Went up] Ascending, vanished out of his sight; so from Jacob, ch. 35. 13. so from Manoah and his wife, Judg. 13. 20. V. 23. In the self-same day] Of the command, not eight dayes after. V. 24. When he was circumcised] By whom Abraham was circumcised is not set down. But he is said to circum∣cise the rest, v. 23. some say that now the Jewes use Chi∣rurgions in this service. CHAP. XVIII. Verse 1. PLaines] O. Oak-grove. of Mamre,] Ch. 13. 18. 14. 13. 23. 19. V. 2. Three men] So▪ in his thought, and in appearance. But thus he entertained Angels at unawares, Heb. 13. 2. But one of them is called Jehova, 13, 14, 17, 20, 22. And after Abraham so acknowledgeth him, v. 25, 27. The o∣ther two were created Angels, Ch 19. 1. V. 3. Lord] Speakes to one of them, in shew, the chief. V. 6. Three measures] Jewes write that their measure, which they call Seah, the Greeks Saton, containes as much as one hundred fourty foure Hens egges, about two gallons and 1/2 of our measure, three of these measures make an Ephah, containing about seven gallons, and 1/2 V. 8. And they did eate] Ch. 19. 3. They had true bo∣dies for the time, and did truly eate. Though a Spirit hath not flesh and bones. Luke 24. 39. yet Spirits may, and by Gods dispensation sometimes do assume humane bo∣dies. V. 9. Where is Sarah thy wife] Thus they begin to manifest themselves to be more then men. V. 10. He said] Jehova, v. 13. returne] Not by apparition again, but by performance of promise, ch. 21. 1. according to the time of life] From this time, according as the time of life is between conception and birth; so many moneths as a woman goes with childe, Rom. 9. 9. This Promise argued more then men. V. 11. After the manner of women] Rom 4. 19. Heb. 11. 11. V. 12. Laughed] Not as Abraham, ch. 17. 17. but through weaknesse of saith, and therefore it is reproved, v. 13. yet commended, Heb. 11. 11. after sure she did better recollect her self, Luk. 1 45. after she laughed for joy, ch. 21. 6. within her self] Not outwardly and openly, which hap∣ly made her the more readily deny it. V. 13. And the Lord said] Jehova said, Christ, so, v. 17. He knew her thoughts themselves. fying, shall I, &c] She used, if not the very same words, yet to the same sense. V. 15. Denied, for she was afraid] Weaknesses and fail∣ings in Saints. V. 16. Toward Sodom] As going thither, the two An∣gels did so, ch. 19. 1. V. 17. Shall I hide] Amos 3. 7. Joh. 15. 15. Abraham a Prophet, ch. 20 7. and a friend, 2 Chron. 20. 7. V. 19. He will command] Duty of Parents, and Masters of families, and example to them, Gen. 28. 1. Deut 6. 7. 11. 10. 32. 46. Job 1. 5. Prov. 6. 20. V. 20. Sodom and Gomorrah] Admah and Zeboim, Deut. 29. 23. Hos. 11. 8. V. 21. I will go down and see] God speaks after the man∣ner of men, as, ch. 11. 5, 7. V. 22. And the men] Two of the three, ch. 19. 1. stood yet before the Lord] Jehovah. This Abraham now knew. V. 23. Drew near] A signe and fruit of saith in prayer, Heb. 7. 19. 10. 22. V. 24. Within the City] Implying the like for the other three Cities. V. 25. That be far from thee] That the righteous should be as the wicked, taken away in justice, wrath and venge∣ance, as the wicked Sodomites here were; though in pub∣lick calamities they are sometimes taken away, as the wheat is thrashed with the chaffe, yet it is in mercy to them. V. 32. Ten] Jer. 5. 1. God offers mercy if there were but one, Esay 65. 8. sometimes again he forbids his Pro∣phets to pray for such, Jer 15. 1. Ezech. 14. 14. CHAP. XIX. Verse 1. TWo Angels] Two of the three, chap. 18. 2, 22. in the gate] As Abraham in the tent door, ch. 18. 1. Both entertain Angels at unawares, Heb. 13. 2. V. 2. Behold now] Now that the night is come on. Nay] To try his affection, and haply they would have done so otherwise, to see the behaviour of the people, and their carriage, ch. 18. 21. V. 3. They turned in] Upon his pressing of them. A sleight invitation may be seriously refused; and yet that which is pressing be accepted afterwards; so, Luke 24. 28, 29. and this without Popish equivocation, or mental re∣servation. unleavened] For haste. And so unleavened is to be un∣derstood, ch. 18. 6. See, Exod. 12. 39. V. 4. But before they lay down] Likely the rare beauty of the two men (Angels) being soon noted and spread a∣broad occasioned this. all the people] So vile were they all. V. 5. called unto Lot, Esay 3. 9. proclaim their sin, im∣pudence. know them] Hence that sin is called Sodomy or Sodo∣metry, as from Simon is the name Simony, Acts 8. 18. Jude v. 7. Rom. 1. 23, to 27. V. 7. Brethren] In nature, Act. 17. 26. Esay 58, 7 Gen. 29. 4. 1 Sam. 30. 22, 23. And in neighbourhood. V. 8. Two daughters] Virgins; yet betrothed, v. 14. This sinful in Lot, Rom. 3. 8. Neither had he such power over his daughters, nor ought they to have yielded to him herein. Haply he might think and hope by this strange offer, to take off their mindes, qualifie their present heat by some delayes, and alter them from their whole purpose by degrees. As Reuben sought by his strange offer, Gen. 42. 37. to alter his fathers minde, and so indeed brought him at last to let Benjamin go with them, chap. 43. 9, 10.
V. 9 Stand further] Spoken in disdain, as, Esay 65. 5. needs be a Judge] Now and heretofore, 2 Pet. 7. 8. pressed sore] To impudence they joyne violence, as, Judg. 19. 22. 20. 5. Their other sins are mentioned else∣where, as, Ezech. 16. 49. V. 11. With blindnesse] Such, as they could not see the door, though likely the house, and the way to their owne houses; so dazled, such a blindnesse likely as that of those Aramites, 2 Kings 6. 18. which could see to follow the Prophet, though they could not distinctly discern who he was, nor the way they went, nor the City whereto they came, v. 20. Mar. 8. 24. Luke 24. 16. wearied themselves] Infinite impudence in sin. V. 14. Which married] Shortly should, being about to marry them, and already betrothed, Deut. 22. v. 23, 24. Mat. 1. 18, 20, 23, 24, 25. V. 15. Which are here] Possibly he had other daugh∣ters which were married, and were dead, or else refused and perished with their husbands. But this not so likely. V. 16. Laid hold] John 6. 44. V. 17. That he said] Jehovah; most likely, by the pas∣sages in the ensuing verses. He had now left Abraham, met them, and made himself known to Lot. Look not] Thou, or any in thy company, v. 26. Luke 17. 22. See, Luke 9. 62. Mat. 24. 16, 17, 18. Phil. 3. 13, 14. V. 19. I cannot escape to the mountain] In so hasty a flight make so long a journey, lest ere I get thither the judgement poured out should overtake me. His infirmity of faith and fearfulnesse, out of which he left Zoar also, v. 30. V. 22. I cannot] Mar. 6. 5. Exod. 32. 10. Deut. 9. 14. Gen. 32. 26. Zoar] Little, before Bela, ch. 14. 2. V. 23. The Sun was risen] Hasty flight from break of day, v. 15. to Sun-rising and speedy execution of ju∣stice. V. 24. Then the Lord] Jehovah from Jehovah. Suites well with a plurality of persons in the unity of the Deity. brimstone and fire] Luke 17. 28, 29, 30. Fit judgement for their stinking burning lusts, and fire unnaturally de∣scending, to punish their unnatural lusts. And this but a forerunner of their everlasting punishment, in that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone for ever, Rev. 21. 8. Jude v 7. V 25. Overthrew these Cities] Deut. 29. 23 Esay 13 19. Jer. 50. 40. Amos 4. 11. V. 26. From behinde him] Either Lot going before, and she following behinde him, looked back; or Lot coming hindmost to haste them forward, she looked back, be∣hinde and beyond him. a pillar of salt] A statue of salt; not such salt as will melt with raine, and turne into water, but a kinde of rockie mineral salt, which will endure all weathers, and serve for a lasting monument, Numb. 18. 19 2 Chron 13. 5. This place of this Plaine is called the salt sea, ch. 14. 3. Salt to season us with better wisdome, Luke 17. 32. 9. 62. V. 27. Stood] Ch. 18. 22. V. 28. The smoak] Before it was as the Garden of the Lord, ch. 13. 10. but now fearfully destroyed, Psal. 107. 34. V. 29. Remembred Abraham] Ch. 12. 1. 14. 14. 16. 18. 23, &c. yet this excludes not a regard had to the righteousnesse of Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. V. 30. In the mountain] Whare the Lord appointed him first, v. 17. so now he findes it had been best to have fol∣lowed Gods Will at the first. feared to dwell in Zoar, and he dwelt in a cave] Weak∣nesse of faith and other causes might occasion this feare. two daughters] Maidens, v. 8. V. 31. In the earth] She knew there were people in Zo∣ar: and saw the judgement to be particular, not universal over the earth or Canaan: and that Abraham and his fa∣mily were not far off. But she complaines, as for the pre∣sent mured up in a cave, and in this solitary life, without society of any but themselves, like to be deprived of all hope of marriage; and this feare and passion blinding her, drives her to this desperate damnable course. V. 32. Wine] Which they had brought from Zor, conceiving, that unlesse drunk he would never sin so foully. perceived not] Drunkennesse drownes all understanding, sense and conscience. He did prostitute their chastity, v. 8. They overthrow his. This just, as from God, though evil in them. He righteous in Sodom, and almost Sodomitical here. seed of our father] They seem to be greedy of having children of their own kin, and not of the faithlesse and cursed Nations. And by giving the names of Moah and Ben-ammi, v. 37, 38. even to boast of it. V. 37. Moah] The Moabites idolaters, neighbours and enemies to the Israelites, yet Ruth a Moabitesse and our Saviour came of her. V. 38. Ben ammi] Sonne of my people. Ammonites like the Moabites to the Israelites. Many foule faults and infirmities in Lot, and yet pardoned upon repentance, and he commended, 2 Pet. 2. 7. CHAP. XX. Verse 1. THence] From the Plaines of Mamre, ch. 18. 1. There it is likely he had now li∣ved about fourteen yeares, ch. 13. 18. 14. 13. between Kadesh and Shur] Ch. 16. 14, 7. Gerar] Ch. 10. 19. Hither Isaac came to sojourne, ch. 26. 1, 6. and after went from Gerar to the valley of Gerar, v. 17. V. 2. She is my sister] Abraham falls into the same sinne the second time, ch. 12. 13. And so Jehoshaphat in joyning with Ahab, and after with Ahaziah, reproved both times, 2 Chron 9. 2. 20. 37. Abimelech] The common or usual name of the Kings of the Philistines, ch. 26. 1. Psal. 34. title. See, Anno. on ch. 12. 15. V. 3. God came] Psal. 105. 14. in a dream by night] Dreams natural are not much to be heeded, as being full of vanities and deceits, Eccles. 5. 3, 7. Esay 29. 7, 8. Job 20 8. Dreames are some∣times by the illusions of Satan, as to the false Prophets, Deut. 13. 1, 3, 5. Jer. 23. 25, 27. 27. 9. 29. 8. Zach. 10. 2. Jude v. 8. Dreames are sometimes super∣natural, sent of God, and bring their evidence and assurance with them: God thereby signifying what he would, or what men should do. And thus God sends dreames some∣times upon extraordinary occasions to wicked men, as here
to Abimelech; and so to Laban, Pharah, and his butler, and baker, to the Midianite, Judg. 7. 13. to Nebuchadnez¦zar, to Pilates wife, Mat. 27. 19. And all these, for the good of his own servants and people. And chiefly God sends them to his choice servants themselves, as to Jacob, to Solo∣mon, to Daniel, to Joseph the sonne of Jacob, to Joseph the husband of the blessed Virgin. And this was one of the ordinary meanes whereby God revealed his Will unto his Prophets. Numb. 12. 6. Joel 2. 28 Acts 2. 17. Under which colour Saul complaines of the want of them, 1 Sam. 28. 15. a dead man] A condition and exception is implied, v. 7. So, Jonah 3. v. 4. John 3. 18. The Lord had now struck him and his, v. 17, 18. And here tells him the cause. V. 4 Near her] Nor touch her, v. 6. being hindred by Gods plague and sicknesse, v. 17, 18. a righteous Nation] Seeing it on his family, v. 17, 18. and fearing it on all his people and subjects. As they sometimes smart for the Princes sinne; so ch. 34. 24. 2 Sam. 24. 17. so threatened here, 27. V. 5. Even she her self said] It was even Sarahs sinne also. integrity] Yet he had a wife, v. 17 but haply he thought Polygamy no sin. V. 6. Withheld thee] Gods restraining grace in the wicked, giving meanes to stay from evil, Gen. 31. 7. 1 Sam. 25. 26. Gen. 35. 5 Exod. 34. 24. And again sending delusions when it pleaseth him, for the punishment of sin, 2 Thes. 2. 7. against me] Though wronging in it both Abraham and Sarah, Psal. 51. 4. V. 7. A Prophet] Psal. 105. 15. To whom God famili∣arly revealed himself and his Will, and who foresaw Christs day, ch. 18. 17, 18, 19. John 8. 56. Some Pro∣phets foretel this to come; some only interpret Scripture, as, 1 Cor. 14. 3, 29. 31, 32. Rom. 12. 6. Aaron is called Moses Prophet, i. e. Interpreter, Exod. 7. 1. and he shall pray for thee] Prayer for others is the work of a Prophet, Jer 14. 11. 15. 1. 27. 18. V. 12. Indeed she is my sister] See, Annotat. on chap. 11. 19. V. 13. When God caused me] In the Hebrew it is, when they, even God, or the gods caused errare facerent Deus, So, 2 Sam . 23. Here Elohim is coupled with a word plu¦ral, expounded singularly, Josh. 24. 19. V. 16. Thy brother] As thou callest him. This summe is 62. li. 16. sh. a thousand pieces of silver] i. e. shekels usually where sil∣ver is set down, and not the kinde, shekels are understood, as, Numb. 7. 13. where in the end shekels are named. And where shekels are set down, and the mettal not ex∣presed, there silver is understood; so, Exod. 30. 13, 15. compared with Exod. 38. 25, 26. The common shekel is 1. sh. 3. d. The shekel of the Sanctuary 2. sh. 6. d. i. e. ½ ounce. In gold 15. sh. ½ shekel is a Bekah, Exod. 38. 26. ¼ is mentioned, 1 Sam 98. which is the Romane penny, and Grecian drachma, our 7. d. ob. (still counting upon the sacred shekel) A common shekel is ten Gerahs, our 1. sh. 3. d. The Kings shekel 1. sh. 10. d. ob. The sacred she∣kel is 2. sh. 6. d. Shekel comes of Shakal, weigheth; whence haply come our skole, or skase to weigh; they used of old to weigh money. A sacred shekel is twenty Gerahs, Exod. 30. 13. A Gerah weighed sixteen barley cornes, and is our 1. d. ob. Of shekel or the Chaldee Selang, our shilling seemes to come. The Greeks translate shekels didrach∣maes, or double drams a covering of the eyes] Covering of the eyes and face with a vaile, is a signe of the wives subjection, and of the husbands power, Gen. 24. 65. 1 Cor. 11. 3, 6▪ 7, 10. He is the Guardian of thy chastity to cover thee from the eyes and lusts of all others. Thus she was reproved] These are rather Moses words, then Abimelech; here a Heathen King schooles her, to her greater shame. V. 17. Healed Abimelech] Therefore there was some further punishment, then the closing up of the womens wombes by barrennesse, which was a thing that could not in so short a time, either be perceived as a judgement, or discerned as a cure upon Abrahams prayer. CHAP. XXI. Ver. 1. VIsited] This word signifieth Gods remem∣brance, care, providence, performance of what he hath spoken, be it good or evil, in justice, as, Ex∣od. 20. 5. or in mercy, for blessings temporal or spiritual. Here, for performance of his promise of a childe to Sarah, ch. 17. 19, 21. 18 10, 14. V. 2. Conceived] Hereupon her faith commended, Heb. 11. 11. at the set time] Ch. 18. 10, 14. Hereupon Isaac is said to be borne by promise, Gal. 4. 23, 28. Isaac borne at Gerar. V. 3. Isaac] So appointed by God, ch. 17. 19. V. 4. Being eight dayes old] On the eighth day, chap. 17. 12. V. 5. An hundred yeares old] Ch. 17. 1. V. 6. Laugh] For joy now, Esay 54. 1. 66. 10. Gal. 4. 27. not out of diffidence, as, ch. 18. 12, 13, 15. Laughing is taken for mocking, or laughing to scorne, v. 9. V. 7. Who would have said] So, Esay 49. 21. Rom. 4. 18. children] As daughters for daughter, and sonnes for sonne, ch 46. 7, 23. V. 8. Weaned] So Samuel 1 Sam. 22. 23, 24. It is not said at what yeare of his age. feast] Fitter at that time then at the time of birth or Circumcision. V. 9. Mocking] Laughing to scorne, mocking him as their young Master, and he that must forsooth be heire of all. And likely his mother Hagar had some hand in it, as being not free from an envious eye, and repining at the jollity of this feast; and therefore she is cast out too. So, ch 19. 14. Ezech. 23. 32. Nehem. 2. 19. 4. 1. This mock∣ing here was in some malignant bitter way, which so high∣ly incensed Sarahs wrath. St. Paul calls it a persecution, Gal. 4. 29. So Cham his mothers Progenitor derided his own father, ch. 9. 22. V. 10. She said] By the Spirit of God, and God con∣firmes it, v. 12. And Paul saith not that Sarah, but the Scripture speaks it, Gal. 4. 30. Her saying was not only passionate, but prophetical. this bondwoman and her sonne] Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25, 30, 31. not be heire] Under this inheritance Heaven was figu∣red, Gal. 3. 18, 29. V. 12. And God said] By night, v. 14. God approves Sarahs minde and Will, it was not then only her passion that ruled her. the lad] Ishmael was now about seventeen or eighteen
years old, chap. 17. 24. 25. 21. 5. in Isaac shall thy seed be called] And not from Ishmael. The promised seed and spiritual prerogatives shall be en∣tailed upon him, Rom. 9. 7, 8. V. 14. Bottle of water] Scant in those dry deserts. and the childe] See Annot. on v. 12 wandered] Lost her way in those deserts towards E∣gypt. of Beersheba] So first called, v. 31. V. 15. Cast the childe] Being sick and fainting for thirst. V. 16 The death] Such extremity they were come unto in the wildernesse. V. 17. And God heard] In accomplishment of his Pro∣mises, ch. 16. 10, 12. 17. 20. where he is] Though he be cast out of his fathers house, and here in such misery. V. 18. And old him in thy hand] Not lay him on thy back. V. 19. Opened her eyes] Withheld before from seeing it, by grief or some other reason; or as it was with the two disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 34. 16, 31. and Elishaes servant and the Aramites, 2 Kings 6. 17, 18, 20. V. 20. Dwelt in the wildernesse] Ch. 16. 12. archer] And so a Warriour, shooting with the bowe be∣ing used in war, ch. 48. 22. 49. 23, 24. Psal 44. 6. Josh. 24. 12. 2 Sam. 1. 22. 1 Kings 22. 34. V. 21. Paran] Nigh to Sinai, through which the Israe∣lites went, Numb. 10. 12. A part of tht wildernesse is called Kedar, from one of Ishmaels sons of that name, ch. 25. 13. Ps. 83. 6. his mother] The mothers right in marrying her childe; she chose an Egyptian as her self was one. V. 22. At that time] While Abraham dwelt at Gerar, ch. 20. 1. and after Isaacs weaning. that Abimelech.] Ch. 20. 2. V. 23. If thou shalt lie unto me] Gen. 14. 23. An imper∣fect speech, implying an imprecation if he should deal de∣ceitfully with him. For an oath calls God both as a wit∣nesse of the truth, and an avenger of the untruth. This imprecation is sometimes expressed, as, Ruth 1. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 23. V. 24. I will swear] He. 6. 16. Abrahams right to the land of Canaan, was but for the future, after foure ge∣nerations, ch. 15. 13, 16. V. 25. A Well of water] Of great use in that dry Sou∣therne part of Canaan. And therefore such strife about them, v. 30. ch 26. 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 2, 32. V. 27. And Abraham took sheep] Likely gifts were in use at the making of Covenants Or he did it in requital of Abimelechs gifts, ch. 20. 14. V. 30. That they may be a witnesse] To prevent future controversie about this Well, v. 25. so an heap of stones is made a witnesse, ch. 31. 46▪ 48. V. 31. Beersheba] The Well of the oath, or of seven, with relation to the seven lambes. It was afterward in the Southerne part of the lot of the tribe of Judah, toward the coast of Edom, Josh. 15. 21, 28. 1 Xings 19. 3. Nehem. 11. 25, 27. yet seemes to be allowed to the tribe of Simeon, which was within the inheritance of the tribe of Judah, Josh. 19. 1. 2. 1. ch. 4. 24, 28. It is oft opposed to Dan, as to the Northerne part of Canaan. There is a Well, Wil∣dernesse and City of this name, all joyning together. As Abraham dwelt here, and made this Covenant, and digged this Well: so after Isaac dwells there, makes a Covenant, and digs again the Well, and renewes the name, chap. 26. 23, 33. And Jacob dwelling there with his father, went thence to Laban in Haran: and going into Egypt, with all his family comes thither, there sacrificeth and hath a vision. And yet at last in the dayes of King Uzziah or sooner, it became a seat of some solemn idolatry, Amos 8. 14. 5. 5. V. 32. a Covenant] Such Covenants lawful with Hea∣thens and Idolaters; so, ch. 31. 44. V. 33. Grove] Of Oakes, as intending long to dwell here. Abraham dwelt under the shadow of trees in the Plaine of Mamre, ch. 18. 4, 8. Here it seems he intends it for a religious use, for the place of prayer and exercise of Gods Worship, as not being a thing yet forbidden. But after in Moses time, when God had chosen a place of Worship, God strictly forbids this, not to plan a grove of any trees near the Altar of the Lord, and commands such groves to be cut down, and threatens grievously such offenders; yet hardly were Gods people kept from this sin and idolatry, but they planted groves, placed their idols, served them, even as the Canaanites and other Heathens did, Deut. 12. 2. Thus it was in the times of the Judges, ch. 3. 7. In the times of the Kings of Israel throughout, 2 Kings 17. 16. specially in the reignes of Jo∣roboam, 1 Kings 14. 15, and of Ahab, whose Queen Jezabel had foure hundred Prophets of the groves, that did eare meat at her table; yea, and in the reignes of some Kings of Judah, specially of Ahaz and Manassh. But the godly Kings of Judah cut them down, pluck't them up, or burnt them, as Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah. And Asa put down his Grandmother Maachah from being Queen, because she had made an idol in a grove. V. 34. Many dayes] Till Isaac was offered, ch. 22. 19. And how long after we know not. CHAP. XXII. Verse 1. AFter these things] How long a time it is not certain. But that Isaac was then able to bear the wood of the burnt-offering, v 6. I know not why any can fix it upon the thirty third yeare of Isaacs age. God did tempt Abraham,] Not by seeking to seduce him to evil, so God tempts no man, Jam. 1. 13. But so our own lusts and Satan do, Jam. 1. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 5. who is therefore called the Tempter, Mat. 4. 3. 1 Thes. 3. 5. God doth it to try by experiment what is in man, what faith in Gods Promises, what obedience to his Will; as men sometimes use to make experiments of the faithfulnesse of their friends. Not yet that God is ig∣norant of what is in man, but to make it the better known to himself and others. So, Exod. 15. 25. 16. 4. Deut. 8. 2, 16. 13. 3. Indeed God and Satan may both have an hand in one and the same tentation, as in Da∣vids numbring the people, 2 Sam. 24. 1. 1 Chron. 21. 1. But to far different ends; both Satan and wicked men tempted our Saviour often in the Gospels, with an e∣vil minde, to an evil end. And the sinful Israelites are said often to tempt God, by making doubt and trial of his pre∣sence, Providence, Wisdome, Power, and so by unbelief and murmurings, tempting and provoking him to wrath. And so Ananias and Sapphira tempted the Spirit of the Lord. And Paul gives the caveat that we tempt not Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 9. And again tentations are taken for troubles, afflictions, persecutions, which try the truth
and strength of Gods graces in his children. And so if God lead into temptation, Matth. 26 13. he will with it give you the issue and outgate, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Here God doth so wih Abraham, in a marvellous trial of his faith and obedience. V. 2. And he said] In such a manner, as he could not doubt but it was God, and no Satanical illusion. thy only (sonne) Isaac] Only in thy family, Ishmael was gone, and we never read he returned, but to the burial of his father, ch. 25. 9. And it seems at this time Abraham had not taken Keturah, or had no children by her. Thy only Isaac that childe of Promise, Heb. 11. 18. Thy only begotton son▪ Heb. 11. 17. namely of Sarah, thy lawful wise, the freewoman. wom thou lovest] Above all; and that for many good reasons. land of Moriah] Here afterwards Solomon built the Temple, 2 Chron. 3. 1. Moriah had this name afterwards, upon the occasion in the fourteenth verse. a burnt-offering] Not that God intended he should do it. But this was for trial of his rare faith and obedience, and that in a most extraordinary way and manner. For indeed here all that was in Abraham as a Man, Father, Husband, Believer, Professor of Religion, were put to trial, Heb. 11. 19. one of the mountaines] It was a mountainous countrey, Psal. 125 2. The mountaine or hill Sion was close by it. V. 3. Rose up early] It seemes the command was given in the night▪ Here in this strange trial is his strange and ready quick obedience. and went] From Beer-sheba, in the land of the Phili∣stines, ch 21. 31. 33, 34. and v. 19. of this chapter. God had told him] More particularly then at first, v. 2. 4, 9. V. 4. The third day] Either he went leisurely, or some occasions might let and hinder him in his travel. V. 5. Abide you here] Lest they should hinder him. lad] The same word used of Joshuah when he was thirty yeares old, ch. 41. 12. and of Joseph when he was fifty three yeares old, as appears in that he lived fourty yeares in the wildernesse, and seventeen yeares after Moses death, and his whole life was one hundred and ten, Josh. 24. 29. and so of Benjamin, Gen. 43. 8. when at that time he had nine or ten sons, ch. 46. 21. And so of Absalom at the time of his death, 2 Sam. 18. 29. and come again to you] He speaks this as a man astonish∣ed and amazed, or in humane frailty, or as Prophet, (as Caiaphas did, John 11. 49. 50, 51. not knowing or mean∣ing what his words would bear, Heb. 11. 19. and so, v. 8. V. 6. And laid it upon Isaac] Isaac a type of Christ in many things. Christ the only Sonne of his Father, Well-beloved Son in whom he is well-pleased, the promised seed, bore his Crosse, was bound, sacrificed, meekly submitted, being obedient unto death, rose again, as Isaac from the Altar. V. 9. And bound Isaac] Telling him, no doubt, at this time Gods whole command: and he having only his fa∣thers word for it, yet readily submits and obeyes. V. 10. To slay his sonne] Heb. 11. 17, 18. James 2. 21, 22, 23. V. 11. And the Angel] Christ the Angel of the Cove∣nant, who speaks of himself as God, v. 12. sweareth by himself, and promiseth as God, and is called Jehovah, v. 16, 17, 18. Out of Heaven] So to Hagar, ch. 21. 17. V. 12. Lay not thine hand] Heb. 11. 19. God accepts the Will for the deed, 2 Cor. 8. 12. Against idolaters sacrifi∣cing their children, both Jewes and Gentiles haply upon this pretended example. V. 13. Behinde him] Likely that way the Angels voice sounded. aram] This is for the Lamb mentioned, v. 7, 8. This he tok as sent from God, 1 Pet. 1. 19. V. 14. Jehovah Jirch] The Lord will see, or will be seen, answerable to that, v. 8. Mori-Jah is of the same sig∣nification, so Jehovah-Nissi, Exod. 17. 15. Jehovah Sham∣mah, Ezech. 48. 35. in the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen] The meaning of the proverb is, that in due time and place God will help and provide for his children, and they shall see it. V. 16. By my self have I sworne] Heb. 6. 13, 14, 17, 18. Sometimes God doth swear by his Soul, Jer. 51. 14. by his Holinesse, Amos 4. 2. by his Name, Jer. 44. 26. And all this is to swear by himself. saith the Lord] Thus saith Christ of himself. In like manner, Ps. 2. 7. for because] Not for the merit of this prompt obedience. The Promise was freely made afore. ch. 12. 2. 13. 16. 15. 5. 17. 2, 4, 5, 6, 16. But as an occasion of repeating and confirming the Promise, finding him rightly qualified, and to encourage him and others to the execution of faith and obedience. V. 17. In blessing] Surely under the name blessing is meant the Promise of eternal salvatation. thy seed] Isaacs posterity, ch. 21. 12. possesse the gate] Ch. 24. 60. where all publick places were for consultation, for judgement, Job 31. 21. Deut. 22. 15. 21. 19. Amos 5 12, 15. and which were the strongest for∣tifications. The meaning is, thy seed shall subject them, and bring their strength and government under command; their holds and cities, Mat 16. 18. V. 18. In thy seed] Christ. So the Apostle applies it, Gal. 3. 16, 18. Jer. 4. 2. Ps. 72, 17. Beer-sheba] Ch. 21. 31, 33, 34. V. 20 Milcah] Ch. 1. 29. Abraham sends thither for a wife for Isaac, ch. 24. 15, 47. V. 21. Uz] In this land Job dwelled, Job 1. 1. There is another Uz, ch. 10. 23. and another, ch. 36. 28. Buz] Job 32. 2. dwelt by his elder brother Uz in Arabia, Jer. 25. 20, 23, 24. Kemuel the father of Aram] Aram throughout the Bible, is turned in Greek Syria and Syrians, as Mizraim is Egypt, and Cush Ethiopia. V. 22. Bethuel] Ch. 24. 15. V. 23. Rebekah] Isaacs wife, ch. 24. 15, 67▪ For this cause chiefly is this Genealogy here set down. V. 24. And his Concubine] An half wife, sometimes called by the name of a wife, yet not solemnly betrothed, nor taken with dowry, nor Partner in the Government of the family, but subject to the lawful wife, and whose chil∣dren did not inherit, ch. 16. 6, 9. 25. 5, 6. 21. 10. 1 Kings 11. 3. yet Bilhahs and Zilpahs did extraordinarily, beco∣ming Heads of Tribes.
CHAP. XXIII. Verse 1. THese were the yeares of the life of Sarah] How long any other woman lived is not recorded in Scripture. She lived sixty yeares in Ur, five in Haran, twenty five in Canaan, (almost all) before she had Isaac, and thirty seven after in Canaan, most at Geraa and Beer-sheba, until her death in Kiriath-arba or Hi∣bron. V. 2. Kiriath-arba, the same is Hebron] V. 19. Judges 1. 10. This city was first called Mamre, ch. 13, 18. Here Abraham and Isaac sojourned; and hither Jacob came to his father Isaac, after his returne from Laban, ch. 35. 27. This afterwards fell by lot in the tribe, and mountain or hill-countrey of Judah, Josh. 15. 54. And was given to the Priests for a City of Refuge, Josh. 20. 7. But the fields of the City (excepting the subuths,) and the villages thereof were given to Cale, Josh. 21. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and Abrahem came] Out of his own Tent into Sarahs Tent, for they had several Tents, separated from each o∣ther, ch. 24. 67. So, ch. 31 33. It is possible that Abraham had not removed his dwelling from Beer-sheba to Hebron, but that Sarah upon some occasion travelling thither, there from home fell sick and died. And that from Beer-sheba Abraham should come and mourne for her, and take order for her burial. But it is not likely she should so travel in her extream old age, nor so likely he would have in that manner buried her there, if they both had not re∣moved and dwelled there, it being their ancient place of habitation. And wherever Abraham had been, as at Beer-sheba, as at Hebron, he must have bought an inheritance, if any he would have for any use, he being but a stran∣ger and sojourne in the land, Acts 7. 5. to mourn and to weep] So our Saviour wept for Laza∣rus, John 11. 35. but it must be with moderation, as in hope and belief of the Resurrection, 1 Thess. 4 13. A little letter is here in the Original to note his moderation in weeping without excesse. V. 3. Stood up from before his dead] Where likely he had sitten awhile on the earth, Job. 2. 12, 13. Esay 47. 1. the sonnes of Heth] The Governours and Elders of the Hittites, the inhabitants of Hebron, of the progeny of Cham, ch. 10. 15. V. 4. Sojourner] He. 11. 13, 14, 16. a possession] Leave to purchase it. burying place] Abraham having lived sixty two yeares in this land, yet never purchased foot of inheritance, till now a burying place. This was a kinde of taking possessi∣on of this promised land, Esay 22. 16. or a kinde of pledge or prophetical signe that his posterity should come and inherit the land, as Jeremies buying his Uncles field was a signe of the Jewes returne into the possession of this land, Jer. 32. This made Jacob give charge to be buried here. And Joseph to have his bones carried into this land, not a foot; by Gods gift, Acts 7. 5. bury my dead] Sowe it as seed in the ground, till the Re∣surrection, where they rest, as in their beds, till their change come. out of my sight] Death makes lovely Sarah, the desire of his eyes, now athsome to his sight. V. 6. A mighty Prince.] ch. 2 1. v. 22. V. 9. For a possession] Though they offered him the free use of the choice of their sepulchres, v. 6. yet he had rather pay for a propriety, then hold such a community with the heathen. V. 9. Machpelah] Before Kiriath-arba, or Hebron, or Mamre, v. 17, 9. V. 10. And Ephron dwelt] Or sate, being present in that assembly, though likely not known by face to A∣braham. v. 8. at the gates of the City] There Assemblies used to be and places of Judicature, v. 18. ch. 34. 20. Deut. 17. 5. 21. 19. 22. 15, 24. 25. 7. Ruth 4. 1, 11. and in many other places, Prov. 31. 23. V. 13. If thou Wilt give it; or be that Ephron. I will give v. 9 The like strivig in kindnesse is be∣tween David and Araunah, 2 Sam 4. 21, 22, 23, 24. V. 15. Shekels of silver] See, ch. 20. 16. The com∣mon shekel little more then our shilling, viz. three pence, foure hundred common shekels come to twenty five pounds; some make the common shekel to be one shilling eight pence; and the Royal or Kings shekel to be one shil∣ling three pence, 2 Sam. 14. 26. V. 16 Weighed] Money paid by weight, not by tale, so, ch. 43. 21. Esay 55. 2. Jer. 22. 9. Zech. 11. 12. V. 17 And the field of Ephron] This is not that men∣tioned, Acts 7 6. were made ] By payment and Witnesses, without Deeds and Writings; after Writings were used, Jer. 32 Now hardly will skilful Writings serve the turne. V. 18. For a possession] And monument to posterity, without distrust of Gods Promises, or a renunciation of his own right, he buyeth a parcel of the land for his present necessity. The time of possession, according to the grant and promise being not yet come. V. 19. Buried Sarah] And so after himself was buried there: and Isaac and Rebecca. Jacob and Leah, ch. 25. 9, 49. 31. 50. 13. They testifying hereby their faith in Gods promises, for the inheritance of this land, and of the heavenly Canaan figured by it, Mat. 27. 7. V. 20. A burying place] A seemly care is to be had of bu∣rial places. CHAP. XXIV. Verse 1. WAs old] One hundred and fourty yeares old, as may be gathered out of chap. 25. 20. V. 2. His eldest servant] Most likely his Steward E∣leezer, ch. 15. 2. And this not without Isaacs consent, he being now fourty yeares old. thy hand under my thigh] So Jacob required of Joseph, ch. 47. 29. It is a signe of subjection, 1 Chron 29. 24. yet in Scripture the most frequent ceremony used at swearing, is the lifting up the hand, as ch. 1 22. Exod. 6. 8. Numb. 14. 30. Deut. 32. 40. Ezech. 0. 15. Dan. 12. 7. Rev. 10. 5, 6. The custome of several countreys and religions hath been, and is very various for rites and gestures in this case. That Abraham by this gesture here should have any rela∣tion to the promised seed, to proceed out of his loines, is a reach, I feare, too far fetch't. V. 3. Sweare] A thing lawful; forbidden in vain▪ and light causes, and such was Herods oath to the dancing dam∣sel, Mar. 6. 23. forbidden in ordinary communication, Mat. 5. 34, 37. James 5. 12. But in weighty causes we may swear, and being thereunto lawfully called and war∣ranted; so here. And so for ratification of Covenants and Promises of importance, so did Abraham and Abimelech
sware, ch. 21. 31. so Isaac and Abimelech, ch 26. 31. so Jacob and Laban, ch. 31. 53. so David and Jonathan. 1 Sam. 20. 17. And o God commands it, for removal of suspitions of jealousie, Nmh. 52. of theft, Exod. 22. 11. 1 Kings 8. 31. 2 Chron. 6. 22. And so many men in Scripture, upon weighty causes did lawfully require an oath; so did Abraham of his servant, Jacob of Esau, Gen. 25. 33. and of his sonne Joseph Gen. 47. 31. Rahab of the spies, Josh. 2. 12. Samson of the men of Judh, Judg. 15. 12. Saul and the Egyptian of David, 1 Sam. 24. 21. and 30. 15. Nebuchadnezzar of Zedekiah, 2 Chron 36. 13. And many in like cases freely and voluntarily gave their oathes; so Moses to Calb. Josh. 14. 9. David to Bathsheba, 1 Kings 1. 13. Gedaliah to the emnan of udah, 2 Kings 25. 24. King Zedekiah to Jeremy, Jer. 38. 6. The reason and end of all is, to assure men the more of faith and truth in words and promises; for in an oath men call God to be both a witnesse of the truth, and an avenger of the lie, and breach of promise. And so an oath bindes the soule with a bond, Numb. 0. 2. And hereupon the godly, to binde them∣selves the more to God, and his service, and good duties, have sworne to he Lord, so David to finde out an house and place for Gods habitation, Psal. 132. 2. so the Priests, Levites and all Israel, to reforme the strange marriages, Ezra 10. 5. so King Asa and all the people entred into a Covenant to seek the Lord, and they sware unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornes▪ 2 Chron. 15. 12, 13, 14. yea, God himself is mercifully pleased so far to condescend, as to swear un∣to men for their better assurance, and the confirmation of their faith in the truth of his promises, Heb. 6. 12,—18. so he sware to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Gen. 24. 7. 26. 3. Exod. 6. 8. Luke 1. 73. so to David, Psal. 89. 49. And sometimes in wrath, to ratifie his threatenings against sin∣ners, so, Psal. 95. 11. Heb. 3. 11. In sacred account then is the bond of an oath, Heb. 6. 16. it must be carefully taken, in truth, in righteousnesse, and in judgement, Jer. 4. 2. Not vainly or falsely, Gods wrath is great against such oathes and oath-breakers, Exod. 20. 7. Levit. 19. 12. Hos. 4. 2. 10. 4. Jer. 23. 10. Ezek. 17. 15,—21. Zech. 5. 3, 4. Mal. 3. 5. It was Peters sinne for which he wept so bitter∣ly, Matth. 26. 74. 75. we must feare an oath, Eccles. 9. 2. though it be taken to men, yet it is called the oath of God, Eccl. 8. 2. Ezek. 17. 10. and therefore the godly man, though he sweareth to his own hurt, yet changeth not▪ Psal. 15. 4. Though the Gibeonites beguiled Joshuah, and the Princes of Israel, yet say they, we must let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them, Josh. 9. 15, 19, 20. by the Lord] It is a part of our duty, and Gods Worship, to swear by Gods Name, Deut. 6. 13. 10. 20. Esay 45. 23. 65. 16. Jer. 12. 16. Psa. 63. 11. so Jacob sware to Laban by the feare of his father Isaac, Gen. 31. 53, 42. we must not swear by false gods, Josh. 23. 7. Jer. 12. 16. not by Baal, by the sin and idol of Samaria, the manner of Beer-sheba, by Malcham. Against such Swearers God threaren∣eth his judgements, Jer. 5. 7. Amos. 8. 14. Zeph. 1. 5. nor must we sweare by the creatures as if they were God, or we had power over them as our own, to pawn them on the truth of what we say, Mat 5. 34, 35, 36. and ch. 23. 16, 18, 20, 21, 22. James 5. 12. of the daughters of the Canaanites] ch. 9. 25. 10. 15. 15. 16, 21. such was the sin of the old world, ch. 6. 2. This was Rebekahs grief at Esau, and feare, lest Jacob should do the like, ch. 27. 46. 28. 1, 2. Lest by marrying with ido∣laters his sonne or seed should be drawn from God, Deut. 7. 3, 4. And specially he would not have his seed and blood mixed with that cursed Nation, whose blood his posterity was to shed without pity, and to succeed in their place according to Gods Promise. Therefore Moses for∣bids any Covenant wih them; neither would Abraham buy with them, ch. 23. 6, 20. V. 4. Unto my Countrey] the City of Nahor in Meso∣potamia, v. 10. Haran or Charran (not Ur) ch. 29. 4. Here was the truest Worship of the true God, next to that in Abrahams family, though indeed vry much corrupted. Laban being an idolater, ch. 31. 30, 53. and after Jacobs marriage there also, some of that race in his family were not altogether free, ch. 31. v. 19, 32. 35. 2, 3, 4. V. 5. Must I needs bring] In case the woman will not yield to marry Isaac, to leave her countrey and come dwell in Canaan, but that he must yield to go and dwell there, in that case he desres direction, and to know what his oath bindes him unto. bring] Isaac having undertaken to his father to be guided by him, and this servant in the businesse of his mar∣riage bring him by perswasion. again] Not that Isaac had been there before, but Abra∣ham, as, ch. 15. v. 16. V. 6 Beware] Yield not to any such condition. They there are too corrupt in Religion; and my sonne must not by going to dwell elsewhere, in a kind, renounce so the land of Promise. He must live here rather as a stranger and sojourner by faith as himself had done, Hebrewes 11. 9. V. 7. His Angel] A ministring Spirit, Heb. 1. 14. for thy direction and protection. V. 8. Clear] So, Josh. 2. 17. V. 10. Master] Or Lord. These two termes in Scri∣pture are used indifferently, Mat. 17. 4. compared with Mar. 9. 5. all the goods] V. 2. 53. ch. 39. 4. n camels] Numerous in those countreys, 1 Chron. 5. 11. ten here, and servants to attend them, v. 59. and la∣ding no doubt for them. This argues Abrahams wealth, and the servants trust. And it was fit for so long a jour∣ney, and to carry presents and gifts, v. 53. and that the kindred might see his Masters great estate. Mesopotamia] Between Tygris and Euphrates, called Padan. Aram, ch. 25. 20. Aram in the New Testament is usually called Syria, Mat. 4. 24. City of Nahor] See Annotations in ch. 11. 31. as Christs City, i e. wherein he dwelt, Mat. 9. 1. V. 11. Kneel down] As the custome of those Camels was, to rest them, and to load and unload. V. 12. And e said] In his heart, v. 45. Good speed] V. 42. prosper my way. Luke 10. 31. the word chance is used. and shew kindnesse] This kindnesse, in the words fol∣lowing. V. 14. Let it come to passe] No doubt this came into his minde by the special instinct of Gods Spirit, v. 7. as that of Gideon, Judg. 6. 17, 37. and that of Jonathan, 1 Sam. 14. 9. without like warrant we may not attempt the like. V. 15. Before he had done speaking] So, Esay 65. 24. Dan. 9 23. her Pitcher] Thus women employed in mean services, v. 11. 13. yea, great and good women, as here, and, ch. 18. 6. and, 29 9. Exod. 2. 16. V. 17. Ran to meet her] v. 13. but had removed a little aloof off to give way o Rebekah, and to mark her.
V. 22. Took a golden ear-ring] To give her, as taking or receiving, Psal. 68. 19. is expounded giving. Eph. 4. 8. He puts the ear-ring upon her face, v. 47. after he had asked whose daughter she was. Shekel] See Annotat. on ch. 20. 16. and on ch. 23. 15. Half a shekel is called Bekah, Ex. 38. 26. V. 26. Worshipped] v. 52. ch. 22. 5. Exod. 4. 31. This is more then kneeling, or bowing of the head. This is a pro∣strating of the whole body, a falling down upon the face to the ground, Psal. 95. 6. Luke. 5. 12. compared with Mat. 8. 2. V. 27. Brethren] Kinsfolk, v. 48. ch. 13. 8. V. 28. Mothers house] It seems the custome of those times and places, was for the women to dwell in tents and hou∣ses apar by themselves, v. 67. ch. 31. 33. V. 32. And he ungirded] i. e. Laban. and water to wash] Ch. 18. 4. 1 Tim. 5. 10. In those hot countreys men used to go barefoot, or with sandals, open above. V. 33. I will not eate] Eph. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. V. 47. Upon her face] Some were worne in the eare, some on the forehead which hanged down to the nose, Ezech. 16. 12. Esay 3. 21. V. 48. Daughter] Grandchilde. V. 49. Kindly and truly] Mercy and truth joyned, ch. 47. 29. Josh. 2. 14. Prov. 3. 3. Psal. 85. 10. V. 50. Then Laban and Bethuel] The sonne set before the father, as having the chief managing of all, by reason of his fathers age, v. 55. bad or good] Nothing at all against it, chap. 31. 24, 29. V. 51. At the Lord hath spoken] As we plainly see by the whole carriage of this businesse, v. 15. 2 Sam. 16. 10. V. 57. At her mouth] About this motion for her sudden departure. V. 59. Her nurse] Deborah, ch. 35. 8. Great is the tender∣nesse of the affections of nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, Numb. 11. 12, 13. 1 Thes. 2. 7. Esay 49, 22. 2 Sam. 4. 4. V. 61. And followed the man] Psal. 45. 10. V. 62. Lahai-roi] Ch 16. 14. 12. 9. 25. 11. in the wil∣dernesse of Beersheba, ch. 21. 14, 33, 34. e dwelt] Not apart from his father, but with him. That Well was not far from Beersheba where Abraham dwelt, ch. 21. 14, 33, 34. V. 63. To meditate] Or pray, or both, so the word sig∣nifieth, Psal. 77 3, 6. 12. 119. 15. V. 65. A Veile] A signe of modesty and subjection, 1 Cor. 11. 5, 6, 10. The custome was to bring the spouse veiled to her husband. The face was covered sometimes for grief and mourning, as in Davids mourning for Absalom. Sometimes by others in token of wrath and judgement, as when Hamans face was covered. Sometimes in way of feare and reverence, as Elias covered his face, 1 Kings 19. 13. V. 67. Sarahs Tent] Women, it seems had their tents apart, ch. 31. 33. And Sarahs Tent and furniture, it seems, was reserved for Isaacs wife. and took Rebekah] By solemnity of marriage, in the fourtieth yeare of his life, ch. 25. 20. loved her] Eph. 5. 25, 28. after his mothers death] Three yeares before, ch. 17. 17. 23. 1. Dear and durable was his affection toward his mo∣ther. CHAP. XXV. Ver. 1. THen again] Whether in Sarahs life-time cannot certainly be determined. The sa∣cred story mentions nothing of Keturab or her children, till now after Sarahs death. And the words here seem to give it to be after her death. And Sarah in her life-time not enduring Hagar and Ishmael▪ would hardly have en∣dured another. And Isaac when offered is called his on∣ly son. And yet on the other side, Keturab is called a Con∣cubine, implicitely, v. 6. and expresly, 1 Chron. 1. 32 And though a Coucubine be called a wife, yet I finde not that a legitimate wife, as she should be after Sarahs death, or a second wife, is called a Concubine. And the words of Abrahams servant seeking a wife for Isaac, ch. 24. 36. compa∣red with v. 5, 6. of this chapter, seem to reflect on Ketu∣rahs sonnes in Sarahs life-time. And which is most of all, if Abraham did not take her to wife till after Sarahs death, then he must be one hundred thirty eight, and likely one hundred and fourty yeares old when he married her, and after that begat six sonnes of her, whereas the Apostle saith, that fourty yeares before that time, his body was dead for begetting of children, Rom. 4. 19. Gen. 17. 17. 18. 12. If then it were after Sarahs death, it must be said, that God did renew unto him that masculine strength, and vigour of body, after fourty yeares, by an extraordinary blessing, in a marvellous, if not miraculous manner, and that to make good his Promise of multiply∣ing Abrahams seed, ch. 17. 5. in others also, though princi∣pally in Isaac. V. 2. Medan] Ch. 37. 36. Midian] Numb. 25. 6, 17. Shuah] Job 2. 11. V. 3. Sheba] Job 1. 15. V. 4. Midian] Numb. 31. 18. Judg 7. 25. 8. 5. children of Keturah] And Grandchildren. V. 5. To Isaac] As being his only heire and childe of Promise, ch. 21. 12. a figure of Christ and Christians, ch. 24. 36. V. 6. Concubines] Hagar and Keturah. and sent them away from Isaac] Because he was to be the heire of Canaa. Eastward] Arabia Syria, Job 1. 3. Job likely came of Keturah, Judg. 6. 3. 7. 12. V 7. One hundred seventy five yeares] Ch. 15. 15. He∣ber (of whom he was called an Hebrew, ch. 14. 13.) out-living him. And Jacob and Esau were then fifteen yeares old, v. 26. ch. 21. 5. V. 8. Gathered unto his people] V. 17. which implies the immortality of the soule, and so the phrase of gathering to their fathers, Judg. 2. 10. Heb. 12. 23. V. 9. Isaac and Ishmael] Ishmael, though never received again into Abrahams family, yet dwelt not so far off, but might heare of his fathers death, and come to his bu∣rial. V. 11. Blessed Isaac] Entailed the blessing and Promi∣ses made to Abraham on him, ch. 17. 19. Lahai-roi] See, ch. 24. 62. V. 12. Generations of Ishmael] ch 16. 10, 12. 17. 20. much exceeded Isaacs, 1 Cor. 15. 46. Nebaioth] He and his brethren seated in Arabia, Esay 21. 13. 60 7. Ezech 27. 21. Jer. 49. 28. V. 15. Tema] Job 2. 11.
V. 16. Twelve Princes] Ch. 17. 20. Like the twelve sonnes of Jacob. V. 18. Havilah] Ch. 2. 8. an ample region in Arabia, not that Havilah in India. Shur] Ch. 16. 7 Ex. 15. 22. died in the presence] His brethren surviving him, ch. 16. 12. V. 20. The Syrian] So, Luke 4. 27. Aramite is transla∣ted Syrian by our Saviour. Padan-Aram] Called Aram-Naharaim, ch. 24. 10. sometime Padam only, ch. 48. 7. This is Mesopotamia of Syria, distinguished from Aram-Zobah, Ps. 60 tit. V. 21. Intrcated] Often, no doubr. barren] Twenty yeares, v. 20, 26. many good women in Scripture barren a long time. V. 22. Strugled] A misery to her, and a mystery in her, v. 23. if it be so, why am I thus?] A speech of passion; why prayed I? why conceived I? or why is this strange strugling in my wombe, more then in other women? to enquire of the Lord] By her prayer, or by some Pro∣phet, as her father in-law Abraham, ch. 20. 7. or Heber, yet living. V. 23. Two Nations] Esau and Jacob, the virtual roots and Original of two Nations, Edomites and Israelites. two manner of people] Differing and disagreeing one from and with another, differing in Religion, Lawes, Manners, Affections, jarring, at variance. shall be stronger] So Esau stronger then Jacob, ch. 27. 43. 32. 4, 6, 13. and, ch. 33. 3. And a long time the Edo∣mites were more potent then the Israelites, Numb. 20. 18, 20. and the elder shall serve] So the Israelites subdued the Edomites, 2 Sam. 8. 14. 1 Kings 22. 47. Obad. v. 17, 18. And spiritually Jacob got the birth-right, v. 33. and Esau despised it, v. 34. and he got also the blessing, ch. 27, 29, 36. The Lord in Malachi proceeds further, saying, Though Esau was Jacobs brother, yet I loved Jacob and hated Esau, Mal. 1. v. 2, 3. whence the Apostle gathereth the doctrine of Gods free grace, in the election of some, and reprobation of others, before the doing of good or evil, Rom. 9. v. 10, 11 12, 13. Likely Isaac did not rightly understand this Prediction; but Rebekah did, which made the one seek so much to favour Esau, and the other Jacob. V. 25. Red] A signe of the cholerick and cruel dispo∣sition, found in him and his posterity, ch. 27. 40. 41. O∣bad. 1. 10. Ezech. 25. 12. His meat red, ch. 25. 30. his land red, ch. 32. 3. all over] With red haire all over his body, ch. 27. 11. his name Esau] That is, made, perfected, as if he were borne a man rather then a childe. V. 26. Took hold on Esaus heele] As if he would have pulled him back, that he might be borne before him, or as if he would overthrow and supplant him. A divine pre∣saging what would afterward come to passe, v. 23. This striving for the grace and preheminence of the birth-right, the Prophet mentioneth, Hos. 12. 3, 4. Jacob] An holder by the heele or supplanter, chap. 27. 36. V. 27. A cunning hunter] Somewhat like Ishmael or Nimrod, valourous, fierce. a plaine man] A good plaine man, living a plaine shep∣herds life, keeping home and looking to houshold-affaires, ch. 4. 20. and a sincere plain-dealing man, without guile, though at his mothers instance and urging, he used too much deceit in getting the blessing, ch. 27. Shepherds kept in Tents. And such was Jacobs trade and his childrens, ch. 46. 34. V. 28. Because he did eat of his venison] By seeing his officiousnesse to please his fathers palate, his father might take it as a signe, that he did greatly reverence, respect and love him, and that he would prove the most able and a∣ctive, the fittest for great emploiments, and the best and stoutest stay and support of their family; yet all this was but carnal, and not so suiting to the divine oracle, on the behalf of Jacob, v. 23. V. 29. Sod pottage] This though a small matter, con∣duceth yet, and is subservient to that divine Promise, ch. 27. 29. 2 Sam. 8. 14. V. 30. Red] Red is doubled in the Hebrew, and pottage omitted; to note Esaus haste, and his eagernesse of appe∣tite, in his extremity of fainting, after that mear which his eye first pitched upon, (there being other meat, no doubt, in his fathers house) and haply fancied too by him for the colour sake, if there were not also some cordial in it, as saffron or other like thing, which gave it that extream red colour. called Edom] Or Aedom; Adam signifieth red, red-borne, v. 25. and now so greedily desiring red broth, and selling for it his birth-right, got him this nick-name, and brand for it. V. 31. Sell me this day thy birth-right] The honour of the first-borne was great. God in honour calls Israel his sonne, his first-borne, Exod. 4. 22. and so Ephraim, Jer. 31. 9. as first chosen by him of all people to be his peculiar people, Ex. 19. 4, 5. Deut. 32. 11, 12. Ps. 89. 27. yea, Christ is called the first-borne among many brethren, Rom. 8. 29. This birth-right advanced them to be highest in their Parents affections, Zech. 12. 10. to be first in honour next their Parents, ch. 49. 3. to be Governours of the family under them, ch. 4. 7. 2 Chro. 21. 3. to the Peiesthood, after the fathers death, at least till Moses time, Numb. 8. 14, 15. 10. 18 to a double portion, Deut. 21. 17. to omit, that it might be an out∣ward sign or pledge of being one of those first-born, which are written in Heaven, Hebr. 12. 23. They being peculiar∣ly consecrated to God in after-times, Exod. 22. 29. These rights and priviledges, or the most of them, together with the Oracle, v. 23. might move Jacob to catch at any ad∣vantage to gain the birth-right: and did move him too to seek it, in a way not altogether so lawful, as to deny his brother necessary relief in his extremity, except upon such hard termes: upon such a pinch to drive him for such a price to so unjust a bargain. V. 32. At the point to die] With this present hunger, with dangers in hunting wilde beasts. V. 33. Swear] See Annot. on ch. 24. 3. V. 34. Bread and pottage] One morsel of meat, Hebr. 12. 16. of lentiles] A mean kinde of graine, a kinde of pulse, 2 Sam. 17. 31. Ezech. 4. 9. eate and drink] Never troubled at all for what he had done, 1 Cor. 15. 32. despised] Irreligiously and profanely, Hebr. 12. 16. Though possibly selling so precious a thing, for so poor a price, he might have a purpose to recover that by force, which was got from him by fraud. And therefore he pleads his birth-right after this to his father, ch. 27. 32.
CHAP. XXVI. Verse 1. BEsides the first famine] Ch 12. 10. Unto Gerar] From the Well Lahai-roi, ch. 25. 11. near Beersheba, ch 21▪ 14. 33. 34. V. 2. Into Egypt] As thy father did, and by his example thou mindest to do. V. 3. I will give] To thee as a sojourner, to thy poste∣rity as owners, by way of propriety, possession and heredi∣tary right. all these countreyes] Possessed by so many Nations, ch 15. 18, 19, 20, 21. to Abraham thy father] Thy self being present, ch. 22. 17, 18. V. 4. Stars] See Annot. on ch 15. Seed] Meaning Christ, Gal. 3. 6, 18. V. 5. Because that Abraham obeyed] On mans part there are conditions required, and by the assistance of Gods grace performed and graciously accepted, and mentioned as if there were some causality in them, for Gods accept∣ance and performance of his part ch. 22. 16. See the An∣notat. V. 6. And Isaac dwelt in Gerar] Where he was borne, ch. 20. 1. 21. 2. V. 7. She is my sister] As his father did through frailty, ch. 12. 13, 19. 20. 2, 5, 12, 13. This true in a sense, as, Jer. 3. 7, 9. Ezech. 16. 46. Mat. 12. 50. Rom. 16 1. 1 Cor. 7. 15. Jam. 2 15. But untrue in their intent. V. 8. Looked out] As David saw Bathsheba, 2 Sam. 11. 2. sporting] Deut. 24. 5. Prov 5. 18, 19. V. 9. Of a surety she is thy wife] So holy and un∣blameable was Isaacs life, that worse then this Abimelech never suspected. V. 10. What is this] By this passionate expostulation he sheweth, how greatly adultery, if not, dissimulation too, were condemned by heathen morality, ch. 20. 9. guiltinesse] Both sin and punishment, Lev. 5. 5, 6. V. 11. Toucheth] So, v. 29. ch. 20. 6. Josh 9. 19. Ruth 2. 9. Ps. 105. 15. Prov. 6. 29. Zech. 2. 8. V. 12. An hundred fold] Mat. 3 8, 23. V. 14. Envied him] Eccl. 4 4. Ps 2 10 Job 5. 2. V. 15. The Philistines had stopped] Contrary to Cove∣nant and Oath, ch. 21. 30, 31. V. 17. Valley of Gerar] V. 6. V. 18. After the names by which his father] Renewing the ancient good names, and altering idolatrous names, Numb 32. 38. The names of idols are not to be heard out of our mouthes, Ex. 23. 13. Ps. 16. 4. Deut. 12. 3. Hos. 2. 17. V. 21. Sitnah] Hatred or spight. Hence Satan hath his name. V. 23. To Beersheba] The famine being ended, he re∣turned to the place whence the famine had driven him, the place of his fathers dwelling. See, Annot. on v. 1. and on ch. 21. 31. V. 24. And the Lord appeared.] As it seems to comfort him against the envious dealings of the Philistines. So, ch. 15. 1. the God of Abraham] Therefore Abraham lives in soul, Mat. 22. 32. V. 25. An Altar] Ch. 12. 7, 8. 13. 4, 18. V. 26, Then Abimelech] As, ch. 21. v. 22. &c. These may be those same men. This history is to be compared with that. Ahuzzath] More then in ch. 21. v. 22. V. 27. Seeing ye hate me] Prov. 16 7. V. 28. And they said] See Annotat. on chap. 21. 22, 23. an oath] And execration▪ as, ch. 24. 41. V. 29. That thou wilt] With a curse if thou shalt, so, ch. 21. 23. in the margin. the blessed] Ch. 24. 31. This is spoken to further the Peace▪ and Covenant desired. V. 30 Feast] Used at Covenants, ch. 31 54. V. 32. Concerning the Well] V. 25. V. 33, Sebah] Oath. Beersheba] Ch. 21. 31 Here the name of the City. This Well was formerly so called by Abraham, ch. 21. 31. But having been stopped by the Philistines, and now opened again by Isaacs servants, the old name is again imposed upon the same occasion. V. 34. Fourty years old] He married thirty six yeares before Jacob. At fourty years old also Isaac married, chap. 25. 20. Judith] Esaus wives and their fathers had several names, Gen. 36. 2. Both Hittites the worst sort of Canaa∣nites, Ezech. 16. 3. contrary to the cares and commands of his father, mother and grandfather, ch. 24. 3. and v. 35. of this chapter, and ch 27 46. and ch. 28. 1, 6, 8. CHAP. XXVII. Verse 1. ISaac was old] One hundred thirty six, or one hundred thirty seven yeares old; As is rightly gathered and proved in the great late Annotat. upon this place. For Isaac was sixty yeares old when Jacob was borne, ch. 25. v. 26. And Jacob was at this time seven∣ty five or seventy six yeares old, when he got the blessing and fled to Laban. See the Annotat. on ch. 29. 21. and his eyes were dimme] So Jacobs, ch. 48. 10. so Elies, 1 Sam. 3. 2, 4, 15. Isaac lived blinde fourty foure yeares at least, ch. 35▪ 28. V 4 That my soule] He would by that feasting chear up his spirit against dulnesse, or any distemper, that he might be the more fit instrument of the Spirit of God; so E∣lisha calls for a minstrel, to allay his passion against Jeho∣ram, prepare his minde, compose his spirit, and fit it for a divine motion of Gods Spirit by Prophecie, 2 Kings 3. 15. may blesse thee] In faith before the Lord, by the Spirit of the Lord, Hebr. 1. 20. some blesse men, by praying to God to blesse them: So, Luke 6. 28. Some by pronoun∣cing a blessing upon them, by vertue of their calling, and warrant of Gods Word. So the Priests blessed the people, Numb 6. 23, to the end. Some by the Spirit of Prophecie foretelling the blessings should come upon them; so Ja∣cob blessed Ephraim and Manasseh, ch. 48. 9, 15, 16, 20. and the twelve tribes, ch. 49. 28. and so did Moses likewise, Deut. 33. 1. And so Isaac intends to blesse Esau here. And doth blesse Jacob and Esau, v. 27, 28, 29 39, 40. and Jacob again, ch. 28. 3, 4. Thee] Esau. Isaac being left in this point to his owne spirit, out of his carnal judgement and affection, he in∣tends the blessing to Esau, to transmit the inheritance of the blessings and promises made to his father unto Esau, as his first-borne; either not mindful of the divine O∣racle,
ch. 25. 23. Or understanding it, not of their per∣sons, but of their posterity. But Gods Providence, serving it self upon the better faith and illumination of Rebekah, and by her meanes doth disappoint Isaacs purpose, and he by his free grace and singular favour, transfers the blessing upon Jacob. V. 6. And Rebekah spake] Being soundly grounded that the blessing belonged to Jacob; and seeing now her hus∣band going about to give it to Esau, she labours to disap∣point his errour, though by wayes not so warrantable, un∣lesse she were moved by some secret instinct of Gods Spirit. V. 7. Before the Lord, before my death] In his pre∣sence, and by his power and authority, who will ratifie this my last Will and Testament, Heb 11. 20 V. 12. I shall bring a curse] For my deceiving, Deut. 27. 18. Jer. 48. 10. Mal. 14. V. 13. Upon me be thy curse] She was over-confident, u∣sing such ill meanes, though in a good cause, and trusting to the Oracle. V. 15. Goodly raiment] Perfumed or kept sweet, v. 27. not likely to be holy robes received from their Ancestors, and kept for the first-borne to minister in. Which were with her] Not with Esaus wives. V. 16. Skins upon his hands] His face by a beard and haire, might be much like Esaus. V. 19. I am Esau] It is in vaine to labour to excuse Ja∣cob here and hereafter from divers lies, deceipts and dis∣semblings. V. 20. Brought it to me] Ch. 24. 12. one lie drawes on another. V. 27. The smell of his raiment] Aromatick odours, and spices for perfume, abounded in those countreys. V. 27. As the smell of a field] With flowers, fruits and vines, Cant. 2. 13. 4. 14. 7. 13. V. 28. God give thee] A Prayer and Prophecie. And these promises of earthly blessings were types of spiritual blessings, extending to all that was included in the Pro∣mises and Covenant made to and with Abraham, Deut. 33. 28. 8. 8. V. 29. Let people serve thee] From Jacob came Judah; 1 Chron. 5. 2. Gen. 49. 10. David subdued many Nations. be Lord over thy brethren] Hereby he confirmes to him the right of the first-borne. thy brethren, and let thy mothers sonnes] Cursed] Ch. 12. 3. Numb. 24, 9. The efficacy of the blessing here, did not depend upon the intention of Isaac, And no more doth the truth and efficacy of the Sacrament depend upon the intention of the Minister. V. 33. Trembled] As one perplexed, astonished, between wonder and feare lest he had done amisse. Yea, and he shall be blessed] By that trembling as by a bit and bridle. God restraines him from revoking the blessing. And recollecting himself he doth now by faith re-establish it, Heb. 11. 20. And after more advisedly, chap. 28. 3, 4. V. 34. Exceeding bitter cry] Yet found no place of re∣pentance, no way to change his fathers minde, to recal what he had done, though he sought it carefully with tears, Hebr. 12. 17. Prov. 1. 24, 28. V. 35. Thy blessing] Which I intended thee, and by birth-right pertained to thee. V. 36. And he said] These words shew no true repentance in Esau. he took away] Nay, Esau sold it and despised it, ch. 25. 33, 34. my blessing] Not his then, when the birth-right was none of his. V. 37. Thy Lord] V. 29. and what shall I do?] As if he should say, compara∣tively, all other blessings are nothing. V. 39. The fatnesse of the earth] Not unlike that, v. 28. Mount Seir was such a place, Josh. 24. 4. By faith Isaac blessed Esau concerning things to come, Hebr. 11. 20. yet Canaan far surpassed Idumea. Besides that Canaan was a type of the heavenly Canaan. V. 40. And by this sword shalt thou live] With warres and troubles defend thy state and countrey, Mat. 10. 34. And not enjoy peace as Jacob, Deut. 33. 27, 28. Esay. 2. 4. and shalt serve thy brother] In thy posterity, Deut. 33. 29. Gen. 25. 23. 2 Sam. 8. 14. 1 Kings 22. 47. Obad. v. 18, 19, 21. when thou shalt have the dominion] Because of Israels sins, as in the days of Jehoram, 2 Kings 8. 20. 22. 2. break his yoke] Of thy servitude, 2 Chron. 21. 8. under which thou wast from Davids dayes till then, above one hundred yeares, Esay 9. 4. 10. 27. Jer. 27. 8, 11. Herod was an Idumean. V. 41. Hated] Spitefully. This shewes no true repent∣ance in him, 1 John 3. 12, 15. This hatred continued in his posterity, Obad v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 21. said in his heart] Afterwards uttered it in words, v. 42. are at hand] In his wish and opinion, Isaac being now blinde, and yet he lived fourty foure yeares after. V. 42. Comfort himself] To receive his birth-right by killing of thee. Revenge is sweet to the enraged wicked man; yea, the very purpose of it. And thus they harden their heart in evil against Gods known Will; so did Saul against David, 1 Sam. 18. 28. God useth a like speech of himself in an holy sense, Ezech. 5. 13. V. 44. A few dayes] It proved to be above twenty yeares, ch. 31. 38. Doubtful whether ever Rebekah saw him a∣gain: She sent not for Jacob, because she saw Esaus rage and malice continue, ch. 32. 6. V. 45. Both in one day] By fighting they might kill each other, or if Esau lived, they should and would then count him as dead, and no better. And the Law was such, chap. 9. 6. V. 46. Of the daughters of Heth] Esaus wives, ch. 26. 35, 34. A wise, godly and crafty counsel she conceales from Isaac, the hatred of Esau, and dangerous discord be∣tween his sons. CHAP. XXVIII. Ver. 1. ANd blessed him] Isaac was constant to his first blessing, notwithstanding Jacobs craft in getting it Jacob had need of this second blessing to confirme his faith against his future troubles and trials; I∣saac therefore by his fatherly authority, now wittingly and willingly settles it on him again. V. 2. Arise, go] Isaac was not; but his fathers servant, ch. 24. 3, 4. 5, 6. And he with ten camels, &c. Jacob here with his staffe in his hand, ch. 32. 10. and to serve for a wife, Hos. 12. 12. thy mothes brother] Cousin-germans marry. V. 3. A multitude of people] Chapter 35. 11. 48. 4.
V. 4. The blessing of Abraham] His Grandfather, who had the Original grant of the blessings, both temporal and spiritual, earthly and heavenly, made over to him and his seed, and the blessing chiefly of the promised seed. art a stranger] Ch. 17. 8. This is to prevent the weak∣ening of his faith, by being but a stranger in it still, as al∣so his father and Grandfather were. unto Abraham] By Promise, ch. 12. 7. and often re∣peated. V. 5. Of B thuel the Aramite] Syrian. So Luke tran∣slateth the word, Luke 4. 27. V. 9. To Ishmael] The Ishmaelites, for he was dead, ch. 25. 17. Mahalath] Called also Basemath, ch. 36. 3. sister] By the same mother at least, if not father. Nebaioth] Ishmaels eldest sonne, ch. 25. 13. From him Esau had his sister to wife, Ishmael being now dead. Esau and she were Cousin-germans; two brothers children. This Esau did to please his father, and strengthen himself by the Ishmaelites against Jacob. And now he hath three wives, assoon likely as Jacob had any. V. 10. From Beersheba] Ch. 26. 23. toward Haran] Charran, Acts 7. 2. a long journey; se∣ven dayes journey in Labans pursuit to Mount Gilead, ch. 31. 22, 23. which Mount stretched through the two tribes, and 1/2 beyond Jordan Eastward. And now was Jacob seventy five or seventy six yeares old. See Annot. on ch. 29. 21. V. 11. And he lighted] By Gods Providence, chap. 32. 10. because the Sun was set] And so, or for wearinesse, he did not reach Luz, after called Bethel. Though it were hard by, v. 19. It is conceived to be near fifty English miles distant from Beer-sheba; and from Jerusalem eight miles Northward. for his pillowes] Hard distresse. He went so meanly from his parents, or haply stole away in a sort, lest Esau should lie in wait for him by the way; as he did at his returne, ch. 32. 6. Abrahams servant went with great state, so that Rebekah calls him Lord, ch. 24. 18. But Jacob with his staffe in his hand, ch. 32. 10. V. 12. Dreamed] A divine dream; See Annot. on ch. 15. 1. and on ch. 20. 3. Ladder] Signifying Christ, John 1. 51. In his two na∣tures personally united; Heaven and earth are as it were joyned together. And by him the only Mediatour is man reconciled to God. Colos. 1. 20. by him the Angels for our service, and the Holy Ghost and his gifts descend down to us, and we and our prayers have accesse and ascend un∣to God. And secondarily, hereby is signified the Provi∣dence of God in governing the world, Psal. 113. 5, 6. and particularly, his provident care over Jacob, in his jour∣ney going and returning, v. 13, 15. and 32. 1, 2. And both these, specially by the Ministery of Angels, Psal. 91. 11, 12. Heb. 1. 13, 14. earth] Denoting Christs humanity, and his conversing with men, Joh. 16. 28. Heaven] Denoting his Deity and Mediation, or negoti∣ation for men with God, Heb. 8. 1. 9. 24. John 14. 6. ascending] Coming and going, looking with desire into the mysteries of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 12. ministring unto him, Mar. 1. 13. at his Tentation, Mat. 4. 11. in his Pas∣sion, Luke 22. 43. at his Resurrection, John 20. 12. and Ascension, Acts 1. 11. And ministring through him unto his people. V. 13. The Lord stood] Jehovah; His Providence over us in Christ: I am the Lord God of Abraham, ch. 17. 7. Heb. 11. 16. And this teacheth the Resurrection of the dead, Luke 20. 37, 38. to thee and to thy seed] To thee in thy seed, when yet he had no wife or childe V. 14. And thy seed] Renewes the Promise to him, and states it in him, which was formerly made to Abraham, and to Isaac, Act. 3. 25. all the families] So the Promise pertaines to us; we may say with the Prophet, God found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us, Hos. 12. 4. V. 15. I am with thee] The like Promise made at his return, ch. 31▪ 3. in all] God giving his sonne, doth with him give all things also, Rom. 8. 32. 1 Tim 4. 8. not leave thee] Josh. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 5. untill] Not excluding the time following. As, Mat. 28. 20. V. 16. And I knew it not] Being awaked, he perceived that God had appeared to him there: admires at it, and his goodnesse in it: that not only in his Fathers house, but even there God vouchsafed such Apparitions, Job 9. 11. V. 17. Afraid] Such glorious, though gracious Appa∣ritions, affects mans frailty with feare because of his sin, Mat. 17. 6. Luke. 2. 9. 8. 35. Rev. 1. 17. See Annot. on ch. 16. 13. the house of God] He thinks this therefore a fit place for the building of an House to God, v. 22. 1 Tim. 3. 15. V. 18. The stone] Or heap of stones, v. 11. or else some one of them. pillar] Some extemporary pile of stones raised by him a∣fore on the sudden, without tooles, as a thankful memo∣rial of Gods gracious Apparition in that place. This likely being after demolished, he erects about thirty yeares after a new pillar of stone upon another Apparition in the same place, ch. 35. 14, 15. This here was a religious signe and monument as Altars also were, Esay 19. 19. There were also pillars for civil monuments, as Rachels pillar on her grave, ch. 35. 20. and Absaloms pillar, 2 Sam. 18. 18. the pillar Galecd, Gen. 31. 45, 47, 52. But when the Law was given by Moses, pillars for religious use were forbid∣den, Lev. 26. 1▪ Deut. 16. 22. in the margin, Hos. 10. 1. And the pillars of idolaters commanded to be broken down, Deut. 12 3. 7. 5. and poured oile] Which he had for food, or to anoint his body in travel. Jacob poured it on the top or the pillar to consecrate it for holy use. Thus oile of consecration in use before the Law of Moses. So again, ch. 35. 14. As af∣ter in the Law there was an anointing oile, to sanctifie the things used in Gods service, Exod. 25. 6. 30. 22, 25, 29, to 34. 40. 9, to 16. Or rather here Jacob poured it as to an offering of thanksgiving to God; having no other sacrifice at hand. As David poured out the water of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Sam. 23. 16. See, ch. 35. 14. but these rites and manner of Worship, with all the Levitical ceremo∣nies, and Consecrations of places, persons, and things to divine service, are taken away by the Gospel, John 4. 20. 1 Tim. 2. 8. Yet the rules of religious order and decency in the times, places, and particulars of Christian Worship are to be observed. V. 19. Bethel] The City Luz hard by this place; and after hereupon called Bethel. Bethel was on an high hill; And therefore we read of Mount Bethel, Josh. 16. 1. It was
nigh to Hui or Ai, and West of it, Gen. 12. 8. Josh. 7. 2. ch 8 9. 12 ch. 12. 9. And therefore the men of Bethel and Ai are joyned together, Ezra 2. 28. Nehem. 7 32. Beth∣lehem and Shilo were not far from it, Gen. 35. 16, 19. Judg. 21, 19. Abraham pitched his Tent close by it i not there, Gen. 12. 8. 13. 3. As Jacob had this dream and vi∣sion here, whereupon he calls the name of the place Bethel, so God himself bidding him returne from Laban, is plea∣sed to call himself the God of Bethel, ch 31. 13. And upon his return God bids him go and dwell there. which command he obeyes and here makes an Altar. And up∣on a second vision and Promise made he the second time, erects a pillar, and renewes the name of Bethel, ch. 35. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 9▪ 13, 14 15. Hos 12. 4. In Joshuths time it had a King, Josh. 12. 16. Joshuah, and after the house of Joseph conquered it, Josh. 12. 16. Judg. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25. It fell then by lot to the tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18. 22. There being another of the name it seems that fell to E∣phraim, 1 Chron. 7. 28. It is one of the three places whither Samuel rede circuit yearly, and judged Israel, 1 Sam 7. 16. Saul in his time met three men going up to God to Bethel, Sam 10. 3. & had two thousand men of his army with him there, and in Micmash, 1 Sam. 13. 2. David sent of the spoiles of the Amalckites to them of Bethel, if under that name in that place, Kiriah-jearim, the House of God, where the Ark then was and abode be not understood. Jeroboam in his time set up here one of his golden Calves, made an Altar, and setled Priests, 1 Kings 12. 28. 29, 32, 33. And hence Bethel the House of God, seemes to be called Bethaven, the house of vanity, Hos. 4. 15. 5. 8. 10. 5. And yet there was another place properly called Bethaven, and nigh to Bthel, Josh. 7. 2. 18. 12. 1 Sam. 13. 5. 14. 23. Thither came a man of God while Jero∣boam stood by the Altar to burne incense, and prophesied against it; and healed the Kings hand that was dried up, for stretching it out against him; which Prophet was af∣ter slain by a Lion, for suffering himself to be seduced by an old Prophet that dwelt in Bethel, and came out of Sa∣maria, 1 Kings 13. 2 Kings 23. 18. Abijah the sonne of Rchoboam took from Jeroboam Bethel, with the townes thereof, 2 Chron. 13 9▪ whereupon, and upon the capti∣vity of the ten tribes Jeremie useth these words, That the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence, Jer. 8. 13. And before that captivity Hosea threatens that Bethel should do so unto them, as Shalman had spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of battel, Hos, 10. 14, 15. In Aha∣ziah's time, or rather Jehoram's Kings of Israel, Elias comes thither with Elizcus, immediately before his taking up into heaven. And upon Elizcus his return thither, the little children out of the city came and mocked him, cal∣ling him Bald-head, and fourty two of them were torne by beares, 2 Kings 2. In the dayes of Jeroboam the second, Amos the Prophet in scorn, bids the ten tribes come to Bethel and transgresse, Amos 4. 4. And seriously forbids them to seek to Bethel, for Bethel shall come to nought: but chargeth them to seek the Lord. lest he break out like fire, and there be none to quench it in Bethel, ch. 5. 5, 6, 7. Upon his preaching Amaziah the Priest of Bethel sends to Jeroboam against him, and forbids him to prophesie any more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chappel, and it is the Kings Court, ch. 7 10, 13. Josiah in his dayes performed all that was sore told by the man of God, 1 Kings 13. He brake down the Altar, and burnt the bones of men upon it. And the idolatrous pollutions of the Temple of Je∣rusalem he burnt, and carried the ashes of them to Bethel, so far off, on purpose to defile that place, which the ten ido∣latrous tribes had held so sacred, 2 Kings 23. 15. 19. 4. Thus large have I been on this place, once for all; purposing to make a reference hither, whenever I shall meet with the name elsewhere. uz at the first] This name in use▪ ch. 35. 6. 48. 3. and in Joshuahs time, Josh. 18. 13. See▪ Judg. 1. 23, 26. It signi∣fieth Nut-tree, whence the City might have its name, as Jericho is called the City of Palme-trees, 2 Chron. 28. 15. Deut. 34. 3. V. 20. Vowed a Vw] There is an Oath, a Vow, and a devoting of a thing to God: of an Oath, see, Annot. on ch. 24. 3. of the devoting any thing, See, Lev. 27. 28, 29. A Vow is a binding of the soule with a bond, by a sacred, and solemne, a free and voluntary Promise made to God, for the doing or more careful doing of things, which o∣therwise by our duty and Gods Law we are bound to do, or for the doing of certain things lawful in themselves, but otherwise left indifferent to be done, or not to be done; or for the abstaining from the use of some things, other∣wise lawful to be used. And all this in way of thankfulness to God for some extraordinary blessings received; or for the obtaining of some special benefits, which we greatly desire and stand in need of. And therefore Vowes are ever joyned with Prayers, or Praises and Thanksgiving, or both. And these Vowes once made must carefully be kept and performed. Thus Jocob here vowed by way of thank∣fulnesse to God for this glorious Apparition, and the gra∣cious Promises vouchsafed to him, and for further and fu∣ture blessings to be received from God, that God should be his God, this should be a new engagement and obligation upon him, that he would for ever serve and worship him; and that that stone or pillar now erected by him, should be Gods house, a place consecrated to his worship and service, and that he would give the tenth of all he should have to God, and for his special use in Sacrifices, Altars, sacred buildings, and maintenance of his service. Thus Hannah vowed, that if God would deliver her from the reproach of barrennesse, and give her a man-child, she would give him to the Lord all the dayes of his life, and no razour should come upon his head, 1 Sam 1. 11. Thus Bathsheba it seems made a Vow for the obtaining of Solomon, whence she cal∣leth him the sonne of her Vowes, Prov. 31. 2. Thus Jeph∣thah made a Vow to obtain victory against the children of Ammon, Judg 11. 30, 39. And all Israel, to obtain victo∣ry against King Arad the Canaanite and his people, Numb. 21. 1, 2. Thus David vowed unto the mighty God of Ja∣cob, forthwith to finde out a place for the habitation of the Lord, Psal. 132. 2, 3. Thus Paul was under a Vow, Acts 18. 18. And again he and foure other men, Act. 21, 23, 24. Yea, the Heathen Mariners, by the light of nature made vows to the Lord, vowes of thankfulnesse for their deliverance from shipwrack, Jonah 1. 16. In Moses time, the vow of a Nazarite and Lawes for them are set down at large, Numb. 6. as also the things to be vowed to the Lord, as per∣sons, beasts, clean and unclean, houses, fields of inheritance, and of purchase, whether vowed before the year of Jubile, or after, and the several Lawes for the Redemption of them, Lev. 27. And in that Mosaical and Ceremonial Law, God carefully provides that no unworthy thing shall be vowed to him, no beast deformed, or that hath any member superfluous, or lacking, or any way faulty, Lev. 22. 18, 21, 22, 23. Mal. 1. 14. Much lesse the hire of a whore, or price of a dog, Deut. 23. 18. any sinful thing as those wicked men of Judah did, in their idolatrous ways, both they and their wives which fled into the land of Egypt, contrary to the Word of the Lord by Jeremie say, We will
surely perform our vowes which we have vowed, to burne incense to the Queen of heaven, and to poure out drink-offerings unto her, Jer. 44. 25. And least of all would he have any sinful vow made unto him. Now to forbear to vow is no sin, Deut. 23. 22. at least, no such sin as if they vow and pay not, as, John 9. 41. If ye were blinde, ye should have no sin, no such sin as now remaineth on you, for refusing the light. And the like, John 15. 22, 24. For howsoever in the general, a vow is a kinde of a free-will-offering, a service of God, Esay 19. 21. but an arbitrary and voluntary service. Before men vow it is in their own power and pleasure, as it is spoken in Ananias his case, Acts 5. 4. yet in some extraordinary cases of petition and thanksgiving, vowes are requisite and necessary. And however; yet being once made lawfully, after vowes to make enquiry, undoubtedly it is sin. But after vowes to make enquiry is a snare and sin, Prov. 20. 25. For who vowes, bindes his soule with a bond, Numb. 30. 3. And there∣fore when a lawful vow is lawfully made, then God strictly requires the same to be punctually performed, Deut. 23. 21, 23. Eccl. 5. 4, 5, 6. And for that cause he gives Laws, who have power to vow, and who may not vow, namely, children and wives, who are not free of themselves, but un∣der the power and command of others, Numb. 30. David therefore is mindful of his performance, Thy vowes are upon me, O God, Psal 56. 12. and 66. 13, 14. And he mindes others of it, Vow and pay unto the Lord your God, Psal. 76. 11. And again, To thee shall the vow be paid, Ps. 65. 1, 2. And he saith unto God, Thou, O God, hast heard my vowes. And so will I sing praise unto thy Name for e∣ver, that I may daily performe my vowes, Ps 61. 5, 8. If God will be with me] Prayer-wise, respecting the Pro∣mile, v. 15. and will keep me] Respects the Promise likewise, v. 15. and bindes upon it; for if here hath the signification of when, as in 1 Sam. 15. 17. And is here a word of doubting or of condition, but of faith and inference of his duty of thankfulnesse, bread to eate] 1 Tim. 6. 8. V. 21. So that I come again] Jacobs vow in all points grounded upon the Word and Promise, v. 15. then shall] Not as if otherwise not. He was sure of the truth of the Promise, and thereupon vowes this in way of thankfulnesse. V. 12. This stone] See on v. 18. and ch. 31. 45. Gods House] So performed, ch. 35. 7, 14. the tenth unto thee] A signe of homage and subjection to God: And therefore given to the Priests. Thus by Abraham, and by Jacob, tithes paid before the Law of Moses. CHAP. XXIX. Verse 1. THeu Jacob] Being seventy five or seven∣ty six yeares old. See, Annotat. on ver. 21. East] Whence Abraham came, Esay 41. 2. where Job lived afterwards, Job 1. 3. but the particular place in the East here meant is Haran, v. 4. V. 2. A Well] So, chap. 24. 11, 15. and, Exod. 2. 15, 16, 21. a great stone] To keep the store. V. 5. The sonne of Nahor] That is, the Grandchilde. V. 6. Is he well?] So, ch. 43. 17, 28. 1 Sam. 25. 5, 6. 2 Sam 20. 9. V. 8. We cannot] By right, as, ch. 34. 14. 43. 32. or with our might and strength, for it was a great stone, v. 2. V. 10. Rolled the stone] By his own strength, or with the help of the shepherds. V. 11. Kissed Rachel] Having first shewed her who he was, ch. 31. 55. V. 12. Her fathers brother] That is Kinsman, his sisters sonne, v. 13. V. 13. Kissed him] One man kisseth another; so, ch. 45. 15. Exod. 4. 27. 18. 7. Luke 7 45. Rom 16. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 12. Traiterous were the kisses of Joab and Judas. all these things] Touching his father, the birth-right, blessing, Esau, his sending away, and the cause and end of it, and vision by the way, else Laban might have won∣dered at his poor and solitary manner of coming, Deut. 26. 5. considering he saw the servants rich manner o coming, ch. 24. 10, 2, 53. We read not here of any letter or token sent by him. V. 14. Surely thou art] I doubt not of thy person; and welcome thou art whatever the occasion of thy jour∣ney be. V. 15. Shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought?] Seeing him in his moneths abode not idle, but active and able, casts about to procure his stay. beautiful] So, Esther, chap. 2. 7. So, Joseph, chap. 39. 6. V. 18. I will serve thee] In some countreys, and in some ages men buy wives; so, David, 1 Sam. 18. 25. 2 Sam. 3. 14. Hos. 3. 2. Gen. 34. 12. V. 19. It is better] Laban out of his churlishnesse and covetousnesse, makes use of Jacobs loving proffer. And yet by his general words and ambiguous speech may be suspected, not to intend faire and ingenuous dealing with Jacob, as soon after appeared, v. 23. V. 20. Served seven yeares for Rachel] There are two several opinions, and there can be no more, which must guide and rule the Exposition of these words, and some o∣thers also which are in the ensuing passages of this histo∣ry. One is, that Jacob married first at the end of his first seven years service. And then having Leah fraudulently put upon him in stead of Rachel. That he newly con∣tracts the second time to have Rachel for other seven years service; but marries her a week after he had taken Leah; and performes that seven yeares service, for Rachel after he had married her. And most Expositors are of this opi∣nion. But I conceive there are two strong arguments a∣gainst it. One is, that they are thereby forced to hold, that Jacobs twelve children were all borne within those seven yeares, viz. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Ashur, Issachar, Zebulun, Dinah, Joseph, v. 25. ch. 31. 38, 41. You may say, this may well enough, be by foure women, I confesse it; but considering the plaine and pregnant passages of the sacred history, in the times and manner of their births, I hold it impossible. For it is plaine, that none of them at any time had twins. Again, Leah had Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, at several births, which will take up three or foure of the seven yeares, before Rachel complaines of barrennesse. Or put case she complained sooner then the history mentions, yet Bilhah must have Dan and Naphtali at several births, before Zilpah had Gad and Ashvr at several births; and these last foure sonnes will take up three or foure yeares;
and after all this, Leah having formerly left bearing when Judah was borne, v. 35. ch 30. 9. And when Reuben her eldest sonne was of age to finde mandrakes in the field; then after her time of barrennesse, and after her maid Zil∣pahs births, she then again conceiving beares Issachar, and Zebulun, and Dinah at several births. And last of all Ra∣chel beares Joseth, all which must be done within the com∣passe of one seven years according to that opinion. Which, how it may stand with truth, and without offering vi∣olence to the course of the history, and to many words of the text, I confesse I cannot comprehend. And a second argument against that opinion, is taken from the conside∣ration of Judahs age, and the birth of Hezron and Hamul his Grandchildren, when they with Jacob and all his posterity went down into Egypt ch. . 1.] To, open this we must first knew, that Jacob was seventy five yeares old when he came down to Laban, which appeares thus; he was one hun∣dred and thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh, ch 47. 9. and then Joseph was fourty years old, viz. thirty when he was taken out of prion and advanced by Phara∣oh, ch. 41. 46. After which passed seven years of plenty, and three of famine when Jacob came down, Joseph then being fourty yeares old; it appeares also that he was borne in the fourteenth yeare after Jacobs coming to Laban, ch 30. 25. 31. 38, 41. Take then those fourteen yeares be∣fore Joseph was borne, and the fourty yeares of Josephs age, when his father stood before Pharaoh, out of his fathers age at that time, he being then one hundred and thirty; and it will so be clear, that Jacob was seventy five or seventy six yeares old, when he first came to Laban. Now this being so, Judah the fourth sonne of Jacob by Leah, must needs be by their opinion but three or foure yeares elder then Jo∣seph, Jacob not  Leah, as they say, till after his first seven yeares of service were ended. And so Judah must be but fourty three or fourty foure yeares old at most, when he and his Grandchildren Hezron and Hamul came with Jacob into Egypt. To compasse this, they must cast their reckonings thus, that Judah married at twelve yeares old, and had Er at thirteen; that Er married at twelve yeares old, and Onan his younger brother, ch. 38. 4. marri∣ed at twelve yeares old, that Tamar remained a widow, and waited till Shlah was grown; and the dayes being multi∣plied, Judahs wife died, and Tamar beares to Judah Pharez; and all this within the compasse of three years. That Pha∣rez married at twelve yeares old and begat Hezron and Ha∣mul; and supposing them to be twirs, that at a yeare old they were carried into Egypt. For thus the reckoning will rise to the fourty third or fourty fourth yeare of Judahs age. But these supposed reckonings seem so harsh in that age of the world, to the most learned favourers of this o∣pinion, that they choose to ease or avoid this, to say ra∣ther, that Hezron and Hamul were not carried down into Egypt, but were borne afterwards in Egypt, so the learned late Annot. on ch. 46. 12. But this were to offer such plain violence to that text; and to the drift of that whole chapter, and giving way for others borne after in Egypt to be reck∣oned in as well as they, for why not others as well as they? and so the whole number to be altered, and the intent of the Holy Ghost disappointed; that I think upon due consideration had, not many will comply with that conceit. And the same Annotators disclaim it them∣selves, in their Annotations on ch. 38. 1. The other opi∣nion whereunto my resolution bends, is this; that Jacob being seventy five yeares old, married both sisters at the beginning of the fourteen yeares service, fulfilling a week in keeping the feast at the marriage of the one, and so a∣gain presently after at the marriage of the other. And the enjoying not the want and hopeful expectation of Ra∣chel, made his seven years service for her seem unto him to be bu a few dayes. This addition of seven yeares to the former opinion gives faire way to the birth of all the twelve children, in that order and sequence of time, as the letter of the words, and context of the story do require, and gives further scope, (which yet is little enough) for the time of the birth of Hezron and Hamul, in the fiftieth year of Judahs age, (as this opinion makes it) when he and they went down with Jacob into Egypt. The only difficulty here occuring is, the exposition of some words and senten∣ces, seeming to favour the first opinion, which yet may better receive a commodious interpretation, then involve and intangle us in greater perplexities, and draw upon us the fore-mentioned incongruities, if not impossibilities. The text then here saith, That Jacob served seven yeares for Rahel] that is, after he had married her. And so all Ex∣positors agree, that indeed he did so, though most of them infer it upon their construction of the 27. and 28. verses. but a few dayes] If he had not enjoyed her by marriage all those seven yeares of his service, they would have seemed a longsome and tedious time. For hope deserred maketh the heart sick, Prov. 13. 12. And love makes men think eve∣ryday a year till they enjoy the Party loved. V. 21. And Jacob said] That is, had said. for my dayes are fulfilled] That is, I am full of dayes, and ripe for marriage: being now seventy five yeares old, and my brother Esau of my age, being married thirty five yeares ago, ch. 26. 34. that I may go in unto her] Not go away with her, but use her as my wise, whiles I perform my covenanted service of seven yeers for her. V. 22. And Laban gathered] Had gathered. The Hebrews want a preterpluperfect tense. V. 23. He took Leah] Being veiled as the manner was, in bringing Brides into the Bride-chamber, Joel 2. 16. and unto their husbands in the dark, for modesty sake, ch. 24. 65. ch. 38. 15, 16. V. 25. What is this] For he hated Leah, v. 31. did not I serve with thee for Rachel?] Covenant to serve with thee. beguiled me?] In the dark; and by her silence or soft whispering, likely upon her fathers direction, which Ja∣cob also might impute to her modesty. V. 26. Not be so done in our country] Custom here on∣ly pretended to cover his accustomed fraud. Else he should have said so before, and told it. V. 27. Fulfil her wk] The week-feast for Leah, and keep her with thee, reject her not. The marriage-feast continued a week, Judg. 14. 10, 12, 15, 17. Thus Laban provides that Jacob by voluntary consent to this marriage with Leah, should not be able afterwards to put her a∣way. give thee this also for the service] All Expositors here a∣gree, that Jacob did not first serve these seven yeares, and after marry Rachel. But married her first, and served after. V. 28. And fulfilled her week] Leahs week for her mar∣riage-feast. Or it may be understood of Rachels week for her marriage-feast, presently succeeding the other. V. 30. And he went in also unto Rachel] At the first Creation in Adams time. And again in Noahs time, when there was most need of multiplication of mankinde, yet God allotted but one woman for one man. And therefore
though the Law against plurality of wives, was not yet so expressely and literally declared, nor against the marriage of two sisters, as afterwards it was, Lev. 18. 18. yet this here in Jacob cannot be allowed, unlesse besides a disposition of the divine Providce in it, there were a dispensation by divine authority for it. Neither may it without like war∣rant be drawn into example. As neither the example of Abraham taking Hagar, nor Jacobs taking here of Zilpah and Bilhah. V. 31. Hated] Not simply, but in comparison of Rachel, v. 30. so, in Deut. 21. 15. Mat. 6. 24. Luke 14. 26. John 12. 25. V. 35. Now will I praise] Openly in solemn manner. This here applied to the Lord, is after applied to Judah himself, ch. 49. 8. of Judah the Nation were afterwards called Jewes. and left bearing] If but two yeares; yet she could not have three children more, viz. Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah, at several births, within the compasse of one seven yeares; yea, the favourers of that opinion confesse, that it must needs be that it was not above a half yeare that she stayed ere she conceived again. Mr. Jackson on ch. 30. 9. CHAP. XXX. Verse 1. RAchel envied her sister] Rachels fault, ch. 37. 11. Num. 11. 29. Psal. 106. 16. Prov. 27. 4. give me children] Laying the fault on her husband, who yet had children by Leah, she speaks this in a womanish passion, never considering to whom she spake, or by what meanes he should be able to satisfie her desire. or else I die] For grief, Prov. 14. 30. It will be my death, and I shall have no desire to live, Job 5. 2. Barrennesse counted a reproach, v. 23. V. 2. Am I in Gods stead] ch. 50. 19. God only can give children. ch. 16. 2. 20. 18. Psal. 113 9. 127. 3. Therefore Isaac, and Hannah; and others go to God by prayer for children, Gen. 25. 21. 1 Sam. 1. 10. V. 3. Bilhah] By the example of Sarah, ch. 16. 2. heare upon my knees] Brought forth and nursed on my knees, ch. 50. 23. that I may] So she calls them hers, and she gives them names, v. 6, 8. claiming a kinde of motherhood in her Hand-maids issue; the Hand-maids children by nature were the Dames by adoption, or in right of her husband by the Law given afterwards, in Exod. 21. 4. And so Ra∣chel made account that some part of her barrennesse was put away, and some of her husbands good will swayed from her sister (whose envious rival she was,) to her side. V. 4. Handmaid to wife] Called a Concubine, ch. 35. 22. so a secondary wife is called, such was Hagar, ch. 16. 3. Ke∣turah, 1 Chron. 1. 32. and Zilpah, v. 9. ye she and Zilpah are called his two women-servants, ch. 32. 22. The sonnes of Bilhah and Zilpah became Heads of tribes, and did in herit in Canaan, as well as the sonnes of Leah and Ra∣chel. V. 5. And bare Jacob a sonne] An improbable cunjecture it is, that this should be the same yeare, wherein Leah did bear Levi. V. 6. God hath judged me] On my side against Leah, who upbraided me with barrennesse, as Peninnah did Hannah, 1 Sam. 1, 6. so judging is used, 1 Sam. 24. 15. 2 Sam, 18. 19 Gen 49. 16. V. 8. Have I wrastled] By prayer, and by all meanes. V. 9 Left bearing] An improbable conjecture it is, that it was not above half a yeare that she stayed ere she conceived again. And yet to these straits they are driven that hold the opinion, that Jacob did not marry till the be∣ginning of the last seven yeares service. V. 13. Call me blessed] Luke 1. 48. Cant. 6. 9 V. 14. Reuben] Must now need be more then five yeares old, rather eight or nine, having seven brethren at this time borne after him; three of his own mother, and foure by the two Hand-maids whiles his mother left off bearing. And yet if he were now but five or six yeares old, as the late Annotat. affirme on this verse, there would remain but one or two yeares for her three last children, Issachar, Zebulun and Dinah▪ which helps still to make against the foresaid opinion formerly re∣jected. mandrakes] Pleasant to the eye, and of a sweet smell, Cant. 7. 13. Lovely flowers, whether those we call man∣drakes, iis uncertain. But it seemes they were of some esteeme amongst them, such ado is here kept about them. V. 15. Hast taken my husband] His affection from me, and so his conjugl duty belonging to me, that he doth e∣strange himself from my bed through thee. Haply these contentions were not meerly carnal; but aimed and reached further. shall lie with thee] Rachel makes ill use of her husbands great affection to her, takes upon her the disposal of his person, and hires him out or a trifle to her sister. V. 16. Leah went out to meet him] To make sure, he should not go in to Rachel. It seems they had several tents. V. 17. And God hearkened unto Leah] v. 22. Therefore she prayed to him, for a child. Gods Providence reacheth to the numbring of our haires, Mat. 10. 30. and she conceived] Not the same yeare that Zilpah her Hand-maid had her first sonne; much lesse the fifth yeare of the last seven yeares service. V. 21. Diuah] Ch. 34. V. 23. My reproach] Of Barrennesse, 1 Sam. 1. 6. Esay 4. 1. Luke 1. 25. V. 24. The Lord shall adde] Prayer-wise. See the ac∣complishment, ch. 35. 7. V. 25. When Rachel had borne] Jacob then was ninety yeares old. send me away] He being now out of Labans debt, chap. 31. 41. mine own place] Ch. 28. 13. The respect he had to the Promise made him earnest to return thither. V. 26. Give me my wivs] cb 21. 21. He would not have stollen them away against his will, and have married them after. He had served for them, and yet here craves his good leave to depart. Though afterwards upon good occasion he steales away, ch. 31. 20. V. 27. Favour in ahine eyes] Ch. 18. 3. for thy sake] Ch 39. 3. V. 30. Since my coming] And at my labour. and now when] I being now ninety yeares old, 1 Tim. 5. 8. He alters his former real intention to return present∣ly, upon good considerations. And God did not command his return, till ch. 31. 3, 13. V. 31. Not give me any thing] No fit wages; nothing
out of thy precedent or present estate, but out of that which shall accrew to thee afterwards. V. 32. I will passe through] Jacob will depend upon Gods bounty, rather then upon Labans churlish covetous∣nesse. and of such shall be my hire] Of the speckled only, when no speckled ones were left in the flock. But only white ones. V. 34. I would it might be] For this was likely to be a good bargain for Laban, for naturally cattel bring forth young ones like themselves; yet seeing the issue of this, Laban changes this course ch. 31. 7. V. 37. Rods] This he did at the ramming-time; and it seems by Gods command, ch. 31. 9, 10. 11, 12. in recom∣pence of his sore labours, ch. 31. 38, 40. As the Israelites dealt with the Egyptians, at Gods command. And other∣wise Laban would have sent him away empty, ch. 31. 42. E∣zech. 39. 10. V. 38. Conceive] The colour of the rods, haply made also the shadowes of the rams that leaped upon them, to ap∣pear particoloured in the water. And the strength of fan∣cy or imagination is much at such a time of conception, and specially with Gods blessing upon it, as here. V. 40. The Lambs] That were particoloured. and set the faces] That so they might conceive the like, as they did before, by seeing the pilled rods in the troughs. his own flocks by themselves] Not amongst Labans cat∣tel, lest his own seeing Labans cattel of one colour, shouln engender the like to Labans, and so be Labans, not his. A third device. V. 43. Increased exceedingly] Thus even in temporal things God abundantly blessed him, ch. 31. 9. CHAP. XXXI. Ver. 1. GOtten all this glory] i. e. riches. Riches pro∣cure men honour and glory in the eyes of the world. And worldly men esteem them as their chief∣est glory, Psal. 49. 16, 17. Riches and glory, or honour are joyned together, Prov. 3. 16. 8. 18. Eccl. 6. 2. V. 2. Countenance] Bewrayes the heart; its looking glasse. V. 3. Returne] Thus God removes all Jacobs feares and doubts. And Jacob makes use of it, ch. 32. 9. V. 5. Hath been with me] To bid me returne, v. 3, 13. V. 7. Ten times] That is, many times. So, Numb. 14. 22. Job 19. 3. Lev. 26. 26. Zech. 8. 23. yet ten times may well be in six yeares, if sheep in Mesopotamia bring forth young twice a yeare, as some say now they do in Italy. suffered him not] Gods restraining grace in the wicked, ch. 20. 6. V. 8. Ring straked] With a round strake like a ring, of a contrary colour about their leg. Thus Laban ties and re∣straines him to that one mark. all the cattel For the greatest part. V. 9. God hath] No fraud in Jacob. V. 10. In a dream] Sent of God, six yeares afore this time, and this apparition, v. 13. V. 11. Angel] The God of Bethel, v. 13. which appear∣ed to him in Bethel, ch. 28. 13. ch. 48. 16. the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 3. Exod. 23, 20, 21. V. 13. I am the God] This Apparition was six yeare af∣ter the former. of Bethel] Putting him in minde of his promise and vow there made by him, and accepted by God, thus appro∣ving the name it self, and his service there vowed, ch. 28. 18, 19, 22. now arise] Without delay. V. 14. Rachel and Leah] The younger first named, as the best beloved, and who should have been the elder wise. So, Ruth 4. 11. V. 15. Strangers] Dealt with us as strangers rather then children. hath sold us] To thee for fourteen yeares service. our money] What we might have had in money or mo∣ny worth, for thy fourteen years service being our husband; whereas in good conscience he should have given us that as our portion, he hath converted it to his own use. And should he do so with the wages God hath given thee, for us and our children, for thy last six yeares service also? V. 16. Whatsoever God hath said] This is a binding reasun, which answers all doubts, and secures against all af∣ter-claps. V. 18. To go to Isaac] By the way he stayed about six yeares at Succoth, and at Shalem a City of Shechem, till Di∣nah was marriageable, who came from Laban at six or seven yeares of age, ch. 30. 21. 33. 18. 34. 1. After he stayed at Bethel, but not long, notwithstanding Gods command for his dwelling there, ch. 35. 1. as appears by the birth of Benjamin by the way, when he left Bethel, ch. 35 16, 17, 18. and the number of Benjamins children, when they all went down into Egypt, ch. 46. 21. Joseph being then fourty yeares old, and Benjamin but twenty seven, though he were borne within a yeare after Dinahs ravishing, nor doth it appear that Jacob stayed long about the tower of Edar, before he came to Isaac to Mamre. ch. 35. 21, 22, 23, 27. V. 19. Rachel had stollen the images] Teraphim. Laban calls them his gods, his houshould-gods, deos penates, v. 30. Images likely in the shape of men, 1 Sam. 19. 13, 16. where the word plural Teraphim signifies one image, used in di∣vine worship by idolaters, Judg. 17 5. 18. 14, 17, 20 Hos. 3. 4. consulted withal as Oracles, Ezech. 21. 21. Zech. 10. 2. as Ahaziah did with Beelzebub, 2 King. 1. 2. put down by Josiah and other godly Kings, 2 Kings 23. 24. V. 21. The river] Euphrates, Josh. 24. 2, 3. Gilead] Ag eat mountain, or tract of mountaines East∣ward of Jordan, running through the Kingdomes of Si∣hon and Og, the tribes, two 1/2 Deut. 3. 12. and having in several parts several names, as Gilead, Seir, Hermon and Li∣banus, the countrey under it very fertile, called the land of Gilead, Jer. 22. 6. 8. 22. 46. 11. Gen. 37. 25. Numb. 32. 1. Here called Gilead by Anticipation; See v. 47. V. 22. The third day] Ch. 30. 36. 31. 19. Labans fact pro∣ved Jacobs advantage, Job 5. 12, 13. V. 23. Seven dayes journey] From the time he set for∣ward in his pursuit, three days of Jacobs journey were spent ere Laban knew of it. Likely three dayes more in his re∣turn from his sheep-shearing to his home, and in preparing. Then these seven dayes in pursuit were twice swifter, and gained more way then Jacob could in his slow pace, chap. 33. 14. This then is the thirteenth day of Jacobs jour∣ney. V. 24. And God came] So, ch. 20. 3, 7. Numb. 22. 9. take heed] A commination and rebuke, v. 9, 42.
either good or bad] V. 29. Not simply; but to this end to bring him back again, or hinder him in his journey, or a∣ny way to hurt him, as is the present intent of thy pur∣suit, 2 Sam. 13. 22. V. 26. As captives] They went willingly, ver. 14, 15, 16. V. 27. Sent thee away with mirth] He had no such minde then, nor willingly now, but as God over-powered him. V. 28. To kisse] A Ceremony used both at meering and parting, ch. 29. 11. 27. 26. Exod. 4. 27. Gen. 31. 55. 33. 4. Ruth 1. 14. 2 Sam. 14. 33. foolishly] Jacob did it wisely, and that Laban himselfe knew. V. 29. It is in the power] A vain brag, like Pilates, John 19. 10, 11. V. 30. Stollen my gods?] Vanity of idolatry and ido∣laters, that their gods can be stollen: gods plurally is spoken of one image, Ex. 32, 8. And so Teraphim plurally signifies somtimes one image, 1 Sam. 19. 13. 16. Though Jacob was twenty yeares with Laban, yet Laban continued an ido∣later. Not thinking yet those Teraphims to be gods, but that he worshipped God in them, by them and with them. V. 32. Let him not live] A severe judgement, proceed∣ing from confidence of innocency: uttered in detestation of theft, but much more of idolatry, yet done more rash∣ly then wisely, when he extended it beyond the innocency of his own person. V. 33. Tent] Each sort had several tents. See, Annot. on ch. 23. 2. V. 35. The custome of women] Lev. 15. 19. V. 36. Wroth and chode] Be angry, but sin not, Eph. 4. 26. upon just cause, whence innocency is slan∣dered. V. 37. May judge] Lay the blame where it is due. V. 39. I bear the losse of it] Though against the rule of right, Exod. 22 10, 13. V. 40. Thus I was] Labans iniquity drives Jacob to praise and justifie himself. So, 1 Cor. 15. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 1. Hos. 12. 12. Deut. 26. 5. V. 41. Ten times] V 7, 8. V. 42. The feare of Isaac] V. 53. ch. 27. 33. 32, 9 Psal. 76. 11. Esay 8. 13. As elsewhere called the Hope of Is∣rael. yesternight] V. 24. V. 43. And all that thou seest is mine] 1 Kings 20 3. A brag, as if Jacob had nothing by desert from Laban, or gift from God. and what can I do] As if he should say, I cannot hurt them but I must hurt my self. But why did he then so pur∣sue? surely not to make this ensuing Covenant; it was not his minde then. Jacob may thank God for all, who had thus bridled, if not altered Laban. V 44. A Covenant] Ch. 21. 32. V. 45. A stone] Heap of stones, v. 46, 48, 51. as, chap. 28. 19. a pillar] A Monument of the Covenant. V. 46. Brethren, gather stones] Jacob speaks to his own family and Labans too, v. 51. did eat there upon the heap] After the Covenant made, v. 54. V. 47. Jegar-Sahadutha] In Labans Syrian language . Galced] The same in Jacobs Hebrew language. Hence likely the mountain and countrey took the name of Gi∣lead. V. 48. This heap is a witnesse] A signe, memo rial, which may be alledged in after-times as a wit∣nesse. Galeed] Therefore by anticipation so called, v. 21. V. 49. Mizpah] Near Mount Hermon and Lebanon, Josh. 11. 3. watch-tower. There were afterwards divers places of that name; one in Judahs lot, Josh. 15. 38. another in Benjamins, Josh. 18. 26. another in Moab, 1 Sam. 22. 3. V. 50. If thou shalt] Implying the words of a curse, as is usual in this case, ch. 14. 23 forbearing the expression of the words of the curse, either out of feare or unwil∣lingnesse to mention it in particular, or as yielding to any curse in general, if they break Promise and Covenant; so, ch. 24. 3. V. 52. To thee] For harme. V. 53. The God of Nahor, the God of their father] Te∣rah: both idolaters, Josh. 24. 2. The idolater sweares by his gods, his idols. V. 54. Offered sacrifice] Killed beasts, for a feast, not sacrifice. Feasts used at the making of Covenants, ch. 26. 30. Numb, 22. 40. 1 Kings 1. 9. 19 21. 1 Sam. 28. 44. V. 55. Blessed them] Thus God over-rules the wicked; so, ch. 33. 4. so he turned Balaams curse into a blessing, Numb. 23. 11. Deut. 23. 5. so the mindes of the Barbarians towards Paul, Acts 28. 4, 5, 6. CHAP. XXXII. Verse 1. ANgelis of God] To comfort and confirm him against the future fear and danger by Esau, Psal 91. 11. met him] In a visible Apparition when he was a∣wake. V. 2. Gods Host] Camp, Army, Heavenly souldiers, Luke 2. 13. Horses and charets of fire, 2 Kings 6. 17. fight∣ing for Gods people against their enemies, Dan. 10. 13, 20. 2 Kings 19. 35. Psal. 34. 7. Hoste] For their Numbers, Or∣der, Power, Employment; Angel the Guardian of Ja∣cob; but two Hosts, Heb. 1. 14. No Angel is restrained from a particular ministration to any of the Elect, nor a∣ny of the Elect so allotted to the custody of any Angel, that he may not expect the protection of many. Mahanaim] Two armies, the word is of the Dual num∣ber, Cant. 6. 13. on either hand of him, or before and be∣hinde, Ps. 34. 7. 91. 11. Here is not one peculiar Angel. It seems not so likely, that by the two Armies should be meant, the one of the Angels, the other of Jacobs family. Hence likely is the name of that City, Josh. 21. 38. in the tribe of Gal, assigned to the Levites the children of Merari. V. 3. Land of Seir] Ch. 14. 6. Deut. 2. 22. The Horims dwelt there afore; called Seir, not from Esau, but from Seir a Chorite or Horite, ch. 36. 20, 21. ch. 14 6. Thither was Esau gone, ch. 36. 6, 7, 8. And that lay in Jacobs way, which he must passe. V. 4. My Lord Esau. Thy servant Jacob] V. 18. 33. 8. Not here by prejudicing or renouncing the birth-right or blessing, ch. 27. 29. Though yielding for a time, as David, after he was anointed, did to Saul, so Jacob here to paci∣fie Esaus old malice, and present rage, v. 5. Prov. 15. 1. waiting by faith for the Promise, which was to be accom∣plished in future times.
I have sojourned with Laban] As an exile, as it were so long, and rendering to him an accompt of his time spent. V. 5. And I have oxen] And so will not be burdensom to him, or to his fathers house, not gape after his fathers riches, nor be a reproach to their family by his poverty, nor seek Esaus favour for his own profit sake. to tell my lord] q. d. I would not passe by thee without acquainting thee with it. V. 6. Foure hundred men] Most likely, with a bloody intent, how grievous soever it might be to his aged father, v. 8. These were too many for ostentation sake. V. 7. Greatly afraid] The infirmity of the flesh ap∣pears, the Angels being gone. he divided] V. 8. Another division, ch. 33. 1, 2. Good and godly policy, so, v. 16, 17, 18. and, ch. 14. 15. 30. 38. V. 9. O God] He falls to prayer as his only safe-guard. And prayers not to the Angels that appeared for their medi∣ation. But labours to strengthen himself, and his faith in God, and his Promises and Word throughout his Prayer. of my father] To whom thou hast made such promises. He prayes not to Abraham. which saidst unto me, Return] Ch. 31. 13. Be now as good as thyword, to me obeying it. V. 10. I am not worthy of the least] Nor of this I now beg; so, ch. 18. 27. 2 Sam. 9 7, 8. Luke 17. 10. Though he justly pleaded his merit to Laban, ch. 31. 38. the truth] In performing thy gracious Promises and Predictions. this Jordan] Now in sight, being in Mount Gilead or nearer. two bands] V. 7. V. 11. And the mother with the children] Or upon them, as, Hos. 10. 14. Deut 22. 6. V 12. And thou saidest] Ch. 28. 14, 15. 31. 3. V. 13. Which came to his hand] The night, and his haste to prevent his brother, would not suffer him to stand upon choice, 1 Sam 25. 8. a Present] Rich, of five hundred and eighty head of cattel, a stock for breed. As Jacob prayeth and trusteth in God and his Promises, so yet he useth means, Prov. 17. 8. 18. 16. V. 16. A space betwixt] V. 20. To mitigate his displea∣sure by degrees, ch. 33. 8, 9. and that if he fell in hostile manner upon the first, the other might seek the better to e∣scape. V. 20. Jacob is behinde us] Lest Esau might surmise that he sent these only, that he in the mean season might escape some other way. V. 21. That night] Not that, v. 13. but the night fol∣lowing, having spent the day before in sending away the droves and Presents by his servants. V. 22. Two women-servants] So are Bilhah and Zilpah called here. eleven sonnes] Dinah his daughter not mentioned. And Benjamin not yet borne. Jabbak] Deut. 2. 37. 3. 16. Numb. 21. 24. Josh. 12. 2. Judg. 11. 13. the border of the children of Ammon. If Jacob now had not been well setled in the confidence of Gods Protection, he would not likely have passed over this river, as having better meanes to escape on the other side, Or rather, he being last, stayed yet on the other side of the river. V. 23 Sent them ever] He remaining behinde, left alone on the other side, v. 24. And there, without knowledge of any, wrestled with the Angel that night, v. 24. 26, 31. V. 24. Wrestled] Jacob wrestling both spiritually and corporally. He deignes this, who afterwards deigned to be borne in a stable, to die on a Crosse for us, Esay 55. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. a man] God in the shape of a man, even Christ, v. 26, 28, 30. Called God, and an Angel, Hos. 12. 3, 4. that An∣gel, Gen. 48. 16 Mal. 3. 1. that Arch-Angel Michael, Jude v. 9. After he had stayed behinde alone, purposely to pray, as he did, Hos. 12. 4. with weeping, at the last the Lord appeared and set on him with wrstling. until the breaking of the day] A private wrastling without Spectators, v. 26. nor then did Jacob fully know with whom he wrastled. V. 25. And when he saw] This is spoken after the man∣ner of men. God knowes all, with one pure and perfect act. that he prevailed not] With that measure of strength, which God in that assumed body was then pleased to take and use, Gen. 19. 22. Mar. 6. 5. Mat. 15. 22. 24. 27, 28. Exod. 32, 10. Luke 24. 29. To confirme him hereby, that he should prevail with Esau. out of joynt] The huckle-bone, where the Sciatica is, to humble him that he should not be exalted out of mea∣sure: but know by whose indulgence he did prevaile; and this halting to remain as a monument of it, and of this Apparition. V. 26. Let me go] Speaks after the manner of men, whose shape he had taken, and to put Jacob in minde of haste to his affaires, Esay 64. 7. Cant. 3. 4. except thou blesse me] Now then he knew him to be an Angel, the Arch-angel. Here is his wrastling by prayers and teares, knowing him now to be God, Hos. 12. 4. The power of prayer, Deut. 9. 14. V. 27. What is thy name] God knew well enough, as what was become of Abel; and Adam, ch. 3. and 4. He asketh his name, to take occasion for what himselfe meant to say of the change of his name. V. 28. No more Jacob] Only, so, 1 Sam. 8. 7. Jer. 7. 22. or principally. The Jews are never called Jacobites but Isra∣elites; as, Exod. 16. 8. See, Annotations on chap. 46. 2. but Israel] The change of names for honour sake; so in Abraham, Sarah, Joseph, Daniel and others. Esay 62. 2, see, ch. 35. 10. with men] Laban already, Esau shortly. V. 29. Tell me, I pray thee, thy Name] As God asked before his name v. 27. so Jacob here returnes a like demand, hoping he would give himself some peculiar name, where∣by he might have the surer and clearer knowledge of him, and the better remember and honour him, Judg. 13. 17. God appeared to Jacobat least thrice before, yet not ha∣ving the like occasion, he doth not, as now, ask his name. wherefore is it] A refusal to satisfie his curiosity; as likewise, Judg. 13. 17, 18. It would be curiosity in us to ask the reason of this resusal, 1 Sam. 6. 19. some Angels had names, as Gabriel, Luke 1. 19, 26. Christ the Angel of the Covenant is named Michael, Dan. 10. 21. Jude v. 9. A∣poc. 12. 7. Rom. 12. 3. blessed him] So granting his request, v. 26. V. 30. Peniel] And Penuel, v. 31. Exod. 33. 11. so be∣fore in ch. 28. 19. In this place afterward a City and Tower was builded, and spoiled by Gideon, Judg. 8. 8, 17. and built again by Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12. 25. God face to face] Jacob now knew him to be God, Exod. 33. 11, 20, 23. Deut. 34. 10.
and my life is preserved] Which the godly feared when they saw visions of God. See, Annotat. on chap. 16. 13. V. 31. He halted] Infirmities we have in tentations and wrastlings with God, whether cured of it afterwards, or it still continued, we reade not. V. 32. Eate not] In any creatures. To perpetuate the me∣mory of this honour done to Jacob. unto this day] Till Moses time; without fault or folly in abstaining. CHAP. XXXIII. Verse 1. HE divided] Ch. 32. 16. V. 2. He put] The dearest he reserves to the safest place. V. 3. Before them] This shewes his fatherly affection, and his faith in the Promises. It seems he followed the five droves of cattel, and went before his children and their mothers, that were in three companies. bowed] See Annot. on ch. 32. 4. Humility goeth before honour. Seven times] Sometimes taken for many times, 1 Sam. 2. 5. Prov. 26. 25. V. 4. Kissed him] Esaus heart really changed, Luk. 15. 20. Prov. 26. 7. V. 8. What meanest thou] The servants had told him; but he thus takes occasion courteously to refuse them. V. 9. I have enough] Many will never say so, Eccl. 4 8. Prov. 30. 15. V. 10. Face of God] Honourable and comfortable. The Scripture useth to entitle to God the things that excel; so the Mountaines of God, the City of God, Prince of God, Wrastlings of God, Cedars of God, and seeing the light of Gods countenance shine evidently in the chear∣ful countenance of his brother, Psal. 41. 11. V. 11. My blessing] Gift of good will to thee, which God hath blessed me with, 1 Sam. 25. 27. blessing thee, and God for thee, 1 Sam. 30. 26. 2 Kings 5. 15. 2 Cor. 9. 5, 6. he took it] It is a more blessed thing to give then to re∣ceive, Acts 20. 35. Gen. 14. 23. V. 14. Be able to endure] Esay 40. 11. Mar. 4. 33. 1 Cor. 3. 2. 9 22. Rom. 15. 1. until I come unto my Lord] We reade not that he perform∣ed this Promise. After, upon some reasons he might change his minde, (Mat. 2. 12.) Or go to him with a few, making no stay. For it is not like that he would so soon, by so manifest a contempt or neglect, provoke afresh his new reconciled brother. V. 15. Let me finde grace] Ch 34 11. 47. 25. 1 Sam. 25 8. 2 Sam 16. 4. Ruh 2. 13. V. 17. To Succoth] Here first so named, Judg. 8. 15, 16. Exod. 12. 37. Lev. 23. 34. and built him an house] Not yet that he stayed here long. V. 18. To Shalem] Or Salem, Thought to be Sychar, Joh. 4. 5. Not that Salem where Melchizedech reigned. This Salem was about fourty miles distant from it, John 3. 23. There is Salim near Ae non, haply that mention∣ed, 1 Sam. 9. . a C ty of Shechem] Sychem, Acts 7. 16. Sychai, John 4. 5, 6. pitched his tent] Dwelt at Succoth, and here most about six yeares, till Dinah was ravishable, and Jacobs sons able men to slay the Shechemites. V. 19. And he bought] As Abraham did, ch. 23. 17, 18. See Annot. there. a parcel of a field] After it became the portion of Joseph and his children. (And perhaps that legacy of Jacob on his death-bed, ch. 48. 22) Josh. 24. 32 Here Christ had con∣ference with the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 5. of Hamor] Acts 7. 16. Emor. a hundred pieces] Or lambs. Ancient custome to buy and sell by exchanging one thing for another. Or money having the pictures of Lambs stamped on them, whence pecunia hath its name à pecude, Josh. 24. 32. Job 42. 11. the same word Kesitah is used, where it must be understood of a piece of money, likely of gold, for a Lamb were too small a gift. Kesitah is 1 d. ob. V. 20. An Altar] As, ch 12. 8. 13. 3, 4, 18. 26. 25. He repaired that Altar Abraham had built there, ch. 12. 6, 7. El-eohe-Israel] Exod. 17. 15. Figuratively calling the signe by the name of the thing signified. This the name of the Altar, not the Inscription upon the Altar. Judah's departure from his brethren, and marrying a Canaanitish woman, ch. 38. 1. fell not out at this time; but before. See Annot. on that place. CHAP. XXXIV. Verse 1. ANd Dinah] Ch. 30. 21, 22. This must needs be about six yeares after Jacobs co∣ming from Laban, and Dinah at this time but thirteen years old at most; because of Benjamins birth a while after this, ch. 35. 16, 17, 18. who, if borne the next yeare, yet can be but twenty six yeares old, when he went with his father into Egypt, and had then ten sons, ch. 46. 21. went out to see] Likely upon some festival day, and also her self alone, Tit. 2. 5. V. 2. Hamor] Acts 7. 16. Emor or Emmor. V. 3. And sake kindly] To comfort her, being afflict∣ed for the injury done her, as Tamar in like case was, 2 Sam. 13. 13, 19. V. 5. Jacob held his peace] Though sorrowful enough. So Aaron, Lev 10. 3. and David, Psal. 39. 9. Thus Jacob ruling his own spirit, did better then his sonnes that took the City, Prov. 16. 32. until] As fittest to comfort and counsel him. V. 7. And the sonnes of Jacob] Reuben being born the first yeare of Jacobs coming to Laban, was now about twenty five yeares old, Simeon twenty foure, Levi twenty three. wroth] In hatred of the sin, and for the disgrace and re∣proach of the Church. folly] So the rape, Judg. 20. 6. and Achans sacriledge, Josh. 7. 15. are called folly, Rom. 1. 22. Folly in offending God, losing the soule, forfeiting heaven, gaining hell. in Israel] This name given him first, ch. 32. 28. There∣fore these words likely are the words, not of Jacobs sonnes, but of Moses, who writeth this story, according to the phrase of speech used in his time, and suitable to the words of the Law, delivered by him afterwards, Deut. 23. 17. See, Deut. 21. 21. Josh. 7. 15. Judg. 20. 6. V. 8. With them] Likely apart from their father. Your daughter] They treating in their fathers name as well as in their own. So, v. 17. V. 11. I will give] See, Annot on ch. 29. 18. Amnon
did far worse with Tamar, 2 Sam. 13. Exod. 22. 16, 17. and, Deut. 22. 28, 29, is in satisfaction for wrong done; not upon a free and equal motion and proceeding in mar∣riage. V. 13. And the sonnes of Jacob] Without their fathers consent. deceitfully] Without their fathers knowledge. He was a plain man and sincere, ch. 25. 27. V. 14. Uncircumcised] Superfluous. Though Isaac and Jacob were married to women of Bethael and Labans fami∣ly, where circumcision of the males in all likelihood was not in use. V. 15. But in this will we] Jacob would not have the holy Sacrament prophaned, and obtruded upon unbelie∣vers, nor his holy seed to be mingled with the cursed Ca∣naanites, (Deut. 7. 3, 4) Neither did Jacobs sons here deal otherwise then deceitfully, v. 25. be circumcised] Thus they abuse and prostitute the ho∣ly Sacrament to their bloody purpose, and under colour of Religion cover their deceipt; so did Jozebel, 1 Kings 21, 9, 10. and Absalom, 2 Sam. 15. 7, 8. V. 16. Our daughters] Which we have or shall have. V. 17. Our daughter] As, v. 8. using the name of their father. V. 19. More honourable] His great esteem was one ground of his present prevailing so much with all the men, in so strange a request. V. 20. The gate of their City] Where were the publick Assemblies and Courts of justice. See, Annotat. on chap. 23. 10. V. 23. And every beast of theirs be ours?] Not as a spoile from them, but by commerce, marriages and the like. V. 25. On the third day] The Critical day, by Physici∣ans, for wounds. Simeon and Levi, Dinahs brethren] By father and mo∣ther, Reuben was of a more milde nature, ch. 37. 29. They only the chief Authours and Actors, others also both bre∣thren and servants like to be Assistants, v 13, 27. boldly] Because the wounded men could not resist them; and the City was secure. slew all the males] A male had done the wrong. Their wives and little ones they took captives, v. 29. God might justly suffer this for the Shechemites own sins, and take oc∣casion for it from the sin of their Prince, 1 Chron. 32. 25. 2 Sam 24. 1, 15, 17. V. 27. The sons of Jacob] The rest likely. and spoiled the City] V. 28, 29. of murderers become rob∣bers. they had defiled their sister] One of them had, and the o∣ther repressed it not, nor judged him for it; So, Josh. 7. 1, 11, 12. 22. 20. V. 29. Captive] What they did after with them we reade not. in the house] In every house, chiefly Shechems house wherein Dinah was, v. 2. V. 30. Unto Simeon and Levi] As the chief offenders. ye have troubled me] He then was neither privy to, nor approver of this massacre. And therefore, ch. 49. 5, 6, 7. he doth by the spirit of prophecie curse them for it, Josh. 6. 18. 7. 25. 1 Kings 18. 18. For this fact likely he de∣prives them of their birth-right, as Reuben for his sinne, and conferres it on Judah, chap. 49. Prov. 11 29. to make me] Though he were in no fault. to stink] Cruelty and treachery are odious crimes, Ex. 5. 22. 1 Chron. 19 6. V. 31. As with an harlot] A stubborne answer. In the Hebrew Zonah, the first letter is extraordinarily great. In ch. 23. 2. There is a little letter to note Abrahams mo∣deration without excesse in weeping. CHAP. XXXV. Verse 1. ANd God said] Jacob being now perplexed with feare, for that done to the Sheche∣mites, and likely thinking thereupon of removing, God here bespeaks him, as followeth. said] Whether by vision, or dream, or in what manner is not set down. to Bethel] Southward from Shechem about thirty Eng∣lish miles. and dwelt there] Yet he dwelt a small while there, as appeares by the birth of Benjamin, after he went from Bethel, v. 16, 18. And from Dinahs ravishing at Shechem, to Benjamins going down with his father into Egypt, there can be no more then twenty seven yeares; reckoning Jo∣seph to be thirteen yeares old when Dinah was ravished, both being borne in one yeare, ch. 30 21, 22. and Joseph being fourty yeares old in the third yeare of famine, when Benjamin with his father came down into Egypt. And Benjamin then had ten sons, ch. 46. 21. an Altar unto God] Altars built by Noah. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob himself, chap. 33. 20. To sacrifice thereon. unto God] Speaks of himself in the third person. So, Ex. 20. 7, 10, 11. that appeared unto thee] Thereby minding him of Gods gracious Promises, and of his own vow there made, ch. 28. 22. when thou fleddest] And wast in as much danger then, as thou art in now. V. 2. Unto his houshold] Jacobs religious care of his houshold. and to all that were with him] This may relate to the captived Sichemites, and to all of his retinue and fol∣lowers. Put away] So, Josh. 24. 23. Judg. 10. 16. 1 Sam. 7. 3, 4. no mixture permitted, no toleration allowed in a false wor∣ship, Deut. 29. 9 10, 11. 1 Sam, 5. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Strange gods] Of strange Nations, and other people, dif∣fering from the true God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, whether Labans gods stollen by Ruchel, and it may be yet unknown to Jacob; or any other brought by any other of his retinue, when they came from Laban and Mesopotamia; or any gods of the Shechemies, their captives among them, worshipped by them, or taken as spoile, and secretly kept for the tichnesse of them. and change your garments] Putting on others or washing these, Zech. 3. 3, 4, 5. Exod. 19. 10, 14. Ceremonies after∣wards enjoyned by the Law in divers cases, Lev. 15. 13. Numb. 31, 23. importing change of minde and manners, cleansing from sin to holinesse, Jude v. 23. 2 Cor. 7. 1. E∣zech. 16. 8, 10 Apoc. 3. 4, 18. 7. 14. V. 3. And go up to Bethel] Eccl. 5. 1. The House of God, that dreadful, the gate of Heaven, chap. 28. 17. Therefore in a special manner they should prepare and sanctifie them∣selves. I will make] And perform my vow. an Altar] V. 1, 7. after a pillar, v. 14. of my distresse] About twenty seven yeares ago.
V. 4. And all their eare-rings] Idolatrous monuments, Hos. 2. 13. Judg 8. 24, 25, 26. 27. Deut. 7. 25, 26. Exod. 32 2, 3, 4. under an oak] From the knowledge of his family and people, Esay 30. 22. Under an oak by Shechem, Joshuah set up a great stone for a witnesse of the peoples Covenant with God, Josh. 24. 26, 27. And there the Shechemites made Abimelech King, Judg. 9. 6. Oakes and groves of trees forbidden in worship, and used by idolaters, Esay 1. 29. by Shechem] Shiloh and the Tabernacle of God were af∣ter there, or by Shechem, Josh. 24. 1, 25, 26. V. 5. Terrour of God] Ch. 34. 0. In all humane reason they easily might have destroyed him and his, Exod. 23. 27. Josh. 2. 9, 11. Gods restraining hand upon the wicked. See, Annot. on ch. 20. 6. V. 7. An Altar] According to part of his vowe, ch. 28. 22. El-Bethel] Here he addes to the former name, chap. 28. 19. V. 8. Rebekahs nurse] Sent with Rebekah, ch. 24. 59. And Jacob being now returned into Canaan, and being there now about seven yeares, and not very far from his fathers house, she thence might come to him of her owne accord, or he send for her, or fetch her, if she did not return into Mesopotamia, and thence come along with Jacob. V. 9. Again] This is the seventh time God revealed himself to Jacob in special, manner, ch. 28. 13. 31. 3, 11. 32. 1, 2, 24. v. 35. 1. V. 10. But Israel shall be thy name] Confirmes this name to him the second time. See Annotat. on chap. 32. 28. V. 11. I am God Almighty] Confirmes and amplifies the Promises made, ch. 28. and ch. 32. Kings] Thus God gives him the blessing of Abraham, ch. 28. 4. 17. 6. V. 12. To thee] Not to Esau. V. 13. And God went up] Chap. 17. 22. Judges 13. 20. V. 14. Set up a pillar] Repaired the old, set up neare thirty yeares ago, ch. 28. 18. or rather a new one in the ve∣ry place here named. a drink-offering thereon, and he poured oile thereon] These in use before the Ceremonial Law by Moses, chap. 28. 18. V. 16. A little way] About a mile short of Bethlehem, ch. 48. 7. 2 King. 5. 19. Ephrath] Which is Bethlehem, v. 19. The Prophet joyns them, And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, Micah 5. 2. called al∣so Bethlehem-Judah, to distinguish it from another in Ga∣lilee, in the tribe of Zebulun. Here our Saviour was borne. V. 17. This sonne also] Ch 30. 24. V. 18. As her soule was in departing] To God that gave it, Eccl. 12. 7. being it self immortal, as appeareth here; and as is confessed by Heathens themselves, as Plato, Ari∣stotle, Cicero and others; and so again life is restored, when the soule comes again into the body, 1 Kings 17. 21, 22. for she died] Who formerly would die for want of chil∣dren, ch. 30. 1. Ben-oni] The like case is, 1 Sam. 4. 20, 21. Benjamin] Psal. 80. 17. Now was Joseph about twelve or thirteen yeares old, six yeares old when he came from Laban, and six or seven yeares more since he came into Ca∣naan, till the birth of Benjamin after Dinah's ravishing And Bnjamin was twenty seven or tweney eight when he went into Egypt with his ten sons, Joseph then being four∣ty, and Benjamin younger then he twelve or thirteen yeares. V. 19. Buried in the way] About this place many infants were murdered by Herod, Mat 2. 16, 18 Jer. 31. 15. V. 20. A pillar] Monuments and memorials for the dead are lawful and useful too. unto this day] Till Moses time, and after that to Sauls time, 1 Sam. 10. 2. V. 21. Tower of Edar] i e Of the flock, Micah. 4. 8. It may be hereabouts the Angels appeared to the shep∣herds, Luke 2. 8. V. 22. His fathers Concubine] See Annot. on ch. 22. 24. and on ch. 25. 1. By this he justly lost his birth-right, ch. 49. 4. 1 Chron. 5. 1. So Absalom sinned with his fathers Concubines, 2 Sam. 16. 22. And as David abstained from them afterwards, 2 Sam. 20. 3. so likely Jacob did from Bilhah. and Israel heard it] Here is an empty space left in the line, with a mark to move consideration. As likewise in Gen. 4. 8. And also a pause or breaking off as to a new matter, even in the midst of the verse. So in Deuteron. 2. 8. twelve] He had no more after. Dinah was a daughter, and Joseph was one of the twelve; yet after when the twelve tribes were accounted and setled, Ephraim and Ma∣nasse were put in, and Joseph and Levi (in a sort) left out, Levi for any land by lot in Canaan. They are called the twelve Patriarchs, Acts 7. 8. and twelve tribes, Acts 26. 7. Their names engraved on twelve precious stones, on the High Priests plate, Exod. 28. 21, 29. and on the twelve gates of the new Jerusalem, Ezech. 48. 31. A∣poc. 21. 12. The Apostles of Christ were twelve, and their names written on the twelve foundations of the wall or the City of the new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. 14. V. 23. The sonnes of Leah] The sons of the wives by themselves, and of the Concubines by themselves. V. 26. In Padan Aram] Except Benjamin, which is so plain in the former part of this chapter, as no Reader could mistake it. And so no need of an exception of him to be named. V. 27. And Jacob came unto Isaac] His sons, though borne out of the land of Canaan, come with him into the land, whereas Esau and his sonnes, though borne in the land, do go out and give place. Jacob and his wives, chil∣dren and family came to him, and removed their habitati∣ons thither. Though in all likelihood, living divers years in Canaan before, and that not far from Isaac, he did be∣fore this time come to visit his blinde and aged father. unto Mamre] See Annot. on ch. 13. 18. and on 23. 2. V. 29. And died] Long after Jacobs rerurn to him, for he lived till the yeare before Josephs advancement in Egypt, or till the time of his advancement. He being sixty when Jacob was borne, and Jacob being one hundred and twenty when Joseph was advanced in Egypt, and one hundred and thirty when he stood before Pharaoh, which sixty and one hundred and twenty make up the full life of Isaac. Esau and Jacob buried him] So Isaac and Ishmael buried Abraham, ch. 25. 9.
CHAP. XXXVI. Verse 1. NOw these are the generations of Esau] 1. Chron. 1. 35. All this shewes the accom∣plishment of that Oracle given to Rebekah, ch. 25. 23. As also of that temporal blessing wherewith his father blessed him, ch. 27. 39, 40. And likewise of the Promise to Abraham, ch. 22. 17. V. 2. Esau took his wives] Ch. 26. 34. 28. 9. Many here have two names. Adah] Called Bashemath, ch 26. 34. Aholibamah] Called Judith, ch. 26. 34. the daughter of Anah] Called Beeri, ch. 26. 34. the daughter of Zibeon] His Grand-childe. And this doth distinguish this Anah from another of the name, v. 20. who was the brother of Zibeon, and so the Uncle of this Anah. the Hivite] A Hittite, ch. 26. 34. The Hivites compre∣hended the Hittites under them. V. 3. And Bashemath] Called Mahalath, ch. 28. 9. V. 6. And Esau took] Had taken before Jacobs coming, ch. 32. 3. 33. 14. and went into the countrey] Another countrey, Mount Seir, v. 8. from the face] Before Jacobs coming, ch. 32. 3. V. 7. For their riches] His and his fathers, or else all this removing, though begun as before, yet might receive a full and final accomplishment after Jacobs coming, and perhaps after Isaacs death. When the riches of the two brethren were more, then that they might dwell together in a land wherein they were but only sojourners; and hap∣ly too that Esau by this time had already hope to get the possession of the land of Seir. V. 8. Seir] So named from a man of that name, v. 20. God gave it to Esau, Deut. 2. 5, 12. Josh. 24. 4. V. 11. Eliphaz were Teman] Eliphaz the Temanite, Job 2. 11. V. 12. And Timna] Sister to Lotan, the son of Seir, v. 20, 22. was married to Eliphaz Esaus sonne. Thus by marriages and the sword Esau got into the rule and posses∣sion of Mount Seir, ch. 27. 40. 1 Chron. 1. 36. Amalek] 1 Chron. 1. 36. A Duke, v. 10. Whence came the Amalekites, which were so great enemies to Israel, Exod. 17. 8, 14. V. 13. Revel] 1 Chron. 1. 37. V. 15. Dukes] Leaders or chief Governours, fourteen in number. After they had Kings, v. 31. and after that Dukes again, v 40, 41, 42, 43. V 16. Duke Korah] Omitted among the sons of Eli∣phaz, v. 11. and 1 Chron. 1. 36. nor yet that Duke Korah, v. 18. he being of another mother. V. 20. Seir the Horite] Ch. 14. 6. Horites seem to be of the Hivites. v. 2. for Zibeon the Hivite, v. 2. cometh of this race. Their race is mentioned because of the affini∣ties the Edomites made with them, and the Edomites being their successors in the land and Government. V. 24. This was that Anah] Mule.] The vulgar La∣tine translates it Buhes. Mules ingender not, but are in∣gendred by an He-Asse upon a mare; against the Law, Lev. 19. 19. This Anah was father-in law to Esau, v. 2. 25. V. 26. Children of Dishon] Many following are of two names, 1 Chron. 1. 41, &c. Hemdam] Or Amram, 1 Chron. 1. 41. V. 27. Akan] Or Jakan, 1 Chron. 1. 42. V. 28. Dishan] And Dishon, distinct persons, v. 21, 28. 1 Chron 1. 38, 42. V. 30. Among their Dukes] That is, Dukedomes. For these seven sons of Seir had their Dukedomes at one time in several places, being all brethren, the sons of Seir, ver. 20, 21. V. 31. And these are the Kings] The accomplishment of the Promise to Abraham, ch. 17. 16. For Kings to pro∣ceed from Sarah. Thus Esau after his Dukes, v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. had of his posterity eight Kings, which bre succes∣sively a golden scepter, whiles Jacobs posterity was in servi∣tude, under a rod of iron in Egypt. Before] Before Moses time; for he was King in Jeshurun, Deut. 33. V. 32.] These Kings being borne in several places, of several kindreds, and reigning most in several Cities, must therefore reign, not by succession, but by election or ty∣ranny. V. 37. Of Rehoboth] A City builded by Nimrod, Gen. 10. 11. by the river] Euphrates. V. 40. And these are the names of the Dukes] From Kings they come down to Dukes again, eleven here named; which haply might be Dukes in several places, all at one time. The Dukes of Edom are mentioned, Exod. 15. 15. at the Israelites coming out of Egypt And the King of E∣dom, mentioned a little before the end of their fourty yeares being in the wildernesse. Numb. 20. 14. and that may be haply the last King Hadar, v. 39. of this chapter. If these eleven Dukes were to be counted in succession one after an∣other, then must Moses here by the spirit of Prophecie fore∣tell their names and dignities, which did succeed when he was dead. V. 41. Aholibamah] And Timnah likewise, v. 40. before the names of women, v. 12, 14. are here the names of men. the father of the Edomites] Of Edom, from the red pot∣tage, and his red haire too, ch. 25, 25, 30. CHAP. XXXVII. Verse. 2. THe generations of Jacob] The story of things that did befall him, chap. 6. 9. 25. 19. Joseph being seventeen years old] And Jacob then one hundred and seven, Joseph uourished him seventeen yeares in Egypt before he died. was feeding the flock] Not idle, but a shepherd him∣selfe. with the sons of Bilhab] The sonnes of the Handmaids sorted together, and Joseph with them rather then with Le∣ah's sons, for safety against envie and emulation. And specially in safety with Bilhah, Rachels handmaid. their evil report] Of their injurious usage of him, or of their evil conversation. V. 3. More then all] More then any of them all. sonne of his old age] He was upon ninety at the birth of Joseph, and now one hundred and seven; Bonjamin was now but about three or foure yeares old, and not come yet to any proof to gain so much of his fathers affection. of many colours] So Tamar had, and Kings daughters u∣sed them that were Virgins, 2 Sam. 13. 18. A signe of Ja∣cobs
love, an object of his brethrens envie. V. 4. More then all his brethren] There appeared in him presages of vertuous acts and great employments. V. 5. Dreamed] See Annot. on ch. 20. 3. told it] Gods special Providence was in it, causing him thus to reveal his dreames. V. 7. And made obeisance to my sheaf] For corne it was that they went down into Egypt, and there did obeisance to Joseph, ch. 42. V. 8. Reign over us] They apply it to themselves, as the Midianites did, Judg. 7. 13, 14. made obeisance to me] Twice, as Pharaohs dreams, chap. 41. 25, 32. see it accomplished, ch. 46. V. 10. And his father rebuked him] Partly through igno∣rance, and partly in policy to abate the hatred of his bre∣thren, v. 11. and thy mother] Stepmother, Leah; Rachel being dead at this time undoubtedly. V. 11. Observed the saying] Seeing the dream was doubled, and that excellent gifts and graces of mind and body, appeared in Joseph, Luke 2. 19, 51. V. 12. In Shechem] Which was from Hebron, where his father and Grandfather were, v. 14. about sixty miles, ch. 35. 27. This the place, where not foure yeares ago they committed that massacre. And ever since likely the lesse inhabited, and so more fit for pasturage, and freer from danger, the terrout of God being still upon the neighbour∣ing places. Haply in that place bought, ch. 33. 19. V. 14. Well with thy brethren] Minding haply the mas∣sacre they had made there, and their possibility of danger by it. V. 16. I seek my brethren] His fathers care in sending, and his in seeking, do aggravate his brethrens sin and cruelty against him. V. 17. And found them in Dothan] Josephs obedience stretched further then his fathers words, to his fathers mind. About eight miles distant from Shechem. Here afterwards was a City where Elizaus was, 2 Kings 6. 13. V. 18. They conspired] They quickly conclude out of their fore-conceived malices, so, Luke 20. 14. V. 19 This dreamer] A nick-name in scorne. And so best men are used. V. 20. Slay him, and we will say] One sin draweth on another. some evil beast] As, 1 Kings 13. 24. 2 Kings 2. 24. They will do a beastly act, but not own it. V. 21. Reuben] The eldest, ch. 42. 22. He the eldest might most hate Josephs Sovereignty; he did it with an intent to deliver him to his father again, v. 22. it may be to make some amends to him for his incest with Bilhah. Sinful all the sons of Jacob, sinful the Church. V. 23. Stript Joseph] He besought them in the anguish of his soule, ch. 42. 21. Mat. 27. 28. V. 24. No water] Jer. 38. 6. Zech. 9. 11. V. 25. To eate bread] Exod. 18. 12. without remorse for it, they make much of themselves, and little regard the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. 6. Their consciences were asleep. Ishmaelites came from Gilead] From Arabia; or East from Jordan, by Dothan towards Egypt. Gilead] A place of merchandise, Jer. 8. 22. 22. 6. 46. 11. V. 26. What profit] A good quaerie to pose our selves when we are about to sin. Profit would arise by selling him, Mat. 16. 26. Rom. 6. 21. V. 27. Sell him] Ancient and usual to sell men, Exod. 21. 21, 16. Ishmaelites] Ch. 39. Called also Midianites, v. 28. and Medanites, v. 36. Medan and Midian brethren, 25. 1, 2. a mixt company of Merchants, both Ishmaelites by Hagars sonne, and Midianites of Keturahs sonne, ch. 25. 2. both dwelling in Arabia; so, in Judg. 8. 22, 24, 26. V. 28. Drew up] in Reubens absence. for twenty pieces of silver] Twenty shekels, i. e. shillings, and 3 d. a piece more,  1 li. 5. sh See Annot. on ch. 23. 16. Joseph here may many wayes be a type of Jesus; sold for thirty pieces. V. 29. And he rent his clothes] He was absent when Ju∣dahs counsel was followed, v. 26, 27. And likely he ab∣sented himself of purpose, that he might, as now he did, go some secret way to the pit to deliver him, v. 22. missing him, he rent his cloathes, as custome then was in like ca∣ses of great and grievous sorrow, to shew the brokennesse of their heart, what little care or comfort they took of any thing in that passion. Examples are many of the like, v. 34. ch. 44. 13. David commands it to Joab and the peo∣ple in their mourning before Abuer, 2 Sam. 3. 31. V. 30. The childe is not] Not in the pit, nor alive, ch. 42. 13, 36. Jer. 31. 15. Yet after he knew all, he consents to conceal the sale of him from his father. and I, whither shall I go?] Of me the eldest my father will require him. And I have so greatly offended him al∣ready, ch. 35. 22. So, 2 Sam. 13. 13. V. 32. sent] By messengers. and they brought it] The messengers. V. 34. Jacob rent his clothes] Isaac was alive, and no doubt mourned too. put on sack-cloth] Here first mentioned. A ceremony of sorrow much practised afterwards by Gods people, and by the Ninevites themselves, Jonah 3—5. Hereunto were sometimes added earth and ashes on the head. and mourned] Washed the bloody coat of his son with his teares. V. 35. And all his sons] That plotted this sorrow, pre∣tended sorrow themselves; and would never lessen his sor∣row by confessing the sale. and all his daughters] Dinah and his sons wives. but he refused to he comforted] Infirmity in Jacob. This aggravates his sons sin. into the grave] The word signifieth the state of the dead, without any reference to pain or anguish. Jacob here meant not a grave properly, because he thought Joseph to be some of wilde beasts, much lesse dreamed he of a Limbus Pa∣trum, and least of Hell or Purgatory, Joseph being so good a sonne. Usually the word signifies a grave. As death is ap∣pointed for all men, so is this Sheol, Psal. 89. 48. Eccl 9. 10. Job desired to be hid in Sheol, Job 14. 13. Gen. 42. 38. 44. 29, 31. Psal. 16. 10. V. 36. An Officer] Eunuch. Such came to be great Of∣ficers in Courts of Kings, Chamberlaines, &c. and so the word came to be a word of Court-honour, ch. 40. 2. and so given to some that were not gelded; as to Potiphar here, who had a wife, ch. 39. 7, 9. The Law is against such, Deut. 23. 1. Captain of the guard] A Provost-Marshal, 2 Kings 25, 8. Gen. 40. 3.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Verse 1. AT that time] Or in that time not of Josephs selling into Egypt. For between that time and Judahs going into Egypt with his father Jacob, were but twenty two or twenty three yeares. Joseph be∣ing sold at seventeen yeares old; and all coming down when he was fourty yeares old. And within the compasse of those twenty two or twenty three years, Judabs marri∣age with the daughter of Shuah, and the begetting of Pharez upon Tamar his daughter-in-law, and Pharez his begetting of Hezron and Hamul could not possibly be done. Judah's marriage then must needs precede the story of Jo∣sephs sale; and Er his eldest sonne must needs be about ten yeares old at that time. Therest, and so the most of the story in this chapter, fell out after the selling of Joseph into Egypt. went dom from his brethren] Not before he left Laban, though some reject not that opinion; but before Dinahs ravishing, yea, speedily upon his first coming into Canaan. They that make Judah to be born in the beginning of the 14th year of the latter seven of Jacobs service, & so but three or four years older then Ioseph, and but fourty three or fourty foure when he came with his father into Egypt, they find him by that account to be but ten yeares old when he first came into Canaan, and thereupon defer his marriage till two or three yeares after, and so straiten the times for the births of his off-spring before they all went into Egypt, which howsoever the great Annotations miscast it upon this place, must needs run thus, viz. that Judah at twelve or thirteen married the daughter of Shuah, two or three yeares after his coming into Canaan; and in three yeares after had Er, Onan and Shelah. That Er at twelve marri∣ed Tamar, that foure yeares were spent in the matters of Onan and Shelah, and Judahs begetting Pharez, and Zerah of Tamar, to the time of the birth of Pharez: that Pharez at twelve married, and in two yeares had Ezrom and Hamul. All which do make up but thirty three or thirty four years, which is the ful time between the first coming of them all into Canaan, and their going down into Egypt, as clearly appears by the several periods of Josephs age; he being six or seven yeares old when they all left Laban, and fourty when they all came down unto him into Egypt. But the other opinion which makes Judah to be borne in the fourth yeare of the first seven of Jacobs service, and so to be ten yeares older then Joseph, and fifty yeares old when he with his father came into Egypt, doth give fairer way to the course and times of the story thus, viz. Judah at six∣teen yeares old, comes into Canaan, and speedily marries the daughter of Shuah. In the next yeare hath Er. Er mar∣ries Tamar at fourteen. After which foure yeares are spent in the matters of Onan, of Shelah, and till the birth of Pha∣rez, begotten by Judah after the death of his wife, upon the body of Tamar, and Pharez at thirteen yeares old mar∣ries, and in two yeares hath Hezron and Hamul, and then all go down into Egypt. And all this within the fifty years of Judahs age. Adullamite] Adullam, a city that fell afterwards to the tribe of Judah, Josh. 12. 15. 15. 33, 35. had a King was seated in a valley, David fled to a cave here, 1 Sam. 22. 1. 2 Sam. 23. 13. V. 2. Canaanite] Contrary to the wills of his Grand∣father and great Grandfather, ch. 24. 3. 27. 46. 28. 1. Shuah] The name not of Judahs wife, but of her father, v. 12. 1 Chron. 2. 3. V. 3. He called] The man names the childe. V. 4. She called] The woman names. And so, v. 5. Chezib] Likely Achzib, Josh. 19. 29. 15. 44. signifies lying, and thereto the Prophet alludes, Micah. 1. 14. V. 7. Was wicked in] What wickednesse is not set down, but heinous sure in kinde and degree. slew him] Shortly after his marriage, how or by what meanes is not set down, ch. 46. 12. Numb. 26. 19. 1 Chron. 2. 3. In some extraordinary remarkable manner by sud∣den vengeance. V. 8. And marry her and raise up seed] This before Mo∣ses time. After a Law made for it, Deut. 25. 5, 7, 9. And in want of a brother, the next Kinsman was to do it, Ruth 3. 9. 4. 6, 7. But forbidden in case the brother left a∣ny issue before he died, Lev. 18. 16. 20. 21. V. 11. Remain a widow at thy fathers house] Lev. 22. 13. Lest she should entice Shelah. till Shelah] Yet he minded it not, v. 14, 26. lest he die] Conceiving something amisse of Tamar, up∣on an evil surmise, as if some unluckinesse followed her. V. 12. In processe of time] The dayes were multiplied, yet long it could not be: but surely after the deats of Er and Onan, because after his fit of mourning for her death, he soon lies with Tamar. sheep-shearers] Then they used to have feasts, 1 Sam. 25. 8, 11. So he went to make merry after his mourn∣ing. Timnath] A City in the Philistines countrey, which af∣ter fell to the lot of Judah, Josh. 15. 20, 57. There Sampson took a wife, Judg. 14. 1. V. 14. Widowes garment] Some mournful guise and ha∣bit, to notifie her estate. An ancient and lawful pra∣ctice. in an open place.] So whores used, Prov. 7. 12. 9. 14. Jer. 3. 2. Ezech. 16. 25. grown, and she was not given] Some suitable time must be allowed to this: which will hardly stand with that opini∣on of Judah's not marrying till he had been three yeares in the land of Canaan. V. 15. Because she had covered her face] A veile did serve for Modesty, ch. 24. 65. But here it was that Judah might not know her. And likely to the same purpose she used whis∣pering, or changed her voice and tone. See, Annot. on ch. 29. 25 V. 16. What wilt thou give me] Ezech. 16. 33. Deut. 23. 18. Micah 1. 7. V. 17] Pledge] Hebrew Eraben, whence the Greek Arrhaebon, and the Latine Arrhabon. This she did for her future security. v. 24, 25. V. 18. Thy signet] Luke 15. 22. Jer. 22. 24. came in unto her] In some secret place by, and near. conceived by him] Being now about thirty foure yeares of age. The great Annotators reckon him now to be a∣bout thirty yeares of age; and yet by the grounds of their own reckoning, he must needs be twenty nine at the mar∣riage of Er; marrying himself at fourteen, and his eldest sonne Er likewise marrying at fourteen; which how they will agree together let the Reader judge. See their Annot. on ch. 38. 1. yet of Judah by this conception come the Jewes, who brag they were not borne of fornication, John 8. 41. yea, our blessed Saviour sprung from this race, Mat. 1. 3. He will not reject great sinners.
V. 23. Lest we be shamed] Shameful was the sin of for∣nication among the Heathen. V. 24. Let her be burnt] For adultery, as being betroth∣ed and belonging to Shelah. Thus the Heathens condemned adultery, Jer. 29. 22, 23. And so Moses Law after, Deut. 22. 23, 24. condemned there to be stoned. And a Priests daugh∣ter for fornication to be burnt, Lev. 21. 9. Judah here takes upon him, as if he had power of life and death over those that belonged to his family, as Tamar did though now in her fathers house; or at least, he shewes the eager∣nesse of his desire against her, if his meaning were, but to have her carried before the Magistrate, and be so pu∣nished by burning, according to the Law of the countrey. However, he was desirous to be rid of her, for his sonne Shelahs sake: and bewrayes his own partiality in his owne sinne, and inhumane cruelty in thus judging her to fire, and the fruit in her wombe yet unborne, and that before he heard what she could say for her self, never minding how unjustly he had dealt with her, in not giving her to Shelah to wise. Thus, 2 Sam. 12. 5, 7. Rom. 2. 1. V. 25. When she was brought forth] To execution, or rather to prison or trial. she sent] To stay his proceedings, and haply to smother it before it came to a publick hearing. the signet, and bracelet, and staffe] Thus she convicts him by his owne seale, and beats him with his owne staffe. V. 26. And Judah acknowledged] His repentance, else he might have pleaded against those tokens many wayes, by many excuses, to have freed himself. more righteous then I] Aggravates his own fault. In ma∣ny things both faulty, and in some things each of them more faulty then the other. He was the cause or occasion of her sin. and he knew her again no more] It had been incest. His repentance. To sin no more is true repentance, Job 34. 31, 32. Though Judah were young now, yet we reade not of any more of his children after, so that it seems he married not again, or had no children by his second wife, ch. 46. 12. Numb. 26. 19, 20, 21, 22. 1 Chron. 2. 3, 4. She∣lah was after married, and likely to Tamar, Numbers 26. 20. V. 8. Put out his hand] Dangerous labour for her sin, ch. 25. 26. a scarlet thread] Discerning there were twins, as a skil∣ful midwife might do, and intending to mark the first-borne. V. 29. This breach be upon thee] Thou hast made it, and thou shalt beare the name of it. As these twins, so Ja∣cob and Esau may be said to strive for the birth-right in the wombe. Pharez] Ruth 4. 12. Mat. 1. 3. V. 30. Zarah] Signifies risen or sprung up, as the Sun is said to rise. In the birth of these two brethren, the state of the two Churches of Jewes and Gentiles may be considered, as in a figure, the Jew drawing back his hand by unbelief, Rom. 10. 3. and after the fulnesse of the Gen∣tiles is broken forth and come in, then he coming forth last of all, Rom. 11. 11, 12, 24, 25, 26. CHAP. XXXIX. Verse. 1. TO Egypt] For their preservation, chap. 45. 5, 7. V. 2. And the Lord was with Joseph] V. 3, 21. Acts 7. 9, 10 Psal. 91. 15. in the house of his Master] Gods blessing went along with him. His Master employed him at home in the house, and not in more servile businesses abroad. No doubt he soon got skill in the Egyptian language, to enable him to it. V. 3. His Master saw] By the effects. Thus the Hea∣then acknowledge a divine Providence, ch. 30. 27. V. 4. Found grace in his sight] V. 21. though none in his brethren, Nehem. 2. 4, 5. Overseer] Steward, Prov. 27. 18. 14. 35. 17. 2. all that he had] So fully trusted him, his worth and fi∣delity. V. 5. For Josephs sake] The benefit of a religious ser∣vant, Psal. 1. 3. V. 6. Save the bread which he did eate] A proverbial speech, noting his ease and security, and his trust reposed in oseph, v. 23. ch. 43. 32. the Egyptians might not eate bread with the Hebrewes, as being shepherds. a goodly person] Here beauty and grace do meet. So in David, 1 Sam. 16. 12. V. 7. Cast her eyes] Beauty a dangerous object to a wan∣ton eye, eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14. lustful looks condemned, Mat. 5. 28. Job makes a Covenant with his eyes, Job 31. 1. lie with me] Impudency, though haply she spake not so broad at first, Prov. 7. 13, 18. 6. 26. V. 9. How then can I] The godly cannot consent to sin, 1 John 3. 9. the wicked cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. great wickednesse] Adultery a great wickednesse. The suspition of it raiseth jealousie and rage, Prov 6. 34, 35. It is a kinde of sacriledge in a godly person, 1 Cor. 6. 19. against God] It had been great ungratefulnes to his kinde Master. Yet the feare of God was the chiefest reason to withhold him. V. 10. Day by day] Importunity joyned with impu∣dency. he hearkened not] Perseverance in the resistance of sinne. or to he with her] Appearances and occasions of sin are to be shunned, 1 Thes. 5. 22. 1 Tim. 5. 14. Prov. 1. 15. 5. 8. V. 12. Caught him by the garment] So unuly a thing is lawlesse lust: makes such a woman impudently offer to commit a rape upon a man. he left his garment] Stayes not to parley with her. got him out] v. 15 Eccl 7. 6. V. 14. The men of her house] V. 11. Those few that were about the house. See] Shewing the garment. an Hebrew] She so names him in contempt, chap. 43. 32. to mock us] To cause us to be mocked; by his dishonest attempt to cause us to be disgraced. Or she will seem to speak modestly in a pretended attempt of ravishment. And thus raging lust turnes to raging hatred, yea,
though satisfied, as in Amnon, 2 Sam. 13. 15. to lie with me] A loud lie. Thus sin is seconded with sin, and the guilty charge the innocent. Thus the blas∣phemous Jewes charge Christ with blasphemy. Papists call us Hereticks, 1 Kings 18. 17. V. 16. Her Lord] The soveraignty of husbands, and subjection of wives. V. 17. Which thou hast brought] She layeth the fault up∣on him, that to quit himself to her, he may lay more ri∣gour upon Joseph. V. 20. Into prison] Dungeon, ch. 40. 15. 41. 14. Psal. 105. 18, 19. without examining the matter, or hearing Joseph, or at least not believing him, and his true pleading for himself, and not willing to have the blame and shame lie upon his wife, and so upon him. V. 21. And gave him favour] After a time, Psal. 105. 18, 19. of the Keeper of the prison] Chief Goaler, perhaps un∣der Potiphar, ch. 40. 4. Captain of the Guard. Likely Jo∣seph might declare the matter, and cleare his innocency to him, which he might not be suffered to do to his Master. And Potiphar by his officers relation, might begin to be better perswaded of Joseph, and to shew him favour. V. 22. He was the doer of it] Not as a drudge to do e∣very ones work, but as a Ruler, that all things there were done by him, or his direction. Thus, though many Ar∣chers had shot at Joseph, yet his bowe abode in strength, and the armes of his hands were made firme, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, ch. 49. 23, 24. CHAP. XL. Verse 1. BUtler] V. 13. Nehem. 1. 11. V. 2. Officers] Hebr. Eunuches. See, An∣not. on ch. 37. 36. V. 3. Put them in ward] The fickle state of Favourites and Courtiers. in the house of the Captain of the guard] Likely the same Potiphar, ch. 37. 36. 39. 1, 20. into the prison] Tower or round prison, dungeon, v. 15. ch. 39. 20. 41. 14. V 4. Charged Joseph with them] Potiphar, if he be this Captain now thinks better of Joseph, and intrusts him, likely upon that relation of his chief officer, chap. 39. 21, 22, 23. V. 5. And they dreamed] See Annotations on chap. 20. 3. according to the interpretation] No vain dreams, as the interpretation shewed, v. 12, 18, 21, 22. 41. 11, 12. V. 6. Sad] So dreams sent of God use much to affect men, ch. 41. 4. Dan. v. 1, 3. Mat. 27. 19. V. 8. We have dreamed a dream] Each his own dream, not both one. no Interpreter] Being prisoners we cannot go to the Sooth-sayers, ch. 41. 8. Dan. 4. 7. beong to God▪] Not to your wizards, ch. 41. 16. Dan. 2. 27, 28, 18, 19, 23, 47. tell me] He findes by the instinct of Gods Spirit that he should be able to interpret their dreames, through an extra∣ordinary gift given him. Though Joseph was bound, yet Gods Word and gift to him was not bound, 2 Tim. 2. 9. Before he was a dreamer, ch. 37. 5, 9, 19. Now an Inter∣preter. V. 12. They are] They signifie, ch. 41. 26. So, Mat. 26. 26, 28. V. 13. Within three dayes] V. 20. The three branches might as well have signified three weeks, moneths or years, but for Gods revelation to Joseph. lift up thine head] Summe up and reckon thee, as, Ex∣od. 30. 12. Numb. 1. 2. 26. 2. and promote thee to thy for∣mer place of office and honour, as, Jer. 52. 31. This shall Pharaah do when he shall take survey of his family and of∣ficers. V. 14. Think on me] Therefore Joseph knew not the time, meanes and manner of his own deliverance. God in his wisdom did not reveal that unto him. So, 1 Kings 13. the man of God knew not his own mishap, by meanes of the old false prophet, Gen 46. 27. make mention of me] Joseph is careful to use the meanes for his delivery. V. 15. Stollen away] To conceal his brethrens fault, And yet stollen from his father and sold, Ex. 21. 16. Land of the Hebrewes] Canaan, wherein the posterity of Abraham the Hebrew dwelt, ch. 14. 13. And to whom by Gods Promises it belonged, called the Holy Land, Zech. 2. 12. Thus Joseph shewes his faith. have I done nothing] Innocency protects not against mis∣chief, yet may be pleaded, as here, John 10. 32. Acts 24. 12, 13, 20. 25. 10, 11. Job 31. Psal. 7. 3 26. 1. Dan. 6. 22. V. 16. White baskets] Of which holes, that is made of white twigs, with holes as net-work. uppermost] Of the three baskets, nothing mentioned in the two lower baskets. V. 19. Lift up thine head] Reckon thee; as, ver. 13, 20. from off thee] Likely cut off thy head, and after hang thy body on a tree. and the birds shall eate] The Jewes were to bury him the same day, Deut. 21. 22, 23. The Egyptians and many Gentiles suffered them to hang many dayes. Joseph deales truly and plainly with the Baker. So should Physicians do, and such as attend the sick. V. 20. Birth-day] So Herod kept his with a feast, Mar. 6. 21. Lawful in it self so it be kept without vanity, excesse, superstition and prophanenesse. And so for Ecclesiastical Festivities, if there be no errour committed in the manner and end of their celebrations. V. 22. Hanged] On his birth-day, having occasion there∣by to take notice of his chief officers. V. 23. But forgat him] Forgot his misery, and unthank∣ful for his interpretation, Eccl. 9. 15, 16. Amos 6. 6. Thus Joseph tried still two yeares longer, ch. 41. 1. until the time his Word came, Psal. 105. 19. CHAP. XLI. Verse 1. TWo full yeares] After that, ch. 40. 19. There is no certainty how long Joseph was in pri∣son, in what yeare first put in. He waited patiently upon God in long afflictions for his deliverance. by the river] Nilus, or some river drawn from it, Deut. 11. 10, 11. This waters Egypt, and makes it fruitful with∣out raine, Zech. 14. 18. V. 2. Out of the river] Out of Nilus comes plenty and dearth, according to the heights of the rising of it. Plin. nat. hist. l. 5. c. 9. Kine] Kine and corne are the two chief sustenances of man. V. 5. Seven cares of corne upon one stalk] Signe of great plenty.
V. 6. Blasted with the East-winde] Strong and drying to blast the fruits, Ezech. 17. 10. 19. 12. V. 7. A dream] That stuck by him: dreames the occasi∣on of his fall; and dreames the occasion of his rising. V. 8. His spirit was troubled,] Ch. 40. 6. Dan. 2. 1, 3. Gods Power to scare men, even Kings, with dreames, Job 7. 17. Magicians] Exod. 7. 11. Dan. 2. 2. 5. 7. strong illusions of Satan, that wrought men to such deceits, and strong conceits of the power of Magicians, Dan. 2. 2, 4, 5. If A∣theists confesse a devil and devillish divinations, there must needs be a God and divine revelations. wise men] Mat. 23. 34. Philosophers among the Greeks, Acts 17. 18. none that could interpret] So, Dan, 2. 10. 5. 8. Thus God maketh the wisdome of their wise men perish, Esay 29. 14. 44. 25. 19. 11, 12, 13. V. 9. I do remember my faults this day] Courtier-like complements to prevent suspition in the King, lest he should think he grudg'd as unjustly punished in his impri∣sonment. This was rather to please Pharaoh, then to plea∣sure Joseph. Gods Providence in it, that he mentions not Joseph, till the Magicians had been tried. V. 13. Me he restored] He, that is, the regal Majestie restored me. V. 14. Brought him hastily] Psal. 105. 20. Dan. 2. 25. The wicked seek to the Prophets and People of God in their necessity. dungeon] There haply he was then, as overseeing the rest in that place. shaved himself] Polled himself in a seemly sort. He had let his haire grow, it seems, in signe of sorrow, as, 2 Sam. 19. 24. Mephibosheth did. Now he trims himself; being to go before the King. To shave all haire away were unseemly, Jer. 41. 5. 2 Sam. 10. 4, 5. The middle way is command∣ed the Priests, Ezech. 44. 20. raiment] His prison-weeds, Esther 4. 2. V. 16. Not in me] Dan. 2. 28. an answer of peace] So Joseph wished, hoped, and haply foresaw. It is an apprecation of such an answer, as might quiet his troubled minde concerning his dream. V. 21. Still ill-favoured] Such are wicked men, Esay 9. 20. The godly otherwise, Psal. 37. 19. neither earing nor harvest, ch. 45. 6. V. 26. Are] Signifie, Joseph before a Dreamer, now an Interpreter. V. 32. Doubled] Here God teacheth the reason, why things are sundry times repeated in the Scriptures. V. 33. Let Pharaoh look out] Meanes must be used. Jo∣seph gives this counsel not rashly, but by the guidance of Gods Spirit, by this meanes and occasion to fulfil that, ch 37. 7, 9. V. 34. Officers] Overseers, Bishops, so the Bishops of the Army, Numb. 31. 14. 2 Kings 11. 16. Bishops of the works, 2 Chron. 34. 12, 17. So among the Priests and Le∣vites, Numb. 4. 16. Nehem. 11. 9, 14. So, 1 Tim. 3. 1, 2. the fifth part] Likely other great men would be buyers and storers, by Josephs example. Thus counsels he to pro∣vide against the time of want, as in the example of the Pis∣mire, Prov. 6. 6, 7, 8. Luke 16 9. This fifth part was for the King, ch. 47. 14. Taken up most likely by way of tribute partly, and partly by purchase; and upon his charge put into his granaries. The other foure parts were abun∣dantly sufficient in those yeares of plenty. V. 37. Was good] Acts 7. 10. Prov 20. 12. Psal. 105. 22. V. 38 The Spirit of God is] Dan. 4. 6. 5. 11. This Pha∣raoh grounds upon his Prophetical interpretation. He speaks as an Heathen, naming gods plurally. So, chap. 31. 53. V. 40. Over my house] Psal. 105. 21 So, Dan. 2. 46, 47. 5. 29. So, 1 Kings 8. 3. 2 Kings 18. 18. Luke 12. 42. Men fitly and fully qualified and gifted should be made Of∣ficers, Numb. 11. 17. Acts 6. 3. according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled] Hebr. is, At thy mouth shall all my people kisse. That is, at thy Commandment. (So, Job 39. 30. Numb. 9. 20. Luke 19. 22. Gen. 24 57.) they shall kisse or apply the hand to the mouth. (as, Job 31. 27.) in signe of honour and obedience, as, Psal. 2. 12. so Samuel kissed Saul, 1 Sam. 10. 1. 1 Kings 10. 18. Hos. 13. 2. Prov. 24. 26. Thus Jo∣seph was honoured and ouhorized, Psal. 105. 22. Acts 7. 10. they kissed the commands that came from his lips, which imports a submission, and that rather of affection and delight then of compulsion and fear. V. 41. See I have set thee] See, respecting the ornaments and ceremonious signals, whereby this honour was confer∣red unto him. Thus God bringeth low, and lifteth up. &c 1 Sam. 2. 7, 8. Psal. 113. 7, 8. V. 42. Took off his ring] An Ensigne of honour and au∣thority, Esther 3. 10. and 8 2. Luke 15. 22. Hereby to publish under the Kings seale such Orders and Com∣mands as Joseph would. of fine linnen] Egypt was famous for fine linnen, Prov. 7. 16. Ezech. 27. 7. it signifies also bysse or silk, Ex. 25. 4. Apoc. 19. 8, 14. The weare of great personages, Prov. 31. 22. Ezech. 16. 10. Luke 16. 19. a gold chaine] Prov. 1. 9. Ezech. 16. 11. Thus, Dan. 5. 7, 16, 29. V. 43. Second chariot] 2 Chron. 35. 24. As Mordecai ri∣ding on the Kings horse, Esther 6. 8. Thus Joseph the se∣cond man in the Kingdome, Daniel made the third, Dan, 5. 29. Bow the knee] Abrech. kneel down, as to the father of the King, ch. 45. 8. V. 44. I am Pharaoh] I am King, and will be; and as∣sure as I am Pharaoh, so sure without thee, thy advice, and authority, not the least thing shall be done in matter of Government; no man shall do anything, or go any whi∣ther. V. 45. Zaphnath-Paaneah] A Revealer of secrets, Dan. 1. 7. Gen. 17. 5. of Poti-pherah Priest of Ou] To distinguish him from that Potiphar, ch. 37. 36. 39. 1. who dwelt in Memphis the royal City. Priest] Or Prince, Exod. 2. 16. 18. 1. Both offices concurred in one person, as was the manner of those times and places. See Annotat. on chap. 14. 18. This name gi∣ven to the sonnes of David, 2 Sam. 8. 18. and expounded, 1 Chron, 18. 17. of Ou] Called also Aven, Ezech. 30 17. in Greek Heli∣opolis, the City of the Sun, perhaps now Damiata. Josephs marriage here cannot be an example or rule to us, except where all reasons, and circumstances, and warrants are a∣like, by reason of the prohibitions and perils set down in Scripture. The Israelites forbidden to marry with the Canaanites, Exod. 4. 16. Deut. 7. 3, 4. 1 Rings 11. 1. Nehem. 13. 26. Forbidden to Christians, 2 Cor. 6. 14, &c. But for Joseph there was no other in the land, and he might not desert his charge and dignity, whereto God had called him for the preservation of his Church, to go seek a wife elsewhere: neither know we what instinct or dispensation
he might have from God. As the like might be in Esthers marrying with Ahashuerus. V. 46. Thirty yeares old] At this age Jesus Christ en∣tered into his publick Ministery; so John Baptist; so the Levites, Numb 4. 3. And David began his reign, but not Ezekiel his Prophecie. This notation of Josephs age, here gives much light to many passages in this history of Jacob and his sonnes; there are thirteen yeares since he was sold ch 37. 2. V 51. And all my fathers house] My injuries and mo∣lestations there; not his filial affection, whereby he might haply privily enquire in the thirteen yeares afore, and after∣wards also of his fathers welfare, ere his brethren came down, and yet wait for the most fit opportunity of fulfilling the dream. V. 54. In all lands] Round about, as Canaan, Arabia, &c. So, Luke 2. 1. V. 55. Cried to Pharaoh] As the woman, 2 Kings 6 26. Joseph would do but as Pharaoh directed. V. 56. Sold] Prov. 11 26. V. 57. And all countreys] Neighbouring. to Joseph] Ch. 45. 5. 50. 20. Psal 105. 16, 17. CHAP. XLII. Verse 1. SAw] Heard, v. 2. so the people saw the voices, Exod. 20. 18. Jacob was as much assured of it as if he had seen it. And one eye-witnesse is of more credit then many eare-witnesses. And likely he saw it too by many Canaanites that bought and brought cone out of Egypt, Acts 7. 12. corac] The word for corne signifies also break∣ing. why] So negligent, or as men amazed helplesse, Acts 7. 11. gaze, as men destitute of counsel. Famine is a ter∣rible thing, 2 Kings 6. 25. Deut. 28. 57. Lam. 4. 10. Esay 9. 20. A famine in Canaan in the dayes of Abram, ch. 12. 10. of Isaac, ch. 26. 1. and now in Jacobs time, and, Acts 11. 28. Gods servants subject to common calamities, yet God provides for them, Psal. 37. 19. V. 2. Get you down] Egypt lay lower then Canaan, ch. 45. 13, 9. V. 4. But Benjamin] h. 37. 3. 35. 18. 42. 38. V. 6. Governour] Ps. 105. 22. Of the Hebrew word Shal∣let and Shilon, is made in Arabick Sultan, a title where∣by the chief Governours of Egypt and Babylon are still called. and he it was that sold] Likely his Officers to the Na∣tives. But himself to Forreigners, that by sifting them he might informe himself of any danger to the land, to pre∣vent it of any meanes of good to the land, to ad∣vance it. bowed down] So fulfilling his Prophetick dream, ch. 37. 7, 8, 9. So, ch. 43. 26, 28. 44. 14. 50. 18. V. 7. He knew them, but] For many good reasons, he yet dissembles that he knew them, and yet discovers not himself unto them, to prevent sundry inconveniences, and to further good intents and purposes towards them. spake roughly] They deserved no better of him. Though Joseph did it in a good intent, to a good purpose. V. 9. Remembred the dreams So he did before. But now more usefully, he saw the time for the fulfilling of them. spies, to see the nakednesse] Exod. 32. 25. Not by way of lying he speaks thus, but by way of questioning and exa∣mining, to bolt out other matters to other good purposes; so▪ v. 12. as a severe Inquisiter. V. 11. All one mans sons] And therefore not likely to be spies. The spies were sent one of a tribe, Numb. 13. 2. And they dispersed themselves in all likeli∣hood and reason. V. 13. One is not] Is dead, ch. 44. 20. 37. 30. Not in this world, ch. 5. 24. Heb 11. 5. V. 14. This is it that I spake] This discovers it; pre∣tending another brother, or why should he alone be left be∣hinde? This not likely; and being false in this, ye are but spies sure. V. 15. By the life of Pharaoh] Pharaoh liveth: a kinde of oath or swearing as the like phrase importeth, Jer. 5. 2: But more properly a kinde of vehement Asseveration, as, Ezech 33. 11. 1. Sam, 1. 26. 17. 55. 20. 3. 25. 26. and 2 Sam▪ 15. 21. 2 Kings 2. 2, 4. Or it may be a wish, Let, or, so let Pharaoh live, as, &c. No sufficient ground to charge upon Joseph, a sinful oath by the life of Pharaoh, yea, a grievous sin, Deut. 6. 13. compared with Mat. 4. 10. Jer. 5. 7. Ye] Ye all, v. 16. ye shall not] If ye go. The words are suspensive, imply∣ing a curse; so, ch. 14. 23. V. 17. Into ward] God calls them by tribulation to re∣pentance for their sin, Heb 12. 10. V. 18. I feare God] Chap. 20. 11. Nehem. 5. 15. Prov. 16. 6. V. 20. Your youngest brother unto me] Cares most for him, and hopes his father will conceive no hurt towards him, by his bountiful dealing with them. V. 21. And they said one to another] In the absence, or out of the hearing of the Interpreter. guilty] Affliction as a rack forceth confession, and a guilty conscience, though likely sleeping afore, yet now up∣on twenty yeares after, galleth afresh, Hos. 5. 15. Job 36. 8, 9, 10. therefore is this distresse] Divers wayes Joseph dealt now with them, as they had done with him, Judg. 1. 7, Mat. 7. 2. Jam. 2. 13. V. 24. And wept] Ch. 43, 30, moved with their self-ac∣cusations, and his own natural affection, which was to o strong to be kept in by artificial disguises, but that in secret it must have vent. Simeon, and bound him] That eldest of them that were most against him. Reuben most, and Judah next, were for him. And Simeon was chief in that bloody massacre of the Sichemites. before their eyes] Though haply when they were gone, he might give him some more liberty, ch. 43. 23. V. 25. Every mans money] Lest his father should be in want. Thus did he unto them] Josoph did so, or his steward at his command. Thus Joseph rewards evil with good, Rom. 12. 17, 19. Mat. 5. 44. V. 27. And as one of them] V. 35. What Judah saith, ch. 43. 21. as if they had all opened their sacks, and found their moneys in the Inne, is but a summing and cutting off particulars for brevity sake, to Josephs steward, as not a thing material to their present purpose, with him, and they speaking in haste. V. 28. Failed them] Suspecting some plot laid for their ruine, or at least some danger to Simeon by it, Lev. 26. 36. God hath done] They rightly acknowledge Gods hand and his Providence in it.
V. 35. Were afraid] Lest also they should be accused of theft, chap. 44. 5. Guilty consciences timorous, Lev. 26. 36. V. 36. Against me] Heavy to me, though ye make light of them. V. 37. My two sonnes] That is, slay two of my sonnes. For he had foure, ch. 46. 9. or my two sonnes here present, or most deare to me. A passionate speech, yet such as might make Jacob conceive he had some reason for his so confi∣dent undertaking for Benjamins return. V. 38. For his brother is dead] Only brother by the mo∣ther, ch. 44. 20, 27, 28. to the grave] See Annot. on ch. 37. 35. Here Jacob bewrayes too much passion, and too little faith and pati∣ence. CHAP. XLIII. Verse 1. SOre] The longer, the sorer. V. 2. Eaten up] Near-hand. a little food] For present need, not knowing there were five yeares of famine yet to come, and he had a great fa∣mily. V. 3. Solemnely protest] Ch. 42. 15, 20. not see my face] With favour and safety. V. 4. Thee food] At thy command, for thee and us all, thy family. V. 5. We will not go] Because it were vaine and dange∣rous, ch. 44. 26. V. 7. Asked us strictly] Many things passed between Jo∣seph and his brethren, which are not so expressely related in the story, ch. 44. 22, 19. They could not upon Josephs questions honestly avoid the telliug of their brother Ben∣jamin. V. 8. And Judah said] He now fittest to move, and this the fittest season. the lad] Benjamin was now about twenty seven yeares, being twelve or thirteen yeares younger then Joseph, and borne after Dinahs ravishing, and in the departing from Bethel. See Annot. on ch. 35. 18. And now Benjamin had nine or ten sonnes, ch. 46. 21. See Annot. on ch. 22. 5. Lad, comparatively, being the youngest. V. 11. Must be so] No wisdome to strive against neces∣sity. Better to adventure one to uncertain danger, then to cast the whole family upon certain famine. a Present] Prov. 18. 16. 21. 14. 17. 8. So Jacob had tri∣ed, ch. 32. 20. He useth prudent meanes as subservient to Gods Providence. nuts] Of Terebinth, or the Turpentine-tree. V. 12. Double money] Because the price of corne increa∣sed by the continuance of the famine. and the money] This besides. Jacobs just dealing. V. 14. God Almighty] Our chief trust must be in him, Prov. 21. 1. If I be boreaved] Esther 4. 16. Contentation in Gods Will, referring all to him with patience. V. 18. Sek occasion] Guilty persons are suspi∣cious. V. 19. At the doore of the house] Before they went in. V. 21. Every mans money] See Annot. on ch. 42. 27, 35. For haste they joyne together what was done in the Inne, and what was discovered at home. V. 23. Your God] It seems Joseph taught his steward and family to feare God. V. 24. Washed their feet] Ch. 18. 4. 24. 32. V. 26. They brought him the Present] Each a part of it, as they had divided it amongst themselves. bowed] Ch. 37. 9. V. 28. Thy servant our father] Ch 37. 9. V. 30. Did yerne] 1 Kings 3. 26. V. 32. By himself] As became the Viceroy. Here were three Tables. Abomination unto the Egyptians] For the Hebrewes were known to be Keepers of sheep, and so to kill, eat and sacri∣fice such cattel as the Egyptians worshipped, ch. 46. 34 Ex∣od. 8. 26. The Egyptians had flocks of sheep, ch. 47. 6. Oxen, Exod. 9. 3, 19. But not to kill the sheep or kine, or to eate the head of any beast. But for delight and profit by their milk and wool, and for commerce. And haply those that kept them were strangers rather then Egy∣ptians. V. 33. Youngest] Hebt. Least in age. marvelled] Seeing themselves so seasted, and that Joseph appointed them their places, according to each mans age. V. 34. Messes] The custome of those times, to have the meat set before the Lord, and he to distribute to the Guests, 1 Sam. 1. 4, 5. 9, 23, 24. 2 Sam. 6. 19. five times] To shew his affection to him, and to make trial whether his brethren would envie him for it. 1 Sam. 1. 4, 5. drank, and were merry] yet with sobriety, Hag. 1. 6. John 2. 10. Cant. 5 1. CHAP. XLIV. Verse 2. PUt my Cup] To try their affection to his fa∣ther and to Benjamin: and for the more full verification of the dreams. Josephs case, and place, and person may carry out these practices, which otherwise are not so warrantable, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 11. 3. V. 5. Is not this it] Speaking according to the opini∣on the Egyptians had of him, who by reason of his prophe∣tical skill in interpreting dreams, thought he used divina∣tion as their Magicians did. whereby] Or in which, or by which, or of which cup. Their fault so made the greater, a kinde of sacriledge in stealing such a Cup. he divineth] Searching searcheth, maketh trial by expe∣rience, as, ch. 30. 27. searcheth thoroughly, 1 Kings 20. 33. or searcheth by divination, and so sinfully using the cup, (as some do a basin and other things) in such an unlawful Art. Thus the steward by Josephs appoint∣ment may speak as an Egyptian, as they conceived of Jo∣seph, and as their Magicians used to do. Not yet that Jo∣seph was guilty of such a crime. V. 7. My Lord] Thus they call Josephs steward. God forbid] Far be it, ch. 18. 25. V. 8. We brought againe] Therefore would no steal. V. 9. Let him die] So, ch. 31. v. 32. Innocency is confident, yet this is too rash and rigorous. They might have though of their money in their sacks mouth be∣fore. V. 10. My servant] The steward speaks in his Lord Josephs name. V. 12. And be searched] He knew well how not to meddle with that end of the sacks, where he had put their money. V. 13. Rent their clothes] See Annot. on ch. 37. 39, 34▪
V. 14. He was yet there] Expecting their return. V. 15. What deed] As, ch. 3. 13. 4 10. can certainly divine] See Annot. on v 5 V. 16. What shall we say] Their consciences clear, and yet their conviction seems as clear. They knew not what Apology to make. God hath found out] So, ch. 42. 28. If we see not evident cause of our affliction, let us look to the secret counsel of God, who punisheth us justly for our sins. A good use of afflictions and crosses, Esay 27. 9. Gen. 42, 21, 22. Judah thought this his best argument and way, having no legal excuse or defence to make for the clearing of themselves: though he was sure enough of Benjamins innocency, and could not upon this occasion, but remember the putting of their money in their sacks, yet he durst not accuse any of Josephs family, nor stand out against him, but yields and submits, as an hopeful way to procure favour with a man of a generous spirit. iniquity] Our other sins, though free of this. both we] V. 9. and he also] Not die, a, v. 9. but be servant, as, v. 10. is found] He forbears to say that he stole it. V. 17. He shall be my servants] Joseph confirmes his stew∣ards dealing, v. 10. In Moses Law, for theft restitution should be made, in some cases double, in some fourefold; if the party not able thereto, then to be sold, or become a slave to him from whom he had stollen, Exod. 22. 31. Here Josephs power and their own yielding bindes them. V. 18. Then Judah came near] Judah before, v. 16. And now Judah more addresseth himself to plead, because he had undertaken for Benjamin, ch. 43. 8. 9. in my Lords eares] But an Interpreter yet still for ought we reade. as Pharaoh] And so thine anger would be dreadful and deadly, Prov. 19. 12. have ye a father] See Annot. on ch. 43. 7. V. 20. A little one] Ex enuating his age by an officious lie, to excuse his taking so long a journey. See Annot. on ch. 43. 8. V. 26. We cannot go down] Ch. 43. 5. We will not go down. V. 27. My wife bare me] Rachel his wife, by way of e∣minency, first in his choice, and dearest in his love. Leah but by fraud. V. 28. Torne in pieces] Thus Joseph might perceive how they coloured to their father their dealing with him. V. 30. Bound up in the Lads life] 1 Sam. 18. 1. If he die, or be thought so, the father cannot live. V. 33. In stead of the Lad] A filial affection to his old father. And yet love useth more to descend then as∣cend. V. 34. How shall I go] He would rather remain here a servant or prisoner. CHAP. XLV. Verse 1. REfrain himself before] Upon this supplica∣tion of Judah, though hitherto he had refrained, ch. 43. 31. to go out] He would not have his brethrens fault di∣vulged, nor his own passion, being a man of his place, so openly discovered, as to weepe aloud before o∣thers. V. 2. Wept aloud] No thought of revenge for their cruel usage of him. heard it] V. 16. V. 3. Could not answer him] Through astonishment at the wonder; and the prick of their guilty conscience. V. 4. Come near] They had kept, no doubt at a reverend distance from him so great a Lord. ye sold] Tells this, not to upbraid them, but to assure them it is he. V. 5. not grieved] Ch. 31. 35. nor angry with your selves] He comforts them, 2 Cor, . 7. Look up to Gods Providence, who turnes your sin to good. for God did send] V. 8. Ps. 105. 16, 17. V. 6. Neither earing nor harvest] None, till Joseph supplied them with corne for it the last yeare, ch. 47. 23. or as good as none; few had corne to sowe, few would at∣tempt to sowe, as being to expect little or no increase by Josephs prediction. V. 8. But God] Ch. 50. 20. Josph cleares not his brethren, but he cheeres them up in contemplation of Gods merciful Providence, who turnes their sin to much good. God can and doth bring good out of evil, out Judas sin and others in the death of Christ the salvation of man∣kinde, Acts 4. 27, 28. a father to Pharaoh] Judges 17. 10, 11. Gen. 41. 40, 44. As a son follows the direction of a father, so did Pharaoh Josephs. V. 10. Goshen] A Province between Nilus and the red-sea, very fruitful, ch. 46. 28, 29. 47. 1. 6, 27. Another Goshen in Canaan, Josh. 11. 16. 10. 41. 15. 51. This he saith, presuming of Pharaohs assent, ch. 47. 4, 6. near unto me] On the City whence he married, and where he most resided was near to Goshen. V. 12. My mouth] And not an Interpreters, as, chap. 42. 23. V. 15. He kissed] See Annot. on ch. 20. 13. talked with him] Having overcome their astonishment and feare, talked of any thing he or they desired to know. V. 16. And his servants] The Courtiers envied not, but honoured Joseph. V. 19. Thou art commanded] Thou needest no more au∣thority or instructions from me. V. 20. Regard not your stuffe] That is not portable. Here you shall be supplied. V. 22. Changes of raiment] Such as were used to be given for honour or reward, 2 Kings 5. 22. Zech. 3. 4. Judg. 14. 12. Apoc. 6. 11. 7. 9, 14. Three hundred] Shekels▪ See Annotat. on ch. 20. 16. and on ch. 23. 16. V. 24. Fall not out by the way] About the selling of me. Reubens former words, ch. 42. 22. occasioned haply this charge. V. 26. Heart fainted] Between hope and doubt, between joy and feare. Unbelief and doubting weakeneth the heart, Rom. 4 19, 20. Mat. 14. 31. Believed them not] So he fell into that fainting, swooning fit, Luke 24. 41. They beleeved not for joy, Jacob might the lesse believe them, because of their former lie they had told him of Joseph. V. 27. Revived] Rose out of that swoone, as it were. His failing of spirit did not altogether take away the use of his sight and senses, but that he saw the wagons. V. 28. It is enough] Here is proof enough. And it is e∣nough to me that he is alive, and enough for me, if I may
be so happy as to see him once before die. chap. 46. 30. CHAP. XLVI. Verse 1. TO Beer sheba] This was in the way from Hebron to Egypt, the most Southern part of Canaan. Here Abraham and Isaac had much been. See Annot. on ch. 21. 31. sacrifices] Of thanks, for the tydings of Joseph. and to consult with God about his going into Egypt, and thereby to worship God. V. 2. In the visions of the night] See Annot. on ch. 15. 1. what this vision was, and in what manner is not set down. Jacob, Jacob] To rouse him up to attention, and for more certainty, as, ch. 22. 11. 1 Sam. 3. 10. Gen. 41. 32. See Annot. on ch. 32. 28. Here Jacob twice for Israel once. And so v. 5. The name Jacob forbidden but comparatively. V. 3. Feare not] It seems he feared it, knowing his father in a famine was forbid it, ch. 26. 1, 2, 3. And knowing the Oracle, that his seed was to be afflicted in Egypt, ch. 15. 13, 14. And, now he and his father and grandfather had been Pilgrims, two hundred and twenty yeares in Canaan, from the first Promise of Canaan, and he saw now lesse hope to have it, by his leaving the land with seventy soules, which might seem a kinde of forsaking of it; yet by faith as he sojourned in the land, Heb. 11. 9. so now he goes to so∣journe in Egypt upon this warrant. there] Egypt. This not promised before. This won∣drously fulfilled, in that of seventy souls going down, in the space of two hundred and ten years, there came up six hun∣dred thousand men, Exod. 12. 37. Deut. 10. 22. a great nation] This promised. ch. 28, 14. 35. 11. 15, 13 V. 4. Thee up again] Thee dead, ch. 50. 5, 13. Thy po∣sterity after, Ex. 12. 37. Josh. 3. A like Promise, ch. 28. 15. his hands upon thine eyes] Closing them on thy death-bed. An ancient and honourable custome. V. 6. And came into Egypt] This journey is often men∣tioned, Josh. 24. 4. and Esay 52. 4. Acts 7. 15. Numb. 20. 25. Deut. 10. 22. Thus that was fulfilled, chap. 15. 13. V. 7. His daughters, and his sons daughters] As many as he had. A general kinde of speaking, though he had but one daughter Dinah, and one grand-daughter Sarah, v. 15, 17. The like speech, v. 23. and ch. 21. 7. Numb. 26. 8. 1 Chron. 2. 8, 31. His servants, no doubt, went also. V. 8. These are the names] To know hereby their won∣derful increase, ch. 35. 23. see the order of the tribes on Aarons breast-plate, Exod. 28. 10, 21. V. 9. These foure were heads of their fathers house, Exod. 6. 14. Numb. 26. 5, 6. 1 Chron. 5. 3. So of the rest that follow. V. 10. Jemuel] Nemuel, Numb. 26. 12. 1 Chron. 4. 24. Obad] Omitted, Nub. 26. 12. 1 Chron. 4. 24. Jachin] areb, 1 Chron 4. 24. Zohar] Zerah, Numb. 26. 13. 1 Chron. 4. 24. of a Canaanitish woman] Likely Zerah, Numb. 26. 13. Gen. 28. 1. V. 11. Kohath] Grandfather to Moses. Of his family came the Priests. They are reckoned before the Gersho∣nites, Numb. 4. 34. V. 12. Hezron and Hamul] Too great violence to the text, to say these were borne after in Egypt. See Annot. on ch. 29. 20. Compare the great Annotations upon this verse, and upon ch. 38. 1. V. 13. Thola] He had a rare blessing in multitude of children, 1 Chron. 7. 2. A Judge of this name and tribes, Judg. 10. 1. Job] Jashub, Numb. 26. 24. 1 Chron. 7. 1. V. 15. In Padan Aram] With his Nephewes or Grandchildren, bore after e went out of Padan-A∣ram. Thirty three] Reckoning himself in. It seems Leah was dead. V. 16. Ezbon] Ozni, Numb. 26. 16. V. 17. Jisvah] His name and family wanting, Numb. 26. 44. V. 19. Jacobs wife] As if Rachel were the sole legitimate wife. V. 20. Ephraim] Here the LXX. adde a sonne and a Grandchilde of Manasse, and two sonnes and a Grand∣childe of Ephraim, taken out of 1 Chron. 7. 14, 20. By rea∣son of that speech, Gen. 50. 23. but this makes too bold with the Hebrew text which wants it. V. 21. The sonnes of Benjamin,] These ten might well be borne to him now. He being now twenty seven yeares old at least, and twelve or thirteen year younger then Jo∣seph. See Annot. on ch. 35. 18. Belah] The eldest sonne, 1 Chron. 8. 1. Becher] Seems to be the fourth sonne, called Nohah, 1 Chron. 8. 2. Neither is his name or family reckoned, Numb. 26. 38. but his children are named, 1 Chron. 7. 8. Ashbel] The second son, Numb. 26. 38. 1 Chron. 8. 1. cal∣led also Jediael, 1 Chron. 7. 6. Gera] By the LXX. made the sonne of Balah, and so the Grand-childe of Benjamin from a seeming ground of 1 Chron. 8. 3. But Benjamin was too young now to be a Grandfather, Numb. 26. 38. There is no mention of Ge∣ra, neither was he Benjamins third sonne, but A∣harah. Naaman] Another of his name, sonne of Belah, 1 Chron. 8. 4. Numb. 26. 40. Ehi] Aharah, 1 Chron. 8. 1. third sonne, Numb. 26. 38. Rosh] Likely Rapha the fifth sonne▪ father to Palti one of the spies, Numb. 13. 10. none of his family reckoned, Numb. 26. Muppim] Called also Shuppim, 1 Chron. 7. 12. Ard] Seemeth to be the son of Belah, and Grand∣childe of Benjamin. And such a one thing there was, Numb. 26. 40. But this Ard was brother to Belah. V. 22. Fourteen] The Septuagint say elghteen, adding Josephs Grandchildren, as is noted on v. 28. V. 23. Sonnes] One sonne, change of numbers is oft in the Hebrew, v. 7. 1 Sam. 9. 21. Gen. 21. 7. Numb. 26. 42. 2 Chron. 24. 25. Thieves for one of them, Mat. 27. 44. Asse for an Asses, Zech. 9. 9. Mat. 21. 5. sate upon them, Mat. 21. 7. for which in Mark 11. 7. it is, he sate upon him. Sixty six] So the LXX. here. Jacob is not reckoned in here: nor Joseph and his two sonnes which were now in Egypt. V. 27. Seventy] So Exod. 1. 5. and Deut. 10. 22. count∣ing in Jacob, Joseph and his two sons, Acts 7. 14. the num∣ber is seventy five, which will arise if we reckon in all that are here named, viz. the foure wives of Jacob, and Er, and
Onan that were dead, and take out Jacob, as distinguished from them. The LXX. have here seventy five, raising the number of five out of the psteity of Ephraim and Ma∣nasseh, (see the notes on v. 20.) And St. Stephen in that, Act. 7. 14. seems to follow the LXX. as St. Luke doth, likewise in the matter of Cainan. See Annot on Gen. 11. v. 12. And see the late leaned and large Annotat. upon this text, where this doubt is fully discussed and deter∣mined. V. 28. To direct his face unto Goshen] That Joseph might meet him there, and by his authority settle him there, without grievance to the native inhabitants. V. 29. Presented himself] With lowly reverence to his father. fell on his neck] While Joseph bowed before him. and wept] With teares of joy, ch. 45. 1. V. 30. Let me die] I am willing to die, as, Luke 2. 29, 30. ch. 45. 28. here that desire is accomplished. V. 31. Unto him, my brethren] Joseph in his greatnesse not ashamed of them, yea, though shepherds were an abo∣mination to the Egyptians, v. 34. chap. 47. 7. Hebr. 2. 11. V 32. Shepherds] Not ashamed of their base trade in the account of the Egyptians. V. 34. That ye may dwell in the land of Goshen] The nearest part to Canaan a fruitful pasturage for cattel. That thus living by themselvs they might be least corrupted with the Egyptians idolatry and superstition, and lesse offensive to them by their trade of shepherdy. Joseph though in that favour, and of that power, ch. 45. 19. yet would not do it without the Kings expresse consent. Goshen] See Annot. on ch. 45. 10. for every shepherd] See Annot. on ch. 43. 32. CHAP. XLVII. Verse 1. GOshen] See Annotat. on chap. 45. 10. 46. 28. V. 2. Five men] Not set down which five, and there∣fore guesses here are but idle and curious. V. 3. Occupation] Ch. 46. 33. Jonah 1. 8. 2 Thes. 3. 10. Good Magistrates inquisitive against idlensse, as the bane of a Common-wealth. shepherds] Every one a shepherd, v 6. ch. 46. 34. V. 4. To sojourne] For a time, durig the famine. This likely their intent at first, and not to leave Canaan. Though afterwards for Josephs sake, and his great accommodations afforded them, they continued their abode there. And af∣terwards the following Kings against the Lawes of Hospi∣tality, kept them as bond slaves. no pasture] It failed sooner in Canaan, then in Egypt and Goshen, Canaan being an higher land. let thy servants dwell] Pharaoh made a frank offer, ch. 45. 18, 20. Joseph intended this place for them, ch. 45. 10. His brethren here requested it, and no doubt by Josephs di∣rection, ch. 46 34. Thus by this meanes, Joseph in his modesty, would gaine Pharaohs onsent to this particular place. V. 6. Of Activity] Men of fit and able parts are to be chosen to places and offices. Jacob blessed Pharaoh] Saluted him with prayer for his welfare; and thanks, and praise for his bounty to Joseph, to him and his children, 2 Kings 4. 29. Numb. 6. 23, 24. Mat. 26. 26. with Luke 22. 19. so again, when Jacob left Pharaoh, v. 10. V. 9. Of my pilgrimage] Pilgrims here, seeking after a better countrey, an heavely, Heb. 11. 9, 13. 13. 14. 1 Chron. 29. 15. Psal. 39. 12. 119. 19. Jacobs flittings from Labai roi to Gerar, to the valley of Gerar, to Rehoboth, to Beersheba to Bethel, to Haran in Mesopotamia, to Gilead, to Mahanaim, to Succoth, to Shalem in Sechem, to Bethel, to Ephrath, to Mamre, to Beersheba, to Egypt, to Pharaohs Court. one hundred and thirty yeares] Therefore Jacob was ninety when Joseph was borne, and seventy six when he came to Laban, v 28. and have not attained] Abraham lived to one hundred se∣venty five. Isaac to one hundred and eighty. V. 11. Ramases] Exod. 12. 37. The City built after by the Israelites, Exod. 1. 11. After the Israelites multiplied and spread further, and had Egyptian families among them, and about them, whence their doores were distin∣guished by the blood, Exod. 12 7, 23. and, v. 35, 37. they soon borrowed jewels of them. V. 12. According] As a child is nourished by the nurse, ch. 45. 11. 49. 24. 50. 21. lovingly, tenderly, carefully. V. 13. Fainted] Yet now among strangers God satis∣fies his Church with fulnesse. V. 14. All the money into Pharaohs house] His treasury. Josephs fidelity. V. 15. Money failed] Generally, for the most part, al∣most totally. give us bread] Yet ask it in an humble manner, v. 17. 18, 19, 25. V. 18. The second yeare] Namely after their cattel was sold, which seemes to have been the sixth yeare of the fa∣mine, the second of their extremity. V. 19. And our land] Die, become desolate. As trees while they bear fruit are said to live; when not, to die, so may the ground. and give us seed] This is the seventh year of the famine, V. 21. He removed them] So to gain the right of pro∣priety and possession, from the people to Pharaoh. The people mutinie not in all these extremities, nor break open the granaries of Pharaoh: but by Josephs prudence, and Gods over-ruling Providence keep their loyalty and obedi∣ence. Thus Chams posterity was brought into bondage, ch. 9. 25. V. 22. Only the land of the Priests] Or Princes, Pha∣raohs chief Officers and Lords, as, ch 41. 45. See Annos. on that place, ch. 14. 18. if it be here understood of Priests, as the Chaldee and LXX. translate it. This shews Phara∣ohs care, (not Josephs, for he favoured not idolatrous Priests) to preserve their rights and revenues, to save their lands from alienation, to maintain them; so Jezabel, 1 King. 18. 19. These shall rise up in judgement against many Christian Kings and people, who neglect the main∣tenance of the Ministers of the Gospel. V. 24. The fifth part] He might have required the halfe, or have allowed them but the fifth part. Here then he deales not with them injuriously, or uncharitably, making his best advantage of their necessity: But mercifully, as them∣selves confesse, v. 25. and yet faithfully, as became the steward of Pharaoh, whose corne he sold. This fifth part was no more then was laid up in the yeares of plenty, ch. 41. 44. V. 25. Pharaohs servants] His Farmers and Tenants. V. 27. Multiplied exceedingly] So God fulfilled his Promise, ch. 46. 3. V. 28. Seventeen yeares] So long Joseph nourished his fa∣ther in Egypt, as his father had nourished him at home.
V. 29. Thy hand under my thigh] See Annot: on ch. 24 2. Jacob requires this oath, not so much doubting Jo∣sephs obedience herein, but that he might alledge it to Pharaoh, ch. 50. 5. and so decline the envy of the Egypti∣ans, and their surmising of his scorning their land, and that it might be a testimony of his faith in Gods Promises for possessing the land of Canaan, & that as a type of Hea∣ven, Heb. 11. 9, 10, 14, 15, 16. and for a strengthening of the faith of his seed, that they should return thither. And for this also Joseph layes his bones, as it were at stake, ch. 50. 25. Heb. 11. 22. Thus being dead they teach and preach faith to them. V. 30. But I will lie] Lie down and sleep. Such is death, lie in burial. with my fathers] Abraham and Isaac. See, v. 29. V. 31. Bowed himself] Unto God with thankfulnesse, Heb. 11. 21. His religious thoughts, now near his end, took up his minde with matter of praying to God, and praising of God. And though weak and bedid, yet he would not do it without some outward expression of de∣vout reverence. This bowing then was not to Joseph, (ch. 48. 12.) nor yet towards the East or Canaan, but to God, so David, 1 Kings 14. upon the beds head] The LXX. read it leaning upon the top of his staffe. The Hebrew word without pricks or vowels serves both. Mittch is a bed, Matteh is a staffe. The LXX. sure had a copy without pricks. The Apostle follows the LXX. in Heb. 11. 21. See Annot. on ch. 46. 27. and on ch. 11. 12. Jacob turning his face to the bed, and so rear∣ing himself upon the boulster at his beds head, he then bowed himself and worshipped the Lord, ch. 48. 2. 1 Kings 1. 47, 48. And it well may be, that to help himselfe herein in his great weaknesse, he might leane upon the top of his staffe which he had in his hand, being an old man; and the Apostle knowing this also to be true, did not therefore stick to alledge the place, according to the Translation of the LXX. CHAP. XLVIII. Verse 1. WIth him his two sonnes] To receive the blessing of their venerable Grandfather, at his farewel from the world. V. 2. And sate upon the bed] Ch. 47. 31. V. 3. At Luz] Or Bethel, and that twice, ch. 28. 13, 19. and, ch. 35. 6. V. 4. A multitude] Thirteen populous tribes. for an everlasting possession] Literally, if his seed keepe Covenant with God, spiritually to his spiritual seed, he will give the heavenly Canaan for an everlasting posses∣sion. V. 5. Epraim and Manasseh] Jacob still prefers Ephra∣im, v. 19. are mine] My sons by adoption, and shall have the pri∣viledge of my sonnes; have either a twelfth share and be heads of tribes, as Reuben and Simeon. Thus Joseph had the double portion, that right of the first-borne, 1 Chron. 5. 1. A Law for this to the first-borne after, Deut. 21. 17. So the Sabbath, Circumcision, raising up seed to the brother, and many such more before Moses Law. V. 6. begettest after them] Therfore he had no more at this time. the name of their brethren] Therefore he had more chil∣dren after; which were sorted and counted to the stock and tribe of Ephraim or Manasse, as if they were their sons not their brethren: as all Jacobs other Grand-children like∣wise were. V. 7. Rachel died] Thy mother, and my dear and only true wife, if I had been fairly dealt withal, and so thou hadst been my right first-borne: and therefore in thy sonnes I give thee a double portion, yet she was soon taken from me. in the way of Ephrata] Even there, rather then to bury her among idolaters in Bethlehem, ch. 23. 9. V. 8. Who are these] Named them before, yet knew not that they were present, or did not well discerne them for the dimnesse of his sight, v. 10. V. 9. I will blesse them] Not by a meere apprecation of prosperity, for so the lesse may blesse the greater; but in the Name and Authority of God, guided with an especial e∣nergy or operation of Gods Spirit, and so ratified by God, as ordinary blessings were not; so, ch. 27. 33. See Annot. on ch. 27. 4. Gen. 49. 26. V. 10. Dimme] Ch. 27. 1. V. 11. I had not thought] Gods blessings are beyond our expectations and imaginations. V. 12. From between] Jacobs knees rather then Josephs, for Jacob embraced and kissed them, v 10. he bowed] In reverence and thankfulnesse for the former Adoption. V. 13. Ephraim in his right hand] In a fit posture, as he thought, to receive the Patriarchal blessing, which it seems was usually done with Imposition of hands. And in this punctual order, as fearing haply Jacob might mistake their age and persons, naming Ephraim first, v. 5. towards Israels right hand] The right hand hath the preheminence of the left, 1 Kings 2. 19. Mat. 25. 33. Ps. 20. 6. 110. 1. 118. 16. Esay 62. 8. Eph 1. 20. in strength and honour. To which the Scripture hath reference, in speech also of God. V. 14. And laid it upon Ephraims head] Here is the first expresse mention of Imposition of hands, used after in benediction, Mat. 19. 13. Mar. 10. 16. at secrifices, Lev. 1. 4. as witnessing, Lev. 24. 14. in extraordinary giving of graces, Acts 8. 17. in miraculous cures, Mar. 6. 5. in or∣dination of Ministers, Numb. 8. 10. Acts 6. 6. 1 Tim 4. 14. so now Moses laid his hands upon Joshuah, Deut. 34. 9. in prayer, Acts 13. 3. Ephraims head] Of him came Joshuah, and the Kings of the ten tribes. And the tribe of Ephraim is called the tribe of Joseph, Numb. 1. 32, 34. Apoc. 7. 6. 7. 8. The name of Ephraim is taken for the whole Kingdome of Israel, E∣say 7. 2. They both had a double lot, Josh. 17. 14. wittingly] And therefore crossed his armes to that pur∣pose, as a signe, not of Christs Crosse, but of that which afterwards he foretold, by the special revelation of the Spirit of God, he being so dim of sight, that he could not thereby so well distinguish between them. V. 16. the Angel which] Christ. See Annot. on ch. 31. 11. Exod. 14. 19. 13. 21. my name be named on them] As, v. 5. no invocation of Saints departed; they shall be in the same state and degree as my other sons, my adopted children; so Gods Name is said to be called on us, Deut. 28. 10. 2 Chron. 7. 24. Jer. 14. 9. that is, we are called the sons of God, and the hus∣bands name is called upon the wife, Esay 4. 1. And the Lords Name upon the City Jerusalem, Dan. 9. 19. and up∣on the Temple, 1 Kings. 8. 43. Jer. 7. 10, 11. grow into a multitude] Spawn like fishes. There were eighty five thousand two hundred men of war of these two
in Moses time, Numb. 26. 28, 34, 37. Thus Moses bles∣seth them, Deut 33. 17. Josh. 17. 17. V. 17. it displeased him] Thinking his father was mistaken, he seeks to mend the error, and likely before that blessing, v. 15, 16. was uttered. greater then he] In number of issue and power, though the birth-right remain with Manasseh, Josh. 17. 1. So, Numb. 1. eight thousand three hundred men more of Ephraim then of Manasseh, and, Deut. 33. 17. See Annot. on v. 14. Num. 2. 18, 20. yet sometimes Ephraim was at a losse, 1 Chron. 7. 20, 21, 22. lesse in number then Manasseh, Numb. 26. 28. V. 20. In thee] Joseph using thy name and for thy sake, or taking thee for an example, as, Ruth 4. 11. and so for cursing, Jer. 29. 22. Israel] My posterity. I have given] Thus Prophetically bequeathing, as by Will and Testament to the posterity. one portion] That bought, ch. 33. 19. nigh unto Sechem after called Sychar, John 4. 5. Not all the City Sechem, and all its territories, as some would have it out of Josh. 17. 7. This portion, though little, was all he had by pur∣chase, and so he designes him as it were his heire; Sechem was the inheritance of the Ephraimites, Josh. 16. 1. 20. 7. John 4. 5. And thither were Josephs bones carried and bu∣ried, Josh. 24. 1, 25, 32. have taken] Shall take. So, Esay 9. 6. Thus Jacob in faith disposeth of it as already taken, Heb. 11. 21. or rather have taken it out of the hands of those neighbouring peo∣ple, that seised upon it among the rest, after the slaughter of the Sichemites, and would not restore it till Jacob by force of armes took and recovered it. Though this be not elsewhere mentioned in Scripture. my sword] Of my children, Josh. 17. 14, to 18. CHAP. XLIX. Verse 1. GAther your selves] Repeated, v. 2. Some present were to call and gather the absent. By this joynt injunction he intimates the union that should be amongst them, Psal. 133. 2, 3. 33. 3. that I may tell you] By the Spirit of prophecie. Men on their death-beds should give their last and best coun∣sels to their children, and family, and friends. you] Altogether, what I have to say to every one particu∣larly, that so every one may reap benefit also of what shall be said concerning his brethren. in the last dayes] In long time to come, 1 Tim. 4. 1. 2 Tim. 3. 1. Acts 2. 17. with Joel 2. 28. Your last state in this land, your state in Canaan, & til Christs coming, v. 10. The time of the Gospel may be called the last time, because after that there will be no change of the Church from Christi∣anity, no change of doctrine or Sacraments to the worlds end, Heb. 1. 1. This foretelling things to come so long after, shewes that Jacob now was inspired and assisted with a di∣vine Spirit. V. 3. Reuben, thou art my first-borne] And so many ho∣nourable priviledges belonged to him: headship of the family, a double portion to maintain the honour of the Headship. This practised among the Patriarchs, as many like other things were put into a Law afterwards, Deut. 21. 17. See, Gen, 35. 2. 48. 5. my might] Deut. 21. 17. Psal. 105. 36. 78. 51. 127. 4, 5. They are the principal stay and pillar of the family also. Thus and thus thou shouldest have been but for thy sinne. V. 4. Unstable as water] That is, easily moved with the windes, still ebbing or flowing, never standing still, nor easily contained in its own bounds & place, unconstant, light, treacherous, Zeph. 3. 4. Such were the divisions and grudgings of Reuben amongst themselves, Judg. 5. 15, 16. Such was he in his sin, such shall he be in his downfall from the dignity of his birth-right, as waters roll down from high places; or Reubens posterity shall be weak as water, (Ps. 22. 14. Josh. 7. 5.) thou shalt not excel] We reade not that this tribe ever came to any excellency among the other tribes, excelled not in number, Deut. 33. 6. valour, or any excellent archieve∣ment. because thou wentest up] For a pang of lawlesse lust he lost all, So doth sensuality besot and befoole men, Prov. 7. 7, 22. This fact, above fourty yeares ago done, soon af∣ter the birth of Benjamin, ch. 35. 22. is here doomed and punished in Reuben and his posterity. Forbearance is no ac∣quittance. he went up] As out of an indignation of the fact, he turnes his speech from Reuben to his brethren, and shewes how just cause there was to pronounce this sentence a∣gainst him. Such changes are often in Scripture, Deut. 5. 10. love me, and keep his Commandments, Dan. 9. 4. that love him, for that love thee, Mar. 11. 32. If we shall say of men they feared the people, for we feare. Jacob would have this censure of him, to be a caution to his brethren. And now dying, without malice sure to Reuben, is yet thus zealous against sinne. So David, 1 Kings 2. 9. V. 5. Simeon and Levi are brethren] In birth, in evil, Prov. 18. 9. It may haply be also in conspiracy against Jo∣seph. Thus impartially Moses sets by his relation, & a brand of infamy upon Levi, his great grand-father. instruments of cruelty] Cruel weapons, Ch. 34. 25. in their habitations] Or in their agreements and con∣ventions with the Sichemites, ch. 34. 13, 15. V. 6. my soue] By this pathetical Apostrophe, he shewes his zealous detestation of their out-ragious fact, and cleares himselfe of suspicions and aspersions of his fa∣vouring it, which otherwise after his death might have been cast upon him for it. come not thou into their secret] He protests against his least knowledge of, much lesse consent unto their secret (to him) and cursed plot, contrivance and execution of it. q. d. God forbid that ever my soule should joyne in such a villany. secret] Psal. 64. 2, 4. Jer 15. 17. my glory] My soul, which is mans glory. Or, my tongue, Ps. 16. 9. my glory is rendered by the Apostle, my tongue, Acts 2. 26. Jacob would not suffer in his honour and re∣putation for their sakes. they slew a man] The singular is often put for the plu∣ral, 1 Chron 10. 1. They slew Hamor, Sichem, Citizens and subjects. self-will] Not in sudden wrath, but upon a wilful setled resolution and deliberation, plotting and act∣ing. they digged down a wall] We reade not of this, ch. 34. yet haply they might do so to the house of Hamor or Shechem, where their sister was. The words may well, yea,
best be rendred thus, they houghed an oxe; so relating to the prey of cattel they took, and houghing such as would not drive. V. 7. Cursed be their anger] It was likely to be to the ruine and extirpation of him and his, ch. 34. 31. he curseth not their persons, but their sin; so David not against Ahito∣phels person, 2 Sam. 15. 31. Psal. 109. 17, 18, 19, 20. is a prediction rather then an imprecation, or imprecation conditional, not absolute. Or if absolute, then by the im∣mediate guidance of Gods Spirit, and so not lawful to those that want it. The rule for all is, Prov. 20. 22. I will divide them] Jacob speaks as in the person of God: as Prophets usually do. Or he would do it by his prediction and prophesie, as it were passing his word, they should be divided. As Ezekiel is said to come to destroy the City, Ezech. 43. 3. Levi was thus divided and scat∣tered, yet God, after their zealous execution, Exod. 32. 26, 29. turned it to a blessing to his people and to them, Deut. 33. 9, 10. The Levites are first mentioned to be taken in, Numb. 1. 47. and 3. 12, 45. and ch. 4. and ch. 7. 5, 6, 7, 8. and ch. 8. for the first borne, which were by their birth the Priests before Moses time, and again due to the Lord, upon his slying the first-borne when he brought Israel out of Egypt, Exod. 13. 2. Simeon likewise was not plant∣ed apart by himself, as the other tribes were, but had their inheritance intermingled with that of Judah, out of whose lot in several places here and there Simeonites had certain cities and villages, Josh. 19. 9. And that not so much for Simeons sake, as because Judah had too much. So Simeon was but an Inmate to Judah, and under him. Till afterwards upon their multiplying they were forced to seek further for new habitations in Mount Seir, and Mount Gedor, driving out the Amalekites, 1 Chron. 4. 39, 41, 43. And so they were scattered in their habita∣tions. And all this wrath of Jacob, and detestation of Si∣meon and Levies massacre of the Shechemites proves the book of Judith to be Apocryphal, which so highly com∣mends this fact of Simeon, ch. 9. 2, 3, 4. Moses omits the blessing of Simeon, Deut. 33. And thus their union in e∣vil was punished with this division and scattering among the tribes. V. 8. Judah thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise] Judah signifieth praises, ch. 29. 35. as if Jacob should say, thou art so by name, and shalt be so indeed; praised for Regal Government, praised for that Christ shall come of thee, Heb. 7. 14. See, Hos. 11. 12. of Judah all the children of Israel were called Jewes; not Reubenites of Reuben, not Simeonites, nor of any other sonne. Judahs sin with Tamar is omitted; Judah therein only intended single for∣nication. in the neck] This was fulfilled, Numb. 10. 14. 7. 11, 12. Judg. 1. 1, 2. 20. 18. 3. 9. in Othniel, David, Solo∣mon, and perfectly in Christ, 2 Sam. 22. 41. Psal. 78. 68. 89. 20. thy fathers children] By all his wives, chap. 27. 29. thy mothers sonnes, because Isaac had but one wife. shall bow down before thee] Thy Regal power. Every knee to Christ. Phil. 2. 10. the Lion of the tribe of Ju∣dah, Apoc. 5. 5. V. 9. Lions whelp] True in Judahs Kings, most true in Christ. Lions are kingly beasts, stout, bold, strong, ter∣rible. Lions in Kings armes. Lions were stays for the steps of King Solomons throne. he couched] Varies the person as the Prophetick Spirit moved him. After victories he shall lie down and rest se∣curely. So in Solomons dayes after Davids victories, 1 King. 4. 25. Numb. 23. 24. V. 10. The Scepter] Or tribe, so the word signifieth, v. 16, 28. after once the regal dignity should be setled in this tribe, 1 Chron. 5. 2. (as in David) the Government should never be taken from him, at least so far, but that there should be a Law-giver from between his feet; nor his Kingdome and Common-wealth be utterly ruined, and the distinction of his tribe taken away and confound∣ed, till the coming of Shiloh. There were no more Kings of that tribe after Jechoniah and Zedekiah, Jer. 22. 30. E∣zech. 21. 27. After their returne from that captivity, the principality was in Zerubbabel, and likely in others of the tribe of Judah, And when some while after, the Maccabees of the tribe of Levi got the rule; yet then the Sanhedrin, or great counsel of LXX. Elders, consisted of the tribe of Judah And the Maccabees had thir supreme power by the choice and appointment of the people of Judah, and continued therein till a little before the birth of Christ, when Herod a meer stranger was King, and rooted them quite out, in the thirtieth yeare of his reigne. And if that Sanhedrin were not all chosen out of the tribe of Judah though most of them doubtlesse were: yet the Maccabees themselves of the tribe of Levi, were of the Kingdome of Judah, as distinct from the Kingdome of Israel, or of the ten tribes, the tribes of Benjamin and Levi, were amongst the tribe of Judah, and adhered to them; yet were but as incorporated into the tribe and Kingdome of Judah, which is therefore said, 1 Kings 11. 1, 32, 36. three times to con∣sist but of one tribe, viz Judah only; so also, 1 Kings 12. 20. And when they returned out of captivity, the greatest part by far that returned were of that tribe, yea, and after their return out of captivity, they were all chief∣ly planted in the lot and territorie that appertained to the tribe of Judah, and the People, Kingdome and Common∣wealth were still called by the name of Judah; and there∣fore still the Government may be said to be in Judah. wher as those of the ten tribes once carried into Assyria, never returned to become a Kingdome or Common∣wealth, as before, and had also their tribes, confused and confounded. Shebet] Signifies a rod, a rod of iron, a rod of autho∣rity, a Mace or Scepter of Kings, a Kingdome, Esay 14. 5 a tribe, Judges 18. 19. shall not depart] When once come to it. It was long ere it came to it. Moses was of the tribe of Levi; Joshuah of the tribe of Ephraim; of the fifteen Judges only two, Othniel and Ibzan were of the tribe of Judah; Saul was of Benjamin, David the first King of this tribe Therefore Jacob saith not when Judah should begin to sway the Sce∣pter, but having begun, how long it should hold on. from Judah] Not his person, v 1. in the last dayes, but the tribe of Judah, or the Nation of the Jews with rela∣tion to that tribe. nor a Law-giver] Ps 60. 7. or Scribe, writing Laws for Rules. from between his feet] Deut. 28. 57. until] And then it should. The authority of the Syne∣drion in their Synagogues in our Saviour Christ time, was but precaio under the Romanes, and restrained in capital crimes, Mat 23 34. Acts 5. 17. 9. 1, 2. 23. 5. John 18. 3. 19. 7. Acts 7 59. Ananias was deposed from the High Priesthood, for stoning James the brother of Jesus, Joseph. antiq l. 20. c. 8. The Jewish Scepter was much weakened by Pompey, much shaken by Herods intrusion; finally broken and abolished at the distructi∣on of Jerusalem. After which they had no forme nor face of a Common-wealth. Therefore it is evident
against the Jewes, that the Messiah is come. until Shiloh come] The Prosperer, Safe-maker, or his Sonne, viz, of a Virgin, i. e. Christ, Heb. 7. 14. secundae e∣jus, the tunicle or skin wherein the childe is wrapt in its mothers belly, and so taken for the childe it self, the con∣tinent for the thing contained in it. Then it shall depart. God appoints the periods of Kingdomes and States, and so the puses and stops by rebellions and insurrections; wherein Gods Providence is not asleep, but his Justice a∣wake. shall the gathering] Jews and Gentiles shallobey him, Is. 11. 10. 42. 4. Mat. 12. 21. Rom. 15. 12. He is the de∣sire of all Nations, Hag. 2. 7. Esay 2. 1, 2. V. 11. Binding his foale unto the vine] Wondrous fruit∣ful, for wine especially should Judahs lot in Canaan fall out to be, full of vines, and abounding in pastures▪ lying all in the South-part of Canaan. V. 12. Red with wine] Prov. 23. 29, 30. No allowance to drunkennesse, no more then to theft in that saying, A∣poc 3. 3. white with milke] Through plenty of pasturage and kine. V. 13 Zebulun] Before Issachar, so his lot before him in the division of the land, Josh. 19. 10, 17. though Issachar the elder. So, Deut. 33. 18. at the Haven of the sea] The Ocean westward, neare Mount Carmel, and the sea of Gal lee Eastward, Josh. 19. 10. Esay 9. 1. Thus the lot for Zebulun fell out, not by chance, but by Gods Providence according to Jacobs pre∣diction so many ages before. Nazareth was in this tribe, and Mount Tabor, and here Christ began to preach, Mat. 4. 15. unto Zidon] Josh. 19. 10. to the 16. the coas of it were over against Zidon, and fit for easie commerce with Zidon. V. 14. Issachar is a strong Asse] Of strong force, but small courage, Deut. 33. 18. Judges 5. 16. between two burdens] Or bounds, borders. In a fertile and fat soile, loving husbandry and a quiet life: and not trafficking abroad as Zebulun. V. 15. And bowed his shoulder] Rather servilely sub∣ject themselves to toile and tribute, then forego their qui∣et peaceable kinde of life. Yet some of Issachar were of more noble and heroick spirits, Judg. 5. 15. 1 Chron. 12. 13, 32. 16. Dan shall judge] Ch. 30. 6. Alludes to his name of judging; as, v. 8. and ch. 9. 27. He shall enjoy the privi∣ledge of a tribe, as well as his free-born sonnes. And as o∣ther tribes had their Heads and Elders to judge and de∣cide causes amongst them, so should they, Numb. 1. 4, 16. And Sampson of Dan was an extraordinary Judge. And the like is implied concerning the rest of the sons of the handmaids. V. 17. Dan shall be a serpent] More by cunning, then by force shall they prevaile, so did the Danites with Laish, Judges 18. 27. And Sampson used craft as well as strength, Judges 15. and 16. Moses compares him to a Lions whelp, Deut. 33. 22. haply for the suddennesse of his leap, when he seeth the advantage of his prey. Dan is omitted in the sealing of the tribes, Apoc. 7. And so is Simeon o∣mitted in Moses his benediction, Deut. 33. Likely Simeon for his cruelty against the Sichemites. And Dan for his no∣torious idolatry, Judg. 18. 20. 1 Kings 12. 29. Not because Antichrist should come of the tribe of Dan. V. 18. I have waited] Psal, 130. 5. Esay 26. 8. Moti∣ons of the Spirit, and ejaculations of a dying man, are not tied to rules of method, and yet may have good coherence with silent and smothered thoughts, whence their expres∣sions burst out. for thy salvation] Foreseeing the troubles of his poste∣rity, and of the tribe of Dan in special, Judg. 1. 34. he breakes out into this passionate expression, of longing af∣ter their deliverance and salvation by Shiloh specially, Luke 2. 30. V. 19. Gad, a troop] Ch. 30. 11 An Allusion, as, v. 16. See the Annotations upon it. Gad was situate beyond Jordan Eastward, and so the more subject to incursions of the bordering enemies, Judg. 10. 7, 8. Jer, 49. 1. He comforts him against his dangers by sudden inroads of troopes, that at last he shall overcome them, Deut. 33. 20. Fulfilled, 1 Chron. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Judg. ch. 10. and 11. V. 20. Asher his bread shall be fat] Rich soile for corne and wheat specially, and for oile, Deut. 33. 24, 25. and royal dainties, and minerals, Josh. 19. 24, &c. Fat signifies the best of any thing, chapter 4. 4. 27. 28. V. 21. Naphtali is an Hinde let loose] Deut. 33. 23. with scope and liberty in choice of pastures, in plenty and peace. And also of cunning and active nimblenesse in dealing with their enemies, and light-footed to pursue them, and to escape danger, Psal. 18. 34. Judg. 4. 10, 15, 16. Josh. 19. 32, to 39. Judah a Lion, Is∣sachar an Asse. Dan a Serpent, Naphtali an Hinde. All these were absurd in a literal sense. And so the words in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in a literal sense. he giveth goodly words] Faire and courteous, prevail∣ing by that means, and words also of praises and blessings, Judg. 5. V. 22. Joseph is a fruitful bough] In his two branches Ephraim and Manasseh, which multiplied exceedingly, and became two tribes. by a well] Moisture is a meanes of fruitfulnesse, Psal. 1. 3. Ezech. 19. 10. whose branches] Hebr. Whose daughters. As bough was called by the name of sonne, and whatsoever cometh of or from another, is called in Hebrew a sonne, as the young of birds, beasts, &c. arrowes are called the sons of the bowe, ch. 18. 7. Job 41. 28. runne over the wall] Abundantly increase, Josh. 17. 17. V. 23. The archers] His brethren that sold him, his Mystris that accused him, his Master that imprisoned him, and haply the Magistrates of Egypt, and the Courti∣ers of Pharaoh. V. 24. But his bowe] His innocency, patience, faith, chastity, Psal. 18. 34. by the hands of the mighty] Joseph ascribes his strength to God, Psal. 44. 6, 7, 8. from thence] From the mighty God of Jacob, from his Power and Providence it was that Joseph became the shepherd, the stone of Israel, to feed them in famine, and to be a rock of refuge, stay and strength unto them. And herein Joseph may be as a type of Christ, the true shep∣herd and corner-stone, Act. 4. 11. Esay 28. 16. V. 25. With blessings of Heaven] Influences of the startes, raine and dew, Deut. 33. 14. Ezechiel 34. 26. blessings of the deep] Springs and rivers, if not minerals too, ch. 7. 11. Deut. 33. 13. of the beasts] Ten thousands of Ephraim, and thou∣sands
of Manasseh, Deut. 33. 17. A contrary curse is that, Hos. 9. 14. V. 26. The blessings of thy father] Wherewith I do blesse thee and thy brethren. have prevailed] Or do prevaile, are stronger, of greater efficacy and excellency. above the blessings of my Progenitors] Abraham and Isaac, I have blessed thee in thy two sonnes, more then my father or grand-father blessed their two sonnes. Abraham gave way that Ishmael should be cast out. And Isaac gave the blessing to me from my brother Esau. But I blesse thy two sonnes, and make them two tribes, and keep them within the Church. Or I have more expressely, and with more tendernesse of affection blessed thee, then my Progenitors blessed their children. I do strive to out-blesse my fore-fathers, in multiplication of bles∣sings upon thy head. Or referring the words to all Jacobs children, he preferres his blessing above that of his Progenitors, as being more particularly ex∣plained and applied; and should be more suddenly, clearly, fully and effectually accomplished in them; by their multiplication in Egypt, &c. And by including them all in the Covenant of grace, ma∣king them all heires of the Promise, not one of them being excluded. unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hilles] Deut. 33. 13, 15. This sets forth the riches of that portion of land in Canaan, which should by lot fall to Ephraim and Manasseh. Or, the blessings on Joseph shall be eminent and excellent in extent, and in quality and quantity; and perpetual in duration, as the everlasting hills, intimating so spiritual blessings, Psal. 54. 10. on the head of Joseph] Poured as oile (wherewith Princes are anointed) on his head. separated] By his selling away from them, and be∣ing by God so advanced in Egypt. V. 27. Benjamin shall ravine] Be strong, fierce, warlike, going forth mornings and evenings to take his prey, vanquishing and spoiling his enemies. So did Saul the King of this tribe, 1 Sam. 11. 6, 7, 11. 14. 13. 15. 47, 48. Paul was of Benjamin, Warlike they were, as appears in those bloody bat∣tels, Judges 20. 15, 16, 17. Ehud was of Benja∣min, Judg. 3. 15. Mordecai and Esther were of Ben∣jamin, Esther 8. 7. &c and ch. 9. 5. devoure the prey] 2 Sam, 2. 26. V. 28. Twelve tribes] Distinguished into twelve tribes afterward. And in them, rather then in the persons of his twelve sonnes, we are to look for the meaning and the accomplishing of these prophe∣tical blessings. They were thirteen counting in Le∣vi, and Ephraim and Manasseh in stead of Joseph. But Levi had no portion in dividing the land, Deut. 10. 9. And so they were still called the twelve tribes. For their order they are reckoned sometimes accordig to their birth, chap. 29. and 30. Exod. 28. 10. sometimes with reference to their mothers, as, chap. 35. sometimes with rela∣tion to their dignity; so is Judah first, Numb. 2. 3. Apoc. 7. 5. sometimes to their lot in di∣viding the land of Canaan. And so is Zebulun placed before Issachar here; sometimes withoot regard had of any order, as here, and Deut. 33. and Apoc. 7. 5. and Numb. 1. 5. 2. 5. and blessed them] To Reuben, Simeon and Levi, it might seeme rather a curse then a blessing; yet the denomination may be from the greater and better part. And their fathers reprehension might prove a blessing to their further repentance. He concludes them within the number of the tribes, and so com∣prehendeth them within the Covenant, gives them a right to Canaan the type, and so by faith to the hea∣venly Canaan. And likely he dismissed them all with a general benediction, praying for them all. And as those three became tribes, and had their shares and portions in Canaan, so they had their names in Aa∣rons breast-plate on twelve stones, Exod. 28. 21. and on two Onix-stones upon the shoulders of the E∣phod, Exod. 28. 10, 11, 11. Levi likely, because they were the Priests and holy Ministers themselves, being left out in the precious stones. And as many of their tribes are sealed, Apoc. 7. 5, 7. as of the rest. every one according] The blessings applied to eve∣ry tribe, according to the several references to his twelve sonnes; such blessings as were meet for every of them, as Gods Spirit did allot. V. 29. Gathered into my people] His soule to the Saints, Heb. 12. 23. His body to the grave. See Annot. on ch. 25. 8. and on ch. 47. 9. to my holy fathers by death, v. 33. bury me with my fathers] See Annotat, on chap. 47. 30. in the cave] This a ground of Josephs request to Pharaoh, ch. 50. 5. And lest in seventeen yeares absence question might be made of his right to the place, evidences by writings being not then in use. of Ephrou] Bought of him, v. 30. ch 23. 9, 10, &c. and ch. 47. 30. V. 31. I buried Leah] Ch. 47, 30. 48. 7. Of the death and burial of Rebekah and Leah, we have no∣thing elsewhere set down in Scripture. V. 33. He gathered up his feet] Which haply hung down before, as he sate on the beds side. And so composed himself to a quiet rest and sleep of death, en∣joying the use of memory and speech unto the last, Psal. 37. 37. The gesture, ch. 47. 31. was for reverence and thankfulnesse to God, and haply to Joseph 100. CHAP. L. Verse 1. ANd Joseph fell upon his face] Exceed∣ed his brethren, as in Piety toward God, so in filial affection and duty to his father. Religion rejects not, but regulates natural affecti∣ons. wept upon him] Not womanish weaknesse to weep, Men of excellent spirit and valour have been noted for it; David, Ezekiah, Ne hemiah, Joseph seven times, Christ himself thrice. John. 11. 3. Luke 19. 41. Heb. 57. Paul, Acts 20. 19, 31. 2 Cor. 2. 4. Lawful in Funerals, if mixt with faith, and exceed not a just measure. The want is a fault, Esay 57. 1. Acts 8. 2. Jer. 22. 18. and kissed him] To touch the dead was after for∣bidden, Numb. 19. 11, 12. yet in Josephs time not forbidden. Filial affection in a good sonne dieth
not with a good father, but surviveth. V. 2. His servants the Physicians] The Antiquity of Physick, Physicians, and embalming the dead. Luke a Physician, Col. 4. 14. 2 Tim. 4. 10, 11. embalmed] Embalmed bodies are transported from E∣gypt into other parts of the world, at this day to be used for medicine. Hence the Jewes had the custome of em∣balming; so they embalmed King Asa, 2 Chron. 16. 14. 21. 16. and our Saviour, John 12. 7, 19, 39, 40. Mar. 14. 8. Though his body needed it not, being secured from corruption, Psal 16. 10. Act. 2 31. 13. 35. yet they that embalmed him knew not so much. Jacobs bo∣dy was to be kept long and carried far. V. 3. Seventy dayes] To honour him, as, 2 Chron. 32. 33. The Hebrewes time of mourning was thirty dayes, Numb. 20. 29. Deut. 21. 13. 34. 8. And the E∣gyptians time for embalming was fourty dayes. These two might make up the seventy dayes; much time taken in the very ceremonies of mourning. V. 4. Joseph spake unto the house] Useth the mediati∣on of Egyptian Courtiers, to testifie his modesty in a businesse concerning himself, to prevent all suspicion of his not returning, and to decline their envie, and en∣dear himself to them the more. And perhaps also Mourners were not to come into the presence of Princes, Esther 4. 2. V. 5. Made me swear] Lest he should seem to disdain to have his father buried in Egypt, he alledgeth this tie upon him by the dead. which I have digged for me] So spacious was the place, that they might dig themselves several Reposito∣ries or Cells for their dead bodies in it; where his Pro∣genitors and wife were buried. The manner of men to build sepulchres while they were alive. So Absalom, so Asa, 2 Chron. 16. 14. so Joseph of Arimathea, Mat. 27. 60. so Shebna, Esay 22. 16. bury me] Some bodies are embalmed and not buried; most buried without embalming; some embalmed with Aromatick spices put into their bodies, some only had spices upon them and about them; some had sweet o∣dours burnt at their burials, 2 Chron. 16. 14. 21. 19. Jer. 34. 5. some had their dead bodies themselves burnt, 1 Sam. 31. 12. sundry other manners amongst Heathen. Want of burial is a calamity bewailed, Psal. 79. 3. and a judgement threatened, Jer. 7. 33. 22. 19. V. 6. As he made thee swear] Very infidels would have oathes performed. V. 7. All the servants] A very great multitude of them. So, Mat. 3. 5. All Judea; and so again many is put for all, Rom. 5. 19. Such was Josephs prudence, and sweetnesse of disposition, that he kept the height of ho∣nour still without envie, which Court-favourites sel∣dome do. and all the Elders] Senatours, Governours, Offi∣cers, Counsellours, Ezech. 7. 26. Psal. 105. 22. V. 10. Valley of Atad] Signifies a bramble or thistle. Likely not far from Hebrou or Machpelah. beyond Jordan] As Moses stood when he wrote this, Deut. 1. 1. 3. 25. being now in the plaines of Moab. Else in a direct journey from Egypt to Hebron, Mamre or Machpelah, their way was not to passe over Jordan. seven dayes] So long in Moses Law they were un∣clean, the touched the dead, Numb. 19. 11. See Annot. on v. 3. V. 13. And buried him in the cave which] Acts 7. 15, 16. saith Stephen, to Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he and our fathers, and were carried over into Sichem, and laid in the Sepulchre that Abraham bought for a summe of money of the sons of Emor, the father of Sichem. The case is clear, that the two places which Abraham bought, ch. 23. and which Jacob bought, ch. 33. are not one and the same but divers; as appears by the place or situation, by the name, use, price and per∣sons, buyers and sellers. And yet these two purchases seem to be confounded in the speech of Stephen. Again, Stephen might have a failer in memory, in his long and sudden speech, as not being then infallibly guided as an Inditer of Scripture, though full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 6. 5. 7. 55. For so it is said of the other Deacons, Acts 6. 3. of Peter, Act. 4. 8. of Paul, Acts 9. 17. yet Peter erred, Acts 10. 14. Gal. 2. 11, &c. and all the A∣postles erred in the point of Christs Resurrection, and of his Kingdome, Acts 1. 6. and of the calling of the Gentiles. And St. Luke might do right in recording it as it came from Stephen. As the like is in ch. 27. 19, 24. and, 1 Kings 13. 18. Josephs bones were buried in She∣chem, the place his father bequeathed to him and his on his death-bed, and likely the rest of his brethren, in con∣formity to his example, would be buried there, have their bones likewise carried thither; and this, though not mentioned in Scripture, might by other Records or Re∣velation be made known to Stephen, as the names of annes and Jambres to Paul, 2 Tim. 3. 8. the Prophecie of Enoch to Jude, v. 14. the Genealogy to Luke, ch. 3. v. 23, to 31. Jacob himself was certainly buried in Machpelah, as is here recorded: and though he be joyned together with his sonnes in a state of mortality, Acts 7. 15. yet the sixteenth verse of their burial may well be confi∣ned to his sonnes as the next Antecedent without taking him into the number. And that Jacob bought the field of the sonnes of Emor or Hamor, Shechems father, is like∣wise certain. By Abraham then, Acts 7. 16. we must un∣derstand Abrahams Grand-Child Jacob; And so ex∣pound it, which is a very harsh Exposition, the whole text considered, and could not be so apprehended by the multitude of his hearers. Or rather we may say, that Stephen mistook the story, and named Abraham in stead of Jacob, which may be done without any great offence, as hath been shewed, and so Luke relates what rightly he should; for to lay an errour upon the sacred text, by say∣ing Jacob should be put in the text in stead of Abraham, and that Abraham came into it by the errour of the tran∣scribers, mistaking the one name for the other, or whereas neither was in the Original, and Abraham errour be∣ing put in the margin, that from the margin they put it into the text, all this is not so likely, nor any way so safe. That Emor or Hamor was father to Sichem, not sonne to Sichem, appears, Josh. 24. 32. Gen. 33. 19. and therefore it is so to be supplied in Acts 7. 16. so is the word mother supplied, Luke 24. 10. out of Mar 15. 40. That Zohar, Gen. 23. 8. was not otherwise called Hamor, not had a sonne called Sechem, but called Ephron, the Scripture-Story declares. And Sechem of Hamors sonnes is only mentioned, because he was more honourable then all the house of his father, and so it is most probable, that in the sale of the ground to Jacob he had most to do, and the rest consented to his transaction. They that would make a reconciliation, by saying that the two pla∣ces and sepulchres, that Abraham bought, and that which Jacob bought were near one another, presuppose what is not sound, for Hebron and Machpelah were in the tribe of Judah, and Sechem or Sychar a city of Samaria in the
tribe of Ephraim, above twenty miles distant. And if granted, yet helps nothing to answer the other difficul∣ties of the text. of the field] Places for burials have been very various. Fields as here. Moses in a valley, Deut. 34. 6. Uzziah in the field of the burial which belonged to the Kings; in the same field; but apart from the corpses of the Kings, 2 Chron. 26. 23. The Potters field was bought to bury strangers in, Mat. 27. 7. Manasseh was buried in the garden of his own house, 2 Kings 21. 18. Our blessed Saviour in a garden, Joh. 19. 41. Among Chri∣stians, after they had peace from persecutions, and Churches for devine service, they soone buried in the Church yards, and afterwards came to bury in the Churches themselves, which grew in time into a su∣perstition among many, and to be an annoyance to the living through the commonnesse of it. V. 15. And will certainly require us] The unqui∣etnesse of guilty consciences now after fourty yeares, Lev 26. 36. V. 16. Sent a messenger] And after went themselves, v. 18. thy father did] Most likely that they feigned this. V. 17. So shall ye say unto Joseph] They use argu∣ments from his fathers command, their relation as bre∣thren, their Penitencie, his Piety. wept] As pitying their perplexity, and grieving at their doubt of his good will. V. 18. Fall down before his face] Wittingly confirm∣ing the prediction, ch. 37. 7. and yielding themselves his servants, whom they had sold for a slave. V. 19. Am I in the place of God?] Ch. 30. 2. Am I in Gods stead to revenge myself; or to crosse Gods pur∣pose, turning it to your hurt, which he turned to your preservation? or feare ye me more then God? am not I under God? V. 20. But God] Joseph] ascribes nothing to himself, but all to God, whose goodnesse over-masters mans ma∣lignity and badnesse, chap. 45. 5. Acts 3. 12, 13. Psal. 119. 71. much people] Them, Egyptians and others. V. 21. I will nourish you] Doing good for evil, Mat. 5. 44. Rom. 12. 21. V. 23. Third generation] So soon was Jacobs blessing begun to be accomplished in Josephs life-time, ch. 48. 19. 49. 22. of Machir] Numb. 32. 39. 1 Chron 7. 16. V. 24. Surely visit] Ch. 15. 14. 46. 4. Heb. 11. 22. V. 25. Took an oath] V. 5. of the children of Israel] His brethren haply were now dead, many of them; yet was Levi alive, who li∣ved one hundred thirty seven yeares, Exod. 6. 6. and so out-lived Joseph some sixteen yeares. Therefore the oath was taken of the children of Israel: and it may be re∣newed by the succeeding generation, that they in whose time the deliverance should be brought to passe, should perform this oath. from hence] Mean while his body was interred in E∣gypt to the contentment of the Egyptians, and to the comfort of his family and kindred, to have his bo∣dy and bones among them; and so to have them there the more preserved for their good. And Jo∣sephs bones were carried thence. And not kept as reliques to be worshipped. but were buried at She∣chem, Josh. 24. 32. Jacobs purchase, and Josephs sonnes heritage. And this, to testifie his owne, and confirme his brethrens faith, in the belief of the Promises of Canaan, and that as a type or pledge of the heavenly Cannan. There were the other Patriarchs Jacobs sonnes and Jo∣sephs brethren also buried, Acts 7. 16. Their bones likely being carried with his bones. V. 26. An hundred and ten yeares old] Eighty yeares after his advancement. At that age also died Joshua, who was of his race, Josh. 24. 29. Joseph died in the two thousand three hundred sixty nineth yeare of the world; sixty yeares before the birth of Moses, and one hundred and fourty yeares before the Israelites coming out of E∣gypt, as may be gathered out of Gen. 15. 13. and Exod. 12. 41. See Annot. on ch. 15. 13. FINIS.
CHOISE OBSERVATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS UPON THE Old Testament. Genesis. GENESIS Containns an History of 2369 years; from the Creation of the World, and Adam; to the death of Joseph. The Day of 24 hours, called Day, Numb. 8. 17. begins here at Evening, Chap. I. v. 5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31. And so Exod. XII. 18. and Levit. XXIII. 32. And hence, in Dani∣els time, it is called the Evening-Morning. , Dan. VIII. 14, 26. 2 Cor. XI. 25. Yet the Account sometimes seemes to begin in the Morning: as vulgarly with us, and many other Nations. And may seeme so also, in some kinde of reckoning with the Jewes; out of Num. XXVIII. 3, 4. And so in the dayes of our Saviour, out of Matth. XXVI. 17, 20. and XXVIII. 1. Mar. XVI. 1, 2. Luke XXIV. 1. John XX. 1, 19. Unlesse we take the day there for the time of Light contradistin∣guished to Darknesse; as it is, 2 Sam. I. 12. Divers other Nations did begin their day diversly; Some with Sunne-rising; some at the setting; some at mid-night, as Astronomers with us usually do. And whereas our Saviour seemes to some to keep his last Passeover a day before the Jewes, out of John XVIII. 28. and XIX. 14. Un∣lesse
by Passeover there we understand the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which immediately succeeded the Passeover, or Paschal Lamb, Levit. XXIII. 5, 6, 7, 8. and not the Passeover it self; or both, as Luke XXII. 1. yet supposing he did so; both upon the former di∣versities of accompts, may be said to keep it on the XIV. day at Even: Our Saviour rightly reckoning the Beginning of the day, from the Evening: And the Jewes then reckoning it amisse, as vulgarly, and the Romanes then did, from the morning following. But all this is only tendered to consideration. And yet this rather then that Jesus should not be said to eate the Passeover at that time; But onely a like thing, which they please to conceive, and call, without all ground save their own imagination, a commemorative Passeover, commemo∣rative of that which was to be kept the next day. Eden] A Region in Mesopotamia or Chaldea, Acts VII. 2, compared with Gen. XI. 31. It signifies Delicacy or Delight, Psal. XXXVI. 8. Esay XLVII. 8. In the Eastern part whereof, and not onely Eastward from Jurie was this Garden planted. See Esay XXXVII. 12. Ezek. XXVII. 23. Ethiopia] Heb. Cush, Called so from the sonne of Cham, or Ham, ch. X. 6. 1 Chron. I. 8, 10. The Ethiopians or Cushites seeme first to inhabite some parts of Arabia, on the North-side of the Red Sea: And after to settle themselves on the South-side of it, and South of Egypt; whence we read in Authors of the Asian and African E∣thiopians. And in Scripture we reade of Zerah their King, who came out against Asa, with the hughest hoast that Gods Word doth mention, 2 Chron. XIV. 9. And of Tirhakah that came forth a∣gainst Sennacherib, Esay XXXVII. 9. Of Candace the Queen, Acts VIII. 27. Of those two great and good Eunuchs, Proselytes; the one Jeremies deliverer, Jer. XXXVIII. and the other baptized by Philip, Acts VIII. 27,—39. And of Zipporah the wife of Moses Num. XII. The Ethiopians were kinsmen and allies to the Egypti∣ans; coming both of Cham; near neighbours and confederates, Esay XVIII. 1. and XX. 4. Jer. XIII. 23. and XLVI. 9. Ezek. XXX. 9. See more in the Annotations on Jer. XIII. 23. A Tree is mentioned, and the Fruit of it. And so, v. 17. and ch. III. 1, 2, 3, 6. But the Apple-tree, or what kinde of Tree, is not speci∣fied. Cherubims] And so, Num. VII. 89. 1 Sam IV. 4. 1 King. VII. 29. Esay. XXXVII. 16. Ezek. X. throughout that Vision; and ch. XLI. 18. Heb. IX. 5. and in sundry other places. And in like sort we have the word Seraphims, Esay VI. 2, 6. And this for expres∣sion-sake of our English plural by the letter (s): whereas the words might have been rendered Cherubs and Seraphs, or Cherubim and Se∣raphim; that being the termination plural in the Original Hebrew; as also in the Chaldee, and Syriak. And so is rightly left out in the word Baalim, in all places. Of Cherubin see my Annotations on E∣zek. IX. 3. and X. 1, 3,—10, and v. 14,—22. and XI. 22.
Offering] Offering is here mentioned. And so v. 4. Called Sacri∣fice, Heb. XI. 4. And as this; so other nominated Mosaical and Levi∣tical Rites and Ceremonies, were in use before the times of Levi, and Moses. As, 2. Beasts, and Fowles, clean and unclean; at the time of the Flood; ch. VII. 3. Priests, Altars, Burnt-Offerings, Drink-Offerings, VIII. 20. and XIV. 18. and XXII. 13. and XXXV. 14. 4. Eating of Blood forbidden, ch. IV. 4. 5. Oile in use for Consecration; XXVIII. 18. and XXXV. 14. 6. Marrying the brothers widow, to raise up seed to the brother deceased; ch. XXXVIII. 8, 9, 26. Called his name] Names afterwards usually imposed at the time of Circumsion;  as appears, partly in Abraham; plainly in John the Baptist, and others. By the Jewes some of Gods Titles were many times inserted into the Composure of the names of their children, as plentifully appears. And the maner of many Heathens was to im∣pose, or insert the names of their Idols and Pagan Deities upon, or into the names of their children, and of their Kings and Favourites, Rom. XVI. 1, 14, 15. 1 Cor. I. 12. 1 Thess. I. 1. And hence we have among the Babylonians, from their Idols, Bel, Nebo, and Mero∣dach, these Names, of Belteshazzar, Dan. I. 7. and IV. 8. and Bel∣shazzar, Dan. V. 1. And Merodach-Baladan, Esay XXXIX. 1. and Evil-Merodach, 2 Kings XXV. 27. And Nebonatsar Naopolatsar, and Nebuchadnetsar. And in the same names are many times a change of letters, like letters put some times one for another; as Merodach is called Berodach, 2 King. XX. 12. As Dibon the name of a Citie, Numb. XI. 30. is called Dimon, Esay XV. 9. And Nebuchadnezzar is written also in Scripture Nebuchadnetsar, Ier. XXII. 25. and Ne∣buchadrezzar, and Nebuchadretzer, Ier. XXI. 2. and XXIV. 1. Some∣times letters, or syllables are transposed, and left out, and added: And so there is much variation in one and the same name: Esaias is called also Ieshajah, and Ieshajahu; Hezekiah is called and written Ezekias, Chiskijah, 2 King. XVIII. 1. Chiskijahu, XXXVI. 1. Jechiskijab, Micah I. 1. Iechiskijahu, Esay I. 1. Iehojacin is called also Iechoniah, Iechonias, Coniah, Conijahu. I omit others not much unlike. Yea sometimes in Scripture divers men have divers dissonant names; some 2, some 3, as 1 King. XV. 2, 10. compared with 2 Chron. XI. 20. and Ch. XIII. 2. And as further may be seene at large in the Great An∣notations upon 1 Chron. III. 1, 15, 16. and VI. 1, 20, 24. and VIII. 5, 33. and Ch. XI. and Ch. XVIII. 10, 16. and Ch. XX. 7. And divers places have two several names; as in 2 Sam. VIII. 8. com∣pared with 1 Chron. XX. 4. And many others. Adam] Adam lived to the 243 year of Methuselah. Seth] Seth was borne in the 130th year of Adams age, And so likely soone after the murder of Abel by Cain. In which space of near 130 years, so many might be borne, as might justly occasion
that speech of guilty Cain, Every one that findeth me shall slay me. Enoch] Enoch lived so many years before his Translation, as we have dayes in our year, viz. 365. And his Prophecie mentioned, Jude v. 14, 15. is not intimated in the Old Testament. Methuselah] Methuselah lived to the 98 year of Shem. Methuselah] Methuselah the longest liver, died in the beginning of the year of the Flood, as appears by the Chronology of the times and years of those ten Patriarchs; Ch. V. and VII. 6. Noah] Of Noah's sonnes, Japhet was the eldest, Shem the second, and Cham the youngest, Gen. VII. 1. and IX. 24. and X. 21. and XI. 10. Shem] Shem was two years younger then Japhet, Ch. V. 32. and VII. I. and Ch. XI. 10. and lived to the fiftieth year of Isaac. And so Shem is the onely person in Scripture that lived to see his posterity of the tenth generation. And seemes to be Melchizedech, Gen. XIV. 18. Heb. VII. I. &c. These 120 years, c. VI. 3. begin 20 years before Noah had any children. Cubits] Of Cubits, which measure the Ark, see my Annotations on Ezek. XL. 5. Flood] These 150 dayes c. VII. 24. from the begnning of the Flood on the second moneth, 17 day, c. VII. 11. to the Resting of the Ark on the seventh moneth, 17 day, XIII. 4. do shew those moneth to consist of 30 dayes apiece. And the number of the moneths can∣not be doubted of. Here is mention made of the 1, 2, 7, 10. Which shews the year to differ little from ours now. Noah] Noah lived 950 years, c. IX. 29. being born in the 1056 year of the World; and dying in the year 2006. two years before A∣braham was born; He so lived to see his children or posterity of the ninth generation. Iles] Iles are taken, not onely for Ilands properly, compassed a∣bout with Sea, or water; but for Countreys also lying on the Sea∣coasts, as Jer. XXV. 22. Ezek. XXXVII. 3, 15. Esay XX. 6. And sometimes for Ilands likewise, being remote and transmarine parts, as Esay XLII. 1, 5. and XLII. 4, 10. and XLIX. 1. and LI. 5. and LX. 9. Babel] See my observations on Dan. IV. 30. Sidon] Sidon, in Hebrew Tsidon, called the great City, Josh. XI. 8. and Ch. XIX. 28. Ancienter by much then Tyre. See my Annotati∣ons on Zech. IX. 2. Arphaxad] Mans life halfed, or thereabouts, at the time of the flood, XI. 11. &c. compared with Ch. V. And again shortened about an∣other half at the building of the Tower of Babel, X. 25. and XI. 19. And well-nigh the third time, between the times of Abraham and Moses, XXV. 7. Psal. XC. 10. Abram] Abram borne, not in the 70, but in the 130. year of Te∣rah, Gen. XI. 32. and XII. 4. Acts VII. 4.
Ur] Ch. XI. 31, 32. and Acts VII. 2, 3, 4. shew Ur to be in Me∣sopotamia, and Abram to be called there. And after Terahs death at Haran, then he had a new Call, Gen. XII. 1. And else the Hebrew Perasha upon Terahs death, Ch. XI. 32. had been unfit. Egypt] Egypt, In Hebrew Mitzrajim, or Misraim. So called from the sonne of Ham of that name, Gen. X. 6. whence also it is called, the Land of Ham, Psal. CV. 27. and CVI. 22. It is called also Ra∣hab, Esay LI. 9. from her pride and power, Esay XXX. 7. Ezek. XXX. 6. It is the ancientest Kingdom that we read of; except it be the Kingdome of Assyria, by Cush, the other sonne of Ham, Gen. X. 8.—12. The Kings of Egypt mentioned in Scripture, are Pharaoh (which af∣ter seemes to be a common name to their Kings; as Ptolomie, whence Bartholomew that is Bar-Ptolomie, the son of Ptolomie, was to them in the times of the Macedonian or Greekish divided Empire) or many Pha∣raohs; as in the dayes of Abraham, Gen. XII. 15. Of Jacob and Joseph, Gen. XXXVII. 36. and Ch. XLI. 1. and XLVI. 5. & L. 4. Of Moses, Exod. I. 11. and Ch. XVIII. 10. Heb. XI. 24. Of Solomon, 1 King. III. 1. Shishak is the name of the King of Egypt in Solomons time, and in Rehoboams time, 1 King. XI. 40. and Ch. XIV. 25. 2. Chron. XII. 2, 9. So, a Kings name of Egypt in Hoshea's time, 2 King. XVII. 4. Phara∣oh in Ezekiah's time, 2 King. XVIII. 21. Pharaoh Necho (deemed to be the sonne of Psammetichus) in Josias his time, and in Jehojakims time, 2 King. XXIII. 29. and Ch. XXIV. 7. Jer. XLVI. 2. Pharaoh. and Pharaoh-Hophra, in Zedekiahs; and in the Prophet Ezekiels time, Jer. XXXVII. 5, 7, 11. and XLIV. 30 Ezek. XXIX. 2, 3. and Ch. XXX. 21. and Ch. XXXI. 2. and Ch. XXXII. 2, 31. Sarai] Sarai fair;  and the more accounted so, going among the Egyptians, XII. 11, 12. And she the onely woman, whose whole age is recorded in Scripture, XXIII. 1. That Prophetical promise, Gen. XV. 13. makes not the Israelites to be 400 years in Egypt; But rather is thus rightly understood; That Abrahams Seed, that is, Isaac and Jacob, should be strangers in a Land that was not theirs; that is, in Canaan 190; years from the birth of Isaac, to Jacobs going down into Egypt, XXV. 26. and XLVII. 9. And Jacobs posterity were strangers in Egypt, from his going down thither, till their bringing forth by Moses, 210 years; not 400 years there: Moses himself being the sonne of Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, Num. XXVI. 59. and grandchilde of Kohath; And Levi, and Koath went down into Egypt with Jacob, XLVI. 11. And Machir the sonne of Manasseh: And Jair the grandchilde of Hezrom, living in Moses his time, Num. XXXII. 40, 41. And Achan the third from Zarah living in Joshuahs time, Josh. VII. 1. 18. 1 Chron. II. 6, 7. And thus 190 and 210 make up those 400 years, in this Prophetical promise mentioned. And the Samaritan Bible or Text here; and the LXX. in Exod. XII. 40. do thus declare this point; though their insertion and addition there be of their own minde and meaning; and no part of the sacred Text.
Name] Names changed, as Abrams, and Sarai's here; so Jacobs, Josephs, Naomies, Pashurs, and others. See the Annotations on Esay LXII. 4. and on Jer. XXIII. 6. and XXXIII. 16. Abram] Abram signifies an high or lofty Father; Abraham, a Father of a great multitude. He is called, The Friend of God, 2 Chron. XX. 7. Esay XLI. 8. Jam. II. 23. Sarai] Sarai signifies my Lady, or my Princesse: Sarah a Lady, or Princesse, without restriction; The Title being so enlarged. Ishmael] Ishmael was 13 years old when he was circumcised, XVII. 25. And so above 15. or rather 17 at Isaacs weaning, when he and his mother were cast out of Abrahams family, XXI. 5, 8, 14, 15. Three measures] The Hebrew measures of Capacity mentioned in the Old Testament, are these 10. viz. 1 Log. Lev. XIV. 10. the least measure. 2 Cab, 2 King. VI. 25. 3 Hin, Exod. XXIX. 40. Levit. XXIII. 13. Ezek. IV. 11. 4 Omer or Homer, or Gnomer, being the quantity of a mans daily eating of Manna, and the tenth part of an E∣phah, Exod. XVI. 16. 36. 5 Seah, translated measure or Satum, in this Text, Gen. XVIII. 6. and 2 King. VII. 1. 6 Ephah, containing ten Omers, Exod. XVI. 36. 7 Bate or Bath, containing likewise ten O∣mers; and being both the tenth part of a Cor, and Chomer, Ezek. XLV. 11, 14. 8 Lethec, translated half an Omer, or rather half a Chomer, Hos. III. 2. 9 Cor, and 10 Chomer, each equal, and containing ten Bates or Ephahs apiece, Ezek. XLV. 11, 14. Thus farre Scripture. The particular assignations of their several Capacities are usually made thus, viz: The Log to containe the quantity of six hen-eggs-shels of Palestine, the same with Sextarium Romanum, and is about our half pinte (yet some make it a pinte.) The Cab to contain four Logs, i. e. a quart of our measure, or 24 egs-shels; (yet some say a pottle) The Hin to containe six Logs, i. e. 36. egs-shels (some say 12 Logs, or 72. egs-shels) or about three quarts. An Omer to containe one Cab and an half, and a fifth part, about our three pintes and an half, or a pottle, the tenth part of an Ephah. Seah to containe two Hins, or six Cabs, i. e. a gallon and an half, or Modius Romanus, the third part of an Ephah. Ephah to containe ten Omers or Pottles, i. e. four gallons and an half; or about three Seahs; and to be Medimnus Atticus, (yet some make it to containe eight gallons; and so four Ephahs to con∣taine our barrel; some to containe near ten gallons: or about the measure of our bushel, or half a bushel and a pottle.) Bate or Bath is of the same measure for liquid things, as Ephah is for dry things. Lethec to containe five Ephahs, or fifteen Seahs, or Sata, or Modii, that is, two bushels, six gallons, and one pottle; or half a Chomer. Chomer, and Cor are both of the same measure, either equal; and contains certainly, as was said, ten Bates or Ephahs apiece, or two Lethecs. Cor is oft translated Measures. And thus uncertaine are we for the grounds of these measures of Capacities. Abimelech] And XXVI. 1. This seemes to be a common name to the Kings of Palestine; as Pharaoh to the Kings of Egypt; Benhadad
to the Kings of Syria; Candace to the Queens of Ethiopia; Caesar to the Romane Emperours. Hebron] Hebron called also Kiriath-Arba, the City of Arba, the the father of Anak, where Anak lived, and his sonnes and the Anakims, all Giants. Here Abraham, Isaac and Jacob dwelled, and were bu∣ried here in the Cave of Macpelah, before Mamre, the same is Hebron. Here Sarah died, and was buried in that Cave: And Rebekah, and Leah were likewise buried here. Hence Joseph was sent to see the welfare of his brethren. And hither the Spies came that were sent by Moses to spy out the Land. Hoham the King of Hebron was one of the five Kings hid in the Cave, and slaine and hanged up by Joshu∣ah: And it seemes another King of Hebron soone after slaine by him. And he and Caleb slew the Anakims dwelling here. This Ci∣ty fell to the Tribe of Iudah; and was seated in a mountaine of Iudah: and together with the Suburbs of it, was given to the Priests; and to be a Citie of refuge: But the Fields, and Villages of it were given to Caleb that good Spie. To the top of an hill before Hebron, Sampson carried the Gate of Gaza. David having sent to them of Hebron a Present of the spoile which he got of the Amalekites, in the rescue of Ziklag, was commanded by God to go hither. And here at Hebron he was made King, and reigned seven years and six moneths: had six sons borne him here, of six several wives. Hither Abner cameto David; and being murthered by Joab, was by David mournfully buried here. Hither Ishbosheths head was brought, and buried in Abners grave; and his murtherers by David hanged here. Hither came all Israel to make David King over all Israel. And afterwards Absalom being borne here, pretended a vow to be performed here; and rebelling against his father made himself King here. This City was first built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. And in King Rehoboams time was repaired and fortified by him. Abraham] Abraham alive when Jacob was 15 years old, XXI. 5. and XXV. 7, 26. And so Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were living at the same time, Heb. XI. 9. Esau] Esau sold his Birth-right for bread and pottage, XXV. 34. for one morsel of meat, as it is, Heb. XII. 16. Isaac] Isaac blinde above 43 years. He being 60 at the birth of Jacob, XXV. 26. And blinde at the blessing of Jacob, XXVII. 1. And Jacob was then 77. years old, as appears by his age of 130 when he stood before Pharaoh, XLVII. 9. And the age of Joseph being then 39 or 40, viz. 30 when he was advanced by Pharaoh, XLI. 46. And after that, seven years of plenty, and two of famine passed ere Jacob came down, XLV. 6. And Joseph was borne in the 14 year after Jacobs coming to Laban, XXX. 25. and XXXI. 41. And Iacob came to Laban presently after the foresaid blessing, XXVII. 42. &c. XXVIII. 1, 2. And so the 14 years before Ioseph was borne, and 39 of Iosephs age after, being taken out of Iacobs 130. leaves him to be 77. when Isaac blessed him. And Iacobs 77. being added to Isaacs 60 when Ia∣cob
was borne, makes Isaac to be 137. when he was blinde, and bles∣sed Jacob. And Isaac dying at 180, XXXV. 28. must so needs be blinde 43 years at the least. Esau] Esau could not prevaile with Isaac to bring him to repent of his blessing Iacob, and to recall the blessing, though Esau sought it of Isaac with tears, XXVII. 33, 34. Heb. XII. 17. Iacob] Iacob being 77 years old, marries both Leah and Rachel, in the first year of his coming to Laban, [Laban by inversion of the let∣ters is Nabal] and at or before the beginning of the 14 years service for them. This appears by his twelve children; Dinah being one: and by the Sequence of their births, within those 14 years, Ch XXIX. and XXX. which are not possible to be, in that maner, and order borne, within the compasse onely of the last seven years: And ha∣ving seven of them by Leah her self; who yet left bearing a while af∣ter her fourth sonne: and Reuben her eldest sonne being so old to ga∣ther Mandrakes in the field a year before Issachar, her fifth childe, was borne by her. And this is further evidenced by the age of Iudah, be∣ing but fifty upon this account it self, that is, 10 years elder then Jo∣seph, when yet he, and his grandchildren by Tamar, both Hezron and Hamul came down with Iacob into Egypt, XLVI. 12. whereby it al∣so appears, that Iudah marrying at 17 years of age, which was the first year of Jacobs returne from Laban the Syrian into Canaan, XXXVIII. 1, 2, 3. Then both Er, and Onan, and Pharez must needs marry each when they were about 12 or 13 years old, which was rare in that age of the world. And this truth of the time of Jacobs mar∣riage will stand well with the computation of time by the ages and acts of Judah, and his posterity; and with a right rendition of those texts, Gen. XXIX. 20, 21, 25, 27, 28, 30. which should be some∣what altered in our English translations. Here then those large An∣notations 1651. making Jacob to marry both Leah and Rachel at the end of the first seven years service: And the twelve children to be borne within the compasse of the seven later years: And Judah to be but three years elder then Joseph; And to marry at fourteen years of age: And Er and Onan to marry at fourteen apiece: And Hezron and Hamul, to be borne in Egypt, and to come downe with Jacob on∣ly in the loynes of their father Pharez; (wherein yet there remaines a contradiction in them, as appears by comparing together their An∣notations on Gen. XXXVIII. 1. and XLVI. 12, 27. do in all the said particulars seeme to me to misse the right; and at least to require a more serious review and consideration. See the said Annotations on Gen. XXIX. 27, 30. and XXXVIII. 1, 2, 6. and XLVI. 12. Sacks] Sacks, saccus; and Amen are the words that hold most, in most languages. Benjamin] Benjamin not 24 years old when he came into Egypt, but hard upon 30. Yea some conceive him to be conceived in Pa∣dan-Aram, out of Gen. XXXV. 24, 26. and so to be 33 years old at that time; yet is he called a Lad, Gen. XLIII. 8. and XLIV. 22, 30,
31, 32, 33, 34. and a little one, v. 20. And yet at that time said to be the father of ten sonnes, Gen. XLVI. 21. And two of them, Naaman, and Ard, (if not more) seeme to be his grand-children, Num. XXVI. 40. But not borne in Egypt: no more then Hezron and Ha∣mul were borne there. And so both Benjamin, and his eldest sonne Belah must marry very young: as the like was observed in Er, Onan, and Pharez, before. The number] The number of the souls that came out of Jacobs loines, and came down with him into Egypt, are truly told and reckoned to be 66. Gen. XLVI. 26. And this is the exact number. For Jo∣seph and his two children came not down with Jacob into Egypt, but were in Egypt before. And leaving out Er and Onan, that were dead before in Canaan; and reckoning in Hezron and Hamul, the grand-children of Judah by Tamar; as the expresse letter of the Text doth in both points require, the said number of 66. doth rightly arise. And to imagine otherwise, that Hezron and Hamul were borne in Egypt, and did go down thither with Jacob onely virtually in the loines of their father Pharez, it doth not onely contradict the Text, as was said; but also doth overthrow the whole intent and drift of the Re∣cord, Catalogue, and Genealogy in that chapter; which is to shew the small number that went down personally with Jacob into Egypt, Deut. XXVI. 5. That thereby wonderful multiplication of their posterity in Egypt, Exod. XII. 37. and in little more then a year af∣ter, Num. I. 45, 46. by Gods blessing might the more gloriously ap∣pear. And if some; or any of those mentioned in the said Catalogue, went down onely virtually in the loines of their parents; in that sense as well might 46000; yea 600000. be said to have descended with Jacob into Egypt. Again, the number of the souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt, are truly told to be 70. Gen. 46. 27. Exod. I. 5. Deut. X. 22. So justly reckoning Jacob himself, and Joseph with his two sons, who were then in Egypt already. And so these 70. are made up of those summes, 33. 16. 14. 7. set down in Gen. XLVI. 15, 18, 22, 25. Again, the number is told to be 75. by Stephen, and Luke re∣cording Stephens speech, Acts VII. 14. Here, denying any corrupti∣on of the Text; some would lay a failer of memory upon Stephen; as the like again in v. 16. as not being so priviledged in this sudden Speech, as the holy Pen-men were inspired for the writing of Scri∣pture: And thereupon say, That Luke dealt tfaihfully in relating what Stephen spake. Others say, That Stephen herein did wittingly and willingly follow the Translation of the LXX. Interpreters on Gen. XLVI. 27. and Exod. I. 5. As in divers citations the holy Wri∣ters of the New Testament do; That Translation being then in high esteeme, and almost onely in use. Yet the five persons super∣added by them seeme not to be those which the LXX. fetch out of 1 Chron. VII. 14, 20. But rather all those that are named, Gen, XLVI. namely Jacobs four wives, and Er, and Onan; which make up 75. in all, leaving out Jacob himself.
Exodus. EXODUS Containes an History of 141 years, and some few dayes over; And not of about 146 years. This truth appears thus; From the death of Joseph, to the birth of Moses were 60. years, and either 56. or 65. or 72. or 80. And this assertion of 60. years is thus gathered. The Israelites being in Egypt, from the going down of Jacob thither, till Moses brought them out thence, 210 years; as hath been shewed on Gen. XV. 13. And Joseph be∣ing 40 years old when his father Jacob came down; as being 30 when Pharaoh advanced him, Gen. XLI. 46. And after that, seven years of Plenty passing, and the third year of Famine in being, when Ja∣cob came down. And Joseph living 110 years, Gen. L. 22. So leaves 70 of his life to be spent in Egypt, after Jacobs coming down thither. And Moses being 80 years old when he brought the Isra∣elites out of Egypt, Exod. VII. 7. So leaves just 60 years, between Iosephs death, and Moses his birth. For those three numbers, of Io∣sephs 70. and the said interval of 60, and Moses his 80. make up the said summe of 210 years. Now to those 60 years before the Birth of Moses, adde those 80 years of his age, Exod. VII. 7. And the time spent about getting leave of Pharaoh for their departure, Exod. Ch. III. to the XII. which was some small part of year, viz: with∣in one moneth: And their coming forth on the first moneth, the 15 day, Num. XXXIII. 3. And their coming into the Wildernesse of Sinai; in the third moneth, Exod. XIX. 1. where the Law was given, Exod. XX. And their making and erecting of the Taberna∣cle, in the next year, first moneth, first day, Exod. XL. 1. And so the summe of 141 years, and few dayes doth arise; which containes the whole History of Exodus. Whereof 140 years, within few dayes, are comprised in the two first Chapters; And one year, and few dayes are spent in the rest of the Book. His sister] His sister, that is, Miriam; who was elder then Moses, or Aaron: And Aaron elder then Moses by three years, Exod. VII. 7. All three were the children of Iochebed the daughter of Levi, by Am∣ram the grand-son of Levi, Exod. VI. 16, 18, 20. Num. XXVI. 59. 1 Chron. VI. 3. Moses] Moses, His age of 40 years when he went to visit his bre∣thren, and flew the Egyptian: As also his skill in all the wisdome of
the Egyptian, 3 are not mentioned in the Old Testament: But by Saint Stephen, Acts VII. 22, 23. Iethro] Iethro who is likewise called Iether, in the Original, Exod. IV. 18. and Hobab, Num. X. 29. Judg. IV. 11. were the names of Moses his father-in-law. And Kenite, Judg. I. 16. seemes to be his name Patronymical. And Revel, and Raguel seeme to be the names of Jethros father, Exod. II. 18. Num. X. 29. Horeb] Horeb here, and Sinai, Exod. XVI. 1. and XIX. 11. are the same mountaine; or two tops of the same mountain: called Sinai, from the bush, Exod. III. 2. or bushes growing there, and there∣abouts in that wildernesse, Ch. XIX. 1. As Mount Sion, and Mount Moriah were much alike. A Token] This token or signe was to come to passe afterwards; yet is given to confirme a Promiser made afore it. And the like is, Esay VII. 14. and XXXVII. 30. Ier. XLIII. 9, 10. and Ch. LI. 63, 64. Among other reasons, to assure there the truth of the Promise, by the quality of the Promise foretelling such events. No lie] No lie in this Petition to Pharaoh: nor in that assertion, Ch. V. 3. Will not] The foreknowledge of God doth not impeach or trench upon the Free-will of Pharaoh. Borrow] No wrong in that borrowing, and spoyling the Egypti∣ans, Exod. III. 22. and Ch. XI. 2. and Ch. XII. 35, 36. The Magicians] The Magicians of Egypt, are none of them named in the Old Testament: yet Iannes and Iambres, the two prime of them are named in the New, 2 Tim. III. 8. The Red-sea] And so in the Greek Erythraeum, Acts VII. 36. Heb. XI. 29. signifying red: And so the Latines from them. So called, either from the seeming colour of the water from the abun∣dance of reddish bulrushes therein; or the red sand and gravel in it; or red Corall growing in it; or red sandy mountains adjoyning to it; or why not from Edom, as the Edomean Sea, 1 King. IX. 26. He being called Red from his red colour; and the red Pottage, Gen. XXV. 25, 30. But the likeliest reason is from the Hebrew appella∣tion, calling it the sea of weeds, or sedge, mare algsum, of flag, or rush, or tange, rack or reet, in Latin alga, Ionah II. 5. which reddish weeds in abundance grew in it, being but shoaly; and specially about the bancks of it. Neither rose] The Plague of Darknesse in Egypt seemes to ob∣struct both Candle-light, and Fire-light. This moneth] The beginning of the year being here changed from the time wherein formerly it was, to the moneth wherein the Isra∣elites came out of Egypt; a little before our Easter, and about our Vernal Equinoctial, as it then stood; This argues the Creation of the World to have been at that time when the Jewes yeare formerly be∣gan: And the time of Noahs Flood to begin the 17th day of the se∣cond month of that year. Which year is known to commence its Be∣ginning
from the Autumnal Equinoctial, as it then stood. From whence, even after this Change, the year of Jubile, and Sabbath-year, and year for some Civil accompts did continue still to have and enjoy their former Beginnings; as we see, Levit. XXV. 8, 9, 10. Exod. XXIII. 11, 16. and Ch. XXXIV. 22. In the evening] The Paschal Lamb is appointed here to be kill'd and eaten, and so the Passeover to be kept, at Even; or, as it is in the Hebrew, at or between the two Evenings; And so, Num. IX. 3. Lev. XXIII. 5. And so kept by our Saviour at Even, Matth. XXVI. 20. Now the better to know the Even, and two Evenings, we must first know, That the Artificial Day is divided, from Sunne-rising to Sun-setting, into twelve hours, John XI. 9. Matth. XX. 6, 12. Acts II. 15. which hours are sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, as the course of the Sunne measures them. And again, that day seemes to have a division into three equal parts, allotting four hours to each part. Or into four equal parts, allotting three hours to each part. And so the first part is from their Sunne-rising, to our ninth hour: the second from our ninth to our twelfth, or Noone, and Mid-day: the third from that, to our three in the after-noone: the fourth from that, to Sun-setting. And sometimes there is taken in∣to the first of these, the time from Day-light to Sun-rising: And in∣to the last of these, the time from Sun-setting to night and darknesse, as Matth. XVI. 2. and XXVII. 57. John XX. 19. And both these comprise the whole dayes Fasting, 2 Sam. I. 12. Now the Even in Scripture is most properly, and usually expressed, and defined strict∣ly by the Going down, or Setting of the Sunne. So in the purify∣ing of the Unclean, Levit. XXII. 6, 7. Deut. XXIII. 11. And so in that case of the King of Ai, Iosh. VIII. 29. And of Ahab, 2 Chron. XVIII. 34. And of those five Kings in the Cave of Makkedah, Iosh. X. 26, 27. And so in Mark I. 32. And so it is expressely for the Passeover it self, Deut. XVI. 6. To which acceptation of the Even agrees that, Psal. CIV. 23. Mark XI. 11, 19. Luke XXIV. 29. Acts IV. 3. and XXVIII. 23. Yet in Scripture the Evening is sometimes taken in a larger extent and latitude, for the latter part of the Day, beginning from the declining of the Sunne at Mid-day; or from the abating of the heat and force of it, at our three in the after-noone: As may be clearly gathered from Mat. XIV. v. 15,—23. Mark VI. 35, 47. Luke IX. 12. And as it is usual taken with us in our ordinary sa∣lutations. Now at, or between the two Evenings, is mentioned, as for the yearly Passeover; so for the daily Evening Sacrifice, Exod. XXIX. 39. Num. XXVIII. 4. And for the daily burning of Incense on the Incense-Altar: And for the daily dressing and lighting of the Lamps in the Tabernacle, Exod. XXX. 8. So that in these four cases the meaning of the phrase seemes to be the same; Noting out one certain time; and these two Evenings in the larger, or stricter sig∣nification, to be contiguous, or continued rather; to be that Communis terminus, which couples the end of the day, and the beginning of the
night together; or the two extremities of our Evening-tide, where∣of the former belongs to the end and shutting up of the natural day preceding, and the later to the beginning of the night, which leades on, and ushers in the natural or civil day following, as the first part of it. So that this time is a participle of both, or a Borderer betwixt both, as the large Annotations fitly expresse it. Two side-posts] In this first Passeover each Head of a family served as a Priest: divers Rites were enjoyned, which were not observed or required afterwards; And the second moneth also allowed for it, Num. IX. 11 And other seven dayes, 2 Chron. XXX. 23. No maner of work] On divers Feast-dayes of the Jewes it was not lawful for them to do any servile work;  On others, any kinde or maner of work, save that which every man must eate. But on the Sabbath day, (and so likely on the day of expiation) that it self was unlawful; or to kindle a fire on it, Exod. XII. 16. and Ch. XVI. 5, 23. and Ch. XXXV. 2, 3. And much more, to do any maner of work upon it, Neh. XIII. v. 15,—22. Jer. XVII. 21, 22. though for the making of the Tabernacle it self, Exod. XXXI. 11, 12, 13. or at any time, in earing-time, or harvest, Exod. XXXIV. 21. And that upon paine of death, Exod. XXXV. 2. For ever] Many Legal Ceremonies, or Ordinances are enjoyned the Jewes to be observed throughout their generations for ever; all which yet ended at the coming of Christ in the flesh. And some such enjoyned in like termes, yet ended in the year of Jubile, Exod. XXI. 6. Levit. XXV. 40. Of this see more in the Observations on Deut. XV. 17. 430 years] These do commence from the first Promise made to Abram, in Ur of the Chaldees, whence 30 of the years are made up thus; viz: 5. in Haran; 11 in Canaan, when Ishmael was borne, Gen, XVI. 3. And 14 years of Ishmaels age, when Isaac was borne, Gen. XVII. 25. and Ch. XVIII. 10. and XVI. 16. and XXI. 5. And the 400. begin from Isaacs birth; as was shewed on Gen. XV. 13. By day in a Pillar of a cloud] The Pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night, may seem to be two Pillars, Exod. XIII. 21. 22. Nehem. IX. 12, 19. Num. XIV. 14. Or rather seeme to be one Pillar, Exod. XIV. 19, 20, 24. Spread as a cloud by day, to cover them from heat; and gathered up into a Pillar of fire by night, to guide them. Out of which God spake unto them, Psal. XCIX. 7. Num. XII. 5, 10. Deut. XXXI. 15. See the Annotations on Esay IV. 5. Migdol] A strong City or Fort, situate in the territory of Beth∣shemesh in Egypt, not farre from the Red-sea, Num. XXXIII. 7, 8. Jer XLIV. 1. Before the Testimony] This command for Aaron to lay up the Pot of Manna before the Lord, was performed by him, in laying it not be∣fore the Testimony, not at this time of the Command here; but after the Ark, and two Tables of the Covenant were made, Exod. XXXIII. 29. and Ch. XXXVII, 1, &c.
An Omer] The Omer and Ephah here seeme quite altered in that Visionary New State of Israel, Ezek. XLV. 11. Unlesse Gnomer and Chomer be two several measures; which I rather incline unto; and conceive the truth to be this; That  Exod. XVI. 36. is the tenth part of an Ephah, as is there set down; whereunto accords that ver. 16. it being the measure of the eating of Manna suf∣ficient for a man by the day. But  Ezek. XLV. containes ten Ephahs or Baths, both being of the same measure, v. 11. and 14. And hereunto accords that, Esay V. 10. where one  (for so the word is there written, as it is in Ezek. XLV.) yeelds but one Ephah. i. e. the tenth part of the seed, it being a judgement of famine there denounced. See also, Levit. XXVII. 16. And this may serve for the better explication of my Annotations upon that place of Ezekiel, contained in the second Edition of the great Annotations printed 1651. Rock] Rocks twice smitten: this Rock, Exod. XVII. 6. And that water going likely into the Red Sea; and so failing them in the 32. Station at Ezion-gaber; Upon their new murmuring, another Rock was smitten 39 years after, Num. 20. 1,—13. And both called the waters of Meribah. Went up] Moses nine or ten times goes up to the Lord on Mount Sinai. See Exod. XIX. 3, 7, 8, 10, 14, 20, 21, 25. and Ch. XX. 21. and Ch. XXIV. 3, 12, 13, 15, 18. and Ch. XXXII. 7, 15, 30. and Ch. XXXIII. 6, 7, 21. and Ch. XXXIV. 2, 29, 34. Moses spake] This speech, not mentioned what it was. But seems to be that recorded, Heb. XII. 21. Priests] So, v. 24. These Priests probably seeme to be the fathers of the families. The young men, Exod. XXIV. 5. might possibly be of those Primogeniti or First-borne, which God first challenged to himself within one quarter of a year before, Exod. XIII. 2. and Ch. XXII. 29. And for them the Levites were taken in afterwards, Num. III. 12, 13, 40, 41, 45. and Ch. VIII. 18. Or else such as Mo∣ses pleased to imploy in slaying and dressing at least of these Sacri∣fices: Called young men likely, as those servants of the King of As∣syria are called in the Original young men, 2 King. XIX. 6. An Altar] These Altars mentioned in this verse, and, v. 25, 26. were allowed and appointed for the time: much differing from those by appointment made when the Tabernacle, and Temple, were ere∣cted, and builded, Exod. XXVII. 1, &c. 2 Chron. IV. 1. Of Al∣tars see more on Levit. XVII. 3. In the seventh] In the Seventh and Sabbatical year, beginning in September, as the Iubile did, The Book of the Law was to be read pub∣likely and solemnly in the beginning of that year; The Land was to rest from Culture; Lendings vouchsafed to poor Hebrews, and then due, were to be released, and intermitted, if not clean remitted, Luke VI. 35. Hebrew servants, both men and women, though bought, if not redeemed before, were to go out free, if themselves would,
and that liberally furnished, Exod. XXI. 2,—7. and XXIII. 11, 16. Levit. XXV. 4, 5, 6, 7, 20, 21, 22. Deut. XV. 1,—18. Jer. XXXIV. 14. Who hath betrothed her to himself] The Hebrew Text hath signifying Not, and so runs thus, Who hath not betroathed her. But the Hebrew Criticks commonly called Masorets, put for it in the magin , signifying to him; so observing a various reading. And indeed they observe divers readings in sundry places of Scripture; but about no one word so many, as about this; as may be seene, Levit. XI. 21. and Ch. XXV. 30. 1 Sam. II. 3. 2 Kings VIII. 10. 1 Chron. XI. 20. Ezra IV. 2. Job XIII. 15. Psal. C. 3. Esay IX. 3. and XLIX. 5. and LXIII. 9. And in many of these, both senses come to one; read∣ing the Negative by way of interrogation. See the Annotations on Job 13. 15. From mine Altar] The Tabernacle, and Temple, and Altars there, may seeme to pretend to some such Priviledge, as the Cities of Re∣fuge had, Exod. XXI. 14. 1 King. 1. 50, 51. and Ch. 11. 28. An Oath] An oath is pnt to the Party suspected, to accuse, or clear himself; So, v. 11. Somewhat like an Answer to a Bill in Chan∣cery; or to the oath called ex officio; though haply in all things not correspondent. Males] Women among the Jewes, as not Circumcised;  so hap∣ly may seeme neither to be tied to eate the Passeover, Exod. XXIII. 17. and Ch. XXXIV. 23, 24. Deut. XVI. 16. Yet is this no ground to debar women from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper more then from the Sacrament of Baptisme: the partition-wall being now bro∣ken down by Christ, and male and female in him are all one, Gal. III. 8. Thy bounds] The bounds of the Land of Canaan were Larger, Ge. XV. 18. Exod. XXIII. 31. Deut. I. 7. and Ch. 11. 24. Josh. I. 4. Narrower, Num. XXXIV. 3. &c. Num. XIII. 21. 1 King. VIII. 65. 2 Chron. VII. 8. Judg. XX. 1. The larger bounds were never possessed and inhabited by the Is∣raelites; at most made Tributary onely in the dayes of David, and Solomon. And the default might be no wise in God; but in the Is∣raelites sinning and breaking with God, Deut. XIX. 8, 9. Yea the narrower bounds, by reason of their sinnes, were scarce at any time fully possessed. In the Arke] In the Arke were the two Tables of the Law and Co∣venant, See also Exod. XL. 20. And nothing else, 1 Kings VIII. 9. 2. Chron. V. 10. which Tables are called the Testimony, Exod. XXV. 16, 21. and Ch. XXX. 6. and Ch. XL. 20. And the Arke is called The Arke of the Testimony, Exod. XXV. 22. and Ch. XXVI. 33. and Ch. XXX, 6, 26. And the Mercie-seate is said to be upon the Testi∣mony, Levit. XVI. 13. By the Arke was laid and kept the Pot of Manna, before the Testimony, Exod. XVI. 34. And Aarons Rod, be∣fore
the Testimony, Num. XVII. 10. And that Censer, Levit. XVI. 12. Heb. IX. 4. And the Book of the Law, in the side of the Arke, or on the outside of it, Deut. XXXI. 26. Not onely those Pieces of it, Exod. XVII. 14. and Ch. XXIV. 4. and Ch. XXXIV. 27. and Deut. XXXI. 9, 22. But the whole Law and writings, and inspired Books of Moses. And this seemes to some to be the Book found in Josiah's time; and to have been lost in the dayes of wicked Manasseh, and Amon: Though the matters of that Book, when it was read to Jo∣siah, and to all the people, seemed so strange unto them, as if no Co∣pie of it at all, or wondrous rare, had been extant among them. Lamps to burn alwayes] The Lamps may seeme to burn night and day;  because we read of no windows for light in the Tabernacle. See also Exod. III. 7, 8. Levit. XXIV. 2, 3. At least some of them in the day-time. Tabernacle] Moses his Tent is called the Tabernacle. And the Ta∣bernacle is called by the name of the Temple, 1 Sam. III. 3. And the Temple diverse times by the name of the Tabernacle, and Sanctuary, and Tents of the Lord, 2 Chron. XXXI. 2. Fourty dayes and fourty nights] Moses twice fasted 40 dayes, and 40 nights, Exod. XXXIV. 28. Deut. IX. 18. and Ch. X. 10. And some conceive thrice out of Deut. IX. 25. Yet this is not likely. Elias once; and our Saviour once. Of Fasting, see the Annotations on Joel I. 14. Skin of his face shone] By reflexive raies and beames of the Di∣vine splendor: And had not hornes, as the Trent Bible renders the word; And Painters commonly picture him. The Hebrew word a substantive signifies an Horne; but  the Verbe signi∣fies to shine. And so Saint Paul interprets it, 2 Cor. III. 7. Looking-glasses] Looking-glasses made not of Glasses, whereof we have no record in Scripture; but rather of steele, or of brasse which was much refined, as Ezra VIII. 27. and of much use; and special∣ly for armour inwarre, as Virgil often mentions. Talents. Shekels] Shekel comes from Shakal, to weigh; And thence may our English word scale come. A Shekel is 20. Gerahs, Exod. XXX. 13. Ezek. XLV. 12. or two Bekahs, Exod. XXXVIII. 26. The Shekel is half an ounce in silver, or 2 s. 6d. And so the Gerah, 1 d. ob. and the Bekah 1 s. 3 d. The Talent is 3000 Shekels; which appears thus in the Text; The 603550 men are taxed at a Bekah a piece. This makes 301775 Shekels. Now reckoning 3000 Shekels to a Talent; The 301775 Shekels make up 100 Ta∣lents, and 1775 Shekels; according to the summe there specified, v. 25, 27, 28. And counting the Shekel at 2 s. 6d, the Talent so comes to 375 l. starling. The Shekel of gold was of the same weight with that of silver; but of farre greater value; of ten to one with the Jewes, as may be gathered out of 1 Chron. XXII. 14. And so their Shekel of gold comes to 1 l. 5 s. their Talent of Gold comes to 3750. l. But gold now in Christendome is at an higher rate. By
silverings, as, 2 Sam. XVIII. 11, 12. Matth. XXVI. 15. usually Shekels are understood. See the Annotations on Ezek. IV. 10. And on Esther III. 9. Vaile of the Covering] That hanged before, and covered the Mer∣cy-seate. Lamps to be set in order] Dressing them every morning, and light∣ing them at even, Ch. XXX. 7, 8. if not at morning too: there be∣ing no windows in the Tabernacle; and so burning alwayes, Ch. XXXVII. 20. continually, Levit. XXIV. 2. Blessed them] The offerers, and the work-men. Of the Gongregation] Where Priests, Levites, and People assem∣bled, according to the several degrees of their approaches. Everlasting] That their posterity should not need to be anointed again. Of Everlasting see the Observations on Deut. XV. 17. A Cloud] Even that Cloud, Exod. XIII. 21, 22. miraculously re∣moved hither. Not able] The maner therefore of the clouds abode, and the Lords glory appearing at this time, was extraordinary.
Leviticus. LEVITICUS takes up onely the time of one moneth; viz: the first moneth of the second year of their coming out of Egypt; whiles yet they stayed at Mount Sinai: Compare toge∣ther, Exod. XL. 2, 17. Levit. I. 1. and Chap. XXVII. 34. and Num. I. 1. And this was in the 2509 year of the world; thus, 1656. to the Flood. Thence to Abrams birth, in the 130 year of Terah, 352. Thence, to Isaac's birth, 100. Thence, to Jacob's birth, 60. Thence, to Jacob's going down into Egypt 130. Thence to the coming out of Egypt 210: and one year after their coming forth; in all 2509. And not in the year of the world 2455. or 2514. This Book contains principally the Function and Offices of the Levites; And Ceremonials concerning Sacrifices, and Feasts, Rites, and Purifications: Delivered by God to Moses out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation when it was newly reared, Levit. I. 1. And accordingly is that, Levit. XXV. 1. to be ex∣pounded. The moneth of this Book may seeme to be thus spent, taken up, and subdivided, viz: 1. Day; The Tabernacle, Altar, and all other things belonging to the Sanctuary, reared, placed, anointed, Exod. XL. Levit. VIII. The Consecration of Aaron, and his sonnes, Commanded, Exod. XXIX. Begun, Exod. XL. fully finished, Levit. VIII. in the space of seven dayes. And seven dayes to make an Atonement for the Altar, and sancti∣fie it, Exod. XXIX. 37. 8. Day; The Princes Offerings of six Waggons, and twelve Oxen, for carriage and service of the Tabernacle. Their Offerings at the Dedication of the Altar; each Prince on his day: which so continued twelve dayes, Num. VII. And likely during that time of twelve dayes, Moses received from the Lord, out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, those Lawes for Sacrifices, and Offerings, Levit. Ch. I,—VII. 8. Day; The Consecration of Aaron, and his sonnes, being end∣ed, Aaron doth first Sacrifice, Levit. IX.
In the sacrifices and offerings Levitically are considerable; Principally, and more Generally: The Persons, Offerer or Bringer, Lev. 1. 4. and 3. 2. and 7. 30. Sacrificer, Priests, Lev. 1. 6. 2 Chron. 29. 24. Now wine or strong drink, When, &c. Lev. 10. 9. Levites, in some part, and in some cases, 2 Chron. 29. 34. and ch. 35. 11▪—14. Place, Lev. 17. 3.—9. Deut. 12. 5,—14. and ch. 16 5, 6. Fire Came down from Heaven, Lev 19. 24. See further, 1 Kings 18. 38. 1 Chron. 21. 26. 2 Chron. 7. 1. Must never be suffered to go out, Lev. 6. 12, 13. notwithstanding their journeys in the wildernesse, Numb. 4 13. Fat in Sacrifices, alwayes to be burnt, and what fat, Lev. 3. 16, 17. Other cases, when Not to be eaten, Leviticus 7. 23, 25. To be eaten, Leviticus 7. 23, 25. Nehemiah 8. 10. To be used otherwise, Liviticus 7. 24. Oile, Lviticus 2. and 14. Exod. 29. Ezra 7. 22. Salt, Levit. 2. 13. Ezek. 43. 24. Mar. 9. 49. Ezra 6. 9. and 7. 22. Blood Never to be eaten, Gen. 9. 4. Lev. 7. 26, 27. and 17. 10,—14. 1 Sam. 14. 13. Deut. 12. 16 23, 24, 25. In sacri∣fices, Sprinkled, sometimes Before the vail of the Sanctuary, and upon the hornes of the Altar of incense, Lev. 4. 6, 7, 17, 18. Upon the hornes of the Altar of burnt-offerings, Lev. 4. 25, 30. 34. Round about upon the Altar of Burnt-offering, Lev. 1. 5, 11. and 3, 2, 8, 13. and 7, 2. Wrung out at the side of the Altar, Lev. 1▪ 15. and 5. 9. Poured out at the side of the Altar, or at the bottome of the Altar, Leviticus 4 7, 18. 25, 30, 34, and 8 15. Particularly: The Kindes and sorts of them. Burnt-offering, or Holocaust, Lev. 1. Matter of Cattel, Herd, Oxen or Bullocks. Males. Flock, Sheep. Males. Goates. Males. Fowle, Tuttle-Doves. Young Pigeons. Manner and Law of it, Lev. 1 and ch. 6. 9,—13. and ch. 7. 8. Numb. 10. 10. and ch. 15. 5, 8, 11, 12. Meat-offering, Lev. 2. Matter of Fine flower. No Honey. Leaven. v. 11. Oile, No Honey. Leaven. v. 11. Incense. No Honey. Leaven. v. 11. Salt. No Honey. Leaven. v. 11. Or of first-fruits in the eare. No Honey. Leaven. v. 11. No Honey. Manner, and Law of it, Lev. 2. and ch. 6. 14—18. and 7. 9, 10 and 10. 12, 13. Numb. 15. 1,—16. and 18. 9, 10. Drink-of∣fering. Matter, wine. Manner, Measure and Law of it, Lev 23. 13, 18, 37. Numb. 6. 15, 17 and ch. 15. 5, 7, 10, 24. and ch. 28. 7,—31. and ch. 29. 6, 11,—39. 1 Chron. 9. 29. and 29. 21. 2 Chron. 29. 35. Ezra 7. 17. E∣zek. 45. 17. Jer. 44. 17. 2 Kings 16. 13, 15. Deut. 32 38. Ezra 7. 12. Meat and drink-offerings ever joyned together, Numb. 16. 35,—12. And joyned almost to all other sacrifices, Numb. 6. 15, 17. 1 Chron. 21. 23. and 29. 21. 1 Kings 8. 64. Ezra 7. 17. 2 Chron. 29. 35, Peace-offerings; Or Gratulatory of Thanksgiving, Lev. 3. Matter of Herd; Oxe or Bullock. male or female. Flock. Lambe. male or female. Goate. male or female. Manner and Law of it, Lev. 3. and ch. 7. 11,—34. and 10. 14, 15. and ch. 22. 23, 29, 30. Numb. 10. 10. touching the wave-breast and heave-shoulder. See, Lev. 7. 30,—34. Sin-offering of ig∣norance, Lev. 4. Of the High-Priest; the matter and manner of it, Lev. 4. 1, - 12. and 6. 30. and 10. 16, 17, 18. Whole Congregation; the matter and manner of it, Lev. 4. 13,—21. and 6. 30. Numb, 15. 22,—26. Ruler; the matter (a male) and manner of it, Lev. 4. 22,—26. and ch. 6. 25,—29. Vulgar; the matter, (a female) and manner of it, Lev. 4. 27,—35. and 6, 25,—29. Num. 15. 27, 28. and 18 9, 10 Trespasse-offer∣ing, for sins of Ignorance, Lev. 5. in Divers things, ch. 51,—13. And therein after confession, both the matter (fe∣male) and manner of it. Holy things Lev. 5. 15.-19. by Diminution or Sacriledge; matter and manner of it, ad∣ding the fifth part, with thy estimation. Otherwise; matter and manner of it, with thy estimation. Knowledg, by Weaknesse in divers cases, with the matter (a Ram) and manner of it, Lev. 6. 1.—8. Numb. 5. 6, 7, 8. adding a fifth part with thy estimation. Presumption; there is no sacrifice for it but death, Num. 15. 30,—36. As the sin-offering is, so is the trespasse-offering; there is one law for them, Lev. 7. 1,—7. And in some things they are hardly distinguishable. And the trespasse-offering seems to be for the greater offences. Times, wherin several sorts of them were to beused. And so some were Voluntary free-will-offerings, At pleasure; as many times the whole burnt-offerings, and peace-offerings; See those at the Deduction of the Ark, 1 Kings 8. 5. 2 Sam. 6. 13, 17. Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8. 63. Walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 12. 43. Upon voluntary Promise by Vow, Lev. 22. 23. and Deut. 12. 17, 26. and 23. 21. See here the Law of the Nazarites, Numb 6. Injoyned upon Fixt Times; Daily, morning and evening, Exod. 29, 38. Numb. 28. 3,—8, Weekly, on the Sabbath-day, Numb. 28. 9, 10. Monethly, on the first day, Numb. 28. 11,—15. and 10. 10. Ps. 81. 3 Esay 1. 13. Yearly at Feasts 3. Solemn, of Passeover, and Unleavened bread Lev. 23. Weeks. Deut. 16. Tabernacles. Deut. 16. Others for one day, viz. of First-fruits, Lev. 23 9.—15. Blowing of trumpets, Lev. 23. 24, 25. Fast of expiation, Lev. 16. and ch 23, 27.—32. Incident oc∣cassions; more Extraordi∣nary; as at the Consecra∣tion of Aaron, and his sonnes, Lev. 8. Exod. 29. and ch. 40. See Aarons first-offerings, Lev. 9. Levities, Numb. 8. Dedication of the Altar, Numbers 7. 10,—88. Ordi Purification and cleansing of Women after childe-birth. Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15. chapters. Leper. Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15. chapters. Men, in their issues. Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15. chapters. Women in theire Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15. chapters.
9. Day; Nadab, and Abihu offer Incense with strange fire; and are slaine, Levit. X. 11, 12, 13. Dayes Seeme those Lawes given from the Lord, to Moses and Aaron, touching Beasts, Fishes, Fowles, clean and unclean, Ch. XI. Moses, for Purification of Wo∣men in child-birth, Ch. XII. Moses and Aaron; for Leprosies, & their cleansings, Ch. XIII. XIV. For issues of men and women, & their cleansings, Ch. XV. 14. Day; Celebration of the Passeover, Num. IX. whether the Feast of unleavened Bread, for seven dayes, was added hereunto, is not expressed. After the death of Nadab and Abihu, Moses receives Lawes from the Lord, touching the High Priests coming into the most Holy Place, once a year, to make an Atonement, on the tenth day of the seventh moneth. And the maner of it, Ch. XVI. Place of Sacrificing. And touching Blood, Ch. XVII. Unlawful mixtures, and Lusts; and other sins. And the Punishments of them, Ch. XVIII, XIX, XX. Priests; their Holinesse; Honour: and cleansing, Ch. XXI, XXII. Feasts, Ch. XXIII. Oile, and Lamps. And Shew-bread, Ch. XXIV. 1,—9. Shelomiths sonne blasphemeth, Ch. XXIV. 10,—14. Thereafter, Moses receiveth Lawes from the Lord; touching Blasphemy, and Murder, Chap. XXIV. 15—23. Sabbath-year: and Jubile; Ch. 25. Idolatry, and Religiousnesse: with Blessings and Curses, Ch. XXVI. Vowes and Tythes, Chap. XXVII.
For the better understanding, and remembring of this Book; And specially of the Offerings, and Sacrifices therein contained, The Ta∣ble ensuing, and the Directions thereof, may give some part of help and furtherance; though the same be not in all points perfect and compleat. Sacrifices then are of a Divine Institution. And were indeed practi∣sed by Adam, and his children; and in all ages. But by Moses enlarged with many Observations, Circumstances, and Prefigurations contain∣ed in them. Yet not principally commanded; nor so much as Mo∣rall duties of Piety, and Honesty, 1 Sam. 15. 22. Psal. L. 5,—16. Marke XII. 33. Hos. VI. 6. Matth. XII. 7. as Joel II. 13. Esay I. 11. and Jer. VI. 20. Amos V. 21. Jer. VII. 21, 22, 23. Of the Cattell] The kindes of Beasts and Birds, for Sacrifices, were Oxen, Bullocks, Sheep, Lambs, Rams, Goats, Turtle-Doves, & young Pigeons. The Sparrow, or living Bird, mentioned, Levit. XIV. 4. in the cleansing of the Leper, was not properly a Sacrifice. These Creatures for Sacrifice, were of common use for mans sustenance & maintenance; And so were lawfull to be eaten in civill and common use, Deut. XIV. 4, 26. and Ch. XII. 15, 21. And they were easie to be had. As also Bread, Flower, Cakes, Wafers, Wine, Salt, Oile, Frankin∣cense, used most in the Meate, and Drink-offerings; And such like∣wise are Water, Bread and Wine, in our Sacraments. See Levit. I, II, III, IV. Ch. and Ch. VII. v. 11, 12, 13. A Burnt-Sacrifice] In all Burnt-Offerings;  and in such Sin-Of∣ferings, whereof any of the Blood was to be brought into the Ta∣bernacle of the Congregation to reconcile withall in the holy place; and also in Meat-Offerings of and for a Priest; all was to be burnt to the Lord; There was nothing left to be eaten by any, Levit. I. and Ch. VI. 22, 23, 30. In all other Sin-Offerings; and Trespasse-Offerings; besides the fat, and kidneys, burnt to the Lord: All the Flesh was the Priests, and to be eaten by him, and his. And so in all other Meat-Offer∣ings, Levit. VI. 16, 17, 18, 26, 29. and Ch. VII. 6, 7, 9, 10, 14. In the Peace-Offerings, the Wave-breast; and heave, or right shoulder, were the Priests, to be eaten by him, and his: And the rest of the Flesh belonged to the bringer of the Peace-Offering, to be eat∣en by him and his, Levit. VII. 31, 32, 33, 34. and v. 15,—21. The Levites had no part in any Offerings. Burnt-Offerings used for Sinne-Offerings, in Jobs time; Job XLII: 8. At the doore] Killed there. Because thither it was lawful for the Offerer or Bringer of it to come, that he might put his hand up∣on the head of the Sacrifice, Lev. I. 3, 4. and III. 2, 8, 13. and IV. 15, 24, 29, 33. Leaven] Leaven generally forbid in Meat-Offerings;  except in those two mentioned, Lev. VII. 13. and Ch. XXIII. 17. Confesse] This Confession of sinne differeth altogether from the Popish Sacramentall Confession.
That soul shall be cut off from his people] This Punishment as it is awarded here against the eating of the flesh of the Peace-Offering, for him who hath any Legal pollution upon him; so it is against such who are not circumcised, Gen. XVII. 14. who eate leavened bread during the Feast of the Passeover, Exod. XII. 15, 19. who do any work on the Sabbath-day, Exod. XXXI. 14. who eate of the fat of Beasts of which men offer Sacrifices, Levit. VII. 25. who eate Blood, v. 27. and Ch. XVII. 10, 14. who bring not the Sacrifice to the doore of the Tabernacle, to be killed there, not elsewhere, Levit. XVII. 4, 9. who eate of the Sacrifice of Peace-Offering on the third day, Levit. XIX. 8. who give of their Seed to Moloch, Levit. XX. 2, 3. or kill not such a sinner, v. 4, 5. who go a whoring after Wiz∣zards, and such as have familiar spirits, v. 6. who commit incest, v. 17. or lie with a woman in her sicknesse, v. 18. who goeth unto the holy things which the children of Israel hallow unto the Lord, ha∣ving his uncleannesse upon him, Levit. XXII. 3. who doth any work, or is not afflicted on the Fast-day of Atonement, Levit. XXIII. 29, 30. who keep not the Passeover, Num. IX. 13. who sinne presum∣ptuously, Num. XV. 30, 31. who being unclean, do not purifie themselves, Num. XIX. 13, 20. who being idolaters, come to a Pro∣phet to enquire concerning the Lord, Ezek. XIV. 8. This kinde of punishment hath variation of phrases in the expressions in Scripture, thus, shall be cut off, utterly cut off, cut off from Israel, from the Congregation of Israel, from among the Congregation, in the sight of their people, from the midst of my people, cut off from the earth; cut off from my presence: which likely do import various kindes, and degrees of punishments, according to the nature of the sinnes spoken to in them. How farre this phrase advanceth the Jewish Ex∣communication, I leave to further consideration. The unclean might eate of common meats; as the child-bed-wo∣man, Levit. XII. But in no case of Sacred meats, as, Leviticus VII. 20. Fat] the Fat of other cleane Beasts then of such as were fit for Sacrifice, was allowed to be eaten, Levit. VII. 25. The Fat also of the flesh, or body of the beast sacrificed might lawfully be eaten, Neh. VIII. 10. Esay XXV. 6. and LV. 2. But the Fat or Suet that was a∣bout the flanck, and the kidneys, or about and upon the entrails, Levit. III. 3, 4. was reserved out of all Sacrifices as Gods portion, to be burnt upon his Altar, Levit. III. 15, 16. and IV. 8, 10. and XVII. 6. Deut. XXXII. 38. 1 Sam. II. 15, 16. And is forbidden there∣fore to be eaten by any, Levit. III. 17. and XVII. 23, 25. Take Aaron] On the same day, that is, the first day of the first moneth of the second year, Moses began to consecrate, and anoint the Tabernacle, Altar, and all things belonging to them; As also Aaron and his sonnes, Exod. XL. 1,—17. Levit. VIII. 1,—36. Anointed] Aaron and all his sons were at first anointed, v. 30. Num. III. 3. XXXV. 25. Psal. CXXXIII. 2. Not the Levites. And
the High-Priest onely was anointed afterwards, Exod. XXIX. 29, 30. Levit. XVI. 32. We read oft of the Anointing of Kings, 1 Sam. X. 1. XVI. 13. 2 Sam. 11. 4. 1 Kings I. 39. 2 Kings IX. 6. XXIII. 30. Psal. LXXXIX. 20. But never of Prophets. That of Elisaeus, 1 Kings XIX. 16. seemes not to have beene done with material oile; see ver. 19. As neither that of Hazael to be King of Syria; compare 1 Kings XIX. 15. with 2 Kings VIII. 13. nor that of Absolon, 2 Sam. XIX. 10. nor that of Cyrus, Esay XLV. 1. there being no such custome of oiling Kings in his Countrey: But anointing in those places is taken simply, without that Ceremony, for designing them to their Offices. Burned] Moses at the Consecration of Aaron, and his sons, Sacri∣ficed with Common Fire; See ver. 20. 21, 28. But upon Aarons first Sacrificing, fire came out from before the Lord, out of the San∣ctuary, or came down from heaven rather, Levit. IX. 24. which must never after be suffered to go out. Nadab and Abihu] Nadab and Abihu took Strange or Common Fire, (and not fire from the Altar of Burnt-Offering, which was sent from heaven) to burne Incense therewith before the Lord, on the Altar of Incense; as the dayly duty required, at or before the dayly morning Sacrifice. But fire from the Lord, as, Num. XVI. 35. that is, from heaven, or the Sanctuary, or from the Altar of burnt-Offering, like lightning, strook them with sudden death; not con∣suming their bodies, or their coats, Levit. X. 4, 5. Some Names of some Beasts, and Birds, and Fishes; as also of some Trees, and Apparel; and some other Hebrew words, having no mate in Scripture, are to us now, and so to the modern Jewes, of uncer∣tain signification. See also the Annotations on Esay III. 18,—23. and on Jer. XVII. 3. Hoof] The Beasts, dividing the hoof, that is, into two clawes; and also chewing the cud, were clean, and to be eaten; See ver. 26. Deut. XIV. 6. Fins] Fish (here we meet with a phrase of a flesh of fish, Levit. XI. 11. and, Num. XI. 22. as well as, 1 Cor. XV. 39.) that had Fins and Scales, were likewise cleane, and to be eaten, Deut. XIV. 9, 10. Come not] The High-Priest must enter into the most Holy place but once in the year, on the tenth day of the seventh moneth, Levit. XVI. 29, 34. Exod. XXX. 10. Heb. IX. 7. That is, for his Priestly Ministration and Expiation. And then he was to be cloathed, not with the glorious garments which were peculiar to the High-Priest; but with those which were Common to him with the inferiour Priests, Levit. XVI. 4. as being a day of Humiliation and Afflicting the soul, Levit. XVI. 29. Yet upon other necessary occasions, he might enter in at other times, as at the taking down, and setting up of the Taber∣nacle in their removals and journeys in the Wildernesse; And when they took thence the Arke, upon severall occasions, as Josh. VI. 4. 1. Sam. IV. 3.
Not to the doore] No Sacrifices must be offered, but by Priests; nor killed by any but the Priests; except in some extraordinary Cases, by the Levites: but never by the Bringer for whom it was offered. Nor was it to be offered at any other place, but upon the Altar of Burnt-Offering, at the Tabernacle, Levit. XVII. 3,—9. Yet up∣on Extraordinary, and necessary Occasions, God commands, Deut. XXVII. 5, 6, 7, 8. And holy men of Prophetical spirits, though not Priests, did Sacrifice; and for a present time and use, did make and use other Altars; as Samuel, 1 Sam. VII. 9, 17. and Ch. XI. 15. and Ch. XVI. 2, 5. And David, 2 Sam. VI. 13. and XXIV. 18, 25. And Solomon, 1 King. VIII. 64. And Elijah, 1 King. XVIII. 32. And Gi∣deon, and Manoah, See Judg. II. 5. and VI. 26. and XIII. 16, 19. and XXI. 4. Blood] Blood, to make an atonement for their souls, Levit. XVII. 11. As a Type of the Messias his Blood, Rom. 3. 25. Ephes. I. 7. Col. I. 14, 20. Heb. IX. 12, 22. which is the principal cause of the prohi∣bition of the eating of Blood. Defiled] The dignity and estimation of the Priest, and principaly of the High-Priest. See v. 4, 7, 8, 9—15. and v. 21, 23. is re∣markable. Burnt] The Capitall punishments among the Jewes, were Burning, Gen. XXXVIII. 24. Levit. XXI. 9. Josh. VII. 15. Stoning, Levit. XX. 2, 27. and 24. 14, 16, 23. Hanging, Num. XXV. 4. Deut. XXI. 22. And in after-times, by example of the Romanes, Crucifying, and Beheading, as in our Saviour, and John Baptist. Superfluous] In a Freewill-Offering, the Sacrifice which had something Superfluous, or lacking in his parts, was accepted. To the Feasts, Levit. XXIII. are added, the Feasts of the New-Moones, Num. XXVIII. 11,—15. 1 Chron. 23. 31. 2 Chron. II. 4. and Ch. VIII. 13. The Feast of Purim, Esth. IX. 17, 19, 22, 26, 28. And of that Dedication, John X. 22. Sabbath] Sabbath is called Sabbath of Rest, or Rest of Rest; and so, v. 32. And Sabbath sometimes signifies besides the seventh day weekly, other Feast-dayes also, as Levit. XXIII. 11, 24, 32, 39. And sometimes the whole week; as Levit. XXIII. 15. Luke XVIII. 12. John XX. 1. Of the Sabbath-day, see the Annotations on Jer. XVII. 21, 22, 24, 27. The seventh moneth] The seventh moneth had as many Feasts in it, as all the year almost beside, Levit. XXIII. Deut. XVI. And the on∣ly set Fast-day. Of blowing of Trumpets] The Feast of blowing Trumpets was the first day of the seventh moneth; Beside the Feast of the New-Moone, Levit. XXIII. v. 24. And the year of Jubile began with Blowing of Trumpets on the tenth day of that moneth; which also was the day of Expiation, Levit. XXV. 9. And the Feast of Taber∣nacles for seven dayes followed after in the same moneth. Twelve Cakes] The twelve Cakes of Shew bread, each of an e∣quall,
and of a good bignesse, set in two rows, six on a row, seeme to be two rows in Longitude upon the Table, one by another; And so the Frankincense upon each Cake; rather then in Altitude one up∣on another; And so but one Frankincense upon either row; See v. 6, 7. The Table being two Cubits long, and one Cubit broad, Exod. XXV. 23. And the Frankincense being to be burned every Sabbath, Levit, XXIV. 7, 9. yet some make them to be two rows; six upon one another in either row, on heaps in height. In the Tem∣ple there were ten Tables of Shew-bread, five on the right hand, and five on the left; 1 Chron. 28. 16. 2 Chron. IV. 8. A Jubile] The Jubile-year had all the priviledges of the Sab∣bath-year, and more besides, Levit. XXV. Fruit for three years] Viz: the year before the Sabbath-year; and the Sabbath-year; and the year after it, till the plowing and sowing at the end of the Sabbath-year, came to an harvest in the end of the third year, Esay XXXVII. 10.
Numbers. THis Book begins with the year of the World, Not the 2455, or 2544: But the 2514, or rather 2510 and a little over. Thus, 2369, to the end of Genesis, and death of Joseph. Thence 60 to the birth of Moses. Thence 80 to the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt. And thence, 1 year, and one moneth, to the begin∣ning of this Book; which is the second year, second moneth, first day of their coming out. It containes an History, not of 39, years; but expressely of 38. years and 9 moneths, Num. I. 1. and Ch. XXXIII. 48, 49. compa∣red with Deut. I. 3, 4, 5. That in Num. IX. 1, &c. is but a Rehearsal of what was both given in charge, and was done before. And some other like Repetitions there are. 603550.] From twenty years old, and upwards, besides the Le∣vites. A wonderful multiplication from seventy persons in 211. yeares: yet fairly possible. Whereas, if they had been in Egypt it self 400 years, then their spawning or multiplying there had been very small; considering that from three persons that came out of the Arke with Noah, within the space of 400 years to the time of A∣braham; issued such infinite numbers, and troops of people, in seve∣rall Kingdomes, and Countreys in the world; as out of the Sacred Text and Storie, doth plainly appear. The Order of the Camp, and march of the Israelites in the Wil∣dernesse, Ch. II. and III. is thus; viz: The Tabernacle in the middest and Center of all the Hoast. Round about the Tabernacle, the Levites camped and marched, viz: On the West, the Gershonites; Num. III. 23. South, the Kohathites, Num. III. 29. North, the Merarites; Num. III. 35. East, Moses & Aaron, & his sons, Num. III. 38 Males from a moneth old and upwards 7500. 8600. 6200. 22300.
Round about the Levites; at a good distance, (Josh. III. 4.) Camp∣ed, and Marched, on the East-side, Judah; and in his Camp Issachar, and Zebulun; likely on either side, or each hand of Judah; he being in the midst. And so in the other Camps following. South-side, Reuben; and in his Camp, Sime∣on and Gad. West-side, Ephraim; and in his Camp, Ma∣nasse, and Benjamin. North-side, Dan; and in his Camp, Asher, and Naphtali. Num. II. and X. Chap. In all, 603550. And this is the same number of Males, from twen∣ty years old and upwards, when they gave a Bekah, or ten Gerahs each man, that is half a Shekel, after the Shekel of the Sanctuary, to the building of the Tabernacle, Exod. XXXVIII. 26. As was com∣manded, Exod. XXX. 11,—16. In the last numbering in the wil∣dernesse, in the fourtieth year, after the death of Aaron, and the death of that Generation, for their rebellion, and murmuring, Num. XIV. 29,—35. The males from 20 years old and up∣wards, all that were able to go to warre, were 601730. The Levites still numbered, not with them, but by themselves, Num. XXVI. 51. 22000.] 300 Male-Levites are omitted in this summe, as appears out of ver. 22, 28, 34. which make up 22300. being all the males from a moneth old and upwards. And the First-born males of all the children of Israel in the twelve Tribes, from a moneth old, and up∣wards, being 22273. Ch. III. 43. (which argues at least twenty se∣ven males in each family): And the surplusage of 273. verse 46. be∣ing redeemed at five Shekels apiece, amounting to 1375. Shekels, verse 50: All this argues the foresaid 300. male-Levites to be wit∣tingly left out in the casting up of the summe; most likely omitted so, Because they were such First-born of the Levites, as were born from the time of the coming out of Egypt to the time of this reckoning; and in that regard were sanctified to God as his own, by his Law and chal∣lenge, Exod. XIII. 2. and so could not come into the number of the other Levites which were to be changed for the First-borne of the other Tribes, and in their stead to be substituted, and appropriated to God and his service. This number of the Levites was very farre lesse then were of each other Tribe, Ch. III. with Ch. I. The number of the least Tribe, from twenty years old and upward, males able to go forth to warre, being 3200. Of the greatest, 74600. And the number of the male-Le∣vites from a moneth old and upwards, being onely 22300. The charge of Aaron, and his sons, joyntly; and of Eleazar, and Ithamar, distinctly; and of the Kohathites, Gershonites, and Mera∣rites, severally, is prescribed in the taking down, and carrying, and set∣ting up of the Tabernacle. See Ch. X. 17, 21. From thirty] The Levites at the age of thirty years, entered into the full possession of their Offices, to waite upon the service of the
Tabernacle, Num. IV. 3. At the age of twenty five they entered, or might enter upon them, as Novices, and subservients in some se∣condary, or inferiour administrations, as Probationers, and Profici∣ents, Num. VIII. 24. And when the Temple should be builded, they were ordered to begin and enter at twenty years of age, 1 Chron. XXIII. ver. 24—27. Ezra III. 8. And that by Davids appointment toge∣ther with the Prophets, Gad and Nathan, 2 Chron. VIII. 14. and Ch. XXIX. 25. They continued in their Offices till fifty. Num. IV. 3, 47. At fif∣ty they ceased waiting upon the service of the Tabernacle, but were Overseers there, Ch. VIII. 25, 26. And in their several Cities, as being well experienced in the Judicial Laws, they judged of matters brought before them. The Levites Offices distinct from the Priests, are set down in many particulars, 1 Chron. XXIII. 28,—32. David in his time by divine warrant doth distribute them, for the service of the Temple, into three sorts, to three several Functions, and Offices. One was to Attend the Priests, and to be helpful and sub∣servient unto them in their several Services. Of these there are sun∣dry Orders set down, 1 Chron. XXIII. and XXIV. Chapters. A se∣cond to solemnize the Service of God, with all maner of Musick; by Voice; and Instruments, both winded, and stringed. The third sort was to be Porters. Of whom, 1 Chron. XXIII. 5. and Ch. XXVI. and 2 Chron. XXIII. 4, 5, 6, 19. and XXXV. 15. Their Orders are set down, 1 Chron. XXV. These three Sorts being divided by Lot into twenty four Orders, or Courses, as the Priests were; That the first Course of these might attend with the first Course of the Priests; and leave the Temple, when they left it. The Levites also had other Offices, over the Treasures of the house of God; and of the Dedicate things; and for the outward businesse over Israel for officers, and Judges, in all businesse of the Lord, and in the service of the King, 1 Chron. XXVI. 20,—32. over divers Tribes. See further, 1 Chron. XXIII. 28,—32. Even those] Levites numbered, males from thirty years old to fifty, are 8580. Upon which reckoning there was then one such Le∣vite for every seventy such males in Israel. In Davids time, the Le∣vites (besides the Priests) from thirty years old to fifty, were 38000. 1 Chron. XXIII. 3. She] The Blessing of conceaving Seed, seemes to be promised to the innocent Wife, though barren before, upon the triall of her in∣nocency, in the case of her Husbands jealousie. We read not that the man in like case was subject to like triall: yet we finde that the Wife could divorce her Husband, Mar. X. 12. Woman] Women might be Nazarites, Num. VI. 2. And such likely was Sampsons mother, Judg. XIII. 4. The word Nazarite signifieth one that is separate: And the name Pharisee is of the same signification. And of these Nazarites, some
were for a certaine time, of moneths, or years, at their own choice, by their own special vow; as Acts XVIII. 18. and Ch. XXI. 24. Of whom these Lawes here are chiefly to be understood. Some for terme of life; as Sampson, Judg. XIII. 5. and so Samuel, 1 Sam. I. 11, 28. And John Baptist, Luke I. 15. Our Saviour was not a Nazarite, as hath beene commonly mis-conceived, out of a mis-translation, and mis-understanding of that text, Matth. II. 23. Offered] At the Consecration of the Tabernacle, there were two Waggons, and four Oxen given to the Gershonites, for car∣riage. Four Waggons and eight Oxen, to the Merarites, Num. VII. 7, 8. as they had the more need. The Kohathites Levites were to carry upon their shoulders, Num. VII. 9. 2 Sam. VI. 6. 1 Chron. XV. 2, 13, 15. And what it was, see Num. III. 31. and IV. 15. The Priests, Aaron and his sonnes being so few, were not then to Carry, but to Cover, Num. IV. ver. 5,—15. Deut. XXXI. 25. But afterwards growing more in number, they onely were to carry the Arke, as Josh. III. 3, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15, 17. and IV. 3, 9, 10, 11, 18. and ch. VI. 4, 6. and 2 Sam. XV. 29. and not very rarely; as some writing on Josh. III, 3. and on 1 Chron. XV. 15. do conceive. Altar] The Altar of Burnt-Offering had seven dayes spent for the Consecration and Expiation of it to sanctifie it, as it was appoint∣ed by God, Exod. XXIX. 37. (As likewise for Ezekiels Altar, Ezek. XLIII. 18,—27.) Yet twelve dayes spent at the Dedication of it, Num. VII. Silver charger] The silver Vessels of Chargers and Bowles, were for the Altar of Burnt-offerings. All Vessels of, and in the Sanctua∣ry, were of Gold, Exod. XXXVII. From off the Mercy-seat] Moses hears the voice of one speaking to him from off the Mercy-seat, Num. VII. 89. As the Lord promised, Exod. XXV. 22. Whereas formerly the Lord spake out of the Taber∣nacle of the Congregation, Levit. I. 1. Num. I. 1. Take the Levites] The Consecration of the Levites was done in one day. That of the Priests, in seven dayes. Which was so appointed, Exod. XXIX. 35. and so executed, Levit. VIII. 33, 35. Certain men] The Passeover of the second moneth is extended to more dayes then are here mentioned, or v. 10. As in Hezekiah's time, 2 Chron. XXX. 2. 15. Priests] The blowing of Trumpets is to be used by the Priests a∣lone, Num. X. 8. 2 Chron. XXIX. 26. And that, in Convocating As∣semblies; in journeying through the wildernesse; in going forth to warre, Num. X. 2,—9. and Ch. XXXI. 6. 2 Chron. XIII. 12, 14. in the first day, and tenth day, of the seventh moneth, Num. XXIX. 1. Levit. XXV. 9. in the New Moones, Num. X. 10. Psal. LXXXI. 3. In all their solemne Feasts; over their Burnt-Offerings, and Peace-Offerings, Num. X. 10. And upon Extraordinary Occasions, of
Fasts, and Humiliations. Joel II. 1, 15, Or of Joy and Gladnesse, Num. X. 10. as when David brought in the Arke to the place which he had prepared for it, 1 Chron. XV. 24, 28. And appointed Priests to minister before it, 1 Chron. XVI. 6, 42. And when Solomon brought the Arke into the Oracle, he mightily had multiplied the number of Trumpets, and had 120 Priests sounding them at that Solemnity, 2 Chron. V. 12, 13. And at the Dedication of the Temple, the Priests sounded Trumpets, 2 Chron. V. 12. and VII. 6. As also at the laying of the foundation of the second Temple by Zerubbabel, Ezra III. 10. And the Dedication of the Walls of Jerusalem by Nehemiah, chapt. XII. 35. And in Hezekih's joyful Reformation, 2 Chron. XXIX. 26, 27, 28. Besides, there were civil Trumpets for civil use, sounded by others then Priests; As in Warre, Judg. VII. 2 Sam. II. 28. At the Coronations of Kings, as of Solomon; Jehu; and Joash. And upon o∣ther occasions. The Levites used other Instruments of Musick, and not Trum∣pets, 1 Chron. XV. 19, 20, 21. and Ch. XVI. 5. 2 Cron. V. 12. and Ch. VII. 6. and Ch. XXIX. 25, 26, 27, 28. And used them, and song, at the daily Sacrifices, and all Festival Sacrifices, 1 Chron. XXIII. 30, 31. And haply in the night, 1 Chron. IX. 33. Psal. CXXXIV. 1. On the] The Israelites journeyed from Mount Sinai, in the second year, second moneth, twentieth day, (having stayed there in that their twelfth Station, a year within thirteen dayes, Exod. XIX. I.) See v. 12. Deut. I. 6, 7. Hobab] Jethro, or Hobab, a Kenite, the sonne of Revel or Raguel, a Midianite, and father-in-Law of Moses, comes to Moses to Horeb, and brings to him his wife, and two sonnes. And Moses upon his counsel, appointing very many Rulers, and Judges over the people, Jethro returnes into his own Land, Exod. XVIII. Deut. I. 9,—18. He (rather then his supposed sonne Hobab, the supposed brother-in-law of Moses) being come again, as it seemeth, thither towards the end of that year, and intreated there by Moses to stay and go along with them, refuseth to do so; Yet being again prayed and pressed by Moses thereunto, in this Text he either yeeldeth, (no reply being mention∣ed); or not long after, both he, and his house, and kindred, return to Moses; (It may be, warned by Moses to come then; as Saul in his time warned them to depart from the Amalakites, 1 Sam. XV. 6) and so were saved from that destruction of the Midianites, Num. XXXI. which return is plainly gathered out of Num. XXIV. 21. Judg. I. 16. and IV. 11. and 1 Sam. XV. 6. 1 Chron. II. 55. Jer. XXXV. 6. compared with 2 King. X. 15, 23. Seventy men] These LXX. Elders, were appointed about a year af∣ter those many Rulers, and Judges, Exod. XVIII. They prophesied, and did not cease for the time; like whereunto was the case of Saul, 1 Sam. X. 10. God by this signe sealing so, and at first honour∣ing their Vocation; though this extraordinary Gift ceased after∣wards. These LXX. are added to assist Moses in the Government of
this People in the Wildernesse. Yet it seemes from hence in after∣ages the Jewes took their rise of Constituting their Sanedrim or Sy∣nedrion of LXX. Elders for their Senate, and Supreme Court of Judicature in that Nation. Of LXX. see Ezek. VIII. 11. Exod. XXIV. 1, 9. Luke X. 1, 17. Quailes] Quailes given the second time, above a full year after those, Exod. XVI. 13. those being at their eighth Station, in the Wildernesse of Sin, and before they came to Sinai. These at the thirteenth Station, and after they left Mount Sinai▪ in Kibroth Hat∣taavah: And continuing for a full moneth, Psal. LXXVIII. 26, —31. Ethiopian] Zipporah called an Ethiopian or Cushite, from that East∣ern Ethiopia, or part of Arabia, wherein Midian stood or border∣ed with it; Arabia containing other Nations also lying Northward upon the Arabick Gulph, or Red-Sea. Miriam her sister-in-law, seemes to envy her, and fall foul upon Moses: and being first and deepest in the fault more then Aaron, is exemplarily punished. The man Moses] The commendation of Moses, God inspiring his pen, Num. XII. 3,—8. Kadesh] Kadesh is Kadesh-Barneah in the Wildernesse of Paran, and South-Confines of Canaan, in a Mountain of the Amorites, Deut. I. 19, 20. nigh to Mount Seir, ver. 44. whence Moses sent the Spies, Num. XII. 16. and Ch. XIII. 26. and XXXIV. 4. Josh. XV. 3. Being the fifteenth station of the Israelites, Deut. I. 2, 19. and II. 14. and IX. 23. Josh. XIV. 6, 7. and XV. 3. The Israelites abode at Kadesh-barneah, and compassed Mount Seir about the space of thirty eight years, compared with Deut. I. 2, 46 and II. 14. Another Kadesh was a City in the uttermost border of Edom, or Idumea towards Ezion-Gaber, and the Red Sea, Num. XXXIII. 36. Deut. II. 8. and in the Wildernesse Sin, by the waters of Meribah, and the 33. Station of the Israelites. Thither they came in the four∣tieth year, first moneth. And there Miriam died, four moneths before Aaron, who died in the next Station at Hor. Hence Moses sent Messengers to the King of Edom, Num. XX. 1, 14, 15, 16, 22, and XXVII. 14. and XXXIII. 36, 37, 38. Deut. XXXII. 51. Judg. XI. 17. Fourty years] These fourty years wandring in the Wildernesse, are not to be reckoned from the sending of Spies to search the Land; but from their coming out of Egypt, Num. XXXIII. 3, 38. Josh. IV. 19. Deut. VIII. 2. This appears also out of the ages of Moses and Aaron, Exod. VII. 7. compared with Num. XXXIII. 39. and Deut. XXXIV. 7. After the Return of the Spies, the Israelites continued in the Wildernesse but thirty eight years, and odde moneths; which yet are said to be fourty years, as the next full number. So Gideons seven∣ty sonnes, Judg. VIII. 30. are said to be slain, Ch, IX. 5, 18, 56. though Jothan one of them escaped. And so the Disciples are cal∣led 11. to whom Jesus appeared on the day of his Resurrection at
Evening, when yet Thomas was absent, Mark XVI. 14. Luke XXIV. 33,—40. John XX. 19,—25. compared together. And so the LXX. Elders are said to be gathered, and set round about the Taber∣nacle, when yet Eldad and Medad came not, Num. XI. 24. And not unlike is that of Davids reign fourty years, 2 Sam. V. 4, 5. when yet six moneths were over and above. And Solomons Building the Tem∣ple in seven years, 1 King. VI. 30. when yet six moneths are to be added, by comparing v. 1. and last. Hormah] This History at Hormah is another, and divers from that at Hormah, Num. XXI. 1, 2, 3. See another Hormah, Judg. I. 17. And all the men] Compared with Ch. XXVI. 11. yet doth shew that the Children of Korah were not swallowed up of the earth, likely miraculously saved: Or rather, they departing from their fathers tent, according to that command of God, and Moses, ver. 24, and 26. And of their race came such as made some of our Psalmes, or at least were famous Singers in the Temple; and Samuel also, the great Prophet, and Judge in Israel, 1 Chron. VI. 33,—38. Broad plates] The Altar thus covered twice with Plates of brasse; Here, and Exod. XXXVIII. 2. Altar] The Levites might not approach to the Altar to minister at it, nor eate of the Sacrifices. The First-fruits] First-fruits seeme to be of many sorts;  First, A Sheaf of the first ripe Corne, or an Homer of it, presented the se∣cond day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, Levit. XXIII. 10. Se∣condly, Two Wave-Loaves, of two tenth deales, at the Feast of Pen∣tecost or weeks, Num. XXVIII. 26. Levit. XXIII. 15, 16, 17, 20. Thirdly, A Cake of the first of their doughs, for an Heave-offering, Num. XV. 20, 21. Fourthly, brought in a Basket, in the seventh moneth, when all their fruits were gathered in, as most understand that place, Deut. XXVI. 1,—11. First-fruits injoyned without any set or certain proportion or stint, Deut. XVIII. 4. Of these, and o∣ther kindes of First-fruits, see more in this Text, And Exod. XXII. 29. and XXIII. 19. and XXXIV. 22, 26. Levit. II. 12, 14, 15, 16. Deut. XVIII. 4. Ezek. XLIV. 30. The tenth] So, ver. 21. Tythes, and their kindes and sorts; thus; Tythes of the yearly increase of all things in the Land paid to the Le∣vites, after the First fruits had been first deducted, and brought to the Priests, Exod. XXXIV. 26. Levit. XXIII. 10. Out of the nine parts remaining, there seems another Tenth taken, set apart for their Journeys, Sacrifices, and Feastings, thrice a year at Jerusalem; and therefore brought up thither, and there eaten by the owners, their fa∣milies, and the Levites, as most probably appears out of Deut. XII. 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 17, 18, 26. and Ch. XIV. 22,—26. And this se∣cond Tythe seems every third year to be distributed to the poor. Or rather a third Tythe every third year, not carried to Jerusalem, and eaten there; But gathered for these charitable uses onely, and to be eaten any where throughout the Land, Deut. XIV. 28, 29. and XXVI.
12, 13. And this third year is therefore called the year of Tything, Deut. XXVI. 12. Amos IV. 4. Of Tythes see more, 2 Chron. XXXI. 4,—19. Nehem. X. 32, —39. and XII. 44, 47. and XIII. 5, 12, 13. Mal. III. 8, 10. Luke XI. 42. and XVIII. 12. Heb. VII. 2,—9. The great maintenance of the Levites, appears in that the whole Tribe of Levi being three or four times lesse in number then any o∣ther Tribe, yet had they distinguished from all the Priests, the Tythes of all the Tribes, and so more then any one other Tribe; Besides their thirty five Cities and Suburbs, whereof five were Cities of Refuge; Josh. XXI. one belonging to the Kohathites Levites; two to the Gersho∣nites, and two to the Merarites. In all twice at least more Cities then some other Tribes had that were twice their number. See also that, Num. XXXI. 30, 47. The greater maintenance of the Priests appears, in that being but three persons at first, at least of ripe and mature age, yet they had the Tythes yearly of all the Levites Tythes, which were at first 8580 of thirty years old, and upwards; and so about the hundred part of all the fruits and increase of all Israel. And as the numbers of the Priests multiplied afterwards, so did in all probability the number of the other Tribes. They had also all the First-fruits of all things, from all persons, throughout the twelve Tribes, even of their doughs and bakings, Deut. XVIII. 4. Num. XV. 20, 21. which, as some think, exceeded their Tythes aforesaid. They had also all the First-borne of Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, which were given to them in kinde; And the Redemption money of the First-borne of Men, and of unclean Beasts and cattell, Num. III. 46—52. Exod. XXXIV. 19. 20, and Ch. XXII. 29, 30. Deut. XV. 19. They had also all Oblations, both Voluntary, and by Vow; And the Redemption of Things, and of Persons, Devoted to God: And all Sacrifices for Sinnes and for Tres∣passes, and the Meat and Drink Offerings, and Heave-offerings; And the Breast and Shoulder in Peace-offerings, Deut. XVIII. 3. And the Skins of the whole Burnt-offerings. And all their Tythes, First-fruits and Oblations were to be of the best and choisest sorts, Num. XVIII. 12, 29. Besides these they had thirteen Cities, and Suburbs, and Pri∣viledges belonging to them, whereof one was a City of Refuge, Josh XXI. 13. See Num. XVIII. 8,—19. And that also Num. XXXI. 28, 29, 37, 38, 39, 40, 50. Levit. X. 12, 13, 14, 15. and Ch. XXVII. 21, 28. See the Annotations on Num. XVIII. 29. Rock] At Rephidim by Mount Sinai, Exod. XVII. 1,—7. be∣ing the eleventh Station of the Israelites, Num. XXXIII. 14. Mo∣ses with his miraculous Rod, struck the Rock in Horeb, in a due obe∣dience to Gods commandment, and waters came forth: And he na∣med the place Massah, and Meribah, Exod. XVII. 5, 6, 7. But at Ka∣desh in the Wildernesse of Zin, where Miriam died, being the thirty third Station, Num. XXXIII. 36. Moses, with Aarons miraculous Rod (for he took it from before the Lord, as he commanded him), ha∣ving
his spirit provoked by the rebellious people, smiles the Rock twice without any such command, or commission to smite at all. And he, and Aaron likewise, speak unadvisedly with their lips, uttering words of passion and incredulity, and so rebelling against Gods commandment. And thereupon they not sanctifying the Lord in the eyes of the chil∣dren of Israel; He was sanctified in them, by his excluding them from entrance into the Land of Canaan. And this also is called the water of Meribah, or Strife; as here, so Ch. XXVII. 14. Psal. CVI. 32, 33. Aaron] Aaron, whose name may seem to signifie an Ark or Chest, dies seven moneths and seven dayes before Moses, at Mount Hor, (the Place called Mosera, Deut. X 6.) in the thirty fourth Station. For A∣aron dying in the fourtieth year, fifth moneth, first day, Num. XXXIII. 38. And that compared with the moneths mourning for Moses, Deut. XXXIV. 8. and three dayes preparation to passe over Jordan, Josh. I. 1. and Ch. III. 2. And their coming out of Jordan, on the first moneth, tenth day, Josh. IV. 19. Do shew that Moses died in the twelfth moneth, seventh day: And so seven moneths, and seven dayes after Aaron. In which short interval of time, many, and mighty things were done and atchieved; as among other things, Sihon, and Og, and their Kingdomes conquered; the Midianites almost destroy∣ed; among whom Balaam was slaine, Josh. XIII. 22. and the book of Deuteronomie written, Num. XXI. and XXXI. Deut. I. 1, 3. Fiery Serpents onely in the later part of the fourtieth year, after Aarons death. Heshbon] Heshbon a chief City in Moab; afterwards of Sihon King of the Amorites, Deut. I. 4. afterwards of Gad; and out of that Tribe, given to the Merarites, Josh. XIII. 26. and XXI. 38, 39, 40. 1 Chron. VI. 80, 81. Afterwards recovered by the Moabites; and wasted by Shalmanesar, Esay XV. 4. and XVI. 8, 9. and after by the Babyloni∣ans, Jer. XLVIII. 45. There may seeme to be another Heshbon of the Ammonites, Jer. XLIX. 2, 3. And one in the Tribe of Reuben, Num. XXXII. 37. Josh. XIII. 15, 17. Heshbon signifies Devises; And an allusion is made to the name, Jer. XLVIII. 2. in the judge∣ment there denounced against it; like to this is English, There is mis∣chief devised against the Devises, the name of a town with us. Balak] Balak needed not to have hired Balaam, and feared Israel, Num. XXII. and XXIII. and XXIV. if he had known the prohibition of God to Israel, Deut. II. 9. which they obeyed, Judg. II. 15, 17, 18, 25. 2 Chron. XX. 10. Yet that part, which was great, of the Lands of Moab, which Sihon had lately conquered from Vehab, King of Moab, as Tremelius translates, Num. XXI. 26. the Israelites conquering Sihon, in that right possessed it, Num. XXXIII. 49. Deut. I. 5. and XXXIV. 1, 5, 6, 8. and it was given to the Reubenites, and Gadites, Josh. XIII. Unicorne] So Deut. XXXIII. 17. Job XXXIX. 9, 10. Psal. XXII. 21. and XXIX. 6. and XCII. 10. Esay XXXIV. 7. Yet the
translation of the word is doubted of; or at least the nature of the beast, such as the Pensil of our Painters doth portray out unto us; be∣cause no such beast was known or seen by any man. And the Uni∣cornes horne so deemed, is of some strange Fish, not of any known Beast. Some learned render the word Bufale, or Buff; or else the wild Oxe called by the Latines Urus; eminent for bignesse, strength, hornes, and untamable fiercenesse. Advertise thee] Balaam called a South-sayer, Josh. XIII. 22. and a Prophet, 2 Pet. II. 16. gives this advertisement to Balak, which seems to have a relation to that which follows in the residue of that Chap∣ter. Yet besides he gives counsel to Balak, or at least after to the Mi∣dianites to draw the Israelites into sinne, Num. XXXI. 16. which com∣ing so to passe, He himself in his return, is slaine by the sword amongst the Midianites, Num. XXXI. 8. in that Expedition, wherein Jo∣shuah, though not named, may seeme to be the General, and Phineas chief of the Priests, sounding Trumpets in that warre, wherein 12000. Israelites, not having one man slaine, did yet slay five Kings of Midian, (or Dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the Countrey; as it is, Josh. XIII. 21.) and all the males of that populous Nation (save such as escaped by flight, whose posterities in the dayes of Gideon came to pre∣vaile against Israel, Judg. VI. 1, 2.) And they took a mighty prey and booty; whereout, after Purifications of themselves, and the Prey, there was paid a tribute and portion to the Priests, and a portion to the Levites; and a voluntary Oblation after made by the Captaines to the Lord, Num. XXXI. Of the 24000. that died in the Plague and stroak of Gods venge∣ance; the 23000. mentioned, 1 Cor. X. 8. likely were the vulgar sort that died in the slaughter, Num. XXV. 5. and the other thousand were the heads of the people hung up, ver. 4. without supposing any Pestilence at that time. Or if by Plague, Num. XXV. 9. Psal CVI. 30. we understand the Pestilence, then most probably, the 23000. died of it; and the other thousand by Hanging, and Slaughter. 22200.] In this last numbering of the people in the Plains of Mo∣ab; in the fourtieth year of their wandering in the Wildernesse, Sime∣on was farre the least in number, and Judah the most. And the whole number of fighting men of the twelve Tribes, after that generation died in the Wildernesse, upon that judgement, Numb. XIV. 29,—35. and upon sundry other judgements besides, was now 1820. lesse in number, then in the former numbering at Mount Sinai, thirty nine years before. 23000.] And so but 700 more then they were in the former num∣bering at Sinai, Ch. III. Being likely not altogether free from that sinne and punishment, Num. XIII. and XIV. Sin] This Wildernesse differs from Zin, ver. 36. This being the eighth Station of the Israelites: that of Zin the thirty third, which is Kadesh, where Miriam died, as was said, Num. XXXIII. 11, 36. Rephidim] See the Observations on Ch. XXVIII. 8.
Abarim] Pluraly;  Mountains; being a continuation of Moun∣tains or Hills, Num. XXXIII. 47. in the Confines of the Amo∣rites, and Moabites; whereof the tops had several names, as Nebo, Pisgah, Pehor: But Mount Sinai was none of them, being farre e∣nough of. Salt Sea] Is not that Lake of Genesareth. But only that Dead Sea, and Salt Sea, where formerly Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zebo∣im had stood, Deut. XXIX. 23. Hos. XI. 8. Riblah] Riblah in the Land of Hamath, part of the East border of Canaan, near the North quarter. Here Pharaoh-Nechoh put Jehoa∣haz in bonds, 2 Kings XXIII. 33. And Nebuchadnezzar put King Ze∣dekiah in bonds, and put out his eyes, 2 King. XXV. 6, 7. And slew the High Priest, and second Priest, and the sonnes of Zedekiah, and other prime men, ver. 18,—21. Jer. LII. 10, 27. This Riblah seems to be that which was afterwards called Antiochia in Syria. Of this see my Annotations on Ezek. XI. 10, 11. Chinnereth] Num. XXXIV. 11. Deut. III. 17. Josh. XI. 2. and XII. 27. and XIX. 35. is called in the New Testament Genezareth. Luke V. 1. which Lake is also called the Sea of Galilee, Matth. IV. 18. Mark I. 16. And the Sea of Tiberias, Josh. XXI. 1. And absolutely the Sea, Matth. XVII. 27. Suburbs] The Suburbs of the Cities of the Priests, and Levites were 1000. Cubits from the Cities on every side: And so 2000. in the limits and utmost Bounds and Borders of each Quarter, East, West, North, and South. Fourty eight Cities] See Josh. XX. and XXI. and 1 Chron. 6. com∣pared together; and the Great Annotations upon the said sixth Chapter. Shall not be guilty] The innocent man, that by meere accident, a∣gainst his will slew a man, might yet, as it seemes, be lawfully slaine by the revenger of blood, if he took him without the Citie of refuge. Which the more shews the wrath of God against murder. Onely to the family] Israelites might marry wives of other Tribes, so that they were not inheritrixes of Land, Num. XXXVI. Yea, of other Nations if they were Proselytes; and not of those Nations which God expressely devoted to destruction, Deut. VII. 3. and XXI. 10, —13. Of their marriages with Heathens, and mixing the holy seed, See Ezra IX. and X. Ch. Neh. IX. 2. and X. 30. and XIII. 3. 23,— 30.
Deuteronomie. DEUTERONOMIE was written in the yeare of the world, not 2493. But in the year 2553. or rather 2548. thirty eight years, and odde moneths, from the time of the beginning of the Book of Numbers. And about 1450 years before Christ's time. It containes to the fifteenth Verse of the last Chapter, an History of one moneth, and seven dayes, viz: From moneth eleven, day one, to moneth twelve, day seven; at which time Moses died; as hath been formerly gathered upon Aarons death. See and compare together Deut. I. 3. and XXXIV. 8. and Josh. IV. 19. In which short time the Book was written by Moses; And, besides sundry Repetitions, and Explications, other new Lawes given; A second Edition, as it were, of the Covenant made with the new Generation; with some other Consequences, and last Acts of Moses. The last Chapter of Deuteronomie was written after Moses his death. As likewise the Conclusion of the Book of Jeremie, was written after his Death, Jer. LI. 64. and LII. 31, 34. And that XXXIV. Chapter contains one moneth more, of the Israelites mourning for the death of Moses. This Book of Deuteronomie, and that of the Psalmes, are of chief note in the Old Testament, for the Life of Religion, the spiritual power of Worship and Obedience in the inner man. Yet this Book of Deuteronomie seemes not to be that which was to be written very plainly upon great stones plaistered, in Mount Ebal; For that was the Decalogue only, or those Blessings and Curses, on∣ly, Deut. XXVII. 2,—26. Josh. VIII. 30, 35. Nor seemes it to be this book of Deuteronomie only that was to be Copied out by the King, and He to read therein all the dayes of his life, Deut. XVII. v. 18, 19, 20. Not yet seemes it to be this book only, that was to be solemnly read by the Priests, every seventh or Sabbatical year in the Feast of Tabernacles, in the audience of all the people, Chapt. XXXI. 9,—13. As in the three foresaid particulars some would have it. Nor yet is it this Book only; or that Song only, Deut. XXXII. that was to be put and placed by the Priests, in, at, or by the side of the Arke of the Covenant, Deut. XXXI. 25, 26. But the whole book of the
Law, the five Books of Moses were to be Copied out by the King, read in every Sabbath-year, and laid up and preserved safe by the Arke of the Testimony. The Judicial Lawes, most of all mentioned in this Book, and pe∣culiarly belonging to the Countrey and People of the Jewes, are grounded upon an equity of Right Reason for that Countrey and People. And so far are useful to all others. The ten first Chapters are most-what of precedent Passages, Re∣petitions of what things were formerly done; with Exhortations to Obedience intermixed. Moses yet herein not binding himself to an exact order in observation of the times, and places. These] Is an Inscription of the whole book, and an accurate de∣scription of the Place, where Moses delivered, and did, what in this book is contained. Eleven] The eleven dayes journey end either at Kadesh-barneah; or, compassing about by the way of Mount Seir, and Kadesh-barneah, it ends at, and in the Plaines of Moab. Both which ser to shew how soone they might have come from Horeb or Sinai to Canaan; had they not provoked God by their sinne, Num. XIV. instead of that eleven dayes journey, to keep them wandring in the wildernesse 38. years after. Horeb] Horeb and Mount Sinai are taken for the same, Exod. III 1. See on that Text, Deut. I. 2, 6, 19. and IV. 10, 15. and V. 2. and IX. 8. 1 King. XIX. 8 Mal. IV. 4. They being close neighbours, or rather two tops of the same Mount. The Israelites abode almost a year there, Deut. I. 6. Exod. XIX. 1 Num. X. 11. Og that dwelt at Ashteroth, was slaine in Edrei, another of his roy∣al Cities, Ch. III. 1. Num. XXI. 33. Josh. XIII. 12, 31. and XII. 4. Angry] Gods anger at Moses here mentioned, was not in the se∣cond year, when and where the Spies were sent from Kadesh-barnea, Num. XIII. and XIV. But in the fourtieth year at that other Kadesh, when and where Miriam died, Num. XX. 1, 2, 12. Many dayes] The Israelites abode in Kadesh many dayes. And they compassed Mount Seir many dayes: The space in which they came from Kadesh-barnea, till they came over the brook Zered, or pitch'd in the Valley of Zared, in Moab, being their thirty ninth Sta∣tion, was thirty eight years; which was in the beginning of the four∣tieth year of their coming out of Egypt, Deut. II. 1, 2, 3, 7, 14. some take thirty seven years and a half of this time to be spent at Kadesh-barnea: And sure the most of it was spent there; and the lesser and later part of it in compassing Mount Seir: And the other half year spent in coming from Mount Seir to Zered. See Deut. II. 7. Distresse not] And so, v. 19. The Israelites forbidden to distresse the Moabites, and Ammonites; or to possesse their Lands. Yet what Sihon had lately conquered from them, and possessed; which was no small part of their Countreys, all that, the Israelites conquering Si∣hon,
by right of that Conquest, did fairly possesse, Josh. XIII. 15,—25. Judg. XI. 12,—27. Gyants] There are mentioned Anakims, Emims, Zanzummims, Rephaims, as several races of Gaints, Deut. II. 11, 20. and Ch. III. 11, 13. Num. XIII. 33. See further, Gen. VI. 4, 1 Sam. XVII. 4. and 2 Sam. XXI. 16,—22. Mount Sion, which is Hermon] Called by the Sidonians Syrion, by the Amorites Shenir, in the Valley of Lebanon, Deut. III. 9. and IV. 48. Josh. XI. 17. and XIII. 5. and XII. 5. 1 Chron. V. 23. And Mount Sion, that strong hold, in the City of David, being the South-part of Jerusalem, and not seated on the North-side of it, 2 Sam. V. 7, 9. 1 King. VIII. 1. Psal. II. 6. and IX. 11. and XLVIII. 2. (upon which Text see the Annotations) are two differ∣ing Mountains, and farre asunder. They differ also in their Origi∣nal Characters and letters; the former being written  and the later ; though the New Testament write the later also Sion, Rom. IX. 33  XI. 26. As likewise the Hebrew  is written Si∣don; And  is written Tyre, Matth. XI. 21, 22. Called] We may not conceive a miracle in Moses voice, as some do on this place. My Commandments] So it is in the Masorets marginal reading. But in the Text it is his Commandments: And may import the words of Moses, expounding the sense and meaning of Gods words that went next before, Seventh day] Some words are added by Moses to those uttered by God on Mount Sinai, Exod. XX. 10, 11. as an Explication of them. And also a Reason is given of the fourth Commandment differing altogether from that Reason in Exod. XX. 11. which Reason here yet evinceth not, that therefore God brought the Israelites out of Egypt on the Sabbath-day. But the putting of Wife before House, ver. 21. contrary to that order of House before Wife, in Exod. XX. 17. confounds the late Papists silly shift in di∣viding the last Commandment into two, to make up ten, Deut. IV. 13. to colour thereby their taking away the second Commandment; or shufling of it into the first: so that by them is not known which is the ninth, and which the tenth Commandment. Seven Nations] So many are here reckoned. And so, Iosh. III. 10. Six in Exod. XXXIII. 2. Deut. XX. 17. Iudg. III. 5. In many places fewer. In Gen. XV. 19, 20, 21. ten Nations are reckoned. And among them the Philistines are never mentioned. Yet all the inhabitants of the whole Land go many times under the names of Canaanites, and Amorites; as Gen. XXIV. 3. and Ch. XV. 16. Utterly destroy them] Such is Gods Command;  And such his Promise of assistance, v. 16. See Exod. XXXIV. 11, 12. Deut. IX. 3. and XX. 16, 17. Yet this was not a thing to be done in one year, or in Ioshuah's Life-time, Iosh. XXIII. 4, 5, 13. Iudg. l. 9, 21, 27, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34. But by little and little, Exod. XXIII. 29, 30. Deut. VII.
22. Yet God justly threatens and blames them for their neglect in Conquering and Expelling them, Num. XXXIII. 55, 56. Josh. XXIII. 13. Judg. II. 3, 21, 22, 23. And he never gave them the possession of their full Bounds, as of Tyre, Sidon, and of all the Land of the Philistines, because they kept not for their part the Condition of their Covenant with him, Judg. II. 20, 21. Neither shalt thou] Marriage forbid with the Canaanites strictly. Yea also forbid with the Ammonites, Moabites, and Egyptians, Ezra IX. 1, 2. Neh. XIII. 23. A reason is given, Deut. VII. 4. Neh. XIII. 26. Exod. XXXIV. 16. The mischief of that marriage be∣tween Jehoram the sonne of Iehoshaphat King of Iudah, and Atha∣liah the daughter of Ahab King of Israel, is recorded, 2 King. VIII. 18. Yet in case they became Proselytes, Converts to the true Reli∣gion; the marriage with all of them seemes lawful: as in that case, Deut. XXI. 10, 13. And in the case of Rahab, and Ruth; of the wife of Ioseph in Egypt: of the wife of Moses; of Maacah the daughter of the King of Geshur with David; and of Pharaohs daughter with Solomon. And this made Iacobs sonnes propound or pretend the con∣dition of Circumcision to Shechem, and the Shechemites, Gen, XXXIV. 14, 15, 16. In the New Testament, we read the prohibition, 2 Cor. VI. 14. And the precept, 1 Cor. VII. 12—16. which rules touching Infidels seeme to serve for the case of grosse Hereticks, and Apo∣states. Against unlawful marriages see more, Iudg. III. 6, 7. and XIV. 2, 3. 1 King. XI. 2. Ezra IX. and X. Chapters, Neh. X. 30. and XIII. 3, 30. Rayment] The rayment waxing not old on the Israelites in the Wildernesse, was a Miracle sufficient, though it grew not greater still with the growing children, Deut. XXIX. 5. Neh. IX. 21. This day] Is taken somtimes properly: somtimes as for a short time; here. Somtimes for a longer time indefinitely, as Hester I. 18. And the Phrase since yesterday, and the third day, is sometimes taken pro∣perly, or for a short time, Gen. XXXI. 2, 5. Exod. IV. 10. and XXI. 36. 2 Sam. III. 17. Iob. VIII. 9. Sometimes for a long time, 1 Sam. XIV. 21. and XIX. 7. 2 King. XIII. 5. 1 Chron XI. 2. (As likewise to morrow is taken, sometimes for a short time, as 1 Sam. XXVIII. 19. Sometimes for a long time, as Josh. IV. 6, 21.) Sometimes for never. Iosh. III. 4. 1 Sam. IV. 7. Of to day, and to morrow, see Iosh. XXII. 18. and IV. 6, 21. Esay XXII. 13. Matth. 6. 30. 1 Cor. XV. 32. Arke] Besides that famous Arke for the Tables of the Covenant, Exod. XXXVII. 1, &c. There seemes here one formerly made, for present use, wherein the Tables by Gods commandment were first put. And possibly this Arke with the Tables might be put into that famous Arke built afterwards, Exod. XXXVII. Deut. X 5. Journey] These verses seeme to be as a Parenthesis inserted by Moses: And their journeys summarily mentioned, v. 6, 7. are more distinctly and orderly recorded, Num. XXXIII. 30,—39. without
any coming or returning, again and again, to one and the same place. Altars] Idolaters had their Priests, Temples, Altars, Tables, La∣vers, Pillars, Groves, Oaks, Statues, Images of wood, stone, and mettals, carved, graven, molten; in Cities, and Townes, in streets, in fields, and gardens, in houses, and on their tops, in Gods house, in chambers, behinde the doores, by rivers, and rocks, and caves, upon high mountains, and hills, and valleys, and under green trees: with their several sorts of Scrifices, and burnings, even slaying their children to them, Jer. VII. 31. XIX. 5. Ezek. XVI. 20, 21. and XX. 26, 31. Feasts, Incense, costly cloathes, and other services of them. See Deut. VII. 5. and XII. 31. and sundry other places, as Esay I. 29. and LVII. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and LXV. 3, 4, 11. and LXVI. 3. Amos II. 8. 1 Cor. VIII. 10. and X. 21. Jer. X. 9. XVII. 2. And see their ea∣ger rage after idolatry, Ezek. XVI. 15, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31. A poor man] Private poor rather then publick beggars were, and still will be among Gods people, Matth. XXVI. 11. For ever] Ever, hath reference, sometimes to a long time, indefinitely, Exod. XXI. 6. 1 Sam. I. 22. and XXV II. 12. 2 King. V. 27. 2 Chron. XIII. 5. Psal. XXXVII. 18, 27. and LXXXIX. 1 Esay XIII. 20. and XIV. 20. and XXV. 8. and XXXIII. 20. and XXXIV. 10. Jer. VII. and XVII. 4, 25. and XXV. 5. and XXXI. 40. and XXXV. 19. and L. 39. and LI. 26, 62. Lam. V. 20. Sometimes to the terme of a mans life. 1 Kings I. 31. Dan. III. 9. Josh. 8. 28. Gen. XLIII. 9. 1 Sam. I. 22. 1 Chron. XXVIII. 4. Psal. XXXVII. 27, 29. and CXIX. 44, 98. Esay XXXII. 17. Sometimes to the year of Jubile, As in this Text, and Exod. XXI. 6. compared with Levit. XXV. 40. Sometimes to so long as the conditions annexed to a thing are observed, 2 Chron. XX. 7. 1 Sam. II. 30. Sometimes to the continuance of a State of politie, Num. X. 8. See the Annotations on 1 Kings VIII. 13. Some∣times to the Time and Coming of the Messiah, 1 Chron. XV. 2. and XVII. 12, 14, 22, 23, 27. and in many places of the Prophets. Some∣times to eternity, Exod. III. 15. and XV. 18. Deut. XXXII. 40. Luke I. 33. And so never is taken sometimes for a long time: some∣times for almost all times of a mans life, Luke XV. 29. Sometimes for a mans life, 2 Sam. XII. 10. Sometimes for eternity. The flock and the herd] Oxen, Kids, Sheep, and Bulloks were used in the Feast of the Passeover, that is, in the Feast of Unleaven∣ed bread, the bread of affliction, for seven dayes, Exod. XIII. 6, 7. Num. XXVIII. 16,—24. 2 Chron. XXXV. 7, 8. 9. and Ch. XXX. 24. All which Festival time is called the Passeover, and so Joh. XVIII. 28. A Lamb, or a Kid, might be used for the Passeover properly so called, on the fourteenth day, at the going down of the Sunne, Exod. XII. 5. Deut. XVI. 6. A matter too hard] As Judges and Officers were to be appointed in all Cities in Canaan, Deut. XVI. 18, 19, 20. So here the highest Court of Judicature over the whole Land, in difficult Causes, and for matters of Appeal, was appointed to be in that one place which the
Lord should choose; which in after-times appeared to be the City Je∣rusalem. And here it is not sure and evident whether this Supreme Court were to be one, mixt of the Priests, and the Civil Judge joynt∣ly; Or (though this not so likely) two distinct Courts, Ecclesi∣astical, and Civil; both Supreme in their kinde. Judgement of death was awarded upon presumptuous disobedience to their Sentence. And more of this Supreme Court Moses doth not deliver. Yet upon this, the Jewes in after-ages grounded their great Sanhedrin in Jeru∣salem; and not upon the LXX. Num. XI. For those were onely ad∣ded to assist Moses in his troublesome government of that unruly Campe of the Jewes in the Wildernesse; as likewise those Rulers and Judges, Exod. XVIII. The Priests due] Of the very great maintenance of the Priests, see on Num. XVIII. 24. Three Cities more] Three other Cities of Refuge, over and above the six, here allowed, and conditionally enjoyned. Yet we never read more of them, that they were separated and set out. And that because the Jewes by their sins and breach of Covenant with God on their part, never got possession of the utmost Bounds of the Lands by God conditionally promised to them. To Battel] The Law of warre, Deut. XX. 1, 10,—18. and Ch. VII. 2, 3, 16, 23, 24. and Exod. XXXIV. 11,—16. in∣joyned by God to the Israelites, was various, according to the seve∣rall Cities and Nations against whom, whether neere, or very farre off, Deut. XX. 15, 16, 17. and according to the several Causes and Occasions, whereupon they were to wage it: And is best expounded by their Practices in Scripture recorded. Against the Amalakites, see the injunction, Exod. XVII. 14, 16. Deut. XXV. 17, 18, 19. Against the Midianites, see that, Num. XXXI. Where they slew all the males they could, even to the male∣children; and every woman that had known man, and took the spoil, and all their cattel, flocks, and goods, as a prey to themselves. Against the Amorites, Sihon, and Og, (included in the seven Na∣tions, or in the same condition with them) See Num. XXI. and Deut. II. 34, 35. and Ch. III. 6, 7. where they slew the men, women and children. But all the Cattel, and spoile, they took for a prey to them∣selves. Against Jericho, see Josh. VI. 17,—26. where the City, the first that withstood them in the Land of Canaan, was singularly accursed, and all therein, ver. 17, 18, 24, 26. 1 King. XVI. 34. And accord∣ingly they slew man and woman, young and old, and Oxe, and Sheep, and Asse: Onely the silver and the gold, and the vessels of brasse and iron, they put into the Treasury of the House of the Lord, as God commanded; keeping nothing to themselves: And as Achan, with his, and all he had, perished; They being first stoned, and then burnt for the transgression: So Rahab, her parents, brethren, and all that she had, were saved, upon the special cause and occasion of her Faith in hiding the Spies.
Against Ai, See Josh. VIII. 2, 26, 27. where they slew all, as at Jericho: onely the spoile, and cattel thereof, they took as a prey to themselves. Against the five Kings of the Amorites: And against seven; See Josh. X. 10, 28, 30, 32, 33, 35, 37, 39, 40. where they slew all the souls that breathed; as they did at Jericho: But for the spoile, and cattel, they did as at Ai and took them as a prey to themselves. Against all those Kings at the waters of Merom, and presently af∣ter, they did the like, Josh. XI. 11, 12, 13, 14. The Gibeonites, upon a crafty contrivance, got to be spared, and obtained a league to live. And though al the congregation murmured against the Princes for it, yet because of the oath, Joshuah and the Princes onely adjudged them to bondage, to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the House of God for ever, Josh. IX. 13,—27. And Saul afterwards in a wrong zeale, slaying many of them, was punished for it, in his sonnes, 2 Sam. XXI. 1,—9. Many other of the seven Nations were not conquered, Or so conquered, as brought onely under Tribute, See Deut. VII. 22. Josh. XIII. 1,—6. and XIII. 3. and XV. 63. and XVI. 10. and XVII. 12, 13. Judg. I. 1, 19, 21, 27,—36. For which yet the Israelites were reproved, Judg. II. 1, 2, 3. And doomed so, as we read, Judg. II. 21, 22, 23. according to that Prediction, Num. XXXIII. 55. and Threatening, Josh. XXIII. 13. And of the Race of the seven Nations, see that in the dayes of Solomon, 1 King. IX. 20, 21. And if that Law of warre, Deut. XX. 10,—15. should be extend∣ed to the seven Nations also; yet they deprived themselves of the benefit of it, in not yeelding to conditions of peace; or staying to be besieged; But ingaging first, and beginning the warre upon the Israelites; as appears mainly in Josh. Ch. X. and XI. The Captive, a beautiful woman] Seemes a permission and Indul∣gence, in case of warre; rather then an Allowance; As appears by the displeasing Rites before the marriage; and the slight dismission. It is not much unlike that Bill of Divorce, Deut. XXIV. 1. Matth. XIX. 8. And the case of Usury; as some accompt that, Deut. XXIII. 20. Two wives] Moses supposing the practice of having two wives to∣gether, though in it selfe unlawful; or rather of having two one af∣ter another; taketh order for the right and double portion of the mans first-borne, Deut. XXI. 15, 16, 17. Hanged is accursed] That Curse seemes not to be for the kinde of punishment;  but for the Crime sake, acted by such Malefactors here mentioned. And so Num. XXV. 4. John XVI. 26. 2 Sam. XXI. 6. It is true of Christ, Gal. III. 13. Iosh. XIX. 31. by reason of all our horrible sins laid upon him, I meane the debt of our sins; He be∣coming our Surety; and so sinne for us, 2 Cor. V. 21. that is, a Sa∣crifice for sin; as Sacrifices for sin in the Levitical Law are termed sometimes by the name of sin. The imputation of Guilt would seeme to make him a sinner.
Not weare] That difference of Apparel, to distinguish the Sexes, must be observed, and never broken; except in case of necessity, and for some present pinch, some weighty and urgent occasion, as to e∣vade and avoid a sudden mischief; and the like. If a man] Is understood of an unmarried man, and a Virgin not betrothed: as likewise that is, Exod. XXII. 16, 17. The difference is in inticing her there; and in laying hold on her here, though not violently to ravish her. And therefore the Offender is ordered and punished somewhat lesse there; and more here. An Ammonite] The Israelite was to respect more, and hate lesse, the Edomite, and the Egyptian; then either the Moabite, or the Am∣monite: The two former in their third generation, after they became Proselytes, might be, as it were, endenized and made free among the Israelites; as well as if they were native  Israelites: As those that were honoured to be made Citizens of Rome, by birth, or purchase Acts XVI. 37, 38. and XXII. 25,—28. were thereby invested with the Priviledges of Romanes. The Moabite, and Ammonite were not to be so priviledged in their tenth generation: which yet must be un∣derstood, either of the men only, or else with exception of some such singular Cases, as was that of Ruth, Ch. IV. 10. Upon Mount] The Tribe of Levi was to stand on Mount Geri∣zim, in the Tribe of Ephraim by Sichem, with five other Tribes, whereof Joseph is one: And the six other Tribes to stand on Mount Ebal. And so the Priests called Levites, Deut. XXVII. 14. may seeme to stand with the Ark in the narrow valley between both: And there turning to Mount Ebal, to pronounce the Curses, whereun∣to all the people and Tribes on Mount Ebal were to say Amen. The other part concerning the Blessings is not expressed; but in all points, and circumstances easily to be gathered and understood, Deut. XI. 26,—30. and XXVII. 12,—26 This was done in the first year of their coming over Jordan Josh. VIII. 32,—35. when, and where were read likewise all the words of the Law of Moses, before all the Congregation of Israel. With ships] Ships, besides the Ark of Noah, are first mentione in Jacobs blessing of Zebulun, Gen. XLIX. 13. and in Moses his threat∣ning the Israelites in this place. Not given] Gods hand in giving and working of Grace. See Ch. XXX. 6. Jer. XXIV. 7. and XXXI. 33. and XXXII. 39. Ezek. XI. 19, 20. and Ch. XXXVI. 26, 27. Heb. VIII. 10, 11. John VI. 44, 45, 65 Phil. I. 29. and II. 13. Ephes. II. 8. 2. Tim. II. 25. And he gives grace to the remnant which is according to the election of Grace, Matth. XI. 25. and XIII. 11. Mark IV. 11, 12, John XII. 39. Rom. XI. 7. Ephes. I. 5. 2 Chron. XXX. 12. Mount] This Mount Hor, where Aaron died, Num. XX. 25, 26. was South of Judea. And Mount Hor, on the North-bounds of Judea, Num. XXXIV. 7. are far differing and distant mountains. King in Jeshurum] Moses King in Ieshurum, in Blessing the twelve
Tribes, doth omit Simeon, if we accompt him not included in Iudah, as his Lot in the division of Canaan fell within the Lot and Tribe of Iudah; and their expeditions against their enemies in con∣quering their own shares were joynt, and undertaken together, Iosh. XVIII. and XIX. Iudg. I 3. Dwell between his shoulders] That is, In Ierusalem. For though the Southerne, and Superior part of Ierusalem, where Mount Sion was, and which was called the City of David, did belong to the Tribe of Iudah; yet the Northerne, and inferior part of it, where Mount Mo∣riah was, whereon the Temple was built, belonged to the Tribe of Benjamin. The huge deep valley of Mello between the two Mount∣ains, being filled up and levelled by Solomon; so that thence after∣ward, Sion, and Moriah, might be called two tops of one Mountain, Sion the higher top, and Moriah the lower. Died] The time of Moses his death was in the fourtieth year, twelfth moneth, seventh day of their coming out of Egypt; and one hundred and twentieth year of his age. See upon Aarons death, Num. XXXIII. 38. No man knoweth] The reason of concealing the place of the Bu∣rial of Moses; And Michael the Archangel his contending with the Devil, and disputing about the body of Moses, Iude ver. 9. was not revealed in the Scripture of the Old Testament. And this dispute might be, lest the Israelites knowing it, might carry it with them (as Iosephs bones) into Canaan, into which God had said, That he should not enter; or rather, That the people might not idolize it.
Joshua. THE Book of Joshua was not probably written by him; though of, and concerning him; For be∣sides some things contained in it, which are deemed by some, to be done after his death; As that concerning Caleb and his daughter Ach∣sah, Ch. XV. 16,—19. And most surely the Conquering of Leshem or Laish by the Danites, Ch. XIX. 47. Iudg. XVIII. 7.—29. And those things recorded, Ch. XXIV. 29,—33. Some other things seeme to plead, That it was written by some Prophet Long after his death. Whence that phrase remaines unto this day, is so frequently used, Ch. IV. 9. and Ch. VI. 25. and VII. 26. and VIII. 29, and IX. 27. and X. 27. and XIII. 13. and XIV. 14. and XV. 63. And the Book of Iasher is named, Ch. X. 13. which seemes written at soonest in Davids time, as recording an Act of his, 2 Sam. I. 18. unlesse we say, This Book of Iasher in Ioshua's time, to be continued on, and en∣larged in after-times, by adding and inserting memorable acts in af∣ter-ages; And so in Davids time. And further the Mountains of Iudah, and the Mountains of Israel are mentioned, Iosh. XI. 21. Which many possibly seeme to intimate the Book to be written after the division of the Nation into the two Kingdomes of Iudah and Is∣rael. Ioshua was the Tribe of Ephraim, Num. XIII. 8. 1 Chron. VII. 27. And he lived one hundred & ten years, Ch. XXIV. 29. and was six full years in conquering the Land; and in the seventh fell to the Divi∣ding of it by Lot; as is gathered out of the age of Caleb, Iosh. XIV. 7, 10. And divers years Ioshua lived and governed after that time; but how many, it doth not appear out of this Book: yet is gathered out of other places to be ten years more: and so this Book to containe an History of seventeen years, from the Beginning of his Government to his Death. The truth of this account stands upon this computa∣tion; from the coming out of Egypt, to the fourth of Solomon, are four hundred and eighty years, 1 King. VI. 1. which are made up thus; fourty years in the Wildernesse; seventeen of Ioshua; two hun∣dred ninety nine of the Iudges; counting in the twenty of Sampson, as coincident and concurring with the first twenty years of Eli; twenty years more of Eli; twenty of Samuel; fourty of Saul; fourty of David; four of Solomon: In all, 480.
Within three dayes] This Edict and Proclamation of three dayes, for preparation to passe over Iordan, set down here, doth begin and commence after the History of the two Spies, and their returne to Ioshua; which History yet is recorded after in the Chapter follow∣ing. And thereupon the mention of the said three dayes is taken up a∣gain the second time, Ch. III. 2. when new directions are given for their Passage, and the manner of it. Rahab] Rahab, an Harlot, because at least she had been so, though now a beleeving Convert, ver. 9, 10, 11. Heb. XI. 31. Iames II. 25. She had her house on the wall of Iericho, ver. 15. which fell not when the rest of wall fell, Ch. VI. 20, 22. In framing her excuses for the Spies sake, she bewrayes her infirmi∣ty, in making equivocations, or untruths rather, ver. 4, 5. In trans∣acting with the Spies, some speeches seeme to passe between them after they were let down the wall, ver. 18. In pleading for her family, she makes no mention of an Husband, ver. 13. and Ch. VI. 23. She was after married to Salmon, eldest sonne of Nahshon, which Nahshon was great-grand-childe to Hezron or Esrom that went down with Iacob into Egppt, Gen. XLVI. 12. And was Prince of Iudah, at the numbring of the people, Num. I. 7. at the marshalling of the Camps, Num. II. 3. at the Dedication of the Altar, Num. VII. 12. and at the setting forward in their journeys, Num. X. 14. But died in the Wildernesse, Num. XIV. 29. This marriage of Rahab to Sal∣mon, now Prince of Iudah, is not recorded in the Old Testament: But mentioned, Matth. I. 5. in the Genealogy of our Saviour; wherein, as Rachab; so Thamar, Ruth, and Bathshebah, are mentioned. Now there being four hundred and eighty years from the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt to the Building of the Temple, in the fourth year of Solomon, 1 Kings VI. 1. whereof fourty years were spent in the wildernesse, and seventy in Davids life time, 2 Sam. V. 4. and four in Solomons reigne; The Remaining time between Rahabs receiving the Spies, and Davids Birth must be 366. which may, and must be made up in some such reckoning as this; viz. Supposing Ra∣hab to be eighteen years old when she received the Spies; and sixty six when she did bear Boaz to Salmon; then of necessity must Boaz be∣get Obed, and Obed beget Iesse, and Iesse beget David, each about the age of 106. Which well considered, evidenceth and evinceth these two things. 1. That the years of the six Oppressors in the times of the Judges, Ch. III. 8, 14. and IV. 3. and VI. 1. and X. 8. and XIII. 1. which amount to 111. years, cannot be reckoned distinct and apart; But are to be included within the years of the Judges, and of the Rest of the Land. For otherwise the years between Rahabs receiving the two Spies, and Davids birth, would rise to 477. which cannot be true. And secondly, that the years 480. which is that famous Link of time, 1 King. VI. 1. cannot possibly be forced to any more then 480. much lesse to 580. as some learned men of late would have it; and con∣trary
to that sacred text, 1 King. VI. 1. which never received any veris Lection; and contrary to the clear evidence and notation of pacular times set down in Scripture, which exacty make up that summe of 480. as was now shewed: viz. fourty in the Wilder∣nesse; seventeen in Ioshuah's Government; 299. in the Judges times, eighty in Eli, Samuel, and Sauls times; fourty in Davids; and four in Solomons. Ark] The Ark here leads the way before the hoast, into Iordan and Canaan; without any more mention of the Pillar of Cloud and Fire. Two thousand Cubits] The distance of two thousand Cubits from the Ark, Josh. III. 4. was on either side of it; and seemes to be the same distance that was kept from it, in their Campings or Pitchings, and in their Journeyings in the Wildernesse: And may well be deem∣ed to be the Sabbath-dayes journey mentioned, Acts I. 12. Compa∣ring together John XI. 18. and Luke XXIV. 50. Rose up upon an heap] When the Israelites passed through Jordan, the waters were not as a wall unto them, on the right hand, and on the left; as likely they were when Elias, and Elizeus divided them with a mantle, 2 King. II. 8, 14. And as certainly the waters of the red∣sea were, Exod. 14. 21, 22. But God stopped the waters of the river that came down from above, and they stood and rose upon an heap, ve∣ry farre from the City Adam: And thereupon those waters that came down from Adam to the Salt and Dead Sea, and Lake of Sodom and Asphaltites, did run away, failed, were cut off. Midst] The often mentioning the midst of the river of Iordan to be the place where the Priests feet stood bearing the Ark of the Lord; the place where twelve stones were erected; and the place whence twelve stones were taken to be set up in Gilgal, Iosh. III. 17. and IV. 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 18. doth induce me to take the word midst in its pro∣per signification, having no maner of inconvenience in it for so do∣ing, rather then to transferre it to the Channel close by the further side and banck. Passed over] The place of their passage over Jordan, may seeme to be called afterwards Beth-barah, in the Tribe of Reuben, beyond Jor∣dan, Judg. VII. 24. And Bethabara, John. I. 28. (not Bethania, as the Trent-Bible erroneously there hath it) where John baptized Jesus; as well as others. And Betharabah seemes to be a City not farre from the Passage on the other side, a City of Benjamin, border∣ing upon Judah, Josh. XV. 6. 61. and XVIII. 22. Though some not so rightly place the foresaid town higher upon the river more then twenty miles above Adam; and farre off from the border of Judah. At this Passage the Altar Ed seemes to be builded in the Tribe of Reuben, Josh. XXII. 11. Twelve men] Reuben, and Gad, are here included in the twelve; though their Possessions were beyond Iordan. And of these two Tribes, and half Manasseh, about fourty thousand armed men passed
over Iordan to the warre, ver. 13. which were yet but a few more then one third part of their military men, Num. XXVI. 7, 18, 34. The rest stayed behinde for their many necessary occasions. Came up] They came over Iordan, on the tenth day of the first moneth; were Circumcised the eleventh; And did eate the Passeover on the fourteenth, Ch. V. 2, 10. Both which were omitted in the wildernesse; at least since the Returne of the twelve Spies, and af∣ter that Passeover at Mount Sinai, Num. IX. 5. See Iosh. V. 5, 7. And on the XVI. day Manna ceased, ver. 12. The second time] Not that these were Circumcised once before. See ver. 7. It was neglected, or omitted many years for some rea∣sons. And at this time upon many reasons renewed, and again in∣joyned by God. See the Annotations upon this text. Gilgal] Of this place, see the Annotations on Hos. IV. 15. A man] This Captain of the Lords hoast, was not Gabriel, or any other created Angel; but Michael the Archangel, Iude 9. Michael the great Prince of Gods people, Dan. X. 21. and XII. 1. the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. III. 1. Christ the Sonne of God; Appearing here, and sundry other times, in the shape of man, as a foregoing presage and prologue, to typifie his future Incarnation. And this ap∣peareth, by Ioshua's Adoration of him, as his Lord Jehovah, Ch. VI. 2. and by His acceptance of it, which an Angel would have refused, Apoc. XIX. 10. by his Commanding Joshua to put off his shoes, be∣cause the place was holy; like to that, Exod. III. 5. Not that the Place was capable of any inherent holinesse in it self, but hallowed by Gods holy presence in it, and in that relation onely so esteemed; and which ceased so to be when his Presence was withdrawn from it. This Captain instructs Joshua about the maner of besieging, and conquer∣ing Jericho, Ch. VI. 2,—5. Seventh day] The Sabbath-day must needs be one of the seven wherein the Camp of Israel did march round about the walls of Jeri∣cho; if not the seventh wherein they compassed the Citie seven times, and took it. And this by the command of him who is the So∣vereigne Lord of the Sabbath. Priests shall blow with the Trumpets] Priests, not Levites. And Priests, not Levites carry the Ark. See the Observations on Num. X. 8. and on Ch. VII. v. 1,—9. Achan] Achan is called also Achar, 1 Chron. II. 7. which signifi∣eth a Troubler; and the Place of his execution is called the Valley of Achor, v. 26., that is trouble. He was Grand-childe of Zabdi; other∣wise called Zimri, 1 Chron. II. 6. Ai] Ai is called Hai, Gen. XII. 8. and Aijah, Neh. XI. 31. in the tribe of Benjamin, very near to Bethel, Ezra II. 28. Neh. VII. 32. and differs from that Ai, situate between Heshbon and Rabbah, in the tribe of God; yet taken by the Ammonites; whereof see Jeremie XLIX. 3. Bethaven] Bethaven, and Bethel, two distinct townes, not farre
asunder, near the North bounds of the Tribe of Benjamin. Yet Ho∣sea calls Bethel by the name of Bethaven, the house of vanity, and vaine Idols, in scorne and derision, for Jeroboams golden Calf there set up, Hos. IV. 15. and V. 8. and X. 5. See the Observations on 1 King. XII. 29, 32. Taketh] By Divine instinct and command Lots are here used; In which case their judgement is infallible. Of Lots, see my Annotati∣ons on Ionah. I. 7. And his sonnes] Gods severe judgement upon his whole family, ver. 24, 25. is warranted by Him, who is sole Dispensor, and Sove∣reigne Lord over his own Law, Deut. XXIV. 16. And at the most, his Sacriledge, was but the Occasion, not the Cause of Gods judge∣ment upon his family; They having sinne enough in themselves o∣therwise, for Gods justice to work upon, though they had no hand in this sacrilegious act. Ambush] God appoints both the End, and the Means, 1 Chron. XIV. 14, 15. And Gods people having the assurance of Gods Par∣ticular Promises, do yet carefully use the Meanes; as Josh. XI. 7. and X. 9. Acts XXVII. 24, 31. Iudg. XX. 28, 29. Stratagems in warre are lawful. Chose out] Not likely that the 30000. did lie in wait behinde Ai Westward, between Ai and Bethel; but onely 5000. ver. 12, 17. Gibeon] Gibeon was a great City, a royal City of the Hivites, and all the men mighty, Ch. X. 2. and XI. 19. allotted afterwards to Benjamin; and out of that Tribe to the Priests, Ch. XXI. 13, 17. The Tabernacle, and Altar were here in Davids and Solomons time, 1 Chron. XXI. 20. 2 Chron. I. 3. David orders the service of it here, 1 Chron. XVI. 30. Solomon sacrificeth at this High Place: God ap∣pears to him here: And he brings the Tabernacle, and Altar thence, to the Treasuries of the Temple, 1 King. III. 4. Here Ioshua vanquished the five Kings of the Amorites, Ch. X. And had the Sunne stand still upon his prayer. Here David smote the Philistines, 1 Chron. XIV. 16. By the poole of Gibeon was that mortal fight between twelve of Abners, and twelve of Ioabs men; whence the place was called the field of strong men in Gibeon. Here Abner in his flight slayeth Asa∣bel the brother of Ioab; And Ioab pursueth Abner by the way of the Wildernesse of Gibeon, 2 Sam. II. 12, 16, 24. and Ch. III. 30. At the great stone in Gibeon Ioab slew Amasa, his Cousen-german, 2 Sam. XX. 8. And by the great waters that are in Gibeon, Iohanan fighteth, and puts to flight Ishmael, Ier. XLI. 12. The Gibeonites were Hi∣vites, Iosh. IX. 7. yet called also by the more general name of Amo∣rites, 2 Sam. XXI. 2. They were those which in after-times were cal∣led Nethinims, &c. that is, Deodands, given and devoted to that Drudgery, ver. 23, 27. Of whom see 2 Sam. XXI. 2. 1 Chron. IX. 2. Ezra II. 43, 58, 62, 70. and VII. 7, 24. and VIII. 17, 20. Neh. VII. 46, 60, 73. and X. 28. and XI. 3, 21. Something like to these were those other of these Nations, on whom Solomon did raise a tribute of
Bondage, 1 King. IX. 20, 21. Of whom see more on that place. The Oath and League made with the Gibeonites, and their Cities, ver. 17. though surreptitiously and fraudulently gotten, and also rash∣ly granted, yet seemes in the substance of it to be lawful; otherwise an unlawful Oath should be broken: whereas this was kept with all faithfulnesse; Joshua fighting in their defence, and that by the Lords approbation and encouragement, Ch. X. 7, 8. And this seemes law∣ful, because they sued for Peace before they were besieged; and wil∣lingly submitted to all Conditions, without any reservation of their Lands, Goods, Lawes, Liberties, much lesse of their superstitions and idolatries, (which otherwise might have ensnared the Israelites); but of their Lives onely, and they to be employed in the Israelites ser∣vice. Cities, and People of other Nations then these, very farre off, might be received upon farre easier termes and conditions. But up∣on all these Conditions, others of these Nations themselves might have been spared their lives. Yet God in his providence so ordered, That there was not a City that made peace with the Israelities, saving these Hittites of Gibeon onely, and their Cities: All other they took in battel; for it was of the Lord so to harden their hearts, that they might be destroyed, Ch. XI. 19, 20. And therefore, the Con∣gregation here murmured unjustly (haply through ignorance) against Joshua, and the Princes, for this League and Oath: And Saul was justly punished, and that grievously, in his posterity; and the Land also with famine, many ages after this, because he sought to slay and destroy them from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel, contrary to this League and Oath; though Soul did it in a pretended or wrong zeale to the children of Israel and Judah, 2 Sam. XXI. 1,—6. Adoni-Zedek seemes, in after-ages to have succeeded that Melchi∣zede, Gen. XIV. 18. But Adoni-bezeck, Judg. I. 7. seemes not any successor to this Adonizedeek, much lesse himself; He himself being slaine; ver. 23, 26. But Adoni-bezeck was Lord or King, not of Jeru∣salem; but of Bezeck, in the Tribe of Judah; where Saul numbred a∣gainst Nahash 330000. men, 1 Sam. XI. 8. Jerusalem, is called also Jebus, Judg. XIX. 10. 1 Chron. XI. 4, 5. of Jebusi the sonne of Canaan, Gen. X. 16. And Salem, Gen. XIV. 18. Psal. LXXVI. 2. The name seemes composed of them. If not; then of Jireh, and Salem, the place Salem [Gen. XIV. 18. Psal. LXXVI. 2.] where God appeared [Gen. XXII. 14.] Or, Jiereh Shalem, sig∣nifying the Vision of Peace, or Possession of Peace, or Peace shall be seene or provided, a place of providence, Gen. XXII. 14. See Hebr. VII. 1, 2. And it is of the Dual number, being a double City, be∣longing to two Tribes, Judah, and Benjamin; Josh. XV. 8, 63. and XVIII. 28. Judg. I. 8, 21. Jer. XXXIX. 3. The Southern and higher part belonging to Judah, wherein the strong hold of Zion was; taken at last by David presently after his anointing King over all Israel; and built and called his City, 2 Sam. V. 6,—9. 1 Chron. XI. 4,—8. And became the Burial-place of the Kings of Judah. And Davids
Sepulcher continued there till the Apostles times, Acts II. 29. near 1100. years. And the Ark for a time, was placed there, 2 Sam. VI. 12,—17. whereupon Zion is called the City of God, Gods holy Hill. The Northerne, and lower part, belonging to Benjamin; wherein the Temple stood, on Mount Moriah, 2 Chon. III. 1. Honourable things are spoken of this City, Psal. LXXXVII. 2, 3. This City is called the City of God, of the Lord of Hoasts, of the great King; the ho∣ly place of the Tabernacles of the most High, Psal. XLVI. 4. and XLVIII. 8. The Throne of the Lord, Jer. III. 17. Jehovah-Sham∣mah (in that visionarie Description) Ezek. XLVIII. 35. It is called the City of Solemnities, Esay XXXIII. 20. a City of Righteousnesse, Esay V. 26. a City of Truth, Zech. VIII. 3. a Faithful City, Esay I. 26. a City sought out, and not forsaken, Esay LXII. 12. The walls thereof are called Salvation; and her gates Praise; and they are ever in Gods sight, Esay XLIX. 16. and LX. 18. Hoham] These other four Kings were all South of Jerusalem: And all five did after belong to the Tribe of Judah. Lachish] Of this City see the Annotations on Micah I. 13. The Lord said] The Lord spake to Joshua; sometimes immedi∣ately by himself; sometimes being consulted with by Urim and Thum∣mim. Hailestones] Gods two Miracles in this battel. I. By wondrous Hailestones; like those in Egypt, Exod. IX. 18,—25. which kil∣led more Amorites then were slaine by the sword; braining likely the body of their hoast, as they fled, where they were thickest, and those that were formost in the flight; and not hurting the Pursuers, who were intermingled, yet likely mostwhat in the Reare of the ene∣my. II. By the miraculous standing still (upon Joshua's Prayer, first privately made, and granted; after publikely pronounced in the sight of Israel) of the Sunne, and of the Moone; and with them of the whole frame of Heaven; about a whole day, till the people had a∣venged themselves upon their enemies. Jasher] The Book of Jasher records the Miracle. No Heathen History being so ancient. This Book seemes to be carried on, and en∣larged still with the story of things acted in after-ages. For there is mention of it in Davids time, 2 Sam. I. 18. And this Book being no part of Canonical inspired Scripture; but a Civil Chronicle or An∣nals among the Jewes, is since perished; as divers others of like na∣ture; Among which are those books of Chronicles, not Canonical, but Civil, so often cited in our two books of the Kings. No day] That day in Hezekiah's time, was in some things like this, 2 King. XX. 11. But that, not till many ages after; And this book first written. Returned] If Joshua here resolved to return to Gilgal, Yet many other victories, in the Southern parts, even from Kadesh-barnea, un∣to Gaza, in a short time, intervened, ver. 16,—42. before he actually returned thither, ver. 43.
Ioshua] And c. XI. 31. Ioshua took Hebron, or Kiriath-Arba, and Debir, or Kiriath-Sepher, and cut off the Anakims. Yet under the conduct of Caleb this was perfected; Ioshua assigning him, out of his army, the Tribe of Iudah, for his assistance therein, Ch. XIV. 6,—15. and Ch. XV. 13,—19. which thing seems to be repeated, Iudg. I. 10,—15. rather then a new Conquest made again after the death of Ioshua. Goshen] And Ch. XI. 16. and Ch. XV. 51. This Goshen in Canaan; differing from that in Egypt. Sand] Hyperbolees much used in Scripture. So Gen. XXII. 17. and XLI. 49. Iudg. VII. 12. and Ch. XX. 16. 1 Sam. XIII. 5. 2 Sam. I. 23. 1 King. I. 40. and IV. 20, 29. 2 King. XIX. 24. 1 Chron. XII. 8. and XVI. 33. 2 Chron. I. 9. and XXVIII. 9. Job. XX. 6. and XXII. 24. and XL. 23. Psal. VI. 6. Esay XXXIV. 3, 5, 7, 9. and XLVIII. 19. Jer. IV. 24. and XV. 8. Ioel. III. 18. Amos II. 9. and IX. 13. Iohn XXI. 25. A long time] After the battel at the waters of Merom, Ioshua did make warre a long time with all those Northern Kings in Canaan: about sixe years; as is gathered out of Ch. XIV. 6,—15. Arnon] Arnon the River, ariseth not farre from the head-spring of the River Iabbok; and both from rocky Mountains that lie in the East part of the Tribe of Gad. It runneth Southward, and falls into the North-East corner of the Dead Sea. It is the border between Si∣hon, or Reuben on the West, and Ammon on the East; and between Sihon or Reuben on the North, and Moab on the South. Iabbok] Iabbok the River, ariseth as Arnon; but runneth North a little; and after turneth his streame West; and falleth into Iordan a little below the Sea of Galilee. It divided the Land of Gilead between Sihon and Og; and afterwards between Gad, on the South, and halfe Manasseh on the North. Remaineth yet] The Land both Conquered, and Unconquered, was to be divided by Lot among the nine Tribes and a half; so Iosh. XXIII. 4, 5. Begun at Gilgal, Ch. XIV. 6. and Ch. XV. and Ch. XVI. and Ch. XVII. Resumed, and Perfected at Shiloh, Ch. XVIII. and XIX. But we never read, That they did Conquer the whole Land, and all their several Shares and Lots; through their own de∣fault and breach of Covenant with God, by Disobedience, Chapt. XXIII. 13. Aroer] The City Aroer was neere the Rise of the River Arnon; and in the confines between the Reubenites and Gadites; as also Heshbon, Dibon, and Ataroth; which being bordering Cities, are said to belong to them both, sometimes to the one, sometimes to the o∣ther; To Reuben, Iosh. XIII. 16, 17. Num. XXXII. 37. To Gad, Iosh. XXI. 39. Num. XXXII. 34. 1 Chron. VI. 81. Distributed] The whole Countrey, seemes to be divided into so many parts as there were Tribes to possesse them. Yet so, as that the Bounds of every part or Province were not so precisely limited be∣fore the Tribe had drawn the Lot, but that afterwards they might
be enlarged or lessened, according to the greatnesse or smalnesse of the number that belonged to it, Num. XXVI. 53,—56. and Chap. XXXIII. 54. which last point of division was left to the wisdome of the High Priest, Ioshua, and the Elders, whom God had appointed to divide it, ver. 1. and Ch. XVII. 14,—18. By lot] Lots fell out providentialy to the twelve Tribes, in the Division of the Land; in relations, partly to their Birth, partly to the Prophetical Blessings of them by Jacob, Gen. XLIX. and Moses, Deut. XXXIII. And so in the Cities of the Levites; the Lot cast the thirteen Cities of the Priests in the Tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Simeon, which were nearest the Temple, Josh. XXI. 9, 10, 17. when it was builded. Old] Calebs age, when he was sent among the Spies from Kadesh∣barnea was fourty. At this Division of the Land eighty five. So that fourty five years intervened, viz. 38. in the wildernesse, and se∣ven of Joshua's Government untill this time. And Caleb here, ver. 9,—14. And Joshua, Ch. XIX. 49, 50. did both aske, and both had certain inheritances given them two, according to the word of the Lord. The City and Suburbs of Hebron were given to the Priests, for a City of refuge: The fields and Villages thereof to Caleb, Ch. XXI. 11, 12, 13. Caleb] Not that Caleb, 1 Chron. II. 18, 42. the sonne of Hezron, unlesse by sonne we understand great-grand-childe; But Caleb that is constantly called the sonne of Jephunne; And Othniel constantly called the sonne of Kenaz, are here yet called brethren: And Oth∣niel is again called the younger brother of Caleb, Judg. I. 13. and III. 9. which could not be except by one mother: But Othniel marrying the daughter of Caleb, ver, 17. And cosen-germans, Nephews, and the like being often called brethren in Scripture, It is likely that ei∣ther Iephunne, and Kenaz were brethren, and so Caleb and Othniel co∣sen-germans; or that Caleb and Kenaz were brethren, and so Othniel Calebs Nephew; or that the Kenezite mentioned, Num. XXXII. 12. might be Grandfather to them both. But no certainty appears for any further determination. Separate] The bordering Cities of the children of Ephraim, were between or among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh. See also, ch. XVII. 8, 9. And as Ephraim had part in Manasseh, so Ma∣nasseh had Cities in Issachar, and in Asher, ch. XVII. 11. The Portion] Ten portions to Manasseh; that is, five portions to the five sons, mentioned, ver. 2. And the portion of the sixth son, who was Hopher, was divided into five portions among his grandchildren, the daughters of Zelophahad; which so made up ten portions, though the five last were but as big, as one of the former five. One lot] Both Ephraim and Manasseh seek for a larger portion and Lot then what did befall them in the General Division. Shiloh] Shiloh was on the North-side of Bethel, on the East-side of the high-way from Bethel to Shechem, on the South of that Leba∣non,
Judg. XXI. 19. And so situated on the border between Ephra∣im and Benjamin; yet belonged to Ephraim, not to Benjamin, Judg. XXI. 1, 21. There was the Tabernacle, as was formerly said. There were the Lots cast for seven Tribes. Josh. XVIII. 8. Thence were the two Tribes and a half dismissed to their Possessions, after the warre, Josh. XXII. 9. And thither were the whole Congregation of Israel gathered to go up to warre against them, upon a wrong surmise con∣cerning the Altar Ed, ver. 12. Thither came all the other Tribes to aske counsel of the Lord in their warre against the Tribe of Benja∣min, and there was their Camp, Judg. XX. 18. and XXI. 12. and XIX. 18. Thither came Elkanah and Hannah to worship; and Samu∣el ministred there before the Lord, 1 Sam. I. 3. and II. 11. and III. 21. And there the Prophet Ahijah dwelt in the dayes of the first Jero∣boam, 1 King. XIV. 2. Tabernacle] The Tabernacle, coming over Jordan, was first set up in Gilgal; Not that Gilgal of the Nations, Josh. XII. 23. Gen. XIV. 1. Esay IX. 1. (whence haply Galilee might take its name); But that Gilgal in the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh. IV. 19, 20. After∣wards in Joshua's time it was set up here in Shiloh, in the Tribe of E∣phraim, near the Center of the Land; which was by Sichem, Ch. XXIV. 1, 25, 26. And Bochim, Judg. II. 1, 5. may seeme to be conjoyned to it. It may seeme to be fetched thence for a present use, to that solemne Assembly at Shechem, in Joshua's time, Ch. XXIV. 1, 26. But being returned to Shiloh, it continued there above three hundred years, at least till the death of Eli, 1 Sam. I. 3, 9, 24. and II. 14. and III. 3, 21. and IV. 3. It may seeme to be again at Gilgal with the Ark, in Samuel and Sauls time, 1 Sam. X. 8. and Ch. XI. 15. But soone after we surely finde it to be at Nob in the Tribe of Benja∣min, near Anathoth, Neh. XI. 32. when David came thither in his flight from Saul, 1 Sam. XXI. 1,—9. After that sacrilegious slaugh∣ter of eighty five Priests by Saul at Nob, 1 Sam XXII. 18. it was soon removed, in the dayes of David, to Gibeon, in the same Tribe of Ben∣jamin, (and not farre from Bethel;) the City first of the wily Gibe∣onites Hivites, but after given to the Priests, Josh. IX. and ch. XXI. 17. See 1 Chron. XVI. 39, 40. and XXI. 29. and 2 Chron. I. 3, 5, 6, 13. 1 King. III. ver. 4, 5. And lastly, when Solomon had built the Temple, he brought the Tabernacle thence to Jerusalem, 1 King. VIII. 4. 2 Chron. I. 3 5 6, 13. and ch. V. 5. And placed it likely in and among the Treasuries of the Temple. For the Ark see the Observations on 1 Sam. IV. 3. Tabor] A Mountain in the Tribe of Issachar, or bordering on it: near to Mount Carmel. See Joshua XIX. 26 34. Here Barak was with his ten thousand men against Sisera, Judg. IV. 6, 12, 14. See more of this in my Annotations on Hos. V. 1. Tyre] Called the strong City, whence it hath its name Tsor in Hebrew, signifying a Rock; situate, like Venice, in the Sea. A fa∣mous Port and Mart-town in Phoenicia, the lower part of Syria, whence
the whole Countrey is supposed to take the name of Syria, omit∣ting the letter [t] in Tsor. More of this see in my Annotations on Amos. I. 9. Bethshemesh] A City in the Tribe of Naphtali, ver. 32. and 39. Judg. I. 33. Another in the Tribe of Judah, given to the Priests, Josh. XXI. 16. 1 Chron. VI. 59. 1 Sam. VI. 12. 2 King. XIV. 13. Another also in Egypt, Jer. XLIII. 13. the same as is supposed with On, Gen. XLI. 45. by the Greeks called Heliopolis, and now Damiata. The word signifies a City or House of the Sunne. As also Kirhare∣sheth a City in Moab, Esay XVI. 7. hath the same denomination. And all, because of Temples and Idol-service used there by the ancient in∣habitants to the Sunne. From which the Jewes sometimes were not altogether free, 2 King. XXIII. 5, 11. Cities of refuge] The sixe Cities of refuge belonged to the Le∣vites; that is, Hebron, and Shechem, to the Koathites; Golan, and Kedesh to the Gershonites; Bezer and Ramoth, to the Merarites, Josh. XX. and XXI Chapters. In Galilee] Galilee is often mentioned in the Old Testament. See ch. XXI. 32. 1 King. IX. 11. 2 King. XV. 29. 1 Chron. VI. 76. Esay IX. 1. Galilee divided into the Upper, in the Tribe of Naphtali; and the Lower, in the Tribe of Zabulon; both coasting about the begin∣ning of Jordan. The Upper is called Galilee of the Gentiles because both Populous, and replenished with many Gentiles as lying near∣est to them 1 King. IX. 11. Matth. XV. 21. Mar. VII. 31. And so is Harosheth, called Harosheth of the Gentiles, Judg. IV. 2. as lying in that Tribe of Naphtali. Thirteen] Thirteen Cities with their Suburbs in title and domi∣nion given to the Priests Josh. XXI. 4. See the Annotations on 1 Chron. VI. 59. Though one of them at that time, was too much for their present use and habitation; we reading but of three of them in number about fifty years before this time. Called] The two Tribes and a half dismist,  likely at the end of sixe or seven years; before the Division of the Land; and stayed not fourteen yeers, till after the Division; which Division might yet possibly be made sooner then so, Josh. XX. 11. Divide] This Dividing the spoile with their brethren, those that stayed at home beyond Jordan, seemes to relate to that, Num. XXXI. 27. And David seemes hereupon to revive and enact that Law of like Division, 1 Saem. XXX. 24, 25. Mention of the name] The not naming of Idols is mentioned, as here, so, Exod. XXIII. 13. Deut. XII. 3. Psal. XVI. 4. And a like, Ephes. V. 3. Yet the thing in it self is not simply and absolutely un∣lawful. Shechem] Shechem was a City in Mount Ephraim, Josh. XX. 7. North-North-East from Shiloh, and Bethel; and close by Mount Gerizim, and Ebal Judg. IX. 7. Here Abraham and Jacob had so∣journed; And Jacobs two sonnes, Simeon and Levi, young men,
upon Dinah's ravishment, murthered the Citizens, Gen. XXXIV. Here after Gideons death, the Citizens worshipped Baal-Berith; and rebel∣led with Abimelech; and were after punished and spoyled by him, Judg. IX. This City in Ioshua's time was made a City of Re∣fuge, and given to the Kohathite-Levites, Iosh. XXI. 21. And here Ioshua made a Covenant with all the people to serve the Lord, Chap. XXIV. ver. 25. The Mount Ephraim whereon the City stood, was famous for Burials: Here they buried Iosephs bones in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Iacob bought of the children of Hamor or Emor, Josh. XXIV. 32. Acts VII. 16. Gen. XXXIII. 19. Here was great Ioshua himself an Ephraimite, buried in his inheritance in Timnath-Scrah, or Heres, which is in Mount Ephraim, on the North-side of the hill Goash, Josh. XXIV. 30. Judg. II. 9. And here was the High-Priest Eleazar buried in an Hill that pertained to Phineas his son, which was given him in Mount Ephraim, Josh. XXIV. 33. Here Deborah dwelt, Judg. IV. 5. And Tola the Judge, ch. X. 1. Hither came Rehoboam to be made King: But Jeroboam was there made King in his stead; who built or fortified the City, and dwelt there, 1 King. XII. 1, 20, 25.
Judges. THE Book of JUDGES contains an History, not of four hundred and ten years; but of two hun∣dred ninty and nine years. So, Counting the years of the VI. Oppressors within the years and times of the Judges; as I have shewed they necessarily must, upon Rahabs marriage with Prince Salmon▪ Josh. II. And so Expounding the Texts following, according to the truth of the times, thus; That the Land had Rest by Othniel, in the fourtieth year after it was first settled in Rest by Ioshua at his Death, Judg. III. 11. not after the Death of Moses. And again had Rest by Ehud in the eightieth year, after the former Rest by Othniel, Ch. III. 30. And again had Rest by Deborah in the fourtieth year, after the former Rest by Ehud, Ch. V. 31. And again had Rest by Gideon, in the fourtieth year, after the former Rest by Deborah, Ch. VIII. 28. These make up two hundred years. And then follow three of Abimelech; twenty three of Tolah; twenty two of Jair; sixe of Jephthah; seven of Ibzan; ten of Elon; eight of Abdon; twenty of Sampson, which make np the other ninty nine years; in all two hunded, ninty nine. The text, Judg. IV. 3, 4. seemes to accord with rhis reckoning: and to accompt Jabins Oppression within the years of Deborah. But yet counting, beside these, the times of the VI. Oppressors distinctly over and above, which amount to one hundred and eleven years; and is according to the seeming letter of the texts; And then fourty years of Eli being added thereunto, the summe a∣riseth to those 450. years mentioned by Paul, Acts XIII. 20. But reading the words of Saint Paul, as in order they stand there in the Original; and after these things about four hundred and fifty years; he gave them Judges untill Samuel the Prophet; we may rather con∣ceive the four hundred and fifty years to comprehend all the time, from the choosing of the Fathers, till the Division of the Land by Joshua; it being four hundred fifty two from the Birth of Isaac, and four hundred fourty seven from the Rejection of Ishmael; both wayes about four hundred and fifty, wherein those things mentioned, ver. 18, 19, 20. were done and accomplished. And after that time he gave them Judges until Samuel the Prophet: And after that time, He gave them Kings. And thus the most learned Primate of all Ireland hath it in his learned Annals.
This Book seemes written of, and concerning the Judges, (as the Book of Ruth concerning Ruth;) And long after their times; As may seeme to be gathered by those phrases, remaine unto this day, and the like, Ch. I. 21, 26. and VI. 24. and X. 4. and XV. 19. And Ch. XVIII. 30. must needs have relation at soonest to the captivity of the Arke in the dayes of Samuel, 1 Sam. IV. 17. Psal. LXXVIII. 60, 61. Asked] They asked the Lord;  by Phineas the High Priest; who by Urim and Thummim makes answer, Num. XXVII. 21. Both which were on or in the Breastplate; and the Breastplate was annexed to the Ephod, Exod. XXVIII. 28, 30. and XXXIX. 21. which made David call for the Ephod, and High Priest, thereby to enquire of the Lord, 1 Sam. XXIII. 9, 10, 11, 12. and Ch. XXVIII. 6. So Ezra II. 63. See more on 1 Sam. XXIII. 9. Bezek] Bezek a City in the tribe of Iudah; not farre from Ierusa∣lem, lying from it South-West; and midway between  and Bethlehem. Adoni-Bezek] Of him see on Iosh. X. 1. Said, seventy Kings] His seventy Kings subdued, and mangled by him, must needs be very pettie Kings of Provinces, or Cities; if not such Princes as are now in Germany, where all the brethren of a Prince are called Princes likewise. And these seventy were such, as in the time of all his reigne and tyranny Adoni-bezek had subdued. He was brought from Bezek to Ierusalem to be made a publike example there. Ierusalem] Iudah had taken Ierusalem, slaine the inhabitants, and burnt the City, i. e. that part of it which belonged to Iudah, Iosh. XV. 8. yet so as the Jebusite still dwelt therein with the children of Iudah, ver. 63. even till Davids time, 2 Sam. V. 6, 7, 8. And Ben∣jamin did the like, and no more, with their part of Ierusalem, Judg. I. 21. yet both had little hold in it in that Levites time, Iudg. XIX. 10, 11, 12. or haply at that time had never got any hold in it at all. Hebron] Of this City see the Observations on 2 Sam. II. 1. Caleb] Of Caleb see the Observations on Iosh. XV. 16. A South-Land] Or dry Land. Kenite] and Ch. IV. 11. and Ch. V. 24. See 1 Chron. II. 55. As also Gen. XV. 19. Num. XXIV. 21. 1 Sam. XV. 6. And see my Ob∣servations on Num. X. 29. Palme Trees] Jericho. Of this see the Observations on Ch. III. 13. Gaza] Iudah took Gaza, and Askelon, and Ekron: And lost them soone afterwards, Ch. III. 3. Bethel] Of this see the Observations on 1 King. XII. 29. and XXXII. Bethsan] And the rest in this verse, were Cities in that half Tribe of Manasseh that lay West of Jordan. Angel] The Angel here seemes to be no created Angel: But that Angel of the Covenant, Mal. III. 1. that appeared to Moses in the Bush, Exod. III. 2. called Jehovah, ver. 4. and to Ioshua, Iosh. V. 14. And
to Gideon, Iudg. VI. 16. And to Manoah, and his wife, Ch. XIII. Of whom Iacob spake, Gen. XLVIII. 24. And of whom God spake unto Moses, Exod. XXIII. 21, 22, 23. termed both Jehovah, Exod. XIII. 21. XIV. 10, 24. and his face, or presence, Exod. XXXIII. 14, 15. and an Angel, Exod. XXXIII. 2. the Messias, Acts VII. 38. the Sonne of God, Heb. I. 3. See on Judg. XIII. 3. But whether this History fell out in the life-time of Ioshua, or after his death, is some∣what more uncertain. all the dayes of Joshua] Therefore the Angel's coming to Bochim, though premised, was after the death of Joshua, and those Elders. Mount of Ephraim] Of this see the Observations on Joshua XXIV. 1. Baal and Ashtaroth] Of these see the Observations on Ch. VIII. 33. Judges] This Chapter seemes to be a summarie of the bulk of this Book. Left those Nations] Ver. 22. and Ch. III. 1, 2, 4. See the Observa∣tions on Deut. VII 1. and 2. King of Mesopotamia] Heb. Aram-Naharaim, i. e. of Syria between the two rivers, Tigris and Euphrates: Naharaim being of the Dual number. Fourty years] See the Observations on the beginning of this Book. Palme-trees] Jericho, the City of Palme-trees, Deut. XXXIV. 3. 2 Chron. XXVIII. 15. This was nigh Jordan on the West-side of it; and Gilgal in the East border of Jericho, where Rahab entertained and hid the two Spies: And from the Plaines of Moab, Pisga and Shirtim, which were over against Jericho, on the East-side of Jor∣dan the Israelites passed over. Here the Israelites kept the Passeo∣ver: and the Captain of the Lords Hoast appeared to Joshua This was burnt, Josh. VI. 24. And the Re-builder of it cursed, ver. 26. And the same verified in Hiel, in the dayes of Ahab, 1 King. XVI. 34. So that the Kenites being in it; and Eglons possessing of it men∣tioned here; And that of Davids ill-intreated messengers residing here, 2 Sam. X. 5. must be meant of some mean buildings, or Forts onely in it, or rather by it. It fell by Lot to the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh. XVIII. 21. Here was a Colledge of the sonnes of the Prophets in the times of Elias; and Eliseus: and the waters healed by Eli∣seus, Hither were sent back courteously the many Jewes captived by Pekah in the dayes of Ahaz, 2 Chron. XXVIII. And in the Plaines here was Zedekiah taken by Nebuchadnezzars forces. And in the dayes of our Saviour, he did herein, or hard by, give sight to blinde men; and converted Zacheus. And he arose] Reverence to God and his Word, Num. XXIII. 18. 2 King. XX III. 2. 2 Chron. XXXIV. 31. Neh. VIII. 6. Oxe-goad] Miraculous are the victories of Shamgar, slaying sixe hundred Philistines with an Oxe-goad; and of Sampson slaying one thousand of them with the jaw-bone of an Asse, Ch. XV. 15, 16. Jabin] This Jabin successor to that Jabin slaine by Joshua, and
his City Hazor burnt, Josh. XI 1, 10, 11, 13. Yet this successor or sonne, reinforceth himself, and twenty years oppressed Israel; and was destroyed at last by Deborah and Barak, ver. 24. Hazor] A City in Naphtali, and upper Galilee, East from Rehob in Asher: and in former times head of the neighbouring Kingdomes, Ish. XI. 10. There was another Hazor, or two, in the Tribe of Judah, Iosh. XV. 23, 25. Haresheth of the Gentiles] Ver. 16. In Naphtali, about thirty miles East from Hazor; near the South-bottome of the waters of Merom. Here he dwels, because Joshua had burnt Hazor, Iosh. XI. 11, 13. Charets of iron] Much use of these in warre;  not by the Jewes, but by their enemies. See the Observations on Ch. XX. 2. and on 2 Sam. VIII. 5. A Prophetesse] See the Observations on Zeph. III. 4. and on 1 Sam. XVIII. 10. at that time] Even when, and while Iabin oppressed them. So that those twenty years, v. 3. are within those fourty years of Deborah, V. 31. Ramah] See the Annotations on Hos. V. 8. There were divers Ci∣ties of this name in divers Tribes; See Josh. XVIII. 25. and XIX. 29, 36. 1 Sam. I. 1. Those in Benjamin, Ephraim, and Judah, were the chief Places, famous by Deborah, Samuel, Saul, and David; as the sa∣cred Histories do record. Barak] This Barak, as also Rahab, Gideon, Jephthah, Sampson, com∣mended for their Faith, Heb. XI. 31, 32. though weak in Faith; and not without their many failings. Tabor] In the South-part of Zebulon; not farre from the river Kishon, as it runnes into the South-bottome of the Sea of Galilee. Of Tabor see more in the Annotations on Hos. V. 1. Of a Woman] Deborah, and Jael. Zaanaim] Zaanaim by Kedesh in Naphtali, where Barak dwelled. Not a man left] Not a man left in the field to make any resistance, Psal. XIV. 3. and LIII. 3. Rom. III. 12. Shamgar] Of him, Ch. III. 31. And of Jael, Ch. IV. 18. Was there a speare] 1 Sam. XIII. 19. From the noise] They could not fetch water without danger from the enemy. Out of] Hence to the end of the Song, and Chapter, Deborah relates how the several Tribes behaved themselves in this Expedition; with their praise, or dispraise. And here Reuben, Gilead, and Dan, and Asher are blamed; and Meroz cursed: and Jael the wife of Heber is blessed. Roote] Most likely, understood of Deborah of Mount Ephraim, the firstrise and mover of this Expedition; though some extend it to Joshua; and others understand it of the Tribes of Judah and Simeon. Amalek] Amalek joyned here with the Canaanites, in this battell against the Israelites.
After thee Benjamin] After Ephraim came Benjamin, to assist in this warre. Out of Machir] That half Tribe of Manasseh that dwelt within Canaan. For though the one half of the children of Machir had their inheritance in Gilead, Josh. XIII. 31. which is here blamed, ver. 17. yet the other half of Machirs children had their inheritance within Canaan; West of Jordan, Josh. XVII. 1, 2. who are here com∣mended. Barak] Not of Issachar: but of Naphtali, dwelling in Kedesh of Naphtali. Ch. IV. 6. Divisions of Reuben] Divided among themselves touching this warre; or divided from the other Tribes, and deserting them in it. Megiddo] Megiddo an eminent City which Manasseh had in Issachar, Josh. XVII. 11. not farre from Jezreel, and the river Kishon. Joshua slew the King of it, Josh. XII. 21. And Josiah was slaine, or had his deaths wound, in the valley of it, 2 King. XXIII. 29, 30. 2 Chron. XXXV. 34. Taanach] Taanach a royal City, near Megiddo, Josh. XII. 21. Took no gaine] Took none of Jabin; nor got any gaine by this fight with Israel. The Stas] The Stars in their stations;  by extraordinary influen∣ces, at Gods appointment, raising stormy Meteors, did help to ruine them. As it was in Ioshua's time, Iosh. X. and in Samuels time, 1 Sam. VII. Or frighting them with dreadful noises, as in Iehorams time, 2 King. VII. 6. Rest fourty years] from that eightieth year mentioned, Ch. III. 30. See the Annotations on Ch. III. 11. and the Observations on the be∣ginning of this Book. Midian] See the Annotations on Hab. III. 7. Angel] Christ the Angel of the Covenant. ver. 14, 15, 16, 22, 23. Thy might] Which I now give thee; with my promise to assist thee; as ver. 16. My Present] Not Sacrifice, or meat-offering; but for thy food and repast. As Abraham entertained the Angels, Gen. XVIII. and Manoab, Iudg. XIII. 15. Fire] Here fire comes out of a rock: as water did, Exod. XVII. 7. Of seven years old] The same age that the tyranny and oppression of the Midianites had arrived to. And build an Altar] Gideon had Gods warrant and command for all, for his building the Altar; and for his sacrificing upon it. And this is that Altar mentioned, ver. 24. That he may die] Their idolatrous zeale. Ierubbaal] Gideon so called by his father; not in way of reproach, but of honour rather. In 2 Sam. XI. 21. he is called Ierubbosheth. And so Eshbaal, and Meribbaal, the sonne, and grandchilde of Saul, 1 Chron. VIII. 33, 34. are called Ishbosheth, and Mephibosheth, 2 Sam. II. 8. and IV. 4.
Iezreel] As here in Iezreel the Midianites pitched;  so did both the Philistines, and Israelites in Sauls time, 1 Sam. XXIX. 1, 11. And hence came the newes of Sauls death, 2 Sam. IV. 4. who was slaine in Mount Gilboa on the North-side of Iezreel. This Iezreel was not that in the Tribe of Iudah, Iosh. XV. 56. But in Manasseh; towards Issa∣char; about twelve miles Northward from Samaria. Ahab from Car∣mel rode hither, and Elijah did run before his Chariot, 1 King. XVIII. 45, 46. Here Ahab gets Naboths Vineyard, and came from Samaria in the Tribe of Ephraim hither to take possession, 1 King. XXI. 18. having his habitations and Palaces in both Cities. And besides Gods judgement upon Ahab himself, ver. 19. both Ioram, and Iezebel, the sonne, and wife of Ahab, were slaine here by Iehu; and also all that belonged to Ahab in Iezreel: And the heads of Ahabs seventy sons were brought from Samaria to Iezreel, 2 King. IX. and X Chapters. Messengers] The Tribes here named were the next to Gideon, and to Iabin. Fleece of wooll] Herein is Gods great condescension to Gideon, work∣ing a miracle forward and backward, as it were; yea, many miracles for the strengthening of his faith, in his vocation, and in Gods pro∣mise. From Mount Gilead] Or towards Mount Gilead. Haply to be there in a readinesse against the enemies flight that way. The people] The three hundred lappers, took the trumpets of them that were dismissed. Fled] The places named here were in that half Manasseh where the overthrow was given. And Abelmeholah was the habitation of the Pro∣phet Elizaeus in after-ages, 1 King. XIX. 19. Succoth] And so of Penuel, ver. 8. See Gen. XXXIII. 17. and XXXII. 30. They, and Karker were in the tribe of Gad. Ishmaelites] Midianites and Ishmaelites seeme confounded toge∣ther: as being intermingled one with another. So Gen. XXXVII. 25, 27, 28. Golden ear-rings] The weight and multitude of them. And chaines about their Camels necks. Of ear-rings, see Exod. XXXII. 2. and XXXV. 22. Ephod] See the Observations on 1 Sam. XXIII. 9. and on Hos. III. 4. Ophrah] In the East border of this Westerne half Manasseh, near Jordan. Baalim] Baalim in the Plural number, signifying Lords, seemes to be a very common name to their He-gods, and Idols, among the Mo∣abitts, Ammonites, Canaanites, Philistines, Sidonians, Phenicians, and other neighbouring Nations, and the idolatrous Israelites them∣selves: as Ashtaroth of the plural number, and feminine gender, seemes to be so to their She-goddesses, Iudg. II. 13. and X. 6. And there are sundry specifications of Baal; As Berith, and Baal-Berith here, and Ch. IX. 4, 46. the God of the Shechemites. Peor and Baal-Peor, the idol-god of the Moabites and Midianites, Num. XXV. 3, 17, 18. Ba∣al-Zebub,
called also Beelzebub, or Beelzebul, the god of Ekron, 2 King. I. 2. And from Baal, were names imposed, both upon persons, and places: as we read of Ethbaal, the King of Sidon, Iezebels father, 1 King. XVI. 31. of Esh-baal, 1 Chron. VIII. 32. of Baal-hanan, Gen. XXXVI. 38. of Jerubbaal, Judg. VI. 32. of Merib-baal, the other name of Mephibosheth, 1 Chron. VIII. 34. As also of Baal-Zephon, Exod. XIV. 2. and Baal-Meon, Josh. XVII. 17. And from other particular Idols, specially among the Babylonians, were like denominations ta∣ke. Whether Bel be a contraction, or in a diverse dialect, the same with Baal, is not so certaine. God himself also was called Baal; But refused after to be so stiled, because the name had been so commonly given to Idols, Hos. II. 16. Of Bel, see the Annotations on Esay XLVI. 1. Ashteroth or Ashtoreth or Ashtaroth is more specificaly the goddesse of the Sidonians, 1 King XI. 5, 33. 2 King. XXIII. 13. and of the Philistines, 1 Sam. XXXI. 10. Take also these other names of Idol-gods in Scripture; Chemosh, of the Moabites, and Ammonites, Iudg. XI. 24. 1 King. XI. 5, 7, 33. 2 King. XXIII. 13. Dagon, of the Philistines, Iudg. XVI. 23. 1 Sam. V. 2,—7. 1 Chron. X. 10. Moloch, or Molech, or Milchom, of the Ammonites 1 King. XI. 5, 7, 33. 2 King. XXIII. 13. Bel, and Nebo, and Belteshazzar, and Merodach, and Succoth-Be∣noth, of the Babylonians, Esay XLVI. 1. Dan. IV. 8. 2 King. XVII. 30. Ier. L. 2. Nishrosh, of the Assyrians, and Sennacherib, 2 King. XIX. 37. Rimmon of the Syrians, 2 King. V. 18. 2 King. XVII. 30, 31. Nergal, of the men of Cuth. Ashimah, of the men of Hamath; Nibhaz and Tartak, of the Avites; Adrammelech, and Anammelech, of Se∣phervaim; Siccuth, Chiun, and Remphan; named, Amos V. 26. Acts VII. 43. The seven Planets under several names, by several Nations. And from the Egyptian Apis the Bull, and Mevis the Cow, the Jewes took their Idol of the golden Calf or Oxe, Psal. CVI. 20. And Ieroboam's Calves. These Idols are called  quasi  not gods, 1 Cor. VIII. 4. Ier. 2. 11. and V. 7. and Ch. XVI. 20. or nothing worth, Ier. XI. 13. Vanities; They are called Shames, Abominati∣ons, 1 King. XI. 5. Dungie, or Dunghil-gods, Deut. XXIX. 17. De∣vils, Deut. XXXII. 17. 2 Chron. XI. 15. 1 Cor. X. 20, 21. Apoc. IX. 20. Psal. CVI. 37. 2 King. XX. 1. Shechem] See the Observations on Josh. XXIV. 1. Threescore and ten persons] So ver. 18, 24, 56. and Ch. VIII. 30. The whole number designed to slaughter, though the youngest of
them Iotham escaped; and Abimelech himself was the murderer. And this is a thing usual in the Scripture. As Gen. XLII. 13. Num. XIV. 32, 33. 1 Cor. XV. 5. Gerizim] Near Shechem. Millo] See the Observations on 1 Sam. V. 9. Iair] Not that Iair, Num. XXXII. 41. Deut. III. 14. But of his posterity, and name. Thirty Cities] That former Jair in the dayes of Moses, had but twenty three Cities, 1 Chron. II. 22. though the sonnes of Machir, the son of Manasseh, and the father of Gilead, and grandfather of this Iair, had among them sixty Cities, in the dayes of Moses, Iosh. XIII. 30, 31, 32. But here this Iair, the Judge, had thirty sonnes and they had thirty Cities, seven more then the former Iair had, all which they called by the same name of Havoth-Iair, as their progenitor had cal∣led his twenty three. Philistines] In this time of their oppressing Israel, which was the sixth oppression; Sampson lived, and was a Judge, and began to de∣liver them, Ch. XIII. 5. Ammon] This was the fifth oppression; And Iephthah was the Judge and deliverer. And that year] The last of the eighteen of their oppressing the Israelites. Eighteen years] Which years of oppression fell upon the two Tribes and a half beyond Iordan in Iairs time. Passed over Iordan] In this eighteenth year the Ammonites pro∣ceeded further to invade the Tribes on this side Iordan. And then Iephthah doth vanquish them; and begin his sixe years of judging Israel. And all this stands well with the Chronologie of the times, viz: of two hundred ninty nine years in the Book of the Iudges; and of the four hundred and eighty mentioned, 1 King VI. 1. The Sidonians] Divers of these Deliverances are not expressed in the holy History. Grieved] Gods compassion to his people. Mizpeh] There is mention of the Land of Mizpeh, under Her∣mon, Josh. XI. 3. But most commonly there were Citiet of that name; And those builded on hills or high places, as the word signi∣fies, fit to set wath-towers upon, as our Beacons. We read of divers such in Scripture. One Mizpeh in Moab, 1 Sam. XXII. 3. Another in Mount Gilead, in Manasseh, beyond Iordan, not farre from the Tribe of Gad, Josh. XIII. 26. Here Laban overtook Iacob, Gen. XXXI. 49. And here the Israelites encamped against the Midianites, in this text, Iudg. X. 17. And Iephthah their Judge and General had his house here, Iudg. XI. 11, 29, 34. Another Mizpeh was in Iudah, Josh. XV. 38. Likely that re-built by Asa, 1 King. XV. 22. 2 Chron. XVI. 6. But the most famous Mizpeh was that in Benjamin upon the border of it, Iosh. XVIII. 26. which was near the middle of the Land; and not farre from Shiloh, which stood East from it. This was a Place and Ci∣ty
fit for general meetings and Assemblies of the Land. Thither all Israel assembled against the Benjamites, Iudg. XX. 1, 3. and XXI. 1. There Samuel brought all Israel to publike Repentance, 1 Sam. VII. 5, 6. And thither likewise, as to Bethel and Gilgal, he came in crcuit from year to year; to judge Israel, ver. 16. There Saul was found out, and made King, 1 Sam. X. 17, 21. And there Gedaliah was Gover∣nour; so made by Nebuchanezzar; and there slaine by Ishmael, 2 King. XXV. 23, 25. Tob] Some thirty miles East from the waters of Merom. My Land.] No. It was the Land of the Moabites; after of Sihon; and from him conquered by the Israelites, by Gods command and donation, ver. 21, 22. Three hundred years] And four of five over, which are omitted for the roundnesse of the number. As Ch. XX. 46. 2 Sam. V. 5. See the Observations on Ch XX. 46. A Vow] Of Vowes, see the Annotations on Jonah. I. 16. And I will offer it] These words of Jephthah's Vow do fairly ad∣mit a Disjunctive acceptation of the letter Vau to be interpreted and rendered Or, and not and. As it is likewise used in Gen. XXVI. 11. Exod. I. 10, and XXI. 15, 17. Deut. XVII. 9, 12. and XIX. 17. Judg. XV. 18. 1 Sam. VI. 3. Jer. VI. 20. and IX. 12. and XIII. 23. and XVI. 2, 7. and XXI. 9. and in very many other places. Bewaile my Virginity] Much more her death, if she had been vow∣ed to be a burnt-offering; but that she doth not mention. And she knew no man] But lived a Virgin, as her father had vow∣ed, and she consented. To lament] Or talk with her, and comfort her, being cut off from all hope of having posterity to uphold her fathers house, ver. 34. Smote Ephraim] In a Wood, whence that place seemes to be called the Wood of Ephraim, from that slaughter of the Ephraimites. Where afterwards Absolom was slaine, and his armie, 2 Sam. XVII. 6. E∣phraim having in truth no Wood, or Land, or portion of inheritance on that side of Jordan East-ward. Because they said] The Ephraimites said; the Gileadites are fugi∣tives, mungrels, the refuse of both Tribes. Or, the Gileadites being got between the Ephraimites and Manassites; said to the Ephraimites, ye are but the fugitives of Ephraim. Took the Passages] As the Ephraimites were to return back from Gilead, West-ward. Shibboleth] Which signifies the streame of a river, or foard; a pro∣per word for the present place and purpose. Fourty years] These fourty years of Oppression by the Philistines fall in with the times of Sampson and Eli, and are a part thereof. Angel] The Angel of the Lord, is called by Manoah, Elohim, God, ver. 22. And by his wife, Jehovah, ver. 23. He whose Name is Won∣derful, ver. 18, 19. Esay IX. 6. Nazarite] Of Nazarites, see the Observations on Num. VI. 2.
Begin] Sampson did but begin only. For the Philistines prevailed, and Lorded it over Israel, all the dayes of Sampson, Ch. XIV. 4. of Eli, of Samuel partly, 1. Sam. VII. 8. 13▪ and of Saul; slaine by them. This deliverance was not perfected till Davids dayes. Drink no Wine] The mother is thus forbidden, ver. 14. Likely because the infant was to receive hutriment and suck from her. If the Lord] A good plea, and comfort, And a good example for our imitation to comfort us in sundry cases and conditions. Sampson] Sampson's Birth hath relation to that, Ch. X. 7. where the Philistines are mentioned before the Ammonites. And he began to deliver Israel being young; and died about fourty. To move him] Inspire him with magnanimous, heroical thoughts, and indow him with miraculous strength. Timnath] In the Tribe of Dan: East from Ekron of the Philistines▪ Here Sampson intended to have his first wife. And Judah had his sheep-shearing, Gen. XXXVIII. 12. This Citie was given to the Tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 57. And after, out of that Tribe to Dan, Josh. XIX. 43. But the Philistines most what possessed it. And in the dayes of wicked Ahaz, we read that they took it from him, 2 Chron▪ XXVIII. 18. Some make this in Dan, and that in Judah to be divers Cities. Sampson] Sampson by extraordinary motion of the Lord, the law∣full Dispenser with his own Law, seeks a marriage, though a Naza∣rite, with a Philistine: had thirty of the Philistines brought as com∣panions to be with him at the nuptial feast, to honour him in shew; but more in jealousie and fear of him, seeing and noting some things extraordinary in his person. His wife weeping before him the seven dayes while the Feast lasted, but more after the third day, and most upon the seventh and last day, he expounds his Riddle to her; and she to the companions. He performes what he had promised thereupon: And in anger; for their fraud, and her treachery, he went away; lea∣ving them; and her too behinde him. Foxes] The Lan was full of them. And besides his own art and industry by sundry meanes to take them▪ he was not debarred the help of others; and above all Gods providence eoncurring therein. Hip] Sampson hip and thigh, pell-mell, haply with his leg, and foot onely, slew the Philistines with a great slaughter. And after∣wards slaying one thousand of them with Lehi, that is, the jaw-bone▪ of an Asse, upon that occasion he called the place jaw-bone, or Lehi: And at his prayer, had a Well of water, which he therefore calls En∣hakkore, springing in that place of Lehi, to revive his spiri, being near dead with thirst. Rock Etam] We read of a Citie of that name▪ 1 Chron. IV. 32. Cal∣led also Ethar. Josh▪ XIX. 7. in the Tribe of Simeon; as it joynes to the Tribe of Dan and Judah; in the North-East corner of Simeon; and not very far from Zorah in the South-East corner of Dan, where Sampson was borne, ver. 2. not meaning that Dan, or that so farre di∣stinct
portion of Dan, that lay in the North-bounds of the Land of Canaan. Of Judah] Iudah joyning to Dan, on the East-side of it. Twenty years] These twenty years, in the just computation of the times, do fall in with the former half of Eli his fourty, 1 Sam. IV. 18. Gaza] See the Annotations on Amos I. 6. Harlot] Sampsons sinne; yet upon repentance pardoned; and he registred among those Worthies, Heb. XI. 32. Took the doores] His strength came up to a miracle. Before Hebron] Not so farre as Hebron. Of Hebron, see the Obser∣vations on Gen. XXIII. 2. Sorek] The river or torrent of this name divides Dan, and Si∣meon. Delilah] The chief Passages of this part of the History are these; That Delilah had a very great summe payed in hand for betraying of Sampson, ver. 5, 18. whose strength yet lay not in his haire, in the ha∣ving of it; or in the growing of it again; the haire being but a cere∣monial signe of it; But in Gods presence with him: And so his weak∣nesse, not in the losing of his haire; which here he lost unwittingly, and unwillingly; But in the Lords departing from him, for his sinnes, ver. 20. The shaver might easily have cut his throat, being asleep: But Gods Providence was in and over all. And blinde Sampson com∣ing at last to see his sinnes, and repent; And being brought into the magnificent house and Idol-temple, containing about three thousand persons spectators upon the roof of it, verily a wondrous building is moved by an extraordinary instinct of Gods Spirit, in his last act, not to murder himself, but to undervalue his own life, so as he might therewithal, as a Judge, and publike person execute Gods mighty vengeance upon his own, and Gods peoples enemies and oppressors, ver. 30. wherein many make him a Type of Christs victorious con∣quest over our spiritual enemies, at and by his death: Or at least do take an occasion, to use an Allusion from the one to the other. Dagon] Dagon] seemes to have his name from Dag, signifying a Fish in Hebrew: And was portraied in the likenesse of a Fish from the middle downward, and of a man from the middle upward, 1 Sam. V. 4. A sea-Idol, worshipped by them of Gaza, and the Philistines that dwelt on the sea-coast; as the Heathens did their Neptune or Tri∣ton. And the Idolaters do here ascribe it to this Idol their god, that he delivered Sampson into their hand; and therefore offer a great sacri∣fice to him. In his most stately Temple they fastened the head of King Saul, 1 Chron. X. 10. And at Ashdod, by Dagon in the house of Da∣gon (for he had many Temples) they placed the Arke of God, 1 Sam. V. 2. Of this again you may see more in the Observations upon that text, 1 Sam. V. 2. These five last Chapters of Iudges containe Histories of things done, soone after the death of Ioshua, and those Elders that out-lived him, Iudg. II. 7. soone after the Idolatry and Apostasie of the
People mentioned, Ch. II. 11, 12 in the times, if not before the times, of all the Judges, whose times and Histories are recorded, Ch. III. and along to the XVII. Chapter, without any interruption. And this appears by very many Passages in these five last Chapters. Cursedst] So Prov. XXIX. 24. That is, didst adjure, with an exe∣cration; if an answer were not made in truth and fidelity. Thus, 1 King. VIII. 31. Levit. V. 1. Num. V. 21. And so it is expounded, 1 Thes. V. 27. And so put to our Saviour, Matth. XXVI. 63. And so used, 1 Sam. XIV. 24. 2 Chron. XVIII. 15. Neh. XIII. 25. The Lord] Micha's mother dedicated this silver to the Lord Je∣hovah; to make both a graven, and a moulten Image, Ch. XVIII. 18. to worship Jehovah in and by them; and not any false god. For in this point of the Object or Thing worshipped, the Idolatries of the Jewes, and of the Heathens most what differed. See Exod. XXXII. 4, 5. 2 Chron. XXXIII. 17. Hos. II. 16. The other nine hundred Shekels, it is like, she bestowed on house, vestments, and other necessa∣ries for that Idolatrous service. An house of gods] So great was the Idolatry of the Jewes at this time. And their zeale great in their Idolatry, Ch. XVIII. 24. Ephod] This Ephod, mentioned againe, Ch. XVIII. 14. As like∣wise that of Gideon, Ch. VIII. 27. were not like those Linnen Ephods, Exod. XXVIII. 40. 1 Sam. II. 18. and Ch. XXII. 18. But like Aarons rich and glorious Ephod, Exod. XXVIII. 6,—34. See the Annotations on Hos. III. 4. and the Observations on 1 Sam. XXIII. 9. Teraphim] Or Theraphim, a word of the plural number; and still so used in Scripture; signifies Images, or Idols; Hos. III. 4. 1 Sam. XV. 23. But of what kinde or fashion, it is uncertaine; some con∣ceive them to be made like men; because Michal put one of them in Davids bed, thereby to deceive her father Sauls messengers, 1 Sam. XIX. 13. Some take them to be houshold-gods; and as such in La∣bans house and family, Gen. XXXI. 19, 34. Some to be such as they used to consult with as Oracles; as in the case of the Danites here, and Ch. XVIII. 14, 17, 18, 20. and of Nebuchadnezzar, Ezek. XXI. 21. and in Zecharies time, Zech. X. 2. Answers likely being given by the subtilty of the Devil, or forgery of their Priests. And to workers with familiar spirits, and Wizards, They are joyned in Josiah's Re∣formation, 2 King. XXIII. 24. See the Annotations on Hos. III. 4. Consecrated] And ver. 12. The grosse abuse of Consecration. As in Jeroboams time, 1 King. XIII. 33. No King] King here is taken, not properly for a King, but for a Judge; such as the thirteen Judges in this Book: for King properly there was none till Sauls reigne. A Levite] A Levite borne or▪  bred in Bethlehem. Judah, or so∣journing there as a stranger. Where I may finde a place] The necessitous state of the Levites, in those Idolatrous times, ver. 10, 11.
Danites sought] Their inheritance by lot is set down, Josh. XIX. 40. But they got it not all; through their own sinne and default, Iudg. I. 34. And their tribe being numerous, they sought out larger bounds, and more commodious habitations, Iosh. XIX. 47. And this, though mentioned in that text of Ishua, yet fell out after his death, and the death of those Elders that out-lived him; likely soone after, but surely before the dayes of Sampson. Mount Ephraim] See the Observations on Josh. 2. XXIV. 1. Ask counsel] These Danites, being superstitious Idolaters, ascribe thus much to this Levite, and to his Idolatrous Ephod, and Teraphim, and graven and molten Images, ver. 14, 17. Laish] Laish very farre off from the body of the Tribe of Dan; that lying next to Simeon, and Judah, in the South-parts of the Land of Canaan, and this under Mount Libanon, by Asher, and Naphtali, in the North-bounds. This Citie first burnt, and after rebuilt by these Danites, they then called Dan; which is taken as the North-bound of the Land of Canaan, as Ch. XX. 1. 1 Sam. III. 20. 2 Sam. III. 10. and elsewhere. And here Jeroboam did set up one of his golden Calves, 1 King. XII. 29. Jonathan] A Levite the great grandchilde of Moses, though borne in Bethlehem-Judah; and so, as of the family of Judah, Ch. XVII. 7. And though a Levite, yet taken and used as a Priest; and consecrated thereunto by Micah an Ephraimitie, ver. 1, 12. Who likewise had consecrated one of his owne sons to become his Priest, ver. 5. And this Jonathan forced to seeke and shift for his maintenance and livelihood; and to accept of one so poore and base, ver. 10. All this bespeaks the sad and la∣mentable condition and coufusion of those times wherein they lived. Captivity of the Land] This Idolatry of the Danites, in this Citie Dan, continued untill the day of the Captivity of the Land; that is, as it is explained, ver. 31. all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh, till the Philistines took the Arke, 1 Sam. IV. Psalme LXXVIII. 60, 61. which was at the death of Eli. A Concubine] Or a wife a Concubine. The word for Concubine in Hebrew is etymologized wittily by some from two other words of that language, which put together, signifie that which the Greeks call , some old Latine Inscriptions, Viro-conjux, an half-wife, or secondarie wife. We read in Scripture of Concubines, and Wives, variously: Of many wives to one man, in the Old Testament. And this, not onely in prophane and evill men, as in Lamech, Gen. IV. and Esau, and other; but also in good and godly men, as in Iacob, David, and others. And among these many wives, we sometimes finde a kinde of distinction of them into two sorts; One sort, the First, and princi∣pal, and absolutely lawful wife, and Mistris; The other sort, but in a secondary and inferiour degree. And such as had no Dowries; nor
solemne Rites of reception; nor Rule in the family; nor their chil∣dren had any Inheritance, but Gifts and Portions, For that of Iacobs sons by Bilhah, and Zilpah, was a case extraordinary. And thus we finde with Abraham, Sarah of the first sort; and Hagar, and Keturah of the second: with Iacob, Rachel, and Leah, of the first; Bilhah, and Zilpah of the second. And those of the second sort, are sometimes called wives, and sometimes Concubines; as we see in Keturah, Gen. XXV. 1, 6. 1 Chron. I. 32. And in Bilhah, Gen. XXX. 4. and XXXV. 22. and Ch. XXXVII. 2. And Davids ten Concubines, 2 Sam. XV. 16. and Ch. XVI. 22. and Ch. XX. 3. are called his wives, 2 Sam. XII. 11. And thus Concubines are of two sorts, some are wives, or half-wives; others plaine Whores and Harlots. But this Concubine of the Levite was his wife, and he her Lord, as appears, ver. 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 26, 27. and Ch. XX. 4. Gibeah] Distinct from Gibeah in the tribe of Iudah, Iosh. XV. 57. And from Gibeon in the Tribe of Benjamin, Iosh. XVIII. 25. This was either that which afterwards was called Gibeah of Saul in the Tribe of Benja∣min, 1 Sam. XI. 4. or else very near it, in the same Tribe, and not farre from Ierusalem, and Ramah, ver. 13, 14, 16. House of the Lord] In Shilo. And so Ch. XX. 18. This was near Mount Ephraim; where he sojourned. And thither the whole Campe came, Ch. XXI. 12. Know him] So Gen. XIX. 5. monstrous impudent wickednesse: a modest intimation of a most immodest meaning. My brethren] Men in nature, though worse then beasts in their lusts. Behold my daughter] Sinful this;  to use unlawful means, though to a good end. We may not do evill that good may come thereof, Rom. III. 8. Not hearken] Yet did in the next words. And she sinning by lust. ver. 2. was plagued by lust. Divided her] An act barbarous in it self and inhumane: though he did it to a good end; to bring these sons of Belial to deserved punish∣ment; that such pests might not be suffered to live, and poion the aire with their breath, and so pollute the Land, and go unpunished. The unbowelling, and enbalming of dead bodies, and anatomizing of them by Physitians and Chirurgeons, to good uses, is a case differ∣ent in divers points, Mizpeh] See the Observations on Ch. X. 17. Footmen] Footmen four hundred thousand. We read not of Horsemen among the Israelites, in all, or any of their battels. Onely we finde them prepared iu Solomons time, 1 King. IV. 26. and IX. 19. and Ch. X. 26. 2 Chron. I. 14. and Ch. VIII. 9. and Ch. IX. 25. where the four thousand stalls of horses for his Chariots, 2 Chron. IX. 25. agree well with the fourty thousand in 1 King. IV. 26. counting ten single stalls or divisions in every stable: yet we finde no expresse mention of the use of any horsemen in any battel afterwards. And to this
the command and care for the houghing of the enemi es horses▪ and the burning of their Charos, may have relation, Iosh, XI. 6, 9. 2 Sam. VIII. 4. 1 Chron. XVIII. 4. yet we read of many horses and Chariots in warre; with the Canaantes, Iosh. XI. 4. Iudg. IV. 3▪ 13. And many among the Israelites; Esay II. 7. Trust in them is forbid∣den, Du. XVII. 16, 17. Psal. XX. 7. & XXXIII. 16, 17. Prov. XXI. 31. Asked Counsel] The eleven Tribes presume here more upon their own strength▪  and the justnesse of their Cause, then upon God; and consult him at first onely about the precedencie in the warre, and who shall have the honour of the day. And upon their first overthrow, they weep; but more for their shame, and smart, then for their sin; And they aske counsel of God, whether they shall fight again; but neither crave his assistance, nor inquire of the successe, being still so confi∣dent in themselves of their own strength, and still putting their trust in the arme of flesh and blood. But upon the second overthrow, they seek God in a right manner; they more seriously mourn, and Fast, and repent of their sins; Offering Burnt-offerings for the expi∣ation of them; and Peace offerings, to make their peace with God, and testifie their Faith in him: And gaining a Promise of successe, yet they carefully use the means, and stratagems, which formerly they sleighted, and presumptuously neglected. And by this stratagem they seeme to divide their army into three parts; some to lie in wait; some to fight, and seemingly flee: And the body of their Army, as a strong reserve to fall on and gaine the victory, upon an appointed signe, when the Benjamites were brought to an amazed stand, and come within the reach of it. Phineas] Phineas here living, yet died long before Sampson was borne; which sheweth this History preceded Sampson a long time. As the like might have been observed, to a like end, of many other Passages in these five last Chapters, as hath been formerly said. All which fell] The odde hundred men mentioned, ver. 35 are here omitted;  as well known out of the foresaid former verse; The sacred Author here contenting himself with the round number of 25000. As the like is in the number of the time of Davids reigne, 2 Sam. V. 5. and Ch. II. 11. And of the time of Solomons building the Temple, 1 King. VI. 1, 38. And the like is in Jephthahs accompt of the 300. years, Judg. XI. 26. And likely here in the number of the remaine of the Benjamites that were slaine after the three battels. Turned again] This done in heat of warre, and rage of blood; though after a sort it may be said to be done in cold blood, and after the fierce brunt of warre was over▪ And of this, they repented af∣terwards, as of a barborous and bloody act, as well they might. This slaughter lessened the number of the Benjamites in very many genera∣tions after. See that in Jehoshaphat's time, comparing the number of Benjamin with Judah, 2 Chron. XVII. 14,—18. Had sworne] This Oath, and Curse, ver. 18. was made in rash∣nesse,
and rage, out of a blinde zeale, and superstitious ignorance; And by Gods Law might and ought to have been broken; And was unlawful to be kept; and much lesse to have fraud, and violent rape, without consent, either of parties, or parents, used, for the keep∣ing of it. Which yet they did, thinking to silence thereby the cry of a superstitious conscience in themselves; and to provide also for the like in those parents of the 200 Virgins, ver. 22. Women] The women, and children, here are unjustly and outragi∣ously slaughtered. Here again rash zeal out-runs right reason.
Ruth. THE Book and History of Ruth falls in with the time of Deborah, or Gideou; as may be gatherd by com∣paring Matth. 1. 5. with the end of this History: and what formerly hath been said upon Rahabs marriage. And the History serves mainly to continue and de∣clare the Genealogie of our Saviour Jesus Christ, Chap. IV. 18,—22. Famine] In the time of the Oppression of Jabin, or the Midi∣anites. Ephrathites] Ch. IV. 11. Bethlehem was called Ephrath, Gen. XXXV. 19. Micah V. 2. Matth. II. 6. Of Bethlehem Judah] To distinguish it from Bethlehem in the Tribe of Zebulun, Josh. XIX. 15. And these persons from those of the Tribe of Ephraim, who were likewise called Ephrathites, 1 King. XI 26. Ruth] The subject matter; not the Author of this Book. Mothers house] I am but your Mother-in-Law. Moe sons in my womb] See Deut. XXV. 5, 6. And unto her gods] Orpha's idolatrous inclination. Returne thou] As, Josh. XXIV. 19. Testified against me] As a witnesse of his just displeasure, and my sinne. Barley-harvest] Part of our March and April, Lev. XXIII. 10, 15, 16. Let me gleane] Her modesty; notwithstanding the Law, Lev. XIX. 9, 10. and XXIII. 22. An 20. Ephah] See the Observations on Exod. XVI. 36. One of our next kinsmen] Who hath right to redeem, &c. And ought also to marry the Widow of his Kinsman, being dead without issue, Levit. XXV. 25, 26. Deut. XXV. 5, 6, 7. Mar. XII. 19. Uncover his feet] Naomi well knew the piety and chastity of Bo∣az, and of Ruth; and confidently trusted therein. Spread therefore thy skirt] Receive me into thy protection, by ta∣king me to be thy wife, according to the Law. Lie down untill the morning] Boaz not offended with this maner of her approach, and motion. Not be known] Boaz then did lie alone, in a roome by himself; and is careful to avoid scandal.
Six] See the Observations on Gen. XVIII. 6. Gate] Gates of Cities were the ordinary places of audience, and judicature, Deut. XVII. 2, 8. 2 Sam. XIX. 8. Prov. XXXI. 23. Jer. XXXVIII. 7. Lam. V. 13. And the usual maner of Prophets was to publish their Prophecies in the Gates, either of the Temple, or of the Citie of Jerusalem, Jer. VII. 2. and XIX. 2. and XXVI. 10. and sometimes of the Kings house; as places of greatest concourse of peo∣ple, Jer. XVII. 19. and XXII. 1, 2. Lest I marre mine own inheritance] Want an heire, if I shall have but one childe by her: or having many, she being young, and poor, weak∣en mine owne inheritance, in dividing it among so many, specially if he were now a widower, and had children by his former wife. A man plucked off his shoe] These Ceremonies then used in buy∣ing, and bargaining of land, in reedeeming, and changing, had some resemblance to that Law, Deut. XXV. 8, 9. But with diverse differ∣ences. See, Psal. LX. 8. The Ceremonies that respected the person of Ruth, are here not mentioned, but may seeme either omitted, or else transacted with much alteration from the first institution▪ as those times now were.
THe two Books of Samuel are thought to be written by Samuel, Nathan and Gad, one after another, 1 Chron. XXIX. 29. Yet some passages in them may seeme to intimate the writing of them to have been of a later time. As, 1 Sam. V. 5. and XXVII. 6. and XXX. 25. 2. Sam. VI. 8, and XVIII. 8. They may better be called, The I. and II. Book of Kings: The I. containing all the History of King Saul; Samuel dying, 1 Sam. XXV. And the II. the History of King Ishbosheth shortly; and of King David at large. And so do the LXX. and many other stile them. I. Samuel. THis first Book contains an History of eighty years: viz: fourty in the time of Heli, Ch. IV, 18. in the four first Chapters. And fourty in the times of Samuel, and King Saul, in the rest. If Samuels time be reckoned in with that of Saul. Or rather thus; fourty to Eli, whereof the for∣mer half runs up in the times of the Judges, in the twenty years of Sampson: And the later halfe, or twenty begins with this Book; after the death of Sampson, and the end of the Book of the Judges. And then follow twenty years of Samuels Government alone. And after that, fourty years of King Saul, Acts XIII. 21. In the former part whereof Samuel also lived, and partly judged with him, as appears in the XIII. XV. & XVI. & XIX. Chaters of this Book: though he withdrew from Saul in his last dayes, 1 Sam. XV. 35. And died, ch. XXV. And in regard whereof they are named as joynt partners in the administration of the Government. 1 Sam. XI. 7. Still in the whole eighty years. An Ephrathite] As the Jewes are called Cretes, and Arabians, Parthians, Medes, Elamites, &c. because borne and bred up in those, Countreys, Acts II. 9, 10, 11. For though borne, or at least dwel∣ling in Mount Ephraim in Ramah; yet was Elkanah, and so Samuel his son, of the posterity of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Le∣vi, 1 Chron. VI. 33,—38. Eli] Eli or Heli, was by unknown descents of the posterity, not of Eleazer, the elder; but of Ithamar, the younger son of Aaron, the
son of Amram, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi. Eli was extraor∣dinarily both High Priest; and Judge; And a good and famous man; though faulty, and infamous in his children. And therfore more grie∣vously punished for their flagitious wickednesse, then Samuel for his sons lesser faults. See the sins of the sons of the High Priest Joshua, Ezra X. 18. From Eli descended Phinehas, his son; Ahitub, his son, 1 Sam. IV. 19, 21. compared with chap. XIV. 3. Ahimelech, his son, slaine by Saul, [his brother was Ahijah] 1 Sam. XIV. 3. and XXII. 9, 11. Abiathar, his son, in Davids time, 1 Sam. XXII. 20. 1 King. I. 7. This Abiathar is named High Priest by our Saviour, Marke II. 26. when David did eate the Shew-bread; because Abiathar then was with his Father Ahimelech joyned in that action of giving the bread to David instantly succeeded in his Fathers roome and Priest∣hood; was therein more eminent then his Father; and continued therein, with David in his persecution by Saul, and in all the time of his reigne afterward. And thus have we no need in that whole Hi∣story of Ahimelech and Abiathar, Father, and son, to make them Bi∣nomii, to be both known by both those names, and both indifferent∣ly called by either; yet see the great Annotations on 1 Chron. XVIII. 16. This Abiather was thrust out of the High Priesthood by Solo∣mon, 1 King. II. 26, 27. And the sons of Abiathar were Ahimelech, and Jonathan, 2 Sam. VIII. 17. and XV. 27. This Ahimelech, and not his Grandfather, of the same name, is he that is usualy joyned with Zadok in Davids reigne. And both then are named Priests, 2 Sam. VIII. 17. 1. Chron. XXIV. 31. i. e. Priests of the second ranck, or next the High Priest, who then was Abiathar. Such a se∣cond Priest we read of, 2 King. XXV. 18. Jer. LII. 24. who upon any extraordinary occurrent, restraining or disabling the High Priest; was to supply his place. This Jonathan the son of Abiathar was im∣ployed with Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, as newes-bearer to David in his flight from Absolom, 2 Sam. XV. 27, 28. and XVII. 17. Of Zadok, See 2 Sam. VIII. 17. Temple] So is the Tabernacle here called. And so, chap. III. 3. 2 Sam. XXII. 7. Psal. XXVII. 6. And so again, The Temple is called a Tabernacle, Lam. II. 6. Samuel] We read not that he was High Priest, or ever so called; But an extraordinary Prophet and Judge, a Nazarite, ver. 11. a Sa∣crificer; though a Levite onely, and most likely of the posterity of that Korah, Num. XVI. 32. and of the race of Izhar the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, as was formerly said, 1 Chron. VI. A rare and worthy person. The doores of the house of the Lord] The Hangings of the Gate of the Court, Exod XXVII. 16. Ark] The Ark so precious in the eyes of God, and of the Israe∣lites, and that worthily, Psal LXXVIII. 61. and CXXXII. 8. 1. Sam. IV. 20. Was carried about the walls of Jericho, and then returned into the Tabernacle, Being in the Tabernacle in Shiloh, it was ta∣ken
thence (and never came into the Tabernacle again), and was car∣ried to Eben-Ezer (a place ominous then, but a monument of Gods help soone after) into the Camp, 1 Sam. IV. 1, 3, 4, 5. and V. 1. that it might save them out of the hand of their enemies, the Philistines. (As we read, the Philistines themselves, in the dayes of David, brought their Images into their Camp, 2 Sam V. 21. 1 Chron. XIV. 12.) The Ark being taken there by the Philistines, they carried it about to Ash∣dod, into the house of Dagon: Thence to Gath: Thence to Ekron. And after they had kept it seven moneths, they carried it to Beth-Shemesh, a Citie in the Tribe of Judah, given to the Priests, 1 Chron. VI. 57, 59. Josh. XXI. 16. And it was fetched thence to Kiriath-jearim, a Citie of Judah, likewise, 1 Chron. XIII. 6. and Judg. XVIII. 12. So called, it may be, from Kiriath-jearim, the son of Shebal, grand∣childe of Caleb, the son of Hur, 1 Chron. II. 50, 52, 53. If Kiriath-jearim be there to be understood of the name of a man, and not of the Citie. Or thus called from its seate in a Wood, or woody Countrey, as the name signifieth; See ou Psal. CXXXII. 6. It was called also Kiriath-Baal, Josh. XVIII. 14, 15. And Baalah, Josh. XV. 9, 10. 1 Chron. XIII. 6. And Baale of Judah, 2 Sam. VI. 2. It was brought thither into the house of Abinadab, a Levite; builded in the hill, or Gibeah there, 1 Sam. VII. 1. 2 Sam. VI. 3, 4. It abode there twenty years, till the time of the Repentance and Reformation wrought by Samuel, 1 Sam. VII. 2,—6. And after in the times of Saul, it seems to be fetched thence to Giglal, 1 Sam. X. 8. and Ch. XI. 15. and ch. XII. 3. and chap. XIII. 8, 9. And after to Gibeah of Benjamin; compare together 1 Sam. XIII. 6. and chap. XIV. 2, 18. It may seeme to be thus fetched into extraordinary Assemblies, upon extraordinary oc∣casions both in Warre, and Peace. But being returned to Kiriath-jearim, and the honse of Abinadab, it was fetched thence by David, 1 Chron. XIII. 5. sixty seven years after it was first brought thither; And was brought by him to the house of Obed-Edom, 2 Sam. VI. 10. a Levite, and Porter on the South-side of the Temple, 1 Chron. XV. 18, 24. and chap. XVI. 38. and chap. XXVI. 4,—8, 15. if not a Singer also, 1 Chron. XV. 21. and chap XVI. 5. And one of his race and name was treasurer in the Temple, in the dayes of King Amatzi∣ah, 2 Chron. XXV. 24. He is called a Gittite, likely because borne at Gath-Rimmon, a Citie of the Kohathites Levites, Josh. XXI. 24, 25. situated near Gath of the Philistines. The Arke was there three moneths, 2 Sam. VI. 11. 1 Chron. XIII. 13, 14. And then, and thence, fetched by David, with great solemnity, into the Tent which he prepared for it, in the Citie of David, in Jerusalem, 1 Chron. XV. 1,—29. and XVI. 1. 2 Chron. I. 4. And thence seemes to be carried into Joabs Camp before Rabbah, 2 Sam. XI. 11. And begun to be carried with David in his flight from Absalom, 2 Sam. XV. 24, 25. And being returned to Davids Tent for it in Jerusalem, Solo∣mon, as soone as he had builded the Temple, brings it thence with great solemnity, and placeth it in the Holy Oracle, 2 Chron. V. 2,—14.
and chap. XXXV. 3. about one hundred and twelve years after it first left Shiloh. And last of all was burned with the Temple by Ne∣buchadnezzar. And no more to be minded, or remembred in the dayes of the Messiah, Jer. III. 16. The hand of God] The hand of God in Punishments upon the Phi∣listines, for detaining the Arke, were Mice marring the Land, chap. VI. 5. And in their bodies Emerods; and some other disease or plague, whereof most died, chap. V. 12. The house of Dagon] This Dagon was the Idol or God of the Phi∣listines, Judg. XVI. 22. They lived on the coast of the midland-Sea, on the East-end of it from us. This Dagon seemes to be a kinde of Sea-god, having his name from Dag, which signifies a Fish; and is thought to be portraied like a Fish from the middle downward; and his upper part like a man, if not a maid, 1 Sam. V. 4. Such Idols o∣ther Heathens worshipped, as the gods of the Sea; as Neptune, Tri∣ton. This House or Temple of Dagon was a marvellous House, Judg. XVI. 27. Hither the Philistines brought Sampson to make them sport; and he brought down the House upon them, Judg. XVI. 30. Hither they brought the Ark of God, as a captive in triumph, to the honour of their Idol; And Dagon fell down before the Ark, broken in pieces, 1 Sam. V. 3, 4. And here they fastened the head of Saul, whom they slew in Gilboa, 1 Chron. X. 10. Bethshemesh] Bethshemesh a Citie of the Priests, in the Tribe of Judah, on the North-border of it, Iosh. II. 16. and XV. 10. 1. Chron. VI. 59. Here Amaziah of Iudah fighting against Iehoash of Israel was vanquished and taken, 2 King. XIV. 2 Chron. XXV. There was another Bethshemesh a fenced Citie of Naphtali, Iosh XIX. 38. Iudg. I. 33. Another Bethshemesh, a prime Citie in Egypt, Ier. XLIII. 13. called anciently On, in later times Damieta. Bethshemesh signifies the house of the Sun; and the Cities so called, from the Temples of the Sun built therein, and the idol-worship of the Sun by the ancient inhabi∣tants practised there. Fifty thousand and seventy men] These were not all of the Citie Bethshemesh, but of the people also of neighbouring townes and pla∣ces, that came rejoycing ro see the Arke returned; but over-boldly gazing on it bare and uncovered, by the Philistines, or by themselves, contrary to the Law, Num. IV. 5, 20. If not prying presumptuously into it, out of an impious curiosity, or a pretence to see whether the Philistines had taken ought out of it, or put any thing into it. Kiriath-jearim] A Citie, not of the Levites, or Priests, and seated in the Tribe of Iudah, Iosh. XV. 9, formerly called Kiriath-Baal, ver. 60. and XVIII. 14. Of this Citie see more in the Observations on Ch. IV. 3. and on Psal. CXXXII. 6. These Citizens fetched the Arke, but borne and carried by the Priests of Bethshemesh. Twenty yeeres] Till this time of lamentation and repentance, and a long time after, see the Observations on Iosh. VI. 6. Thundered] By thunder here: by hailstones, Iosh. X. 10, 11.
Now make us a King] The danger by Nahash, as well as the wicked∣nesse of Samuels sons, made the Israelites ask a King, 1 Sam. XII. 12. which they might have done warrantably, if they had waited patient∣ly and faithfully, as well for the time when, as the person whom God should choose: But not tumultuously, and distrustfully, as they did now, 1 Sam. VIII. 5, &c. and Ch. XII. 19. Hos. VIII. 4. This will be the maner] This maner of a King speaks in many things more then what is the lawful power, and duty of a good King; more what he will do, then what he ought to do. The fourth part of a Shekel] Samuel, and God in him, conde∣scends to answer touching Saul's Asses: As Ahijah did touching the sicknesse of Jeroboams childe, 1 King. XIV. And Elias did also, of Ahaziah, 2. King. 1. And Samuel, in humility, seems to accept of a trifle, they having then no better; not for a reward of Divining; but as a free testimony of their due respect and thankfulnesse: As Ahi∣jah did the like from Jeroboams wife, 1 King. XIV. 3. And Elizeus also the like, 2 King. IV. 42. And as God accepts from the poor widow two mites. a Seer] And so ver. 19. 2 Sam. XXIV. 11. and Esay XXX. 10. Prophets called Seers by reason of the Visions and Prophecies which they saw from God; He, and they, being seen of them in Visions and Dreams, Num. XII. 6. And that as clearly, and as certainly as if they had seene them with their eyes, 1 Pet. I. 12. 1 Cor. II. 10. 2. Cor. IV. 18. and V. 1. Heb. XI. 27. to Gilgal] Not assoone as he parted from Samuel: nor yet seemes this to be understood of that being at Gilgal after his vanquishing of the Ammonites before Jabesh Gilead, Ch. XI. 4, 5, 11, 14, 15. when, and where, they made, or confirmed him King; though chosen before by Lot at Mizpeh, Ch. X. 17, 24. But this seemes to relate to a se∣cond time of being at Gilgal, after that former, and above a year af∣ter this parting from Samuel, Ch. XIII. 1. when he was to be there upon that weighty preparation of the warre against the Philistines, Ch. XIII. 7, 8. one year and he reigned tmo years] i. e. one year from his Ele∣ction at Mizpah, to his Coronation at Gilgal. And another year after that, which make two years, Then he began to take upon him the Royal state of a King, and chose his Guard and Army. Or thus, He reigned two years lawfully before he was rejected by God, upon his sparing of Agag, King of the Amalakites, Ch. XV. Or rather, two years quietly, before he was oppressed, and in a maner outed from his Kingdom by the Philistines, 1 Sam. XIII. 6, 19, 22. Upon whose overthrow Saul is said to take the Kingdom again, 1 Sam. XIV. 47. If they say to us] The like is, Gen. XXIV. 14. and Judg. VI. 36, —40. These done by some special divine instinct; and so not Pat∣terns for our imitation without like warrant. a very great trembling] The Hebrew phrase is, a trembling of
God. And so, asleep of God, 1 Sam. XXVI. 12. Mountains of God, Psal. XXXVI. 6. Cedars of God, Psal. LXXX. 10. and CIV. 16. an Hoast of God, 1 Chron. XII. 22. Garden of God, Ezek. XXVIII. 13. The wrastlings of God, Gen. XXX. 8. A Citie of God, Jon. III. 3. Visions of God, Ezek. XL. 2. And so may we understand, Sinners of God, or unto God, Gen. XIII. 13. that is, exceeding sinners a∣gainst God, Jer. L. 29. And so faire to God, Acts VII. 20. that is, exceeding faire. And so the flame of God, Cant. VIII. 6. A most vehement flame. A Seed of God, Mal. II. 15. A most holy seed. See my Observations on Jonah III. 3. Vtterly destroyed all the people] Not all the Amalekites slaine not∣withstanding this, and ver. 3. and Exod. XVII. 14, 16. For David fights them, 1 Sam. XXVII. 8. and they spoile Ziglag, 1 Sam. XXX. The youngest] David young, when anointed by Samuel, likely a∣bout two and twenty years old, young when he killed the Lion and the Bear; when he slew Goliah; when, after these, he slew his ten thousands (in Sauls sundry services); when afterwards he endured so long persecution by Sal; was with the King of Moab; and twice with Achish King of Gath, abiding at one time an year there, and four moneths: And yet was but thirty years old, when, after Sauls death, he was made King at Hebron, 2 Sam. V. 4. neither seemes he to have any childe, till he was a King; And then had six in Hebron of fix wives; four in Hierusalem of Bathshua or Bathshebah, the daughter of Ammiel, or Eliam; and nine more; in all nineteen, besides the sonnes of his Concubines 1 Chron. III. 1,—9. Anointed] David thrice anointed. Doubtful whether David slew Goliah before his first coming to Saul, mentioned Ch. XVI. 18,—23. Or after, that time: There are fair probabilities on either side; no undoubted certainty. And he prophesied] Besides the signification of the word for fore∣telling things to come, and some other miraculous operations. It is al∣so taken for Interpreting of Scripture, or Preaching, 1 Cor. XIV. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 22, 24, 29, 31, 32. And for singing and praising God, 1 Sam X. 5. 1. Chron. XXV. 1. 1 Cor. XI. 5. And more generaly for declaring the will of God to any by Revelation, or Mission from him. And so Christ is the great Prophet, Luke XXIV. 19. And so Enoch, Ahraham, Moses, are called Prophets: and after Moses in this ranck none was greater then he, Deut. XXXIV. 10. And after his time Samuel, David, Gad, Nathan, Elias, Elizeus, the four great Pro∣phets, the twelve small Prophets inspired Pen-men of Holy Scrip∣ture, and others many, were such, and so called. And as these Extra∣ordinary Prophets; so there were multitudes of Ordinary Prophets among the people: And Colledges of Prophets, and the sons of Pro∣phets at Bethel, Jericho, Gilgal, Ramah, Naioth, in the times of the Old Testament. And in the New Testament, Zacharias the father, and John Baptist the son, Barnabas and Paul, Judas and Silas, Agabus, and many others, are called Prophets; some Extraordinary, others Or∣dinary
Prophets, Matth. XXIII. 34. Acts XI. 27. and XIII. 1. and XV. 32. Rom. XII. 6. 1. Cor. XII. 10. and chap. XIV. 6, 9, 22, 24, 29, 31. Ephes. IV. 11. Apoc. XI. 10. And in both Testaments there were as men-Prophets; so women-Prophetesses: And in both Sexes, both True ones, and False. In the female sexe we read of good and True, Miriam, Deborah, Huldah, Anna, Philips four daughters virgins: of bad and False, Noadiah, Jezebel, and others, Ezek. XIII. 17,—23. Yea, among the Heathen some Poets pretending to, or reputed to be Declarers of Gods will, or Divine truths, are in a like sense termed Prophets, Tit. I. 12. Prophets in their esteeme. And the mode and maner of the expressions of their mindes, Oracles, and Prophecies a∣mong these Heathen Enthusiasticks was most-what in a wilde, raving and raging sort, with strange motions and agitations of the body, thereby the more to pretend their divine raptures; as in the Sybils, and others. And not unlike thereunto is this of Sauls prophesying here; In this his rage he casting a jaylin at Davi, ver. 11. yet in what sense properly he is said here to Prophesie, is well guessed in the great Annotations upon this text, though it be not altogether sure and cer∣taine. As neither that of Eldad and Medad, and the rest of the LXX. Num. XIII. 26, 27. Only this is unquestioned in the LXX. That it was some extraordinary Act and Testimony, That the Spirit of God rested upon them in some extraordinary maner, and as such was dis∣cernible to all, and so fit to authorize them in the eyes of others, as by a miracle, and to declare to all That they were gifted and assumed to that their present Office and imployment. Naked] i. e. Stript of his upper garment or military habit. So Pe∣ter, John XXI. 7. and Micah, chap. I. 8. Esay, chap. XX. 2, 4. And those Acts XIX. 16. Slew] Sauls most horrid and bloody Act. Ephod] The Ephod here is that of the High Priests;  wherin were the Urim and Thummim, Exod. XXVIII. 30. which Urim and Thummim were not the twelve precious stones of the Breast-plate; mentioned, v. 17-21. Or the words of Vrim and Thummim, engraven in the middest of those twelve precious stones on the Breast-plate; Or things committed into the hands of the workmen to make them: But rather given by God to Moses, to put them not on, but into the Breast-plate; which haply to this end and purpose was doubled, ver. 16. so to have them hid there. And accordingly, Levit. VIII. 8. Moses is said to put in the Breast-plate the Urim and the Thummim. Yet what things, or what kinde of things they were, appears not. Only we know the names signifie Lights, and Perfections; haply intimating Knowledge of Doctrine, and Integrity of Life and Conversation: And that by these the High Priests extraordinarily did ask Counsels of the Lord, and did receive Answers, as Oracles from him. So we see the Pre∣cept for it, Num. XXVII. 21. Joshuah shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask Counsel for him, after the judgement of Urim before the Lord: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they
shall come in, both he (i. e. Joshuah) and all the children of Israel with him. And the Practice of it we finde, expected earnestly by Saul, 1 Sam. XXVIII. 6. though the same, it may seeme, lighty sleighted by him, 1 Sam. XIV. 18, 19. And here acted by Abiathar the High Priest, for David; David hereunto adjoyning his Request unto the Lord, for the Answer, ver. 10, 11, 12. And again, 1 Sam. XXX. 7. And not unlike but Davids enquiring of the Lord, 2 Sam. II. 1. and chap. V. 19, 23. and XXI. 1. And possibly that, Judg. XX. 18, 23, 27, 28. was by the same meanes, upon the same ground. And if it were burnt, or lost at the ruine of the Temple, and all, by Nebuchadnezzar, yet the Tirshatha entertains an expectation of the restoring of it, Ez∣ra II. 63. Neh. VII. 65. a Messinger] Gods providence for the preservation of his. unto Achish] This second time, upon better security, beforehand given, then formerly was had. in Shunem] In Shunem and Aphek, 1 Sam. XXIX. 1. the Philistines pitched: And the Israelites in Gilboa, by a Fountain which is in Jezreel. All in the Tribe of Issachar, Josh XIX. 18. This is Davids Spoile] i. e. all that the Amalakites had taken from others, save from them of Ziglag. This, by his right, and free con∣sent and gift of his souldiers, he made use of to gratifie his friends, and engage them to him, ver. 26,—31. they shall part alike] They both alike shall have their shares, ac∣cording to Gods appointment, Num. XXXI. 27,—30. Josh. XXII. 8. Though not both equal shares. fell upon it] Saul his own bloody butcher and self-murderer. The Amalakite belies himself in most of his relation to David, 2 Sam. I. 5,—10. in hope of grace and reward from David; but in issue, to the losing of his life. God in his secret justice justly takes it upon himself, that he slew him, 1 Chron. X. 14. his head] This they fastened in the Temple of Dagon, 1 Chron. X. 10. His body to the wall of Bethshan, or Bethshean. And his Armour in the house of Ashteroth, a name of their female goddesses.
II. Samuel. THis Book contains an History of fourty years; from the death of King Saul, to the death of King David, or the time immediately preceding it, 2 Sam. V. 4, 5. The time, and story of Da∣vids reign. Crown that was upon his head] Likely not so worne by him in the day of battel, 1 King. XXII. 30. But carried with him, or before him, by his armour-bearer, or some others, as an Ensigne of his Kingly honour. bowe] That they might be skilful in the right use of their armes and weapons against their enemies in this time of need. Of the Bowe in warre, see ver. 22. And the Annotations on Hos. I. 5. and on Zech. X. 4. How are the mighty fallen?] Repeated, ver. 25. and 27. as the foot of this sad song and Elegie. Tell it not in Gath] This impossible not to be told there: But this shews Davids desire, if it had been possible. A Pathetical expressi∣on: not much unlike, is that, ver. 21. Unto Hebron] Of this place, thus, once for all: Hebron was a Ci∣ty in the Tribe, and Mountain of Judah, Josh. XV. 54. Called also Mamre, and Kiriath-arba, the City of Arba, the father of Anak, where Anak lived, his sonnes, and the Anakims, a race of Giants. Here formerly dwelt the children of Heth; and Hittites. And Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, sojourned here: And they; and Sarah, and Rebe∣kah, and Leah were buried here in the Cave of Machpelah, before Mam∣re, the same is Hebron, Gen. XIII. 18. and XXIII. 19. and XLIX. 31. Hence Joseph was sent to see the welfare of his brethren. Hither the Spies came that were sent from Kadesh-barnea in the Wildernesse of Paran to search the Land. Hoham the King of Hebron, was one of the five Kings mured up by Joshuah in a Cave; and after slaine and hanged up. And soone after the City taken; and another King there∣of seems then to be slaine by him. And he and Caleb slew the Anakims that dwelled here. This City and Suburbs were given to the Priests, and to be a Citie of Refuge: The Fields, and the Villages of it to Ca∣leb the sonne of Jephunne the Kenezite, that good Spie, Josh. XX. 7. and XXI. II. To the top of an hill before Hebron Sampson carried
the Gate of Gaza. To them in Hebron David sent a Present of the Spoile taken from the Amalakite, 1 Sam. XXX. 31. Hither God di∣rected him to go, in this Text. And here he was anointed King; and reigned seven years and six moneths: And here he had six sonnes born to him of six several women, his wives Here Abner was slain by Joab; and mournfully buried by David. Hither King Ishbosheths head was brought by his murderers; buried in Abners Sepulchre; and they hanged up here. Hither came all the Tribes of Israel to make David King over all Israel, and anointed him here. And Absalom being borne here; pretended a vow to be performed here; and rebelling against his father made himself King here. This Citie of Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt, Num. XIII. 23. And in Rehoboams reigne was fortified by him, after the revolt of the ten Tribes, 2 Chron. XI. 10. Reigned two years] That is, peaceably, before the warre betweene Abner and Joab, ver, 12, &c. As Saul reigned two years, 1 Sam. XIII. 1. that is, Peaceably, as well as Lawfully, before his Kingdom was in a ma∣ner taken from him by the Philistines, 1 Sam. XIII. 19. Zerviah the sister of David had these three valiant sonnes, Joab. Abishai, Asahel. And Abigael the other sister of David had Amasa, 2 Sam. XVII. 25. 1 Chron. II. 15, 16 17. Michal] Michal loved by both her husbands, David and Phal∣tiel, see 1 Sam. XXV. 44. Abner] He, and Saul were brothers children, 1 Sam. XIV. 50, 51. Millo] This in, or adjoyning to the strong hold of Zion, the Citie of David, taken by him, and Joab, of the Jebusites, notwithstanding their scornful brag and confidence; And David built the Citie round about from Millo and inward. And Joab repaired the rest of the Ci∣tie, 1 Chron. XI. 8. 2 Chron. XXXII. 5. This Millo Solomon built, 1 King. IX. 15, 24. and XI. 27. There was another Millo in or ad∣joyning to the Citie Shechem, where Abimelech was made King, Judg. IX. 6, 20. unto the day of her death] i. e. Michal never had any childe. Those five sons, 2 Sam. XXI. 8. were the sonnes of Merab, Michals sister, whom Michal brought up for Adriel, Merabs husband, 1 Sam. XVIII. 19. 2 Sam. XXI. 8. And are called Michals sonnes, because she did educate, if not adopt them. And in a sort not much unlike, is Obed called Naomies son Ruth IV. 16, 17. see Matth. I. 25. and XXVIII. 20. I will] The Promises are, some Peculiar to Solomon, some to Christ, some to both as the Type and Antitype. Davids Conquests. Hadadezer] or Hadarezer, 1 Chron. XVIII. 3. The like is in Diphath, and Riphath; in Dodanim, and Rodanim, 1 Chron. I. 6, 7. compared with Gen. X. 3, 4. The Hebrew letters Daleth and Resh are like one another, and often put and used one for another; See Esay XLVI. 15. Jer. II. 20, & ch. XXXI. 40. which shews that the Hebrew letters had the same forme and figure in those dayes, which they have at this day.
And the same Observation may be made upon the like change of o∣ther letters, wittingly made in Scripture, and much used in proper names; and much more used in the many mistakes of Interpreters and Translators of Scriptures in many other places; and all by reason of the similitude of their Hebrew Characters; as namely of , and : of , and , and ; of , and ; of , and ; of , and  of  & ; All which argue still not the Samaritan Characters, which have none of these mutual Similitudes amongst themselves; but the Hebrew Characters we have now to be the same which were from the Begin∣ning, or in Ezra his time. And farther, The Hebrew Jod is the smal∣lest letter, as it is intimated, Matth. V. 18. whereas the Samaritan Jod is one of the largest. a thousand] These one thousand here are expressed to be Charets, 1 Chron. XVIII. 4. And the seven hundred horsemen are expounded to be seven hundted rancks of horsemen, or decurioues, ten in a ranck; and so make seven thousand horsemen, in the foresaid place. Syrians] Hebrew, are Aram, and Aramites, for Syria, and Syri∣ans: So still in the Old Testament. These came of Aram the sonne of Shem, Gen. X. 22. We read of Padan-Aram, wherein Haran was, the place where Terah, Bethuel, and Laban dwelt, Gen. XI. 32. and XXVIII. and XXIX. chapters. Of Aram Naharaim, Judg. III. 8. of Aram-Zo∣bah, Ps. LX. title. Of Aram of Damascus, in this Text. The word is of a great latitude, and comprehends great Countreys in it. As Me∣sopotamia, so called, because in the middle of two armes of Euphrates; or of the two famous rivers of Euphrates and Tygris. And to this Si∣tuation the names of Padan-Aram, and Aram-Naharaim do relate. But in later ages Aram most relates to Aram of Damascus, that Syria where∣of Damascus was the chief Citie. And of this Syria see more in my Annotations on Amos I. 4, 5. For the Catalogue of the Kings of Syria, see the great Annotations on Amos I. 4. We read of four battels of David with the Syrians. The first, here, when they came to succour Hadadezer against Da∣vid. And in this, two and twenty thousand of them slain, 1 Chron. XVIII. 5. The second. ver. 13. in the Valley of Salt. And Edomites are na∣med there, 1 Chron, XVIII. 11, 12. and Psal. LX. in the Title of it; Because both Syrians, and Edomites joyned in the battell against Da∣vids Generals, Joab, and Abishai: and therefore the victory is ascri∣bed to each of the three: and the number flaine is twelve thousand, Ps. LX. 1. and six thousand more, either by Joab alone, before the main battel; or by both the brethren, after it in the pursuit of the victory; in all eighteen thousand, 2 Sam. VIII. 13. 1 Chron. XVIII. 12. The third battel, 2 Sam. X. 6,—14. when the Syrians joyned to help the Ammonites; and fled before Joab, 1 Chron. XIX. 6. 7, 10, 14. The fourth battel with the Syrians, 2 Sam. X. 15,—19. where∣in David slew (the men) of seven hundred Chariots, i. e. of seven
hundred rancks, or troops, having ten in a ranck or troop; not ten men in a Charet; in all seven thousand, 1 Chron. XIX. 18. And fourty thousand horsemen, 2 Sam. X. 18. And fourty thousand foot∣men, 1 Chron. XIX. 18. And Shobach, the Captaine of their Hoast. Zadok] He was in Davids, and Solomons times, 2 Sam. VIII. 17. and XX. 25. 1 King. I. 8. He anointed Solomon King, and by him was put in the roome of Abiathar, 1 King. I. 32, 34. and chap. II. 35. He was the son of another Ahitub then he that was father of Ahi∣melech: And he came from Eleazar, the eldest son of Aaron, and from Phineas, his son, after six descents, 1 Chron. VI. 4, 5, 6. And the High Priests of his posterity in a continued series and succession, to the Babylonish Captivity, are recorded in eleven generations, 1 Chron. VI. 9,—15. And after the Captivity, in six generations to Jaddua, who lived in the dayes of Alexander the Great: which is the last Hi∣storical Record of the Old Testament, Neh. XII, 10, 11. This Za∣doks son was that Ahimaaz, afterwards High Priest, mentioned by Da∣vid, 2 Sam. XV. 27. This Zadok, of the line of Eleazar, and Ahi∣melech of the line of Ithamar were the Priests, chief of those two fami∣lies, with command over the rest of the Priests of those two families severally: But Abiathar the father of Abimelech was then the supreme and only High Priest. The Cherethites, and the Pelethites] Of these see the great Annotati∣ons on this Text, Mourning was past] David marries her when she was with childe, in some hope thereby also to cover his sinne. Solomon] The elder brother of Nathan, by Bathsheba, or Bathshua, the daughter of Eliam or Ammiel: though Nathan be rancked before olomon, 2 Sam. V. 14. 1 Chron. III. 5. and XIV. 4. Crowne] The weight and worth of the King of Ammons Crowne, a Crowne of State, too weighty to wear. Shobi the brother of Ha∣nun, and sonne of Nahash seemes by David to be made King in Ha∣nuns place, which makes him to shew such kindnesse to David in his flight from Absalom, ch. XVII. 27. 28. After fourty years] Absalom, whose hair weighed [not was worth] above three pounds, at sixteen ounces to the pound, when yearly poll'd, 2 Sam. XIV. 25, 26. Begins his Rebellion against David, after fourty years, 2 Sam. XV. 7. not after fourty since David was anoint∣ed in Hebron; but since he was anointed by Samuel, 1 Sam. XVI. 13. And he ends his Rebellion, with hanging by his hair, as his halter, or by his head rather; where he is slaine first by Joab; after by Joabs armour-bearers; 2 Sam. XVIII. 14, 15 That the fourty years a∣foresaid, did take their Beginning and commencement as aforesaid; and so fell in with the twenty second, or twenty third year of Davids age; with the seventh or eighth year before he actualy began his reigne at Hebron; and ended at the thirty second, or thirty third year of his real reigne, and about seven years before his death; appears in this. That at this time of Absaloms rebellion, David was a strong man,
2 Sam. XV. 36. and ch XVII. 8, 10. and XVIII. 2. And afterwards also, ch. XXI. 15. whereas in the fourtieth and last year of his reigne and life he was bed-rid, 1 King. I. 1, 2. And after the businesse of this Rebellion was carried on, and ended; we read of three yeares of famine, 2 Sam. ch. XXI. I. And of the hanging up of ten of Sauls sons, and grand-sons, ver. 8, 9, 10. and of the gathering of the bones of them that were hanged, and the burying of them afterwards in an∣other place, ver. 13, 14. As also, of warres yet againe raised by the Philistines, and battels fought with them, at four several times; In the first of which David himself was in person, and in present danger, ver. 15,—22. And besides, neere ten moneths were taken up in numbering the people, Ch. XXIV. 8. And upon the occasion of the Pestilence following thereupon, The Threshing-Floore of Araunah being found to be the place where the Temple was to be builded, 1 Chron. XXII. 1. with 2 Chron. III. 1. David doth instruct Salomon about his dutie in the building of it; and doth encourage him to do it; and chargeth the Princes to assist him therein, 1 Chron. XXII. And causing him to be suddenly anointed King, to suppresse the seditious and ambitious attempt of Adoniah; And having afore ordered the Courses, and Offices of the Levites, Priests, Singers, Porters, for the Service of the Temple, 1 Chron. XXIII. XXIV. XXV. XXVI. Ch. He gives Solomon Patterns, and Materials for the Building; tells him of the Courses of the Priests, and Levites which he had Ordered, Ch. XXVIII. And himself offers of his own goods magnificently; and procures the Princes, and People to Offer willingly towards the said Building; And concludes with Thanksgiving and Prayer to God; And the People blesse God, and offer Sacrifices; and make Solomon King the second time, Ch. XXIX. And lastly, on his death-bed David gives Solomon charge to serve God; as also concerning Joab, and Barzillai; and Shimei; and dieth, 1 King II. All which may well take up the seven last years of Davids reigne and life. In the wood of Ephraim] Not that Ephraim had any wood or land on the East-side of Jordan: But the name might seeme to rise from the great defeat given there to Ephraim by Jephthah, Judg. XII. 5, 6. Amasa] Davids gentlenesse and courtesie to spare and honour A∣masa; notwithstanding his chief hand in rebellion against him, 2 Sam. XVII. 25. slew Goliath] His brother Lahmi; as it is explained, 1 Chron. XX. 5. And so Michal for Michals sister, ver. 8. of this Chapter. The words brother and sister being left out by an Eclipsis not unusual, spe∣cially in the short idiome of the Hebrewes, and in cases so well known. This Psalme of Praise and Thanksgiving is the same with Psalme XVIII. The difference is very little. Here are Davids Worthies towards the end of his reigne. These in all thirty seven 2 Sam. XXIII. 39. whereof Joab one, the General and Captaine of the hoast, 1 Chron. XI. 6. Six chief Worthies or Co∣lonels:
And of them the first three above the other three. And the first three, Adino, or Jacobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah; exceeding the other three. Abishai the chief of the second three; and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiadah; and Asahel, who was one not of the thirty, but above the thirty, for there are thirty named after him. The three first, or three chief over the thirty, ver. 13. are described, as otherwise, so by their valiant Acts, both distinctly, and joyntly, 2 Sam. XXIII. 8,—17. And so the two first of the next three. And these six likely were each of them over five of the thirty following, and their Regiments. The Catalogue of Davids Worchies, 1 Chron. XI. was ta∣ken when David began his reign at Hierusalem, or before; The number there is fourty seven, besides the first three, and the second three. And well might the number be more at that beginning of his reigne, then at the end of it; some of them dying in the meane time. And of o∣thers some might have two different names. The chief of all the Worthies slayes three hundred himself, aud likely in the pursuit, at the same time 500. more, by himself, or with his company; in all eight hundred. Of him see more, 1 Chron. XXVII. 2, 3. The se∣cond defies the Philistines, when the men of Israel were fled away, and in a parcel of ground full of Barley, slew the Philistines till his hand clave unto the sword, and wrought a great victory and delive∣rance. Of his father, see 1 Chron. XXVII. 4 The third did the like in a piece of ground full of Lentiles. Of the other three, 1. A∣bishai, the brother of Joab. 2. Asahel, another brother, and Captain for the fourth moneth, 1 Chron. XXVII. 7. slaine by Abner, whiles David reigned in Hebron. 3. Benaejah, the Captaine of Davids guard; the Cherethites and Pelethites, 2 Sam. VIII. 18. And Captaine for the third moneth, 1 Chron. XXVII. 5, 6. And afterwards by Solo∣mon made General of the Hoast in the roome of Joab, 1 King. II. 34, 35. Of him see more, 2 Sam. XXIII. 20, 21, 22. This Benajah, the son of Jehoiada of Kabzeel, is called also a chief Priest or Principal Officer, 1 Chron. XXVII. 5. Another Benajah a Pirathonite, was one of Davids thirty Worthies, 2 Sam. XXIII. 30. And other Benajahs there were besides, that were Priests and Levites. And divers of the Captaines for the twelve moneths were of the number of Davids Worthies. And among the thirty were a son of Achitophel, Uriah the Hittite, and the armour-bearer of Joab likewise. Although my house] Rather thus interrogatively;  And is not my house so with God? Seven years] Seven years of famine here propounded to David. And three years, 1 Chron. XXI. 12. that is three more, to the three years of famine for the Gibeonites, 2 Sam. XXI. 1. To which three so lately past; And Davids sinne of numbering the people being in the fourth year, which was a Sabbatical year; A new addition of other three makes up seven years of famine. Yet the LXX. read three in 2 Sam. XXIV. 13. Of Famine, see more on Lam. I. 11. and II. 11, 12, 19, 20. and IV. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10. and V. 10. Ezek. IV. 9, 16. and V. 16.
I. Kings. THE Books of Kings do most pursue the History of the Kings of Israel, during the continuance of that Kingdome. They seeme to be written after their dayes, 1 King. IX. 13, 21, and X. 12. and XII. 19. 2 King. II. 22. and VIII. 22. and X. 27. and XIV. 7. and XVI. 6. and XVII. 23, 34, 41. 1 Chron. IV. 41 and V. 26. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 22, 23. The first Book of Kings [or III.] contains an History of one hundred and eighteen years: viz. of Solomon: And after him, Of Rehoboam, Abia, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Kings of Judah. Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Tibni, Omri, and A∣hab, Kings of Israel. Acts of Solomon, Rehoboam and Abijah, are written in Books of Nathan the Prophet, of Shemaiah the Prophet, of the Prophecie of Ahijah the Shilomite, of the Visions and story of Iddo the Seer, and Prophet, 2 Chron. IX. 29. and XII. 15. and XIII. 22. which are lost, and never were Canonical Scripture. Yet those of Solomon seeme to some to be written by Nathan, Ahijah, and Iddo, in the beginning of the first Book of Kings, 2 Chron. I. 29. Adonijah] The eldest sonne then living, 2 Sam. III. 3, 4 Chileab or Daniel, 1 Chron. III. 1. being dead (as Absolon was eldest when he formerly sought the Crowne) begins with a Courtly traine and Life∣guard; as Absolon did. But gets Joab, and Abiathar to joyne with him, in seeking to be King; And that by a fairer way then Absolon did, 2 Sam. XV. 1 King. I. En-Rogel] Or the Well of Rogel. This was nigh Jerusalem, East and by South. See Josh. XV. 7. 2 Sam. XVII. 17. Gihon] Gihon is a Mount, and a Rivolet, close on the West-side of Jerusalem. See 2 Chron. XXXII. 30. and XXXIII. 14. Hornes of the Altar] And so, chap. II. 28. The Altar whereunto Adonijah, and Joab fled, seemes to be not any at Jerusalem, but that with the Tabernacle at Gibeon, 2 Chron. I. 3,—6. Fourty years] And so the years of his life, seventy, when he dies of age. For he was thirty when he began to reigne, 2 Sam. V. 4. And
yet Jesse was above one hundred, when he begat him: See on Rahab, Josh. II. And we read not of any King of Judah, or Israel after David that attained to his age: Onely Vzziah, and Manasseh came very near it. I will not say thee nay] Many Promises of God and Man, have their Provisoes, and are to be understood conditionally, as 1 Sam. II. 30. Ezek. XXXIII. 13. 1 Chron. XVII. 9. and chap. XXVIII. 9. 2 Chron. VI. 16. Psal. CXXXII. 12. 2 Chron. VII. 17,—22. As Gods manifold promises of Long Life, and Temporal Blessings, and Delive∣rances. And many the like. And so for Threatnings, and Dooms, Judg. X. 13. Jonah III. 4. See my Observations on that Text of Jonah. Abiathar] Abiathar the fourth from Eli, of the race of Ithamar, the younger brother, was High Priest, till Solomon put Zadok in his roome, being indeed the right heir of the right line, of Eleazar, and Phineas, 1 Chron. VI. 3, &c. Num. XXV. 13. High places] High places called so, because mostwhat on Moun∣tains, Esay LVII. 7. whence named Bamah, Ezek. XX. 28, 29. There they built houses of the High Places, Temples, Chappels, Altars, &c. and put their Idols and Images there, and decked all with Tapistry, and garments of divers colours. They made Priests of the High pla∣ces; and there they sacrificed, yea, sometimes their children; and burnt Incense, 1 King. XII. 31, 32. 2 King. XVII. 29, 32. Ezek. XVI. 16, 17, 18, 24, 25, 31. Ier. XIX. 5. The High places of Hea∣then Idolaters were alwayes abominable. These High places God commands the Israelites to destroy, and quite pluck down, Num. XXXIII. 52. While the Ark, and Tabernacle were parted one from the other; and both from Shiloh; and removed from place to place, till the building of the Temple, and there fixed and setled; We read of High places lawfully resorted to, and used, by Samuel, 1 Sam. IX. 12, 13, 14, 19, 25. and by others, chap. X. 5, 12, 13. And not much unlawfully by these here, 1 King. III. 2, 3. And Gibeon it self, when the Tabernacle and Altar, were there, is called the Great High place, 1 King III. 4. But when the Temple was since built, then all other High places for Gods solemneworship, and Ceremonial Servi∣ces were counted abominable. And in this sin, the ten Tribes, after the division of the Kingdomes by Ieroboam, continualy abounded. They made houses and Priests of High places, in Mountains, and in all the Cities of Samaria, and their Altars were as heaps in the fur∣rows of the fields, 1 King. XIII. 32. Hos. XII. 11. Yea, and Solo∣mon himself, afore that, in his later dayes, fearfully offended in this kinde, 1 King. XI. 7. 8. And Iudah it self fell into this sin, even in Rehoboams reigne, 1 King. XIV. 23. And in after-times, They built High places to Baal, and to the Idols of neighbouring Nations, 2 Chr. XXV. 14. in Tophet, in the Valley of the sonne of Hinnom, on Mount Olivet, in Hierusalem, in all the Cities of Iudah, and in every street of the Cities, Micah I. 5. 1 King. XIV. 23. Ier. VII. 31. and XIX. 5. and XXXII. 35. Ezek. XVI. 16, 31. And this specialy in the reignes
of Ahaz, Ioram, and Manasseh. And in the reignes of divers good Kings of Iudah, as Ioash, Amatziah, Vzziah, Iotham, it is recorded as a blemish in them, That they did not take away the High places, but the people sacrificed, and burnt Incense in them. Of good Asa it is said, that he did, and he did not take them away, 1 King. XV. 14 2 Chron. XV. 17. And so of Iehoshaphat, 2 Chron XVII. 6. and XX. 33 1 King. XXII. 43 The meaning is, They took away those High places which were for Idols and strange gods, not those which were for Gods worship: or they laboured in the Reformation of these later also; but through the peoples waywardnesse, could not therein fully prevaile In the Reformation of Manasseh upon his Repent∣ance, it is said That neverthelesse the people did sacrifice still in the High places, yet unto the Lord their God only, 2 Chron XXXIII. 17 But zealous Hezekiah and Iosiah, went through-stitch with all. Gibeon] The Tabernacle was never at any one of the Cities of the Levites, except here at Gibeon only. Aske Gods proffer to Solomon, in that night after he had offered up those numerous Sacrifices at Gibeon, 2 Chron. I. 7. And his large Petition thereupon for Wisdome, 1 King. III. 6, 7, 8, 9. And Gods ample Grant thereunto; and further Largesse, partly added, partly upon Condition promised, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. were transacted all whiles Solomon was asleep, as appears by ver. 5. and 15. Though in this same History, 2 Chron. I. 7,—12. of Sleep, or Dreame there is no mention made at all. a little childe] In that sleep Solomon calls himself a little childe; And a little before that David testifies the like of him, 1 Chron. XXII. 5. and chap. XXI. 1. with an eye had to his grear charge at that age; not unlike to that, Jer. I. 6. Yet then David calls him a Wise-man, 1 King. II. 9. even before that wonderful increase of wisdome added to him after Davids death; And then Solomon, being indeed a∣bout seventeen years old, had Rehoboam, his son, as appears by the age of Rehoboam at the beginning of his reigne, 1 King. XIV. 21. 2 Chron. XII. 13. Harlots] The King knew not likely, that the women were Harlots; haply open Inne-keepers, and close Harlots. sonne of Nathan] The Prophet Nathans two sons highly honour∣ed and advanced by Solomon. Spake] Solomon chosen by God to be King, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 5. and XXIX. 1. and chap. XXII. 9, 10, spake three thousand Proverbs. And he spake of all Trees, 1 King. IV. 32, 33. Not that the Text saith, he writ them, or of them. And his Songs were one thousand and five. Hiram] Hiram, or Huram King of Tyre, and Sidon too, ver. 6. having Lebanon in his possession. Both father and son of that name, 2 Chron II. 3, 13. And again, Hiram the workman, father and sonne at the same time of the said Kings, both it seemes of the same name likewise, 1 King. VII. 13, 14. 2 Chron. II. 14. and IV. 11. and both
wrought to Solomon, 2 Chron. IV. 16. The sonnes mother was of Dan, 2 Chron. II. 14. His father, of Naphtali, though inhabiting in Tyre, 1 King. VII. 14. The House of the Lord] This House, called the Temple, ver. 3. the Throne of Gods glory, Jer. XIV. 21. a Glorious high throne, Jer. XVII. 12. our Holy and Beautiful House, where our fathers praised thee, Esay XLVI. 11. the Beauty of Holinesse, 1 Chron XVI. 29. was built in Jerusalem, on Mount Moriah, or Sion, on the Threshing-floore of Araunah or Ornan the Jebusite, 2 Chron. III. 1. 1 Chron. XXII. 1. Very wonderful riches acquired, and laid up, and other preparati∣ons made by David, and others, towards the building of the Temple, 2 Sam. VIII. 11, 12. 1 Chron. XXII. 14. and ch. XXIX. And the Patterne or Platforme of it given to David by the Spi∣rit, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 21. he set down in writing particularly, and gave it to his sonne, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 11,—18. This was such like an help as Moses had, Exod. XXV. 40. The Preparations for the second Temple were very small. Huge stones, and costly, and precious stones used in Solomons Buildings, 1 King. VII. 9,—12. and chap. X. 2, 10, 11. 1 Chron. XXIX. 2, 8. 2 Chron. III. 6. The Brazen Altar for Sacrifice was in the Court next the Tem∣ple, in the open aire. The Lavers likewise in that Court, between the Brazen Altar, and the Temple; fixt and placed before the Temple, in the inmost Court; viz. five Bases, and Lavers upon them, on the right hand; and five on the left, as one was to go from the East into the Temple: To wash in them such things as they Offered for the Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices. The great molten Sea, standing on twelve Oxen, or Brazen Buls, which were by, and beside, not under the Bases and Lavers, as the word is rendered, Jer. LII 20. This Sea was placed on the right hand, or North-side, over against the South, For the Priests to wash in, 2 Chron. IV. 6, 10. In most other places in Scripture, the Right hand is taken for the South; and the Left hand for the North; as supposing a mans posture with his face towards the East. Going on from the East towards the West; and passing by the Altar, Lavers, and Sea; Entrance was so made into the Porch of the Temple. This Porch being the entrance, and East-end of the Tem∣ple, was in length twenty Cubits; from North to South; In breadth ten Cubits, from East to West; and in height as high as the Temple, and thrice as high above it, one hundred and twenty Cubits in all, 1 King. VI. 3. 2 Chron. III 4. In the middle betweene the walls, not joyning to the walls, stood on each side of the entrance or Porch, the two Pillars, of Jachin, on the right hand; and Boaz, on the left; eighteen sacred Cubits apiece high, 1 King. VII. 15. or thirty five common Cubits besides the Basis or Pedestal of one Cubit,
2 Chron. III. 15. Although some would have this thirty five to be the number arising from the height of both Pillars or the shafts of them. And a Chapiter on the top of each, five sacred Cubits high, 1 King. VII. 16. 2 Chron. III. 15. to a part whereof are assigned three Cubits, 2 King. XXV. 17. And they being four fingers thick of brasse, and hollow within, Jer. LII. 21. a line of twelve sacred Cubits did compasse either of the Pillars about, 1 King. VII. 15. Some divide the Pillars into five parts; or rather into six thus; a square Table on the bottome; a Rundle or round Basis upon that; the shaft and maine body of the Pillars round; and above that a square Border upon which the Pomegranates were; a Head, or Chapiter, or Belly; and a Crowne or Powel, both round. All the three parts above the Shaft are called by the name of Chapiter, and are said to be five Cu∣bits high, 1 King. VII. 16. Jer. LII. 22. And the four Cubits; 1 King. VII. 19. is to be understood of some parts of them: And the thee Cubits, 2 King. XXV. 17. of the other: or the four Cu∣bits relate to the Lilie-work, and the three Cubits to the Net-work. The whole Chapiters had Nets of Checker-work, and wreaths of Chain-work, seven on either 1 King. VII. 17. And Pomegranates upon the Net-works, in two rowes, one above another, that is, twen∣ty four on a square or side, and so ninety six in all upon the four sides of each rowe; which with the four corner ones make up one hundred in each rowe, 2 Chron. III. 16. Jer. LII. 23. And so two hundred on either Pillar, 1 King. VII. 20. and four hundred Pomegranates on both joyntly. Passing through the Porch, They entered into the Sanctuary or Body of the Temple, conjoyned to the Porch; which Sanctuary or Body was fourty sacred Cubits long, and twenty broad, and thirty high, 1 King. VI. 17. 2 Chron. III. 3 Overlaid within with gold, upon Palme trees, and Chaines, and Cherubims; and garnished with precious stones, 2 Chron. III. 5, 6, 7. In this body of the Temple, were the things following; ten Can∣dlesticks of gold, with their Lamps [Besides other of silver menti∣oned, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 16. for other uses, in other places, in the Courts and Chambers of the Priests and Levites.] Of which ten, there were placed five on the right hand, and five on the left 2 Chron. IV. 7. And each of them far greater then that one in the Tabernacle. Oile was used to the Lamps. Ten Tables for Shew-bread, likely of gold; [besides other of sil∣ver in other places, for other uses, in the Priests Courts, Chambers, and Treasuries, mentioned, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 16.] Of which ten, there were five placed on the right side, and five on the left, 2 Chron. IV. 8, 19. Though one Table and one Candlestick, be named for the rest, 2 Chron. XIII. 11. 1 King. VII. 48. Altar of Incense, of gold, placed by the Oracle, at the West-end of the Sanctuary, 1 King. VI. 20, 22. and VII. 48. On which was daily burnt the Perfume, Exod. XXX. 34,—38. and ver. 1,—10.
And that not by the High Priest only; as it is in the Annotations on 2 Chron. XXVI. 16. But by other Priests; as it is in the Annotations on Exod. XXX. 7. Thence straight forward, Through the Vaile, and Doore the High Priest once in the year entered into the Oracle or Most-Holy-Place; twenty sacred Cubits long; twenty broad; and twenty high; a per∣fect square, 1 King. VI. 20. Being the West-end of the Temple. By the Height here it seemes plainly to be ten Cubits lower then the Body of the Temple; as our Chancels commonly are lower then the Bodies of our Churches. Neither seemes there to be any thing in the Text to induce us to be otherwise minded: Though the Great Annotations on 1 King. VI. 20. seek out wayes to heighten the up∣most outmost top of it to be level and even with the top of the Temple. In the Oracle were, the Ark, called Gods strength, and glory, Psal LXXVIII. 61, and CXXXII. 8. 1 Sam. IV. 20. And in it only two Tables of the Law and Covenant, or Testimony: The Propiti∣atory or Cover upon it; which made up the Mercy-seat: And the two Cherubims, not of massie gold, as those two lesser ones in the Ta∣bernacle, Exod. XXXVII. 7. But of Olive-tree, covered with plates of Gold, and meeting with one of their wings upon the Mercy-seat; and the other wings stretching to the walls of the Oracle; whereupon it is called the Chariot of the Cherubims, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 19. See 1 Sam. IV. 4 Psal. LXXX. 1. and XIX. 1. Esay XXXVII. 16. And their faces were inward or toward the House, 2 Chron. III. 13. These Che∣rubims have one paire of wings apiece. In Ezekiels Vision two paire apiece, Ezek. I. 6. and chap. X. 21. In Esayes Vision the Seraphim have three paire a piece, Esay VI. 2. As also those four living wights, Apoc. IV. 8. Probably on their Shoulders, Breasts, and Hips. These Cherubims were so made as the parts of them might be taken asun∣der, 2 Chron. III. 10. And by the side of the Arke, or before the Testimony, are conceived to be the Pot of Mannah; Aarons Rod; The Censer; and the Book of the Law, as they had formerly been in the most Holy Place of the Sanctuary. And the smaller Cherubims which Moses made out of the matter of the Mercy-seat, or Propitia∣tory, or Cover, if inseparably fastened to the ends of it, then they were also covered with the great Cherubims, Exod. XXV. 18, 19. & ch. XXXVII. 8. Of all which see what more hath been said upon Exod. See also 1 King. VI. and VIII. chapters. 2 Chron. III. and IV. chapters, where more is set down of the gold, and precious ornaments of this place, and the things in it. [Our Westerne Churches have the Chan∣cels at the East-end; and the steeples commouly at the West-end; (o∣therwise then it was in Solomons Temple) in relation likely to Judea, and Jerusalem, and that Temple, East from us. Of the second Tem∣ple in Ezra; we have little for the things in it. Of Herods Temple, little or nothing in Scripture. The windows narrow without, and broad within, were above the
Chambers, round about both the Temple, and Oracle. Of the Walls, and Doores, see 2 Chron. III. 5, 6, 7. and chap. IV. 22. 1 King. VI. 15, 16, 22, 29, 30, 31,—35. and VII. 50. The Floore of the Temple, was of Firre-Plancks, 1 King. VI 15. Of the Oracle, was of Cedar, ver. 16. Both overlaid with gold, i. e. plates of gold, ver. 30. The covering of the House was with beames, and boards of Ce∣dar, ver. 9. sieled or covered within with gold, 2 Chron. III. 5, 8. And in likelyhood Lead upon the outside of them, to defend all against the injuries of the weather. Gates of the Temple, and Courts of it, 2 Chron. VIII. 14. and XXIII. 4, 5, 19, 20. and XXIV. 8. and XXVII. 3. and XXXI. 14. and XXXV. 15. See the Annotations on Ezek. VIII. 3, 5, 14. and on chap. IX. 2. and on chap. XL. 3. The Courts; of the Tabernacle was one; of Solomons Temple at least two, 2 Chron. IV. 9. Besides the Court of the Gentiles, or intermural; the East-gate whereof was called Solomons Porch; of Ezekiels Visionarie Temple, at least three; besides that for the Gentiles. The Courts were comprised under the name of the Temple, Acts XXI. 28. Joh. II. 14, 16. In the Court of the People, or Greater Court Solomon erected his Scaffold, 2 Chron. VI. 13. And Joash was anointed King, 2 Chron. XXIII. 13. And here, and in the Porch of it, were the People taught, by the Priests, and Levites; by the Pro∣phets, and Apostles; by our Saviour, who never entered further then this Court into the Temple. The time of Building, seven years. Though there were six moneths more by comparing, 1 King. VI. 1, 38. 2 Chron. III. 2. Like to that of the time of Davids reigne, 2 Sam. V. 4, 5. The time of Dedication of the House and Altar in the seventh moneth, 1 King. VIII. 2. 2 Chron. V. 3. and chap. VII. 9, 10. either the moneth before all the appurtenances, and ordinances of the House were fully finished; or else in the seventh moneth of the next year, when the Jubilee began; that so the celebrity of Bringing in the Ark, and Dedication of the Temple, and Solomons sacrifices, and his solemne Prayer upon his brazen scaffold, might then and thereby, be∣come the greater and more illustrious, 1 King. VIII. 1,—66. 2 Chron. V. and VI. and VII. chapters. It began the seventh or eighth day of that moneth: for on the fifteenth day began the Feast of Tabernacles. And in relation to these two Feasts, are those four∣teen dayes mentioned, 1 King. VIII. 65. 2 Chron. VII. ver. 8, 9. And on the twenty third day of that moneth the people were dismissed, 2 Chron. VII. 10. the eighth day of the later Feast, 1 King. VIII. 66. House of the Forrest of Lebanon] This was built in Jerusalem. See ver. 6, 7, 8. His dwelling House and Throne not farre from it; and golden shields in it, 1 King. X. 16, 17. And there seazed on by the King of Egypt, 2 Chron. XII. 9, 10. It seemes so called, as being a kinde
of abridgement of that famous Forrest, afarre off from Jerusalem, and containing in it, and in the Groves and Gardens about it, all the delights and pleasures of that Forest, in solitary walks, sweet smels, musick of birds, and sight of wilde-beasts, &c. See my Annotations on Zech. XI. 1. where conceiving this House to be built in that Forest, not in Jerusalem, upon further consideration, I think good to retract that opinion here. Two thousand Baths] Bath the measure of Liquid things, as Epha of Dry: Both of the same capacity. This Sea had ordinarily put into it two thousand Baths, or five hundred Barrels, reckoning eight gallons to the Bath and four Baths to the Barrel. But this Sea being filled up to the brim, it might containe three thousand Baths, 2 Chron. IV. 5. or seven hundred and fifty Barrels; with water drawn out of it by Cocks or otherwayes, the Priests washed, &c. Ten Lavers] But one in the Tabernacle, Exod. XXX. 18. Here are ten Lavers, besides the Sea. And so of the Candlesticks, and Tables, there were ten in the Temple to one in the Tabernacle, 1 King. VII. 49. 2 Chron. IV. 8. Each Laver contained fourty Baths. Bowles of pure Gold] Of Gold belonging to the Altar of Incense, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 17. Some of Silver, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 16. And as those given by the twelve Princes, Num. VII. 13, 85. Some of Brasse, for the Brazen Altar, Exod. XXXVIII. 3 Num. IV. 14. 1 King. VII. 45. And for the Vessels of the Temple, See on Jer. LII. 17,—23. Pleased him not] King Hiram, though displeased with the twenty Cities, given him by Solomon, in the Land of Galilee, yet pleaseth to restore them to him in love, 2 Chron. VIII. 2. A tribute of bond-service] These here mentioned, and their poste∣rity, seeme to be called Solomons servants, Ezra II. 55, 58. Neh. VII. 57, 60. and XI. 3. Gold from Ophir] So gold from Uphaz, Jer. X. 9. and Gold of Ophir, Psal. XLV. 9. and Gold of Uphaz, Dan. X. 5. and Gold of Sheba, Ps. LXXII. 15. and Gold of Parvaim, 2 Chron. III. 6. And these are taken for the finest Gold, 1 King. X. 18. compared with 2 Chron. IX. 17. Job XXII. 24. But whether these places be Peru in America; or Fez in Africa; or Sumatra; or Taprobane; or in Arabia; or else∣where, according to our moderne names, is in these dayes altogether doubtful. Tarshish] The name of one of the sonnes of Javan, Gen. X. 4. whose posterity, as some imagine, planted in that part of Spaine, where a Citie, and Region adjacent, thence took the denomination of Tar∣tesus, and Tartesia afterwards: Or rather, as others conceive, they seated themselves in Cilicia, and gave this name of Tarshish, as to the whole Region, so specially to the chief City, and Port-towne there, afterwards called Tarsus, the place of Pauls birth, Acts XXI. 39. and XXII. 3. And that thence the Midland Sea which bordered upon
that port and territorie, was called Tarshish; and the ships, either be∣longing to that Port, or trading to and fro in that Sea, were thence cal∣led ships of Tarshish, Esay II. 16. yea, sometimes Tarshish seemes to de∣note the Arabian, and Persian Gulphs; the Ocean, either Westerne, or Easterne, Ezek. XXVII. 12. or any great Sea; as likewise Pontus doth in Latine: And ships of Tarshish, to be vessels of great bulk and burden, fit to traverse and traffick in any such Sea, 1 King. X. 22. Silver to be in Jerusalem as stones] The Israelites ripe for Rebellion, complain so much of their Oppressions in Solomons peaceable, rich, & glorious reigne, 1 King. X. 27. and XII. 4. 2 Chron. I. 15. and VIII. 8, 9. Loved many strange women] Wise Solomons, or Jedidiah's Fall is wonderful: yet his Repentance not to be doubted of: as appears in the Book of Ecclesiastes, in 2 Sam. VII. 14, 15. 1 Chron. XXII. 10. and XXVIII 6. and XVII. 13 14. 2 Chron. XI. 17. 2. Pet. I. 21. One Tribe] Not one whole Tribe;  but that of Judah only, did stick to Rehoboam, and the House of David after Solomons reigne, 1 King. XI. 32, 36. and XII. 20. 2. King XVII. v. 18. Yet see 2 Chr. XI, 13,—17. And hence begin those three hundred and ninty dayes in Ezek. IV. 5. See the Annotations there. Rehoboam] Rehoboam is the only sonne we read of that Solomon had, for all his shameful number of Wives, and Concubines. And there is mention made only of two of his daughters, 1 King. IV. 11, 15. set down in that chapter by Anticipation. This Rehoboam is said to be young, and tender-hearted, 2 Chron. XIII. 7. young in experi∣enced wisdome, when yet at that time he was fourty one years of age, 2 Chron. XII. 13. being borne in the first year of his young wise fa∣ther Solomons reigne. He foolishly forsook the counsel of the old men, 1 King. XII. 8, 13, 14. to the losse of the ten parts of his King∣dome. Yet afterwards he is said to deal wisely, 2 Chron. XI. 23. In Bethel, and the other put he in Dan] In the South and North borders of his kingdome. And yet Bethel being in the Tribe of Benja∣min] Bethel was taken from him in his own dayes, by Abijah, 2 Chron. XIII. 19. And Dan was smitten by Benhadad in the dayes of Asa, and Baasha, soone after, 1 King. XV. 20. Bethel] Though Bethel be sometimes called Bethaven, in the Pro∣phets, as Hos. IV. 15. and V. 8. and X. 5, 15. and Aven, chap. X. 8. As Mount Olivet, of Mount Mischa is called Mount Maschith, 2 King. XXIII. 13. Yet were there Bethel, and Bethaven, two distinct neighbouring townes or Cities, Josh. VII. 2. and XVIII. 12. 1 Sam. XIII. 5. and chap. XIV. 23. a childe] Fulfilled, 2 King. XXIII. 15, 16, 17. Samaria] Samaria so called by Anticipation; as Bethel, Gen. XII. 8. And sundry other places in Scripture. Not that they had those names in those times first mentioned; But in after-times, when the writers of those Histories lived, 1 King. XVI. 24. It seemes of old to be cal∣led and belong to Shimron-Meron, Josh. XI. 1, 5. and XII. 20. Book of the Chronicles] After the division of the Kingdomes, The
Books of the Kings do often cite the Books of the Chron of Israel, and of Judah, as 1 King. XIV. 19, 20. XV. 7. 23, 31. 2 King. I. 18. and VIII. 23. and X. 34. Not meaning thereby our Canonical Books of Chron. for they were not then written before, but after the Books of Kings; and therefore they could not be cited before they had a Being: But mean∣ing thereby Civil Chronicles or Rolls, now not extant; Like those Ezra VI. 1, 2. Esther VI. 1. Maachah] Abijahs mother, and her Father, had both of them two differing and various names, 1 King. XV. 2, 10. 2 Chron. XI. 20. and XIII. 2. His marriages and children, 2 Chron. XIII. 21. were all, or almost all, in his fathers reigne. Save only in the matter of Vriah] In this sin David did lie long without repentance, 2 Sam. XII. 14. And to cover this sin, he made Uriah drunck; and after murthered him: yet afterwards upon his re∣pentance, he publisheth it, and his shame and sorrow for it, in the LI. Psalme, and commits it to the chief Musician to be sung publickly in the Congregation. But besides this, there are many other sins re∣corded of David: As his speech and lyes to Jonathan, 1 Sam. XX. 6. to Ahimelech, 1 Sam. XXI. 2. to Achish, 1 Sam. XXVII. 10. the slownesse of his kindnesse to Mephibosheth; compare together, 2 Sam. IV. 4. and chap. IX. 11, 12. And after his ill-managing of it, 2 Sam. XVI. 4. and chap. IX. 29. his many Wives and Concubines; the sparing of his sons, Ammon, and Absolom; his numbering of the people. Yet by reason of the upright intention of his heart, and his singular rare graces, gifts, and qualifications, are the rest not reckoned, and this Praise here gi∣ven him, by the indulgency of God. Fourty and one years] Asa reigned in Judah in the times of the reignes of eight Kings in Israel; viz. Jeroboham, Nadab, Baasha, E∣lah, Zimri, Tibni, Omri, Ahab, 1 King. XV. 9 and XVI. 29. and XXII. 41. In which time the Kingdome of Israel was changed into three se∣veral stocks and families. Maachah] Maachah was wife to Rehoboam; mother to Abijah; and grandmother to Asa, 1 King XV. 2. yet called the mother of Asa, 1 King. XV. 13. 2 Chron. XV ver. 16. And as mother used for grandmother; so daughter for grandchilde, 2 Kings VIII. 26. Bre∣thren for Kinsmen, 2 Kings X. 13. Matth. XIII. 55, 56. And ma∣ny like phrases are frequent in Scripture. See Gen. XIII. 8. Exod. II. 18. 20, 21. Dan. V. 10, 11, 13, 22. these years] Not this place, nor chap. XVIII. 1. nor any place in the Old Testament, do shew that the drought was brought at Elias his Prayer; or continued three years and six moneths; But Saint James first recordeth it, Jam. I. 17. Four Barrels with water] Elijah got this water in the time of that wonderful drought for three years and a half, out of the sea; Mount Carmel joyning to the sea, Jer XLVI. 18. The brook Kishon, at the foot of Carmel being dryed up, as well as the brook Cherith. thine Altars] Formerly erected to him;  thought not so warrant∣ably. See ver. 14. thy Prophets] As chap. XVIII. 4, 13.
I only am left] In his own apprehension. Yet was there then a flow∣rishing Church in Judah. anoint] By another;  viz. Elisha, 2 King. VIII. 7. And likewise Jehu was anointed by a young Prophet at the command of Elisha, 2 King. IX. 1. Thirty two Kings] Petty Kings;  As those, Gen. XIV. Josh. XII. Judg. I. 7. Aphek] A Citie whose Kings was slaine by Joshuah, Josh. XII. 18. Fell by lot afterwards to the Tribe of Asher, Josh. XIX. 30, 31. Where the Philistines pitching in battel against Israel, got the victory, and took the Ark of God, 1 Sam. IV. 1. And again gathering their ar∣mies in Aphek, went up to Jezreel, near the Mount of Gilboa, and o∣verthrew Saul, and his hoast, 1 Sam. XXIX. 1, 11. and chap. XXX. And here the Syrians under Benhadad fought against Ahab, and were slaine, even one hundred thousand footmen in one day: And the rest fled to Aphek into the Citie; and there a wall fell upon twenty seven thousand of the men that were left, 1 King. XX. 26, 29 30. And here again the Syrians were smitten and consumed by Joash King of Israel, 2 King. XIII. 17. Proclaime a Fast] It seemes on Fast-dayes they were wont to try and execute heynous offendors. and stoned him] The blood of his sons is mentioned, 2 Kings IX. 26. Which is in Samaria, behold, he is in the Vineyard of Naboth] Or will be in Jezreel in the Vineyard of Naboth. In Samaria when the message was given in charge to Elias; in the Vineyard at Jezreel when Elias met him. even thine] Verified for the substance in himself, in his wife Jeze∣bel, and in his son Jehoram, 2 Kings IX. 25, 26. not bring the evil in his dayes] That evil, ver. 21,—24. that totally. in the Poole of Samaria] Which might extend, or run into Jezreel; or another poole of that name be there; or the armour washed there, where his chief armory was. made peace] Made peace with Ahab, and his two sons, Ahaziah, and Jehoram, 2 Kings III. 6, 7. 2 Chron. XIX. 2. and chap. XX. 35, 36. and is reprehended justly therefore. would not] Would not at first: but yeelded afterwards, 2 Chron. XX. 35, 36, 37.
II. Kings. THE second Book of Kings, [or fourth rather] con∣taines the History of 321 years; to the lifting up of the head of Jehoiachim: In the reignes of 16 Kings of Iudah, count∣ing in Athaliah. 12 King of Israel. So that the number of Kings; from the first division of the Kingdomes, to the extirpation of them both, were twenty in each: Though the King∣dome of Israel did expire in Hoshea by Shalmanasar, before the King∣dome of Judah, did expire in Zedekiah by Nebuchadnezzar, the space of one hundred thirty and three years; not one hundred thirty and five The twenty of Judah were all of Davids line, excepting Athaliah the Queen. The twenty of Israel were of ten several stocks. Ahaziah, Joash, Amatziah, Kings of Judah, and Athaliah the Queene, all succeeding one another, were all slaine. Amon likewise, and his son Josiah both slaine. And ten Kings of Israel, the half of all their number, were like∣wise slaine. For the times of the reignes of Ahab, Ahaziah, Jehoram, Kings of Israel; and of Iehoshaphat, Iehoram, Ahaziah, Kings of Judah, take this as followeth; Ahab reigned twenty two, years, 1 King. XVI. 31. Ahazia the son of Ahab began to reigne in the seventeenth yeare of Jehoshaphat King of Judah; and reigned two years. Jehoram the other son of Ahab, begins to reigne in the second year of Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat, 2 Kings I. 17. and in the eigh∣teenth year of Jehoshaphat; and reigned twelve years, 2 Kings III. 1. Jehoshaphat began to reigne in the fourth year of Ahab, 1 Kings XXII. 41. and reigned twenty five years, 2 Chron. XX. 31. Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat began to reigne in his fathers life∣time; and in the fifth year of Jehoram of Ahab; and reigned eight years, 2 Kings VIII. 16, 17. Ahaziah Kings of Judah, and son of Jehoram King of Judah, be∣gan to reigne in the twelfth year of Jehoram of Ahab, 2 Kings VIII.
25. in his eleventh year, chap. IX. 29. Ahaziah himself being then twenty two years old, 2 Kings VIII. 26. or fourty two years old, 2 Chron. XXII. 2. And he reigned one year, 2 Kings VIII. 26. 2 Chron. XXII. 2. All the doubts arising from the Premises are fairly cleared, as fol∣loweth: viz. Jehoshaphat King of Judah, beginning to reigne in the fourth year of Ahab King of Israel; And Jehoram King of Israel, and Ahaziah King of Judah, being both slaine by Jehu, in one yeare; Therfore between their deaths, And the first of Jehoshaphat, or fourth of Ahab, there must be one and the same distance and period of time. Which agrees well thus; In the line of Israel, eighteen years remain∣ing of Ahabs twenty two 1 Kings XVI. 29. Two of Ahaziah, but one of them in his fathers life-time; and twelve of Jehoram: in all 31. And so in the line of Iudah; twenty five of Iehoshaphat; and eight of Iehoram, whereof two at least in his fathers life-time; and Ahaziah but a piece of a year; in all thirty one. Now Ahaziah of Israel beginning to reigne in the seventeenth of Iehoshaphat, shewes that Ahab had made him Viceroy the year before his death; for Ahab died in the eighteenth of Iehoshaphat: And so this Ahaziah reigned but one year himself alone. And Iehoram the other son of Ahab beginning to reigne in the se∣cond year of Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat, shewes, That Iehosha∣phat had made his son Iehoram his Viceroy, the same year that Ahab had done the like; viz. the year before their going to battel to Ra∣moth-Gilead; which battell was in the last of Ahab, and eighteenth of Iehoshaphat. And Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat beginning to reigne in the fifth year of Iehoram of Ahab; and that being in the time of Iehoshaphats own reigning, and Iehoram reigning from that time eight years; shewes that Iehoshaphat made his son, of Voiceroy, King joynt with himself, in the twenty third year of his reigne, two years before his death. And so this Iehoram reigned as King two years in his father Iehoshaphats life-time, and six years after his death: Not four years in his life-time, and four years after his death, as is usualy averred. And Ahaziah of Iudah, upon the premises, begins to reigne, upon the twelfth year beginning, or eleventh year ending, of Iehoram of Israel. And Iehoram the father of this Ahaziah beginning to reigne in the thirty two year of his age, and reigning eight years, and dying at four∣ty, 2 Kings VIII. 17, 24; This Ahaziah cannot possibly be fourty two, but twenty two, when he began to reigne; his father being mar∣ried to Athaliah, his mother, in the eighth year of, Iehoshaphats reigne. And those fourty two years must needs relate to another time then Ahaziah's age; and do justly agree with the number of years of the continuance of Omri his race in the royal Throne, from whom this Ahaziah descended by his mother Athaliah and in whom, and Omries
grandchilde Jehoram it ended: Thus, Omri alone, after the death of Tibni, six or seven years, 1 Kings XVI. 23, 29. Ahab, twenty two; Ahaziah alone; one, Jehoram twelve: in all fourty two. And the Hebrew expression in 2 Chron. XXII. 2. is this, A sonne of fourty two years was Ahaziah inhis reigning; which may have a relation to a continuance in a stock. And a passage and computation, not unlike to this, is that, 2 Chron. XV. 19. and chap. XVI. 1. from the begin∣ning of the division of the two Kingdomes of Judah and Israel. This Ahaziah of Judah is otherwise called Azariah, 2 Chron. XXII. 6. and Jehoahaz, chap. XXI. 17. and Joahaz, 2 Chron. XXV. 23. For the times of the reignes of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Heze∣kiah, Kings of judah; And of Zuchariah, Shallum, Menachem, Pe∣kiah, Pekah, Hosheah, Kings of Israel, take this, as followeth; Vzziah being smitten with Leprosie, in his old age, for attempting to offer Incense, on the Altar of Incense, his son Jotham was over the Kings house, judging the people of the Land, 2 Chron. XXVI. 21. This seemes to be four years before his father Uzziah's death: And so may seeme to extend, after a sort, the number of the years of Jo∣thams reigne to twenty, 2 Kings XV. 30. whereas Jotham reigned only sixteen years after the death of his father Uzziah, 2 Kings XV. 33. Jotham begins his sixteen in the second of Pekah's twenty, 2 Kings XV. 32. In Iothams dayes Pekah, and Rezin begin to trouble Iudah, 2 Kings XV. 37. Ahaz begins his sixeen in the seventeenth of Pekah's twenty, 2 Kings XVI. 1. Then doth the danger by Pekah and Rezin increase. He is spoiled by them; and by the Edomites; and the Philistines, 2 Chron. XXVIII. And by the Assyrian, partly helped; and partly di∣stressed. Hezekiah begins his twenty nine in the third of Hoshea, 2 Kings XVIII. 1, 2. that is, the third after his first nine, 2 Kings XVII. 1. which ninth falls in with the ending of the twelftth of Ahaz; and that third after it, falls in with the beginning of the sixteenth and last of Ahaz. 2 King. XV. 8, 13. Zachariah begins in the thirty eight of Uzziah. Shallum begins in the thirty nine of Uzziah Menachem begins his ten in the thirty nine of Uzziah, 2 King. XV. 17. Then Pul King of Assyria made an attempt upon Menachem, ver. 18, 19, 20. Pekahiah begins his two in the fiftieth of Vzziah, 2 King. XV. 23. Pekah begins his twenty in the fifty two of Vzziah, 2 King. XV. 27. And so Pekah's first, and Uzziah's last, are in one year. In Pekah's dayes Tiglath-Pelezer captived Galilee and Naphtali into Assyria, 2 King. XV. 29. Hoshea rules and reignes eighteen years. For thirty eight yeares are from the first of Jotham, to the sixth of Hezekiah: And so many must be from the first of Pekah, to the end and last of Hoshea: And Pekah reigning twenty, the remain for Hoshea must needs be eighteen.
Hoshea begins in the twentieth of Jotham 2 King. XV. 30. that is, from the beginning of his reigne, from the beginning of his sixteenth. For Jothams fourth, in his father Uzziah's time, did precede his six∣teene. And his sixteene ended in the seventeenth of Pekah, when Jo∣thams son Ahaz began to reigne, 2 King. XVI. 1. So that Hoshea truly began in the fourth of Ahaz; which was the twentieth from the time that Jotham began to reigne; not that Jotham reigned twenty years, till Hoshea began. And Hoshea had reigned nine years in the twelfth of Ahaz. And these first nine years, the Sacred story pas∣seth over in silence: He having done nothing remarkable or memora∣ble in them. His later nine years are storied ont thus; That the first of them begins in the twelfth of Ahaz, 2 King. XVII. 1. That in the third of them, which was the last of Ahaz, Hezekiah began to reigne, 2 King. XVIII. 1. That in the seventh of them, and fourth of Hezekiah, Shal∣manezar came and besieged Samaria, 2 King. XVIII. 9. That in the ninth and last of them, and sixth of Hezekiah, Shalmanesar took Samaria, and carried all captives into Assyria, and finaly extinguished that King∣dome of Israel, 2 King. XVIII. 10, 11. The Names then, and the Numbers of the years of the Reignes of the Kings of Judah, and of Israel, in this II. Book of Kings, are as fol∣loweth, viz. of Judah. years. Iehoram, as viceroy—4 In all—12. Im∣perfect. Joynt King with his father Iehoshaphat—2 Sole King after his fa∣thers death,—6 Ahaziah 1 imperfect. Athaliah 6 Ioash 40 Amatziah 17 Vzziah 52 Iotham 15 Ahaz 14 Hezekiah 29 Manasseh 55 Amon 2 Iosiah 31 Iehoachaz   Iehojakim 11 Iehoachin   Zedekiah 11 Thence to Iehoiachins ad∣vancement. 26 Kings of Israel. years. Ahaziah 1 Iehoram 11 Iehu 28 Iehoahaz 15 Ioash or Iehoash 16 Ieroboam 41 Zechariah   Shallum   Menachem 10 Pekahiah 2 Pekah 20 Hoshea 18 See my Annotations on Hos. I. 1.
If thou see me] This signe was of Gods appointment. And the thing done on the East-side of Iordan. a Minstrel] To quiet, quicken, and compose his spirit. his eldest sonne] The King of Edoms eldest son, taken by the King of Moab in this eruption. See Amos II. 1. and the Annotations there. Shunem] A Citie in the Tribe of Issachar, Iosh. XIX. 18. And hath, in the same Tribe standing from it, Iezreel towards the South; Mount Gilboa towards the South-East; The river Kishon on the East; and Mount Tabor towards the North-North-East, in the Confines of the Tribe of Zebulon. In Shunem the Philistines pitch∣ed against Saul in Gilboa, 1 Sam. XXVIII 4. Here was borne Abi∣shag that fair Virgin, that lay in Davids bosome to cherish him, as a wife-nurse, in his decreped age: And was afterwards sought for in marriage by Adonijah; but to the losse of his life, in the State-wis∣dome of Solomon, 1 King. I. and II. chapters. And here dwelt this great and good woman that made these accommodations for the Pro∣phet Elishah: and upon his Prophetical promise obtained a sonne: and had him miraculously raised from death of life againe by Elishah com∣ing from Mount Carmel hither; as is in this IV. Chapter. And fur∣ther, upon this accompt, after her seven years absence, on the Prophets direction, by reason of the Famine to ensue during that time, she re∣turning out of the Land of the Philistines, had her house, lands, and profits of her estate restored to her, by Iehoram King of Israel, 2 King. VIII. Gilgal] Of this see the Annotations on Hos. IV. 15. twenty loaves of barley] This was more then the bread of his first fruits came to. King of Syria] This was Benhadad the son of Benhadad; both Kings of Syria, 1 Kings XV. 18, 19, 20. and XX. 1. 34. 2 King. VI. 24. and VIII. 7. 2. Chron. XVI. 2. The father was the sonne of Tabrimon, the sonne of Hezion King of Syria, 1 King. XV. 18. This the sonne slew Ahab at Ramoth-Gilead, 1 King. XXII. 35, 37. Who contrary to Gods command had saved him, 1 King. XX. 42. And besieging Samaria, he brought it to that extreme famine, 2 King. VI. 24, 25. And after at Ramoth-Gilead, he wounded Jehoram, the son of Ahab, 2 King. VIII. 28, 29. Whence returning to Jezreel to be healed of his wounds, he was slaine by Jehu, 2 King. IX. 24. And this son died, 2 King. VIII. 15. A third Benhadad King of Syria was the son of Hazael, 2 King. XIII. 3, 24. Benhadad signifies the son of Hadad. And Hadad was a name very common among the Kings of Edom, or Idumea, Gen. XXXVI. 35. 1 Chron. I. 50. 1 King. XI. 14 but afterwards grew more common with the Kings of Syria; insomuch as Benhadad may seeme a name common to the Kings of Syria. See Jer. XLIX. 27. Amos I. 4. And take here a Catalogue of the Kings of Syria, as we finde them in Scripture; thus; Omitting Chushan-Rishathaim, who was King of
Aram-Naharaim. or Syria between the two rivers, that is Tigris, and Euphrates; or of Mesopotamia, Judg. III. 10. We finde these Kings of Syria, properly so called, whereof Damascus was the chief Citie, viz. Hadadezer, or Hadarezer, in Davids time, 2 Sam. VIII. 5, 6, 13. and X. 6, 8, 16. Rezon, in the dayes of Solomon, 1 King. XI. 23, 24, 25. Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, in the dayes of Asa, 1 King. XV. 18, 19, 20. Benhadad the son of Benhadad, in the dayes of Ahab, and of Elias, and Eliseus; And Nahaman was the Captain of his hoast, 1 King. XX. 1, 20, 26, 32, 34. and XXII. 3. and 2 King. V. 1, 2, 6, 7. and chap. VI. 8, 12, 23, 24. and chap VII. 4. 16. Hazael, in the dayes of Joram, Jehu, Iehoahaz, 1 King. XIX. 15. 2 King. VIII. 7, 8, 13. and X. 32. and XII. 17. and XIII. 3, 22. Benhadad, the son of Hazael, in the dayes of Iehoash,  King. XIII. 24, 25. Rezin, in the dayes of Pekah, and of Ahaz, 2 King. XVI. 5. Esay VII. 1. 16. and VIII. 4. Talents] See my Observations on Exod. XXXVIII. 24. Go in peace] A fare-well phrase, a friendly dismission; with little or no relation to what Nahaman had said; as little minding it, and of smal concernment to the greater engagements that then lay upon him: which kinde of Answers are not unusual. The Leprosie] Yet King Jehoram holds conference with Gehazi af∣terwards, 2 King. VIII. 4. as upon sundry grounds, and occasions incident, in a right manner well he might. are come down] Here the holy Pen-man useth a word of the Syrian language. Dothan] In the Tribe of Ephraim: about mid-way between Sama∣ria and Shechem. Here Joseph findes his brethren feeding their flocks, Gen. XXXVII. 13, 17. This is not the way] No, nor the place or Citie, whereby, and where∣in, to effect your purpose. came no more] Not these Bands;  nor in this maner, making in∣rodes, or laying ambushes; nor any at all of a long time after, till Ben∣hadad came with all his hoast, ver. 24. a Cab] Is a Hebrew measure. Of this see my Observations on Gen. XVIII. 6. of Doves dung] Or of the corne found in the crop, she flying into the Citie out of the Countrey. five peeces of silver] Or five silverings. See these Observati∣ons on Exod. XXXVIII. 24. said] Said to the Elders, to the Messinger, and to the King Je∣horam the son of Ahab, ver. 17. 18. a measure] See my Observations on Gen XVIII 6. twilight] In the evening, ver. 9, 12.
Edom] Edom revolts from Judah, 1 King. XXII, 47. As Moab had done from Israel, 2 King. III. 5. Libna] A Citie;  which with the King thereof was destroyed by Joshuah, Josh. X. 29. and XII. 15. After fell by lot to the Tribe of Judah; And given to the Priests, Josh. XXI. 13. 1 Chron. VI. 57. It rebelled [wonder it should] against Judah, in the dayes of wicked Iehoram, the son of good Iehoshaphat, 2 Chron. XXI. 10. Senacherib did warre against it, in the dayes of Hezekiah, 2 King. XIX. 8. Esay XXXVII. 8. And there likely had his army, or a great part of it slaine by the Angel of the Lord. There was another place called Lib∣na, the seventeenth Station of the Israelites, mentioned Num. XXXIII. 20, 21. Sonne-in-law] His father was so. And himself might be to that House. Ramoth-Gilead] A Citie of Refuge;  in the Tribe of Gad; given to the Merarites; Deut. IV. 43. Josh. XIII. 26. and chap. XXI. 38. This was taken by the King of Syria; And Ahab, with the joynt for∣ces of Jehoshaphat, seeking to recover it, yet failed of his purpose, and was there slaine by Benhadad, whose life he had unjustly spared; 1 King. XX. 30, 42. and XXII. 3, 35. And Jehoram the sonne of Ahab, with the joynt forces of Ahaziah King of Judah, actualy re∣covered it, from Hazael King of Syria, But was wounded there. And Jehu being left there, as a Captaine under Jehoram, to keep it, was anointed there, by command and direction of the Prophet Elisha, to be King of Israel; who thereupon soone slew both Jehoram, and A∣haziah; 2 King. VIII. 28, 29. and chap. IX. his sonnes] Naboths sons slaine with him. a draught-house] Here the Masorets put a more cleanly word, in their Keri, in the margin, to be read, then is the Cetib, written in the Text; as if they would prompt to the Holy Ghost a more manerly speech. And so Deut. XXVIII. 30. Jer. III. 2. Lesse marvaile then if they deale so with the words of Rabshakeh, Esay XXXVI. 12. And in Zechary speaking of Jerusalems destruction, and womens usage by soldiers, grosse to speak, the Text telleth the terme to be seene, the margin what they would have read. And in Jer. XXXI. 38. they leave a blanck in the Text with the vowel points underneath, and place the head letters in the margin of a word which they suppose to be wanting. Some various Readings seeme to be in the Hebrew Text. See the learned Annotations on Jer. IX. 8. and on chap. XVII. 13. And some learned seeme to grant some superfluous insertions, as Jer. LI. 3 in the word bending; and Jer. LII. 19. in the word Cauldrons. See the Annotations on those places. Yet some other learned men assert the sacred Text to be absolutely entire and perfect without the least default or defect; without altering a syllable, letter, or situation of a letter; holding the margin-reading to be given with equal authority, as the other which is in the Text; and serving to ex∣pound it. And the vowels, and accents to have been ab origine in
the Text, and so of equal authority with it. Insisting upon the Jews care for preservation of the Text, in numbering the letters in every Book, and naming the middle letter in it, and the middle letter in the Law, or Books of Moses. And this done not only by the Masorets that lived five hundred years or more after Christ; but also by those ancient Masorets that are called the men of the Great Synagogue, and succeeded next to the last Prophets of the Old Testament, of whom the Jewes make Ezra to be one. And that in his time the whole number of the letters were reckoned, in all the Law to be 600045. in the Prophets 815280. See more in my Observations on Eccles. IX. 4. and on Ier. XXXII. 12. Iehoiadah] This Iehoiadah was a Priest and prime man, 2 Chron. XXIII. 1, 11, 16, 18, 19, 20. and chap. XXIV. 6. seemes not to be the High Priest: for he is no where so called in Scripture; except he be understood in that place, 2 Chron. XXIV. 11. where yet he is not called neither is there any of his name in that Catalogue of the High Priests, 1 Chron. III. 6,—15. And yet this Priest Iehoiada marries King Iehorams daughter, and King Ahaziah's sister, 2 Chron. XXII. 11. And gives, wives to King Ioash, 2 Chron. XXIV. 3. And was buried a∣mong the Kings, ver. 16. Elisha] or Elizeus prophesied in the reignes of six Kings of Israel; viz. Ahab, Ahaziah, Iehoram, Iehu, Iehoahaz, and Ioash, 1 King. XIX. 16, 19. 2 King. XIII. ver. 14. with Lachish] See the Annotations on Micah. I. 13. Azariah] Called also Uzziah, and Ozias, Matth. I, 8, 9. reigned in the times of six Kings of Israel; viz. Ieroboam the second, Zachariah, Shallum, Menahem Pekahiah, Pekah, 2 King. XV. 1. 27 In which time the Kingdome of Israel was changed into four several stocks or families. Pul] Pul or Phul, 1 Chron. V. 26. This Catalogue of the Assyri∣an Monarchs we finde in Scripture; viz. Passing by Nimrod, and Ashur in the ancientest times, Gen. X. We meet with this Pul in the dayes of Menahem King of Israel. Tiglath-Peleser, or Tilgath-Pilneser, in the dayes of Pekah King of Israel, and of Ahaz King of Judah: who carried away captives the Reubenites; and the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, into As∣syria, 1 Chron. V. 26. And, both helped, and afflicted Ahaz, 2 King. 16. with Shalmanesar, or Shalman, Hos. X. 14. or Enemessar, Tobit I. 2. 15. in the dayes of Hoshea King of Israel; who subdued Hoshea, beseiged and took Samaria; carried Israel captive into Assyria; and extirpated that Kingdome of Israel, 2 King. XVII. 4, 5, 6. and XVIII. 9, 10. with Sargon, mentioned, Esay XX. 1. If he be not the same with Sen∣nacherib. with Sennacherib, in the dayes of Hezekiah, 2 King. XVIII. 13. whose hoast was slaine by the Angel of the Lord; and himself by his owne sons, 2 King. 19. with Esarhaddon, or Esar-Haddon, who seemes to be called Asnapper,
Ezra IV. 10. and Sarchedonus, Tobit 1. 21. with Another King of Assyria, not named, but living in the dayes of Iosiah; in whose behalf Iosiah fighting against Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, at Megiddo, was slaine there 2 King. XXIII. See this same, with some little variations, in my Observations on 1 Chron. V. 26. Kir] This is Cyrene, mentioned, Acts II. 10. Of this see the An∣notations on Amos I. 5. and IX. 7. If rather be not meant hereby that part of Media: which from this deportation seemes to be called Syro∣media, For Media belonged to the Kingdome of Assyria, 2 King. XVII. 6. But Cyrene never, being very farre distant from it. Of the Altar] Of Urijahs new Altar made by the command of King Ahaz, by the patterne of the Altar of Damascus. Urijah the Priest] This might be that Uriah, Esay VIII. 2 unfaith∣ful to God, a fawning parasite to the wicked King; but no wayes ap∣pears to be the High Priest. Covert for the Sabbath] A Covert for the Priests (and Porters likely) on the Sabbath;  or a retiring place covered over to keep from winde and raine, 2 Chron. XXVIII. 24. in the City of David] But not in the Sepulchers of the Kings, 2 Chron. XXVIII. 27. but not as] Hosheah was the best of the Kings of Israel: And yet with him, and in him that Kingdome was extirpated. Carried Israel away into Assyria] See the Observations on chap. XV. 19. They feared the Lord] The same Idolaters are said to Fear the Lord, And not to Fear the Lord, 2 King. XVII. 32, 33, 34. Their folly is derided, Ier. X. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 14, 15. Hezekiah] Godly Hezekiah the son of most wicked Ahaz, 2 Chron. XXVIII. 22. And father of a like wicked Manasseh, 2 King. XXIV. 3. 2 Chron. XXXIII. And godly Iosiah not much unlike. He is a Type of Christ, Esay XXXII. 1. twenty five years old] And therefore was borne in the eleventh yeare of his father Ahaz; because Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reigne, and reigned sixteen years, 2 King. XVI. 2. In all, thirty six when he died. Out of which take the foresaid twenty five; and so Hezekiah must be borne in the eleventh aforesaid. A thing not impossible. But to make Ahaz to be twenty, not when himself, but his father Iotham began to reigne, as it wresteth the Text, so it implies an utter impossibility, because Iotham was but twenty five years old when he himself began to reigne, 2 King. XV. 33. which thing was not well considered by the excellent Tremellius when he as∣serted that opinion; nor is it much favoured, though noted by our An∣notators on 2 King. XVI. 2. In the fourteenth year] Sennacherib comes up against Hezekiah; and partly prevailes against him. See the causes of this his warre, in the learned Annotations on Esay XXXVI. 1. And in the later end of that year Hezekiah fell sick: for he had 15. years added to his life, 2 King.
XX. 6. which make up the twenty nine of his reigne. And in this time of his sicknesse, he had no some; because Manasseh his eldest sonne was borne three years after this sicknesse, being but twelve years old when his father Hezekiah died, 2 King. XXI. 1. a Signe] The present plenty, notwithstanding the Sabbatical year, and the enemies abode, and waste made in the Land, should be a Signe to them for confirmation of the truth of Gods Promise, for the over∣throw of Sennacherib, and their deliverance. Of Signes see these Observations on Exod. III. 12. and on 2 King. XX. 9. Camp of the Assyrians] Either before Libnah, or Jerusalem, or both, 2 Chron. XXXII. 9. See the Observations on Esay XXXVII. 36. his sonnes] These words have an empty place left for them in the Hebrew Tex;  and are printed only in the margent. But they are in the Text, XXXVII. 38. ten degrees] This choise was given to Hezekiah about mid-day, when the shadow of the Sunne might go forward or backward ten de∣grees on the Dial of Ahaz, a famous Dial, haply mural, and haply visible to Hezekiah out of his bed-chamber: and so likewise in all o∣ther Dials, distinguished into half hours, as that of Ahaz was. And so ten degrees make five hours. And the Miracle was not only in the Shadow going backward, but in the Sunne also going backward ten degrees: though whether in an instant, or in the set course of time, or its ordinary continual motion, is not certaine, Esay XXXVIII. 8. Which made the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon to be sent unto him, to enquire of the wonder that was done in the Land, 2 Chron. XXXII. 31. See on Esay. XXXVIII. 8. Altars] Idolatrous Altars, and Images set up in the House of the Lord, ver. 4, 5, 7. eighteenth year] From this famous year, both those thirty years, Ezek. I. 1. And those fourty dayes or years of the sinne of Judah, chap. IV. 6. seeme to take their rise and reckoning. the Book of the Law] The knowledge of it;  and the Lawes in it, seemes a rare and strange thing, as at other times, so in the dayes of good Josiah, 2 King, XXII. 10, 11. 2 Chron. XXXIV. 19, 21. not∣withstanding that Law Deut. XXXI. 10, 11. in peace] Josiah died in peace, according to the Promise, not see∣ing the Evils to come; though he was slaine in battel, 2 King. XXII. 20. and XXIII. 29. 2 Chron. XXXIV. 28. Topheth] Called Tophte, Esay XXX. 33. The name is from Toph, signifying a Drum, Tabret, or Timbrel; such as idolatrous Priests used to beat upon in the time of their detestable sacrificing of children to Moloch, to drowne their skrikes and cries, Levit. XX. 2. 2 Chron. XXVIII. 3. and XXXIII. 6. 2 King. XVI. 3. and XXI. 6. Psal. CVI. 38. This the Jewes learned from the Heathen, Deut. XII. 31. This Tophet stood in a pleasant valley on the South-side of Jerusalem, Josh. XV. 8. and chap. XVIII. 16. Belonging to one Hinnom and his sons, and called therefore the valley of Hinnom, Gehinnom, or Ge-bene-Hin∣nom,
the valley of the sonnes of Hinnom. Whence the Greek and Latin take the word Gehenna, and use it for Hell, fitly resembled by such a Type, for the horrid acts and sufferings used therein, Matth. XVIII. 8, 9. Mar. IX. 43,—48. James III. 6. And allusion is made hereunto, Matth. V. 22. This place was defiled and destroyed by Jo∣siah, in this Text. See the Annotations on Esay XXX. 33. and on Jer. VII. 31. Jehoahaz] Called also Joachaz, and Johanan, and in the opinion of the most and best, Shallum likewise; The Prophesie concerning Shallum, Jer. XXII. 10, 11, 12. best agreeing to him; And suppo∣sing that Shallum the fourth sonne of Josiah mentioned, 1 Chron. III. 15. to be dead before his father; yet under the name of Johanan he is called the first-borne of Joh, 1 Chron. III. 15. in respect likely that he first succeeded him in his throne, 2 Chron. XXXVI. 1. Of him see Ezek. XIX. 3, 4. Jehojakim] Jehojakim called also Joachim, and Eliakim (as Solo∣mon was also called Iedidiah and Lemuel) was the eldest sonne of Iosi∣ah. Of him, and his Burial, we read Ier. XXII. 19. and XXXVI. 30. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 5, 6. Ezek. XIX. 5,—9. Iehojakim] In his fourth, year, or third complete, and 1. of Nebu∣chadnezzar, Daniel was carried captive, Dan. I. 1, 6. Ezekiel, and Mor∣decai, with Iehojachin, Ezek. XL. 1. Esther II. 5, 6. Of Ezechiel, see the Argument of his Book. Iehojacin] Called likewise Coniah, and Iechoniah, 1 Chron. III. 16. Ier. XXII. 28 Of his age at the beginning of his reigne, See the Ob∣servations on 2 Chron. XXXVI. 9. He was carried captive into Baby∣lon in the seventh ending, and eighth year beginning of Nebuchadnez∣zars reigne, ver. 12. Ier. LII. 28. And his head lifted up againe in the thirty seventh year of his captivity, twelfth moneth, on the twen∣ty fifth, and twenty seventh day; and first year of Evilmerodach, 2 King. XXV. 27. Ier. LII. 31. Zedekiah rebelled] Zedekiah rebelled in his sixth year, Ezek. XVII. 15, 17. compared with Ezek. VIII. 1. and XX. 1. the second Priest] Grounded on Num. III. 32. And mentioned as here, So Ier. LII. 24. See 2 King. XXIII. 4. and the like, 1 Chron. V. 12. This second Priest, upon any extraordinary occasion and occur∣rent restraining or disabling the High Priest, seemes set to supply his place. to Riblah] See the Observations on Num. XXXIV. 11.
THE Books of Chronicles do chiefly pursue the Histories of the Kings of Judah. And yet are more sparing in relating the sinnes of David, and Solomon. These are not those Chronicles often cited in the Books of Kings; as hath been shewed heretofore. But these are thought to be written by Ezra, 2 Chron. XXXVI. 22, 23. Ezra I. 1, 2, 3 And that after the return from the Babylonish captivity. Yet some things are inserted which ex∣tend beyond Ezra's time; as that 1 Chron. III. 21,—24. In these Books, as in an Abridgement, the holy Penman is sometimes short, and obscure. But in the Histories of the Kings of Judah, full and exact. Take the periods of times from the Creation, to the year of Re∣turne from the Babylonish Captivity, And so these Books containe an History of 3458. years. The first Book, 2986. to the death of David; Thus; Genesis, 2369; Exodus, 142; Levit, Num. Deut. 39. Joshuah 17. Judges, 299. 1 Sam. 80. 2 Sam. 40. In all, 2986. The second Book 472. from the beginning of Solomons reigne, to the said year of Returne; Others reckon thus; 3467. in the whole: 2990. in the first Book: 477. in the second Book. Others, and that most likely, 2986. in the first Book; And 466. in the second Book: viz. from the first of Solomon, to the seventeenth of Jehoshaphat, 118. Thance to the Captivity in the first of Nebuchadnezzar, and fourth of Iehojakim, 278. Thence to the Returne, 70. In all, 466. And so the whole in both Books will amount to 3452. The first Book mentions occasionally some things long after Da∣vids death; as the Inhabitants of Jerusalem after the Returne from Babylon, chap. IX. And Zerubbabels posterity long after that, chap. III. I. Chronicles. IN the Genealogies of the first eight Chapters, the Tribes of Dan, and Zebulon, are left out. Edom] Eight Kings in Edom before any in Israel. Sisters] of David Zerviah bare Abishai. Ioab. Asahel. Abigail bare Amasa. 2 Sam. XVII. 25 Caleb] Three Calebs famous in Israel; first, the sonne of Hezron,
in this Text called also Carmi, and Chelubai, chap. II. 9. and IV. 1. who had a sonne called Hur; And this Hur a sonne called also Caleb; chap. II. 9, 19, 50. who is the second Caleb. And the third is that fa∣mous Caleb the sonne of Iephunne, Num. XIII. 6. 1 Chron. IV. 15. The sonnes of David] See the Observations on 1 Sam. XVI. 11. Salatheil] Hebrew, Shealtiel, said to be the sonne of Iechoni∣ah. Matth. I. 12. And so here, sonne of Iechoniah Assir, that is, strictly bound, prisoner in Babylon. For we read not of any sonne called Assir that Iechoniah had: yet this Salathiel is named the sonne of Neri, Luke III. 27. who came by many descents, of another line, that is, of Nathan the younger brother of Solomon; from which line came our Saviour; and not of Solomons line: And though Iechoniah may seeme to have seed and sonnes more, out of Ier. XXII. 28, 30. and 1 Chron. III. 17 18. Yet he is doomed childlesse, Ier. XXII. 29, 30. because neither Salathiel, if he were his sonne, nor any of Iecho∣niah's race, (Zedekiah the last King being Uncle to Iechoniah) did suc∣ceed him in the Regality, to sit on the throne of David, though in a kinde of soveraignty; as Zerubbabel the sonne, or grandchilde rather of Salathiel by Pedaiah, did succeed: in regard of which successions, both Salathiel, and after also Zerubbabel, may be called sonnes. See Ezra III. 2, 8. and V. 2. Neh. XII. 1 Hag. I. 1, 12, 14. and II. 3. 24. Of Iehojakim the father of Iechoniah, it is likewise said, He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David that is, for any time worth speak∣ing of; for his sonne Iechoniah reigned but three moneths and tenne dayes; Ier. XXXVI. 30. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 9. Sonnes of Zerubbabel] Among his sonnes, Abihud, and Rhesa are not mentioned (unlesse under other names) nor else where found in the Old Testament: And yet from them two, the Genealogies, Matth. I. 13. and Luke III. 27. are drawn and derived; which makes some sup∣pose, that Zerubbabel, and this here, to be different persons. Ezra] Ezra not that learned Scribe, Ezra VII. 1. And in the last letter of this Hebrew name there is a difference from the name of the other. in the dayes of Hezekiah] The Simeonites lying within the inheri∣tance and lot of the Tribe of Iudah, Iosh. XIX. 9. were not carried a∣way Captive by the Assyrians; but continuing in their estate, sought to enlarge their territories, as is here mentioned. Amalekites] They bordered on mount Seir. These the first that fought against Israel, Num. XXIV. 20. And after joyned oft with o∣ther enemies against Gods people. They were overthrown by Io∣shuah, Exod. XVII. 13. Saul in his time was sent against them; de∣stroyed many; but spared Agag their King; and for so doing lost his own Kingdome, 1 Sam. XV. and chap. XXVIII. 18. David afterwards destroyed more of them, 2 Sam, VIII. 12. And here the Simeonites in the dayes of Hezekiah, smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped. Thus the judgement denounced against them, Exod. XVII. 14, 16. Deut, XXV. 17, 18, 19. was accomplished. See the Observa∣tions on Esth. III. 1.
King of Assyria] This Catalogue we finde in Scripture of the Kings of Assyria; Pul or Phul, in the dayes of Menachem: so here, and 2 King. XV 19. Tiglath-Pileser, in the dayes of Pekah, and Achaz; so here, and 2 King. XV. 29. and XVI. 7, 10. Jareb, Hos. V. 13. and X. 16. Sargon, Esay XX. 1. Shalmanesar, called Shalman, Hos. X. 14. Who took Hoshea, and Samaria, 2 King. XVII. 3, 4. and XVIII. 9, 10. or Enemessar, Tobit. l. 2, 15. Sennacharib, who came against Hezekiah, 2 King. XVIII. 13. Esarhaddon, or Asnapper, Esay XXXVII. 38. 2 King. XIX. 37. Ezra IV. 2, 10. called also Sarchedonus, Tobit I. 22. And another King of Assyria, against whom Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt, fights at Carchemish by Euphrates, in the last year of King Jo∣siah, 2 King. XXIII. 29. 2 Chron. XXXV. But many leave out Iareb, as no proper name of a King; and make Sargon to be the same with Senna harib. And some place Iareb before Pul; and Sargon after Shal∣manesar. And no doubt there were many Kings of Assyria, it being the first Monarchy, before Pul; though their names be not in Scrip∣ture. Though the Assyrians take the name from Ashur the sonne of Shem, Gen. X. 22. 1 Chron. I. 17. yet the Kingdome seemes to be rais∣ed among them by the posterity of Cush, the sonne of Cham, Gen. X. 6,—11. a Singer] Heman, of Kohath, stood in the middest; Asaph, of Ger∣shom, on the right hand; Ethan, of Merari, on the left, ver. 38, 39, 44, 47. See more of the Singers, 1 Chron. XV. ver. 16,—22. All their Cities] The Kohathites had twenty three Cities: The Ger∣shonites thirteen. The Merarites twelve. In all, fourty eight Cities. reckoned] Issachar a numerous Tribe. Ephraim] The line from Ephraim to Ioshuah, is Num. I. 10. and chap. XXVI. 35 1 Chron. VII. 20, 26, 27. Shephuphan, and Huram] Either of these had three names. Ner] Ner had Kish the father of Saul; and another sonne Ner the father of Abner, 1 Sam. XIV. 50, 51. genealogies] This Chapter, and chap. III. 19,—24. are some par∣cels of the last passages for History, of the Old Testament. See more on Neh. XII. 10, 11. David and Samuel] David and Samuel the Seer (though he died in the time of Sauls reigne) ordained, and ordered the Priests, and Levites, Singers, and Porters, in their set Offices, and Courses; See ver. 10, 14, 22 and Chapters XXIII. XXIV. XXV. XXVI. as the Lord God of Israel had commanded him, 1 Chron. XXIV. 19. by the Spirit, and by God and Nathan; 1 Chron. XXVIII. 12, 19. 2 Chron. XXIX. 25. and VIII. 14. and XXXV. 4, 15. And Solomon did according to him, 2 Chron. XXXV. 4. Neh. XII. 45. day and night] The Singers imployed in that work day and night. tydings unto their Idols] Idolaters ascribe their Victories, and pro∣sperous successes to their Idols: so Iudg. XVI. 23, 24. 1 King. XX. 23. 2 Chron. XXVIII. 23. Hab. I. 11. They bring their Idols to their Camps, 1 Chron. XIV. 12. As the Israelits the Ark, 1 Sam. IV. 3.
castle of Zion] David took the Castle, or strong hold of Zion; dwelt in it; built round about it; called it the Citie of David. And Ioab repaired the rest of the Citie, 2 Sam. V. 9. came to David] There came to David to Ziklag a great hoast, like the hoast of God. And to Hebron to make him King over all Israel, 340822. And among them very many Priests and Levites, ver. 26, 27, 28. besides others intimated ver. 32. Jehoiada, the Leader of the 3700. Aaronites that came to David to Hebron, to make him King over all Israel, 1 Chron. XII. 27. Jehoiada, a chief Priest, 2 Chron. XXIV. 6. married Iehoshabeath or Iehosheba; the daughter of King Iehoram, and sister of King Ahaziah, 2 King. XI. 2, 3. 2 Chron. XXII. 11. He caused usurping, and mur∣thering Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab and Iezebel, and wife of King Iehoram, and mother of King Ahaziah, 2 Chron. XXI. 6. and XXII. 1, 2. to be murtheredher self, 2 King. XI. 16. And caused Ioash, grand∣childe of Athaliah, and his wives nephew, and sonne and heir of Aha∣ziah, to be crowned King when he was seven years old, 2 King. XI. 11, 12, 21. 2 Chron, XXIII. 11. Of whom see more on 2 King. XI. 4. Iehoiada, the sonne of Benaiah, Davids Counseller, next to Ahito∣phel, 1 Chron. XXVII. 34. bring again the Ark] David so soone as ever he was setled upon his throne over all Israel, taketh the strong Fort of Zion, from the Jebu∣sites: brings the Ark of God with all solemnity, yet not after the due maner, from Kiriath-jearim, and the house of Abinadab; And upon the death of Uzza, by the way, at the threshing floore of Nachon or Chidon, he carries it aside into the house of Obed-Edom, where it remain∣ed three moneths, 1 Chron. XIII. Hiram sends to David messingers, workmen, and materials to build him an house in Zion: And David takes more wives at Jerusalem; and obtaines two victories against the Philistines, chap. XIV. And with great solemnity, in the due maner, he brings the Ark from Obed-Edoms house, and sets it in the middest of the Tabernacle or Tent which he had prepared for it, in the Citie of David, in Zion, chap. XV. where he offers Sacrifices; Orders a Quire, gives them a Psalme of Thanksgiving, and appoints Ministers, Por∣ters, Priests, and Musicians to attend on the Ark continualy, ch. XVI. In 2 Sam. V. David takes the strong Fort of Zion; builds, dwels in it, hath messingers sent to him from Hiram King of Tyre, with materials, workmen for his building; growes great; takes moe wives and con∣cubines at Jerusalem; gets two victories over the Philistines in two set battels chap. V. And he brings up the Ark from Kiriath-Jearim, and carries it aside into the house of Obed-Edom; and after three moneths, he brings it thence, into the Citie of David, with great solemnity, and joy; 2 Sam. VI Now whether the things contained in 1 Chr. XIV. and 2 Sam. V. after the taking of Zion, did intervene in that three moneths space, while the Ark was in the house of Obed-Edom; or were acted before the Ark was removed from Kiriath-Jearim, is a mat∣ter of conjectural probabilities on either side: yet I rather incline to the later opinion.
from Shihor of Egypt] This Shihor, or Shichor, or Sihor, hath a no∣tion of blacknesse in it; And is not that rill or drill of water called by forraine writers Rhinocolura; but is much rather the same with Nilus, otherwise not once named in Scripture, anciently by the Ethiopians called Siris, by the Greeks Melas, by the Latines Melo, from the black∣nesse of the water, or rather of the mud and slime that it brings downe with it, or the black colour of the grounds and soils it passeth through. It is called by way of excellencie the River, Esay XXIII. 3. Ezek. XXIX. 3, 9. and the river or flood of Egypt, Amos VIII. 8. and chap. IX. 5. This River rising in the South from unknown heads, runs in one intire streame Northward to the Head Delta in Egypt, where it divi∣deth it self into two maine Channels; and afterwards brancheth into seven several streames, Esay XI. 15. Emptying themselves into the midland Sea: And so making that lower part of Egypt to be of a tri∣angular forme with the point upward, and the basis beneath toward the Sea [v]. One of the seven streames named Pelusian hath a stream issuing from it; which first makes the Sea or Lake of Sirbonis, of a great length, and vast depth, dividing Egypt from the Edomites, and Philistines, and so justly is named one of the Limits of the Land of Promise, Num. XXXIV. 5. Josh. XIII. 3. 1 Chron. XIII. 5. as the Ri∣ver Euphrates is named the other, Gen. XV 18. Deut. I. 7. and chap. XI. 24. Josh. I. 4. This River Nilus supplieth the place of Raine in Egypt, Zech. XIV. 18. by the overflowing of it; as is famous in Hi∣stories. The seven streames of old, are now become four. Baal-Perazim] By anticipation. See the Observations on 1 King. XIII. 32. not after the due maner] The maner of doing makes or marres in matters of Gods worship, Esay I. 11,—15. God ownes not, but loaths, his own services, of his own ordaining and commanding, when by evil men, and in an evil maner performed, Jer. VI. 20. and VII. 21, 22. Psal. L. 13, 16. Prov. XV. 8. and XXI. 27. Esay LXI. 8. and LXVI. 3. Amos V. 21, 22. Micah VI. 7. Mal. I. 10. seven] Of the number of seven, see the Annotations on this Text. dancing] See 2 Sam. VI. 14. Usual then to expresse their joyful and thankful hearts to God by Dancing, Psal. CXLIX. 3. and CL. 4. and XXX. 11. See Exod. XV. 20. Judg. XI. 34. and XXI. 21. he appointed] High and Solemne Service, for, and before the Ark, appointed by David, 1 Chron. XVI. See that Particular, 2 Chron. V. 12, 13. trumpets] See the Observations on Num. X. 8. delivered first] See the Observations on Psal. CXV. 1. and on Psal. XCVI. at Gibeon] Hither was the Tabernacle brought after that beastly and bruitish slaughter of the Priests made by bloody Saul at Nob, 1 Sam. XXII. Of Gibeon, see the Annotations on Hos. IX. 9. his throne for ever] Some things here, and hereafter, are true in Solo∣lomon
as the Type; but more in Christ the Antitype: some things proper to the Type only; others to the Antitype only: as was said on 2 Sam. VII. 12. Sate before the Lord] Of this gesture in Prayer, see the Annotations on this Text, and Exod. XVII. 12. Abimelech the sonne of Abiathar] See the Observations on 2 Sam. VIII. 17. It may appear that there is no necessity that both these persons, father and sonne, had both of them these two names of Abi∣melech and Abiathar. See the Observations on 1 Sam. I. 3. Satan stood up] In 2 Sam. XXIV. 1. The Lord moved David a∣gainst Israel. See the Observations on Esay VI. 9, 10. to number Israel] Out of pride only and curiosity, and carnal con∣fidence: Otherwise the thing in it self not simply unlawful, when done upon good grounds and to good ends: As we see it done at other times in Scripture. God commands it, Num. I. 3. and XXVI. 1, 2. And Solomon and Amaziah did it, 2 Chron. II. 17. and XXV. 5. the summe of the number] 1100000. of Israel, able men; from twenty years old, and upwards. To the 800000. in 2 Sam. XXIV. 9. seeme to be added here those 288000. of Davids Trained Bands, 1 Chron. XXVII. 1,—15. already enrolled, in publick records. And their Colonels, Captains, Commanders, and Officers, to the number likely of 12000. which make up the said 1100000. To the 470000 of Judah are 30000. added more, in 2 Sam. XXIV. 9. which addition either might be the number of the Regiments under those thirty Worthies of David, having one thousand in each: Or rather an Addition of so many out of Jerusalem only, or out of Levi, and Ben∣jamin also (which still joyned themselves to Judah) after Joabs first re∣turn to Jerusalem, and giving up his number to the King. For he was weary of the service, it being abominable to him; and therefore he is said, not to count Levi and Benjamin; and to begin to number, but not to finish it, because there fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number put in the account of the Chronicles of King David, 1 Chron. XXI. 6. and XXVII. 24. In all, 1600000. neither yet took he the number from twenty years old and under, 1 Chron. XXVII. 23. It is enough] God in mercy shortens the three dayes of Pestilence, stops the Angel, and repents of the evil. Ornan] Or Araunah was the more free, and forward in his Offer, so to expedite the businesse, for the staying of the Plague: for feare whereof, and of the Angel, he and his four sonnes had there hid them∣selves. for the Place] For the whole place and plot of ground, with the Buildings, Gardens, and other things pertaining to it; which was a suf∣ficient space and circuit of ground for the Building of the Temple up∣on it, with all the Courts, Chambers, Walls, &c., David gives here a great summe. Whereas he gives farre lesse for the bare threshing∣floore, Oxen, and Instruments, 2 Sam. XXIV. 24. And David might
give more then the worth, out of his royal bounty; as 1 King. X. 13. I have prepared] ver. 16. Davids wonderful Preparation of gold and silver, for the building of the Temple; amounting to seven hun∣dred and fifty millions of pounds. See on Exod. XXXVIII. 24, 25, 26. Whereof Dovid gave out of his own proper goods, eleven millions and 250000 pounds Serling in Gold; and two millions, and 625000. pounds in silver; In all thirteen millions and 875000. pounds Serling. And the Heads, Princes, and Rulers, gave eighteen milli∣ons, and 750000. pounds, and 3125. pounds; In all, 18. millions, and 753125. pounds in Gold; And three millions, and 750000. in Silver. The whole amounts to twenty two millions, and 503125. pounds Sterling. Adding to this Davids proper Offering aforesaid, the whole amounts to thirty six millions, and 378125 pounds. See further 1 Chron. XXIX. 4, 7. and Chap. XXVI. ver. 26, 27, 28. All which yet is but a small part of that summe prepared by David, Chap. XXII. 14. See the notes on Exod. XXXVIII. 24, 25, 26. See the Offerings given in Zerubbabels time towards the second Temple Ezra II 69; 70. And those in Nehemiahs time, Neh. VII. 70, 71, 72. made Solomon his sonne King] This verse better concludes the for∣mer Chapter. For what followes to the 28. Chapter concerning the whole Ordering of the Kingdome, Church, and State, both Ecclesi∣astical in the Levites, chap. XXIII. and Priests, chap. XXIV. and Singers, chap. XXV. and Porters, and other Officers, chap. XXVI. And also Political or Civil, in the 12. Captains for each several moneth; in the Princes of the twelve Tribes; and other several Of∣ficers, chap. XXVII. were acted long before Davids death, and his instructing and encouraging of Solomon to the building of the Tem∣ple, and the making of him King. and upward] To fifty years, Num. IV. 3. After fifty they were freed from the service in the Temple; and kept in their several Ci∣ties, in their several Tribes; to teach the people, and to instruct and judge in matters brought before them, as having best insight in the Ju∣dicial Lawes, and the whole word of God. David divided] Chap. XXV. 1 As a Prophet, and by the com∣mandment of the Lord, by Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Pro∣phet, 2 Chron. XXIX. 25. And these Divisions and Courses his son Solomon punctually retaines, 2 Chron. VIII. 14. And Jehoiada, 2 Chr. XXIII. 18. and Josiah, 2 Chron. XXXV. 4. And so after the Return from the Babylonish Captivity, Ezra III. 10. And so by Gods Spirit David had all the Patterns of the Temple, which in writings he deli∣vered to his sonne Solomon, 1 Chron. XXVIII. 12, 19. 2 Chron. III. 3. of twenty years] Num. VIII. 24. from twenty five years old they begin to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle. Here David, by new warrant, enters them into the work for the Service of the Tem∣ple, at twenty years of age: likely more now being needful for this Service, ver. 27. 2 Chron. XXXI. 17. yet they come not to the full
possession and fruition of their Place and Office, till thirty years of age, 1 Chron. XXIII. 3. Num. IV, 3, 4, 7. And to offer] At all offerings to fit and prepare the Sacrifices to the hands of the Priests, who were to offer them on the Altar. The eighth to Abijah] Zacharias the father of John Baptist was of this Course, Luke I. 5. according to their maner] To come on a Sabbath day, and to con∣tinue their services there in the Temple, for that whole week, Ch. IX. 25. 2 King. XI. 5, 6. over against their brethren] That the first Course of Levites might attend on the first Course of the Priests;  And so of the rest. with Harps] Much Musick used in Gods Service. See 1 Chron. IX. 33. and XVI. 4, 5, 6, 41, 42. 2 Chron. V. 12, 13. and VII 6. and ch. XXIX. 30. Psal. LXVIII. 24, 25. and LXXXI. 1, 2, 3. And so in the Tabernacle, Num. X. 10. and XXIX. 1. In bringing up the Arke, 1 Chron. XIII. 8. and chap. XV. 16,—24. In going up to Gods House, and coming from it, 1 Sam. X. 3, 5. Esay XXX. 29. This mu∣sick was by skilful voice; and by various Instruments, both wind-in∣struments, and hand-instruments; And these, both stringed, and touched with fingers, or struck over with quill, or bow; or else sha∣ken, or beaten with hand, or stick. Prophesie] See the Observations on 1 Sam. XVIII. 10. and on Zeph. III. 4. Of Asaph] See 1 Chron. VI. 39. and chap. XV. 17, 19. and XVI. 5, 7. And see the Annotations on 1 Chron. XXV. 1, 2, 6, 9. And see the Titles of sundry Psalmes. Of Heman] See the Annotations on 1 Chron VI. 33. See like∣wise 1 Chron. XV. 17. and chap. XVI. 41. 2 Chron. V. 12. and XXIX. 14. and Chap. XXXV. 15. Jeduthun] See 1 Chron. XVI. 41, 42. 2 Chron. VI. 12. and chap. XXIX. 14. and XXXV. 15. And the Titles of Psal. XXXIX. 62, 77. The four and twentieth] As many Courses and Companies of Mu∣sitians or Singers, as there were of Priests, chap. XXIV. 18. and of Le∣vites attending on the Priests, chap. XXIV. 31. These, as the others, in their Weeks and courses attended. Porters] Of their Office, see 2 Chron. XXIII. 19. and the Annota∣tions on this text. Their number, 1 Chron. XXIII. 5. Korhites] Descended from that Korah, Num. XVI. 1. great grand∣childe of Levi; From which Korah descended likewise Elkanah, and Samuel the Prophet, and Heman the singer, 1 Chron. VI. 27. 33, 37, 38. 1 Sam. I. 1. treasures] Many sorts of Treasures, and many Treasurers, in Gods Temple, ver. 20,—26. See the Annotations on this text. All that Samuel] Samuel, and Saul, and Abner, and Joab, did dedi∣cate part of the spoiles won in battells, to maintaine the House of the Lord.
Izbarites] And Hebronites, ver. 30, 31, 32. being Levites, 1 Chr. XXIII. 12. Num. III. 27. 1 Chron. XXIV. 20,—24. were imploied also for the outward businesse over Israel, for Officers and Judges: on this side Jordan Westward, in all businesse of the Lord, and in the ser∣vice of the King. And some of them made Rulers over the Reube∣nites, and the Gadites; and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every mat∣ter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King. moneth by moneth] David had twelve Captains for the twelve moneths, each with their Companies in their several moneths and courses attending the King: And Solomon had the like, after him, 1 King. IV. Each Captain in Davids time had twenty four thousand under him; which in all arise to 288000. Davids and Husbandry. a chief Priest] The word so most usually signifieth▪ times it signifieth also a Prince, or Temporal Ruler▪ And VIII. 18. and XX. 26. and 1 King. IV. 5. and 2 King. X▪ 11. And And the fathers-in-Law, of Joseph, Gen. XLI. 45 and of Moses, Exod. III. 1. were Princes; for they would not marry the daughters of idola∣trous Priests. The word came thus to be used in both sense, because the same persons at first were both Priests and Rulers; as the firtst-borne; before the Law; Moses, Psal. XCIX 6. and Eli. and Samuel, under the Law: And among the Heathen, famous is that of Anius, Rex idem Hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos. over the Tribes] These are Commanders in Peace;  Princes, or Rulers of the tribes: where thirteen are named. Or whom one is named of the Levites, And another of the Aaronites; One, of the halfe tribe of Manasseh, And another of the other halfe. And Gad, and Asher, are left out. stood up] Being now well-nigh bedrid, immediately before or im∣mediately after Adonijah his conspiracie. Candlesticks of silver] For the use of the Courts, Chambers, &c. yet young and tender] Of Solomons age, see the Observation on 1 King. III. 7. three thousand] See the observations on chap. XXII. 14. Thine] Like the doxology of the Lords Prayer. Keep this] Davids remarkable Prayer. the second time, and anointed him] The rather because the first a∣nointing was in a time of tumult, when Adonia, the next brother to Absalom sought to reigne, 1 King. I. 39. But whether the later Anoint∣ing was before or after Davids death. It is not clear. But sure it is that David himself was thrice anointed, once at Bethlehem by Samuel, and twice at Hebron, 1 Sam. XVI. 13. 2. Sam. II. 4. 1 Chron. XI. 3.
II. Chronicles. THE II. Book of Chronicles contains the History of the Kings of Judah, (not of Israel, but a little occasional∣ly when the two Kingdomes had to do one with an∣other) unto the last end of that Kingdome, viz. from the first of Solomon, to the Babylonish captivity. Men∣tioning also the Proclamation of Cyrus for the Returne out of the Captivity: Containing in all till that Returne, four hun∣dred sixty six years, or upwards: some say four hundred and eighty, which number of four hundred and eighty, was exactly compleat, from the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt, till the build∣ing of Solomons Temple, 1 King. VI. 1. horsemen] Ver. 28. of Horsemen, and Solomons horses, see the Ob∣servations on Judg. XX. 2. How farre his multiplying of Horses, 1 King. IV. 26. and X. 36. And his multiplying of wives, 1 King. XI. 3. And his multiplying of gold and silver, 1 King. X. 21, 27. 2 Chron. I. 15. and chap. IX. 27. may square with, or swarve from, may stand, or fall, by that Law for Kings, Deut. XVII. 16, 17. is a thing to be con∣sidered, and not very hard to be determined. threescore and ten thousand] And ver. 17, 18. Solomons workmen in Lebanon were 150000. viz. 70000. Bearers, and 80000. Hewers; All of strangers dwelling in the Land of Israel. And his Overseers of them were 3600. Such strangers likewise And so each of them were over fourty two workmen or thereabout. And three hundred of these Overseers, which are more then those set downe, 1 King. V. 16. might be extraordinary, in case any of the Ordinary should faile, by sicknesse, death, or any other way. And thus, the Ordinarie Over∣seers would be one over fourty five workmen or thereabout. Or ra∣ther, those three thousand three hundred, 1 King. V. 16. were Israelites & the chief of Solomons Officers, added to the other three thousand sixe hundred Overseers, and set partly as with them, so over them, and partly over the whole work. And so each Overseer would be over twenty one workmen at least. Those sixteen thousand a moneth by course, 1 King. V. 13, 14. are by some added to the Overseers: And so there would be one Overseer to eight workmen. But they may seeme rather to be the better sort of workmen of the Israelites, joyn∣ed to King Hirams workmen, 1 King. V. 6. Those Officers, viz.
five hundred and fifty, 1 King. 9. 23. seeme to be the chief of the Of∣ficers that were over Solomons other words, when he builded his owne house, and that for Pharaohs daughter, and all his other Buildings (be∣sides the Temple) ver. 15,—19. 2 Chron. VIII. 1,—6. These bare rule over the people that wrought in those works. And the two hundred and fifty, 2 Chron. VIII. 10. seeme to be chief of his Offi∣cers that bare rule over the people, i. e. over those Canaanites that So∣lomon had made Tributaries, ver. 7, 8. to rule them. And so iffer∣ing from the former five hundred and fifty. of beaten wheat] The difference of the Food and Measures of them, given by Solomon here, over and above that in 1 King. V. 11. may stand in this, That the former was for King Hirams Court and houshold; And this here for his workmen in Lebanon. Bathes] See the Observations on Gen. XVIII. 6. of Huram my father] See the observations on 1 King. V. 1. to Joppa] See the Observations on Jonah, I. 3. Solomon.] Solomon had divers elder brethren living, besides Adoni∣ah, when he was made King; and he was the eldest sonne of the four, by Bathshuah or Bathshebah, though he be recorded last, 2 Sam. XII. 24. 1 Chron. III. 5. and XIV. 4 2 Sam. V. 14. And Nathan was the second, from whom Christ came, Luke III. 31. After the first measure] See the Annotations on Ezek. XL. 5. Greater house] This was twice as big as the Oracle;  and four times as big as the Porch, 1 King. VI. 3. he seiled] Or covered. This, and the next verse seemes to relate to the Floore of the Temple, 1 King. VI. 15. The walls are mentioned in the seventh verse following. Chambers] Of these see 1 King. VI. 5. 1 Chron. XXVIII. 11; 12. Ezek. XL. 44, 45, 46. and chap. XLI. 5,—11. and chap. XLII. 1,—13. an Altar of brasse] That Altar in the Tabernacle was made of Shit∣tim wood, hallow with boords; and over-laid with brasse, Exod. XXVII. 1, 2, 8. And the staves of it likewise, ver. 6. And so Exod. XXXVIII. 1, 6, 7. And again it was covered with broad Plates made of the Censers of those Sinners, Num. XVI. 38. This Altar of burnt-Offerings in the Temple, though farre greater then the other, seemes to be made of the same materials, Shittim wood, and brasse. Of the Altar in Ezekiels Visionary Temple, see Ezek. XLIII. 13. —17. Court] Of the Courts see the Annotations on 1 King. VI. 36. right side] See the Observations on 1 King. VII. 39. Seventh moneth] See chap. VII. 8, 9, 10. Levites] Priests of the tribe of Levi, 1 King. VIII. 3. Num. IV. 15. unto this day] See 1 King. VIII. 8. 1 Chron. IV. 41. till Nebuchad∣nezzar, or Nebuzaradan burnt all, 2 King. XXV. 9. If Ezra writ these Books of the Chronicles after the returne from the Babylonish
Captivity, then this phrase must be understood as a Proverbial speech, to signifie a long time. See the Observations on Deut. XV. 17. Neither chose I any man] As I chose David, a special type of Christ, and in whose seed a royal succession was to continue from him to Christ. thou didst well] The purpose approved, though the act forbidden. the fire] Of this see Levit. IX. 24. 1 King. XVIII. 38. 1 Chron. XXI. 26. sacrifice of 22000.] Ver. 7. The greatest Offering that we do read of. Those 1 Chron. XXIX. 21. 2 Chron. XV. 11. and chap. XXIX. 32. and XXX. 24. and XXXV. 7, 8, 9. come short of this. appeared] Formerly, chap. I. 7. This is the second time, 1 Kings IX. 2. my wife shall not dwell] Solomons reverend and religious respect to the Place where the Ark of God had been. four hundred and fifty Talents] The thirty Talents reckoned here, more then those, 1 King. IX. 28. seeme to go for all maner of char∣ges of the Navy and Voyage. Four thousand stals] See the Observations on Judg. XX. 2. fourty years] Being born after David warre with the Ammonites at Rabbah, 2 Sam. XI. and XII. chapters. A little before the time that Ammon deflowred Tamar: And so aged about eighteen years when he began to reign. Shechem] See the Observations on Josh. XXIV. 1. Levites left] Cast out by Jeroboam, from their Cities, houses, in∣heritances, and all; for his own safety, 1 King. XII. 27. And to gaine their possessions: making Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sonnes of Levi, 2 Chron. XIII. 9. A practise well be∣seeming Rebels. Devils] Idols here so called. in the way of David, and Solomon] This charitably implies the Re∣pentance of Solomon; as well as his Ecclesiastes doth; in his last dayes: though haply he could not reforme all Idolatry; as neither Manasseh could after his repentance, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 7. and dispersed] As Gen. XXV. 5, 6. 2 Chron. XXI. 3. Israel] Put and meant for Judah, chap. XV. 17. See the Observa∣tions on 2 Chron. XXI. 2. against Jerusalem] After this Jerusalem was taken about tenne times. one and fourty] Therefore borne in the first year of the reigne of his father King Solomon. four hundred thousand] Huge are the armies of the Jews. 1200000 Jewes in those armies of Abijah and Jerrboam Wherein slaine on Jeroboams side five hundred thousand;  much more then every one his man the greatest number that ever we read slaine in any battel, v. 17. In the reigne of Asa, he had out of Judah, and Benjamin, an army of 500080. And he fought against an army of Zerah the Ethiopian
of a thousand thousand, and three hundred Charets (likely meaning three hundred [thousand] Charets, 2 Chron. XIV. 8, 9. the greatest army that we read of. And in Jehoshapha's time, he had men of warre waiting on him, 1160000. besides those whom he put in the fenced Cities, throughout all Judah, 2 Chron. XVII. 14,—19. children of Belial] i. e. without yoake, or without profit, as the word signifieth, Deut. XIII. 13. Such as Judg. XIX. 22. 1 Sam. II. 12. and X. 27. and XXV. 17. 1 King. XXI. 13. This title doth Shimei give falsely to David, 2 Sam. XVI. 7. But is truly given to the Devil, 2 Cor. VI. 15. was young] Not in age; but in experience, and policy; being then, as was said, fourty one years old. fourteene wives] Fourteene wives in his life-time;  for his reigne was but short, even three years, ver. 2. ten years] Yet likely some small skirmishes there were, 1 King. XV. 16, 32. Mareshah] A Citie in the North-West part of the tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 44. There Michah the Prophet was borne, Michah I. 1. And here as we see, in the Valley of Zephathah at Mareshah, Asa overthrew the hugest hoast that ever we read of, (Xerxes army not excepted) of Zerah the Ethiopian. Gerar] Gerar anciently a Citie and Kingdome of the Philistines; whose Kings seeme all to be called Abimelechs; where Abraham, and Isaac, a while lived; both offending in denying their wives, Gen. XX. and XXVI. Isaac leaving the Citie, dwelt in the valley of Gerar. Gen. XXVI. 17. a most fruitful valley, ver. 12. as it were the Granarie of Canaan, when famine was elsewhere in the Land, ver. 1. Here Isaac digged againe the Wells of water, digged by Abraham, and stopped by the Philistines: And he digged others new. After Gerar fell to the tribe of Simeon. And hither, as we see, Asa pursued the Ethiopians: and smote all the Cities round about Gerar. long season] Thirty or thirty one years, conceiving this to be in the eleventh year of Asa at the end of those ten years, chap. XIV. 1. Israel] The ten tribes, under Jeroboam, Nadab, and Baasha. did turne] We read not of their turning in those thirty years. This then may be taken by way of supposition; If they had turned, God would have been found of them. Or else Israel in the former verse may relate to all Gods people; and comprehend in it also former times, even the times of the Judges themselves. Be ye strong] Ye of Judah and Benjamin, ver. 2. Oded] See the Annotations on this verse. Both sonne, ver. 1. and father here, might prophesie. renewed the Altar] And likely that whole Court, whereunto that chap. XX. 5 seems to have reference. strangers] Those Israelites out of the ten tribes, that fell to Judah, are here called strangers. third moneth] Likely at the Feast of Weeks or Pentecost.
fifteenth year] This may seeme a second and more through Re∣formation, four or five years after his victory against Zerah. Or else that victory must be reduced to this fifteenth year of Asa. And till that time they had had rest, and no warre; which fifteenth of Asa was the thirty five in his reigne, i. e. since the Kingdome of Judah was divided from the Kingdome of Israel, ver. 19. viz. 17. of Reho∣boam; three of Abijah, and these fifteen of Asa. six and thirty] It is clear that this well may, and needs must, be un∣derstood likewise of that Kingdome wherein Asa was now King. For Baasha began to reigne in the third year of Asa, 1 King. XV. 28. And reigning twenty four years, ver. 33. he must needs die in the twenty seventh of Asa, or twenty six complete: And so we finde it, 1 King. XVI. 8 And therefore this thirty sixth wherein Baasha waged warre with Asa, must needs be meant of the Kingdome of Judah, that is, since the first division of the two Kingdomes. And so reckoning the seventeen years of Rehoboams reigne, and three of Abijah, we finde this thirty sixth to be the sixteenth of Asa, the next year after that full Reformation mentioned, 2 Chron. XV. 10. And to be the thir∣teenth year of the reigne of Baasha. See a like passage, 2 Chron. XXII. 2. Ramah] Ramah of Benjamin, bordering upon Judah, Josh. XVIII. 25. See the Annotations on Hos. V. 8. Hanani] The father of the Prophet Jehu, chap. XIX. 2. 1 King. XVI. 1. of Syria escaped] Which God might, and would, otherwise have delivered into his hand; as he did the Ethiopians, if Asa had not pre∣vented the occasion and opportunity thereof by his foolish sending to and for Benhadad to aide him, and break his League with Baasha; and so shewing thereby that he relied not upon the Lord, but upon Ben∣hadad; for which he is justly reproved, and punished. a very great burning] Greeks and Romanes of old used to burne their dead bodies;  specially of their Great ones, with a great deale of cost, burning huge piles, and curious fabricks of timber, together with abundance of odoriferous spices, at their Funerals; gathering their ashes into an Urne; and so layed up in their Monuments. And among the Jewes we read something like, viz. of Burning at the Exequies of their Kings; so here, and Jer. XXXIV. 5. of such of them at least, as lived beloved, and died desired: which was to others denied, 2 Chron. XXI. 19. Jer. XXII. 19. and XXXVI. 30. But we read not That this Burning was of their Bodies, but of sweet Odours only at and in their Sepulchers. taught in Judah] The Priests and Levites did so. The Princes by their authority, and in the Kings name, made way for them so to do, with the better courage, countenance, and successe. Philistines] These, and the Arabians, subdued by Asa chap. XIV. 14, 15. Numbers] See the Observations on chap. XIII. 3.
Waited] Waited in their Courses, some at one time, some at an∣other. Jehoshaphat] Jehoshaphat marries his sonne Jehoram to Athaliah, Ahabs daughter. And this in the eighth year of Jehoshaphats reign; as appears by the age of Ahaziah, succeeding his father Jehoram in the Kingdome, when he was two and twenty years old, 2 Kings VIII. 18, 26, 27. 2 Chron. XXII. 2. with chap. XXI. 5. went down to Ahab] In the twenty two and last year of Ahabs reign, and life; And in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat. Ramoth Gilead] See the Observations on 2 Kings VIII. 28. at a venture] Gods Providence. See the Observations on Ester V. 8. and on Ezek. I. 18. Wrath] Wrath deserved by him;  and appearing on him, chapter XVIII. 31 and XX. 1. from Beershebah to Mount Ephraim] The South and North borders of the Kingdome of Judah. set] As Jehoshaphats Commission for teaching throughout the Kingdome, was chap. XVII. 9. So here is his High-Commission-Court at Jerusalem, 2 Chron. XIX 8,—11. following therein the Or∣dinance of Moses, Deut. XVII. and XIX. See the Observations on Deut. XVII. 8,—13. Hazazon-Tamar] Gen. XIV. 7. Called also Engedi, a Citie of the tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 62. thy friend] So Esay XLI. 8. James II. 23. cliffe of Ziz] And so the Wildernesse of Jervel; both in the tribe of Judah; near Tekoah, and Berakah. ver. XX. 26. Korhites] Korhites that descended of that Korah, the sonne of Iz∣har, the sonne of Kohath, swallowed up of the earth, Num. XVI. 1. 32. These were singers in the Temple, and some of them Porters. Praise the Lord] Psal. CXXXVI. So chap. XXIX. 27. began to sing] In assurance of victory. three dayes] A rich spoile. of Jehu] See the Annotations on chap. XIX. 2. in the book] 1 King. XVI. 1. joyned himself] Jehoshaphat first, it seemes, refusing to have Aha∣ziah to joyne with him to make ships to go to Tarshish, 1 Kings XXII. 49. doth at last yeeld, and is reproved by Eliezer, and the ships are broken. Not that he joyned first; and refused after, upon the Pro∣phets reproof; for then the ships might well have been unbroken. But however; Here the good King falls once and again into the same fault of joyning himself with wicked Ahaziah; as formerly he had done with wicked Ahab; chap. XVIII. 1, 2, 3. and chap. XIX. 2. As we see the like in Abraham, Gen. XII. 13. with chap. XX. 2. Jehoshaphat King of Israel] Jehoshaphat here is called King of Is∣rael; that being then a distinct Kingdome from his. So again, are the Princes called, ver. 4. And Ahaz likewise, 2 Chron. XXVIII. 19, 27. And Darius is called King of Assyria, Ezra VI. 22. And Artaxerxes
King of Babylon, Neh. XIII. 6. As indeed the Persian Monarchs were the rightful Kings of Persia, Assyria, and Babylon, or Chaldea. Of names, see more in the Annotations on 2 Chron. XXIV. 20. of his father] After his father Jehoshaphats death;  In his fathers life-time, Jehoram carried himself better, both as, Viceroy, and King. slew all his brethren] And see Gods judgements upon his sonnes, ver. 17. and his grand-children chap. XXII. 10, 11. only Jehoahaz or Ahaziah, or Azariah, left of the one; and Joash of the other. compelled] By force and persecutions. A most wicked sonne of a godly father. A writing to him from Elijah] Written in the life-time of Elijah, who died before Jehoshaphat, 2 Kings III. 11. Left, and directed to Jehoram or for him; who would not endure the Reproof of a living Prophet. Therein prophesying and foretelling Jehorams Sinnes, and Punishments, Amongst other his wickednesses He shew all his bre∣thren, the sonnes of Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. XXI. 4. And his sons were all slaine by the Philistines, and Arabians, but Ahaziah the youngest (called also Jehoachaz, 2 Chron. XXI. 17. and Azariah, chap. XXII. 6, 7.) 2 Chron. XXI. 17. and XXII. 1. And Ahaziah was slaine by Jehu, 2 Chron. XXII. 9. when he was twenty three years old, 2 Kings VIII. 26. And the sonnes of Ahaziah were slaine by their grand-mo∣ther Athaliah, save Joash, that was hid from her, and after crowned King; and at last slaine by his own servants, 2 Chron. XXIV. 24, 25. We read that Josiah, and Cyrus, by their names, were prophesied of many ages before they were borne. But their good deeds were fore∣told not any evill of them; as of idolatrous bloody Jehoram here. Elisha foretels Hazael, face to face, of his bloodinesse, and evil that he would do to the children of Israel, 2 King VIII. 12. Arabians near the Ethiopians] See the Observations on Gen. II. 13. he reigned] Iehoram of Iudah his Life, Death, Burial. Fourty and two] Clear it is, That Iehoram the father of Ahaziah was but fourty years old when he died, chap. XXI. 5. And that A∣haziah himself was but twenty two years old when he began to reigne, 2 Kings VIII. 26. But it was in the two and fourtieth year of the con∣tinuance of the Crown in Omri and his race, from whom Ahaziah des∣cended, by his mother Athaliah, 2 Kings VIII. 18, 26. And the He∣brew expression by the word  a sonne; together with a trajection of some clauses in this verse, do render this interpretation the more passable. And a like passage we finde, as hath been shewed, in chap. XVI. 1. And such trajections are used, 1 Sam. XX. 16. Ezra X. 17. Neh. XII. 22. Athaliah] Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah, and wife of Jehoram the sonne of Jehoshaphat, and daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, and grandchilde of Omri. in Samaria] Not in the Citie, but in the Kingdome of Samaria, 2 Kings IX 27. Sonne of Jehoshaphat] Grandchilde. So daughter for grandchilde,
verse 2. A phrase usuall in Scripture. seed royal] Sonnes of Ahaziah, ver. 11. likely by other women. of the King] Jehoram, and sister of Ahaziah; as is expressed in this verse. Of the Priests, and of the Levites] They the Prime men in the depo∣sing of Athaliah, and crowning of Joash; guarding the gates, and compassing the King round about with weapons in hand, their cour∣ses being not dismissed; and others of them gathered out of all the Cities of Iudah. gate of the foundation] Called Shur, 2 Kings XI. 6. the high or higher gate, 2 Kings XV. 35. 2 Chron. XXVII. 3. Of the Gates of the Temple, and Courts, See the Annotations on Ezek. VIII. 3. See also Ezek. VIII. 5. 14. and chap. IX. 2. and chap. XL. 3. and 2 Chr. VIII. 14. and chap. XXIII, 4, 5, 19, 20. and chap. XXIV. 8. and XXVII. 3. and XXXI. 14. and XXXV. 5. the Horse-gate] Of the gates of Ierusalem, or of the walls of the Ci∣tie, see the Observations on Nehemy III. 1. gather of all Israel] So much of Israel as Ioash had. from year to year] One year would not suffice to make up this Re∣paration. hastened not] For in the twenty third year of Ioash it was not done, 2 Kings XII. 6. the Collection of Moses] So ver. 9. such as Moses used, Exod. XXX. 12, 16. or Exod. XXV. But this, differing from them both: agreeing on∣ly in this; As Moses then provided for the Tabernacle, and the service of it by those Collections extraordinarily, as need then required; so were they now, by somewhat a like Collection, to provide for the re∣pairing of the breaches of the Temple. Yet is this, because somewhat like, called the Collection of Moses; as like sinnes, are called by the names of the sinnes of Manasseh, 2 Kings XXIV. 3. of the iniquity of the fathers, Exod. XXXIV. 7. of the errour of Balaam, and gain-say∣ing of Core, Iudge 11. and the signe of Ionas, Matth. XII. 39. is used in a like sense. Sonnes of Athaliah] In their father Iehorams life-time, before they were taken and slaine by the enemy; if sonnes here be taken properly. High-priests Officer] 2 Kings XII. 10. The High-Priest himselfe did this. But that Iehoiada was this High-Priest, is not expressed. day by day] i. e. time after time, so oft as the chest was full. in Israel] the Kingdome of Iudah, Gods people, 2 Chr. XXIX. 24. Princes] Hypocritical flattering Princes. See ver. 23. Zechariah] Zechariah slaine, and mentioned Matth. XXIII. 35. seemes not to be this Zechariah, But rather the Prophet Zechariah, the sonne of Barachiah. Zech. I. 1. slew his sonne] Cruel ingratitude. hoast of Syria] This might be a seconding of that invasion, 2 King. XII. 17, 18. a small company] Gods visible hand in it;  for the executing of his judgement against Joash, ver. 25.
sonnes] Likely more slaine then Zechariah, or taken indefinitely for one, as Gen. XLVI. 7. Book of the Kings] Most likely some civil Records. Amaziah] Of the times of the reignes of Amaziah, and of Uzzi∣ah; as also of Iotham, and of Ahaz, 2 Kings XV. 32. and XVI. 1. And of their Concordance with the time of the reignes of the Kings of Isreel, See my Annotations on Hosea I. 1. But he slew not their children] See the Annotations on this text. do it] An Ironical concession. See the Observations on Amos IV. 4, 5. top of the rock] Selah, or Petra signifying a rock; whence the chief Citie in Arabia Petraea is called Petra, 2 Kings XIV. 7. gods of the children of Seir] Worse then that of Ahaz▪ chap. XXVIII. 23. Punished, chap. XXV. 20, 27. Altar of Incense] This the High-Priest might do, Exod. XXX. 7. and other Priests also, Luke I. 9 But not the King, or any else, but Priests. the chief Priest] Not stiled the High-Priest was a Leper] Yet bare the title of King to the day of his death. Ophel] Ophel in Ierusalem, over-against the water-gate, toward the East, where the Nethinims dwelt, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 14. Neh. III. 26. and XI. 21. his wars] 2 Kings XV. 37. his God] Though himself such an idolater, ver. 22. So ch. XXXVI. 5. King of Syria] Rezin, 2 Kings XVI. 5. slew] Slew a great number. Captive] A greater number. feirce wrath] Pekah soone slaine: And in Hosheah's time all capti∣vated; and the Kingdome extinguished; Esay VII. 16. the first day] ver. 3. Hezekiah begins Reformation on the very first day of his reign. Or rather on the first day of the year which fell out to∣wards the later end of the first year of Ezekiah's reigne. sixteenth day] So that Passeover was past, and not kept. seven Bullocks] Here are seven, to represent the whole body of the Kingdome. And here are used all maner of Beasts fit for sacrifice. the Priests killed them] And so Levit. IV. 4. and chap. IX. 8, 15, 18. 2 Chron. XXIX. 24, 34. The Levites did flea them, 2 Chron. XXXV. 11. And in some extraordinary cases sley them also, 2 Chron. XXIX. 34. and receive the blood, 2 Chron. XXX. 16, 17. The Priests only, not the Levites, came to the Altar, to lay the wood, sprinkle the blood, and burn them, Levit. l. 7. &c. and chap. III. 2, 5. 2 Chron. XXXV. 14. the Song] Psal CXXXVI. See the Annotations on Ezra III. 11. to Ephraim, and Manasseh] See ver. 5,—11, 18. Yet this was be∣fore their finall captivity by Shalmaneser, 2 Kings XVII. in the second moneth] ver. 1, 3. As in like case, Num. IX. 11. Kings of Assyria, Pul, and Tiglath Pilneaser, 2 Kings XV. 19, 29. 1 Chron. V. 26. 2 Chron. XXVIII. 20.
mocked them] But a finall judgement sonne followed. had not cleansed themselves, yet] And, it seemes, in Josiah's time, all did not eate at the very hour appointed, at Even, 2 Chron. XXXV. 14. yet where the heart is upright, God mercifully heals such offenders. to keep other seven dayes] The power of the Church seene herein; and by God approved. Since the time of Solomon] And the division of the two Kingdomes, so many out of the ten tribes came not to Jerusalem to eat & celebrate the Passeover. Yet see a larger commendation of Josiah's Passeover, which followed after this, chap. XXXV. 18. 2 Kings XXIII. 22, 23. finished] Presently after the foresaid Passeover, they pull down idolatry; yea in Ephraim also, and Manasseh; which belonged to Ho∣shea King of Israel. third moneth] Or Feast of weeks, of Pentecost; which is called the feast of harvest: And the seventh moneth is called the Feast of in∣gathering, Exod. XXIII. 16. hoast of the King of Assyria] Though that King Sennacherib; and his hoast were so slain, in the time of his father Hezekiah. chap. XXXII. 21. a wall] Begun by his father, chap. XXXII. 5. yet unto the Lord] Not to false gods;  as was in the grosser kinde of idolatrous sacrificers. Amon] Amon worse then his father Manasseh. eighth year] Being then sixteen years old;  and before that, the fa∣ther of Eliakim or Iehojakim, 2 Kings XXIII. 36. and chap. XXII. 1. compared together. twelfth year] Himself being then twenty. cities of Manasseh] Remanants then of the Israelites;  for the body of the ten tribes were formerly carried away captives, and the King∣dome exterminated. eighteenth year] This Reformation and Covenant made, and Passe∣over kept, chap. XXXV. 19. And yet from this, or rather from the twelfth year above mentioned begins that reckoning of the sinne of Iudah, Ezek. IV. 6. For under so good a King yet the people continu∣ed obstinately wicked; as appears in Ieremie, who began to prophesie in the thirteenth year of Iosiah's reigne, Ier. I. 2. and XXV. 3. and ch. III. 6. And Iosiah only caused, and made them outwardly to obey, 2 Chron. XXXIV. 32, 33. the Houses] The Houses of the Priests, which adjoyned to the Tem∣ple; and of the Levites, which adjoyned to the Courts. Levites Scribes] 1 Chron. XXIV. 6. Ezra VII. 6. 21. Neh. VIII. 9. and chap. XII. 26. and XIII. 13. See the Annotation on 1 Kings IV. 3. More fully, thus; we read in the Old Testament of severall persons that were Scribes; some, Scribes of Kings, or their Secreta∣ries; So David had one; And Solomon two, Ioash one, 2 Kings XII. 10. Iosiah one, 2 Kings XXII. 3. Of Ionathan Davids Uncle, that he was a Counseller, a wise man, and a Scribe, 1 Chron. XXVII. 32. And of Baruch, that he was Ieremies Scribe. And of families of Scribes, that
dwelt at Jabez in the tribe of Iudah, and were of the posterity of Ie∣thro, 1 Chron. II. 55. But why so called, or what their Office was, whether as Publike Notaries, Scriveners, or Transcribers of the Law, or what else, it appears not. Here in Iosiah's time we finde that in his businesse of repairing the house of the Lord, there were appointed of the Levites Scribes. And in Nehemiah's time he made Treasurers over the Treasuries [in the Lords House] Shelemiah the Priest, and Zadok the Scribe. And in his time also was that famous Ezra, a Priest, sonne of the High Priest Serajah slaine by Nebuchadnezzar, and the same a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses, a Scribe of the Law of the God of Heaven, of the words of the Commandments of the Lord, and of his Statutes to Israel; and the same a publick Rea∣der, and Teacher of the Law. In the New Testament we finde them much more mentioned; and to be of more esteeme; and themselves affected Preheminence and precedencies, Mark. XII. 38, 39. Here they are often joyned with the Chief Priests, and Elders, and often with the Pharisees. They pretended to extraordinary holinesse, as the Pharisees did; whence is that, Matth. V. 20. and Acts XXIII. 9. They were of the Pharisees part against the Sadduces. Yea he that is called a Scribe, Marke XII. 28. the same is called a Pharisee, and a Lawyer, Matth. XXII. 34, 35. We read not that they were of the Sect of the Sadduces, or Essenes. But we finde them to joyne with all the rest, to question, to pose, and oppose our Saviour, to entangle and insnare him by Questions, to charge his miracles to be done by Belzebub; Himself, with Blasphemy; to apprehend and binde him; to condemne him in the Councel; to deliver him to Pilate; to accuse him before Herod; to prosecute him to death; to mock him upon the Crosse. And we finde that these Scribes sate in Moses-chair, Matth. XXIII. 2. and were Preachers and Teachers of the people, Mat. VII. 29. and XIII. 52. And likely were all of the tribe of Levi. rent his clothes] See the Annotations on 2 Kings XXII. 8. Huldah the Prophetesse] See the Observations on Zeph. III. 4. The High Priest Hilkiah is here sent to her; she being an extraordinary Pro∣phetesse, so near at hand. Put the holy Ark] It might be put out of his place, in the dayes of his wicked father, if not of his grandfather. Passeover-Offerings] So ver. 9. in the Feast of Unleavened bread, for the seven dayes. After all this] Thirteen years after the foresaid Passeover;  that being in the eighteenth, and this in the thirty one, and last year of his reigne. by Euphrates] Heb. Phrat, or Prat, or Perath, the fourth river in Eden, Gen. II. 14. usually called the River, and the great River: made one of the Boundaries of the Promised Land, Gen XV. 18. Deut. 1. 7, and chap. XI. 24. Iosh. I. 4. 2. Chron. IX. 26. Cut by Cyrus into seve∣rall Channels when he lay in siege before Babylon which stood upon it; and so by him much dreyned and dried, Ier. L. 38. See 1 Chron. XVIII. 3. Ier. XIII. 4. and chap. LI. 63. Apoc. IX. 14. and Chap. XVI. 12. See on Dan. IV. 30.
Megiddo] See the Annotations on Zech. XII. 11. to carrie him] But he died by the way, Jer. XXII. 18, 19. Eight years old when he] He was eighteen when himself began to reigne, 2 Kings XXIV. 8. And but eight then when his father began to reigne. The like relative sense may that speech admit, 2 Kings XVI. 2. no remedy] Desperate sinners procure implacable wrath, irrevoca∣ble exterminating judgements. Kingdome of Persia] See the Observations on the beginning of the Book of Ezra, threescore and ten years] For the beginning of these, see the An∣notations on Dan. IX. 2. rather then those on Zech. VII. 3. yet many learned are of the later opinion.
Ezra. THE Book of Ezra contains an History of seventy years; viz. from the first of Cyrus, or his Proclamation, chap. I. 1. to the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus; upon this Accompt; viz. Cyrus, seven; Cambyses, seven; Smerdis, one; Darius Hystaspis, thirty six; Xerxes, twelve; of Artaxerxes Longimanus, seven, where Ezra end. Or, premising two of Darius Medus before Cyrus, it comes to seventy two. The four last Chapters containe the Histo∣ry but of that one year concerning Ezra, which was in that seventh year of Artaxerxes. See chap. VII. 7, 9. and chap. VIII. 15, 21, 31, 32, 33. and chap. X. 8, 9, 16, 17. But the six first Chapters are extended by some, otherwise learned men, yet upon lesse probable grounds, to a farre larger scope of time; even to one hundered thirty eight, or one hundred fourty five years: And they end the Book with the nine∣teenth year of Artaxerxes Mnemon; which seemes cleane contrary to the Text, chap. VII. 7, 8. For the clearer knowledge of divers things in this Book; as like∣wise in Nehemy, and Esther; A Catalogue of the Persian Monarchs, and of the years of their Reignes is very useful: which out of the best Authors, with very little variation, may be as followeth;   years. Darius Medus 2 Cyrus 7 Cambyses 7 Smerdis 1 Darius Hystaspis 36 Xerxes 12 Artaxerxes Longimanus 48 Xerxes 1 Sogdianus 1 Darius Ochus seu Nothus 19 Artazerxes Mnemon 43 Darius Ochus 23 Arsen 3 Darius Codomannus 5 And so the Persian Monarchy continued two hundred and eight years; or there about. In this Book of Ezra there is mention made of six Persian Mo∣narchs; first, of Cyrus, chap. I. 1. secondly, of Darius ch. IV. 5. third∣ly, of Ahasuerus, chap. IV. 6. fourthly of Artaxerxes, chap. IV. 7. fifthly, of another Darius, chap. IV. 24. and chap. V. 5, 6. sixthly, of another Axtaxerxes, chap. VII. 1. Or rather thus; Of five Persian
Monarchs, viz: 1 of Cyrus; 2 of Ahasuerus; 3 of Artaxerces; 4 of Darius, taking him mentioned, chap. IV. ver. 5. 24. and Chap. V. 5, 6. and chap. VI. 15. to be the same man. And 5 of another Ar∣taxerxes. And the Persons of these by sundry learned men are sun∣dry wayes understood. Some take the first Darius to be Darius Hy∣staspis; Ahasuerus, to be Xerxes; the first Artaxerxes to be Artax∣erxes Longimanus; the second Darius, to be Darius Ochus and Nothus; the second Artaxerxes, to be Artaxerxes Mnemon or Memor. O∣thers take Ahasuerus to be Cambyses; Artaxerxes to be Artashasta or Smyrdis Magnus; Darius not two, but one, to be Darius Hystaspis; and the second Artaxerxes, to be Artaxerxes Longimanus. This diversi∣ty is occasioned by the silence of Scripture, and uncertainties of Hea∣then Greek Histories: yet this later opinion I the rather imbrace, for that it stands best with the ages of Zeubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Mordecai. Ezra a childe, when his father Serajah, the High Priest, chap. VII. 1. was slaine at Riblah by Nebuchadnezar, 2 Kings XXV. 18, 21. And his brother Jehozadak, the succeeding High Priest, was carried into Captivity, 1 Chron. VI. 14, 15. And his sonne Jeshua, or Joshua, or Jehoshua, the High Priest, the sonne of Jehozadak, or Josedech; Neh. XII. 1. Ezra III. 2, 8. and V. 2. Zech. VI. 11. came up with Zerub∣babel. And this Ezra came up from Babylon, in the seventh of Artax∣erxes, with a gracious Commission, Ezra VII. VIII. IX. X. chapters. And he was with Nehemiah, after the building of the Walls of Jerusa∣lem; at that solemne Reading of the Law, and Preaching: and at that singular keeping of the Feast of Tabernacles, Neh. VIII. 1,—6, 9, 13. &c And after the Feast, chap. IX. and X. at the Dedication of the Walls, chap. XII. 26, 36. So that upon the least accompt, He must live upon one hundred and fifty years, that is fifty three or sixty before the Returne from Babylon; twenty three to the Building of the Temple; sixty seven to the Dedication of the Walls of the Citie. But upon the larger, and more improbable accompt, he must live at least two hundred and twenty years. He was a ready Scribe in the Law of God, chap. VII. 6, 11. And is generaly reputed the holy Pen-man likewise of the Books of Chronicles; And, as some would, of the Books of Nehemiah, and Malachi also. And is taken by many to be the re∣storer and orderer, after the returne from the Babylonish Captivity of all the Books of the Old Testament, in that sort, and posture, and character also, wherein now we have them. Now in the first year] Hebr. And in one year. Thus coupling his Book with the end of Chronicles. As the like is in the beginning of Ex∣odus, Leviticus, Numbers, Joshua, Judges, and many other Books. See moreover the Annotations on Ezek. I. 1. One for First is an usual Scripture phrase. And First here, is of his Conquest of Babylon, and of his reigne there: For he was King of Persia, not Monarch, many years before, chap. V. 13.
Charged me] Esay XLIV. 28. and XLV. 1, 13. This prophesie might likely be shewed to Cyrus, by Daniel or some other. vessels] Such as were not cut in pieces, 2 Kings XXIV. 13. Sheshbazzar] The Chaldee or Court-name of Zerubbabel, Ezra I. 8. and III. 8, 10. and V. 2, 14. As Belteshazzar was of Daniel. The same work that is ascribed to Sheshbazzar, chap. V. 16. is ascribed to Zerubbabel, Zech. IV. 9. were five thousand four hundred] This number ariseth out of the particular numbers formerly mentioned, amounting to two thousand four hundred ninety nine, and the rest that were unnumbered. Moreo∣ver are vessels given, chap. VII. 19. and chap. VIII. 25, 27, See the carrying of them away by Nebuchadnezzar, at four several times, Dan. I. 2. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 7, 10, 18. Province] Judah no Kingdome now;  but made a Province by the Conquerour. See chap. V. 8. Neh. I. 3. and chap. VII. 6. and XI. 3. which came] The manifold variations for Names, and Numbers in this Register and Catalogue, and that Nehemie VII. may arise from the diversity of names given to one man. And from this, That the one was taken at their setting out from Babylon, viz. this Ezra II. The other upon their coming to Judea and Jerusalem, Neh. VII. And so some might come to Jerusalem which had not registred their names in Babylon: and some might register their names in Babylon which yet came not up to Jerusalem, either changing their mindes to stay in Ba∣bylon, or dying by the way. Or else that in Nehemie might be applied to the persons that were living and remaining in the Land of Judah in his time, or else it might be taken out of some other Register be∣sides this in Ezra. The numbers of them that returned with Zerubba∣bel in this Catalogue, Ezra II. and in that Catalogue, Neh. VII. 6—62. fall farre short of that total summe, both in Ezra and Nehemy, which is said to be fourty two thousand three hundred and sixty, besides se∣ven thousand three hundred thirty seven more of servants and Prose∣lites, Ezra II. 64, 65. Neh. VII. 66, 67. The number wanting seems to be supplied out of those Ezra II. 62. and out of the Relicts of the ten Tribes, that were both captivated, and returned with them of Ju∣dah, and are not numericaly set down, yet after the Returne, continued among them, and professed their Religion, even till the coming of our Saviour, and the final destruction of Jerusalem. See 2 Chron. XI. 3, 16. and XXXI. 6. Ezra II. 70. and VI 16, 17. Matt. IV. 14. Luke II. 36. Acts II. 5. and XXVI. 7. Of those which came up with Ezra, see chap. VIII. 1,—14. Tirshatha] Tirshatha signifying Governour in their tongue seemes attributed here to Zerubbabel: And is after to Nehemiah expressely, Neh. VIII. ver. 9. and chap. X. 1. Urim] See the Observations on 1 Sam. XXIII. 9. the whole] Many more returned, then those upon record that were carried into captivity.
Singing men, and singing women] Most likely such as were used, not in the Temple, but elsewhere, for mirth, as 2 Sam. XIX. 35. Ec∣cles. II. 8. Esay XXIII. 16. Amos VI. 5. and for mourning, as 2 Chron. XXXV. 25. Jer. IX. 17, 18. Eccles. XII. 5. Amos V. 16. seventh moneth] Ver. 6. In this moneth, the first day, they first offer∣ed sacrifice on the new built after their returne from the Baby∣lonish captivity. And in the same moneth of the year was the solemn Dedication of Solomons Temple, 1 Kings VIII. 2. In the second year of their coming] They prepare for the building of the Temple;  or rather having formerly prepared, they now begin the building. wept with a loud voice] Many ancient men that had seene the for∣mer Temple, which was burnt but fifty two years before, wept at the laying of the foundation of this Temple; either at the remembrance of the wondrous glory of the former Temple so burnt and consumed; and considering the small Preparations, and Meanes, for the building, and furnishing of this, Ezra I. 4, 6, 68, 69. and chap. VI. 8, 9. and chap. VII. 15,—22. and chap. VIII. 25, 26, 27. 33, 34. Neh. VII. 70, 71, 72. in comparison of those for the former Temple; Hag. II. 3. In which case God comforts them, Hag. II. 7, 9. Zech. IV. 6,—10. and VIII. 6, 9. Mal. III. 1. Or else, seeing these foundation-stones not so goodly and precious, as those were known to be that were in So∣lomons Temple, 1 Kings VII. 9, 10. For as for the largenesse and com∣passe of the foundation, it was not inferiour to that of Solomons, 1 Kings VI. 2. Yea far superiour, if that Decree of Cyrus, and the re∣cord of it found by Darius, Ezra VI. 1, 2, 3. mistake not; and the Cubits be the same. Esar-haddon] The sonne of Sennacherib, 2 Kings XIX. 37. and grandchild of Salmaneser: And this seemes to be the last of the Assyrian Kings; And the same with Asnapper; and to be him that carried Ma∣nasseh prisoner to Babylon, then under the Assyrian Empire, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 11. And is likely the man whom Ptolomie calls Assaradinus, and the Greeks Sardanapalus, of Sar for Esar, haddon, and Pul; Pul being much used in the names of the Assyrian, and Chaldean Kings. Brought us up hither So that those adversaries, ver. 1. seeme to be the race of those Samaritanes brought in by Salmanesar, 2 Kings XVII. 6, 24. Or a second kinde of plantation by his grandchilde, ver. 9. which ever continued fierce enemies to the Jewes, whatever they mischeivously pretend here, John IV. 9. Luke IX. 52, 53. And this makes that Answer returned to them here, ver. 3. Darius] Hystaspis Ahasuerus] Ahasuerus seemes most probably to be the man whom Heathen Authors call Smerdis Magus, the sonne of Cyrus, and young∣er brother of Cambyses, reigning a very short time. Artaxerxes] As they had formerly done in the dayes of this Ar∣taxerxes; who most likely is Cambyses. For to understand this of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and much more of Artaxerxes Mnemon; And
the Temple to be builded in the dayes of Darius Nothus, and much more of Darius Ochus, will no wayes stand with these Scriptures, and the notation of times contained in them, Zech. III. 9. and Hag. II. 3. Syrian tongue] Hebr. Aramite. This was in ordinary use under the Assvrian, Chaldean, and Persian Monarchy, Esay XXXVI. 11. Dan. II. 4. This we commonly call the Chaldee tongue. It differs from the Hebrew Dialect, Esay XXVIII. 11. and chap. XXXIII. 13. and XXXVI. 11. Yet in the dayes of our Saviour it grew common among the Jewes also; and is in that regard called the Hebrew tongue in the New Testament, John XIX. 13, 17. Acts XXI 40. and XXII. 2. Rehum] This, and all the rest to chap. VI. 19. is penned in the Chal∣dee Dialect. And so chap. VII. 11, -27. building the rebellious and the bad Citie] So ver. 13. and 16. They only went about to build the Temple. the river] So chap. V. 6. Jordan, or rather Euphrates, ver. 17. and 20. From Persia, it is beyond the river. work of the House of God] Though their Letter, and the Kings An∣swer mention only the Citie, yet they extend it here to the House of God. Zechariah] He is called the sonne. of Iddo; And Zerubbabel the sonne of Shealtiel, ver. 2. And they were indeed their grandchildren, Zech. I. 1. 1 Chron. III. 17, 18, 19. Tatnai] He, and Shethar-boznai deale more fairly and truly with the Jews in their letter to Darius, then Rehum, and Shimsai did in theirs to Artaxerxes, chap. IV. 12,—16. And they make mention on∣ly of the House of God, and not of the Citie. untill now] But hindered and inhibited in the meane time, chap. IV. 21, 22. in Babylon] Or concerning Babylon. Achmetha] Called by Heathen Authors Ecbatana: signifying a Summer seat for coole refreshing;  In which Citie the Kings of Me∣dia kept their Court in the Summer season. threescore Cubits] Cubits likely are taken here for common Cu∣bits half the length of sacred Cubits;  which sacred Cubits were un∣knowne to Heathen. And the number of them may be reckoned from the bottome of the foundation to the top on the outside; and from the outsides of the Temple, including the thicknesse of the walls, and of the Chambers adjoyning. And so this Temple will be lesse then Solomons, 1 Kings VI. 2. 2 Chron. III. 3. according to that Hag. II. 3. See the Annotations on this text: and the Observations on Ch. III. 12. three rowes] This relates to the Courts of the Temple. Let timber] The great zeale of this King for the Temple, appears in this, and other passages and Decrees, in this his Letter. Artaxerxes] Likely one of the seven that put down Smerdis Magus, and in a sort, at the beginning was fellow in Empire with Darius Hy∣staspides.
finished] About twenty two years after their Returne: about twen∣ty, since the foundation was laid. Offered] not comparable to that, 1 Kings VIII. 5, 63. 2 Chron. VII. 5. 7. And the children] From this verse to Chap. VII. ver. 11. the Text again is Hebrew. Killed] Each family, or master of family must not kill it them∣selves; as they did in Egypt; But Gods Ministers, Priests and Le∣vites, must do it, 2. Chron. XXX. 15, 16, 17. separated themselves unto them] Heathen Proselytes. King of Assyria] See the Observations on 2 Chron. XXI. 2. Artaxerxes] Longimanus. Ezra] See the Observations touching him in the beginning of this his Book. Azariah] Six generations here omitted;  1 Chron. VI. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And three generations omitted between Jeroam and Pash∣ur, 1 Chron. IX. 12. compared with Neh. XI. 12. And so three ge∣nerations are omitted between Joram and Ozias, Matth. I. 8 And all done for brevity sake; conceiving those Omissions to be things evi∣dently known, or not so material to be there inserted. King granted] Ezra's extraordinary power and authority was from the Kings grant, and not otherwayes. went up] So backward were the Jewes in returning back to Judea after the Proclamation of Cyrus: yea, the Priests and Levites them∣selves. See Esther VIII. 8, 9. first] Four moneths in going. King of Kings] Ezek. XXVI. 7. Dan. II. 37. This whole Letter is in the Chaldean tongue. seven Counsellors] So Esther I. 14. freely offered] great zeale, and forwardnesse here; ver. 20—26. and 28. and chap. 8. 25, 26, 27. as was formerly in Darius, chap. VI. 11. canst finde] Grants him a free Collection, and what he can get and gather by it. not lawfull to impose] Artaxerxes gives Ezra the Priest a grant and power for an immunity of the Clergy;  and for setting and appointing Civil Magistrates and Judges. See the Observations on 1 Chron. XXVI. 29. Males] In all, 1496. Ahava] A river, ver. 21, 31. a few dayes journey distant from Babylon, in the way to Jerusalem, ver. 15, 17 21. 31. Levi] Levites here distinguished from the Priests, chap. VII. 7. Casiphia] Not very farre from Ahava: but farre enough from the Caspian Sea. Nethinims] See the Observations on Josh. IX. 23. a Fast] A good patterne here. See the Annotations on Joel I. 14. and on Jonah III. 5. Talents] See the Observations on Exod. XXXVIII. 24.
fine Copper precious as Gold] Rare this;  and so but two of them. in the chambers] Divers of the Chambers on the sides or walls of the Temple, were for Treasuries, to keep the holy treasures appertain∣ing to the Temple, and service of God. their daughters] Of marriages with Heathens, see the Observations on Num. XXXVI. 6. yea more, it may seeme they put away their own wives to take these, Mal. II. 11. 13. weeping] Weeping in Prayer, twise here. So 2 Kings XX. 3. and XXII. 19. Num. XXV. 6. Judg. XX. 23, 26. and XXI. 2. 1 Sam. I. 10. and VII. 6. 2 Kings XX. 3. Heb. V. 7. Psal. VI. 8. and XXXIX. 12. a Covenant] Covenants much used between God and his People, Gen. VI. 18. and XV. 18. and XVII. 2. Deut. V. 2. Josh. XXIV. 24. 2 Kings XI. 17. and XXIII. 3. 2 Chron. XV. 12. and XXIX. 10. Neh. IX. 38. Esay LIX. 21. and such as were borne of them] If the mothers continued Heathens, and did not turne Proselytes; their children were not to be reputed as free-borne sons, in the number of Gods people; yet the fathers were to have a fatherly care of them, for maintenance and education. forfeited] According to that power given to Ezra, chap. VII. 26. separated] By excommunication; as John IX. 22, 34. or by ba∣nishment, chap. VII. 26. ninth moneth, twentieth day] Therefore the Proclamation, ver. 7, 8, was on the ninth moneth, seventeenth day, about the beginning of our December. of one day or two] But of three moneths, ver. 16, 17. Our Rulers of all the Congregation] Such as Deut. XVII. 9. In sem∣blance whereof in after ages they builded their Sanedrin, and great Councel. examine]  a word beside all ordinary forme of Grammer. And the like is again Psal. X. 15. sonnes of Jeshua] of the High Priests race; which haply made the High Priest absent himself in this action, ver. 15. All these] Seventeen Priests;  Of the Levites, Singers, and Porters ten, of all other Tribes, eighty six. In all, one hundred and thirteen, as the great Annotations count them.
Nehemiah. THE Book of Nehemiah is the last Book and History of the Old Testament, mentioning matters after Malachi. It containes an History of one hundred and twenty years, or thereabout; reckoning from the twentieth of Artaxerxes Longimanus when Nehemiah began, chap. II. 1. to the days of Jaddua, two years before the period of the Persian Empire, chap. XII. 11, 22. Some make it about fifty five; reckoning so from the twentieth of Artaxerxes Mnemon, to the period of the Persian Empire. The two maine and differing reckonings then of the years of the two Books of Ezra, and Nehemie joyntly considered, stand thus; Reckoning as some do, to Ezra one hundred fourty six, and to Nehemie fifty five, the summe of both comes to two hundred and one. But rather reckoning to Ezra seventy two, and to Nehemie one hun∣dred and twenty, the summe of both doth arise to one hundred ninety two. Thus the difference between these two reckonings of both Books joyntly, amounteth to nine years. If this Nehemiah be the same that came up with Zerubbabel and Je∣shua, mentioned Ezra II. 2. Neh. VII. 7. and writ this Book; then Nehe∣miah must needs be a very old man; And that passage, ch. XII. 10, 11. mentioning Jaddua the High Priest, must needs be inserted by some other Prophet since his dayes; And much more since the dayes of Ezra: For Jaddua lived till the dayes of Alexander the Great, and met him coming into Jerusalem: which is the very last Historical Passage and Record of the Old Testament: For Psalm XLIV. And LXXIV. concei∣ved by some to be penned in the dayes of Antiochus Epiphanes, carrie no sure ground for such an after-date. And surely so many years as include the whole continuance of the Persian Empire and more, do far passe the date of one mans life in that age of the world. Yet that Nehe∣miah might well reach to the 32. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus; which is the last passage of this Book, setting that of Jaddua aside. However, many make this Nehemiah this famous Governour, to be another Nehemiah, of younger and later years, then he, Ezra II. 2. This Nehemiah came to his Government, when Eliashib, the Grand∣childe of Jeshua, or Joshua, or Jehoshua was High Priest, chap. III. 1. and XII. 10. The whole time of his Government is set down, chap.
II. 1. and chap. V. 14. and chap. XIII. 6. The first time was twelve years. And the twelve first Chapters of his Book mention the things that were done by him in the first year only of those twelve. The se∣cond time of his Government is contained in the last chapter: And the beginning and durance of it is uncertaine: yet long it was, as may be gathered out of chap. XIII. 28. See the Observations on that Text. And it was] The first particle may seeme to joyne this Book to that of Ezra. And some Translatours give this Book the title of the second Book of Esdras; as supposing Ezra to be the sacred Penman of both; though Nehemiah be brought in usualy speaking in his own person. Chisleu] About our November. Shushan] Shushan signifying a Lillie in the Greek; a Fountaine or Well in that Countrey language. The chief Citie in Persia; the winter Mansion of the Persian Monarchs. See Ezra VI. 2. Esther I. 2. Dan. VIII. 2. the wall] Ever since the ruine made by Nebuchadnezzar. Nisan] which is the Hebrew Abib; about our March. the vernal e∣quinoctial. Artaxerxes] Longimanus, thirteene years after Ezra, chap. VII. 7. I took up] His waiting-course being then come: four moneths af∣ter Hanani his coming, chap. I. 1, 2. prayed] Nehemiah his Prayer, by ejaculation, like that of Moses, Exod. XIV. 15. And specialy his zeale in the building, chap. IV. 16, 17, 23. and V. 11. And his speed, chap. VI. 15. And his courage against all oppositions, chap. IV. and chap. VI. And his care for the needy and oppressed, chap. V. 11, 12, 13. And his heat and wrath against sinne, chap. XIII. 25. And his wonderful bounty, chap. V. 14, 15, 17, 18. are all very remarkable. a time] Twelve years, chap. V. 14. and XIII. 6. Sanballat] As the Samaritanes opposed and hindered Zerubbabl in the Building of the Temple, Ezra IV. So the Moabite, Ammonite, and Arabian disturbed Nehemiah in the building of the walls of the Citie, Neh. II, 10, 19. and IV. 1, &c. and VI. 1, &c. Which were] ; Here  (m) is used in the end of a word; which never useth so to be. And again  (m) proper to the end of a word, is found in the middle, in the beginning of Esay IX. 7. Eliashib] Eliashib the son of Jojakim, & grandchild of Jeshua, (which Jeshua came up with Zerubbabel, Neh XII. 10. Ezra II. 2. and lived to finish the Building of the Temple, Hag. I. 14.) was High Priest in the Beginning of Nehemiah's twelve years Government, in the twenti∣eth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, Neh. III. 1. 20. as was said be∣fore; about sixty years after the Temple was finished. gate] For the Gates of the Citie of Jerusalem we read of the Citie∣gate, 2 Chron. XXXII. 6. the first Gate, Zech. XIV. 10. the Gate of Benjamin, Jer. XXXVII. 12, 13. and XXXVIII. 7. Zech. XIV. 10. situate in the wall of the Citie, in the Tribe of Benjamin, Northward.
Yet said to be in the House of the Lord, Jer. XX. 2. that is, by it; as the particle Beth is used, Num. XXXIII. 37. Josh. V. 13. and chap. XXIV. ver. 25, 26, 32. Jer. XIII. 5. and XXXII. 7. the Gate of Ephraim, 2 Kings XIV. 13. Neh. XII. 39. the Corner Gate, 2 Chron. XXV. 23. and the Valley Gate, 2 Chron. XXVI. 9. the Fish Gate, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 14. The New Gate, Jer. XXVI. 10. because re∣paired new by Jotham, 2 Kings XV. 35. 2 Chron. XXVII. 3. Yet some make it the East Gate, some the West Gate of the outer Court of the Temple; wherein they will have the Sanhedrin to sit. The Gate between two walls, by the Kings Garden, if this be a Gate of the Ci∣tie, 2 Kings XXV. 4. In Nehemiah's time, at his new building of the Walls of the Citie, we read of the Sheep Gate; of the Fish Gate; the Old Gate; the East Gate, Jer. XIX. 2. the Valley Gate; the Dung-Gate; the Gate of the Fountain; the Water Gate; the Horse Gate; the Gate Miphkad or Judicatory; the Gate of Ephraim; the Prison Gate, Neh. II. 13, 14. and chap. III. 1; 3, 6, 13, 14, 15, 26, 28, 31. and chap. XII. 39. Zech. XIV. 10. Besides Towers upon the Walls of both Cities; the Tower of Me∣ah; the Tower of Hananeel; Neh. XII. 39. Zech. XIV. 10. on the East side of the Citie, between the Tower of Meah, and the corner gate, Neh. III. 1. the Tower of the Furnaces, Neh. III. 1, 11. and Ch. XII. 38, 39. and others. And Valleys about it; as Jer. XXXI. 40. the Valley of the dead bodies, under Mount Golgotha, West-North-West of the Citie: and the Valley of Ashes; likely that came from the Altar of Burnt-Offer∣ings: the Valley of Jehoshaphat on the East, and the Valley of the sons of Hinnom also; the Valley of Savey, or the Kings Vale or Dale on the South; and the Valley of Rephaim or Gyants, on the South-West. And Fields mentioned about it, the Fullers field on the South, Esay VII. 1. and the Porters field, or Acheldama, on the South-East, Jer. XVIII. 2. and XIX. 2. and XXXI. 40. Matth. XXVII. 7. And Hills about Jerusalem were, Mount Olivet on the East; Mount Calverie or Golgotha on the West-North-west, Mount Gihon West, Mount Gareb North, Ier. XXXI. 39. The Brook Kidron did runne on the East-side of Jerusalem; And the Fountain of Siloam, or waters of Gihon, on the West. Pooles, two of note were near Jerusalem, Neh. III. 15, 16. The upper Poole of Siloah, called also the old Poole, and Kings Poole; on the South, 2 Kings XVIII. 17. Esay VII. 2. and XXXVI. 2. or South-West corner: receiving its water from the river Gihon. And the Low∣er, of which Esay XXII. 9. 2 Chron. XXXII. 30. which was made long after, Neh. III. 16. on the West: and drew water from the upper. sanctified it] This sanctification of this Sheep-gate, built by the High Priest, and his brethren, is deemed by some to be extraordina∣rily ratified and graced with that miraculous gift of healing from this time vouchsafed to the Poole of Bethesda close by this Gate: of which mention is made, John V. 2.
cover not their iniquity] See the Observations on Psal. CIX. and the Annotations on this text of Nehemie. unto the half] Of the height of the Wall. a great cry] Of Oppressions in three sorts;  set down in the three vers. following: Their needs and wants, which made them liable to these oppressions, being the more occasioned by their labours so much im∣ploied in the publick work of the Walls. usury] Ver. 10. Of this see the inhibitions, Exod. XXII. 25. Lev. XXV. 36, 37. Deut 23. 19, 20. Ezek. XVIII. 8. 13, 17. And Gods judgements against it, Prov. XXVIII. 8. Ezek. XXII. 12, 13. Psal. XV. V. Yet the word is used sometimes in a larger sense, and lawfull way; as Matth. XXV. 27. Luke XIX. 23. And so Esay XXIV. 2. Jer. XV. 10. And to a stranger the Jewes might lend upon usury, Deut. XXIII. 20. even this day] Without delay: as Gen. XVII. 23. hundreth part] Which seemes to be that which they received for use and interest; likely the hundreth part by the moneth of what they lent. require nothing] Here is more then was asked;  or rather nothing more then what thou askest. an oath] See the Observations on Hos. IV. 15. Shook my lap] See such like Rites used Luke IX. 5. Acts XIII. 51. and XVIII. 6. 1 Kings IV. 29, 30. fourty Shekels] Five pounds haply each day, taken and gathered from among them all. daily] Yet Solomons exceeded farre, 1 Kings IV. 22, 23. Ono] A Valley, and a Citie in Benjamin, chap. XI. 35. 1 Chron. VIII. 12. not farre from Jerusalem. the fifth time] Thinking to prevaile by impudent importunity. their King] A charge of high treason. So Ezra. IV. 12, 13. John XIX. 12. Shemajah] His vile hypocrisie, false prophesie, corruption by bri∣bery, so attempting strongly to hinder or destroy Nehemiah, and his godly proceedings. Elul] About our August. in fifty and two dayes] Wondrous speed. See the Annotations. This was in the twentieth or one and twentieth year of Artaxerxes, and first year of Nehemiah's Government. Nobles of Judah] Guilty likely some way in the matter of marry∣ing strange wives, ver. 18. These are the children] See the Observations on Ezra▪ II. 2,—60. And some] These Contributions differ from those Ezra II. 68, 69. And were made at another time, long after the other; namely when Nehemie gathered the Nobles and Rulers together, ver. 5. seventh moneth] Beginning with the Autumnal Equinoctial, and was at first the first moneth, but changed, Exod. XII. 1, 2. The Jews being then in their Cities; gathered themselves to Ierusalem, ver. 5. and chap. VIII. 1, 2.
seventh moneth] See more of this in the Annotations on 1 Kings VIII. 2. and the Observations on Lev. XXIII. ver. 24. This was in the first year of Nehemiah's Government. Also Ieshuah] Here are thirteen in several places, at the same time with Ezra, reading, and expounding the Law to the people, ver. 12. Wept] As weeping at Prayer, Ezra X. 1. So here weeping at Preaching, ver. 11. Second day] Of this seventh moneth. feast] On the fifteenth day, for seven dayes together. Of this Feast, see Levit. XXIII. 34. Deut. XVI. 13. roof of his house That were flat, and most likely leaded. So Deut. XXII. 8. 2 Sam. XI. 2. Ier. XIX. 13. and XXXII. 29. Matth. X. 27. 2 Kings XXIII. 12. Zeph. I. 5. Done so] Making such Booths;  and having an holy Convocation, not only on the first, and last day, as the Law required; but on every of the seven dayes, ver. 18. Eighth day] Which likewise was injoyned by the Law, Levit. XXIII. 36. twenty and fourth day] The second day after the Feast of Taberna∣cles was ended. separated themselves] They had not yet fully performed what they had solemnly covenanted, Ezra X. 3. or soone fell into that sin again, chap. XIII. 23, 24. And were also under the guilt of the breach of that Commandment, Deut. XXIII. 3. Hereupon they make an ample Confession of sinne of their fathers, and their own, in this Chapter; and solemnly renew their Covenant with God for amendment, in the next Chapter. One fourth part] Which is three hours;  viz. those from our nine to twelve, in reading and expounding. another fourth part] From twelve to three; in prayer, confessing, and worshipping: all the time between the morning and evening sa∣crifice spent in those two. Ieshua] Here are eight, in eight several places, preaching to eight several Congregations. bread water] 1 Cor. X. 2, 3, 4. Spiritual blessings also in them. Appointed a Captaine] This explaines that, Num. XIV. 4. Seraiah] Chap. XI. 11. The persons that sealed the Covenant are set down; Priests, twenty two; Levites, seventeen; chief of the peo∣ple, fourty four; did it in the name of all the rest. entred into a curse] As by Covenant, and Seale, and Oath; so by an Execration they bound themselves. See Iudg. XXI. 18. to observe] The matter of the Covenant: set forth afterwards in seven main branches. third part of a Shekel] A new Ordinance for this time, and present necessity.
year by year] As so bound by the Law. Shall be with the Levites] See Num. XVIII. 26, 27, 28, 29. take Tythes] Or rather give Tythes. lots] See the Annotations on Ionah I. 7. This also was in the first year of Nehemiah's Government. to dwell] Chap. VII. 4 the inhabitants few: therefore here is care taken to increase the number: and by lot to take one out of ten; beside Volunteers. Solomons servants] See the Observations on 1 Kings IX. 21. at Ierusalem dwelt] The inhabitants of Ierusalem after the Returne are recroded here;  and 1 Chron. IX. But with much variation. And many more are recorded in that of 1 Chr. IX. as intending there al pro∣miscuously, both such as were chosen by Lot, and also Volunteers. And moreover there is mention made of Ephraimites, Menaschites, Zerachites, and others which are not once named here. And also the accompt was taken likely at another time after the first Record in Ne∣hemie. chap. VII. 5, &c. Ophel] See the Observations on 2 Chron. XXVII. 3. over the businesse] These for the inward businesse of the house of God, to assist it, in executing their function there: as those Levites, ver. 16. had the oversight of the outward businesse of the house of God, 1 Chron. IX. 15, 16. and chap. XXVI. 29. the Kings commandment] As formerly, Ezra VI. 8, 9. and Ezra VII. 2, 24. So here by the Kings grant to Nehemiah. Villages] From the inhabitants of Ierusalem, he proceeds now to the inhabitants of other Cities, Villages, and places: and first in the tribe of Iudah, ver. 25,—30. Then in Benjamin, ver. 31,—36. And of the Levites] Cities, and Suburbs were given to the Levites, in Iudah, and Benjamin, for the necessary use of instructing and teach∣ing the people. Priests] The chief of them, ver. 7. that came up with Zerubbabel, and were in the dayes of Ieshua; in number twenty two. Many of these Priests are not mentioned in that Catalogue, Ezra II. 36,—39. and might well be there left out, without blame. The Levites] The chief of them, in the foresaid time;  in number eight, ver. 8, 9. Ieshua Catalogue or Series of the High Priests from Ieshua or Io∣shua, to the end of the Persian Empire, from Cyrus to Alexander the Great; in six generations, ver. 10, 11. Of these, Eliashib was allied to Tobia; and Ioiada to Sanballet; both alients, and enemies to the Jewes, chap. XIII. 4, 5, 28, 29. And Iaddua the last of them hath his name inserted here by some Prophet, after the dayes of Ezra, and Ne∣hemiah too, specialy if Nehemiah be the man that came up with Zerub∣babel; as hath been said in the Observations upon the beginning of this Book. See them. dayes of Iojakim] The sonne of Ieshua. As formerly in his fathers dayes; so here in his dayes, the Prime Priests that were Heads of fa∣milies,
(those in his fathers time being supposed to be now dead) are set down; in number twenty, from ver. 12. to 21. These relate to those ver. 1,—7. Yet the number of the Courses of the Priests ap∣pointed by David was twenty four, 1 Chron. XXIV. 7, 18. That the number of the Priests were now but few, that place Ezra VIII. 15. doth import. The Levites] The chief Fathers of them;  in the times here men∣tioned. recorded] And so to be found registred by name in the publike re∣cords; so as they need not here to be set down again. also the Priests] They likewise so recorded; and so not needful to be here recited. Darius] Darius Codomannus; the last Persian Emperour, con∣quered by Alexander the Great. in the Book of the Chronicles] 1 Chron. IX. 14, 15, 16. seeme to be related to in these words, for these Levites, in the times of these High Priests. Porters] See 1 Chron. XXVI. and chap. IX. Nehemiah] It seemes hereby that Joshuah the High Priest was dead before Nehemiah came as Governour into Judea; yea or Ezra with his Commission. Dedication of the wall] The former Genealogies and Records of the Priests and Levites seeme to be insisted upon, the rather because they had so prime an hand in the Dedication of the wall. And there∣fore they are here so carefully gathered and brought together, 27, 28, 29. And this seemes to be also in the first year of Nehemiah's Govern∣ment. purified] See the Annotations. I brought up] The maner of the Dedication of the wall was thus; The wall was thick and broad;  that divers went a breast on it. Nehe∣miah appointed two great companies, consisting of Priests, Levites, Princes, and People. They entred upon the wall about the middle of the West wall, near the Dung-gate. And there the two companies parted. And each went as in Procession in this Order; The one com∣pany had Ezra the Priest and Scribe before them. And other Priests after him, founding their Trumpets. After them the Levites, play∣ing on sacred musical instruments; and singers of them, that sang with a loud voice; All sounding forth Gods praise, and their own thank∣fulnesse and joy, ver. 31,—42. After them the Princes and Rulers. After them the People. And last of all, some great Prince, likely next in degree to Nehemiah. And this company thus went on the right hand South-ward by the Fountain Gate; and about the Citie of David, and all along the South-wall, even unto the Water-gate on the East. The other company went in like equipage; and Nehe∣miah himself the last of them. And they made their Procession on the left hand North-wards, from beyond the Tower of the Furnaces, even unto the Broad wall. And all along the North-side, from above
the Gate of Ephraim, and above the Old-gate; and above the Fish-gate, and the Tower of Hananeel, and the Tower of Meah, even un∣to the Sheep-gate, on the East; And they stood still in the Prison-gate. The two companies somewhat beyond this Gate met toge∣ther, that they might in order descend from this East-wall, to go into the House of God. And likely it was from the Water-gate on the East-wall; For the street it opened upon, was one of the eminentest, and of greatest receipt in the Citie, deemed to be that of Millo, which lay between the Temple on Mount Morea, and the Pallace on Mount Zion, by which the King and Courtiers did usualy passe to and fro, Neh. III. 26. and VIII. 3, 16. 2 Chron. XXIX. 3, 4. and XXXII. 6. Ezra] Some other Ezra. Ezra the Scribe] That famous Ezra. Gate] Of the Gates, and Towers in this Procession mentioned, see the Observations on chap. III. 1. great sacrifices] As in like cases of joy and thankfulnesse: So 1 Chr. XXIX. 21. 1 Kings VIII. 62, 63. for the treasures] 1 Chron. IX. 26. And so in Hezekiah's time, 2 Chr. XXXI. 4, 5, 11. See again, Neh. XIII. 12, 13. And the Levites sanctified them unto] The Levites paid to the Priests the tythes of all their tythes, Num. XVIII. 26,—30. On that day] Doubtful it is to what particular time this relates. Yet most likely, to that Interim of time which passed in the absence of Nehemiah, between the end of the first, and beginning of his second Government. written] Deut. XXIII. 3. See the Observations on that text. they met not] As Melchizedek did, Gen. XIV. 17. separated] See that Ezra chap. IX. and X. and Neh. IX. 2. and ch. X. 30. and chap. XIII. 23,—30. So difficult was this point of the Reformation; and so ready they to relapse into this sinne. a great chamber] Pulling down the Partitions, to make two or three into one. I cast forth] And so ver. 9. brought I again. By my command and authority, not in my person. had not been given] This, and other matters imply the Interim of Nehemiah's absence to have been more then a year. Sabbath] See the Annotations on Jer. XVII. 21, 22, 24, 27. dark] The sooner, because of the hills about Jerusalem: and the Sabbath was to be kept from Even to Even. some of my servants] That the Merchants might not thrust in a∣mongst those that came to the Service in the Temple. the Gates] The Gates of the Temple;  by keeping out persons le∣galy unclean from the house and ordinances of God. swear] And so they had sworn before, chap. X. 29, 30. sons of Jojada] His grandchilde, called Menasche, and brother of Jaddua the High Priest, as Josephus writeth, Antiq. lib. 11. c. 7. I chased him from me] This argues this Nehemiah not to be that
man mentioned, Ezra II. 2. that came up with Zerubbabel: and yet to live to a very great age, whether he were the Penman of this Book; or else this clause inserted by some other Prophet. See the Observa∣tions on the beginning of this Book. Remember me] So likewise, ver. 14. and 22. and chap. V. 19. He pleads not here any merit of his own, but all he pleads is for Gods mer∣cie sake; all goodnesse in him still proceeding from Gods meere grace. He doth chear up himself in this, in the sincerity and integri∣ty of his heart, and the effects thereof, as fruits and sound proofs of the truth of Gods graces in him, whereupon he further with comfort expects more meere mercie to come from the Lord.
Esther. THE Book of Esther contains an History of nine years, expressed in the reigne of Ahasuerus; viz. the third of Ahasuerus, chap. I. 3. the seventh, chap. II. 16. and the twelfth, chap. III. 7. In which twelfth year are mentioned the first moneth, chap. III. 7, 12. the third moneth, chap. VIII. ver. 9. and the twelfth moneth, chap. III. 7. 13. and chap. VIII. 12. and chap. IX. 1, 13, 14, 15, 17, 21. And some more years in his reigne afterwards are noted indefi∣nitely, chap. X. In this Book only of all the Scripture, there is no mention made of God, nor his Name once used. The Book of Canticles speaking much of Christ the Bridegroom. Ahasuerus] Heb. Ahasuerosh. It is doubted which of the Persian Monarchs this was. The LXX. still name him in their Translation Ar∣taxerxes. Others take him to be Xerxes. Others fix their several fan∣cies upon sundry others of the Persian Monarchs. But the greatest pro∣bability is for Darius Hystaspis; who first extended the bounds of that Empire so farre and wide, and over so many Provinces; and married Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, called Vasthi, ver. 9, who was the third King of Persia; omitting Darius the Mede, before Cyrus; and the Ma∣gus Smerdis, not worthy the reckoning; and was next before Xerxes, that fourth and rich King, Dan. XI. 2. See the Observations on Esther II. 5. This Ahasuerus in his third year makes that Imperial Feast of one hundred eighty seven dayes; And therein that good Law for drink∣ing, as most take it; And at the end of it, he deposeth Vashti, by the learned thought to be the daughter of Cyrus, chap. 1. In his fourth year Haggai, and Zechariah do prophesie: In his sixth year the Tem∣ple is built: In his seventh year, chap. II. 16, 17. he marries Esther. After promotes Haman; And in his twelfth year hangs him, chap. III. 7. and VII. 10. And about his twenty sixth year he imposeth that tribute, chap. X. as Historians do accompt. Shushan] The chief Citie of the Assyrian Empire was Nineve: of the Babylonian, Babylon: of the Persian, Shushan, and Ecbatana: of the Grecian, divers; as the divisions of it were: of the Romane, Rome. Of Shushan, see more on Neh. I. 1. according to the Law, none did compel] Compel; or restraine ra∣ther.
For so a learned Divine renders the word, and sense of the place; That the drinking was according to the Kings Law, not of the King∣dome, but of all the Officers of his house; or that the Officers should give them royal wine, such as the King himself used, and that in abun∣dance, according to the state of the King when now in this Feast the Kings purpose was to shew the riches of his glorious Kingdome, and the honour of his excellent Majesty; that none therefore of his offi∣cers should restraine, inhibit, or hinder it, but give to every one of the guests freely and bountifully what wine, and as much, and as often as he desired; that as no restraint, so no complaint should be to the con∣trary. a feast] The greatnesse of his Empire was, ver. 1. and is also Ch. VIII. 9. See that, Dan. VI. 1. Here is the greatnesse of his Feast; and chap. II. 18. And great was his riotous luxury in the Purification of the Virgins, chap. II. 12. beds] Beds whereon they feasted;  after the maner of those anci∣ent times. See chap. VII. 8. Beds, i. e. bedsteads of gold and silver. And Amos VI. 4. Beds of Ivory. Those for cost and beauty. That of Ogs, Deut. III. 1. for largenesse. On the seventh day] On the seventh day of that Feast, ver. 5. refused] Shee might have made some fair excuse: and not seeme in this sort to despise her husband, ver. 17. his anger burn] See the Annotations on Dan. III. 19. wise men] Wise men in State affairs, in policie, and experience, in prudence and knowledge; and so of great place and accompt, ver. 14. Such are Kings Counsellors. Such as those, Ezra VII. 14. and 1 Chron. XII. 32. men gathering wisdome by observation of times and seasons, for passages of State, in ages past and present: and so the ablest to give counsel and judgement, the fittest for wise plots and projects. Such were still of great use in all Nations. We finde mention of wise men, chap. VI. 13. Esay XIX. 11, 12. and XXIX. 14. Jer. X. 7. and chap. L. 35. Matth. II. 1. And such a great Polititian, a man expert in State-skill; was Achitophel in his time, 2 Sam. XVI. 23. and Jonathan, 1 Chr. XXVII. 32. and others, ver. 34. Of such we read, Prov. XV. 22. Esay I. 26. and chap. III. 3. Micah IV. 9. according to Law] Thus he keeps close to the Law, and that lau∣dable maner, ver. 13. notwithstanding his burning anger. deed of the Queen] Examples have in them a kinde of ; And magnates, men, or women, are in a sort magnetes, loadstones, by their example to dray on others. among the Lawes] Irrevocable, chap. VIII. 8. Dan. VI. 8, 12, 15. Let there be] To divert his minde from Vasthi; and to prevent dis∣pleasure from him, and her, against those who any wise did counsel and animate him against her, if he should repent, and she be restored to fa∣vour. See Dan. VI. 24. to the house of the women] Ver. 14. Mention is made of a second house; for the Concubines: Hege, or Hegai, ver. 8. the Keeper of the
first: Shaahgaz, the Keeper of the second, ver. 14. purification] ver. 12. Mordecai] This might well be that Mordecai, which came up with Zerubbabel, Ezra II. 2. And evinceth this Ahasuerus to be Darius Hysta∣spides; and not Xerxes, or Artaxerxes; because he and not Kish, was the man that was carried captive with Jechoniah, ver. 6. And so he li∣ved above sixty years in the Captivity; two years under Darius Me∣dus; seven under Cyrus; seven under Cambyses; one under Smerdis; twelve under Darius Hystaspis, when Haman conspired against the Jewes, chap. III. 7. And so he was eighty nine years old at that time; besides the age that he was of, when he was carried away captive; and the time that he lived after that conspiracy. All which may well stand together. But if by Ahasuerus be meant Xerxes, then instead of those eighty nine, we must reckon one hundred thirty five, that is, adding to them twenty four more of Darius Hystaspis, and twelve of Xerxes: which, together with his age before his captivity; and after the said conspiracy, intimated chap. X. would make him out-live the age of men in that age of the world. Hadassah] Not the same with Atossa or Vashti who was the daugh∣ter of Cyrus; though the Greek Historians seeme to take Atos∣sa for Esther: But this Hadassa is Esther: called so, as may seeme from the Myrtle-tree, dedicated by the Paynims to Venus; or from , the Star of Venus. his Uncles daughter] So Mordecai and Esther were cosen-germans, brothers-children. best of the house] Best places and roomes in that house. twelve moneths] Many were purifying together. the turne] Which was in the fourth year since Vasthi was put away; and in the seventh year of the Kings reigne. She was taken into the house a year before. Tebeth] The Jewes after their returne from the Babylonish capti∣vity used the Chaldee and Persian names of moneths. To this Tebeth our December, our tenth moneth, most what answereth; they begin∣ning the year at the vernal equinoctial. Queene] The year after the Temple was finished, Ezra VI. 15. the second time] To what ends then gathered, it is not ex∣pressed. the Agagite] Ver. 10. Likely of the royal stock of Agag: but sure an Amalakite. Of whom see Exod. XVII. 14, 16. Num. XXIV. 7, 20. Deut. XXV. 17, 19. 1 Sam. XV. 2, 3, 8. Ever bitter enemies to the Jewes, ver. 10. See the Annotations on this text. King had so commanded] Commanded more then ordinary bow∣ing and reverence;  for to other no command had been needful: This sure was extraordinary, such or such like as was used to the Kings of Per∣sia themselves, more then was fit for any mortal man to have, a kinde of Divine reverence and worship, which made some Heathen men themselves, as Conon the Athenian, not to yeeld unto it.
bowed not] In that sort. His pious spirit would not stoop to it, could not brook it: And the rather because Haman was of that cursed stock, which God would have rooted out for their bitter emnity against the Jews. Yet Mordecai's humility appears in returning to the Kings gate, his ordinary standing and calling, presently after his so high ad∣vancement in chap. VI. 6,—12. had told them that he was a Jew] This he did to satisfie them, and justifie himself; which shewed the true cause of his refusal; and mo∣ved Haman to such wrath. all the Jewes] Wrath raging, and unmeasurable: the rather out of his inveterate hatred against all Jewes. Nisan] Nisan is the Chaldee name, And Abib the Hebrew name, of the first moneth; whereunto our March doth mostwhat answer. In which moneth the Lots were cast that shewed Adar the twelfth moneth, to be the luckie moneth for executing that bloody Decree. The Commandment for which bloody butchery, was issued forth on the thirteenth day of the foresaid Nisan, chap. III. 12. from moneth to moneth] All this was or might be done in one day. Adar] Whereunto our February mostwhat answereth; as beginning on the eleventh day of our moneth. scattered abroad] Not into Babylon only, but also into Persia, and all the many Provinces of it: And there remained behinde after the Proclamation of Cyrus, and the Returne made with Zerubbabel, Ezra II. Amighty scattering, though this comprehend the ten Tribes also; And a shameful neglect of the Jewes, in not Returning. to suffer them] Lest they infect and infest the Kings good sub∣jects. I will pay] The Jewes paid great tributes to the King. In recom∣pence of that losse, if they were destroyed, Haman would pay this great summe Ten thousand Talents] The ten thousand Talents, at three hun∣dred seventy five pound the Talent, comes to 3750000. See Observa∣tions on Eoxd XXXVIII. 24. to the hands] Of the Kings treasurers. his Ring] See chap. VIII. 2, 8. Gen. XLI. 42. Luke XV. 22. 1 King. XXI. 8. Dan. VI. 17. given unto thee] The grace of Favourites. first moneth] All haste used. Malice expedites mischief. young and old] Monstrous cruelty. twelfth moneth] Delayed so long, because of the lot, ver. 7. else folly in Haman to have made so long a delay. Gods Providence seene in ordering the lot so as there might be so long a time between the de∣cree and the execution, for the using of means to prevent it. for a prey] To encourage the enemies and murderers. Which prey the Jewes, in their case, punctualy abstained from, chap. 8. 11. and ch. IX. 10, 15, 16. sent raiment] That he might be fit to come into the Court, ver. 2. and unto her.
who is not called] This custome and law was partly for state and honour, partly for safety and security. Some had a general calling and licence by their places and offices about the King: but this extended not to the Queen her self. deliverance arise] Mordecai's faith and confidence. but thou] Mordecai's peremptorinesse with Esther in such a case of extremity, ver. 13. And assuring her of certain danger and destru∣ction from God, if she insisted on pretended danger from the King. three dayes, night or day] Of Fasting, see the Annotations on Joel I. 14. This length of time might be endured in that hot Countrey; and in a case of such extremity: yet see chap. V. 1. Haman might well know of the Jewes fasting and mourning in Shushan: But not of this of Esthers and her maids. likewise] But not three whole dayes, chap. V. 1. and if I perish] She might suspect her countenance lesse beautiful upon her Fasting; and remember the Kings rigor against Vasthi: yet this is her pious resolution. See Gen. XLIII. 14. on the third day] Whiles they in Shushan continued the Fast. his royal throne] She takes the time, when most likely she might finde the King, and have accesse. half of the Kingdome] Again, ver. 6. and chap. VII. 2. So Herod, Mark VI. 23. a kinde of Proverbial speech; not literaly to be taken. the King and Haman] Both together, that she might accuse him face to face before the King; and so prevent delayes, or mediations. to morrow] Gods secret and over-ruling hand of Providence herein. nor moved for him] It seemes lesse respect used now then before; else Haman belies him. And hither Mordecai comes, now without sack∣cloth, on the third day of the Feast; upon just causes no doubt. of fifty Cubits high] Monstrous high;  and suddenly erected. on that night] Gods wondrous Providence. See the like 1 Sam. XXIII. 27. 1 Kings XXII. 34. Seene, as in Esthers putting off her Pe∣tition to the next day; so here; in his ordering the Kings waking; and hearing the Chronicles read, That so the advancement of Morde∣cai might intervene. Of Gods Providence, see in the four living Wights, and in the Wheeles, Ezek. I. 5,—25. and X. 12. read] Likely reading to one in bed makes him sleep the sooner. to Mordecai the Jew] So that the King knew Mordecai to be a Jew; and could not forget his Grant to Haman against them; and yet thus honours him. nothing fail] Yet the Crowne is not mentioned, ver. 11. Then took Haman] Without any replies, excuses, or objections made. begun to fall] One Favourite falls at the rising of another. yet talking] High time it was considering the businesse already past on that day. could not countervaile the Kings damage] The Jewes were many
wayes very advantagious to the Persian Monarchs; as the Israelites were to Pharaoh in Egypt. upon the bed] For the banquet, chap. I. 6. will he force] Likely Haman might clasp her feet in his hands, to shew the earnestnesse of his Petition for his life, that he would not let her go without granting him some favour. See 2 Kings IV. 27. Matth. XXVIII. 9. covered Hamans face] See Job IX. 24. 2 Sam. XV. 30. Ezek. XII. 6, 12. as unworthy to see the Kings face, or to be seene himself. hang] The Kings word in those dayes was warrant enough. pacified] He was not sorry for it afterwards. On that day] The very same day wherein the things in the former Chapter were done. the house] And his estate, as escheated to the King. came before the King] As one of those, chap. I. 14. had told] And so the Kings kinsmanby marriage. Esther spake yet again] Esthers zealous care for the safety of Gods people the Jewes still appears, after Hamans hanging, and Mordecai's advancement, in the seconding of her Petition on their behalf, with kneeling, and tears, formerly not mentioned to be used by her to the King. golden Scepter] She ventures again to go in uncalled, for her peo∣ples sake. See chap. IV. 11. and chap. V. 2. write ye] This is another way. For the former Decree could not be reverst, nor this new one being sealed with the Kings Seal. See Ch. I. 19. third moneth] Two moneths, and ten dayes after Hamans Decree; chap. III. 12. The Lots were cast in the first moneth, and twelfth year of Ahasuerus, chap. III. 7. And the Decree issued out the thir∣teenth day of that moneth, ver. 12. And did stretch even to the Jews in Jury, ver. 6, 8, 13. And the execution of it was to be on the thirteenth day of Adar, the twelfth moneth following. But the E∣dict on their behalf issued forth on the twenty third day of the third moneth Sivan, i. e. two moneths and ten dayes, after Hamans bloo∣dy Edict. Sivan] Whereunto our May most answereth. and unto the Jewes] Whom it so much concerned. crown of gold] See chap. VI. 8. became Jewes] Proselytes, turned to their Religion. as sought their hurt] As assaulted them;  so as they were on the de∣fensive part, and stood for their lives, chap. VIII. 11. and chap. IX. 16. smote all their enemies] Wonder that they durst rise against the Jewes, considering the minde and power of the King, and Queen, and Mordecai for them; see ver. 3. in Shushan] These likely of Hamans faction;  eager set to revenge his death and downfal.
to do tomorrow] It may be necessity to preserve the lives of the Jewes in Shushan, against such as might seek an opportunity hereafter, to revenge the blood of Haman, his sonnes, and others that were slaine, might move her to this Petition; so to rid their hands of all their enemies. 75000] It argues a great height of malice against the Jewes, That Hamans ten sonnes, and others in Shushan, even on a second day; and so many in all the Kings Provinces, durst so assault the Jewes, that in their own defence they killed in all seventy five thousand eight hun∣dred, likely most Amalekites; considering the Kings Edict for the Jewes, and the power of the Queene, and Mordecai, with the King, as hath been said: yet the Jewes laid not their hands on the prey and spoile, though granted to them by the King chap. VIII. 11. chap. IX. 10, 15, 16. to shew they did it not for covetousnesse; but to preserve their own lives. Mordecai wrote] Some extend this to the whole Book: but more likely it relates to the point of Deliverance and ordaining the Feasts, ver. XXIII. 29. And herein the power of the Church is seene in Or∣daining set annual Feasts, ver. 27. 29, 31. And so for Fasts, Zech. VII. Purim] i. e. Lots. Of Lots, see the Annotations on Jonah I. 7. the matters of the fastings, and their cry] The occasions that were given of their fastings, and cries, by which they obtained such a bles∣sing. Some take this as a part of the Ordinance and Decree, to fast on the thirteenth day: And alledge for it the practise of the Jewes to this day. in the Book] Some publick record. a tribute] We read of a release, chap. II. 18. whether the Jewes, by Mordecai's means were released of this Tribute, the Scripture expres∣seth not.
Job. THE Book of Job is a true History, accompanied fully with all the circumstances of a true History, from first to last: and attested, Ezek. XIV. 14. and Jam. V. 11. This Book is written, in the judgement of some, in Prose, to chap. III. v. 3. In Verse; thence, to chap. XLII. ver. 6. And then again concludes in Prose, thence to the end. Job lived most likely when the Israelites were in Egypt; His age being one hundred and fourty years after his Affliction was ended: and he having seven sonnes, and three daughters; and being the greatest of all the men of the East, before his Affliction began; Job XLII. 16. and I. ver. 2, 3. Jobs patience is wonderful; and so highly commended by the ho∣ly Ghost, Jam. V. 11. His Impatience too much accused, as by his friends then, so by some others now; not weighing the burden of his Afflictions, outward, and inward; from heaven, earth, and hell; and withal his fair clearing of God, and his justice; and his full acknow∣ledgement of his owne sinfulnesse; though not of that Hypocri∣sie wherewith his friends did falsely charge him, chap. VII. 20, 21. and IX. 2, 3. 14, 15, 20, 21. and XIII. 26. and XIV. 17. and XXVII. 5, 6. and XXXI. 6. 33, 35, 36, 37. and XXIII. 10. and XIII. 15. and IX. 12. Jobs three friends most likely were of the posterity of Abraham, viz. Eliphaz, and Zophar of the posterity of Esau, Gen. XXXVI. 11, 40. Bil∣dad of Abrahams race by Ketura Gen. XXV. 2. 1 Chron. I. 32. And Eli∣hu the fourth, of the race of Nahor, Abrahams brother, Gen. XXII. 21. Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, speak in order, one after another; E∣liphaz and Bildad, thrice; Zophar, twice. To every one of which, Jobs Answers are annexed and interposed. Elihu speaks after they ceased, without any answer made by Job to him. Jehovah speaks last of all; And Orders all. Uz] Uz in Idumea, or Arabia bordering upon it. So called from Uz the sonne of Dishan, of the linage of Seir, Gen. XXXVI. 28. Of this we read, Lam. IV. 21. Jer. XXV. 20. Or in that part of Arabia the Desert, near to Chaldea, where Job had such bad neighbours, the Chal∣deans
on the one side, and the Sabeans on the other, chap. I. 15. 17. We read of Kings of the Land of Uz, Jer. XXV. 20. And of Uz, the grandchilde of Shem, Gen. X. 22, 23. And of Vz, the sonne of Nahor, Abrahams brother, Gen. XXII. 21. three thousand Camels] When God blessed his latter end, he had six thousand Camels, chap. XLII. 12. a wondrous number for one man. They were numerous, and of much use, in the Eastern Coun∣tries. Fifty thousand taken from the Hagarites, 1 Chron. V. 20, 21. The Midianites used very great multitudes of them in warre; and put ornaments, and chains of gold about their necks, Judg. VII. 12. and chap. VIII. 21, 26. Some of them were swift; all, for burden, with bunches on their backs, fit for that purpose; but not fit to go through the eye of a needle. David himself had a special officer, only over his Camels, 1 Chron. XXVII. 30. East] Whither Abraham sent his sonnes, Gen. XXV. 6. and sanctified them] Sent to them, requiring them to fit and pre∣pare themselves, by all means, in an holy maner, to come and joyne with him in offering a sacrifice for them, and their sinnes. See Num. X 1. 18. Exod. XIX. 10. Josh. III. 5. and chap. VII. 13. 2 Chron. XXIX. 5. continualy] On those dayes when their feasting was gone about. the sonnes of God] The good Angels, Job XXXVIII. 7. to present themselves] See 1 Kings XXII. 19. This is spoken after the maner of men, as Rom. III. 5. among them] Not that Satan comes into Heaven. The similitude is taken from earthly Kings. escaped alone] Satan spared him, that by him Job might quickly hear it. winde] a great whirlwinde. young men] And daughters also. Satan by his Commission might have taken away his wife also, as well as his children; But he left her to vex him. shaved his head] Did it himself, or by some other. thither] Into the womb of our common mother the earth;  whereon he fell, ver. 20. sinned not] Contrary to that of Satan. He blesseth, ver. 21. not curseth, as Satan said, ver. 11. earth] He hath no power in Heaven;  no temptation is there. skin for skin] Any skin for his own; though even that of his chil∣dren, chap. I. 19. for his life] To save his life and person free. sore boiles] Satans power, if God give him leave. Curse] Hebr. Blesse. Either it is an ironical scoffe at Jobs piety, and patience: Or the word beareth two contrary significations: as the He∣brew Kadesh, Levit. VI. 29. Deut. XXII. 9. And with the Greeks, ; and the Latines, Sacer, and sundry others do. And so Cursing is here meant; as chap. I. 11. and 1 Kings XXI. 10. Some con∣ceive
that the crime of Blasphemy was so odious and execrable in those dayes, that men could not endure to hear it called by the proper name; but though they had a word to expresse it by, yet they chose ra∣ther to understand it by the contrary. So a Sodomite, and a Whore (our English word may haply be rather Hore, from Hire; as Meretrix, from Merces) have their names in Hebrew from holinesse, being both most unholy, Job XXXVI. 14. Gen. XXXVIII. 21, 22. Deut. XXIII. 18. and knew him not] At first sight. wept] When they came near, and knew him. Seven dayes] The three friends silence for seven dayes and nights is wonderful;  Somewhat like is that, Ezek. III. 15, 16. See Lam. II. 10. and III. 28. After this] Job first breaks off that strange silence;  and his former pious patience; And through infirmity he passionately falls to curse the day and night of his nativity: wisheth he had died as soone as he was born; much magnifying the state of the dead, above his wo∣ful life; whereof he complaines, that it is in being, and is so bitter to him. conceived] i. e. borne or brought forth. The night of conception is unknown, and the man-childe till it be borne. Then Eliphaz] Here begins the first Onset of Jobs three friends. I will summe them up together: Here Eliphaz doth accuse Jobs faint∣nesse under present miseries: glance at his former hypocrisie: maintain in the general, that no good man was ever so punished; shewing the prosperous state of the godly, and the plagues of God upon the wick∣ed: and by relating a fearful Vision, he seeks to humble the excellen∣cies of man, and justifie God in his doings above him, chap. IV. More∣over, he hints, that no Saint is so afflicted as Job; and he sheweth that the prosperity of the foolish sinner is but momentany: adviseth Job to submit his cause to God; who doth wonderful things and unsearch∣able; against the evill, and for the good: and that he despise not the chastening of the Almighty; who then shall and will deliver and defend him, preserve and prosper him and his, chap. V. After Jobs an∣swer to this; Then Bildad doth reprove him for it: doth justifie God in his judgements: and that if Iob will seek to him, and be upright, God, who doth confound the hope of the hypocrite, will prosper him, and fill his lips with rejoycing, chap. VIII. After Iobs answer hereupon; Then Zophar reproves Iob, more then the other did, for his former an∣swer, as justifying himself more then God; shewing that God exacts of him lesse then his iniquity deserved: that God and his wayes are un∣searchable: But if Iob will pray unto him, and put away iniquity; then his future state shall become secure and glorious, chap. XI. who can with-hold?] Hearing such, and so impatient speeches. Is not this] This, as a touch-stone, shewes that formerly they were but counterfeits. Thus Eliphaz unwittingly plaies Satans part, chap. I. 9, 10, 11. and II. 5.
Remember] Give one instance, if thou canst, of any good man pe∣rishing by the hand of God, as thou art like to do. This, and many o∣ther speeches of Jobs friends, we must not take for Scriptural and Ca∣nonical truths; though some of their speeches be cited elsewhere in Scripture. True it is that they said thus, though all be not true that they said; specialy their false charges against Job, and misapplying of things to him, chap. XLII. 7. Lion] Seven names of Lions in Scripture. Whereof see the An∣notations on this text; and Buxtorfs Lexicon. Now a thing] A Vision, or Preparation for the Revelation ensuing. Shall] The voice speaking, or revelation it self. Now Eliphaz might misapply the speech of this Vision; as himself, and his compani∣ons did many other good grounds. Loe] There is no comparison between Angels and God, much lesse between man and God. Saints wilt thou turne?] To finde a parallel for thy self, that any living Saint was ever so afflicted. wrath] Impatience in man;  or wrath in God. To set up] This might serve as an encouragement to Job. yea in seven] From many, yea from all troubles. There are in the words following seven troubles reckoned up. thou shalt know] Now Promises of Blessings do follow;  a comfort∣able state, and numerous posterity, a long life, and happy death. Loe this] Application of all to Job, to make use of it. But Job answered] Here I will summe up together his first An∣swers to each of the three friends;  as I did formerly their several first speeches to him. Here then, He aments the most woful extremity of this misery which God inflicts upon him, so that his Complaints are not causelesse; he wisheth that God would cut him off, and complain∣eth of the unpitifulnesse of his friends towards him, chap. VI. He re∣neweth the mention, and bemoaning of his miseries, as insupportable: he wisheth death: confesseth his sinfulnesse; and craveth pardon, chap. VII. He acknowledgeth man cannot contend with God; and that he will not answer God, or contend to justifie himself, though he were righteous, which he is not; but makes supplication to his Judge. He saith, God destroyes the perfect and the wicked; that his dayes are few; his sorrowes are great; that God will not hold him innocent; that he cannot answer God; yet would willingly speak to him, if his rod, and terrours were taken away from him, chap. IX. He will speak to God and say, wherfore doest thou so contend with me; and search after my sinne? Thou knowest I am not wicked: Thy hands have made me: If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head; I am full of confusion; Thou huntest me as a fierce Lion: Oh that I had not been borne. Cease then, that I may take comfort a little before I die, chap 10. He reproves his friends for their pleadings against him: He knowes what they know, and say, viz. That God doth all things in the governing of the affairs and states of men;
even of the great ones. chap. XII. Again reproves his friends, as be∣fore; and checks them for pleading for God, in a wrong maner: bids them hold their peace; that he may speak: professeth his trust in God; his uprightnesse, void of Hypocrisie; and that he shall be justified: he desires of God to know his iniquity, for which he writeth such bit∣ter things against him, Chap. XIII. He entreateth God for favour by the shortnesse of life, and certainty of death; though life once lost be irrecoverable; yet he waighteth for his change: he complains that God watcheth over his sinne; and concludes that God prevail∣eth over man, chap. XIV. Doth the wilde Asse] So neither do I complaine, if I had not so great a cause as ver. 3, 4. Can that] Can it with any pleasure? much lesse if it be bitter, as mine afflictions are; and your unsavoury words. So the application seemes to be made in the next verse. Cut me off] His wealth and health were taken away before;  now he desires that his life may be so. not concealed] But professed before others, his word and worship. Is not] Any help in me, and defence for me, against these evills, and your words? Pitie should] Here he strikes at Eliphaz; and continues on so to do to the end of this Chapter. Tema] That part of Arabia where the posterity of Tema, one of Ishmaels race, Gen. XXV. 15. did inhabit See Jer. XXV. 23. Sheba] In Arabia Foelix, South from Iudea; whose Queen came to Solomon. And whereof we read Psal. LXXII. 10. Esay XLIII. 3. and LX. 6. Ier. VI. 20. Ezek. VII. 22, 23. and XXXVIII. 13. These seeme to be the posterity of Cush, by his fourth sonne Raamah, Gen. X. 7. The Ethiopians were no remote neighbours from them. ye are nothing] Hebr. not, or, as the Masorets in the margin, to it; i. e. ye are like to that brook, ver. 15. See the like various reading, Ch. XIII. 15. Psal. C. 3. Esay LXIII. 9. Exod. XXI. 8. to reprove words] As if my speeches were words without matter, words of a desperate brainlesse man? my righteousnesse is in it] Ye shall finde me no hypocrite, if ye consi∣der better. shall come up no more] Into this world: till the Resurrection, chap. XIV. 12. and chap. XIX. 26, 27. I will complaine] Men in anguish think it some ease to complaine. Grief kept in, like fire, burns the more. Am I a Sea] Too bold a speech from a creature to God, in this, and that which follows. not depart from me] To give me the least intermission of pain. I have sinned] Though not by hypocrisie;  nor more then all o∣thers. Here he confesseth sinne: And petitions for pardon, ver. 21. How long] He seemes to cut off Iob in his speaking; as not able to endure him longer to speak so much against God; so to charge him, and complaine of him.
If thy children] Sonnes;  and daughters, chap. I. 18, 19. If thou wert Wouldest be, as ver. 5, 7. Though thy beginning was small] After thy repentance. As indeed it was, chap. XLII. 11. yesterday] See the Observations on Deut. XV. 17. Can the rush] No more could Iobs and his childrens prosperity continue, because of their hypocrisie, without sound piety, which is the true nourisher of Gods blessings. To which purpose he useth also the Similitude of a Spider, and of a tree, to set out the fleeting prospe∣rity of ungodly men, such as he intimates Iob and his children to be. Arcturus] Iobs skill in Astronomy. And again, chap. XXVI. 7. 13. and in XXVII. 18. in some Translations. See the Annotations on Esay XIII. 10. And we see Astronomy in Gods speech to Iob, chap. XXXVIII. 31, 32, 33. without cause] High speeches against God, and impatient passages. As likewise, ver. 22. should not] An angry beginning likewise, savouring of indigna∣tion. I am clean in thine eyes] Indeed no hypocrite, otherwise this is a false charge. secrets of wisdome] The hidden wayes of his providence, wherein he walks in his dealings with mortal men. wilde Asses colt] So foolish, so unable to comprehend the wayes of God in his workings towards the sons of men. the wicked] Concludes with the misery of the wicked;  surmising, or implying Iob to be such an one. ye are the people] Ye all three. This is an ironical scoffe, with indig∣nation. See the Observations on Iosh. XI. 4. and on Amos IV. 4, 5. who calleth upon God] Either the mocked or mocker, calleth upon God. answereth him] The mocker; whereas Iob himself, the mocked, is not answered. of robbers prosper] This Iob proves at large. earth] This English word may seeme to come from the Hebrew word . Doth not the eare] So easie is this point of trial. with the ancient] This may relate to that, chap. VIII. 8, 9, 10. And indeed it should be so, chap. XXXII. 7. but is not alwayes so, ver. 20. and XXXII. 9. are his] And subject to his authority and power. girdle] Bringeth them to a lower condition. what ye know] This relateth to chap. XII. 3. to reason with God] Rather then with his friends;  he is weary of that. And he joynes herein with Zophar in his wish, chap. XI. 5. be∣cause he could clear his own innocencie, before him, who sees his heart; and that he is no hypocrite, ver. 16. as his friends take him to be, by Gods harsh dealing with him.
of lies] Against God, and me. Hear now] Bids them save their labour in speaking, unlesse it were to better purpose, ver. 5. And now hearken to him, and his reason∣ings, for God, against them, and in defence of himself. mock him?] Or seek to delude and beguile him;  pleading his cause by bad arguments? accept persons Though it be Gods own person. what will] What ever become of me. Like that 2 Sam. XVIII. 23. my flesh in my teeth?] Grief and plagues enough to make me teare my flesh. put my life] Every moment be in danger to die. yet will I trust] Here the Cetib, or written in the text, is  not: And so the Reading and rendering may rather be this, should I not trust in him? And thus the denying Interrogative is equivalent to an af∣firming Enunciative. The like may well be admitted, Esay XLIX. 5, 6. And there are sundry Interrogatives found in Scripture where the Negative is suppressed; as Job XX. 4. Gen. XXVII. 36. 1 Sam. II. 27, 28. 2 Sam. XXIII. 19. Jer. III. 6. and XXXI. 20. Ezek. XX. 30. Amos VI. 2. And the Masorets in like cases to this in Job, do usu∣aly adscribe , to him; as their Keri in the margin. And they use this liberty more in this one word, then in any other in the Old Testament. before him] To plead his cause with confidence, as I am ready to do. I have ordered my Cause] He prepares for his trial before God. I am ready to plead. justified] For the various significations of this word, see the Anno∣tations here. Only] That he may have a fair trial. then] I will go on in my plea. Then call thou] He offers the choise to God, whether he will be Plaintif, or Defendant: such is his confidence. and answer thou me.] This is too much for any man, or creature, to say to God. Yet the extremity of his case brings him to this extre∣mity. How many] Here begins his Plea;  and continues to the end of the next Chapter. Let me know my charge; and condemn me not before I be heard. wherefore] If no heinous cause be alledged. break a leaf] No honour to a Gyant to break and bruise an infant. a print upon] Followest me step by step;  not one step behinde me; to mark my sinnes, to plague me, and prevent my escape. woman] In the Hebrew, hath her name from a man; as the first woman had her nature also. And doest thou] Chap. VII. 17, 18. me into judgement with thee?] So great a God, to deale summo ju∣re, most rigorously, with such a worme and wretch, and not to pity him; as if this were a maine thing that God looked at in his providence.
who can] Why then am I thus singled out? Turne from him] From plaguing him so sorely for sinne, as now thou doest me. hope of a tree] But an impossibility after mans death, to returne hi∣ther again, to enjoy any comfort here. and where is he?] No where among the living. As the waters] As the flood fed by those waters then decayeth; So, &c. till the heavens be no more] As now they are;  but changed, at the Resurrection. shall he live again] As chap. XV. 11. and IV. 2. Gen. XVII. 17. a wonder it is; yet true. Thou wilt have a desire] Thus at that time it will appear;  to Jobs comfort. For now] Job concludes in a passionate fit, That yet now God deals strictly and harshly with him, and his sins. the mountain] The strongest creatures yeeld to thy power. Thou prevailest] Applies it to man, and Gods prevailing power o∣ver him, and his hopes. his soul] For the various acceptations of this word, See the Annota∣tions here. Then] Here begins the second onset of Jobs three friends. Where∣in being angred likely by some harsh words of Job, reflecting on them, they do only lay load upun him, as upon a wicked man; drawing ill Conclusions from his Passionate Speeches; and insisting upon it still, That so many, and great calamities, as fell upon him, befell to none but to ungodly men: But they afford him not one Exhortation to Repent∣ance, or one comfortable promise, as formerly they had done, chap. V. 8, 17. and chap. VIII. 5, 20, 21. and chap. XI. 13,—19. And Job, in his Replies, the more sharply reproves them for their inhumanity, and uncomfortablenesse towards him, in his distressed condition; which sad estate he still sets out copiously; and that it ought to move them the more to pitie and commiseration. He refels their false position, whereupon they stood so much, viz. the Prospe∣rity of the Godly, and the Punishment of the Wicked only; and shewes, That many times the wicked greatly flourish, and the godly extremely suffer. And he refutes the slanderous imputations fastened upon him by reason of the strange grievousnesse of his afflictions; He asserts and defends his own innocencie, and contends more eagerly for his integrity, against hypocrisie, then he did before: He comforts him∣self in the certain hope of a glorious Resurrection hereafter: and moves them to Repent of their ill and hard dealings against him. and restrainest Prayer before God] By thy ungodly speeches doest discourage men from Praying to God. that we know not?] See chap. XIII. 2. what is man] Eliphaz doth but repeat the same argument which he used before, chap. IV. 17, 18, 19. And makes litle against Job; who
confesseth as much. And yet Bildad useth it again, chap. XXV. 4, 5. unto whom] Unto which wise worthy men God gave a continu∣ance of undisturbed prosperity. And therefore their sayings not to be sleighted. The wicked] Here follow those wise sentences, to the end of the Chapter. The same in substance he had said before, chapter IV. and V. But here are they more lively set forth. and the number] How long the Oppressor shall live. He runneth upon him] God sets fiercely on him, and his strongest armour. dwelleth in desolate] His luxury fore-runs his poverty. He shall not be rich, nor prosper; God will blast his endeavours: for all his vaine confidence; as he sheweth to the end of the chapter. Though I speak] Job acknowledgeth that all those things had, and do befall him, which Eliphaz had said do befall wicked men: and he instanceth in divers particular afflictions, wherein, and whereby he complaineth of his misery, and the harsh and fierce dealings of God, and his friends, against him, to verse 17. Yet denies himself to be an ungodly man; and by arguments makes it good, from verse 17. to the end of the chapter. a surety] Job would be glad of a Surety to be put in;  to have some other, and not his friends, to hear him plead and maintain his cause. astonied] At this dealing of God with Job. stir up himself] For me, against the hypocrite; to clear me, and them∣selves, from such men: and make better use of mine afflictions; as in the verse following. my hope] He was sailed past the Cape of good hope, for any world∣ly prosperity: It shall lie down with him in the dust. for thee] Bildad bitterly reproves Job, for contemning them, and misbehaving himself. the light of the wicked] In a sharp and angry speech he laies out to the life the miseries of wicked men, in life, in death, and after death, to the end of this chapter. And so he doth but enlarge what he had said, chap. VIII. And seemes to imply thereby that they had not charged Job unjustly, seeing him lie under such judgements, as God did not inflict but upon ungodly men. And here he deals not with him by ex∣hortation, and promises; as there he did; but seemes also to imply and threaten these judgements to Job, as unavoidable by him. the first-borne of death] The most terrible kinde of death, that car∣rieth the principality above all other kinds of death; as the first-borne doth above all the brethren. And yet death it self, in what kinde so∣ever, is called in the next verse the King of terrors. How long] Here Job again blames his friends, ver. 2, 3. And be it] By a fresh commemoration of his miseries, wherein he chargeth God still too heavily, he moves them rather to a Compassi∣on and Commiseration of him, to verse 23. skin of my teeth] Of my lips, or gums rather.
Oh that my words] Fearing to finde little comfort in his friends, he betakes himself to God, and comforts himself in an assured expecta∣tion of a joyful Resurrection. But ye] Job admonisheth his friends to be well advised of their ill dealing with him;  and to fear Gods wrath; seeing the root of right and Religion is in Job, and will be found so in the end. that the triumphing of the wicked is but short] Being driven from that part of their argument, That God did not use to give prosperity to wicked men; Zophar now insisteth upon this; That though it be so, Yet their Prosperity is but for a moment, or short; and ruine and destruction shall befall them. And this he pursues to the end of the chapter. sweet in his mouth] Zophar seemes to insist upon this similitude, to verse 23. bow of steele] Of the Bow, see the Annotations on Zech. IX. 13. and chap. X. 4. Here is mentioned a Bow of steele. And so Psal. XVIII. 34. such, it seemes, were in use. Wherefore do the wicked live] Job overthrowes Zophars assertion of the short prosperity of wicked men in this world, and their sudden downfal;  and shewes their flourishing estate in themselves, ver. 7. in their children, ver. 8. in their families, ver. 9. in their wealth, ver. 10. in their pleasures, ver. 11, 12. in their life and death, ver. 13. yea though they were notoriously wicked men, ver. 14, 15. yet their coun∣sell, and course is farre from Job, ver. 16. And he shewes that God doth oftentimes break off their prosperity; and plagueth them verse 17,—21. And that God deals both wayes thus diversly with them, out of his unsearchable wisdome, whereunto we cannot reach, verse 22,—26. He concludes with an application of the premises to his own case; relating their false doome of him, and his, upon their false grounds, ver. 27, 28. And refelling the same, by the testimony of pas∣sengers themselves, and their better judgement, that many wicked men live and die prosperously, and peaceably, 29—33. Then Eliphaz] Here begins the third Onset, by Eliphaz, and Bil∣dad, only. Wherein being convinced by Job of the falshood of their grand plea and position; Eliphaz now doth charge him home with particular sinnes; tells him the justification of himself, and his righte∣ousnesse, cannot be profitable to God; and Exhorts him to Repent∣ance, with Promises of Mercie, chap. 22. And Bildad having little more to say, Concludes with this, That neither Job, nor any man can be justified with God; And therefore Job should not contend with God, as if he had done him some wrong in afflicting him more then was fitting, chap. 25. And Job in his Replies, longeth yet to appear and plead before God, in confidence of his mercie. He asserts his innocency against Eliphaz; and promiseth to himself an happy issue, though for the pre∣sent God do seeme to him inexorable. He shewes that God often winketh at many grosse wickednesses committed by ungodly men,
which God punisheth not in this world, but suffers them still to prosper and flourish, chap. XXIII. and XXIV. And checking Bildads imperti∣nencies, He speaks more magnificently of God Power, and Wisdom, then Bildad had done, chap. XXVI. And seeing his three friends at a Non-Plus, He goes on the more confidently to maintaine his Cause, and clear his own innocencie, against hypocrisie. He acknowledgeth that Gods judgements light on ungodly men in this world, and that their Blessings are turned into Curses; though not alwayes, chap. XXVII. And this by Gods wonderful wisdome, which passeth mans deepest wisdome, and is unsearchable, and carrieth things farre above the reach of the wisest men; whose highest wisdome is to Fear the Lord, chap. XXVIII. And Job, it seemes after some intermission of speech, finding his friends still silent, goes on, And in his last speech, bemoanes himself and excuseth his impatience, by his great fall from so great prosperity, chap. XXIX. to so great misery, chap. XXX. And for conclusion, He stands upon the clearing of his own integrity, much more then before. And that by a solemne Protestation of his up∣rightnesse, and piety in sundry several duties, without any grosse wic∣kednesse committed by him, chap. XXXI. for fear of thee? Lest thy wickednesse should hurt him? or, thy fear of him and pietie could help him? Is not] He chargeth Job home, and in particulars: But falsely. old way] Haply relating to the time of the Flood. By the purenesse of thine hands.] God will not only do good to thee, but to others also for thy sake. but he is not there] I cannot so see and finde him, that I might rea∣son with him. in one minde] To lay load on me. that is appointed for me] In his infinite wisdom, and irresistible will: he will not cease afflicting me till all be done. cut off] By death;  Gods Executioner. Why] Why may not God hide his times of punishing the wicked, even from the knowledge of the godly themselves; that they could ne∣ver observe that he punisheth many ungodly men, according to their deeds, in this world? The wicked make ill use of this; as thinking, God sees not, or cares not. yet God] Calls them not to account for their foolish sinful acti∣ons. the way of the Vineyards] He walketh not in those wayes where men use to travel to their work, lest he should be seene and taken. He evil intreateth] The oppressor doth so in this, and in what fol∣loweth. Yet some understand it of God and his judgements upon the wicked; in this verse, and in those also that follow. eares of corne.] The not pronouncing this word rightly did cost so many Ephramites their lives, Judg. XII. 6. peace in his high places.] In and above the heavens. No Angel doth or dare question or complain of his proceedings, much lesse should Job.
How] Job ironicaly taunts Bildad. Dead things] Job now makes a more majestical discourse of Gods infinite power, and knowledge, seene in the works of creation, and ad∣ministration, then Bildad had done; so that his speech was impertinent and needlesse. crooked Serpent] Some understand this of the Orbs;  or of a fiery Meteor, called the flying Dragon; or of the Whale. God liveth] He further asserts and clears his own innocencie against hypocrisie, to ver. 11. These words are in the forme of an oath. will he delight himself] Even in times of adversity? The hypocrite cannot. But Job doth so. I will teach you] Even that which you so much insist upon;  and I confesse; that is, Gods judgements upon the wicked, and his turning their blessings into curses, many times, to the end of this Chapter. Surely] Job shewes how far mans wisdome goes, in natural things. He instanceth in his digging in mines, searching minerals, and finding out gold and precious things, to ver. 12. But where shall Wisdome] He puts a period to humane wisdome; implying that it is not able to finde out a reason of Gods proceedings in his various dispensations, prospering some good and bad, and cros∣sing others of both sorts: And he shewes, that this wisdome cannot be found any where, ver. 13, 14. nor gotten by any price, ver. 15—19. by any living man, ver. 20, 21. But is proper to God, who alone hath it: and teacheth man a more humble wisdome, the best for him, ver. 23—28. Mereover] In this Chapter Job wisheth for his former prosperity, which he sets forth at large; and his own upright, and pious behavi∣our in it. But now] Job bemoaneth his present misery;  which is so much the greater, by considering such a Fall, from such an height of pros∣perity, to such a depth of misery. This misery he sets forth by injuries received from others, even most base people, in words, to ver. 10. in deeds, to ver. 16. by describing his own grief and paine by reason of his soares, to ver. 19. by Gods rough handling of him; to ver. 25. by lamenting his woful estate, and the sad effects of it, though not so deserved, as he conceives; to the end of the chapter. I made] In this Chapter Job most of all doth clear his innocencie, and the uprightnesse of his former life: Implying thereby, that these extraordinary plagues and punishments came not upon him for his ex∣traordinary sins, or hypocrisie, as his three friends would needs have it. He clears himself in many main particulars, That he was clear from fornication; and Adultery; ver. 1,—12. from ill dealing with his servants, ver. 13, 14, 15. from unmercifulnesse to the poore; or wronging the widow, 16,—23. from trusting in riches, ver. 24, 25. from Idolatry, ver. 26, 27, 28. from desire of Revenge, ver. 29, 30. or unkindnesse to strangers; or hiding his own sins ver. 32, 33. or provoking and wronging others, ver. 34—37. or detaining other mens
lands; or the hirelings wages, ver, 38, 39, 40. And he annexeth se∣veral solemne imprecations against himself, if all the premises were not so in truth. or my mouth hath kissed my hand] Kissing the Idols was Idolatry, 1 King. XIX. 18. Hos. XIII. 2. The Sunne and Moone being at such a distance, could not be kissed; therefore Idolaters used to put their hand to their mouth, in a way and signe of their idolatrous Kissing and worshipping of them. Oh that we had of his flesh] The flesh of him that hated Job. Jobs domesticks provoked him to take revenge on his hating enemies; pro∣fessing, themselves could not be satisfied, no not though they had eat∣en them up quick. Yet Job free from any revenge. of Job are ended] Which he had with his three friends. of Elihu] Elihu, the Buzite, descended of Buz, the sonne of Na∣chor, Abrahams brother, Gen. XXII. 20, 21. who had been present all the while, taking occasion of the silence now on all hands used; and being partly offended at some things passed, on either side; He be∣gins his speech; yet modestly excusing the necessity of it; And he continues it in six Chapters. He speaks to Jobs friends, by way of Preface, most for Attention chap. XXXII. To Job him∣self, after a like Preface, in four several Orations: wherein he repeats divers of Jobs sayings; yet with some strainings of some of them; and gathering Collections out of them; and so thereupon, blaming him; and answering them, ch. XXXIII. XXXIV. and XXXV. And in the XXXVI. and XXXVII. chapters, He seeks to allay Iobs Complaints of God, with a magnificent setting out of Gods justice, mercy, power, glory, and wisdome, which Iob seemed to obscure by his bitter complaining of Gods harsh proceeding with him. Elihu speaks more uprightly and wisely in this cause, then Iobs three friends had done; As appears, in that he stopt Iobs mouth, that he answers nothing, though he gave him liberty three or four times to speak; And God himself blames not him at all, as he doth the other three friends. God thrusteth him down] God by his judgements on him, gives sentence on our side, that Iob is an hypocrite and wicked man: though none but God can thrust him down from his own immovable confi∣dence; which God may haply do by the efficacie of his words in the mouth of Elihu; As in a like sense Ioseph speaks, Gen. XLI. 16. And Daniel, chap. II. 28. They were amazed] Thus Elihu speaks of Iobs friends;  turning his speech to some other persons. wherefore Iob] Now Elihu speaks to Iob. And after a Preface first used, ver. 1,—7. He falls close to his work, in that which follow∣eth. surely thou] Here Elihu begins to charge Iob with undiscreet speech∣es, touching himself, and touching God, ver. 9, 10, 11. I am clean] This chardge seems gathered out of chap. X. 7. and chap.
XVI. 17. and XXIII. 10, 11. and XXVII. 5. And yet elsewhere Iob ac∣knowledged his sinfulnesse. Behold, he findes] This seemes gathered out of chap. IX. 17. and XIII. 24, 27. and XIV. 16, 17. and XVI. 9. and XIX. 11. Behold, in this] Elihu's Confutation; from Gods greatnesse, gi∣ving not account of any of his actions, ver. 12, 13. And therefore Iobs expressions against God were too unsavoury and irreverent: And from mans weaknesse, not apprehending Gods wayes of revealing his minde and will; nor Gods aime and end in his proceedings with man; the issue, effects, and fruits of his chastisements; which he sets down in particulars, ver. 14,—28. And summes up all together, ver. 29, 30. And makes a Conclusion and application of this his first speech to Iob, ver. 31, 32, 33. Furthermore] Elihu's second speech to Iob, in this Chapter, wherein the Preface is, ver. 1,—4. Iob hath said] His charge against Iob, and the haynousnesse of it; ver. 5,—10. This seemes gathered out of chap. XIII. 18. and XXIII. 10. and XXVII. 2, 6. and XXXI. 1, &c. And again out of chap. IX. 22. and XXI. 7, 8. and XXX. 26. where he complaineth, that God had handled him like an ungodly man; and would not let him clear himself: And that God destroyed good men, as well as bad; and prospered evill men, and afflicted him so fearfully. Therefore hearken] His Confutation of Iob, wherein he speaks to Iobs friends, ver. 10,—15. to Job himself, ver. 16,—33. and to his friends again, ver. 34,—37. To Jobs friends, he argues against Iob, from Gods justice, ver. 10, 11, 12. And from Gods absolute Autho∣rity and Power, ver. 13, 14, 15. If now thou] To Job himself;  Coming closer to him; He pro∣ceeds here to new arguments, and seeks to convince Iob of injurie done to God, ver. 17,—31. That he injuries God, he argues from Gods just government, ver. 17, 18. from the effects of it, upon Princes, ver. 19. upon whole Nations, ver. 20,—23. upon strong and stout men; With Gods end in such proceedings, ver. 24,—30. Then he teacheth Job how to carry himself better, ver. 31, 32, 33. And lastly he turn∣eth his speech to Jobs friends again; being confident of their consent with him, That Job hath spoken foolishly. Elihu spake] Elihu's third speech;  and the shortest; in this Chapter. Thinkest thou] His charge against Job, ver. 2, 3. That in effect Iob said, That the righteousnesse of his cause, [not person] was more then that of Gods: which he would gather by consequence out of Iobs words, ver. 3. and chap. IX. 22. and X. 15. See chap. XXXIV. 9. I will answer] Elihu's Answer, and confutation of Iob. He shewes that Iobs sinne, or righteousnesse cannot either hurt, or help God, ver. 4,—8. that the Oppressed and afflicted cry; but not to God; and there∣fore he doth not deliver them, ver. 9,—13. And he applies this case to Iob, ver. 14, 15, 16. Therein withall seeming to refute a saying of Iob,
ver. 14. taken out of chap. XXIII. 9. by averring; that God will judge; that Job should trust in him; that because he doth not so, God doth visit him in anger, though in the extremity of his affliction Job so well heeds it not; And so, vainly multiplies words, without know∣ledge. Elihu] This is Elihu's last speech, and largest;  contained in this, and the next Chapter. And herein, after his Preface, ver. 2, 3, 4. He propounds to Job, and dilates upon Gods Wisdome, Power, Justice, Mercie; the good he aimes at in sending afflictions, ver. 5,—15. He ap∣plieth this last point to Job. telling him what might have been, if he had carried himself well in this affliction, ver 16. What is on him, be∣cause he did not, ver. 17. What will be, if he repent not, ver. 18,—21. He adviseth him to remember himself, what God is, in himself, and in his wayes, ver. 22, 23. And in his works; in the Meteors of the aire, the raine, the clouds, the lightnings, whereby he can work good to his, and hurt to his enemies; And whereby Job should be moved to mag∣nifie him, and his infinite wisdome, rather then to stand on his own in∣nocencie, and quarrel so much at his rigorous dealing with him, ver. 22,—33. At this also] Elihu proceeds on to speak of Gods works of Light∣ning and Thunder;  haply the cracks of it then sounding, ver. 1—5. Of the Snow; stormes; Whirle-winde; Frost; Clouds; And this either for correction, or for mercie. And that Job should weigh, and wonder at all this, ver. 1,—14. These natural things farre surpasse the knowledge of man: and much more Gods strange and various pro∣ceedings with the sonnes of men: And therefore Iob must not so cen∣sure God, though he be in such misery. And Elihu further pursueth this same point; with the use, and application of it, to the end of his speech, ver. 15,—24. Then the Lord] Here Jehovah himself, out of a Whirle-winde be∣gins to answer Iob. And this continues in two majestical speeches; far beyond those of Elihu for matter, and maner. And herein by his ma∣nifold, and marvelous works chap. XXXVIII. and XXXIX. And par∣ticularly by his creatures, Behemoth, chap. XL. and Leviathan, chap. XLI. he convinceth Iob of ignorance, and of impotencie; and there∣fore that he should not take upon him to contend with God; to con∣demne God, that himself might be righteous. To each of which speeches there is adjoyned Iobs humble and penitent submission. And lastly the Lord prefers Iob, and his Cause, before his three friends; Or∣ders their Submission, and Sacrifice, and Iobs Prayer for them; Accepts Iob, and blesseth him, giving him as many sonnes and daughters, and twice as much in all particulars of his substance and wealth, as he had before, chap. XLII. answer thou me.] Iob had desired this more then once: And Zophar too, chap. XI. 5. Iob had been right in the maine; yet some rash, if not raging speeches, had escaped from him; complaining of God, and his justice, if not injustice, in his dealing with him. For which, as E∣lihu
before, so Jehovah here more calls him to answer. where wast thou] Thou that takest upon thee to censure me, and my actions, in governing the world; the various dispensations and admi∣nistrations of my Providence towards the sonnes of men, Tell me, Where wast thou when I made the world; the Earth, ver. 4,—7 the Sea, ver. 8,—11. And need I thy counsel now in governing all? Hast thou caused and commanded the morning, and day-spring to know his place? ver. 12,—15. Knowest thou the springs, and depth of the Sea? the gates of death? the breadth of the earth? where light and darknesse dwelleth? the treasures of the Snow, and Haile, ver. 16,—23? Knowest thou who causeth and ordereth the lightning and thunder; the Waters, and water-courses, the Raine; Yce; Profit? ver. 24,—30. And yet takest thou upon thee to know and censure the depth of my wayes, and wisdome? Canst thou order the Influences, and Ordinan∣ces of heaven? Or call for and command clouds, and lightnings, and raine? or give wisdome to man? ver. 31,—38. Wilt thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or provide the Raven his food? If not these things; then much lesse order me, and my wayes, and wisdome. Knowest thou] Having spoken of the Lion, and of the Raven; Je∣hovah addes more in this Chapter of the wilde Goat; of the Hinde, ver. 1,—4. Of the wilde Asse, ver. 5,—8. Of the Unicorne, ver. 9,—12. Of the Peacock, and Ostrich, ver. 13,—18. Of the Horse, ver. 19,—25. Of the Hawk, ver. 26. Of the Eagle, ver. 27,—30. God shewes his power in these; in making and ordering them; in his Provision for them, which men take no care for, nor cannot effect; in the extraordi∣nary strength, and other qualities, which he hath bestowed upon them, in some whereof they farre excel men. In all which particulars Iobs weaknesse, and insufficiency doth more then sufficiently appear▪ And will Iob then contend and debate his quarrel with God? this God? re∣prove him? or think to apprehend, or comprehend the invisible rea∣sons of his proceedings? Moreover] Here the Lord calls upon Iob to answer;  turnes him over to his own desire. chap. 13. 22. Then Iob] Jobs Submission. Once] His sinne is already too great, in speaking presumptuously a∣gainst Gods proceedings. He will do so no more. Then] Here the Lord proceeds yet further to presse Job, and con∣vince him, and humble him. Where, after his Preface, in this verse; and challenge in the next; He reproves him thus; Wilt thou disanul my judgement? wilt thou condemne me, that thou mayest be righteous? ver. 8. Wilt thou be like God? ver. 9. Then do as he doth, ver. 9—13. And so God will confesse it, ver. 14. Behold now Behemeth] The Lord bids Job consider of the Elephant; and of Gods power in making such a creature, which he describes and sets forth, ver: 15,—24. Canst thou] The Lord doth further argue by an instance in Le∣viathan, the Whale;  in this whole Chapter. And shewes Jobs weak∣nesse
to encounter and grapple with him by strength, ver. 1,—10. And applies it thus, Who then is able to stand before me? ver. 10, 11. I will not] Here followes a magnifical description of the Whale;  of the particular parts and members of his body; and of his qualificati∣ons, and actions. All to the end aforesaid, ver. 10, 11. Yet Whales seeme now-a-dayes to be by Art more easily caught and conquered, then they were in Jobs dayes. Then Job] Here Job makes a more full profession of his Repent∣ance, ver. 1,—6. have I uttered] More then was fitting, in things so farre above my capacity. And it was so] Gods sentence upon Jobs three friends, ver. 7, 8, 9. seven bullocks] A great sacrifice for sinne. a burnt offering] There is in Leviticus a difference between Burnt-Offerings, and Sinne, and Trespasse-Offerings; yet likely not known in Jobs time. the Lord turned] The restitution and restauration of Job, after all his misery, ver. 10,—17. After this lived] His age shewes probably that he lived about that time of the Israelites being in Egypt.
Psalmes. PSALMES, Luke XXIV. 44. Or Book of Psalmes, Luke XX. 42. Acts I. 20. is divided by the Hebrewes into these five Parts: The first part ending with Psal. XLI. The second part, with Psal. LXXII. The third, with Psalme LXXXIX. The fourth, with Psalm CVI. The fifth, with Psalme CL. The Division of them, from the Subject-matters of them, is very various. There are Psalmes Laudatorie, of Praises; Gratulatorie, of Thanksgiving: Psalmes of Supplications; of Deprecations; of Con∣solations; of Comminations; of Imprecations: There are Peneten∣tial Psalmes; Psalmes to teach; to give instruction; Psalmes to bring to Remembrance, things past; Psalmes Prophetical, of things to come: And many Psalmes are mixt of many, or most of these matters. So as out of them, as out of a store-house, every man may richly fit and fur∣nish himself for all and every particular occasion, either publike, or else private, according to his several conditions, in prosperity, or ad∣versity, in all his devotions, and addresses to God; still finding his own estate in some one Psalme or other; These Psalmes containing the ve∣ry Anatomy of the soul, the characters and representations of the thoughts, meditations, affections, and workings of it, towards God, towards man, towards herself, throughout all the changes of her pil∣grimage in this world. The number of them is one hundred and fifty. The LXX. and vulgar Latin, do divide the ninth Psalme into two. And so their rec∣koning of the number doth constantly go on to exceed ours by one, un∣to the CXLVII. Psalm: which Psalm doth contain their CXLVI. and CXLVII. And so in the conclusion all agree in the same number of CL. Of these, eighty two bear Davids title. Whereof these are upon several special occasions, as appears in their Inscriptions▪ viz. the III. VII. XXX. LI. LII. LIV. LIX. LX. LXIII. And at Gath, before Achish or Abimelech, XXXIV. LVI. And when he was in the Cave, Psalm LVII. and CXLII. His Psalms of Prayer are Psalm 17. and 86. Some are his Psalmes, and yet without his name in the Title as Psal. II. Acts IV. 25. And Psal. XCV. Hebr. IV. 7. See also Psal. XCVI.
and CV. and CVI. See 1 Chron. XVI. 7. and LXXII. 20. Other Psalmes, without Davids name, which have special Titles, are Psalmes XLV. LXXII. And, of or for Asaph, Psalmes, L. LXXIII. to LXXXIII. See 2 Chron. XXIX. 30. Of, or for the sonnes of Ko∣rah, LXXXIV. LXXXV. LXXXVII. Of Heman, for the sonnes of Korah, LXXXVIII. Of Ethan, LXXXIX. Of Moses, XC. For the Sabbath, XCII. A Prayer of, or for the Afflicted, CII. Psalmes of Degrees, CXX. to CXXXIV. Having Titles, are 125. The rest be∣ing XXV. the sixth part of the whole number, are without any Title or Inscription at all. In the Titles we have the persons, by whom they were written; or for whom they were written; or to whom they were committed. And these last are either generaly described, by their skill in Musick; or more particularly named to be of the Quire or Posterity of Jeduthun, of Korah, or of Asaph. In some we have also the Times when they were made; or when to be used. In some also their Quality and Excellencie. In some their Matter Subject, as of Prayer, of Deprecation, as Destroy not; of obtestation; of Gratulation or Thanksgiving; of Praise; of Instru∣ction, and Doctrine; of Commemoration, or for Remembrance; of nuptial love. The Musick, either by voice, or instrument mentioned in some Ti∣tles, is but little known in our dayes; yet for the voice, some Psalmes may seeme to point to the Base, some to the Tenor, some to the Coun∣ter-tenor: And again, in some mens opinions, some Psalmes do inti∣mate that the voice should leade, and the instrument follow; as in those Titles : Some, that the instruments should leade, and the voice follow; as in those Titles  But the truth is, That howsoever Selah in the Text, used some seventy times in this Book, and three times in that prayer of Habakkuk, chap. III. sometimes in the middle of a verse, but mostwhat in the end; may seeme to be a Musi∣cal Note; And Neginoth to be an hand or stringed instrument; Shoshan∣nim, of six strings; from Shesh, six, as Shalishim of three strings, 1, Sam. XVIII. 6. Sheminith, of eight strings; Nehiloth, a wind-instrument; Ma∣halath, likewise. And so other guesses may be made of other words mentioned in sundry Titles of sundry Psalms; as Shoshannim Eduth, Shu∣shan Eduth, Mahaloth Leannoth, Muthlabben, Altaskith, Gittith, Ala∣moth, Hammagneloth, Aijgeleth Shahar, Jonath-Elem-rehochim: As al∣so of Higgajon, Michtam, Maschil: All which belonging to those instruments, Musick, or Poetry, then in use, now unknown, nor great∣ly material for us now to know, may admit of conjectural probabili∣ties; yet no certainties can be had for the exact notions and significa∣tions of them. Psalme XIV. and LIII. are much the same. And so again, Psalme LX. and CVIII. and Psalme XVIII. and 2 Sam XXII. are more the same. And Psal. CVIII. 1,—5. are the same with the end of the LVII. Psalme. And ver. 6,—18. are the same with the end of the LX. Psalme.
Psalme XXV. begins each verse almost with the several letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, in order. And so in a maner doth the XXXIV. Psal. CXI. and CXII. begin each half verse with the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, in order: save that the two last verses in both Psalmes, take up three letters apiece, to fill up the number of the two and twenty letters of the Hebrew Alphabet. Psal. XXXVII. begins every second verse with the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet in order. Psalme CXIX. without Davids Title, begins each of the first eight ver∣ses with the first letter of the Hebrew Alphabet: and each of the eight next verses with the second letter of the Hebrew Alphabet. And so continues along to the end of the Alphabet. Psalme CXLV. begins each verse with the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; omitting only the letter Nun. Some Psalmes composed long before David was borne; as Psalme XC. Some long after he was dead; as Psalme LXXIV. LXXXIII. CXXVI. CXXXVII. Whereby it appears that the Psalmes were put into the forme and order they now have, after the returne of the Jewes from Babylon. Some are set-formes, as Psalmes XX. XXI. CII. CXXXVI. Esay XXVI. 1. The Book of Psalmes authentical with the Papists, and by them fathered upon Jerome, is confessed by him to be but a Translation out of the Greek LXX. not out of the Hebrew text. And the Popish Bonaventure ventures but badly when he substitutes the word Mary, or Lady, in stead of Lord or God; and with some other alterations ap∣plies them to the Virgin Mary. This Book of the Psalmes is much cited in the New Testament: As doth appear in this Table following.
Psalmes; Alledged, or Alluded to in 2. 1. Acts 4. 25. 7. Acts 13 33.   Hebr. 1. 5. 9. Apoc. 2. 27.   19 15. 5. 9. Rom. 3. 13. 8. 2. Matth. 21. 16. 4, 5, 6. Heb 2. 6, 7, 8.   1 Co. 15. 27. 10. 7. Rom. 3. 14. 14. 2. Rom. 3. 10. 16. 8—11. Acts 2. 25—28. 31.   13. 35. 18. 2. Hebr. 2. 13. 49. Rom. 15. 9. 19. 4. Rom. 10. 1. 22. 1. Matth. 27. 46.   Mark 15. 34. 7, 8. Matth. 27. 35, 39, 43. 16, 18. Mark. 15. 24.   Luke 23. 33.   John 19. 23. 24. 34. 37 22. Hebr. 2. 12. 24. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 26, 28. 31. 5. Luke 23. 46. 32. 1, 2. Rom. 4. 6, 7, 8. 34. 12—16 1 Pet. 3 10, 11, 12. 37. 11. Matth. 5 5. 40. 6, 7, 8. Hebr. 10. 5 6 7. 41. 9. John 13. 18. 44. 22. Rom. 8. 36. 45. 6, 7. Hebr. 1. 8, 9. 49. 4. Matth. 13. 35. 50. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 26. 51. 4. Rom. 3. 4. 53. 1, 2, 3. Rom. 3. 10, 11, 12. 62. 12. Matth. 16. 27. 68. 18. Ephes. 4. 8. 69. 9. John. 2. 17.   Rom. 15. 3. 21. John 19. 28, 29. 22, 23. Rom. 11. 9, 10. 78. 2. Matth. 13. 35. 25. John. 6. 31. 81. 12. Acts 14. 6 82. 6. John 10. 34. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8. 91. 1. Matth. 4. 6.   Luke 4. 10. 94. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 20. 95. 8—11. Hebr. 3. 7—11.   4. 7. 97. 7. Hebr. 1. 6. 102. 25, 26, 27 Heb. 1 10, 11, 12. 104 4. Hebr. 1. 7. 105. 41. 1 Cor. 10. 4. 109. 8. Acts 1. 20▪ 110. 1. Mat. 22. 43, 44.   Mark 12. 36.   Luke 12. 42.   Acts 2. 34, 35.   Hebr. 1. 13. 4. Hebr. 5. 6.   7. 16. 112. 9. 2 Cor. 9. 9. 116. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 13. 1. Rom 3. 4. 117 1. Rom. 15. 1. 118. 6. Hebr. 13. 6. 22, 23. Matth. 21. 42.   Mar. 12. 10, 11.   Luke 20. 17.   Acts 4. 11. 25, 26. Matth. 21. 9. 132. 11. Acts 2. 30. 17, 18. Luke 1. 69, 70. 140. 3. Rom. 3. 13, 14. 143. 2. Rom. 3. 20.   Gal. 2. 16. 144. 3. Hebr. 2. 6.
In these Citations and Allegations, and Allusions, The Penmen of Scripture regard more oftentimes the sense and intent of the Text cited, then the precise termes, where the one swerves not much from the other, and what is in the words so read or implyed, is of undoubt∣ed truth. And sometimes they cite not the entire Text, nor tie them∣selves to the precise words of the place, nor observe strictly the Or∣der of them, as they lie in the Text; but pick only out of them so much as may serve for their present purpose; which in quotation of places is sufficient. So John XII. 40. Matth. IV. 15, 16. Ezek. XX. 7. And in Citations in the New Testament, the holy Penmen in some places follow the LXX. as then most in use in Synagogues, & Schools, publikely, & privately, though therein departing from the Hebrew, but yet only in matters of no concernment as to the present Allegation. Some are Accommodations only; when Prophesies besides their Lit∣teral sense; have sometimes another in this sort affixed to them, To which when they are accommodated, they are said to be fulfilled, i. e. to have a more eminent accomplishment in a higher sense; As Esay IX. 1, 2. the great Light and comfort and deliverance from Sennaohe∣rib, and out of Babylon, is accommodated, Matth. IV. 13,—16. to Christs preaching the Light and comfort of the Gospel, and his deli∣verance of them from the bondage of Sin and Satan. Blessed] This is the maine end man aimes at. Walketh not] Some here observe a Climax, or treble Climax, gra∣dation, or ascension, from the lesse and lower, to the greater and higher: And so there is indeed in the sins here mentioned: But not in the shun∣ning and avoiding of sinne, as some conceive. For so the first degree here mentioned seemes to them to be the highest of the three, in that kind. And so the speech doth not ascend, but descend lower, in each degree. A true Climax is that Rom. VIII. 29, 30. And again, ver. 34. And Jer. XV. 5. The sense here agrees with Davids words, Psal. XXVI. 4, 5. He shall be like] Jer. XVII. 7, 8. Job VIII. 16, 17. Ezek. XIX. 10. and XXXI. 4. Psal. XCII. 12, 13, 14. a tree] No minde or mention here of the Palme tree, or allusion to the tree of Life in Paradise. not so] Thus are these words used, Gen. XLVIII. 18. Exod. X. 11. Num. XII. 7. Deut. XVIII. 14. Prov. XV. 7. Esay XVI. 6. repeated Jer. XLVIII. 30. Ephes. IV. 20. And in Matth. XX. 26. where Christ forbids not the exercise of Superiority among Christians, or among Ministers of the Gospel, or requires parity of authority among them; but saith, that those things, though good and lawful in them∣selves, yet have no place in, nor relation to, his spiritual Kingdome, which is in the soul. not stand] As Num. XXX. 5, 12. Josh. II. 11. and VII. 12, 13. Knoweth] Acknowledge and own;  approveth, regardeth, reward∣eth. As Exod. III. 7. Deut. XXXIV. 10. Psal. XXXI. 8. and XXXVII. 18. and CXLII. 5. and CXLIV. 12. Prov. XII. 10. Hos. XIII. 5.
Matth. VII. 23. Rom. VII. 15. John X. 14. Job XXIII. 10. Prov. II. 8. Why] I his Psalme by many of the Ancients is joyned to the for∣mer, as a part of it; And they take the former, as a Preface to this; or rather to the whole Book of the Psalmes. But Saint Paul doth di∣stinguish them, Acts XIII. 33. And the Church doth ascribe this Psalme to David, though it bear not his Title, Acts IV. 25. And in this Psalme David bears a Type of Christ, who is here more realy, pro∣perly, principaly, and immediately intended. All which appears Acts IV. 25, 26. and XIII. 33. Heb. I. 5. and V. 5. So that the first and open sense points to David; the mystical and more abstruse to the Messias. And no doubt, but this, and such allusions more, were out of all question, even from the beginning so fore-cast, and appointed, as it were, by the holy Ghost. Why] The Psalmist demands, and wonders at the banding and conspiring of all, and all sorts of enemies, against David and his King∣dome typicaly, as did Saul, Ishbosheth, Abner, the Philistines, Jebusites, and others: But against Christ, and his Kingdome principaly, as is the prime purpose▪ maine scope, and intent of this Psalme, Acts IV. 25, 26. Mark III. 6. John XI. 53. Luke XIX. 14. Though all in vaine, ver. 1, 2, 3. The Kings] 2 Sam. VIII. and X. Chapters. heavens] 1 King. VIII. 27. Jer. XXII. 24. Psal. CXXXIX. 7. The King of heaven against those Kings of the earth, ver. 2. laugh] And have them in derision, as Job XLI 29. dictum ; intelligendum . Psal. XXXVII. 12, 13. and LIX. 8. Prov. I. 26. wrath] No passion properly hath any place in Gods will. It is not in him, but without him; not in his affection, but in his act. These expressions are but condescentions to the weaknesse of our capacities, Psal. LXXVI. 6,—9. and CIV. 32. yet have I] God the Father who makes and orders all earthly King∣domes, Dan. IV. 14. and II. 21. and VII. 14. Ezra I. 1. my King] Prov. VIII. 22,—30. Acts II. 36. Sion] See the Observations on Deut. III. 9. and on 1 Chron. XI. 5. See Psal. LXXVIII. 68. and LXVIII. 17. and CXXXII. 13. and LXXXVII. 2. Esay II. 2, 3, 4. and IV. 4. I will declare] David typicaly;  Christ principaly who is in the bosome of the Father, the Word and Wisdome of the Father. The Lord hath said] Hebr. V. 5. Psal. CX. 1. my sonne] Not as holy men. Princes, David, or Angels are called the sonnes of God, John I. 12. Jer. XXXI. 9. Psal. LXXXII 6. Job I. 6. But in a peculiar maner farre above all these, Hebr. I. 4, 5, 9. not by adoption or grace, but by nature. This day] Relates to his Nativity, as man; not to his Divinity, as God. And as , he is called the Sonne of God, Luke I. 35. Heb. I. 5. And that raising up of Jesus, Acts XIII. 33. relates to this
Exhibition of him in the flesh, mentioned also, ver. 23. That other raising him from the dead speaks plainly of his resurrection from the grave, Acts XIII. ver. 34,—37. Rom. I. 4. have I begotten thee] Not relating here to his eternal generation as the Sonne of God, the second Person and Hypostasis in the Trinity: But to his gigniture , when he revealed him to the world. Aske of me] God Decrees, as the End, so the Means. As Assuerus to Ester, chap. V. 3. And Herod to the daughter of Herodias, Mark VI. 23. And God himself to Solomon, 1 King. III. 5. So, and much more here God the Father to Christ his Sonne, the Mediatour. Thus Christ asked and prayed, in the dayes of his flesh; and was ever heard in whatsoever he asked, according to the nature of his asking, John XI. 22, 42. Heb. V. 7. John XVII. 9. and the uttermost] Psal. XXII. 29, 30. Heb. I. 2. Dan. II. 44. them] Thine enemies, ver. 1, 2, 3. rod of iron] Esay XXX. 14. Jer. XIX. 11. See the actual execu∣tion, Apoc. II. 26. and chap. XII. 5. and XIX. 15. Esay XI. 4. Be wise] Take better counsel then that, ver. 2; use better wis∣dome. now] Heb. V. 7. Prov. V. 7. and VII. 24. and VIII. 32. Esay XLIV. 1. Delay is dangerous. Kings] Ye, ver. 2. serve] Kings;  and all other yet enemies serve him, Luke I. 74, 75. Psal. CXVI. 16. with fear] A filial fear, which is joyned with joy, Psal. C. 2. rejoyce with trembling] These two also are coëxistent; joy, Rom. XIV. 17. Ps. IX. 2. 14. Phil. IV. 4. Trembling, Phil. II. 12. The regene∣rate man is a kinde of mixt person; hath, as Rebecca, two strugling in him. Kisse] A signe, of Love amongst equals, Gen. XXXIII. 4. 1 Sam. XX. 41. Rom. XVI. 16. 1 Cor. XVI. 20. Of Subjection in inferiours, Gen. XLI. 40. 1 Sam. X. 1. Prov. XXIV. 26. Of religious adoration, 1 King. XIX. 18. Job XXXI. 27. the Sonne] 1 John II. 23. John V. 23. lest he be angry] Gen. III. 3. Certainly he will, ver. 5. 2 Thes. I. 8. Apoc. VI. 16, 17. and ye perish from the way] The way of happinesse; you, and your way perish, Psal. I. 6. or your way of combination against Christ, ver. 1, 2. or in the way of your conceited peace and secure prosperity. Blessed] Apoc. XIX. 9. Rom. IX. 33. John III. 36. ten thousands of people] And likely more now gathered against him, by means of Absolom. Most of Davids Psalmes in order of time go before this Psalme. my glorie] The glorie of my Kingdome which God hath promised me, and whereunto he hath anointed me. godly] , In an active signification. Whence the Asideans, 1 Macc. 7. 13. 2 Macc. XIV. 6. may seeme to have their name.
And whence the Pelican hath the name of , from the pious be∣nignity it shews, as to her young ones, so to her dam when over-grown with years, as some write. And from her Greek name  ariseth the Greek Proverb , to denotate a retribution and recom∣pensation of pious duties, offices, and benefits, such as the Pelican u∣seth. The same word , is taken also and used by some for the Stork, as Jer. VIII. 7. the Stork having the like pious benigne pro∣perties and qualifications. stand in awe and sinne not] Ephes. IV. 26. Be anrgy, and sinne not. And that sense the word here used will bear; David speaking thus to his friends; Let not your indignation, and just resentment of these scandals and confusions in my sufferings, proceed to a sinful murmur∣ing against God; but consider of it wisely in your most retired thoughts, and be silent, contented, and quiet. into thy house] So farre as it was lawful for David. toward thy holy Temple] And so David, Psal. XXVII. 4. and XXIX. 9. and LXV. 4. and LXVIII. 29. and CXXXVIII. 2. And yet in Davids dayes the Temple was not built. He minded that which af∣ter his dayes he knew presently should be: And meane time he stiles the Arke, or Tabernacle, by the name of the Temple. See the Obser∣vations on Exod. XXXIII. 7. rebuke me not] Psal. XXXVIII. 1. heale me] David was in some soar sicknesse at this time. bed to swim] See the Observations on Josh. XI. 4. If I have done this] Whereof Cush Sauls Courtier or Favourite, one of his Tribe, doth falsely accuse me. return thou on high] To ascend, and set thy self on thy high tribu∣nal and judgement-seat, 1 Kings X. 19. And this; to judge for me; and against Cush; as it followeth in the rest of the Psalme. Out of the mouth] This is alluded to Mat. XXI. 16. What is man] This, and ver. 5, 6. are applied to Christ by the A∣postle, Heb. II. 6,—9. 1 Cor. XV. 27. Ephes. I. 22. so taking in both Christ the head; and mankinde, specialy the faithful, as members; shewing thereby that mysticaly and propheticaly in these words is in∣timated the humiliation and exaltation of the man Christ Jesus. O thou enemie] A kinde of scoff and derision, whereby David up∣braids him for his bloody designes and threats. Know thy name will] Know experimentaly, practicaly, verse 20. in all their hearts, and souls; in themselves; as the phrases of Scrip∣ture are, Josh. XXIII. 14. 1 Sam. VI. 9. Heb. X. 34. Of this know∣ledge is that Iohn XVII. 3. and 1 Iohn II. 3, 4, 5. and chap. III. 19 24. and chap. IV. 6, 7, 8, 13. and chap. V. 2. 18, 19. 20. Noëtical, specu∣lative knowledge, swimming only in the braine, and not sinking into the heart, is none of this knowledge. till thou finde none] Rid the world of them, and their sinnes, at once. flee a bird] 1 Sam. XXVI. 19.
If the foundations] In Church and Kingdome. what can] He help; but suffer in such a general ruine? The fool] Psal. X. 4. and LIII. 1. The three first verses of this Psalme are by Saint Paul applied to all mankinde in general, in the state of the Fall, and natural corruption, Rom. III. 10, 11, 12. usury] Of this see Exod. XXII. 25. Levit. XXV. 36, 37. Deut. XXIII. 19, 20. Neh. V. 17. Levit. XXVIII. 8. And the Annotations on Ezek. XVIII. 8. and XXII. 12, 13. Mat. XXV. 27. that hasten] Or give gifts to another god. See Ezek. XVI. 33, 34. The true God needs them not, ver. 2. But false gods do; which gifts do redound in the end to the dammage and sorrowes of the givers. their drink-offerings of blood] Their Offerings and Sacrifices of mans blood. The drink-offerings to the true God, were of wine, ac∣cording to his Law, Num. XV. 5. But Idolaters in stead thereof did many times offer mans blood. Pauls readinesse to be offered, Phil. II. 17. 2 Tim. IV. 6. imports no more then his willingnesse to die and spend his blood, for Christs cause, and the good of his Church and people. their names] See the Observations on Josh. XXIII. 7. I have set the Lord] Acts II. 25,—31. and XIII. 35,—37. Da∣vid speaks here of himself, in this regard, as having Christ in his loins, in a Prophetical spirit relating to Christ. right hand] Psal. CIX. 31. & CX. 5. & CXXI. 5. not be moved] Psal. CXVIII. 6. CXXXV. 1. Rom. VIII. 31, &c. my glory] My tongue, Acts II. 26. Psal. XXX. 12. and LVII. 8. and CVIII. 2. Gen. XLIX. 6. my flesh also] As Rom. VIII. 19. 21. my soul in hell] A Prophesie of Christs Resurrection. David speaks here in the Person of Christ. Soul] Sometimes is taken properly, sometimes improperly, for the whole person of man, Gen. XIV. 12. Acts XXVII. 37. sometimes for the life of the person, sometimes for the body, Gen. XVII. 21. sometimes for the dead carkasse, Levit. XIX. 28. and XXI. 1, 2. Num. VI. 6. and V. 2, 9, 10. Hag. II. 14. And so  is taken also. Here, my soul, i. e. my self. hell] the Hebrew  is taken for the grave, Psal. CXLI. 7. and LXXXVI. 13. and XXX. 13. and LV. 15. Gen. XXXVII. 35. and XLII. 3. 1 Kings II. 6, 9. Num. XVI. 30. Jonah II. 1, 2. Not for a place of souls under the earth. See Doctor Rainolds, Praelect. 81. & 82. upon the Apocryphal books: and Robert Parker upon Christs Des∣cent into hell;  is taken for death, or the state of the dead: for the place invisible; for the grave, in relation to the body, Acts II. 27. And in relation to the soul, for heaven to the godly soul, as in our Creed; and for Hell, to the soul ungodly; and so most usualy. Christs soul did not descend to the lower parts, or that imaginary place of Limbus Patrum. This place here meant is a place of punishment, and
therefore it is mentioned as a mercy, that Christ was thence deliver∣ed; Christs soul was not therefore there in triumph. The scope of the Apostles in citing this place is not to deale about the deliverance of Christs soul out of Hell, but punctualy of Christs Resurrection: They inferre nothing else out of this Text. But Resurrection is properly of the Body, not of the Soul. Gehenna is sometimes taken for the Grave; and most-times further, for Hell it self. The true meaning and sense of the Article of Christs Descent into Hell, as the Latines very improperly translate the words, , seemes to be thus rendered rather, he went into the place of invisible souls: and to be understood of Christs Soul; for his body remained in the Grave; And his soul in that interim to passe to the place of souls; to Heaven or Paradise; as the souls of the godly did, and his principaly. As the souls of the wicked went to Hell. For  as a general name doth cer∣tainly and evidently signifie both places. And thus the Articles go on methodicaly, without any tautologie; That after Christs death, his body was buried in the Grave, his Soul went to the place of blessed souls; and the third day, both soul and body were reunited in his Re∣surrection. This verse then, and two before, and one following, are most properly meant of Christ, and of his Resurrection. Acts II. 25,—28, 31. and XIII. 35, 36, 37. Thou wilt shew me] Experimentaly. me] Christ speas of himself. the path of life] Of glory after his Resurrection. All this true of Christ the head; and in and by him, true also of David, of all his mem∣bers. Christs Resurrection, and Glorification is the beginning of ours; he the Author, and meanes of it to us; in our first Resurrection here by Regeneration, to the life of Grace; whereby Christ lives in us, Gal. II. 20. He in us, and we in him by Faith, Ephes. III. 17. Rom. I. 17 And in our second Resurrection, to the life of Glory; as followes in. this verse. In thy presence] Before thy face; in the light of thy coun∣tenance. See Gen. XXXII. and Exod. XXXIII. 14, 15. Num. VI. 23. Psal. IV. 6. and XXXI. 16. and LXXX. 3. Deut. XXXIV. 10. Esay VI. fulnesse] Yet all the former but in part, whiles we are in the way; in fulnesse, when we come to our countrey, or heavenly Canaan, Job XIX. 26, 27. 1 John III. 2. 1 Cor. XIII. 12. Matth. V. 8. And yet this beatifical Vision of God in glory shall be to our fulnesse; not to his. The fulnesse of his infinite Essence, by any created power of Saint, or Angel by the eye of flesh, though glorified, or by the intellectual eye of a soul or spirit glorified cannot be seene, 1 Tim. VI. 16. But to our fulnesse, as farre as creatures are capable of, our vessel thrown into this infinite Sea, shall be brim full, though it containe not all this O∣cean, Psal. XVII. 15. And how great then shall this fulnesse then be, when of things in this kinde revealed of God to his Apostles in this life, by his Spirit, the Apostle so speaketh, as we read, 1 Cor. XI. 9.
out of Esay LXIV. 4? This is a fulnesse beyond all that of Faith, and Hope, a fulnesse that fills up all desires, a fulnesse of fruition, of sa∣tisfaction, without satiety. Apoc. III. Consider that saying of the Queen of Sheba, 1 King. X. 8. and of the Disciples at Christs Trans∣figuration, Mat. XVII. 4. At thy right hand] And by thy right hand, Psal. XX. 7. LXIII. 9. CXVIII. 16. for evermore] Without which eternity there were no true felicity. right] My plea for my righteous cause;  my righteous cause and complaint, ver. 2. I am purposed] Psal. XXXIX. 1. of thy lips] Guiding and directing me. when I awake] Our of the sleep of death, Esay XXVI. 19. with thy likenesse] 1 Cor. XV. 49. 1 John III. 2. Apoc. XXII. 4. Horne] Signifieth power, and glory, Psal. XCII. 10. Amos VI. 13. And Christ called the Horne of Salvation, Luke I. 69. earth shook] Here, and hereafter are sublime expressions, not of what historicaly hapned, but of the marvelous maner of Gods migh∣ty presence, assistance, and concurrence in Davids victories, in some sort Poeticaly set forth. thundered] Thunder is called Gods voice, Apoc. X. 3, 4. and XIX. 6. Of thunder. See Psal. XXIX. 3, 10. and LXXVII. 18. and CIV. 7. Exod. XIX. 16. & XX. 18. Jer. X. 13. Job. XXVI. 14 & XXXVIII. 25. Esay XXIX, 6. Apoc. IV. 5. and 8. 5. Some proud blasphemers have laboured to imitate the thunder: and some impious Tyrants have ex∣ceedingly feared it. according to my righteousnesse] The justnesse of my Cause against Saul, and others; and my sincere desire and endeavour to serve and obey God: though not for any merit of my works. thy self froward] Meet with them in their own way. As Levit. XXVI. 23, 24. Bow of steele. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee] This verse is applied, Rom. XV. 9. to the Calling of the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, and praise unto God therefore. And so formerly, ver. 43, 44. and again, verse 50. are more truly verified in Christ, then in David. to his Anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore] To his Mes∣siah, his Christ, as Psal. II. 2. to David literaly; to Christ mysticaly cal∣led by the name of David, Jer. XXX. 9. Ezek. XXXIV. 23, 24. and chap. XXXVII. 24. Hos. 5. to his seed, both himself properly, called the seed of David, Rom. I. 3. Acts XIII. 23. as the seed of Abraham, Gal. III. 16. and to his seed, Esay LIII. 10. Heb. II. 13. And thus properly it is for evermore. Day unto day] Or day after day: the vicissitude or continual suc∣cession of day and night speaketh much divine knowledge. The as∣siduity, and constancy without any intermission by the Heavens preaching is hereby expressed.
There is no speech] Among all variety of Languages, yet this lan∣guage and idiome of the heavens is one and the same, understood of all, and heard of all, ver. 4. Their line] Rom. X. 18. the Apostle hath it their sound, or voice. And such a like difference is found in Micah V. 2. with Matth. chap. II. 6. And again in Rom. IX. 33. with Isa. chap. XXVIII. 16. The Apostle fits this Testimonie to his own purpose; not derogating there∣by from the truth of the literal sense. As that Exod. XVI. 18. is ap∣plied, 2 Cor. VIII. 15. Or rather the Apostle retaines the literal sense, for the preaching of the Gospel to all the world, Rom. XV. 19. Col. I. 6, 23. And out of this testimonie of the Psalme in its literal sense proves that the Gentiles had heard and learned somewhat of God and pietie before, out of the book of the Creation, Rom. I. 19. Acts XIV. 17. Which was a forerunner to this more ample Doctrine and School of the Gospel, which now God was pleased to vouchsafe unto them. In summe, the Apostle herein followes the LXX. And applies this to the preaching of the Gospel to the Heathens; as God had formerly taught them, in another & a weaker maner and degree, by his works of Creation. They had as a voice to speak; so a line to write, rule, direct, and instruct, as Esay XXVIII. 10. sunne] The carbuncle of heaven; the eye, and heart of the world, for its light, and heat. to runne a race] His race, is without intermission, or wearinesse; and the swiftnesse of his running, being so great a body, in its owne orbe, is even to amazement, and astonishment, almost beyond imagi∣nation. That the Sunne should stand, and the Earth so move, as some braines fancie, is no lesse then a prodigious Paradox. The Law] From the Book of Gods works, he comes now to the Book of his Word, in five verses. And in this Schoole, each verse in a maner doth expresse the name, the nature, the effects, the precious∣nesse of this Word; much against all those imbasements and impeach∣ments which the Papists would put upon it. gold] Gold of Havilah, good, Gen. II. 11, 12. Ophir, 1 Kings IX. 28. Uphaz, Jer. X. 9. This is the chiefest gold, Dan X. 5. Job XXVIII. 15. Psal. CXIX. 72. See the Observations on Esay XIII. 12. great reward] Which reward yet is of grace, not of merit, Rom. VIII. 3. through Gods free grace and bounty; not the merit of our works. The Apostle doth thus distinguish of merit, Rom. IV. 4, 5. and XI. 6. There is no merit properly, if the work be not properly out own; and not otherwise due debt; and justly equal to the reward. They are justly due out of his true and free promise. who can] Where then is that possibility, and facility of fulfilling the Law, even unto works of Supererogation, whereof Papists do so much brag? dominion over me] There are sinnes reigning; and not reigning, but rebelling, Rom. VI. 12, 22. and VII. 15,—20. The Lord hear thee] This Psalme, and the next, are composed by
David, for a publike forme of a Prayer in the one, of a Thanksgiving in the other, to be used by the people, for himself the King. They seeme to stretch this Psalme too farre, and that without ground, who make it to be a Prophesie of Christs Sufferings, and his deliverances out of them, for which the Church with him triumpheth. As also the next Psalme to gratulate the victory and Salvation of Christ. Save Lord, let the King hear us] Most here understand God, or the Messias. Some David. The LXX. not observing or keeping the Hebrew distinction Athnach, render it thus, Lord save the King, and hear us when we call upon thee. for ever and ever] Psal. LXXXIX. 29, 36, 37. and LXI. 6, 7. Da∣vid lived but seventy years: yet in his royal posterity, for many ages; and in Christ, the Sonne of David, Matth. XXII. 42. for ever and ever, eternaly, Rom. VI. 9. Apoc. I. 18. Heb. VII. 25. See the Observations on Deut. XV. 17. Thine hand] King Davids hand. In some Psalmes there are passages that properly and literaly belong to David; and to Christ only, as David was a Type of him. But in this Psalme, are some Passages, as ver. 16, 17, 18. (besides many other which are applied to Christ in the New Testament, as ver. 1, 7, 8, 22, 27.) which literaly and properly belong to Christ, and are appliable to him only, or to him more then to David. Then here is no place left for that question of the Eunuch, Acts VIII. 34. The allegations out of this Psalme, Matth. XXVII. 46, 35, 43. Heb. II. 12. and the body of the Psalme it self do shew, that little of it can be applied to David, as a Type, most of it is proper and peculiar to Christ alone, as I formerly said, 1 Pet. I. 11, 12. my God] Jesus on the Crosse little before his death, about the ninth hour, cryed out these words with a loud voice, Matth. XXVII. 46. Heb. V. 7. upon the weight of Gods wrath, under the burden of our sinnes; The Deity by a special providence and dispensation withdraw∣ing and suspending its influence from the Humanity for this time; God withdrawing all sense of his favour from him. Not that the hyposta∣tical union of both natures was then or ever severed or dissolved. But yet he suffered chiefly in his soul, all the paines, pangs and agonies of a justly angry and punishing God, even more then can either be ex∣pressed or imagined, even so farre above the measure of ordinary suf∣ferings, as himself was above ordinary men; without any influence, or joy, or comfort streaming from the Vision of God upon his mind and wil for that time. So that he suffered as in body, so in soul, in his whole man; as in his sensual part, so in his intellectual also, in his whole soul, and body, and in all the parts, powers, and faculties of them. And the greatest sufferings, as was said, that could be sustained in this life, Lam. I. 12. yet without any derogation to the integrity, purity, innocencie, dignity of the person of Christ our Surety and Saviour. These words then are not a complaint out of impatience, ignorance, disobedience, or diffidence. They are the words of sense, not of infidelity. See ver.
24. Luke XXIII. 46. He strongly calls him his God, even in that instant of these suffering; so expressing his firme faith in him. But they are a Protestation of the bitternesse of his Passion, so stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted, and so farre prevailing on him, in whom the spi∣rit of fortitude had his residence. forsaken me] This sense of dereliction and carencie of Divine fa∣vour for the time, as it was the Fathers pleasure to have it so, so the Sonnes office called him unto it; and he did not contract it by any fault of his, but did voluntarily undertake it for our sinnes, and the ex∣piation of them: as he did the death it self. So that in this then there could not be any defect or defanlt of faith, and hope requisite in him, And likewise that Prayer and Speech, Matth. XXVI. 39. bewrayes the sense of the flesh; but joyned with the obedience of the Spirit in him: A double Will in him, against Monothelites: but joyned both in one holy obedience and subjection. All which shew the na∣ture of sinne, the infinite wrath of God against it; the infinite Love of the Father, and the Sonne, towards the children of men; and the ve∣rity of Christs Humane Nature, both in body and soul. roaring] Like that of Lions Psal. XXXII. 3. and XXXVIII. 8. Matth. XXVI. 38. Marke XIV. 33. Luke XXII. 44. so that he had need of an Angel for his Comforter. Yet he so wrestles and prevailes, that no signe of halting was left remaining after; no signe or voice of despair; as some are shamelesly wronged to charge upon him. All the agonies of Christs soul ceased with his death. but thou hearest not] We read that God ever heard him, ver. 24. John XI. 42. Heb. V. 7. But here this Prayer was only conditional; a signification of a natural desire; not an absolute, and plenary Prayer. inhabit the praises of Israel] Whose praise thou art, Deut. X. 21. And they praise thee, in thy House and Sanctuary. Thou art still praised by them for thy benefits to them, and acknowledged their ho∣ly one. Our fathers] And shall I be so forsaken, not heard, nor holpen, nor delivered? Thus he aggravates his complaint, rouzeth up his faith, bowes and moves God to mercie. Cried] Crying or clamor, and Prayer, are oft conjoyned, Psal III. 4. and XVIII. 7. Jer. VII. 16. Jonas III. 8. Micah III. 4. a worme] So vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, Esay LIII. 2, 3. as Job XXV. 6. Esay XLI. 14. Not only made lower then the Angels, Psal. VIII. 5. Heb. II. 7. but disesteemed more then Barra∣bas, or the two theives. All they that see me] This verse, and the next, we see fulfilled in the History of Christs Passion, Matth. XXVII. 39,—44. Luke XXIII. 35. Not that Christ herein murmurs against God; but de∣clares and deplores his own misery, whereunto for mans sake, and his redemption, he willingly subjects himself. laugh me to scorne] Matth. XXVII. 39.
He trusted] Matt. XXVII. 43. But thou art] This verse, and the next, shew his Hope in God. The like see in David, Psal. LXXI. 5, 6, 7. out of the womb] By a natural, not miraculous way; as David was, Psal. LXXI. 5. by the opening of the womb, without any losse or laesion of Blessed Maries Virginity; not by a miraculous penetration of dimensions and substances, to keep the womb still closed and shut. breasts] So Job XXXI. 18. Psal. LXXI. 6. 2 Tim. III. 15. Esay XLVI. 3. and XLIX. 1. Luke I. 15, 41. I was cast] By him saved from Herods intended murder, Mat. II. Be not farre from me] Therefore he was not utterly forsaken, ver. 1. So Psal. X. 1. and XXXVIII. 22, 23. So againe, Esay XLVIII. 9. for trouble is near] Death it self. none to help] Esay LXIII. 3, 5. His Disciples fled; Peter forswears him: none but God could help him. Many Bulls] So afterwards Lions, ver. 13. Dogs, ver. 16, 20. Such were his enemies to him; the Devil and his instruments; the Priests, and Rulers of the Jewes, in our Saviours dayes. Bashan] See the Annotations on Micah VII. 14. roaring Lion] Even they forced Pilate, notwithstanding all his plead∣ings for Jesus, to condemne him. See Matth. XXVII. 17.—26. John XIX. 1,—13. like water] Such is his state. As 2 Sam. XIV. 14. His bones, heart, bowels, melted, burnt, as it were, with the heat of Gods wrath. the Assembly] In their Councils, Marke XIV. 55. and XV. 1. John XI. 47. They pierced] Our Hebrew Bibles have , as a Lion. Which yet by anomalie in Grammer may signifie , they pierced. And such anomalies are found sometimes in the Hebrew text, as Ezra X. 16. 44. Psal. X. 15. And  is confessed to be found in some anci∣ent Copies, or ; So that the text here may be said to admit di∣vers readings. Yet the Spirit of God in the New Testament doth con∣stantly render it, they pierced. The ancient Jewes maintaine this reading; And some of the moderne. The other reading as a Lion, is but a various reading; and though in the text, yet in good sense it seemes not so well to stand; and therefore this foderunt, set in the margin, is to be read. And some Copies have foderunt in the text; yea, and the other reading as was said by anomalie in Grammar, not unusual in Scripture, will signifie foderunt also. And thus they dealt with our Saviour Jesus Christ, John XX. 25. Luke XXIV. 40. Zech. XII. 10. compared with John XIX. 37. stare upon me] As Psal. XXXV. 21. and LIV. 9. They fed their eyes with my miserable spectacle; with all pleasure, and without any pitying of me. parted my garments] John XIX. 23, 24. The four souldiers that had the chardge of the execution, did so. But other souldiers, with
their Captaine or Centurion, were there present. lots] Of Lots, see the Annotations on Jonah I. 7. Lots are for di∣vision; or consultation, and Divination. my darling] Psal. XXXV. 17. or my onely one, which is without an helper, ver. 11. Unicorns] See the Observations on Num. XXIII. 22. I will declare] Recount, publish, and praise; thy bounty, and goodnesse, all thy Divine attributes, perfections, and actions. unto my brethren] Heb. II. 10, 11, 12. brethren in that one and common sanctification. ye that fear the Lord] Christs speech and exhortation to his Church, to praise, and worship God, Psal. CXXXV. 1. &c. hath not despised] Christ, in his low and base estate;  though men did, Esay LIII. 3. he heard] Heb. V. 7. my praise] As Christ exhorted others; so himself will not be be∣hinde, but an example to them, to praise his Father. vowes] See the Annotations on Jonah I. 16. The meek] Spiritual feeding, and blessings are here mainly inten∣ded; by allusion likely to the feastings at Peace-offerings; as at that 2 Sam. VI. 18, 19. See Esay LV. 1, 2. Prov. IX. 5, 6. All the ends] The large bounds of the Church of Christ, Psal. II. 8. Gen. XVII. 18. and XLVIII. 10. Esay XLIX. 22. Acts XIII. 47. and XIV. 14. worship] 1 Sam. I. 3▪ 19, 28. John IV. 20,—24. For the Kingdome] His Kingdome of Grace, revealed to the Gen∣tiles, whereby he reigneth in their hearts, Esay II. 4. All they] All sorts and conditions of men shall worship before him, James I. 9. the rich and great ones, Psal. XLV. 12. Esay XLIX. 23. and the poor hungry ones ready to die and perish, Matth. XI. 5. A seed] Christs Church shall be Catholike, as for places, and per∣sons; so here for time and duration, Esay LIII. 10. Those worship∣pers in the former verse, shall have a seed and succession to continue from generation to generation, Psal. LXXXVII. 5, 6. Acts XV. 16. They shall come] They that are first in Christ, begotten by the im∣mortal seed of his Word. shall declare his righteousnesse] In performing his promises, in the exhibition of the Messias, and the benefits of redemption and salvati∣on by him, Psal. XL. 10. and LXXI. 15. that he hath done this] Like that Psal. XXXVII. 5. Shepheard] A frequent similitude: none oftner used in Scripture; yet may David the more willingly use it, as having been a Shepheard himself. It is used of God; of Christ; and of Magistrates, and Mi∣nisters under them. And the godly are called by the name of sheepe. The texts are numerous. I shall not want] 1 Cor. III 21. Mat. V. 33. in green pastures] Ezek. XXXIV. 14. Esay XLIX. 10.
thou art with me] Gen. XV. 1. and chap. XXI. 22. 1 Chron. XI. 9. 2 Kings VI. Judg. VI. 12. Acts XVIII. 9. Jer. XV. 20. Esay XLIII. 2. Thy rod and thy staffe] Micah VII. 14. Zech. XI. 7. dwel in the house of the Lord] The place of Gods worship, Judg. XIX. 18. Psal. LXVI. 13. and XXVII. 4. yet God dwells not in Temples made with hands, Esay LXVI. 1. Acts VII. 48. The earth] 1 Cor. X. 26, 28. twise alledged by the Apostle; and to two several purposes; and both appositely hill of the Lord] Though all the earth be the Lords, verse 1. yet the hill of Zion, Psal. II. 6. is his holy place. As Exod. XIX. 5. Deut. X. 14. Of this hill, see Esay II. 2, 3. Micah IV. 1. See Psal. XV. 1. holy place] Place, not capable of holinesse in it self, of any inhe∣rent holinesse: But of a relative holinesse, in a relation to Gods pre∣sence therein, for the time, either by extraordinary signes and tokens as Exod. III. 5. or by appointing his ordinary means of worship there∣in; ceremonial under the Old Testament; which now is done away, and not to be recalled; or spiritual, under the New. The former, though of Gods appointment and ordination, had not in themselves, nor could give absolute holinesse to the worship therein performed: And much more now the Places of Gods worship do not make holy the Services therein performed; but by them rather are made holy only relatively, being appointed to such holy uses. He that hath] Esay XXXIII. 15, 16. clean hands] Psal. XVIII. 21. Esay LVI. 2. Ezek. XVIII. 8. pure heart] Matth. XV. 19. Prov. II. 19. Jer. XVII. 9. yet Acts XV. 9. 1 Tim. I. 5. Psal. CI. 2. nor sworn deceitfully] Oaths are taken in a strict and proper sense; or at a great latitude. They are Assertorie, or Promissorie; single, or with a curse or execration annexed; lawful in themselves; an act of Religion, Esay XIX. 18. Lawfull in the Old Testament, by Gods precept, promise, and examples of holy men. Lawful in the New Testament by same nature, and use of them, as in the Old, Hebr. VI. 16. by those warrants, Esay XLV. 1. Jer. XII. 16. speaking of the times of the New Testament; by the example of the Angel, Apoc. X. 16. of the Apostle, Rom. I. 9. 2 Cor. I. 23. That text, Matth. V. 34. and so that James V. 12. is not to be understood simply and absolutely; but relatively, as Christ thereby opposeth the corrupt practise of the Pharisees, and their false interpretation of Gods Law concerning swearing, as if swearing, so as Gods name were not directly used in it, and no falshood or perjury contained in it, were no sinne with them; but ever and altogether lawful, though it were never so lightly and slightly, vainly, and customarily, unnecessarily, and causelesly done, where yea and nay had been sufficient. Thus Christ opposeth and for∣biddeth even all swearing as much as lieth in us; but forbids not law∣full swearing, upon just, urgent and necessary occasions. Of Oaths, see more in the Observations on Hos. IV. 15.
He shall] He is a true member of the invisible and Catholike Church, and he only; whereas hypocrites and wicked persons may be members of the visible and of particular Churches, by reason of their external profession only, Rom. IX. 6. Matth. VII 21. The former are members properly, univocaly, essentialy, formaly, inwardly, in truth, and in the judgement of God; The later only equivocaly, exter∣naly, materialy, not formaly and essentialy, in shew, in the opinion of men as rotten members, or ill humours in the body, 2 Tim. III. 5. Gal. V. 24. These are in the visible Church, as chaffe is among the wheat. receive] Not by merit of condignity, for the worth of his works, Dan. IX. 18. Rom. VIII. 18. For the works are imperfect in them∣selves; and again, not our own, and wholy from our selves, and be∣sides due debt otherwise, without this reward; and lastly no wise equivalent, and equipollent to this reward. But receive the blessing and reward by and because of Gods free grace, rich mercie, bounti∣ful promise, whereby he hath freely engaged himself to give such and so superabundant a remuneration. And so he gives it in justice now because engaged and obliged thereunto by the truth of his so free, gracious, and bountiful a promise. God is just to performe his pro∣mise, 1 John I. 9. 2 Tim. IV. 7. Blessing] Gen. XII. 2. Gal. III. 9. Eph. I. 2. Mat. XXV. 34. righteousnesse] Of Justification, and of Sanctification; Righteous∣nesse, with the encrease, fruit, and reward of it, according to Gods righteous promise and performance. This is the generation] This kinde of men. As Luke XI. 29. and XVI. 8. Matth. XII. 39. Not those that brag of being Abrahams or Iacobs seed, Matth. III. 9. Iohn VIII. 33. but these are the true seed and generation, Gal. III. 7, 29. Rom. IX. 6, 7. These are the true Israel of God, that seek him. that seek] Deut. IV. 29. Psal. XXVII. 8. 2 Kings XX. 3, 4. which grace comes of God, Esay LXV. 1, 2. thy face O Iacob] O God of Jacob. Or, this in Jacob; or the ge∣neration of Jacob, that seek Gods face; as Jacob did, Gen. XXXII. 24, 30. See John I. 47. Rom. IX. 6. and II. 28, 29. Lift up] Having mentioned the hill of the Lord, and his holy place, ver. 3. This may seeme to relate to the gates and doors of the Temple, vowed by David, and to be built by Solomon; and to the coming in of the Ark into it: or rather, proceeding from the Type to the Truth, we may mysticaly referre this to the Church of Christ, and the true members of it, to lift up the gates and doors of their hearts and everlasting souls, that the Lord whom they seek may come into his Temple, Mal. III. 2. that they prepare themselves to receive and entertaine him at his coming in the flesh, at his coming into their hearts, Apoc. III. 20. who is indeed the true King of glory. Apoc. XVII. 14. 2 Cor II. 8. the true Jehovah, Exod III. 15. Psal. LXXXIII. 18. Col. II. 9. and Christ, compare Num. XXI, 5. with 1 Cor. X. 9. and Esay VI. 1. with John XII. 41. Even Iehovah our righteousnesse,
Ier. XXIII. 6. the mighty God, Esay IX. 6. the increase of whose King∣dome and government shall have no end, Esay IX. 7. Dan. VII. 14. Mat. XXVIII. 18. for whose in-coming the doors of our hearts and affecti∣ons should lie open. To make the Alphabetical order perfect in this Psalm, some would have the verses in it not to be rightly all distinguished: as namely, the second, and the fifth. And  to seeme wanting in the begin∣ning of the seventeenth verse. And, the last verse to be only the later part of the foregoing verse. without cause] Given on my part;  not provoked by me. for it is great] And so needs much mercie, great mercie. seek ye my face,] Deut. IV. 29. Davids soul did most seek it, to be near where the Ark of God was, and so before the face of the Lord, as the Scripture phraseth it: being out of heart when he was barred from it, ver. 4. Psal. LXV. 4. Psal. LXXXIV. and XLII. 1 Sam. XXVI. 19. Gods command here was Davids request, and the thing he aimed at. regard not] Esay V. 12. do not attend, and wisely consider of them; of the mysteries of Gods providence and wayes; in bringing David to the Crown; in managing the matters of this world, as to the god∣ly, and as to the wicked; in husbanding mans salvation by contraries, &c. Rom. XI. 33. in the beauty of holinesse] In the comely honour of the Sanctuary, Psal. XCVI. 9. the glorious, holy Sanctuary. The voice of the Lord] Of thunder, see Exod. IX. 23. Job XXXVII, 4, 5. and XL. 9. See the Observations on Psal. XVIII. 13. Sirion] See the Observations on Deut. III. 9. but a moment] Esay XXVI. 20. and LIV. 7, 8. in my blood] By any violent death, through Sauls means. into thy hands] Luke XXIII. 46. 1 Pet. IV. 19. My times] And troubles, and changes therein. O how great] Esay LXIV. 4. 1 Cor. II. 9. in a] As in a fensed Citie. in my hast] 1 Sam. XXIII. 26. Or in my hasty thoughts, through the extremity of my imminent instant danger. So Psal. LXXVII. 7. &c. 2 Cor. I. 8, 9. yet this might stand mixed with faith; as Psal. XXII. 1. And as Fear and Confidence are not altogether inconsistent, Phil. II. 12. Heb. III. 6, 14. Blessed] Saint Paul, Rom. IV. 6, 7, 8. alledgeth this to prove justi∣fication by Faith, without Works. Faith and Works are inseparable, Ephes. II. 8, 9, 10. James II. 14, 17, 18, 20,—26. That Faith which is without Works is dead, no true Faith. But Faith onely acteth in the point of our justification before God, applying Christ and the Promises, beleeving according to the Covenant of the Gospel; where∣by Christ doth become ours his righteousnesse our justification; and all the benefits of his redemption do redound and amount to our sal∣vation.
imputeth] Frequent is the use of this word in the point of justi∣fication. mule] See the Annotations on Gen. XXXVI. 24. neer unto thee] To hurt thee: or not neer to thee to do thee service, unlesse forced by the bridle, Iam. III 3. Harp] Invented by Iubal, Gen. IV. 21. made by Solomon of Al∣mug trees, 1 Kings X. 12. called the pleasant Harp, Psal. LXXXI. 2 much used for mirth and joy, Gen. XXXI. 27. Iob XXI. 12. Esay V. 12. Ezek. XXVI. 13. And much used in Gods worship and service, in the praising of him, by ordinance in the Temple, 1 Chron. XV. 21. and XXV. 1, 3, 6. And upon other religious occasions both pub∣like, as 1 Sam. X. 5. 2 Sam. VI. 5. 1 Chron. XV. 16. 2 Chron. V. 12. Nehem. XII. 27. and private, wherein David excelled, 1 Sam. XVI. 16, 23. and abounded, Psal. LVII. 8. and CVIII. 3. And much in holy use with others also; as here; and so XLIII. 4. and LXXI. 22. and XCVIII. 5. And of spiritual harps we read in the Revelation, chap. V. 8. and XIV. 2. and XV. 2. Psalterie] Or Lute, or Viol. In Hebrew Nebel. Whence the Greeks and Latines seeme to have the names of their instruments Nablium, Naulon. a new Song] So Psal. XL. 3. and XCVI. 1. and XCVIII. 1. and CXLIV. 9. New still, upon new and fresh occasions renued. As Love is said to be both an old and a new Commandment. Yet in Scripture phrase very much, Things appertaining to the times of the Gospel, are called New; as a New Covenant, Heb. VIII. 13. a New Testament, 1 Cor. XI. 25. a New Ierusalem, Apoc. III. 12. New Heavens, and a New Earth, Esay LXV. 17. a New name, a New man, Eph. II. 15. Esay LXII. 2. a New Commandment, John XIII. 34. a New way, Heb. X. 28. a New heart, Ezek. XXXVI. 26. yea and all things New, 2 Cor. V. 17. Apoc. XXI. 5. See that Song, Luke II. 14. Abimelech] The common name of the Kings of the Philistines, signifying my-father-King: Achish being the proper name for this King of Gath, a Citie of the Philistines, 1 Sam. XXI. 10. The LVI. Psalme is also upon this same occasion. And this one of the Alphabe∣tical Psalmes: Only Zain is omitted, and Phe twice used. They looked unto him] To God;  and to his dealing with David. afflictions] They serve to them as cures, or preservatives from spiritual evils, Psal. CXIX. 67, 71. Heb. XII. 6, &c. not one of them is broken] See Exod. XII. 46. Num. IX. 12. John XIX. 36. The sense here is more general. Let them] See the Observations on Psal. CIX. False witnesses] Mat. XXVI. 59. my prayer returned] Though they got no good by it, yet I did. my darling] Psal. XXVI. 20,—23. within my heart] I verily beleeve it of them, by reason of their heinous transgressions, which indeed proclaime it. not good] Extremely bad. . See the Observations on Prov. XX. 23.
great mountains] Mountains of God. See the Observations on Jo∣nah III. 3. and on 1 Sam. XIV. 15. The matter of this Psalme, or the first maine part of it, is that grand point, of the prosperity of the wicked, and afflictions of the god∣ly, in this life; and of Gods Providence therein. Heathens have much debated this matter. Job is much upon it, as chap. XXI. 7. &c. and chap. XXIV: and chap. XXVII. and in other places. Divers other Psalmes also insist upon it more or lesse; as Psal. XLIX. and LXXIII. and XC. Jeremie professedly, chap. XII. 1. &c. And Habakkuk some∣what, chap. I. 13. The case in point of fact is plain and undeniable. The Providence, Wisdome, and Justice of God in it, is a Mystery to man. Yet to the Christian who believes the Resurrection of the bo∣dy, and eternal life, things not so clearly revealed in the infancie of the Church, the difficulty is now soone dissolved. And the well and wise weighing of the point by an Heathen, or natural man, may much availe him for his further and better information in matters of great consequence and concernment. See the Annotations on Psal. XLI. 1. The greatest doubt arising hence to the godly, may seeme to be this, How these same occurrences of administrations in Gods Providence may stand with such constant, continual, and abundant promises of Gods blessings in temporal things to the godly in this life, 1 Tim. IV. 8. and with his like threatnings of plagues and punishments to the wicked in this world. The issue will be, That these Promises and Threatnings, specialy under the Law, are spoken to vulgar capacities, in those times; and yet have their exceptions and limitations in the Word: And that the prosperity of the wicked is but a seeming prospe∣rity; and a short, and momentany prosperity in relation to eternity; and many wayes disadvantageous and hurtful to them; and ends with an overthrow suddaine, and terrible, and everlasting: And again, That the affliction of the godly is but momentany, nothing to eternity, and mainly profitable for the work of Grace here, more then abundantly recompensing and over-poizing their afflictions; and for the increase of Glory hereafter. Yet super-adding this, That Gods wisdome and wayes of Providence are not commensurate with mans finite and shal∣low capacity, Psal. XXXVI. 6. Rom. XI. 33. Gen. XVIII. 25. Esay LV. 8, 9. Fret not] Another Alphabetical Psalme. Wherein, not every verse, but every second verse, begins with the letter of the Hebrew Alpha∣bet in order. Only verse 7, 20, 29, 34. stand single in their due order, without any other letter or verse interposed. cease from anger] Upon unjust causes, in an unjust maner, and mea∣sure, Ephes. IV. 31. yet in it self lawful, Ephes. IV. 26. Mark III. 5. A little] Prov. XV. 16. and XVI. 8. and X. 22. Eccl. IX. 7. I have been young] This was Davids experience in his time. It fol∣lowes not to be so in all ages. to bring to remembrance] That he might remember Gods chastise∣ment upon him for his sinne;  or that God might remember him to help and deliver him out of it.
lest otherwise] A like argument or expression God useth, Deut. XXXII. 27. to Jeduthun] Or for him, and his posteritie, 1 Chron. XXV. 3. So Psal. LXXVII. title. Even from good] Not much unlike that idiotisme and expression, Gen. XXXI. 29. Num. XXIII. 25. the fire burned] See Jer. XX. 9. Job XXXII. 18, 19. a moath] The moath is suddenly crushed, Job IV. 19. and doth in∣sensibly consume a garment, Job XIII. 28. Hos. V. 12. That this Psalme should wholly be understood of Christ;  exclud∣ing David; may seeme not so safe and warrantable. I waited] They are Davids words throughout this Psalme. Yet he being in some things a Type of Christ; and was to be the Father of Christ according to the flesh, he useth some words propheticaly of Christ, speaking them as in the person of Christ, which are directly applyed to Christ by the Apostle, Heb. X. 7, 8, 9. and heard my cry] Thus from experience of mercie formerly re∣ceived, in Gods hearing his Prayers, and delivering him from deepest dangers, in the former part of the Psalme; he strengthens his faith in Prayer for obtaining like mercie, and deliverance, in the later part of the Psalme: so as there is no shew of opposition or contradiction, be∣tween the beginning, and ending of it. an horrible pit] Not that imaginarie Limbus Patrum: nor that state of sinne before regeneration; whereunto their own preparato∣rie dispositions, to their conversion, did availe and prevaile, whiles they were in that state of sinne, to their deliverance out of it, by merit of congruity. But this pit is the depth of miseries, the evils of punish∣ments, the gulph of temporal afflictions, wherein David was plunged after his conversion, and the graces of faith, hope, and invocation ap∣pearing in him, ver. 1. a new song] For new benefits and deliverances;  and those such and so new, as the like were scarce heard of before. many shall] Psal. XXXII. 6. fear, and shall trust.] These two conjoyned in a pious soul; fear, and faith; a reverent fear, and trust in Gods mercie, Psal. CXXX. 4. unto our God] To god, and Christ. his trust] Whose sure mercie to them is such, as we read, 1 Tim. IV. 10. Deut. I. 31. and XXXII. 10, 11, 12. John III. 16. Many, O Lord my God] David speaking to God and Christ;  if not in the person of Christ, as his Type, with admiration of his infinite goodnesse and mercy towards man, and in ordering the meanes of his salvation. So that he riseth up now to a more general admiration of Gods wonderful works and thoughts towards his; and of the num∣ber, quantity, and quality of them. Sacrifice] Christs words, Heb. X. 5. So that these words, and the next are spoken unto God, in the person of the Messias, who was to come of the seed of David, Heb. X. 5, 6, 7. See the like before,
XVI. 10. David having spoken in the former verse of Gods wonder∣full works and thoughts towards mankinde, doth in this maner in the words of the Messias rise up to the very highest of them all in these two verses. For Sacrifices, see my Table of them in Leviticus. not desire] Jer. VII. 22. Hos. VI. 6. Prov. XXI. 3. 1 Sam. XV. 22. Psal. L. 5,—16. Matth. XII. 7. Mark XII. 33. And Christ was now to put an end to them, Dan. IX. 27. as not able in themselves to purge away sinne, Heb. X. 4. Therefore God desired them not simply of themselves, without inward piety concurring, as the very life and soul of them; Or, in comparison of the spiritual worship of God; or, in comparison of that al-sufficient Sacrifice of Christ, which he was to offer in the body of his flesh, Heb. X. 1, 4. Rom. VIII. 3, 4. After which these Legal Typical Sacrifices were to be abolished, as was said. And that Sacrifice of Christ one offered never to be reiterated, Heb. IX. and X. chapters; contrary to that blasphemous sacrifice of Christ in the Popish Masse. mine ears hast thou opened] Digged open, or peirced; made me o∣bedient to thy voice: or bored, to make me thy servant for ever; in allusion to the Law Exod. XXI. 6. For these words here, we read, Heb. X. 5. but a body hast thou prepared me, or fitted me. Wherein the Apostle either followeth the LXX. or cites, not the words, but the sense, Rom. VIII. 3. Phil. II. 7. it being the same both wayes, in issue. Besides that varieties of readings in both places are alledged out of ancient Copies by the learned. Papists themselves deny not this text to be incorrupt. The Apostle faithfuly retaining the sense and scope of the place, without tying himself to the letter of the words in his quo∣tation. The variation is but a change of the figurative phrase into a pro∣per, to expresse the ready obedience of Christ to do the will of his Father in the work of the redemption of mankind, John V. 30. VI. 38. and IV. 34. whereunto by framing him a body God had fitted him. Sinne-offering] Heb Sinne. Put often in the Law for the Sinne-offering. So Levit. IV. 3. 24. Exod. XXIX. 14. In which sense Christ is called Sinne, 2 Cor. V. 21. Then said I, Lo, I come] When thou hadst so fitted me, Mark X. 32, 33, 34. In the volume] or Scroll rowled up, Jer. XXXVI. 2. Ezek. II. 9. The Volume of the Law and Scripture, Luke XXIV. 27, 44. John V. 39. of the Book] Sepher, or Book generaly signifies any writings, Court-rools, &c. Deut. XXIV. 1. 2 Kings V. 5, 6. Jer. XXXII. 11. it is written of me] So Christ himself saith, Matth. XXVI. 24 John V 46. See Luke XXIV. 44, 46. Acts XIII. 29. I delight] Luke XXII. 15. Heb. X. 10. to do thy will] Heb. X. 10. John VI. 38. Luke XXII. 42. In all things to be performed by me in my flesh, which are required by thee for the redemption and salvation of man; even to my obedience in suffering the death of the Crosse, Phil. II. 8. Thus Christ in regard of
his humane nature was truly lesse then the Father, John XIV. 28. was subject to him; his will to the will of his Father; took upon him the forme of a servant, Phil. II. 7. was truly a servant, Esay XLII. 1. obey∣ed the mandates of the Father, John XII. 49. and XIV. 31. and XV. 10. Being our Surety, was made under the Law, Gal. IV. 4. under the Law of Moses, Moral, and Ceremonial; that the righteousnesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Rom. VIII. 4. And these are not figura∣tive and metaphorical, but proper elocutions, in regard of Christs hu∣mane nature; not making a Person in it self, distinct from the Person of the Sonne of God, with Nestorius; nor yet hereby making the Person of the Sonne of God hypostaticaly uniting to himself the Hu∣mane Nature, inferiour to the Person of the Father, as Arius would. I have preached] Though Gods works were such as the fifth verse expresseth;  and specialy that work of mans redemption; yet Christ, as he took a body, by the sacrifice of it, as a Priest, to satisfie the Fa∣ther; so here as the great Prophet of the Church, he doth preach and publish it, John XVII. 6. Luke XXIV. 47. even Gods righteousnesse, faithfulnesse, truth, loving-kindnesse, salvation, to the great Congre∣gation of his people, Rom. III. 21, 22. Esay LXI. 1, 2, 3. and XLIX. 6. which office and duty David also the Type, in his degree, and all Christs messengers in their place and function, do performe. with-hold not thou] David prayes here for what he had preached in the former verse, containing in it the fountain, and the epitome of blessings and happinesse to man. heart faileth me] Psal. XXII. 14. and XXXVIII. 10. Be pleased] Hence to the end of the Psalme agrees with Psal. LXX. David petitions, for his deliverance, in this verse; the confusion of his enemies, verse 14, 15. to the joy of the godly, and the glory of God, verse 16. confounded] Davids imprecation against his enemies. This is more then a passionate unfolding of their injuries, and leaving the revenge to God: more then that 2 Sam. XV. 31. and Acts IV. 29. and Psal. LXXXIII. 16. more then a meer prophetical prediction of evills to be∣fall them. Here is more: And so Psal. XXXV. 4. and LXX. 2, 3. and CIX. 7. &c. & LIX. 13. and 2 Tim. IV. 14. And in many other places. David here, and other holy Prophets do not thunder thus against their enemies, desperate sinners, out of any immoderate carnal passions, of private hatred, or desire of revenge; or out of any rash and inconsi∣derate zeal; but moved and inflamed rather by the Spirit of God; acting herein the publike cause of God, and of his glory; against those whom they knew by the spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. XII. 10. to be Gods, and their forlorne foes. Yet possible that in some of these imprecations some mixture of humane infirmities might be: as in Je∣remie XV. 15, 16, 17. But for us; touching private and personal ene∣mies, our duty is, as we read, Matth. V. 44. as we finde in the exam∣ple of Christ, Luke XXIII. 34. and of Stephen, Acts VII. 60. and 1 Pet. II. 23. And for publick enemies of God and his Church; we
may not absolutely use execrations against their persons; as not knowing but God may convert them afterwards, of Sauls make them Pauls; and lest we incurre that rebuke, with those Disciples, Luke IX. 55. Let us stay till we know that we be of their spirit before we do as these Prophets did. Of imprecations, see more in the Obser∣vations on Psal. CIX. 14. and the Annotations on Neh. IV. 5. Let all those] Davids prayer for those that seek God, and love his salvation. But I] He concludes with commending his own case to God, his help, and deliverer. Blessed] This Psalme by some is applied to Christ;  but very hardly. deliver him] That is, the poor or sick weakling: David so com∣forts the poor afflicted. So we must judge charitably, that God in his ordinary course of providence will in due time, raise and restore them whom for a while he hath cast down. Some by him understand him that considereth the poor. his bed in his sicknesse] Make it to his ease. an evil disease] As Acts XXVIII. eate of my bread] This our Saviour applieth to Judas, John XIII. 18. See Psal. LV. 12, 13, 14. Amen] A concurrence of wishes, and confidence. An end of the first Book of Psalmes. Korah] This, and ten other Psalmes, without Davids name in the Title, are inscribed for Korah's posterity, to be sung in the Temple, with voice, and instrument. Heman the singer, the grandchilde of Samuel the Prophet, being one of his posterity, 1 Chron. VI. 33,—43. See the Observations on Num. XVI. 32. This Psalme seemes written by David; and when he was banish∣ed by Absolom, or Saub rather, from the Sanctuary, and sacred As∣semblies, and Solemnities, verse 1, 2, 4, 6. 9. As the Hart] Or Hinde. The LXX. hath it, the Hinde; reading the Hebrew here in the foeminine gender; for which the Hebrews render divers reasons. And though the Hebrews have a word of the masculine gender for the Hart, and of the foeminine gender for the Hind; yet by either of them many times the other sex is understood. And so it is also in other names of beasts with the Hebrews. As in Zech. IX. 9. the word for Asse is of the masculine gender, yet the female sex is thereby understood, Matth. XXI. 2. So the name of the fish which swallowed Jonas is named both in the masculine, and in the foeminine termination. See Jer. II. 24. Kept holy day] Three solemne feasts in the year. At their solemne Assemblies, and Sacrifices they kept feasts, with dancing and joy; Exod. XXIII. 14. and XXXII. 5, 6 19. Deut. XVI. 14, 15. Judg. XXI. 19, 21. Esay XXX. 29. for the help of his countenance] Or, his presence is salvations i. e. most ample, firme, absolute, and perfect salvation. For so the Plural
number is used to advance and amplifie the matter subject whereunto it is applied, as in this word, Ps. XVIII. 2. & XXVIII. 8, and XLIV. 4. and LXXIV. 12. So in others; as may be seene in the Observati∣ons on Psal. LI. 17. from the land of Jordan] From the places of his banishment, in the borders of the land. Deep] Afflictions upon afflictions, breaking in as billowes, wal∣lowing as waves, upon me: and the noise of one calling as it were for another. Seemes written by David, and upon the same occasion with the former. hill, and to thy Tabernacles] The Ark was then at the hill of Kiri∣athjearim; and the Tabernacle at Nob, or Gibeon. This Psalme of Instruction, concerning afflictions, and the right use of them. And seemes written, in the time of oppressions under the Philistines immediately before Davids reign; or of the Babylo∣nish captivity; and not to be extended to the dayes of Antiochus E∣piphanes. and cast them out] Or rather didst propagate, send forth, make spread, as the word signifieth, Psal. LXXX. 12. Ezek. XVII. 6. them] That is, our fathers. command] Psal. XLII. 8. Deut. XXVIII. 8. Psal. CXXXIII. 3. But] Having remembred Gods former mercies, he now bemoans their present miseries for want of Gods help. So Psal. LXXXIX. Yet] They professe their integrity. neither] In Hebrew it is, and. But this particle is divers times ta∣ken to signifie neither. And so Psal. L. 8. and Prov. XXXI. 3. Esay XLI. 28. and chap. XXVIII. 27, 28. See the Cinnus p. 182, 183. for thy sake are] Applied by Saint Paul, to the present state and con∣dition of himself;  the Apostles, and Christians, in their times, Rom. VIII. 36. Awake,] They beg his help, and mercie. a song of loves] A marriage song or Epithalamion of the well-be-loved (Virgins) verse 9, 10, 14: sung by them. To this Hymne we may apply those words, Ephes. V. 32. It setteth forth Christ in his glo∣ry; and his Spouse, the Church, in her beauty. See Heb. I. 8. John III. 29. Apoc. XXI. 9, 10. Typified here in Solomon, and Pharaohs daughter; wherein yet some things are proper only to the Antitype. My heart] Matth. XII. 34. touching the King] My Poëms of the King. He the matter sub∣ject of this Song. Thou art fairer] Cant. V. 10,—16. John I. 16. Heb. VII. 26. lips] Cant. V. 13. Luke IV. 22. Esay L. 4. John I. 18. and III. 37. gird thy sword] The spiritual sword is the Word of God, Ephes. VI. 17. Therefore Christs sword properly cometh out of his mouth, Apoc. I. 16. And with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked, Esay. XI. 4.
ride prosperously] As in a triumphant Chariot, Esay LIII. 10. because of truth, &c.] Sitting and riding as it were, upon these three royal vertues and graces; & they, as it were, drawing the Chariot. truth] Ephes. I. 13. Prov. XX. 28. Meeknesse] Matth. XXI. 5. and chap. XI. 29. and chap. XII. 19, 20. Esay XLII. 2. Zech. IX. 9. righteousnesse] Verse 7. Dan. IX. 24. teach thee] Experimentaly, by its own actings, Psal. XCVIII. 1. Esay LXIII. 5. Thine arrows] Heb. IV. 12. 2 Cor. II. 14, 15. and X. 4, 5. This verse not so properly suits to Solomon, or befits him. Therefore a great∣er then Solomon is here, Matth. XII. 42. Esay XLIX. 2. Of these ar∣rows is that true, 2 Sam. I. 22. and 2 King. XIII. 17. Thy Throne] Heb. I. 8. 2 Sam. VII. 16. Psal. X. 16. Esay IX. 7. Luke I. 33. Dan. III. 44, 45. and VII. 14 Psal. CXLV. 13. John XVIII. 36. Neither doth this sixth verse properly pertain to Solomon, either for the perpetuity of his Throne; or righteousnesse of his Scep∣ter: But to Christ, who is here called God. the Scepter] Esay XI. 3, 4. Psal. XCVI. 10. Thou lovest righteousnesse] Esay XI. 3, 4, 5. and chap. IX. 7. and LXI. 8. Therefore] To that end and purpose anointed; not anointed for that cause and merit, because he loved righteousnesse. As Esay LXI. 1. And so is therefore to be understood in the second verse aforego∣ing. So Gen. XVIII. 5. and XIX. 8. God thy God] The first of these may be read either in the Nomina∣tive, or Vocative case. The later is God anointing; who is truly the God of the Messias; as Psal. XXII. 1. hath anointed] God anointed him to his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King: as such Officers were of old anointed, Exod. XXIX. 7. 1 Sam. IX. 16. 1 King. XIX. 17. But this anointing here is to be un∣derstood of spiritual, inward, invisible anointing, Acts X. 37, 38. And so Psal. CV. 15. The Patriarchs are stiled anointed, who never were so outwardly with material oile. And this spiritual Anointing here is the superabundant infusion of the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, not into the Divine nature of Christ properly, which is incapable of grace infused, or of having any thing added to it; but into his Hu∣mane nature, plentifuly furnishing him with all abilities and graces for his execution of his said Offices, Luke IV. 17,—21. Esay LXI. 1. Dan. IX. 24. Yet as he is , Emmanuel, the Mediatour, re∣serving ever the property of either nature intire to it self, He may be said to be anionted in both natures, taking anointed in that sense as it denotes the designation and inauguration of him to his said Offices. And this Anointing may be appliable specialy to the time of his In∣carnation, of his Baptisme, and of his Rising from the dead. above thy fellows] Both Kings, Priests, and Prophets, Psal. LXXXIX. 27. above all his fellows, in nature, Heb. II. 14. in Christian Preroga∣tives,
1 John II. 20, 27. Apoc. I. 6. 1 Pet. II. 5, 9. And this both ex∣tensively, and intensively; Esay XI. 2. John I. 16. and III. 24. garments] Are odoriferous, as these aromatique spices and smels; ot by suffumigation of them. out of the Ivory palaces] 2 Kings XXII. 39. Amos III. 15. 1 Kings X. 20. Meaning, that either the King cometh out of them, as the bride∣groome; like that Psal. XIX. 5. Or that the garments were taken out of such palaces or coffers. Whereby they have made thee glad] By those odoriferous smels and perfumes: Prov. XXVII. 9. Or those that meet thee, or the bride∣gromes friends John III. 29. by their joyful acclamations and con∣gratulations. Or, as some, more then theirs that make thee glad, i. e. thy garments more odoriferous then theirs, thy fellows and friends. All this was true in Solomon literaly. Much more in Christ spiritualy and mysticaly. Whereof his Spouse makes use, Cant. I. 3. Esay LXI. 10. Kings daughters] The daughters of minor-Kings, or great Princes: or such as for their deportment, port, and abiliments, might be so esteemed. As Judg. VIII. 18. thy honourable women] Those beloved Virgins, intimated in the Title; honoured also by their invitation to this marriage, and honour∣ing it, as the brides maids. thy right hand] The prime place next the King: as the left hand is the second place; the King being in the middle. So Bathsheba, 1 King. II. 19. So Christ in respect of his Humanity, Matth. XXVI. 65. did stand] Or sit; had her seat, or station. So both standing and sitting on Gods right hand, in one and the same sense, are ascribed to our Saviour, Mark XVI. 19. Acts VII. 56. For us, See Ephes. II. 6. the Queene] This royal and honourable English word is very nigh the dishonest name of a Queane. And so the Hebrew word here u∣sed for a Queene, a wife, is very nigh to the unseemely word : for which the Massorets, as more mannerly forsooth, still in the margin put another word , Deut. XXVIII. 30. Esay XIII. 16. Zech. XIV. 2. Jer. III. 2. in gold] In cloath of gold; of threads of gold, of fine glistering gold, with rings, chains, and bracelets of gold, the most pure and splendent gold, Job XXXI. 24. Cant. V. 11. Dan. X. V. Of the se∣veral names of gold in the Hebrew, see the Annotations on Job XXVIII. 15,—19. of Ophir] See the Observations on 1 King. X. 11. He arken] Matth. XVII. 5. Rom. X. 17. O daughter] John I. 13. Apoc. XXI. 9, 10. forget also] Luke IX. 23. and XIV. 26. Matth. X. 37. As Abra∣ham did, Gen. XII. 1. and Ruth, chap. I. 16, 17. So shall] Upon these termes, more and more. greatly desire] This true in Solomon. But Christ loves his Spouse
first, 1 John IV. 10. Loves her in her blood, Ezek. XVI. 6. thy Lord] 1 Pet. III. 6. Judg. XIX. 26. And that no common or vulgar person. In the highest degree is Christ so to his Spouse the Church, even her Lord and God. Worship thou him] Pharaohs daughter was with civil worship to do it to Solomon, with civil reverent incurvation and adoration. The Church to Christ, with religious worship. of Tyre] Of this Citie, see the Annotations on Amos I. 9. This rich Merchant-Citie, the prime Mart for traffick, should bring to Solomons Spouse gifts and nuptial presents. And much more, Tyre and all Hea∣then Nations should bring themselves, and their Gifts, with all offices of submission and subjection, to the Spouse of Christ, Esay XLIX. 23. and LXVI. 12. Psal. LXXXVII. 4. the rich] Esay LX. 3, 10, 11, 16. glorious within] 1 Pet. II. 4, 5. Not Helen without, and Hecuba within. This true in Solomons Spouse partly. But in Christs Spouse true altogether, by her bridegroomes donation and operation, Ephes. V. 27. brought] With pompe, joy, and jubilation. of needle-work] As formerly costly for matter; so here curious for Art and work. As the like, Exod. XXVIII. 6, 8, 15, 39. with gladnesse] As is fit in marriage solemnities. they be brought] The Spouse first; the Virgins and brides maids, following and waiting on her; Cant. IV. 8. Apoc. XIX. 7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. XI. 2. palace] As the wise Virgins, Matt. XXV. 10. thy children] We read not that Pharaoh's daughter had any child by Solomon. But this is abundantly verified in the Church, the Spouse of Christ; Esay XLIX. 18,—21. and LIV. 1, 2, 3. Heb. II. 13. I will] Saith the Psalmist; by himself;  and by informing others so to do. thy Name] The name of the Bridegroome. therefore] By my example; as well as for all the reasons forego∣ing in this Psalme. praise thee] Christ the Bridegroome, for ever and ever: whereas Solomon by his foul fall worthily merited and inherited shame and dispraise. present help] Deliverer;  or Assistant. will not we fear] Though a natural fear; as Prov. XIV. 16. and XXII. 3. Matth. VIII. 26. yet not a godlesse, and faithlesse fear. Here faith triumphs over such a fear. though the earth] Hyperbolical expressions, usualy intimating the fearful alterations of States, and Polities; or the most dreadful dangers. a river] Alluding to that of Kidron, Gihon, and Shiloah: intend∣ing chiefly that, Ezek. XLVII. 1. Joel III. 18. Apoc. XXII. 1. Or, the meaning of this seemes best expounded in the next verse; and in the two verses following.
He maketh] Esay XLV. 7. Amos III. 6. Psal. LXXVI. 3. Exalted] Esay XXXIII. 9, 10. and XXX. 15. O clap] A signe of joyful acclamation used at the coronation of Kings 2 Kings XI. 12. and upon other joyous occasions. Ezek. XXV. 6. See Psal. XCVIII. 8. Esay LV. 12. Psal. LXVI. 1. The Psalmist exhorteth all people to sing Praises unto God, ver. 1. 7. A thing usu∣al in the Psalmes. For the Lord] Reasons, from Gods nature and properties;  appli∣able also to Christ; terrible to the wicked, his enemies: and a great King above all earthly Kings, Mal. I. 14. Matt. XXVIII. 18. He shall subdue] The Jewes enemies. And he had done so; the Canaanites, and others. And he will do so; the Churches enemies; Christ will call the Nations, and bring them into subjection under him, and his Church, Ezek. XX. 37. He shall choose] He did choose Canaan for his people Israel, Psal. LXXVIII. 55. And will choose and prepare that heavenly Canaan, that inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. I. 4. for all that beleeve and hope in him. for us] The Jewes seeming here to include the Gentiles, as called by Christ into the same communion of the Covenant, for grace, and glory, John X. 16. Eph. II. 14. the excellencie of Jacob] High and glorious excellencie, whereby Jacobs posterity excelled, Ezek. XXIV. 21. Amos VI. 8. and VIII. 7. Nahum. II. 2. viz. the Temple, Priesthood, &c. all those most ex∣cellent and precious promises and blessings made in Christ unto Iacob, and his posterity. God is gone up] When the Ark was carried from Kiriathjearim to the house of Obed Edom: thence to the Citie of David: thence by So∣lomon into the Oracle: 1 Chron. XIII. 8. and XV. 28. and 2 Chron. V. 13. Spiritualy and mysticaly, when Christ ascended with triumph in∣to heaven. See Eph. IV. 8. Col. II. 15. the King of all the earth] The universal Kingdome of God, and of Christ. So again, verse 8. Differing from earthly Kings. with understanding.] 1 Cor. XIV. 15. The word Maschil is here used for Psalme, which is the Title of sundry Psalmes, signifying an in∣structing Psalme. Thereby to instruct your selves, and others, of the Kingdome of God, and Christ; and of your duty. of throne of his holinesse] Psal. IX. 4. Apoc. IV. 2. The Princes] The voluntary, bounteous Princes, and people, sub∣ject themselves to this King. of the God of Abraham] His spiritual seed, Luke III. 8. John VIII. 33. &c. Rom. IV. 16, 17. Sheilds] He is the great Shield, Gen. XV. 1. Psal. V. 12. and XVIII. 35. the great conqueror, and protector of all. And Magistrates Sheilds under him; Hos. IV. 18. Psal. LXXXIX. 18. greatly exalted] Psal. XCVII. 9. A Song and Psalme] Wherein both voice and instrument were
used; the voice began, and the instrument after; And where the In∣scription is a Psalme and Song, there likely the instrument began, and the voice followed. Of the former sort are, as this Psalme; to Psal. LXVI. LXXXIII. CVIII. Of the later, are Psal. LXVII. LXVIII. LXXV. LXXXVII. and XCII. whole earth] Or Land of Judea. As Exod. X. 15. and most likely Matth. XXVII. 45. the sides of the North] The Temple on Mount Moriah, and the City of Jerusalem, joyned North to Mount Sion. Moriah is the North part of Sion. So Esay XIV. 13. the Kings were assembled] The Philistian Princes, 2 Sam. V. or those in the dayes of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. XX. or of Ezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. Upon some of which occasions this Psalme seemes to be com∣posed and inspired, Psal. XLVI. 6. marvailed, and were troubled] At Sions beauty, and at her strength, and their own overthrow. Thou breakest] As in a Shipwrack;  so thou didst break them. As 2 Sam. V. 20. Tarshish] See the Observations on 1 Kings X. 22. East wind] See Ezek. XVII. 10. and XIX. 12. Hos. XII. 1. and Ch. XIII. 15. Jonah IV. 8. As we have heard] Psal. XLIV. 1. seene] By experience. because of thy judgements] In confounding thine enemies, and de∣fending the people. tell the towers] Mark if any of them be demolished, or hurt by the enemie. that ye may tell it] How God had preserved and kept them. a parable] A sententious, grave, witty, dark saying, Prov. I. 6. not beseeming simple ones, Prov. XXVI. 7. used by Balaam, Num. XXIII. and XXIV. by Ezekiel at Gods command, chap. XVII. 2. and XX. 49. and much by our Saviour himself in his preaching, Matth. XIII. 35. sometimes in plainer maner, Mark IV. 33 sometimes in in∣tended obscurity, Luke VIII. 10. requiring sharpnesse of wit to under∣standed and expound them. Here the Psalmists extraordinary Preface ushering it in; and this enigmatical maner of delivering it, argues the matter to be of great weight and difficulty. As indeed it is that which so much troubleth and puzleth the wisest and the best men of the world; the afflictions and miseries of the godly, and the prosperities of the wicked. See Psal. XXXVII. 1. and LXXIII. 2, 12. and XCIV. 3, 4. Job XXI. 7, 13. Jer. XII. 1. Hab. I. 4, 5. And the wicked thereby take encouragement to evil, and nourish impious con∣ceipts in their hearts touching God, and his providence; Iob XXI. 14, 15. Psal. X. 3, 6, 11, 13. and XIV. 1. and XCIV. 7, 8. Mal. II, 17. and III. 15. See more of this in the Observations on Psal. XXXVII. 1. should I fear?] The godly should not fear, dismay, or be discou∣raged at the evils and miseries of this life.
boast] The wicked, and wealthy, cannot save the life of others, or their own life from death. And that ends all their jollity and prospe∣rity. wise men die] Eccl. II. 16. and III. 19. Their inward thought] They hunted after honour, and a famous memorial. Neverthelesse] They shall have no more good by their honours, then the others had by their riches; they abide not in life thereby one night the longer, Psal. XXXVII. 36. 1. Iohn II. 17. abideth not] Heb. Abideth not for a night. Which text many Jews, and other Writers, both old and new, do urge for their opinion, that Adam fell the same day wherein he was created; which point the great Linguist and Chronologer Master Hugh Broughton doth presse and prosecute, even with some heat, and overmuch passion, at large. But the learned Gataker doth clear this text from any such meaning, and gives reasons most probable, That Adam did not fall the same day wherein he was created, in his Cinnus, p. 189.—198. yet their posterity] Not warned thereby;  but commend their fa∣thers foolish courses, and continue in them, Psal. X. 3. like sheep] Rotten sheep that die of themselves. feel on them] And devour them. and the upright] The righteous in Christ, men of sincere inte∣grity. in the morning] Of the resurrection; when Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse shall arise at his second coming. But God] This answers that question, verse 5. will redeeme, &c.] Raise up my body, and receive me into ever∣lasting life; which is here opposed to all the worldly prosperity of faithlesse wicked men. See Gen. V. 24. Psal. LXXIII. 24. John XIV. 3. Acts VII. 15. 1 Thes. IV. 14. A clear testimony of the resurrection of the body, the immortality of the soul, and the life everlasting. Be not thou afraid] Stumble not, nor be offended at the prosperity of the wicked. never see light] Job XXXIII. 28, 30. Psal. LVI. 13. nor the light of heaven, Matth. VIII. 12. man] Verse 12. beasts] The Sheep, verse 14. Asaph] Either the Author, 2 Chron. XXIX. 30. Or chief Singer; to whom, and his sons, and posterity it was committed, 1 Chron. XVI. 5, 7. and XXV. 2. to tune it, and sing it, and play it upon musical in∣struments. And thus, Psal. LXXIII. to LXXXIII. are entituled all to, or for Asaph. The mighty God] God himself is brought in as a Judge upon the Bench, arraigning, convincing, sentencing, and judging his people. the perfection of beauty] Psal. XLVIII. 2. Lam. II. 15. a fire] As at Mount Sinai, when he gave his Law, Heb. XII. 18, 19.
call to the heavens] As Deut. IV. 26. and XXX. 19. and XXXI. 28 and XXXII. 1. Esay I. 2. Micah VI. 1, 2. not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices] Jer. VII. 22. They used to wea∣ry God with outward Offerings; Esay I. 11, 14. and LXVI. 3. Micah VI. 6, 7 Hos. VI. 6. Amos IV. 4, 5. The meaning here is accord∣ing to that 1 Sam. XV. 22. Offer] The inward, and real, and substantial part of the Covenant, is the thing which God requireth; obedience and service in spirit and truth. The rejecting the former; and the exacting this later, is the maine matter of this majestical Psalme, verse 23. Hos. XIV. 3. Heb. XII. 15. pay thy vowes] Of vowes, see the Annotations on Jonah I, 16. But unto the wicked] Here God sentenceth those grosse hypocrites that place all Religion in outward Rites and Ceremonies: neglecting the maine duties of Piety and Righteousnesse. Against whom is the maine bent and drift of this Psalme. And speakest against] Psal. LXIX. 13. The godly do otherwise, Psal. XXVI. 4. 5. Nathan] To reprove him for his sinne, so long unrepented, 2 Sam. XI. and XII. chapters. Written, upon that argument, though not at that time. gone in] Gen. VI. 4. Bathsheba] The daughter of Eliam, 2 Sam. XI. 3. called also Bath∣shua, daughter of Ammiel, 1 Chron. III. 5. Have mercie] A rare example of repentance: and useful against despair: as his fearful fall should make us watchful over our selves; not presume of our own strength; but ever to eye, trust to, and depend upon God and his preventing, assisting Grace. Mercie here, and the multitude of Gods tender mercies, is his Citie of Refuge, and shute-an∣chor. No defense for himself, no other plea can he make. wash me] And so verse 7. alluding to the Legal washings, Levit. XI. 25, 32. Exod. XIX. 10. Num. XIX. 19. Thus he prayes, and thus he deals throughout this Psalme; even after Nathans absolution. And thus true Penitents will do. For I acknowledge] Prov. XXVIII. 13. 1. John I. 9. So Esay LIX. 12. Jer. III. 13. Cited, Rom. III. 4. with no variation in sense. thee only] Not because he a King, and so exempt from the power of others: But because this was his greatest grief, to offend God, 1 Sam. II. 24, 25. and such a God, so good to him, 2 Sam. VII. 18, 19. and that God should so suffer in this his sinne; 2 Sam. XII. 14. who yet only could pardon his sinne, Matth. IX. 3. as against whom, and whose commandment properly, all sinne is committed. in thy sight] God then sees the sinnes of his Saints; yea more, he is offended with them, reproves them, makes his Saints smart for them; as in the Scripture plentifully appears. That place Num. XXIII. 21. is blindly brought against this truth, as if they would make God a
blinde idol, and not an omniscient God. Or, as if that text had not relation to the Saints under the Old Testament, before that grace, which they say, is given in the New. that thou mightest be justified] Acquitted, glorified, by this my confession, Josh. VII. 19. when thou speakest] In thy reproof by Nathan. and be clear] Clearly overcome, be unreprovable, and win the victory in judgement. when thou judgest] In sentencing my sinne, and my punishment for it: Or, when thou art judged; in the opinion of men, and in their censures, for thy dealing with me. Saint Paul citing these words, Rom. III. 4. applies them from the hypothesis, in Davids singular case; to the thesis, to Gods general faith and truth in all his promises and pro∣ceedings. And thus the injustice of man doth commend the justice of God. in iniquity] This we call Original sinne. The Apostle calleth it inhabiting sinne, Rom. VII. 17. whereby all men are carnal, sold un∣der sinne, John III. 6. Rom. VII. 14. The fountain of actual sinnes, John IX. 34. Ephes. II. 1. So as whole man is in evil, and whole evil is in man. the hidden part] The hid man of the heart, 1 Pet. III. 4. thou shalt make me] Thus rising up by faith to this hope: Or, hast made me; thus opposing that integrity which God requires, to his pre∣sent state of corruption by his foul fall contracted. to know wisdome] 1 John II. 4. by his sinne now eclipsed. with hysop] Exod. XII. 22. Levit. XIV. 4, 6, 49. Num. XIX. 6, 18. Heb. IX. 19. Create] Ephes. II. 10. and IV. 24. Jer. XXXII. 39. Ezek. XI. 19. and XXXVI. 26. take not] Yet Gods holy Spirit was in him; even in this case, and state of extremity. free spirit] Freely and bountifully bestowed, freeing me from the bondage of sinne, making me free to righteousnesse, 2 Cor. III. 17. Rom. VI. 18. 22. blood-guiltinesse] Bloods of Uriah, and others slaine with him. Open thou my lips] Give me new occasion by the pardoning of my sinne: yea, give me the grace both to will, and to do; the habit and ability, and the grace to bring the habit into act, to act it effectualy. not Sacrifice] See the Observations on Psal. XL. 6. Indeed we finde not expressed any sacrifice for murder, or adultery, or any capital crime. the Sacrifices] The plural number is here used for the greater em∣phasis, and amplification. And so Iudg. VII. 10. 2 Chron. XXIV. 25. and chap. XXVIII. 3. Prov. I. 20. Mal. I. 6. Lam. III. 22. 2. Sam, XXII. 1. unto Sion] The whole Church was in danger of Gods judgement by his sinne: as 2 Sam. XXIV. 15.
and whole-burnt-offering] See Levit. VI. 23. the Edomite] Of Edom, or Idumea▪ or Adonite, from Adam, a Citie in Reuben; or Admah, a Citie in Iudah; or Adam▪ a towne in Naphtali; or Adummin, in the borders of Iudah and Benjamin. The History of this is in 1 Sam. XXI. and XXII. chapters. Here we have Davids  ation of Doeg; and imprecation against him; and his own glorious  in God. This  uch like the fourteenth Psalme. And so as I have said, the LX. and  CVIII. Psalme are much alike. fear was] Deut. XXVIII. 65. Levit. XXVI. 36. Iob XV. 21.  XVIII. 1. Citizens of Ziph in the tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 24. having  and Wildernesse of that name by it. said ] This they did twise, 1 Sam. XXIII. 19. and againe, chap. XXI. 1. strangers] Though of the same tribe, yet at least they carried them∣selves so to him: as Job complains, chap. XIX. 13, 14, 15. and so e∣stranged from God, Psal. LVIII. 3. No strangers more strange then they that cast off the bands of civility, and nature, wherein they were bound. cut them off in thy wrath.] Psal. CXLIII. 12. Of Imprecations, see the Observations on Psal. CIX. 14. and make a noise] In the earnestnesse of his Prayer, a doleful noise. cast inquity upon me] From themselves upon me, by unjust impu∣tation and defamation. my heart] Psal. XXXI. 9,—12. O that I had] A passionate with, as Psal. XIV. 7. flee away] As a bird, Psal. XI. 1. swiftly and speedily. wildernesse] As Apoc. XII. 6, 14. divide their tongues] Their language, and counsels, as Gen. XI. 7. 2 Sam. XVII. 1, 5, 14. not an enemie] Psal. XLI. 9. John XIII. 18. mine equal] My Peere, and chief Counsellor. This most likely aimes at Achitophel: and the whole Psalme, to his distresse in his flight from Absolom, and his conspiracie. quick into hell] As Num. XVI. 32, 33. Evening,] Dan. VI. 10. Acts III. 1. and chap. X. 9. battel] 2 Sam. XVIII. Psal. XXVII. 2, 3. because they have no changes] In their temporal estate and prospe∣rity, Job X. 17. (David therefore blesseth God for afflictions, Psalme CXIX. 67, 71.) which yet should have made them change from evil to good; but it wrought no change in them, but the contrary; they were in evil unchangable, Jer. XIII. 23. drawn swords] Psal. LVII. 4. and LIX. 7. and Prov. XII. 18. and XXX. 14. cast thy burden] 1 Pet. V. 7. the duty, and triumph of Faith. half their dayes] Job XV. 32, 33. and XXI. 21. Psal. XXXVII. 35,
36. Jeremie XVII. 11. Eccles. VIII. 12, 13. Jonath Elem Rechokim] Many take not these words for a musical instrument;  but thus translate them, concerning the dumb Dove in a farre place; understanding them of David himself, and his case and condition now in Gath. See Psal. XXXIV. and the Title. Of Gath, see the Annotations on Amos VI. 2. Michtam is a jewel, or golden Psalme. I am afraid, I will trust in thee] Faith and Fear stand together. And so Fear and Love. In God I will praise his Word] So again verse 10. 1 Sam. XXX. 6. in his word and promise. The Popish Text and Translation, and their wrested, and forced senses upon it, both here, and very frequently throughout this Book of the Psalmes, is not worth the while to take notice of them. shall they escape by iniquity?] It is not fit so to do. Let their pain∣ful iniquity breed their pain; as Psal. VII. 15. and IX. 15. and X. 2. Prov. V. 22. my wandrings] From Sauls presence to Gath. And he had many wandrings after this; to the Cave of Adullam; to Mizpeh in Moab; to the Forrest of Hareth in Judah; to Keilah; to the Wildernesse of Ziph; of Maon; to Engedi: hunted as a Partridge in the Moun∣taines. wilt not thou] Verse 9. 2 Cor. I. 10. Surely thou wilt, Psal. CXVI. 8. 9. Al-taschith] That is, Destroy not: which seemes to be the subject-matter of this Psalme. The same is in the Titles of Psal. LVIII. LIX. LXXV. Possibly the word here may relate to that, 1 Sam. XXVI. 9. though that fell out after his being in the Cave. Cave] 1 Sam. XXIV. 3. And in the Cave he made a Prayer, which is the CXLII. Psalme. performeth all things for me] Psal. CXXXVIII. 8. Phil. I. 6. Some understand this Psalme in this sense, to admonish Judges and Magistrates of their duties and offices: minding them of their high power received from God: who they are against whom they must ex∣ercise it, even wicked men, such as are here described. And so shall men count them worthy the title of gods, and acknowledge God in them, and their doings: Yet I would not in this Psalme, exclude all, or any relation had to Saul, and his wicked Courtiers. Doye] He appeals to their consciences. speak righteousnesse] Or dumb justice: boasting so to do, when in∣deed justice was dumb, and opened not her mouth. O congregation] O assembly, company of Sauls Courtiers and Counsellors; complying with the King against David. you weigh] Not justice;  but wrong for right, to serve your vio∣lence as you are able. from the womb] Esay XLVIII. 8. John IX. 34. Ephes. IV. 18. in∣bred, inveterate, incorrigible, Jer. XIII. 23.
Charmers] The Addars craft against them is recorded by divers Authors. Some sinners like the Addars, Acts VII. 57. Charmers seem to practise thus upon Addars, Eccles. X. 11. Jer. VIII. 17. And Charmers are forbidded by Gods Law, Deut. XVIII. 11. Yet this may seeme a proverbial speech used by David, without any purpose to maintaine either the truth of the thing in matter of fact, no more then Sirenum voces, or Cygnea cantio do prove such things to be; or else the lawfulnesse of it in relation to God and his Law. And Pro∣verbs and Similitudes may be taked from things in themselves unlaw∣ful; as from a thief, Apoc. XVI. 15. the unjust Steward, Luke XVI. 18. O God] The plural word Elohim here used is most times meant of one true God in the singular number. See Gen. XX. 13. and XXXV. 7. And so may be understood that in Exod. XXXII. 1. and verse 4. com∣paring therewith Neh. IX. 18. Before your pots can feele the thornes] The general meaning is plain, of the suddennesse of the destruction of those wicked men, in the for∣mer verses. Yet this proves a thorny text, to expound aright the si∣miiude of thornes here used, and the rest of the words contained in this verse. Pots, thornes, living, are words here of various significati∣ons; whence three maine renditions and interpretations do arise, thus: Before your pots can feele the fire of thornes, which is short, Eccles. VII. 6. so shall God take them away, as raw (flesh) by the heat of his indig∣nation. Or thus, as quick, or as yet living, and flourishing, in his wrath. Or thus, Ere men shall perceive your young springs of thornes grow to a perfect pricking bramble, God will as with a whirlewinde destroy every one of them, even as alive or quick, even in wrath as in burn∣ing anger. Thus speaking to the wicked, of their sudden destruction. Or thus, As raw flesh is snatched out of the pot, or flesh snatched out of the pot, being yet raw, before the heat of that light bramble-fire be come to it; so God, &c. Thus variously we may extend our mindes and meanings; without any peremptory determination of a∣ny one particular. wash his feet] As Psal. LXVIII. 23. See Esay LXIII. 3. Mal. IV. 3. Apoc. XIV. 20. at evening] Sauls messengers watching the house to kill David. And so verse 14. of his strength] Sauls. Or, suddenly changing the person, as is sometimes in the Hebrew, as Deut. V. 10. Dan. IX. 4. Mich. I. 2. meaning Davids strength. And so it is verse 17. my mercie] So by the vowels, and in the margin of the Masorets. But in the Hebrew text, his mercie. Slay them not] At once;  but by little and little. Yet verse 13. he saith Consume them—that they may not be. And in the next words, and let them know. All which may so well agree together, as needs no words of reconciliation. Shushan-Eduth] Shushan signifieth an instrument of six strings,
from  six; or a Lillie called , because it consists of six leaves: Eduth signifieth Testimony; either implying this Psalme to be a testimony of Davids faith and thankfulnesse; or to be sung by the Priests before the Ark of the testimonie; or rather, being joyn∣ed to the former word by a Maccaph, as in some kinde a part of it, it makes up the name of the musical instrument. to teach] The Doctrine in this Psalme contained; that all might learn it. As Deut. XXXI. 19. 2 Sam. I. 18. 2 Chron. XXXV. 25. when he strove] See the Histories, 2 Sam. VIII. 13. 1 Chron. XVIII. 12. And see the Observations on 2 Sam. VIII. 5, 13. Edom] The Edomites joyning with the Syrians. in the valley of salt] At the South end of the dead Sea. Or, that called the valley of Siddim, Gen. XIV. 8. Or the valley of Saveh, verse▪ 17. twelve thousand] And after in the pursuit of the victory, six thou∣sand, or these six thousand, by Abishai, before the main battel. From both doth arise the number of eighteen thousand. Which victory be∣ing archieved by Davids two Generals, Joab and Abishai, both under him, is ascribed to each of these three, in the places afore cited. And as David, and his Generals, obtained a victory here, 2 Sam. VIII. 13. So afterwards did Amatziah slay of Edom in the valley of Salt 10000. And other 10000. were cast down the top of the rock, or Selah, or Petra; which Amatziah took by warre, and they all were broken in pieces, 2 King. XIV. 7. 2 Chron. XXV. 11, 12. Thou hast given] Now a banner of conquest and victory. That] From hence to the end accords with Psal. CVIII. 6, —13. I will reioyce] David by reason of Gods truth, word, and promises, will triumph over his enemies, within the Land of Judea, and those bor∣dering about it. I will divide] This implieth a possession first. Shechem] It was a Citie in Mount Ephraim near Samaria; given to the Kohathites-Levites, and a Citie of Refuge. Abram came thi∣ther. Jacob had his daughter Dinah ravished there. Joshua thither ga∣thers all Israel, and renues Gods Covenant with them a little before his death. The Shechemites conspire against the house of Gideon to make Abimelech King, and he destroyes them. Thither Rehoboam came to be made King; but Jeroboam gaines the Kingdome of Israel, builds, or repairs Shechem, and dwels in it. Of this see the Annotations on Hos. VI. 9. Succoth] Not that in Egypt, Exod. XII. 37. But that where Jacob built booths, Gen. XXXIII 5. Afterward a Citie in the Tribe of Gad, upon the river Jabbok, East of Jordan; justly destroyed by Gideon, Judg. VIII. But repaired after. Gilead is mine] Thus David triumphs in having, or in assurance to have▪ upon Gods word and promise, these utmost bounds, and Tribes of Judea beyond Jordan, though they stood longest out for Ishbosheth, Sauls sonne.
Moab is my washpot] I can and will use it to base offices, as to wash my feet, use it as a conquered Nation, in servile and abject condition. See 2 Sam. 2. VIII. Psal. CVIII. 9. Over Edom] Trample it under foot, or use it to base offices. See Matt. III. 11. as to pull off my shooe, to wipe my shooe; or as Sapores the Persian used Valerian the Romand Emperour; or Temerlan the Scythian used Bajazeth the Turk; or Pope Alexander the third used Frederik the Emperour; and Pope Caelestine the third did to Henry the Emperour: bring it to a base and ignominious subjection. triumph thou] An ironical apostrophe, or bitter mock to Philistia, or the Philistines, in the West border of Palestine. And divers such ironies are in Scripture; See the Observations on Amos IV. 4. who will] The answer is in the two next verses. Through God] Davids wish, and confidence. See 1 Chron. XIX. 13. From the end of the earth] Of Judea; being now likely driven thi∣ther, by Saul, or Absalom rather, 2 Sam. XVII. 24. prolong] In this likely David hath a principal eye to Christ. once, twice] See the like Job XL. 5. mercie; for thou renderest] Even reward it self is of mercie. in the wildernesse of Judah.] 1 Sam. XXII. 5. and XXIII. 14, 15. Thus Davids Psalmes are not set down in this Book according to the Order of time, and occasions, wherein, and whereupon they were made and inspired. seene thee in the Sanctuary] Davids desires to the Sanctuary, and to Gods Ordinances therein, Psal. XXVII. 4. and LXV. 4. meditate] Davids night-meditations. my soul followeth hard after thee] 1 Cor. VI. 17. Phil. III. 13, 14. that sweareth by him] Swearing here taken for the whole worship of God, Deut. VI. 13. Esay XLV. 23. and LXV. 16. Of Swearing; see the Observations on Hos. IV. 15. O thou that hearest prayer, to thee] An heavenly incouragement to Prayer. choosest, and causest] Gods free grace; not mans free will. Thou visitest the earth] This Psalme may seeme composed after some year of famine. with the river of God] The raine, Deut. XI. 10, 11. submit] Though feignedly and falsely, Psal. XVIII. 44. 1 Sam. XXII. 45. As the faithfull shall obey God willingly and sincerely. with the incense of rams] Meaning their fat which was burned on the Altar: or incense with it; as in Peace-Offerings, Levit. II. 1, 2, 16. and VI. 15. If I regard] John IX. 31. James IV. 3. Job XXVII. 8, 9. Prov. I. 28, 29. Esay I. 15. Micah III. 4. Ezek. VIII. 18. Prov. XV. 29. He that turneth away his eare from hearing the Law, his prayer is abomi∣nation, Prov. XXVIII. 9. David penned by inspiration this Psalme; It seemes; after his vi∣ctories
over the Philistines, and other neighbouring enemies; and up∣on the occasion of that publick joyful solemnity in bringing the Arke into the Citie of David, 2 Sam. VI. 1 Chron. XIII. XIV. XV. chap∣ters. It consists most of Praises, and Prophesies. Let God] These words Moses used, Num. X. 35 at the removing of the Arke and Tabernacle from Mount Sinai. And may be taken as a Prayer, or a Prediction; or an assertion of what is done when God thus ariseth. arise] To help his: to scatter his enemies. See Psal. III. 7. and X. 12. and LIX. 5. extol him that rideth upon the heavens] Verse 33. Psal. XVIII. 10. Deut. XXXIII. 26. Esay 19. 1. some translate thus, make an high∣way for him; prepare it, as Esay XL. 3, 4. Matth. III. 2. Luke I. 76. as Matth. XXI. 8. And thus was done. Or thus, him that rideth in the Deserts; that is, as he did in the Wildernesse of Arabia before his Arke and people, verse 7. This variety of interpretation is of small concern∣ment. Jah] Some would have it the contract of  as  is of , if not of , to signifie the strong God. Jah is used again, ver. 18. God is called also by the Heathens  and Jove or Jupiter, that is Iah-father; deemed by Varro to be the God of the Jewes. This is the proper name of God, Esay XLII. 8. Exod. VI. 3. 2 Chron. VI. 33. Acts XVII. 23, 25, 28. Psal. LXXXIII. 18. See more in the Observations on Esay XXVI. 4. habitation] Of heaven;  and of his Sanctuary, 1. ings VIII. 30, 38, 39. solitarie in families] Senselesse here is the Popish text;  through∣out the verse: and foolish is Bellarmines interpretation, and applica∣tion. See Exod. I. 21. Psal. CXIII. 9. Ruth IV. 11. a dry land] Without fountains of waters, or showers of raine. A special judgement in those hot countries. when thou wentest forth] Iudg. V. 4, 5. Gods praise in bringing his people out of Egypt; in giving them the possession of Canaan; in de∣stroying the Kings their enemies, verse 7—13. The earth shook] Ezod. XIX. 18. Iudg. V. 4. Psal. CXIV. and CIV. 32. Heb. XII. 18. Sinai] An hill of a great height. Of Sinai see more in the Obser∣vations on Exod. II. 11. and on XIX. 3. a plentiful raine] God did blesse his inheritance of the Land of Ca∣naan which he gave to them, with raine, and all temporal blessings; which was an argument for their praising of him: And specially, as the inheritance of Canaan, and all temporal promises, and earthly bles∣sings to them were shadowes and types, intimations, and pledges of spiritual blessings, and eternal life in heaven; Heb. XI. 13,—16 and 26. Iohn V. 39. gave the word] The occasion;  it was his doing; he ministred the matter and speech unto them, in the glad tidings of victories. As Psal. CXVIII. 23.
of those that published it] The word here is of the feminine gender; and so may be understood of maids and women, entertaining, and publishing these good newes of victories with Songs and melody. As Exod. XV. 20. Judg. V. 11. and XI. 34. 1 Sam. XVIII. 6. Or of men, as the feminine is used for a masculine, in Koheleth, Eccl. I. 1. Such publishers, as 2 Sam. XVIII. 19. did flee] Deut. XXVIII. 7. As Exod. XIV. 25, 27. Josh. X. 11, 16. Judg. V. 19, 22. and VIII. 12. 2 Sam. V. 25. And in this verse again, the Popish text scarce bears any sense; and their interpretations are suitable. though ye have lien among the pots] A promise and consolation for the future: ministring more arguments of praising God. Though in the times of Heli and Saul ye have lien in black darknesse of afflictions, as a Skullion lies in a Campe or Leaguer among pots. as the wings of a Dove] Shining and bright. When the Almighty] , the alsufficient. scattered] Dispersed, discomfited, vanquished the Kings by his powerful presence, that they did flee apace, verse 12. Or, when he shall so do: so continuing and amplifying the former Promise. Kings] His, and their enemies, in Canaan. in it] In thy inheritance, wherein thy Congregation did dwell. it was white] An embleme of prosperity and joy; shall be black no more, as verse 13. but joyous and prosperous: or, white with the dead bones of the scattered slaughtered enemies. Salmon] Judg. IX. 48. A Mountain nigh Shechem, and Samaria, in the tribe of Ephraim, not farre from Iordan: likely snow was much upon it. as the hill of Bashan] Of Bashan, see the Annotations on Micah VII. 14. The hill of Sion doth equal, yea excell it; by reason of all its spi∣ritual prerogatives and priviledges; as verse 16. Or thus, the Hill of Bashan is an hill of God, i. e. a most excellent hill; for so the Hebrews expresse the most excellent things. See the Observations on Ionah III. 3. and on 1 Sam. XIV. 15. It is an high hill. All this is true: yet falls short of the hill of Sion; as it is in the next verse. Why leap ye] Insult proudly, vaunt it above the hill of Sion. dwell] Psal. LXXXVII. 1, 2. and CXXXII. 13, 14. This doth infinitely advance this humble hill of Sion above you. for ever] And not flit with his Ark and Tabernacle from place to place, as formerly. The Chariots] Gods glory in Sion by the multitudes of his mini∣string Angels, Heb. XII. 22. as it was in Sinai, when he gave the fiery Law, Deut. XXXIII. 2. Gal. III. 19. Acts VII. 53. Or rather these words may have a direct relation to the glorious maner of Christs A∣scention, with the attendance of infinite Angels. Angels appeared and ministred at his Incarnation, Luke II. 9, 13. Heb. I. 6. And why not so, or more, at his Ascention into the highest heavens? See Acts I. 10. well might the Angels then sing that song, Apoc. V. 11, 12. We
read of a Charet of fire, and horses of fire at the rapture of Elias. And of a mountain full of horses and Charets of fire round about Eliseus in his defense. And why not these Angels here to attend our Savi∣ours triumphant Ascention, set down in the next verse. Thou hast ascended] Literaly and typicaly true, after a sort, in Gods dealing with David. But without any type, it is Mysticaly most tre, and most verified in Christ, and his Ascention into Hea∣ven. And so David here turns his speech to Christ himself. Whereunto the Apostle doth apply it, Ephes. IV. 8. Ascended in his humane na∣ture properly. In Eph. IV. 8, 9, 10. He is said to descend; which being un∣derstood of his Divine nature, is spoken improperly. But Christ being God and Man in one person, That one Person without dissolving it, by reason of the Union of both natures in it, admits properly and truly of such speeches as containe the Proprieties of either Nature; the natures themselvs, & their properties, neverthelesse remaining ever realy distin∣guished. The person then of Christ, without the conversion of the one Nature into the other, in proper speech did ascend in his Humanity, by the power of his Deity; localy from mount Olivet, into that third hea∣ven of Paul, which our Saviour cals his Fathers house, Iohn XIV. 2. above these visible heavens, Eph. IV. 10. Our Saviours humane Nature then is contained in Heaven, Acts III. 21. is not in the Popish hoasts; and much lesse every where, according to the Ubiquitarian fancie. Though a time was, when Christ in his body was in the grave; in his soul in Paradise, in his Divine nature or Deity every where; yet without dissolving the Unity of his Person. captivity captive] Lead and taken them captives; or a multitude of captives; subdued thine enemies unto thee, made them thy cap∣tives Judg. V. 12. Not leading the Fathers out of Limbus Patrum; but captiving the World, and the Flesh, Sinne, and Satan, Death, and Damnation, which otherwise held Gods people in captivity and sla∣very. Col. I. 15. received gifts for men] Taken gifts for them i. e. receiving, gave; as the phrase is, Exod. XXV. 2. And in divers other places taking is used for giving, 1 King III. 24▪ and XVII. 10. Judg. XIV. 2. And giving is sometimes used for taking, as Gen. XLII. 30. What the chief of the Gifts were, are specified, Ephes. IV. 11, 12. rebellious also] Even the most averse and rebellious of them, that God might dwell in them; as Soul made a Paul, Tit. III. 3, 4, 5. dwell in them] Jah in them; not they dwell in the Church. Blessed] David blesseth God, as it may seeme, for the fruits and benefits of Christs Ascention, which do follow. loadeth us] With those gifts and blessings which Christ received for us, verse 18. and unto God the Lord] Here  hath the points of Elohim, not of Adonai▪ And so still when  and Adonai are joyned to∣gether, lest otherwise Adonai should be twise read. But where Adonai is not conjoyned,  hath the pricks of Adonai more often then
of Elohim. Or, Jehovi here may be used as a more pathetical kinde of expression; as in Gen. XV. 2, 8. Deut. III. 24. issues from death] As 1 Cor. X. 13. But God] This seemes to be the fruit and powerful effect of Christs Ascention, upon his enemies. The Lord said] Num. XXI. 34. and Exod. XIV. 13, 14. i. e. as I did from Og, King of Bashan; and from Pharaoh at the red sea. Thus he recals to their memories these two great victories: and to strengthen their faith for like victories over their enemies in Davids dayes, or in times of future extremities. thy foot may be dipped] So great should the slaughter of them be. When God takes publike vengeance, and executes his judgements upon his enemies, the godly who execute the same, may therein re∣joyce, and say as Jehu did, 2 Kings IX. 10, 36. thy goings] In the procedure of the verse, the Prophet goeth from the second person, to the third person. So Gen. XLIX. 9. And it is very frequent with the Hebrews to passe from one person to another. Thy goings then and thy doings, thy wayes and administrations, i. e. when God marched out of Egypt, through the Wildernesse before his people: or when David brought the Ark into Jerusalem. The singers] All sorts, in their rancks, praised God. damzels] As Exod. XV. 20, 21. Iudg. V. 1. and Chap. XI. 34. 1 Sam. XVIII. 9, 7. Blesse ye God] The beginning of their song, or part of their praise. from the fountain of Israel] Ye that flow from that fountain, are of that progeny, Esay XLVIII. 2. Deut. XXXIII. 28. Deut. V. 15, 18. There is] Both those near, and those a farre off, meet and joyne in this praising of God. See Psal. LX. 9. little Benjamin] The youngest sonne of Iacob; and least Tribe, since their fatal blow, Iudg. XX. and contesting most for Sauls house against David. Yet he here one, if not first among them. And all the rest likewisejoyne. ruler] Of the enemies; or rather, of the Benjamites; but no way of the other Tribes. Thy God] He petitions for strength and growth of blessings;  as God had formerly begun to work for them. hath commanded] So Deut. XXVIII. 8. Psal. CXXXIII. 2. XLII. 8. and XLIV. 4. and LXXI. 3. See Psal. XXXIII. 9. Matth. VIII. 8, 9. thy strength] The strength of the King, and of the people. Because of thy Temple] Because of thy Promises made to thy Church, and thy presence at thy Temple, Ark, and Tabernacle; there∣fore thou wilt grant and do according to the foresaid Petition. Shall Kings] David, and his successors shall therefore with all grate∣ful and thankful acknowledgement worship thee. Rebuke] He petitions against the adversaries of the Church, proud,
cruel, and malitious▪ Rebuke them in word, and deed. The mean∣ing is contained in the last words of the verse. the company of spear-men] Of enemies armed with Lances and Spears; or Reeds fitted and used for Spears; or arrowes, as the maner of those times was. buls with the calves] The robustick and strong enemies; with the rest of the rude and Epicurish multitude, Psal. XXII. 12. Amos. IV. 1. submit himself with pieces of silver▪] Though hypocriticaly. Or rather, that glories and vaunts himself in his brave attire embroydered with pieces of silver▪ and out-braves and tramples upon others; or is so rich, as he seemes to tread silver under foot, yet indeed trusts in it, and boast himself of it. And such usually, though unprovoked, de∣light to break forth into warre and wrong-doing: such enemies of thy people rebuke and break. Princes] Prophesying of the calling of the Gentiles to Christ, he exhorteth them to praise God, Ephes. III. 5, 6. Esay XLIX. 6. and LXVI. 19. stretch out her hands] In prayer, in offerings, in way of subjection. a mighty voice] Psal. XXIX. His thunder, Heb. IV. 11. Ascribe] Adds arguments for Gods praise. terrible] To be had in reverence in the assembly of his Saints;  and dreadful to his enemies. faile while I waite] The constancie and earnestnesse of Davids hope and expectation. For the zeale of thine house] Literaly true in David, Psal. XXVII. 8. Principaly true in Christ the Sonne of David; and to him applied by his disciples, John II. 15, 16, 17. And so are the later words of this verse, by the Apostle, Rom. XV. 3. They gave me also gall] Verified in our Saviour: and in relation had to this text, John XIX. 28, 29. Let their table] This used by David against his enemies: applyed by the Apostle against the Jewes in his time, Rom. XI. 9. Let their habitation] That which David speaketh here of his ene∣mies; and, as Type of Christ, of Christs enemies, Saint Peter appli∣eth to Judas the traitor, Acts I. 20. blotted out] Phil. IV. 3. Apoc. III. 5. Luke X. 20. Heb. XII. 23. Of Imprecations, see the Observations on Psal. CIX. 14, 15. Sion] The Type of the Church. inherit it] Under the temporal promises of the Land of Canaan, are comprehended the promises of life everlasting to the faithful, and their posterity, Psal. CII. 28. to the true Israel of God, the true mem∣bers of the Church, Esay XLIV. 26. for to bring to remembrance] For to record. See the Title of Psal. XXXVIII. Both Psalmes are, not to remember any notable deliver∣ance or benefit already received: But rather a time and case of afflicti∣on and distresse. For the matter of both shew, that they were inspired in such a time; and do make earnest petition for deliverance.
to deliver me] This Psalme is in a maner the same with Psal. XL. 13,—17. Cause me to escape] Likely from Absalom. For this Psalme may seem to be penned by David, though his name be not in the Title, and in his old age. God.] This word is Jehovih, that is, with the vowels of Elohim. So again verse 16. and Psal. LXVIII. 20. And so it is usually written when, as I have said, Adonai goeth before it, or next followeth it. At other times having the vowels of Adonai, it is pronounced Lord. See 2 Sam. VII. 18, 19, 20. a wonder] Esay VIII. 18. Heb. II. 13. Zech. III. 8. and 1 Corinth. IV. 9. even of thine only] not mine owne: which is none to thine. quicken me again, and shalt bring me up] Me, me, in the Hebrew margin; but us, us, in the text. For Solomon] Made by David for him;  verse ult▪ by David in his old age. The like inscription is Psal. CXXVII. This Psalme is composed, as in the name of the Church. And con∣tains a Prayer, a Praise, and a Prophesie, of the just, peaceable, righ∣teous, merciful, plentiful, flourishing estate, and large extent and bounds of the Kingdome of Solomon; set out indeed with some hy∣perbolical expressions; scarcely appliable to him, or to any mortal man. So as Solomon may be the immediate object of the words, he li∣teraly intended in them. But yet he so, as a Type of Christ, and of his Kingdome; who is in truth the maine subject of this Psalme. For all in a mystical sense is appliable to Christ more truly, then to Solo∣mon; appliable to him in a spiritual sense, exactly without any hyper∣bole. For Solomon, see that 2 Sam. VII. 14. &c. For Christ, see that Heb. I. 5. And that passadge, Psal. LXXXIX. 19,—37. is not un∣like the subject matter of this Psalme. This premised, may serve to clear the hardest places of this Psalme. The prayers] Psalmes, Hymnes, Songs. are ended] As the like is said of Davids words, 2 Sam. XXIII. 1. The one may be as an Appendix of the other. This his last Prayer, though not placed in the last place. Or the last of those that David set in order before his death: or the last in this second part or book of the Psalmes, as they are all divided into five parts. Or his last, touch∣ing Solomon; and his prophesying of Christ and his Kingdome. So various may our thoughts and interpretations be; and so uncertaine and unsafe to pitch and fixe upon any single one. Truly] The Psalmist premiseth this, as his undoubted ground a∣gainst all conflicting doubts; as a pacificatory protestation before this his contesting plea, Touching the prosperity of the wicked, and his own afflictions. See Ier. XII. 1. and Hab. I. 12, 13. covereth them as a garment] They wear it, and shew it openly as their garment. See the like phrase of cursing, Psal. CIX. 18, 19. But the meek, and godly cover and array themselves otherwise, Ephes.
IV. 24. Col. III. 10, 12, 14. Phil. IV. 5. Gal. III. 27. Rom. XIII. 14. Ephes. III. 17. cum Gal. IV. 19. Their eyes stand out] Stand out in the Hebrew is in the singular number. Whereupon the plural number is here to be understood di∣stributively, for either or each of their eyes. The like is Gen. XLIX. 22. Exod. XVII. 12. and XXXI. 14. Josh. II. 14. Job XII. 7. Prov. III. 18. and XIV. 1. and XXVII. 9. Joel I. 20. Therefore his people returne hither] Gods own people turne to these thoughts and tentations following;  when they see withal their owne mournful miseries. verily I] Thus subject to these dangerous tentations. As a dreame when one awaketh] Job XX. 8. Like to that, John XVI. 21. and to that Acts XII. 9. and to that Psal. CXXVI. 1. when thou awakest] To judgement, Psal. LXXVIII. 65. and VII. 6. and XXXV. 20. thou shalt despise their image] their pageant of worldly pomp, and pride, make it to be despised. Yea, in their owne eyes, if God awake their consciences. Maschil] An instructing Psalme. of Asaph] See on Psal. L in the Title. This Psalme most likely was committed to some of Asaphs posterity, long after Davids time, to tune, sing, and play it. The time of desolation which this Psalme mentions, and bemoanes, seemes not to be that in the dayes of Antiochus Epiphanes; who pro∣phaned and polluted much the Temple of Jerusalem; but did not cast it downe, and burne it to the ground. And he himself was long after the Canon of the Old Testament was concluded. But that ra∣ther in the dayes of Nebuchadnezzar, and Nebuzaradan, 2 Kings XXV. 8. the rod] Or tribe;  which thou hast measured out for thine owne inheritance as with a line or rod, Jer. X. 16. Deut. XXXII. 9. thy congregations] Meaning the Temple, where the holy Con∣gregations assembled. And verse 7. it is in the Hebrew, thy Sanctu∣aries in the Plural number, meaning the Temple. The Plural num∣ber being used discretively to note out, and designe one of many. And so is that Gen. XXIII. 6. Judg. VII. 10. and XII. 7. 2 Kings V. 13. 2 Chron. XXIV. 25. Iohn VI. 45. Acts XIII. 40. Zech. IX. 9. Mat. IV. 3 compared with Luke IV. 3. And so we may understand that, Matth. XXVII. 44. compared with Luke XXIII. 40▪ And that 2 Chr. chap. XXVIII. 3. compared with 2 Kings XXVIII. 3. And that Matth. XXVI. 8. compared with Iohn XII. 4. no more any Prophet] Ezekiel, and Jeremie, were now dead. O∣thers haply not so well known or regarded, Lam. II. 9. Dragons] The Princes of Pharaoh. Leviathan] Pharaoh. gavest him to be meat] Him, and his, drowned, and cast upon the shoar, to be meat to the wilde beasts, and fowles of prey, called a peo∣ple;
as Prov. XXX. 25, 26. Or, their spoile, as meat to the Israe∣lites. Or gavest meat, that is, Manna, to him, that is, thy people in the Wildernesse. When I shall receive] This Psalme seemes to be penned by David, for Asaph to use; and likely at the time, and upon the occasion of the State of affairs at, and upon the murder of Abner by Joab, 2 Sam. III. which being then much shaken and shattered, he promiseth to uphold, and rectifie. And rebuking the foolish, proud, and presumptuous op∣posers of his Promotion, he renueth his resolution to proceed in judg∣ment towards the wicked, and the righteous, uprightly. the pillars of it] He did so, by erecting, and sustaining, and main∣taining good Magistrates, and chiefly Religion and righteousnesse, the maine pillars of a Kingdome. See Gal. II. 9. cup See Esay LI. 17. Ezek. XXIII. 32. Ier. XXV. 15. Apoc. XIV. 10. In Salem] Of Salem, see the Observations on Iosh. X. 1. There brake he] This likely was done in the Assyrian Cam Gods Angel, in the dayes of Hezekiah, 2 Chron. XXXII. 21. p by then the mountains of prey] A proverbial expression of greatest glory. See Esay IX. 3. and LIII. 12. Or, from the mountains of prey, where the Assyrian armies were preying upon thy people, and now slain by thy glorious power, and given by thee as a prey to thy people. their sleep] of death. shall praise thee] Turne to thy praise. the remainder] Keep within compasse the further attempts of our enraged enemies. to Ieduthun] Psal. XXXIX. and LXII. 1 Chron. XXV. 2, 3. my soar ran] Or, my hand was stretched out, that is, in Prayer. and was troubled] Or, made a troubled noise. Thy way, O God▪ is in the Sanctuary] Or, in sanctity; most holy. And thy maner of administration and proceeding is to be learned in thy Word, which is taught in the Sanctuary, Psal. LXXIII. 17. The waters saw thee] Psal. CXIV. 3, 5. the waters of the red-Sea. The clouds] Exod. XIV. 24. Psal. LXVIII. 7, 8, 9, 33. and XVIII. 13, 14. Thy way is in the Sea] The red-Sea, Exod. XIV. 21. footsteps are not known] Before or after; the waters returned, and hid that way, Exod. XIV. 27. Or more generaly, Gods wayes are un∣searchable, Iob XXVI. 14. Psal. CVII. 23, 24. Rom. XI. 33, 34. in a parable] Matth. XIII. 35. cited there by the Evangelist, in an allusion only to the word parable; and therefore with some alterati∣on of the words of the Psalmist. And that forme of allegation is usual with the Evangelists, as well in allusive and indirect, as in more direct and proper applications. Of Parables, see more in the Observations on Psalme XLIX. 4. The children of Ephraim] Some make this relate to that, 1 Chron.
VII. 21, 22. while their father lived in Egypt. Others to the E∣phramites flight before Jephthah, Judg. XII. 46. Others understand∣ing all the Israelites under that name, referre this to their flight before the Philistines, 1 Sam. IV. 10. Or before Abijah, 2 Chron. XIII. 17. And others understanding by Ephraim, the ten Tribes, whereof E∣phraim was the head, make it to relate to the final extirpation of that Kingdome, 2 Kings XVII. 7. &c. whereof Hosea prophesied, chap. X. 11, 14. So various expositions may these general words admit. By sending evil angels] As Iob I. 12, 16. as executioners of his fierce anger. Or angels, i. e. messengers of evils; which may be un∣derstood, either of good Angels; or of Moses and Aaron. hinder parts] 1 Sam. V. 1, 6, 9, 12. and VI. 4. he refused] Shiloh, in the tribe of Ephraim, the sonne of Ioseph: The Ark never came thither again. his Sanctuary] Temple, by Solomon. By this, and some other pas∣sages, this Psalme may seeme not to be composed by David; but by some later inspired Prophet. the Heathen This Psalme seemes composed, not in the times of An∣tiochus Epiphanes; but in the times of the Babylonish captivity ra∣ther. Bemoaning those miseries which were brought upon them by those barbarous Babylonians. Poure] Ier. X. 25. our neighbours seven-fold] That did not pitie us in our calamity; but insulted over us. Gen. IV. 15, 24. Esay LXV. 6, 7. Shoshannim Eduth] See the Observations on Psal. LX. 1. and XLV. 1. some make Eduth here, which signifieth a testimony, to import the Churches testimony and profession of her faith in the promise of God for her deliverance out of the Babylonish captivity, at the end of seventy years, Ier. XXIX. 10. And so this Psalme to be made in the time of that captivity. Asaph] See the Observations on Psal. L. upon the man of thy right hand] Thy beloved one;  as Benjamin was, Gen. XXXV. 18. And here may be meant, David, in his pos∣terity, Psal. CXXXII. 10, 11. and LXXXIX. 19, 20, 21, 35. Or, Zerubbabel particularly. But both as shadowes and types, of Christ the substance, principaly intended, Col. I. 13. Psal. XLV. 3. Luke XXIV. 19. Heb. II. 18. in the new moone] This Psalme seemes sung at the Jewish Feasts. When he went] Or had gone. I heard a language] Was a stranger. in the secret place of thunder] In that pillar of a cloud, Exod. XIV. 24. haply troubling the Egyptians with thunder, lightning, and tem∣pest, Psal. LXXVII. 17, 18. gave them up] See the Observations on Esay VI. 9. congregation of the mighty] Assembly, Assise, and Session, of God, of Magistrates, whose office is the Ordinance of God, Rom. XIII. 1, 2. and they so called gods, Exod. XXII. 8, 9, 28. John X. 34, 35. And
the cause before them, the cause of God, Deut. I. 17. 2 Chron. XIX. 6. all the foundations] Lawes, Orders, estates, are all in confusion, turn∣ed up-side down. Alledged by our Saviour, Iohn X. 34. like men] As Adam did. As Hos. VI. 7. Iob XXXI. 33. But rather the sense is more general; ye shall die as other men do, that last line of death shall put an end to your height and haughtinesse, Psal. CXLVI. 3▪ 4. Ye die as the meanest men do; for so the word is most what ta∣ken, specialy when it is put in opposition, as here, Psal. XLIX. 2. and LXII. 9. Esay II. 9. and V. 15. Death makes no distinction between man and man; as is excellently expressed by Heathen Poets: die all shall, equaly and alike, one with another. like one of the Princes] As one of the other Princes of the world, as other mortal men; as one, or any one, even the meanest, who a∣mong the rest of men make but a number, as it were. A Song as Psalme] See the Observations on Psal. XLVIII. title. This Song seems composed and inspired, as a forme of Prayer, when the Church and people of the Jewes were in great danger by many e∣nemies conspiring against them, to destroy them: And this likely either in the dayes of David, 2 Sam. VIII. or rather long after Davids time, in the dayes of Jehoshaphat; or of Ezekiah. thy hidden ones] Hidden as his peculiar treasure, Exod. XIX. 5. se∣cret, preserved under the shadow of his wings, Psal. XVII. 8. & XXVII. 5. and XXXI. 20. Whose life also is hid with Christ in God, Col. III. 3. Hagarens] And Hagarites, 1 Chro. V. 10, 19, 20. So called from Hagar, the mother of Ishmael, Gen. 16. Gebal] The Giblites, near Sidon, whence Solomon had stone-cutters, 1 Kings V. 18. Ezek. XXVII. 9. See Josh. XIII. 5. Endor] In Manasseh; East from Dor, which lay on the mid-land sea▪ Saul goeth to a Witch at Endor; which indeed was not farre from the mountains of Gilboa, where Saul was slaine. Taanach, and Megid∣do not far from it. whose name alone is Jehovah] Which hath his being of himself, Exod. III. 14. Deut. VI. 4. An eternal Being, Esay XLIV. 6. Apoc. I. 4, 8. and IV. 8. and XI. 17. and XVI. 5. And giveth being to all things, Acts XVII. 25. to his word, and promises, and threatnings, Exod. VI. 3. Ezek. VII. 27. See the Observations on Esay XXVI. 4▪ of Jehovi, see the Observations on Psal. LXXI. 5. Of Jah, see the Observations on Psal. LXVIII. 4. Gittith] So Psal. VIII. and LXXXI. And Obed-Edom, a Levite, and Porter or Singer in the Tabernacle, is called a Gittite, 2 Sam. VI. 10. haply from Gath-rimmon, a Citie of the Levites, Iosh. XXI. 25. And there is Gath a Citie of the Philistines. The word then may sig∣nifie an Instrument of musick, not such as our Gitterne; such as was used in Gath; or rather used by the posterity of Obed-Edom the Git∣tite: Or it may import that those three Psalmes were sung upon occa∣sion of Davids removing the Ark from Kiriathjearim to the house of
Obed-Edom the Gittite; and from thence to Jerusalem, 1 Chron. XIII. and XV. chapters. More certaintie is not found out. Korah] See the Observations on Psal. XLII. Title. thine Altars] The places near them might haply become the nests of birds, Josh. XXIV. 26. Or this may relate to the Psalmists longing and crying after them, by an abrupt and pathetical exclamation and naming of them, Oh thine Altars, thine Altars: not yet excluding the force of that argument from the birds nestling, either near, or else∣where. Some hence conceive, That this Psalme was penned by Da∣vid in the time of his Exile and banishment from Gods house and service by the means of Saul, verse 9. not so likely of Absalom. the wayes of them] Of the travellers that go up to God house, and of such as have liberty so to do: or the high-wayes and causies them∣selves that leade to thy house. of Baca] Or Mulberry trees, which use to grow in dry places. A valley of this name was nigh Jerusalem, 2 Sam. V. 22, 23. Joshua XV. 8. make it a Well] By digging Wells therein for water: no drought, or difficulties shall hinder them from coming to Gods house, but they will break through them. Or, make him a Well; that is, God in stead of a Well to them, Jer. II. 13. and XVII. 13. Psal. XXXVI. 9. the rain also filleth the pools] Which they digged; God so provides for them. Or, the bountiful rain of Gods blessings, of grace and com∣fort, shall cover and comfort them. from strength to strength] increasing so, as Rom. I. 17. 2. Cor. III. 18. Or, from company to company; from troop to troop; as by troops they came up to Gods house thrice a year. of thine anointed] David the type; Messiah, the truth. a door-keeper] Fixt▪ and a servant, in the meanest office there; then to be free, and frolick, and flourishing in the highest degree, in the bravest tents of wickednesse. grace and glory] Many referre grace to this life, and glory to that which is to come. But grace rather may seeme here to signifie favour, estimation, honour, as Prov. III. 34. Iames IV. 6. 1 Pet. V. 5. Exod. III. 21. Num. chap. XII. 36. and XXXIII. 12. Gen. VI. 8. and XXXIX. 4. and L. 4. Esther II. 15. 17. and V. 2. Prov. XXII. 1. and chap I. 9. and IV. 9. Luke II. 52. and I. 28. compared with verse 30. Thou hast been] Formerly. brought back] Out of Babylon. Some understand this of the bring∣ing back of David to Ierusalem after the rebellion of Absalom. But not so likely. covered all their sinne] See the Observations on Psal. LI. 4. Turne us] Do now so again. I will hear] Complaine no more;  but hearken to God, speaking, his promises to his people, and their duty. are met] Will meet. have kissed] Will kisse, though for the present things are other∣wise,
verse 4, 5. This, and what followes had it most compleat fulfil∣ling in and by the coming of Christ. A Prayer] So is the Title of Psal. XVII. And this seemes to be as a set forme of prayer for the godly in distresse; without any particu∣lar circumstances used in it of persons, places, or times; appliable to all; and may not unfitly be applied to Christ. I am holy] So rather then as in the margin, one whom thou favour∣est. The Hebrew word is , which imports an active, rather then a passive signification. And so Psal. IV. 3. and XXXII. 6. and L. 5. and LXXIX. 2. This word is actively taken, and that rightly in our translations; though many learned men, not so well advised therein, render it passively, to denote, not the author and agent, and his quali∣ty, but the object spoken of. Among the gods] Verse 10. Psal. LXXXIX. 6. Deut. XXXII. 39. Esay XXXVII. 16▪ and XLIV. 6. 1 Cor. VIII. 4, 5, 6. Exod. XV. 1. From the first Hebrew letters of which four words in Exodus came the name of the Maccabees, as is thought. unite my heart to fear thy Name] Loose it from all other things, and cares, and fears,; and knit it fast to thy fear only, without back-sliding ever. give thy strength] Iohn XV. 5. Phil. II. 13. and IV. 13. a toaken] as in the end of the verse. His foundation] Gods, and his Churches. Mountains] Moriah, and Zion. Not now in a flitting Tabernacle. Glorious things] See Esay LIV. and LX. and LX. and LXII. and LXV. A∣poc. XXI. and XXII. And see the Observations on Josh. 10. 1. Rahab] So LXXXIX. 10. Esay LI. 9. See the Observations on Gen. XII. 10. Egypt is meant hereby: And the calling of Egypt to the fel∣lowship of the Church. Of whose calling, see Esay XIX. 19, 21, 25. to them that know me] Or among them; as of my knowne fami∣liars. Philistia] Palestine, the Philistines, Psal. LX. 8. this] And the rest afore named, were born in the Citie of God; by regeneration spiritual made the sonnes of God, and of the Church, verse 5, 6. 1 Pet. I. 23. Iames I. 18. Esay XLIV. 5. Singers] The spiritual joy both great, and general, and of the Psal∣mist in particular, which shall be in those dayes, in the Church, and of, and for the Church; in an allusion haply to the Jewish service. Springs] Of my joy, and of Gods spiritual gifts and graces also; Iohn VII. 38. Esay XII. 3. Ephes. III. 10. A Song] See the Observations on Psal. XLVIII. title. Mahalath] A kinde of winde-instrument, Psal. LIII. Leannoth] May either make up the name of the Instrument; or may seeme to signifie to sing by turnes or courses, as Exod. XV. 21. Ezra. III▪ 11. Heman] The next Psalm is of Ethan. These were sacred Singers and Musitians, descended of Levi, 1 Chron. XV. 17, 19. and XVI. 41,
42. and VI. 44. Of Heman, see 1 Chron. XXV. 1. 4,—7. He was of the posterity of rebellious Korah, and grandchilde of Samuel the Prophet, 1 Chron. VI. 33. and himself King Davids Seer, 1 Chron. XXV. 5. There were two brethren, Heman, and Ethan, of the poste∣rity of Judah, 1 Chron. II. 6. men renowned for their wisdome, 1 King. IV. 31. This Psalm is one of the most doleful of all the Bible: And may serve as a set forme of a sad complaint to any man in his greatest distresse. Some make application of it to Christ in his Sufferings. free among the dead] Psal. XXXI. 12. Job. III. 18, 19. I am shut up] As a close prisoner in the Dungeon of sorrowes, and distresses. wilt thou] Psal. VI. 5. and XXX. 9. & CXV. 17. Esay XXXVIII. 18. prevent thee] Psal. V. 3. Hab. II. 1. into darknesse] That they hide themselves from me, none will ap∣pear to my releif; by reason of the darknesse wherein I am, buried as it were in the black Dungeon of calamities. a Covenant] In faithfulnesse, verse 1, 2. How then comes it to be made void? verse 38,—45. David] The figure, and father of Christ; who is also called Da∣vid, Ezek, XXXIV. 23. Jer. XXX. 9. Hos. III. 5. Of him this Psalme is chiefly to be understood; though not in all the particular pas∣sages. Rahab] See the Observations on Psal. LXXXVII. 4. Tabor] Westward, see the Observations on Judg. IV▪ 6. Hermon] Eastward, see the Ohervations on Deut. IV. 48. joyful sound] Of the Trumpet, and other sacred musical instru∣ments, calling them to, and used in the sacred services, and solem∣nities. to thy holy one] To Samuel, who anointed David. laid help upon one that is mighty] Or, help against the mighty: both wayes meaning David: who yet here may be taken as a Type of Christ. I will set] Psal LXXII. 8. my Father] This, and verse 27, 28, 29. universaly and plenarily be∣long to Christ: And only imperfectly, as in a weak type, are apply∣able to David, or Solomon, 2 Sam. VII. 14. Heb. I. 5. Luke I. 32, 33. my first-borne] The first-borne had the priviledges of double por∣tion, chief Rule, and Priesthood: This true in Christ, Col. I. 15, 18. Matth. I. 25. Rom. VIII. 29. Heb. I. 6. Apoc. I. 5. His seede] Verse 36. Christians, his spiritual seed; Esay LIII. 10. Heb. II. 13. whence Christ is called the everlasting Father, Esay IX. 6. his throne] Verse 37. Heb. I. 8. Dan. II. 44. and VII. 14. Luke I. 33. The accomplishment of these Promises cannot be found in Solomon. If his children] So 2 Sam. VII. 14, 15. True of Solomon, and of his children; and cannot be understood of Christs person; who was not the natural of sonne of Solomon; but of his brother Nathan; And
who was without sinne, 1 Pet. II. 22: But as he bare our sinnes, and was made a Sacrifice for sinne for us, 2 Cor. V. 21. Esay LIII. 6. Yet this may have a right understanding of Christs spiritual children, who are subject to the lapses and infirmities of sinne, 1 John I. 8. Rom. VII. 15. sworne] Of Oaths, see the Observations on Hos. IV. 15. as the Moone] Which although it sometime waxeth, and some∣time waineth, and sometime seemes to be gone, (a fit resemblance of the state of Christs Church) yet is continualy renewed, and so stable. Witnesse] See Jer. XXXIII. 20, 21. And Christ is so called, Apoc. I. 5. Esay LV. 4. But thou] The Psalmist complaineth of the miseries of the Church, whereby all the former Promises seeme to be frustrated. youth hast thou shortned] Wherein by thy promises he should have flourished, and grown up as a youth. how short] How vaine, momentanie, and uncertaine; yet am I thy creature. the footsteps of thine Anointed.] This may be referred to Christ, and his Offices, and Works in us, and for us: or to Christians, which fol∣low his footsteps. Blessed] The voice of faith, and joy; as finding an issue out of the temptation, and rejoycing in the midst of tribulation. This is the end of the third Book of Psalmes. See the Observations on Psal. XLI. ult. and on LXXII. ult. of Moses] This seemes inspired and penned by Moses for the use of the people, when upon the returne of the Spies, they had murmur∣ed against God, and he had sentenced to death all above twenty years old, Num. XIV. 22, 23, 29, 34. Returne] The body to the earth;  the soul to God that gave it. watch] The night divided into four Watches;  the evening, mid∣night, cock-crowing, dawning. threescore years and ten] So for the most part, And so in David. And none of the Kings of Judah, or Israel, after him attained to those years. Or seventy here, in regard of that judgement denounced, Num. XIV. 29. even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath] Thy wrath is as thy feare teacheth it to be: which teacheth us to fear thee for thy wrath. But who knoweth the power of it? to number] They might number the utmost extent of them, upon that judgement, Num. XIV. But not how much sooner they might die. establish] Esay XXVI. 12. he shall deliver thee] Having practised in the second verse what he taught in the first;  Here he teacheth others to do the like, applies his example to them. not be afraid] Esay XLIII. 2. emphatical expressions, and rhetorical amplifications, allowed in all humane Authors. Not yet implying that we are actualy deliveed in all such dangers; but that at least they
shall work for our good, if we be not delivered out of them, Rom. VIII. 28. his Angels charge over thee] Alledged by the Devil to Christ, Mat. IV. 6. in all thy wayes] Of holinesse and righteousnesse. These words the Devil omits; as making against his temptation, which was against the minde of the text. tread upon the lion] Esay XI. 6,—9. Hos. II. 18. without harme or damage. Not as the Pope applied it to his treading upon the neck of the Emperour. on high] Safely above all perils and dangers. with long life] If God shall see it good and fit for him. Otherwise a good man may be cut off by Plague, or warre. for the Sabbath day] For the Rest on this day, see the Observations on Exod. XII. 16. For Hallowing it; That was, by an holy convocati∣on; by offering of Sacrifices; singing Psalmes; reading, and ex∣pounding, and hearing Scriptures; Praying; Disputing, and Con∣ferring; by meditating on Gods word, and works; and doing works of mercy, Exod. XX. 10. Esay LVIII. 13. Jer. XVII. 21, 22. Levit. XXIII. 3. Num▪ XXVIII. 9, 10. Acts XIII. 15. and XV. 21. and XVI. 13. and XVII. 2. and XVIII. 4. Matth. XII. 2,—7, 8, 11, 12. as the Palme tree] The LXX. read, , which signifies in∣deed a tree. As the Hebrew word here doth; And the meaning of the whole verse imports. Yet hence many learned men, taking it up one from another, have raised that fable of a wondrous bird called a Phoenix, which yet never was seene, or known in the world. holinesse becometh thy house] In the services, and servants of it; and all professors of so holy a God. The Lord knoweth] Cited, 1 Cor. III. 20. But judgement shall returne unto righteousnesse] Though they might seeme awhile parted;  yet they shall returne and meet; and the wicked shall be punished, and the godly rewarded. O come] Davids Psalme; though without his Title; as appears, Heb. III. 7. and IV. 7. to day] This extends to the whole time wherein Christ speaketh by his Gospel, Heb. III. 7. 13, 15. and IV. 7, 8. So 2 Cor. VI. 2. Provocation] Meribah, in the Hebrew. temptation] Massah, in the Hebrew. See Exod. XVII. 1,—7. Num. XX. 1, 3, 13. Deut. VI. 16. tempted me] Tempted Christ, 1 Cor. X. 9. my work] Works, Heb. III. 9. of miraculous mercies; and judge∣ments. I sware] At Kadesh-barneah, Num. XIV. 21, &c. Heb. III. 17, 19. my rest.] Canaan; a Type of a better Rest, Heb. IV. 3, 8, 9, 11. O sing] This Psalme, and Psalme CV. 1,—15. with small altera∣tions, make up that Psalme composed by David, upon the bringing
of the Ark from Obed-Edoms house, into the Citie of David, 1 Chron. XVI. 8,—36. a new song] See the Observations on Psal. XXXIII. 3. beauty of holinesse] In the glorious holy Sanctuary. searoare] In token of joy. the trees] Humane affections ascribed to insensible creatures;  there∣by to set out mans duty. for the cometh] Or, when he cometh. Which may relate to Christs coming into the world, Matth. XII. 20. Acts X. 42. and ch. XVII. 31. Psal. XCVIII. 9. and CX. 6. Esay II. 4. and XI. 3, 4. and XVI. 5. 2 Tim. IV. 1. Apoc. XIX. 11. The Lord reighneth] Here seemes the Kingdome, both of God, and of Christ to be majesticaly described. a new song] See the Observations on Psal. XXXIII. 3. made known] Esay LII. 10. Let the sea roare] Psal. XCVI. 11. let the people tremble] And so, the earth be moved; that is, with a reverend fear at his Presence and appearance. Or, though they be stir∣red up with anger; Apoc. XI. 17, 18. Acts XVII. 13. The Kings strength] God mixeth his power with justice, Job XXXVI. 5. Moses and Aaron among his Priests] Moses did many things of the Priestly office. And the word Cohen here used, doth signifie also a Prince, and principal officer, as 2 Sam. VIII. 18. and in many other places. though that tookest] Even when thou tookest vengeance of their inventions, yet even then a forgiving God, a God answearing their prayers. and not we Or, and his we are; as the Hebrew in the margin read∣eth it, Deut. VII. 6, 7. and chap. IX. 4. &c. Psal. XCV. 5. A Psalme of David] This seemes inspired and written by David, when he was new made King. Or, as some, He promiseth what to do when he shall be made King; and how he will governe his own house in the meane time. not know] Matth. VII 23. of the afflicted] Or, for the afflicted. A set forme of Prayer for him, for any in a poor afflicted estate. And so divers other set formes of prayer are found in Scripture, in a set forme of words. As Num. VI. 24, 25, 26. Matth. VI. 9,—13. And again at another time, and upon another occasion, Luke XI. 1,—4. Psal. XX. and XXI. This Prayer may seeme inspired and composed by Daniel, or some other Prophet towards the end of the Babylonish Captivity, verse 13, 16. Zech. I. 12, 13. the appointed time] Jer. XXIX. 10. Dan. IX. 2, 24. &c. in her stones] Neh. II. 13. &c. and IV. 2. Zech. I. 22. Of old] This verse, and the two next are cited, Heb. I. 10, 11, 12. and applied to prove the Deity of Christ.
This Psalme, and the four following; containe the Praises of God; and the arguments of his Praise, both Ordinary, and Extraordinary, in relation to his Church, and to all his Creatures. thy youth is renued like the Eagles] Thou keepest thy self fresh and vigorous, as in thy youth; thou returning to the dayes of thy youth, Job XXXIII. 25. And like the Eagles youth, or strength and vigour; which abides so long, even to and in old age, and length of very many years; and seemes to renew her youth by the casting of her feathers yearly, not her bill; the upper beak whereof groweth at last in an extreme old age, so to over-grow and bend over the lower beak, as causeth the Eagle to die of famine, not of feeblenesse, Arist. lib. 9. cap. 32. de historia animalium. See Esay XL. 31. hoasts ye Ministers] Both Angels, and men, and all his creatures, Ephes. 3. 10. Col. I. 16. 1 Kings XXII. 19. Gen. XXXII. 2. Psal. CIV. 4. Dan. VII. 10 Apoc II. 1. Esay LXI. 6. Neh. IX. 6. This Psalme is exquisite for loftinesse, and other ornaments, with light, as with a garment] Gen. I. 3. 1 Tim. VI. 16. He whol∣ly so shines, as the eyes of any, no not of the Angels, are able to be∣hold the luster and splendor thereof. As neither we, that of the Sunne. the beams of his chambers in the waters.] Maketh and distinguisheth the regions of the aire, as into lofts or upper chambers, in and by the watery clouds, ver. 13. his Angels spirits] Alledged and interpreted of Angels, Heb. I. 7. useth them being spiritual substances, as speedy, active messingers, mi∣nisters, and executors of his will, Heb. I. 14. his ministers a flaming fire] The Angels such, 2 Kings II. 11. and chap. VI. 17. Or, the flashes of lightnings, and other meteors are his ministers to do his will. waters stood above the mountains] At the Creation, Gen. I. 2. And at the Flood, Gen. VII. 20. to cover the earth] Job XXXVIII. 8, 10, 11. Jer. V. 22. Gen. IX. 11, 13, 15. oile] Psal. XXIII. 5. and XCII. 10. Eccles. IX. 8. Matth. VI. 17. her house] In them is her house, Psal. LXXXIV. 4. Job XXIX. 18. Matth. VIII. 20. Luke IX. 58. Dan. IV. 12. Conies] Prov. XXX. 24, 26. in wisdome hast thou made them all] By wisdome here to understand Christ punctualy, is more then the Text yeelds: Or, that Text either Prov. III. 19. though that be a sacred truth, Heb. I. 2. Sea] Not that Psal. CXIV. 3. but  that; which particle doth di∣stinguish the great Midland Sea, from the other lesser. go the ships] See verse 10. Gen. II. 14. Esay XXXIII. 21. Leviathan] The Whale, Job XLI. renewest] By causing new creatures to come in the place of the old, Eccles. I. 4. Praise ye the Lord] In the Hebrew, Halelu-jah, Praise ye Jah. This Halelu-jah is kept in the Greek, and in other languages; set sometimes
in the beginnings, sometimes in the end of Psalmes. Apoc. XIX. 1, 3, 4, 6. O give thanks] See the Observations on Psal. XCVI. 1. whereby most likely it is, that this is Davids Psalme. his strength, seeke his face] The Ark, where God declared his pow∣er, and presence, Psal. LXIII. 2. and LXXVIII. 61. See the Obser∣vations on Psal. XXVII. 8. his judgements] Esay XXVI. 9. Specialy those upon the Egyptians, are famously known and spoken of. oath unto Isaac] To Abraham, in the Presence of Isaac, Gen. XXII. 17. and XXVI. 3. mine anointed] This is spoken of the Patriarchs: not of Kings. my Prophets] So Abraham is called, Gen. XX. 7. with fetters] Gen XXXIX. 20. his word came] Gods word in dreams touching his advancement, Gen. XXXVII. 7, 9. came to be fulfilled. Or, Josephs word in the in∣terpretation of the dreams of Pharaohs Officers, and of Pharaoh him∣selfe. He turned] See the Observations on Esay VI. 10. they rebelled not] The Signes and Wonders did not: Or, Moses, and Aaron did not rebel, &c. haile for raine] Raine rare in Egypt, Zech. XIV. 18. much more haile. first-borne] Thus all the ten plagues of Egypt are reckoned up;  save the fifth of Murrain of Beasts; and the sixth of Boyles upon Man and Beast. a cloud for a covering] A large cloud to cover all that hoast from the parching heat of the Sun. Quailes] Twice;  Exod. XVI. 13. Num. XI. 31. dry places] In the deserts of Sin, and Zin: from the rocks of Re∣phidim, Exod. XVII. and Kadesh, Num. XX. That they might] Obedience the end of all Gods mercies, Exod. XIX. 4, 5, 6. leannesse] By their ratson, or lust, they purchased to themselves ra∣zon, leannesse; yea, a plague and death, Psal. LXXVIII. 30, 31. Esay X. 16. Dathan] Korah is omitted here. Oxe] Elsewhere the terme of Ca is used. Ham] Gen. X. 6. pleasant land] Deut. XI. 11, 22. Ezek. XX. 6. See the Observati∣ons on Zech. VII. 14. Baal-Peor] See the Observations on Judges VIII. 33. Baal signifi∣eth Lord, Master, Husband, or Patron. Peor is the name of a moun∣taine: And Beth Pehor the name of Baals Temple there, Num. XXIII. 28. Deut. III. 29. For the idolatry committed to this idol, the Scrip∣ture sometimes for the word Baal, useth Bosheth, which signifieth shame. Hos. IX. 10. See Jer. III. 24. and XI. 13. and the Annotations
of learned Master Gataker upon those places. of the dead] Offered to those dead idols, Num. XXV. 2. Jer. X. 5. And that was counted unto him for righteousnesse] i. e. this fact of Phineas was approved of God as just and righteous, and for such ever to be esteemed. The same phrase used Gen. XV. 6. hath another sense of justifying Abrahams person before God by faith, though a man without faults in himself otherwise. And so is rightly applied by Saint Paul, Rom. IV. 3, 5, 8, 9, 22, 23, 24. to the justification of sinner before God by Faith meerly. for righteousnesse] A right and just action; not the fruit of a rash zeale; though done without ordinary authority. unadvisedly] Num. XX. Devils] Levit. XVII. 7 See the Observations on Judges VIII. 33. his Covenant] This, and his Name sake, verse 8 are the ground of Gods free mercies. among the heathen] among whom divers Israelites were scattered, in the times of the Judges, and Saul, by reason of their often troubles at home, till the Kingdome came to David, whose words these are, 1 Chron. XVI. 35, 36. This Psalme hath much elegancy and sublimity in it. South] In the Hebrew, Sea; meaning the Red Sea, which was South from Canaan. But much more usualy in Scripture by Sea is un∣derstood the West, because the great Mediterrane Sea lay West from Canaan. mount up] And hyperbole. Of them see the Observations on Josh. XI. 4. them] Marriners, and passingers. rivers] Watery fruitful places. dry] Barren, thirsty. will observe] Not that such deliverances are vouchsafed alwayes to all in such dangers: Gods wayes of his governing Providence are a great deep unsearchable: But those deliverances when they come, they come from him. A Song, a Psalme] See the Observations on the Title of Psalme XLVIII. This Psalme is composed of Psal. LVII. 7,—11. and Psal. LX. 5,—12. See the Observations on both those Psalmes. glorie] See the Observations on Psal XVI. 9. wash-pot] So Psal. LX. any washing pot, to wash the filth of my feet in. Without any allusion to the Marishes of Moab; or their Land to be washed in blood; or themselves wiped cleane away, as a pot is wiped. But rather to be used to servile, sordid, base offices. of David] By the matter of the Psalme, it seemes to be penned and inspired towards the end of Sauls reigne, when all things were grown to a forlorne and wicked state. See 1 Sam. XXVI. 19. unto Prayer] The use and comfort of Prayer. Set] Many Imprecations follow. And the like see in Psal. XXXV.
4,—8. and LIX. 5, 13. and LXIX. 22,—28. and LXXIX. 10. and CXIX. 84. and CXL. 10. Job XXXI. Nehem. VI. 4. 5. and VI. 6, 14. Esay II. 9. Jer. XI. 20. and XV. 15. and chap. XVII. 18. and XVIII. 21, 22, 23. and XX. 12. 2 Tim. IV. 14. And these with ex∣quisite formes of speeches. And uttered by David, and the rest, a∣gainst transcendent sinners, rather as Prophets, but of zeale to God and his glory therein, then in relation to their private passions of re∣venge, or respect to themselves as parties. And yet these, or the like Prayers and Imprecations may possibly be mixt with Humane infir∣mities; as those in Jeremy. See the Annotations on Nehem. IV. 5. Or in some they may be understood with silent limitations and reserva∣tions. right hand] He plead and prevail against him. condemned] Go out guilty, or wicked. become sinne] Let no suit, or defence of his avail for him, but ra∣ther hurt him. 8 his office] Applied to Judas, Acts I. 16, 20, 26. their desolate places] Their houses and families that are desolate and destroyed. fathers] Thus God punisheth to the third and fourth generation, the wickednesse of the parents on their wicked children, Exod. XX. 5. As he cloathed himself with cursing] See the Observations on Psal, LXXIII. 6. Let it be unto him] The curse wherein he delighted in cursing o∣thers; which pleased him as water, and oile, Let that same be unto him. Or, let a curse thus cover, and cleave unto him; and come in∣to his bowels and bones. See the Observations on Psal. LXXIII. 6. shaked their heads] Psal. XXII. 7. This Psalme is all Prophetical;  all of Christ; foretelling his Person, Natures, and Offices, specialy his Kingdome, and Priesthood. And of his Victory over his enemies, and of his Triumph afterwards. And hereupon it is cited, and made use of, Matth. XXII. 44. Mark XII. 36. Luke XX. 42. Acts II. 34. Heb. I. 13. and V. 6. and VII. 17. The Lord] The Messias himself applies, ad appropriates this verse to himself, Matth. XXII: 44. Marke XII. 36. Luke. XX. 42. Saint Peter from this verse proves Christs Ascention into heaven, Acts II. 34. Saint Paul relates to it in the point of Christ reigne over all enemies, 1 Cor. XV. 25. Denying that the words of this verse were used, or could be used to any of the Angels, Heb. I. 13. And therefore they cannot be appliable to David himself, or to any meere man. The Lord] Heb. Jehovah. See the Annotations of learned Master Gataker on Esay I. 2. and XXVI. 4. See also my Observations on Psalme LXXXIII. 18. and on LXXI. 5. and on LXVIII. 4. This Name of Es∣sence never admits any affix in the Hebrew tongue. And it may law∣fully be pronounced; though the ancient Jewes refrained from do∣ing so, to gaine thereby the more reverence to it. And this Name is common to the three Persons; yet according to the sense and cir∣cumstances
of divers texts and places, specialy when relation is had to another Person of the Trinity, it is taken Personaly. And so here for God the Father. As likewise, Psal. II. 7. said] In his eternal Decree, predestinating his Sonne to be the Messias, to execute in time the Office of Mediatorship. unto my Lord] Davids Lord, as well as his Sonne. sit thou] This, and other phrases here, are not proper, but figura∣tive: to be understood, not corporealy, but spiritualy. Christ is said in Scripture promiscuously, both to stand, and to sit at the right hand of God, Heb. I. 3. Acts VII. 55, 56. 1 Pet. III. 22. at my right hand] The right hand signifies power and strength, Psal. CXVIII. 16. Exod. XV. 6. Psal. CXLIV. 8. Power to help, verse 5. Psal. XVI. 8. and CXLII. 4. Eccles. X. 2. To be or sit there, imports dignity and honour, 1 Kings II. 19. Matth. XX. 21. And such is the meaning here. And this dignity here expressed by this phrase is ascribed to Christ; not in relation to his Deity, for so he and the Father are one. Herein he is, and alwayes was of equal dignity with the Father: But in regard of his Humanity whereby the Father was greater then he: And wherein formerly he had emptied and hum∣bled himself, and suffered, even to death; and so was made a little lower then the Angels. But now hereby he is crowned with glory and honour. Yet this dignity here is not ascribed to his Humanity singly in it self considered, but in supposito, as it hypostaticaly subsists in the Person of the Sonne of God. And this Dignity is not an elevation and exaltation of the Humanity of our Saviour into the Majesty and essential properties and prerogatives of the Divine-nature; and so to have a parity of Dignity with it, an equality in all points; realy com∣municated to the Humanity in it self, as the Ubiquitaries contend and plead for, and which they referre, not to the Person only; but to the very Humane nature also in the Person of the Sonne of God. But this Dignity of Christs Humanity is that which is next in degree un∣der God and the Father, above that of the Angels, and all creatures, Heb. I. 3, 4. Ephes. I. 20, 21, 22, 23. given to him in time, after his Ascention, as a consequent and reward of his exinanition and passion, Phil. II. ult. Heb. II. 9. Luke XXIV. 26. This Dignity Saint Paul de∣clares, 1 Cor. XV. 25. and Saint Peter, Acts V. 31. and X. 42. Iohn V. 27. In summe then, as Christ emptied himself, and subjected him∣self to the Father, not in regard of his Divine nature, but in regard of his Person God-man, and that only out of his Voluntary dispensati∣on; So out of the same his voluntary dispensation it is, that he exer∣cises this office of Mediation in both natures, And here after his As∣cention; not before; in the Personal Union of both Natures; he re∣ceives this Dignity of sitting on the Fathers right hand; his Person reigning so in both natures. It is not then the Humanity in it self sing∣ly taken that sits on the right hand of God; but the Humanity of that Person that sits at the right hand of God: as in the Incarnation it came to passe, not that the Humanity became God, but that the Hu∣manity
became then the Humanity of God. And Christ now sitting at the right hand of God doth reigne every where▪ even as Man also; though his Humanity be not every where: as a King doth in his King∣dom, though his body be not every where▪ as the Head in the Body, though the Head be not every where as the Sun in the firmament en∣lightens, heats, cherisheth, quickeneth things below, though the Sun remaine in its own place above. until] 1 Cor. XV. 14, 25, 28. Not yet that the Son shal then leave off all Rule and Reigne, and be subject to the Father simply: But that then he shall leave off his Office of Mediation, having then overcome his enemies, and fully gathered his Church; he shall not thenceforth use those meanes, and actings which formerly he did; the whole work being then finished; then shall he leave off the administration of that delegation which he had formerly freely undertaken, there being then no more need of it. But thenceforth shall he reigne together with the Father to all eternity; Dan. VII. 14. Luke I. 23. In a sense not un∣like is this particle untill used, Psal. CXXIII. 2. Matth. ult. ult. Gen. XXVIII. 15. what is affirmed of the time past, is not denied for the time to come. I make] I God the Father. Not excluding God the Sonne. For the same action is attributed to him, 1 Cor. XV. 25. Iohn XVI. 33, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. thine enemies] The Devill, John XIV. 30. 1 Cor. XV. 24. The World; John XVI. 33. and XV. 18. Antichrist; and all wicked men; Luke XIX. 27. Not, but that these are the enemies of God, and the Father also; John V. 23. And so both are joyned together, Psal. II. 2. yet more immediately and directly enemies to Christ the Sonne, who came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John II. 8. enemies to his Kingdome, and his inheritance, Matth. XXI. 38. thy foot-stoole.] All utterly subdued, and put under thy feete, 1 Cor. XV. 14. As Iudg. I. 7. Psal. XLVII. 3. and Psal. XVIII. 39, 40. 1 Kings V. 3. Iosh. X. 24. 25. Thus did Sapor the Persian King; Tamerlane the Scythian; and Pope Alexander the fourth to the Emperour Frederick the first. This Conquest was made by Christs Resurrection and Ascention, Col. II. 15. Ephes. IV. 8. Iohn XII. 3. and chap. XVI. 11. 33. They touch not Christs person now, as they did when he was upon earth. They have not power over his mystical body; and true members, to domineer over them, subdue them, or deadly destroy them: yet they have power to bite and bruise their heel; and so to persecute Christ in his members, Acts IX. 4. and ch. XXII. 7. Zech. II. 8. And so the victory is not yet fully compleat, Rom. XVI. 20. And this makes for Christs greater glory, and his childrens good. But at the last day, in the end of the world, all the enemies shall be al∣together utterly subdued, and destroyed, and punished everlastingly, 1 Cor. XV. 25,—28. Matth. XXV. 41, &c. The Lord shall send] The Prophet David here turnes his speech to
his Lord and Sonne; and speaks here of Iehovah, what he shall do to, and for him. the rod of thy strength] Thy royal Scepter, or Shepherds staffe; thy Kingdome, and the Dominion thereof, Ier. XLVIII. 17. Ezek. XIX. 4, 11. thy royal power; which shall be strong, to overpower all the strength of the world opposing it, Rom. I. 16. And this is his Word and Gospel; not any temporal armes or power. out of Zion] There began the promulgation, and thence sprang the Propagation of the Gospel, and of Christs Kingdome; which wondrously subdued all the world, Ps. II. 6, 8. Esay II. 2, 3. Mich. IV. 2. rule thou in the midst of thine enemies] Here is the successe of Christs Kingdome, even among his enemies. He, and his Church Militant in this world shall still have enemies, Matth. X. 6. Yet he shall rule and reigne in the midst of them, in despight of them; and that with all confidence and boldnesse Thy people] As by right of Creation; so chiefly here, by right of Redemption. Here is the successe of Christs Kingdome, among his subjects. shall be willing] Their first property; to be prompt, ready, de∣vout, chearfully obedient, 1 Pet. II. 9. freely led thereto by Gods free Spirit, Psal. LI. 12. Rom. VIII. 14. Psal. LIV. 6. 2 Cor. IX. 7. As Iudg. V. 9. Nehem. XI. 2. Acts II. 41. Made such by Christ, of un∣willing, to be so willing; Iohn VI. 44. Psal. CXIX. 10, 11. 108. and in many other places of that Psalme, Esay ELIX. 18. and LV. 5. and LX. 4. in the day of thy power] When by the powerful preaching of thy Gospel, thou shalt rule in the midst of thine enemies; and powerfully convert thy people to so willing an obedience unto thee. The word here translated Power, signifies also an armie; and may relate to Christs mustering of his people, as armies, in the dayes of their solemn assemblies for his worship and service. in the beauties of holinesse] Or in the comely honours of the San∣ctuarie; meaning either the comely or honourable places of holinesse, the Sanctuary, or Church; or rather, in the beautiful ornaments of holinesse, that is, holy graces and vertues, which with admirable vari∣etie adorne the faithful, and their inner man. from the womb] The second propertie or condition of the subjects of Christs Kingdome, to be very numerous: as willing; so numerous: as the dew from the womb of the morning, 2 Sam. XVII. 12. by a sudden, unusual and wonderful increase and multiplication, Esay LIV. 1. Micah V. 7. Esay LXVI. 9. so numerous shall his youth be; his new-borne people; Iohn I. 13. and III. 3. Gal, IV. 19. Heb. II. 14. 1 Pet. II. 2. See Esay LIII. 10. So that these words are not to be understood of the temporal Nativity of Christ from the Virgin, or his eternal generation from the Father as some do; but of his active spi∣ritual generation of his children, the subjects of his Kingdome. The Lord hath sworne] The Vocation of Christ to his Office of
Priesthood. Jehovah is the Author of it. hath sworne] Jehovah swears, to confirme matters of greatest moment: when, and where his wisdome pleaseth. And upon this point here of Christs eternal Priesthood mans salvation dependeth. He swears by himself; though that is not here expressed; because he hath no greater to swear by; Heb. VI. 13, 16. Gen. XXII 16. And so by his life, Esay XLIX. 18. by his soul, Jer. LI. 24. by his right∣hand, and the arme of his strength, Esay LXII. 8. The result of all which is the same with himself. And implying thereby thus much, Let me not be accounted what I am, namely God, the living God, the omnipotent God, if that which I speak be not true, or my promi∣ses or threatnings do faile of performance. Of Oaths, See the Ob∣servations on Jer. LI. 14. and my Annotations on Hos. IV. 15. and will not repent] Will not change or retract what he hath sworne, Num. XXIII. 19. James I. 17. Repenting is sometimes as∣cribed to God; as Gen. VI. 6, 7. Psal. CVI. 45. 1 Sam. XV. 11. 35. Not that there is any change of minde of will in God; as there is in mans repenting: But the change is in the work; God eternally and unchan∣gably decreeing both, as to do the thing, so again to change it upon mans repentance, or disobedience; Jer. XXVI. 3, 13, 19. Of this see more in the Observations on Jer. XV. 6. In all this God condes∣cends to mans weaknesse, Heb. VI. 17, 18. Shewes the greatnesse, and excellency of the thing here avowed; that the Lord Christ was lawfully Called and Ordained to be an eternal Priest for us, and our salvation; for our greater confirmation, and consolation herein. Thou art] The Lord Christ well knew this, and could not doubt of the will of the Father herein. What then needed this Oath to be made unto him? Answ. It was made to him, for the use of his Church; that his Church might know and be assured of it. As that John XI. 42. art] God saying, is as much as doing. a Preist] So Gen. XIV. 18. Heb. VII. 1. Melchizedec in type; Christ in truth, the Antitype. The Priests office was to Teach, Pray, and Sacrifice. The High Priest among the Jewes once a year entred into the most Holy place. Yet he in all things was not an ab∣solute and sufficient Type of our High Priest Christ the Lord. For he is an eternal High Priest; and both King and Priest; and his Sa∣crifice of another nature; and himself of another Tribe. for ever] Not so the Priests after the order of Aaron, Heb. VII. 23. 34 and chap. IX. 12. after the order] Or similitude, Heb. V. 6. and chap. VII. 15. of Melchizedec] Much question who this Melchizedec was. He was not the Sonne of God himself, our Lord and Christ. Very many take him to be Sem the Sonne of Noah, who saw both worlds, before, and after the Flood; and lived to the one hundred and fiftieth year of the age of Abraham. Yet because Sems genealogie is exactly set down in Scripture; and that the Levitical Priests themselves came from him
after sundry descents: and the Land of Canaan seems not to be Sems habitation, which took its name from his younger brother Cham, or from Chams sonne Canaan: Neither would Abraham so long have forborne his due respects and visitation of Sem in Canaan, if Sem had lived there: Therefore divers learned men take this Melchizedec to be rather some eminent man in Canaan, raised up by God in those corrupt times, both good and godly, both King and Priest, living in Salem, after called Jerusalem; whose King in Joshuahs time was cal∣led Adoni-Zedeck, that is, Lord of righteousnesse, Josh. X. 1. As this man here is called Melchizedec, that is, King of righteousnesse. By which place, or near to it, Abraham in his returne from this warre and victory, was to passe. Of this Melchizedec, and his Priesthood, and the difference of it from Aarons Priesthood, the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap, VII en∣treateth at large, and observeth divers things; his Name and Title; his greatnesse in that he blessed Abraham, and received Tythes of A∣braham; his being mentioned in Scripture without any Pedegree, without father without mother, without descent, having neither be∣ginning of dayes, nor end of life. All these he had; as our Saviour himself had them; but none of them recorded or registred in the Scripture; that he might so become a Type of the eternity of Christs Person, and Priesthood; verse 3. The Apostle further observeth his Offices, that he was both King and Priest; and that our Saviour was made such, with an oath of God the Father; and a Priest of a better Priesthood, Covenant, and Commandment; and that he was made, not after the Law of a carnal commandement, having carnal succes∣sors in his Priesthood; but after the power of an endlesse life, conse∣crated for evermore, having an eternal Priesthood, and unchangeable, continuing ever, and living ever to make intercession, and by his one, offering up himself once for all, saving them to the uttermost that come to God by him. In all which there are manifold resemblances between Christ and Melchizedec; and manifold differences between theirs and the Aaronical Priesthood. As for those fond and forced dreams of the Papist, That Melchizedec offered up to God the sacri∣fice of bread and wine; And therein was a Type and Figure of their sacrifice of the Masse; And that thereupon Christ our Lord is said to be a Priest after the order of Melchizedec; These may well befal to them, who for want of the love of the truth, are given up to beleeve lies; but are too weak, poor, and silly, for us to trouble our selves withal. The Lord at thy right hand] The prophesie of Christ the Lord his administration of his Kingly Office, in this, and the next verse. The Lord, God, the Father, who will make thine enemies thy footstoole, He at thy right hand, ready to assist thee. O Christ; as Psal. XVI. 8. and CIX. 31. Shall strike through Kings, Psal. II. 2, 4, 5. even the highest Powers and Potentates that oppose Christ and his Kingdome, 2 Cor. X. 5. In the day of his wrath, the time appointed in
Gods wisdome, the time of his just will so to punish them with plagues temporal, eternal, in this life, in that to come, 1 Thes. I. 9, 10. Not that Christ the Lord shall be exempted from this powerful con∣quest, and overthrow of his enemies; the Sonne being in all things coequal, consubstantial with the Father; And so the Act coming from the Father, by the Sonne; But in this speech relation is had to Christ, as , God and Man, as the King Mediatour, and receiving his Office from the Father. He shall judge] The Lord at thy right hand shall execute judge∣ments and punishments. among the heathen] Psal. II. 1. Acts IV. 27. all his enemies what∣soever. he shall fill the places with the dead bodies] All places with the carkases of the slaine. See Jer. XVI. 4. A figurative and poeti∣cal expression of an huge slaughter; such as was that of the Jewes at the final destruction of Jerusalem, after the death of our Saviour. he shall wound the head in many countries] Wound, or strike through. Head for heads collectively, Psal. LXVIII. 21. in many or great countries. See that Apoc. XX. 9, 10. He] Christ the Lord. Thus the Prophet passeth from the Father, to the Sonne. The Father acteth by the Sonne; the Sonne from the Father. shall drink of the brook in the way] In pursuing the victory over his enemies; he shall do, as Gideons souldiers did, Judg. VII. 7. admit of no delaies; which occasioned that interdict, adjuration, and curse of Saul, 1 Sam. XIV. 24. Or rather, these words seeme to have re∣lation to Christs state of Humiliation; and the rather because of that opposition thereunto in the words following. And so here we have Christs exinanition, and exaltation; his passion, and resurrection; whereby he was brought to sit at the right hand of the Father, verse 1. drink] In passing through this valley of tears, in this world, he shall drink deeply of the cup of sorrowes: the waters, floods, and tor∣rents of afflictions and miseries should overtake and encompasse him, if not overwhelme and drowne him, Psal. LXXXVIII. 7. 17. See Jer. XXV. 15, 16. and chap. XLIX. 12. Matth. XX. 22. John XVIII. 11. Matth. XXVI. 39. in the way] Of this life; the way of doing his fathers will for the work of mans redemption, Phil. II. 7, 8. He hid for the time the luster and beams of his Divine Majesty; that it might not hinder the suffer∣ings and death of his Humanity, 1 Cor. II. 8. Matth. XVII. 9. therefore] Thus Christ came from his humiliation to his exaltati∣on, from his Priesthood, to his Kingdome. Therefore here notes not a Merit preceding in Christ, meriting for himself this exaltation; or his glorie either in body, or soul, his life eternal; All necessarily fol∣lowed upon that hypostatical Union, which he could not merit to him∣self. All Christ did, was to merit for us. The particle here notes the consequence or sequel, and order, the means and manner how he came to this exaltation.
shal he lift up the head] Be exalted; sit at Gods right hand. See for the phrase, Psal. III. 3. and XXVII. 6. Jer. LII. 31. Lam. II. 10. sublimi feriet sydera vertice. Praise] This is one of the Alphabetical Psalmes. And so is the next Psalme. Thereby to help memory, and to mark out the excel∣lency of these Psalmes. See the Observations on the beginning of the Book of Psalmes. wonderful works] In Egypt. meat] Manna and Quails. Covenant] Though they by their sinnes often and grievously pro∣voked him. heathen] Canaanites. Praise] See the former Psalme. wealth] See the Observations on Psal. XXXVII. 1. light in darknesse] Esay LVIII. 10. Job XI. 17. Psal. XXXVII. 6. of evil tydings] Prov. I. 33. Otherwise is it with the wicked, Jer. XLIX. 23. gnash with his teeth] See that Luke XIII. 28. who humbleth himself to behold] Psal. CXXXVIII. 6. and CXXXIX. 1, &c. Job XXXIV. 21, 22. Prov. V. 21. Jer. XVI. 17. contrary to that, Psal. LXXIII. 11. and LXIV. 6. and XCIV. 7,—10. Job XXII. 12, 13. He raiseth] 1 Sam. II. 8. mountains skipped] Sinai, Horeb, quaked and shaked, Exod. XIX. 18. Hab. III. 6, 10. Psal LXVIII. 8. Their idols are] Not like unto our God, verse 3. are like unto them] As much without sense and reason, as blocks and stones. their help] Theirs that trust in him: or one person, put for another, which is not unusual. hath he given] To their use, in this world. Or, the earth also is the Lords, which he hath given to the children of men. The dead praise not] Psal. VI. 5. and XXX. 9. and LXXXVIII. 10, 11, 12. Esay XXXVIII. 18. I love] This may seeme to be Davids Psalme, upon his new com∣ing to the Kingdome. Therefore] The experience of Gods hearing our prayers, doth hearten us to pray the more. Pains of hell] The sorrowes and straits of death, and the grave, Psal. XVIII. 5, 6. Gratious] The issue and effect of Prayer. thy rest] Thy quiet comfortable estate in God without trouble of conscience, and that because of Gods goodnesse, and good dealing to∣wards thee. I beleeved] 2 Cor. IV. 13. upon consideration of the Premises, his Faith thus triumphed; notwithstanding his afflictions. I was greatly afflicted] The Hebrew word here hath an Active
forme, but in a Passive signification. As sometimes an Hebrew word in a Passive forme, is of an Active signification. See Esay XXI. 10. and chap. XXV. 9. and LIII. 7. and Ezek XIV. 4, 7. haste, All men are liers] Even the Prophets, as Samuel that promi∣sed to me the Kingdome. Yea, all men, in comparison of God; un∣able to help in time of need, Rom. III. 4. cup of salvations] Used in the Israelites Peace-offerings of Thanks∣givings, and in the Meat-offerings joyned to them, and to their whole∣burnt offerings: and used in their holy Feasts, 1 Chron. XVI. 1, 2, 3 whence that seemes to be, Luke XXII. 17. vowes] Made in mine adversity. Of vowes, see the Annotations on Jonah I. 16. Pretious] Psal. LXXII. 14. which God shewes in preserving my life from death, in the midst of all mine enemies. Praise] The Apostle alledgeth this to prove Gods mercy to the Gentiles, that they should therefore glorifie him. O give thanks] This may seeme to be Davids Psalme;  and like∣ly inspired and composed upon his returne from his last victory over the Ammonites, 2 Sam. XII. 29. on my side] Heb. XIII. 6. Psal. LVI. 4. 11. All nations] David had to deale with all the neighbouring nations round about him. Thou] Speaking to the enemie. Open to me] The gates of the Sanctuarie, or house of God; the gates of the Court thereof; which the Levitical Porters were to do, for men to come and serve the Lord. of righteousnesse] For the righteous and cleane only were to enter in thereat, 2 Chron. XXIII. 19. See Esay XXVI. 2. Apoc. XXI. 27. The stone] David Typicaly;  His Sonne, the Messias, Realy; Mat. XXI. 42. Ephes. II. 20. builders refused] The Rulers refused David in the reignes of Saul, and Ishbosheth. The Priests and Elders refused Christ, Mark XII. 2, 10. Luke XIX. 14. 1▪ Pet. II. 7. the head stone] Acts IV. 11. Luke XX. 17. Of this stone see more, Esay XXVIII. 16. Dan. II. 34, 35, 45. Zech. III. 9. Rom. IX. 33. the day] A chief and choise day of God shewing his mercie. Save nowbeseech thee] Heb. Hoshiah na, in Greek sounded Hosan∣na; wherewith Christ is welcomed to Jerusalem, and the Temple; Mat. XXI. 9, 15. Luke XIX. 37, 38. we have blessed you] These seeme to be the Priests words, relating to Num. VI. 23. light] Prosperity, under the Kingdome of David, and Christ. even unto the hornes of the Altar] Likely the hornes of the Altar Exod. XXVII. 2. intended for that use. Or, sacrifices abundantly all the Court over till you come to the hornes of the Altar, Levit. IV. 7. Blessed] Of this Psalme see the Observations on the beginning of the Book of Psalmes. David probably is the penman of it. The stile
is plaine, fitted for all capacities. And the Alphabetical order was u∣sed for help of memory. It is full of the ardent pious affections of a religious soul. Petitions for saving knowledge, and gracious assi∣stance from God, and Promises of all holy sincere obedience there∣upon, are in every Octonarie; with wondrous art and variety of sense; yet running much upon the same words, without any tautologie. Before I was afflicted] So verse 71. Before I spake or answered, is not so proper an interpretation of this place, though it pleased Junius; unlesse we understand it thus, Before I cried out by reason of affliction. my soul is continualy in my hand] i. e. my life is dayly in danger. As Iudg. XII. 3. 1 Sam. XIX. 5. and chap. XXVIII. 21. Many read this text in thy hand, or hands, understanding Gods hand, which im∣ports, not danger, but safety and security, as Psal. XXXI. 5. Luke XXIII. 46. 1 Pet. IV. 19. And is indeed a wrong reading; and breeds sundry senses, not consonant, or consisting with the tenour of this verse. any iniquity] either in me, subjective; or of others against me, ob∣jective. And so the later way may be understood that Gal. II. 7, 90 Ephes. VI. 12. Heb. XII. 4. Psal. XLIX. 5. and XL. 12. and LXV. 3. and XXXIX. 8. A song of degrees] or ascensions, heights, or excellencies. This, and the fourteene Psalmes following, have this Title prefixed. The meaning whereof is variously conjectured; As thus, That they were to be sung with a loud voice, as 1 Chron. XV. 16. Or, upon the steps and degrees of the staires ascending to the Court of the people, or to that of the Priests, which, they say, were fifteene in number, accord∣ing to these number of these Psalms. Or, in the coming of the Ark into the Temple. Or in their returne out of Babylon. Or to be sung in their returne into their own land in the time of the Messias. Others have other conjectures; yet without any certaine determination; neither is it much material. Of these, four bear Davids title, and some of the rest not unlikely were penned by him. I] David likely. from lying lips] Of such as falsely accused him to Saul. 1 Sam. XXIV. 9. and chap. XXVI. 19. what shall be given] What good or profit shalt thou get or gaine by it. sharp arrowes] Such is a false tongue: or, such are the plagues God will render as a reward unto it. Woe is me] Laments, that in his exile he was forced to dwell so long with the cruel and barbarous posterity of Mesech, the sonne of Japhet, Gen. X. 2. and of Kedar, the sonne of Ishmael, Gen. XXV. 13. or rather, with men of like evil cruel conditions to them. hills] Moriah, and Zion; where God dwelleth. But most to God himself, verse 2. The Sunne] By its parching heat;  as Ionah IV. 8. Nor the Moon, by its cold vapors. Gen. XXXI. 40. nor any discommodity shall be able to annoy thee, Psal. XCI. 5.
I] David having brought the Ark of the testimony to Ierusalem, and setled the Thrones of judgement there, pens this Psalme of joy and gladnesse therefore: Praising the Citie; and praying for the pro∣sperity of it. testimonie] The Ark. See the Observations on. Ex. 25. 16. thrones of judgement] Both Ecclesiastical, and Civil: as God had commanded, Deut. XVII. 8, &c. the captivity of Zion] Out of Babylon: which returne figured our Redemption by Christ. that dreame] So incredible it was, and the joy of it, that we half doubted whether it were true, or but a dreame. As Peter did, Acts XII. 9, 11. See Esay XXIX. 7, 8. And the like speech we read of in Abdolominus when he was taken from manuring the earth, to possesse a Kingdome: and in Isaacus Angelus, when he was suddenly lifted up to the Empire: and in that famous Iohn Chrysostome, when he was first chosen into the Presbyterie. Turn again] Prayes that the deliverance begun, may be carried on, and brought to perfection. For it had many stops and hinderan∣ces; as appears in the books of Ezra, and Nehemiah. They that sow in tears] That went mournfuly into captivity, shall return joyfuly. for Solomon] Seemes to be inspired and penned for Solomon, by David, a litle before his death, Psal. LXXII. title Except the Lord] This is true generaly: yet may relate to the fu∣ture building of the Temple by Solomon, and the safe keeping of the Citie Ierusalem: or rather to the building of Solomons house and po∣sterity. so] By building, keeping, blessing their labours without sorrow. he giveth] Or surely will give, or rightly doth give. his beloved] Whom he loves, and who in assurance of his love com∣mits himself to him and his care. The Hebrew word Iedid seemes to allude to Solomons name Iedidiah, 2 Sam. XII. 25. his darling. sleep] Or quiet rest, without carking care and sorrow. The He∣brew word is written with  a quiet dumb letter, otherwise then usual, to denote the more quietnesse. And this rest, not your care and toil, but Gods blessing, will bring unto you, Prov. X. 22. Blessed] The Blessings that ordinarily follow them that Fear the Lord▪  Take in with this the main matter of that in Psal. LXXIII. eate the labour] As on the other side it is true of the wicked, Prov. I. 31. the cords] Wherewith they drew their Plough;  to make long furrows upon the back of the Church. his bosome] Or armes;  as Esay XLIX. 22. The blessing] As Ruth II. 4. Out of the depths] Psal. LXIX. 1, 2. forgiveness with thee; that thou mayst be feared] Hos III. 5. Gods fidelity, and the truth of his promises for the forgivenesse of our sins,
his mercie, and our plenteous redemption, is the true cause of our fearing of him, and hoping in him, verse 7. If without this, God did strictly mark our iniquities, our hope in him, and reverential fear and worship of him, would utterly fail and perish. shall redeem] Psal. XXV. 22. and CIII. 3, 4. not haughty] In aspiring to the Kingdome;  and that by Sauls ruine and destruction. as a weaned childe] That is, free from such ambitious thoughts. I rested quiet in thy will and promise. Let Israel] By my example. A Song] This seemes to be Davids, at his bringing of the Ark to Jerusalem. Some say, Solomons; acting what his father purposed and ordered, 2 Sam. VII. 8. with 2 Chron. VI. 41. his afflictions] In coming to the crown;  and his afflicting cares, to bring home the Ark, and build God an House; as in the verses following. surely] If I enter. A form of an oath, or curse, Let me perish if I enter. my house] Newly built, and mentioned, 1 Chron. XV. 1. sleep] In that house. Or at least he would never do so quietly, till the Ark were in its resting place. we heard of it] We Bethleemites heard of the Ark. at Ephratha] That it was, or had been at Shiloh in the tribe of E∣phraim: or much rather, we at Bethlehem Ephratha, in our own coun∣trey, heard of it, Micah V. 2. Gen. XXXV. 16, 19. 1 Sam. I. 1. See the Annotations on Micah V. 2. we found it in the fields of the wood] Or Jaar; in Kiriath-jearim, a Citie seated in the woods, as the name importeth. And of Kiriath-jea∣rim, See the Observations on 1 Sam. VII. 1. Arise] 2 Chron. VI. 41. Num. X. 35. Psal. LXVIII. 1. thy rest] Ver. 13, 14. still flitting and wandering before. cloathed] As with their sacred garments. See Apoc. XIX. 8. Eph. IV. 24. Col. III. 10, 12, 14. Gal. III. 27. Rom. XIII. 14. For thy servant Davids sake] Verse 1. thy Covenant, and Promi∣ses made to him, 1 Kings 8. 25. Psal. LXXXIX. 20. Esay XXXVII. 35. And for Christs sake, called David, Hos. III. 5. See the Anno∣tations upon that text. of thine anointed] Me, thine anointed King. of thy body] This relates to Christ, Acts II. 30. If thy children] Thus conditional to Davids posterity, 2 Sam. VII. 14. Psal. LXXXIX. 30—33. for evermore] Verified only in Christ, the Sonne of David. the horne of David to bud] Psal. LXXXIX. 24. Luke I. 69. a lamp] 1 Kings XI. 36. and XV. 4. 2 Kings VIII. 19. Hermon] See the Observations on Deut. IV. 48. Hermon and Zion here are farre distant mountains. And so the dew of Hermon descends not upon the mountains of Zion; but the similitude is twice repeated, of the dew falling upon those two several distinct and distant moun∣tains.
commanded] Psal. XLII. 8. and XLIV. 4. and LXVIII. 28. and LXXI. 3. Deut. XXVIII. 8. by night] 1 Chron. IX. 33. Psal. XCII. 3. and CXIX. 147. Luke I. 37. 1 Sam. III. 3. Some think that this, and the next Psalme, were made for the use of such worshippers by night. for the raine] Or, with the raine; or to shew that raine is com∣ing. repent] Even in the judging of his people;  he will be so tender to∣wards them. Rivers] May comprehend here Euphrates, and Tigris, or Eulaeus or Chabor, being then all under the Babylonish Empire. of Babylon] In the seventy years captivity. Of Babylon, see the Observations on Dan. IV. 30. of Edom] Obadiah, verse 10,—16. Ezek XXV. 12. Jer. XLIX. 7. Lament. IV. 2. thy little ones] Sinne enough in Babylon, in the Land of Shinar, Zech. V. 8, 11. Sinne enough in these little ones: as in the litle ones of the old world drowned with Noahs flood: as in the little ones of So∣dom, burned with brimstone: &c. thy Word above all thy name] Or, thy name above all things by thy Word. Or, thy Word with all thy name. Thy Promise in Christ concerning thy people is greater then all other things whereby thou hast made thy self known. with strength.] Ephes. III. 16, 20. in the wayes of the Lord] Or, of the wayes, Psal. CIII. 7. when they shall be converted. will perfect] Phil. I. 6. Psal. LVII. 2. my bed in hell] In the grave. in the lowest parts of the earth] His mothers womb, Eccles. XI. 5. So Ephes. IV. 9. may be understood of Christs Incarnation. Some∣times this phrase is meant of the Grave; as Psal. LXIII. 9. when I awake I am still with thee] Still meditating of thee, and finding new occasions to think of thee, and praise thee. Or, I watch night and day to be found still cleaving to thee. Or, when I have spent the whole day in those pretious thoughts of thee verse 17. the next morning I am where I was, I am but at the beginning still; the more I think of them, the more wonderful they appear to me still. Surely] This may be rendered here as a Wish. violent man] Saul, and his Agents. O God] Jehovih. See the Observations on Esay XXVI. 4. and on Psal. LXXI. 5. the strength of my salvation] Ephes. VI. 17. of David] This may seeme inspired and composed by David when he was in the Wildernesse of En-gedi, 1 Sam. XXIV. about the same time when the next Psalme, and Psalme LVII. were composed. doore] In the Hebrew dal is contracted here for deleth: as Chaji, 2. Sam. XXIII. 23. for Chajil, 1 Chron. XI. 22.
incline not] By Satan, or my own corruption, James I. 13, 14. So Matth. VI. 13. not eate of their dainties] Lest by their prosperity I should be al∣lured to be wicked, as they are. for yet my prayer] I will requite them with my best prayers, when they most need them. when their Judges] The Chieftains and Senators of mine adver∣saries. in stonie places] Where they persecute, and pursue me. they shall hear my words] Then; that they are sweet, pleasing, and inoffensive to mine adversaries. Our bones] Davids, and his followers; they are in such like pre∣sent danger. when he was in the cave] Psal LVII. 1 Sam. XXIV. 4. The later part of this prayer seemes, as spoken in the cave. Yet it all might be composed after his deliverance out of it. As that Prayer Jonah II. prison] This Cave, wherein I am shut up, as in a close prison. faithfulnesse] For performance of thy faithful and true promises made to me. righteousnesse] To maintaine and defend a righteous cause. Enter not] Though my cause be just;  yet my person is sinful and unjust, not able to abide thy judgement, Rom. III. 20. So Job XXII. 4. and XIV. 3. Gal. II. 16. no man living] Heb. not all living, i. e. not any living. As Mat. XXIV. 22. 1 John II. 21. 2 Pet. I. 20. Psal. LXXVI. 5. is desolate] Or wondrously amazed, upheld only by Gods power. cause me] The work is Gods. He the actor of it. And therefore to him he lifts up his soul. So verse 10. good; lead me] Or, by thy good Spirit lead me: Thus prayer-wise: or shall lead me; spoken in way of assurance. of David] It seemes composed after he came to the crown, and had got some victories over his enemies; and yet other enemies were ready to invade him, 2 Sam. V. & VIII. what is man] Psal. VIII. 5. Job VII. 17. Heb. II. 6. Bow the heavens] Shew thy self present on earth, for my help; and my foes ruine, who are like mountains, in comparison of other men, 1 Sam. XXII. 10. a right hand of falshood] Though they shake hands, yet they keep not promise. whose God is the Lord] This is opposed to all the other worldly wealth;  as farre more then over-poising it all. of praise] His Hymne. And the whole book in Hebrew is called the book of Hymnes, or Praises. This is an Alphabetical Psalme. On∣ly the letter Nun is wanting. See the Observations on Psal. XXV. 1. and on the beginning of the book of Psalmes. over all his works] Or, towards. upholdeth all that fall] Psal. CXLVI. 8. all whom he in his good∣nesse
knows are to be upholden; without whom, and his goodnes none are upholden. But some fall, and never rise. wait upon thee] Psal CIV. 27. 28. in truth] This in Prayer requireth sincerity, without hypocrisie; faith, repentance, earnestnes, and constancie. the desire] Or will. We pray that Gods will may be done, Matth. VI. 10 Here he doth his servants will. So he honoureth them that honour him, 1 Sam. II. 30. And their will agrees with his, 1 John V. 14. Praise ye the Lord] Heb. Halelu-jah. And thus do begin, and end likewise, the rest of the Psalmes that follow. In the Greek, it is Alle∣luia Apoc. XIX. 1. Halelu-jah, is in Psal. CIV. and CVI. and CXXXV. and in many others. which executeth judgement] Who succours and relieves all, in, and according to their several necessities; He it is that doth it; But that when, and how, in his wisdome and goodnesse it seemeth to him best. out-casts] Deut. XXX. 4. telleth the number] Esay XL. 26. though to man they are innu∣merable, Ier. XXXIII. 22. at least in common opinion, and of him in∣deed cannot be all seene. The number of the stars is counted by an∣cient Astronomers; And all within, and without their several Con∣stellations, in their several magnitudes, are reduced by all, much un∣der the number of two thousand. Yet their number, in Scripture∣phrase, is marshaled with the sands of the sea, as innumerable. Which is spoken according to vulgar opinions and apprehensions; as that of the Sunne, and Moone Gen. I 16. And divers other things are in Scripture in like sort spoken of. And yet the innumerable multitude of them appears the more, in our times; Wherein Galileus, and o∣thers after him by their new instruments and Tubi Optici, have made such strange discoveries of many many numbers of them, never seene before. young ravens] Iob XXXVIII. 41. Psal. CIV. 27, 28. Matth. VI. 26. fat of wheat] Psal. LXXXI. 16. Deut. XXXII. 14. runneth] Psal. XXXIII. 9. snow like wooll] accordingly the phrase is, fleeces of snow. his yce like morsels] Frost, or frozen hailstones. his word unto Jacob] This is singular mercie, and peculiar to his Church: farre beyond all those formerly mentioned: for which his Church is so bound to praise him. stars of light] Job XXXVIII. 7. havens of heavens] The heaven of heavens is the highest heaven; called the third heaven, 2 Cor. 2. XII. The sky where the starres are, is the second heaven. And the aire under it, and next us, is the first heaven: In the upper part whereof are the waters here mentioned. For this Text, and Gen. I, 6, 7. yeeld not a sure foundation whereon to build an Orbe of supercelestial waters, above the starry heavens; nor from the windowes of that Orbe came the waters in Noahs flood. But from the lowest region of the aire, called Heaven, and the firma∣ment
of Heaven, wherein the winds, clouds, and fowles do flie; and do divide between the sea-waters, and the watery clouds which moy∣sten the earth, and make it bring forth fruit for the sustenance of man, and beast. See Gen. I. 20. Jer. LI. 16. Dan. VII. 2, 13. Psal. LXXVIII. 23. Mal. III. 10. a decree] Statute, Rule, and Ordinance, whereby every creature is bound to his set time, place, and function, Job XIV. 5. and XXVI. 10. and XXXVIII, 33. Jer. XXXI. 35. and XXXIII. 25. the horne of his people] Psal. LXXV. 10. the power, glory, and Kingdome of his people and Church: and that by Christ, who is the horne of salvation, Luke I. 69. him that made him] Heb. his makers. Likely relating to the Tri∣nity of persons, as Gen. I. 26. and III. 22. and XI. 7. Job. XXXV. 10. Eccles. XII. 1. Esay VI. 8. LIV. 5. King] Christ, of whom King David was a Type. As Mat. XXI. 5. Cant. I. 4, upon their beds] Night and day, Psal. LXIII. 6. Job XXXV. 10. and a two-edged sword] Heb. two-mouthed. This chiefly at least aimes at the spiritual sword, Ephes. VI. 17. Heb. IV. 12. Apoc. I. 16. which is the Word of God, coming out of Christs mouth. To execute vengeance upon the heathen] Chiefly in and by the pow∣er and preaching of the Gospel, 2 Cor. X. 4, 5, 6, 8. See Esay XLI. 15, 16. John XVI. 8, 9. To binder their Kings] Psal. II. 2, 3, 9, 10. Esay XLV. 14. Mark VI. 20. Acts XXIV. 25. Apoc. XXI 24. Matth. XVI. 19. the judgement written] This may have reference to that Law, Deut. VII. 1, 2. Or, to the exact rule of Gods Word, without any addition, or diminution. Deut. XII. 32. Apoc. XXII. 18. This honour] Deut. IV. 6, 7, 8. Sanctuary] His holy place. Or, sanctity, in and for his holy es∣sence. firmament of his power] His power seene in the firmament, in the stretching out and spreading abroad of it, Psal. XIX. 2. Dan. XII. 3. that hath breath] Apoc. V. 13.
Proverbs. THE Book of Proverbs contains the chief of those three thousand Proverbs which Solomon spake, 1 Kings IV. 32. They are Proverbs and instructions of Piety, and Wisdome; and the Praises of it; with Exhortati∣ons to it, and Dehortations from the chief avocati∣ons and impediments of it, in the nine first chapters. All which serve well, as a large Preface and preceding Introduction. And then do follow Proverbs, or choyce sentences, , or wise Apothegines, Solomons Ethicks, our Digesta, and Pandects; All of Morality, and prudential Civility, in the rest of the Book. Wherein coherence of Sentences is not much minded: A Repeti∣tion of the same things, by reason of the several Collections of them, is found sometimes: And the verity of some of them, is not like that of Mathematical Theoremes; but consists in such a generality of truth, as stands good, and is so , for the most part; And yet admits of alteration by variety of circumstances, and other incident occasions. Throughout the Book, Solomon speaks, one while in his Owne name; Another while in his Fathers; Then in Wisdomes; Elsewhere, in his Mothers; and sometimes in Gods name. It may seeme thus; That he speaks in his Owne name, Chapters I, II, III. He sets down the summe of his Father Davids Instru∣ctions, Chapters IV, V, VI, VII. Then brings in Wisdome speaking, Chapters VIII. IX. After he sets down those Proverbs of his Owne, which he had set in order in his Life-time, Chapters X,—XXIV. Then others are added that were gathered by the Servants of King Heze∣kiah, Chapters XXV,—XXIX. Then follows the Prophesie of A∣gur, Chap. XXX. And lastly, the Instruction which Solomons mother taught him, Chap, XXXI. So that the Collection was made by sun∣dry; and at sundry times. For explanations, where most need shall be, I shall give some short touches; And therein willingly make choise to use such expressions as I can best judge in other Authors help∣ful this way: And by way of collection and contraction pick out the pith of them.
of Solomon] Of his wisdome, see 1 Kings III. 12. and IV. 29, 30, 31. and X. 23, 24. Eccles. XII. 9, 10. to give subtiltie] Sacred sagacitie, a sharp wit, a deep reach, 1 Cor. II. 10. 2 Cor. III. 18. The fear of the Lord] It is Wisdome it self, Job XXVIII. 28. He sets it here in the Beginning; and he makes it the End of all, yea, the All of man, Eccles. XII. 13. wisdome] The wisdome of God;  and Christ himself chiefly, Col. II. 3. 1 Cor. I. 30. wisdome crieth] Iohn VII. 37. The Hebrew is, Wisdomes crieth. The plural number is here used, by way of excellencie, to denote the singular eminencie of the thing so spoken of. And so Behemoth, sig∣nifying beasts, for that singular beast, Iob XL. 15. And so, If I be masters, in the Hebrew, Mal. I. 6. And so likewise Elohim pluraly is used for one only God. Unlesse, by way of Ellipsis, we will take the meaning thus; the wisdome of wisdomes; the beast of beasts; the master of masters; the God of Gods. In like sense the plural is used, Lam. III. 22. Psal. LI 17. 2 Sam. XXII. 1. and ye refused] This is a step towards the sinne unpardonable. I also will laugh] Psal. II. 4. Then man hath cause to weep. The poyson of sinne thus working upon God, and Christ. Esay I. 24. Then shall they call] Prov. XXVIII. 9. 1 Sam. XXVIII. 6. Psal. XVIII. 41. the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.] Their prosperity are as gay cloaths, with a plague-soar in them. They shipwrack upon the sands of prosperity, as well as others do on the rocks of adversity. quiet from fear of evil] Psal. XLVI. 2, 3. if thou criest] Hos. VI. 3. A dull suiter begs a denial. and searchest for her] Till ye get all those dimensions of Know∣ledge, Ephes. III. 18. Rom. XV. 14. who rejoyce to do evil] Who cannot be merry, unlesse the Devil be their play-fellow, Ier. XI. 15. none] For the most part, and so generaly. Length of dayes] If a short life be not a blessing, as 1 Kings XIV. 13. Esay LVII. 1. when there is a fire in an house or a town, men carry out their jewels. But then God makes them up in his Cabinet, Malachi III. 17. Be not wise] Bis desipit qui sibi sapit. ch. XXVI. 12. the chastening] Is cited, Heb. XII. 5, 6. Schola crucis, schola lucis. Adversity is the best University. she is a tree of life] Alluding to Gen. II. 9. See XIII. 12. and XV. 4. and happie is] The retainers of her. So in the Hebrew. And the meaning is well rendered in our English, every one that retaineth her. The like phrase and use of the plural, joyned with a singular, and in a distributive sense, in the Hebrew, is found, chap. XIV. 1. Gen. XLIX. 22. Exod. XVII. 12. and XXXI. 14. Iosh. II. 4. Job XII. 7. Psal. LXXIII. 7. Joel I. 20. 2 Kings V. 13.
The Lord by wisdome] By his essential wisdome, by the Lord Christ, chap. VIII. 30. Apoc. III. 14. Heb. I. 2. Col. I. 16. go, and come again] . surely he scorneth the scorners▪ but he giveth grace to the lowly] Jam. IV. 6. 1 Pet. V. 5. Those scorners are such through pride. And the grace here given is not meant of inward sanctifying grace, but of ex∣ternal favour, repute, and estimation with men. And so chap. I. 9. and IV. 9. Eccles. VII. 1. and chap. IX. 11. Luke II. 52. Acts II. 47. And so also may be understood, Luke I. 28. and Ephes. 1. 6. scorneth] Psal, I. 1. chap. I. 22. and IX. 7, 8. See the Observati∣ons there. As also chap. IX. 12. and XIII. 1. Esay XXVIII. 14. and chap. XXIX. 20. Hos. VII. 5. 2 Pet. III. 3. Iude 18. Only] Not borne;  but beloved, by his mother, Bathshebah. His Father loved also other of his sonnes but too well. He taught me] The substance of his Father Davids doctrine, Solomon doth briefly set down to the tenth verse. And then proceeds in his own words. Forsake her not] Falling Stars were never but Meteors. with all thy getting] With any pains, for any price. This gold can∣not be bought too dear. For they sleep not] Et si non aliquà nocuisset, mortuus esset. thy heart] This is the chief Monarch in this Isle of man, c. XXIII. 26 Let thine eyes look right on] On right objects. If thine eye offend thee, pull it out of the old Adam, and set it in the New man: Else bet∣ter to pul it out indeed. Ponder] By the weight of the Sanctuarie. feet] Affections. For by these maids, Satan wooes the Mistresse. a strange woman] Verse 3,—23. and chap. VI. 29. and chap. XXII. 14. and chap. XXIII. 27. and chap. XXIX. 3. Luke XV. 13. Lest] She by her wayes labours to prevent this. Lest strangers] Chap. VI. 26. own cisterne] Cant. IV. 12. let thy fountains] Thy children by lawful marriage: or the good use of thy goods and wealth. only thine own] Sow there where thou mayst reap, and not another with thee. if thou be surety] Of suretiship, see Prov. XI. 15. and chap. XVII. 18. and chap. XXII. 26. and XX. 16. and chap. XXVII. 13. sluggard] Solomon is oft upon him in the Proverbs. Once for all take it thus; He paints him out in this wise; Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, chap. VI 10. and chap. XIX. 15. and chap. XXIV. 33. whereupon he bespeaks him thus, How long wilt thou sleep O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? chap. VI. 9. and chap. XIX. 15. As the doore turneth upon his hinges, so doth a slothful man upon his bed, for all its turnings it hangs there still, chap, XXVI. 14. He hideth his hand in his bosome, and it grieveth him▪ he is weary, he will not so much as bring it to his mouth again, chap. XIX. 24.
and chap. XXVI. 15. and chap. XII. 27. His way is an hedge of thorns, chap. XV. 19. He saith, A lion is in the way, a lion is in the streets, ch. XXVI. 13. I shall be slain in the streets, chap. XXII. 13. a lion with∣out, and a lazie lozel within. I went, saith Solomon, by the field of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of understanding. And lo, it was all grown over with thornes, and nettles had covered the face there∣of, and the stone-wall thereof was broken down, chap. XXIV. 30, 31. He will not plough by reason of the cold, chap. XX. 4. He rosteth not that which he took in hunting, chap. XII. 27. As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoak to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him, chap. X. 26. His soul desireth, and hath nothing, chap. XIII. 4. his desire killeth him, for his hands refuse to labour, chap. XXI. 25. And so he is brother to him that is a great waster, chap. XVIII. 9. whereupon his poverty comes as one that travelleth, and his want as an armed man, chap. VI. 11. and ch. X. 4. and ch. XIX. 15. and ch. XX. 13. and XXIII. 21. and XXIV. 34. that he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing, chap. XX. 4. but be under tribute, XII. 24. and be clothed in rags. And yet this sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason, then the se∣ven wise men of Greece, c. XXVI. 16. Howbeit the wise man here sends him to the Ant, to consider her wayes, and be wise. See Mat. XXV. 26. no guide] As in the Bees is an umbrage of Monarchy, so in the Ants of Democracie. He winketh] Doth twinkle with his eyes, and tinkle with his feet; to promote frowardnesse, mischief, and discord. without remedie] A dreadful and dismal doome, when he dreames not of danger. thou wakest] Psal. CXXXIX. 17, 18. to keep thee] To be as an amulet to that end. her beauty] Helen without, but Hecuba within. not be innocent] flagitium & flagellum, sicut acus & filum. Culpam Paena premit comes, saith Horace. Abraham might see Sodom burning; but Lot must not look that way. sevenfold] Often restore, as he often sinnes in that kinde, Psalme XII. 7. But is not punished with death, as the adulterer is. We read in the Law, of double, of fourfold, and fivefold restitution, in several cases of theft, Exod. XXII. 1, 4. 2 Sam. XII. 6. Here by sevenfold is meant manifold, as Psal. XII. 6. a plentiful restitution. the apple of thine eye] The least moat offends the eye;  that litle man in the eye cannot be touched, but is distempered. I have peace-offerings] Pretends religion to her filthy practises. with me] For thee; as she likely pretended. my vowes] She is a Votarie too; such as many Popish Nuns are. the day appointed] Rather so, then either new Moone, or full-Moone; as some render it. al plaine] In things necessary to salvatiō;  in matters of faith, & practise. wittie inventions] Not toylsome toyes, which are but laborious losse of time, of no use or worth. But to be wise as Serpents; as Eph. V. 15, 16, 17. Deut. IV. 6.
By me Kings reign] Rom. XIII. 1, 2. by God and his wisdome; by Christ the wisdome of God, who is made unto us wisdome. I love them that love me] Here is not love lost, John XIV. 21, 23. Ephes. VI. 24. and Christ is wholy lovely, Cant. V. 16. Hag. II. 7. 1 Cor. XVI. 22. I lead in the way of righteousnesse] I meddle not with the Mammon of iniquity;  lead not to wealth by right or wrong. God forbid that I, or any of mine should take of Satan, from a threed, even to a shoe∣latchet, lest he should say, I have made you rich. possessed me] i. e. Christ. So the Hebrew ; and so Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, , accordingly: not , created me; as the LXX. read, and the Arrian would have it; deny∣ing thereby the eternal Deity of Christ. And yet that Col. I. 15. the first-borne of every creature, stands well in an Orthodox exposition, with the Catholick Doctrine of Christs eternal Deity. And the words in the verses following, do agree unto Christ; compared with Psal. II. 6. and XC. 2. Matth. III. 17. John I. 14. As moreover the words in the beginning of the next Chapter do agree to him likewise, who is the wisdome of the Father, Col. III. 2. And that Christ is God, see among other places, Heb. I. 3. John I. 3. Col. I. 16, 17. foundations of the earth] Yet hangs in the aire, as it were by Geome∣trie, ver. 30. John I. 1. and my delights were] With his Church especially. findeth life] John XIV. 6. and chap. X. 28. and chap. I. 12. Wisdome] Hebr. wisdomes; the most excellent wisdome. See ch. VIII 1. and the Observations on chap. I. 20. seven pillars] So many polished pillars as might be sufficient to up∣hold and adorne her. mingled her wine] This usual in those hot countries, verse 5. In re∣lation to the Gospel, see that Matth. XXII. 4. come eate of my bread] As the Virgin Mary is not meant by wis∣dome, verse 1. so neither the Eucharist by this Bread and Wine here; as some Papists would poorly seek to perswade us. Reprove not a scorner] Chap. XXIII. 9. and chap. XXIV. 9. and XXVI. 4. Matth. VII. 6. The basest can mock: As the abjects did David, Psal. XXXV. 15. thy dayes shall be multiplied] Chap. X. 27. and III. 2, 16. Exods XX. 12. if short life would not prove a blessing to thee, 1 Kings XIV. 13. Esay LVII. 1, 2. as it was to Enoch, to Josiah, and others; who did live long in a little time here, and then lived for ever in heaven. clamorous] The most lewd, are the most loud. stollen waters] Those pleasures where the Devil is a play-fellow. But such morsels of sinne are murdering morsels, not nourishing. The Proverbs] Here the name of Solomon is prefixed again;  as it seemes to a second Head, or Collection of Proverbs; wherein the Op∣position of Contraries in the same verse is very much used; and the first part often serveth much to usher in the second.
from death] The second death;  and from the first too, many times, and alwayes as to the evil and sting of it. The Lord will not suffer] Though he refuse to enrich himself by e∣vil arts, and though he give to the poor, yet he shall not want necessa∣ries, Psal. XXXVII. 25. and XXXIV. 9. Blessings] Chap. XXVIII. 20. Gen. XXVII. 33. a confluence of all, and of all kinds, of Blessings. The memorie] Their name is heire to their life;  their stock remains, goes forward, and shall do, till the day of doome. Chap. XXII. 1. and chap. XV. 30. Eccles. VII. 1. 3 Iohn verse 12. but the name of the wicked shall rot] A frequent phrase and speech with the Hebrews; which they abbreviate, and write thus, . shall receive commandment] Be subject to Gods holy word, with∣out replies, and cavils. winketh] Winketh wiles. sorrow] Sinne, and sorrow, to himself, and others. a well of life] Flowing as an ever-flowing fountain. Psal. XXXVII. 30, 31. Matth. XII. 35. Heb. VIII. 10. love covereth] 1 Cor. XIII. 7. 1 Pet. 4. 8. as choice silver] Prov. XXV. 11. feede many] Luke XIX. 48. 2 Cor. VI. 10. They are empty Vines that bear fruit to themselves only, Hos. X. 1. no sorrow with it] Wealth without woe, store without sore, gold without guilt of sinne, or guilty conscience. a sport] These dance to hell. hath wisdom] For his sport and delight, Rom. VII. 22. Job XXIII. 12. The fear] Iob XV. 21. and ch. XXIX. 25. shall be granted] If they fail not in the matter, manner, intention, or duration of their desires and prayers; being content either to wait, or to want the thing desired, being heartily willing that God should be glorified, though themselves be not glorified. Whirlwind] Iob XXVII. 20,—23. shortned] Eccles. VII. 17. The hope] Psal. CXXX. 5. Prov. XIV. 32. Heb. VI. 18, 19. Pride] Where pride is in the saddle, shame is in the crooper. the hope] His hope made a bridge of his own shadow; and thinking to go over it, he falls into the water: he as a childe grasps at a shadow on the wall. in his stead] As it befell Haman, Daniels enemies in the denne of lions, and others, 2 Thes. I. 6, 7. holdeth his peace] From despising words, opprobrious language; not seeking to wash off durt with durt. concealeth] Tacitus to him is the best historian. own flesh] As Baals Priests, and some popish merit-mongers. sure reward] Only he must have patience, and not look to sow and reap all in one day, James V. 7. pursueth evil] As Asahel followed Abner. Ephes. IV. 19. adding
drunkennesse to thirst, with both hands; Hel gapeth for him. a froward heart] A man may die by inward bleeding, Jer. IV. 14. The Heart appears in the life; as the candle in the lanthorne. only good] Rom. VII. 22. Heb. XIII. 18. Yet when the flesh gets the winde, and hill of the Spirit, it sometimes over-bears: as a gust of winde forceth the ferry-man backward. is wrath] Proves such, Rom. II. 8, 9. that scattereth] The five loaves in the Gospel were multiplied by division, and augmented by substraction. trusteth] Riches were never true to any that trusted in them, Luke XII. 15. Psal. LII. 6, 7. exoriuntur ut exurantur; as the grasse. winneth souls] James V. 20. Dan. XII. 3. One soul more worth then all the world; as he tells us who only went to the price of it, Mat. XVI. 26. recompensed] Chastened. Their afflictions are not penal, but medi∣cinal, or probational. in the earth] Which is their house of correction: not in hell. much more] Totaly and finaly, Nahum. I. 9. as 1 Sam. XXVI. 8. 1 Pet. IV. 17, 18. not be established] Though he may flourish for a time. not be moved] Chap. X. 25. Psal. LXII. 2, 6. a crown] A choise and chief ornament. but the mouth] Hence are those many Apologies of the Christians, in all times, and ages. according to his wisdome] James III. 13, 17. 2 Cor. X. 18. Rom. I. 22, 23. 1 Cor. II. 4,—8. the net of evil men] Such a net as that Hab. I. 15. that they may do the like, use all cunning arts and crafts of doing mischief; he so furi∣ously pursueth his lusts, as if he desired to be intangled in the net of his own destruction. Or, he desireth the forteresse against evils; but all in vaine; or, the fortresse of evil men, to be secured and defended by them, and their strength. Thus various may be the reading and sense of these words. is snared] The venome of his heart blisters his tongue, that it breaks out at his lips to his own ruine. A fools wrath] He hath no power over his own passions. chapter XXIX. 11. covereth shame] 1 Sam. X. 27. Passeth by an offence, covereth an injury. no evil] Esay XXVII. 9. filled] He that makes a match with mischief, shall have his belly full of it. chap. I. 31. and XIV. 14. deal truly] Psal. LI. 6. Esay LXIII. 8. Ephes. IV. 15. 1 John I. 6. 8. concealeth] Loves not to out-lash. Yet is not niggard where there is need, chap. XV. 7. proclaimeth] In it is, and out it must, what ever come of it. a good word] As cordials of comfort, breasts of consolation, wells of salvation.
more excellent] As a Prince of God among them;  as Abraham a∣mong the Hittites, Gen. XXIII. 6. Psal. XVI. 3. no death] No sting in it. And they passe from the jawes of death, to the joyes of heaven. heareth not] But jears at it. Keepeth his mouth] God hath set a double guard of lips, and teeth, before this gate; yet unlesse God himself keep the watch, all will be lost, Psal. CXLI. 3. and CXXVII. 1. See chap. XII. 13. and chap. XVIII. 21. and chap. XXI. 23. diligent] Affection without endeavour is like Rachel, beautiful, but barren; we must work, as well as will and wish. and 2 Cor. VIII. do, as well as desire; performe as well as promise. loathsome] Stinks as it were above ground. And cometh to shame by his lying. The ransome] Jer. XLI. 8. heareth not rebuke] As a man not worth the chiding, not conside∣rable; having nothing to lose. the lamp of the wicked] As a candle, Job XVIII. 5, 6. and ends in a snuff, Eccles. VII. 6. wisdome] Meeknesse of wisdome, wisdome peaceable, James III. 13, 17. Hope deferred] Many lie long languishing at Hopes Hospital;  as he at the poole of Bethesda. The Law] Chap. XIV. 27. good understanding.] Both gaineth favour, as in Joseph, Daniel, and others. And favour or grace gaineth a good understanding or good successe, chap. III. 4. Psal. CXI. 10. is hard] Harsh, rough; 2 Tim. III. 3, 4. Tit. III. 3. prudent man] Observes seasons, and circumstances, deports himself with discretion, Amos V. 13. his folly] By his headstrong, headlong exorbitances. a wicked messinger] Chap. XXVI. 6. is sweet] Specialy in spiritual things. abomination] To be pulled from their evil lusts and sinful courses. walketh] Converseth, is a constant companion. companion] 1 Cor. XV. 33. which Saint Paul takes out of Me∣nander the Poët. pursueth] Hard at heeles. Sinne and Punishment are linked toge∣ther with chains of adamant. repayed] By God a liberal paymaster. to his child] Personal goodnesse is profitable to posterity, 1 Kings XV. 4. Exod. XXXIV. 7. where the Hebrew word Ntser, keepeth, hath a great N. to note likely the greatnesse of Gods mercie to the good mans posterity. Wealth] As Nabals was for David; Hamans for Mordecai; the Canaanites for the Israelites. Job XXVII. 16, 17. Though this be not so alwayes, and universaly, Psal. XVII. 14.
want of judgement] In tillage;  or managing, and husbanding what is gotten. hateth his sonne] As it proves in the issue. As we see in Eli to his sonnes: and in David to his Absalom, and Adonijah. See chap. XXIII. 13. and XIX. 18. And thus we are said to will and do many things, which properly and directly we do not so; but because we do such things whereupon the other will follow. So chap. VIII. 36. and chap. XVII. 19. Matth. XXVI. 12. John XII. 7. Luke XI. 48. Ezek. XVIII. 31. and XXXIII. 11. Psal. CVI. 24. satisfying] With contentation, be it more or lesse. seeketh] As a coward seeketh his adversarie;  in hope not to finde him. is easie] Chap. I. 20. and chap. VIII. 1, 17. a mock at sinne] These dance with the Devil. Chap. X. 23. 2 Thes. II. 12. 2 Pet. II. 13. favour] From God: or a complacencie in their righteous dealing: or gains them favour among themselves. not intermeddle] 1 Pet. I. 8. Phil. IV. 7. 2 Cor. V. 4. It is an han∣sel of heaven. The cock on the dunghil knows not the worth of this jewel. seemeth] Chap. XVI. 25. Sinne comes cloathed with a shew of Rea∣son. Exod. I. 10. And thereupon we willingly deceive our own hearts, James I. 26. as Micah, Iudg. XVII. 13. and Ier. VII. 4. And self-de∣lusion is an epidemical disease, and deadly. even in laughter] Some frothy and flashy mirth the wicked may have;  but there is a snare or cord in their sinne which strangles their mirth, that they rejoyce in the face, not in the heart, 2 Cor. V. 12. Esth. V. 13 heavinesse] Iob XXI. 12, 13. Luke 6. 25. Eccles. II. 2. filled with his own wayes] have made a match with mischief, and shall have enough of it; hath sold himself to wickednesse, and shall be sure of his payment. from himself] 1 Tim. VI. 6. Heb. X. 34. Psal. XIX. 11. Goodness is its own reward, in hand, and in hope. The simple beleeveth] As Ieroboam that old baby. looketh well] Looks before he leaps; tries before he trusts. 1 Iohn IV. 1. Ephes. V. 15. feareth, and departeth] Feareth the judgements whiles they hang in the threatnings: counts them, not words so much, as thunderbolts, Hab. III. 16. The evil bow] The worst cannot but think well of them;  and do homage to the image of God stamped upon the natures and practises of the good and righteous. his neighbour] Poor neighbour, and needy. that devise evil? That plot and plough it, dig and delve it; are they not heavenly wide, utterly out? labour] That is honest, not that whereby they do wickedly with both hands earnestly.
talk of the lips] Great talkers, are commonly do-littles. is their riches] For God gives them wisdome to use them well. fools] Rich fools. Riches to them is as a sword put into a mad mans hand. strong confidence] Dan. III. 17. 2 Kings XVIII. 5. multitude of people] Which wars waste and consume. See 2 Sam. XXIV. slow to anger] Anger may rush into a wise mans bosome;  not rest there, Eccles. VII. 9. Iames I. 19, 20. exalteth] Proclaims it aloud;  sets it on the theater. A sound heart] Well freed from passions and perturbations holds out long. envie] A corroding disease it is: an hel-hag that feeds upon its own marrow, bones, and strongest parts: it is as rust is to iron; as the viper: It both sinnes, and is punished together, so quick and speedy justice accompanies it, Iob V. 2. his maker] 1 Sam. II. 7. A poor mans livelihood is his life, Luke VIII. 43. honoureth him] That is, honoureth God. God so takes it; chap. III. 8. And God honours him; Matth. XXV. 34. &c. driven away] Being arrested by the Serjeant death, in the Devils name and so hurried away, and hurled into hell. hath hope] Death to them is as the valley of Achor. Iustus etiam dum exspirat sperat. in the heart] Is not vainglorious, sets not forth his good parts and practises a sunning, to be seene and cried up. in the midst of fools] Their zeal must be seene; 2 Kings X. 16. Their pietie must be shored up with popularitie. a reproach] Sinnes are the snuffs of our candlesticks, and threaten the removal of it, and will render us a reproach and a taunt; Deut. XXVIII. 37. Ier. XXV. 9. Ezek. V. 14, 15. a wise servant] So to Joseph by Pharaoh; so to Daniel by Darius. And much more is the favour of the King of Kings to his servants; Matth. XXIV. 45, 46, 47. and XXV. 21, 23. his wrath] So to Haman, Shebna, and others. A soft answer] Chap. XXV. 15. As Gideons to the Ephraimites, Judg. VIII. And Abigaels apology to David, 1 Sam. XXV. 32, 33. Yet roughnes & hard language in some cases, & circumstances, is necessary. The tongue] Which David stiles his glory; and he used it ac∣cordingly. The eyes of the Lord] As a well-drawn picture viewes all that come into the roome. The sinner vainly thinks to hide himself from God, by hiding God from himself. But the world, and our thoughts are to him as a sea of glasse. God like the Optick vertue in the eye sees all. Iob XXXIV. 21, 22. tree of life] Gen. II. 9. Ezek. XLVII. 12. Apoc. XXII. 2. breach] A sting and a staine, in the conscience, and spirit: yea, and grieves the spirit of God.
is prudent] Wise he is, and wiser he will be, Psal. XIV. 5. much treasure] The righteous man is alwayes rich;  and rich in all estates: rich in the most precious spiritual things; rich in reversions, in sure Bills and Bonds; rich in propriety, he holds all in capite, in Christ, he is no usurper of them, 1 Cor. III. 22. Rom. VIII. 32. trouble] In getting, keeping, and fears of losing: together with sting of conscience, Iob XX. 15. disperse knowledge] As Stars diffuse their light Phil. II. 15. The sacrifice] As good words uttered with a stinking breath, from rotten lungs. Their sacrifice is abominable, quoad fontem, & quoad finem; not proceeding from a right principle; nor tending to the right end, which is Gods glory, that should consume all other ends, as the Sunne puts out the light of the fire. See chap. XXI. 27. Amos V. 22. Esay I. 11. and LXVI. 3. Jer. VI. 20. and VII. 22. but the prayer] Esay XLV. 11. command ye me. The way] Prov. XXI. 4. Their very consciences send up continu∣al poisonous vapours unto God. followeth after] With might and maine; as ravenous creatures have in chase their prey. Phil. III. 11,—14. resurrection of the dead that is, that height of holinesse that accompanieth the resurrection. Correction is grievous] Being in love with his own ruine. hateth reproof] Being imbittered, not bettered by it. Hell] Job XXVI. 6▪ Psal. CXXXIX. 12. Heb. IV. 13. ; though invisible to us. loveth not] Yea hates, Amos V. 10. neither will he go] As he should. Dan. XII. 4. 2 Kings IV. 23. Psal. LXXXIV. 7. Esay LXVI. 20. He saith, as Jeroboam, 1 Kings XII. 28. A merrie heart] Acts VI. 15. and V. 41. Cant. II. 4. This chiefly is true spiritualy. broken] Is as a limb out of joynt. A dejected spirit takes off as it were the wheels of the soul. seeketh knowledge] As an hungry man seeks meat;  or a covetous man gold; the more he hath, the more he desireth. feedeth] As swine do on swill. a continual feast] This is eminently true in a good, clear, and chear∣ful conscience, 2 Cor. I. 9, 12. a little] It is not the great cage makes the bird sing: neither do they sing when they are on the ground, but when got up into the aire, or on boughs of trees, from the ground. See chap. XVI. 8. and XVII. 1, 15. Psal. XXXVII. 16. 1 Tim. IV. 8. and VI. 6. appeaseth strife] Is busie to stint it, not to stir it up. See chap. XXII. 24. is made plaine] By much practise having gotten an habit, he di∣spatcheth duty with delight, and comes off with comfort. Esay XL. 31. Christs yoak is no more burdensome to him, then the wing is to the bird.
is above] In heaven;  and thitherward he goes, Phil. III. 20. Col. III. 1. He deals in low and earthly things, as a wise man may sport with children: but that is not his businesse. hell beneath] That when the cold grave shall have his body, hot hell may not hold his soul. widow] That hath none to stick to her, and stickle for her. So to the Shunamite, the widow of Sarepta, and of the poor Prophet, 2 King, IV. The thoughts] Thoughts are not free, Jer. VI. 19. pleasant words.] Mal. III. 16. chap. X. 20. and XXV. 11. troubleth] Fires his own nest, when he thinks to feather it: and troubles all his houshold with hast, and hurrie, to get gain. studieth] His tongue runs not before his wit. heareth the prayer] Psal. CXLV. 18. 1 Pet. III. 12. the breathing, Lam. III. 56. the minde of the spirit, Rom. VIII. 26, 27. Baal hears not, though they call on him never so long, never so loud, 1 Kings XVIII. See 2 Chron. XXXIII. 13. The light] Light and sight are comfortable, Eccl. XI. 7. reproof] Better the Vine should bleed, then die. before honour is humility] The lower the ebbe▪ the higher the tide. The lower this foundation of humility is laid, the higher shall the roof of honour be over-laid. Honour followeth him that flies from it; as the shadow doth the body. The preparations] Or disposings, verse 9. and chap. XVI. 9. and chap. XIX. 21. and chap. XX. 24. Ier. X. 23. is from the Lord] By the obstetrication of his assistance; and by his secret influence, and disposing providence, beyond mans own ima∣gination Acts XVII. 28. Esay X. 7. in his own eyes] Chap. XXI. 2. He thinks his penny good silver. But all is not gold that glisters, Luke XVI. 15. Rom. II. 29. Iudg. XVII. 13. we set up a counter for a thousand pounds. weigheth the spirits] Chap. V. 21. the inside; and there discovers a New-found world of wickednesse. Commit] Luke XII. 29. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, Psal. LV. 22. as it were, by a writ of removal. 1 Pet. V. 7. Psal. XXXVII. 5. established] Till then it flickers up and down, as Noahs Dove, till it return to the Ark. for himself] His own glory, and the demonstration of his good∣nesse, properties, and attributes, Rom. XI. 36. for the day of evil] Iob XXI. 30. as they are wicked men; and as such looked upon by God: though he created them good; and he be the absolute Sovereign Lord of all his creatures, and his will be both recta and regula. He justly keeps, orders, and ordains such for the day of their deserved punishment, Rom. IX. 17. 21, 22. though hand] Chap. XI. 21. Heb. X. 31. By mercie and truth] Of God; Chap. XIV. 22. his mercie in pro∣mising, his truth in performing. Or, where these graces are in man,
there iniquity is purged. Piety, and grace, and the fear of God, are a sure token of remission of sins. even his enemies] Sinne is the make-bate. Please God; Esay XXVII. 4, 5. and all his creatures are at his beck and check. God made Laban, and Esau, at peace with Iacob; Gen. XXXI. and XXXIII. Chapters. A divine sentence] Is, or should be, and best becomes them. See it in Solomon, 1 Kings III. 24. in David, 2 Sam. XIV. 17, 20. a dis∣cerning power and sagacitie was in them, which God gave them. his work] His Ordinance. Stones were used for weights. And they usualy put into a bag, Deut. XXV. 13. to Kings] For they are more obliged to God then other men: and their sinnes are exemplarie. Magnates are Magnetes. throne] Ier. XXII. 13,—20. love him] Chap. XXII. 11. yet oft-times it falls out otherwise with wicked Kings. pacifie it] As Abigael did Davids; and Benhadads servants did Ahabs. No other way is to be taken. of the later raine] Deut. XI. 14. James V. 7. Amos IV. 7. See my Annotations on Joel. II. 23. and on Zech. X. 1. The high way] This is his road, and trade, Psal. CXXXIX. 24. Acts XXIV. 16. Pride] Swelling is dangerous in a wall, Esay XXX. 13. dangerous in mans body; so is the swelling of pride. Examples many of the fall of such. Better] to be spoiled, then to spoil: to suffer wrong, then to do it. wisely] With due deliberation and circumspection. trusteth in the Lord] Not in his own wisdome. God can crack the strongest sinew in all the arme of flesh, Esay XXII. 11. sweetnesse of the lips] Eloquence gives an addition of weight to learning. teacheth] Seasoneth it with salt of grace;  ere it sets it by utterance, as a dish, before the hearers. pleasant words] Such as those, Eccles. XII. 10. lips] James III. 6. He shutteth his eyes] With more freedome of minde to beat his brains, and study, to excogitate, and revolve, and resolve of mischief. moving his lips] Mumbling and muttering to himself. then he that taketh a Citie] Fortior est qui se, quàm qui fortissima vin∣cit moenia, Nec virtus altiùs ire potest. The Lot] Gods Providence extendeth to things in our account meerly contingent and casual. Matth. X. 29. See Josh. XIV. 2. 1 Sam. X. 20. Acts I. 24, 25, 26. See my Annotations on Jonah I. 7. sacrifices] Good chear used at Sacrifices, chap. VII. 14. alluded to James V. 5. See chap. IX. 2. trieth] Zech. XIII. 9. Mal. III. 2. 3. God trieth us, that we may know what is in our selves: and by his trying to refine us, 1 Pet. I. 7,
or to punish us, Ier. XVII. 9, 10. See chap. XXVII. 21. giveth heed] Is apt to beleeve scandalous reports. poor] chap. XIV. 31. childrens] If they, and their fathers be good. it prospereth] Chap. XIX. 6. most love gain; love with shame, Give ye. covereth] For even in friendship faults will fall out, chap. X. 12. 1 Cor. XIII. 4. repeateth] Rips up, and rakes into his friends frailties. A reproof] A word to the wise. an hundred stripes] Beaten he is, but not bent or bowed thereby to goodnesse; amerced he is, but not amended. Gods spirit did not set it on. Chap. XXVII. 22. only rebellion] Against God, and Man. a cruel messenger] Gods executioners, all, and every of his crea∣tures; Hab. II. 11. And mans executioners, the hangman, and offi∣cers. Whelps] Which she licketh into forme, and loves above measure. Yet her danger may be sooner shifted and shunned. evil for good] This ingratitude is a monster in nature. To render good for evil, is divine; good for good, is humane; evil for evil, is sin∣ful and bruitish; evil for good is devilish. Ier. XVIII. 20, 21. Psalme CIX. 4, 5. The beginning] Therefore stop it betime;  as one would a breach of the Sea. Quench it, whiles a spark. Iames III. 5. It is hard to be dis∣ingaged from contentious quarrels when one is once in. 1 Thes. IV. 11. justifieth] These frame mischief by a Law, Psal. XCIV. 20. and sinne cum privilegio. Neither must Judge do thus: nor private men in their Censures. They must not hold him, or handle him as a just man. a price] Principaly appliable to those that neglect so great salvati∣on, Heb. II. 3. and let slip the opportunities put into their hands for heaven; and so trifle and fool away their time, and eternal happiness. The vulgar Latin and LXX. make another translation, and sense; not rightly. A friend] A true friend, chap. XVIII. 24. and XXVII. 17. not such as those Psal. XXXVIII. 11. and chap. XIX. 7. Scilicet ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum, Tempore sic duro est experienda fides. strife] Chap. XXIX. 22. and XV. 18. and XXVI. 21. James III. 16. Psal. XXXVII. 8. It opens the gap to many mischiefs. gate] High and broad gates break men many times. Or rather, setteth open a wide door to strife and contentions, lets in many destru∣ctive mischiefs; though not in his intention, yet in issue. begetteth a fool] Solomons own case, chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. and chap. XIX. 13. Better were a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts. A merry heart] Chap. XV. 13. and XII. 25. Eccles. IX. 7, 8, 9.
a broken spirit] Chap. XVIII. 14. Psal. XXXII. 3. and CII. 3, 4, 5 and CXIX. 83. A wicked man] A Judge in taking, or receiving; a briber in giving, chap. XXIX. 4. chap. XV. 27. and chap. XXI. 14 Psal. XV. 5. and XXVI. 10. Job. XV. 34. Deut. XVI. 19. and chap. XXVII. 25. before him] Easie to him, chap. XIV. 6. and chap. VIII. 9. Or, in his face and eye, appears there; chap. IV. 25. Eccles. II. 14 But the fools eyes up and down, wandering; and he as one that hath lost his way, nor knows where he is, or which way to turne, is besides him∣selfe. to punish] They should be cherished. nor to strike Princes for equity] Rulers, for doing right in their of∣fices. Or, Princes should not strike well-doers. Or, to strike Princes and worthy men, besides and against right and equity. spareth] James. I 19. chap. X. 19. Even a fool] Job XIII. 5. Sitacuisses philosophus fuisses. counted] Not that he is so. Or is wise in being silent. Whence is that, Loquere tte videam. separated himself] From the world, and all other impediments, to apply himself to seek wisdome. Or, the Separatist stirs busily in eve∣ry thing that is done, whereby he may effect his designe, and come off with his credit ad reputed wisdome. And this is true in quarrelsome and medling men: And in Separatists and Schismaticks, that rend the Unity of the Church. A fool] It wilful to follow his own humour, against all that can be said to the contrary. Or, is vainglorious, setting his good parts a sun∣ning; only to seeme wise and understanding, and to gaine applause, chap. XIV. 33. Or phantastickly affects singularitie, to be crosse to all men. Then cometh contempt] It comes into the world with him, being vainly puft up by his fleshly minde, Col. II. 18. and contemning o∣thers. Job XI. 12. And as he contemnes God, and good men; so con∣tempt from God and good men comes upon him, chap. III. 34. they are paid in their own coine; they are with ignomie repaid reproach. deep waters] Which can never be drawn dry, chap. X. 11. and ch. XIII. 14. and XIV. 27. and XX. 5. John VII. 38. brook] That the simplest may understand. The holy Scripture indeed is both text and glosse. It is not good] But very bad, ch. XXIV. 23. and XXVIII 21. Levit. XIX. 15. Deut. XV. 7. and ch. XVI. 19. and I. 17. James II. 1,—4. stroaks] By his desire upon others;  but by desert and issue upon himself; as in the next verse. A fools mouth] Chap. X. 14. and XII. 13. and XIII. 3. Tale-bearer] Chap. XII. 18. 1 Tim. III. 8. is brother] Is alike. The sloathful, and prodigal, both have the same event; both come to want and povertie. The Name] His Attributes.
a strong tower] Esay XXVI. 4. and XXXIII. 16. and is safe] And set aloft. All other refuges will fail. wealth] Hard to be rich, and not to trust in riches, Mark X. 23, 24. 1 Tim. VI. 17. Yet this his trust is not like that in the former verse: This shall fail; this trust is but only in conceit. haughtie] Chap. XI. 2. and chap. XVI. 18. and chap. XV. 33. who can bear?] Many are the examples thereof;  yea, even in hea∣then, and in wicked men; worldly comforts here are but as a fair shoe to a gowtie foot, or a silken stockin to a broken leg. Gift] Chap. XVII. 8, 23. This Jacob knew well, Gen. XXXIII. 11. He that is first] Therefore Judges, and all men, had need to keep one eare for the defendant. Tertullus pleaded fairly till Paul came to answer. And so Ziba against Mephibosheth. A man is not easily to be beleeved in his own tale against another. The lot] Josh. XIV. 2. Acts I. 26. See my Annotations on Jonah I. 7. A brother offended] A brother natural, or spiritual; a sworne bro∣ther. Too many are the sad experiences of this. The vulgar Latin, and LXX. read, and render otherwise. tongue] That best and worst member of the body. James III. 2, —11. Mark XII. 37. a wife] A good wife. As a Name, for a good name, Eccles. VII. 1. He obtains favour of the Lord; chap. XIX. 14. and XXXI. 10. The poor] Speaks supplications. Much more should poor man to God. hath friends] Love is the whetstone, and loadstone of love. a friend] Chap. XVII. 17. as ones own soul, Deut. XIII. 6. Better] Chap. XXVIII. 6. perverse in his lips] Speaketh wickedly, roughly, and robousti∣ously. without knowledge] An ignorant man is in the dark;  nor can be good. Knowledge is much magnified in this Book of the Proverbs. hasteth] Rashly, without premeditation and forecast. Such is blind zeal; as mettle in a blind horse. perverteth his way] And God walks contrary to him, Levit. XVI. 24. frets] As 2 Kings VI. 33. wealth] Chap. XIV. 20. Donec eris foelix multos numerabis amicos. Tempora si fuerint nubila solus eris. neighbour] Who turnes strange to him, or enemie against him. unpunished] By God. And when known, by man also. There is a pillorie-perjury. See verse 9. and chap. XXI. 28. and ch. XXV. 18. Exod. XXIII. 1 Deut. XIX. 16,—21. Prince] For their own commodity. Poor] Ch. XIV. 20. Delight] But stripes rather. Ch. X. 13 Ch. XXX. 22.
a servant] As Abimelech the bramble, Iudg. IX. 15. As Pontifex Romanus, the bridgmaker of Rome; who writes Servus servorum, chap. XXX. 22. Eccles. X. 7. deferreth] Ch. XIV. 29. But it must not be so, as Absalom did toward Ammon. passe by] As winking at it, or forgiving it, or overcoming it with goodnesse. Kings wrath] Chap. XVI. 14. and XX. 2. and XXVIII. 15. Ec∣cles. VIII. 2, 3, 4. 2 Tim. IV. 17. A foolish sonne] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. and XVII. 21, 25. contentions of a wife] Chap. XXI. 9. and XXVII. 15, 16. This is like a tempest in the haven. inheritance] More immediately. from the Lord] Chap. XVIII. 22. By his peculiar providence, To∣bias VI. 22. Keepeth] Evangelicaly: thinks upon them to do them, Psal. CIII. 18. 2 Cor. VIII. 12. Esay XXVI. 12. Let us ask him to give, what he commands us to have. his wayes] Gods wayes; or, his own wayes, living loosely, and carelessely, and lawlessely. lendeth] Matth. X. 42. and chap. XXV. 40. 2 Cor. IX. 6, 7. Eph. IV. 28. Psal. XLI. 1. 1 Tim. VI. 17, 18, 19. Heb. XIII. 16. 1 John III. 17. He lends it to the Lord upon usury; as the vulgar Latin renders it. Chasten] Chap. XIII. 24. and XXII. 15. and XXIII. 13. and ch. XXIX. 15, 17. of great wrath] Cholerick and wrathful men;  their Passion, after their deliverance, will bring them in danger again. Or, if thou in great wrath, yet pardon thy sonnes fault, yet threaten him with greater pu∣nishment if he fault again. Hear] This may be the fathers lessoning his childe whom he hath lashed. Or may be taken in a greater latitude, and sensed more ge∣neraly. many devises] Chap. XVI. 1, 9. Job. XXIII. 13. Psal. XXXIII. 10, 11. and XLVI. 10. The desire] A mans will is to be accepted for the deed, if he have nothing to give. Or, mans desire is to be counted kinde and bountiful. Not he that brags what he would do if he had wherewith; and yet ha∣ving it, fails of performance. a poor man] Having a giving affection, is better then such a brag∣ing lyer. The fear] Chap. XXII. 4. and chap. XIV. 27. and I. 7. and VIII. 13. Smite a scorner] Though not he, yet the simple will beware by it, chap. XXI. 11. devoureth] Job XV. 16. Ephes. IV. 19. wine] Chap. XXIII. 29,—35. Hos. VII. 5. Esay XXVIII. 1. Gen. IX. 21. 1 Sam. XXV. 36.
not wise] When the wine is in, the wit is out. of a King] Chap. XVI. 14. and chap. XIX. 12. to cease from strife] Gen. XIII. 8, 9. 1 Cor. XIII. 4, 5, 7. Brawl∣ing becomes not a man of a magnanimous spirit. Counsel] Verse 27. chap. XVIII. 4. draw it out;  for his use and imi∣tation. his own goodnesse] So all Hereticks;  and ambitious men, Matth. VI. 1. V. 16. But few faithfuly performe what they proudly proclaime. his children] Personal piety is profitable to posterity, 2 Kings X. 30. Exod. XX. 6. Psal. CXII. 2. scattereth] Verse 26. Psal. CI. 5. The sword of justice is to be fur∣bished with the oile of mercie; yet there are cases wherein severity ought to cast the scale. And this Kings best do, when they sit in the throne themselves; and leave not all alwayes to Judges under them. my heart clean] The Pharisee, and Popish Justitiarie saith it. Not Paul, Rom. VII. 15. 1 Cor. IV. 4 nor Iob, chap. IX. 30, 31. and XIV. 4. nor David, Psal. CXXX. 3. and LI. 5 Eccles. VII. 20. 1 John I. 8. a childe] Is, or should be known by his doings: early shewes his in∣clination; and how he is like to prove afterwards: and from his child∣hood it self should be a plaine dealer, without any hypocrisie. eare] Exod. IV. 11. Psal. XCIV. 9. Therefore he sees, hypocrites, and all, and will punish. Yea, he makes, and opens the spiritual eare, and eye, 1 Cor. II. 9, 10. sleep] Chap. XIX. 15. open] Be vigilant, and diligent, chap. XII. 11. and XXVIII. 19. the lips of knowledge] Chap. V. 2. Psal. XLV. 3. Cant. V. 1. John VII. 46. is sweet] Chap. IX. 17. but afterwards] Job XX. 15 after the meale comes the reckoning: we must not think to dine with the Devil, and afterwards to sup with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdome of heaven. Every purpose] Deliberate oft ere thou resolve once. Take Coun∣sel: Esay XXX. 1. Psal. CXIX. 24. See chap. XV. 22. and XXIV. 6. warre] Chap. XXIV. 6. be neither timorous, nor temerarious. A∣hab, or Jehoshaphat rather in this might have been a good president to Josiah, 1 Kings XXII. 5. 2 Chron. XXXV. 22. tale-bearer] Chap. XI. 13. Meddle not with such. Curseth] Chap. XXX. 17. Exod. XXI. 17. Levit. XX. 9. Matth. XV. 4. lamp] Chap. XXIV. 20. gotten hastily] Chap. XIII. 11. and X. 2. and XXVIII. 20. I will recompence] Chap. XXIV. 29. Deut. XXXII. 35. Rom. XII. 17, 19. 1 Thes. V. 15. 1 Pet. III. 9. Wait] It belongs to him. This is the way to be even with him that wrongs thee; yea, to be above him. divers weights] Verse 10. not good] . Mans goings] Chap. XVI. 1, 9. and chap. III. 6. Psal. XXXVII. 23. Jer. X. 23.
a snare] As the fish that swallows the hook. Against Sacriledge. Acts XIX. 37. Rom. II. 22. Let Princes, and all look to this. make inquirie] How the vow may be made void. candle] The minde and conscience is such, Matth. VI. 23. 1 Cor. II. 11. It is Gods Spy, and Mans overseer; a kinde of middle thing betwixt God and Man; Our God, as well as Moses was Pharaohs God, and Aarons God, Exod. IV. 16. and VII. 1. the King] Chap. XXIX. 14. Psal. CI. 1. Yet this rule is not with∣out all exception; as in our late King of blessed and bleeding memo∣rie: and in many others. gray head] Chap. XVI. 31. clenseth] Corrections beat out corruptions. , nocumenta documenta, chap. X. 13. The Kings heart] Jer. X. 23. Ezek. XXI. 19, 20, 21. Though never so absolute, is ruled yet, and over-ruled by him who is higher then the highest. Yea, to do his will, though unwitting to the King. then Sacrifice] To obey is better then sacrifice. God will have mercie, and not sacrifice. Mark XII. 33. Heathens could see, and say so much. See Esay I. 11. Hos. VI. 6. Micah VI. 7. the plowing] Whether they plot, or plough. Tit. I. 15. As a plague∣sore will render the richest robe infectious. Even their Prayer is sinne. diligent] Chap. X. 4. and chap. XII. 24. hastie] Rashly, make more hast then good speed to be rich. treasures] Chap. X. 2. and chap. XI. 4. and chap. XIII. 11. and chap. XX. 21. So in Achan. Joshuah that could stay the Sunne in his course, could not stay him from fingering those accursed treasures. The robberie] Robbing and spoyling others, by briberie, wrong judgement, and wrong dealing. a brawling woman] Verse 19. chap. XXV. 24. and chap. XIX. 13. and XXVII. 15. desireth evil] Evil to all, but to himself. findes no favour] Whether he sink or swim, is no part of his care. Psal. LXIX. 26. 2 Tim. III. 3. wisely considereth] That it shall be overthrown;  and so envies not at their present prosperitie; but makes their destruction his instructi∣on, Esay XXVI. 11. 1 Cor. X. 11. Psal. LII. 6. not be heard] Of God; or man, Matth. XVIII. 30. Esay LVIII. 7, 9. A gift] Chap. XVII. 8. and chap. XVIII. 16. and XIX. 6. This Abigael knew well, 1 Sam. XXV. It is joy] Psal. CIX. 162. Rom. VII. 22. workers] Jer IX. 5. Psal. VII. 14. Esay V. 18. wandereth] He cannot wander so farre as to misse of hell, Prov. II. 18. Esay L. 11. in that Congregation-house of Gehenna-gyants; where is punishment without pitie, miserie without mercie, sorrow without succour, crying without comfort, mischief without measure.
loveth pleasure] Luke XVI. 13. a ransome] Chap. XI. 8. God causing that to fall upon the wicked, which was intended against the righteous. spendeth it up] Foolishly lavisheth it. 1 Pet. IV. 3, 4. Whereas it should be husbanded thriftily, for necessity, and honest affluence, and comfortable livelihood. followeth after] Though not overtake it: si faciat, etiamsi non per∣ficiat; though he cannot open the door, yet if he lift at the latch; be an active apprentise, though not yet his crafts-master. A wise man scaleth] Prudence is better then Puissance, Eccles. VII. 19. and IX. 15, 16. Prov. XXIV. 5. 2 Sam. XX. 16, 21, 22. Proud] Chap. XIII. 10. and chap. XV. 25. giveth] Chap. XI. 25. and chap. XXII. 9. Esay LVIII. 7. Psal. CXII. 9. 2. Cor. IX. 9. Deut. XV. 10. Matth. XIX. 21, 22. Rom. XII. S. Eccles. XI. 2. Ephes. IV. 28. See on Prov. XIX. 17. heareth] What he witnesseth. against the Lord] The arme of humane policie (as Jeroboams) in that case shrinks up presently. The horse] Though so serviceable;  Job XXXIX. 19,—25. Yet a∣vails not. Psal. XXXIII. 17. A good name] Eccles. VII. 1. See the Observations there. Omnia si perdas, famam servare memento. meet together] Chap. XXIX. 13. Have mutual need one of ano∣ther, Deut. XV. 11. Matth. XXVI. 11. And meet many times, as tra∣vellers in the mid-way; by an alteration and exchange of their condi∣tions, Luke I. 53. foreseeth] Eccles. II. 14. and X. 2. looks before he leaps; sees a tempest in the clouds, and seeks seasonable shelter under the hollow of Gods hand. passeth on] Pusheth on without fear or wit, desperately into dan∣ger, chap. XIV. 16. and XXVII. 12. These after-wits, and post-ma∣sters may prove prudent, but too late. farre from them] From those thornes and snares;  from the mise∣ries, and misdemeanours too, of the froward man. Traine up a childe] Young Saints, old Angels Yet it faileth some∣times, which is the case of most of these moral observations. is servant] As it were a servant. , saith the Heathen Author. rod of his anger] Wherewith he whipt others, his underlings. scorner] Psal. CI. 5. That takes and turnes every thing to the worst. loveth] Affects, though he can never effect it. strange women] Chap. II 16. and V. 3 and VII. 5, 27. and chap. XXIII. 27, 28. Eccles. VII. 26. of a childe] Chap. XIII. 24. and XIX. 18. and XXIII. 13. and VI. 23. and XXIX. 15, 17. giveth to the rich] With a minde to get more then he gave;  and by his countenance to colour and cover his oppressive practises, and
scape with them: by such briberie he shall not thrive. Bow down] Here seemes to begin some alteration of stile and me∣thod; He seemes to assume a new kinde of bespeaking his sonne, dif∣fering from that in the twelve preceding Chapters; and much like that in the nine first. Wherein the several documents and instructions are prosecuted in more verses then one. a pleasant thing] Psal. XIX. 11. and CXIX. 103. more pleasant then all the tastlesse fooleries of this present world. fitted] Whereby to get a singular dexterity and volubility in holy language, Matth. XII. 24. thy trust] Ephes. I. 13. even to thee.] We must read the Scripture, as men do Statute-books, holding themselves as much concerned therein, as any others; binding themselves in every precept, threatning themselves in every threat, blessing themselves in every promise. For these are verba vi∣venda, non legenda. excellent things] Princely things;  rare and royal sentences, chap. VIII. 6. the certaintie] Col. II. 2. 2 Cor. IV. 13. Rob not] By might, as the greater fish devour the lesser; nor yet by false judgments, Zech. VII. 10. plead] Without fee, for they come forma pauperis, chap. XXIII. 11. Job XXI. 21. spoile] Pay them in their kinde, chiefly when the cold grave shall hold their bodies, and hot hell hold their souls. angrie man] Anger is a short madnesse. He rageth, and casteth fire-brands, Fit to live alone, as dragons, and wilde beasts; to be look∣ed on only as through a grate, chap. XV. 18. and XXVI. 21. and XXIX. 22. lest] Sinne is as a leprosie, and infectious plague. land-mark] Deut. XXVII. 17. and chap. XIX. 14. and XXIII. 10. diligent] Chap. XXVII. 23. Ezra. VI. 13. and VII. 26. Gen. XLI. 39, 40, 46. and chap. XLVII. 6. 1 Kings XI. 28. to eate] feed not without fear. Jude verse 12. a knife] Bridle thy appetite. Or, otherwise thou dost put a knife to thy throat, and diggest thy grave with thy teeth; for meat and the board, kils more then the musket, and the sword, Luke XXI. 34. deceitful] An hook under that bait. to be rich] 1 Tim. VI. 9, 10. James III. 15. 1 John II. 15, 16, 17. wilt thou] Cast a leering eye after such vanities? and flie a fooles pitch? is not] Hath no solid subsistence; though we call riches substance, 1 Cor. VII. 31. Earth is hanged upon nothing, as Job speaketh. And so all earthly things, Amos VI. 13. Esay XXVIII. 15. eate thou not] A miserly fordid muckworme. thinketh] Grudgeth at his guests: as one willing to starve even his own genius.
sweet words] Which he hath spoak to thee;  or rather thy chearful words at his table. speak not] Chap. IX. 7, 8. Matth. VII. 6. land mark] Chap. XXII. 28. Deut. XIX. 14. and XXVII. 17. O∣vidius ad Deum Terminum, Omnis erit sine te litigiosus ager. Plead] Chap. XXII. 23. Job XXXI. 23. and XXVI. 14. Psal. XC. 11. Eccles. VI. 10. God is the great Master of the wards. apply] Busie them about the best things. withhold not correction] Chap. XIII. 24. and Chap. XIX. 18. and chap. XXII. 25. and shalt deliver] This a means for it. And if it succeed not, yet thou hast done thy duty, and so shalt deliver thine own soul; and have thy reward. As the Phisitian hath his fee whether the Patient live, or die. shall rejoyce] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. 3 John. 4. 1 Thes. III. 9. envie sinners] Chap. XXIV. 1, 19. and chap. III. 31. Psal. XXXVII. 1. and LXXIII. 3. feare] This cures one of the fret. all the day long] Waking, walking, and lying down in his fear; in continual communion with him, and conformity to him, ch. XXVIII. 14. 1 Pet. I. 17. Phil. II. 12. 2 Cor. VII. 11. an end] Chap. X. 28. An end of the sinners prosperitie, Job VIII. 13, 14. and chap. XI. 20. and XVIII. 14. Psal. CXII. 10. And an end and reward to those that fear God, Psal. XXXVII. 37, 38. and LVIII. 11. Wine-bibbers] Verse 29,—35. Rom. XIII. 13. Ephes. V. 18. Mat. XXIV. 49. Buy the truth] Tit. I. 9. Phil. I. 27. Iude 3. Either live with it, or die for it. The father] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. thy heart] This the seat of our affections, and fountain of our acti∣ons, Mark VII. 21. Matth. XII. 34, 35. And therefore that care and caveat is given of it, Prov, IV. 23. And God so craveth, and wisheth it, Deut. V. 29. and complains of the want of it, Matth. XV. 8. yea, and deals, as Ioseph with his brethren concerning Benjamin, Gen. XLIII. 3. no seeing his face without it. thine eyes] Look well to this patterne and copie, get a ful pro∣spect, and fix and feed thine eyes hereupon. a whore] Chap. XXII. 14. See chap. V. 15. who hath woe?] Chap. XX. 1. mixt wine] Chap. IX. 2. Psal. LXXV. 8. moveth] Sparkleth;  as the most generous wine useth to do. strange women] Drunckennesse ushers in whordome. Wine the milk of Venus; and strange things and sights, disturbing the braine. Et geminum Solem, & duplices consurgere Thebas. midst of the Sea] Thy braines shall turne round;  thy self reel as a ship tossed at Sea, Psal. CVII. 27. Or, thy braines swim, as if at Sea;
and so drunckenly dream as if thou wert at Sea. Or, be so stupid and senselesse in this druncken lethargie, as to be fearlesse and carelesse in the greatest danger whatsoever; and not refuse or forbear to sleep on the top of ma. not sick] A druncken man, we say, takes no hurt, feels no blows, no smart: is turned into a beast; yea, a block. I will seek it yet again] Though they be sick with it, yet after their recoverie, and that fit past, they will to it again. For drunckennesse inflaming, increaseth thirst, Deut. XXIX. 19. and thirst drunckennesse; and so the drunckard irrecoverable! to be with them] In their state, and at their stay. For this David befools, and bebeasts himself, Psal. LXXIII. 10, 22. studieth] Great students, to be wittily wicked. lips] It blistereth out at their tongues end. Through wisdome] Chap. III. 13, 19. is strong] Chap. XXI. 22. warre] Chap. XX. 18. and chap. XV. 22. and chap. XI. 14. too high] Chap. XIV. 6. and chap. VIII. verse 9. and chap. IX. 1. Yet the highest and saving wisdome is too high for the wisest natural man, 1 Cor. II 14. openeth not] He were two fools if he did. deviseth] Is an Artist at any evil. The thought] Chap. XIV. 22. and chap. VI. 18. and chap. XII. 5. and chap. XV. 26. Esay LIX. 7. Jer. IV. 14. If thou faint] Gen. XLIX. 23, 24. Man hath no trial of his strength till he be in trouble. If thou forbear] Psal. LXXXII. 4. Esay LVIII. 6, 7. It being in thy power to deliver such innocent persons, Mark III. 4. Job XXIX. 17. and XXXI. 8, 9. If thou sayest] Sinnes are not to seek for excuses. But they availe not with God, Psal. XI. 4. Iob XXXIV. 22. Ier. XVII. 9, 10. When thou hast found it] Experimental knowledge is the only true knowledge, Heb. X. 34. Iosh. XXIII. 14. A literal notion of the brain comes short of it. a reward] Psal XIX. 10, 11. and CXIX. 103. chap. XXIII. 18. falleth] Into trouble. It is not here meant of falling into sinne, Micah VII. 8. and riseth] Iob V. 19. Psal. XXXIV. 19, 20. and XXXVII. 24. and XCI. 3. James. I. 2. the wicked fall] As Nahum I. 9. into an Only evil, Ezek. VII. 5. Esther VI. 13. Job V. 12. Amos VIII. 14. Jer. XXV. 27. Esay XXIV. 20. Rejoyce not] Chap. XVII. 5. Job XXXI. 29. Psal. XXXV. 12, —16. Obad. 12. 2 Sam. I. 11, 12. Matth. V. 44. Rom. XII. 19. thine enemie] But only so farre as Gods glory is concerned in it. And still pitie his person, Psal. LVIII. 10. from him] To thee.
no reward] The pain of Losse. And sure the tears of hell are not sufficient to bewail the losse of heaven. fear] Who would not fear thee O King of Nations, Ier. X. 7. And the King must be feared, 1 Pet. II. 1. Rom. XIII. 3. under God, Acts IV. 19. suddenly] When it comes; though delayed awhile, Had Zimri peace that slew his master? of them both] That fear not the Lord, and the King. These things also belong to the wise] Concerne wise men to look un∣to. Not that the sentences following were taken out of wise mens books, or saings; after Solomon, and before the time of Ezechiah. not good] Verie bad, . The like is chap. X. 2. and chap. XX. 23. Psal. V. 5. 1 Cor. XVI. 22. Exod. XX. 7. respect of persons] Chap. XVIII. 5. chap. XXVIII. 21. Levi. XIX. 25. Deut. I. 17. and XVI. 19. Thou art righteous] Chap. XVII. 15. Esay V. 23. Exod. XXIII. 7. that rebuke him] Job XXIX. 11,—17. a good blessing] Of every good man. Kisse] Gen. XLI. 40. Shall do him honour, Psal. II, 11. afterwards build thine house] First be sure of the means how to compasse it, Luke XIV. 28,—33. Do things of necessity first; after, of accommodation. without cause] Without a calling;  or, against thine own consci∣ence. deceive not] To bolster out a bad cause, or out-face a good; or, ot entise another, to suborne him to be a false wit∣nesse. Say not] Chap. XX. 22. Rom. XII. 17. 1 Thes. V. 15. 1 Pet. III. 9. Matth. V. 39. Rom. XII. 17. This is to wring the sword out of Gods had, Rom. XII. 19. sloathful] See on Chap. VI. 6. received instruction] A Bee can suck honie out of a flower, which a Flie cannot. A spiritual man can extract good out of other mens faults and follies; can gather grapes of thornes, and figs of thistles. The worse others are, the better we should be, saving our selves from an untoward generation; and redeeming the time because the dayes are evil. yet a little sleep] Little, and yet sleeps, plutaly in the Original. A little he asks, but a little will not serve his turne. Thus he personates the sluggard speaking. povertie] The beggar shall catch him by the back, swiftly, and irre∣sistibly. These] Here begins a new Collection of Proverbs, long after So∣lomons time; which some choice men of King Hezekiah; likely by his appointment, Copied out of some of Solomons writtings then extant; or out of publike Records, Registers, and Commentaries, wherein for their worth and wisdome they were inserted. And in these Solomon
most-what intreateth of higher matters, of State businesse, of Regal and Civil administrations. to conceal] Such as are, the Union of three Persons into one Na∣ture; and of two Natures into one Person: his wonderful Decrees, and the no lesse wonderful Execution of them, &c. Rom. XI. 33. Deut. XXIX. 29. to search out] Chap. XVI. 10. Job XXIX. 16. 1 Kings III. 24, 27. unsearchable.] As the two former, Jer. XXXI. 37. profundum sine fundo Jer. XVII. 9. 1 King. IV. 29. Much more unsearchable are the deep and hidden wayes of God; Rom. XI. 33, 34. we must adore them, when we cannot comprehend them. Neither must the subject think to at∣tain to the depth of all the secret reasons and doings of a King, even when he is upright, and doth his dutie. wicked from] Chap. XX. 8. Evil Counsellers about a King are great means of much mischief; as Human, Doeg, Rehoboams young Coun∣sellers, Psal. CI. 4. Put not forth] This is for modestie, and against ambition; which useth to ride without rains. Wait rather on Gods pleasure and lea∣sure for thy promotion. Psal. LXXV. 5,—8. better it is] Luke XIV. 10. hastily] Hastie men never want woe, Eccles. V. 2. chap. XXIX. 20. He soone shoots his fools bolt. Debate thy cause] Matth. V. 25. and XVIII. 15. discover not] Specialy out of a revengeful minde; no nor thy friends secret. All wise men will abhorre such a one, as not to be trusted, but to be deemed as a tale bearer, or backbiter rather. fitly spoken] Chap. XV. 23. Esay L. 4. Job VI. 25. Eccles. XII. 10. as apples of gold put in cases of silver cut-work, with curious inlay∣ings and interlacings. a wise reprover] Chap. IX. 9. Touch some never so gently, yet like the nettle, it will sting you. Exod. II. 14. Prov. XIII. 18. But an obedient eare deserves such earings of gold, as diamonds in a diademe; as wel as the wise reprover, that rightly orders and circumstantiates his words. messenger] Verse 25. and chap. XIII. 17. His speed and trustiness revives and refresheth the longing and languishing minds of them that sent him, Job XXXIII. 23. of a false gift] As the Devil, who promised Christ excelsa in ex∣celsis, mountains on a mountain, Matth. IV. 9. Such are like clouds, &c. Jude verse 12. By long forbearing] Chap. XV. 1. and chap. XVI. 14. Gen. XXXII. 4. 1 Sam. XXV. 24. Judg. VIII. 1, 2, 3. And thus not ministring occasion to provoke him further. Though it self be flesh, yet thus it breaketh the bone. sufficieut] Philosophandum, sed paueis. We must not overdo a busines. and vomit it] By excesse the sweetest comforts will be dissweetned, grow sower and loathsome, 1 Cor. VII. 29. We must hang loose, and
be weanedly affected towards all creature comforts. withdraw] Let thy foot be rare, and so precious there, 1 Sam. III. 1, overlay not thy neighbour, nor abuse his courtesie; take not too much of a free horse. Nulli te facias nimis sodalem. false witnesse] Chap. XIX. 5. Psal. XLII. 10. and LVII. 4. A sinne of a deep die, of a crimson colour. Confidence in an unfaithful man] As was Achitophel to David. Jobs miserable comforters, Job VI. 16, 17. There is faith to be kept with dogs, say the Turks; with Hereticks, say the Papists. David durst not trust Saul, 1 Sam. XXVII. 1. notwithstanding his fair speech∣es and promises, chap. XXVI. 17, 21. 25. Therefore trie well before we trust. songs to an heavie heart.] Musick and Mourning agree like Harp and Harrow; Ecclus. XXII. 6. Dan. VI. 18. Or, as some render and sense the words, musick drives away sorrow, 1 Sam. XVI. 24. 2 Kings III. 15. Enemie be hungrie] Exod. XXIII. 4. Matth. V. 44. Rom. XII. 20. heap coals of fire] This seems to be related to, if not cited, Rom. XII. 19, 20. And the words are commonly expounded and un∣derstood of heaping vengeance on thy enemies head, and bles∣sing on thine own, Psal. CXL. 10. But this seemes a very uncharita∣ble Exposition; but so savour of a vindictive policie; and not to suit with Solomons, or Pauls main scope, and charitable intention. And contrarie to that, chap. XX. 22. and chap. XXIV. 9. and to the tenden∣cie of the text; And therefore these coals of fire thus heaped on the enemies head, may better be understood of his hearty repentance, kindled and burning in his head and heart, wherby his malice is melted, and himself grieved with burning and scalding sighs, that he hath been thine enemie, who hast been, and art so good as to desire and do him good, whiles he did thee evil: And thus the fire of love and charitie is kindled in his heart, and his evil overcome with thy goodnesse: as is in the Apostles Precept, and Exhortation annexed, Rom. XII. 21. reward thee] Though he should not; nor be overcome by thy kindnesse and goodnesse. a backbiting tongue] Brow-beat it. The tale-hearer is blamable, as well at the tale-bearer. And he that loves a lie, as he that makes it, Apoc. XXII. 15. good newes] The more unexpected, the more welcome. Eminent∣ly is this true of the newes of salvation from heaven. falling down] By infirmity, yeelding to him by timorousnesse in an evil thing; or otherwise falling under his reproof for sinniug, he is prejudiced and disgraced thereby; he is as a troubled fountain. Or, to fall down before him by any calamity, is a thing to be grieved at by all, as at a publick mischief. their own glorie] It is not glorie, but vain-glorie Gal. V. 26. Iohn V. 44. and chap. XII. 43. Gloria fugientem sequitur. no rule over] Chap. XVI. 32. that reigns not in, his unruly affecti∣ons.
so honour] Dignitie should wait upon desert. Psal. XII. 8. The contrarie is of very evil consequences many wayes. the curse causelesse] As the Popes Excommunications, and Exe∣crations with Bell, Book, and Candle, Psal. CIX. 28. Such Cursers are cursed; the curse will fall upon the Cursers head. for the fools back.] Verse 4,—12. Chap. X. 13. chap. VII. 22. Psal. XXXII. 9. Much, and often is spoken of fools in this Book of So∣lomons wise Proverbs: to mark them out as rocks at Sea, that we might avoid shipwrack thereon. Shortly thus; That the Foole feedeth on foolishnesse; it is joy to him; he is full of words: delights that his heart may discover it self: uttereth all his minde; layeth open his fol∣ly: saith to every one that he is a fool: whereas, if he held his peace, he might be counted wise: his instruction is folly: Excellent speech becomes him not: honour is not seemely for him: The legs of the lame are not equal; and so is a parable in the mouth of fools. His eyes are in the ends of the earth; his heart at his left hand; he will be medling: he enters into contention, and his mouth calleth for stroaks, Job V. 2. A stone is heavie, and the sand weighty, yet his wrath is heavi∣er then them both. And as a whip is for the horse, a bridle for the Asse, so a rod for the fools back: yet he trusts in his own heart: that though thou shouldest bray him in a Morter among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishnesse depart from him: But as a dog returneth to his vo∣mit, so a fool to his folly. He hath no delight in understanding; it is too high for him: though a price be put in his hand, to get wisdome, yet he hath no heart; he doth despise, doth hate knowledge and reproof: yea the thought of foolishnesse is sinne. He makes a mock of sinne; it is a sport to him to do mischief: And therefore saith Solomon, meddle not with him, or his companie. Answer him not according to his fol∣ly; unlesse it be shortly, to convince him; leave him, and go from his presence; for shame shall be his promotion; and destruction is near at hand, to wait upon him. Answer not] Say nothing, and you pay him to purpose. Esay XXXVI. 21. Jer. XXVIII. 11. John XIX. 9, 10. Luke XXIII. 9. Mark XV. 2, 3, 4, 5. like him] As hot and as headlong as he: and so at length there will be never a wiser of the two, but both fools. Not foolishly] As he speaks;  or as soothing, humouring, or con∣senting to him therein: But in fit time and place, shortly, and sound∣ly, to convince him. Answer] Cast in somewhat that may sting him, and stop his mouth. lest] He took upon himself as a conqueror; clap his wings, and crow. These seeming contradictions and contrarieties, by due distinction of times, and other incident circumstances, and considerations, are easi∣ly reconciled. So Matth. XII. 30. fool] See on verse 3. bindeth a stone in a sling] Whereby the undiscreet and foolish
slinger may do hurt to others; putting, as it were, a sword in a mad mans hand. Or, as others, As he that putteth a (precious) stone in an heap of stones; so, &c. Some make these heaps to be such, as into which every traveller passing by, out of superstition did cast a stone. As a dog] 2 Pet. II. 22. The sloathful man] See on chap. VI. 6. with strife] As Jehoshaphat; and Ahaziah, in Ahabs, and his son Jehoram's case at Ramoth Gilead: and Josiah with Pharaoh-Necho, 1 Thes. IV. 11. 1 Tim. V. 13. Yet to be a Peace-maker is not to be this medler. is like] Him that takes a Lion by the beard, or a Bear by the tooth, or thrusts his hand into a Wasps nest. deceiveth his neighbour] Under colour of jest and sport, Such mirth works much mischief; such jests and dry flouts are as dangerous as a sword in a mad mans hand, and handling, in his rage. talebearer] Verse 22. and chap. XVIII. 8. and chap. XVI 28. chap. XXV. 23. Levit. XIX. 16. James III. 6. a contentious man] That loves to live in the fire, Salamander-like. Burning lips] Burning with pretended affection and hot love;  and so drawing a fair glove on a foul hand. See verse 24, 25, 26. believe him not] Iohn II. 24. David did not beleive Sauls fair pro∣mises. Psal. CXX. 2. seven abominations] Many. As Verse 16. and XXIV. 16. shewed] Detected sooner or later, and detested of all. diggeth] Chap. V. 22. Psal. VII. 15, 16. and IX. 15. and X. 2. Eccles. X. 8. a stone] As he that rolleth it up an hill. A lying tongue] False love proves true hatred;  seeketh to do them more mischief whom he hath hurt before. of to morrow] Iames IV. 13, 14. Luke XII. 19, 20. Psal. XXX. 6. 9. Iudg. V. 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Kings XX. 10, 20. No man knowes what is in the womb of to morrow, Matth. VI. 34. Let another man praise] Against arrogant boasting, and vaine-glorious praising of a mans self, 2 Cor. X. 18. Mat. VI. 1. Luke XVIII. 11, 12. Let our works, not our words, praise us; Prov. XXXI. 31. Ruth III. 11. 3 John 12. And God will provide that fame and praise shall attend vertue, as the shadow doth the body; yea, in the consciences of their enemies; as it was with David, in the heart, and mouth of Saul; and with Daniel; in the minde and affection of Darius, who yet was wrought upon to cast him into the den of Lions. Neverthelesse a man must stand in defence of his own innocencie, as David eftsoones did; and in such like cases may praise himself, 2 Cor. XI. 5, 6, 10, 16, 17, 18—33. and Chap. XII. 1, 11. a fools wrath] See the Observations on chap. XXVI. 3. envie?] Chap. XIV. 30. See the Observations there. Or, jealouzie, chap. VI. 34, 35. See Deut. XXXII. 21. Gen. XXVI. 14. and XXX. 1. and XXXVII. 11. Gal. V. 21, 26. Iob V. 2. Prov. XIV. 30. Eccl.
IV. 4. Matth. XXVII. 18. Tit. III. 3. Iames IV. 5. 1 Pet. II. 1. Acts XIII 45. Open rebuke] Chap. XVII. 10. and I. 30. and chap. XXVIII. 23. Psal. CXLI. 5. Levit. XIX. 17. Much better is this then that love of Hira the Adullamite to Iudah, Gen. XXXVIII. 20. or of Jonadab to Ammon, 2 Sam. XIII. 5. This though unpleasing, is wholsome. Faithful] They proceed from very faithfulnesse and friendship to us. Kisses] As those of Joab, Absalom, Judas, &c. chap. XXVI. 23. loatheth] But hunger is the best Cook, and sawce. Apply it spiri∣tualy. Num. XI. 6. Matth. V. 6. wandereth] From his place and calling;  idle, or not content with his present station and condition. sweetnesse of a mans friend] Psal. XLV. 8. as a fresh gale of sweet aire; as sweet ointment, and odoriferous perfume: eminently true in the spiritual friend; Job XXXIII. 23. Psal. LV. 14. His sweet friend∣ship comforts more then a mans own counsel can. friend] Chap. XVII. 17. and chap. XVIII. 24. brothers house] Thy Carnal kindred will sooner fail thee; when thy old friend will stick to thee; as Jonathan did to David; Onesipho∣rus to Paul. My sonne be wise] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. and chap. XXIII. 24. and XXIX. 3. foreseeth] Chap. XXII. 3. See the Explanations there. rising early] Over-doing it, as in voice, so in time; early, lest any other should be seene to exceed him. Thus praising him to his face, chap. XXIX. 5. Iron sharpeneth] Specialy spiritualy. Mal. III. 10, 17. Heb. X. 24. Acts XVIII. 5. A mutual quickening in dul and dead times, is Chri∣stian conference. fig-tree, shall eate] 1 Cor. IX. 7, 8. Waiteth on his Master] As Joseph, Daniel, Mordecai, &c. 1 Tim. VI. 1, 2. God will honour them; though some Masters do not; Col. III. 22, 23, 24. in water face] A man in himself, as in a glasse, may see the state, temper, conditions, qualities, dispositions, of another; of what kinde soever; or sorely and shrewdly guesse at them. Hell] So the lusts and desires of men are never satisfied, Eccles. I. 8. and chap. V. 10. so is a man to his praise] Chap. XVII. 3. His own worth proves his praise; and purifies it too. Yea, and a man may be known what he is by them by whom he is praised. the state of thy flock] Oversee them, as Boaz did; Ruth II. 4. and chap. III. 2, 7. 1 Chron. XXVII. 25,—31. And 1 Kings IV. 6, 7, 27, 28. 2 Chron. XXVI. 10. The profit and commodities of this careful husbandrie, and thrift, are set down in the verses following. The wicked flee] Being hotly haunted, hunted, and pursued by
the blood-hounds, and furies of their own guilty consciences. So Gen. IV. 14. Levit. XXVI. 17, 36, 37. God caused the Canaanites to flee, Josh. XXIV. 12. And the Syrians, 2 Kings VII. 7. bold as a lion] As Noah, mediis tranquillus in undis: si fractus il∣labatur orbis, impavidum ferient ruinae. Such is their privie-armour of proof, the power of the Spirit, and spiritual graces within them, Heb. XI. 33, 34. Ephes. VI. 16. Many are the Princes] Either as Competitors, or intruders; en∣tring, and endling in blood. As in the History of the Kings of Israel, and in many others, frequently appears. See Esay III. 4. Hos. XIII. 11. 1 Sam. XII. 25. a man of understanding] Job XXII. 30. 2 Sam. XX. 16. Eccles. IX. 13, 14, 15. Jer. V. 1. A poor man] As that mercilesse fellow-servant, Matth. XVIII. 28. He should rather pitie such, as knowing in himself the miserie of po∣vertie, then oppresse them, and rob the Hospital and Spittle. Praise the wicked] As birds of a feather keep together. Like will to like. They swim in one streame, and tyde. contend with them] Chap. XXIX. 277. Psal. CXXXIX. 21, 22. and LXIX. 9. and CXIX. 158. 1 Pet. IV. 4. 2 Chron XIX. 2. He hates sinne as hell. There is an antipathy between the forsakes and keepers of the Law. understand not] Their wits work not that way, 1 John II. 4, 20, 27. 1 Cor. II. 14, 15. Esay I. 3. Usurie] See the Annotations on Ezek. XVIII. 8. See also Nehem. V. 7, 10. Ezek. XXII. 12. And see that Matth. XXV. 27. for him] Chap. XIII. 22. Job XXVII. 17. Eccles. II. 26. even his Prayer] Chap. XV. 8. and I. 28. Jer. XI. 11. and XIV. 2. Zech. VII. 12, 13. John 9. 31. to go astray] Chap. XXVI. 27. Matth. XV. 14. He shall be catcht in his own trap. upright] 2 Pet. III. 17. and 1 Pet. I. 5. in his own conceipt] A very small winde will blow up a bubble, Chap. XIV. 12. and Chap. XVI. 2, 25. and Chap. XXI. 2. See the Ex∣planations on those texts. This rich man here thanks his wit for his wealth; he sacrificeth to his own net, 1 Tim. VI. 17. great glorie] Verse 28. Chap. XI. 10. and Chap. XXIX. 2. Their joy carries publick and eminent good in the mouth of it, as the Cause of it: and so bespeaks a common joy. hidden] Keeps close, or flees. So Matth. II. 13. Apoc. XII. 14. And those worthies, of whom the world was not worthie, Heb. XI. 38. covereth his sinnes] Psal. XXXII. 5. 1  John I. 9, 10. Job. XXXI. 33. Gen. III. 12, 13. Sinne and shifts came into the world together. But if not confession, sure confusion will follow upon it. In the Court of Heaven, it is best to plead, Guilty. 2 Sam. XXIV. 10. and forsaketh] Many Papists use Confession, as drunkards use vomiting; not to forsake sinne, but that they may adde drunkennesse to thirst.
hardeneth his heart] Esay LXIII. 17. Psal. XCV. 8. Heb. III. 8, 15. and IV. 7. The dehortation in this case is urgent; the accusation dreadful; the sinne it self direful. As the heart; so the neck, and the face are said to be hardened, made stiffe not to hear, harder then a rock. God is said to harden the hearts of Pharaoh, and sundrie others: And that whom he will he hardeneth, Rom. IX. 18. But how he doth this, see in the Observations on Esay VI. 9, 10. fall] Into ruine, without remedie. a wicked ruler] As a Lion, and Bear, Zeph. III. 3. Micah III. 3, 11. Jer. LI. 34. flee to the pit] Die without mercie, Gen. IX. 6. Exod. XXI. 14. Deut. XIX. 13. uprightly] Chap. X. 9. Psal. XXIII. 4. perverse] Crooked, and doubling; can shift his saile to every wind, verse 6. chap. XIX. 1. tilleth] Chap. XII. 11. We must earne our bread ere we eate it. haste to be rich] Verse 22. chap. XX. 21. 1. Tim. VI. 9, 10. robbeth] As Micah rob'd his mother, Judg. XVII. 1, 2. And Ab∣salom did his father of his crown. proud heart] Chap. XIII. 10. through haughtinesse and ambition, thinking great thoughts of himself, and nothing too good for himself, not enduring to be crossed in the least, Esay II. 11, 12, 13. trust in the Lord] 1 Tim. VI. 6. That which would break a proud mans heart, will not break an humble mans sleep. giveth] Chap. XIX. 17. See there Chap. XXII. 9. and chap. XXIX. 7. 2 Cor. IX. 6, 7. Deut. XV. 8, 10. Matth. V. 42. and chap. X. 42. Luke VI. 35. Esay LVIII. 7. Eccles. XI. 1, 2. Job XXIX. 16. and Ch. XXXI. 16,—20. hardeneth his neck] Esay XLVIII. 4. Jer. VII. 26. and chap. XVII. 23. Neh. IX. 16, 17. Acts VII. 51. There is much complaint of it; and exhortation against it. Without remedie] 2 Chron. XXXVI. 13, 16. Remedilesse sinning brings remedilesse destruction. Gods wrath shall shatter into shivers, Esay XXX. 13, 14. such a sinner as will needs stand and stout it out with him. a snare] That strangles his joy, checks and choaks all his comforts; that his jollitie is but the counterfeit, and hypocrisie, the mask of mirth, chap. V. 22. and XIV. 13. Eccles. VII. 6. Guilt within makes his heart ake and quake, when his face and forehead faines a smile. righteous sing] Righteousnesse carries joy and comfort in its own mouth, in the deed-doing; that peace, and joy, Phil. IV. 7. Rom. XV. 13. even in tribulations, chap. V. 3. 2 Cor. VII. 4. scornful men] Being proud, and contentious, bring mischiefs upon the stage, a Citie into a snare, set all on fire. But wise men, of a mild∣er temper, turne away the wrath of God, and man, Job XXII. 30. Psal. CVI. 23. Exod. XXXII. 10. Gen. XVIII. 32. whether he rage or laugh] He, the fool: or he, the wise man; as some
sense the words: there will be no quiet; and that through the fooles fault; he, as a foul stomack will turne good nourishment it self into vitious humours, Luke VII. 30. The blood-thirsty hate] As being enemies to them, and their bloodinesse. his soul] The soul of the upright; yea, of his enemies. all his minde] Hath no command of himself;  specialy when he is angry; yea, or in his foolish jollitie. till] Due season, and occasion. all his servants] They will be fit helves for such hatchets, fit let∣tice for such lips; to humour them, and ingratiate themselves. They take their Rulers as Looking-glasses, wherein, and whereby they dress themselves. wicked are multiplied] 1 Sam. XXIV. 13. the sluce and flud-gate of transgression is then set loose; and of it self will make an inunda∣tion. see their fall] Psal. LVIII. 10, 11. and Psal. XXXVII. 36. and XCI. 8. no vision] As 1 Sam. III. 1. 2 Chron. XV. 3. Hos. IV. 6. Psal. LXXIV. 9. Matth. IX. 36. And so in time of Popery, when Preach∣ing failed, and the Scripture was not read. Keepeth] Doth not only hear, but practise, James I. 22. Luke XI. 28. John XIII. 17. So on chap. XIX. 16. A servant will not] Some such there are, Luke XII. 47. Exod. XXI. 20, 21, 26, 27. Ephes. VI. 5. sonne at the length] And turne young master, so ungratefuly abu∣sing himself, and his masters goodnesse to him. An angry man] See on chap. XXII. 24. pride] Chap. XV. 33. and XVIII. 12. Job XXII. 29. Luke XIV. 11. Matth. XXIII. 12. partner] Chap. I. 10, 13, 14. Psal. L. 18. Apoc. XVIII. 4. Ephes. V. 7, 11. and IV. 8. fear of man] Apoc. XXI. 8. cowes a man both to sinnes, and suffer∣ings: where it prevailes above the fear of God. So even in Abraham, Peter, and others. trusteth] Esay XXXIII. 15. and chap. XL. 30, 31. the Rulers favour] Chap. XIX. 6. from the Lord.] Who ruleth, and over-ruleth the Ruler, chap. XXI. 1. and orders every mans state and condition of life. This Chapter is not Solomons. But in this are the words of Agur, some man famous in his time for wisdome; his words unto his disci∣ples, or friends, Ithiel, and Ucal; Or, here is a Comportation and Col∣lection of Agurs wise sayings and Sentences: though none of all their names mentioned in the first verse, are found elsewhere in Scripture. The words] Not of Solomon. For his words end with the former Chapter. of Agur] Not mentioned elsewhere in Scripture. But seemes a
man famous for wisdome, either in Solomons, or Hezekiah's time. Prophesie] Or, instruction; for so largely is the word Prophesie many times taken. Or, Collectanies; gathered out of wise Agurs sayings, and proverbial sentences, then extant, or well-known; and here added to Solomons Proverbs, as being of like argument, and con∣sorting with them. Ithiel, and Ucal] Some take these names for Christ, for his good∣nesse, and power. But with lesse straining, they rather seeme to be the names of Agurs schollers, or friends, here instructed by him. more brutish] Agur begins in all humilitie, so deeply abasing and vi∣lifying, himself; knowing his losse by his fall in Adam; 1 Cor. II. 14. Psal. VII. 3, 22. Job XXXII. 8. and chap. XI. verse 12. That flesh and blood, in natures schoole, could not reveal saving mysteries unto him. neither learned] Not of himself: but from God, Gal. I. 1. James I. 17. of the holy] Holy God; and holy Angels, Dan. IV. 13. and VIII. 13. or holy and heavenly things. who hath ascended] The difficultie great;  the impossibility evi∣dent, to humane wisdome: who can, or hath done it, but the Sonne of man, John III. 13. And the Angels Ministers to him, John I. 51. No man hath seene God at any time: the only begotten Sonne, which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared him, John I. 18. and declared heaven, Rom. X. 6, 7. Heavenly wisdome by man of himself is not attainable, Job XXVIII. Chapter. See Esay XL. 12. winde] Psal. CIV. 3. and CXXXV. 7. Matth. VIII. 26, 27. waters] Job XXXVIII. 8,—11. Psal. CIV. 3, 6,—13. Esay XL. 12. earth] I. Job XXXVIII. 4, 5, 6. Esay XL. 12. what is his Name] Job XI. 7, 8, 9. Judg. XIII. 17, 18. Exod. III. 13, 14, 15. Matth. XI. 27. John VI. 46. Esay LIII. 8. The Sonne is like the Father, John XIV. 7, 8, 9. Heb. I. 3. if thou cast [ None can. word of God] Psal. XII. 6. and XVIII. 30. and XIX. 8. and CXIX. 140. sheild] Gen. XV. 1. 2 Sam. XXII. 31. Adde thou not] Deut. IV. 2. Apoc. XXII. 18, 19. Against the blasphemous speeches of Papists concerning Scripture: And their ad∣ditions to it. So adding, as it were, to Gods will, and abasing his coyne. Two things] Two special ones mentioned in the next verse. deny me not] With importunitie he reinforceth and followeth his request, so Psal. XXVII. 4. Gen. XXXII. 26. Luke XI. 8. Matth. XV. 23. She came for a cure, and a cure she would have. And God calls for, and delights in such importunities; that so he may abound in his bounteous grants unto us, John XVI. 24. He would have us smite five or six times, 2 Kings XIV. 18, 19. And he as Naaman would
then force two talents upon us; grant above all we ask or think. vanitie and lies.] Those lying vanities of sinne: from the damning and domineering power and punishment of it; from the sting and staine, the crime and curse of it. neither povertie, nor riches] Both are naturaly attended, encumber∣ed, and burdened with many inconveniences. Yet sanctified both, to the childe of God. Mediocrite, a sufficiencie without superfluitie, is the estate that is most easily managed, Matth. VI. 11. 1 Tim. VI. 8. Tuta me media vehat Vita decurrens via. Lest I be full] Deut. XXXII. 15. 1 Tim. VI. 17. And so, as the Moon at the ful; then, and then only, suffer they the Eclipse of grace, by the interposition of the earth: and come to say, Pharaoh-like, Who is the Lord? as if they with their Mammon were pettie-gods, of, and with∣in themselves. or lest I be poor] Stealth upon necessitie, is lesse then adulterie, Prov. VI. 30. Yet a sinne alwayes, Exod. XX. 15. Ephes. IV. 28. name of my God] This he grieves at more, then his own shame, burning in the hand, whipping, hanging. Accuse not] Rom. XIV. 4. and II. 1. Matth. VII. 1. Eccles. VII. 21, 22. Tit. III. 1, 2, 3. lest] The harme of the servants ill wishes fall upon thee. Here begin his Quaternions, of some things Moral, of some things Natural; yet intended for Moral use, which he pursueth six times o∣ver, in the rest of the Chapter. that curseth their father] A cursed crew, a bastardly brood, verse 17. and chap. XX. 20. Levit. XX. 9. Exod. XXI. 17. Matth. XV. 4. Deut. XXI. 18,—21. are pure] As the Puritanes, Novatians, Donatists, Catharists of old, Matth. XIX. 20. Hos. XII. 8. Esay LXV. 5. Papists that pretend to works of Supererogation; And yet welter in wickednesse. O how lofty] Chap. VI. 17. and chap. XVI. 5, 18. and chap. XXI. 4. Esay II. 11, 12, 17. and V. 15. and X. 33. Job XXXIII. 17. Ps. CI. 5. whose teeth] Psal. LII. 4. and LVII. 4. Job XXIX. 17. The horseleach] Hath two forks in her tongue, whereby she first pricketh the flesh, and then sucketh the blood. Such is the covetous extortioner and oppressor of the poor. never satisfied] No more then Pharaoh's leane kine. with a maid] That yet pretends so to be: as appears in the next verse: and that with impudencie enough. Incerta sunt virginis aut corruptae indicia. for a servant when] Chap. XIX. 10. Asperius nihil est humili cùm surgit in altum. little] Deus est maximus in minimis. exceeding wise] Job XII. 1. The Ants] Chap. VI. 6, 7.
Conies] Psal. CIV. 18. Locusts] Joel II. 4, 5, 7, 8. Those Apoc. IX. 11. have their King Abaddon Comely] A comlinesse of carriage belongs to us, Phil. I. 27. So Neh. VI. 7. No rising up] Eccles. VIII. 2, 4. in lifting up thy self] Against the King, verse 31. Eccles. VIII. 3. and chap. X. 20. Exod. XXII. 28. Or, in any evil matter; then stop and silence thy self: as Job XL. 4, 5. and chap. XLII. 6. and chap. XXI. 5. so the forcing of wrath] Chap. XV. 1. Reiterated provocations ex∣tort strife. James III. 16. Patientia laesa furor fit. Here are the words of Bathsheba, the mother of Solomon; taught him likely when he was young, against the time wherein he should be King; And when he was King, recorded here, and registred by him. He is called here Lemuel, verse 1. And by his mother Lemoel, verse 4. as tender mothers do often use to make loving changes in their chil∣drens names. And here she warnes him chiefly against women, though he made ill use of this warning; And against wine. And from the tenth verse, to the end, she elegantly describes the vertues of a worthy wife; as a patterne for his choise; beginning every verse thereof with a several letter of the Hebrew Alphabet in order. Lemuel] Verse 4. Lemoel. It seemes to signifie, of God. God had owned him, 2 Sam. VII. 14. and chosen him for King before any of his elder brethren. His mother thus stiles him; as mothers many times do frame affectionate titles with some smal variations, to insinuate with their children; she breaks off the first letter of his name, and adds in the end the name of God. his mother taught him.] Lemuels lesson; taught him by Bathsheba; and if taught him haply being King; then upon his beginning to warp and wander. He was taught likewise by his father, ch. IV. 3, 4. Ps. CXXVII. and LXXII. Both which heighten his after-fall, as well as that 1 Kings XI. 9. These words and Prophetical documents may seeme to be pen∣ned down by Lemuel himself afterwards. What my sonne] Passionate, and affectionate words; a sweet school∣ing out of a fear and jealousie conceived, and a care had to prevent his miscarrying. thy strength to women] Chap. V. 9. Deut. XVII. 17. to drink wine] Chap. XXIII. 29, 30. Ephes. V. 18. Hos. VII. 5. E∣say V. 11. Hab. II. 15, 16. Eccles. X. 16, 17. Lest] One, amongst many, of the mischiefs of drunkennesse, in Kings and Princes, chap. XXIII. 29,—35. and wine to those] Jer. XVI. 7. Good things well used. Hence, as some conceive, arose the custome of giving wine to such as were condemned to die; as Mark XV. 23. Whereunto some apply that of Amos II. 8. and forget] Judg. IX. 13. Psal. CIV. 15.
for the dumb] Chap. XXIV. 11, 12. such as may not, or can∣not speak for themselves, Iob XXIX. 15, 16. Ier. XXXVIII. 8, 9. and plead] Levit. XIX. 15. Deut. I. 17. Psal. LXXII. 4. a vertuous woman] Chap. XII. 4. 1 Cor. XI. 7. Her praise is set forth all along to the end of this Chapter. And that metho∣dicaly, beginning every verse with a letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, as it stands in order. Such a woman as this is the female glo∣rie, the wonder of woman-kinde; amiable, and admirable, as the paragon of the world. A faire patterne for Solomons choise in a wife. But a lesson ill learned by him, a worse practised. In this large Description, the whole Text needs not any Glosse.
Ecclesiastes. THis is the Book of Solomons Repentance; written in his old age, as may seeme to be gathered, both out of the Title of the Book, and the Closure of it in the six last verses; and also out of the whole Body of it; Being written upon a serious view of the Passages and practi∣ses of his life past, and the great and manifold Experi∣ences he had made and found therein. His maine businesse is a curious search after true Felicitie and real Contentation. And upon his search, and experience he doth finde and pronounce. That in order thereun∣to, all things under the Sunne were but vanitie of vanities, and vexa∣tion of spirit: and for such experimented by him; though the same improved by humane wisdome in him to the utmost, Chap. II. 3, 9. This he shews in a large maner, in sundry sorts, in many particular va∣nities under the Sunne; principaly in humane wisdome and know∣ledge, humane labours, industries, and endeavours; in Delights and Pleasures of all kinds; in Honours, Greatnesse, and Power; in Rich∣es and Possessions; and in the utter insufficiencie that is in all these, to extract from them, or the quintessence of them, any true happi∣nesse, or from any other sublunarie thing, or creature whatsoever. He seemes to speak sometimes in the person, and according to the carnal reasonings of the Atheist and Epicure, as reciting their opinions, with their arguments; yet he avers the truth of God against them; and the just and wise course, though to us secret, hid, and unsearchable, of his Providence, Administration, and government of all the events, issues, accidents, and affairs of this life, in relation both to the just, and to sinners; even in things befalling in common to both of them. He giveth sundry sound remedies to abate and heale the said Vanities. He speaks much for Wisdome, and against Folly. And prescribes many good Rules for better things, for procuring tranquillity unto the mind, and peace and comfort to the life of a man; eftsoones minding and mentioning, among other things, a chearful fruition and enjoyment of the outward Blessings and Comforts of this Life, with gladnesse, contentation, and thankfulnesse, as from the hand of God. And last∣ly, in the twelfth Chapter he concludes, That in Old age, elegantly de∣scribed by him, and at Death, It will appear, That to Fear God, and Keep his Commandments, is the whole of man, both the whole Du∣tie,
and Felicitie of Man; the one, and only thing wherein it consist∣eth. The words] Solomons Ethicks, his Sapiential Tractate of the Sove∣reign good; his Retractations and Penitential Sermon; his Experi∣ments. of the Preacher] Or of a preaching soul. The word  being Foeminine, hath  the soul understood. The penitent convert; ga∣thering himself to the Church. He again gives himself this title, chap. I. 2, 12. and VII. 27. and XII. 8, 9, 10. Yet in those places it is construed with a Masculine. And so the foeminine is sometimes used for the Common gender, which is wanting with the Hebrews. The Greeks and Latins render it in the Masculine, Ecclesiastes. David pub∣lished his Repentance in Psal. LI. Vanitie of vanities] Psal. CXLIV. 4. and XXXIX. 5. All Adam is all, Abel even at his best estate, altogether vanitie. And all worldly things are so, an heap, a nest of vanities; vanitie in the abstract. This the last issue and result, the upshot of all his curious critical enquirie, search, and experiments. what profit] A chief point in the wise mans Compasse, is, cui bono? Who will shew us any good? Thus worldly men look after this, Psal. IV. 6. Yea, wicked men in their overtures of Religion, Mal. III. 14. No profit, towards the attainment of true happinesse. Labour which, &c.] A labour in order to things above the Sunne will profit, Phil. III. 20. Colos. III. 1, 2. John VI. 27. No toilsome labour in earthly things will do so. Nothing remaineth or abideth with him, nothing more is added to him by it; it addes nothing of re∣al worth unto him at all. That we shall finde to be truth, which is in Habak. II. 13, 6. One generation] Ecclesiasticus XIV. 18. Meere man is but the dream of a dream, a curious picture of nothing. Mortalitie is the stage of mutabilitie: The inward principles of change and alteration are al∣wayes working. The children thrust out the fathers. but the earth] Whereon as on a stage, the several Generations act their parts, and go off, others come on. abideth for ever] Till its time of change, in the end of all, 2 Pet. III. 10. See my Observations on Deut. XV. 17. The duration of the earth, opposed to every mans duration, not the motion or standing of it, is here intended. The Sunne] Psal. XIX. 3. There is one constant course in Na∣ture, and its actings. Of the Sunne, see my Observations on Psal XIX. 5. See Job XIV. 7, 12. Here the earth stands, and the Sunne moveth round about it. The winde] Thus whirleth, and returneth: though in some parts of the world▪ in some moneths of the year, they have a very regular and uniforme motion. Rivers] Runne thither whence they come through pores and pas∣sages of the earth, whereby they lose their saltnesse. Thus which
way ever we cast our eyes, we every where meet with evidences of inconstancie and mutability here below, as testimonies of that vani∣tie which all things under the Sunne are subject unto; so that man cannot finde fatisfaction and full content in them. full of labour] All these things are sweeter in the ambition, then in the fruition, Prov. XXVII. 7, 20. After our utmost endeavours for plenarie satisfaction in the things of this world and this life, we are still to seek, because it is not in them; we do so but seek for the living a∣mong the dead, as Luke XXIV. 5. And they tyre us in the search, and toylesome labour after them; and cloy us in the use. man cannot utter it] If not Solomon, then surely no man, chap. II. 12. As on the other side our happinesse in God, to our joy, is unutter∣able, 1 Cor. II. 9. 2 Cor. XII. 4. The thing] Happinesse cannot be extracted out of the creature; never was, nor ever can be. no new thing] Though some kinde of new inventions be, as Gun∣powder, Printing, the Mariners Compasse, &c. yet but of the old stamp, as to this maine use and purpose; they come still from defective and insufficient principles of happinesse, chap. III. 15. no new thing out of which man can extract real content, comfort, and satisfaction, or any principle of true happinesse and blessednesse, more then out of old and former things. And indeed Solomon speaks here of natural things, and their natural actions. This is new?] Such new things as may so farre surpasse the disco∣veries before, as to be able to satisfie the heart, and make man happie? They are indeed new-nothings. There is no remembrance] If some new things be found out, as many old things are forgotten. How many things never Recorded? How many ancient Records totaly perished? How many fragments remaining? And so shall it be of things hereafter. No new thing is, or shall be more pregnant of satisfaction to mans heart and happiness, then hath beene heretofore. No such thing on earth, or in the crea∣ture can be found. Only it is in God, and in the new creature from him, when he gives us a new heart, and a new spirit, Ezek. XXXVI. 26. puts a new spirit within us, Ezek. XI. 19. and a new name upon us, Esay LXII. 2. I the Preacher] None had more abilities, and helps to extract hap∣pinesse out of the creatures, and these worldly things, then Solomon had. And therefore his verdict may be credited. And I gave my heart] Solomon made this point his task; and that in the extent and utmost employment of his great wisdome, chap. II. 3, 9. chap. IX. 10. all things] 1 Kings IV. 33. and chap. X. 23, 24. the several kinds of them, all natural causes and effects; all humane counsel and e∣vents. and vexation of spirit] Active enough hereunto;  far enough from making him truly happy, Chap. XII. 12. chap. I. 18.
That which is crooked] Chap. VII. 13. The most excellent natu∣ral knowledge will not do either the one, or the other; rectifie what is amisse, or supply what is defective. I communed] And this without vaine boasting, 1 Kings III. 12. and chap. IV. 30. and X. 7, 23. 2 Kings III. and IV. and V. and X. none can out-do him herein. and to know madnesse and folly] Chap. II. 12. and VII. 23. experi∣mental knowledge he did practise himself in. He found by experi∣ence that neither course could quiet or settle the heart of man, chap. XI. 8, 9. 1 Cor. I. 20. In much wisdome is much grief] Many wayes, and upon manifold occasions, Verse 14. I said] The summe of this Chapter is well set down in the Great Annotations. I will prove thee with mirth] Missing of his expected good from the knowledge of the creature, he now resolveth to search what good may be found in the use and fruition of it; And first in the sensual pleasure of it: In mirth, here. Which most men count the only life, to sing all sorrow and care away; and melt in mirth, jollity, and jovizans∣ses, which emasculates the spirit, and drawes out, and draines away the very vigour and vivacitie of it: when they indulge to themselves, and give up their heart to it, and make it the businesse of their life to pour out themselves in delights, and wallow, and drown themselves in them. This sort of men after Epicurus was borne, were called E∣picureans. mad] And indeed many mad men are very merry. But it is but like the crackling of thornes, chap. VII. 6. and hath sorrow in the bot∣tome of it. wine, yet acquainting] He would trie, by mixing wisdome and wine together, mitigating the grief of the one with the pleasure of the other. till I might see] This the end of his inquirie by this experiment; whether this voluptuous course of living were best, to sweeten the mortal life of man, during all his dayes. I made me great works] He shewes what magnificent and royal pro∣visions he made in order to his foresaid designe. Not trifling ones; but adequate acts, and objects to his person and state, as Ester I. 4. These things he had as materials for his wisdome. houses] Besides what David had formerly built, 2 Chron. II. 3. Vineyards] Cant. VIII. 11, 12. Besides what David had, 1 Chron. XXVII. 27. gardens and orchards] Cant. VI. 2. and chap. IV. 12,—15. as pa∣radises for amenitie and delight. We read of Hortus pensilis, a gar∣den hanging in the aire, made by an Assyrian King for the pleasure of his Queen. pooles] Chap. IV. 15. and VII. 4. These are Princely works, 2 Kings XX. 20. Neh. II. 14.
the wood] Of Forrests; and likely in those Gardens and Orch∣ards, which for their spaciousnesse might be called woods. servants, and maidens] See those servants, mentioned, Ezra II. 58. Neh. VII. 60. cattel] More then David had, 1 Chron. XXVII. 29, 30, 31. silver and gold] In all abundance, 2 Chron. I. 15. men-singers] See 2 Sam. XIX. 35. he laboured to take all plea∣sure in pleasures. also my wisdome] Verse 3. by wisdome to minde what real good could be extracted from them. Thus he heeds his maine end. I with-held not] Luke XII. 19. cleane contrary to that, Rom. XIII. 14. Then I looked] In the serious review he findes all to be but a feed∣ing upon the winde;  nothing but labour for his paines and gaines, he catcheth but a Butter-flie, with much vexation and all his toile. And I turned] To his first enquirie, to see if his second thoughts therein might prove the wiser. what can] True, without boasting. None can go beyond him; trie who will. wisdome excelleth follie] Foolish, sensual pleasures, which perish in the using, and leave a sting behinde them. Though the most excel∣lent humane wisdome is vaine also, as to this maine end, and in order to it to attaine true happinesse. The wise mans eyes] He shewes the great difference of worth be∣tween these two contraries;  And the antithesis and opposition of them serves to illustrate the nature of them both. The wise man sees, fore-sees, fore-casts, ponders things past, present, and to come, he casts and considers; is vigilant and circumspect. The foole hath neither sight nor light; his eyes are any where rather then in his head; he is inconsiderate, rash, carried headlong in blindnesse. and I my self perceived] Though the one so farre excelling the o∣ther; yet both alike in this; no difference herein; but one event happeneth to them all; as two wayes meet at the same Inne; and Ships from several Coasts meet at the same Haven; and Counters af∣ter casting summes, are put into the same bag. And why was I then more wise?] To what purpose, as to the maine point? no remembrance] Chap. VIII. 10. Prov. X. 7. Psal. CXII. 6. and XLIX. 11, 12. Jer. XVII. 13. and how dieth] As oblivion, so death, equal and common to both, Psal. XLIX. 10. Ezek. XXI. 4. Only piety maketh the difference, John XI. 25, 26. Therefore I hated life] He saw little valuable or desirable in it. He was wearie of living to so little purpose: and withal, that sufficient to the day was the evil thereof. all my labour] As being so vaine and vexatious. No felicitie and true happinesse in this life being to be gained by any creature-comfort.
leave it] Psal. XLIX. 10. and XXXIX. 6. And so Luke XII. 17. ere he was a day elder. a wise man, or a foole] How Rehoboam proved, is well known, chap. VI. 2. therefore I went about] Fetcht a compasse, by a reflex act of my minde, as Ephraim, Jer. XXXI. 18, 19. and the Prodigal, Luke XV. 17. as those, 1 Kings VIII. 47. And being wearied in this round, I was brought to a despondencie of spirit, and a despair of attaining to my purpose and search, as being fruitlesse and unseazable; these em∣ptie things only abusing and deluding me. For there is a man] This particular did so pinch Solomon, that he thinks he can never say enough of it, he cannot give it over. And it is a judgement threatened, that it shall so fall out, Prov. XIII. 22. Yea, leave it to a stranger, and enemie; as Nabals was to David; Hamans to Mordecai; the Canaanites to the Israelites. what hath a man, &c?] A meere nothing; a coffin perhaps to his grave. Then all the world is gone with him, Psal. XLIX. 17. Eccles. I. 3. and III. 9 and V. 15 are sorrowes] In the abstract. And those pluraly, Job V. 7. not rest in the night] Though he lie upon a bed of downe, yet these gnats will not suffer him sleep; his heart doth not rest, in that time of rest, Job IV. 13. as the clock cannot stand still while the plummets hang at it. Grace only cures these cares, and procures this quiet rest, Phil. IV. 6, 7. Ps CXXVII. 2. nothing better] Chap. III. 12, 13, 22. and VIII. 15. as to the hap∣pinesse of this life attainable by all study and industrie in worldly things and affairs; and so to free our selves from this vanitie and vex∣ation of them; and specialy from that disease, verse 21. the hand of God] It is not alwayes in our power, Verse 26. Chap. III. 13. and V. 19. Acts XIV. 17. God is then to be sought to, in whom only felicity is to be found, Psal. CXLV. 15, 16. Eccles. IX. 7, 8, 9. For who can eate?] Who else can prove it by his own experience better then I? verse 12. For God giveth] To get these worldly things rightly, and to use them rightly, and comfortably; giveth this peculiar blessing to this person, the proper subject of it, Chap. III. 12, 13. but to the sinner] To scrape, and rape, chap. IV. 8. Hab. II. 6. Psal. XXXIX. 6. Luke XII. 18. give to him that is good] Job XXVII. 17. Prov. XIII. 22. and XXVIII. 8. To every thing there is a season] Or rather a time prefixed, set, and predetermined. The series and contexture whereof, and of all future events, we cannot order or alter, we cannot antedate or anticipate; nor post-off, or post-date; by all our anxious care and toyles: we cannot break through the bounds of Gods providence and predeterminate purpose in the guidance of them. So again, chap. VIII. 6. And there∣fore
we should quiet and content our selves in the good and comfort∣able use of them; as chap. II. 24. And not seek to extract out of such vaine and variable things that good and felicity which is not in them. Yet again, This may minde us not to neglect the seasons, times, and opportunities of Grace, which are in Gods hand when he doth please to offer and afford them, Luke XIX. 42. Heb. II. 3. A time] Chap. III. 17. This here is oft repeated, that it may be once remembred. There are various vicissitudes and changes in all things under the Sunne. We should seek perfect felicitie in him only in whom there is no shadow of change; and in his kingdome of glo∣ry, which shall continue when time it self shall be no more. What profit] Concludes that, Chap. I. 3. Matth. VI. 27. no more then that, James II. 14, 16. Consider that, Matth. XVI. 26. which God hath given] God gives it, for our exercise in it, and by it. And he, not we; or fate, or fortune orders it, and the event of it. He usualy gives the blessing in our use of the meanes beautiful] Though we at all times see it not in every thing; though we are not able to put together all the pieces of Gods provi∣dence, nor to foresee that frame and forme & feature that he will bring them to at the last, Esay X. 12. we being not able to finde out the be∣ginning or end of the causes or uses of Gods works. Yet these seeming confusions God will reduce into an excellent & beautiful order, and in a beautiful season too. Frost and Snow are as seasonable in the Win∣ter as heat, and flowers, and fruits are in the Summer. The world is so much in our hearts, that we minde and mark not Gods dealings suf∣ficiently: and we are of so short continuance, that though we minde it, yet we live not to observe a full point in the works of God: Their beginning may be in one age, and their end in another, Rom. XI. 34. No good in them, but, &c.] To enjoy things present, and to do good here, and so have good hereafter, Psal. CXXVIII. 2. 1 Tim. VI. 18, 19. it shall be for ever] His doing and counsel shall stand. Esay XLVI. 10, 11. Jer. 44. 28. And is perfect and holy; unalterable by man. Job XXXVIII. 31, &c. We should therefore with willingnesse and contentment submit to him and his doings, acquiesce in him, and dread, and adore him, though our blear eyes cannot see the bright Sun-shine of his actions. His decrees must not drive us to despair, or to a neglect of using the means; but from deifying our selves, and our own wisdome in the use of meanes, still depending upon his blessing. And moreover] Having formerly shewed the vanitie and vexation of Knowledge, and of Pleasures, and of humane Labours, in many regards; together with the Remedies of them; He now proceeds to shew more vanities and vexations; and yet to vindicate Gods Provi∣dence in them. the place of judgement] That should be a Sanctuarie and Citie of Refuge for wronged Innocencie. That wickednesse and oppression
should be and reigne there, was a great vexation, and a great tentati∣on too against Gods righteous Providence. I said] That God shall judge and right all, at least and last in that great Assizes to be held by his Sonne at the last day, Acts XVII. 31. Some he judgeth here, lest his Providence, but not all, lest his pati∣ence and promise of judgement, might be called into question. There∣fore this vanitie and vexation ought not to dismay the innocent, or hearten the oppressors: seeing God will amend all. that God might manifest them] Men in place and power, though they carry themselves as beasts to their brethren, yet will hardly know themselves, their own fraile and base condition, and that as to out∣ward respects, they are but as the beasts that perish, Psal. XLIX. 20. God must manifest it to them. And this should humble them, and staine their pride; This shewes, and should cure this vanitie, Prov. XXX. 2. For that which befalleth] Psal. XLIX. 10. chap. II. 15, 16. hunger, thirst, diseases, &c. all turne to dust againe] Expire alike;  and the body turnes to dust alike, Gen. III. 19. Job XXXIV. 15. This still in relation to the body only. Who knoweth the spirit of man] No man can by sense discerne the ascent of the one, or the descent of the other. But he can who hath the minde of Christ, who hath seen the insides of Nature, and Grace; Who is spiritual, 1 Cor. II. 14, 15, 16. See chap. XII. 7. of this book. And Solomons scope throughout this Book, is to shew the vanitie of earthly things, and of humane actions in order unto things under the Sunne, as to satisfie the heart of man in the acquiring of true felicitie. Of his immortal or heavenly condition he speaks not purposely. But as he makes Pietie the Only Remedy against all these earthly vanities and vexations; and so concludes his Book in the two last verses. We need not here then to make these passages to be speeches taken up in the Person of the picure or Atheist. Wherefore I perceive] He resumes his Assertion, verse 13. and ch. II. XXIV. and V. 18. after him] What shall become of his goods; how used, and dis∣posed; and by whom. all the oppressions] More vanities and vexations in the Civil State. no Comforter] Doubled here. This addes to their miserie. This was Jobs case, chap. VI. 14, 15. and chap. XVI. 2. and chap. XIX. 21. he crieth and calleth for this pitie and commiseration. It was Davids case, Psal. LXIX. 20. And Jerusalems, Lam. I. 2, 9, 16. God cals for it towards Jerusalem, Esay XL. 1, 2. And himself doth it, Esay LI. 3, 12. See Nahum. III. 7. praised the dead] He preferreth the ease and quietnesse of death, before the miseries of such a dying life. See Job, chap. III. through∣out, Jonah IV. 3. 1 Kings XIX. 4. He speaks here according to the judg∣ment
of men under oppression: without relation to the wickednesse of men, whose state after death is in those terrours and torments that shall either mend, or end, and they be never able to abide or avoid, Matth. XXVI. 24. not yet been] Job III. 10. and chap. X. 18, 19. envied] For his eminent worth and works, his ingenious Acts and Parts. As the Courtiers of Persia did Daniel. See Prov. XXVII. 4. foldeth his hands The foolish sluggard so described, Prov. VI. 6. See the Explanations there. And chap. XXVI. 15. and chap. XIX. 24. eateth his own flesh] Prov. X. 4. maketh many an hungry meale. Better is an handful] The sluggards plea. Sinners will have their shifts. saw vanitie] Another vanitie, contrary to the former. Fools whiles they shun the sands, do rush upon the rocks. yet no end of all his labour] This matchlesse miser, and fellow that hardly hath a fellow is never satisfied, as Prov. XXX. 15. toiles with∣out end, Esay V. 8. Hab. II. 5. and to no end trusts he can draw up Jordan into his mouth, Job XL. 23. and yet knows he hath none to whom he may leave his goods so toiled for. This is worse then that of Psal. XXXIX. 6. neither is his eye satisfied with riches] Indeed the eye only hath the use of riches with such covetous men. Two are better then one] In a natural, and in a Moral sense, Jer. XLI. 13, 14. 2 Sam. X. 11. And spiritualy, next to Communion with God is the Communion of Saints, Psal. XVI. 2. Heb. X. 24. he cometh to reigne] The poor and wise child. I considered] Another vanitie and vexation: if this be not an ex∣emplification of the old foolish King dethroned, and the poor wise child standing up in his stead. all the living] All the present generation of men living under a present Prince or Government; the multitude, many-headed, given to change, falling off from the falling Sun, and adoring the rising Sunne. with the second child] The Successor; sonne, or who ever he be: joyning to him, and following him; as thinking they must live by the living, and not by the dead; and so expecting protection and preser∣vation by and under him. Such is the vanitie and vexation of Princes, that if they live long, they outlive their own glorie, and are looked upon by their own subjects, as faling, sinking, bending to the grave: And such is the vanitie and levitie of people, that they are weary of present government, and even sick for a change, prove the change what it will, 1 Sam. VIII. 5, 18, 19, 20. and XII. 12. 2 Sam. XV. 12, 13. and chap. XX. 2. 1 Kings II. 15. Prov. XXIV. 21. no end of all the people] Infinitely discontented, and restlesse in their desires of change, never contented with their present state. The people put no end or stop to this vanitie, to this their epidemical dis∣ease; but this vanity and vexation passeth on from one generation to
another, that they are thus variously affected towards their Princes in all ages. shall not rejoyce in him] But grow wearie of him, whom now they so zealously affect, and with so much loyaltie adhere unto, and shall wish for another. Surely this] Must needs be a vanitie and vexation to people; but to Princes specialy. Keep thy foot] Having searched and found, That neither humane Wisdome and Knowledge;  nor Pleasures, nor Riches, nor Honours, or Crowns, can make men happy, but are all full of vanitie and vex∣ation; and that it is a thing beyond the sphere and activitie of any creature for to do; He now ascends higher, to search for it in the worship and service of God. And discovers even here much vanity; not in the thing it self; but as it is performed by vaine and foolish men. And therfore for remedy of this, he prescribes sundry Caveats to prevent it: And first this in these words, Keep thy foot: Where the letters are plural, the Points direct to read it in the singular number. That all and every one should look well to his affections and inward man, that all be com∣posed and in a right temper when he goes to worship God, Ps. LVII. 7, 8. and CIII 1. See Exod. III. 5. and chap. XIX. 21. Josh. V. 15. house of God] The Gate of Heaven, Gen. XXVIII. 17. Psal. CXVIII. 20. the beauty of holinesse, Psal. XCVI. 9. This the likeliest place where Felicitie is to be found. But here then our preparation before, and our deportment in this place, must be, as in the Presence of God, looking him full in the face. ready to hear] As Acts X. 33. which includes obedience in it, Psal. LXXXV. 8. Job XXXIV. 32. 1 Sam. III. 10. Acts IX. 6. James I. 19. the sacrifice of fooles] Outward services and ceremonies foolish sin∣ners are apt enough to, to load God with, even to loathing, Esay I. 11, 14. So as their heart and inward man, in spirit and truth, may be free to themselves, and farre enough from God, 1 Sam. XV. 22. that they do evil] In so doing; doubling their iniquity by a seem∣ing sanctitie, Ios. XI. 12. Esay LXVI. 3. nor rash] In prayer to God, Rom. VIII. 26. nor hastie, precipitate, unadvised. for God is in heaven] Job XXVI. 14. Esay LVII. 15. Come thou with all possible reverence, humilitie, and self-abasement, Job XLII. 6. Gen. XVIII. 27. few] Luke XVIII. 13. Matth. XXVI. 39, 42, 44. Against bat∣tologie, Matth. VI. 7. Prov. X. 19. For a dream] Multitude of businesse produceth dreames;  multi∣tude of words, which usualy are rash, hasty, and sudden, produceth fol∣ly; specialy in Prayer to God, chap. X. 14. Vowest] Of vowes, see my Annotations on Jonah I. 16. Better] It is a voluntarie service to vow, Num. XXX. But being lawfully made, must be performed, Deut. XXIII. 21, 22, 23. neither say thou before the Angel] Exod. XXIII. 20, 21. that Angel of the Covenant, Mal. III. 1. Psal. II. 12.
For in the multitude of dreams] Verse 3. Prov. X. 19. As in those are many Vanities, so vaine will thy many words and excuses be, in pleading an erroneous mistake, and extenuating the non-performan∣ces of thy vowes and promises to God. but fear thou God] The true remedy against the former vanities, of rash vowes and prayers, and addresses to God. The fear of God is the foundation of all holy duties. Marvaile not] Be not amazed, or astonished; to doubt of God, or his Providence, or to forsake his service; Many are sorely tempted hereby. for he that is higher] There lies an appeale to an higher Court. And wherein they deale proudly he is above them, Exod. XVIII. 11. Psal. LXXVI. 12. higher then they] Higher here in the plural number, may relate to the holy Trinity or to Angels, by whom God doth punish Princes, E∣say XXXVII. 36. Acts XII. 23. Moreover the profit of the earth] Is for all men, and uses; and above all other profits. the King] 1 Chron. XXVII. 26. 2 Chron. XXVI. 10. Amos VII. 1. The commendation of tillage, and grasing. And this shewes the vani∣ty of earthly felicity, When the highest stands in need of the lowest, to sustaine and support them. Shall not be satisfied with silver] The loving and desiring doth in∣crease with the having. It cannot therefore be mans chiefest good, see∣ing it doth not terminate and satisfie the appetite. They can never say, It is enough; but are like the grave, and barren womb, Prov. XXX. 15, 16. What good?] Little else;  and that is small enough. The sleep] And herein he hath advantage over that great rich man. And this vanity of riches he pursueth in the five verses following. He resumeth in this, and the two next verses his former assertion touching the right use of Riches; And concludeth with it, as he did, chap. II. 24, 25, 26. An evil] Another and another, one still after another, our lives full of them. And yet we vainly dote on this life, which is indeed but a lingring death. common] Usual among all sorts of men; an epidemical evil dis∣ease. God hath given] In way of Providence: as he maketh his Sunne to shine, and raine to fall, on the good and bad. Wanteth nothing] That he can justly and reasonably desire; though indeed this covetous mans desires are bottomlesse and boundlesse; And he wants all things, not having power to make use of any thing. but a stranger] Hos. VII. 9. Jer. V. 17. Lam. V. 2. many years] And many children;  not like him, chap. IV. 8. But filled both with children, and years; and yet not filled with good, with the comfortable use and fruition of his blessings and estate; lives beside it,
is not master of it, but mastered by it. no burial] Deut. XXVIII. 26. Jer. XXII. 19. through enemies; or greedy heirs to such covetous caitifs, and niggardly misers. an untimely birth] An abortive, that comes from birth to burial, from womb to tomb, Matth. XXVI. 24. is better then he] He is in rest; having never had sense or reason, to feel losse or pane, ver. 4, 5. A thousand years] Which never man yet did. yet hath he seene no good] Better then to have beene without those years;  they did but lengthen his misery, Prov. XV. 15. Job XIV. 1. to one place?] The house appointed for all living, Job XXX. 23. Esay L. 11. Thus he findes in the end all to be vanity, and vexation of spirit. For his mouth] For food, and rayment for his body. This is all he can have, of all his worldly labours. And a little of this would suffice him. appetite] Yet that is never filled, it is insatiable, chap. V. 16. nor can be filled with these worldly things, much lesse his soul can: Riches have no suitablenesse with it, no proportion, either in excellency or in duration unto it. Wise more then the foole?] Speaking with relation to wealth, and the event of outward things. These things promiscuously happen to all, without peculiar prerogative to any: and beyond their own natural use they are not able to supply a wise man more then a fool: and the fool may have as much, and as much also of them, as the wise. Better is the sight of the eyes] To enjoy quietly and contentedly what a man hath in present possession;  then to wander and rove up and down in desire and pursuit of what we have not, and cannot hardly attaine; but endlesly weary our selves in hawking and hunting after them, which never will, nor can satisfie. That which hath beene, the name] And nature of it is known already. That which is hoped for hereafter, is yet unknown. That it is man] Man still, earthly Adam, sorry man, be his wealth or greatnesse what it will. And God will make him know himself so to be, Psal. IX. 20. Ezek. XXVIII. 6, 9. Esay II. 22. and XXXI. 3. Contend with] To enter plea against God, or require a reason of his judgements, or strive against this streame, thinking to alter or break through the order & bounds of his Providence or decrees, Esay XLV. 9. Job IX. 2, 3, 12. and IV. 17. and chap. XXXIV. 23. Jer. L. 44. Rom. IX. 20. Seeing there be many things] A solemne conclusion of all the former discoveries of vanities in the Creatures;  averring that first set down, chap. I. 3. which is the maine matter of this Book. What is man the better?] In regard of sound and solid happinesse, for any, or for all the former vanities. For who knoweth] The animal creatures by instinct of nature know what is good for them, to maintaine their being, and well-being; to remedy their maladies. But man knoweth not what is good for him,
What is best for him in this life, as to the things of this life; Whether to be rich or poor, &c. Achitophel might have lived longer with lesse wisdome: Nabal with lesse riches: Herod with lesse pride and praise, &c. God is pleased to shew man the only good, Mic. VI. 8. and Solomon, chap. XII. ver. 13, 14. vaine life] This life it self, a vaine shadow, Psal. CXLIV. 4. and XXXIX. 6. Job XIV. 2. and chap. VIII. 1 Chron. XXIX. 15. What shall be after him] He cannot promise to himself, when he is gone, any satisfactorie content, in name, family, and posterity, no more then he could in his life-time, to himself, chap. II. 18, 19. Nescis quid serus vesper vehat. A good name] Solomon in this Chapter proceeds to many other par∣ticular meanes and remedies for healing the vanities and vexations of this life; and procuring tranquility and peace of minde, in the midst of them. Yet here and there he doth intermix some more vanities and vex∣ations. The first meanes and remedy here is a Good Name. or Fame. The first letter of the Hebrew word for Good, is here greater then or∣dinary; to intimate belike the great and extraordinary goodnesse of a good name. Which is better to a man, to his conscience, and soul, then a precious ointment is to his body. It refresheth, and cheereth, and comforteth the soul and conscience, in the very midst of all wrongs and sufferings; and specially at the hour of death; and remaines fresh af∣ter the body rots in the grave. They leave their names for a blessing, and are had in everlasting remembrance; whereas the memory of the wicked shall rot, Job XVIII. 17. Prov. X. 17. and they leave their names as a curse, and a stinking snuff behinde them, Esay LXV. 15. yea, in this life this fattens the bones, Prov. XV. 30. And procures reve∣rence and esteeme in the consciences of others. And is rather to be cho∣sen then all riches, Prov. XXII. 1. Herein the Hebrew is a Paranoma∣sia of the words  and  And the same is in Cant. I. 3. and the day of death] To such a man of a good name: or to any man, relation being had to the many vanities and vexations of this life, Job XIV. 1. Life begins with crying: 2 Nondum loquitur infans, & tamen sic prophetat. And Lawyers define life by crying, without which they are counted still-borne. 3 Now that day that delivers a man from them, is better then that which lets in, and puts a man in possession of them. Which makes Solomon here prefer his coffin before his cradle. to the house of mourning] So wise men do, And fools they are that do the contrary, verse 4. This is better for the living, as the former for the dead. for this is the end of all men] Here is the reason, men will so fall into deep and due consideration of their own dying life, as Job XXX. 33. Psal. XXXIX. 4, 5. and XC. 12. that life is but to lie a dying, and so be weined from the vaine jollities of this life, and wrought to humi∣liation, mortification, and preparation for a better life. From which, Feasting calls us off. See Josh. XXIII. 14. Heb. IX. 2. And againe, Amos VI. 3,—6. Deut. VIII. 12,—14. Esay XXII. 12, 13, 14. and chap. V. 12.
Sorrow is better] James IV. 9 Luke VI. 21. 25. Matth. V. 4. yet this is a Paradox to the world, which is alwayes set upon the merry pin, to be as merry Greeks: to eat and drink, and laugh, and play, and la∣bours to banish all sorrow away, as the bane of their life. sadnesse of the countenance] In our selves, by grave thoughts, and sad and serious meditations and considerations: or, of a sower and se∣vere, yet sure friend. the heart is made better] The better part is bettered: the inward man is amended; by abandoning those loose noisome and destructive vanities and jollities of laughter; and of penitential humiliation, com∣punction, contrition, of mortality, death & judgment. These sorrowful tears have much joy in them, they wash away the filth of sin; & as sweet April showers they bring on amaine the May-flowers of Grace, and Glorie. And therefore, where ever the body is, upon several occasi∣ons, yet the heart of the wise is here, he numbereth the dayes of his life, and the dayes of darknesse, Psal. XC. 12. Eccles. XI. 8. And where ever the body is, yet the heart of fooles is on effuse mirth, runs a mad∣ding; the way to rejoyce in a thing of nought, Amos VI. 13. is on foolish follies, in the filth and froth whereof is bred and fed that woful worme that never dies, Job XXI. 12, 13. Yet their laughter is indeed but the hypocrisie of mirth, as the crackling of thornes under a pot, a sudden blaze soone gone, as sudden lightning, which yet is followed with the rending and roaring of thunder-claps, Luke VI. 25. Psalme CXVIII. 12. The rebuke of the wise] Prov. XIII. 18. and chap. XV. 31, 32.—ch. XXVII. 6. Psal CXLI. 5. An enemie in this case many times proves a good and useful Informer, though a bad Judge. Crackling of thornes] Psal. LVIII. 9. Ovid. Trist. l. 5. Elog. 8. Flam∣máque de stipula nostra, brevisque fuit. Prov. XIV. 13. Surely oppression] Chap. IV. 1. and chap. V. 8. Deut. XXVIII. 29, 33. Psal. CXIX. 134. Jer. VI. 6. and chap. XXII. 17. Ezek. XXII. 29. maketh a wise man mad] To see it in the world upon others; to un∣dergo it himself. No man is so wise, but he is sometimes over-borne with passions and rage, and indignation. a gift] Job XV. 34. Psal. XXVI. 10. Prov. XVII. 23. and the Observations upon it. Deut. XVI. 19. Exod. XXIII. 8. Better is the end] This maxime holds in many things;  where the beginning is difficult, the end sweet. James V. 11. Psal. XXXVII. 37. Many graces run in the race of a Christian course: only perseve∣rance to the end gaineth the prize, crownes the enterprize and action, Matth. X. 22. Heb. III. 6. Apoc. II. 10, 26. Many seeme to set out for heaven with much eagernesse; as Orpah from Moab; but returne back; put their hand to the plough, but after look back, as Lots wife; run well, but after fall off, Gal. V. 7. leave their first love, A∣poc. II. 4. begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh. But better they had never known the way of righteousnesse, &c. 2 Pet. II. 20, 21. Heb. X. 26. 27, 38, 39. Some here understand the end of angry conten∣tion.
For so the Hebrew word sometimes signifies, as Prov. XVII. 9. And so the sense wil best agree with that which followeth. the paient] Prov. XIV. 29. and XV. 18. 1 Thes. V. 14. James V. 7, 8, 11. Heb. XII. 1. And patient therefore under oppression, waiting on God till he bring both ends together, not looking only on present face of things; but hoping and expecting that they which sowe in reares, may reap in joy, Psal. LXXIII. 17, 18. Esay X. 12, 24, 25, 26. 2 Sam XVI. 11, 12. Habak. II. v. 3, . the proud in spirit] Exod. V. 2. Prov. XIII. 10. angry] Psal. XXXVII. 8. Anger is an evil counsellor, hasty to pre∣vent reason. The angry man is like him that casteth firebrands, like that demoniak, Marke II. 3. Prov. XIV. 17. and XVI. 32. resteth] It may rush in and be as a passinger, for a while, for a fit; in a wise man, as in David, 1 Sam. XXV. 21, 22. and in the Disciples, Luke IX. 54, 55. But it resteth, remaineth, lodgeth, as an inmate a∣bideth, domineereth only in the bosome and breast of fools, is there as in its proper place. Yet in some cases anger is just, and a dutie, Ephes. IV. 26. Mark III. 5. But the sunne must never go down upon our wrath. We must not then hastily be angry, as to murmur at Gods Providence, when things go not as we could wish, when we see Op∣pression prevailing, Psal. XXXVII. 1 Prov. XXIII. 17, 18. and XXIV. 19. We must be slow to anger, James I. 19, 20. Prov. XIX. 11. and chap. XV. 18. Tit. I. 7. That the former dayes] And yet this hath been a continual com∣plaint in all dayes and ages;  and specialy by them that would be thought wise and good, Matth. XXIII. 30. And yet the dayes are the worse because these men themselves are no better, Acts VII. 51. Truth is, some dayes and ages are worse then others: And we should be sen∣sible of, and sorry for the evil of our dayes; yet not be unmindful of the good things of our present dayes that we do enjoy; much lesse re∣pine at Gods Providence in the ordering of the times; a thing we are too prone to, and the thing here checked: but our wisdome should be to leave Gods work to himself; and for us to serve God in our genera∣tion, and walk with God, as Noah did in the worst of times; every one to amend one, and so the dayes would be better, Ephes. V. 15, 16. Wisdome] Good without it;  but better with it, Prov. XIV. 24. and such to Gods glory, and the good of himself and others, Prov. III. 9. Luke XVI. 9. 1 Tim. VI. 11, 18, 19. The poor mans wisdome is oft despised, chap. IX. 15, 16. A defence] Both, good and useful: But Wisdome the more excel∣lent, Job XXVIII. 15. Prov. VIII. and XVI. 16. giveth life] Prov. III. 16. and IX. 11. Whereas riches cannot, Psal. XLIX. 6,—9. but sometimes taketh away the life of the owners thereof, Prov. I. 19. Consider the work of God] See, view, and ponder the work of God, his over-ruling hand and Providence in all the affairs of the world. When thou art apt to complaine of the times, and oppressions therein,
and the crooked courses and crosses thereof, look up above the crea∣tures, and all second causes, and acknowledge and acquiesce in Gods wisdome and justice, infinite above ours, who would not suffer or per∣mit such things to prevaile, if he were not so wise and powerful as to bring good out of evil, light out of darknesse, order out of confusion, and to make all serve unto his own glory. He can use crooked tooles to make streight work. And we cannot set things streight, or make the man streight that is borne crooked, we cannot amend things amisse, nor rectifie what he hath made crooked, Job XXXIV. 12. His pur∣poses must stand, and cannot be altered or resisted, Esay XIV. 24, 27. Job IX. 12. This consideration wrought upon Aaron, Levit. X. 3. up∣on Eli, 1 Sam. III. 18. upon David, 2. Sam. XV. 26. Iohn XVIII. 11. See Iob IX. 4. we must make our own burden lighter by our patient bearing it. In the day of prosperity] Enjoy it, with a chearful and thankful heart: and be mindful that the more wages requires the more work. but in the day of adversity consider] God intermingles both, like checker-work. As the Physician ministers sometimes Corrasives, some∣times Cordials, sometimes lets blood, even to swooning, sometimes useth Restoratives. We should consider this, Lam. III. 28. 33, 40. Heb. XII. 3,—12. Mic. VI. 9. Psal. XCIV. 12. hath set the one] That we should not either surfet in prosperity, or despond in adversity, Lam. III. 38. Esay XLV. 7. finde nothing after him] What shall after befal him; whether pro∣sperity or adversity: or nothing better for him, and his advantage, then what God hath ordered and done. All things have I seene] He confirmeth the former point of Gods dark and wonderful Providence, as aforesaid, by his own observation and experience in his life-time, Esay XLV. 15. There is a just man] As Abel, Zacharias, Naboth, Stephen, and Mar∣tyrs all, Matth. V. 10. Hab. I. 13. See 2 Kings XXII. 20. Esay LVII. 1. a wicked man] Job XXI. 7. Jer. XII. 1, 2. This is a sore stum∣bling block even to good and wise men. But it should teach them, and all, That there is a just and righteous day of doome to come, Acts XVII. 31. Rom. II. 5. And if wicked men live long, thereby they ag∣gravate their sinne; and God so shewes his patience; and makes their judgement the more heavie, and to appear the more conspicuous. Be not righteous over-much] Not in it self, and in truth; but in thine own conceit; we must moderate our zeale with prudence, Matth. X. 16. not make our selves over-wise, to do a thing conscienciously, scru∣pulously, upon opinion of dutie, when indeed there was no necessity so to do; and so to make sinne where God hath made none. And thus all will-worshippers are all over-religious, over-wise, or over-weening, too too well conceited of their own religion, wisdome and worth. See Rom XI. 20. destroy thy self] By the former means involve thy self in much unne∣cessary trouble and danger; which otherwise thou mightest and would∣est fairly avoid.
over-much wicked] Not allowing any degree of wickednesse. But cautioning most against the most excessive ranck, the superfluity of naughtinesse, James I. 21. When we run to the excesse of riot in sinne, 1 Pet. IV. 4. And being past feeling, give our selves over to it, to work it with greedinesse, Ephes. IV. 19. doing wickedly with both hands earnestly, Mic. VII. 3. Jer. VIII. 6. before thy time] Wasting thy body by such sinning; or exposing thy self to the stroak of humane justice; or divine extraordinary ven∣geance upon such exorbitant outragious sinners. Take hold of this] That thou be not over-much wicked. And from this, That thou be not righteous over-much. But hold the golden mean, and mediocrity, keep constantly to duty, not turning aside to the right hand, or to the left, and yet wisely declining danger. For those that turne aside to crooked wayes, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, Psal. CXXV. 5. as malefactors to execution. When he that feareth God shall come forth of them all, those dangers all that extremes do usualy bring men to; be freed, or pulled as a fire∣brand out of the fire, Zech. III. 2. Psal. XXXIV. 9,—16. Wisdome strengtheneth] Chap. IX. 14, 16. Prov. III. 21,—26. and Chap. XXI. 22. and XXIV. 5. Thus prudence excelleth pussance, 2 Sam. XX. 16,—22. Cedant arma togae. Not a just man] This is reserved for the state of Perfection in Heaven, Heb. XII. 23. Here we sinne, yea even in doing of good; our best actions, even in holy duties, are stained with imperfections and corruptions, come short of what God by vertue of our creation, and his most righteous Law doth most justly require at our hands. Our whole hearts and souls now though we give them to God, yet are not those but much unlike those which God at first gave us. Pelagians and Papists are proud Justiciaries, Prov. XX. 9. 1 Kings VIII. 46. James III. 2. 1 John I. 8. Nemo semper sapit. No heed unto all words] That are spoken of thee, and against thee: heed not to know them all; or knowing all, lay them not to heart, to disquiet thee, or revenge them. In a brave composednesse, with silence and patience set thy self above the reach and trouble of them: yet so, as thou be not wanting to the clearing of thy good name. See 1 Sam. XXV. 25. and X. 27. Prov. XIX. 11. 2 Sam. XVI. 10, 11. lest thou hear] Though they lest should, 1 Pet. II. 18. yet some∣times it falls out so, Job XXXI. 31. Yea, the abjects teared Davids name, and ceased not, Psal. XXXV. 15. Yet see Jobs minde and mo∣deration in this case, chap. XXXI. 13, 14, 15. Thy own heart] The power of conscience, the conscience of our own guiltinesse should meeken us towards others that do amisse, Gal. VI. 1, 2. Tit. III. 2, 3. Matth. VII. 1,—5. I will bewise] Solomon had many extraordinary means, and used all endeavours to get and increase in wisdome; yet after all that, he found it farre from him, and he farre fromit. It surpasseth the sublimest un∣derstanding
of man Job XXVIII. 12,—21. and chap. XXXVIII. Rom. XI. 33, 34. Exceeding deep] As what not? even in things Natural, and the works of creation; much more profound, abstruse, mysterious, and mystical in things supernatural in Gods works of Providence, and mans Redemption, 1 Pet. I. 12 Iob XI. 6,—10. Psal. CXXXIX. 6. This the cause why he was so farre from Wisdome. And to know the wickednesse of folly] The vast, and deep, and des∣perate corruption of mans heart; yea, the sinfulnesse of sin, Rom. VII. 13. For Contraries do best set off, and illustrate the one the other. And this he did, that he might the better anatomize and dissect both wisdome and wickednesse to his own conscience, and to the consci∣ences of others. See 1 Cor. XIV. 24. 25. Ezek. XIV. 5. The woman whose heart is snares] One instance of his discoverie;  a bitter sweet, Prov V. 4. & II. 16. & VI. 26. IX. 17. This Solomon found most woful experience; and here penitently proclaims it. her bands as bands] So Dalilah to Samson. So Prov. XVII. 22. escape-from her] As Ioseph did; not by his own strength, but the supernatural power of Gods grace. See Prov. V. 8. but the sinner] Prov. XXII, 14. II. 19. Her steps take hold of hell, Prov. V. 5. and IX. 11. This] Mentioned, ver. 26. and 28. one by one] In his diligent search. Among all those] Thousand, 1 Kings XI. 3. Yet most evidently, many good women there have been, and are. But in respect of the discovery of hearts and natures, whether in good or evil, it is harder to finde out throughly the perfect disposition of a woman, and their deep sleights, then of men. For whoredome taketh away the heart of a man, Hos. IV. 11. Prov. V. 6. and chap. VII. 21, 22. That God hath made man upright] In his creation, Gen. I. 27. Ephes. IV. 27. but they] Here he discovers the Original and fountain of all these evils and follies, not to be from God; but from themselves, and their Fall in Adam. So that man now is of another make; whole evil is in man, and whole man is in evil. Sought out] B Satans guiles, and their own deceived hearts. many inventions] Many, and mighty; to be like to Angels, to God, Gen. III. 5, 22 many shifts to palliate their sins, and sinful courses. Who is as the wise man] None like him, a matchlesse man, such as Abraham, Joseph, Job, Moses, Gen. XXIII. 6. and chap. XLI. 38. Job I. 8. Num. XII. 7. as those excellent ones of the earth, Psal. XVI. 3. the Worthies of the world, Heb. XI. 5. and who knoweth] Such are rare, one of a thousand. the interpretation of a thing?] Rightly to discerne in all affairs, what in every case is to be done or left undone. face to shine] As did the face of Moses, of Stephen. The wisdome of Piety is reverend and venerable. Natural Conscience cannot but
stoop and do obeysance to it. Some thus; A mans wisdome shines in his face. and the boldnesse] Shall be changed to the better, shall be doubled; as bold as a Lion, Prov. XXVIII. 1. Dan. III. 16, 17, 18. Psal. III. 6. and XXVII. 3. and XLVI. 3. Job XI. 15. Luke XXI. 28. Prov. IV. 18. Some thus, And wisdome will change the boldnesse of his face to more modesty. The Kings commandment] Obedience in the Lord, and for the Lord, Acts V. 29. the oath of God] Whereby thou hast sworne allegeance to thy Prince, 1 Pet. II. 13. See Ezek. XVII. 15,—21. So as this is both a limi∣tation, and an enforcement of this duty. Papists can slight this oath; And some other too. to go out of his sight] Turne not thy back to him discontentedly; fling not away in a chafe. But forbear and submit, Prov. XXV. 15. and chap. XXX. 32. If thou hast offended him, provoke him not more, by persisting in it. What dost thou?] Prov. XXX. 31. Job XXXIV. 18. Yet he may be admonished, and altered, as 1 Sam. XIV. 45. as Elias, Micaiah, Na∣than, and other Prophets did, he is not absolute, as God is, Job IX. 12. And as the Pope would be, as the Canonists make him. Whatsoever pleaseth him] Such was their power, specialy in the Eastern Empires. the Commandment] Of God, and the King. shall feele] Know experimentaly. no evil] No danger of punishment, ver. 3. But being morigerous, and obedient, shall finde good, and encouragement rather, Rom. XIII. 3, 4. Ephes. VI. 8. 1 Tim. II. 2. a wise mans heart] Yeelds not blinde obedience; But discernes when; and how, both the season, and the meanes and manner of obey∣ing; so to apply himself to the King, as to prevent his displeasure, to gaine his favour; and yet to preserve his conscience and allegeance to the King of Kings. See 1 Chron. XII. 32. time] A well chosen season, which is the greatest advantage to a∣ny enterprize and action, Prov. XV. 23. Amos V. 13. Acts XXII. 25, —29. and chap. XXIII. 6, 7. miserie of man] Is great, for not knowing and observing that point of time, that proper season to every action; as the next verse expres∣seth. For he knoweth not] Jer. VIII. 7. Luke XIX. 42, 44. Man cannot foresee, to prevent the miserie. He is in the dark in regard of future e∣vents; He cannot so much as fore-appoint his own actions for the fu∣ture, much lesse foresee the consequences & issues which would follow thereupon. Prov. XXVII. 1. James IV. 14. Therefore his misery is great upon him, not knowing that point of time and exact season on∣ly fit for transacting and dispatching his great affairs, which way is but one; And he so having a thousand wayes to misse the mark, and but
one to hit it. Difficult then is this; though not alwayes altogether impossible, Prov. XXII. 3. and XXVII. 12. Power over the spirit] To retaine breath and life, to keep it from going away, to prolong it, or to adjourne and proroge death, Psalme XLIX. 7,—10. Heb. IX. 27. no man, no King can do it. The syth of death mowes down as well the Lilies of the Crowne, as the grasse of the field. no discharge in that warre] No weapon againstit, no dismission from it, no vacation, or exauctoration. Some apply this verse to the power of a King over the life of a man; and that there is no power in a man to withstand it and escape it, Prov. XVI. 14. neither shall wickednesse] Sinfull shifts avoid it; though they turne every way, move every stone, make a Covenant with death and hell, Esay XXVIII. 15, 18. Ruleth over another to his own hurt] Through his tyrannical rule, and evil government he comes to hurt, punishment and destruction, Esay X. 12. and chap. XIV. 4. 23. 1 Kings XV. 30. Thus he proceeds to another vanity, verse 10. The wicked buried] Such wicked Rulers buried magnificently. who had come and gone] In the administration of Government, as the phrase elsewhere is, to go in and out, Numb. XXVII. 17. from the place of the holy] Seat of judicature: Where the Holy one sits among the Judges and Rulers, as Lord Paramount. were forgotten] Their names perished, even in the places where they had so domineered, and been flattered, and been buried, Psalme XXXVII. 9, 10, 35, 36. Prov. X. 7. Because sentence] Psal. XXXVII. and Psal. LXXIII. God is pati∣ent, willing men should repent, 2 Pet. II. 9. Rom. II. 4. Esay XLVIII. 2. But men abuse this patience of God unto presumption, Fsay V. 19. Ier. XVII. 15. 2. Pet. III. 4. Matth. XXIV. 48, 49. Ezek. XII. 22. therefore the heart] Therefore wicked Rulers go on more boldly, and other wicked men abuse this patience of God unto presumption. But yet Gods forbearance is no acquittance. If he be slow, yet he is sure; the deeper he draweth his arrow, the soarer it woundeth; his delay abused doubles the blow when it cometh. Though a sinner] Yea though he commit the same sinne an hundred times over. and his dayes be prolonged] In prosperity, and his punishment be delayed. yet surely I know] Here he answereth that Tentation, whereby the godly are offended, and the wicked hardened. well with them] Psal. LXXIII. 1. Esay III. 10. He inverts the or∣der, to begin with the remuneration of good men, to strengthen their faith, and comfort them against this tentation, that they may neither fret nor murmur; but go on to hold fast their integrity. not be well with the wicked] But very ill, Esay III. 11. Num XXXII. 23. Psal. XI. 6. Nay even his prosperity shall slay him; and this Sun∣shine ripen them to ruine.
Neither shall he prolong his dayes] Unlesse it be for a curse. And all that while living, he is truly dead; dead in sinne, dead in Law, Mat. VIII. 22. 1 Tim. V. 6. Col. II. 13. Luke XV. 24. Rom. VII. 9. Ephes. II. 5, 7. That there be just men] This vanitie and vexation he doth more then once insist upon. It hath gravelled great Divines, and Heathen wise moral men. But all this is done, and falls out here upon the earth; as it is in the words of the Text. The wicked live in pleasure, and re∣ceive their good things here, James V. 5. Luke XVI. 25. And the godly receive their rods; Physick and Surgery here. Yet this Solomon speak∣eth, not to censure the Providence of God, in this distribution of things, but according to judgment of flesh and blood; and thereby to shew the vanity of these earthly things; using an argument against them, like to that argument used against Idolatry, Deut. IV. 19. Then I commended mirth] Some make this a sensual and carnal de∣duction from the former passage and observation. But it seemes ra∣ther to accord with that sense formerly expressed, chap. II. 24. and III. 12, 13, 22. and V. 18. That is all that can be reaped from all our labours in earthly things. And that will make our comforts to be much more comfortable; and our troubles to be farre lesse trouble∣some. Whereas the contrary puts us under the reigne of continual unthankfulnesse, and indisposeth us to all duties of active and passive obedience, takes off the wheeles of the soul, makes it as a limb out of joynt, that can do nothing without paine and deformity. Dead flies] As one sinner, in the precedent words; so here one sin destroyes much good. Alike folly doth fly-blow a wise mans re∣putation, Neh. VI. 11. heart is at his right hand] As his eyes are in his head, chap. II. 14. He ordereth his affairs with discretion; he acts dexterously and dis∣creetly with mature advise and judgement; he worketh by the gui∣dance of his heart, Luke XIV. 28, 31. But a fools heart] He is left-handed in his works and wayes; doth them rashly, awkwardly, bunglingly, preposterously, As 1 Kings XII. 8. Esay XIX. 10,—14. walketh by the way] He doth palpably discover to others, and pro∣claime, That he is a fool, Prov. VI. 13 and chap. XII. 23. and XIII. 16. and XVIII. 2. See Prov. XVII. 28. Leave not thy place] Thy office, duty and obedience to him. A soul∣dier must stand to his station, ch. VIII. 3. proudly fling not away in dis∣pleasure; much lesse, stand not to affront him; turne not, rise not up against him, as 1 Kings XII. 16. seek to pacifie him, Prov. XV. 1. and if need be, go a little aside out of his sight, till his rage, and thy danger be over-past. See Judges VIII. 1, 2, 3. Gen. XXXII. 13. and XXXIII. 3. 1 Sam. XXIV. 16. and chap. XXV. 32. Prov. XXV. 15 as an error] Haply by the erring information of others;  seeing Rulers must needs see much with other mens eyes, and hear much by other mens ears. And yet this error may prove a great mischief, to Church, and State.
and the rich] In worth, and wisdome. Dignity ought to wait up∣on Desert; though it alwayes doth not. For Rulers sometimes grow into suspition of such as eminently excel in extraordinary worth. Servants upon horses] Men of a low, base, servile condition. And how insupportable this is, see Prov. XXX. 22. and how unseemly, see Prov. XIX. 10. It is a curse of God, Deut. XXVIII. 43. 44. Gen. IX. 25, 26. Lamented, Lam. V. 8. Yet the Levellers would be at this, to lay all alike: As in Germany, in Anno 1525. But the issue of that at∣tempt was to themselves deservedly miserable. He that diggeth a pit] This, and the three following Proverbial si∣militudes tend all to this end, That evil usualy returneth on the heads of those that were the authors of it. Malum consilium consultori pessi∣mum, Prov. XXVI. 27. and XXVIII. 10. Psal. VII. 16. and IX. 15. In application; against such as overturne the foundations of Lawes, and Customes; and alter the long established and wholsome consti∣tutions of Kingdomes, Nations, and people; and confound Rule and Subjection, and dissolve the ligaments of Government, Prov. XXVI. 27. Who so removeth stones, &c.] Besides the general sense of the words, application of them may be made against those who remove land-marks; or rashly alter things seriously setled, and duly defined; and so do sowe seditions, and raise factions. If the iron be blunt] Wisdome directeth to whet the edge;  to save the putting to of more strength; And so wisdome is better then strength chap. IX. 16. It guideth a mans actions without so much toile and labour, and a better end: without it, and Art and cunning by it, strength, and toile, and eloquence, or ought else is to small purpose. The Serpent will bite] If not charmed before. And after the biting, the Master of the tongue or eloquent man, cannot help or better the matter. The meaning may be, to compare the spirit of disloyalty a∣gainst Rulers, and rebellious speeches against them, to the biting of a Serpent: And the wise and humble speeches and demeanor of sub∣jects to their offended Governours, to an inchantment to keep them from biting. Or, to shew that a vaine babler, whose lawlesse tongue is ever finding fault with Government is no better then an uncharm∣ed Serpent. It may be applied against any Sycophants and Slanderers whatsoever. Or to those who bite and babble at the Traditions of the wise. The words] Ephes. IV. 29. Col. IV. 6. Prov. X. 32. and XII. 13. and XV. 1, 2. 4, 26. and XVI. 23, 24. Such were Abigaels to David, swallow up himself] Prov. XIX. 28. and XII. 13. Rom. III. 13. James III. 2,—12. Psal. LII. 3. Many men by their tongue have cut their own throats. is full of words] Multiplyeth boasting discourses, vainly tells his own undertakings, brags what he will do, and what he shall have. cannot tell what shall be] No man, much lesse a fool, can tell this to himself.
wearieth every one] By his wordinesse, and much idle vaine babling without any solid and sound matter;  as empty casks sound loudest, chap. V. 3, 7. Prov. X. 19. and XVII. 17, 27. how to go to the citie] He tires himself in trifles, being not able to manage the least matters, and easie for children; having not wit e∣nough to keep the high road, to know the beaten path to the Citie. And yet he will foolishly labour and weary himself about hard and dif∣ficult matters. Wo to thee O land] Esay III. 4. A child in years, For Tutors and Protectors have mostwhat self-ends, and deal not fairly and faithfully, or jarre among themselves. Thus it was in Rome after the death of Ancus Martius: and in the Romane Empire in the times of Arcadius and Honorius. Yet the Land was blessed and happy under young So∣lomon, Josiah, Uzziah, our Edward the VI. and others, for the parts and graces wherewith God endowed them. Or else a child in under∣standing and parts, rude and raw, without experience, discretion and a∣bilities for so weighty an imployment, of a childish disposition for wit, courage, carriage, this, though not a childe in years. And such was Rehoboam, 1 Kings XIV. 21. with 2 Chron. XIII. 7. In a word, a worthlesse and wicked King is a Woe to the whole Land; and a great argument of Gods anger against it, 1 Sam. VIII. 6,—18. Job XXXIV. 30. Prov. XXVIII. 2. Esay XIX. 4. eate in the morning] Are riotous, and luxurious, unseasonably fea∣sting. Sonne of Nobles] Nobly borne, The ancient splendor of a royal stock and descent addes much honour to a King, Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum virtus. And much more when he is nobly bred up, nobly seasoned with principles of true nobility, wisdom, & holinesse, honour and government; without which, nobility in blood and birth, are but shapes and shadows of true noblenesse. Though never so much noble blood run in the veins, yet worthlesnesse and wickednesse remaining in the heart, rendereth it ignoble. sloathfulnesse] See the Observations on Prov. VI. 6. Here it seems applyable to a sluggish, childish, carelesse government of a Kingdome or Common-wealth. A feast] Feasting and wine have their mirthful use. But money answereth all things, doth supply and minister the former; yea, and hath the dominion in humane affairs above all other things: money is the measure of all things, buyeth all things. Money is the sinewes of warre; beares the masterie, in matches, and marriages, and Law-suits; effecteth all things. Curse not the King] Notwithstanding his errours in government, or miscarriages in living, or wrongs done to thee, Exod. XXII. 28. 2 Pet. II. 10. no not in thy thought] Or conscience, or heart. Thought is not free. Jer. IV. 14. Esay LIX. 7. Psal. LXII. 4. It will likely break forth. for a bird of the aire] The danger if thou mutter it in hugger-mug∣ger,
God can reveale it by brute creatures; birds, and beasts; by inani∣mate creatures. See Gen. IV. 11. Esay XXVI. 21. Hab. II. 11. As Luke XIX. 40. So in this case. However, Kings themselves have long eares. Yea, we say, walls, and hedges have ears. See that Ester II. 22. And consider the discovery of our hellish Powder-plot. Cast thy bread] It must be thine, well gotten, Ephes. IV. 28. upon the waters] Where it may seeme clearly cast away, as if it were throwne into the Sea: lost, because the poor cannot recompence thee againe, Luke XIV. 12, 13, 14. Yet lend in that manner, looking for nothing againe, Luke VI. 35. God will repay it, Prov. XIX. 17. Esay LVIII. 7. Yet some by water here do understand moist and fer∣til soile; well watered, or grounds on the sides of waters, such as on the banks of Nilus, which yeeld increase very abundantly: And, that so plen¦tifully God will reward thy almes to the poor. In the former Chapter, as the Great Annotations do well observe, Solomon shewed the excel∣lent use of true wisdome, as a means of tranquility of minde, and Re∣medy against the vanity and vexation of outward things, in Ordering our behaviour aright toward Superiours, for prevention of those dan∣gers which their displeasure might subject us unto. In this Chapter he further discovereth the use thereof, unto the same end of comfor∣table living; so still pursuing his principal argument touching tran∣quility and comfort of life, in Ordering our behaviour towards Infe∣riours, those especially that are in want. shalt finde it after] Gal. VI. 9. Prov. XI. 25. and XIX. 17. James V. 7. 2 Cor. IX. 6,—10. Matth. XIX. 21. Deut. XV. 9, 10. to seven, and also to eight] Micah V. 5. To many: as waters for∣merly, in the plural number, may likewise intimate. The necessity of a man may require it, when his person doth not deserve it. And thy ability must guide thee to Give with discretion, Psal. CXII. 5. Luke VI. 30. Prov. XXXI. 20. thou knowest not what evil] Therefore sowe whilest thou hast it: work while the toole is in thy hand, James IV. 14. Prov. XXVII. 1. By bounty evil of punishments and judgements is prevented: by un∣mercifulnesse to the poor, it is procured. If the clouds] They emptie themselves in showers for the good of the earth. So should rich men do, Psal. CXII. 9. And the showers fal up∣on all the ground, this as well as that. And so should the full and rich, not too solicitously enquire who it is to whom they give; He is a man, and needie man. and if the tree fall] Fall it must; and man must die. And as death leaves him, judgement findes him; and sentence goes upon him, for the right hand, or the left, according to his carriage towards the poor, Matth. XXV. 33,—46. Or, This seemes a vulgar Proverb touch∣ing things of small concerment, care, or choise. And to imply that our ordinarie almes should fall upon any, this or that poor, and be distributed as it were with a blinde hand, or hood-winkt eye, with∣out any over-curious choise.
He that observeth the winde] We must not stand scrupling and ca∣sting perils and objections and pretences to hinder or delay our Alms-giving; and come with our Talent tied up in a napkin. Whereas any pertext serves the covetous miser, not to give. What is the way of the Spirit] Of the winde, say some, John III. 8. Of the Soul rather how it comes into the body, and quickens it. Nor how the bones] Psal. CXXXIX. 14, 15, 16. Job X. 8,—13. Knowest not the works of God] The works of his Providence; how he may dispose of thy life, and state, and ability of doing good: And therefore thou must take the present season and opportunity, and not delay and defer it lest the Lord haply will put thee out of all capacitie and meanes to do it. Neither knowest thou by what secret and won∣drous wayes he may recompence thy liberality. In the morning] At all times, upon every occasion and opportuni∣ty, chap. IX. 10. John IX. 4 Begin betimes, and continue to the end, lose not a day. Whether shall prosper) Though sometimes thy bounty prove mis∣placed; and it be ten to one if any cured Leper returne to give thanks; yet thy reward is sure from God, Heb. VI. 10. Matth. X. 41, 42. 1 Kings XVII. 13,—16. The light is sweet] The light of life, as appears in the opposition, verse 8. And specialy a lightsome joyful life is such, Job II. 4. 1 Kings XX. 32. Esther VII. 3. Life was given as a prey and reward to Ebed∣melech and Baruc, Jer. XXXIX. 18. and XLV. 5. Yet consider it will end in death; dayes of darknesse will come. Therefore unto compleat happinesse there is yet more to be done; not only to gaine and se∣cure the comforts of this life, and tranquility of minde here amidst all the vanities and vexations of it; In which search and point Solomon had hitherto laboured; But also to get the assurance of a better life after this; which is the businesse of Solomon in the remaining part of this Book. But if a man live] And sit in the worlds warme Sun-shine, and say he shall never be moved, Job XXI. 7,—13. yet let him remember] That the light will be turned into darknesse, the dark dayes will come of old age and death, chap. VI. 4. Job X. 21. Psal. VIII. 12, 13. and CXLIII. 3. and they so many, as that the light∣some days of life will seeme but a warm gleame, a momentanie glance; which remembrance should coole our hot desires after the vanites of this life, and lay our lusts a bleeding and a dying at our feet, 1 Pet. II. 12. All that cometh, every man, every thing that hapneth, is vanity. Rejoyce O young man] No encouragement;  but a scoff and ironie, derides his folly, Like that of Elias to the Baalites; and many more in Scripture. and walk in the wayes] Go on in the choise and chase of thy hearts desires. But know thou] To thy cost, though such would faine baffle their knowledge, and blinde the eye of their understanding; yet it will not
be. As Esay XXVI. 11. 1 King. XXII. 25. 2 Pet. III. 5. that for all these things] This mars the mirth; leavens all; is sowre sauce to his sweet meats. God will bring thee] Whether thou wilt, or no, when thou shalt in vaine call to rocks to hide thee. into judgement] If not in this life; yet at thy death, thy doomes∣day; and at the judgement of the great day, Jude 6. called The ter∣ror of the Lord, 2 Cor. V. 10. Acts XVII 30. See Esay XXVIII. 17. Therefore remove sorrow] Sinne, which is the true cause of sorrow, as the end will prove, Prov. XIV. 13. and the true cause of Gods in∣dignation. Or, particularly this sinne of thy indignation, and all inor∣dinate passions, thy swelling and storming at the will and wayes of God, or at any serious advice given thee. . Remember] 1. Chron. XXVIII. 9. Prov. XXIII. 17. thy Creator.] Heb. Creators, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost. So God my Makers, Job XXXV. 10. The Makers of Israel, Psal. CXLIX. 1. thy Makers is thy husbands, Esay LIV. 5. Gods created, Gen. I. 1. youth] Youth is slippery, prone to lusts and sensual pleasures, apt to put off the evil day farre from them, to look on death and judge∣ment as at a great distance; as evil men use to do, Ezek. XII. 27. Amos VI. 3. 2 Pet. III. 3, 4. Solomon here calls on them to remember them∣selves better, to minde God in the Spring of their age, to present the first-fruits to God, as young Samuel, Jeremy, and Timothy did; and not to leave and reserve the dregs and snuffs to God. while the evil dayes] Old age is very unfit to begin so great a work in. Old age will bring evils enough of its own besides. While the Sunne] Before the sight of thine eyes grow dimme. Or, before thy most delightful and pleasant things begin to grow unwel∣come, unpleasant to thee. The darknesse of lights about them, as of the Sun, candles, torches, &c. Whence we need Spectacles. Returning of the clouds after the raine, alludes to the winterly state of old age. In summer after raine, the clouds break up, and fair weather comes. Not so in winter. So in youth—Not so in old age— nor the clouds return] One grief comes upon the neck of another, as the billows of the sea wallow and tumble upon the back one of ano∣ther. A proverbial speech, as Psal. XLII. 7. the Keepers of the house] The hands and armes. Some here take in the head, and ribs, and outward senses, and inward faculties; but not so properly. strong men] Thighs and legs. Here some take in the feet. Grinders] The teeth. They come not with us into the world. And they commonly leave old men before they go out of the world. look out of the windows] The eyes: out of the eye-lids. darkened] A further degree of dimnesse then that, ver. 2.
And the doores] Old men shall shut the street-dooers, shall stay within doores, because the weaknesse of their appetite, and digestion, when the sound of the grinding with the teeth was low, and doth cause them to eat little, and so weakens their bodies, to stir abroad. Others, by streets here understand those Pipes and passages, which are for the meat to go down to the stomach; and for the breath and aire to go down to the lungs; which passages have doores and covers, which open, and shut: And these being weakened in old age, breed weaknesse of the body, and difficulty of swallowing, and of speaking. Those which stretch the words to the Hearing; or to the eye-lids; or to all the senses, seeme to misse most of the true meaning. doores] Lips. When for want of teeth, the meat is rolled and ra∣velled in the mouth, and hath need of shut lips to keep it from falling out of the mouth. at the voice of the bird] Shall wake out of sleep at every little noise, through the badnesse of sleeping: and wearines to lie long in bed, by reason of little ease, and much paine and akings. daughters of musik] That we can neither sing our selves; nor be delighted with the musik of others, 2 Sam. XIX. 34, 35. afraid of that which is high] To go up it, being weak, and short-winded. And fear stumbling at every little stone in the way. Both heights, and hollows, in the way annoy their goings. almond-tree] The gray-hairs; which some call the white flowers of the Church-yard. grashoppers] Every light thing shall be a burthen to them, who are now already become a burthen to themselves. and desire shall faile] The lust of the flesh (libido) As also the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. In decrepit age all these desires die, though they reigned and raged in him before. long home] The grave, his own house, and long home; Nox est perpetua Vna dormienda, Esay XIV. 18. never to returne hither again, Job VII. 10. But long to abide there, till the Resurrection-day. mourners] Jer. IX. 17. and XXII. 18. Amos V. 16. See Job III. 8. silver cord] The marrow of the back-bone; be loosed, or lessened and contracted; whence old men grow crooked and bending in the back. Some take this for the sinewes, which are the ligaments of all the members; and are loosened by cold humours, and palsie-distem∣pers. golden bowle] The heart, the blood of it, or the pericardion, or the brain pan, pia-mater, and pericranion. Some understand this of the cista fellis, the gaul and choler, which easily breaks out in old men. Some of the skull, parted in the stures and seams of it: diseases grow round, as a bowle-golden, for the colour and precious use of it in preserving the brains. or the pitcher be broken at the fountain] By fountain we may under∣stand those principal parts, as the Heart, Head, Liver, from whence
the vital supplies of spirit, heat, blood, sense, and motion are drawn into the body. By Cisterne the same aforesaid; or those places of the body whereinto those vital supplies are drawn and conveyed. By the pitcher, and wheele, the veins, arteries, and sinewes, which as sub∣servient instruments do conveigh those supplies into the several parts of the body. Some understand by the pitcher, the bladder; and by the cisterne, the belly; that neither duly performe their office: by the fountaine or spring, the issuing forth of the water; the retentive faculty of the muskle at the neck of the bladder being broken, so that water, the urine issueth from him insensibly, without stay. the wheele broken at the cisterne] The Lungs broken off from their motion of inspiration and respiration by phlegme from the stomach, stopping and stifling the Lungs. The Lungs are as the wheele transmit∣ting the aire in, and out, up and down: and when this free course is stopped, then follows ratling in the throat, and death after. The sto∣mach is the cisterne from all the body. And the spirit shall returne] Gen. II. 7. Joh XXXIV. 14, 15. And even the wisest Heathen have avouched the immortality of the soul; and a life of joy, or paine after this life ended, according to our carri∣age here. So Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Plutarch, Epicharmus, Euripides, Lucretius, Heraclitus, Virgil, and others. Vanitie of vanities] He resumes and concludes his main Text, ater his large demonstration of it, by so many convincing argu∣ments. the Preacher was wise] And moreover, because he knew how hard it is to work man to a firme belief of this maxime, That all these earth∣ly things are but vanity, he heaps up in these few words of his conclu∣sion many cogent arguments yet more to re-inforce the same; from his own wisdome, from his care to teach the knowledge of this prin∣cipal lesson, his heed, his search, his ordering of it, and other Proverbs; from the delight and acceptablenesse of it; from the up∣rightnesse, and truth of it. All which as they may relate to his teach∣ing, and writing in general; so more specialy to the subject matter of this Book. The words of the wise] In this verse Solomon riseth higher, and comes up to the praise of the words of the wise in general, which is most appli∣able to the Word of God in the Scripture; the praise is from their pow∣er and efficacie; they are as Goads; as Nailes: And from their Authori∣ty, fastened d managed by the Masters of Assemblies, the Preach∣ers and Ministers; And the Word, and they, both given from one Shepheard, the great Shepheard of the Sheep, the Lord Jesus Christ. Yet some would make this understanding of this verse, That the Au∣thors of these Collections compiled them together into one body un∣der the name of Solomon, guided thereunto, and so given, by and from Zerubbabel.
by these] and by no other;  no humane and vaine words or wri∣tings, Psal. XIX. 11. These are sufficient. Some conceit that Zerubba∣bel speaks thus to Abihud. Many books] This most true in this age, if not more then any o∣ther. But these many, in comparison of the Scriputure, may well be called wast-papers. And much study in them is a wearinesse of the flesh. The Conclusion of the whole matter let us hear] The first word of this verse, rendered Conclusion is written in the Original with an ex∣traordinary big letter; to put an extraordinary mark of Attention up∣on it. The meaning of the words of this, and the last verse, need no Explanation.
THE Song of Solomon. A Song it is; as the title bears. Not an Historie, or a Prophecie: which conceit, while some have fancied to themselves to maintain the same, they have been driven, in their Expositions, for∣cibly as it were to ravish the Text, and to fall into sundry (I might say) ridiculous singularities and absurdities. It is the Song of Songs, the chiefest of his 1005. Songs, 1 Kings IV. 32. the most excellent of all others: and that for Expressions, Mysteries, Purity and Holinesse; but most for the Subject and Matter of it, which is sublime, divine, and Evange∣lical. It is all a continued Allegorie; full of Obscurities, as is confessed by all; somewhat the harder to understand by reason of so many di∣versities of understandings; somewhat the more difficult, because we meet here with diverse Hebrew words which are not found in the Scripure besides. It is all mystical; as many words, almost so ma∣ny Mysteries: As is likewise said of the Apocalypse. And the Jewes hereupon are said to forbid the reading of this Book among them till they came to thirty years of age. Yet it appears to be an Epithalamium, a marriage-Song, a Song of Loves: Penned by Solomon, it seemes in his younger years, and best times, not long after his marriage with Pharaohs daughter, where∣unto he may haply allude in this Song; and long before his foul falls in his old age. But yet a greater then Solomon is here. Here is Christ the true Solomon, the Bridegroome; and his Church, the Spouse. Here between them is set down all Rhetorick of Love; pathetical Compellations, affectionate Elogies, Passionate Expressi∣ons; all here pure and spiritual in this Celestial Poem: Here is no∣thing of Temporal, Carnal, or worldly mixture in it. The flowers and ornaments of Language in the Praises of Both, are not applicable to bodily or natural beauties, but to spiritual and supernatural. Here is hidden Manna; sancta sanctis; Pearls are not for swine. Here So∣lomon rips up, and rifles, as it were, all the rarities of Nature, to de∣scribe his sacred and supernatural mysteries. Yea, such is the match∣lesse
riches and sweetnesse of this Poem, and the subject of it, that though the storehouse of the whole world from both her spheres con∣tribute to it, yet all is not sufficient: The richest earthly things are but grosse and sensible illustrations of spiritual Majesty, and glory: They can serve but as mystical representations, as Emblemes, as Hierogly∣phiks, as Manuductions, and Perspectives to Grace, and Glory. Here between Christ, and his Church are interchangings of mutual Prai∣ses, Gloriations, and Congratulations; of Zealous spiritual longings, and breathings of Loves, and Vowes, and Joyes; of acclamations, at∣testations and administrations. His divine and glorious excellencies in himself, and rich bounties and blessings to her; and her precious hea∣venly graces, and endowments, ornaments, and priviledges by him, in an high character, in lofty and stately sayings and similies, are por∣traied and laid out to the life, by her, and by him. And yet withal, her failings, and recoveries; and his withdrawings thereupon, and re∣turnings, are not omitted And lastly, she being never satisfied with his Love, out of the un∣quenchable flame of her affection, she doth beg still a more intimate Union, and communion with him, and a perpetual fruition of him, for her self; and for all her members that yet knew him not: And that he would hasten his last coming, for the full finishing of all, and her enjoy∣ment of him in Vision Beatifical in the Life of Glory. In all these Interlocutions betwixt them; she speaking nine times. He seven times; And both joyntly together the same things, as in a Chorus, two times; In a word, There are such divine raptures as are able to fire the holy affections of the sons of men Let him kisse me, &c.] The speech of the Church, the Spouse, to Christ, the Bridegroom, to the 8. ver. set forth in her wishes of his love, in expressions of the worth of it; of his sweet smelling graces, and the powerful vertue of them in her and in others, in his rich and gracious provisions for her; in her Vindication of her own deformities; and defects against the envious and uncharitable censures of others concerning her; and in petitioning him for further counsel and dire∣ction. If thou know not, &c.] Christ his Reply, in the four next verses; granting her last request; with gracious and great commendations of her, and rich promises made unto her. While the King, &c.] The Church in this, and the next verse re∣turnes the fruits of Christs love and bounty, magnifying by similies his gracious goodnesse to her; and declaring what her cate shall be to keep and indeere him to her. Behold thou art fair] Christ here in this, and the next verse con∣gratulates his Church; Praysing again, and so cherishing his lovely graces in her: and their joynt flourishing fertility and felicity. The beames, &c.] Both Christ;  and his Church, joyne here toge∣ther in a symphonie, as in a Chorus, and with united delight, do extol the parts and fabrick of their spiritual house and happinesse.
I am the rose, &c.] Christs speech, in the two first verses; characteri∣zing both himself, and his Church; who, and what they are. Sharon] A fertile and pleasant region, lying in the Tribe of Gad, beneath Mount Lebanon, not farre from Bashan, 1 Chron. V. 16. There had David his heards of cattel fed, 1 Chron. XXVII. 29. It is coupled for excellencie with Carmel, Esay XXXV. 2. it is supposed to be the same with Lesharon mentioned, Josh. XII. 18. Lillie] Christ here both Rose and Lillie, ch. V. 10. Mat. IX. 29. And in that Christ here doth so commend himself, it is for our sakes; that we might take notice of his excellencies, and fall in love with him. thorns] These thorns Christ makes useful to his Church;  to prick and let out her ill humours; to hedge her in and keep her within com∣passe. See Judg. VIII. 16. As the apple-tree, &c.] The Churches speech, continued to the end of this chapter. And in all the next chapter, uttered sometimes of Christ, and somtimes to Christ. Declaring his praise and preciousnesse in him∣self, his loving dealings with her may ways; his speech to her, so sweet¦ly and affectionately inviting her unto him. And withal expressing her delight in him, and that she is sick of love towards him: charging others not to distrub him: and joying in her interest in him, & petitioning him for his speedy approach and presence. And all this in this second chap. trees of the wood] Wild, fruitlesse trees, or trees of hedg-fruit. But in Christ is alsufficiencie for us, Col. I. 19. John I. 16. Col. III. 11. banquetting house] Of inward consolations through peace, and joy in Beleeving, and the comforts and graces of the Spirit: and that by the meanes of his Word and Ordinances. Flagons] Large measures of that wine in Christs banquetting house, or wine-seller, ver. 4. apples] Such as fall from Christs apple-tree, ver. 3. sick] Ever & sinking swooning with a love-qualme, through excess of love, & exuberancie of spiritual joy in Christ, such as she could hard∣ly stand under, but that the raptures and ravishments thereof, the exta∣sies thereby, do even overwhelme her spirit, Ephes. I. 18. and III. 19. His left hand, &c.] Christ himself relieves my sicknesse, supplies my desires, fulfils my joy, prevents your help and comfort, or at least, works with it effectualy. Christ circleth his Church with all healing, all comforting embracements. by the Roes, &c.] By the things most dear and precious to you: as these are to Shepherds. As ever ye love any thing, and desire it may not perish, disquiet him not. Or rather then disturb him, abide ye from him, abide without doors, with the Roes and Hinds of the fields; as some make the meaning to be. until he please] until he waken of his own accord. Be not over∣hasty with him, to disease or displease him; but hold out in faith and patience; Let him take his own time, who is a God that waiteth to be gracious, Esay XXX. 18. The voice, &c.] She being sick with pangs of love, lay lingring
and listning, hankering, and hearkning after her beloved; and behold here she hears his voice, John X. 3, 4. And sees him coming; so as neither mountains, nor hills; her enormities, or infirmities; or the worlds oppositions and emnities shall hinder his coming. behinde our wall] He is come so near. looketh forth] Or, looketh in. Thus he returnes, and comes by degrees. Never farre off, or staying long absent, upon her seeking and longing after him. Yet the full enjoyment and fruition of him is re∣served for the life to come, 1 Cor. XIII. 12. in the clefts of the rock] Jer. XLVIII. 28. in the secret places of the staires] for secrecy and security; or for conscience of infirmity and modesty. my Beloved is mine, &c.] She is sure, and speaks it boldly, 1 John IV. 16. 1 Cor. VI. 17. he feedeth] Though before, and at such a time, she knew not, Ch. I. 7. yet now she knows, and can tell it to others. In this Chapter the Church implying Christs departure from her, occasioned by her own negligence and security; sets forth her diligent scrutiny, and search for him; her finding of him; her dutiful care, and behaviour towards him, and holy gloriation in his Majesty, and beauty; which she inciteth others to minde and magnifie. By night] Even night after night. I fought] Sought and sought, instantly & earnestly, Jer. XXIX. 13. She longed, as David did, 1 Chr. XI. 17. Counts all but losse and dung in comparison of Christ, Hos. V. 15. Psal LXXVIII. 34. Esay LXIII. 15. but I found him not] We are faultie: And yet withal too hasty; we antedate the promises; and are ready to complaine of Christs de∣lay, though procured by our selves. I will rise] An holy, and resolute determination. now] Presently, without losing any opportunity; while the day and time of grace lasteth: Delays are dangerous, Hos. V. 6. Prov. I. 28. John VII. 34. & VIII. 21. And too many sluggishly use them, as Pro. VI. 10. the citie] Jerusalem, where the Temple, Priests, and Ordinances were: Jesus was found there, Luke II. 46. Psal. CXXII. 4. a little that I passed from them] From the Watchmen, the meanes, and Ordinances; that the finding might not be attributed to the ex∣cellency of the meanes; but unto God, 1 Cor. III. 6, 7. Rom. IX. 16. I found him] Hos. VI. 3. Mark VII. 24, 25. would not let him go] As, Gen. XXXII. 26. Job XIII. 15. Rom. VIII. 35. Who is this] Chap. VIII. 5. There spoken concerning the Church. See the Observations there. And so possibly it may be spoken here. Or else spoken by the Church, concerning Christ; as the words follow∣ing all along do seeme to imply; she continuing her high expressions, and continual ascensions in her affection to Christ. The words fol∣lowing seeme to me to be straitened by Commentators, and tied to more particular senses and applications, then in their general meaning
they need, or will well bear. The Church pleaseth under the Person and Parable of Solomon, and his glory, in his Bed; in his bed-cham∣ber-warders, or Esquires of his body; in his Charet; in his Crowne in the day of his Espousals; and in their descriptions; to typifie, and magnifie the glorious state of Christ her Bridegroome, in all his bra∣veries. Christ here in a great part of this Chapter, amplifies the Praises, and the Graces of his Church, by elegant similies and ornaments of speech, not applicable to bodily, but to spiritual beauty. And pro∣ceeds to admonish and dehort her from unworthy societie and com∣munion which he urgeth by fresh praises, and vowes of love. To which she makes a brief Reply, by desiring to be made fit for those Praises and future affections, by the work of his Spirit; and that he may come to enjoy them in her. faire] Christ here interchangeably seemes, as it were, rapt and ravished, and altogether enamoured with his beautiful Bride; sets her forth in all her parts, in her eyes, haire, teeth, lips, temples, neck and breasts, in that fairnesse, and comelinesse, which indeed he himself hath put upon her, Ezek XVI. 14. no spot in thee] Ephes. V. 26, 27. Apoc. XIV. 5. Not such as Jude ver. 12. and Deut. XXXII. 5. no Leopard-spots: none that God will so account; though in many things we offend all, James III. 2. Shenir and Hermon] Deut. III. 9. 1 Chron. V. 23. Of Hermon, see the Observations on Psal. LXXXIX. 12. a fountaine sealed] For preservation from pollution, and for the excellencie of it, John IV. 14. a fountaine, &c.] Or, Oh fountaine, &c. For some make this the Churches speech to Christ, acknowledging, that for all she is, or hath, the entire praise belongs to him alone, is derived from him, Psalme LXXXVII. 7. John XV. 5. Esay XXVI. 12. Hos. XIV. 8. Psalme CXV. 1. Awake] The Church prayes, and accordingly beleeves, that these windes, the besomes of the world, may ever blow to the good of the garden, Christs Church, for her fruitfulnesse, that Christ may come and reap the pleasant fruits thereof, 1 Cor. IX. 7. He and she, make both one mystical Christ, 1 Cor. XII. 12. Christ pleaseth to grant the request of his Church, and cometh, and accepteth her entertainment; yea, and bringeth his friends with him, and feasteth them, vers. 1. But this kindnesse, it seemes, is not so well improved by her as it deserved, but she is surprized by an∣other fit of drowsie negligence, and tepidity; and so she is brought into a fresh danger of losing him, who after much patient waiting, knocking, and calling upon her, and her unkinde answer thereunto, becomes angry; and being not received when he tendered himself, departs displeased, and is hardly reconciled, though she testifie much care and importunity in seeking him, and therein suffereth losses, and wounds for his sake; And chargeth others to tell him that she is sick of love.
I am come, &c.] Christ so readily answers and grants the Church∣es Prayer, Psal. CXLV. 19. and XX. 4. and XXXII. 5. and XXXIV. 15. Esay LXV. 24. Dan. IX. 20,—23. She seeks not him in vaine, Esay XLV. 19. eate O friends] The holy Angels; or Saints on earth rather, Esay XLI. 8. John XV. 14. James II. 23. abundantly] Ephes. V. 16. I sleep, but, &c.] The Churches infirmity. As, Matth. XXV. 5. and XXVI. 41. she lets fall the watch of the Lord; and so sinnes a∣way her inward peace, as David did, Psal. LI. It is the voice, &c.] She soone hears the first call and knock; as be∣ing half awake; awake in the hidden man of the heart. Knocketh] Apoc. III. 20. Micah. VI. 9. my locks with the drops] Thus Christ stands bare-headed, as with cap in hand, and that in foul weather too, suing, wooing, and begging admittance; and yet must go look another lodging. I have put off my coate] Luke XI. 7. A silly excuse; and yet worse then so, in seeking to mend one fault by making another. Thus the flesh is both weak and wayward: But it is to be served, as Paul doth, 1 Cor. IX. 27. And as he adviseth others, Rom. VI. 12. how] Why, easily enough: It had beene no such great matter. Sinne and shifting came into the world together. Look to that, Heb. XII. 25. and chap. II. 3. Lest refusing this Call, they hear that Com∣mand, Matth. XXV. 41. by the hole] Christ herewith is offended and gone, ver. 6. Seemes minded, as Mark XIV. 41. and Ezek. III. 27. Yet even then he leaves a sweet remembrance behinde him. my bowels] She had no rest in her spirit; her bowels earned towards him; her heart asked and quaked for the unkindnesse she had offered him: she sorrowed according to God, or as God would have it, 2 Cor. VII. 9. I rose up] She better bethinks her self, she starts and stirs, and she leaves her bed of carnal security, would mend her former fore-thought negligence. dropped with myrrhe,] Testimonies and tokens of his sweetnesse left behinde him, where his hand had beene; with a secret instinct to attract her, as the Loadstone doth the Needle: that did whet, edge, steele her affections towards him; and wrought her to that resolution, Hos. II. 7. I opened] Better late then never. was gone] She had presumed too much of his patience, and abused it, Micah III. 4. she hoped here, but missed of it. my soul failed] Psal. XXX. 7. she suffers now; she may thank her self for it. I sought him] She goes not to bed againe; but seeks him, with all her might: seeks, and calls, and gives not over. This is the guise of the godly, Esay XXVI. 9.
I could not finde him] She was so justly dealt withal, Esay LIX. 1, 2. And this is the Churches soarest affliction, whereof they bitter∣ly complaine, Lam. III. 8, 44. Job XXX. 20. Hab. I. 2. A spiritual desertion is a kinde of Hell it self to a godly soul. This sense of Losse they count heavier then the sense of Paine. And indeed the tears of Hell are not sufficient to bewaile the Losse of Heaven. The Watchmen] Now she will seek him through thick and thin, by night it self, without delay, among the Watchmen, and midst of dan∣gers. Nothing shall stay her, she is at no rest without him. See chap. III. 3. they smote me] Even these Watchmen, Ezek. XXXIII. 2, 6, 7. smote her with the tongue of just reproof and rebuke, out of Gods Word, for her former fault, and sloathful neglect of duty. I charge you] See chap. II. 7. and chap. III. 5. But here her charge varies. Tell him, and what shall ye tell him? as the Hebrew hath it. Like that phrase in Hos. IX. 14 sick of love] Chap. II. 5. What is thy beloved, &c.] And they double the demand: And that by reason of her so extraordinary charging them, if not swearing and adjuring of them. Some singular thing then was in the man, and in the matter. They question likely, not as utterly ignorant of Christ; but that they might hear the Church what she had to say to him; and by her discourse they might better their knowledge, 1 Pet. I. 12. My beloved, &c.] The Churches large character of Christ to them, she describes him, and his particular praises in his several parts, in sundry Similies, but no hyperbolies; for Christ admits of no hy∣perbolie; he is altogether matchlesse and incomparable. She de∣scribes his colour, head, locks, eyes; cheeks, lips, hands, belly, legges, countenance, mouth; and that he is altogether lovely. Her Love wants no Rhetorick to display his parts; she thinks she can never speak enough of him. Whither] The effect of the Churches speech being so ful of affection and admiration, what it wrought upon the daughters of Jerusalem. And here they double their demand; as they did, chap. V. 9. thou fairest] Though she acknowledged her self black, chap. I. 6. And was now in a distresse and a desertion. that we may] They cannot help her, to satisfie her desire; but they will joyne to seek him with her. So much good they received by her holy conference with them. And so God blesseth the holy conferen∣ces of his people; and the communion of Saints, Zech. VIII. 21. And surely best it is to seek Christ with the Church, in her companie; she being the pillar and ground of truth, and as that pillar of fire in the Wildernesse, to guide and go before us. is gone downe] See before chap. V. 6. But now she can tell it her self; and tell it to others. And she is ready so to do, apt to commu∣nicate all she knows, all she can tell them, 1 Cor. XII. 7. Not the pow∣ring out, but the want of powring out, dries up the streaming of that oile of Grace, 2 Kings IV. 6.
into his garden] Chap. IV. 16. I am my beloveds] Chap. II. 16. and chap. VII. 10. Here her faith reviveth. And come what will come, she rests upon this resolu∣tion. Thou art beautiful, &c.] The Church having confessed her fault; and seeking so earnestly to repair the breach, and renew her love and interest in him; Christ hereupon is so ready to receive her, and afresh so highly to praise and commend her; as formerly he had done, ch. IV. which shewes that he is no changeling; and makes to her singular comfort, Jer. III. 22. as Tirza] Josh. XII. 24. 1 Kings XIV. 17. and chap. XV. 33. so beautiful a Citie. as Jerusalem] Lam. I. 1. and chap. II. 15, 16. Psal. CXXII. 3. and XLVIII. 2. and LXXXVII. 3. and CXXXII. terrible] To daunt enemies, and draw hearts unto her, she is admi∣rable, inexpugnable. Turne away thine eyes] Chap. IV. 9. If she be sick of his love, he is overcome by hers: no love lost between them. threescore Queenes] This verse is put hypotheticaly, by way of sup∣position: Be it so. my Dove] The rendition of the case, and comparison; Yet allt hose would not equal thee; yea, even they themselvs would yeeld the praise and blessing to thee, Deut. XXXIII. 29. 2 Sam. VII. 23. Ps. CXLIV. 15. Who is she, &c.] Many make this the praise which the Queenes and Concubines give the Church; not hereby doubting, but admiring her. and her excellencie. Yet I see not but they may well be a continuati∣on of Christs speech in praising her; not unlike to that in the fourth verse aforegoing. I went downe] Christs inspection and care of his Church, and Con∣gregations, and how they fructifie, and flourish, Esay V. 2. Matth. XXI. 34. 1 Cor. IX. 7. This phrase speaks not a present ignorance in him; no more then that phrase, Gen. XVIII. 21. Or ever I was aware] i. e. not ignorantly; but suddenly. As Esay XLVII. 11. my soul, &c.] This seemes to denote the affectionate haste and de∣sire, wherewith Christ was carried on, in a kind of insensible manner, to revisit his Church, and restore comforts to her, to present his ardent and longing affection to behold the flourishings and propagati∣ons of his Church. Amminadab] Likely some swift Charet-driver, some translate it appellatively, my willing people. Some make the whole verse to be the speech of the Church, confessing her ignorance that Christ was gone downe to that end, as is expressed in the former verse; But that he was gone away from her in angry displeasure, for her unworthy and sluggish neglect of him, chap. III. 3. And therefore she drove on so furiously to finde him out againe; yea, so furiously, that she over past him. So obscure is this text, and the meaning so dark and difficult to determine.
Returne, &c.] Various likewise are the Opinions of Interpreters here: I conceive, The word fairly come of, as the words of Christ to his Church; mainly and earnestly recalling her to return to him. O Shulamite] Not Shunamite. Some make it the feminine of So∣lomon; and so to denote his wife; the women being usualy called af∣ter their husbands names, Esay IV. 1. And so his Spouse is the figure of the Church of Christ throughout this Song. that we may look upon thee] view and contemplate thee; and thy beauty with complacency and delight. What will ye see] Seemes best to be Christs words still; in answer of his own question. as it were the company of two armies] As in that joyful day at Mahana∣im, and the Vision there of Jacob, Gen. XXXII. 2. The Spouse here likened to these two armies. Or, that she is so guarded and safe-guarded, with such armies, as Jacob there was. Yet some apply this to that in∣testine warre within her, of the flesh and spirit, fighting as two armies within her, as the twins did in Rebecca's womb. Christ here to the tenth verse, continueth his Praising of her again, running over every grace and ornament in her, from the lowest to the highest; together with his joy and pleasure that he takes in her; And all under new and fresh Similies and exemplifications. And thereup∣on, in the tenth verse, and to the end of this chapter, the Church re∣newes the joyful profession of her love to him, and of his desire to∣wards her; inviting him to her Assemblies to see them how they pros∣per, and she promiseth to give and devote all her best fruits wholly to him, for whom alone she had brought them forth, and by whose bles∣sing she flourished with all manner & sorts of them, both new and old. How beautiful] This beautifulnesse is ascribed, with admiration, to sundry parts of her; and to her whole person oftentimes. O Princes daughter] 1 John III. 1. John I. 12. 2 Cor. VI. 18. the King is held in the galleries] Christ himself. Yea, and no earthly King but would finde in his heart to be tied to these walks, and to be held, as it were, prisoner in the sight of thee and thy bravery, Ps. CXXXVIII. 4, 5. and XXVII. 4. being so astonished, and never sa∣tisfied with the sight of thee, and thy beauty, and so over-valuing it a∣bove his own, and all other earthly glory whatsoever. How faire] Such passionate admiration of her, proceeds from his wonderful love to her; agreeing well to that saying, Esay LXII. 4, 5. and LXV. 19. Zeph. III. 17. And cannot but procure some sui∣table reciprocal love to him, Ezra IX. 13, 14. 2 Cor. V. 14. Palme-tree] The Embleme and symbol of constancie, and fruit∣fulnesse, patience, and victory, Psalme XCII. 12, 13. Apoc. VII. 9, 10. go up to the Palme-tree] He will familiarly dwell with his Church; and with the boughs and branches thereof; purging and pruning them, and making them fruitful. and the smell of thy nose] Or nostrils; the breath that thence
proceedeth, shall be sweet, odoriferous, and grateful: to those at least that have their inward senses habitualy and spiritualy exercised. causing the lips] Hyperbolicaly, but excellently expressing the vertue and efficacie, the power and vigour of the Word and Gospel, preached under the similitude of the best wine, and the operation of it. They that have tasted of the power of the good Word of God, and of the world to come, cannot forbear to declare and speak of it to ll the world, Acts IV. 20. and II. 4, 11, 14. I am my Beloveds The Churches renewed speech and profession, upon Christs so great commendations of her, and affections towards her, notwithstanding her former faylings and imperfections. She growes up to this confident assurance. Come] She is emboldened hereupon to these Petitions following; that he will accompany her to visit the particular Churches, that his spirit and care may joyne together, to prosper hers, for the good of all the Churches. She will not now go any way, ot do any thing with∣out him and his companie. She had lately felt the sorrow and smart of his absence from her, of her being without him, and his presence. She is minded now, as Bark was, Judg. IV. 8. my loves] The fruition of my graces, the fruits of my faith, hope, love, good works, thanksgivings, &c. She will detaine nothing that is hers from the love and service of Christ, but resigne all unto him, who is worthy alone to enjoy all. The mandrakes] See the Annotations on Gen. XXX. 14. at our gates, &c.] This may seeme to allude to the order of straw∣ing the wedding-house doores with sweet smelling flowers: or of lay∣ing up of fruits in gate-houses and garners. for thee] All for Christ. He gives all to them, all his offices and efficacies; all his merits and graces; what he did, and suffered, was for them: and they returne all to him, all that they are, and have all that they do and suffer, all their good works and services, as fruits of his owne Graces in them, they ascribe and devote unto him, Psal. CXV. 1. that he may be Ali in All. In this last Chapter, the Church proceeds to her dearest wishes for and after Christ, How she faine would have him, and use him; in the three first verses. And in the next verse, she againe chargeth others not to disturbe or displease him. as my brother] That she might have more close conjunction and con∣sociation with him, more intire familiarity and sweetnesse, more inti∣mate union and communion with him. kisse thee] Chap. I. 2. Psal. II. 12. and publikely professe thee, not∣withstanding any danger. yet they should not despise me] 2 Sam. VI. 22. not dishearten me from duty and affection: but she would bravely sleight all scorning Michols, all contumelies and contempts for her conscience sake, and Christs sake. mothers house] The universal Church she calls her her mother;
in her universal latitude of al her members; yea, somtimes comprehen∣ding in that notion Christ the head also, as, v. 5. And so again in the New Testament, the whole Church in all her members with her head Christ, is called Christ, i. e. mystical Christ, 1 Cor. XII. 12. Thither from with∣out, would she bring him with solemnity and joy; and there humbly welcome and entertaine his presence with all honour and obedience. instruct me] The Church would do it instrumentaly and subordi∣nately, from God primarily and originaly, John VI. 45. Esay LIV. 13. Jer. XXXI. 34. of spiced wine] Prov. IX. 2. This should be her hospitality and kindnesse to Christ: nothing too dear for him, as he doth the like for her, Esay LV. 1, 2, 3. who is this, &c.] Chap. III. 6. Some would have this to be the speech of the Church; some, of Christ; some, of the Angels. that cometh up] Sure whosoever speaks it, this is meant of the Church; it is she comes up. There are continual ascensions in the hearts of Gods people▪ whiles here; they are ever aspiring to heaven-ward. from the wildernesse] Of this world and the tribulations of it, of sin, and the temptations and miseries of it. Leaning] For otherwise without him she could not ascend. No more then the Vine without its supporter; or the Ivy without its Oak. And leanes truly; not as those, Micah III. 11. And leanes wholy and solely upon him; utterly unbottomed of her self, and of every crea∣ture. All other are but as, Job VI. 17. and, VIII. 15. and, Esay XXXVI. 6. I raised thee up, &c.] Some understand these words as spoken by the Church, and in answer to Christs question; That namely, I is she her self, and no other; even she that raised him up and awoke him from under the apple-tree, by her prayers; as, Psal. XLIV. 23. Matth. VIII. 25. Esay LXII. 7. And there by acts of faith, and be∣leeving on the promise, did after a sort conceive, bear, and bring him forth. And that it is she also that in the extreme height and heat of her love and zeal, so prayes to him, and so professes, as is in the two ver∣ses following. Others under stand all these words as spoken by Christ to the Church, whose grace alone did, and doth raise up his Church, depressed and fallen under the tree of offence after the eating of the forbidden fruit, lying in her blood, as it is, Ezek. XVI. 5, 6. then and there he said unto her, and be the mother of the living, as, Gen. III. 20. And so they make the rest of the words to be his command to his Church, naturaly following as her duty, from the consideration of his foresaid benefits to her vouchsafed. But yet, however the words in the fifth verse be taken, I do rather incline to understand the words in the six and seven verses to be the Churches; by reason of their mas∣culine idiome. She so begging Christs dearest love to her: and so professing her own love to him, as riding in a Chariot o triumph, vi∣ctorious over all oppositions, unconquerable, unquenchable. And such indeed is the Divine mutual love between Christ and his Church, thus exalted to the highest.
Set me as a seale] Have me in precious esteeme: bear me on thy breast, and shoulders, as Aaron did the Tribes, Exod. XXVIII. 11, 12, 20, 21, 29, 30. Thus she begs to be highly remembered, preserved honoured, by Christ; in his heart dearly cherished and valued; by his arme mightily defended. strong as death] Death conquers all; is the King of terrors, Job XVIII. 14. yet Love as strong as death: Jonathan would have died for the love of David; and David for Absalom. See Rom. XVI. 4. Apoc. XII. 11. She would not refuse to die for him: but shall die, if he grant not her desire. Wherein the irresistible and undaunted vigour and courage of holy love and desire after Christ, is exalted to the highest. as the grave] Which is never satisfied and filled, Prov. XXX. 16. coales of fire] Luke XII. 49. This was her fever and sicknesse, in this Song. She was carried up, as it were, in a Chariot of fire; and con∣sumed, as it were, in her love towards Christ in the zeale of it, Psalme LIX. 9. and CXIX. 139. See 2 Cor. V. 13. Not lukewarme she. Many waters, &c.] As no good can match it, so no evil can over∣match it. Nay, the floods of afflictions are so farre from drowning this Love, that they do rather inflame and increase it; as the water that is cast upon lime, Rom. VIII. 35. all the substance of his house] To buy this love of me, or to get it from me; or to bribe and corrupt it. Yea, his house it self, lands, life and all. utterly oontemned] As, Acts VIII. 20. Phil. III. 8. Matth. X. 37. Luke XIV. 26. IX. 24. we have a little sister] Thou Lord and I have such a one;  mean∣ing the Church of the Gentiles; so thy holy Prophets have foretold me. So as this continues to be the speech of the Church; or of them both. no breast] Not marriagable yet immature yet. As once the Church of the Jews also was, Ezek. XVI. 7, 8. What shall we do] Love is laborious, Sichem will do all that can be done for his beloved Dinah. So Paul for the Jewes, Rom. IX. 1, 2, 3. True Love is not in word only, but in deed, John XIV. 15. when she shall be spoken for] For her good, and advancement; for to have an husband, Gal. IV. 4. Rom. XVI. 25. If she be a wall] The answer to the foresaid question: Parabolical, very obscure, and difficult: Yet seems plaine in this, that Christ▪ and the Jewish Church are contriving here and mentioning some good, which they purpose to do to their sister, the Church of the Gentiles: That in nothing they will be wanting unto her; but in love provide and do all for her that they can in her respective conditions. If she be a wall, strong, and well-grounded; Or when she shall be so; we will do thus and thus for her. Or, they will make her a Wall first; and afterwards enlarge her; pulling down that partition-wall, which formerly was
between Jew and Gentile; and then making a new wall, larger, and able to comprehend both Jew and Gentile. We will build] We both; yea the whole blessed Trinity, will have an hand in building the Church of the Gentiles. a palace of silver] A royal precious Palace; that she may beseeme to be the City of the great King, Psal. XLVIII. 2. and if she be a doore Or, when she shall be a doore: to open to the righteous Nation, &c. Esay XXVI. 2. to open to the faithful Ministers, 1 Cor. XVI. 9 that come to build her for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Eph. II. 22. to open to the King of glory, Psal. XXIV. 7. And thus become, as it were, the gate of heaven; as Gen. XXVIII. 17. enclose her with boarde of Cedar.] Board her, and beautifie her with faire, sweet, and strong Cedars; Compasse her with my everlasting mercies; and preserve her walls and her gates, that the gates of hell shall not prevaile against her, Esay XXVI. 1. and LX. 18. Matth. XVI. 18. I am a wall] Saith this Church of the Gentiles;  answering that in the former verse. Or, when I shall so be, as I desire to be? and my breasts like towers] Not, as once, without breasts, verse 8. but now, as, Ezek. XVI. 7. yea, beyond those of my elder sister, new like towers, farre greater then those. See Esay XLIX. 21. and LIV. 1. and LX. 4, 8. and LXVI. 8. then was I, &c.] Or, then shall I be, &c. Here is the effect and is∣sue of her being built up through Christ. For when God shall have united these two sticks, Ezek. XXXVII. 19. And made way for those Kings of the earth, Apoc. XVI. 12. then it shall be said of both, what hath God wrought? as, Num. XXIII. 23. then she shall be neare her compleat happinesse, her heavenly and everlasting peace. And all this through the free favour, and meere mercy of God in Christ. Solemon had a vineyard] This, and the two next evrses, are the last speech of Christ to and of his Spouse, in this Song. Wherein he mag∣nifies the price and praise, the precious fruitfulnesse and worth of his Church, by the comparison of a Vineyard, the best of Vineyard, e∣ven Solomons in Baalhamon; a very fruitful place, a Lord of multi∣tudes of wine; as the word signifieth. And yet is that far short of Christs Vineyard. he let out, &c.] Solomon set and let out his to keepers and farmers. every one] Every Tenant and Keeper, for his share. a thousand pieces of silver] See Esay VII. 23 a thousand Vines for a thousand silverlings. Every keeper then likely had so much ground as would plant a thousand Vines. And wonderful then was the fruit∣fulnesse and increase that would raise the rent to so high a rate. Of sil∣verlings and shekels, See the Observations on Exod. XXXVIII. 24. My vineyard] The Church often called a Vineyard, Esay V. 1,—7. Psal. LXXX. 8. Here is the other part of the comparison, the difference between Christs Vineyard, and that of Solomons. This superiour to that.
which is mine] He ownes it: And it is his by a manifold right of donation, purchase, conquest, plantation, preservation, fructification, 1 Pet. I. 18. 1 Cor. III. 7. is before me] Ever in his sight, dear and tender in his eyes. He is alwayes with his Church, Matth. XXVIII. 20. He walks among her candlesticks; having engraven her upon the palms of his hands, and her walls being continualy before him, Esay XLIX. 16. and under his con∣stant never-slumbring charge and protection, ch. XXVII. 3. Thou, O Solomon] Solomon could not be ever with his Vineyard; nor dresse it himself. But the Keepers and Tenants must have their share of the fruits of it to themselves, as good reason they should. But I look to my Vineyard my self, 1 Cor. III. 7, 9. Nor suffer I any part of the profits to go from me. Thou that dwellest, &c.] Thou Church here called the inhabitresse of the gardens, because she is divided and branched into many particu∣lar Congregations, which are no lesse delightful to him then so many Edens and Paradises. the companions] The Angels, say some, Eph. III. 10. 1 Cor. XI. 10. 1 Pet. I. 10. Or rather, Those Partakers of the same precious faith and grace with her self, 2 Pet. I. 1. hearken to thy voice] Thine obedient children will hearken to their mothers counsel, Ier. XIII. 15, 16. set to their seals, Iohn III. 33. glorifie the Word, Acts XIII. 48. cause me to hear it] Chap. II. 14. In holy exercises, preaching, pray∣er, conference, &c. uttered by the Spirit of grace and supplication. Or, as some, cause them to hear me; by thy preaching of me, of my Word of truth, without mixture of hay or stubble, 1 Cor. III. 12. Make haste] See chap. II. 9, 17. They then waited for the consolati∣on of Israel. Here is the Churches last speech and prayer; like that A∣poc. XXII. 17, 20. She loves, and longs, and looks for his second Ad∣vent, 2 Pet. III. 12. As the espoused Virgin doth after the day of marriage. like to a Roe] In nimblenesse and swiftnesse. Come with all speed, quickly, cut off of delaies. Yet his coming seemes long to us, because we are short; we set the Sun by our Dyal. upon the mountaine of spices.] Where Christ is, and whence the Church expects him; and whither she longs to be brought by him. Those high and heavenly, those sweet and precious pleasures, Ps. XVI. 11. are the issue and upshot of all, and the end of this spiritual heavenly Song.
THe Great, and Small Prophets, according to the Times where∣in they lived, and prophesied, may seeme to stand in this ranck and Order; viz. Jonah, Esay, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephanie, Ieremy, Daniel, Ezekiel, Obadiah, Haggai, Zecha∣riah, Malachi. In the LXX. the Lesser Prophets are placed before the Greater. Esay. ESAY Prophesies of the Destruction of the Kingdomes, of Syria, and Samaria, shortly to be accomplished by the Assyrian. And of the Kingdome of Iudah afterwards, by the Babylo∣nian. And of the Neighbouring Kingdomes round about, by them both. And of the Ruine of the Assyrian Empire, by the Babylonian. And of the Babylonian by the Mede, and Persian. Inter∣mixing sharp accusations of sins; severe threatnings of judgments and comfortable Promises; chiefly to the Jewes, and Israelites: And ex∣tending his Evangelical Prophecies, and Promises to Christ, and his glorious, spiritual Kingdome; And the Vocation of the Gentiles to the Communion of it. And all in a stately stile, and lofty language. The time of his Prophesying must needs be 46. years from the first of Iotham to the 14th of Hezekiah, Besides the Times that the Prophe∣sied in the dayes of Vzziah, and after the 14th. of Hezekiah; which for the number of years are uncertaine. Yet it is recorded that he writ the Acts of Uzziah, first and last, 2 Chron. XXVI. 22. though that Book seeme not extant now, as not so necessary for the use of the Church. As neither that of Iasher, 2 Sam. I. 18. Nor that of Ieremy, 2 Chron. XXXV. 25. The Times in Esay may seem to be thus distinguished; viz. In the dayes of King Uzziah, Chapter I.—5. whose reigne is mentioned, chap. I. 1. and his Death, chap. VI. 1. Wherein some things most Prophetickly be spoken, and understood, both of sinnes, and Punish∣ments, which otherwise are fitting rather to the times of Ahaz. In the dayes of Iotham, chap. VI. In the dayes of Ahaz. Chap. VII.—XIV.
ver. 28. whose reigne is mentioned, chap. VII. 1. And his Death, chap. XIV. 28. And the rest may seeme most, if not all, to be in the dayes of Hezekiah; wherein there is a special notation of time in chap. XX. mentioning the year that Tartan (2 Kings XVIII. 17.) came to Ashod (or Azotus) and took it, when Sargon, next Prede∣cessor to Sennacharib, or Sennacharib himself King of Assria sent him, which seems to be about the eighth or ninth year of Hezek. And in the XXXVI. & XXXVII. chap. mentioning the 14th year of Hezekiah, and the Histories contained in it. And in chap. XXXVIII, XXXIX. con∣taining Histories that fell out in the later end of that fourteenth year of Hezekiah; without any other or further Notation of Times, to the end of all the Book. In this Prophecie are chiefly contained manifold Evangelical Promises and Prophecies of Christ, of his Person, and Offices, his Gospel, and Kingdome; more Particularly, of his Incar∣nation, and Birth; His Breeding, Calling, Teachings, Sufferings, Life, Death, Rising again, Glory ensuing, Kingdomes Length and Extent; That Esay is well called an Evangelical Prophet, or Prophetical Evan∣gelist: Concluding with the destruction of Babylon: and the Delive∣rance of Gods People thence: the glorious restauration of the Church: and Numerous Vocation of the Gentiles. And by reason of the Pre∣mises it is, That this Book is so often cited in the New Testament. As in the Table ensuing may appear.
Esay Alledged, or Alluded to in 1. 9. Rom. 9. 29 6. 9, 10 Mat. 13. v 14, 15   Joh. 12. 39, 40, 41   Act. 28. 25, 26, 27 7. 14 Mat. 1. 22, 23 8. 14 Rom. 9. 33 15 1 Pet. 2. 8   Mat. 21. 44 17 Luke 20. 18 18 Heb. 2. 13, 14 9. 2 Mat. 4. 14, 15, 16 7 Luke 1. 32, 33 10. 22, 23 Rom. 9. 27, 28 11, 1 Mat. 2. 23 10 Rom. 15. 12 13. 10 Mat. 24. 29. 21. 9 Apoc. 14. 8 22. 13 1 Cor. 15. 32. 22 Apoc. 3. 7 25. 8 1 Cor. 15. 54. 28. 11 Apoc. 11. 7, 17   1 Cor. 14. 21 16 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8   Rom. 9. 33 29. 10 Rom. 11. 8 13 Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9   Mar. 7. 6 14 1 Cor. 1. 19 33. 18 1. Cor. 1. 19, 20 34. 4 Apoc. 6. 13, 14 35. 5, 6 in many places 40. 3 Matth. 3. 3   Mark 1. 3   John 1. 23 3, 4, 5 Luke. 3. 4, 5, 6 6, 7, 8 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25 13 Rom. 11. 34   1 Cor. 2. 16 41. 4 Ap. 1. 17 & 22. 13 8 James 2. 23 42. 1, 2, 3, 4 Mat. 12. 17, 18   19, 20 6 Acts 13. 47 43. 19 2 Cor. 5. 17 44. 3 John 7. 38, 39 45. 9 Rom. 9. 20 23 Rom. 4. 11   Phil. 2. 10, 11 47. 8 Apoc. 18. 7 49. 6 Luke 2. 32   Acts 13. 47 8 2 Cor. 6. 2. 10 Apoc. 7. 16 50. 6 Luk. 22. 64   John 18. 22 8 Rom. 8. 30, 34 52. 5 Rom. 2. 24 7 Rom. 10. 15 10 Luke 3. 6 11 2 Cor. 6. 17 15 Rom. 15. 21. 53. 1 John 12. 38   Rom. 10. 16 3 Mark 9. 12 4 Matth 8. 17 5 1 Cor. 15. 3 53. 5, 6 1 Pet. 2. 24, 25 7, 8 Mark 15. 3, &c.   Acts 8. 32 9 1 Pet 2. 22 12 Mark 15. 28   Lu. 22, 37 & 23, 34 54. 1 Gal. 4. 27 13 John 6. 45 55. 1 John 7. 37 3 Acts 13. 34   Psal. 89. 35 56. 7 Matth. 21. 13   Mark 11. 17   Luk 19. 46 59. 7 Rom. 3, 15 17 Eph. 6. 17   1 Thes. 5. 8 20 Rom. 11. 26 60 3 Apoc. 21. 24. 11 Apoc. 21. 25 19 Ap. 21. 23. & 22. 5 61 1, 2 Lnk 4. 17—21 62. 11 Matth. 21. 5 63 2, 3 Apoc. 19. 13, 15 64 4 1 Cor. 2. 9. 11 65. 1, 2 Rom, 10. 20, 21 17 2 Pet. 3. 13. 66 1 Acts 7. 48, 49 21 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9   Apoc 1. 6. 24 Mark 9. 44
Chap. VII. ver. 16. hath reference to Shear-jashub. Chap. VIII. ver. 18. hath reference to Shear-jashub, and Maher∣shalah-hash-baz. Chap. XXXVIII. ver. 5. Ezekiah's tears, among other causes, might chiefly be, because at that time he had no sonne; Manasseh being borne after, chap. XXXVIII. 5. 2 Kings XXI. 1. 2 Chron. XXXIII. 1. As the Sun stood still at Joshuah's Prayer; and the Moone likewise; and consequently with them the whole frame of the Heavenly Bodies, and their Motions, about a whole day, Josh. X. 12, 13. So upon Eze∣kiah's choise, the Sunne went back, and consequently the other Cele∣stial Bodies with it, ten degrees, in the Heavens, [that the Chaldeans took notice of the wonder, 2 Chron. XXXII. 31.] as well as in the Sun-dial of Ahaz, chap. XXXVIII. 8. Making that miraculous ano∣malie of time, in obedience to their Creators will. Esaiah his going naked, without his upper raiment, or Prophetical rough garment, (as that, 2 Kings I. 8. Zech. XIII. 4. Matth. III. 4.) and bare-foot; though but three dayes; (like to that, Ezek. IV. 4, 5, 6.) yet was a three yeares Prophetick signe, that Egypt and Ethiopia, by that time, should be led into captivity, naked and bare, by the King of Assyria, chap. XX. 3, 4. The 185000. were slaine by the Angel, in the Camp of Sennacha∣rib, not after their returne from the Ethiopians, but in that very next night after the message and promise sent from God by Esay to Heze∣kiah, Esay XXXVII. 21,—35. And slaine either before Jerusalem in the Camp that Rabshakeh brought thither, and in his returne to the King at Libna left there, Esay XXXVI. 2. Or in Sennacharib's Camp before Libna, where himself was, so drawing near to Jerusalem, chapter XXXVII. 8, 9. 14 33, 36. 2 Kings XIX. 8, 32, 35, 36. 2 Chron. XXXII. 9. If not in both Camps. The Vision] One of those meanes whereby God in those times im∣parted his minde and word to his Prophets. Of Isaiah] Heb. Jeshajahu. In other places, Jeshajah. In the Greek, Esaias; whence our English, Esay, and Esaiah. It signifies Gods salvation. saw] Hence the Prophets of old called Seers. Judah and Jerusalem] Chiefly and mainly. Though likely in a relation to them, he prophesied also concerning and against other neighbouring Nations. Hezekiah] Heb. Jechizkijahu, Micah I. 1. Jechizkijah; some∣times Chizkijahu; and Chezkijah. Greek, Ezekias. Likely Esay di∣ed in the latter end of his reigne; and was not sawn in sunder in the reigne of Manasseh; as commonly, out of Heb. XI. 37. but ground∣lessely, it is conceived. Heare, &c.] His first Sermon, in this first chapter. And if so, Then we must understand the desolations herein mentioned to be Prophe∣ticaly denounced: for they seeme to have relation to Ahaz his time. O heavens,] See Deut. XXXII. 1. and XXX. 19. and IV. 26. See Micah VI. 1, 2.
Israel] The common name of Gods people;  yet meaning hereby Judah and Jerusalem. your countrey, &c.] Spoken Propheticaly, as was said, if this were his first Sermon and Prophecie. See chap. IX. 12. 2 Chron. XXVIII. 5, 17, 18. Heare, &c.] Thus wicked they were, likely in King Uzziah's time. upon thee] Or rather, unto thee as the work-man turnes his hand to the work. I will once more set upon the reforming and new mould∣ing of thee. So mitigating that direful doome in the former verse. as at the first] Fulfilled in the times of Hezekiah, and Josiah: and after the returne from the Babylonish captivity, in Zerubbabel, Joshua, Nehemiah, and others. oaks] Trees set apart and used for idolatrous services. gardens] Where they practised Idolatry, as well as in Groves, and Woods. strong] Strong Idols, as ye esteeme them. The word, &c.] A second Sermon, to the end of the IV. chap. in the last dayes] Micah IV. 1, 2, 3. the dayes of the Messias, and of the Gospel. all Nations] The Gentiles. He will teach us, &c.] The Messias will. And so, ver. 4. Nation shall not, &c.] Such shall be the peaceable meek disposition among themselves which the Gospel shall bring them to, Acts IV. 32. Though the wicked will rise up in war, with fire and sword against them, Mat. X. 21, 22. Luke XII. 49, 53. O house of Jacob, let us] Provokes the Jewes so to do, by the ex∣ample of those Gentiles. Therefore thou hast forsaken, &c.] A sad charge against the present people, for their grievous manifold sinnes; whereby God is brought to desert them, and proceed in fierce wrath against them. boweth down] To their Idols in their Idol-worship. And therefore God will bow them down, and humble them, by his judgements, ver. 11. forgive them not] Spoken by way of imprecation, if not rather as a meere prediction or denunciation; that God would now at length, without further delay, proceed most severely to punish them, without sparing. Enter into, &c.] So foretelling what sorry shifts they should be then driven to; though to small or no purpose, verse 19. and 21. Cedars of Lebanon] Not any, not all their strongest hopes, and helps shall any whit availe them, against the wrath of the Lord; when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth; when he comes to make a terri∣ble earthquake in the State, for their hainous and hideous sins. to the moles] His most precious Idols, in whom he trusted; seeing no help or hope in them, he shall cast them away with indignation and disdaine, into the vilest and filthiest holes and corners, chap. I. 29.
Cease ye from man] Seeing no humane help, no might or height will availe against the Lord, therefore cease to put any confidence in frail man, Psal. CXLVI. 3, 4. Ier. XVII. 5, 6. Psal. LXXVI. 7. For, behold, &c.] God will take away the stay and the staff of man, and of other creature-comforts and supports, one and other. children] In age, or men of childish dispositions. Oppressed] Which followes of none, or of evil government. I will not, &c.] Men will refuse publike imployment, to under∣take the care and cure of the State, and to be Rulers in it, being so full of confusion, so perplexed and perilous as theirs then should be. is ruined] And therefore for their extreme obstinacie and impu∣dencie; as the words following do declare. Say ye] A consolation to the small companie of the Godly among them, in those calamitous times. As for my people] Proceeds on to declare the confusion and disor∣ders of the times;  that even boyes and women, persons so qualified, a∣bused them, and domineered over them. The Lord] He riseth up to plead and judge for his people, against those cruel oppressors. Moreover, &c.] Comes from the Men to the Women. tinckling ornaments] Divers names following in this wardrobe of Women, are of conjectural, rather then certaine and sure significati∣on, to us at this day. glasses] Looking-glasses;  of bright brasse, or steele, or like met∣tal, Exod. XXXVIII. 8. Of glasse properly so called we finde no cer∣taine mention in the Old Testament. girdle] Girding. The word is used of those aprons or girdings, which of twigs twisted or wreathed, rather then leaves sowed together, our first parents made to cover their shame with. a rent] Or rags. burning] Sun-burning, tanning. gates] Cities, Lam. I. 4. She] The Land of Iurie, or the mother-City Ierusalem. seven women] Chap. III. 25. Such should be the paucity of men surviving, as chap. XIII. 2. that is uncouth, immodest motion and sol∣licitation should fall out, and finde place with them. In that day] After these calamities overpast; when the Lord shall have washed, &c. as it is, ver. 4. the branch] The Messias, chap. XI. 1. Zech. III. 8. and VI. 12. Jer. XXIII. 5. and XXXIII. 15. Yet some understand this here of the Church. And so to the end of this short Chapter. of the Lord] The Messiah himself; And likewise the Church, and her beauty, and holinesse, and defence, and shade, and shelter, come and spring all from the Lord. and the fruit of the land] Literaly. And may be applied spiri∣tualy. that remaineth] The remnant that shall escape, be left, and survive
Altar] The brazen Altar in the Court before the doore. the voice of the Lord] Not of the Seraphs. I send] The Unity of the Deity. for us] The Trinity of the Persons. send me] Being so fitted, as formerly, he now promptly offers him∣selfe. make the heart of this people fat] This God doth not by infusing any wickednesse or corruption, of any kinde, into them: but indirect∣ly, and by accident, and consequent, thus; By not hindering it, but permitting it; justly, for their sinnes, withholding, or withdrawing his Restraining Grace, which holds them in as a Grayhound is held in from an hare by a slip; Denying his blessing to the meanes of Grace, not vouchsafing his special and free grace and assistance to them; but withdrawing the efficacy of his Spirit, which things he is not bound to give to any: and justly leaving them so both to all Satans tentations, and his instruments; And also to their owne vile lusts, the inbred hardnesse of their hearts, rebellion of their wills, and the universal corruption of their natures; which enslaves them to sinne, and fires them after it; yea, the more for any opposition of Gods Commands, Word, or Works, or any meanes else used to the contrary; as we see Lime burne with water cast upon it. Even so the Heathen could say, Nitimur in vetitum, semper cupimúsque negata: according with that of the Apostle, Rom. VII. verse 8,—13. Yea, God justly suffering and presenting such objects, and occasioning such things to fall out, as are not simply evil in themselves, yet through their default will prove stumbling-blocks unto them, as whereupon their own wicked hearts will still work and improve their own induration, excecation, and ir∣ritation to further sinning. Thus they willingly fall further into sin∣full actions. The power of doing which acts, as they are acts, are yet from God alone, in whom we live, and move, and have our being; but the obliquity, malignity, and evil of them is from the wicked Agent. And all this God doth in a way of justice: It is a just thing with God, when men wilfully winkand shut their eyes against the light; And when they harden their hearts, and stop their eares against him, his Word, and Will, and Works; It is just with him, in maner aforesaid, to let them have and enjoy what they so love and desire to have and enjoy. And so to punish sin with sin. For all the premises, see Deut. XXVIII. 28. and XXIX. 2, 4. Psal. LXIX. 23. and LXXVIII. 32. and LXXXI. 12. and CVI. 7. Esay XXVIII. 13. and XXIX. 10. and XLIV. 18. Jer. V. 31. Ezek. II. 5, 7. and III. 7. and XX. 25. Zech. VII. 11, 12. Matth. XIII. 14. John XII. 37. Acts XIV. 16. Rom. I. 21, 22, 26, 28. and II. 4, 5. and Chap. VII. ver. 8, 9, 11, 13, 23. and XI. 8. 10. 2 Cor. II. 15, 16. 2 Thes. II. 10, 11, 12. 2 Tim. III. 13. Heb. VI. 4, 6, 7. Apoc. XVI. 9, 11. All this I say is just for Him who knoweth how, and orders withal, out of the infinitenesse of his wisdome and goodnesse, so as to make them serve his providence for the producing of good out of evill, the greetest good out of the greatest sinne; as Acts
IV. 28. See my Annotations on Ezek. III. 20. Lord, how long?] Shall this sad condition last? utterly desolate] Yet there is mention of a Reserve, v. 13. farre away] Into Assyria, and Chaldea; yea, some extend this to the last destruction by Vespasian, and Hadrian, the Romane Empe∣rours. But yet in it shall be a tenth] God will still in his dreadfulest judge∣ments preserve a small remnant, to continue his Church. Thus he concludes with this comfort here: as he likewise concluded his first and second Sermon. a Teil-tree] Or a Line-tree, of goodly boughs and leaves. and an oak] So most do render the word. whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves] As in winter. so the holy seed] The seed of Saints. The application of the simi∣litude. These God reserves, by them to propagate his Church, Rom. XI. 15. And it came to passe] The fifth Sermon. in the dayes of Ahaz] In the third, or the beginning of the fourth yeare of his reigne. For within the fourth of his reigne was Pekah slaine, 2 Kings XV. 30, 33. in the twentieth yeare of Jotham, reckon∣ing so both the four yeares of Jotham in his father Uzziahs life-time, and the sixteen yeares of his reigne after the death of his father. Or rather, reckoning from the beginning of Jothams sixteen. And so this will fall out in the fourth of Ahaz. See my Observations on 2 King. I. pag. 103. Of the death of Ahaz, See chap. XIV. 28. that Rezin] Rezin and Pekah severaly by themselves, had made some attempt against Iudah, in the end of Iothams, or the very begin∣ning of the reigne of Ahaz, and then mightily prevailed, 2 Kings XV. 37. 2 Chron. XXVIII. 5, 8. But now joyntly they bend their forces together, to make a full conquest: yet in this prevaile not; And so 2 Kings XVI. 5. One Rezon was the first King of Syria, 1 Kings XI. 23. Syria] See the Observations on 2 Sam. VIII. 5. as the trees] Their hearts quaked and quivered, as an aspin leafe. And the rather, because of what they had formerly suffered from them severaly. Which put them instantly upon dispatching of messen∣gers, for aide, unto the King of Assyria, which God sends here to dis∣swade them from, 2 Kings XVI. 7, 8. Shear-jashub] Signifies the remnant shall returne. This name given him in a prophetical way: as that of his other sonne, chap. VIII. 3. and those of Hosheah, chap. I. 4, 6, 9. Here brought with Esay, because he was to make use of him in his message to Ahaz, v. 16. upper poole] The very place where Rabshakeh afterwards stood, ch. XXXVI. 2. 2 Kings X. 17. See the Observations on Neh. III. 1. And the Annotations on this text of Esay. fullers field] See the Observations on Neh. III. 1. the sonne of Tabeel] Uncertaine who. But whoever, a King to hold from and under them.
the forementioned calamities. These a Type of the Elect, Phil. IV. 3. Apoc. III. 5. and XVII. 8. and by the spirit of burning] By the fire of Gods zeale, chap. IX. 7. rhe fire of his Spirit. And the Lord will, &c.] A promise of Gods gracious presence a∣mong his people, for their direction, and protection, after they are so washed and purged. her assemblies] for the solemne services of God, Psal. XLVI. 5. Zech. II. 5. a cloud] As the Pillar was to the Israelites, Exed. XIII. 21. a cloud by day, and a fire by night. Even the same Pillar, Exod. XIV. 19, 20, 24. all the glorie] All Gods people. Or rather all that glorious estate, that God would advance his people unto, as aforesaid, should conti∣nue firme and stedfast unto them, under his protection over-spreading every part of it, and preserving it from all annoiance in any kinde. Now will I sing, &c.] His third Sermon. what could have been done more, &c?] Matth. XXIII. 37. and ch. XI. 21. more, in regard of Ordinances and means offered and used: more, as a Vine-dresser, more in this kinde and way, by my Ministers and Labourers, and Husbandmen; more, to leave them inexcusable. Gods absolute power, and will, are not here questioned. See Matth. III. 9. and ch. XI. 25, 26. 1 Cor. III. 6, 7. Rom. IX. 16. one bath] See the Observations on Gen. XVIII. 6. an Homer] See the Observations on Exod. XVI. 36. the work of the Lord] The judgements, either impendent, or in∣cumbent; And the Lords hand in them. are gone into captivity] Or, are going. It is as sure so to be, as if it were done already. So Jer. IX. 1. and John III. 18. Hell] The grave: or any kinde of receptscle of mans dead body, Gen. XXXVII. 35. Jonah II. 1, 2. Mean man] See the Annotations on Ch. II. 9. Adam, of base earth. mighty man] Ish. in judgement] In his righteous judgements upon them. Then] After the judgements threatened, are accordingly exe∣cuted. shall the Lambs] Literaly. Or rather the godly poore ones. after their maner] Freely and quietly, as they had wont to do, be∣fore their disturbance and expulsions by their great oppressors. And this, either in the time of the captivity, when they were left in the land, and the great ones carried away; or upon their returne, quietly en∣joying their own lands and meanes againe, whence by the injurious dealings of the mightier sort they had formerly beene ejected. strangers eate] As Chap. I. 7. Woe] More wilde grapes, and vile fruits that Gods Vineyard brought forth: And woes with them.
draw iniquity] Toile and tire themselves with all their might to draw on iniquity, to practise it. Let him make speed] That scoffe at his threatenings, jest at his judgements. Therefore as the fire] Gods judgements at the heeles of sinne. their carcases] 2 Chron. XXVIII. 6. 120000 in one day. And he will lift up, &c.] More, and greater judgements, should follow after those; still more. to the Nations] The Assyrians, in the time of Hezekiah. Some stretch it to the Chaldeans, in the time of Nebuchadnezzar. slumber or sleep] Be drowzie and sloathful;  but vigilant and dili∣gent. girdle] They shall not lay their armes aside, but be alwayes ready for journey, and march, and action. nor the latchets] Nothing should befal them that might retard them in their march, or hinder their expedition. roare like young lions] See the Annotations on Job IV. 10. By sun∣dry similies, and hyperbolees he sets forth the fiercenesse of the ene∣mies, and their armies. and if one look] The forlorne and perplexed condition of the Jewes, by the irruption of so fierce and powerful an enemie; that cast they their eye which way soever they could, downward, or upward, yet no hope of help or comfort should appear. So again, chap. VIII. 21, 22. in the closing up of this hideous prediction. yeare that Uzziah died] And the beginning of Jothams reigne. Jo∣tham had ruled some yeares in the life-time of Uzziah. See the Anno∣tations on Hos. I. 1. And the Observations on 2 Kings I. But this here is after Uzziah's death. This is the fourth Vision or Sermon of Esay. I saw the Lord] One God in Trinity of persons: as the Plural terme, ver. 8. go for us? seemes to imply. Esay saw him, not in his Essence, but in this visible module of glory here represented. traine] Of his robes. filled the Temple] The Throne then, it seemes, was in that high Portal of 120 Cubits high; and the traine of his robes filled the Tem∣ple or the Sanctum. flie] Verse 6. Dan. IX. 21. one cried to another] As by course singing out the praises of the Lord. holy] Thrice, to denote the superlative eminencie of the Lords holinesse: and likely the holinesse of his justice. And the posts, &c.] The Temple doores and posts shaken; and the body of the Temple filled with smoak. Signes of Gods anger and in∣dignation, Psal. XVIII. 8. at the voice of him that cried] A loud and dreadful voice. See A∣mos IX. 1. woe is me] As Hab. III. 16. See the cause here; and, v. 7.
within sixty five yeares] From the fourth of Ahaz, to the four and twentieth of Manasseh, wherein he was carried to Babylon, by Esar∣haddon, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 11. who withal swept away the remainder of those that Shalmaneser had left, Ezra IV. 2. are 65. years. and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's sonne] Pekah. And he was slaine by Hoshea. And Rezin by Shalmaneser; both almost presently after; 2 Kings XV. 30. and chap. XVI. 9. See my observations on 2 Kings I. Ask thee a signe] Seeing thou still remainest staggering and doubt∣ful, for all this. A great grace offered to a gracelesse man. I will not ask] Not as loath to tempt God;  though he pretend that. But because he beleeved nothing of that the Prophet spake, and was resolved to go on another way, contrary to the Prophets minde; to seek help of the Assyrian, and not to rely on God and his help. O house of David] Speaking as to him, so to his traine and atten∣dants; alike herein faulty as he was. weary my God] In distrusting him, and me his messenger? Therefore] Or, Neverthelesse. Though you are unworthy of it by your refusal. a signe] Such as never any was before it, or since. a Virgin] This fell out in many ages after. And so things to en∣sue afterwards, are sometimes given for signes: as chap. XXXVII. 30. Exod. III. 12. Jer. XLIII. 9, 10. and LI. 63. By this signe God shewes that he can do a greater thing, then he promised to Ahaz, to save him by his help against those two Kings. And this signe indeed is the foundation of all Gods promises, and of the fulfilling of them; In this Sonne all the promises of God being Yea and Amen. This here is applied to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Matth. I. 18, 23. Luke I. 27, 35. and beare a Sonne] A Virgin still, in, and after the birth; which continues on the strangenesse of this miraculous signe. Not yet but that otherwise he was borne in the ordinary maner, by the opening of the womb, Luke II. 22, 23. Butter and honey] Meats that young children affect. shall he eate] The Virgins Sonne. that he may know] That he may grow up, and attaine to yeares of discretion, &c. Luke II. 52. For before the childe] A childe: or rather, pointing to Shear-jashub. For no other use appears of his being there with his father, but this a∣lone. See chap. VIII. 4. The Lord shall bring] The Prophet now proceeds to foretel him, a farre worse evil then that he now feared, that should befall him and his, from the Assyrians themselves, whom he now so much rested upon. King of Assyria] King or Kings collectively. flie] Egyptians;  or others neighbouring to them, 2 King? XXII. 33, 35. holes of the rocks] As Bees do. Whence is that of honey out of the
rock, Psalme LXXXI. 16. Deut. XXXII. 13. that is hired] Ezek. XXIX. 18, 19. Or rather, 2 Kings XVI. 7, 8. So that Ahaz in issue, did but hire a razor to shave himself, and his estate. the river] Euphrates. And it shall, &c.] The condition of those that shoule be left in the Land, after this shaving. a young cow and two sheep] That had numbers of them, before the plundering. abundance of milke] Through the depopulation, and great pauci∣ty of inhabitants; and large pasturage occasioned thereby. where there were a thosand vines, &c.] The richest and fruitfulest pla∣ces, for want of husbanding and manuring, should be overgrowne with uselesse and harmful trash, ver. 24. with arrowes] To defend themselves against wilde beasts, and o∣ther harmful creatures as might lurk there. And on all hills] Such places on the hills, which the rich had by un∣due inclosures, fenced in for pleasure or profit, that such fences being now cast downe, they should lie open to cattel, great and small, to grase upon, and trample downe at pleasure. Moreover, &c.] The sixth Sermon, in this, and the four Chapters following. And that of the same nature, and subject matter for the most part, with that in the last chapter aforegoing. But as that was to Ahaz; so this to the People. and write in it] Some think, only the name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. Others rather, this whole Sermon or Prophecie contained in these five Chapters. Maher-shalal hash-baz] As in relation to the King of Assyria, make speed to the spoile, haste to the prey; intimating what he should spee∣dily do to Israel and Syria. Witnesses to record] The name given to the childe, and the reason of it. Uriah the Priest] The High Priest. Of whom, 2 Kings XVI. went unto] Or, had gone in to. And so in the words following. bare a Sonne] Or had borne a Sonne: was newly delivered of a male-childe. this people] Of Israel and Samaria. of Shiloah] The soft rivolet of Jerusalem. over all his channels] Or rather, with all his channels; or from all his channels, and his banks; meaning his owne; That the King of Ashur should come with all the forces he could make. thtough Judah] Having subdued Israel, should make his way there∣by to passe through Judah also. even to the neck] To Jerusalem; that all Judah should be in dan∣ger to be drowned, by the inundation of this river, the Assyrian and his forces. Associate your selves] Speaking to the enemies, the Israelites, Sy∣rians,
Assyrians, & all their people & armies; & that in way of derision. and ye shall be broken] All shall turne to your ruine. for God is with us] Even that Immanuel, ver. 8. and, ch. VII. 14. spake thus to me] To comfort, and confirme the godly in Judah, against their distrusts and fears, in these calamitous times. a confederacie] Be against that confederacie with the Assyrian. Binde up the Testimony] God would not have the Prophet to deale further in this kind, with these faithless and prophane people; but re∣serve such sacred mysteries to be imparted to the faithful, his disciples. And I will waite] The Prophets resolution, what he would do. Behold, I, and the children] My self, and my children, chap. XX. 2, 3. and, chap. VII. 16. and, ver. 3, 4. of this chapter. Indeed, Heb. II. 13. These words are produced, as spoken, either of, or by Christ: As likewise those words, 2 Sam. VII. 14. are applied to Christ, Heh. I. 5. And the like is againe in that same text, Heb. II. 13. The truth is, Many speeches of the Prophets, concerning themselves; and many Prophecies concerning Cyrus, and others▪ who were types of Christ, are in the New Testament applied unto Christ; being one way, and in one maner verified of them; and another way, and in another man∣er also, many times fulfilled in him. seek unto them that have familiar spirits] People in times of straits are prone this way, 1 Sam. XXVIII. 7, 15. 2 Kings I. 2. And so likely at this time. The Prophet therfore here armes the faithful against this course. And they shall passe] The evil that shall betide such men: In their distresses they shall flit and fling to and fro; but meeting with no meanes of succour or relief, either from above, or below, they shall be at their wits end. and curse their King] Who brought them to that miserable distress, and should rather have saved and preserved them. And their God] Even God himself, in their murmuring desperati∣on. Or rather, their Idol-god. unto the earth] Downward: or abroad into the Land, as, ch. V. 30. Neverthelesse] This Chapter hath dependance upon the Chapter a∣foregoing, and is a continuation of that discourse. Here the beginning imports some allay of the calamitous condition there mentioned. he lightly afflicted] By Pul, rather then Tiglath-Pileser, 2 Kings XV. 19, 20. more grievously] By Shalmaneser, 2 Kings XVII. 3, 6. Or, by Tig∣lath-Pileser rather, 2 Kings XV. 29. by the way of the sea] Of Cinnereth, Josh. XIII. 27. called also the sea of Galilee, the sea of Tiberias, the lake of Genesareth. beyond Jordan] Or beside Jordan, on the West-side of it. The word signifies either side. in Galilee of the Gentiles] The upper Galilee, in the Tribe of Naph∣thali; much replenished with the Gentiles, being near the Confines of Tyre and Sidon, and having the Cities in it, made over by Solomon to Hiram, though he refused them. And our Saviour preached much
in this Galilee also, Matth. IV. 2, 13, 18, 24. The Evangelist cites this text, Matth. IV. 15, 16. and picks out only so much, as did con∣cerne his present purpose, and applies it thereunto. The people] In those places, on which the darknesse of affliction had first seized in those times, There the spiritual light of joy and life, had, by our Saviours preaching, first sprung forth: He includes here the lower Galilee, in the tribe of Zebulun. hath seene] He speaketh in prophetical maner, of things to come, as already effected. Thou] Speaking to God. hast multiplied] Wilt multiply. The Prophet runs all along here in a prophetical straine. the Nation] The Jewish Nation; in the dayes of the Messias, by the confluence of the Gentiles, of all Nations. and not increased the joy] Read this interrogatively: and so it makes a strong affirmative. Or thus, Thou hast increased the joy to him, or it; that is, to the Nation. They joy before thee] And the greatnesse of their joy, is amplified by two similitudes. For thou hast broken] One reason of their joy. Midian] Chap. X. 26. Judges VII. For every battel, &c.] Or, to be rendered thus; When the whole battel of those that were in battel, was with clashing of armes, and rayment rolled in gore blood; which by burning became food for the fire. Thus it was in the Midianites Camp. a childe is borne] Who it is, and what maner of person, by whom all that hath beene said, shall be effected. Emmanuel, the Vigins Son. Unto us] And for us. The Lord sent a word] After these comfortable Promises interlaced, for the stay of the faithful, the Prophet here returnes again, torelate th calamities that should, for their excesse of sin, and obstinacie therein, befall the people of Israel, and the Syrian King their confederate. hath lighted] Shall light. adversaries of Rezin] The Assyrians. against him] Against Rezin. his enemies] Israels enemies. Under the Assyrian afterwards. Or, rather, these enemies are the Assyrians and Philistines, ver. 12. Thy Syrians] The Syrians, being now subdued by the Assyrian, shall now as his subjects, come under his conduct and command. cut off] By Shalmanazer. and rush] 2 Kings XVII. 6, 23, 24. an hypocrite] Or rather prophane. no man shall spare his brother] But plunder and spoile one another, Jer. XIX. 9. his owne arme] Prey, and devour the substance of those that are nearest unto them. Manasse Ephraim] The Israelites one against another.
and they together] Both of them against Judah. Woe] Here is a further charge, with a denunciation annexed to it against Israel. Though some would apply it to Judah. What will ye do, &c?] As, Matth. XXIII. 33. Rom. II. 3. Job XXXI. 14, 23. from far] From the Assyrian. without me, &c.] What will ye do then? or to whom will ye flee for help? ye shall by no shift be able to escape, either to be taken pri∣soners, or be put to the sword. O Assyrian,] Here might best beseeme this Chapter to begin. God purposing to use the Assyrian as the rod of his anger, against his peo∣ple; doth here for the support and comfort of his faithful ones, insert a denunciation of destruction to befall him afterwards: and a gracious promise of deliverance of his people from him. O the Assyrians, see the Observations on 1 Chron. V. 26. Is not Calno, &c.] Cities here mentioned, were near Euphrates. As I have done unto Samaria] The successe of his predecessors, Tiglath-Pileser, and Shalman-Eser against Samaria, Sennacherib here takes to himself. I will punish] Chap. XXXVII. 23, 29, 36, 37, 38. egges that are left] The dam forsaking them for fear. his fat ones leannesse] Among the chief and choise ones in his ar∣mies, upon his hoasts, God will send a consumption. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire] A light to his people; a fire to his adversaries. in one day] Chap. XXXVII. 36. stay upon him that smote them] The Assyrian. a remnant] As but a remanant only of Sennacheribs armie. thy people Israel] As God speaking to the Prophet; or rather thy people, O Israel, speaking so to Jacob of his posterity. yet a remnant] And but a remnant only. Alluding again to Shear∣jashubs name. See Rom. IX. 27, 29. and XI. 5. That remnant being a type of Gods elect. the consumption decreed] The reason, why but a remnant. Therefore] Comforts the few faithful ones. and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt] As God destroyed the Egyptians then, so he will the Assy∣rians now. Allusion is here had to Moses his lifting up his rod over the red-sea. because of the anointing] Christ the anointed. He is come] The Prophet here describes the Progresse of Sennache∣rib with his armie, through Benjamin, whereunto most of the townes here mentioned did appertaine, to and against Jerusalem; as if he plain∣ly beheld it in a prophetical rapture and vision. They are gone over the passage] Not of Jordan, but the straits be∣tween the hills near Michmash, 1 Sam. XIII. 23. and XIV. 1, 4, 5. Gallim] 1 Sam. XXV. 44.
top the bough] The chief and principal in Sennacheribs armie. and Lebanon shall fall] The Assyrian King is called a Cedar of Le∣banon, Ezek. XXXI. 3. And Carmel, though a mount of Israel, is in this very argument applied to him, and his forces, verse 18. These then may resemble other great States, Persons, and People, as well as those of the Jewes. And therefore by the tenure of the context, Le∣banon here is no other then the Assyrian vast host. by a mighty one] An Angel, chap. XXXVII. 36. And there shall come] Here, as usualy upon occasion of particular great deliverances, the Prophet riseth higher, and proceeds unto that spiritual deliverance of the Church by the Messias, at his coming: This temporal being a kinde of type of that spiritual. And withal, it shews a reason why it was said, for the anointing, chap. X. 27. Here then in this Chapter we have Christ the Messias prophesied of, and de∣scribed, by his descent, and meane appearance, and low condition, in our humane nature; the meane estate his parents were then brought unto; his transcendent excellencies and endowments, by meanes whereof he should be enabled to effect and accomplish such strange and unheard of archievements as are herein mentioned; and particu∣latly, the Calling of the Gentiles. second time] As formerly out of Egypt, to recover] Into his possession againe. the remnant] A small parcel. See chap. X. 22. of his people] The Jewes; distinguished from those, ver. 10. See Apoc. VII. 4,—9. from Assyria, &c.] And other forreigne places here mentioned, where they were scattered. for the Nations] Or, to the Nations; for them bring or send in, the Israelies that are in captivity with them, or sojourne among them. This typicaly and chiefly relates to the calling home of the elect of them to Christ, wheresover dispersed; some at one time, some at another, and also the maine body of the residue, in his own appoint∣ed season, Acts II. 41. and IV. 4. and XXI. 20. Rom. XI. 5, 25, 26. 2 Cor. III. 16. The envie also of Ephraim] That had beene between them, and Ju∣dah, since the rent of the Kingdomes by Jeroboam the Ephraimite, 1 Kings XII. was to cease, when united either to other in Christ, E∣zek. XXXVII. 16. Jer. III. 18. and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off] In the time of the Messias, the obstinate enemies of the Church of God, shall by Christ be destroyed, see chap. LX. 12. But they shall flie, &c.] They shall subdue these inveterate enemies; the enemies of the spiritual Kingdome of Christ hereby typified. the tongue of the Egyptian sea] The Prophet here promiseth from God a removal of all impediments that might hinder the Jewes in this their returne into their land. This their returne, shadowing out the reducing of people to the obedience of Christ, and his spiritual King∣dome.
By this tongue there is meant the red-sea, which is like a tongue. the river] Nilus. in the seven streames] By which, as by so many mouths, it empti∣eth it self into the Sea. To make way for the Jewes returne from her into their own land. The meaning is, that no impediment or obsta∣cle should be so great, that might hinder those, who were to be brought home to Christ, and his Church, out of all quarters, but it should be removed. an high way] The same meaning for Assyria, as in the former verse, for Egypt. in that day] Of thy returne home. thou shalt say] And sing, these or the like Hymnes of Praise; com∣posed by the Prophet, as set formes; or as directories to them; or both. So 1 Chron. XVI. 7, 35, 36. in that day] A preface or passage into a new forme, another ditty: and this in way of exhortation to others, to do the like. Babylon] Here begin Prophecies, purposely against forreign States. And first against Babylon, that should be their principal enemy. The Inscription of this Sermon is here in the first words. Of Burden, See Jer. XXIII. 33, 36. Of Babylon, see my Observations on Dan. IV. 30. Of her Fall, see Jer. L. and LI. And this seemes to be the seventh Sermon. Lift ye up a banner] To summon those that were to be imployed a∣gainst Babylon. nobles] The great Peeres of Babylon. my sanctified ones] Set apart to this service, ver. 17. Jer. LI. 27, 28. a far countrey] Media and Persia. whole land] Of Chaldea. Howle ye] Babylonians. their faces shall be as flames] Lam. IV. 8. and V. 10. Ezek. XX. 47. Yet this here seemes to be for fear of evil yet to come. See there∣fore that, Jer. XXX. 5, 6. Joel II. 6. Nahum II. 10. Yet the Original word seemes to incline, to the faces of Lybians, or tawny-moores. the stars] All shall be so full of horror and terror, that the heaven∣ly bodies may seem to have lost their light; no glimps of comfort shall appeare. Ophir] See the Observations on 1 King. X. 11. shake the heavens] I will cause them to be in such confusion and di∣straction, as if heaven it self were falling upon their heads, and the earth moving or removing from under their feet. And it shall be] Babylon. turne to his owne people] Babylon shall be forsaken by her hired for∣ces, and confederates. found] Medes and Persians. Medes] Under the conduct of Cyrus and Darius. overthrew Sodom] This utter devastation of Babylon was not at
once; but began at the conquest of it by Cyrus, and in the succeeding a∣ges was consummated. It shall never be inhabited] Jer. LI. 26, 29, 43. and her time is near to come] Esay in vision seeth the judgements as if presently approaching: or, this may be taken as spoken to and for them that then should be living in the time of the captivity of the LXX. years. For the Lord] The reason of the hastening of the destruction of Ba∣bylon, which is Gods mercie and compassion towards his people; the deliverance of whom depended upon Babylons destruction. strangers shall be joyned] See the like, ch. 5. XLIV. and LVI. 3. and LX. 3. Esther VIII. 17. Psal. XLVII. 8, 9. This partly accomplished at their returne from Babylon; but more in the Kingdome of Christ, by the Ministery of the Gospel. possesse them] These Proselites and Converts. take them captive, &c.] Partly verified in the time of the Macca∣bees literaly: but most of all spiritualy by the means and ministery of the Apostles, and Preachers, subduing them to the obedience of Christs Scepter. this Proverb] Or by-word, or taunting speech. Here the Prophet continues the denunciation of the destruction of Babylon. the King] i. e. the Kingdome. O Lucifer] Meaning the Babylonian. the mount of the Congregation] Mount Sion; or mount Moriah, be∣ing in the North-side of Jerusalem, 2 Chron. III. 1. Psal. XLVIII. 2. that opened not the house of his prisoners] But kept them LXX. years in captivity. Prepare slaughter] Esay speaks to the Medes and Persians. for the bitterne] See chap. XIII. 21, 22. that I will break the Assyrian in my land] Rather as in breaking the Assyrian in my land. Sennacheribs overthrow, it seemes, was before this. And it is brought in as an argument and example to prove, that as God had done that one, so he would as certainly do the other, that is, overthrow Babylon in its time. In the yeare that King Ahaz died] Here begins another Sermon, or Prophecie. And might well be the beginning of another Chapter. Chap. VI. did beare the date of the death of Uzziah. This, of the death of Ahaz. Palestina] Meaning here the Westerne part of Jury that was in∣habited by the Philistines. Of the Philistines, see my Annotations on Zech. IX. 6. The Babylonians were the greatest enemies to the Jews, farthest off. The Philistines were their greatest enemies, nearest at hand. because the rod, &c.] This is meant of King Uzziah, who prevailed much in his wars against them, 2 Chron. XXVI. 6, 7. But in Ahaz his reigne the state and strength of the Jews was much weakened: where∣at the Philistines did much rejoyce. But Esay biddeth them not to be overjoyed; for it should not last long.
a cockatrice] Ezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. 8. and his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent] The Serpents fruit shoul be a cockatrice, yea▪ more then so, a fiery flying Serpent. And the first-borne of the poore] The extremely poore, as the Jewes at that time were. shall feed] Freely, fully, and quietly without fear of the Philistines; when they should want, and famish. and he shall slay thy remnant.] A remnant still reserved of Gods people, in his fearfulest judgements. But not a remnant let here by Ezekiah to the Philistines: or at least a slaughter was among that rem∣nant. For Jeremy, Ezekiel, and Zephanie, all after Ezekiahs dayes do againe denounce judgements against them. thou whole Palestina] As thou whole Palestina didst rejoyce before, verse 29. so thy dread and desolation shall be now as general and uni∣versal. from the North] Judea, and Jerusalem, that stood North-East from the Philistines. a smoak] Ezekiahs forces. and none shall be alone in his appointed times] Or, Assemblies, Eze∣kiah's forces should come against them in flocks at his set times, and places for their randezvous. Or, none of the Philistines should care or endure to stay in their meeting places and strong holds, when Eze∣kiahs forces should as smoak break in upon them. What shall one then answer?] To any messengers in general, that upon any occasion shall come to Jerusalem. of Moab] Of Moab, see the Annotations on Amos II. 1. See Jer. XLVIII, wherein are many passages found borrowed from hence. because] Relates the destruction and devastations of some of their chief Cities, and principal parts of their Countrey; together with the Moabites distraction, and vaine devotions thereupon, flocking unto their Idols, who could do them no good. is laid waste] The usual maner of Prophetical language. And this was done at several times, by Shalmanezer, Sennacherib, and Nebu∣chadnezzar. Of which see more on chap. XVI. 14. an heifer of three years old] Ier. XLVIII. 34. as an heifer of three years old, i. e. such shall the criers, or the cry be. shall they carry away] The enemies shall. to the brook of the willows] Some place in Moab; there to share it; and thence to carry it into Assyria. Send ye the Lamb] The tribute due. to the Ruler of the Land] The King of Iudah; Ezekiah; of Davids race. See 2 Sam. VIII. 2. Moab subdued by David. After the divi∣sion of the Kingdomes, it fell to Israel. After the death of Ahab, it rebelled, 2 Kings I 1. and ch. III. ver. 4, 5. and so denied the tribute, whereupon Ihoram, with the assistance of King Iehoshaphat, and the King of Edom, makes that warre against Moab, 1 Kings III. 7, 9. Here the Prophet seemes to admonish Moab what course she should take,
and might have taken, for the prevention of the judgements here de∣nounced against her; to wit, by paying their due tribute to the King of Iudah; And by performing kind offices unto Gods people, in the times specially of their distresse, verse 3, 4. Wherein failing, they are again menaced with the judgements before mentioned, verse 7,—13. And a certain time set for the execution of the same, verse 14. from Sela in the wildernesse] Or, as some, to the wildernesse. unto the account] Where the King had his palace. at the fords of Arnon] Which bounded their Countrey on the one side, Num. XXI. 13. consumed out of the land] Of Judah. As indeed Sennacherib was. And therefore the performance of the kinde offices oi the Moabites to the Jewes should not last long, or be over-burdensome. the throne] Of Judah. and he shall sit] Ezekiah, the Type, Christ, the Truth. and hastening justice] Without needlesse delayes. his lies shall not be so] All his haughty and wrathful thoughts, shall not take such effect, as in the pride of his heart he imagineth. his Sanctuarie] The Temple of his chief idol Chemosh, 1 Kings XI. 7. Jer. XLVIII. 46. since that time] That this judgement past upon Moab, was first re∣vealed to the Prophet; That which followeth, ver. 14. being added afterwards thereunto. within three years] Most likely thus;  Conceiving this prophecie and denunciation to have beene delivered about the fourteenth or fifteenth year of Ezekiah, then it took effect about the eighteenth or nineteenth year of his reigne; and was put in execution by Ezarhad∣don the Assyrian King. Though the utter and final destruction of Moab, here before denounced, and by Jeremy long after seconded, was to be executed by Nebuchadnezzar. That which was speedily effect∣ed, helping to confirme the truth of the former denunciation, though that were to take effect long after. Yet some conceive this to be done by Ezarhaddon in the tenth Of Hezekiah. Others, by Shalma∣nezer, in his way as he came to besiege Samaria. Damascus] of Damascus, Annotations on Amos I. 3, 4. The like burden against Damascus, see chap. XLIX. 23. Amos I. 2. Zech. IX. 1. is taken away] This was partly effected by Tiglath-pilezar, 2 King. XVI. 9. and after by Shalmaneser, and after by Nebuchadnezzar. the glory of Iacob shall be made thin] Of Israel the ten Tribes. At that day, &c.] The residue of Gods people, refined and re∣formed by these forementioned calamities, shall then abandon their idols, and seek unto God. Which they left for the children of Israel] The enemy left. God so disposing things out of his gracious affection to his people. plant] Curiously. but the harvest] For all thy curious planting, and sowing, the har∣vest shall be an heap, ruined, spoyled, destroyed.
Woe to the multitude of many people] Those forces that Sennache∣rib led against Gods people. See chap. XXX. 28. and XXXVI. and XXXVII. that served under him. and they shall flee farre off] So did Sennacherib, chap. XXXI. 9. at evenintide trouble] In Jerusalem. before morning he is not] Most slaine by the Angel, and the rest fled. This is the portion] A sweet Close. A new Sermon or Prophecie. But very obscure; and full of va∣rious interpretations. Woe] Some sense this, as if it were a Compellation Ho. Shadowing with wings] Meaning Egypt, say some: Ethiopia, say others. beyond the rivers of Ethiopia] The rivers and streames of Nilus a∣bove in Ethiopia, South of Egypt; where Meroe a chief Island, say some. Others understand it of the rivers of Ethiopia, not above, but under Egypt. And they there do place Meroe, where they conceive the Queen Candace reigned. That sendeth Ambassadors] Some say, The Ethiopians send them, and namely Tirhakah. Others, the Egyptians send them. by the Sea] The Red-Sea. Go ye swift] The words of Tirhakah, say some. Of the Egyptians, say others. a Nation scattered] The Assyrians, say some; Tirhakah so pro∣voking them to warre and battel. The Ethiopians, say others; the E∣gyptians thus warning them of their ruine approaching by the Assy∣rians. And a third sort would understand by this scattered, peeled, ter∣rible Nation, the Israelites. a Nation meted out, and trodden down] The Ethiopians were such, and so here to be entreated and used. But they that understand here∣by the Assyrians; or the Israelites either, render the words a Nation meting out▪ and treading down; arrogating so much to themselves, and acting accordingly. the rivers have spoiled] The forces of the King of Assyria, say some, thus should spoile the land of the Ethiopians. The others understand∣ing here the land of the Assyrians, conceive it here to be thus descri∣bed by the rivers, and the abundance and violence of them, and their streams in it. All ye inhabitants] Esay calls all the world to observe, how re∣markable and conspicuous, Gods judgements and the execution of them by the Assyrians, should be upon the Ethiopians, say some: Gods judgements upon and against the Assyrians, say others. And ac∣cordingly they apply what is set down in the 4, 5, and 6. verses fol∣lowing; the one, for the Assyrian executing the judgement upon the Ethiopian: the other, for God executing his judgement upon the As∣syrian; asserting to himself the defence and security of his owne people.
In that time] A prophecie of the Conversion of the Ethiopians to Christ, in the dayes of the Messias, Acts VIII. 27,—39. As most hold. shall the present be brought] By the Ethiopians, a present of their spiritual services. Others expound it, a present of the prey of Senna∣cheribs armie, chap. XXXIII. 23. consecrated to Gods service, and in way of Thanksgiving to him. Jer. LI. 44. of Egypt Of Egypt see the Observations on Gen. XII. 10. Of this burden of Egypt, see likewise Jer. XLIII. 10. and XLIV. 30. and XLVI. 2, 13. Ezek. XXIX. and XXX. and XXXI. 2, 18. and XXXII. swift cloud] Swiftnesse for expedition: cloud, in an extraordinary manner; for clouds are not ordinarily seen in Egypt, Psal. CIV. 3. a cruel Lord, and a fierce King] Which some understand of Sen∣nacherib, some of Nebuchadnezzar; some rather of one of their own Kings; as namely, Psammetichus, who had beene a pettie King of one of the two Provinces, into which Egypt had beene divided after the death of Sethon, who had beene King of the whole Countrey before. But this Psammetichus at last overpowering the rest, made himselfe Lord of all Egypt, and was the father of Nechoh, who slew the good King Josias, 2 Kings XXIII. 29. See Herodotus, lib. 2. Diodor. lib. 1. And the waters shall faile from the Sea] This may imply the im∣peaching of their trade and traffick by Sea. and the river shall be wasted] Nilus; upon which the wealth and felicitie of Egypt did depend. The miseries which should ensue up∣on the wasting and drying up of it, are set downe in the five verses following. of Zoan] See Num. XIII. 22. Psal. LXXVIII. 12. Land of Judah shall be a terror] Judah's overthrow shall fright E∣gypt; left the like befall them, and their own turne come next. In that day five Cities] A gracious prediction of the conversion of Egypt to God, and his service; which principaly hath reference to the dayes of the Messias. So againe, Jer. XLVI. 26. see the like comfor∣table closes, chap. VI. 13. and XVII. 7. and XVIII. 7. and XXIII. 17, 18. one shall be called the Citie of destruction] Or, of Heres. Or, of the Sunne. See the Observations on Josh. XIX. 38. at the border thereof] Alluding to that, Josh. XXII. 10, 24, 25, 27. a Saviour, and a Great one] Principaly the Lord Jesus. Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians] Both serve the Lord. And Israel be the third. All three, serve the Lord, ver. 24, 25. In the yeare] The time when this Prophecie was delivered. that Tartan] One of the three that Sennacherib sent to Ezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. 17. came to Ashdod] Of Ashdod, see the Annotations on Amos III. 9. When Sargon] Of him, see the Observations on 2 Kings XV. 19.
and took it] Some say, in the twelfth year of Ezekiah: some in the fourteenth, some in the fourth. But most likely, about the eight, or ninth year of Ezekiah after Shalmanezers decease. And the Egypti∣ans, and Ethiopians coming to the relief of Ashdod, were by the As∣syrians defeated, and carried captives, in such scornful and despiteful manner; as is described, ver. 4. the sackcloth] Not here a mourning weed: but such an upper gar∣ment, made of course and hairy stuff, as the Prophets ordinarily were wont to weare, 2 King. I. 8. Zech. XIII. 4. Mat. III 4. naked] Not stark naked. But stript of his Prophetical mantle. As, 1 Sam. XIX. 24. Joh. XXI. 7. Mic. I. 8. Act. XIX. 16. As captives are wont to be led. three yeares] And well might the siege of Ashdod continue three yeares, as well as that of Samariah; most likely the Prophet went so three dayes, so fourty dayes, for fourty years, Num. XIV. 33, 34. E∣zek. IV. 4, 5, 6. upon Egypt, and upon Ethiopia] Judgements denounced upon them before, severally; upon Ethiopia, Chap. XVIII. upon Egypt, Chap. XIX. Here now upon them joyntly. so shall] The explication of the signe. It shall be so at the end of three yeares, from the beginning of the siege of Ashdod. And they shall be afraid] both the Ashdodites, and Jews, that re∣lied so much upon their aid. Isle] See the Observations on, Gen. X. 6. of the desert of the sea] Another Sermon and prophecie against Baby∣lon. And so there are many Sermons against the Assyrians; and also against the Egyptians; by this Prophet. Babylon and Caldea is here called the desert of the sea; a desert, because a large desert, or wide Wildernesse lay between Caldea, and Media; or, it self should be made so, by the judgements ensuing. Or the word here used signifieth a Plaine, and in a plaine Babylon was built, Gen. XI. 2. And called a sea, because of the great river Euphrates, on the banks whereof Babylon was built; and because of the vast lakes made out of the river. And hence is Babylon said to sit upon many waters, Jer. LI. 13. and ver. 36. I will dry up the sea. As whirlwindes] such shall the violent irruptions be of the Medes and Persians breaking into Chaldea. The treacherous dealer] hath now his match;  is now paid in his own coine. Or, the treacherous dealer, dealing treacherously, which some apply to the Chaldeans, some to the Medes and Persians. and the spoyler spoyleth] Some apply only these words to the Medes and Persians. O Elam] The Persian. all the sighing] Wherewith Babylon made my people sigh. Therefore loines] Spoken in the person of the Babylonians. The night of my pleasure] Even in their sestival night was Babylon taken by Cyrus, Dan. 5. 1, 30.
hath he turned] Though it were done about 170. years after. This is an usual Prophetick phrase. Prepare the table] Most likely K. Belshazzars words, for the Feast, and for the Watch. arise ye Princes] Cyrus, and Darius. set a watchman] Gods word to the Prophet. And that as if God willed him to stand as on a watch-tower, to see what he could descry. And for him to relate what himself in Vision had seene; as chap. VI. 1. For this seemes to be done, in a Vision; as that 1 Kings XXII. 17, 19,—22. earkened diligently with much heed] A through watch-master. A Lion] Viz. leads them. Or rather, he cried loud, as a Lion; by his hideous noise expressing much fear and terror. my Lord, I stand] That watchmans words: professing his constant vigilancie. here cometh] Even now are gone into Babylon, speaking as a thing suddenly done: the issue of what he had hitherto so vigilantly ex∣pected. Babylon is fallen] God himself expounding more fully to the Prophet, what this apparition all tended to. O my threshing] My threshed ones, saith the Prophet; my afflict∣ed ones; though not by me. that which I have heard] Foreseene, and foreshewed, is no dreame or relation of my own devising; but what by revelation I have recei∣ved from God. As, 1 Cor. XI. 23. Dumah] In Arabia say some. Edome say others. Another Pro∣phecie; short, and sharp; obscure and difficult; wrapt up in two verses. He calleth to me out of Seir] Seir so called from Seir the Horite, Gen. XXXVI. 20. in whose race it continued, untill the Edomites, or posterity of Esau, thence expelled them, Deut. II. 12. Watchman, what of the night?] Either in a scoffing way. Or ra∣ther, implying a distracting and hazardous condition of those by whom they were uttered, unto whomsoever they were directed. What of the night? or, in the night. Or, concerning the night, hast thou seene, and observed? The night of black affliction that at the present lay heavie upon them, they seeme to enquire of. The watchman said] As by Divine Oracle. The morning cometh] either a faire morning; as ye suppose, ha∣ving shaken off that yoake wherewith Jacobs issue kept you under, Gen. XXVII. 40. Yet this faire morning should not last long. In issue, this morning should be such a morning, as shall afford you no light or com∣fort at all. and also the night] Cometh. A night of calamitie and misery will by the Assyrians ere long seize upon you; worse then the Israelitish yoak. And this as sure, as night succeedeth day. If ye will enquire] Not scoffingly, but seriously; do it then with
all earnest, eager, and ardent inquisition. returne, come] Returne to God; Come to his People. upon Arabia] Another Prophecie. Of Arabia see the Annotati∣ons here. They did wander up and down, and did pitch in tents, chap. XIII. 20. The Arabians were neere the Egyptians, 2 Chron XXI. 16. Mount Sinai was in it, Gal. IV. 25. Paul went into it, Gal. I. 17. So∣lomon had yearly gold from all the Kings of it, 1 Kings X. 15. They traded with Tyre, in Lambs, and Rams, and Goats, Ezek. XXVII. 21. They brought Jehoshaphat presents, flocks, 7700. Rams, and 7700. He Goats, 2 Chron. XVII. 11. But they rose up against his sonne Je∣horam in battel; and their camp slew all his eldest sonnes, save onely the youngest, 2 Chron. XXI. 16. and XXII. 1. In Uzziah's time, God helped him against them, 2 Chron. XXVI. 7. Nebuchadnezzar sub∣dued them, Jer. XXV. 24. Yet afterwards in Nehemiah's time, they eagerly endeavoured to hinder him in the building of the walls of Je∣rusalem, Neh. II. 19. and IV. 7, 8. In the forrest] Leaving their abode in the champion, they should be driven to seek shelter in the Woods. See Jer. XLIX. 28, 29. O ye travelling companies of Dedanim] A people of Arabia, de∣scended from Dedan, one of Abrahams sonnes by Keturah, Gen. XXV. 3. These travelling companies, are like those, Gen. XXXVII. 25, 28. We now call them Caravans. Tema] Another people of Arabia: of Ismaels race, Gen. XXV. 15. Arabia had in it a mingled people. See Jer. XXV. 23, 24. Job VI. 19. This intimated unto the Temanites, what distresse their Countrey∣men of other parts of Arabia should be brought unto. For they fled] It was no groundlesse feare that makes them flee thus. within a yeare] A shorter time that assigned to the Moabites, chap. XVI. 14. Or that, to the Egyptians and Ethiopians joyntly to∣gether, chap. XX. 3. the Assyrian falling in upon these parts of Arabia, before those other of the other Countries. an hireling] Which reckons his year accurately. Kedar] The sonne of Ishmael, Gen. XXV. 13. Another people of Arabia. They and their Princes also occupied with Tyre, in Lambs, and Rams, and Goats, Ezek. XXVII. 21. They also dwelled in tents; and therefore called Scenites, which they were wont to remove from place to place, to procure change of pasture for their cattel. See Psal. CXX. 5. Cant. I. 5. Nebuchadnezzar did smite them, Jer. XLIX. 28. Yet in the dayes of the Gospel they should be converted unto Christ, Esay XLII. 11. and chap. LX. 7. valley of Vision] Judah, and Jerusalem, ver. 4, 8, 10. Ierusalem and Iudea, were full of mountains; and consequently of Valleys. And the Patriarchs, and Prophets, had therein many Visions from God. What aileth thee now] In this distresse by Sennacherib, in the dayes of Ezekiah. Rather then that by Nebuchadnezzar. house tops] To lament, or look about for help, &c.
not slaine with the sword] But, as it were, stark dead with fear, ere they came to any fight. they are bound by the archers] Or, from the bowe. Their hands are so restrained, and tied up with extremity of fear, that they are not a∣ble to manage and make use of their bowes. Or, they are bound and captived by the archers of the enemies. of crying to the mountains] So loud, as will cause the mountains to ring againe with it. Or, so making to the mountains for shelter and safeguard. Elam] Under the Assyrian, fighting in his army. Kir] A Citie in Media, and under the dominion then of the As∣syrian, 2 Kings XVI. 9. Amos I. 5. thou didst look] About thee, and bestir thee. in that day] When the Countrey was full of forreigne forces. to the house of the forrest] The name of an armory situate within Jerusalem. Most likely that which Solomon built, and called the house of the forrest of Lebanon, 1 Kings VII. 2. See the Observations there. of the lower poole] See the Observations on Neh. III. 1. between the two walls] See 2 Chron. XXXII. 5. Jer. XXXIX. 4. for to morrow we shall die] Either desperately: or rather thus mock∣ing the threatnings of the Prophets. revealed] The Lord of Hoasts did in my hearing reveale himself, saying, &c. Shebna] He was a rotten-hearted man, and one that had much a∣bused his power, being in likelihood of meane parentage; and it may be a stranger by descent. See ver. 16. and chap. XXXVI. 3. He is cal∣led the Scribe, or Secretarie, 2 Kings XVIII. 18. Here, over the house; as high Steward. Wherein Eliakim succeeded. He was one of the three sent out to Rabshake. and will surely cover thee] With shame and sorrow. As Ester VII. 8. 2 Sam. XV. 30. Job IX. 24. Ezek. XII. 6, 12. Eliakim] Invested, after the devesting of Shebna. they shall hang upon him] As things are wont to be hanged on a pin. his fathers house, the off-spring and the issue] All his kindred and allies, as well small, as great shall partake of his honour, one way or other. Or, there should be nothing in the Kings house but should be under his power, and have dependance on him. fastened in a sure place] As Shebna accounted himself to be. e cut downe] Meaning Shebna. Tyre] Of Tyre, See the Observations on Josh. XIX. 29. And the Annotations on Amos I. 9. See the like Prophecies against this Towne and State, Ier. XXV. 22. and XLVII. 4. Ezek. XXVI. XXVII. XXVIII. chapters, Amos II. 9. Zech. IX. 2, 4. Tarshish] Of this see the Observations on 1 Kings X. 22. from the Land of Chittim it is revealed to them] It is revealed, and the report is come unto them that formerly traded with Tyre, how it
fared with her, that she is sacked; so that now all harbour in Tyre, or entrance into it is denied unto them. Who these of the land of Chittim should be, there are variable conjectures; but little cer∣tainty. inhabitants of the Isle] Ye, Tyrians. the seed of Sihor] Tyre described here, by her traffick with Egypt; as formerly with Sidon. See Ezek. XXVII. 7. By the great waters of the midland Sea, the graine of Egypt, and all the trade and commo∣dities of it, of Sihor, that is, Nilus, were brought to Tyre. Of this Si∣hor, or Shichor; and that it is Nilus, see the large Annotations upon this Text. the Sea hath spoken] Tyre. The Lord of Hoasts hath purposed it] By his Agents to do it. By Nebuchadnezzar, who spent thirteen years in the siege of it, as Jose∣phus against Appion, lib. 1. doth testifie. And by Alexander the Great long after, in his rage; as Curtius in his fourth Book, IV. Chapter doth witnesse. He] The Lord. Behold the Land of the Chaldeans] This is, or shall be brought to ruine. And therefore it is not impossible but Tyre may be so. in that day] Wherein Tyres calamities here foretold shall be accom∣plished, by Nebuchadnezzar. Ezek. XXVI. 7. seventy years] During the same time of the Jewes captivity in Ba∣bylon. dayes of one King] One Kingdome; as, Dan. VII. 17. and VIII. 21. to wit, in the dayes and reignes of Nebuchadnezzar, and his sonne, and his sonnes sonne, Jer. XVII. 7. sing as an harlot] To renew her lovers; her traders and traf∣fickers. turne to her hire] Of trading and traffick. with all the Kingdomes] The amplitude of her commerce and trade, ver. 8. Holinesse to the Lord] The conversion of the Tyrians to God, in the Kingdome of the Messias. it shall not be treasured, nor laid up] Not reserved for any common or prophane use, publike or private, for themselves or their posterity. that dwell before the Lord] The Lords Ministers for their plentiful maintenance, in food and clothing. the earth empty] Another Sermon or Prophecie;  continuing to the end of Chapter XXVII. This is more General then those going before: And comprehends Judea, and the neighbouring Nations on every side. And the judgements herein denounced, to be executed, partly by the Assyrians, and partly by the Chaldeans, and afterwards also by others, upon them. See the like, Jer. XXV. 15,—38. and XXVII. 2,—8. as with the people, &c.] All estates, and conditions should fare a∣like.
is defiled] The reason of the former denunciations. The new wine] He proceedeth in particular, to instance in some spe∣cialties of judgements The Citie] Taken collectively, as, chap. XXV. 2. and XXVII. 10. every house is shut up] So as there is no going out, or in. as the shaking of an Olive-tree] Few shall be left, yet this remnant shall be to praise the Lord, ver. 14. from the Sea] The transmarine lands, and Sea-coasts in general. God in the fires] In the fires of tribulations, glorifie God, by pa∣tient sufferings, and depending upon him for deliverances. uttermost] The generality of the joy of this Remnant left. my leannesse, my leannesse] The Prophet breaks off here his relati∣on of the gladsome joy, and praises of the foresaid Remnant; And falls into a passionate bemoaning of himself, and regret, for the mi∣series, that were the mean while, for their sins, to befal the others. the windows from on high are opened] Gods vengeance surprizing them, both from above, and from beneath; as well over their heads, as under their feet; and as no shelter for them against the one, so no steady standing for them against the other. To amplifie which, hy∣perbolies are here used. the hoast of the high ones] Such as the Assyrian, and Chaldean Monarchs were. and after many dayes shall they be visited] In favour and mercy. Verified of sundry States and Nations, in the Gospel-times, under the Messias. Then the Moone, &c.] Esay closeth this first part, after his wont∣ed manner; with a passage concerning the spiritual, yet illustrious glory and majesty of Gods reigning in his Church, in the times of the Gospel; the brightnesse and splendor whereof should be such, as no light of Sunne, or Moone; no glory, or magnificence of any worldly estate, should be comparable thereunto. O Lord, &c.] Esay falleth into a solemne celebration and prai∣sing of God, for his foresaid wonderful works, as well of judgement, as of mercy. the Citie] Collectively. of the terrible Nations] That were a terrour to others, shall then stand in awe of thee. when the blast] Even in times of most need, and greatest dan∣gers. And in this mountain] Mount Zion, a Type of the Church. unto all people] As well Gentiles, as Jewes. wines on the lees] Pure and strong wines. The face of the covering] That ignorance and obstinacy, where∣with the minds and hearts of the Gentiles were formerly possessed. veil] 2 Cor. III. 14, 16. death] The second benefit accrewing to the convert Nations;  a freeing them from the power of death, of death spiritual.
in victorie] Or, unto victory, i. e. until an utter conquest be made of him. So the LXX. which the Apostle retaineth, 1 Cor. XV. 54 because the sense is good and sound; though it do not exactly render the let∣ter; for the Hebrew is, for ever. wipe away] A third benefit accrewing to the godly converted ones: fulfilled partly in this life, and perfectly in the next. Shall be said] Their thankful and joyful acknowledgement for those his mercies and favours. For] A reason of their rejoycing and triumphing. in this mountain] Verse 6, 7. Moab] Put for the enemies of Gods people in general. And he] The Lord. Swimmeth] Stretcheth out his armes with all his might. So shall the Lord in powerful maner, reach and smite his enemies, on either side, Zech. V. 3. thy walls] The walls of Moab, ver. 11. this Song] A large Song of purpose penned in this set forme, by Esay, for Gods people, then to be made use of, what time these fore∣said benefits should betide them. For in the Lord Jehovah] Heb. Jah Iehovah. See the Observati∣ons on Psal. LXVIII. 4. Both used distinctly, Psal. CXXXV. 1. Ie∣hovah the usual name, &c. the feet of the poore] He setteth up his poore formerly afflicted ones, over the power of their proud oppressors. Thou most upright] Esay directeth his speech unto God;  and so runneth on in the greatest part of that which followeth; relating there∣in the various passages of his Providence; and acknowledging his goodnesse in going along with them, for his people, and in due time giving a good issue of them. will learne] Or should learne. for their envie at the people] Their envious and spightful carriage towards Gods people. Or, thy zeale and ardent affection which thou bearest towards thy people, and in behalf of them, against those that oppose them. yea the fire of thine enemies] The fire prepared for thine enemies, the fire whereof they are the object. Lord,] Esay speaks still in the person of Gods people. all our works] Those gracious protections, and strange deliverances, to God alone they ascribe them; all our works, not done by us, but for us. in us] Heb. unto us, to our hand, or for us. They are dead] Gods dealing with other people and persons, irre∣coverably destroying them. Thou hast increased the Nation] He deales otherwise with his owne people, ver. 19. though he variously afflict and chastise them. we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth] By all their devices, and designes, they were not able to compasse or accomplish ought for the succour or safeguard of them, and their Countrey.
Thy dead men] In opposition to that, ver. 14. Thus Gods people relate their faith and confidence in God, even in the midst of their deepest miseries: Alluding haply herein, to the general resurrection at the last day. my dead body] In this restitution, and National resurrection of the Jewish people, no one of them shall faile to have his share in the same. Come my people] Esay having ended his Song;  adviseth Gods people to hide and shelter themselves, under Gods protection, till the storme of Gods foresaid general indignation be overpast. In that day] Justice shall be done upon those, be they never so great, that have been the murtherers and oppressors of Gods people. even Leviathan that crooked Serpent] Collectively taken, not of any one particular person alone, but of sundry great Tyrants, that had been principal oppressors of Gods people, ch. XXVI. 13. In that day] When the potent adversaries of Gods people shall be destroyed;  and Gods people by the former afflictions and chastise∣ments pruned and purged. Fury is not in me] No implacable fury towards mine;  as it is to∣wards mine, and my Churches enemies. I am towards my people re∣concileable, Jer. III. 1. Who would set the briars] Sinners set against me in their strength, should by me be soone consumed. Or let him] So much rather let the Sinner do. He shall cause them] The blessing and benefit upon such as should so make peace with him. Hath he smitten him, as] Not so. He deales better in his chastise∣ments of his people. In measure] Not over-roughly, but accordingly as he enables them to beare, Jer. XXX. 11. 1 Cor. X. 13. Psal. LXXVIII. 38. when he maketh all the stones of the Altar] When Jacob, by his re∣pentance, shall abolish all monuments and reliques of his idolatry. yet the defenced Citie] But Gods dealing with his enemies shall be as followeth in this, and the next verse, even without mixture of mercy. in that day] Esay, after his wonted maner, Concludes this long Sermon, with a gracious promise of Gods restitution of his people, after the maine body of the obstinate wicked were by his judgements destroyed from among them, and the residue reformed. the Lord shall beat off] Sever his dispersed people from the Na∣tions among whom they remained; to gather them to him, and his worship. the great trumpet] Cyrus his Proclamation, Ezra I. 1, 2. Woe] Another Sermon or Prophecie. Ephraim] Describes them, as men drunk with pride and prospe∣rity, and drowned in sensuality. Thus were the ten Tribes, where∣of Ephraim was the head. fat valleys] Under the mountaine of Samaria. and strong one] Salmanezer.
with the hand] By maine might. unto the residue of his people] To Judah. to the gate] Of the enemie;  beat them thither. But they] Even they of Judah, whom God vouchsafeth these fa∣vours unto, yet take the same evil courses with Ephraim. Whom shall he teach] Their sensuality and and riotous excesse, made them sottish, and unteachable. Precept upon precept] Yet all to as little purpose to them, as if it were done to a new wearied infant. another tongue] They no more reaped fruit from ought spoken to them, then if it had been spoken in a strange tongue, utterly un∣known to them. See 1 Cor. XIV. 21. he said] God by his Prophets. This is the rest] The only means to procure rest and refreshing. But the word of the Lord] Through their obstinacie, and Gods judgement thereupon. scornful men] Verse 15. 2 Pet. 2, 3. are we at agreement] We have made provision for our safety, ver. 18. come unto us] Or at us. I lay in Zion] For the stay of the minds and hearts of the faithful ones, in the midst of all the ensuing judgements, God maketh this pro∣vision for them to rest and build upon. a precious corner stone] Jesus Christ, Psal. CXVIII. 22. Matth. XXI. 42. Acts IV. 11. 1 Pet. I. 4. shall not make haste] But with patience wait and expect, Rom. IX. 33. the Apostle in his quotation renders it, shall not be abashed or con∣founded; regarding not the words, but the matter. Or having an eye to this text, and that also, ch. XLIX. 23. As in the former part of that quotation he joyneth two places together, ch. VIII. 14. and XXVIII 16. lay to the line] God will in an exact and precise way of justice pro∣ceed against those sensual, secure, and scornful wretches. A meta∣phor taken from Carpenters. For the bed] They should be in such straits and distresses, as all their wiles and shifts should not be able either to secure, or sucour them in. as in mount Perazim] 2 Sam. V. 20. See the like, ch. X. 26. and XIII. 19. Valley of Gibeon] Either, that 2 Sam. V. 25. Or, that Josh. X. 10. his strange work] His dismal judgement; and that upon his owne people; grown to such an extreme height of sin and obstinacie. Strange, in it self, strange to God, to deale so with the body of his own people. lest your bands] Lest God tie them up the shorter for it. a consumption] Of such of you, as so continue, through the whole land. Doth the ploughman] He doth not alwayes insist upon one piece of
his work. And so God will not alwayes, and only be menacing. Another Sermon seemes to begin; and to continue, ch. XXX. and XXXI. Woe] A sad prophesie against Jerusalem, and the Temple; and consequently the whole State of the Jewes. to Ariel] The word signifies a Lion of God. Hereby is meant the brazen Altar, so called, Ezek. XLIII. 15, 16. and called Gods fur∣nace or chimney, ch. XXXI. 9. the Citie] Or of, Or in. Or, and to the Citie. adde ye year to year] Cause feastival sacrifices still to be slaine. and it shall be unto me as Ariel] The whole Citie shall be as an A∣riel; all on a light fire, all full of gore blood, and dead bodies of men slaughtered, after the surprisal of it. And I will camp] Bring an enemy to do it, verse 8. my self com∣manding them, as in chief. This enemy may be understood both of the Assyrian Sennacherib; and the Babylonian Nebuchadnezzar. of thy strangers] All thy help's from abroad, or at home. with thunder] In a most dreadful and direful maner. As when an hungry man] Sets out the appetite, the eagernesse and unsatiablenesse of the enemies cruelty and thirst after blood. and wonder] At the strange stupidity of the body of the people; that regarded not what had been threatned. the Lord hath powred] Verse 14. See the Observations on ch. VI. 10. See ch. XIX. 14. And the Apostles allegation of this text, Rom. XI. 8. draw near me with their mouth] Matth. XV. 3, 8, 9. deep to hide] Hide deep, from the Lord, for him to be able to dis∣cerne and discover. Thus these scoffing States-men conceived of their own contrivances, their wiles and shifts for themselves: and derided all that the Prophets spake. as the potters clay] Lieth as open to his eye;  and as easie for him to mould, or marre. Is it not yet, &c.] This seemes rather a Promise, then a Commi∣nation, chap. XXXII. 15. That great should be the fruitfulnesse of the Land, upon the restitution of their State, either after the Assyrian devastation; or after the Babylonian deportation. shall the deaf hear] Esay here, after his usual maner, beginneth to close up his Sermon, with matter of comfort, and gracious promises; fulfilled partly in those times; but chiefly in the Kingdome of the Messias: The Promises concerne the illumination of the minde, in this verse, the joy of the godly, verse 19. the confusion of those that wrong∣ed them, verse 20, 21. the vindication from shame and fear; and the propagation and enlargement of the Church, by accesse of many Proselites, verse 22, 23, 24. In this, and the next Chapter, Esay principaly bends himself against those that sought and trusted to forreigne helps and succours; and not to God.
Zoan] This;  and Hanes, otherwise called Tahapanes, and Tah∣panhes, were famous Cities in Egypt. Thither they sent for help a∣gainst the Assyrian: and after, against the Babylonian. The burden of the beasts of the South] The burden that the beasts of the Jewes were to carry Southward into Egypt, either to secure their treasures there, or to procure aid thence. from whence come the young and the old Lion,] The way thither so dangerous. And the Egyptians themselves should prove such and so dangerous to the Jewes. write it before them in a table] Or, write this prophesie on a table, that it may be with them: to witnesse against them hereafter. And therefore] Having reference to what followes. Or, Notwith∣standing, if it relate to the premises. Will the Lord wait] Here is matter of comfort, concerning the de∣liverance and restitution of Gods people, ver. 18,—26. And the destruction of the Assyrian, their enemie, ver. 27,—33. and thine eares] Not as before, ver. 10, 11. Get thee hence] As Matth. IV. 10. and ch. XVI. 23. great slaughter] Of Sennacheribs camp. towers fall] His great ones, and Princes in state and place. as the light of seven dayes] Put all in one. So great then should their joy be. burning with his anger] The destruction of Sennacherib, and his forces: And the great joy that Gods people should have thereupon. With the same are divers Chapters and Sermons concluded: as ch. X. 33, 34. and XIV. 24, 25. and XVII. 12,—14. and XXXI. 8, 9. and XXXIII. 13, 14. the Nations] That served under Sennacherib. causing them to erre] And wander to and fro, to make what haste they could into their own Countrey again. as in the night] Of their holy Festivals. Some solemne night-wakes they used to have, before, or after the day of their Feastivals. goeth with a pipe] With musick in the way going up to Gods House: to cheere up themselves; the journey being sometimes long. scattering, and tempest, and hailstones] It may seeme that together with the Angel smiting, there was an horrible and hideous tempest, wherewith the Assyrians were surprized. And thus also it is by some deemed that God disturbed the Egyptian at the red-sea, with a storme like this described. Assyrian] Sennacherib. Tophet] See the Observations on 2 Kings XXIII. 10. for the King] His forces, wherein he suffered; or those Kings that served under Sennacherib: yea, his Commanders he counted as Kings, ch. X. 8. 33. For himself, his Temple was his Topheth, chapter XXXVII. ver. 38. This Chapter is of the same subject with the former.
for help] Against the Assyrians, chap. XXX. 6, 7. and XXXVI. 8. As after in processe of time, against the Chaldeans, Jer. XXXVII. 5. and XLIII. 5, 6, 7. For thus] Here beginneth the Comfortable part of this Prophecie. to fight for mount Zion] Farre higher mounts incircled it. As birds flying] And fluttering about their nests, to defend their young ones, in what they may; so God in all affection and sedulity will defend Jerusalem, and those that trust in him. Turne ye unto him] And so should they partake of the promised protection. children of Israel] Meaning here Judah. deeply revolted] Hos. V. 2. and IX. 9. cast away his idols] Wherein they trusted for help, ch. II. 20. fall with the sword] Not of a man;  but of an Angel. flee] As he did, ch. XXXVII. 37. strong hold] To Nineveh. afraid of the Ensigne] That God by his Angel had lifted up, in the slaughter of their fellowes. whose fire is in Zion] Kept on his Altar there ever burning. Or ra∣ther, fire to burne up the enemies of him, his worship, his people. a King] Ezekiah. Yet a type of Christ; as before him, David, E∣zek. XXXIV. 24. Shall reigne] Hence some suppose this Prophecie to have been de∣livered in Ahaz his dayes. Some in Hezekiahs, concerning his religi∣gious and righteous government of his people, specialy after the o∣verthrow of Sennacherib; and his recovery out of his sicknesse. Princes] Under Hezekiah. And a man] Each one under him. in a weary land] Where men are weary of travelling, through heat, and drought. not be dim] Or closed, as those, ch. XXIX. 10. and VI. 9. Not look another way, from God, unto Idols: from the light of Gods Word, and his judgements conspicuously manifested unto them; not wilfully shut their eyes, or turne them aside from them; as those, chap. XXVI. 11. Shall hearken] Not refuse to hear, as formerly, chap. XXVIII. 9,—13. and XLVIII. 18. but hearkeu diligently, as chap. XXI. 7. and XXIX. 18. and XXX. 21. and XXXV. 5. stammerers] That did but stammer before at any good and religi∣ous speech, shall now manifest the inward alteration and change of their hearts by their ready religious speaking the language of Canaan, that which may minister grace and edification to the hearers. no more called liberal] They shall no more call vice, vertue; evil, good; but they shall in singlenesse of soul call sinne, sinne, a spade, a spade. For the vile person] His description. Churle] His description.
Liberal] His description. The drift seemes to be this, That in Hezekiah's reigne, base-minded, and evil-affected persons should not be now raised and advanced unto places of honour and authority, as in his father Ahaz his time too many had been; and too likely base and wicked Shebna: But now, only worthy men. Rise up] Esay here returnes to speak of those troubles that were to come, before the establishment of the State, in maner before de∣scribed. ye women] The Court-Ladies especialy, that were faulty, as the men; and the more secure and carelesse, as lesse fore-seeing dangers to come; and yet must suffer in them alike, though lesse able to bear them then the men. Therefore Esay rouzeth up them; and by them, the men. Many dayes and years] Heb. Many dayes above a year. Some use the translation in the text: and apply it to the LXX years in the Ba∣bylonish captivity: Others rather use the marginal reading; and ap∣ply it to a just and exact limitation of that calamitous time of almost two years, whiles the Assyrian abode in the land; For full two years he could not be there, considering he came in, in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. 13. And afterwards Hezekiahs life was prolonged fifteen years, chap. XXXVIII. 5. And he reigned but 29. in all, 2 Kings XVIII. 2. for the teats] Which were to them as teats. Some translate, There shall be beating upon the breasts, Nahum II. 7. shall come up thornes] Esay seemes here to passe from that short in∣vasion of the Assyrian, to that greater and longer of the Chaldean Nebuchadnezzar: As if he should say, I am now farther to acquaint you with this later; and which is far worse every way, and of a far longer continuance; in this, and the next verse. for ever] a long time, about seventy years. Of, ever, see the Ob∣servations on Deut. XV. 17. Vntill the Spirit] Esay concludes, as usualy, with gracious Promi∣ses. This promise may extend also to the time of the Messias. when it shall haile coming down on the forrest] God will preserve the fruits of the earth for them, that they shall not with storme and tem∣pest be destroyed. and the Citie shall be low in a low place] Though the Cities built there, yet shall be there secure, verse 18. even though, say some, it haile never so much; and Cities be brought never so low. Blessed are ye] Gods blessing on their husbandry and labours. Ap∣pliable to Gods spiritual husbandry, in the Ministery of the Gospel. This Chapter seemes to begin another Sermon, continued on in the two next Chapters. And in the whole Sermon Esay mainly insists upon the destruction of the enemies of Gods people; and upon their defence and deliverance, their priviledges, and joyful flourishing e∣state, thereupon ensuing, and opposed thereunto. This Chapter is much of the same nature and subject with the for∣mer Chapter.
Woe to thee] Nebuchadnezzar; or rather Sennacherib, ver. 8. they shall deale treacherously with thee] This may relate to Senna∣cheribs two sons slaying their father, ch. XXXVII. 38. O Lord] The Prayer of the faithful in time of trouble. At the noise] This is in way of answer to the former Prayer. fled] As the maner of the Prophets is, to speak of things future as past. So it came to passe in the Assyrian Camp. your spoils] Speaking to the Assyrians. shall he run upon them] The Jew pillaging the Assyrian camp. of thy times] O Hezekiah. their valient ones shall cry] Shew the disttesse of Gods people, the Jewes should be in. the Ambassadors] Sent with presents to Sennacherib, 2 Kings XVIII. 14. Or those sent out to Rabshakeh, ch. XXXVI. 3. He hath broken the Covenant] Sennacherib did so, 2 Kings XVIII. 14, 17. Now will I arise] To help and deliver my people, in this extre∣mity. ye shall conceive chaffe] The Assyrians. as the burnings of lime] Describes that fatal blow in the Assyrian Camp. The sinners in Zion are afraid] Terrified with this dreadful execu∣tion done upon the Assyrians, and complaining, and fearing lest the like vengeance might light also upon them, as they knew they deser∣ved it; As, Num. XVI. 34. with devouring fire?] With God, who is a consuming fire? He that walketh] The Prophets answer. Thine eyes shall see the King] A further blessing that such should enjoy, the sight of their King, and State settled in prosperity and glory. the land that is very far off] Liberty to travel abroad in safety, un∣to the remotest parts of the land, without danger or disturbance. Or, as some, remote lands subdued by the King. Where is the Scribe?] So now taunting Sennacherib, and his Offi∣cers in the Camp, 1 Cor. I. 20. either minds not this Text; or alludes only to the phrase in it. not see] For they shall be slaine, or flee. Look upon Zion] See how safe, and whole it is. No galley] Of any enemie shall be able with help of winde and oars, to get up to it, to annoy it. Thy tacklings] Speaking to the Assyrians. the inhabitant] Of Jerusalem. forgiven their iniquity] Being refined by their chastisements, and reformed; and so God reconciled to them. This Chapter, for the subject matter of it, agreeth much with ch. XXIV. This being a Prophecie of the destruction of the enemies of Gods people: And more particularly of the Edomites in Idumea: set
forth in many hyperbolical expressions. And all the hoast of heaven] So strange and dreadful shall Gods judgements be, that the whole frame of the world shall seeme to be dissolved. It is the maner of Gods Prophets, in their descriptions of some extraordinary judgements to set them forth in such colours, as if they were deciphering the face of that last universal judgement; whereof such are, in some sort, resemblances and forerunners. And again to set forth the restitution and restauration of Gods people out of greatest calamities, in such termes, as have occasioned many to be mistaken in them▪ conceiving no other then the general and joyful resurrection at the last day to be described in them. Unicorns] Or Rhinocerots. See the Observations on Num. XXIII. 22. for ever and ever] Heb. ever of evers. The Cormorant] See the like, Chap. XIII. 18,—22. and XIV. 23. Zeph. II. 13, 14. Apoc. XVIII. 2. Seek ye out] The certainty of this Prophecie: As if each thing here were entred into a roll of Record. In the day of the execution of this judgement, take this Book, read this passage; and see if any of these be found wanting then and there. they shall] These wilde creatures shall. This Chapter agreeth much with chap. XXV. And containes the joyful and glorious restitution, exaltation, and exultation of Gods people. Sharon] A fertil region, and pleasant, lying beneath mount Le∣banon, in the Tribe of God, and adjoyning unto Bashan, 1 Chron. V. 16. There were the Roses mentioned, Cant. II. 1. There had David his herds feeding, 1 Chron. XXVII. 29. Likely it is the same with Lassharon, Josh. XII. 18. Strengthen ye] He incites them to hearten and encourge one ano∣ther, with faith and patience to expect the accomplishment of those glorious promises. Then the eyes of the blind] Fulfilled in Christs time, both corpora∣ly and spiritualy. For in the wildernesse] Literaly true in the Jewish Kingdome: be∣ing there n a Type of Christs. And an high way] They shall be blessed with peace, and safety. the way of holinesse] A Type of the way to heaven. but it shall be for those] Holy ones, verse 5, 6. No Lion shall be there] As the way so plaine;  so as free from danger. This History is brought in to confirme and seale up the truth of some of the Prophecies and Predictions aforegoing. This is recorded, 2 Kings XVIII. and XIX. 2 Chron. XXXII. came up] Upon pretence likely of the Contribution with-held by Hezekiah, which his father Ahaz had paid to Tiglath-Pilezer, 2 Kings XVI. 7, 9. and XVIII. 7.
without the Lord] Heb. Jehovah, that sonne of four letters, as the Hebrews call it: used here by Rabshakeh six times in his Speech. Syrian language] See the Observations on Ezra IV. 7. dung and pisse] See the Observations on 2 Kings X. 27. and take you away] The maner of Conquerours to transplant the Natives. Sepharvaim] Subdued before his time, 2 Kings XVII. 24. Eliakim] Now in Shebna's office and place. And Shebna now the Scribe; and so here is the beginning of his fall, chap. XXII. 20, 21. chap. XXXVII. 2. This Chapter the same in substance with 2 Kings XIX. a rumor] Verse 9. and 36. So Rabshakeh returned] Most likely leaving the armie still before Jerusalem. Libnah] See the Observations on 2 Kings VIII. 22. Lachish] See the Annotations on Micah I. 13. Ethiopia] See the Observations on Gen. II. 13. warre with thee] Either to assist the Jewes;  or in Assyria, in the ab∣sence of Sennacherib and his forces. Thus shall ye speak] Instructions to his messengers, delivered to them in writing; and so by them in writing to Hezekiah: Likely as if he scorned to write himself to Hezekiah, but sent him only a Co∣pie of the Instructions. Eden] See the Observations on Gen. II. 8. Cherubims] See the Observations on Gen. III. 24. And the Anno∣tations on Ezek. IX. 3. and on this text. a Signe] See the Observations on chap. VII. 14. and on Exod. III. 12. ye shall eate this yeare] A confirmation of Sennacheribs sudden de∣parture and returne home: And also including in it an assurance of a comfortable provision of necessary food for them, out of the Land; notwithstanding all the havock that Sennacheribs armies had made in it; and the coincident Sabbatical year, for intermission of culture. See the Observations on Lev. XXV. 21. Then] In that night, 2 Kings XIX. 35. the very next night after the message sent from God, by Esay. and smote] The maner how is not expressed. in the camp] Likely both before Jerusalem, and Libnah. See Ch. XXXVI. 2. and verse 8, 9, 14, 33. of this Chapter. all dead corpses] All in a maner. Yet some escaped, and sled with Sennacherib himself. See chap. XVII. 14. Nineveh] See the Annotations on Jonah I. 2. and on this text. his sonnes] These words here written;  are read in the margin, but not written in the text, 2 Kings XIX. 37. Armenia] Heb. Ararat on the mountains whereof the Arke rested. Esarhaddon] See the Observations on Ezra IV. 2.
In those dayes] Shortly after Sennacheribs defeat and departure. shalt die] Yet a secret reservation there was. See Jer. XVIII. 7, 8. Ezek. III. 18. See the Observations on Jonah III. 4. to the wall] Which haply might be towards the Temple: or by that withdrawing, that he might with the more privacie, and intenti∣on, make his addresse to God. remember now] Humbly appealing to God, touching the integrity and sincerity of his heart, and endeavours. wept sre] One cause might be the want of a son. Manasseh was not yet born. And the State of Church, and Common-wealth much unsetled. Then] Afore Esay was gone out into the middle Court, 2 Kings XX. 4. where the text is Citie; but the margin, Court. And the first Court of the Kings house, that neerest the Palace, and farthest from the street or Citie, seemes here to be meant. to thy dayes] That he had lived already. fifteene years] About the one half of his reigne. will deliver thee and this Citie] The promise before made, is again here renewed; assuring him, as of his life; so of peace and tranquility to be continued to him, with it; that Sennacherib should not return; or any Assyrian to molest him, or this Citie, 2 Chron. XXXII. 22. which yet afterwards was done in the dayes of his son Manasseh, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 11. a Signe] Asked by Hezekiah, ver. 22. and put to his choise, 2 Kings XX. 8, 10. So the Sunne returned ten degrees] Not the shadow only: which indeed depended upon the Sunne. Nor could forraine people in re∣mote places have taken notice of this miracle, had no alteration beene in the course of the Universe, 2 Cron. XXXII. 31. For this miracle as it was visible in Judea, so in other parts of the world also; particularly in Babylon; the King and Princes whereof observing the thing, yet ignorant of the occasion, except by report only, which might deceive, for their further satisfaction send Ambassadors to Hezekiah, not only to congratulate his recovery, but to enquire of the wonder, 2 Chron. XXXII. 31. In this Miracle, if the Sunne went back in its ordinary pace and swiftnesse; and in like sort did returne forward againe, then that Day-light must be long thirty two hours, if by a degree, an hour be understood. If the Sunne returned back ten degrees in an instant, then it must be long twenty two hours. But by a degree here most likely half an hour is understood. See more of this in the Annotations on this text, and my Observations on 2 Kings XX. 9, 10, 11. by these things men live] By thy promises, and preformances of the same, by his speaking and doing, verse 15. is the life of my spirit] As the life of all men is so continued; so by these things is the life of my spirit miraculously prolonged, and I re∣covered; and shall out-live in all the rest of my years that bitternesse of my soul into which I was formerly cast, ver. 15. For Peace I had great bitternesse] Instead of it, or presently after it,
and upon it; upon that peace from the Assyrian, by his overthrow; then this grievous bitter affliction suddenly surprized me. a lump of figs] This might have no power in it;  or, if any at all, yet not sufficient to this so signal and sudden a cure. that I shall go] So soone as within three dayes, as God had graci∣ously promised, 2 Kings XX. 5. And for which he asked the Signe, 2 Kings XX. 8. Merodach Baladan] 2 Kings XX. 12. Beredach Baladan. Of the change of letters, see the Observations on Gen. IV. 25. and 2 Sam. VIII. 3. And of Names, see the Annotations on Dan. I. 7. And on this text, Merodach, one of their Idols, Jer. L. 2. King of Babylon] Under the Assyrian. glad] over-much;  for self-ends, of pride, or profit. And of thy sonnes] Manasseh was carried thither, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 11. Eunuchs] Or Officers. Thus those of the posterity, and issue of Hezekiah, 2 Chron. XXXVI. 6, 10, 20. Dan. I. 3, 4. for there shall be peace] An humble submission preceding.. And here an acknowledging this interim of favour, in the delaying and de∣ferring the judgement. In the former Chapter Esay, upon the occasion therein related, having made some mention of the Babylonian captivity; doth now in the ensuing Prophecies mostwhat insist upon that same subject matter. For the subsequent Sermons are generaly most, if not all of them, concerning that their Captivity, the delivery out of it, and the restitution of their Church and State, in after-times. Yet so, as that all this reacheth farther, unto the spiritual delivery of Gods people from the thraldome under sinne and Satan, by the Messias herein ty∣pified, and the glorious advancement, and enlargement of his spiritu∣all Kingdome, in the dayes of the Gospel. Comfort ye] The Promulgation and approach of Gods purpose, concerning his peoples deliverance, he commands, for their comfort, to be published to them; Relating herein both to the time of the Babylonish captivity; and also to the time of the coming of the Mes∣sias. double] Abundantly;  so much to the full as God deemed fit to be inflicted. The voice] The undoubted certainty of the performance of it, is set forth, and confirmed, notwithstanding all obstructions and difficul∣ties lying in the way. And that first, by the stability of Gods Word, illustrated by the ficklenesse and frailty of all humane excellencie, ver. 3,—8. of him that crieth] This applied to John the Baptist more especi∣aly, Mal. IV. 5. Matth. XI. 14. Marke I. 2, 3. John I. 23. surely the people is grasse] Yea, even the Babylonian Monarchy; and it cannot hinder the performance of Gods Word, purpose, and pro∣mise for the deliverance of his people. Saint Peter applies this to the
work of Regeneration, wrought in the soul, by the Ministery of the Word, 1 Pet. I. 23, 24, 25. So, John VIII. 51. 2. John II. O Zion, that bringest good tydings] Or, thou that bringest good ty∣dings to Zion] A second command, for the promulgation and pro∣clamation of this good tydings to Zion, to Jerusalem. be not afraid] Make no scruple or doubt of publishing it. and his work before him] even that work, verse 11. lies open, and easie to him. who hath measared] A second proof of the undoubted certainty of Gods performance of this his glorious Promise, from the immensi∣ty of his power and essence, illustrated by the feeblenesse and vanity of all Creatures; of Idols especialy, ver. 12,—20. To whom then will ye liken God] He is not like to Idols. They are not able to hinder him in the performance of his gracious promise for the glorious deliverance of his people. Have ye not known] Appliable both to the people of God;  and al∣so to the Heathen Idolaters. yea, they shall not be planted] Be, as if not planted; &c. How sayest thou, O Jacob] He taxeth now his own people, who had been taught better things, for their diffidence and distrust. my way is hid from the Lord] He looketh not after me, what I en∣dure and suffer; or what course is to be taken for my deliverance. He giveth power to the faint] He maketh his might to appeare in mans weaknesse. This is much of the same argument with the former Chapter. Keep silence] God standing up to debate his cause, by his Prophet, against the enemies of his people, with them and their Idols, requireth silence, that he may be heard. renew their strength] To support themselves, and their Idols; and to hinder my work for the recovery of my people, if they can. the righteous man from the East] Cyrus from Persia, to manifest my righteousnesse in fulfilling my promises, and in righting the wrongs done to my people. Yet Cyrus herein a type of Christ. calling the generations] Having them at call and command. saw it] These strange works of God, by Cyrus, set on foot for the deliverance of his people. and feared] Their own safety. drew near, and came] Not to God; but to take counsel together, how to secure and save themselves. So the Carpenter] They made recourse to their Idols, making more of them, as if their safety consisted in the multitude of them. But thou] Confirmes and strengthens his against all fear from the enemies;  undertaking to secure them, and make them successeful a∣gainst all that should oppose them. whom I have taken] Abram from Ur of the Chaldees. Sharp threshing instrument] To thresh the mountains; even thy greatest enemies.
I will open rivers] Rather then my people shall want meanes of comfortable subsistance. the Cedar, &c.] God will by his providence and provision so ac∣commodate them, as if such things had been done. Produce your cause] God challengeth the Idolaters to produce the strongest pleas they can, in the behalf of their Idols; and to prove the truth of their religion, by producing the like works, foretold first, and effected afterwards, by their Idols, to those of his before menti∣oned, when they shall see them accomplished, and withal so long fore∣told. from the North] Cyrus, who was a Medo-Persian, Media lying more Northerly; and Persia more Easterly, ver. 2. He brought peo∣ple and forces from both parts, against Babylon. shall he call upon my Name] Or proclaime my name, Ezra. I. 1, 2. who hath declared] Which of your Idols? from the beginning] Of old time; near two hundred years before it shall come to passe. he is righteous] That so he may be rightly called a God. The first shall say] Or, I say first to Zion; I am the first that sig∣nified ought to Zion concerning her deliverance; or the destruction of Babylon; and the persons by whom these should be effected; which none of your Idols could do, ver. 26. amongst them] Their Idols. all vanity] The conclusion, of, and against their Idols. Another Sermon, in this, and the three Chapters following; which are much of one Subject with the former: Foretelling the Blessings that God would confer upon his people, partly by Cyrus; and princi∣paly by Christ: Discovering the vanity of Idols, and sottishnesse of I∣dolaters: Taxing his people for their incredulity, blindnesse, excesses, and obstinacie, the causes of their captivity: and yet Promising pardon, and restitution, upon their sincere repentance. my servant] Christ the Messias, Matth. XII. 14, 18, 19, 20. Some weakly, and in a low degree, make also application of this; and what follows, to Cyrus, in some sort herein as a Type of Christ. thee] My Sonne, the Messias. neither my praise to graven Images] By my failings in my Predicti∣ons, and promises. of the rock sing] Of Petra, the chief Citie of Arabia, chap. XVI. 1. The Lord shall go forth] To warre, against the enemies of his peo∣ple. I have] The words of God himself. He long restrained his wrath: but now will hasten the execution of it; and lay desolate the whole Countrey of Chaldea, and of those that were adjacent, and adjutant to it. the rivers Islands] It was so done by Cyrus, in the siege of Ba∣bylon. And I will bring the blinde] Partly true, in the returne of the
Jewes out of the Babylonish Captivity more true, spiritualy, in the Conversion of Jew and Gentile to grace in the Kingdome of Christ, under the Gospel. Hear ye deaf] Jewes, of whom many still continued such; not∣withstanding all that God had said and done, and they had heard and seene. who is blinde] A reason why he gave his own people those titles, ver. 18. because they deserved them, as well, yea rather, then any o∣ther. as he that is perfect] Should be so; and hath best means to be so. opening the eares] In shew at least, listening. he will magnifie his Law] He is pleased to magnifie his Law; as well by execution of justice upon the transgressors of it, as by making good his Promises unto those that observe it. Or, he magnified and dignified him with his Law. But this is a people] After all those favours and honours conferred upon them, yet see what calamities and miseries are befallen them, for their sins. will give eare to this] To amend, and grow wiser for time to come? laid it not to heart] Their extreme stupidity;  even in their present afflictions. But now] though a great part of my people continue still thus ob∣stinate and impenitent, yet I will have care of my chosen ones among them, whom I will protect in all dangers, and in due time re∣store. I gave Egypt for thy ransom] Exod. XIV. 20,—38. and XV. 9, 10. Ethiopia, and Seba for thee] 2 Chron. XIV. 9,—15. bring thy seed] by Cyrus temporaly, by Christ spiritualy. Bring forth the blinde people,] challenging the Gentiles, who were blinde and deaf, as their idols▪ to see if they can yet produce ought in defence of their idols, ver. 9. who among them] which of their idols could foretel those, or the like things? It is truth] that the Lord alone is the true God, and they all but base idols. ye are my witnesses] ye my people;  speaking thus to them, that had plentiful and pregnant proofs of his divine power and provi∣dence. and my servant] the Messias: and in some degree, Cyrus. that I am he] the onely true God, ver. 12. whose cry is in the ships.] They wanting water, by Cyrus his drayn∣ings, to carry them in their flight away: Or, they cry, to the ships, to the ships, for safety; as chap XXII. 5. to the hils, to the hils. Yet some tran∣slate thus, the Chaldeans, together with their choise ships which they vaunt of. which maketh a way in the sea] Red-Sea; and Jordan. Chariot] Pharaoh and his armie.
they shall lie together] In the bottome of the Sea, Exod. XV. 10. Remember ye not the fermer things] in comparison of the New;  the deliverance by Cyrus; but principaly and spiritualy by Christ. I will even make a way] I will fit, and furnish them in the way as they shall returne from Babylon. they shall shew forth my praise] Or at least should; It was their duty. But thou] Hast not beene so careful to worship me: But hast been weary of me, and my service. me] But Idols, and strange gods. I have not caused thee] Not I, but thine Idols have made thee at so much cost with them, tyring thee out, as a slave to them, with such services. But thou hast] Hitherto of their Failings; now of their Faults. And all this, to shew, that the deliverance of them from their thraldome, was of his own free favour and mercie, not for any merit of desert of theirs, as in the two next verses. Thy first father] Or forefathers, and not you alone, have sinned. And therefore no cause in your selves, or them, why I should do you so great a favour, as this is. yet now] Notwithstanding all their sinnes;   and his judgements and chastisements; yet he would now at length, relieve and refresh them, restore them, and cause them to thrive and prosper again. I will poure] A type of that spiritual blessing, and growth and in∣crease of Gods Church, and the members of it, under the Messias, by the graces and comforts of his Spirit. One shall say] Gods blessing to them, in the addition of many Pro∣selytes. since I appointed the ancient people] The lineage of Abraham to be my peculiar people. things that are coming] Things to come, in a continued course, from the first to the last, like lincks of a chaine, hanging one upon another. Is there a God besides me?] That can so foretel, and do? They that make a graven Image] The sottishnesse of them, their makers, and worshippers, is largely set down, ver. 9,—20. Remember these] Their sottishnesse: and thy duty, by all my deal∣ings with thee, so freely, and bountifully, above my dealings with o∣thers. Sing, O ye heavens] At the redemption and deliverance of Gods people. Implying such abundant matter of joy, as might well affect the whole Creation, were it all sensible of it. that frustrateth the tokens of the liars] Specialy those that would prognosticate the long continuance of the Babylonian Monarchy. messengers] Such as Esay, Jeremy, Ezekiel, and others. That saith of Cyrus] Thus naming him about two hundred yeares
before he was borne. So to assure them of their deliverance by him. This Chapter is also of the same subject with the former: And be∣gins where that did end. two-leaved gates] Such as great mens houses and Palaces are wont to have. and create evil] Specialy to the Babylonians. Drop down] A command of a Blessing from God: That Gods mercy and goodnesse should so manifestly and plentifuly appear in the deliverance of his people, and disposing all things for their behoof; as if the heavens, and the earth, were full of blessings for them, even of righteousnesse, and salvation. woe to him that] A curb to restraine the impatiencie of some, that murmured at their miseries, and at the delay of their deliverance. Or, against the Babylonians, that would strive, even against God himself, to keep his people in perpetual slavery. And many other passages of Gods providence, concerning the affaires of those times, might be, which flesh and blood would be over-prone to be quarrelling with God about, and controuling his carriage of them. Ask me] Or by interrogation;  will ye presume to appoint and direct me, what I shall do, and how I shall carry matters concerning the disposition and ordering of my people? Or positively; seek to me for these things, concerning my sonnes; and not to Idols. raised him up] Cyrus. build my Citie] Give order for it; and the Temple especialy, Ezra I. 1. shall come over unto thee] How, and by whom, they should be fur∣nished with supply of all requisite commodities, Ezra I. 4. and chap. VII. 21, 22. Some expound this whole passage of Cyrus himself; That because he had dealt so freely with Gods people, God would therefore give him, as a reward, the wealth of those rich Kingdomes, and Countries, which together with Babylon, of whom they formerly held, at the fall of that State, fell also into his hands. surely God is in thee] Or, with thee, with Cyrus typicaly; with Christ realy: And he, in his Church. verily] Esay here admires the hidden depth of Gods dispensati∣ons, in the passages of his providence. And men ought not therefore to take upon them, to control and censure him therein. I have not spoken in secret] As your false gods deliver their Ora∣cles: But plainly. Assemble your selves] Ye that escaped the sword of Cyrus; ye Chaldeans, and other Nations; seeing now how much God is able to do for his people; how little their Idols for those that served them. Look unto me] Leaving Idols, betake your selves unto me, who am the only true God, and able to save you, ver. 16, 17. unto me every knee shall bow] And it is your wisest course there∣fore,
to come willingly in unto me, ver. 22. Psal. II. 8, 10. The A∣postle, Rom. IV. 11. applyeth this text to the last judgement, which is a thing herein necessarily included. be justified] God approving their innocencie, and unjust suffer∣ings at the hands of their enemies; notwithstanding their pretences in doing justice upon them on Gods behalf, for their sinnes; and there∣fore they took them as lawful prize. God would clear them, deliver them: and punish their enemies. In this Chapter, and the next (as in the 13. and 14. Chapters be∣fore) is set down a full and pregnant Prophecie against Babylon, and of her utter overthrow: and of Gods deliverie of the Jewes from her. Asserting withal, the vanity of the Babylonian Idols; and his owue incomparable divine power, to effect it. Bel] This Chapter begins with the ruine of their Idols: See the Observations on Judges VIII. 33. Nebo] Another of their Idols. Whose name is found inserted in many of the names of their Kings, and Nobles; as Nabonassar, Nabo∣polassar, Nebuchadnezzar, Nabuzaradan. The name imports Prophecie. And so this may seeme, their Apollo; as Bel, their Jupiter. A burden to the weary beast] On whose backs the Medes and Per∣sians lead them, to carry them away. which are borne] Minding them of his Divine power and love. God not like to those Idols, ver. 1, 2. and shew your selves men] Not beasts, like these idolaters. Declaring the end from the beginning] Foretelling the issue of things; in a continued course and progresse, from the first to the last: which no other then my self can do. bird from the East] Cyrus from Persia;  which is East from Babylon. ye stout-hearted] Impious obstinate of the Jewes: or rather, sto∣mackful and proud enemies. far from righteousnesse] Or righteous dealing with my people. my righteousnesse] In executing judgements on you;  and right∣ing the wrongs done to my people. This Chapter prosecutes the destruction of Babylon: and begins with the ruine of their State. And describes throughout it, her deject∣ed and despicable condition upon her overthrow, together with the procuring Causes, and the suddennesse, and unavoidablenesse of it. Uncover thy locks] Cast off thy stately head-tire;  and go bare-head∣ed, as captives and drudges are wont to do. as a man] But in full wrath, and power, as God. in a moment, in one day] That night of Belteshazzars feast, Dan. V. 30. This Chapter is also much of the same subject, and frame, especialy with Chapters XLIII. and XLIV. out of the waters of Judah] The stock of Judah, the royal Tribe; that had kept the true worship of God; and not fallen away, as the ten Tribes.
and thy neck is an iron sinew] A reason why God was pleased to foretel things to his people, that they might not be ascribed to their Idols, or to any other, which he foreknew that this stiff obdurate peo∣ple would be too prone to do, ver. 5. new things] Yet further to convince thee of thy wilful obstinacie I acquaint thee again, with other of my secret counsels, which shall al∣so in their due time be fulfilled. very treacherously] In ascribing them, and the foreknowledge of them to thine Idols, or Southsayers. For my Names sake] No merit of thine. My mercy and might, my grace and glory. but not with silver] Not so fully as silver, till all the drosse be ex∣actly wrought out. But chastised them with moderation, regarding their infirmities. my glorie unto another] He is charie and jealous of a corrival. loved him] Cyrus. hath sent me] Me the Prophet Esay. This added, to give the great∣er assurance of the truth and certainty of it. Go ye forth from Babylon] Ezra I. 1. Esay having prophesied much of the Returne of the Jewes from the Babylonish captivity;  from the fourtieth Chapter hitherto: doth now mainly insist upon the instauration of the Church by Christ; And plaies the Evangelist, as it were, to the end of this Book and Prophecie. Listen, O Isles,] Christ calls for audience;  declaring his Calling to his Office, by the Lord, to be the Saviour both of Jew and Gentile. from the womb] Yet designed thereto from eternity, 1 Pet. I. 20. my mouth like a sharp sword] God furnisheth him with abilities to this great office and work of mans Redemption. Thou art my servant, O Israel, &c.] Or rather thus; Israel it is, in whom I will be glorified by thee, the true Israel of God. And indeed to the Jewes in general he was first sent, as the minister of Circumci∣sion. whom man despiseth] Christ in the dayes of his flesh and humili∣ation. Kings shall] Chap. XLV. 23. and LII. 15. Psal. LXXII. 10, 11. Ephes. I. 21 Phil. II. 10. In an acceptable time] God the Father speaking unto Christ. to establish the earth] Of Judea, to restore and settle the State of it againe, after their returne from the Captivity: A Type of the other. prisoners, Go forth] From Babels bonds, corporaly: from Satans bonds spiritualy. They shall feed in the wayes] In their returne from Babylon to Ju∣dea, God will provide them of all necessaries in the way; and make it even and easie to them. Sinim] Or, Sini, the Sinites, that lived in the desert of Sin, or a∣bout mount Sinai. Or, from Sin, a chief Citie in Egypt, Ezek. XXX.
15, 16. And all this a Type of those that out of all quarters of the world should be converted unto Christ, and come in to him. But Zion said] Her objection. Can a woman] Gods answer, full of a tender affection to her. gather themselves together] A Type of those numberlesse numbers that should be brought home to the Church of God, under Christ, by the Ministery of the Gospel. to the Gentiles] Their Conversion should make up this number∣lesse number. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers] As Persian Emperours first;  and much more Christian Emperours afterwards. and lick up] An expression of the lowest submission that may be. even the captives of the mighty] Notwithstanding their pretended might and right;  God would yet deliver his people from them. And I will feed them] And thus destroy their enemies. This, and the next Chapter, seeme to make one Sermon. Where is the Bill] A conviction of the Jewish people, as authors of their own forlorn condition; together with a justification of God and his Ministers against them, verse 1,—9. divorcement] Either, none at all; or not for sleight causes, as they used to give Bills of divorcement, but for great disloyalty, yet God ever had his reserved remnant, in all times among them, Rom. XI. 1,—5. none to answer?] Their wilful obstinacie;  and rebellious, refra∣ctory courses. This retarded their delivery, and kept them in this de∣plorable plight, this desolate and disconsolate condition. is my hand shortned?] No want of power in God, to deliver them. tongue of the learned] The Prophet Esay maintains his own Mini∣stery, and his faithful discharge of it: So to justifie God, that there was nothing wanting on his part, to reclaime and reduce them. It is true, that divers understand all this as spoken in the person of Christ. And indeed there are divers passages, that very fitly agree to him, and whereof concerning Esay there is no mention in the holy Story. And it is true, that the same may be said of sundry particulars, in Psal. XXII. and XL. and LXIX. applied expressely unto our Saviour Christ, in the New Testament, Matth. XXVII. 34, 35, 43, 46. Heb. X. 5,—10. And yet none make doubt, but that those Psalmes, as they were by David composed, so in his own person they concerned him; and that in all likelihood, in some particulars which yet are not found expresse∣ly recorded in the story of him. The like may be here. my back to the smiters] Matth. XXVI. 27. and XXVII. 26. John XVIII. 22. He is neere that justifieth me] Saint Paul alludes to this, Rom. VIII. 33, 34. The Apostles maner is, to enlarge the promises of God, made to some particular persons, as to Jacob, Joshuah, David, and others, Gen. XXVIII. 15. Josh. I. 5. Psal. XXIII. 1. extending them to all
the faithful in general, as having a joynt interest therein, with them, Heb. XIII. 5, 6. And the Apostles argument, borrowed hence, stands firme and good, in general. Who is among you] An exhortation to the godly party among them, to rest and rely upon God, in these calamitous times: with a sad com∣mination to those that trusted to ought else; notwithstanding all their shifts and fetches: for which Esay derides them. Hearken] Esay returnes to Comfort the godly party again, endea∣vouring to keep them from being dismaid, either by the consideration of their own fewnesse and feeblenesse, or by the apprehension of the supposed might, malice, and multitude of the adverse party alone, and blessed him, and increased him] And so I will deale with you. shall comfort Zion] God can do, and will do as much for his Church, as he sometime did for Abraham. a Law] As a Law, at mount Sinai; so a second Law, even the Gospel. my salvation is gone forth] Aiming at Cyrus his Proclamation, Ez∣ra I. 1, 2. the Isles shall wait upon me] The Gentiles, at the law of the Gospel. Awake, awake,] Spoken either in the person of Gods people; or by the Prophet himself, moving in their behalf. Rahab] Egypt. Dragon] Pharaoh. returne] From the Babylonish captivity. Gods answer to the for∣mer supplication. and where is the fury?] The Babylonians are perished;  and their fu∣ry is gone. thy mouth] The mouth of Esay. Yet so as more eminently intend∣ing Christ. that I may plant the heavens,] To make a new world, a new hea∣vens, and a new earth, chap. LXV. 17. and LXVI. 22. 2 Cor. V. 17, 18. 2 Pet. III. 13. Awake, awake,] He largely declares the deep misery of Gods peo∣ple; their delivery; and the utter overthrow of their enemies; in the re∣sidue of the Chapter. To the thirteenth verse, seemes to be an Appendix to the forego∣ing Prophecie; running all along in the same tenor with the latter part of it. How beautiful] These bringers of good tydings of the delivery from Babels captivity: And much more from Satans slavery, by preaching the Gospel of Christ: that publish salvation, corporal by Cyrus; spiri∣tual by Christ. Behold, my Servant] Here seemes to begin a new Sermon; and con∣tinued in the end of the next Chapter, joyntly making up an entire Prophecie, of Christ, his person, parentage, condition, manner of life, sufferings, humiliation, exaltation, benefit redounding thence to his, and to himself.
shut their mouthes at him] In admiration, and reverence. our report] Chap. LII. 7. Unto the times of his being in the flesh, we finde these words applied in John XII. 37, 38. Rom. X. 16. Stripes] Mat. XXVI. 67. and XXVII. 16. Opened not his mouth] Mat. XXVI. 39, 42. 1 Pet. II. 23. Acts VIII. 32. He was taken from prison, and from judgement] From all those harsh and cruel courses, as under pretence of judgement were exercised up∣on our Saviour, whereby his life was taken from him. And he made his grave, &c.] His burial was at the disposal of wic∣ked ones, and of rich ones, or Rulers, at his death. They not only took his life from him, but disposed of his burial▪ at their pleasure. he shall] Christ shall die no more, but live and reigne for ever. by his Knowledge] Objectively. The words of God the Father. justifie many] The maine fruit and effect of Christs Passion. many] So, verse 12. Matth. XX. 28. and XXVI. 28. Rom. V. 15, 19. Therefore I will divide him] God the Father will. a portion with the great, and he shall] God would bestow many up∣on him, or give many unto him, to be his subjects; whether with an allusion to a portion of inheritance, or distribution of spoils, it is indif∣ferent. This intimates the numerous, or rather innumerable multitude of those that should be converted unto Christ. was numbred with the transgressors.] Mat. XXVII. 38. Marke XV. 27, 28. Barrabbas let loose, rather then he should be let live. made intercession] Luke XXIII. 34. Yet may relate further, to Christs intercession, which still continueth, Rom. VIII. 34. Heb. VII. 25. and IX. 24. 1 John II. 1, 2. Another Sermon or Prophecie, this seemes to be distinct from the former: though much of the same subject and argument; and depends well upon the latter end of it. For this insists upon swarmes of people that should come in to Christ, and become members of his Church. O barren] The Church under the New Testament;  that little sister, Cant. VIII. 8. of the desolate] She that had been desolate: the Church of the Gen∣tiles; then that of the Synagogue of the Jews. Enlarge] Thou Christian Church. when thou wast refused] As in the time of the Babylonish captivity. I have sworne] No expresse mention of that oath. As neither of that to Isaac, Psal. CV. 9. yet meanes as much as if he had taken a so∣lemne oath; as he used in such solemne Covenants. nor rebuke thee] To forsake thee utterly. For the mountains shall depart] Sooner may. tossed with tempest] In the Babylonish captivity;  seemingly then forsaken of man, and of God. thy stones with fair colours] The spiritual excellencies of the Church under the Messias are here described in way of hyperbolies. See the
like, Apoc. XXI. 11,—21. The stones here seeme to be those of the Pavement. borders] Or walls. taught of the Lord] Jer. XXXI. 34. John VI. 45. 1 Cor. II. 10. 2 Cor. XIII. 3. Ephes. IV. 20, 21. 1 John II. 20, 27. gather together] To attempt against thee. No weapon that is formed against thee] By the Smith, ver. 16. tongue that shall rise] To accuse or charge thee wrongfully. their righteousnesse] The reward of their righteousnesse. Ho,] A free invitation of all that are thirsty and hungry, both Jew, and Gentile to come and partake of the true spiritual food and graces of Christ in the Gospel, Mat. XI. 28. John VI. 35, 37. buy] This impeacheth not the freenesse of the Gift. A Princes almes may be said to be freely given, albeit it be required, that those that desire to share in them, do repaire to his Almoner. And a Scholar may be said to have his learning freely given him, when no stipend is required for the teaching; yet must he ply the School hard. the sure mercies of David] Acts XIII. 34. In this Citation the A∣postle addes this, I will give you, for the fuller explication, and fitter application of it; to his purpose. The like is, Luke IV. 18. See Psal. LXXXIX. and 2 Chron. VI. 42. touching these mercies of David. But the full meaning is, The mercies of the Messias, the David, not past, but to come; the mercies before promised, and to be exhibited in, and by him; in whom the Covenant is made with Gods people, and in whom all Gods Promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. which Promises had never been made good, had not Christ been raised up from the dead; And therefore the Apostle, Acts XIII. 34. to good purpose alledgeth this Text. I have given him] The words of God the Father concerning the Messias. And Nations that knew not thee] The Gentiles. he hath glorified thee] When after thy state of humiliation he shall have glorified thee in heaven. Seek ye the Lord] An exhortation both to Jew and Gentile, to make request to Christ for grace and favour; to repent, and amend, and turn to him. his thoughts] They not free. For my thoughts are not] But prone to pardon; and constant and immutable therein: as that shews which follows. For as the heavens] My disposition and dealings, both for mercie and goodnesse, and for firmnesse and faithfulnesse, is as farre above yours, as, &c. So shall the Word] My Promise to my people concerning recon∣cilement with them, upon their returne to me; and my deliverance of them out of captivity, be as firme and sure, and take effect. In stead] Relating to the Jewes returne out of the Babylonish captivity, chap. IV. 2. and XXXV. 1, 2. The face and state of their
Land and State should be strangely altered to the better. And gene∣raly the flourishing estate of the Church of God, hereby is intimated, as abounding in spiritual graces and comforts. signe] Monument, Memorial, Trophie: an everlasting honour to God, and a signe to his Church of his mercie to her. Keep ye judgement] God admonisheth his people to do that where∣by they may obtaine a part in the favours and mercies last men∣tioned. Neither let the Sonne of the stranger] He comforts the Proselyte, and Eunuch. The Partition-wall should be broken down under the Messias. a Name better] Of great honour, and more durable; an everlast∣ing Name, that should more then countervaile the other defect. yet will Igather others to him] John X. 16. Acts X. 34, 35. All ye beasts] Here seemes to begin a new Sermon: Declaring a∣gaine Gods most fearful judgements upon his People, by their ene∣mies, the Babylonians especialy, and those that served under them: And that for the manifold shameful sinnes of the Jewish watch-men, Shepherds, and Seers. The righteous perisheth] Esay here inserts somewhat for the Com∣fort of the godly, though by death taken away in those sad times: The wicked nothing heeding Gods hand and end in it. from the evil to come] As was the sonne of Jeroboam, 1 Kings XIV. 12, 13. and good Josiah, 2 Kings XXII. 20. the evil, in the general ruine of the State, and deportation of the people. But draw neere] Esay returnes now to the surviving wicked ones; as having another maner of errand to them: in lively colours laying out their abominable courses. are ye not, &c?] Deny it if ye can. slaying the children] 2 Kings XVI. 3. Psal. CVI. 37, 38. is thy portion] Thine Altars, and thine Idol-service, is thy portion that thou choosest and delightest in. As God is to his people, Psalme XVI. 5, 6. a drink-offering] Used and annexed to most Kinds of sacrifices. Of this kind were those, Jer. VII. 18. and XLIV. 19. offered to the Queen of heaven. And thou wentest to the King] i. e. Kings, collectively, for forreign aid and succour. unto hell] Abasing thy self to them in most servile maner. thou hast found the life of thine hand] Thou still imaginest so to do, and thinkest thou hast found sufficient means and aids to support thee, and to strengthen thine hand. And therefore thou wast not grieved in so doing. And of whom] Whom needest thou to have feared, and sought for forreign aid; if thou hadst feared me? hast lyed] And dealt disloyaly with me. my peace, even of old] My Lenity thou abusest.
thy righteousnesse] As thou esteemest it: But I so call it ironicaly. let thy companies deliver thee] Thy troopes of strangers, or strange gods, Judg. X. 13, 14. And he shall say] God;  or, it shall be said. for the spirit should faile] This moveth God, in way of commise∣ration to stay his hand, Psal LXXVIII. 38, 39. and LXXXIX. 47. and will heale him] For my own Names sake, and free mercie; not∣withstanding his frowardnesse, and crosse and contrary wayes. Peace, Peace] Whereas before was no speech but of warre; Now it shall be of abundant peace and prosperity; and consequently of praise and thanksgiving. The fuller complement of this is under the Messias in the Gospel. In this Chapter Esay reproves them mainly for their Hypocrisie in Fasting. and take delight] They seeme so to do. you finde pleasure] You do not break off your sinful desires, minds, pleasures, and purposes; but persist still in a purpose to pursue them; though haply not upon the very day of the Fast to act them. and exact all your labours] Debts, and services; with all rigour. for strife and debate] Your fastings end in, and are seconded with vexatious suits, quarrels, and brawles. to make your voice to be heard on high] By your loud clamours used in your prayers in the times of fasting. Or, that God on high should by fasting be induced to hear your voice, and grant your requests. Is not this the Fast] When it is joyned with reformation and a∣mendment of your lives? As, Acts X. 2, 4. Then shalt thou call,] Then no cause to complaine, as, verse 3. the putting forth of the finger] Forbearing not acts of violence, and threatening termes only, but even all gestures, and expressions of that kinde whatsoever. and makes fat thy bones.] Fill them with marrow, arme and strengthen them. the old waste places] Of Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, and other like places. thy soot from the Sabbath] Thy affections, and wayes, which would pollute the Sabbath. Whether it be the yearly, or the weekly Sab∣bath. a delight] See Psal. XXVII. 4. and XXXVI. 8. and XLII. 1, 2, 4. and XLIII. 2, 3, 4. and LXV. 1,—5. and LXXXIV. and CXXII. 1, 2. honour him] In it; by sanctifying him, and it. thine own wayes] Wicked works, and courses. nor speaking thine own words] Those, verse 9. to ride upon the high places of the earth] Aloft, in places of secu∣rity, and safety, ch. XXXIII. 16. Deut. XXXII. 13. This Chapter relates their various enormous iniquities;  and them to be the causes of their sad calamities, verse 1,—15. And a promise
to the faithful ones, of deliverance from them; and of spiritual mer∣cies and blessings in and from the Messias, ver. 16,—21. is not shortened] Either to hear, and help you out of those calami∣ties; or to make good those large and liberal blessings promised upon your repentance. spiders web] To entangle and destroy others. he that eateth] There is no safe dealing any way with them. Their feet] Rom. III. 15, 16, 17. not know peace] Experimentaly, to have and enjoy it. See Phil. III. 10. Apoc. II. 17. Therefore is judgement farre from us] God stands off farre from you, neither executing judgement and vengeance on your enemies, nor protecting you against their wrongs. our transgressions are with us] Stick close to us;  we cannot shun, or shift them off. is fallen] For want of support. cannot enter] But is shut out by violence. a prey] He cannot be safe, that will not be wicked. wondered] Spoken in an humane straine, Rom. III. 9,—19. the Apostle concludes hereupon the universal depravation of man-kind, in his natural condition. no intercessor] No interpoer. his arme] He did the work alone himself. brought salvation] Temporal, vers. 17, 18, 19. Spiritual, verse 20, 21. breast-plate] Here is God, as a man of armes. repay] Vengeance to the enemies of his people. And the Redeemer] Rom. XI. 26. the Apostle applies this verse to Christ; and the conversion of the Jewes, when the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in. Where the Apostle retaines the Ancient Greek version, as Hierom witnesseth it to have beene in his time, having no∣thing in it disagreeing from truth, or crossing that in ought for which he alleadgeth it. This then cannot have relation to the Angel slay∣ing Sennacheribs army; or to Cyrus, further then as Types of Christ, and his spiritual deliverance. And Esay useth to slip from temporal deliverances, in a close way, unto spiritual; and to close up the Pro∣phecies of the one, with the Promises of the other. my Covenant] Of sending the Redeemer to them;  and of continu∣ing his Word and Spirit to Zion, his Church. This Chapter containes the glorious state of the Church under the Messias;  the abundant accesse of the Gentiles; and their Kings, and chief ones adjoyned to it, and their riches, endowments, and services humbly submitted, and chearfully yeelded unto it. Thy light is come] The night of affliction is over;  and the day is dawning, the light of the morning is risen upon thee. glory of the Lord] In thy deliverance, and restauration. But the Lord shall arise] The Sunne of righteousnesse, Mal. IV. 2.
And Gentiles] To congratulate with thee, and to enjoy the light together with thee. and thine heart shall fear] With admiration, and joyes so sudden and excessive. shall come in to thee] By tendering both themselves, and whatso∣ever they are stored with, unto thee, and thy service. Ephah] The posterity of Midian, by his eldest sonne, Gen. XXV. 4. the praises of the Lord] Repairing thither not for traffick, but to worship, Acts VIII. 27. the house of my glory] My Temple, a Type of the Church. what are these] A question moved by Zion, touching their multi∣tude; and speed. Surely] The Answer returned. first] With the first, or among the first. their silver] Ezra I. 4, 6,—11. ch. LXVI. 20. and LV. 5. Rom. XV. 16. sonnes of strangers] Proselytes. Kings] Cyrus, and others his successors. and I will make the place of my feet glorious] The Ark, Temple, Zi∣on, all resembling the Church. verse 7. such the breasts of Kings] Being as thy foster-fathers, chap. XLIX. 23. and LXVI. 12. For brasse] Thy damages shall be repaired with advantage, thine exactors righteousnesse] Overseers; not such as shall pill and poll thee, exact upon thee; but deale most righteously, moderately, and mercifully. thy walls salvation] All should be safe with them, under Gods pro∣tection. The Sunne] Their chief and principal light and comfort should consist in such a plentiful enjoyment of Gods gracious love, favour and kindnesse, that in comparison thereof the Sunne and Moone should be as of no account or regard. This may relate to the glory of the life to come. Thy Sunne] Not clouded, or eclipsed; but continualy shine, with∣out interruption. Thy people] Sanctified here, perfected hereafter. inherit the land for ever] The new world, chap. LVII. 13. and LXV. 17, 18. 2 Pet. III. 13. Apoc. XXI. 5, 7. Canaan was a Type of this. the branch of my planting] My in the margin: his in the text. The meaning may be this, A branch of my plantations (by way of emi∣nencie and excellencie,) a work of my hands, to glory in. A like one] A miraculous multiplication of the Church. in his time] Speedily, when its due time is come, and till then they must expect, chap. XIII. 22 and XXVIII. 16. and XXXVIII. 18. Hab. II. 3. Luke I. 20.
This Chapter is much of the same matter, and to the like purpose, with the former. The Spirit of the Lord] Christs calling to his Ministery, and the ex∣ercise of his Prophetical Office; Shadowed out in that of Esay here. Christ applieth this to himself, Luke IV. 18. hath anointed me] In a special maner above his fellowes, Ps. XLV. 7. Acts X. 38. Col. II. 3, 9. Heb. I. 8. good tydings] Whence our Gospel; signifying, not Gods-spel or Word; but Good-spel, Evangelium. to proclaime liberty] Temporal, by Cyrus; spiritual, by Christ, Luke IV. 8. year of the Lord] Relating to the Jubile. of vengeance] For his people, of their Oppressors. build the old wastes] Upon their returne to their own countrey, re∣edifie the Cities and townes that had been ruinated, during the cap∣tivity. And strangers shall stand] As servants waiting and attending on their Master. the Priests of the Lord] In that repute, as they; as near to God, and in as honourable a condition, as they, 1 Pet. II. 9. Heb. XIII. 15. Apoc. I. 6. and V. 10. For your shame, double] Honour, verse 6. as 1 Tim. V. 17. Zech. IX. 12. possesse double] Double in extent, or double in worth upon Gods blessing, when they returne to their land againe. love judgement] And therefore will right and repay the wrongs and dammages done to my people. and I will direct] As verse 7. returning them a reward in lieu of their misery: And directing their affairs in a successeful course, in a prosperous way. shall be known] Eminently, As, Psal. LXXVI. 1. I will greatly rejoyce] A solemne acknowledgement made in the Churches name, of the manifold blessings of God, bestowed on her; mentioned, verse 3. and 7, For Zions sake] Esay his resolution constantly to solicite God, for the compleat performance of his Churches restitution, promised be∣fore, chap. LX. and LXI. thy righteousnesse] The Prophet Esay turneth his speech to Zion. a new name] Verse 4. chap. LXV. 15. Hephzibah] i. e. my delight is in her, Psal. XVI. 2. Benlah] i. e. married. thy sonnes marry thee] Thy sonnes shall as in marriage possesse thee, keep thee, enjoy thee; in such a chearful and comfortable maner. thy God] Christ, God and Man. I have set] Spoken in the person of God. Have; Or, will. Watchmen] Prophets, and Pastors.
make mention] Are his remembrancers; specialy by office and function. arme] Let me not be deemed Almighty, if, &c. Of which forme of an Oath, see on chap, V. 9. and XXII. 14. Go through,] The gates of Babylon, to returne to your land, as ch. XLVIII. 20. and LII. 11. gather out the stones] That nothing may hinder them in the way. Proclaimed] By Cyrus. thy salvation] God thy Saviour, as Luke II. 30. sought out] Or, sought unto, sought after. Who is this] This seemes to have relation to that, chap. LXII. 11. Esay asks this question, to whom the sight or apparition was offer∣ed in a vision or extasie. from Edom] Idumea. And Bozrah, the head-Citie of it. Put here for the enemies of Gods people. died garments] Verse 3. Apoc. XIX. 13. glorious] Gorgeous; as great Commanders and Generals use in warre; and returning in triumph from the slaughter. See Psal. LXVIII. 7, 8, 21, 22, 23. travelling] Marching, stalking, with a stately gate, as victor. I] Gods answer. thou red] Saith Esay againe. I have troden] Gods answer to Esay again. Somtimes he treads down thus Gods people themselves for their sins; as Lam. I. 15. Somtimes the wine-presse of Gods wrath, to expiate the sinnes of his people, Apoc. XIX. 15. Here, the enemies of his people as grapes in a wine-presse. alone] In the greatnesse of his strength, verse 1. So, Deut. XXXII. 12. Yet see verse 12. in this Chapter. And so, Zech. IV. 6. The pow∣er of the instrument is from him alone. Some application of this may be made to that, Apoc. XIX. 15. them] The Edomites, none of them to withstand me, nor any o∣ther assistant to me. staine all my raiment] Not with my blood in my passion; but the Edomites blood. none to help] Chap▪ LIX. 16. Then God struck in, when all hu∣mane helps failed, chap. XXVI. 18, 19. and XXXVII. 3, 36. 2 Chron. XX. 12, 15, 16, 17. drunck] With their own blood. Here seemes to begin a new Sermon; and to continue to the end of the next chapter. I will mention] Esay's thankful acknowledgement of Gods great goodnesse, and manifold mercies, to his people. so he was their Saviour] Upon those hopes, and expectations. In all their affliction] He took to heart their afflictions, Psal. CVI. 44. Zech. II 8. the Angel] Christ the Messias, Exod. XXIII. 21, 22, 23. and XIII. 21. and XIV. 10, 24. Gen. XLVIII. 24. Mal. III. 1. Acts VII. 38.
But they rebelled] Their ungracious and rebellious demeanour to∣wards God. Where is he] The Prophet, or the people then saying this. As, Judg. VI. 13. The want of this enquiry is complained of, Jer. II. 6, 8 And punished with the want of Gods presence in time of adversity, Hos. V. 6. And thereupon that admonition is, Chap. LV. 6. Look down] A prayer of the people, or of the Prophet in their per∣son. Where is thy Zeale] What is become of them? Psal. LXXXIX. 49. the sounding of thy bowels] Chap. XVI. 11. rumbling, yearning in compassion, 1 Kings III. 26. Jer. XXXI. 20. Hos. XI. 8. though Abraham be ignorant of us] As being dead, he and Israel long ago. made us to erre] By denying us the conduct of thy Spirit;  and lea∣ving us to our selves, and giving us up to the spirit of error. Or, why shouldest thou give this people any occasion so to do? as, 1 Sam. XXVI. 19. Psal. CXXV. 3. See the Observations on chap. VI. 9, 10. but a little while] In comparison of thy promise. This Chapter beginneth in the middle of a verse, according to the distinctions in the Hebrew. wouldest rent] Considering the indignities, and outrages against thee, and thy people, chap. LXII. 18. come down] Psal. XVIII. 9,—16. terrible things] Of old, on the behalf of thy people, Ps. LXXVIII. and CV. and CVI. Nehem. IX. Exod, III. 8. welooked not for] Were then unexpected, or beyond expecta∣tion. mountains flowed down] Judg. V. 5. Psal. XLVII. 5. Deut. IV. 11. Exod. XIV. 3, 9. Hab. III. 3,—15. For since the beginning of the world] This brought in, as in the per∣son of Gods people, to intimate that they wanted not some good ground to solicite God to do for them, as they here desire, in their present distresse; because they knew him to be such a God, as was able to do, had done, and would do such things for his people that rest∣ed and rerelied upon him, as no humane eye, or eare had ever either seene, or heard, or any other God was ever known to have done, or was able to do, chap. LXVI. 8. The Apostle, 1 Cor. II. 9. seemeth to have made use of the Prophets words in this verse, applying them to his present discourse; as he doth those other of the Psalmist, XIX. 4. in that place of Rom. X. 18. that waiteth for him] 1 Cor. II. 9. that love him. And those that wait for him, do love him. For thou] A continuation of their commemoration of Gods deal∣ings for, and with, his people in times past. meetest] Or, didst meet, was wont to meet. As, Luke XV. 2c. Psal. XXI. 2, 3.
him that rejoyceth, and worketh righteousnesse] Him that rejoyceth to work righteousnesse, and delights in well-doing, Deut. XXVIII. 47. Psal. II. 11. and XXXVII. 4. and LXVIII. 3. and CXII. 1. and ch. LVIII 13. in thy wayes] Of Providence; and of precepts and direction. in those is continuance, and we shall be saved] In those thy wayes. Or, in our sinnes; and shall we be saved? interrogatively: importing the cleane contrary. Or, in those righteous works, and by their being with and among us, is our continuance, and meanes of being saved. But we] And so none of us fit to intercede. We not like those; ver. 4, 5. Psal. CVI. 23. Those are now all gone, verse 7. Jer. V. 1. Mic. VII. 2. Psal. XII. 1. our righteousnesses are as filthy rags] So noting out, not the defects and defilements, the inbred vitiosities of meere infirmities; in all the best works, even of the best, and in the best maner performed; But the vile and abominable practices which had so highly incensed the Lord against his people. And the most righteous among us, for all our outward semblances of holinesse and righteousnesse, are indeed no better then such, Micah VII. 4. 2. Sam. XXIII. 6. 7. None] So few, as are drowned in the multitude. hold of thee] To stay thee with us;  or bring thee back unto us. But now] A pathetical imploration of Gods favour and mercie. thy people] thy peculiar people] Chap. LXIII. 19. Deut. V. 3. and XXIX. 10,—15. Our holy and our beautiful house] Chap. LX. 7. and LVI. 7. and LXXXIV. 1, 2. burnt] 2 Kings XXV. 9. Lam I. 7, 10. refraine thy self] Canst thou endure to see them, and be still, and suffer them? Another Sermon. I am sought of them that] Rom. X. 20. cleare this to be spoken by Christ of the Gentiles, and of their coming in to him, Acts XIII. 46. not called by my Name] Chap. LXIII. 19. I have spread out] To the Jewes, Rom. X. 21. See Rom. XI. 11,—24. in gardens] To their Idols. altars of brick] Of matter, and maner, according to their owne de∣vising. which remaine among the graves] To consult with spirits, that haunt such places; or to have dealings with the dead; necromancers, chap. VIII. 19. Deut. XVIII. 11. 1 Sam. XXVIII. 8, 11. and lodge in the monuments] In their idol-temples; or, in Caves under ground, haply to expect dreams from their imaginary deities; or among the corpses; as that possessed man did, Mar. V. 5. and broth] Wherein unclean flesh had been sod. stand by thy self] Though themselves so impure and vile, Luke VII. 39 Such sinners would yet be such Saints.
a smoak] A continual provocation, and vexation to me. written before me] Upon record in my sight. and the iniquities of your fathers together] Though God lay no∣thing upon any person, but what indeed comes farre short of what is due to him; Yet he hath an eye oft in inflicting judgements on notori∣ous wicked ones descended also from such like fathers, unto the sins of the fathers also, either enhauncing, or lengthening the judgements, to make their sufferings the more exemplarie, that men may observe how execution of vengeance, though delayed for a time; yet at length fal∣leth, with a full storme, on the race of the wicked, 1 Sam. III. 12. Lam. V. 7. Matth. XXIII. 32, 35, 36. 1 Thes. II. 15, 16. a blessing in it] The little liquor in the cluster argued life and sap to be in the plant;  and so hope of recovery, to become fruitful againe. not destroy them all.] A Remnant still reserved and saved, ver. 9. for the propagating of the Church, Jer. XXX. 11. Amos. IX. 8. Sharon] Under Libanus, 1 Chron. XXVII. 29. valley of Achor] Neere Jericho. that prepare a table for that troope] Feasts, for their troope of idols; pointed at as it were with the finger, in contempt, by the Prophet here. Some by this troope understand the hoast of heaven. Some, one particular Star, as Jupiter. that furnish the drink-offering] Heb. that fill mixture; i. e. wine, Apoc. XIV. 10. Psal. LXXV. 8. Prov. IX. 2. strong wine is in these pla∣ces meant, without mixture of water. For they would not offer such to their Idols; though in their ordinary drinking they did mix it for themselves. behold] A strange alteration, four times repeated. by another name] Verse 16. chap. LXII. 2, 4, 12. as being in another state and condition, then you, or they formerly. Such a name as should be used, not in Cursing, but in Blessing. See Hos. I. 6, 9. and II. 1, 23. Rom IX. 26. 1 Pet. II. 10. I create new heavens] A further more strange alteration. Make, as it were, a new world: Their change shall be such, that coming sud∣denly out of such adversity, into such prosperity, they shall seeme to be in a new, in another world. But this is chiefly applyable to the times of the Gospel, under Christ, in a spiritual sense; in regard of those plentiful endowments of spiritual graces that therein should a∣bound, John I. 16, 17, Acts II. 17, 33. Heb. IX. 9,—12. And here∣unto is this change applied chap. LXVI. 22. 2 Cor. V. 17. begun here: to be perfected in heaven, 2 Pet. III. 13. Apoc. XXI. 1, 5. and the former] Jer. III. 16. 1 Cor. II. 9. 2 Cor. III. 7,—10. But be ye glad] Gods speech, as, chap. III. 10. and XXX. 10. the childe] He that was once a childe. None among them, young, or old, should be taken away by untimely death, but should live to the utmost course of nature, wont usualy to be attained, verse 22. but the sinner] Such among them as remained still unreformed, unrefined, unreclaimed, though he live never so long, shall at length prove a cursed wretch
as the dayes of a tree] As the Oake, and Elme. before they call] Chap. LVIII. 9. Psal. XXXII. 5. Dan. X. 12. and IX. 20,—23. Luke XV. 18, 20. Acts X. 44. and XI. 15. John XIV. 13, 14. and XV. 7, 16. and XVI. 23, 24, 26. The wolf and the lamb] Such as had beene of a wolvish disposition formerly, should now be thus transformed. All shall be harmlesse, ch. XI. 6,—9. Another Sermon, like the former; and that as in matter; so also in many expressions, agreeing with it. The heaven in my throne,] Cited Acts VII. 48, 49, 50. See Psalme CIII. 19. Matth. V. 34. where is the House] That ye have, or should, or can, build unto me, when as I fill heaven and earth with my presence, Jer. XXIII. 24 See 1 Kings VIII. 27. Acts XVII. 14, 25. And this is to take off their minds from the Temple of Jerusalem, wherein they over-much trust∣ed, and gloried, Jer. VII. 4. place of my rest] Psal. CXXXII. 8, 14. Not but that he can well be without them; as he was also before they were. He needs no house to receive him, nor service of man to be done to him, Psal. XVI. 2. and L. 10, 11. He needs not these things, as their idols do. contrite spirit] John IV. 21, 23, 24. God looks to him more then to his material Temple, Psal. XXXIV. 18. and CXXXVIII. 6. He that killeth an Oxe] For sacrifice. As in the Temple, so in their Sacrifices, the Jewes much confided and boasted, 2 Chron. XIII. 10, 11. But when they rested in these outward things and exercises, without any grace and goodnesse in the soul, and with much filthi∣nesse, and wickednesse in their hearts and lives, God loaths their per∣sons and their sacrifices, chap. I. 11,—14. Prov. XV. 8. and XXI. 27. Jer. VI. 20. and VII. 21, 22, 23. Amos V. 21, 22, 23. Micah VI. 6, 7. Ezek. XX. 39. blessed an idol] With a Present or oblation, Gen. XXXIII. 10. and XLIII. 11. I also will choose] An implication of a Retaliation;  As, chap. LXV. 12. Levit. XXVI. 27, 28. Psal. XVIII 26. Jer. XXXIV. 17. their delusions] Passively, or objectively; their illusions or mock∣ages, that they shall be exposed and subject unto. As they have made choice of such wayes and courses, as please not me; so will I make choice of such things for them, as they shall finde small pleasure in. their fears] Prov. X. 24. that cast you out] Either by unjust Censure, under pretence of a legal proceeding;  or that shun you, as persons so polluted and defiled, that there is no dealing with you, without being defiled by you. See John IX. 34. and XVI. 2. See chap. LXV. 5. Lam. IV. 15. Niddui a word of this root is the lowest degree of Excommunication in the Jewish Church for my Names sake] For your loyalty to me; As, Matth. X. 22. Let the Lord be glorified] Spoken in way of derision. Let him ma∣nifest
his might and majesty, in doing some remarkable matter for you, if ye be so dear to him, as ye deeme your selves to be. Thus jear∣ing their trust and confidence in God; As, chap. V. 19. Psal. XXII. 7, 8. Matth. XXVII. 43. 2 Pet. III. 3, 4. but he shall appear] The answer to that jear. A voice] Esay breaks out into these words, as if in a Prophetical rapture he heard the noise and voice. Like that, chap. XIII. 4. Jer. L. 22, 28. and LI. 54. A voice of noise of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Temple, by the Chaldeans, or by the Romanes. from the Temple] To control their vaine confidence in it; as im∣plying, how little relief or safeguard they should then receive from it, Lam. II. 20. to his enemies] Most likely, the obstinately wicked amongst the Jewes, verse V. 14. chap. LXV. 6, 7, and I. 24. Before she travelled] A prophecie of the strange sudden, and unex∣pected restitution of the Church, and the dilatation of it into all parts. This may relate to the delivery out of Babylon by Cyrus, done at an in∣stant by his Proclamation: not with so much ado, as that was out of Egypt. Here Zion is like the Hebrew women, Exod. I. 19. But prin∣cipaly this relates to the times of the Gospel, and the Christian Church, under Christ; to which the other is subordinate. a man-child] Collectively multitudes are meant, verse 8. Ezra II. 64, 65. Acts II. 41. and IV. 4. shall I] Set upon a work, and not go through with it? suck] Chap. LX. 16. and your bowes] Shall get vigor, and verdure againe: as those bones, Ezek. XXXVII. 1,—10. come with fine] Towards and against his enemies. Fully to be ac∣complished at the last day of judgement. They that sanctifie themselves] Using superstitious rites of expia∣tion. in the gardens] Set apart for idolatrous services. behinde one in the midst] Or, one person, or company after an∣other; possibly purifying themselves in the fountaine in the midst of the garden. It shall come] Since this people do take such courses, ver. 3, 4. I will execute judgement upon them, and casting them off, take in the Gentiles, Rom. XI. 11, 12, 15, 17. Set a signe] A Signe or Ensigne to gather them. Or, a saving signe and mark upon them; as, Ezek. IX. 4, 6. Apoc. VII. 3. and IX. 4. those that escape of them] The reserves and holy remnant of the Jewish Nation, the Apostles, and other faithful, to all Nations, to call them in by the preaching of the Gospel. your brethren] In Christ, the Converts of the Gentiles, chap. LX. 4, 9. for Priests, and for Levites] Make of them Ministers of the Gospel.
For as the new heaven] Chap. LXV. 17. Heb. XII. 28. remaine] Stand, continue for ever, Matth. XVI. 18. to worship before me] By allusion in termes to the old Jewish maner of worship, Zech XIV. 16. and look upon the carcases] Be spectators and witnesses of the ex∣ecution of Gods vengeance upon those wicked ones, verse 15, 16. Psal. LVIII. 10. for their worme] Hell here is principaly intended. See chap. XXX. 33. Matth. III. 12. and X. 28. and XVIII. 8, 9. and XXV. 41. James V. 3. Apoc. XIV. 10, 11. and XIX. 20. and XX. 14, 15.
Jeremiah. JEREMIE, a Priest of Anathoth in Benjamin, prophesied fourty one years, and upwards; thus, From the thirteenth of King Josiah's reigne, to the end of it, being nineteene years; eleven in the reigne of Jehojakim; and eleven in the reigne of Zedekiah, chap. I. 1, 2. and chap. XXV. 3. and XXXIX. 11. And he prophesied some years after that, in Judea first, and Egypt last, ch. XLII. 2. and XLIII. 10. and XLIV. 8, 24. But how long is uncertaine. He was much opposed by false Prophets: and sustained much hard measure from the Priests, Princes, and Peo∣ple. And after the taking, and destruction of Jerusalem, Citie, and Temple, we read of his usage, chap. XXXIX. 11,—14. and chap. XL. 1,—6. and XLII. 2. and XLIII. 2, 6. Jeremiah in this Book mainly preacheth against the sinnes of the Jewes. And for them fore∣telleth the ruine of their State by the Babylonians, which he lived to see; and to lament in his Book of Lamentations. He foretels the LXX. years captivity there; Their returne thence, and happy en∣largement under that blessed Branch, the Messias; And he propesieth also in the latter part of his Book against other Nations, the Enemies and Oppressors of Gods people, against Egypt; the Philistines; Moab; the Ammonities; Edom; Damascus; Kedar; Hazor; Elam; And foretels chiefly the utter ruine of Babylon, and the Empire by Cyrus; the Medes and Persians. His Chapters as they now stand numbered, and placed in the He∣brew text, and in our English Translations, if they were rancked ac∣cording to the course and Histories of the times, and the things done in them, after the first twenty Chapters, would follow in this ensuing Order, keeping the numbers of the Chapters that we now have, 20. 22. 23. 47. 26. 25. 36. 1—8. 45. 46. 36. 9—32. 35. 27. 24. 49. v. 34 —39. 29. 30. 31. 28. 51. v. 59—64. 21. 32. 33. 34. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 48. 49. 50. 51. v. 1—59. 52. Thus much varying from the Order wherein we have them. The LXX. also marshal them in another ranck and order much differing from the Hebrew Text. And as Chap∣ters here are thus displaced; so also in Daniel partly. And the He∣brew Text seemes sometimes not so rightly to divide the Chapters, as Esay LXIV. And in our English Bibles, Chapters sometimes are not so fitly and exactly divided, as Esay 4. 1. and 26. 20. and 52. 13. 14. 15. And in other Books. No nor verses neither; as Esay 53. 9, 10. and
58. 9. and 59. 15. The end of his Book, Chap. 52. 31—34. was writ∣ten by some Prophet after Jeremies death. But when, and where he died, is not recorded. in the thirteenth year of his reigne] Then Jeremie was called from being ordinary Priest, to be an extraordinary Prophet. captive] There were Captives under Jehojakim, and under Jeco∣niah: But this is the last and greatest of Jerusalem it self; when both Citie, and Temple was sackt, and burnt, and the Kingdome de∣stroyed, in the dayes of Zedekiah. in the fifth moneth] This might end the eleventh year of Zedeki∣ah's reigne, chap. LII. 12 Then] When God first called him. As thus, the Time; So now followes in this Chapter, the maner of his Calling; and such general instructions as God was pleased then to give him concerning his car∣riage in it, and discharge of it. I sanctified thee] Designed thee to be a Prophet: to which Office I do now call thee. So, Gal. I. 15. See the like use of the word, Esay XIII. 3. This stretcheth not to inward sanctification; as that of Iohn Baptist doth, Luke I. 15. Nations] Both Jewes, and other Nations also, verse 10. Chap. XXV. 15, &c. And chap. XLIII. and XLVI. and XLVII. and XLVIII. and XLIX. and L. and LI. I cannot speak] Not dumb, as Zacharie, Luke I. 20, 22. or slow, and stammering, as Moses, Exod. IV. 10, 14. But that he could not deliver such a message in that maner as was fitting; considering his childhood, and weaknesse, wanting that gravity, &c. put forth his hand] In a Vision. to root out] By publishing my word, in Threatenings, and in Pro∣mises; which should as certainly be performed, as if the Prophet himself had acted them, chap. XVIII. 7, 8, 9. A foolish application is made of these words to the Popes pretended power over King∣domes. came unto me.] Seemingly at the same time with the former. What seest thou?] See the like, Amos VII. 8. and VIII. 2. Zech. IV. 2. and V. 1. I see] In a Vision. Almond tree] That doth bud and blossome, the earliest of any. hasten my word to performe it] 2 Kings XXIII. 33, 35. and chap. XXIV. 2. a seething pot] Resembling Ierusalem. Kingdomes of the North] Babylonians, and their Assistants. gird up thy loines] Addresse thy self manfully to thy imploy∣ment. In this Chapter Ieremie directs his speech and Sermon to the whole body of the State, as in the name and person of God, debating the case, and expostulating with them, thus, viz. minding them of Gods mer∣cies and favours towards them; taxing them for their base and unwor∣thy
thy carriage towards him; convincing them of their extreme folly and madnesse, in bringing mischief and misery upon themselves; and forewarning them of the sorry successe they should finde by relying on such as would not be able to relieve them. the kindnesse of thy youth] What kindnesse, and love, God then had shewed them; As, Psal. CVI. 4. Esay XLVI. 3. when thou wentest] Gods kindnesse to them then, even though they then did but ill deserve it, Psal. CVI. 7, 32, 33. Amos V. 25, 26. what iniquity] No fault in God, that he is now changed towards them. mine heritage] As dear to me, as mine heritage; and by me assign∣ed to you for an heritage. and with your childrens children will I plead] As I formerly plead∣ed the cause with your forefathers, chap. VII. 25. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 14, 15. Pleads here upon a new ground, verse 10, 11. Though they had no cause to plead with him, v. 29. Kedar] In Arabia; a kinde of savage people. desolate] Lose your lustre. Is Israel a servant] That he is so servilely, slavishly, used by his enemies? The young lions] Former judgements upon them;  as by the Sy∣rians, and Assyrians. Noph and Tahapanes] Cities in Egypt. Sihor] Nilus. river] Euphrates. The two broken Cisterns, v. 13. when upon every high hill] Notwithstanding thy Promises and en∣gagements. see thy way in the valley] God points them, as it were, with his fin∣ger, to the particular places of their idolatries. dromedarie] A swift beast, whence in Greek it hath its name. A lesser and lower kinde of Camel, very rife in Arahia; and much used by Curriers there. Strabo l. 15. Diodore l. 2. c. 54. Leo Afric. l. 9. A wilde Asse] Male, or female. For Genders in the names of beasts, are often promiscuously used by the Hebrews. And we finde both Genders used sometimes of the very self-same thing; as, Ezek. II. 9. Jonah. I. 17. and II. 1. snuffeth up the winde] Of lust, after the male or female. in her moneth they shall finde her] When she is heavie with young, goeth near her time, and cannot so easily shift for her self. withhold] A wholesom admonition and Caveat;  to break off their wicked courses in gadding after strange people, and strange gods, lest they suffer for it. will I go.] Whatsoever comes of it. And so they are past cure, and past care. to a stock] The ignorant idolatrous Jew no worse then the igno∣rant idolatrous Papist: And the learned Papist not much differing herein from the learned idolatrous Jew.
Arise, and save us.] Judges X. 10, 13, 14, 15. of thy Cities, are thy gods] Tutelar gods. As Papists had their Tu∣telar Saints, to every Citie, Parish, Corporation, trade, sicknesse, &c. See the Word of the Lord] As, hear the rod, Micah VI. 9. See Deut. XXIX. 2, 3, 4. Prov. XX. 12. Eccles. I. 16. Psal. XVII. 2. and LXVI. 18. Jer. II. 19. we will come no more unto thee.] We have no further need now of thy support; we can do well enough without thee. forgotten me] Their ornament, and attire. why trimmest] Esay LVII. 9, 10. thou also taught] Wicked Harlots may learne of thee; by thy evil example. but upon all these] The skirts of thy garments, it is openly to be seene. to change thy way] Ranging up and downe, to seek aide and auxili∣aries abroad. ashamed] 2 Chron. XXVIII. 20. from him] Heb. this; place: into captivity. The five first verses seeme to belong to the former Chapter and Sermon. shall he returne unto her againe?] Clearly No. And the Law ex∣pressely forbids it, Deut. XXIV. 1,—4. Neither could his heart brook it. lien with] So, Deut. XXVIII. 30. In both places the over-man∣nerly Masorets check the Pen-men of Scripture, in appointing an ho∣nester terme to be read, in the roome of that they found written. See the Observations on 2 Kings X. 27. as the Arabian] As Thamar did, Gen. XXXVIII. 14. See Ezek. XVI. 24, 25, 31. or to truck and trade with them. from this time] Of my Correcting thee, and admonishing thee, v. 3. and chap. II. 25. My Father] Lamenting, as a childe to his father offended. thou hast spoken] As formerly, v. 4, 5. and done evil things] But still doest evily and wickedly. as thou couldest] Get opportunity, and have ability; As, Micah II. 1. A new Sermon in Josiah's dayes. backsliding Israel] The revolt of the then Tribes: and Gods Bill of divorce thereupon given her. her treacherous sister Judah] Not fearing, or mending by that ex∣ample: proves worse then Israel, v. 11. but feignedly] In the dayes of good Josiah. For all that he could do, yet the generality of the people never turned unto God with their whole heart, as too well appeared by their sudden relapse and revolt presently after his death, 2 Kings XXIII. 32,—37. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 12, 14.
North] Whither the ten Tribes were carried. Not that he was to go thither: but to proclaime, setting his face towards it. So, Ezek. XX. 46. and XXI. 2. one of a Citie] God would make such an exact enquirie and search for them, upon their sincere turning to him, in all places of their di∣spersion, that though there should be but some one only of them in a Citie, or some two only in a whole Countrey, yet he would, &c. See a parallel place, Esay XXVII. 12. in those dayes] After the enlargement and growth of the Church under the Messias. The Arke] An utter cessation of Legal Rites, under the Messias. Now they should have no misse of it, no want, or use of it at all. Jerusalem] Gods Church;  whereof that was a Type, Cal. IV. 26. Apoc. XXI. 2. See Esay LX. 14. and all the Nations] Esay II. 2. neither shall they] Israelites, or Proselyte-Gentiles. Iudah walk with the house of Israel] They shall be reconciled toge∣ther. land of the North] From Chaldea, and Assyria. The spiritual deli∣verance, and restitution of them by Christ, being shadowed out in these Prophetical Sermons, by those temporal deliverances and re∣staurations. So, chap. XXXI. and XXXIII. Esay XI. and LIV. and LX. But I said] I had such thoughts as these with my self. How shall I] Demanding of them, how he should do so great things for them, whenas they had dealt so perfidiously with him, in times past, verse 6, 9, 13, 20. Somewhat like that, Hosea VI. 4. and XI. 8. and I said] After such crosse thoughts to disswade me, yet at length I resolved to do it, upon the condition following; which in effect God promiseth to effect in them. surely as a wife] God requires her to engage her self to such fu∣ture loyal carriage;  because she had in this kinde beene very faulty before. A voice was heard] Or, is heard; as, Esay XIII. 4. bewailing their sins, ch. XXXI. 19, 18. Returne] Gods exhortation, and invitation. we come] Their Answer; and Confession, to the end of the Chapter. O Israel] Doubtful, whether the ten Tribes, or Iudah. in him] In God. men of Iudah and Ierusalem] Them he exhorts to repentance;  to prevent the imminent judgements to come. Break up] Hosea X. 11. Blow the Trumpet] To give warning of the enemies approach. towards Zion] Whereby men may be admonished to repair to∣wards Zion, their chief place of strength. The Lion is come] Nebuchadnezzar.
thou hast] The false Prophets in Gods Name;  those in the end of the former verse; those he blames for promising them peace. unto me] To do my will against them. from Dan] The utmost bound Northward, and towards Babylon, ch. VIII. 16. Ephraim] North-border of Judah; by which Nebuchadnezzar must come. watchers] Hostile forces, v. 17. my bowels,] The Prophets passionate grieving at the miseries of the war upon his people, ch. IX. 1. Esay XXII. 4 bewailing their fol∣ly that would take no warning. my tents spoiled] The tents of my people. I beheld] In a spiritual rapture, represented to the eye of his minde. the earth] The Land of Iudea. Very Rhetorical delineations do follow of their miseries by this invasion of Nebuchadnezzar, graphi∣caly as in a Map described. yet will I not make a full end.] But reserve a remnant. rentest thy face with painting] Noted as a whorish practice in Jeza∣bel, 2 Kings IX. 30. in Aholah▪ and Aholibah, Ezek. XXIII. 40. if ye can finde a man] Zeph. I. 12. If not ten in Sodom; how much is it stranger that not one in Jerusalem, a larger Citie? See the oecu∣menical contagion; and yet Gods marvelous mercie. So Gen. XVIII. 32. Yet here, by a man, and any, we are not to tie it up to one indivi∣dual person; No doubt more then one such there were: among those, chap. XXVI. 16, 24. and chap. XXXVI. 25. in Jehojakims time. And in Zedekiahs time, during the siege there were Ebedmelech, Jeremie himself, and others. The meaning must be, to understand scarce a man, very few, no considerable number, worth the speaking of; that a man might go to and fro for a long time in it, and yet not light on any man, one, or other, that were sincere and upright. See the like, Gen. VI. 1. Psal. XII. 1. and XIV. 2, 3. Esay LXIV. 6, 7. Micah VII. 1, 2. The Lord liveth] Of swearing, see the Observations on Hos. IV. 15. These are poore] Poverty may put them upon evil courses. a Lion] Nebuchadnezzar, and his forces. Go ye up] Gods Commission to the Chaldeans. not a full end] Verse 18. chap. IV. 27. not he] That thus threateneth, by Jeremie and some others. a Nation] The Chaldeans. O house of Israel] Of Judah, who are of the linage of Israel. which have eyes, and see not] Esay XLII. 20. Ezek. XII. 2. Acts XXVIII. 26, 27. See the Observations on Esay VI. 9. they catch men] As Jezabel set a trap, and a snare, to catch Na∣both. they overpasse the deeds of the wicked] They surpasse them. Or, ra∣ther they passe by evils, they escape those evils wherewith others are surprised; as Psal. LXXIII. 5.
and the Priests beare rule by their meanes] Priests;  Or, Princes. Both banded against Gods true Prophets. This Chapter is full of plagues and judgements, chiefly by the Chal∣deans, threatened for their sinnes. And their sinnes charged upon them, as the Cause of those judgements. Benjamin] Which Tribe adhered still to Judah; had the Nor∣therne halfe of Jerusalem; and joyned to the North-side of it, Josh. XVIII. 28. flee out] Before flee unto it, for succour; chap. IV. 6. now to flee out of it, to escape: yea, out of the Land, ch. X. 17. Tekoah] A fenced Citie, built by Rehoboam, 2 Chron. XI. 5, 6. Where Amos was among the herdmen, and called to be a Prophet, Amos I. 1. And where that wise woman dwelled, 2 Sam. XIV. 2. Bethhaccerem] Nehem. III. 14. Very many Cities in Jurie, begin with Beth. There set up a signe of fire, or fire a Becon, to give warn∣ing of the Babylonians approach. Wholly oppression] As if all made of it. before me continually is grief and wounds] Their grievances and woundings one another, by their cruel dealings, are still before me, to provoke me to proceed in wrath against her. Be thou] A summons to Repentance. Turne back thy hand] Gods speech to the Chaldeans. To whom] The Prophets Speech. I am full] The Prophet cannot longer hold it in. the aged] With the decrepit. were they ashamed] The false Porphets. They were shamelesse in it. stand ye] The seduced people;  stand, as travellers use to do, when they are at a stand, and doubtful of the way. we will not] Their wilful obstinacie. Nations] God calls all the world to witnesse. To what purpose] So long as their lives and courses were such as had beene shewed, Esay I. 11,—15. Sheba] Psal. LXXII. 10. I will lay stumbling-blocks] I will bring those things upon them that shall be meanes of ruine and mischief to them, Ezek. III. 20. and VII. 19. I have set thee] God to his Prophet. They are all] The Prophets answer. One only verse in Jeremie is written in the Chaldee-language; for the ready use of the Jewes there, among, and against the Chaldeans Idols; viz. that in Ch. X. v. 11. The seventy years captivity, or serving the King of Babylon, Ch. XXV. 11. take their rise and commencement, not from the last of Zedekiah; But from the first of Nebuchadnezzar, and third or fourth of Iehojakim; if not from the last of Iehojakim; and captivity of Ie∣choniah. See Jer. XXV. 1, 11, 12. and XXIX. 1, 2, 3, 10. Ezek. XL. 1. and XXXIII. 21. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 21, 22.
Rach l (who kept her fathers sheep, and had her name from Sheep or Ewe) her weeping for her children, chap. XXXI. 15. applied most∣what by way of Allusion, to the mothers weeping for their children, Matth. II. 17, 18. Jonadab, the sonne of Rechab; and not Rechab, the Author of that Injunction and Inhibition, to his Posterity; Chap. XXXV. 6, 8, 14, 16, 18, 19. The Command concerning the Yoakes, chap. XXVII. 1, 2, 3. was either injoyned in the beginning of the reigne of Jehojakim, (and so the reigne of Nebuchadnezzar, and of Zedekiah, propheticaly fore∣seene and foretold by Jeremiah) And was after executed in the reigne of Zedekeih, when the Messengers of those neighbouring Kings, verse 3. came to Zedekiah, to congratulate him in the Begin∣ning of his reigne; or to sollicit him to rebel against Nebuchadnezzar, in the fourth year of his reigne, chap. XXVIII. 1, 10. Or otherwise Jehojakim, in chap. XXVII. v. 1. must by errour of the Scribe be crept in, for Zedekiah; mentioned againe, v. 12. which thing in all Copies may not be admitted. He shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness, chap. XXIII. 6. She shall be called, The Lord our Righteousnesse, chap. XXXIII. 16. The Lord is our Righteousnesse. Iehojakim is made King by Pharaoh Necho, and paies to him the tri∣bute imposed, 2 Kings XXIII. 31, 32, 34, 35. slaies Uriah the Prophet, Ier. XXVI. 20,—23. And in the third or fourth year of his reigne, and first of Nebuchadnezzar, he was conquered by Nebuchadnezzar; as Jeremie foretold, chap. XXV. 1,—11. And he served him three years, 2 Kings XXIV. 1. In which time he burnes the Book written by Baruc from the mouth of Jeremie, chap. XXXVI. After rebels against Nebuchadnezzar. And at last, after that, 2 Kings XXIV. 2. he is taken by him, and bound in fetters to be carried to Babylon, 2 Chron. XXXVI. 6. But dying by the way, his dead body is cast out, and he buried with the burial of an Asse; as Jeremie foretold, chap. XXII. 18, 19. and XXXVI. 30. And so he slept with his fathers, 2 Kings XXIV. 6. Zedekiah saw with his eyes the eyes of the King of Babylon: But not Babylon it self, where yet he should die in captivity: Having his eyes put out by Nebuchadnezzar at Ribla, Jer. XXXII. 4, 5. and LII. 10, 11. Ezek. XII. v. 13. and XVII. 16. In the first year of Zedekiahs captivity and nineteenth of Nebu∣chadnezzar, Nebuzaradan came, in the fifth moneth, seventh day, un∣to Jerusalem: and after two dayes preparation, and taking order a∣bout it, on the tenth day burnt the Temple, Kings house, and all the great mens houses. Or, began to burne them on the seventh day, which fire continued burning, and came to its height, or end, on the tenth day, Jer. LII. 12. 2 Kings XXV. 8.
Jewes car∣ried capives into Baby∣lon, by Ne∣buchadnez∣zar: in his I. Year; and third, or fourth moneth of Jehojakim; Dani∣el▪ and his three Companions; and others. And part of the Vessels of the Temple, Jer. XXV. 1. Dan. I. 1, —6. VII. Year; and eleventh and last of Jehojacin; 3023. Persons. And, it seemes more Vessels of the Tem∣ple, Jer. LII. 28. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 7. VIII. Year; with Jehojakim; men of might, and apt for warre, 10000. out of all Jerusalem: and 1000. Smyths: and more Vessels of the Temple; and cut them in pieces, 2 Kings XXIV. 13, 14, 16. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 10. And at that time, Mordecai, Ester II. 5, 6. And Ezekiel; who calls it his Deportation, E∣zek. XXXIII. 21. and XL. 1. XVIII. and XIX. years; and last of Zedekiah; He car∣ried away Zedekiah; and 832. persons. And all the rest of the Vessels of the Temple, great, and small. And by Nebuzaradan the Captaine of the Guard, burnt the Citie of Ierusalem, and the Temple; brake down the Walls: slew Serajah the High Priest, and the se∣cond Priest; and twelve other principal men, and six∣ty others brought to him to Ribla by Nebuzaradan; Ier. LII. 11,—29. 2 Kings XXV. 8,—21. 2 Chron. XXXVI. 17, 18, 19. XXIII. Year; and fifth of Zedekiah's captivity, by the aforesaid Nebuzaradan; 745. Ier. LII. 30. This was after the murder of Gedaliah. Their number at their Returne out of the Captivity was farre greater, Ezra II. 64, 65. Neh. VII. 66, 67. Leopard] Or rather an Ounse, or Cat-a-mountaine. I am weary with repenting] God repents, see Gen. VI. 6, 7. and in ma∣ny other places. But this is not properly Repentance, such as is in man. Man Repents with trouble of minde and conscience, for some fault, or out of ficklenesse, or through some oversight, or impotence. In which respects God cannot Repent, Num. XXIII. 19. 1 Sam. XV. 29. Mal. III. 6. Iames I. 17. But he is said to Repent improperly. And so this, and other Humane Passions, in some semblance, are ascribed to him improperly for our better apprehension. And thus God is said to Repent, when he doth as men use to do when they Repent, 1 Sam. XXV. 33, 34. When he undoeth what he had done before, revoketh a doome that he had passed before, stayeth the execution of a Sentence that formerly he had denounced, withholdeth the punishment de∣nounced against sinne when the Persons repent of the evil of sinne. So, Iudg. X 13. 15, 16. 1 Kings XXI. 21, 27, 29. Ionah II. 10. Ier. XVIII. 8, 10. and XLII 10. Psal. CVI. 45. The end being thus ac∣complished for which the doome was denounced: Without which Re∣pentance in man, God will not Repent of his purposed punishment;
Esay XIV. 24, 27. Ier. IV. 28. Zech. VIII. 14. Thus Repentance in man produceth this kinde of Repentance in God. Man Repenting chang∣eth his minde, will, and act: But God Repenting, willing this change in man, altereth the act; His minde and purpose abiding still the same, Ier. XX. 16. Shallum] This seemes to be the same with Jehoachaz, and Joha∣nan, 2 Kings XXIII. 30. 1 Chron. III. 15. And that Shallum named, 1 Chron. III. 15. seemes to be another from this Shallum, as being reckoned distinctly the fourth sonne of Iosiah, and haply dying before his father Iosiah. See the Observations on 2 Kings XXIII. 31. Branch] Is taken for the Messias. And so, chap. XXXIII. 15. and Zech. III. 8. and VI. 12. Esay IV. 2. XI. 1. Yet that King, Esay XXXII. 12. and XXXIII. 17. seemes properly and immediately to be understood of Ezekiah; of Christ only Typicaly. And that, Esay VIII. 18. and XLIX. 1. and chap. LXI. 1. of Esay partly, but of Christ principaly. As likewise that, Esay XLIX. 1. And that, Esay VIII. 8. Of Esay literaly, of Christ figuratively, Heb. II. 14. And againe, Esay XLII. 1. of Christ principaly, of Cyrus Typicaly. That Esay XLI. 2. of Cyrus only. Many speeches of the Prophets, con∣cerning themselves, and others who were Types of Christ, are in the New Testament applied to Christ; being one way, and in one ma∣ner verified of them; and another way, and in another maner also, many times fulfilled in him. And so those words, 2 Sam. VII. 14. compared with 1 Chron. XXII. 10. and Heb. I. 5. And those, Heb. II. 13. Yea, in diverse Prophecies, some Particulars agree to the Type, and not to the Truth; as, Psal. XXII. 6. and XL. 12. Some to the Truth, and not to the Type; as, Psal. XVI. 10. with Acts II. 29. and XIII. 36, 37. Or to the Type in one sense; to the Truth in an∣other: so in those Psalmes wherein David is a Type of Christ, as Psal. II. and XVI. and XXII. and those in which Solomon, as, Psal. XLV. and LXXII. Christ is called the Branch, because springing up as a bud or sprout from the root of Jesse, Esay XI. 1, 10. And so from David, Apoc. V. 5. and XXII. 16. Psal. CXXXII. 11, 17. Acts XIII. 23, 32. called the Righteous Branch, in this Text, and chap. XXXIII. 15. springing from a withered stock and stump, & sprouting at first in a mean and despicable maner, Esay XXXIII. 2, 3, 4. Yet after branch∣ing out beautifully, retaining its verdure perpetualy, spreading and growing, flowering and flourishing to all eternity, Dan. II 44, 45. A man] See the Annotations on Esay II. 9. uncles sonne] Sonne omitted in the Original, haply for brevity fake, as well knowne to be supplied out of verse. 7. preceding. As likewise the word Sister seemes to be omitted, 2 Sam. XXI. 8. And the word Brother, Verse 19. of that Chapter. Funeral Burnings, among the Heathen, were of the dead bodies: But among the Jewes, not of the bodies; but of sweet odours; and divers kinds of spices, prepared by the Art of the Apothecaries, burn∣ed in the Tombe where the embalmed body was to lie, 2 Chr. XVI. 14.
This was denied to the wicked King Jehoram, 2 Chron. XXI. 19. yet granted here to Zedekiah, in Babylon: And that burning of the Flesh of Saul, and his sonnes, 1 Sam. XXXI. 12. was a case extraordinary, and as their present condition, and that exigent seemed to require. when they cut the calf in twaine, &c.] The maner of making Co∣venants; whence the Hebrew phrase is to Cut a Covenant, that is from the right of Cutting a beast in twaine, sometime for Sacrifice, sometime for Feasting; and the Covenanters passing through be∣tweene the Parts of it; implying it seemes, and that by way of exe∣cration, Themselves to be alike cut in sunder in case of violating the Conditions of the Covenant, Matth. 24. 51. Though some make the Cutting to relate to the strict and exact cutting out of Articles agreed upon for mutual performance by both parties, Gen XV. 9, 10, 17. Deut. XXIX. 12. Of Covenants, see more betweene man and man, and betweene God and man, Gen. IX. 9,—17. Gen. XXI. 27,—32. and chap. XXVI. 28,—31. and chap. XXXI. 44,—55. Exod. XXIV. 4,—8. Deut. V. 2, 3. whence the two tables are called the Tables of the Covenant; and the Ark, the Ark of the Covenant. And the Tabernacle, The Tabernacle of the Covenant; the Book of the Law, the Book of the Covenant, Josh. XXIV. 24, 25, 26, 27. Neh. IX. 38. 1 Sam. XVIII. 3, 4. and XXIII. 18. 1 Kings V. 12. and XX. 34. 2 Kings XI. 17. and XXIII. 3. Ezra. X. 3. Esay LIX. 21. Jer. L. 5. And God promises to make a New Covenant with his peo∣ple, Jer. XXXI. 31, 32, 33, 34. cited, Heb. VIII. 8, 9. which yet is not simply New, in regard of the substance of it: for the maine mat∣ter and substance of the former Covenant is there, verse 33. And, Gen. XVII. 7. Deut. XXVI. 17, 18. and XXIX. 13. And both Cove∣nants ratified by the blood of the Messias. But as Love is called a New Commandment, John XIII. 34. So this a New Covenant; in that it is ratified by the death of our Saviour exhibited; in that the Do∣ctrine of the Gospel is now more fully and clearly revealed; in that this runneth wholly upon the spiritual, and celestial Blessings; in that the Ceremonials are removed, and the more Spiritual Service substi∣tuted for it; in that it is more generaly dilated and enlarged to all Na∣tions; in that a large measure of Spiritual Gifts and efficacie of the Spirit is now vouchsafed; in that the continuance of it, without change, is to be to the end of the world. hath sworne by himself] Having no greater to swear by, Heb. VI. 13. So, Gen. XXII. 16. Jer. XXII. 5. Amos VI. 8. By his soul; So is the Hebrew in this text, and chap. LI. 14. By the excellency of Jacob, Amos VIII. 7. By his Holinesse, Amos IV. 2. And againe, the Forme of his Oath is thus expressed, As I live, Heb. I. live, so, Jer. XXII. 24. and XLVI. 18. Ezek. V. 11. And, I live for ever, Deut. XXXII. 40. So men use to swear, The Lord liveth, Jer. IV. 2. and V. 2. As the Lord liveth that made us this soul, Jer. XXXVIII. 16. Gods oath shall undoubtedly be fulfilled, Psal. CX. 4. and CXXXII. 11. Heb. VI. 17, 18. Of Oaths, see more in the Annotations on Hos. IV. 15. and Gen. XXIV. 3.
carried away captive] Five captivities into Babylon are mentioned in Scripture. Lamentations. THese are not those of Jeremie, for Josiah, 2 Chron. XXXV. 25. No more, then those were for him, Ezek. XIX. 1, 14. which indeed were commanded to be taken up by Ezekiel, for Jehoachaz, and Jehojakim; But these were written by Jeremie, in the time of the Babylonish cap∣tivity, after the Temple of the Lord, and Citie of Jerusalem were burnt, and destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar: Lamenting here those more then lamentable miseries; As the whole Matter and Contents of this Book doth declare: And particularly, that very passage it self, chap. IV. 20. which is appliable properly to King Zedekiah; and not to King Josiah. The LXX and Jerome, doth expresse this very time, in the beginning of the Book it self. These Lamentations are full of Pathetical expressions. And for the weight of the Matter, and the Help of Memorie; The first, second, and fourth Chapters do containe twenty two verses apiece, according to the number of the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; and do be∣gin each verse with one of them in their order methodicaly. And chap. III. contains 66. verses, treble the former number: And begins each three of them, with one letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, in the order methodicaly. The last Chapter only is without this Art. Many Signes of Lamentations are expressed here. Which from hence, and other Scriptures, may more fully be gathered, thus; Sigh∣ing, Mourning; mournful Songs; weeping, howling; Fasting; changing of the garments, mourning women, Ier. IX. 17. 2 Chron. XXXV. 25. Amos V. 16. rending of the Cloathes; wearing black, and sack cloth; sitting on the ground, and keeping silence; lying prostrate upon the ground, sitting, lying, covering, rowling, wallow∣ing in ashes; in dust, and ashes; casting up dust, ashes, earth upon them, and their heads; spreading, and wringing the hands; laying the hands upon the head; smiting with the hand; stamping with the feet; hanging down the head; uncovering the head, and bare, and againe in some ages, the covering the head, covering head and face too, as our close mourners; covering the upper lip; bare-foot, shaving the head and beard; making baldnesse; plucking off the haire; beat∣ing the breast; printing marks upon the flesh; tearing it; cutting it. Amongst other places, see these, viz. Lam. II. 10. and III. 16. Lev. X. 6. and XIII. 45. and XIX. 27, 28. and XXI. 5, 10. Deut. XIV. 1. Iosh. VII. 6. 1 Sam. IV. 12. 2 Sam. I. 2. and XIII. 19. and XIV. 2. and XV. 30, 32. and XIX. 4. 2 Chron. XXXV. 25. Ier. IX. 17. Ezra
IX. 3. Ester IV. 1, 3. and VI. 12. Iob I. 20. II. 12. XLII. 6. Esay XV. 2, 3. and LVIII. 8. Jer. II. 37. and VI. 26. and XIV. 3, 4. and XVI. 6, 7. and XXV. 34 Ezek. XXIV. 17. and XXVII. 30. Micah I. 10, 16. Amos V. 16. Nahum. II. 7. Luke XVIII 13. Lam. I. 17. Ier. VII. 29. and IX. 17, 18. XIV. 3, 4. XVI. 6, 7. XLI. 5. XLVIII. 36, 37. Lam. III. 48. Ezek. VI. 11. VII. 18. In the Observations and Explanations upon this Book; as also upon Daniel; and the twelve small Prophets; I am the briefer, because that portion fell to my share in the last Great English Annotations; to which in ma∣ny things I shall now refer thee. Ezekiel. EZEKIEL, like as Ieremie, was both Priest, and Prophet. Being carried captive with Jehojacin, He prophesies in Chaldea: And calling that His captivity, as was said, he makes it his Epocha; and from thence begins the accompt and reckoning of years, in all the distinct times of his several Prophe∣cies, throughout his Book; Thus, In Jehoja∣cins Capti∣vity. In the V. Year, fourth moneth, fifth day, He begins to Pro∣phesie, chap. I. 2, 3. And so continues on in the se∣ven first chapters: with some other short Notations of Times, soone following, chap. III. verse 15, 22,—27. and chap. IV. v. 5. VI. Year, sixth moneth, fifth day, (420. dayes from the former time, chap. I. v. 2.) He was carried in a Visi∣on to Jerusalem, chap. VIII. 1, 2, 3. chap. IX. chap. X. chap. XI. 24. And thereafter doth continue on Pro∣phesying to the twentieth chapter. VII. Year, fifth moneth, tenth day, (335. dayes from that time, chap. VIII. 1.) He was consulted by the Elders. And thereupon Prophesied, Chapters 20, 21, 22, 23. IX. Year, tenth moneth▪ tenth day (when the siege of Ierusalem began, 2 Kings XXV. 1, 2.) He Prophesied, Chapters 24, 25. X. Year, tenth moneth, twelfth day; Against Pharaoh, and Egypt, Chap. XXIX. v. 1,—17.
XI. Year, first moneth (though some think the fifth) fifth day, against Tyrus, Chapters 26, 27, 28. v. 1,—20. Zidon, chap. XXVIII. v. 20,—26. First moneth, seventh day; Against Egypt, chapter XXX. v. 20,—26. Third moneth, first day; Against Egypt, chap. XXXI. Fourth moneth, ninth day; The Citie taken, Jer. LII. 5, 6. 2 Kings XXV. 2, 3, 4. Fifth moneth, tenth day; Nebuzaradan burnt the Temple, and Citie, Jer. LII. 12, 13. XII. Year, tenth moneth, fifth day; The newes brought to Ezekiel. And then he Prophesied, chap. XXXIII. v. 21,—33. and chapters XXXIV.—XL. Twelfth moneth, first day; Against Egypt, ch. XXXII. 1,—16. Fifteenth day; A∣gainst Egypt, chap. XXXII. v. 17,—32. and chap. XXXIII. 1,—20. XXV. Year, first moneth, tenth day; He hath that large Vision, chapters XL.—XLVIII. XXVII. Year, first moneth, first day; Against Egypt, chap. XXIX. v. 17,—21. and chap. XXX. v. 1,—19. The Glo∣ry of the Lord Appearing By Chebar, ch. I. 3,—28. In the Plaine, chap. III. 22, 23. In Jerusalem, ch. VIII. 4, and c. X. 15, 20, 22. Departing, by degrees, chap. VIII. 3, 4, 5, 6. and IX. 3. and chap. X. 3, 4, 5, 18, 19. and chap. XI. 22, 23. Returning, chap. XLIII. 2, 3, 4. The Measures mentioned in the Description of Ezekiels Visiona∣rie Temple; and Division of the Land, chap. XL.—XLVIII. are Calamus, and Cubitus; the Reed, and the Cubit. The length of the Reed is defined, chap. XL. 5. and XLI. 8. That of the Cubit, is more usualy known; adding that, chap. XLI. 8. and XLIII. 13. See more of these, in my Annotations upon Ezekiel XL. 5. among those large Annotations upon the Bible, printed Anno 1651. By the Cubits are measured, the Gates, East, North, South, of the Exterior; and of the Inner Courts: with their Posts, Porches, Arches, and Chambers: The Courts, and the Pillars, and Chambers about them; The Ta∣bles: Chambers of the Singers, and of the Priests; and the Porch of the House, chap. XL. The several Parts, Places, and Chambers of the Temple; and of the Separate Place, chap. XLI. The North-Chambers; and South-Chambers; before the Separate Place, ch. XLII. The Altar of Burnt-Offerings, chap. XLIII. And the waters, chap. XLVII. 3. By Reeds, besides a few other parts, chap. XL. 6, 7, 8. there is, or seemes to be, Measured; The Wall about the outmost Court; five hundred Reeds, on each side of that square Court, ch.
XLII. 15,—20. Which, if Literaly understood, it makes the Tem∣ple, and all Holy Building about it; and the Courts of it, to be big∣ger then Solomons Temple, and all the Citie of Jerusalem with it. But if we understand by five hundred Reeds, Reeds of five hundred Cubits, that is, making up five hundred Cubits, on each side of that Square Court; as Tremelius doth; And indeed the Suburbs of it are named to be fifty Cubits ound about, chap. XLV. 2. Then we shall bring that Sacred Visionarie Building into a spacious, yet reasonable and proportionable quantity; But with a very harsh, as it seemes, translation of the words of the sacred Text. And as for that Oblation of the Land offered to the Lord, that Holy Portion for the Priests; and for the Levites: and that Land for the Citie of Jerusa∣lem, and Suburbs, and Use of it being in all 25000. square; mentio∣ning neither Reeds, nor Cubits, chap. XLVIII. 20. And the Prin∣ces Portion of Land, lying on the outside of it, East, and West, chap. XLVIII. 21. If we take that great Square to be so many Reeds, as most do; with very great probability in this Visionarie Division; We shall so make that Visionarie Square to be as big as the whole Land of Canaan. But if we understand it of Cubits, we shall bring it to be about the compasse of twenty five miles on each side of the square: and so leave a proportionable quantity of Land for the twelve Tribes, chap. XLVIII. stand upon thy feet—set me upon my feet] God with the com∣mand gives the power and act of performance. And so Grace, and Regeneration is both Gods Fromise, and Work, Ezek. XI. 19, 20. and XVIII. 31. with chap. XXXVI. 26. and chap. XI. 19. land of Pathros] A Province in Egypt, chap. XXX. 14. Jer XLIV. 1, 15. possessed by the Pathrusim, or Pathruses which were of the li∣neages of Mitsraim, or Egyptus, Gen. X. 14. 1 Chron. I. 12. Likely the same with Thebais, higher and further up in the Countrey the Noph, Esay XI. 11. Lybia] Heb. Phut, or Phuth, or Put. These Lybians were of the same race with the Ethiopians, Gen. X. 6. 1 Chron. I. 6. Seated in A∣frica, to the West of Egypt. Lybia] These were in Africa, and came of Lud, the sonne of Miz∣raim, and grandchild of Cham, Gen. X 6, 13. Ger. XLVI. 9. The Lydians in Asia, or Anatolia came of Lud the sonne of Shem, Gen. X. 22. Esay LXVI. 19. See the Annotations on Ezek. XXX. 5. Tehaphnehes] Or, Tahapanes, or Tachapanes, Tapanhes, or Tach∣panches, and the same, as it seemes in a contracted forme Hanes, or Cha∣nes, Esay XXX. 4. a Prime Citie in Egypt: taking likely its name from Tahpenes Queene of Egypt, 1 Kings XI. 19, 20. Seated not farre from Pelusium; whence termed by the Greeks and Latines Daphnae Pelu∣siacae. See Jer. II. 16. Here Jremy was, chap. XLIII. 8. Ezek. XLVIII. 8,—22. In this Visionary Description, The Portion or holy Oblation of Land, for the Priests, and the Sanctuary; for the Levites; for the Citie, and Suburbs; for the Prince; was all
at most no greater or biger then the several Portions for each of the other Tribes. And therefore in that Draught of mine set forth by my learned and industrious friend Master Thomas Fuller in his Pisgah-sight of Palestine, V. Book. page 189. I desire to be rightly so understood, and no otherwise. The said Draught is represented there in a far larger Proportion. But the only Reason was, That so there might be roome enough for the setting down of the several Situations, and Limits a∣mong themselves, of the Priests Portion, and of the Sanctuarie in the midst of it; And of the Levites Portion by themselves; And of the Citie Jerusalem, and Suburbs, of it, by themselves; And of the Prin∣ces Portion, lying, and guarding, as it were, all the former, at both Ends, East, and West. The true quantity of all this, in relation to the other Tribes, being no other then I have formerly expressed. Daniel. DANIEL was carried Captive in the first year of Nebu∣chadnezzar, and the third or fourth of Jehojakim, Dan. I. 1,—6. And at this time began the Babylonian Monarchy: and the Jewes Subjection or Captivity, which lasted seventy years. Daniel living, and young, was so famous for Prayer and Piety, That in the thirteenth or fourteenth year of his Captivity, He is matched with Noah, and Job, Ezek. XIV. 14. And in the eighteenth or nineteenth year, He is held such an unparallel'd patterne for Wisdom, That the King of Tyre, who thought himself so wise above others, is taunted in these words, Behold, thou art wiser then Daniel, Ezek. XXVIII. 2. His Book begins with his own Captivity; reacheth to our Savi∣ours time, Dan. IX. 25. And ends a while after, with the final De∣struction of the Temple, and Citie of Jerusalem, by the Romanes, Dan. IX. 27. Daniels Prophecies stretch not beyond Daniels owne People the Jewes. Some reckon the times thus; seventy years in the Babylonish cap∣tivity, or subjection to Babylon: seventy years seven times, or seven weeks of years; that is, four hundred and ninety years, thence to our Saviours death. And fourty thence to Jerusalems Destruction, and the end of the Jewes Common-wealth: in all, six hundred years. But others rather, upon more likely grounds, extend the number of years to a great summe. His Book is Historical, in the first six Chapters Prophetical, in the rest.
The Language of it is Chaldee, from chap. II. v. 4 to chap. VIII. A little Arabique being intermixt in the sixth Chapter. Because, as some conceive, the matters contained in those Chapters mostwhat con∣cerne the Chaldeans, and were things known to them; or at least such as no danger by the knowledge of them accrued to the Jewes. In all the rest, before, and after, it is Hebrew, the Churches dialect, and treasure. And yet here are sometimes some kinde of concealments from the Hebrews themselves, in the darkest Visions, chap. VIII. 26. and chap. XII. 4. The Chapters in Daniel fall within the reigns of seve∣ral Kings, Thus, In the reign of Nebuchadnez∣zar; in his I. Year, Chapter I. V. Year, Chap. II. VI. Year, most likely, Chap. III. XXXV. Year, Chap. IV. Belshazzar, in his I. Year, Chap VII. III. Year, Chap. VIII. Last year, Chap. V. Darius, in his first year, Chapters VI. and IX. Cyrus, in his third year, first moneth, Chapters X. and XI. and XII. So that in the Order of the Chapters, there is this Transposition; That the seventh and eighth Chapters, as now they stand numbered and placed, in order of time go before the fifth and sixth Chapters. And for the matter of some Chapters; Those Prophetical Dreames, and Visions, Chap. II. and IV. and VII. and VIII. and XI. seeme mostwhat to expound one another; falling so oft upon the same matters, lesse or more; and going over them, or some of them still: Nebuchadnezzar, and the Babylonian, is the Golden Head, Chap. II. the Tree, Chap. IV. the Lion, Chap. VII. The Mede and Persian, is the Breast and Armes of silver, Chap. II. the Beare, Chap. VII. the Ram, Chap. VIII. and Chap. X. 1, 13, 20. and Chap. XI. 1, 2. The Grecian Alexander, is the Belly and Thighs of Brasse, Chap. II. the Leopard, Chap. VII. the he-Goat, Chap. VIII, and Chap. X. 20. and Chap. XI. 3, 4. The Grecian divided, chiefly into the Seleucide, and Lagide, are the Legs of iron, and Feet, part of iron, and part of clay, chap. II. The fourth Beast, chap. VII. and the Kings of the North, and of the South, chap. XI. Daniel having his suit denied by the Prince of the Eunuchs, makes his addresse to his Steward, and prevails, chap. I. 10, 11. That second year, Dan. II. 1. is not of Cyrus, the last word of the former chapter; But of Nebuchadnezzar: Nor of his Reigne, or Mo∣narchy either; But in his reigne; as the Hebrew distinctions in the Context seeme to import; Namely, the second year, after the three years of Daniels education were past, and he brought in to stand be∣fore the King; which falls in with the fifth year of Nebuchadnezzars reigne, and Daniels Captivity, and with the eighth or ninth of Jeho∣jakim.
In the second year, in Nebuchadnezzars reigne, Nebuchad∣nezzar had this Dreame; and Daniel was then sought for to be slaine, with the rest of the Wisemen and Magicians. That huge Image of gold, though hollow within, as the two bra∣zen Pillars were, Jer. LII. 21. which was set up to be worshipped, Dan. III. seems to be soone after the former Dreame, and before Je∣hojacins Captivity; Being Daniels three companions only, newly ad∣vanced, are accused; and no other Jewes; for not worshipping it, and committing such grosse and open Idolatry. That Dreame and Vsion of the Great Tree, chap. IV. being when Nebuchadnezzar was at rest, after all his Victories, chap. IV. 4. And flourishing in his Palace, after his conquest of Egypt, which was in the twenty seventh year of Jehojacins Captivity, Ezek. XXIX. 17,—20. seemes to be some thirty years after the former Dreame, chap. II. and in the thirty fifth year of Nebuchadnezzars owne reigne, and Daniels Captivity. A year after this Dreame, he fell mad, chap. IV. 29. and continued so seven years, verse 16, 25, 3. even so long as Solo∣mons Temple was in building, which he destroyed. And about two years after his restoring to his wits, and Kingdome, v. 26, 34, 36. in the fourty fourth or fourty fifth year of his reigne, and thirty seventh of Jehojacins Captivity he died, Jer. LII. 31. Evilmerodach, the sonne of Nebuchadnezzar, in the first year of his reign, advanced Jehojacin, 2 Kings XXV. 27,—30. Jer. LII. 31,—34. Belshazzar, the grandchilde of Nebuchadnezzar, was the last of Babels Monarchs, Jer. XXVII. 7. Dan. V. 28, 30, 31. Though he be called the sonne of Nebuchadnezzar, and Nebuchadnezzar be called his father, Dan. V. 11, 13, 18, 22. The Romane Empire is none of the four Beasts, chap. VII. But the Greeks are the Dealers in the end of wrath. Antiochus Epiphanes, the last of the ten Hornes of the fourth Beast, was the most furious Persecutor of the Jewes, and their Religion. See of him largely, Dan. VII. v. 8, 11, 20, 21. and chap. VIII. v. 9,—14. and v. 23, 24, 25, 26. and chap. XI. 21,—45. and chap. XII. He raged terribly, for two thousand three hundred dayes, chap. VIII. 14, 24, 25, 26. that is, six years, three moneths, and some twenty dayes, viz. from the one hundred fourty second year of the Kingdom of the Greeks, when after wicked Jason, worse then Menelaus had got of Antiochus to be High Priest, having in him the fury of a cruel Tyrant, and the rage of a sa∣vage beast, 1 Macc. I. 11. and v. 20,—53. 2 Macc. IV. 25. from this time Antiochus continuing his rage until the one hundred fourty eighth year, ninth moneth, twenty fifth day, 1 Macc. IV. 52, 53, 54. But raging most of all for a time, times, and the dividing of time, Dan. VII. 25. and, chap. XII. 7. that is, three years, and ten dayes; from the time he took away the daily Sacrifice, and set up the abomination of desolation, till the restoring of Gods worship againe, 1 Macc. I. 54, 57, 59. and chap. IV, 52, 53, 54. Or three years, and a half; begin∣ning so at 1 Macc. I. 30. And againe, from that time of taking away
the daily Sacrifice, and setting up the abomination of desolation, were one thousand two hundred and ninety dayes, to the end of those sad times of the Churches troubles. But the one thousand three hundred thirty fifth day, which was fourty five dayes after the former, was the last end of the indignation, the Blessed time perfectly to finish those furious persecutions by Antiochus, by the death of Antiochus himself, Dan. XII. 6, 7, 8, 11, 12. 2 Macc. XI. 33. 1 Macc. VI. 16. And at the end of the Kingdome of the Greeks, subdued soone after by the rising up of the Romane Empire, Christ came, and erected his everlasting Kingdome; and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. II. 34, 35, 44, 45. and Chap. VII. 9, 10, 13, 14, 27. But of these things see more in my Annotations upon Daniel, in the large Annota∣tions upon the whole Bible, printed, Anno 1651. Gabrieal the only Angel in Scripture that hath a proper name, Dan. VIII. 16. and chap. IX. 21. Lke. I. 19, 26. Michael being understood of Christ. Darius the Median, the sonne of Ahasuerus, Dan. V. 31. and VI. 28. and Cyrus, the Persian, Dan. IX. 1. seeme fellowes in Empire: and Cyrus, the Survivor, and sole Monarch. Messiah a proper name, Dan. IX. 25. And hence famous in the New Testament, John I. 41. and IV. 25. The Abomination of Desolation hath reference to Antiochus E∣piphanes, Dan. VIII. 13. and chap. XI. 31. and chap. XII. 11. And to the Romanes, Dan. IX. 27. Matth. XXIV. 15. like the Sonne of God] Or rather like a sonne of the gods. For a Heathen King, utterly ignorant of the Mystery of the Trinity, could not dreame of the second Person, the Sonne of God. And so is that to be understood, Psal. LXXXIX. 6. As a phrase not unlike, is in Judg. VIII. 18. Many of the Ancient Fathers, being desirous to get proofs of the Mystery of the Trinity, and of Christs Humanity, out of the Books of the Prophets, did catch at all occasions, and made use of any thing in them, that might have the least shew and shadow to look that way. And so they have wrested, though not rightly, this speech of Ne∣buchadnezzar to that purpose. great Babylon] The compasse of it within the walls was about four hundred furlongs, or sixty miles. The walls of it fifty foot, if not Cubits broad, so as two Charets with four horses on breast might easily meet on them: And high at least fifty Cubits. See my Anno∣tations on this place. And the learned Annotations on Jer. LI. 53, 58. It is said to sit upon many waters, Jer. LI. 13. to have a Sea, ver. 36. Esay XXI. 1. by reason of the great river Euphrates whereon it was seated; and the vast lakes, meeres, and pooles that were made out of it in that great plaine of the Land of Shinar and Babylon; Gen. XI. 2. This is an ancient Citie, built by Nimrod, Gen. X. 10. And was under the Assyrian Empire. Manasseh King of Judah was carried hither by Esar-haddon the Assyrian Monarch, 2 Chron. XXXIII. 11. The Kings of it, when it came from under the Assyrian Empire, we reade
in Scripture to be these, Merodach Baladan, Nebuchadnezzar, Evil∣merodach, Belshazzar, Esay XXXIX. I. 2 Kings XXV. 27. Dan. V. 1, 11. Jer. XXVII. 7. Yet some interpose one Assur, and Labarssar∣dach, before Belshazzar, for short times; But not out of Scripture. This Citie of Babylon is called Sheshach, Jer. XXV. 26. and LI. 41. (though a King of Egypt was of the like name, 2 Chron. XII. 2.) And likely this name is from some Babylonian Idol; whence Michael might by the Babylonian Chamberlaine be termed Meshach, Dan. I. 7. And haply hence the Sacean Festival in Babylon for eleven dayes together, which erosus, and Ctesius do mention, took that name: A Feast not unlike the Greek and Latine Saturnalia, and our Christmas. And in the time of which Feast probably was Babylon taken by Cyrus; as Her∣dote, and Xenophon do report. And the Prophet Jeremie himself by naming it Sheshach, may seeme to point as it were with the finger to the very time of that Feast, wherein Babylon, and that State was to re∣ceive its fatal blow. See Dan. V. 1. V. 30. to the Medes and Persians] Medes coasted upon the Caspian Sea. Persians lay upon the Persian Gulph, Esay XIII. 17. Medes descend∣ed from Madai, the sonne of Japhet, Gen. X. 2. 1 Chron. I. 5. They, and the Persians, in some sort one people, as well for vicinity, as affi∣nity; and acknowledging one King, Esay XXI. 2. Jer. LI. 11. Dan. V. 28. and IX. 1. like the sonne of man] Rather like a sonne of man. For Christ is not there likened to himself, but to a man in general. As Ezekiel is called a sonne of man; and as men in Scripture are usualy called the sonnes of men. And so is that place to be understood, Apoc. I. 13. Like a sonne of man. And againe, chap. XIV. 14. Like unto a sonne of man. Province of Elam] Elam is Persia; from Elam the sonne of Sem, and brother to Asshur, and Arphaxad, Gen. X. 22. 1 Chron. I. 17. The Province of Elam is that part of Persia that bordered upon the Medes: whereupon Elamites and Medes are joyned together, Esay XXI. 2. Jer. XXV. 25. They served under the Assyrian Monarchs Salmane∣sar and Sennacharib, and under the Babylonian Nebuchadnezzar against the people of God, Esay XXII. 6. And therefore are judgements denounced against them by the Prophets, Jer. XXV. 25. and chap. XLIX. 34, 38. And they became afterwards Gods instruments to ex∣ecute his vengeance upon the Babylonians, and to deliver his people from their bondage and captivity, Esay XXII. 6. and XLI. 2, 25. and XLIV. 28. and XLV. 1, &c. and XLVI. 11. and XLVIII. 14. See more in the Annotations on Esay XIII. 17. Uphaz] Where the finest gold seemeth in those times to have beene, Jer. X. 9. This some suppose to be the same with Paz, or Phaz, Job XXVIII. 17. Psal. XXI. 3. Esay XIII. 12. and Mupaz, 1 Kings X. 18. 2 Chron. IX. 17. Some take it to be Phez in Africa.
Hosea. HOSEA Prophesied in the dayes of four Kings of Ju∣dah; and seven Kings of Israel: from Vzziah of Ju∣dah, to Hezekiah; and from Ieroboam the second of Israel to Hosheah, when, after that the two Tribes and a halfe had beene carried captive by Tiglath-Pilesar, King of Assyria, in the dayes of Pekah, 2 Kings XV. 29. 1 Chron. V. 26. All the rest of Israel, was captivated, and that King∣dome extirpated by Shalmanesar, in the dayes of King Hosheah, Hos. X. 7, 15. 2 Kings XVII. 6. and chap. XVIII. 10. But of him, and the rest of the small Prophets, see more at large in my Annotations upon them, in the large Annotations upon the whole Bible printed Anno 1651. He was sent chiefly to Israel: And begins to Prophesie Destru∣ction to them; even when they were in the height of their prosperity under Ieroboam the second. Among other reasons of Gods vengeance upon the house of Jehu for the blood of Jezreel, this might be one, That his Commission a∣gainst the house of Ahab, stretched not to slay King Ahaziah of Judah, and his brethren. Most commonly taken illatively for Therefore;  yet some∣times in a discretive notion; for Notwithstanding, Neverthelesse, Yet; as here, and Esay VII. 14. and XXX. 18. and LI. 21. Ier. XVI. 14. and XXX. 16. Ezek. XXXIX. 25. nor sweare, The Lord liveth] Swearing, and this Forme of swear∣ing is lawful. It is a part of our duty, and Gods worship to sweare, when we are lawfully thereunto called and warranted, Esay XIX. 18. Psael. LXIII. 11. But not in our ordinary communication, Matth. V. 34, 37. Iaes V. 12. Not upon vaine and light causes; as Herods oath was to the dancing damsel, Marke VI. 23. much lesse to be a bond to wickednesse; as those, Acts XXIII. 12. to kill Paul. But in ne∣cessary and weighty causes▪ As for ratification of Covenants, and pro∣mises of importance: So did Abraham and Abimelech, Gen. XXI. 31. Isaac and Abimelech, Gen. XXVI. 31. Jacob and Laban, Gen. XXXI. 53. David and Ionathan, 1 Sam. XX. 17. And so God commands it, for removal of suspitions, of jealousie, Num. V. 21. of Theft, Exod. XXII. 11. 1 Kings VIII. 31. 2 Chron. VI. 22. And so many men in Scripture upon weighty causes did lawfully require an oath. So did Abraham of his servant, Gen. XXIV. 2. Jacob of Esau, Gen. XXV. 33. and of his sonne Joseph, Gen. XLVII. 31. Rahab of the Spies, Josh. II.
12. Sampson of the men of Judah, Judg. XV. 12. Saul, and the E∣gytian of David, 1 Sam. XXIV. 21. and XXX. 15. Nebuchadnezzar of Zedekiah, 2 Chron. XXXVI. 13. And many in like cases did freely and voluntarily give their oaths: so Moses to Caleb, Josh. XIV. 9. Da∣vid to Bathshebah, 1 Kings I. 13. Gedaliah to the Remnant of Judah, 2 Kings XXV. 24. King Zedekiuh to the Prophet Jeremie, Jer. XXXVIII. 16. And so godly men, to binde themselves the more to God, and his service, and good duties have sworne to the Lord. So David to finde out an house and place for Gods habitation, Psal. CXXXII. 2. So the Priests, Levites, and all Israel, to reforme the strange Marriages, Ezra X. 5. So King Asa, and all the people entred into a Co∣venant to seek the Lord, and they sware unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets, 2 Chron. XV. 12, 13, 14. Yea, God himself is mercifully pleased so farre to condescend as to sweare unto men, for the better assurance and confirmation of their faith in the truth of his promises, Heb. VI. 13—18. So he sware to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Gen. XXIV. 7. and XXVI. 3. Exod. VI. 8. Luke I. 73. So to David, Psal. LXXXIX. 49 And sometime in wrath, to ratifie his Threatenings against sin∣ners. So, Psal. XCV. 11. Heb. III. 11. In sacred accompt then is the Bond of an Oath. Though it be taken to men, yet it is called the Oath. of God, Eccles. VIII. 2. Ezek. XVII. 19. And why? Be∣cause therein men call God to be both a witnesse of the truth, and an avenger of the lie, and breach of promise. And so an Oath binds the soul with a Bond, Num. XXX. 2. It must therefore carefully be ta∣ken, in truth, in righteousnesse, without rashnesse, and in judgement, upon just grounds, in just causes, Jer. IV. 2. In truth, without e∣quivocation, or mental reservation. And carefully kept: yea, though made to Heathens, or Hereticks; without Popish dispensations, or relaxations. We must fear an Oath, Eccles. IX. 2. fear to break it. And therefore the godly man, though he sweareth to his own hurt, yet changeth not, Psal. XV. 4. Though the Gibeonites beguiled Jo∣shuah, and the Princes of Israel, yet, say they, we must let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we sware unto them, Josh. IX. 15, 19, 20. And the breach of the matter of this Oath by Saul, so long after, we read punished sorely upon him in his sonnes, 2 Sam. XXI. 1,—6. And of Gods fierce wrath against false Oaths, and Oath-breakers, we read more, Exod. XX. 7. Levit. XIX. 12. Jer. VII. 9. and XXIII. 10. Ezek. XVII. 15,—21. Hos. IV. 2, 3. and X. 4. Zech. V. 3, 4. and chap. VIII. 17. Mal. III. 5. It bore a part in Peters sinne, for which he wept so bitterly, Matth. XXVI. 74, 75. Now the Forme of this swearing here, Hos. IV. 15. is lawful; It is taken in the Lords Name. Gods Name is to be used in Oaths, Deut. VI. 13. and X. 20. Psal. LXIII. 11. Esay XLV. 23. and LXV. 16. Ier. XII. 16. So Iacob sware to Laban by the Feare of his father Isaac, Gen. XXXI. 42, 53. We must not sweare by false gods, Iosh. XXIII. 7. er. V. 7. and ch. XII. 16. Not by Baal, by the sinne and Idol of
Samaria; the manner of Beersheba, by Malcham: Against such swear∣ers God threateneth his judgements, Ier. V. 7. Amos VIII. 14. Zeph. I. 5. Nor must we sweare by the Creatures, as if they were God; or we had power over them, as our owne, to pawne them on the truth of what we say, Matth. V. 34, 35, 36. and chap. XXIII. 16,—22. Iames V. 12. See on Matth. XXIII. 16,—22. And a∣gaine, though this maner of Speech, The Lord liveth, may be taken in a way of a strange asseveration only, thus, As surely as the Lord li∣veth. As likewise that, Gen. XLII. 15. 1 Sam. I. 26. and XXV. 26. Yet it goeth often in Scripture under the notion and name of an Oath, as, 1 Sam. XIX. 6. Ier. V. 2. and chap. XII. 16. And is here forbidden, because God would not have his Name once in the mouth of Idolaters, as not enduring to be joyned with Idols, 2 Cor. VI. 15. Zeph. I. 5. Ezek. XX. 39. Of Oath, see more in page 10, 52, 74. and upon Ier. LI. 14. And of the Maner and Ceremonies in swearing, see Gen. XXIV. 2. and XLVII. 29. and XIV. 22. Exod. VI. 8. Exod. XX. 5, 15, 23. Dan. XII. 7. Apoc. X. 5, 6. And there are divers Rites and Gestures for it in divers Countries in all ages. as the raine; as the later and former] Raine in due season is men∣tioned, Levit. XXVI. 4. Deut. XXVIII. 12. Ezek. XXXIV. 26. The First or former Raine, and the later Raine are mentioned, Deut. XI. 14. Jer. V. 24. so called in relation to their husbandry, and the order thereof. The former raine was in their Seeding time, in the eighth moneth, part of our October and November, requisite for the bringing up of their Seed, and thereupon is called the Seeds raine, Esay XXX. 23. And that moneth is called Bull, from the abundance of raine, and great showers then requisite and falling, as making a Deluge, Jer. III. 3. and this former raine is called Yoreh, or Moreh, from a word that signifieth to poure downe. The later raine was in the first moneth, Joel II. 23. part of our March and April, for the filling of the corne then in the eare, and the fitting of it for harvest; whence this moneth is called Abib, Exod. XIII. 4. which signifieth the stalk with the eare of corne. Their harvest-time for corne being commonly within the compasse of two moneths, half Abib or Nisan, all Jair or Zif, and half Sivan. And hereupon were those two Offerings, of corne in the sheaf, and of two loaves injoyned, at the Beginning and End of harvest, Levit. XXIII. 10,—21. Num. XXVIII. 26. Deut. XVI. 9, 10. See my Annotations on Zech. X. 1. bread of mourners] Banquets at Burials, as well as Bridals: as of mirth, the one; so of consolation against mourning, the other. See Prov. XXXI. 6, 7. Jer. XVI. 7. Ezek. XXIV. 17. Matth. IX. 23. Memphi; in the Original Moph; And thence with the Greeks and Latines Memphis. In Esay and Jermie, named Moph, Jer. XLIV. 1. and XLVI. 14, 19. Likely now that Grand Cairo, the Great Citie. See. Esay XIX. 13. Ezek. XXX. 13. Chap. IX. 7. and Chap X. 3, 4. do shew the miserable state and condition of things in those times.
Is true liberality of the Body of the Church of Israel in Egypt. And true Mysticaly of the Head of the Church, of Christ. Whereupon the Apostle doth allude to this place, and alledge it, Matth. II. 15. Jacob wept, in wrestling, and making Supplication to the An∣gel: though his weeping be not recorded by Moses. The names for Lions in Hebrew are very many;  and distinguish∣ed in Scripture according to their ages, and qualities. See the Anno∣tations on Job. IV. 10 The like is true for the variety of the names of gold. See the Annotattons on Job XXVIII. 15,—19. I did know thee] Owne thee, as, Psal. I. ult. Exod. III. 7. Deut. XXXIV. 10. Psal. XXXI. 7. and XXXVII. 18. and CXLII. 4. Matth. VII. 23. Rom. VII. 15. As for that place, Acts XXIII▪ 5. Most like∣ly it is that Paul did not know Ananias to be High Priest, he being so long absent from Ierusalem; and the High Priest being so often chan∣ged in those times. Joel. JOEL; Preacheth to Iudah. And by the Matter and Argument of his Book, as well as by the Ranck wherein we finde him placed, He seemes to Prophesie when Hosea did, in the dayes of King Uzziah. Yet some assigne to him a later time, upon those passages, chap. III. 1,—9. He declareth a dreadful judgement of Famine, brought upon them by a Drought, and Vermine: Exhorts to true Mourning, Fasting, and Repenting; with Promises thereupon of abundant Blessings, Tem∣poral, and Spiritual, upon themselves: and of Gods dreadful judge∣ments and revenge upon their enemies. The Armie, and Camp described, chap. II. is not of the Assyrians, or Babylonians; But of those Vermine, Gods Hoast, named, chap. I. 4. The Valley of Jehoshaphat, is not the place for the General judge∣ment in the end of the world, at Christs second coming; But serves only to note out thus much, That Gods judgements upon the enemies of his Church, shall be visibly in her sight, and before her eyes; as the Valley of Jehoshaphat was nigh the walls, and in the sight of Jeru∣salem. weepe betweene the Porch and the Altar] The Porch of the Tem∣ple, and the Altar of Burnt-offering in the Priests Court, or inner Court; where they stood to minister and officiate. See, Ezra X. 1. and 1 Macc. VII. 38. Visions] By them God of old did speak to man, and reveale his
will unto him, Job XXXIII. 15. Particularly to his Prophets, Num. XII. 6. Hos. XII. 10. Ezek. VII. 26. So to Abraham, to Jacob, to Sa∣muel, 1 Sam. III. 1, 15. to Esay; Ezekiel, and others; whence Judea is called the Valley of Vision, Esay XXII. 1. And so to Daniel, to Peter, Acts X. 19. and to Paul, Acts XVI. 9. and XVIII. 9. 2 Cor. XII. 1. Yea, to Balaam, Num. XXIV. 4. And to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. II. 28. See my Annotations on Ezek. I. 1. This whole Text, And so on to the end of this Chapter, is cited by Saint Peter, Acts II. 16,—21. and applied to his present time, the Beginning of the Gospel, the time immediately preceding the destruction of the Jewish Politie, their Citie and Temple; as being fulfilled and compleated then and there: He shewes that both this effusion of the Spirit; And likewise those wonders shewed in heaven, and in earth, so particularly menti∣oned, had their accomplishment before that terrible day of their de∣struction by Vespasian and Titus, about fourty years after their cruci∣fying of our Saviour, which said great and terrible day our Saviour likewise foretels, and gives the dreadful signes the forerunners of it very largely in the twenty fourth Chapter of Saint Matthew, as may be gathered more specialy out of ver. 33, 34. Vainly therefore is this pouring out of the Spirit applied to our times so farre advanced to∣ward the end of the world; to patronize our New Lights, and pre∣tended Divine illuminations, our extraordinary Gifts and Inspirati∣ons poured now by the Spirit on all sorts of Christians, young and old, sonnes and daughters, even to the sleighting and superseding of all external offices, and Officers, Orders, and Ordinances, in the Church: Whereas this was a Peculiar Priviledge and character of those First times, and had a Propriety to them. And unadvisedly are those dreadful times and signes, Matth. XXIV. or any of them appro∣priated to the end of the world, and last coming of our Saviour to judgement; having received their true accomplishment before Je∣rusalems final fall aforesaid; as Jewish and Heathen Histories make manifest; unlesse we take them out of their Literal meaning, and make them to serve as Symbolical Representations of what likely may ensue at the last day.
Amos. AMOS; Of an Herd-man was made a Prophet; ch. VII. 14. He useth sometimes Countrey-similitudes, ch. II. 13. & III. 12. & IV. 1, 3. And sometimes he hath high and A∣stronomical expressions, as, ch. V. 8. & ch IX. 6. As Job had formerly: And God himself, unto Job. And Esay, chap. XIII. 10. Yet we may not understand them of such Con∣stellations or Configurations, as our Astronomers, do now retaine from the Greeks and Latines, which have their figures and denomina∣tions assigned them from the feigned stories of the old fabulous Greeks: we should rather retaine the Hebrew termes and names; ad∣ding our best exposition of them. Amos hath great conformity with Hoseah, living in the same time, chap. I. 1. and sent to the same people, of Israels principaly. Amos foretelleth strange shakings and destructions of six Heathen Neighbouring Nations, the Churches enemies; for their three trans∣gressions, and for four severaly. As likewise he doth the same of Judah: And so of Israel, chap. I. and II. He pursueth in five chapters following Israel manifold trans∣gressions, and mighty sinnes: Intermixing both Threatnings and Ex∣hortations. Threatenings of Judgements generaly, upon all Israel, That they shall finaly be drowned in a flood of miseries, and be capti∣vated: Particularly, upon Jeroboams house; and upon Amaziah Priest of Bethel. And inserting Exhortations to Israel for repentance; as, chap. IV. 3. with Promises of Mercie thereupon; as, chap. V. 4, 14. 15. And after, upon their Obstinacie, and Incorrigiblenesse; He shewes in the two last chapters, under two Types, of a Basket of Sum∣mer fruit; and of smiting the doore of the Temple; their ripen∣ing, approaching subversion, and Gods abdicating his house, and peo∣ple. Yet concluding all, with Evangelical Promises to his Church, of a Reduction, and restauration by, and under Christ. Among other places, chap. V. 10, 13. and chap. VI. 10. do shew the evil of his times. Carmel] Carmel signifieth plenty, fruitfulnesse, and fruitful field. This mountaine was situate in the Confines of Asher, and Issachar, near the Midland-Sea; and not farre from Mount Tabor, Josh. XII. and XV. chapters. See more of it in my Annotations on this Text. revealeth] Yet Gods true Prophets are not alwayes in all things, guided by divine revelations; As, 1 Chron. XVIII. 2. 2 Kings IV. 27. 1 Sam. XVI. 6. The meaning here is, That God usualy reveals to his
Prophets his great judgements which he intends to bring upon his own people, for their sins. A kinde of Ironie, as, Gen. III. 22. 1 Kings XVIII. 27. and XXII. 15. 2. Chron. XVIII. 14. and XXV. 8. Eccles. XI. 9. Job XII. 2. Lam. IV. 21. Mark VII. 9. Of Hyperbolies, see on Josh. XI. 4. Gen. XI. 4. mighty sinnes] Ezek. XVI. 23, 27, 28, 33, 34, 47, 48, 51, 52, 56. and chap. XVII. 15, 16, 18. See my Annotations on Ezek. II. 4, 5. God is said to fret at sinne, Ezek. XVI. 43. And to ease and quiet him∣self upon vengeance taken for it, Esay I. 24. Ezek. XVI. 42. Obadiah. OBADIAHS Time is uncertaine. His Prophecie is a∣gainst Edom. And the like to this, in Matter, and in Words, is likewise against Edom, in Jer. XLIX. 7,— 22. And in Ezekiel, chap. XXV. 12, 13, 14. The Summe is; Gods Revenge upon Esau, notwithstand∣ing all his Pride; Self-Wisdome; and Confidence: And that for his Violence against his brother Jacob; and insulting over him in the day of his Calamity. Which God reproves; and foretels that Saviours shall come up on Mount Zion, for Deliverance; and to judge, devoure, and possesse the Mount of Esau: and the King dome shall be the Lords. Gilead] A large Mountaine, or mountainous Countrey;  so named, Gen. XXXI. 47. A place of a rich soile for wealth, and a∣bounding with Balme, and Spicerie, Gen. XXXVII. 25. Num. XXXII. 1. Halfe of Gilead given to Reuben, and Gad; and the other halfe to halfe Manasseh, Deut. III. 12, 13. Josh. XIII. 11, 25, 31. and XXII. 9, 13. Of Gilead, see more in my Annotations upon this Text.
Jonah. IONAH Prophesied in the dayes of Jeroboam the se∣cond, 2 Kings XIV. 25. A time wherein a Constel∣lation of Prophets appeared. He was sent to Nine∣veh, the great Citie, and Metropolis of the Assyrian Empire. But fleeing to Joppa, a cleane contrary way; and taking Sea; He is followed with a Tem∣pest; and being throwne over-board, is swallowed of a Fish, called a Whale, Matth. XII. 40. And in the Whales belly, three dayes, and three nights; which is a resemblance of Christs lying in the Grave; And to that end is thrice alluded unto, and alledged by our Saviour himself, Matth. XII. 39, 40. and chap. XVI. 4. and Luke XI. 29. Not yet that the Correspondence in all points must be exact and ab∣solute; either for the space of three whole dayes, and three whole nights; for our Saviour, as himselfe foretels, did rise on that third day in a part of it: no, nor yet for some part of three dayes, and of three nights, unlesse we reckon the dayes of twenty four hours, from midnight to midnight. But the Type here, and Text, Matth. XII. 40. needs no such subtil shifts, and curious quirks, to make up their sense. Only this, That this of Jonas was the fittest and nearest sha∣dow of Christs lying in the Grave, that the Scripture did afford. There prayeth. And the Whale vomiteth him out upon the dry land. Be∣ing sent the second time, He obeyes; Nineveh repents; And God in pitie spares Nineveh for that time: And justifies his pitie against the angry Prophet, repining at it. Wonderful great was the Citie of Nineve, Iohah I. v. 2. and c. III. 2, 3, 4 and chap. 4. XI. And such the Citie of Babylon, Ier▪ LI. 31, 58. made vowes] Of Vowes, see my Annotations on this Text. Joppa] Or Japho. A Citie, and Haven lying on the Midland-Sea, in the North corner of the Tribe of Dan, as it joynes to the Tribe of Ephraim, Josh. XIX. 46. Hither was all the Timber brought in floats that was cut and wrought in Lebanon, for the building of the Temple, (and other buildings) by Solomon, 2 Chron. II. 16. And for the new building of it, by Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah, after the Re∣turne from the Babylonish captivity, Ezra III. 7. We see here Jo∣nah fled hither; farre enough from the way to Nineveh: And this in the dayes of Jeroboam the second, King of Israel: In the dayes of the Apostle Peter, he being at Lidda, was sent for hither; and here raised from the dead that good and charitable Tabitha or Dorcas, Acts
IX. 38, 40. And tarrying here many dayes with one Simon a Tan∣ner, by the Sea-side; He Praying, in a trance saw a Vision, a certaine Vessel, as it had beene a great sheet, &c. And at that instant being sent for to Cesarea, by Cornelius, he goes thither, Preacheth Christ to Cornelius, and his kinsmen, and near friends. And upon their con∣version and receiving the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, he Bap∣tiseth them. A Citie of God, i. e. exceeding great; an Hebraisme. So we read the Wrestlings of God, Trembling of God, 1 Sam XIV. 15. a Sleep of God, 1 Sam. XXVI. 12. Gen. XXX. 8. the Mountaines of God, Psal. XXXVI. 6. Trees of God, Psal. CIV. 16. the Cedars of God, Psal. LXXX. 10. the Increasing of God, Col. II. 19. Prince of God, Gen. XXIII. 6. the Hoast of God, 1. Chron. XII. 22. And so much alike of the garden of God, of the Flame of God, Cant. VIII. 6. a Fire of God, Job I. 16. Cant. VIII. 6. River of God, Man of God, the Visions of God; the Voyce of God, the Kindnesse of God, 2 Sam. IX. 3. Harps of God. See my Observations on 1 Sam XIV. 15. yet fourty dayes] Gods Threatenings and doomes have yet their conditions and limitations, or Provisoes understood; so, Jer. XXI. 10. and XXV. 9, 10, 11. and XXXII▪ 29. and XXXIV. 2, 22. and XXXVII. 8, 10. compared with chap. XXVI. 13. and XXXVIII. 17. And so David understood that threatening, 2 Sam. XII. 14. conditionaly, verse 22. So, Judg. X. 13. Esay XXXVIII. 1. Jer. XVIII. 7, 8. Ezek. III. 18. Yet sometimes God expresseth his doomes of judge∣ment against some sinners irrevocably; as, Ezek. XIV. 13, 14, 16, 18, 20. See the Observations on 1 Kings II. 20. East-winde.] So, Hos. XIII. 15. Ezek. XVII. 10. and XIX. 12. Psal. XLVIII. 7. See my Annotations on Hos. XII. 1. an hurtful, dry, and skorching winde. The Ninevites in all probability, were the rather reduced to their repentance, and that in such a maner, by that Preaching of Ionah; upon the knowledge of him, and of his being in the Whales belly.
Micah. MICAH; Is the last of that great number of Prophets that lived, and Prophesied, in the same times. Micah his time is set out thus; in the dayes of Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. He is like to Esay, the first of them, in Matter; and in lofty stile. He Prophesieth to, and a∣gainst, both Iudah, and Israel: Declareth Gods wrath; Lamenteth them; and tells their future destructions, and captivities, by the As∣syrians, and Babylonians; For the manifold sinnes of the People, Princes, and Prophets, Chapters I, II, III. The Repenting Remnant He comforteth with Promises of Temporal Blessings; and Deliver∣ances from their enemies: But chiefly with Promises, and Predicti∣ons of Christ; foretelling the Place of his Nativity; And the ma∣nifold Spiritual Blessings of Him, and his Kingdome, Chapters IV. and V. And after a fresh controversie, and contestation of God with all his People, for their ill requiting of all his ancient Kindnesses; with their present sundry sinnes, chap. VI. And the Prophets Complaint thereafter of the Paucity of good men; He endeth his Prophecie, with the Churches Consolation, in he Patient Expectation of Gods time to plead her Cause, to the shame of her insulting enemie; and her owne marvelous felicity, chap. VII. The sinnes of the Prophets, Princes, and People, are pointed out by this Prophet, as in other places, so namely in these, chap. II. 11. and chap. III. 1, 2, 3, 11. and chap. VII. 2,—6. The people of God seeme to argue, and resolve thus; All people naturaly are addicted to their several superstitions, and will walk eve∣ry one in the Name of his God: Much more we will, as we have all right and reason for it, walk in the Name of Jehova our God. Yea, though every Sect oppose their Superstition to us, triumph, and glory in theirs, and insulting over us, conspire in one against us, and our way; yet will not we despond, or shrink, but over-look, and over∣come all difficulties, obstructions, and oppositions whatsoever; the Name of Jehova our God shall render us invincible, to walk constant∣ly in him, and his Name, and his true way of worship, for ever and ever. Bethlehem-Ephrata] To distinguish it from another Bethlehem in the Tribe of Zebulun, Josh. XIX. 15. This being in Judah, Matth. II. 1. And in these parts were many names of this stamp; as, Bethel, Bethaven, Bethania, Bethesda, Bethsaida, Bethabarah, Bethbarah, Beth∣haccerem, Bethshemesh, and others. This Bethlehem, and this Text, was
alledged by the chief Priests and Scribes to Herod, for the place of Christs birth, Matth. II. 5, 6. And though here called little; yet by the Priests and Scribes called not the least; either reading the words of Micah interrogatively in a Negative sense; or varying the Text out of ignorance, or of set purpose before Herod; though yet both readings may well be reduced to one true sense; Bethlehem little, when David was borne there; not little, but famous, for, and after that the true Sonne of David, and Sonne of God was borne there. Nahum. NAHUM; seemes to live, and Prophesie, in the dayes of Josiah. His Prophecie is. The Burden of Nineveh. The Ninevites after their Temporary Repentance, up∣on the Preaching of Jonah, returned to their former sinnes; Through their Ambition, Covetousnesse, and Cruelty, they overthrew the Kingdomes of Syria, and Samaria, after Jonah his time; They invaded Judea, and besieged Jerusalem; and grew up to be like a great Cedar in Lebanon, Ezek. XXXI. 3,—9. And Nahum now propounds Gods dreadful power in himself; and his furious revenge upon his enemies: that He will make an utter end of Nineveh; affliction shall not rise up the second time; No more of the name of the Assyrian shall be sowen. And this shall be for Judah's Consolation chap. I. And then he expounds more fully the Manner, and the Meanes of the Ruine of Nineveh; and the woful Mourning for it, that they shall mourne, as with the voice of Doves, tabering upon their breasts; and bewailing their former flourishing estate, chap. II. And lastly, He insists upon her sinnes, the Causers of Gods wrath, in her shameful ruine: ascertained by the example of populous No (or Alexandria) to be verified upon her; that not∣withstanding all her strong holds, and numerous Assyrian Captaines, and crowned Commanders; yet there shall be no healing of her bruise, and mortal wound, chap. III. Not Nahum I. 15. But Esay LII. 7. is alledged, Rom. X. 15.
Habakkuk. HABAKKVK; Doth comfort the godly against the Chaldeans; as Nahum did against the Assyrians. He succeeds Nahum soone after. He doth humbly ex∣postulate with God of his delay, to hear, and to re∣dresse things amisse; Complaining to him of his peo∣ples sinnes; chap. I. 1,—4. And declaring from God, his wonderful judgements to come upon them by the Chalde∣ans, verse 5,—11. He states the End and Issue of Gods dealing therein, verse 12. And yet after admiration, and expostulation, that God should use such wicked instruments for executioners of his judg∣ments upon his people, verse 13,—17. He puts the godly upon their living by Faith, chap. II. 1,—4. And then he largely insists upon the Chaldeans several sinnes, Intermixing their punishment for them, verse 5,—20. And lastly, concludes with a wonderful Prayer, ch. III. Celebrating therein Gods marvellous, and mighty works, of ter∣rible executions upon the enemies, and of the deliverances of his peo∣ple, in ancient times: and triumphing in Faith, even in the worst of times, in expectation of the like deliverance. Is thrice alledged in the New Testament. A famous Text. Heb. X. 38 to perswade to Patience, Gal. III. II. to prove, No justificati∣on by the Law. And Rom. I. 17. to prove justification by Faith. The Hebrew is, The just shall live by his Faith. The Apostle still omits the particle his. The LXX. translating the Hebrew, have my for his. That place, Heb. X. 37, 38. may seeme only to allude to this place, Hab. II. ver. 3, 4. with a liberty of some Variation; which most ac∣cords with the LXX. translation of the Hebrew text. Here is Selah in the middle of a verse. And so, verse 9. Though very rarely so. Of Selah, see A. Rivet on Psal. XXIV. 6.
Zephanie. ZEPHANIE; Prophesies towards the beginning of the dayes of Josiah, chap. I. 1. and chap. II. 13. He doth charge upon Judah, and Jerusalem great and grievous sinnes: And doth threaten them therefore with a great Day of the Lords wrath, near at hand, chap. I. He ex∣horts them to Repentance before the day of the Lords anger come upon them. And warnes them by Examples of like judgements up∣on Neighbouring Nations, denounced against them, ch. II And after a sharp Reproof and Commination of Jerusalem taken up againe; He concludeth with glorious Promises of her deliverance and restaurati∣on at the last; and of Evangelical Blessings; and that God will joy over her, and rest in his love. Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons] Hos. IX. 7, 8. Micah III. 5, 6, 11. Deut. XIII. Prophets of Baal, 1 King XVIII. 2 Kings 10, 19. False Prophets in Israel, and Judah, 1 Kings XXII. Neh. VI. 14. Esay XXVIII. 7. Ier. V. 31. and VIII. 1, 2. and XIV▪ 13, 14. and XXIII. 9, 13, 14, &c. and XXVI. 8. and XXVII. 14, &c. and XXVIII. 1, 10, 16. Ezek. XIII. and XIV chapters. See the Argu∣ment upon the Prophecie of Ezekiel. So there were false Prophetes∣ses, Neh. VI. 14. Ezek. XIII. 17, 18. Apoc. II 20. And againe there were both true Prophets, some extraordinary ones, spoken of, Iohn VII. 52. extraordinarily called, and qualified: Others ordinary, most∣what, if not altogether Priests; and Levites, going under the name of Prophets, from the times of Ahab, and after. And also there were true Prophetesses, as Deborah, Huldah, Anna, and Philips four daughters Virgins. Haggai. HAGGAI; His whole Prophecie is within the compasse of somewhat lesse then four moneths: and was upon four se∣veral dayes within that time; viz. in the second year of Darius [Hystaspis] on the VI. Moneth, first day, chap. I. 1. 24. day, chap. I. 13, 15. VII. Moneth, 21. day, chap. II. 1. IX. Moneth, 24. day, chap. II. 10, 18, 20.
The maine matter is, for Zerubbabel, the Governour of Iudah, and Ioshua, the High Priest, To Build the Temple. With the Promise of the greater Glory of this Temple, then of the Former, by the Com∣ing of the Messias into it. Zechariah. ZECHAIAH; Prophesies likewise in the reigne of Da∣rius; in his II. yeare 8th. moneth, chap. I. 1. 11th. moneth, 24 day, ch. I. 7. IV. year, 9. moneth, 4. day, ch. VII. 1. He Prophesied likewise, with Haggai, to Zerubba∣bel, and Ioshua for the Building of the Temple, Ezra. V. 1. Adding the Promise of the Branch. And he being the sonne of Barachiah, ch. I. 1, 7. And living after the second Temple was builded, at the later end of the Old Testament, He may seeme rather to be meant by our Saviour, Matth. XXIII. 35. though his Death be not recorded be∣fore; then that Zechariah flaine by Ioash, 2 Chron. XXIV. 21. as the Great Annotations on 2 Chron. XXIV. 20. would have it. There were seventy years, from Iehojakim his fourth year, to Dari∣us the Mede: and from Iehojacin, to Cyrus his Monarchy: and from Zedekiah's eleventh year, to the second of Darius Histaspis: and from the murder of Cedaliah, to the fourth of Darious, chap. I. 7, 12. and VII. 1, 5. Thus the best Chronologers do agree. The Man and Angel, for he is called both that talked with the Prophet, and is mentioned, chap. I. 8,—14, 19. And againe, that Commands the Angel that met him to runne, and speak to the Pro∣phet, chap. II. verse 3, 4. And againe, is mentioned, chap. III. 1,—6. and chap. IV. 1,—5. and chap. V. 5, 10. and chap. VI. 4. is the Son of Man, the Angel of the Covenant Jesus Christ. And so againe, The Branch, and Stone is Christ, chap. III. 8, 9. The four Hornes, are Principaly the Chaldeans; And the four Carpenters, the Medes and Persians chap. I. 18, 20. The Candlestick, with the seven Lamps of it; alluding to the Can∣dlestick in the Temple; Represents the Church, shining forth to the world in the light of Faith, and Life; of Profession, and Conversati∣on, Matth. V. 15, 16. Phil. II. 15. The two Olive trees, and Branches, that through the two golden Pipes empty the golden Oile, out of themselves into the Bowle, and thence to be conveyed by the seven Pipes, to the seven Lamps of the Candlestick, may seeme best to sig∣nifie the manifold Gifts and Graces of God▪ and of Christ, flowing
from Him, by the Spirit; and the mystical power of communicating the same, sundry wayes, and by sundry meanes, to the Church, and to the chief anointed Rulers of it; for the plentiful use, and good of it. Chap. IV. Chap. VIII. 19. The Fast of the IV. Moneth, ninth day, was for the taking of Je∣rusalem, Jer. XXXIX. 2 and LII. 6, 7. 2 Kings XXV. 3. V. Moneth, tenth day, was for the burning of the Temple, and Citie, by Nebuzaradan, 2 Kings XXV. 8. Jer. LII. 12, 13. VII. Moneth, for the murder of Gedaliah, Jer. XLI. 1, &c. X. Moneth, tenth day, was for the first day of lay∣ing the Siege against Jerusalem, Jer. LII. 4. 2 Kings XXV. 1. Of Swearing see my Notes on Gen. XXIV. 3. pleasant land] Heb. Land of Desire, or Delight. So, Psal. CVI. 24. Jer. III. 19. Hephzi-bah, Beulah, Esa, LXII. 4. the glory of all lands, which God spied out for them, Ezek. XX. 6. Is cited in Mat. XXI. 5. Mar. XI. 2,—7. Luke XIX. 30,—37. John XII. 15. Where Christ rides, not one while upon the Asse, another while upon the Colt; but upon the Colt only, Mar. XI. 7. Luke XIX. 30,—35. Even upon the Colt, the foale of an Asse; as the same particle is used, Mark X. 45. And a Speech not unlike is that, Matth. XXVII. 44. His staffe of Beauty seemes to be his Loving, Guiding, and Ruling them, by his Word, and Spirit. His staffe of Bands, or Binders, his severe Ruling them by Punish∣ments; as, Esay X. 5. The three Shepherds seeme to be the many evil Priests and Prophets; and haply those three Sects of Pharisees, Sad∣duces, and Essenes; or Priests, Scribes, and Lawyers, in the dayes of our Saviour. The Price, and Potter, are cited, and expounded, Mat. XXVI. 15. and chap. XXVII. 9, 10. His breaking both the Staves, seemes to signifie the utter rejecting of Judah, and Israel; and the taking to him the Israel according to the Spirit, all true Believers. The foolish Shepherd signifies evil Pastors, and Governours, which God suffered to raise themselves to those Offices. Cited and alledged, John XIX. 37. and Apoc. I. 7. where Saint John leaveth the LXX. Translation scoffed, or insulted; and sticks to the Hebrew Text, pierced. The like is done by Matth. XXVI. 31. and Mark XIV. 27. in al∣ledging that Text, Zech. XIII. 7. a rough garment] Or garment of haire. The true Prophets used such coursnesse of habit and attire; as Patterns for Penitents, to whom they preached Repentance, austerity of life, and contempt
of the world. So Elias is called an hairy man; not in body, as Esau; but in his rough and hairy attire, and letherne girdle, 2 Kings I. 8. And so Iohn Baptist, the second Elias, answerable to him, had his raiment of Camels haire, not finely spun into Chamlet, or Grogran, but into rough sack-cloth, or hair-cloth, such as is mentioned, Apoc. VI. 12. And suitable to his letherne girdle, and course diet, Matth. III 4. And so those two witnesses did Prophesie cloathed in sackcloth, Apoc. XI. 3. And so Esay the Prophet used to go attired, Esay XX. 2. Shewes that in Egypt there is no raine;  or in a manner none. Malachi. MALACHI; The last Prophet; and after the Tem∣ple was built; Contemporarie with Nehemiah, as may seeme by chap. II. 11. and chap. III. 8. com∣pared with Neh. XIII. Or at least presently after him, in the later end of the reigne of Artaxerxes Longimanus; or, in the time of Ochus called No∣thus. He ends the Old Testament; Reproving their Prophansing of Gods Worship in the Temple, chap. I. 7,—14. And other manifold Vices in their lives: Threatening them, both Priests, and People: and Exhorting to Repentance, chap. II. Promi∣sing, and Propheticaly telling them, of the sending of Elijah, the Mes∣senger, and Harbinger; And of the sudden coming of the Lord of the Covenant, in whom they delight, to his Temple, chap. III. 1, &c. Meane while Referring them to the Law of Moses. In his Prophecie he prooceeds most Dialogisticaly. Hence Saint Paul argueth directly, or ratione pari, by a Conse∣quent at least, Rom. IX. 11, 12, 13. for the Freedome of Gods Will and Pleasure, in the free Election of some to Salvation; and the Pre∣terition of others. Seek the Law at his mouth] The Priests duty to teach it. And so, Ier. II. 8. Deut. XXXIII. 10. Neh. VIII. 8. The Prophets so frequently mentioned in the practice of it, ordinarily were the Priests and Levites. Against Polygamie, and Divorce; alledged and pleaded by our Sa∣viout, Matth. XIX 3,—13. Chap. III. 1. and ch. IV. v. 5, 6. mentioning the Messenger, Elijah, is expounded of Iohn Baptist, by Zacharias, Luke I. 76. and by Mark, ch. I. v. 2, 3, 4. and by our Saviour himself, Matth. XI. 10,—14. dreadful day] Of Ierusalems final destruction by Vespasian and Titus. to the children] Or, rather with the children; turning and convert∣ing them both to Christ, by his preaching of Repentance, and Faith in Jesus; so preparing the way before him. FINIS.
