R1565 12388176 60906
THE SECRETS Of the Famous LAZARƲS RIVERIƲS, Councellor & Physician To the FRENCH KING, And PROFESSOR of PHYSICK In the UNIVERSITY of MONTPELIER. Newly Translated from the Latin, by E. P. M. D. LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple-Barr. MDCLXXXV.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Reader, THou art here presented with the Secrets of that ever re∣nown'd Physitian, Laza∣rus Riverius, whose other Works, publish'd first in Latin, and then in our own Language, I believe thou art very sensible that they were like good Wine, needing
no Bush; for at the first comming forth of his Practice of Physick in the Latin Language; many eminent Physitians in England, and other parts made it their Cy∣nosura and steer'd their Practice wholly by it; as the Mariner sails by his Compass: for in those days, before it was translated into Eng∣lish; you might see the Apotheca∣ries files fill'd with Recipe's, trans∣scrib'd out of his Book almost ver∣batim, & ad amussim, scarce any alteration at all, or what's worth the taking notice of, being made in their prescriptions; and at this very day I can assure you there are very able Physitians in Eng∣land and other parts (without making comparisons) that still
adhere to, and have a greater estee∣mation of, and veneration for him, than for Willis, the London Practice of Physick, &c. and other later Books. Now as concerning these his Arcanum's, they were publish'd in Latin, as it seems, by an Honest, Ingenious and Con∣scionable Scholar of his; who was not willing the World should be depriv'd, of such a rich Cabinet, conteining so many precious Jew∣ells; and if any one shall object any thing as to the laboriousness of these, above other operations yet extant; they are desired to consider; that their excellent Virtues and eximious Qualities, will countervale, equally ballance and recompence, all that; always
remembring the old saying, Dii laborantibus omnia vendunt; & labor improbus omnia vincit. And this is all, Reader I hope I need to say in behalf of this piece; little truly in it self; but will't find, without doubt, to be great in its worth; so I bid thee Adieu, as also because I would never have too great Gate made for a little City; and so I say again Fare∣well.
THE SECRETS OF Laz. Riverius, &c. CHAP. I. His Tincture of GOLD. SINCE there are more then a good many Recipés of Aurum potabile ex∣tant, in the World, which by some are denominated the Essences of Gold; &c. I have a mind, in like manner, to de∣scribe one after my most Honoured and
Learned Master Riverius's method and manner, as one of those to whom I doubt∣ed not, in the least, to stand by, and trust to, after the example of my aforesaid Ma∣ster, and also of the very Learned and excellent Artist Peter John Faber; under whose Discipline I first learned my Chy∣mical Operations; and many of his very excellent Secrets. Other Artists dissolve Gold, making not, in the least, any preparation, or dis∣position thereunto before hand; but our method is performed after this manner. Take of the purest Plate-Gold, and cal∣cine it thrice with Antimony; always ad∣ding thereto Crude Antimony; then se∣parate it from the Cinders which will be very apparent; and being mundisied dis∣solve them in Aqua regia after the usual manner of dissolutions. Upon the dissolu∣tions sprinkle Oil of Tartar made by de∣lqim drop by drop; and so the Gold will be precipitated to the bottom; then the water being drawn off by decantation; see you take away the acrimony by often ablutions with clear, sweet, common water: Then dry it either in the Sun,
or upon warm Cinders; but be sure you beware of the Fire, for it's now Aurum fulminans. Afterwards dissolve the Powder in Spirit of Salt, and our Spirit of Vi∣triol, keeping it in a heat for the space of one month; and by that time it will com∣municate its whole Tincture to the said Spirits. Separate the half, adding a new Spirit till it be tinctur'd; and to every Ounce of the tinctur'd Spirit, add a drachm of the volatile Salt of Tartar dis∣solv'd, digesting it in a warm place for the space of fifteen days; then add all these again to the Powder, which then re∣mains in the bottom of the Vesel; put it into a Glass-house Furnace for  spce of two months, with a gentle Fire at first, augmenting the hear by litle ; for at fifteen days end they will all become of the consistence of a stone; then after two months, let them be put in a moist place, in an Egg, as the custom is, till they be dissolv'd; thus you have the true, exact and genuine process of our Aurum po∣le.
Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THE Virtues of this our so great a Secret very far excel all others; for it corroborates the Heart, the Brain, the Liver, and all the parts of our Body; but those parts especially whose duty, fa∣culty, and functions are to attract, alter, nourish, separate, expel, &c. By this the pture Balsame of life is upheld; by this it's preserv'd in its Youthful state; its Spirits are augmented, and old Age retarded; and lastly it so orders affairs that the Humors corrupt not one another. So that it's pro∣per in all kind of Diseases, both by rea∣son of the Gold, and also of the six'd Salts, which dissolves all impurities of the Body by transpiration; it's given in certain ap∣propriate Liquors from five drops to eight, for one dose.
CHAP. II. His Tincture of SILVER. BEcause what's written of Gold, chal∣lengeth to its self, the First place in Value and Vertue; In the next place, I put our Tincture of Silver; as coming nighest to the other, not only in Price but in Virtue also. Its process is perform'd after this manner and method following. Take of the purest Plate-Silver, and dis∣solve it in Aqua fortis; and see you preci∣pitate it with Oil of Tartar; then shall you wash it with common Water; then dry it, and extract a Tincture with the aforementioned Liquors after the very same manner and method, as aforegoing in the process of Gold, and at length dissolve it, as abovesaid. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. INnumerable are the Virtues of this Tincture of Silver; especially in Ca∣pital Diseases; for it is very effectual in
the pilepsie although it be of a long standing, in the Vertigo, in the Megrim, Pally, and all other Diseases proceeding from sion of the Brain. For as it the Macrocosm, or great World, Sibver is called he Brain of the World; So this Tincure is a true, and powerful remedy against Diseases of the Brain. It more over wonderfully helps Hectical and Pthi∣sical persons, if it be given with other spe∣cisies, especially with our potable Gold, before describ'd; it's given in Waters ap∣propriate to the Disease, as for example, in the Falling-sickness, in Swallows Water, from five, to seven drops, &c. CHAP. III. His Tincture of Jupirer, or TIN. COncerning Tin, many write of a Salt made thereof; but few have had the happiness to attain to the true and ge∣nuine manner and method of its operati∣on:
So that in lieu of Salt of Jupiter, or Tin, they'l extract the Salt of Saturn, or Lead; as plainly appears in most of our great, boasting Professors at this day; who are not able to produce any substance from Tin; Now our Tincture is made af∣ter this manner following. Take pure Tin without Lead, and cal∣cine it in the Fire, in an Iron Vessel, con∣tinually stiring it with an Iron Spahula till it be reduc'd to a Powder; and it will wax white with the heat of the Furnace, then put it into a Glass-house Furnace for a month, with a very vehement Fire; or into a Reverberatory Fire, for seven days toge∣ther; afterwards digesting it with a gentle heat, in distill'd Vinegar, separate the green Tincture, which will tinge; and this being taken away, put your Vinegar to the calcin'd Tin into a luted Retort, distilling it seven times; always adding new distill'd Vinegar: Digest the distill'd part with the same Calx in a warm place for many days together; then siltre and distil it to a dryness; adding  of Wine well rectified, and alcooli∣ted to that which is sixt matr
shall dissolve the Tincture; but take no∣tice you shall put only so much of the Spirit, as will dissolve the fixt matter. Afterwards digest it for eight days, for by that time the Spirit being separated, the Tincture will remain in the bottom, which indeed is marvelous. Note. You will not find any such clear and sincere Receipts as these; for I lay down nothing, but what I have illustra∣ted by frequent Operations. Vertues, Ʋses and Doses. THis Tincture is wonderfully bene∣ficial for all kinds of Diseases; for as Jupiter derives his Name à juvando, from helping; so that this Tincture helps all Diseases, both inward and outward. In∣wardly it obtains the first place in Diseases of the Womb, although incorrigible: For it Comforts, Strengthens and Mundifies it from impure and corrupt Seeds, which produce so many various Diseases; it also succors the Brain, Heart, Liver, and Hy∣pochondria's, and given with Specifies, it much profits Hectical and Pthysical persons.
Outwardly it bridles and checks any acri∣monious humor in Wounds; and sweet∣ens it; and brings them to their perfect integrity. 'Tis given with Liquors, from a Scruple to half a Drachm, for one dose. CHAP. IV. His Tincture, or Essence of MARS. THere are already very many Reme∣dies extant from the very many preparations of Mars, or Iron, though a Tincture of the nature of this of ours be in use but by very few; and yet it is one of the most excellent, though it be the most laborious of all others; its process is as follows. Take filings of Iron, and being very well fir'd in a Crucible, extinguish them with distill'd Vinegar, and this do more then thirty times, then make them boil in the said Vinegar. And, while 'tis warm, fil∣tre them through a Paper; dry your Filings,
and siring them again, as before, in Crucible, quench them with distill'd Vi∣negar, as abovesaid: Which rule after yo have repeated thrice, you shall then disti your siltrated Vinegars to a dryness; an then add thereto Spirit of Wine; and a for the rest of the process, you shall ob∣serve the same order as in the Tinctur of Jupiter. Virtues, Ʋses and Deses. THis Tincture is a great Cordial, strengthening the parts, and open∣ing obstructions: For it is excellent above other remedies in all Fluxes, as Dysenteries Diarra'heas, and Iaenteries, &c. and all im∣moderate monthly and white Fluxes in Women; Gonorhaeas, spittings of Blood, Fluxes of Blood, either at Nose, or He∣morrhoides; in all sudden Fluxions in any part of the Body. It suffers no Corrup∣tion in any manner of Wounds; and heals them in a very short time; it mun∣disies and heals Wounds and Ulcers; it is given in specifi cordials from a Scruple to half a Drachm.
Note. After the same manner are made the Tinctures of Lapis Hamatitis, Sanguis Draconis, &c. which are Remedies appro∣priate to the Blood. CHAP. V. His ssen of MERCƲRY. SUblimate your Mercury thrice, accord∣ing to the common manner, with Vitriol and Nitre; and thence separate a most pure Chrystal; which you shall after∣wards sublimate again leven times, with common white Salt very well decrepita∣ted; and being very well bruis'd put it into a Glass Vessel, with Spirit of Salt very well rectisied, which must be six fingers bredth above the Salt: Being seal'd, digest in Balneo forty days; then separate the Spirit by decantation; and powring new Spirit thereon digest again, for forty days more. Then separate as abovesid; and if all the sublimate be not dissolv'd, infuse
and digest anew, until almost nothing re∣main in the bottom. All the Spirits be∣ing digested, put them into a Retort very well luted; and with a Recipient distil them until white drops ascend; then re∣move them and cohobate the Spirit four times, always upon the Caput mortuum; making, towards the latter end, a more vehement Fire, till all becomes one: what remains of the fixt matter in the bottom calcine, so long until  wax white, and become a Salt after the usual manner. Distil the Spirit, and separate until the Tincture remain in the bottom, which you shall join to its Salt, by a gentle Fire, that they may incorporate into one sub∣stance, then dulcifie it with Spirit of Wine, and digest it in the same, and separate the Spirit; doing thus five times, that it may become dulcified. Vertues, Ʋses and Doses. THis is a difficult Operation; but in recompence it eradicates all almost incurable Diseases; and may be given to all Bodies, Sexes and Ages, in all kinds of
Diseases; it mundifies all kinds of cor∣rupt Diseases producing malignancy in any part of the Body: It Operates with∣out any trouble, disturbance, hurt or da∣mage to the Body; it preserves and cheri∣shes the natural Balsam of Life; it expells all impurities by insensible transpiration; it dryes up and consumes Catarrhs proceed∣ing from what cause soever: It cures ob∣structed and cachectic Bodies, caused from deprav'd, and naughty humors of the Hy∣pochondria's, Womb, or corrupt Blood: It helps both hot and cold hysterical per∣sons, by corroborating the Liver and other viscera: It drives out either new or old in∣fections proceeding from the Lues Vene∣rea: It heals also Schyrrhus's, King's Evil, or such pertinacious tumors: 'Tis admini∣stred in Broths, or the yelks of Eggs, or Wine, from eight drops to ten, in a morn∣ing, fasting.
CHAP. VI. His Essence, or Tincture of CORAL. THERE are almost infinite Recipés, which teach how to draw a Tin∣cture from Coral; and how to make its Salt: But for the most part they are de∣ceived: And in lieu of a Tincture of the Coral, there appears a Tincture of other lagredients, (from the Efficacy of the ) which use to be mixt there∣with. Ours is this which follows, a very sincere one, if it be artificially perform'd by an expert Operator. Take Coral very smally pounded; and infuse it in a Glass Vessel in Vinegar which hath before extraed the Tincture of An∣timony; and was separated therefrom by distribution; for there is nothing more sit than this for Crals, Ʋnions, Crabs-eyes, Egglis, Ble-Arme, Lapis hematitis, and the like. Let the Vinegar swim six sing∣ers bredth uppermost; and let the Coral
be dissolv'd for some days space in an hot Balneo; and then distill the Vinegar to driness, then wash the Powder ten or twelve times in Cordial Waters; until all acrimony, and the grosser and car∣thier parts be taken away, and it become very well ducisy'd, and as clear as Chry∣stal. Then dry it well and lay it up to be used, as shall be directed hereafter: Then take other Coral, and being mixt with equal quantity of Sal Armeniac, put them into a sublimatory Vessel to be subli∣med; and the Sal Armoniac will attract all the redness from the Coral: Then put your Sal Armoniac, being rubisyed, into Spirit of Wine, rectilyed and achooliza∣ted, in an hot Bath; and in sew days the Spirit of Wine will attract to it self all the Tincture; then separate the Spirit by di∣stillation, and there will remain an Es∣sence; to which you shall add the aforesaid fix'd Powder, and this is your true, real and genuine Essence of Coral.
Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THis is a Cordial, and a mundifier of the Blood, as may appear in Leprous persons; 'tis given to all Bodies, and in all kinds of Diseases; 'tis proper for Fluxes as hath been said in the Essence of Mer∣cury: It comforts the Heart and Stomach; restores the natural heat, and fortifies the radical moisture; it dissolves glotted Blood; it helps and cures venemous Wounds, and malignant and solid Ulcers: 'Tis given in Broth, the yelk of an Egg, Wine, Plan∣tane-water; &c. from half a Drachm to a Drachm. CHAP. VII. His Essence of PEARLS. OUR Essence of Pearls differs some∣what from that which is common∣ly describ'd by others; and is this which followeth.
Digest your Pearls in Vinegar of Anti∣mony, as before, and they will very quick∣ly be dissolv'd; then do as before in the Essence, or Tincture of Coral, until the Salt become white; to wit, after it hath lost its Acrimony by washing; then dis∣solve it in Alchoolizated Spirit of Wine, and distil it seven times, always upon the Caput mortuum, then separate the Spirit, and there will remain your Essence as in others. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. 'TIS a most perfect Cordial; and not in the least inferior to Aurum po∣tabile; for 'tis given to restore weak and languishing Bodies; 'tis proper in malig∣nant Fevers, and the Plague, by reason of its Cordiality: It repells, Syncopes or Swooning Fits, Passions of the Brain, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies, and Ver∣tigoes, as also Hysterical passions and Hy∣pochondriacal Fits; it's given in Broth, or the yelk of an Egg, in appropriate Waters, from half a Drachm to a Drachm.
CHAP. VIII. His Essence of EMERALDS. TAke one part of the Fragments of E∣meralds finely poudred; of Nitr and Sulphur three parts; the which be∣ing put into a glas'd Vessel that will resi the Fire; you shall calcine it: Afterwards being dulcifyed with warm Waters, cal cine them twice, after the same manner as before, always with new Nitre and Su∣phur. After the third calcination and du∣cification put your Powder, into a crucible luted, into a Glass Furnace; or into a Re∣verberatory Fire, for the space of six days afterwards being put into a Glass Vesse pour on Spirit of Salt rectify'd; as much as will overtop it four singers breadth; an so digest them in an hot Bath for twenty days; then make a separation by decantation into another Vessel; and, pouring on new Spirit of Salt upon the foeces, digest them again as abovesaid, until all the Pouder b dissolv'd. Put all the Spirit into a Vesse
very well stopt; and digest it for the space of a month; which being past, distil it lightly, for the Tincture will remain in the bottom; then you may augment its Vir∣tue by adding Spirit of Wine Alchooliza∣ted; and digesting it, and afterwards by separating it. After the same manner is made your Essence of Carbuncles, Hyacynthes, and o∣ther pretious Stones. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. I Have no need to say any thing of the Virtues of this Essence, good Wine needing no Bush; for it is really a most potent Cordial against Poison, and malig∣nant, pestilential Fevers; and succors all Diseases of the Brain, as Madness, Apo∣plexies and the like.
CHAP. IX. His Essence of Auripigmentum. 'TIS a very dextrous and perfect spag∣girical Art, to be able on the o hand to extract deadly Poyson from use precious things; and on the other has to be able to convert Poyson it self in most perfect Antidotes, Alexipharmics a true Cordialls. As may be seen in Or∣ment; which though it be one of the dea∣ly Poysons; yet may be produc'd from an admirable Essence; by reason of  Cordiality; and its process is perform'd ∣ter this manner following. Take one part of Auripigmentum, a three parts of rectify'd Nitre, which bei put into an unglassed Earthen Vessel th will resist the Fire; do as is usual in Cro Antimonii; being calcin'd, then wa off the Nitre with warm Waters; the dry it, and do so again as abovesaid wit new Nitre; then repete this exsiccatio after a new ablution; and adding two
parts of Nitre, and two of Sulphur Fire it a fresh; and ducy it; but take heed of flame and sume: After the third calcina∣tion and dulcification, put your Powder into a crucible well luted . Fornace or Reverberatory Fire  space of one month. Afterward, proceed with Spirit of Salt, as hath been often said in other foregoing processes, digesting and coho∣bating it oftentimes; all being dissolv'd, separate the Spirit, to a dryness; then with Spirit of Wine; &c. proceed as in other before. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THis Essence expells all manner of Poy∣son very forcibly; and is of like Vir∣tue with Aurum potabile, Pearls, Corals, and pretious Stones; it purifies impure Bodies from all naughty corruption in the Veins: This is the chiefest among other remedies against malignant Ulcers, Gan∣greens, or any other corrosions; and roots out Scurffs and Scald-heads being anointed therewith. 'Tis given in Broths or Wa∣ters, from a Scruple to a Drachm.
CHAP. X. His Essence of common Salt. FIltrate decrepitated Salt several times through a Paper in rain Water being seven times distill'd: Exhale the humidity and from what remains fixt, diligently ex∣tract a Spirit with Bole-Armenia accord∣ing to Art. Then cohobate it four times upon the Caput mortuum, and being recti∣fy'd from its impurities keep it, for the use hereafter specify'd; then break your Re∣tort, and make a Salt of the Caput mor∣tuum according to Art; filtrating it well and it will begin to look red; then joyn∣ing it with the aforesaid, digest it in Bal∣neo, in a Vessel well luted with Mastich and the white of an Egg: Then after a month is past, rectify it again twice or thrice, and adding alchoolizated Spirit of Wine, and making a new digestion, sepa∣rate the Spirit of Wine, and there will re∣main your Essence of Salt.
Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THis Essence will preserve as well dead Carkases as living wights from Cor∣ruption, and is more effectual for Wounds, than your Balsams; it wonderfully helps Ulcers; it dissolves the Gravel and Stone in the Blader; it mundifies the Veins from any bad, gross quality; and cures Diseases proceeding from Blood; it conglutinates, consolidates and cures Ulcers of the Reins and Blader: It helps obstructions of the Spleen, Liver and visera; it very much pre∣vails against putrid Fevers; it removes in∣fections of the Skin; amongst which are Scabs, Pimples, Shingles, St. Anthony's Fire, Ringworms, &c. it suppurates all sorts of hot Tumors; and dissolves cold ones, although they be schyrrous: It appeases pains in the joints; it defends the radical moysture, keeps back old Age; sharpens the Wit, 'its drank in Liquors from one Drachm to two.
CHAP. XI. His Essence of Sal-prunella. MIX Sal-prunella very well clarify'd with Common Salt decrepitated; 'its done by the same Rule as in Common Salt. This differs not in Virtue from the Common, chiefly in Fevers. CHAP. XII. His Essence of Sulphur. FIrst of all rubifie Vitriol, then adding an equal portion of Sulphur; put it into a new pot as the custom is, and let the Sulphur be sublimated four times; then mix with it Common Salt decrepitated, dis∣solved and coagulated, and sublimeit thrice with the said flower, and then the flower will wax white, and become volatile; and this keep for uses hereafter specify'd; Af∣terwards
take Spirit of Sulphur drawn er Campanam, and rectify'd: And pass∣ing it a fresh through filings of Steel; ake away its acrimony; so that it become as sweet as Water; put your flowers, for∣merly laid by into this dulcify'd Spirit; so that the Spirit may swim four singers bredth above them, and digest them in Balneo, in a well Glazed Vessel well stopt; where your Spirit will assume a reddish Color; separate the Spirit by decantation; still adding fresh until it will tinge no more; then separate the Spirit by distillation; and the Tincture will remain at the bottom; to which adding alchoolizated Spirit of Wine, digest them for several days, until they be very well mixt; afterwards sepa∣rate them by distillation, and in the bot∣tom there will remain an Essence. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THis is a most cordial Essence; and no∣thing is more proper against contu∣sions in Wounds, even when the nerves are cut in two; it cures Punctures, or Poy∣sonons bitings, of any animal; it extin∣guishes
the Poyson, and heals the Wounds. 'Tis a true Balsam in Diseases of the Lungs, even Ulcers thereof; it succors Hectical, Pthysical, Asthmatical People. It conserves the radical moysture; it eradicates pains of the joints; it comforts the nerves; it consumes new and old impurities in Ca∣tarrhs; it restores hearing to the Deaf; 'tis profitable to sordid Ulcers: 'tis to be drank from half a Drachm to a Drachm, in Broths or Waters; and is outwardly u∣sed by it self alone, or with proper Un∣guents. CHAP. XIII. His Essence of Vitriol. PHilosophers assert Vitriol to be the Blood of the macrocosmical machine; and will needs have the Philosophers Stone, after which so many inquirers have labor'd in vain, to be made of it. In this they affirm the true Force and Virtue of the Universal Secret which is the Soul of
minerals doth consist. But, indeed, and in truth, if through genuine spagyric Ope∣rations, there emerge so many wonderful Virtues, from all sorts of minerals and se∣minerals; then certainly not a few mar∣velous ones are to be extracted from Vi∣triol; as may appear, from its stopping Fluxes of Blood, it being only calcin'd in the Sun; and the many also that use it by applying it a distance, to preserve the parts from corruption. Hence it may ap∣pear, that it must certainly be of much more efficacy being mundifyed from its Impurities, and brought to its perfection by an ingenious Artist. Now its process is as followeth. Take calcin'd Vitriol, and, a Spirit being extracted therefrom according to Art, re∣ctifie it; and dissolve the foeces that re∣main in hot Water; then filtre and dry them, repeating the said Operations several times, that you may gather from thence a Spirit and Salt, as beforesaid. After∣wards join the Spirit, being thrice recti∣fy'd, to the Salt; and distil them, coho∣bating them seven times; but alway dis∣solve the Caput mortuum, and fix it as be∣fore.
Put your Salt into a Vessel, that will endure the Fire, into a Reverbatory Fire for seven days, until it begin to look red; then add it again to its Spirit well rectify'd, and, in a Vessel very close stopt, digest it in an hot Balneo Marte; After for∣ty days distil it, and rectifie the Spirit seven times and dissolve the Salt in aqua vitae, rectify'd and alchoolizated, and six it; then join the Spirit again, and digest it until it grow red; afterwards separate the Spirit by distillation; in the bottom there will remain a Tincture which you shall add to fresh Spirit of Wine alchooli∣zated; digest it, and, extracting a Spirit therefrom, there will remain your Es∣sence. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. NO one yet ever communicated a more famous medicine against all Diseases; for it expells all kind of Poyson whether vegetable, animal or mineral; it recreats the vital, natural and animal Spirits. This is the Arcanum so long conceal'd by many which is so wonderful and so universal; and
which agrees so well with all Diseases, all Ages and both Sexes; it exceeds your Au∣rum potabile, Panacea's, or any other medi∣cine under any denomination whatever: 'Tis given from a Scruple to a Drachm, in Broths, yelks of Eggs or other Liquors. CHAP. XIV. His Antiepileptic Troches. THere are many that affirm these to be your mineral cinabar; whose mother they suppose to be the bowells of the Earth. But they are much mistaken; for that which is call'd your mineral cinabar, is cover'd under the shaddow of this of ours, lest it should be called Antimony. The cinabar laid down by many Authors against the Epilepsy, called mineral and articial, is made after this manner following. Take the Caput mortuum, which remains after making of your compound Butter of Antimony, and add thereto as much Mercu∣ry sublimate; then distil it for use in a Glass
well luted in an Alymbec. Towards the end make a fierce Fire, so that the Anti∣mony may ascend to the neck of the Glass, just like your clearest cinabar, which will be mineral. Wash th until it be dul∣cify'd, and then put it into a Crucible, into an open, circulatory Fire for three hours to∣gether, and kindle your Spirit of Wine three or four times. Of this take one Ounce, Magistry of Pearls and Coralls, of each one Drachm and an half. Ambar and Safron, of each one Scruple, Elke's hoof one Drachm; humane Scull pre∣par'd without Fire three Drachms; faeculi Peoniae half an Ounce, Oil of Ambar distill'd, of the mucilage of Hart's-horn, and Scull, as much as will be sufficient to form them into Troches; whereof give from a Scruple to half a Drachm, to Epileptics; and you will see Wonders; for this Arcanum hath been confirm'd by many experiences.
CHAP. XV. His magistral Caput mortuum TAke the Caput mortuum of Aqua fortis, made of Nitre rectify'd, and Vitriol well calcin'd; and make a lixivium there∣of with warm, distill'd Rain-water, and extract a Salt according to Art. Then the same Salt being dissolved again twice in the said distil'd Rain-water, until there appear chrystalls; take one part of recti∣fy'd Nitre, and two of the said Salt; and melting the Nitre in a crucible with a Fire of the second degree, add the Salt by de∣grees; and melt them all with the Fire for the space of three hours. Put this Mass into Aqua fortis, extracted from the aforesaid things; and to every pound add flowers of Antimony from the Regulus of Mars, three Ounces; leaf Gold three Drachms; Coral, Pearls, Egg-shells, of each two Drachms; digest all in a warm place for four days together; this done distil to a dryness; powder  which
remains, and imbibe it again in Aqua vitae digest for eight days, and distil to a dry∣ness; The Caput mortuum which remain keep in Glasses well stopt: And if you shall give from twelve to eighteen drop thereof, you will consume Hypochondria∣cal Diseases; for it is one of the most pow∣erful remedies against such Diseases. I expells all kinds of obstructions, an naughty Fevers; 'tis good for Cachecti Bodies and frees solks from Dropsies. CHAP. XVI. His Golden Catharic. TAke of our Aureat, hereafter describ'd half an Ounce; Spirit of Sulphur rectify'd after the best manner; thre Ounces; digest them in a warm place At fifteen days end distil them with  Glass retort with a Fire of Sand; an then cohobate the said Spirit with the sai Aureat nine times; and wash the powde very well with Cordial Waters, and dry
it. The dose is from four to ten Grains, with Magistery of Mechoacan, Jalap, Seamony, or Extracts; which shall be most convenient. CHAP. XVII. His Antivenereal Pills. TAke of our Calomelanos, Magistery of Lapis lazuli, extract of Rhubarb, Se∣a, Turbith, Buckthorn-berrys, of each two Drachms; Gum Guajaci or Ligni sancti the weight of them all; magistery of Tar∣ar dissolv'd in Oil of Cinamon of each one Drachm and an half; Syrup of Fu∣mitery as much as will suffice to form them into Pills. Vertues, Ʋses and Doses. THese Pills very happily pull up all Ve∣nercal humors by the root; yea even f the Bones be infected; Their dose s from half a Drachm to one Drachm; or twenty, thirty or forty days together.
CHAP. XVIII. His Calomelanos. TAke good Mercury, and put it into a Re∣tort, with a double quantity of San both very well mixt; and put to the Fir by degrees; and pour it into a Vessel; no shuting its mouth, that the impure part may remain in the Sand. Then sublimat it with common Salt decrepitated, accord∣ing to Art; and throwing away the foeces, add the Salt again to that Mercury being more purely sublimated. Then casting away the parts that remain sublime i more purely with new Salt; do this seven times, and the foeces being at last separa∣ted, place the Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace, with the sublimate of the se∣venth process, and leave it there for two hours with a most vehement Fire. Then wash it with Cordial waters many times, and imbibe in Juniper Aquae vitae, which must swim a top a fingers breadth, and urn it, which you must do thrice.
CHAP. XIX. His Cathartic of Antimony with Vitriol, called His Catholicon. TAke shining Antimony out of the Earth; that which is of a Golden Color, one part, rubify'd Vitriol two parts, being urify'd and mixt, put them into a Cru∣ible that they all melt together: then owder the Mass, and put it into a Re∣ort very well luted with distill'd Vinegar, hat it may be uppermost four fingers readth; and augment the Fire by litle nd litle, and at last make a most ardent ne, that all the Spirit may be exhal'd; nd it will evaporate with a moderate eat, until there remain a sat Tincture. Then take of the Extract of Rhubarb, Se∣a, Jalap, Turbith, black Hellebore, of each one Drachm; Extract of Aloes one Ounce, Essence of Juniper and Citron Pills of each, two Drachms; and adding thereto half an Ounce of the abovesaid Tincture, di∣gest them all with a moderate heat; and so reduce to the consistence of an Extract;
and you will have a very excellent Catha c, marvelous against all kinds of Fevers as well acute as intermittent; excelling a the anchy magogues of other Physitian the dose from eight to fifteen Grains. CHAP. XX. His Troches against Gangrenes. TAke the foeces of Common Regulu and put it into a moist place upon a Marble, under a Vessel, and keep it from the rain, that the Air only penetrate it and that it may be dissolv'd into an Oil which you shall exhale with a gentle Fire and you will have a most pungent Salt whereof take one Ounce, Mercury subli∣mate one Ounce, Barly and Lentil meal o each two Ounces; Gum tragaganth, two Drachms; dissolve them in Rose-water, and make Troches of them, which will cure all Gangreens, and wonderfully corrode pec∣cant flesh.
CHAP. XXI. His Antihectic Powder. TAke of the starryed Regulus of Mars, and English Tin, of each one part; ulverize them and mix them with three parts of rectify'd Nitre, and calcine them according to Art; then take away all the altness with hot water, as is usual, and put the white powder again into a Rever∣eratory Furnace for three days, or in a Glass, or Potters-Furnace; and imbibe t again in Aqua vitae rectify'd, which you shall kindle to burn; and this you shall do thrice. Take one Ounce of this Powder, of Vipers prepar'd half an Ounce; Sage dry'd and powdred one Ounce and a half, then throw live Frogs into a pot; shut it close till they be dead; and then put them into an Oven till they be so dry as they may be powdred; and mix three Ounces of these with the ingredients abovesaid; and of this compound give from one Drachm to two; for forty days together.
CHAP. XXII. His Aqua vitae, against pains of the Joint TAke four handfuls of ground Ivy of Cypress leaves, Sage, Rlema, Spike, Netles, of each one handful; o Elme Bark, and leaves, of  Oun∣ces: Dwarf Elder two handfuls; all these being beaten, in a Morter, infute them in two pownds of Generous Wine; and the  and extract the forth part. T  call'd Aqua vitae, add half o  the aforesaid green Herbs, and  of Earth-worms, which have  wash'd well with Wine, before; and  pounds of Dogs grease, and then di∣l them again, extracting the half. Then d the third part again of the aforesaid Herbs, Worms and sat, and distilling them again extract the third part; and so you will have a perfect Aqua vitae, which will be excellent good to comfort and resolve all Diseases of the Joints and Feet-Gout.
CHAP. XXIII. His Anodine, or Narcotic of Vitril. TAke of Romane Vitril and Tartar of each one pound; filings of Steel half a pound; the Tartar and Vitriol be∣ing pulveriz'd put them into a Glass Cu∣curbit; being first well mixt; then imbie them in distill'd Vinegar, swimming two singers bredth above; and digest for three days. Which being past, congele them with a moderate Fire; and imbibe them in Vinegar as aforesaid; and follow the a∣foresaid order; After you have congel'd them add distill'd Vinegar, which must overtop it six singers breadth; and with a mild Fire it will very suddenly take a red color. Then put fresh Vinegar there∣to, until the Tinure be extracled; and to the said Vinegar add Oil of Tartar per deliquium: For so all the Sulphur will des∣cend to the bottom of the Glass: then you shall dry it well; and immerge it in three pounds of rectify'd Aqua vitae; then
place the Vessel, well stop'd with Mastick and the white of an Egg, in hot Horse∣dung; which you must change every four days; At the fortieth days end distil; and reserve the Tincture remaining in the bot∣tom of the Glass, according to the custom of Tinctures: And here you have a true Narcotic. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THis Narcotic was invented chiefly to chase away away all acute, burning and malignant Fevers, and especially in de∣liriums; as also against Hysterical passions. Colic, and Nephritic pains; and against all Diseases wherein Laudanum, or Nephenthe is to be given, this Narcotic is safer; the dose is from five Grains to twelve.
CHAP. XXIV. . TAke one Ounce of  Gold, Crude Antimony four Ounces: mix them and melt them together in a crucible: but with an equal, not a vehement Fire; lest the  separated by too much Fire. Atter you have melted them let them cool; and then powder them finely; after that calcine them by degrees with a gentle Fire after the same manner as done in calcining of Glass; always stiring them with an Iron rod. You shall know them to be calcin'd enough when the Antimony and Gold shall become very white; and will not cleave together: nor being put upon burning coals will smoak at all. Glass is made from hence by putting the Cal in a crucible in a vehement Fire of Fusion for an hour; and then ts perfect when the Vitrification appears very clear and of the color of a Carbuncle Stone. This truly is somewhat a difficult Ope∣ration;
and sometimes fails the Artist but you shall have a more clear manner and method for the compounding this Ar∣canum, in another Work, which I shall ex∣pose to light; where I shall explicate the very proper and genuine one to the young Student. This as it is a richer preparation with Gold than that which Crollius, Se∣nertus, Schroderus and others have left us, so 'tis a more Cordial one: Lastly this out Aureatum is of a vomitive and solutive nature; but challengs to it self, the first place among the Vomitives; because the Gold defends the Heart and Viscera. It doth not only equal the Virtues of the Antimonial Cup but excells them: Its dose is from two Grains to five. CHAP. XXV. His Catholic Water. TAke of the juice of Bryonie, Buck∣thorn berryes, Celandine, Eglantine berryes, of the bark of Elder, dwarf Elder,
Germander; of each two Ounces; Spirit of Wine rectify'd two pounds; digest them for two days space, then distil them and to the distill'd water add your Extract of Rhubarb, Agaric, Sena, Hedge Hyssop, of each half an Ounce; Magistery of Me∣choacan three Drachms; solutive Magiste∣ry of Tartar two Drachms; Cinamon, Mastick, Ginger and Aniseed of each half a Dracm. Spirit of Vitriol stibiated six Drachms; and digest them in Horse-dung: At twenty four days end strain them and keep them in a Vessel very close stop'd: This is call'd Catholic, because it works truely without any nausconsness, and  all Diseases wherein purging is requisite, it is very proable; and 'tis to be taken ei∣ther in Bros, Wine or Water; the dose is from one Drachm to three or four at most.
CHAP. XXVI. His First Alexipharmac Troches. TAke of Oriental Bezoar Stone, Harts∣horn prepar'd, Jovial and mineral Bezoar: Of the true Unicorn and Rhi∣noceros's horn of each two Drachms, Earth of Malta, yellowish Bole-armenia, Bohemian Earth; Terra sigillata, of each half an Ounce; Contrayervae five Drachms; Spodium, all the Fragments of pretious Stones, prepar'd half a Drachm. Magi∣stery of Pearls; of all Corals; of Boars teeth, of each one Drachm; twenty leaves of Gold; let all be poudred and with the Mucilage of Harts-horn make Troches. Virtues, Ʋses and Deses. THey free the Diseased from all manner of Poyson, malignant and erratic Fe∣vers; and are marvellous good against menstrual Fluxes, spitting and vomiting of Blood; Pleurisie and pain at Heart. And
are in a more especial manner profitable to Women with child that fear Abortion; their dose is from half a Scruple to a Scru∣ple in Specifies. CHAP. XXVII. The Second Viper Alexipharmic Troches. TAke yellow Monks-hood, Swallow∣wort, Scorzonora, Contrayervae, Ci∣trion Pills, of each one Drachm. Viper pouder half a Drachm; right Unicorn's-horn, true Bezoar Stone, and Rhinoce∣ros's-horn, bone of Harts-heart, of each half a Drachm. Jovial Bezoard, red Chrystal prepar'd, of each one Drachm; let them be poudred, and with mucilage of Harts∣horn make them into Troches; which will vanquish Poysons and malignant Fe∣vers, Pustles, Smal-pox and Meazles, and the like; the dose is from one Scruple to half a Drachm.
CHAP. XXVIII. His Third  of Alexipharmic Troches. TAke of Tormentil Root, Angelica, Car∣line, or White thistle, Gentian, Con∣trayerva, yellow Monks-hood, Swallow∣wort, Scorzonora, Master-wort, of each one Drachm; Juniper and Bay-berries of each one Ounce; Ivy, hath an Ounce; Cina∣mon, yellow Sanders, Wood of Moes, of each two Scruples. Bone of an Harts-heart half an Ounce; you shall ponder all these, and put them into a Gsen Vessel and be∣sprinkle them with Essence of Tartar three Drachms; adding red Chrystal prepar'd, Oriental Bezoar-Stone, Magery of Pearls, true Unicorns-horn, of each o Scruple; Magistery of Ambar, Salt of Jupiter, leaf Gold of each twenty five Grains. Of the Mucilage of Harts horn and gum Tra∣gacanth made with Pome-citron-water, as much as will suffice to make all into Tro∣ches according to Art.
Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THese Troches expel the Plague and Pe∣stilential Diseases, and malignant Fe∣vers; and are profitable and powerful in all Syncoeps or swooning of the Heart; and Arsenical Medicines; and such like Poysons; the dose of them is from a Scruple to half a Drachm. CHAP. XXIX. His Cordial, or Balsam of Life. TAke of our Universal Panacea with Gold, of the Essence of Gold and Sil∣ver, of each two Drachms; of the Es∣sence of Ambar-Grise, twenty five Grains, of the Essence of Pearls three Drachms; of the Tincture of Vipers half an Ounce; of the Essence of Harts-blood one Ounce; mix them and add to them true Oriental
Opobalsmum four Grains; and you have a very great Cordial to comfort Nature with all; the dose of this Balsam is from half a Scruple to a Scruple. CHAP. XXX. His Balsamum Salutis. TAke of the Essence of Ambar-Grise made with Spirit of Roses, of the Quintessence of Roses; of the Essence of Juniper-berryes, and Citron peels of each one Scruple; Oil of the flowers of Pome-citrions, half a Scruple; mix them and give it with simple Sugar of Roses, from two drops to six.
CHAP. XXXI. His Bezordicum minerale. OUR Bezoardicum minerale differs but litle from that Common one, which the Chymists compound; but 'tis more correct and safer; because the correction of Antimony and Mercury is while they be purged from all their evil and malig∣nant qualities by the Fire. Its process is as followeth. Take Regulus of Antimony; but let it be of that which hath afterwards been purify'd in a most ardent Fire; for sixteen hours together; and also Mercury subli∣mate that hath been made of it, as be∣fore in our Calomelanos; and distil them by an Alembic; as the custom is, extract∣ing a Butter, as in Bezoardicum minerale, laid down by other Authors: Then dul∣cify it by washing often with warm Waters, and dry it in a temperate heat; being dri∣ed imbibe in Spirit of Nitre, which must overtop it four singers bredth, and then di∣stil;
and after cohobate thrice, and dul∣cify again as before. Put your dulcifica∣tion into an Earth Glass'd Vessel, that wi endure the Fire; and kindle your Fire for about three days together; for this is its true manner and method of its decoction. Then imbibe the Spirit of Wine; which you shall kindle about five or six times, and then you are certain to have the per∣fect and best Bezoardicum minerale. This is that of my Master's; and i you take notice of the compositions o others; you shall not need to be altoge∣ther so diligent and exact. He used it in sit sorts of Broths, giving a Scruple  one dose; as may appear from his, and my, Observations; and because it is well corrected and concocted, so that it will never harm any one, he gave it to all that were troubled, not only with a malignant, acute and pestilential Fever; but also in Cachectic distempers; and in the Small∣pox and Meazles, and other such like Di∣seases; the dose is as before, from half a Scruple to one Scruple.
CHAP. XXXII. His Bezoardicum Joviale. THis is compos'd after the same manner as the former, nothing excepted, but only differs in the Composition; for first ou must make a starryed Begulus Martis, nd join to t by Fire a like quantity of he more perfect Tin; and the aforesaid Mercury sublimate, as in the process of our Calomelanos; But be sure you omit nothing of the right ordering and making the aforesaid mineral. For that is it which is so much celebrated by my Master's using  in his practice; whereof he gave, and to do I, in all desperate Diseases, from half a Scruple to half a Drachm. There are other Solar Bezoardies made by adding Gold; and also Lunar ones by dding Silver; as they are describ'd by other Authors: But I think it enough not to depart from the Fire, and manner of aking which I have laid down in the∣nineral Bezoar. For if you shall do o∣therwise
they shall not obtain their whole Virtue. The Correction of the correct flowers, crocus and auratum, is done after this manner. Take, the Flower, Saffron, or Glass, and put it into a Retort with rectify'd Spi∣rit of Vitriol, to digest, for the space of five days, in a moderate hot place; the distil to a dryness; and chohobate six times more; always distilling to a dryness; then dulcify with Cordial Waters; and being dry imbibe it in generous Aqua vitae; which you shall kindle thereon five times; for after this manner your Antimony is much corrected; and being so corrected they are to be compounded after this manner.
An Appendix. HAving not a mind to pass by the wonderful prodigie of Bezoardies; I have given thee this Additional one; whereby Reader, thou wilt not disdain to cast thine eye upon a very fair Event which hapned at Venice. The most Illustrious and most excellent Andreas Donatus the most worthy Senator of this Republick, and to whom I am very much obliged, commanded me to visit, one John Baptist Tola, who was Sick; I went, and found him to be about sixty five years Old, of a dull, melancholick temperature; formerly given to drink much generous Wine; and then at that time labouring under a continual, malig∣nant Fever, for one day past; and troub∣led in his head with sumes, and an obscure delirium; his pulse was tremulent and small; his Urine thick and troubled; his eyes darkish, almost glassy; his faculties
very abject: at length, that I may con∣tract much into a litle, from all signs that appear'd mortal; I gave out that I des∣pair'd of his life; which also did a most excellent Physitian; who had administred opportunely many remedy's, according to rules of Art: We both concluded that there was no other way left but to succor him with Cordials; and told his Servants there was but a very short period to death. Yet I ask'd this most excellent Physitian, whether he thought best, at la to try your Solar and Jovial Bezoardies; for many times good events follow from those in these cases; because these Bezoardies com∣pel nature to expel those things, by Sweat, Urine or Seige, which impel the miserable patient almost to death. He conrm'd this my opinion; and commanded pre∣sently to be given, six Grains of the So∣lar, and six of Jovial Bezoar, in Cordial waters; but he sent to the Governor, a very good Spagyric and a perfect operator, that he would allow of the aforesaid ad∣vice; The patient took it; and voyded much black choler by seige; but his faculties being exhausted from a Convulsion, which
follow'd, they were almost destitute of strength, and began to express signs of greater debility; whereupon his domestics being affrighted; his Son being a Presbyter comes to me, not only inflam'd with anger: But from the Physitians words signifying to him that his death proceeded from that powder of the Bezoardies; who though he know it could not in the least be from that; yet he endevours to lay the blame upon me, because of that suddain, dange∣rous motion: His Son, I say, upbraiding me with the heinousness of the fact; threatned to accuse me concerning the death of his Father; But at length such an Evacuation, by the Almighties per∣mission, carried off the black bile, which nature of it self was not able to do; and so, as it were being dead, recal'd him to life. Since which time, always when I am in any Consultation, I never propound any thing contrary to the opinion of o∣thers; being assur'd that the least evil that shall happen will be attributed to me.
CHAP. XXXIII. His Antipleuretic Extract. TAke of the Extract of wild Poppy flowers, two Drachms, red Mallows, of Gum extracted from Wood of Oak; of each one Drachm and an half; of the pleura of a Man, or Boar, two Drachms; of the filings of a Boars Teeth, three Drachms; of the true Unicorn, Magiste∣ry of Coral, of the inward Peels of Fil∣berds, Box flowers, Salis prunella, of each one Drachm; make a Mass with the a∣foresaid extracts, and you will have a prodigious composition against a Pleuresy; whose dose is from a Scruple to half a Drachm.
CHAP. XXXIV. His Hysterical Extract. TAke of the Extract of Mugwort, and Mother-wort of each three Drachms; Extract of Savin, and Juniper Berryes of each one Drachm; foeculae Aronis, half an Ounce, Foecula of Bryony two Drachms, Extract of Gith, and Assarabacca of each one Drachm, and an half; Magistery of Ambar four Drachms. Salt of Jupiter four Scruples; Seeds of Hart-wort, Nepen∣te, of each two Scruples; Seeds of Bishops∣weed, Rue, Caraways, Anise, Cardamomes of each two Drachms; Castor, four Scru∣ples; mix them all according to Art; and give thereof from half a Drachm to two Drachms; for it is greatly profitable in Hysteric passions.
CHAP. XXXV. His Nephritical Extract. TAke dry'd Rupturewort, three hand∣fulls, Eryngo, Rest-harrow, Burdock, of each one handful; Juniper and Bay∣berryes, of each two Drachms; Seeds of Gromwel, Netles, Onions, Saxifrage, Anise, Fenil, of each two Ounces; of all these make an Extract according to Art; to which add Magistery of Lapis Judaicus, mountain Christal, Crabs-eyes, Eggs-shells, Salt of Bean-shells, Salt of Flower of Ar∣moniac; of each one Drachm; ferment all these together, and you have a great Re∣medy against pains of the Reins; its dose is from a Scruple to half a Drachm.
CHAP. XXXVI. His Golden Extract. TAke of Bay-beryes, Persian Almonds, of each four Ounces; Flowers of Nuts,  Elder, of wild Grapes; of the , Origanum, Penny-royal, of  one handful; Carot-seed, Ani-seed, Fil-seed, Cummin-seed, of each two Ounces; Cinamon, Cloves, of each half an Ounce; wood of Aloes, one Drachm; make an Extract according to Art; to which add true Balsamof Peru, Oil of Nutings; of the Skie-color'd Oil of Tur∣pentine; of each half an Ounce; mix and ferment them together; and the dose is from half a Drachm to one Drachm.
CHAP. XXXVII. His Golden Diaphoretic. THis is describ'd by many Authors to be that Sulphur which is in the foeces of the vulgar Regulus; which being beaten and boild with Vinegar, the Sul∣phur is precipitated to the lower part; af∣terwards washing it very often, and dry∣ing it, they use it to mundify the Blood, and provoke Sweat. But our's is more correct; because the aforesaid forms be∣ing finish'd; it is again calcin'd in a For∣nace for twenty four hours; or in a circular Fire, till it wax white, together with the fourth part of fulminant Gold. Then ti's digested in ardent Aqua vitae, which is kindled thrice; and so you have a very good Diaphoretic, in Pleuresies and pestilential Fevers; and is given from six∣teen Grains to twenty.
CHAP. XXXVIII. His Common Diaphoretic. THis is the Common Regulus, thrice calcin'd; always with double quan∣tity of Nitre rectify'd, and then dulcify'd, and Aqua vitae kindled thereupon; It is given from a Scruple to half a Drachm, or to one Drachm; against all chronic di∣seases; where it will work upon them by sweat, or insensible transpiration. CHAP. XXXIX. His Fixt Diaphoretic. IT is the fix'd Powder of Father Bazil Valentine, which he proposes for an universal remedy; and sometimes under the name of Bazil's fix'd Panacea; des∣crib'd in the Triumphal chariot of Antimo∣ny of the same Author.
CHAP. XL. His universal liquid Panacea, with Gold. TAke an Ounce of leaf Gold, and cal∣cine it with Sulphur, in a circulatory Fire for eight hours; adding Sulphur four times; then wash with warm water; and being dry'd join it to Oil of Antimony, made after this manner. Take of the Regulus of Antimony, Mer∣cury sublimate, of each four Ounces; mix them well in a Mtar, and distil them with a Retort; as you use to do in um glaciale, or Butter of Antimony: Add then Fire by degrees, till it be converted into Butter; putting coals also to the neck of the Retort; put that Oil into a Wine Cellar upon a stone, with a Vessel under it, to receive drop by drop; and you have an Oil; to one Ounce of which add one Ounce of Gold calcin'd by circent, as afore∣said. Then put your Vessel in a warm place, digesting for a month together, for it will be ting'd into a Golden color. Then
add rectify'd Spirit of Wine, and put it into an hot place, as before, and the Aqua vitae will attract all the Gold to it self: strain it, and adding Aqua vitae again until it be tinged, exhale the Oil; and the Powder will remain; you shall put this with eight Ounces of crude Antimony, and twenty Ounces of Oil of Nitre made per deliquium, into a Vessel, which you shall stop very close, to digest. At a months end add a quart of rectify'd Spirit of Wine; and digest again; and the Tincture will in a short time be rob'd of its men∣struum, join this Spirit with that of the Gold; and add another Spirit upon the Oil of Nitre; until the color be detected; for it ought to remain, as it was when it was first placed. Then filtrate these Spi∣rits through a Paper; and distil them with cinders, by degrees; until there remain four Ounces of the Tincture, in the lower part of the Retort: And this is our uni∣versal liquid Panacca; which works by transpiration; And gently forces the vital faculties, to do those things which Nature hath need of; without doing any damage. Many Hectical, Phthysical, and Hydropical
Patients have been cur'd and obtain'd their health by me, with this: And you may give thereof from eight drops to twenty; with Specifies; and it works sooner or later as the strength is. CHAP. XLI. His Tincture, or true Oil of Sweet Antimony. TAke of your clear Hyacinthine Glass of Antimony, four Ounces; Oil of Nitre made by deliquium, eight Ounces; the Antimony being beaten mix it with the aforesaid Oil, in a glaz'd Vessel well stopt; and digest for a month with an equal and temperate Fire; and that Oil will become reddish. Then add rectify'd Spirit of Wine, as you did before in your liquid Panacea, till the Oil be depriv'd of its Tincture. Then extract the Spirit and Tincture, which rests in the lower part.
Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. 'TIS very precious against all kinds of Diseases, and litle inferior to the Panacea aforesaid. 'Tis excellent good in inward Wounds and corrosive Ulcers; and other pernicious Diseases. Its dose is from eight to ten drops, in Wine, or other Specifies. Bazilius and others write that bodies are renewed and made to grow young by this; for it mundifies all impurities of the humors; which pollute the Blood; and is a very great-Cordial. It helps Hydro∣prical, Cachectical, Hectical, and Phthy∣sical, and all such like infirmities after a wonderful manner. Many others have written of this; but not easily to be done, for if you observe the manner of this operation, there is no need of distilling your menstruum; for your Aqua vitae may be remov'd, and it will serve for other solutions. Other Tinctures are made after the same manner, and all good; but these two excel
the other; that likewise which is extracted from crude Antimony is marvellous; be∣cause the simple Nitre attracts the Tin∣cture; and the Fire consumes nothing thereof; and is call'd a Panacea. It is ex∣tracted from the vulgar Regulus of the third degree; from Ambars, from Regulus of Mars, from Regulus of Jupiter, from Crocus metallorum, from flowers of Anti∣mony; from calcination of the same; and if it be extracted with the said menstruum, it will be much better, than from distill'd Vinegars, and other such liquors; its dose is from half a Scruple to one Scruple. His Corrosive Oils are of two sorts; to wit, his Oleum glactale, that is the but∣ter, that I speak of to dissolve Gold; and this corrodes all bad flesh: The other is a liquor which is made of the foeces of the vulgar Regulus, by deliquium. Those are accounted for Essences by ma∣ny, which I call by the name of Tinctures or Extracts. But I call those Essences which are made after this manner. Take of the Simple from which you will extract an Essence, Flowers, Barks, Peels, Seeds, Roots, if you can have them
all; and macerate them in rectify'd Spirit of Wine, for two days; then distil to a dryness. Then imbibe that Spirit again with the herbs or flowers of the same, and digest them again in a Vessel well stopt; and distil a fresh; and follow the same course twice; then circulate, and you will have a vegetable Essence, for your use. Those which he used for the most part are those of Wormewood, Mint, Rosemary, Sage, Spike, Lillies of the Vally, Marygold∣leaves, flowers of the Lentil tree, Peony, Oak, Angelica, Carline, Swallow-wort, Celandine, Eyebright, Bistort, Tormentil, Contrayerva, Jumper and Bay-berryes, Ani-seed and Fenil-seed, and Cummin, Par∣snip, and Carots-seeds, Cardamoms, Ga∣langa, Citron-peels, and such like.
CHAP. XLII. QƲINTESSENCES. THese are made after another man∣ner than your Essences; for you materials must be sermented; as mos writers direct; and then an Oil separate by distillation; what's separated is the true Quintessence; your liquid Tincture are extracted with Spirit of Wine; by ex∣haling part thereof. Some Extracts are made with distill'd waters by the help  acid Liquors: They are extracted from minerals and semiminerals, with their pre∣per menstruums; as may more fully appear from our Laboratory.
CHAP. XLIII. FLINIRS. SInce we mention'd these in our Obser∣vations, 'tis necessary therefore to ex∣licate some of them. As for your Flixir Proprietatis, I always follow'd Crellius's way of process; and can testifie of its very good effects. And I add, with him, of the Essence of Wormewood and Mint; as for example two Ounces of the Elixir, of the Essence of Wormewood and Mint of each one Ounce; digest them together, and use them, for it is a great stomachie. And so I add to the same, of the Essence of Celandine, Watercresses, Mustard-seed, Snails, of each equal parts, and I digest them for a month; of which I give from a Scruple to half a Drachm. Against all atrabiliary distempers, and Scorbutic and Hypochondriac, with very happy success.
CHAP. XLIV. An Elixir against the Scurry and Hypo∣chondrical effects. TAke two pounds of Elixir Propie∣tatis, Essence of Ambar two Oun∣ces, Essence of Capars and Tamarisk-Bark. Essence of the midle bark of Ash, of each half an Ounce; white Dittany roots, Rha∣pontic, Polypody, Scorzonera, Fern, Sweet root, of each two Drachms; Watercresses, Wall-house-leek, Germander, Celandine, Ceterach, Harts-rongue, Agrimony, Vine leaves with its flowers, Liverwort, Fuma∣tory; flowers of Broom, Centaury, St. John's-wort, of each two handfuls, Broom-seeds, Fenel-seed, of each half a Drachm; Lignum sancium raspt, and its bark, of each four Ounces; Salsaparilla, one Ounce and an half, Sassafras four Ounces; Salt of Tartar half an Ounce; eat them and infuse them all in well re∣ctify'd Spirit of Wine, and dephlegmated; as much as will suffice, till they be well
imbib'd, and it overtop them two fingers bredth, digest them eight days, distil, and in the distill'd repote a new composition, s before; 'tis marvelous for Hypochon∣driacs, and for those that are assired with cold Rheums; the dose is from one Scruple to half a Drachm in appropriate vehicles. CHAP. XLV. Elixir Nephriticum. TAke of true Nephritic wood one Ounce and an half; Camomil, Me∣lilot, ground Ivy, Golden-rod, Flewellin, St. John's-wort, with its seed and flowers, Rupture-wort, or the Turkish herb; of each three handfulls, Rest-harrow root, Pim∣pernel, Saxifrage, of wild Rose-seeds, and Gromwel of each two Ounces, win∣ter Cherryes three Ounces; Juniper and Ivy-berryes, of each one Ounce and an half; being all beaten, put them into a Vessel well stopt, with Spirit of Wine
terebinthinated; which must be upper∣most the bredth of four singers; then di∣gest for eight days; then distil; and a∣gain infusing the same things green, do as before; the dose is of this from a Scruple to half an Ounce: And 'tis an excellent thing for Gravel and the Stone. CHAP. XLVI. An Ʋterine Elixir. TAke Mug-wort Rupture-wort, Fe∣verfew, Peny-Royal, Catmint, of each three Drachms; Peels of Citrons and Pome-Citrons, of each half a Drachm; of the roots of Swallow-wort, Birth-wort, Peony, Madder, Bryony, Oris, white Ditany, Zedoary, Ani-seed and Cardamum-seeds of each half an Ounce; Bazil two Drachms, Bay-berryes, two Ounces; Gin∣ger, Cinamon, Nutmegs and Saffron, of each one Ounce, being all beaten, digest them in Spirit of Wine, alchoolizated, three pints, in a Vessel close stopt, and in
a warm place, to wit, in Horse-dung, or Balneo Martae; at fourteen days end distil in Balneo Mariae; and then add to the foeces, a pint of new Spirit of Wine; and digest again in an hot place. At eight days end separate the ting'd Spirit by inclinati∣on; and exhale the Tincture with a very gentle Fire, until it be converted into a mellagenous substance. Add this to the first distillation; burn the foeces to ashes; and extract a Salt with water of Mug∣wort; which you shall join to the afore∣said Elixir, together with an Ounce of Tincture of Tin. It works alter a heaven∣ly manner in diseases of the Womb; and all diseases that draw their origine from the Womb. The dose is from half a Drachm to a Drachm, in proper Liquor; and may be administred during several days, according as necessity requires.
CHAP. XLVII. His Antiepileptical Extract. TAke of the Extract of an humane cra∣nium, made according to Art, half an Ounce; Extract of Box, the root and seed of Peony, Oak-wood, Flowers of Lilly of the Vally, and Flowers of Line-tree of each two Drachms; of the mucilage of an Harts-horn of one year old, three Drachms; of true Oriental Bezoar Stone, true Unicorns-horn, true Elks-hoof, of each one Drachm; of the Extract of wal∣lows and Magpies, before they fly out of their nests, Peacocks-dung, of each one Drachm and an half; of our Narcotic Vitriol, Salt of Silver, Abar, of each two Drachms, Magistery of Pearls, Co∣rals and Saphirs, of odoriferous slowers of Sweet-root, the true Balsam of Peru of each half a Drachm; of our sixt Dia∣phoretic of Antimony, half an Ounce; of our Universal Tinure of Antimony with Gold, three Drachms; mix them and
make a compound whereof you shall give either in Pills, or proper Liquor, from half a Scruple to half a Drachm; for a dose, for fifteen days, in the morning in the wain of the moon. With this have many Epileptics been wholly freed, though I gave it to some for months together, more or less; and though it be laborious and costly, yet it challenges a place amongst the most pow∣erful. Used after the same manner, 'tis very good against all Megrims, Palsies, Apoplexies, and capital diseases proceeding from a cold distemper. CHAP. XLVIII. His Polycrest, or Tincture of many uses. TAke of the roots of Angelica, Car∣line, white Dittany, Bistort, Tor∣mentil, of each three Drachms; Swal∣low-wort, Gentian, Rhapontic, Scorzo∣nera, true Acorus, of each half an Ounce, of the leaves of Wormewood, Southern∣wood,
ground Ivy, of each half an hand∣ful; of the slowers of Rosemary, Centau∣ry the less, Clary, Betony, Pome-citrons of each one pugil, of Cinamon, Nutmegs, Cloves, of each one Drachm, Myrrh, Mastic, Aloes-Succotrine, of each two Scruples, red Coral prepar'd, Harts-horn, Mother of Pearl prepar'd, of each one Drachm and an half; Saffron one Scruple, Assa dulcis, Spikenard, of each one Drachm, Peels of Citron and Pome-citrons, of each one Ounce and an half; of all the sorts of Sanders, of each half an Ounce; beat all these, and infuse them in a glassen Vessel well stopt, in nine pints of choice alcooliza∣ted Spirit of Wine, to digest for fifteen days; then seperate your Tincture by decantation, and add thereto the Salt made of the foeces according to Art; this Tin∣cture excels in many Virtues; as your Elixir vitae; it recreats the vital Spirits; and expels from them all venemos Va∣pors; 'tis given in all malignant diseases, in time of the Plague, and against all Poisons, from a Scruple to a Drachm.
CHAP. LI. His greater Elixir of life. TAke of the juice of Baum eight pounds, generous Wine four pounds, shavings of crude Harts-horn three pounds; Uni∣corns-horn Bole-Armeny, of each half a pound; three Vipers the skins taken of, without their heads, tails or intrals, and distil them through an Alymbic well tinn'd; which hath a great refrigeratory; but let the fragments of the Harts-horn and Unicorns-horn be put in the neck of the Alymbic that they may receive all the sume. After you have distill'd add new juice and Wine to the distillings again; and always new Harts-horn, and three Vipers, as abovesaid, do this operation nine times; to every time adding fresh juice, and new Wine. And changing your Vessel according to the capacity; the last time let all things be added to the aforesaid Polycrest Tincture, and let them be digested in Horse-dung, or in a warm
Balneo Mariae for a month in capable glaz'd Vessels, well clos'd: Then distil to dryness, extracting, not only from all the foeces, but also from the shavings of the horns, and earths, a Salt according to Art; which being mixt with the distillation, you shall circulate for two months. This Elixir, although disticult, yet 'tis not very chargeable; but I never sound a more pretious one, among the many that I have used: for it operates more cor∣dially then that of the most Serene grand Duke of Tuscanie's. It may be given in all diseases wherever the heart and viscera have need of help; and to resist poyson and pu∣trefaction, &c. Its dose is from half a Drachm to two Drachms; neither hath it the smell of Aqua vitae, but a most grateful and sweet one.
CHAP. L. His Tincture of Vipers. TAke twenty Vipers, their skins pul'd off and imbibe them in Spirit of Salt; and then add white Dittany of Crete, Tormentil, Bistort, Swallow-wort, Scor∣zonera, of each one Ounces; as much generous White-wine as will serve to im∣bibe them, which must overtop them two singers bredth; and digest in Balneo Ma∣riae, or Hose-dng; at eight days end boil them in the same glaz'd Vessel for two hours in B. M. and strain them hard: Burn the dried foeces and extract a Salt from them; what remains is to be twice purify'd with the white of an Egg, and to be put into a warm B. M. again for three days; with moderate heat; for in this time it will be red like Blood. This is Cordial and Alexipharmic; pro∣fitable for Hectical, Phthysical, Hydro∣pical, Cachectical, putrid and malignant Fevers, and in time of the Pest; and many
use it for a preservative, for they affirm it clears the Blood; the dose is from a Scruple to half a Drachm. CHAP. XL. His Antinephritic Extrall. TAke Firr-wood rasp'd and its bark one pound, Nephritic-wood half a pound; seven Ounces of the inward bark of Filerds, Saxifrage and Pimpernel, Peli∣tory of the wall, Pupture-wort, of each one handful; iquiris, Rest-harrow. Bur∣dock, and ovage roots, of each one Ounce and an hal; ripe Juniper-berryes, Persian Almonds, Cherry stone kernels, of each three Onces: of the seeds of Ca∣rots, Percely, impernel, Onions, Netles, Broom, of each half an Ounce; beat and brise them all; then take of the juice of Rupture-wort, ground Ivy, Pellitory, Onions, itrons, Redishes, of each one pound; generous Wine three pints; and with all the aforesaid materials, put it into
a capable glaz'd Vessel, well stopt in Bal∣neo for eight days; then press them strong∣ly, and clarify them with the white of an Egg, and strain them, and exhale by an Al in B. M. until they become in form of a liquid Extract. Then you shall add these things following; Magistery of Crabs-eyes, gg-shells, Mother of Pearl, mountain Christal; of each one Drachm and an half; volatile Salt of Beans, Pellitory, Ambar, Urine, of each one Drachm, mix them and keep them for use. This is a very great Remedy against all kinds of Stones, Gravel and the like; and excels others in extinguishing pains of the Reins: The dose is from half a Drachm to a Drachm either in Pills, or proper Li∣quors.
CHAP. LII. His Antifebrile. TAke of China root, bark of Tamarisk, and Ash, of each one Ounce; leaves of Germander, Celandine, Pimpernel, the lesser Turnsoil of each a handful; distill'd water of the juice of Turnsoil, and from the juice of tender tops of Ash leaves of each three pounds; Spirit of Vitriol stibi∣ated two Drachms; being all beaten, in∣fuse them in the aforesaid waters, in a Glass Vessel well stopt, in B. M. at twelve days end extract all the moisture by strong expression; and make a Salt of the dry'd and burnt foeces; make an Extract of the Liquor by the heat of a Balneum, accord∣ing to Art; then take of this Extract two Ounces, Extract of Rhubarb, Sena, of hedge Hysop, of each half an Ounce; Magistery of Mechoacan, and Jalap of each one Drachm; of Salt of the abovesaid foeces, Salt of the lesser Centaury, Gen∣tian, and Worme-wood vitriolated, of vi∣triol
of Mars, of each one Drachm; Magi∣stery of long small Snails-shells of the Lake, half an Ounce; Magistery of Tartar solu∣tive, two Drachms; all these you must ferment for twelve days; and this is given in all kinds of Fevers, as well intermitting as continual. It stays the Vapors of Fe∣vers, and purges pleasantly; and is one of the most perfect that can be given; and besides it hath never harm'd any one; the dose is from half a Drachm to a Drachm and an half. CHAP. LIII. His stibiated Spirit of Vitriol, which en∣ters into his Aqua Catholica and Antife∣brile Extract. TAke Spirit of Vitriol rectify'd one Ounce, Hyacynthine Glass of Anti∣mony, half an Ounce; digest them in a warm place for a month, and your Spirit will be ting'd into a Golden color; strain it and reserve it for use This Spirit, with
other purging Medicines, from twelve to twenty drops, works pleasantly, and with∣out Vomit, and corrects their heat. CHAP. LIV. His purging Magistery of Tartar. THis is describ'd by many, but they put not that Trust in it which they ought; for Physitians don't mind the way of composition, which is this which follows. Take Salt of Tartar made of the Oil of the said Tartar, one part, the strongest distill'd Vinegar, two parts; mix them to∣gether: after they begin to ferment with an inward murmuring, distil to a dryness; then add new Vinegar, and the aforesaid sub∣limation begining again, let them be dulcily∣ed: er the Vinegar puts off the Salt with its ; and the Salt throws off the Vine∣gar with its Acrimony; then distil again, and this peration you must perform ten ; until the Vinegar reassumes its ; and you must always distil
to the fixing of the Tartar. To the fix'd matter of the tenth operation add distill'd and rectify'd Aqua vitae, made of the seces of Wine; and it will suddenly be ting'd into a red color; then strain the Tincture; and pour on Aqua vita again; till it will tinge no more; then filtrate and distil again to dri∣ness; what remains six'd, will be dissolv'd into an Oily liquor by the Air; which is then solutive Magistery of Tartar. Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THis dissolves gross and tenaceous hu∣mors, in the Veins; but 'tis a certain and necessary remedy in all vitious and long Fevers; yea my Master Riverius, at the end of acute and contumacious Fevers, to dissolve the reliques of the humors and the ferment, purg'd his Patients by degrees, after this manner. Recipe, of Maiden-hair-Water or the like, proper for the peccant humor, six Ounces; Sena two Scruples, Cinamon, Rhubarb, of each one Scruple; stibiated or common Spirit of Vitriol three drops; these he infus'd for a night; and strain'd
them in the morning, and adding fifteen or twenty drops of the said Magistery, he gave four or five times, more or less, as need required; to some every day, to others every other day; to some a less, to others a greater dose; to some in lieu of Rhubarb he gave Mechoacan, or Jalap; to some he gave an Ounce of Roses solutive; and after this manner bodies were freed from infection; and Fevers from becom∣ing erratic. I have us'd and use this me∣thod, as also many Physitians of my ac∣quaintance, have got great Praise thereby. CHAP. LV. His Febrifuge. TAke slowers of Antimony thrice subli∣med with Sal-Armoniac, and dulcify'd; very clear Hyacinthine Glass of Antimo∣ny, of each half an Ounce; Aqua fortis made with Nitre, and Alum, four Oun∣ces; precipitate the said Antimony in Water, and again take Mercury revivify'd
from Cinabar, six Ounces; and, with Aqua fortis made with Nitre, Vitriol and Alum precipitate, till all become precipitated. Then take Gold of Venetian or Hungary Chehiens fil'd, to one Ounce, and dissolve it Aqua Regia, and put the three menstroums with the materials into a Retort well luted; distil by degrees to dryness; gather the Spirit in a Recipient well stopt, and pour the distill'd into a Retort; distil again, twelve times after the same manner, al∣ways upon Caput Mortuum. The last time, break the Retort, and wash the Powder five times with Cordial Waters; and be∣ing dry'd put it into a quart of Aqua vitae rectify'd, and distil again in a new Retort, well luted, cohobating six times upon the Mass; then separate the Aqua vitae, and put the Mass of Calx into a strong Cruci∣ble well luted in a circulatory Fire, for three hours: Then take away, and kindle the Aqua vitae upon them. This Febrifuge is compos'd of three Her∣cules with our Master, the forth Champion the destroyer of quartane Agues, as may appear from inumerable experiments from his, and my observations: The dose
is from six Grains to twenty with Resin of Scammony, or Scammony prepar'd with Sulphur, from twelve Grains to fifteen, according to the strength of the Patient. Many have searched for this; but not by true and legitimate operations, but this is the only sincere one. CHAP. LVI. Very good Salts, which he used in pertinaceous and Autumnal Fevers, and to disselve He∣terogeneous humors. TAke Salt of Gentian, of Centaury the less; Celandine, Worme-wood, Car∣duus Benedictus, Self-heal, of Vitriol of Mars, slower of Sal-Armoniae, of each one Ounce; water of Agrimony, or such like, as much as will suffice to dissolve the aforesaid Salts, and make a xivinm; decoct with a gentle Fire, until there arise a skin a top; and put it in a cold and molst place, and they will be crystalliz'd.
Virtues, Ʋses and Doses. THese consume obstructions and viti∣tious intermitting Fevers; proceed∣ing from impurities, as quartanes, &c. the dose is from one Scruple to half a Drachm, and a Drachm in Broth; or some proper Liquor: They are given to some two hours before the sit; covering the Sick that they may sweat. My Master gave a Salt made of Alum and Tartar, which he highly extoll'd, but I never us'd it; 'tis this; Take Cream of Tartar and Alum, of each equal parts, as much Cardus Water distill'd, as will dissolve them; and let them be re∣duc'd by a gentle Fire into a form where∣by they may be christalliv'd, in a moist and cold place. Of this he gave from one Scruple to half a Drachm, in proper Li∣quors. I also often give Vitriolated Salt of Worme-wood, or others; to wit, take Salt, and put it to Spirit of Vitriol, till there be a subbullition, which done eva∣porate,
and it will be the less pungent; and apter to deobstruct, and cooler; of Vitriolated Tartar many write, and 'tis given by Physitians. In like manner any of these Salts are join'd with Steel; if you take two parts of Salt, which you would chalibeat, and one of Vitriol of Mars, and dissolve with some appropriat distill'd water, you may then condense into a Salt, with a gentle Fire, which will truly be chaly beated. After the same manner they are made with Vi∣triol of Venus, with Salt of Luna, with Salt of Tin; and the like. CHAP. LVII. His Famous Antiscorbutic Salt. TAke of the white and searsed ashes of Ash-tree, Juniper, Box, Lignum san∣ctum, crisp Mint, Germander, Agrimony, Centaury, Liver-wort, Cetrach, Harts tongue; Fumitory, Elder-budds, Water∣cresses, Capars, Tamarisc, Broom, St. John-wort;
Sea-Porcelane, sprigs of Vine, of each equal parts; of which with water of Water-cresses, make a Salt according to Art. Then take of this Salt two Ounces, and add two Drachms of Vitriol of Mars, Salt of Tartar aluminated half a Drachm; slowers of Sal-Armoniac thrice sublim'd, two Drachms; twenty leaves of Gold; Common Spirit of Salt, as much as will suffice to imbibe, so that it overtop half a singers bredth; let the Spirit with the a∣foresaid materials be dryed, and make a Mass, and 'tis called Riverius's Antiscor∣butic; which is very exquisite in Hypo∣chondriacs and Cachectics, &c. for it expells all impurities of the attribilious humors, and mundisies the Veins; the dose is from half a Drachm to one Drachm; in proper Liquor.
CHAP. LVIII. His Extract of Lignum sanctum, for the Lues Venerea. THis differs from others because I use the Extract, and menstruum, which is sudorisie; after this manner. Take Lignum s  rasp'd, with  Bark, Salsaparilla, Cinamon, of each  Ounces, Sassafras two Ounces; generos Wine six quarts; digest them in a Vessel well opt; after two days distil, and ex∣tract a quart of the Spirit; which put by it self; the other Wine exhale by B. M. till half be wasted; then strain, and siltre, and exhale again by Balneum, until it be of the consistence of Hony; and a litle harder. To every Ounce of this extract add two Drachms of Common Antimony diaphoretic, and half a Drachm of Orien∣tal Bezoar; make Pills, of which give one in a morning from one Scruple, to half a Drachm, in half an Ounce of the Aqua vitae spoken of before; and let the Patient
be well covered; and in thirty days, more or less, they shall be freed from all evil quality of the aforesaid disease; as I have often experienc'd, of this composition. CHAP. LIX. His potable Turpentine for Gonorrheas. TAke four Ounces of clear Terebinthine, and put it into a marble Mortar, with two yelks of Eggs, and mix them with a oden pestle, and they will be converted into a Liquor; adding a pint of water of Agrimony, mix them till it be wholly dissolv'd. Then put it into a Glass Phiol, in B. M. for a night, and early in the morning strain it through a broun Paper, or a linnen Cloth. Then add a pound or more of fine Sugar, with as much juice of imons as will suffice for a gratefullness; and of this, you shall give one Ounce or an Ounce and an half, in the morning, to them that cannot take Pills.
CHAP. LX. His Water against old Gonorrheas. TAke Lignum sanctum, Mastie-wood, the bark of Firr, of each four Ounces; beat them and infuse them in four quarts of generous Wine; add Dittany and Oris roots, of each three Ounces; a handful of dry'd Mint: An handful and half of Vervene; Seeds of Agnus Castus, Rue, Letuce, of each three Ounces; well bruis'd; clear Terebinthine one pound; mix them and put them into a Glass cu∣curbit for twenty four hours in a warm place, then distil by B. M. and of this give two or three spoonfuls; in the morn∣ing for some days.
CHAP. LXI. His potion against Gonorrheas and Ʋlcers of the Reins and Bladder. TAke of the herb Prickmadam, two hand∣fuls of the roots of Confound, Tor∣mentil; Ladies Mantle, Solomon's-Seal, Knotgrass, Plantan, of each one Ounce and an half; Seeds of Quinces, Agnus Castus, Bue, Plantan, Roses, of each one Ounce; juice of Limons one pound; Sanguis, Draconis, Crocus martis astringent, of each one Ounce; water of Mallow flowers three pints; macerate them for two days; then boil with a gentle Fire; and give two spoon∣ful in the morning four hours before meat. CHAP. LXII. Concerning Extracts. IN my Master's Pharmacopea many O∣perations seem to differ from these, but reduc'd to the form describ'd by him; and
are of greater value then those that Quer∣citan and others use; not that Qurcitan and so many others wanted the best; but facile inventis addere; he kept an other a more profitable form; as appears from these Arcan's describ'd by me, which are amplify'd by the addition of Operations and Virtues. My manner of Extracting Purges from Vegetables, according to the aforesaid di∣scipline, is thus; I Extract the juice from those Plants, which I had gather'd before at proper times; and I digest in B. and clary very well; then I distil by sepe∣rating the Spirit; and I coagulate what rests into the  of an Extract. After∣wards I beat the press'd Plant, and the fresh on not press'd, and put them into a sit Vessel to distil by descent; such a Ves∣sel as they use to make Oils of Woods, having plac'd your Vessel to receive the Oil with a  Fire; which must always e more vehemently augmented all the humy long extracted, I con∣vert the rest being burnt, into white ash∣es; but lest the ashes should not be calcin'd enough, I caline them again. Of this
with the Water or Spirit that is first sepa∣rated, I make a Lixivium; and by siltra∣tion a Salt; according to use: The Oil ex∣tracted by descent, which exhales an ig∣neous odor, I mix with the aforesaid Salt; and a litle clear and pure Salt of Tartar be∣ing added to the same, I digest in a warm place; then I distil, always cohobating the Spirit upon the foeces, till the Oil by the strength of the Salt be destitute of an Empyreuma. Then I reduce it into the form of Hony. I then add this mella∣ginous substance to the extract first made; whereby all the Spirits of the Extract and faculties of the Salt, are united by this means. This is the perfectest process that can be found out for Extractions. In using 'tis given according to strength of the Compound, or the Rules of the Pharma∣copoeas, yea rather in a less quantity, because 'tis more Effectual. In Herbs, Druggs, or dry Roots, or of litle juice, all the strength is extracted with their proper menstruum; and the mat∣ter is so accommodated as before, by des∣cent, and an Oil express'd. Then is made a Salt; which is added to the Oil; and
being often rectify'd, as 'tis said, is join'd to the Extract; but truely those kind of Extracts are to be kept in Glass Vessels stopt. All sorts of Extracts, may be made af∣ter this manner as well Alexipharmic as Specific; though they were compounded of divers things; but I shall not stay to describe the way; for one that is vers'd in the Art, needs no Instruction. It is to be noted that your Extracts of Vulnerary Herbs, as Aristolochia, St. John's-wort, Comfry, Star-wort, Veronica, Sa∣nicle, ground Ivy, &c. may not only be us'd inwardly; but also outwardly in form of Liniments, apply'd to wounds by it self, or with other like; they work wonderful effects; for they strengthen and contract, and defend the part from corruption; and bring it soon to a cicatrice; o also those Plants which are abstersive and Ulcerative will the better perform their operations. Concerning Oil of Vegetables for Spa∣gyric use, many spagric Volums treat thereof, but I esteem this to be the best way. Dry the Plant that you will have Oil from, and extrat an Oil by descent,
as aforesaid; then make a Salt of the ashes; which join to the Oil; then with a litle lx vrva rectify the Oil; for the calx dissipates the igneous odor, if you will pour it on, often times as the custom is. Put it then into a Glass Vessel to the Sun; mixing the flowers, or leaves of the pro∣per vegetable for infusion; or of another, if you intend a compound; for it re-as∣sumes a greateful odor, and according to the Virtues of the Plants, it receives those degrees of increase; which are an hun∣dred fold: And it is used after the same manner to the aforementioned concerns, by my first Master Letter John Faber, as well inwardly as outwardly. CHAP. LXIII. His Chymical Bazilicon. TAke distill'd Oil of Myrrh, Mastich, Frankincense, of each an Ounce; Oil of Turpentine, Philosophoru, of wax distill'd, of each one Ounce; three yelks
of Eggs, mix them well and use them; for you will find wonders. CHAP. LXIV. His Balsam of Sulphur. TAke one Ounce of flower of Brim∣stone, three Ounces of Oil of Tur∣pentine, Oil of Violets three Ounces, mix them and let them boil in a glaz'd Vessel, stiring them with a wooden Spathula, till they become very red; then take them from the Fire, and add Oil of wax, yelks of Eggs, of each half an Ounce; mix them and use it in all cancrous Ulcers, in all Wounds, Convulsions, and bruised and prick'd Nerves.
CHAP. LXV. His mumiated Balsam. TAke of the Extract of round Birth∣wort, the lesser Centaury, of each half an Ounce; of the Extract of St. John's-wort, the greater Comfry, of each one Ounce; Venice Turpentine, and white Hony, of each four Ounces, Myrrh an Ounce and a half; true Mummy three Ounces, Crocus martis, four Ounces; mix all these and infuse them in a glazen Ves∣sel, with three quarts of rectify'd Aqua vitae; and digest for a month; dayly stir∣ing the ingredients that the Spirit of Wine may extract more easily the Tincture of the things; then separate the Tincture di∣ligently by inclination; and distil in Bal∣neo, till there remain, as it were of the consistence of Hony in the Alembie, which is your Balsam; which you may use to agglutinate all sorts of Wounds; the distil∣led Spirit is also of wonderful Virtue.
CHAP. LXVI. His Apolectic Baisam. TAke of the Essence, or distill'd Oil of Spike, Sage, Rosemary, Juniper, of each one Drachm; Rue, Marjoram, of each half a Drachm; Cinamon, Cloves, of each one Scruple; of Ambar one Drachm and an half; of the Extract of Berjoin, Storax calamit. Of the white oriental Balsam of each two Drachms; of Balsam of Peru, liquid oriental Basam, of each half an Ounce, prest Oil of Nut∣megs, three Ounces; Ambar-greese of each one Drachm and an half; sweet Musk, two Drachms; mix them and stir them over a very gentle Fire, until they be united; 'tis a very complete remedy for Epileptics and Apoplecties; it expells Vertigoes; defends the body from conta∣gious corruptions of the Air; recreates the Heart and all the vital and animal fun∣ctions: 'Tis to be used by anointing the coronal futures, and the Tempills, and by smelling to it.
CHAP. LXVII. His Spirit of Sulphur, to consolidate Ʋl∣cers of the Lungs, and to cure their cor∣rosions. TAke of the acid Spirit of Sulphur re∣ctify'd, and imbibe thereon, by de∣grees, two or three pounds of filings of Steel; and it will buble of it self; and from thence become as it were of a saline qua∣lity. Then put all into a Retort well lu∣ted; and distil according to Art, and ex∣tract a Spirit; Imbibe in this again the Caput mortuum, and cohobate five times; in a new Retort every time; to the dul∣cify'd Spirit add Magistery of Pearls, Rue, Oriental Balsam, and of Benjoin, of each one Ounce and an half; mix them, and it will be wonderful in the aforesaid disea∣ses; for all Pthysics; whereof many have been cur'd by me with this. Note. Your Magistery of Pearls is made by distilling, your Unions first in Oil of Sulphur, and then being well dulcify'd
with Cordial waters; afterwards exalting them with Spirit of Wine. Your Magistery of Benjoin and Oriental Balsam, are to be dissolv'd in Spirit of Wine, and preci∣pitated with Cordial waters, and then sub∣limated after the same manner as Sulphur: That which is sublimated is purer, and best for the Lungs. CHAP. LXVIII. His Balsam of a Red-Dog. KILL a Red-Dog, and throwing a∣way the Intralls, not the Fat, cut its flesh and skin all into pieces, and break his bones small; boil them all in a fit glaz'd Vessel, with a sufficient quantity of Oil and Wine; adding, Bears, Goose, Hens, Bad∣gers, Foxes, Cats, Horses, Asses grease, of each one Ounce; four pounds of Earth∣worms wash'd in Wine, roots of dwarf Elder, ground Ivy, of each three hand∣fuls Sage, Spike, Rosemary, Worme-wood, Southern-wood; leaves of Cypress, bark
of Ivy and Elm, Savin, of each one hand∣ful: boil all these, until the flesh be con∣sum'd, then press them and put them into a strong Retort well luted, with six Oun∣ces of Ivy-Gum; and two pounds of the Wormes aforesaid, ground Ivy six hand∣fuls, twenty live Frogs, and digest it in a warm place three days; then distil and extract all the Oil, which you shall keep, for 'tis an Anodine, and consolidates the Nerves, especially in articular diseases. CHAP. LXIX. Rulandus's Emplaster of Sulphur. TAke three Ounces of our Oil of Sulphur, three Drachms of Colo∣phony, half an Ounce of wax, of Myrrh the weight of all; the Wax, Colophony and Oil being mixt, sprinkle in the Myrrh by degrees, being very finely powdered, and boil them with a gentle Fire; always stirring them with a Spathula, until they be very well mixt; after a quarter of an
hour take them from the Fire, and let them cooll by degrees: And so you have a most excellent and infallible Emplaster, for the curing of all kinds of Wounds and Ulcers; as his Experiments in his Centu∣rys describe, which you may always safely trust; and in his ninety fourth cure, he says, that there is a divine, wonderful, and quick Virtue in this Emplaster, of soften∣ing, suppurating, breaking, absterging and agglutinating, as by long experience hath been try'd. CHAP. LXX. His Toad Oil. TAke four live Toads, far from any water, and put them into a glaz'd pot well stop'd to purge; then take two pounds of common Oil, wherein boil Sage, Sowthistle, roots of Oris and Gentian of each one handful; and puting one of the Toads therein, set it over a Fire in an o∣pen place, in a glaz'd Vessel cover'd, but
take heed of the smoak; when the first is dry put in another live Toad; and that dry'd, a third, and so a fourth; and when 'tis boild rain the Oil; and this is very hot, and very good against all cold pains, against Scabs, Morphew and Dropsie; use it hot. CHAP. LXXI. His Anti-Apoplectic Balsam. TAke rectify'd Oil of Ambar, oleum petroleum Philosophorum, Rosemary, Sage, Spike, being all distill'd) of each half a Ounce; Oil of Nutmegs, by ex∣pression, two Ounces; Extract of Castor, Oil of Box. Camphar, of each one Drachm: Balsam of Peru, Occidental Opobalsam; Civet, of the Extract of Benjoin, of each half an Ounce; Musk, Ambar-grise, of each one Scruple, mix them all, and with a moderate heat make a Balsam; which is prevalent against diseases of the head by anointing the hinder part thereof, the
noistrills, and pulse; against the Apo∣plexy, Epilepsy, &c. Collic pains and Hysteric passions are remov'd by anointing the navil. CHAP. LXXII. His Pills against pestilential diseases. TAke wash'd Aloes, Saffron, Myrrh, of each half an Ounce, Oriental and Occidental Balsam, of each half a Drachm, six bones of Harts-heart: Uni∣corns-horn, Emeralds, Oriental Bezoar, Pearls, and Coral prepar'd, wood of Aloes, of each ten Grains, Ambar-grise five Grains; our Tincture of Ambar-grise; of Ambar, and Magistry of Tartar, of each, as much as will form a Mass of Pills, where take one of half a Drachm weight; going to bed, twice a week. These mundify the Blood, corroborate the Head and Stomach, help pains of the Heart, comfort all the Spirits, revive youth and retard old age.
CHAP. LXXIII. His Water breaking the Stone. TAke green Wallnuts in the month of May, bruise them and distil them thrice, always cohobating with the distill'd water upon the fresh Nuts bruis'd; then extract a Salt; from the residue of the Caput mortunm; and 'twill be very powerful. CHAP. IXXIV. His Balsam against Asthm's TAke Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of Terebinthine, and his Oil of Sul∣phur dulcify'd of each one Ounce; slow∣ers of Sweet root, one Ounce and an half; two pounds of Oil of Sugar made with Spirit of Wine; mix them and make a Balsam; this is very profitable in all di∣seases of the brest, and lungs, the dose is from half a spoonful to a spoonful.
CHAP. LXXV. His Pills against all impurities of the blood and humors. TAke Extract of black Ellebore, with its sixt alt, half an Ounce, of our Ca∣lomelanos two Drachms; leaves of parti∣col'd Gold half a Drachm; Magistery of Pearls one Drachm; mix them and make a Mass of Pills, the dose is from a Scruple to half a Drachm; If without Calonclanos, it may be given for four or five months twice in a week; but you will mundify the contumacy of the Lues venerea with the said Calomclanos.
CHAP. LXXVI. His  against . TAke of Persian bitter Almonds four pounds. Cypress Tere inthine three pounds, beat them and mix them well; then take three Ounces of express'd Oil of Nutmegs, alsam o  one Ounce and an half, Oil of Cloves half an Ounce; mix and distil them according to Art; and cohobate thrice upon the Capat ∣tuum; then add Spirit of Vitriol rosated three Drachms; mix them and circulate for fifteen days; for 'tis very profitable against Colic pains; the ose is from half a Scruple to one; in proper Liquors.
CHAP. LXXVII. His Opthalmic water. TAke the juice of Celandine, Eyebright, Verbene of each half a pound; juice of River-Crabs eight Ounces; Aloes Suc∣cotrine half an Ounce; crude Tutia, one Ounce; Crocus metallorum, one Ounce and an half; digest them with a gentle Fire for twenty four hours, then distil, and add to the distillation three Drachms of glass of Antimony; and boil them over a gentle Fire for an hour, then strain and keep it; for it is excellent against dimness of sight, Cataracts, &c.
CHAP. LXXVIII. His Arcanuum against the biting of a mad Dog. TAke the Liver of a mad Dog reduc'd to the form of a Magistery, and the Magistery of River-Crabs, of each one Ounce. Tincture of Oriental Saffron, Gentian, Castor, Myrrh, of each two Drachms; of the Quintessence of Vitriol, of common Salt, Antimony, Silver, of each half a Drachm; of St. John's-wort-leaves, Betony, Yarrow, the lesser Cen∣taury, Mug-wort, Mint, Wormwood, Plantane, Polypody of the Oak, the lesser Sage, Verven, Garden Rue, of each one pugil, of Moon-wort, three pugils, dry and powder them and with a sussicient quantity of Gum draganth dissolv'd in Scorzonera-water, and with the abovesaid liquors make Troches, and give a Drachm for a dose for four days, with some Cordial water, and you will see wonders.
CHAP. LXXIX. His Tincture against Dysenteries. TAke of Hares-blood dry'd half a pound rectify'd Spirit of Wine one pound and an half; digest them in B. M. for three days; then extract a Tincture according to Art; and coagulate to the consistence of Hony; the dose is from half a Scruple to one, with some Emulsion of Sorel-seed. CHAP. LXXX. His Balsam of Mastich. TAke of the best Mastich, as much as you will, dissolve it in Spirit of Tere∣binthine, over a warm Fire in B. M. then separate the menstruum from the dissolv'd body, and then you have a Balsam for all diseases of the body; for outwardly apply'd
to the mouth of the stomach; it stays vomiting; and inwardly you give five drops in Broth, or Wine. CHAP. LXXXI. His Arcanum against twisting of the guts and vomiting. TAke of the aethereal Oil, or Quintes∣sence of Terebinthine, six Ounces, a Drachm and an half of Balsam of Peru, fine Mastich six Drachms, mix and distil them, then cohobate thrice; and use it in Malago Wine; or Broth of red Cicers, or any other specific liquor, the dose is from six Grains to twelve; your oleum ethereum is good for the same, after the same man∣ner.
CHAP. LXXXII. His Spirit of fixt Nitre tartariz'd. TAke of Spirit of Nitre rectify'd one pound, put it into a glass Cucurbit, with a large mouth open; and pour on drop by drop and by degrees as much Oil of Tartar by deliquium; which will raise a froth; and so long pour on, as long as you shall observe no more froth to arise: The Tartar'd Nitre, will fall to the bottom; then decant, and dulcisy with Rose-water; 'tis given in long diseases with appropriat decoctions, from six drops to eight, in water of Crabs, or Ants, and 'tis Anti∣frebrisic. CHAP. LXXXIII. His Emplaster against a Pleurisic. TAke three Ounces of Line-seed, Oni∣ons and new Soap, of each one Ounce and an half; bruise and mix them;
then put them over the Fire in a Frying-pan; mixing them till they be incorpora∣ted, spread these upon a stupe, and apply it to the Pleuretic part, and opposite pain; and you will see marvelous effects against this disease. CHAP. LXXXIV. His Emplaster for broken and disjointed bones. THE bone being reduc'd into its place, take three Ounces of chimney-soot one Ounce of Frankincense, four Ounces of Wheat-flower; as many whites of Eggs as will suffice to bring the materials in∣to a sit consistence; then apply it to the part with fit splinters and bandages; and remove it not till it fall off by help of na∣ture; this may seem improper to some; but truely, I never saw any equal or excel this in such like cases; you may after∣wards use Cerats of Oxycroceum, and such like; as occasion requires.
CHAP. LXXXV. His Antipleuretic Oil. TAke four pound of common Salt in the month of May, wherein put humane pleurae, two pounds, three pounds of Cam∣momil and white Lilly flowers; for two months place them in the Sun: Then press them with a press; and weigh the Oil; to which add a Pompion in Summer, the weight of the Oil, cutting away the mar∣row and peel; and cutting it into pieces make it boil, until the Oil hath extracted all the moisture from the Pompion; to wit, its small pieces become dry. Then you shall have in a readiness twelve pieces of new Iron red hot, every one weighing half a pound, and put them in singly into the Oil; and so twice made hot; you shall twice extinguish in the Oil; and then it will be complete. 'Twill prove won∣derful if the pain'd parts be anointed there∣with twice or thrice in a day.
CHAP. LXXXVI. His Ʋterine Powder. TAke Rupture-wort one handful, Bay∣berryes husk'd, Parsnip-seeds, of each one Ounce; Rue and Agnus Castus and Peony-seeds, grains of Paradise, of each half an Ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Cas∣sia lignea, Mace, Cinamon, Cloves, of each three Drachms; Feculae Briontae, sal Jovis, of each two Drachms; mix them and beat them into very sine powder, whereof you shall give from half a Drachm to a Drachm, in Broths, Wine, Conserves, or the like, against all diseases of the Womb. We cannot make publick all our Arca∣naes, at this time, in this small treatise; but if it shall please God to grant us two more years of life and health; I have many observations worth noting to pub∣lish; and a Laboratory, wherein shall be expounded most of the mysteries of Art; and cautions for errors, wherein Artists
offend. And although there are at this day many new Volums publish'd in the Italian and Latin, &c. languages concern∣ing the spagyric Art which have been collected from the Ancients; yet I also shall write of the same, but more co∣rectly. The Chymical Cup so often nominated in his Observations, and so commonly ad∣ministred to all people, is not prepar'd, as some have supposed of the Vulgar Regulus of Antimony; true 'tis prepar'd from a Regulus, but of the third degree; which dissers much from the Vulgar; although many also use this not without prejudice to the takers. I have been at Rome, Na∣ples, Venice, and other Cities of Italy, and other Provinces, and I sound many that would tell you they knew the secret of the Chymical Cup: But all prepar'd it of the common Regulus, or of that com∣pounded with Mars; I discours'd many of them to penetrate, whether any of them knew how to separate the Arsenical parts which the Regulus conteines, from the same; but they judg'd, when the Anti∣mony is fired with Tartar and Nitre, that
those Sulphurous foeces, which are then separated, contain'd all the Impurity of the Antimony; and that was the Cup of the ANcients; But truely they are far from the truth; for they will find none of the classic and rational Authors using the sim∣ple Regulus, to make the Cup of, but for o∣ther preparations. The Vulgar Regulus hath not as yet left its crudity; and made after the manner aforesaid 'tis call'd Regulus of the first degree; whereof many compo∣sitions may be made; as the Starry Regulus, with filings of Iron; as the noble Ambar; which is a Regulus; and so with Gold, Silver, Tin, Iron; the other Regulus is made into an Ambar, with Iron, Brass, Lead, Tin, Mercury and the Regulus; but how to attain to the top of the third degree, hic labor, hoc opus; and then it may be granted for perfect; as Clossius and Bazil Valentine celebrate it for the King of pur∣ging medicaments; for it only draws so much out of the body as is hurtful to it; mundifies the Blood; and corroborates the uncorrupted humors, as is observ'd in those that have taken thereof; who al∣though they vomit, yet are they not at
all weakned thereby; and in this it dif∣fers from other medicines. I celebrate these its praises, because I write in the Latin lan∣guage; and so they will not penetrate the ears of the ignorant; for I am not to put weapons into the hands of Children. I tell you truely for twenty two years past no other purging medicine hath entred my body, than Wine of the Chymical Cup; whereof I drink three or four times in a year; and, by the grace of God am per∣plex'd with no infirmity at this time; and if you see it often mention'd in the Obser∣vations, this is because it hath gain'd very great honor. Here truely I must not neglect by any means to discover the frauds of some, which they are not a fraid to perpetrate; many of which make these Cups, and di∣stribute them: Yet those cannot attain to fly higher than the first degree; but that their operation may appear very beautiful and shining; they add marchesite of crude Silver, which doth not only augment the beauty, but also multiplies the Regulas to the half; and so being greedy of Gold, they cheat you with a Regulus, and sell
you Cups, as of the third degree: But these are most diligently to be avoided; for the Marchesite in lieu of mundisying the Blood, corrodes it; and though it quickly provoks bodies to vomit, it brings no small damages thereto. The way to detect so great cheats, shall be more plain∣ly laid down in our Chirurgery. The composition of our Chymical Cup, of our astringent Balsam, and astringent Pills, is not in this treatise, but I reserve it for another; and therein also shall be explicated the more hidden and noble Arcana; and these shall be the most celebrated ones of my most beloved Ma∣ster; and the three aforesaid shall be the Captains: For I hope therein to lay down rare secrets of nature; to wit, I have ac∣curately investigated, with Virtuoso's and other curious Persons the natural virtues of minerals, semiminerals, stones, animals and vegetables, which work by an occult power; for those are your true specifies; from which I have seen wonders; neither could I know any thing therefrom. In this second work I shall put to light public Observations belonging to Chirur∣gery;
which have and shall happen until this work shall come forth; and chiefly those in the Kingdom of Naples, and at Venice where I now live; although I am not altogether fixt in this City: I am of∣ten at the consults of most excellent Phy∣sitians; as the most excellent, Bernardus Florius, Bracchus, Bravus, Cornelius and others; who have often been pleased to accept of my advice. I have made experience in this City of my astringent Balsam in the house of the most illustrious, and most excellent the Count d' Avaux, Seigniour de Longueville Embassador of the Christian King to this most serene Republic: To wit, the jugu∣lar veins were cut in a porket by his Chi∣rurgion; the greater Artery in the thigh of a Dog; and the Artery nigh the jugu∣lar, was cut by me in another Dog; and all were heal'd only with our astringent Balsam; to the admiration of all people, in nine days time. And one Surdus a Bar∣ar in St. Vaw's was cur'd of a broken ar∣ery with this our Balsam: And a Pilot, whom a Surgion cutting of an Ulcer in his irile parts, cut an Artery, which could not
be closs'd with Fire; the flux of Blood was staid by our Balsam; and he reco∣ver'd. Another experiment was made in the house of the most Illustrious and most Ex∣cellent the Marquess of Fuentes, the Spa∣nish Embassador, in a Dog; who had an Artery cut eight days before, and was cur'd. The most Excellent Pica, cut a vein quite asunder, and while he call'd to the standers by to see the Dog, during the space, almost all its Blood slowed out of its body before the Balsam was apply'd, then the Balsam being apply'd that litle Blood that remain'd flowed no longer; but the Dog died the day following of an inani∣tion with a terrible convulsion; by reason he could take no nourishment. FINIS.
Books Sold by Daniel Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple-Barr. A Prospect of Government in Europe, and Civil Policy, shewing the Anti∣quity, Power, Decay of Parliaments, with other Historical and Political Observations relating thereunto, by T. R. 8vo price 1. The Third Edition of the ife, Bloody Reign, and Death of Queen MART. In this Edition is added an Account of the most Remarkable Judgments of God on many of the Persecutors. Price Bound 1s. Seldens Janus Anglorum. The Mystery and Method of his Maje∣sties Happy Restauration laid open to pub∣lick View. By John Price Doctor of Di∣vinity, one of the late Duke of Albermarle's Chaplains, and Privy to all the Secret pas∣sages and particulars of that Glorious Re∣volution. 8vo. Price 1s. 6d. The Imposter Exposed, in a Dissection of a Villanous Libel (here Printed at large) Entituled a Letter to a Person of Honour concerning the Black-Box. 8vo. Price 1s. 6d. A compendious History of the two
late Plots, against the Establisht Govern∣ment. Price 1s. Poems and ettns on several occasions . Price 1s. Councellor. The fourth tion. Pleasant Companion. The second i∣tion. Price . , on the ament. PLAYS. The , or the Mistake: Writ∣ten by Mrs. . Remulus and , on the Sabine War. The City Heiress, or Sir Thomas Treatall. The Roundheads, or the Good Old Cause. Three Farces Acted before the King and Court at . The Merry Milk Maids of Islington, or the Rambling Gallants defeated. Love lost in the Dark, or the Drunken Coupple. The Politick Whore, or the Conceited Cuckhold.
