R584 11893765 50517
REASONS SHEWING The Absolute Necessity OF Large & speedy Supplys, Proportionable to the Present Occasion. HUMBLY OFFERED To the Consideration OF Both Houses of PARLIAMENT. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1691.
REASONS SHEWING The Absolute Necessity of Large and Speedy Supplys, &c. WE have chosen our Representatives in Parliament, and they being at the Spring-head of Business, must needs have a true Prospect of Affairs, and need not to be told what is necessary to support the Government, in the present Exigency. Therefore we ought to be concluded by their determinations, and altogether acquiess in what shall be Enacted by this August Assembly, for the peace and security of the Nation: And this we have reason to do with more cheerfulness, since we have all the reason in the world to hope, that there will be the same Harmony betwixt His Majesty and His Parliament this Sessions, which we saw the last; wherein all seemed to conspire in the same pub∣lick design of promoting the true interest, safety, and prosperity of the Kingdom. We seem now to have a King and Parliament after the old, honest, hearty way of Q. Elizabeths days; and may they, their Successors and Posterity continue so, as long as Government shall have a Being in the world: And may all their former interrupting Contests, turn to kindly Emulations, who shall be most instrumental in promoting the General Good, and compleating our Settlement. When there are two considerable Parties in a Government, 'tis not to be expected, but that they who chance to be uppermost, will endea∣vour to keep the other down; and these will as naturally be strugling to get aloft, to the perplexing, and embroyling the publick Affairs. But though this be the usual Practice, yet, our late experience may convince us that it is not always so; for we have lately had a Sessions, of about three Months continuance; wherein all things went on so
smoothly, and with such an universal Concurrence, as if the Conten∣tion only had been who should most effectually carry on the publick Concerns of raising Money, &c. Both the one Party and the other, shewed great Moderation, Wis∣dom and Generosity, in waving their particular interests as Parties, and unanimously joyning to promote the General Good of the whole: And let the Men of Politicks, and deep Conjecture▪ assign what Causes they please, for all this calm and quiet, I must needs think, that we ought to make the most favourable Construction of such passages as produce the most kindly Effects. 'Tis true, we never were more closely pressed, and as it were, driven together, by Storms and Tempests from abroad; that so we may be united at home, and every one of us put to his helping hand, to pump and ply the Oars, to prevent a fatal Shipwrack. But shall we unite and pack together only to Winter stormy Wea∣ther? Is there no means to be used, no expedient to be found, to prolong this happy Union, beyond the Time of publick danger, and to six it so firmly, that it may descend to our Posterity? Certainly such a Legacy would be more lastingly beneficial to them, than all the Patrimony which we can bequeath unto them. Many Attempts have been made to compose our Differences, but have all proved ineffectual. Time and Rest alone have cured some diseases, which would have been inexorable to the best Methodical Prescriptions that could have been administred: And how happy should we be, if our disease of Division, would yeild to such an easie Remedy? Let us hope the best: May not this Truce be a propitious Fore∣runner of an happy Peace? This Cessation has given Men time to think cooly, and deliberately to represent to themselves the Benefits and Ad∣vantages of Peace and Unity; and the fatal Consequences of the con∣trary, especially at this Critical Conjuncture. But whither am I going? I doubt the Reader will begin to despair, that I shall ever well perform my intended Voyage, seeing me wander so far out of my way, at the first setting out. I could not let slip such a favourable Oportunity, without dropping this Votum pro Pace, this small Peace-offering by the way; and I hope it will have no ill Influence upon that which follows; but rather give it a more favou∣rable reception with all the Lovers of Peace. For, if we were united amongst our selves, we might upon much better Grounds, hope, that all our Councils would be guided, and directed, so as to aim and center in the general Good of the Community; and then also Taxes would be both more seasonably given, and more faithfully applyed, as also Punishments more impartially inflicted upon Offenders.
But to return from this large digression, if it shall be accounted so — There are great Murmurings, and variety of Descants, and Cen∣sures upon the mismanagement of Affairs; and who can reasonably expect, that upon any great Revolutions of Government, publick Matters should be managed so titely, and with so much fidelity, as in more fix'd and settled Times. All men think it good Husbandry (though its Policy may have a very ill effect) to make Hay whilst the Sun shines, lest Clouds should gather, and some sudden storms should arise, and disappoint their designs. To search out such self∣ish Intreaguers, and animadvert upon them, is all that human Pru∣dence can do. But all the difficulty lies in the proof; which yet People will not consider. And supposing, that this Method of search∣ing out, and punishing Delinquents, be not taken, ought we there∣fore to be sullen, and backward in raising and paying Taxes? Must we sit still, and let the ENEMY take all, because we suspect that some part of our Supplies will be misemployed, and em∣bezled? If there be no other Remedy, we ought, in Levying Taxes, to make Allowance, and reckon upon so much to be lost, and give so much the more upon that Account. But now the Government hav∣ing gained more strength and firmness, we have, 'tis hoped, no need to make this Provision; but may be reasonably well assured, that what we shall give, will be managed with all prudence and fidelity. But to obstruct, and refuse the raising of Taxes, proportionable to the Occasion, at this Time, upon supposition, that some part may be misemploy'd, and diverted from its right Use, is just as if the Hus∣bandman should deny to sow his Land, because a Company of Rooks and Vermin, it's likely, will come (notwithstanding all his Care to prevent them) and devour his Corn. At this rate he would have no Harvest, but be ruin'd and starv'd for his folly: But such Ac∣cidents do not discourage his Husbandry; but he sows plentifully, in hopes to reap the Fruits of his Labour and Charge: And so may we, if we will pursue the same Method in the publick Husbandry. Our last Years Seed hath produced a plentiful Harvest in Ireland this Summer, which may give us great Encouragement to go on: The vigorous and quick Reduction of that Kingdom, this Campaign (to the everlasting Honour of the General, and the Officers, and to the Praise of the Souldiery) is a sufficient Return for our Ex∣pences in that Service: Nay, it may stand for an ample Recom∣pence for the whole Tax of the last Year. 'Tis true, 'twas a great Sum, but 'tis to be considered, that we have purchased no less, than a whole Kingdom with it. This Conquest seems to be an Earnest
of Success in greater Atchievements abroad, as well as it doth en∣able and capacitate us to attempt them the next Campaign. And since the Levying Taxes is so indispensibly necessary for com∣pleating the Work so fairly advanced; instead of murmuring and complaining against our Senate for imposing them, we should be most sensibly affected, with all the grateful Resentments, that were ever due to the most provident and vigilant Patriots. And since (which is to be considered) we pay the largest share of them, we ought to be convinc'd that the Exigency of our Affairs doth require them. In the Two Late Reigns, I will not deny but that we had Cause to be uneasie under Taxes; since they were either so vainly and profusely squandered away, or so imploy'd, as if they had been Con∣tributions imposed, and exacted by our Enemies, rather than Supplies for the necessary Support of the Government. But now we have a King we can trust, (and 'tis not long since we could say so) who both can, and will manage to the best Advan∣tage; and is as indefatigably intent in executing the Office of a just, wise, and valiant Prince, (and performs it as well) as the best, and worthiest of his Predecessors. A Prince who despises no Danger to do us good; who hath freely exposed himself to the greatest Diffi∣culties for our sakes, and is at any time ready to venture his Person for our Benefit, and the Honour of the Kingdom. With what Cares and perplexed Thoughts, was His Majesty exer∣cised? To how many dangers was His Royal Person exposed? With what amazing Difficulties did he Contest in the happy Enterprize of our Deliverance; (Difficulties, had he not been conducted out of them by the Hand of Divine Providence)? And with what Constancy, and vigorous Resolution; with what Intensness of Mind, and Fateigue of Body, hath His Majesty ever since persevered steddy, and immoveably constant to his first Generous Undertaking? This is no strained Panegyrick, but only a short, and transient Glance at bare Matter of Fact, which His Majesties greatest Enemies cannot but acknowledge. And we be backward, and slow in Contributing the best Assistance we can give to a Prince, who incessantly labours, both in Mind and Body to procure our Ease and Safety. If we would be frugal and thrifty Husbands of our Money, 'tis evi∣dent, The way is, to be quick and liberal in giving, for some time, that we may Not be always giving, (or at least that it may lessen by degrees) like as Physitians advise to take Blood freely, to stanch such Haemorrhagies of frequent Bleeding, as otherwise would endan∣ger the Life of the Patient.
In the beginning of the Late Reign, the stream of Common Talk run, that every Body was willing to have parted with one half, to have secur'd the other, and still our Religion had been in danger, or at best, had been depress'd and insulted over. And shall we not be more willing now, to Contribute a Share, competent for the occasion, since 'tis hop'd it will fall so many de∣grees below that. And sure we shall thereby (in human probabi∣lity) secure the entire Enjoyment of our Religion, Liberties, and Properties. To give plentifully now, is like searching a Wound to the bot∣tom; which, though it may cause some extraordinary pain and smart for the present, yet is the most effectual Course, in order to a speedy and perfect Cure; whereas to give sparingly, will but pal∣liate, and only make an Anodine: The Pain will again return with more acuteness. If we sow sparingly we shall reap sparingly, is a Text, which I think, may without offence be applyed to the present Case: But if we sow bountifully, I dare promise, (without pretending to the Gift of Prophecy) that we shall, by GOD's Assistance, reap a plentiful Harvest. If any of us should have a Suit at Law of great Moment, and lose the Cause by pinching the Lawyers, and Attorneys, in their Fees, it would be no great sign of prudent Management: And is it not a much greater imprudence, and much more lyable to Cen∣sure, to starve the Publick Cause, on which we do All together, with all that we have, depend? To spend to get, is such an obvious piece of Prudence, that no body scarce will neglect: Gentlemen, and those of the higher Rank, if they have a probable Prospect of Advancement into Offices and Places, they will spare no reasonable Cost, as well as no Pains, to accomplish their Design. The Trades-men too, will Caress, and treat his Customers high, when he hopes it will bring in a Return with good Encrease. And why shall not we, (for the same End and Design) spend freely upon the Publick; especially, since the omission thereof, is like to be so fatal to us. When People are parsimonious, inclining to an extream; if they have a hopeful Posterity to reap the Fruits of their Cares, this is accounted an Error of the Right Hand, a pardonable Fault, yet 'tis a Fault. But when People take the same Course, of hoarding up Trea∣sure, when they have only a Fool, or they don't know who to suc∣ceed: This is by the wisest of Men, rank'd amongst the most un∣accountable Follies of Mankind.
But now further; if Persons shall be sparing of a small part of their great Substance, (for I'me now speaking to the rich Hoarders, best able to pay) when, in a manner, the inevitable Consequence, of such saving, will be, to expose all the rest, to the Mercy of a cruel and implacable Enemy: This is a much higher Extream of Imprudence still; for in the Instances above (besides other Reasons) the Parties would have the possession (I can't say enjoy them) for their own time, of what they had so anxiously scrap'd together. But now in our Case, the Enemy would make 'em put off their Shooes before they're going to Bed, and strip them of all, whilst alive, and treat them like Slaves, and account them Fools for their pains, for being so Penny-wise, in sparing of that which would have secured the rest. What would the Wise Man have said to all this? This sure, is (as one may say) such an extravagant piece of Thrift, that he never thought the most penurious Miser, could e're have been guilty of, and therefore left us no Reprimand nor Censure in the Case: Like as some Law givers have omitted making Laws, against such enormous Vices, as they could not think, would be perpetrated by the wickedest and vilest of Mankind▪ We have a good Government in time of Peace, let's mend the Defects it's lyable to in time of War, by good management, and quick dispatch. We see, to our damage, how early our Enemy is in his Preparations: We are ready enough to follow the French in their Vanities. But if we must be their Imitators, let us not only imitate them in their airy and lighter Part, but also in their solid and manag∣ing Part too, that by our raising sufficient Supplies, and good Con∣duct, we may prosecute the War to Effect. There are few of the Nobility, and higher Rank, who have not unnecessarily spent six or seven times as much, as they have paid in Taxes, (and in as short a time too) without any Concern or Regret; and there are few of the Degrees under them, who have not some time or other had Losses by Sea, trusting Commodities, or lending to insolvent Persons, to the Value above-mentioned; and we find by experience, that after some little time, they bear those Losses well enough, and rub on, and go about their Business, as cheerfully as before. Why then shan't we bear a Payment to the Publick (for Loss I can't call it) of like Value, with a more easie, and less anxious Concern; since thereby we hope to secure the rest, and to relieve and rescue our Allies and Friends, from the great Oppressions they lye under.
But perhaps, this dry way of reasoning, may grow somewhat tedious; to move the Affections and Reason together, may be more prevailing with some: Suppose then, we should hear the raging Sea had entred our Neighbours Countries round, and how it bluster'd and swell'd, and came rowling along, and threatned a general Deluge; if instead of raising a speedy and plentiful Sum to repair the Banks, to put a Check to its fury and rage, we should hang back and be slow, and each one wrangle to pay his due share, and drill out the time, until the merciless Waves come floating along and end the Debate, by tumbling us all in the Deluge; Should we not in all this be more unadvis'd, than were the Jewish Zealots of old? For they (notwithstanding their heats and their feuds) would joyn and unite to repulse an Ene∣my, when at their Gates: And shall we be wrangling and de∣bating about paying our shares, for repairing the Breeches i'th' Walls, while the Enemy enters the City by storm, and put all to the Sword? This Allusion, I think, is not very wide and foreign from our present Circumstances; for, tho' we shan't be all destroy'd, and put to the Sword upon a Conquest, yet, when we shall have lost our Liberties and Properties, and which ought to be dearer to us, the free Exercise of our Religion too, how insipid, nay rather, how burthensome would such a Life be to any true En∣glish Spirit, or good Christian. — Would an English Life be worth valuing or saving, which can't breath in a free Air, but be surrounded with the Checks, Insults and Cruelties of a Con∣quering Tyrant? But Instances and Examples, which lye fresh in Peoples Me∣mories, especially such as they have been most sensibly affected with of late, may make stronger and more lively Impressions, than the best cold Reasoning, or the most hitting Allusions that can be invented. Let us instance then, in the late Irish Alarum, with what a Panick Fear was the whole Nation struck at that time, and what Lamenting, what Skreeking and Crying was there heard in our Streets (with the Women): And though the Men shew'd all the Bravery of the Old English Courage, in mustering together to encounter the Danger; yet, as Men of Common Sense, who would not be Fool-hardy, considering the Tumult and Confu∣sion, and with what horror and dread the Danger was repre∣sented, it can't well be suppos'd, but that they too were in such a Consternation, as that they would have been willing to have
made a good large Offering, towards the appeasing those sup∣pos'd, fierce and ravenous Daemons, if that would have sav'd the rest, and also their, and their Wives and Childrens Lives. May we not reasonably suppose, every body would have giv∣en a Year or two's Revenue, and so proportionable for Perso∣nal Estates: And herein I dare appeal to every Man's pri∣vate Thoughts, if they would but set themselves to represent the danger, just as it appear'd to them then, if they would not have been willing, to have made such an Offering as above, and thought they had compounded at an easie Rate. Our danger now, (for ought I know) is as great as it was suppos'd to be then, tho' not all out so near at hand; for tho' a Conqueror may not take away our Lives (as above-said) yet such a Life as we should then have, would but be a lingring Death. Why then should we not be as willing to give as good a Price towards procuring our Safety now, as then. Therefore let's every one set apart two Years Revenue (and so proportionably, according to every ones ability) for the Pub∣lick Service; besides what's already past, let's account our selves Debtors to the Publick, so much. 'Tis an honest and just debt, and ought first to be paid: And those who have no Mind to be in debt, may reckon upon't as an Adventure sent out, it may perhaps, make a Return, with good Encrease; at worst, there is good reason to hope, it will ensure the rest of their stock: All this would arise to a very great Summ, and not much hurt the wealthiest and richest sort, from whom ought to arise the greatest part of the Taxes. But if all this Proposal be a strain too high, yet at least, let it be like bending a crooked Tree to an extream, to make it grow strait: Let these Considerations however, prevail and influence us, to contribute such Proportions, as our Senate shall from time to time judge necessary or expedient, without repin∣ing or desponding, perhaps much less than is propos'd may serve. I confess, (if it were practical) it seems greatly necessary to lighten the Burthen of those, on whom Taxes lye most hea∣vy, and place it on those who are better able to bear it, by which means, such would hold out much longer, and the great and rich ones too; and this should be done in time, before it be too late: For the higher and lower Rank of Men, depend each upon the other. It may be said of them, as of Old Peo∣ple much about an Age, that if one dye, the other will quake for fear. When the meaner sort are sinking, they will go near
to catch hold of the Great Ones, and pluck them along: It ought always to be remembred, that a Kitching is as useful (if not more) than a Parlour. The Romans (a wise People) in their way of Taxing, had a re∣gard to the Circumstances of persons, and to their Usefulness in the Common-wealth; and the Reason and Nature of the thing re∣quires it: For, may not a single man, of an Hundred Pound per Annum clear Estate, afford to pay, double or treble, to him that hath but an estate of like Value, who hath a Wife and five or six Children to maintain and provide for: There are great variety of Instances of this Nature; to enumerate them, and propose fit Remedies, would make up a Treatise of its self; and a very useful one too it might be, well worth the pains of any such person, as shall have a Talent sufficient for the undertaking it: For, it would require great Prudence and Consideration. Methinks, to Tax people without any Consideration of their particular Abilities, seems as unreasonable, as 'tis amongst the Good Fellows, to sorce all Constitutions to drink alike; whereas some may be Sick, others Drunk, while others again may scarce be Toucht, nor so much as Merry. So in our Case, by this unequal-equal-way of Taxing every ones Estate alike; some may be Weak∣ned, others almost Undone, while others (viz. the Rich Ones) are not Hurt, nor can scarce miss what they have Payd, (though it will reach 'em at last, if not prevented, by the means aforesaid.) In common times, when Taxes are Low and Easie, the necessity of an exact Scrutiny, in distinguishing the Abilities of Persons, is not so pressing: But now, that the Country - Trade sinks so Low, and Taxes rise so High, sure all proper Methods ought to be taken in laying of Taxes, so as they may continue Longest, and be least Grievous. And if, at this Juncture, we contrive and manage to the best Advantage, and most Ease, to all Parties concern'd, and use all probable means; (since Providence so signally favour'd His Maje∣sties Undertaking, in delivering us out of our Distress; and since so many of our Neighbours labour under the like Pressures, and depend upon our Aid and Assistance); Why may we not yet hope, that the same Divine Hand will lead His Majesty on, to En∣terprizes of larger extent, and more diffusive in their happy Con∣sequences? Why may we not yet hope, that the Almighty hath Deputed his Majesty, as his Vice-gerent, to put a Check to the Ra∣vages and Devastations of the great Disturber of Europe, and to force him to Reason?
Many a seeming Topping Tradesman, who bears it off at a great Rate, and who so much Talkt on, on the Change, as they; yet such of them must needs have many a sad Heart-ake, and fetch many a deep Sigh in private, who knowing the weakness of their Condition, to be such, that in a very little time, they must slink off the Stage, and vanish like an Apparition, or shrink into some low and mean station; Why may it not fare thus with this great Trafficker that makes such a Busle in the World? His Forreign, and chief Trade of buying Towns, fails him already: We have heard no Returns in that kind of a long time; and his Home-Trade must needs run very Low, since his highly-injured Neighbours refuses all Commerce with him, for the Product of his own Country ever since he endeavour'd to Monopolize and Engross. These are probable circumstances to Conjecture, that things are worse with him than most people suppose. If We and the Confe∣derates hold together but for some time, Why may not this Glo∣rious Sun with the Pompous Motto, (Nec pluribus Impar) be only like the splendor of the Sun when its going to set? But as in Hawking, if the Cramp take the Hawk (a disease they are incident to) it so hinders her Flight, she will scarce be a Match for a Crow: So, if we be too sparing in our Supplies, we shall also be cramp'd in our Sinews of War; We shall not be able to pounce and plume our Enemy, as we ought; at that rate indeed the lurching Rook may well be too hard for the generous Hawk. And plume our Enemy we must, if ever we hope to live peaceably under our Vines; for, if We and the Confederates should make a Peace with Him, and permit him to Enjoy his New Conquests, this would in effect shew him the way how to gain all the Rest: This Tame way of yeilding, would but make us Tenants at Will of our yet Fee-simple Estate. We should then have no more Solace and Satisfaction, amidst the plentiful product of our Country, than Damocles had, when plac'd at the plentiful well-spread Table of Dyonisius, with the point of a Sword hanging over his bare Head, only by one single Hair. It may perhaps be Noted as a Defect, That I have not at large Vindicated the Lawfulness and Necessity of procuring and bringing on the Revolution, and carrying on this Expensive War; for they may say, if People were well Convinc'd of that, it might be a pow∣erful Argument to contribute more heartily and freely. I have occasionally touch'd upon the Head (as to the necessity of it) but that Part, and also the Lawfulness of it, has been so oft, and so well treated of (by some) that scarce any thing can be
said, but what would prove Repetition, which I endeavour to avoid. It may also be Noted as an Omission, that in a Discourse of this Nature, I have not shew'd and set forth particularly, how and wherein People may retrench their Expences, that so they may hold out the longer in paying Taxes: As for Instance, People ought to deny themselves such Foreign Commodities, where such Trade's a Loss and Damage to the Publick in general, tho' some Particular Persons may be enrich'd thereby; and many useful In∣stances may be given upon this Subject of Entrenchment; but such Hints may, perhaps; come seasonable enough from another hand, more fit for the undertaking, tho' some short ones shall be given in the following Discourse. First Objection: Some may say, That this earnest pressing for Taxes, when the Nation's so low already (as if People were a∣ble in paying, to keep pace with Fancy and Imagination) shews, as if the Author had been kept up in some Retirement, or dropt lately out of the Clouds, and were altogether unacquainted with, or at least, insensible of the State and Condition of our Nation: If he had found some Mine of Treasure to pay Sessment with, he had done something to the purpose. I Answer: There's scarce any discernable Retrenchment in the City, in such superfluous foreign Commodities, which Trade's a Loss in general, both to the Publick, in wearing Ornaments, and things spent in House-keeping; People treat and spend, much as they us'd to do: Nor is there any great difference in the Coun∣try, so that paying Taxes, pinches not so much as People com∣plains. And there's a Mine of Treasure sufficient for the Occa∣sion, its wants but digging out, and producing into publick Use: What a vast Quantity of useless Plate is there in the Kingdom, (as to publick Use) which might be employ'd, if it were come to that. What great heaps of Treasure are there in many particular Per∣sons Hands, who are best able to pay, and yet pay least of any sort of People whatever? Perhaps, he that's worth 5000 l. pays after the rate of 500 l. (and well too, as things are manag'd); in that Sum, there is 22 l. 10 s. Loss to the Publick, at the usual way of Taxing Money: And is there no Remedy, but that our Laws must still be Cob-webs, to catch the lesser Flies, and the greater slip through. It seems also reasonable, that those of larger Estates in Lands, and great Money'd-Men, and those who have great Stocks in Trade, should be tax'd much deeper in the Pound rate, and for their Mo∣ney and Stocks, than those of smaller substances; for the former
have a Latitude and Scope to retrench, in such superfluous things, as above; they may also retrench in the Number of their Servants. A Person of Quality, that uses to keep ten Servants, may be serv'd with five, as to all things necessary; and People ought to deny themselves in some things, when the good of the Publick so re∣quires: If such Persons, and those of the richer sort, did so ge∣nerally, it would be no diminution to their esteem and credit; there wants but some Examples to brake the Ice: And such dis∣carded Servants, would be much more useful in the Common-Wealth, by falling to some sort of Work or Manusacture, or be∣ing Souldiers; for we want People. But now as to those of small Estate in Land, little Money, and small Trade, they ought not to bear pace, in paying with the other; for they have no room to retrench in, for such keep only necessa∣ry Servants, for their Husbandry and Trades, and spend little or nothing in the unnecessary things above mention'd, and have but a bare Livelihood with their utmost Industry; whereas most of the other sort, may pay as above, without retrenching: And if those of smaller substance should retrench, it must be in Meat and Drink, and their ordinary Cloathing: Now all those are the Product of our own Country; therefore to abridge themselves of such, (if they could) would be a damage to the Publick, in as much, as it would cause a less Consumption of our own Countries Commo∣dities, and so cause the Prices to sink lower still. Second Objection: Some may say, what needs all this industri∣ous Arguing, to convince People of that which is so plain and e∣vident, to every common Understanding, viz. that raising Taxes is necessary at this Juncture. I Answer: Though this be of no great Use to the wise, and prudent, yet perhaps, there may be some reasonable hints to the second and third, if not to the first rate of Readers: And yet I doubt, those who pretend to be most convinc'd, are most in fault, in shuffling the Burden from themselves, when it comes to the practical Part: If People could pay Taxes in Theory, by Talk and Discourse, then no body would be slow and hang back. Third Object. The Author all along goes upon a Supposition, that paying a part will secure the rest: Now if he would pro∣pose any good security for that, then People would be willing to pay the Revenue (as he hints) of a Year or two, and so pro∣portionably for Personal Estates: But as the Case is, notwith∣standing what he has said, we may pay as much as he proposes, and yet be forc'd to pay as much more, and not then come to a thorow Settlement.
I Answer: If this be the general sense of most able and intelli∣gent Persons (as I believe it is) that they would be willing to pay Two years Revenue; and so proportionably for other Estates; then it seems they can pay so much: And why should People so heavily complain? For if they can, they ought: Because, as it's said, in the Opinion of all the most Wise and Prudent, that's the most proba∣ble way; nay, that (with good management) is the only Expedient to secure the rest of our Estates, Liberties, Properties, and Religion it self: And if so, then whether the Effect and Success be certain, or contingent; yet the same Means and Method are to be pursued in hope of obtaining the end Design'd. Why then should we be so slow and backward in raising Taxes, and paying our due Proporti∣on, since it is but what the dictates and convictions of our Rea∣son prompts us to, if we would but Hearken to them? Fourth Objection: All this busie promotion of great Taxes, and putting Power into the Hands of Kings, is but to serve a Turn, and is a ready Way to throw us into a Relapse (before Recover'd) into the old Tory-Way of lavishing and squandring away our Liberties and Properties. Answer: That we may preserve our Religion, Liberties and Properties entire, were the only Reason that induced me to be so Earnest in perswading People into a Willingness to pay Taxes (though Great at present). Besides, we have all the Assurance we can reasonably Desire, that His Majesty is so far from stretching and enlarging the Pre∣rogative beyond its legal Limits; that His Wisdom and Justice is such, that He would throw back with the highest Resentment, all such Overplus Prerogative, as Officious and Designing Flatte∣rers may heap upon Him. To Conclude All: If we would continue our Long enjoy'd dar∣ling Liberties and Properties: If we would leave to our Poste∣rities (on whom we usually Dote with so much tenderness and passion) a peaceable Possession of that, which many of us so In∣dustriously have labour'd for. And above all, If we would preserve the full exercise and enjoyment of that Religion, we in Appearance so Zealously Profess; and for which we have so earnestly Contended, We ought to take the most probable Methods, which (next to Imploring the Divine Aid, and Living HOLY Lives) are, to Contribute Freely for a Time; and manage Faithfully and Wisely what shall be so Con∣tributed. FINIS.
