R802 R14194 13336094 99096
THE RELATION Of an Assault made by French Papists, UPON A Minister of the French Church. In Newport-Street, near St. Mar∣tin's-Lane, June 11, 1682. ABout five Weeks agoe, the Wife of Monsieur de la Coste a French Tay∣lor, dwelling then at the upper end of Bow-Street in Covent Garden, lying upon her Death-Bed, sent for Mr. Du-Marest that he might com∣fort and pray with her before she departed; which the aforesaid Mini∣ster having accordingly done, and acquitted himself of the Functions of his Ministry, the Sick Person caused the Company to be desired to withdraw, for that she had something in particular to say to her Husband and the Minister; the Com∣pany being withdrawn, she desired her Husband to take care of a Daughter she had by a former Marriage, who lived in the House of the Widdow of one Reinbean, because that she was a Papist, and that she feared that after her Death she would Seduce her Daughter. The Husband promised to do what his Wife desired; the dying Person not content with the promise of her Husband, made the same request to the Minister, who assured her that he would acquit himself of his Duty, in that respect: The Sick Party dyed the day after, and the Father-in-Law sent immediately for the young Maid, Cloathed her very handsomely, and told her the last Will of her Mother; the young Maid made answer that she was born a Protestant, brought up as such, and that she should be very glad to be instructed in her Religion, that she might resist and pre∣vent falling into Errour. Her Father-in-Law finding her in that resolution, told her that it was requisite she should live in his House, to which she consented with a wil∣ling Heart. Some days after Widdow Reinbeau caused Mr. La Coste to be fetcht be∣fore a Justice of the Peace for detaining from her her Apprentice: He appeared there accordingly, and said that his Wifes Daughter was not an Apprentice, and that though she were so, he was not willing that she should be seduced, that he knew there was such a design; but the Justice without having regard to this, redelivered the young Maid into her pretended Mistresses hands. The Father-in-Law complain∣ed hereof to his Friends, and while they were contriving to remedy this business, the young Maid went to Mr. Jehu a Gold-Smith dwelling in the House of the De∣ceased, and weeping bitterly, desired him to use the means of having her instruct∣ed in her Religion, and of getting her out of the Hands of the Papists. He pro∣mised to use his endeavours for that purpose, and that he might perform his word, he went to Mr. Dumarest a Minister, and told him the business; who assured him of Contributing all that lay in his power to his Efforts; and they two together agreed, that on Sunday the Second of June, the young Maid should go to the Greek.
Church, and that she should be there examined. Accordingly she went thither to that intent, but the Minister being hastened to go to the Savoy Church, bid the young Maid follow him, that he would discourse her on the way, and that he would after that present her to the Consistory; which the young Maid agreeing to, fol∣lowed the Minister, but they were no sooner in Newport-Street, than that Widdow Reinbeau, a Niece of hers, three of her Nephews, a Vintner, and other Papists, stopped the Maid and Minister in the way; and the Widdow with an insolent tone asked the Minister why he talked to that Maid? The Minister asked her by what authority she asked him that Question? To which she said that this Maid was her Appren∣tice: The Minister told her that he was assured of the contrary, but that though she were so, he had a right to instruct her, and that it was only with that intent that he spoke to her, and that she followed him, that it was Sunday, and that after she had been Catechized, she should return unto her House, until it was known if she was under any obligation to her or not: Which after he had said, he bid the young Maid continue her way with him. The Widdow seeing that the young Maid followed, seized her with violence, swore that she should not go with the Minister, at the same time three of her Bullies surrounded the Minister, and af∣ter that he had told them that he was amazed they should commit such a violence in the Kings High-way on a Sunday, when the business was only the instruction of one of his Subjects, being in fear of the Roman Dagger, he went to a Justice of Peace called Sir John Reresby, to inform him of the whole matter; the Minister was no sooner gone than that Mr. Jehu being desirous to get near the young Maid and speak to the Widdow Reinbeau, this Woman without hearing him, fell upon him, tore his Perruke and Shoulder knot off, and she and her Myrmaidons began to cry out a French Papist. This piece of Malice had like to have cost the Protestant his life: For at the same time some of the Mobile who were crouded about them seiz∣ed him by the Throat; but the Populace being undeceived, and having understood the Popish trick let go the Protestant, which the Papists perceiving, they ran into a House hard by, swearing they would cause the French Protestant to be stabbed. After they were got into that House, they immediately contrived how to secure their Prey, for that purpose they sent for a Chair, and had her conveyed away. During that Interval Mr. Du-Marest the Minister having discoursed Sir John Reres∣by upon this business, this worthy Justice of the Peace, sent for a Constable, and gave him a Warrant, the Constable performed his Commission, brought the Wid∣dow and her Niece, but the other Papist prevented his seizing them by making their escape in the Crowd. The Justice of the Peace examined them concerning the Maid, they confessed that she was not an Apprentice, but a Maid they set to work, and to whom they gave twenty Shillings a year; upon this, and the Declaration which the young Maid made, he discharged her, and recommended the care of her to the Minister, and then proceeded to examine to the bottom the violent action which the Women had committed, and upon their Confession, and the Depositions of several Witnesses, he bound them to the Sessions. This conduct of the Papists would something startle me, if I did not daily hear of such-like Violences. But when I am assured that a certain papist called Maistre Jacques upon a dispute of Religion did so wound a Protestant that he is since dead of it: VVhen people of Honour assure me, that they hear Papists call the Illustrious Queen Eliz. a VVhore, and beat those who oppose them upon this Subject; when I hear that the Papists threat∣ned some years since, that they would set the Streets a flowing with Blood, when that I see people that are perverted every day, and who are taken from us by force, when I see that the Papists contemn the Kings Proclamations, that instead of with∣drawing according to his Pleasure to some distance from London, they crowd to that degree this City and its Suburbs, that one would say they Designed to make a Garrison of it; I do not wonder at this last insolence, and I apprehend much greater if care be not taken. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for B. Heath. 1682.
