R921 12953008 96010
A REMARKABLE PASSAGE, OR, A VVITTY DISCOVRSE between two Citizens and the Bishop of LINCOLNE, Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, before the Lords of the PARLIAMENT House. With the pleasant Passages in their Discourse worthy to be observed by the READER. LONDON: Printed in the yeer 1641.
A REMARKABLE PASSAGE, OR WITTY Discourse, between two Citizens and the Bishop of LINCOLNE. OVr Soveraigne Lord King Charles after his Royall entertainment by his most loving and faithfull Sub∣jects of this famous City of Lon∣don, by those grave Senators of the Citie, shewing their joyfulnesse by their obedi∣ence and dutie; and the meaner sort of peo∣ple rejoycing in their hearts, in hopes of a happy reformation, that would by his meanes be put forward, after they had con∣ducted his Majestie home to White Hall, where after many kinde congratulations, the Lord Maior left him with the rest of the
Citizens, and returned home to their seve∣rall habitations triumphing. And so leaving the perambulation, falling upon the cir∣cumstance and matter. His Maiestie after his safe and happie re∣turn went to the Parliament House, And viewing the Trained Band which tended there for the safeguard of that Honorable House, he fearing some casualties that might happen by it, discharged them, thinking they would be as safe as his Sacred Person. But upon their discharge, some godly Chri∣stians of honest Report, house keepers of reputation and good credit; the streames of their thoughts running upon some other obiect, went thither with some discontent∣ed feares, to shew their loving affections, with their lives and estates, as it did appear by their designes, but there being legions of spirits foming after the honour of the world, rather then the glory of God. There presently coming by the Bishop of Lincolne (A) by name, and spying these Christians there, he certified the Parliament, that there was a tumult gathered together,
of inhumane fellowes. There being at that time betweene both Houses some dis∣cord about Bishops, he certifying at that time that there was none but such there as could not abide the Divine Service. Vpon his Relation there was two of them called in before the House and examined, upon this Cogitation which came into the Bi∣shops braine. Whereupon after a while one was asked where he was at Church by the Honourable House, which being present with them there the Bishop of Lincolne; The parties answer was, That he was at Aldermanbury at Master Calamies. Where∣upon the Bishop asked him, If he were present all the while at the Divine Service; He made Answer, that he was there from the beginning to the ending. (which being as short an answer, as the matter used in that Congregation.) Then was the other Questioned, where he was at Church; His Answer was, That he was at Wool-Church. Then the Bishop demanded of him, whe∣ther he was at Divine Service or no; but his reply was agreeable to the others an∣swer,
being very wittily replyed, which was, from one end to the other, there be∣ing no Service read at all, being well knowne every where. This question of the Bishop being so fully answered, one of their Honours said, they were worthy to be recompenced for their paines; for their answer gave great content. Besides, their accuser the Bishop of Lin∣colne said, it was well done of them: where∣upon they were freed of their opposer (his aimes and ends) which being contrary to his expectation, and the rest of their Ho∣nours said, they were worthy of recom∣pence for their paines; for they had answe∣red all Objections that was put to them, and had cleered themselves. This being a pretty remarkable passage, and let it exhort Christians to be milde in their speeches; calling to minde an olde Proverbe, Ill words corrupts good manners; therefore, let all Christians pray for peace and happinesse, that the King our anointed may flourish over us in a Ioyfull and setled peace, both in this and his other two
Kingdomes, that He and his people may triumph; And the enemies of God, his Church, and People, may be confounded in their plots and intentions. And thus courteous Reader, I bid thee farewell. FINIS.
