S2857 12484409 62273
THE LIBERTINE: A TRAGEDY. Acted by His ROYAL HIGHNESS's Servants. Written by THO. SHADWELL. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor, in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1676.
Robert Harley of Bramton Castle in the County of Hereford Esqr.
To the most Illustrious Prince WILLIAM, DUKE, MARQUIS, and EARL OF NEWCASTLE, &c. May it please your Grace, THe Favours have been so many and so great, which your Grace's un∣wearied Bounty has conferred upon me, that I cannot omit this opor∣tunity of telling the World, how much I have been obliged, and by whom. My Gratitude will not suffer me to smother the favōurs in silence; nor the Pride they have rais'd me to, let me conceal, the Name of so Excellent a Patron. The honour of being favoured by the great Newcastle, is equal with any real Merit, I am sure infinitely above mine. Yet the encouragement I receive from your Grace, is the certain way to make
the World believe I have some desert, or to create in me the most favourable thoughts of my self. My Name may thus, when otherwise it would perish, live in after Ages, under the protection of your Grace's, which, is famous abroad, and will be Eterniz'd in this Nation, for your Wit beyond all Poets; Judgment and Prudence, before all Statesmen; Courage and Conduct, above all Generals; Constancy and Loyalty, beyond all Subjects; Virtue and Temperance, above all Philosophers; for skill in Weapons, and Horsemanship, and all other Arts befitting your Quality, excelling all Noblemen: And lastly, for those eminent Services in defence of your King and Countrey, with an Interest and Power much exceed∣ing all, and with Loyalty equalling any Nobleman. And indeed, the first was so great, that it might justly have made the greatest Prince afraid of it, had it not been so strongly secured by the latter. All these Heroick Qualities I admired, and worshipped at a distance, before I had the Honour to wait upon your Grace at your House. For so vast was your Bounty to me, as to find me out in my obscurity, and oblige me several years, before you saw me at Welbeck; where (when I arrived) I found a Respect so extremely above the mean∣ness of my Condition, that I still received it with blushes; having had nothing to recommend me, (but the Birth and Education, without the Fortune of a Gentleman) besides some Writings of mine, which your Grace was pleased to like. Then was soon added to my former Worship and Ad∣miration,
, and infinite Gratitude, and a Pride of being  by one, in whom I observ'd a Ma∣jesty equl with greatest Princes, yet Aability exceeding ordinary Gentlemen. A Greatness, that none e'r ap∣proached without Awe, or parted from without Satisfa∣ction. Then (by the great honour I had to be daily admitted into your, Grace's publick and private Conversation) I observed that admirable Experience and Judgment surmounting all the Old, and that vigorousness of Wit, and Smartness of Expression, exceeding all the Young, I ever knew; and not onely in sharp and apt Replies, the most excellent way of pursuing a Discourse; but (which is much more difficult) by giving easie and unforced oca∣sions, the most admirable way of begining one; and all this adapted to men of all Circumstances and Conditions. Your Grace being able to discourse with every man in his own way, which, as it shows you to be a most accurate Ob∣server of all mens tempers, so it shows your Excellency in all their Arts. But when I had the favour daily to be admitted to your Grace's more retired Conversation, when I alone enjoyed the honour, I must declare, I never spent my hours with that pleasure, or improvement; nor shall I ever enough acknowledge that, and the rest of the Ho∣nours done me by your Grace, as much above my Condition as my Merit.
And now, my Lord, after all this, imagine not I intend this small Present of a Play (though favoured here by those I most wish it should be) as any return; for all the Ser∣vices of my life cannot make a sufficient one. I onely lay hold on this occasion, to publish to the World your great Fa∣vours, and the grateful Acknowledgments of, My most Noble Lord,  Your Grace's Most obliged, humble, and obedient Servant, THO. SHADWELL.
PREFACE. THe story from which I took the hint of this Play, is famous all over Spain, Italy, and France: It was first put in∣to a Spanish Play (as I have been told) the Spaniards having a Tradi∣tion (which they believe) of such a vicious Spaniard, as is represented in this Play. From them the Italian Comedians took it, and from them the French took it, and four several French Plays were made upon the Story. The Character of the Libertine, and consequently those of his Friends, are borrow'd; but all the Plot, till the latter end of the Fourth Act, is new: And all the rest is very much varied from any thing which has been done upon the Subject. I hope the Readers will excuse the Irregularities of the Play, when they consider, that the Extravagance of the Subject forced me to it: And I had rather try new ways to please, than to write on in the same Road, as too many do. I hope that the severest Reader will not be offended at the representation of those Vices, on
which they will see a dreadful punishment inflicted. And I have been told by a worthy Gentleman, that many years agon (when first a Play, was made upon this Story in Italy) he has seen it acted there by the name of Atheisto Fulminato, in Churches, on Sundays, as a part of Devotion; and some, not of the least Judgment and Piety here, have thought it rather an useful Moral, than an incouragement to vice. I hve no reason to complain of the uccess of this Play, since it pleased those, whom, of all the world, I would please most. Nor was the Town unkind to it, for which reason I must applaud my good Fortune, to have pleased with so little pains: there being no Act in it, which cost me above five days writing; and the last two, (the Play-house having great occasion for a Play) were both written in four days, as several can testifie. And this I dare declare, notwithstanding the soul, course, and ill-manner'd censure passed upon them, (who write Plays in three, four, or sive weeks time) by a rough hobling Rhimer, in his Postscript to another Man's Play, which he spoil'd, and call'd, Love and Revenge; I having before publickly owned the writing two Plays in so short a time. He ought not to have measured any Man's Abilities, who writes for the Stage wih his own; for some may write that in three weeks, which he cannot in three years. But he is angry, that any man should write sense so easily, when he finds it so laborious a thing to write, even Fustian, that he is believed to have been three years drudging upon the
Conquest of China▪ But he ought not to be called a Poet, who cannot write ten times a better in three weeks. I cannot here pass by his sawcy Epistle to this Con∣quest, which (instead of expressions of just respect, due to the Bith and Merit of his Patron) is stuffed with railing agaist others. And first, he begins with the vanity of his Tribe. What Tribe that really is, it is not hard to ghess; but all the Poets will bear me witness it is not theirs, who are sufficiently satisfied, that he is no more a Poet than Servant to his Majesty, as he presumes to write himself; which I wonder he will do, since Pro∣tections are taken off: I know not what Place he is Sworn into in Extraordinary, but I am sure there is no such thing as Poet in Extraordinary. But I wonder (after all his railing) he will call these Poets his Brethren; if they were, me-thinks he might have more natural affection than to abuse his Brethren: but he might have spared that Title, for we can find no manner of Relation betwixt him and them; for they are all Gentlemen, that will not own him, or keep him company: and that, perhaps, is the cause which makes him so angry with them, to tax them, in his ill-manner'd Epistle, with Impudence, which he (hav∣ing a particular affection for his own vice) calls by the name of Frailty. Impudence indeed is a very pretty Frailty. But (what ever the Poets are guilty of) I wish he had as much of Poetry in him, as he has of that Frailty, for the good of the Duke's Theatre; they might then
have hopes of gaining as much by his good Sense, as as they have lost by his Fustian. Thus much I thought sit to say in vindication of the Poets, though, I think, he has not Authority enough (with men of sense) to fix any calmny upon the Tribe, as he calls it. For which reason I shall never trou∣ble my self to take notice of him hereater, since all men of Wit will think, that he can do the Poets no greater injury, than pretending to be one. Nor had I said so much in answer to his course railing, but to re∣prehend his Arrogance, and lead him to a little better knowledge of himself; nor does his base Language in his Postscript deserve a better Return.
PROLOGUE. OUr Author sent me hither for a Scout, To spy what bloudy Criticks were come out; Those Piccaroons in Wit, wh'infest this Road, And snap both Friend and Foe that come abroad. This savage Party crueller appears, Than in the Channel Ostend Privateers. You in this Road, or sink or plunder all, Remorsles as a Storm on us you fall: But as a Merchant, when by storms distress'd, Flings out his bulkey Goods to save the rest, Hoping a Calm may come, he keeps the best. In this black Tempest which o'r us impends, Near Rocks and Quick sands, and no Ports of Friends, Our Poet gives this over to your rage, The most irregular Play upon the Stage, As wild and as extravagant as th' Age. Now, angry men, to all your splenes give vent; When all your fury has on this been spent, Else-where you with much worse shall be content. The Poet has no hopes you'll be appeas'd, Who come on purpose but to be displeas'd. Such corrupt Judges should excepted be, Who can condemn before they hear or see. Ne'r were such bloudy Criticks yet in fashion; You damn by absolute Predestination. But why so many to run one man down? It were a mighty triumph when y'have done. Our scarcity of Plays you should not , When by foul   dsiroy the Game. Let him but have fair play, and he may then Write himself into favour once again. If after this your anger you'll reveal, To Caesar he must make his just appeal; There Mercy and Judgment equally do met, To pardon Faults, and to encourage Wit.
The Persons represented. Don John. THe Libertine; a rash fearless Man, guilty of all Vice. Don Antonio. His two Friends. Don Lopez. His two Friends. Don Octavio. Brother to Maria. Jacomo. Don John's Man. Leonora. Don John's Mistris, abused by him, yet follows him for Love. Maria, Her Maid, abused by Don John, and fol∣lowing him for Revenge. Don Francisco. Father to Clara and Flavia. Clara. His Daughters. Flavia. His Daughters. Six Women. All Wives to Don John. Hermit. Two Gentlemen. Intended for Husbands to Clara and Flavia. Ghosts. Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Old Woman. Officer and Souldiers. Singers, Servants, Attendants.
THE LIBERTINE. ACT I. Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo, Don John's Valet. D. Joh. T Hus far without a bound we have enjoy'd Our prosp'rous pleasures, which dull Fools call [Sins; Laugh'd at old feeble Judges, and weak Laws; And at the fond fantastick thing, call'd Conscience, Which serves for nothing but to make men Cowards; An idle fear of future misery; And is yet worse than all that we can fear. D. Lop. Conscience made up of dark and horrid thoughts, Rais'd from the fumes of a distemper'd Spleen. D. Anto. A sensless fear, would make us contradict The onely certain Guide, Infallible Nature; And at the call of Melancholly Fools, (Who stile all actions which they like not, Sins) To silence all our Natural appetites. D. John. Yet those conscientious Fools, that would perswade us To I know not what, which they call Piety, Have in reserve private delicious sins, Great as the happy Libertine enjoys, With which, in corners, wantonly they roul. D. Lop. Don John, thou art our Oracle; thou hast Dispell'd the fumes which once clowded our brains.
D. Ato. By thee, we have got loose from Education, And the dull slavery of Pupillage, Recover'd all the liberty of Nature, Ou own strong Reason now can go alone, Wiout the feeble props of splenatick Fools, Who contradict our common Mother, Nature. D. Joh. Nature gave us our Senses, which we please: Nor do our Reason War against our Sense. Naturs order Sense should guide our Reason, to the mind all objects Sense conveys. ools for shaddows lose substantial pleasures, or idle ales abandon rue dlight, And solid joys of day, for empty dreams at night. Away, thou foolish thing, thou chollick of the mind, Thou Worm by ill-digesting stomchs bred: In spight of thee, well surfeit in delights, And never think ought can be ill that's pleasant. Jacom. A most excellent Sermon, and no doubt, Gentlemen, you have edisi'd much by it. D. Joh. Away! thou formal phlegmatick Coxcomb, thou Hast neither courage nor yet wit enough To sin thus. Thou art my dull conscientious Pimp. And when I am wanton with my Whore within, Thou, with thy Beads and Pray'r-book, keep'st the door. Jacom. Sir, I find your Worship is no more afraid to be damn'd, than other fashionable Gentlemen of the Age: but, me-thinks, Halters and Axes should terrisie you. With reverence to your Worships, I've seen civiller men hang'd, and men of as pretty parts too. There's scarce a City in Spain but is too hot for you, you have committed such outrages wheresoe'r you come. D. Lop. Come, for diversion, pray let's hear your Fool preach a little. Jaco. For my part, I cannot but be troubled, that I shall lose my honour by you, Sir; for people will be apt to say, Like Ma∣ster, like Man. D. Joh. Your honour, Rascal, a Sow-gelder may better pre∣tend to it. Jacom. But I have another scruple, Sir.
D. Joh. What's that? Jacom. I fear I shall be hang'd in your company. D. Joh. That's an honour you will ne'r have courage to de∣serve. Jacom. It is an honour I am not ambitious of. D. Lop. Why does the Fool talk of hanging? we scorn all Laws. Jacom. It seems so▪ or you would not have cut your Elder Brother's throat. Don Lopez. D. Lop. Why, you Coxcomb, he kept a good Estate from me▪ and I could not Whore and Revel fufficiently without it. D. Anto. Look you, Jacomo, had he not reason? Jacom. Yes, Antonio, so had you to get both your Sisters with Child; 'twas very civil, I take it. D. Anto. Yes, you Fool, they were lusty young handsome Wenches, and pleas'd my appetite. Besides, I sav'd the Honour of the Family by it▪ for if I had not, some body else would. Jacom. O horrid villany! But you are both Saints to my hopeful Master▪ I'll turu him loose to Belzebub himself, He shall out-do him at his own Weapons. D. Joh. I, you Rascal. Jacom. Oh no, Sir, you are as innocent. To cause your good old Father to be kill'd was nothing. D. Joh. It was something, and a good thing too, Sirra: his whole design was to debar me of my pleasures: he kept his purse from me, and could not be content with that, but still would preach his sensless Morals to me, his old dull foolish stuff against my pleasure. I caus'd him to be sent I know not whether. But he believ'd he was to go to Heav'n; I care not where he is, since I am rid of him. Jacom. Cutting his throat was a very good return for his be∣getting of you. D. Joh. That was before he was aware on't, 'twas for his own sake, he ne'r thought of me in the business. Jacom. Heav'n bless us! D. Joh. You Dog, I shall beat out your brains, if you dar be so impudent as to pray in my company.
Jacom. ood Sir, I have done, I have done— D. Lop. Prethee let the insipid Fool go on. D. Ant. Let's hear the Coxcomb number up your crimes, The patterns we intend to imitate. acom. Sir, let me lay your horrid crimes before you: The unhappy minute may perhaps arrive, When the sense of 'em may make you penitent. D. Anto. 'Twere better thou wer't hang'd. D. Lop. Repent! Cowards and Fools do that. D. Joh. Your valiant well-bred Gentlemen never repent: But what should I repent of? Jacom. After the murder of your Father, the brave Don Pe∣dro, overnour of Sevil, for whom the Town are still in grief, was, in his own house, barb'rously kill'd by you. D. Joh. Barbarously, you lie, you Rascal, 'twas finely done; I run him through the Lungs as handsomely, and kill'd him as decently, and as like a Gentleman as could be. The jealous Coxcomb deserv'd death, he kept his Sister from me; her eyes would have kill'd me if I had not enjoy'd her, which I could not do without killing him: Besides, I was alone, and kill'd him hand to fist. Jacom. I never knew you go to Church but to take Sanctuary for a Murder, or to rob Churches of their Plate. D. Joh. Heav'n needs not be serv'd in Plate, but I had use on't. Jacom. How often have you scal'd the Walls of Monasteries? Two Nuns, I know, you ravish'd, and a third you dangerously wounded for her violent resistance. D. Joh. The perverse Jades were uncivill, and deserv'd such usage. Jacom. Some thirty Murders, Rapes innumerable, frequent Sacrilege, Parricide; in short, not one in all the Catalogue of Sins have scap'd you. D. Joh. My bus'ness is my pleasure, that end I will always compass, without scrupling the means; there is no right or wrong, but what conduces to, or hinders pleasure. But, you te∣dious insipid Rascal, if I hear more of your Morality, I will Car∣bonado you.
D. Anto. We live the life of Sense, which no fantastick thing, call'd Reason, shall controul. D. Lop. My reason tells me, I must please my Sense. D. Joh. My appetites are all I'm sure I have from Heav'n, since they are Natural, and them I always will obey. Jacom. I doubt it not, Sir, therefore I desire to shake hands and part. D. Joh. D'ye hear, Dog, talk once more of parting, and I will saw your Wind-pipe. I could find in my heart to cut your Rascal's Nose off, and save the Pox a labour: I'll do't, Sirra, have at you. Jacom. Good Sir, be not so transported; I will live, Sir▪ and will serve you in any thing; I'll fetch a Wench, or any thing in the world Sir. O how I tremble at this Tyrant's rage. [aside. D. Anto. Come, 'tis night, we lose time to our adventures. D. Lop. I have bespoke Musick for our Serenading. D. Joh. Let's on, and live the noble life of Sense. To all the powers of Love and mighty Lust, In spight of formal Fops I will be just. What ways soe'r conduce to my delight, My Sense instructs me, I must think 'em right. On, on, my Soul, and make no stop in pleasure, They're dull insipid Fools that live by measure. [Exeunt all but Jacomo. Jacom. What will become of me? if I should leave him, he's so revengeful, he would travel o'r all Spain to find me out, and cut my throat. I cannot live long with him neither: I shall be hang'd, or knock'd o'th' head, or share some dreadful Fate or other with him. 'Tis just between him and me, as between the Devil and the Witch, Who repents her bargain, and would be free from future ills, but for the fear of present durst not venture. Enter Leonora. Here comes Leonora, one of those multitudes of Ladies, he has sworn, li'd to, and betray'd. Leon. Jacomo, where is Don John? I could not live to endure
a longer absence from him. I have sigh'd and wept my self away I  but ve no lif le in me. His coldness and his absence  gien me fearful and killing . Where is my Dear? . Your Dear, Madam! he's your's no more. . Heav'n! what do I hear? Speak, is he dead? com. To you he is. Lon. Ah me, has he forgot his Vows and Oaths? Ha e no Conscience, Faith, or Honour left? . Le, Madam, he ne'r had any. . It is impossible, you speak this out of malice sure. . There's no man knows him better than I do. I have a greater respect for you, than for any he has betray'd, and will undeceive you: he is the most perfidious Wretch alive. Leon. Has he forgot the Sacred Contract, which was made privately betwixt us, and confirm'd before the altar, during the time of holy Mass? Jacom. All times and places are alike to him. Leon. Oh how assiduous was he in his passion! how many thousand vows and sighs he breath'd! what tears he wept, seeming to suffer all the cruel pangs which Lovers e'r endur'd! how eloquent were all his words and actions! Jacom. His person and his parts are excellent, but his base vices are beyond all measure: why would you believe him? Leon. My own love brib'd me to believe him: I saw the man I lov'd more than the world. Oft on his knees, with his eyes up to Heav'n, kissing my hand with such an amorous heat, and with such ardor, breathing fervent vows of loyal Love, and venting sad complaints of extreme sufferings. I poor easie Soul, flatter∣ing my  to think he meant as I did, lost all my Sexes faculty, Diembling; and in a moneth must I be thus betray'd? Jaco. Poor Lady! I cannot but have bowels for you; your sad Narration makes me weep in sadness: but you are better  than others. I ne'r knew him constant a fortnight before. eon. Then, then he promis'd he would marry me. acom. If he were to live here one moneth longer, he wou'd marry half the Town, ugly and handsome, old and young:
nothing that's Female comes amiss to him— Leon. Does he not fear a thunde bolt from Heav'n. Jacom. No, nor a Dvil from ll. He owns no Deity but his voluptuous appetite, whose satisfaction he will compass by Murders, Rapes, Treasons, or ought else. But pray let me ask you one civil question, Did you not give him earnest of your Body, Madam. Leon. Mock not my misery. Oh! that confounds me. Ah! I thought him true, and lov'd him so, I could deny him nothing. Jacom. Why, there 'tis; I fear you have, or else he wou'd have marri'd you: he has marri'd six within this moneth, and promis'd fifteen more, all whom he has enjoy'd, and left, and is this night gone on some new adventure, some Rape or Murder, some such petty thing. Leon. Oh Monster of impiety! Oh false Don John! wonder of cruelty! [She swounds. Jacom. What a pox does she swound at the news! Alas! poor Soul, she has mov'd me now to pity, as she did to love. Ha! the place is private—If I should make use of a Natural Receit to refresh her, and bring her to life again, 'twould be a great pleasure to me, and no trouble to her. Hum! 'tis very private, and I dare sin in private. A deuce take her, she revives, and pre∣vents me. Leon. Where is the cruel Tyrant! inhumane Monster! but I will strive to fortifie my self. But Oh my misfortune! Oh my misery! Under what strange Enchantments am I bound? Could he be yet a thousad times more impious, I could not chuse but love his person still. Jacom. Be not so passionate; if you could be , ad love your self, I'd put you in a way to ease your grif now, and all your cares hereafter. Leon. If you can now ease an afflicted Woman, who lse must shortly rid her self of life, imploy your charity; 'twas never plac'd yet on a Wretchneeded it more than I. Jacom. If Loyalty in a Lover be a Jewel! say no more, I can tell you where you may have it— Leon. Speak not of truth in man, it is impossible.
Jacom. Pardon me, I speak on my own knowledge. Leon. Is your Master true then? and have you happily de∣ceiv'd me? Speak. Jacom. As true as all the power of Hell can make him. eon. If he be false, let all the world be so. Jacom. There's another-guess man than he, Madam. Leon. Another! who can that be? No, no, there's no truth found in the Sex. [Aside. Jacom. He is a civil vertuous and discreet sober person. Leon. Can there be such a man? what does he mean? Jacom. There is, Madam, a man of goodly presence too— Something inclining to be fat, of a round plump face, with quick and sparkling eyes, and mouth of cheerful overture— His nose, which is the onely fault, is somewhat short, but that's no matter; his hair and eye-brows black, and so forth. Leon. How! he may perhaps be brib'd by some other man, and what he said of his Master may be false. Jacom. How she surveys me! Fa-la-la [Sings, and struts about. Leon. Who is this you speak of? Jacom. A man, who, envy must confess, has excellent parts, but those are gifts, gifts—meer gifts—thanks be to Heav'n for them. Leon. But shall I never know his name? Jacom. He's one, whom many Ladies have honour'd with their affection; but no more of that. They have met disdain, and so forth. But he'll be content to marry you. Fa-la-la-la [Sings. Leon. Again I ask you who he is? Jacom. Lord, how inapprehensive she is? Can you not guess? Leon. No. Jacom. Your humble Servant, Madam. Leon. Yours, Sir. Jacom. It is my slf in person; and upon my honour, I will be true and constant to you. Leon. Insolent Varlet! am I faln so low to be thy scorn? Jacom. Scorn! as I am a Christian Soul, I am in earnest. Leon. Audacious Villain! Impudence it self!
acom. Ah, Madam▪ your Servant, your true Lover must en∣dure a thousand such bobs from his Mstris; I can bear, Madam, I can. Leon. Because thy Master has betray'd me, am I become so in∣famous? Jacom. 'Tis something hard, Madam, to preserve a good re∣putation in his company; I can scarce do't my self. Leon. Am I so miserable to descend to his man? Jacom. Descend, say you: Ha, ha, ha! Leon. Now I perceive all's false which you have said of him. Farewell, you base ingateful Fellow. Jacom. Hold, Madam, come in the morning and I will place you in the next room, where you shall over-hear our discourse. You'll soon discover the mistake, and find who 'tis that loves you. Retire, Madam, I hear some body coming. [Exeunt Jacomo, Leonora. Enter Don John in the Street. D. Joh. Let me see, here lives a Lady: I have seen Don Octa∣vio haunting about this house, and making private signs to her. I never saw her face, but am resolv'd to enjoy her, because he likes her; besides, she's another Woman. Entr Antonio. Antonio, welcome to our place of randezvous. Well, what game! what adventure! Enter Lopez. Come, dear Lopez. Anto. I have had a rare adventure. Lop. What, dear Antonio? Ant. I saw at a Vill not far off, a grave mighty bearded Fool, drinking Lemonado with his Mistris; I mislik'd his face, pluck'd him by the Whiskers, pull'd all one side of his Beard off, fought with him, run him through the thigh, carri'd away his Mistris,
serv'd her in her kind, and then let her go. D. Joh. Gallantly perform'd, like a brave Souldier in an Ene∣mies Countrey: When they will not pay Contribution, you fight for Forrage. D. Lop. Pox on't, I have been damnably unfortunate; I have neither beat man, nor lain with Woman to night, but faln in love most furiously: I dogg'd my new Mistris to her Lodging; she's Don Brnardo's Sister, and shall be my Punk. D. Joh. I could meet with no willing Dame, but was fain to commit a Rape to pass away the time. D. Anto. Oh! a Rape is the joy of my heart; I love a Rape, upon my Clavis, exceedingly. D. Joh. But mine, my Lads, was such a Rape, it ought to be Registred; a noble and heroick Rape. D. Lop. Ah! dear Don John! D. Anto. How was it? D. Joh. 'Twas in a Church, Boys. D. Anto. Ah! Gallant Leader! D. Lop. Renown'd Don John! D. Anto. Come, let's retire, you have done enough for once. D. Joh. Not yet, Antonio, I have an Intrigue here. Enter Fidlers. Here are my Fidlers. Rank your selves close under this Win∣dow, and sing the Song I prepar'd. SONG. THou joy of all hearts, and delight of all eyes, Nature's chief Treasure, and Beauty's chief Prize, Look down, you'l discover, Here's a faithful young vigorous Lover; With a heart full as true, As e'r languish'd for you; Here's a faithful young vigorous Lover.
The Heart that was once a Monarch in's breast, Is now your poor Captive, and can have no rest; 'Twill never give over, But about your sweet bosom will hover. Dear Miss, let it in, By Heav'n 'tis no sin; Here's a faithful young vigorous vigorous Lover. D. Joh. Now Fidlers, be gone. [Window opens, Maria looks out, and flings a Paper down. Mar. Retire, my Dear Octavia; read that Note. Adieu. [Exit Mar. D. Joh. Good, she takes me for Octavio. I warrant you, Boys, I shall succeed in this adventure. Now my false Light assist me. [Reads by a dark Lantern. Reads. Go from this Window, within eight minutes you shall be admitted to the Garden dore. You know the Sign. Ha! the Sign, Gad she lies, I know not the Sign. D. Anto. What will you do? you know not the Sign. Let's away, and be contented this night. D. Joh. My friends, if you love me, retire. I'll venture, though Thunderbolts should fall upon my head. D. Lop. Are you mad? as soon as she discovers the deceit, she'll raise the house upon you, and you'll be murder'd. D. Joh. She'll not raise the house for her own sake, but rather grant me all I ask to keep her counsell. D. Anto. 'Tis very dangerous: be careal of your self. D. Joh. The more danger, the more delight: I hate the com∣mon road of pleasure. What! can I fear at such a time as this! The cowardly Deer are valiant in their Rutting time. I say, Be gone— D. Anto. We'll not dispute your commands. Good luck to you. [Exeunt Antonio, Lopez. D. Joh. How shall I know this devillish▪ Sign?
Enter Octavio with Fidlers, and stands under Maria's window. Ha! whom have we hear? some Serenading Coxcomb. Now shall we have some damn'd Song or other, a Cloris, or a Phillis at least. SONG. Cloris. hen you disperse your influence, Your dazling Beams are quick and clear, You so surprize and wound the sense, So bright a Miracle y'appear. Admiring Mortls you astoish so, No other Deity they know, But think that all Divinity's be low— One charming look from your illustrious Face, Were able to subdue Mankind, So sweet, so powerful a Grace Makes all men Lovers but the blind: Nor can they freedom by resistance gain, For each embraces the soft Chain, And never struggles with the pleasant pain. Octa. Be gone! be gone! the Window opens. D. Joh. 'Sdeath! this is Octavio. I must dispatch him, or he'll spoil all; but I would fain hear the Sign first. Mar. What strange mistake is this? Sure he did not receive▪ my Note, and then I am ruin'd. Octa. She expects the Sign. Where's my Whistle? O here. [Whistles. D. Joh. I have found it, that must be the Sign— Mar. I dare not speak aloud, go to the Garden door. [Don John rushes upon Octavio, and snatches the Whistle out of his hand. Octa. 'Sdeath, what Ruffian's this?
D. Joh. One that will be sure to cut your throat. Octa. Make not a promise to your self of what you cann't perfom. [Fight. D. Joh. I warrant you. Have at you. Mr. O Heav'n! Octavio's fighting. Oh my heart! Octa. Oh! I am slain— [Falls. D. Joh. I knew I should b as good as my word. I think you have it, Sir—Ha!  he's dying—Now for the Lady—I'll draw him further off, that his groans may not disturb our pleasure—Stay—by your leave, Sir, I'll change Hat and Cloak with you, it may help me in my design. Octav. O barbarous Villain! [Dies. Mar. They have done fighting, and I hear no noise. Oh un∣fortunate Woman! my dear Octavio's kill'd— Flora. Perhaps, Madam, he has kill'd the other. I'll down to the Garden door; if he be well, he'll come hither, as well to satisfie his appointment, as to take refuge. Your Brother's safe, he may come in securely— [Ex. to the door. Mar. Haste! haste! Fly! fly! Oh Octavio. I'll follow her. [She follows. D. Joh. Now for the Garden door. This Whistle will do me excellent service. Now good luck— [Goes to the door and whistles. Flo. Octavio? D. Joh. The same. Flo. Heav'n be prais'd, my Lady thought you had been kill'd. D. Joh. I am unhurt: let's quickly to her. Flo. Oh! he'll be over-joy'd to see you alive. D. Joh. I'll make her more over-joy'd before I have don with er. This is a rare adventure! Enter Maria at the dor. Flo. Here's your Jewel, Madam, speak softly. Mar. O my dear Octavio! have I got you within these arms? D. Joh. Ay, my Dear, unpierc'd by any thing but by your eyes. Mar. Those will do you no hurt. But are you sure you are not wounded?
D. Joh. I am. Let me embrace my pretty Dear; and yet she may be a Blackamore for ought I know— Mr. We'll retie to my Chamber. Flora, go out, and prepare us a Collation. D. Jon. O admirable adventure! Come, my Delight. [Exeunt. Enter Don Lopez, Antonio, Jacomo. Jac. Where's my pious Master? D. Ant. We left him hereabouts. I wonder what he has done in his adventure: I believe he has had ome busle. D. Lop. I thought I heard fighting hereabout. Jac. Gad forgive me! fighting! where! where! D. Ant. O thou incorrigible Coward! D. Lop. See, here's some of his handy-wor▪ here's a man kill'd▪ Jac. Another murder. Heav'n, what wi become of me?  shall be hang'd, yet dare not un away om hm. Enter an Officer with a Guard, going the Rond. Officer. Stand! who are there? D. Lop. We do stand, Rascal, we never use to run. Jac. Now shall I be taken and hang'd for my Master's murder. [Offers to run. D. Ant. Stand, you Dog! offer once more to run, and I'll put Bilbow in your guts. Jc. Gad forgive me! what will become of me? Officer. What's here? a man murder'd? yield, you are my prisoners. Jac. With all my heart! but as I hope to be sav'd, we did not kill him, Sir Offic. These must be the murderers, disarm 'em. D. Ant. How now, Rascal! disarm us! D. Lop. We are not us'd to part with our Swords. Jac. I care not a farthing for my Sword, 'tis at your service. D. Ant. Do you hear, Rascal; keep it, and fight, or I'll swear the murder against you.
D. Lop. Offer to flinch, and I'll run you through. Offic. Take their Swords, or knock 'em down. [They fight. Jacomo offers to run, some of the Guards stop him. Jac. A pox on't, I had as good fight and die, as be taken and be hang'd. [Guards are beaten off. D. Lop. Are you gone, you Dogs? I have pinck'd some of you. Jac. Ah Rogues! Villains! I have met with you. D. Ant. O brave Jacomo! you fought like an imprison'd Rat: The Rogue had conceal'd Courage, and did not know it. Jac. O Cowards! Rascals! a man can get no honour by fight∣ing with such Poletroons! but for all that, I will prudently withdraw, this place will suddenly be too hot for us. D. Lop. Once in your life you ar in the right, Jacomo. Jac. O good Sir, there is as much to be ascribed to Conduct, as to Courage, I assure you. [Exeunt. Enter Don John and Maria in her Chamber. Mar. Speak softly, my Dear; should my Brother hear us, we are ruin'd. D. Jh. Though I can scarce contain my joy, I will. O she's a rare Creature in the dark, pray Heav'n she be so in the light. Enter Flora with a Candle; as soon as they discover Don John, they shreke out. Mar. O Heav'n! I am ruin'd and betray'd. Flo. He has Octavio's clothes on. Mar. O he has murder'd him. My Brother shall revenge it. D. Joh. I will cut his throat if he offers it. Mar. Thieves! Murder! Murder! Thieves! Flo. Thieves! Murder! Murder! Thieves! D. Joh. I will stop your shrill wind-pipes.
Maia's Brother, with his Sword drawn. Brth. 'Sdeath! a man in my Sister's Chamber! Have at you, Villain. D. oh. Come on, Villain. [Don John kills the Brother. Flo Murder! Murder! Mr. O Villain, thou hast kill'd my Brother, and dishonour'd me. Entr five or si Servants, with drawn Swords. O your Master's murder'd! D. Joh. So many of you; 'tis no matter: your Hero's in Plays beat five times as many. Have at you, Rogues. [Maria runs away shriking, and Don John beats the Servants off, and stops Flora. Now give me the Key of the Garden, or I'll murder thee. lo. Murder! Murder! There, take it— [She runs away. D. Joh. So, thus far it is well; this was a brave adventure. 'Mongst all the Joys which in the world are sought, None are so great as those by dangers bought. [Exit. ACT II. Jacomo solus. Jc. WHat will this leud Master of mine do? this Town of Seil will not much care for his company after his last  Atchievments: He must now either fly, or hang for't. Ha! me-thinks my bloud grows chill at the naming of that deadful word, Hang What will become of me? I dare not leave him, and yet I fear that I shall perish with him. He's cer∣tainly the sirst that ever set up a Religion to the Devil.
Enter Leonora. Leon. I come to claim your promise; is Don John within? Jacom. No, Madam, but I expect him every minute. You see, Madam, what honour I have for you, for I venture my ears to do this. Leon. You oblige me extremely; so great is the present pain of doubt, that we desire to lose it: though in exchange of cer∣tainty, that must afflict us more. Jac. I hear him coming, withdraw quickly. [She withdraws. Enter Don John. D. Joh. How now, Sir, what wise thoughts have you in your Noddle? Jac. Why, Sir, I was considering how well I could endure to be hang'd. D. Joh. And why so, Buffle? Jac. Why you will force me to wait upon you in all your for∣tunes, and you are making what haste you can to the Gal∣lows— D. Joh. Again at your reproofs. You insipid Rascal; I shall cut your ears off, Dog— Jac. Good Sir, I have done; yet I cannot but admire, since you are resolv'd to go to the Devil, that you cannot be content with the common way of travelling, but must ride post to him. D. Joh. Leave off your idle tales, found out by Priests to keep the Rabble in awe. Jac. Oh horrid wickedness! If I may be bold to ask, what noble exploits did your Chivalry perform last night? D. Joh. Why, Sir, I committed a Rape upon my Father's Mo∣nument. Jac. Oh horror! D. Joh. Do you start, you Villain? Hah! Jac. I, Sir, who I, Sir? not I, Sir. D. Joh. D'hear, Rascal, let me not see a frown upon your
face; if I do, I will cut your throat, you Rogue. Jac. No, Sir, no, Sir, I warrant you; I am in a very good hu∣mour, I assure you—Heav'n deliver me! D. Joh. Now listen and learn. I kill'd a Lady's Lover, and suppli'd his place, by stratagem enjoy'd her: In came her foolish Brother and surpriz'd me, but perish'd by mv hand; and I doub not but I maul d three or four of his Servants. [Jacomo starts. Jac. Oh horrid fact! [Aside. D. Joh. Again, Villain, are you frowning? . No, Sir, no, Sir; don't think so ill of me, Sir. Heav'n send me from this wicked Wretch! What will become of us, Sir? we shall be apprehended. D. Joh. Can you fear your Rascally Carcase, when I venture mine? I observe always, those that have the most despicable persons, are most careful to preserve 'em. Jac. Sir, I beg your pardon; but I have an odd humour, makes me something unsit for your Worship's service. D. Joh. What's that, Sirra? Jac. 'Tis a very odd one, I am almost asham'd to tell it to you. D. Joh. Out with it, Fool— Jac. Why Sir, I cannot tell what is the reason, but I have a most unconquerable antipathy to Hemp. I could never endure a Bell-rope. Hanging is a kind of death I cannot abide, I am not able to endure it. D. Joh. I have taken care to avoid that; my friends are gone to hire a Vessel, and we'll to Sea together to seek a refuge, and a new Scene of pleasure. Jac. All three, Sir? D. Joh. Yes, Sir.— Jac. Three as civil disreet sober persons, as a man wou'd wish to drink with. Enter Leonora. Leon. I can hold no longer! D. Joh. 'Sdeath, you Dog, how came she here? Jac. I don't know, Sir, she stole in—
Leon. What Witchcraft do I suffer under? that when I abhor his vices, I still love his person. Ah, Don John! have I deserv'd that you should fly me? are all your Oaths and Vows forgotten by you? D. Joh. No, no; in these cases I always remember my Oaths, and never forget to break them. Leon. Oh impiety! Did I, for this, yield up my Honour to you? after you had sigh'd and languish'd many moneths, and shew'd all signs of a sincere affection, I trusted in your truth and constancy, without the Bond of Marriage, yielded up a Virgin's Treasure, all my Inno∣cence, believ'd your solemn Contract, when you invok'd all the Pow'rs above to testifie your Vows. D. Joh. They think much of us, why don't they witness 'em for you—Pish, 'tis nothing but a way of speaking, which young amorous Fellows have gotten— Leon. Did you not love me then? What injury had I e'r done you, that you shou'd feign affection to betray me? D. Joh. Yes 'faith, I did love you, and shew'd you as frequent and as hearty signs of it as I could; and i'gad y'are an ungrateful Woman if you say the contrary. Leon. O heav'n! Did you, and do not now? What crime have I committed, that could make you break your Vows and Oaths, and banish all your passion? Ah! with what ten∣derness have I receiv'd your feign'd affection, and ne'r thought I liv'd but in your presence; my love was too fervent to be counterfit— D. Joh. That I know not, for since your Sex are such dissem∣blers, they can hold out against, and seem to hate the men they love; why may they not seem to love the men they hate? Leon. O cruel man! could I dissemble? had I a thousand lives, I ventur'd all each time I saw your face; nay, were I now dis∣cover'd, I should instantly be sacrifi'd to my raging Brother's fury; and can I dissemble? D. Joh. I do not know whether you do or no; you see I don't, I am something free with you. Leon. And do you not love me then? D. Joh. Faith, Madam, I lov'd you as long as I could for the
heart and bloud of me, and there's an end of it; what a Devil wou'd you have more? . O cruel man! how miserable have you made me! D. Joh. Miserable! use variety as I do, and you'll not be . Ah! there's nothing so sweet to frail humane flesh  variety. Leon. nhumane Creature! what have I been guilty of, that hou shouldst thus remove thy  from me? D. Joh. Guilty, no: but I have had enough of you, and I have done what I can for you, and there's no more to be said. Leon. Tigers would have more pity than thou hast. D. Joh. Unreasonable Woman! would you have a man love  njoyment? I think the Devil's in you— Leon. Do you upbraid me with the rash effects of Love, which you caus'd in me? and do you hate me for what you ought to love me for? were you not many moneths with Vows and Oaths betraying me to that weakness? Ungrateful Monster! D. Joh. Why the Devil did you not yield before? you Wo∣men always rook in Love; you'll never play upon the square with us.. Leon. False man! I yielded but too soon. Unfortunate Wo∣man! D. Joh. Your dissembling Arts and jilting tricks, taught you by your Mothers, and the phlegmatick coldness of your consti∣tutions, make you so long in yielding; that we love out almost all our love before you begin, and yet you would have our love last as long as yours. I got the start of you a long way, and have reason to reach the Goal before you. Leon. Did you not swear you wou'd for ever love me? D. Joh. Why there 'tis; why did you put me to the trouble to swear it? If you Women would be honest, and follow the Dictates of Sense and Nature, we shou'd agree about the business presently, and never be forsworn for the matter. Leon. Are Oaths so slighted by you? perfidious man! D. Joh. Oaths! Snares to catch conceited Women with; I wou'd have sworn all the Oathes under the Sun; why I wou'd have committed Treason for you, and yet I knew I should be weary of you—
Leon. I thought such love as mine might have deserv'd your constancy, false and ungrateful man! D. Joh. Thus your own vanity, not we betray you. Each wo∣man thinks, though men are false to others, that she is so fine a person, none can be so to her. You should not take our words of course in earnest. Leon. Thus Devils do in Hell, who cruelly upbraid whom they hav tempted thither. D. Joh. In short, my constitution will not let me love you longe: and what ever some  pretend, all mankind obey their constitutions, and cannot do otherwise— Leon. Heav'n, sure, will punish this vile treachery. D. Joh. Do you then leave it to Heav'n, and trouble your self no farther about it. Leon. Ye Sacred Pow'rs, who take care of injur'd innocence, assist me. Enter Jacomo. Jac. Sir, Sir! stand upon your guard. D. Joh. How now! what's the matter? Jac. Here's a whole Batalion of couragious Women come to charge you. Enter Six Women. D. Joh. Keep 'm out, you Villain. Jac. I cannot, they over-run me. D. Joh. What an inundation of Strumpets is here? Leon. O Heav'n! I can stay no longer to be a witness of his falshood— [Exit Leonora. 1. Wom. My Dear, I desire a word in private with you. D. Joh. 'Faith, my Dear, I am something busie, but I love thee dearly. [Aside. A pox on thee! 2. Wom. Don John, a word: 'tis time now we should declare our marriage; 'tis now above three weeks. D. Joh. Ay, we will do it suddenly— 3. Wom. Pre'thee, Honey, what bus'ness can these idle Women
have▪ send them packing, that we may confer about our . 4. Wom. Lord! how am I amaz'd at the confidence of some Women! who are these that will not let one converse with one's own Husband? By your leave, Ladies. . Now it works! tease him, Ladies, worry him sound∣ly— 5. Wom. Nay, by your leave, good Madam; if you go to that. [Pulls Don John from the other. 6. Wom. Ladies, by all your leaves; sure none of you will have the considence to pretend an interest in this Gentleman— D. Joh. I shall be torn in pieces: Jacomo, stand by me. 1. Lad. Lord, Madam, what's your meaning? none ought to claim a right to another Woman's Husband, let me tell you that. 2. Lad. You are in the right, Madam. Therefore prethee, Dear, let's withdraw, and leave them; I do not like their com∣pan. D. Joh. Ay, presently, my Dear. What an excellent thing is a Woman before enjoyment, and how insipid after it! 4. Wom. Come, prethee, put these Women out of doubt, and let them know our Marriage. D. Joh. Tomorrow we'll declare and celebrate our Nuptials. 6. Wom. Ladies, the short and the long on't is, you are very uncivil to press upon this Gentleman. Come, Love, e'en tell 'em the truth of the story— 4. Wom. Uncivil, Madam, pardon me; one cannot be so in spaking to one's own. 3. Wom. That's true; she little thinks who that is. 6. Wom. To their own! Ha, ha, ha, that's true—Come, Honey, keep 'em no longer in ignorance. 4. Wom. Come, Ladies, I will undeceive you all; think no further of this Gentleman, I say, think no further of him— 1. Wom. What can this mean? D. Joh. Hold, for Heav'n's sake; you know not what you do. 4. Wom. Yes, yes, I do; it shall all out: I'll send 'em away with Fleas in their Ears. Poor silly Creatures! D. Joh. Now will Civil Wars arise—
4. Wom. Trouble your selves no longer about Don John, he is mine—he is mine, Ladies— All. Yours!— D. Joh. ox on't, I must set a good face upon the bus'ness; I see murder will out— 6 Wom. Yours! that's pleasant; he's mine— 5. Wom. I have been too long patient; he is my Husband. 1. Wom. Yours, how can that be? I am sure I am his Wife. 3. Wom. Are you not , Ladies, to claim my Husband? 2. Wom. Are you all mad? I am sure I am marri'd to him. All. You! D. Joh. Look you, Ladies, a Man's but a Man; here's my Bo∣dy, tak't among you as far as 'twill go. The Devil cann't please you all— Jac. Pray, Ladies, will you dispatch; for there are a matter of fifteen more that are ready to put in their claims, and must be heard in their order— D. Joh. How now, Rogne? this is your fault, Sirra. Jac. My fault, Sir, no; the Ladies shall see I am no Traitor. Look you, Ladies— D. Joh. Peace, Villain, or I will cut your throat. Well, La∣dies, know then, I am marri'd to one in this company; and to morrow morning, if you will repair to this place, I will declare my Marriage, which now, for some secret Reasons, I am oblig'd to conceal—Now will each Strumpet think 'tis her I mean. 1. Wom. That's well enough. 4. Wom. I knew he would own me at last. 3. Wom. Now they will soon see their errors. 5. Now we'll conceal it no longer, Dearest. D. Joh. No, no, I warrant you— 6. Wom. Lord how blank these Ladies will look. 2. Wom. Poor Ladies— Jac. Ladies, pray let me ask a question, which of you is really marri'd to him? Omn. I, I, I— D. Joh. 'Sdeath, you Son of a Baboon. Come, Pox on't, why should  dally any longer! why should I concal my good acti∣ons! in one word, I am married to every one of you, and have
above fourscore more; nor will I ever give over, till I have as many Wives and Concubines as the Grand Seignior. Jac. A very modest civil person truly— 4. Wom. O horrid Villain! 6. Wom. Perfidious Monster! Enter Don Lopez and Antonio. D. Ant. How now, Don John; Hah! you are a rav'nous Bird of prey indeed; do you fly at no less than a whole Covee of Whores at once? you scorn a single Strumpet for your Quarry. Ant. What, in tears too! Fie, Don John; thou art the most ungentle Knight alive: use your Ladies civilly for shame. D. Joh. Ay, before the Victory, I grant you; but after it, they should wear Chains, and follow the Conqueror's Chariot. D. Lop. Alas, poor Harlots! D. Joh. Peace, peace, good words; these are certain Animals call'd Wives, and all of 'em are my Wives: Do you call a man of Honour's Wives, Harlots? out, on't. 1. Wom. Peridious Monster! Ant. Excellent! D. Joh. Come on, you are come very opportunely, to help to celebrate my several and respective Weddings. Come, my Dears; 'faith we will have a Ballad at our Weddings. Where are my Fidlers? 6. Wom. O salvage Beast! 4. Wom. Inhumane Villain! revenge shall follow. D. Joh. Pox on revenge. Call in my Ministrils. Enter Fidlers. Come, sing my Epithalamium.
SONG. SInce Liberty, Nature for all has design'd, Apox on the Fool who to one is conin'd. All Creatures besides, When they please change their Brides. All Females they get when they can, Whilst they nothing but Nature obey, How happy, how happy are they? But the silly fond Animal, Man, Makes Laws 'gainst himself, which his Appetites sway; Poor Fools, how unhappy are they? Chor. Since Liberty, Nature for all has design'd, Apox on the Fool who to one is confin'd. At the first going down, a Woman is good, But when e'er she comes up, I'll ne'r chew the Cud, But out she shall go, And I'll serve 'em all so. When with one my stomach is cloy'd, Another shall soon be enjoy'd. Then how hppy, how happy are we? Let the Coxcomb, when weary, drudge on, And foolishly stay when he wou'd fain e gone. Poor Fool! how unhappy is e? Chor. At the first going down, &c. Let the Rabble obey, I'll live like a Man, Who, by Nature, is free to enjoy al he can: Wise Nature does teach More truth than Fools preach; They bindus, but she gives us ease. I'll revel and love where I please. She, she's my infallible Guide. But were the bless'd freedom dni'd Of variety in the things we love best, Dull Man were the slavishest Beast. Chor. Let the Rabble obey, &c.
D. Joh. Come, how do you like this? let's be merry, my Brides. 4. Wom. O monstrous Traitor! do you mock our misery? D. Joh. Good Spouse, be not passionate—faith we'll have a Dance. Strike up— [Dance. D. op. Be comforted, good Ladies; you have Companions in our misfortunes— D. Ant. He has been marri'd in all the Cities of Spain; what a breed of Don Johns shall we have? D. Joh. Come, Sweethearts; you must be civil to these Gen∣tlemen; they are my Friends, and men of Honour▪ 6. Wom. Men of Honour! they are Devils if they be your▪ Friends. D. Joh. I hate unreasonable, unconscionable fellows, who when they are weary of their Wives, will still keep 'em from other men. Gentlemen, ye shall command mine. 4. Wom. Thinkest thou I will out-live this affront? D. Joh. I'll trust you for that, there's ne'r a Lurece now adays, the Sex has learnt more wit since. Let me see, Antonia, thou shalt have for thy present use, let me see, my sixth Wife—▪faith she's a pretty buxom Wench, and deserves hearty usage from thee. 6. Wom. Traitor! I'll be reveng'd on all thy treachery. Ant. A mettel'd Girl, I like her well: she'll endure a Rape gallantly. I love resistance, it endears the pleasure. D. Joh. And, Lopez, thou shalt have, let me see, ay, my fourth Spous, she's a brave Virago; and Gad if I had not been some∣thing familiar with her already, I would venture my life for her. 4. Wom. Vile Wretch! think'st thou I will out-live this af∣front? Impious Villain! though thou hast no sense of Vertue or Honour left, thou shalt find I have. D. Joh. Vertue and Honour! There's nothing good or ill, but as it seems to each man's natural appetite, if they will consent freely. You must ravish friends: that's all I know, you must ravish. 1. Wom. Unheard of Villany! Fly from this Hellish place. Ant. Ladies, you shall fly, but we must ravish first.
D. Lop. Yes, I assure you we must ravish— 4. Wom. No, Monster, I'll prvent you. [Stabs her self. D. Ant. 'Sdeath, she's as good as her word. The first time I e'r knew a Woman so. D. Lop. Pox on't, she has prevented me; she's dead. D. Joh. Say you so? well, go thy ways, thou wer't a Girl of pretty parts, that's the truth on't; but I ne'r thought this had been in thee. 2. Wom. These, sure, are Devils in the shape of men. D. Joh. Now see my providence, if I had been marri'd to none but her, I had been a Widdower. 1. Wom. O horror! horror! flie! flie! 6. Wom. No, I'll be reveng'd first on this barbarous Wretch. D. Joh. Why look you, here's a Wench of mettle for you; go ravish quickly— 6. Wom. Let's fly, and call for help, some in the street may help us ▪ [They all run off, crying, Help, murder, murder! D. Ant. Let 'em go, they are confin'd, they cann't get out. D. Joh. It shall ne'r be said that a Woman went out of this house Reinfecta; but after that, 'twill be time for us to fly. D. Lop. We have hir'd a Vessel, the Master is a brave Rogue of my acquaintance; he has been a Bandit. D. Ant. A brave honest wicked Fellow as heart can wish, I have ravish'd, robb'd, and murder'd with him. D. Joh. That's well. Hey, where are my Rogues? Hey! Enter Servant and Jacomo. Here, Sirra, do you send my Goods on Board. Ant. My Man will direct you. [Exit Servant. D. Joh. Come, Sirra, do you remove this Body to another Room— Jac. O horrid fact! what, another Murder! what shall I do? D. Joh. Leave your complaints, you Dog; I'll send you after her. Jac. Oh! I shall be hang'd, I shall be hang'd. D. Joh. Take her up, Rascal; or I'll cut your throat.
Jac. I will, Sir. Oh mercy upon me! I shall be hang'd— D. Joh. Now, Sirra, do you run into the strets, and force in the next Woman you meet, or I'll cut your Wind-pipe; and let nobody out— Jac. What hellish fact will he now commit? D. Joh. Take her up, you Hen-hearted compassionate Rascal. Jac. Heav'n! what will become of me? Oh! Oh— [Carries her off. D. Joh. Now, Gentlemen, you shall see I'll be civil to you, you shall not ravish alone: indeed I am loath to meddle with mine old acquaintance, but if my Man can meet with a Woman I have not lain withall, I'll keep you company; let her be old or young, ugly or handsome, no matter. D. Lop. 'Faith I will eversay, you are a well bred man. D. Ant. A very civil person, a man of Honour. Enter Servant, orcing in an ugly old Woman, who cries out. D. Joh. This unlucky Rogue has made but a scurvy choice, but I'll keep my word. Come, Bawd, you must be ravish'd, Bawd. Old. Wom. O murder! murder! help! help! I was never ra∣vish'd in my life. D. Joh. That I dare swear; but to show I am a very vigorous man, I'll begin with you. But, you Rascal, Jaccall, I'll make you Cater better next time. Serv. Indeed, Sir, this was the first I met. D. Joh. Come on, Beldam, thy face shall not protect thee. Old Wom. Oh my Honour! my Honour! help, help, my Honour! D. Joh. Come to our business. Enter Jacmo. Jac. O Sir▪ ! shift for your self; we shall all be hang'd:  house is . Oh what shall we do? D. Joh. Away, Coward: were the King of Spain's Army be∣leagu'ring
us, it should not divert me from this Exploit. D. Ant. Nor me. D. Lop. Nor me: let's on. D. Joh. Keep the doors fast, Sirra. Come on. Jac. Oh what will become of me! Oh Heav'n! mercy on me! Oh! Oh! [Exeunt. In Man's habit, Enter Maria, and her Maid Flora. Mar. Thus I have abandon'd all my Fortune, and laid by My Sex. Revenge for thee. Assist me now, You Instruments of Bloud, for my dear Brothers, And for my much more dear Octavio's sake. Where are my Bavo's?— Flo. They have beset the Villains House, And he shall ne'r come out alive.— Mar. O let 'em show no more remorse, Than hungry Lions o'r their prey will. How miserable am I made by that Inhumane Monster! No savage Beast, Wild Deserts e'r brought forth, provok'd By all its hunger, and its natural rage, Could yet have been so cruel. Oh my Octavio! whether art thou fled, From the most loving and most wretched Creature of her Sex? What Ages of delight Each hour with thee brought forth! How much, when I had thee, was all the world Unenvi'd by me! Nay, I piti'd all my Sex, That cou'd have nothing worth their care, Since all the treasure of Mankind was mine. Methought I cou'd look down on Queens, when he Was with me: but now, compar'd to me, How happy is the Wretched, whose sinews Crack upon the merciless Engine Of his torture? I live with greater torments then he di. Flo. Leave your complaints. Tears are no Sacriice for bloud.
Mar. Now my just grief to just revenge give place. I am asham'd of these soft Tears, till I've Reveng'd thy horrid Murder. Oh that I could Make the Villain linger out an Age in Torments! But I will revel in his bloud: Oh I could suck the last drop that warms the Monster's heart, that might inspire me with Such cruelty, as vile Man, with all his horrid Arts of power, is yet a stranger to; Then I might root out all his cursed Race. Flo. I'll follow all your Fortunes, my dear Lady; Had  thousand lives, in this cause I'd Venture one by one to my last stake. Mar. Thou art my dear and faithful Creature; Let not thy Fortunes thus be wrack'd with mine. Be gone, and leave thy most unhappy Mistris; One that has miseries enow to sink the Sex. Flo. I will not leave you, till death takes me from you. Mar. O that I had been some poor lost Mountain Girl, Nurs'd up by Goats, or suckl'd by wild Beasts, Expos'd to all the rage of heats and killing colds. I ne'r could have been aband on'd to such fury. More savage cruelty reigns in Cities, Than ever yet in Desarts among the Most venomous Serpents, and remorsless Ravenous Beasts, could once be found. So much has barb'rous Art debauch'd Man's innocent Nature. Flo. Lay by your tears, till your revenge be finish'd; Then, then you may have leisure to complain. Mar. I will: 'tis bloud I now must spill, or Lose my own in th'attempt. But if I can Have the fortune, with my own hand, to reach The Dogs vile heart: I then shall die Contnted, and in the other World I'll him so, Devils shall learn of me to lse the Damn'd. Flo. Let's to our Sacred Instruments of revenge.
Mar. Come on: so just a cause would turn the Vilest Ruian to a Saint. [Exeunt. [Bravo's watch at Don John's house. Maria and Flora re-enter. Mar. Come, friends, let once a Woman preach courage To you, inspir'd by my just rage this Arm Shall teach you wonders. I'll shew you now What Love with just Revenge can do. 1. Brav. We are so practis'd in the trade of death, We need no teaching. Mar. There's Gold good store; if you dispatch the Dog, I'll give you yet much more; if not, If all the wealth I have can buy your lives, I'll have 'em in stead of his. 1. Brav. For half the Sum, I'd kill a Bishop at th' Altar. [They retie. Enter Don John, Don Antonio, Don Lopez, Jacomo. D. Joh. Now we have finish'd our design; let's make a Salley, and raise the Siege. D. Ant. Jacomo, do you lead the Van. D. Lop. Lead on, Jacomo, or we are sure to lose you; you are not good at bringing up the Rear. Jac. Nay, good Gentlemen, I know my self better than to take place of Men of Quality, especially upon this occasion. D. Joh. Sirra, go on: I'll prick him forward. Remember, if you do not fight, I am behind you. Jac. Oh Heav'n! Oh Jacomo! what will become of thy dear person? Is this your Courage to put me forward, to what you dare not meet your selves? D. Joh. No words, Rogue, on, on, I ay— Jac. O I shall be murder'd! murder'd! Oh! Oh!— D. Joh. On, on, you Dog. Jac. Inhumane Master! It must be so! Heav'n have mercy on my better part.
Enter Maria. Mar. Fall on, fall on, that's the Villain! Have at you, Dog▪ D. Joh. Courage, Jacomo. [They fight, and are driven off, but Maria and Flora remain. Jac. Oh! Oh! Mar. Oh cowardly Villains! the Traitor will escape their hands. Oh Dogs! more feeble than the feeblest of our Sex Let's after him, and try our strength. Enter Don John. He is return'd—fall on. D. Joh. Ha! must I encounter Boys? Flo. Oh I am slain— [Kills Flora. Mar. At thy heart, base Villain. [Don John disarms Maria. D. Joh. There, take your Sword; I'll not nip Roguery in the bud; thou may'st live to be as wicked as my self. Mar. Poor Flora! But, Dog, I'll be reveng'd on thee yet ere I die. [Exit. Enter Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. Jac. What! no thanks! no reward! D. Joh. What's the matter, Sirra? Jac. What, no acknowledgment? you are but an ungrateful man, let me tell you that, to treat a man of my prowess thus. D. Joh. What has your valour done? Jac. Nothing, nothing; sav'd your life onely, that's all: but men of valour are nothing now adays. 'Tis an ungrateful Age. I fought like a Hero D. Ant. Call'd a Stag at Bay. D. Lop. You can fight, when there's no way of escape, with∣out it. Jac. Oh! what's here! another murder! fly, fly; we shall be hang'd.
D. Joh. Come on! let's now to Sea to try our fortunes. Jac. Ay, make haste; I've laid Horses, and will shift by Land. Farewell, Sir; a good Voyage—— D. Joh. I will murder you, if you refuse to go to Sea— Jac. O, good Sir, consider, do but consider; I am so Sea-sick always: that wicked Element does not agree with me. D. Joh. Dare you dispute! go on, I say. Jac. O, good Sir, think, think a little; the merciless Waves will never consider a man of parts: besides, Sir, I can swim no more than I can fly. D. Joh. I'll leave you dead upon the place, if you refuse. Jac. O Sir, on my knees I beg you'll let me stay. I am the last of all my Family; my Race will fail, if I should fail. D. Joh. Damn your Race ▪ D. Ant. Do not we venture with you? Jac. You have nothing but your lives to venture, but I have a whole Family to save; I think upon Posterity. Besides, Gentle∣men, I can look for no safety in such wicked company. D. Joh. I'll kill the Villain. His fear will else betray us. Jac. O hold! hold! for Heav'ns sake hold ▪ [Ghost of Don John's Father rises. Ghost. Hold! hold! Jac. Ay, hold, hold. Oh Heav'n! your Father's Ghost; a Ghost! a Ghost! Oh! Oh! [Falls down and roars. D. Joh. 'Sdeath! what's here? my Father alive! Ghost. No, no; inhumaue Murderer, I am dead. D. Joh. That's well; I was afraid the old Gentleman had come for his Estate again; if you wou'd have that, 'tis too late; 'tis spent— Ghost. Monster! ehold these wounds. D. Joh. I do; they were well meant, and well perform'd, I see. D. Ant. This is strange! how I am amaz'd! D. Lop. Unheard of Wonder!— Ghost. Repent, repent of all thy villanies; My clamorous blood to Heav'n for vengeance cries.
Heav'n will pour out his judgments on you all; Hell gapes for you, for you each Fiend does call, And hourly waits your unrepenting fall. You with eternal horrours they'l torment, Except of all your crimes you suddenly repent. [Ghost sinks. Jac. Oh! Oh! Heav'n deliver me from these Monsters. D. Joh. Farewell, thou art a foolish Ghost; Repent, quoth he! what could this mean? our senses are all in a mit sure. D. Ant. They are not, 'twas a Ghost. D. Lop. I ne'r believ'd those foolish Tales before. D. Joh. Come, 'tis no matter; let it be what it will, it must be natural— D. Ant. And Nature is unalterable in us too. D. Joh. 'Tis true, the nature of a Ghost cannot change ours. D. Lop. It was a silly Ghost, and I'll no sooner take his word than a Whores. D. Joh. Thou art in the right. Come, Fool, Fool, rise; the Ghost is gone. Jac. Oh! I die, I die; pray let me die in quiet. D. Ant. Oh! if he be dying▪ take him up; we'll give him burial in the Sea. Come on. Jac. Hold, hold, Gentlemen; bury me not till I am dead, I beseech you— D. Joh. If you be not, Sirra, I'll run you through. Jac. Hold, hold, Sir, I'll go, I'll go— D. Lop. Let's on. D. Ant. Let's on. D. Joh. Should all the Bugbears Cowards feign appear, I would urge on without one thought of fear. D. Ant. And I. D. Lop. And I.— [Exeunt omnes.
ACT III. Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo, Captain of the Ship, Master and Sailors. Mst. MErcy upon us! what sudden dreadful storm is this? we are all lost; we shall split upon the Rocks. Loof, loof— Jac. Oh! Oh! Mercy! Oh I was afraid of this! See what your wickedness has brought me to? Mercy! mercy! D. Joh. Takeaway thy Cowardly face, it offends me, Rascal. Capt. Such dreadful claps of Thunder I never yet remember'd. D. Joh. Let the Clowds roar on, and vomit all their Sulphur out, they ne'r shall fright me.— D. Ant. These are the Squibs and Crackers of the Sky. D. Lop. Fire on, fire on; we are unmov'd. Capt. The Heav'ns are all on sire; these unheard of Prodigies amaze me. D. Joh. Can you, that have stood so many Cannons, be fright∣ed at the farting and the blching of a Clowd? Mast. Bless me, Captain! six of our Foremast men are even now struck dead with Lightning. Sail. O that clap has rent our Masts in sunder. Jac. O we are lost! You can swim, Sir; pray save me, Sir, for my own and Family's sake.— D. Joh. Toss these cowardly Rogues over-board. Captain, Cou∣rage! let the Heav'ns do their worst, 'tis but drowning at laft. Jac. But—in the name of Heav'n, but drowning, quoth he; your drowning will prepare you for burning, though Oh, Oh, Oh— Sail. Captain, Captain, the Ship's on ire in the Forecastle— Capt. All hands to work upon the Forecastle. Heav'n! how it blazes already!— [Exit Cptain. Jac. Oh! Oh! we burn, we drown, we sink, Oh! we perih, we are lost, we are lost. Oh, Oh, Oh—
Mast. O horrid Apparitions! Devils stand and guard the fire, and will not suffer us to quench it. We are lost. Enter Captain. Capt. In all the dangers I have been, such horrors I never knew; I am quite unmann'd. D. Lop. A man and fear: 'tis but dying at last. D▪ Joh. I never yt could know what that foolish thing Fear is. Capt. Help, help, the fire increases. What horrid sights are these? where e'r I turn me, fearful Spirits appear. [Exeunt Captain and Sailers. D. Joh. Let's into the Boat, and with our Swords kep out all others. D. Ant. While they are busie 'bout the sire we may 'scape. D. Lop. If we get from hence, we certainly shall perish on the Rocks— D. Joh. I warrant you— Jac. O good Gentlemen, let us shift for our selves, and let the rest burn, or drown, and be damn'd and they will. D. Joh. No, you have been often leaving me: now shall be the time we'll part. Farewell. Jac. Oh! I'll stand by you while I live. Oh the Devil, the Devil! What horrors do I feel? Oh I am kill'd, I am dead! [A Thunder-clap strikes Don John and Jacomo down. D. Joh. 'Sdeath! why this to me? you paltry foolish bug∣bear Thunder, am I the mark of your sensless rage? D. Lop. Nothing but accident. Let's leap into the Boat. D. Ant. The Sailors all make towards us; they'll in and sink it. D. Joh. Sirra, if you come on, you run upon my Sword. Jac. O cruel Tyrant! I burn, I drown, I sink! Oh I die, I am lost. Capt. All shift aboard; we perish, we are lost. Mast. All lost, all lost. [A great shreik, they all leap over-board.
Enter an old Hermit. Her. This fourty years I've liv'd in this neighbouring Cave, and srom these dreadful Cliffs which are always beaten by the foamig Surges of the Sea; beheld the Ocean in its wildestrage, and ne'r yet saw a storm so dreadful: such horrid flashes of lightning, and such claps of thunder, never were in my remem∣brance. Yon Ship is all on fire, and the poor miserable Wretches must all perish. The dreadful object melts my heart, and brings a floud of tears into my eyes: It is prodigious, for on the sud∣den, all the Heavens are clear again, and the inraged Sea is be∣come more patint. Enter Don Francisco. D. Fran. Oh Father, have you not been frighted at this pro∣digious storm, and at yon dreadful spectacle? Herm. No man that has an apprehension, but wou'd have been mov'd wih horrour. D. Franc. 'was the most violent Tempest I ever saw. Hold, yonder are some coming in a small Vesl, and must necessarily split upon the Rock; I'll go and help to succour 'em. Herm. Hee are some this way, just come in a small Boat: Go you to those, and these I will assist— D. Fran. I'll haste to their relief— [Exit Don Fran. Herm. Hah! these are come safe to Land, three men, goodly men they seem to be; I am bound in charity to serve them: they come towards me. Enter Don John, Don Antonio, and Don Lopez. D. Joh▪ Much ado we are safe, but my Man's lost; pox on him, I shall miss the Fool, it was a necessary Blockhead. D. Ant. But you have lost your Goods, which were more ne∣cessary. D. Lop. Our Jewels and Money we have all about us. D. Joh. It makes m laugh to think, how the Fools we left
behind were puzzl'd which death to chuse, burning or drown∣ing— D. Ant. But how shall we dispose of our selves, we are plaguy wet and cold. Hah! what old Fool is that? D. Lop. It is an Hermit, a fellow of mighty Beard and Sanctity. D. Joh. I know not what Sanctity he may have, but he has Beard enough to make an Owl's Nest, or stuff a Saddle with. Herm. Gentlemen, I see you are shipwrack'd, and in distress; and my Function obliges me in charity to succour you in what I may. D. Ant. Alas! what canst thou help us to? dost thou know of ever a house near hand, where we may be furnished with some necessaries? Herm. On the other side of this vast Rock, there is a fertile and a pleasant Valley, where one Don Francisco, a rich and ho∣spitable man, has a sweet Dwelling; he will entertain you no∣bly: He's gone to assist some shipwrack'd persons, and will be here presently. In the mean time, what my poor Cave can afford, you shall be welcome to. D. op. What can that afford? you oblige your self to fasting and abstinence ▪ Herm. I have studi'd Physick for the relief of needy people, and I have some Cordials which will refresh you; I'll bring one to you— [Exit Hermit. D. Joh. A good civl old Hipocrite: but this is a pleasant kind of Religion, that obliges 'em to nastiness and want of meat. I'll ha' none on't.— D. Ant. No, nor of any other, to my knowledge. Enter Hermit with a Cordial. Herm. Gentlemen, pray taste of this Vial, it will comfort your cold stomachs. D. Joh. Ha! 'tis excellent 'faith. Let it go round. Herm. Heav▪n bless it to you. D. Lop. Ha! it wams. D. Ant. Thank thee, thou art a very honest old fellow i'faith. D. Joh. I see thou art very civil; but you must suppl us
with one necessary more; a very necesary thing, and very re∣freshing. Herm. What's that, Sir? D. Joh. It is a Whore, a fine young buxom Whore. D. Ant. A Whore, Old man, a Whore. D. Lop. A Whore, Old man, a Whore. Herm. Bless me, are you Men or Devils?— D. Joh. Men, men, and men of lust and vigour. Pre'thee, old Sot, leave thy prating, and help me to a Strumpet, a fine sala∣cious Strumpt; I know you Zealots have enough of 'em. Wo∣men love your godly Whore-masters. Herm. O Monsters of impiety! are you so lately scap'd the wrath of Heaven, thus to provoke it? D. Ant. How! by following the Dictates of Nature, who can do otherwise? D. Lop. All our actions are necessitated, none command their own wills. Herm. Oh horrid blasphemy! would you lay your dreadful and unheard of Vices upon Heaven? No, ill men, that has given you free-will to good. D. Joh. I find thou retir'st here, and never readst or thinkst. Can that blind faculty the Will be free, When it depends upon the Understanding? Which argues first before the Will can chuse; And the last Dictate of the Judgment sways The Will, as in a Balance, the last Weight Put in the Scale, lifts up the other end, And with the same Necessity. Herm. But foolish men and sinners act against Their Understandings, which inform 'em better. D. Ant. None willingly do any thing against the last Dictates of their Judgments, whatsoe'r men do, Their present opinions lead 'em to. D. Lop. As fools that are afraid of sin, are by the thought Of present pleasure, or some other reason, Necesarily byass'd to pursue The opinion they are of at that moment. Herm. The Understanding yet is free, and might perswade 'em better.
D. Joh. The Understanding never can be free; For what we undstand, spite of our selves we do: All objects are ready form'd and plac'd To our hands; and these the Senses to the Mind convey, And as those repesent them, this must judge: How can the Will be free, when the Understanding, On which the Will depends, cannot be so. Herm. Lay by your devillish Philosophy, and change the dan∣gerous and destructive course of your leud lives. D. Ant. Change our natures? Go bid a Blackamore be white, we follow our Constitutions, which we did not give our selves. D. Lop. What we are, we are by Nature, our reason tells us we must follow that. D. Joh. Our Constitutions tell us one thing, and yours ano∣ther; and which must we obey? If we be bad, 'tis Nature's fault that made us so. Herm. Farewell. I dare no longer hear your impious dis∣course. Such harden'd Wretches I ne'r heard of yet. [Exit Hermit. D. Ant. Farewell, old Fool. D. Joh. Thus Sots condemn what they can never answer. Enter Don Francisco. This I believe is Francisco, whom he spoke of; if he has but a handsome Wife, or Daughters, we are happy. D. Lop. Sir, we are shipwrack'd men, and if you can direct us to a place, where we may be furnish'd with some necessaries, you will oblige us— D. Franc. Gentlemen, I have a House hard by, you shall be welcome to it: I even now endeavoured to succour a Youth and beauteous Woman, who, with two Sailors, in a Boat, were driven towards these Rocks, but were forc'd back again, and, I fear, are lost by this time. I desire nothing more, than to assist men in extremes, and am o'rjoy'd at the opportunity of serving you. D. Joh. We thank you. D. Fran. You shall command my House as long as you please:
I see you are Cavaliers, and hope you will bear with some in∣convenience. I have two young, and, though I say it, handsome Daughters, who are, to morrow morning to be marri'd; the So∣lemnity will bring much company together, which, I fear, may incommode my house and you— D. Ant. You pose us with this kindness. D. Joh. What ever pleases you, cannot be inconvenient to us. D. Lop. On the contrary, we shall be glad to assist you at the Ceremony, and help to make up the joyful Chorus. D. Fran. You shall command my house and me; I'll shew you the way to it▪ D. Joh. Your humble Servant. We'll follow you. [Exit Don Francisco. This is an admirable adventure. He has Daughters, Boys, and to be marri'd too: If they have been so foolish, to preserve those Toys, they call Maidenheads; their sensless Husbands shall not be troubled with them: I'll ease them of those. Pox, what should those dull Drudging Animals, call'd Husbands, do with such Treasures: No, they are for honest Whore-masters, Boys. D. Ant. Well said, Don; we will not be wanting in our en∣deavours to succeed you. D. Lop. To you alone we must give place. Allons. [Exeunt. Enter Hermit, Maria in Man's habit, and Leonora. Herm. Heaven be prais'd, you are safely now on Land. Mar. We thank you, reverend Father, for your assistance. Leon. We never shall forget the obligation. Herm. I am happy to be so good an Instrument. Leon. We follow'd a Vessel, which we saw fir'd with Light∣ning, and we fear that none of 'em escap'd. Mar. I hope the Villain I pursue has scap'd. I would not be reveng'd by Heaven, but my own hand; or, if not by that, by the Hangman's. Leon. Did any come to and? for I most nearly am concern'd
or one; the grief for whom, if he belost, will soon, I fear, de∣stroy me. Herm. Here were three of that company came safe to Land; but such impious Wretches, as did not deserve to escape, and such as no vertuous person can be concern'd for, sure; I was stiff with fear and horrour when I heard 'em talk. Mar. Three, say you? Leon. By this sad description it must be Don John, and his two wicked Associates; I am asham'd to confess the tenderness I have for him. Why should I love that Wretch? Oh my too violent passion hurries me I know not whether! into what fear∣ful dangerous Labyrinths of misery will it conduct me? Mar. Were they Gentlemen? Herm. By their out-sides they seem'd so, but their in-sides de∣clar'd them Devils. Mar. Heaven! it must be the Villain and his barbarous Companions. They are reserv'd or my revenge: Assist me, Heaven, in that just cause. Oh, Villain, Villain! inhumane Villain! Each minute is, me-thinks, a tedious Age, Till I have dipt my hands in thy hearts bloud. Herm. You seem o'r-joy'd at the news of their safe arrival: Can any have a kindness for such dissolute abandon'd Atheists? Mar. No; 'tis revenge that I persue against the basest of all Villains. Herm. Have a care; Revenge is Heavens, and must not be usurp'd by Mortals. Mar. Mine is revenge for Rapes and cruel murders, and those Heaven leaves to Earth to punish. Herm. They are horrid crimes, but Magistrates must punish them. Leon. What do I hear? were he the basest of all men, my love is so head-strong and so wild within me, I must endeavour to preserve him, or destroy my self: to what deplorable condi∣tion am I fall'n? what Chains are these that hold me? Oh that I could break them! and yet I wou'd not if I cou'd; Oh my heart! Herm. They are gon to one Don Francisco's house, that Road
will bring you to it; 'tis on the other side of this Rock, in a pleasant Valley. I have not stirr'd these fourty years from these small bounds, or I wou'd give him notice what Devils he har∣bours in his house. You will do well to do it. Jac. (within) Help, help, murder! I am drown'd, I am dead; Help, help! Herm. Hah! what voice is that? I must assist him— Mar. Father, farewell. Come, Madam, will you go to this house? Now, Monster, for my revenge. Leon. I will; but for different ends we go; 'Tis Love conducts me, but Revenge brings you. [Exeunt Maria, Leonora. Jac. Oh help, help! I sink, I sink! Herm. Poor man, sure he is almost drown'd. Jac. No, not yet; I have onely drunk something too much of a scurvy unpleasant Liquor. Herm. Reach me your hand— [Pulls him out. Jac. Ay, and my heart too; Oh! Oh! Sir, a thousand thanks to you: I vow to Gad, y'are a very civil person, and, as I am an honest man, have done me the greatest kindness in the world, next to the piece of the Mast which I floated upon, which I must ever love and honour; I am sorry it swam away, I wou'd have preserv'd it, and hung it up in the Set of our antient Family. Herm. Thank Heaven for your deliverance, and leave such vain thoughts. Jac. I do with all my heart; but I am not setled enough to say my prayers yet: pray, Father, do you for me; 'tis nothing with you, you are us'd to it, it is your Trade. Herm. Away, vain man; you speak as if you had drunk too deeply of another Liquor than Sea-water. Jac. No, I have not, but I wou'd fain: Where may a man light of a good Glass of Wine? I would gladly have an Antidot to my Poison. Methinks, Pah! these Fishes have but a scurvy time; I am sure they have very ill drinking. Herm. Farewell, and learn more devotion and thankfulness to Heav'n— [Exit Hermit. Jac. Ha! 'tis uncivilly done to leave a man in a strange Country.
But these Hermits have no breeding. Poor Jacomo, Dear Jaco∣mo, how I love thy person, how glad am I to see thee safe? for I swear, I think thou art as honest a fellow as e'r I met with. Well, farewell, thou wicked Element; if ever I trust thee again—Well, Haddocks, I desie you, you shall have none of me, no, not a Collop; no, no, I will be eaten by Worms, as all my Ancestors have been. If Heaven will but preserve me from the Monsters of the Land, my Master and his two Compani∣ons (who, I hope, are drown'd) I'll preserve my self from those of the Sea. Let me see, here is a path—this must lead to some house. I'll go, for I am plaguy sick with this Salt-water. Ph— [Exit Jacomo. Enter Clara and Flavia, with her two Maids. Clar. Oh, Flavia, this will be our last happy night, to mor∣row is our Execution day; we must marry. Flav. Ay, Clara, we are ondemn'd without reprieve. 'Tis better to live as we have done, kept from all men, than for each to be confin'd to one, whom yet we never saw, and a thousand to one shall never like. Clar. Out on't, a Spanish Wife has a worse life than a coop'd Chicken. Flav. A singing Bird in a Cage is a Princely creature, compar'd to that poor Animal, call'd a Wife, here. Clar. Birds are made tame by being cag'd, but Women grow wild by confinement, and that, I fear, my Husband will find to his cost. Flav. None live pleasantly here, but those who should be miserable, Strumpets: They can choose their Mates, but we must be like Slaves condemn'd to the Gallies; we have not li∣berty to sell our Selves, or venture one throw for our freedom. Clar. O that we were in England! there, they say, a Lady may choose a Footman, and run away with him, if she likes him, and no dishonour to the Family. Flav. That's because the Families are so very Honourable, that nothing can touch them: there Wives run and ramble whither nd with whom they please, and defie all censure.
Clar. Ay, and a jealous Husband is a more monstrou Cr∣ture there, than a Wittall here, and wou'd be more pointed at: They say, if a man be jealous there, the women will all joyn and pull him to pieces. Flv. Oh happy Countrey! we ne'r touh money, there the Wives can spend their Husbands Estates for 'em. Oh bess'd Countrey! Clar. Ay, there, they say, the Husbands are the prettiest civil easie good natur'd indierent persons in the whole world; they ne'r mind what their Wives do, not they. Flav. Nay, they say, they love those men best tha are kindest to their Wives. Good men! poor hearts. And here, if an honest Gentleman offers a Wife a civility by the By, our bloudy butch∣erly Husbands are cutting of throats presently— Clar. Oh that we had those frank civil English-men, instead of our grave dull surly Spanish Blockheads, whose greatest ho∣nour lies, in preserving their Beards and Foreheads inviolable. Flav. In England, if a Husband and Wife like not one ano∣ther, they draw two several ways, and make no bones on't, while the Husband treats his Mistris openly in his Glass-Coach; the Wife, for decency's sake, puts on her Vizar, and whips away in a Hackney with a Gallant, and no harm done. Clar. Though, of late, 'tis as unfashionable for a Husband to love his Wife there, as 'tis here, yet 'tis fashionable for her to love some body else, and that's something. Flav. Nay, they say, Gentlemen will keep company with a Cuckold there, as soon as another man, and ne'r wonder at him. Clar. Oh happy Countrey! there a Woman may chuse for her self, and none will into the Trap of Maimony, unless she likes the Bait; but here we are tumbl'd headlong and blindfold in∣to it. Flav. We are us'd as they use Hawks, never unhooded, or whistled off, till they are just upon the Quarry. Clar. And 'tis for others, not our selves, we fly too. Flav. No more, this does but put us in mind of our misery. Clar. It does so: but prethee let's be merry one night, to mor∣row is our last. Farewell all happiness. Flav. O that this happy day would last our lives-time. But
prethee, my Dear, let's have thy Song, and divert our slves as well as we can in the mean time. Clar. 'Tis a little too wanton. Flav. Prthee let's be a little wanton this evening, to morrow we must take our leaves on't. Clar. Come on then; our Maids shall joyn in the Chorus: Here they are. SONG. WOman who is by Nture wild, Dull berded men incloses; Of Nture's freedom we're begil'd By Laws which man impoes: Who still himself continues sree, Yet we poor Slaves must fetter'd be. Chor. A same on the Curse Of, For better sor worse; 'Tis a vile imposition on Nature: For Women should change, And have freedom to range, Like to every other wild Creature. So gay a thing was ne'r design'd. To be restrain'd from roving; Heav'n meant so changeable a mind Should have its change in loving. By cunning we could make men smart, But they by strength o'rcome our Art. Chor. A shame on the Curse Of, For, &c. How happy is the illage Maid, Whom onely Love can ftter; By foolish Honour ne'r betray'd, She serves a Pow'r much greater:
That lawful Prince the wisest rules, Th▪ Usurper Honour rules but Fools. Chor. A shame on the Curse Of, For, &c. Let us resume our antient right, Make man at distance wonder; Though he victorious be in sight, In love we'll keep him under. W and Ambition hence be hurl'd, Let Love and Beauty rule the World. Chor. A shame on the Curse Of, For better, &c. Flav. Oh, dear Clara, that this were true! But now let's home, our Father will miss us. Clar. No, he's walk'd abroad with the three Shipwrack'd Gentlemen. Flav. They're proper handsome Gentlemen; but the chief, whom they call Don John, exceeds the rest. Clar. I never saw a finer person; pray Heaven either of our Husbands prove as good. Flav. Do not name 'em. Let the Maids go home, and if my Father be there, let him know we are here. [Exit Maids. Clar. In the mean time, if he be thereabouts, do you go down that Walk, and I'll go this way, and perhaps one of us shall light on him. Flav. Agreed. [Exit ambo. Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio. D. Joh. Where have you left the Old man, Don Francisco? D. Lop. He's very busie at home, seeing all things prepar'd for his Daughters Weddings to moriow. D. Joh. His Daughters are gone this way: if you have any
friendship for me, go and watch the Old man; and if he offers to come towards us, divert him, that I may have freedom to at∣tack his Daughters. D. Ant. You may be sure of us, that have serv'd you with our lives; besides, the justice of this cause will make us serve you. Adieu. [Exeunt Don Lop. Don. Ant. D. Joh. Now for my Virgins. Asist me, Love. Fools, you shall have no Maiden-heads to morrow-night. Husbands have Maiden-heads! no, no—poor sneaking Fools. Enter Jacomo. Jac. I have lost my way, I think I shall never find this house: But I shall never think my self out of my way, unless I meet my impious Master; Heaven grant he be drown'd. D. Joh. How now, Rascal, are you alive? Jac. Oh Heaven! he's here. Why was this leud Creature sav'd? I am in a wose condition than ever; now I have scap'd drowning, he brings hanging fresh into my memory. D. Joh. What mute, Sirra? Jac. Sir, I am no more your Servant, you parted with me, I thank you, Sir, I am beholding to you: Farewell, good Sir, I am my own man now— D. Joh. No: though you are a Rogue, you are a necessary Rogue, and I'll not part with you. Jac. I must be gone, I dare not venture further with you. D. Joh. Sirra, do you know me, and dare you say this to me? have at your Guts, I will rip you from the Navel to the Chin. Jac. O good Sir, hold, hold. He has got me in his clutches, I shall never get loose—Oh! Oh!— D. Joh. Come, Dog, follow me close, stinking Rascal. Jac. I am too well pickl'd in the Salt-water to stink, I thank you, I shall keep a great while. But you were a very generous man, to leave a Gentleman, your Friend, in danger, as you did me. I have reason to follow you: but if I serve you not in your kind, then am I a sows'd Sturgeon. D. Joh. Follow me, Sirra; I see a Lady. Jac. Are you so fierce already?
Enter Clara, singing, A shame on the Curse, &c. Clar. Ha! this is the Stranger; What makes him here? D. Joh. A delicate Creature. Ha! this is the Lady. How happy am I to meet you here— Clar. What mean you, Sir? D. Joh. I was undone enough before, with seeing your Picture in the Gallery; but I see you have more Excellencies than Beau∣ty, your Voice needed not have conspir'd with that to ruine me. Clar. Have you seen my Picture? D. Joh. And lov'd it above all things I ever saw, but the Ori∣ginal. I am lost beyond redemption, unless you can pity me. Jac. (aside) He has been lost a hundred times, but he always sinds himself again—and me too; a pox on him. D. Joh. When Love had taken too fast hold on me, ever to let me go, I too late found you were to morrow to be marri'd. Clar. Yes, I am condemn'd to one I never saw, and you are come to railly me and my misfortunes. Jac. Ah, Madam, say not so, my Master is always in earnest. D. Joh. So much I am in earnest now, that if you have no way to break this marriage off, and pity me, I soon shall repent I ever came to Land; I shall suffer a worse wrack upon the Shoar, here I shall linger out my life in the worst of pains, despairing Love; there, I should have perish'd quickly— Jac. Ah poor man! he's in a desperate condition, I pity him with all my heart— D. Joh. Peace, Rascal. Madam, this is the onely opportunity I am like to have; Give me leave to improve it. Clar. Sure, Sir, you cannot be in earnest. D. Joh. If all the Oaths under the Sun can convince you, Ma∣dam, I swear— Jac. O Sir, Sir, have a care of swearing, for fear you should, once in your life, be forsworn— D. Joh. Peace, Dog, or I shall slit your Wind-pipe.
Jac. Nay, I know if he be forsworn, 'tis the first time, that's certain. Clar. But, Sir, if you be in earnest, and I had an inclination, Tis impossible to bring it about, my Father has dispos'd of me. D. Joh. Dispose of your self, I'll do well enough with him, and my Fortune and Quality are too great for him, for whom you are intended, to dispute with me. Clar. If this be true, wou'd you win a Woman at first sight? D. Joh. Madam, this is like to be the irst and last; to morrow is the fatal day that will undo me. Jac. Courage, Don, matters go well. Clar. Nay, I had rather have a Peasant of my own choosing, than an Emperor of another's. He is a handsome Gentleman, and seems to be of quality: Oh that he could rid me of my in∣tended slavery. [Aside. Sir, talk not of impossible things; for could I wish this, my Father's Honour will not suffer him to dispense wtih his promise. D. Joh. I'll carry you beyond his power, and your intended Husband's too. Clar. It cannot be; but I must leave you, I dare not be seen with you— D. Joh. Remember the short time you have to think on this: will you let me perish without relief? if you will have pity on a wretched man, I have a Priest in my company, I'll marry you, and we'll find means to fly early in the morning, before the house are stirring. Clar. I confess I am to be condemn'd to a Slavery, that no∣thing can be worse; yet this were a rash attempt. D. Joh. If you will not consent to my just desires, I am resolv'd to kill my self, and fall a Sacrifice to your disdain. Speak, speak my doom— [Hlds his Sword to his breast. Clar. Hold, hold— Jac. Ay, hold, hold: poor foolish Woman, she shou'd not need to bid him hold. Clar. I'll find a means this night to speak with you alone; but I fear this is but for your diversion. Jac. Yes, 'tis for diversion indeed; the common diversion of all the world.
D. Joh. By all that's great and good, my intentions are ho¦nourable. Clar. Farewell, Sir, I dare not stay longer. D. Joh. Will you keep your word, Madam? Jac. You'll keep yours, no doubt— Clar. I will, any thing rather than marry one I cannot love, as I can no man of another's choosing. D. Joh. Remember, Madam, I perish if you do not; I have onely one thing to say, Keep this Secret from your Sister, till we have effected it; I'll give you sufficient reason for what I say. [Exit Clar. Victoria, Victoria; I have her fast, she's my own. Jac. You are a hopeful man, you may come to good in time. Enter Flavia. D. Joh. Here is the other Sister; have at her. Jac. Why, Sir, Sir; have you no conscience? Will not one at once serve your turn? D. Joh. Stand by, Fool. Let me see, you are the Lady. Flav. What say you, Sir? D. Joh. You have lately taken up a stray heart of mine, I hope you do not intend to detain it, without giving me your own in exchange. Flav. I a heart of yours? since when, good Sir? you were but this day shipwrack'd on this Coast, and never saw my face before▪ D. Joh. I saw your Picture, and I saw your motion, both so charming, I could not resist them; but now I have a nearer view, I see plainly I am lost. Flav. A goodly handsome man! but what can this mean? D. Joh. Such killing Beauties I ne'r saw before; my heart is irrevocably gone. Flav. Whether is it gone, Sir? I assure you I have no su thing about me, that I know of. D. Joh. Ah, Madam, if you wou'd give me leave to search you, I should find it in some little corner about you, that shall be nameless. Flav. It cannot be about me, I have none but my own
that I must part with to morrow to I know not whom. D. Joh. If the most violent love that man e'r knew can e'r deserve that treasure, it is mine; if you give that away, you lose the truest Lover that e'r languish'd yet. Jac. What can be the end of this? Sure Bloud▪ must follow this dishonour of the Family▪ and I unfortunate, shall have my throat cut for company. Flav. Do you know where you are? D. Joh. Yes, Madam, in Spain, where opportunities are very , and those that are wise make use of 'em as soon as they have 'em. Flav. You have a mind▪ to divert your self; but I must leave you, I am dispos'd to be more serious. D. Joh. Madam, I swear by all— Jac. Hold, hold; will you be forsworn again? D. Joh. Peace, Villain, I shall cut that tongue out. Flav. Farwell, I cannot stay. [Exit Flavia. D. Joh. I'll not leave her; I'll thaw her, if she were Ice, before I have done with her. Jac. There is no end of this lewdness. Well, I must be kill'd or hang'd once for all, and there's an end on't. [Exeunt. Enter Maria and Leonora. Leon. I am faint with what I suffer'd at Sea, and with my wandring since; let us repose a little, we shall not find this house to night. Mar. I ne'r shall rest till I have found Don Francisco's house; but I'll sit down a while. Leon. I hope he will not find it, till I have found means to give Don John warning of his cruel intentions: I would save his life, who, I fear, would not do that for me. But in the miserable ase that I am in, if he dies his love, death would be the wel∣com'st thing on earth to me. Mar. Oh my Octavio▪ how does the loss of thee perplex me with despair! the honour of Mankind is gone with thee. Why do I whine? grief shall no longer usurp the place of my revenge. How could I gnaw the Monster's heart, Villain! I'll be with you.
When I have reveng'd my dear Octavio's loss, I then shall d contented. Enter Don Lopez and Don Antonio. D. Lop. Th'old man's safe; I long to know Don John's success. D. Ant. He's engag'd upon a noble cause: if he succeeds, 'twill be a victory worth the owning. D. Lop. Hah! whom have we here? a young man well ha∣bited, with a Lady too; they seem to be strangers. D. Ant. A mischief comes into my head, that's worth the do∣ing. D. Lop. What's that, dear Antonio? D. Ant. We are in a strange Countrey, and may want money: I would rob that young Fellow. We have not robb'd a good while; me-thinks 'tis a new wickedness to me. D. Lop. Thou art in the right. I hate to commit the same dull sin over and over again, as if I were marri'd to it: variety makes all things pleasant. D. Ant. But there's one thing we'll ne'r omit. When we have robb'd the Man, we'll ravish the Woman. D. Lop. Agreed; let's to't, man. Come on, young Gentleman, we must see what riches you have about you. Mar. O Villains! Thieves! Thieves! these are the inhu∣mane Companions of that blouy Monster. Leon. Have pity on poor miserable Strangers. D. Ant. Peace; we'll use you kindly, very kindly. D. Lop. Do you carry that young Gentleman, bind him to a Tree, and bring the money, while I wait upon the Lady. D. Ant. Will you play me no foul play in the mean time then? For we must cast Lots about the business you wot of. D. Lop. No, upon my honour. Mar. Honour, you Villain? D. Ant. Come, young Gentleman, I'll tame you. Mar. Help! help— [Exit Don Ant. having Maria. Leon. Have you no humanity in you? Take our money, but leave us liberty; be not so barb'rously cruel. D. Ant. Come, I have made haste with him; now let us draw
uts who enjoys the Lady first. Leon. O heav'n assist me! what do I hear? help! help! Enter four or five Countrey Fellows, coming from work. 1. Count. Fel. What, two men a robbing of a Lady! Be gone, and let her alone, or we have sower Cudgels shall wasler your bones, I tell you that. D. Ant. How now, Rogues? [Fight ofs the Stage. Leon. Thanks to Heav'n. I fly! I fly! where shall I hide my self?— [Exit. Enter Don John and Jacomo. D. Joh. I shall conquer'em both. Now, Sirra, what think you? Jac. Why I think you manage your business as discreetly, and take as much pains to have your throat cut, as any man in Spain. D. Joh. Your fear o'r-rules your sense, mine is a life Monarchs might envy.— Jac. 'Tis like to be a very short one at this rate. D. Joh. Away, Fool, 'tis dark, I must be gone; I shall scarce find the way home— Enter Leonora. Leon. Heav'n guard me from these wicked Wretches. Help! help! they are here. D. Joh. How now, Madam? what▪ afraid of a Man! Leon. Don John, no, not of you; you are the man i'th' world I wou'd have met. D. Joh. Leonora, you are the woman i'th'world I would have avoided. 'Sdeath! she will spoil my new designs; but I have a trick for her. What miracle brought you hither? Leon. Love, that works the greatest miracles, made me follow you; and the same Storm drove me on this shoar, on which you were thrown, and thus far I've wander'd till I have found you. D. Joh. This is the most unreasonable unsatiable loving Lady▪ that ever was abus'd by man; she has a kind of Spaniel love,
the worse you use her, the more loving she is. Pox on her, I mu be rid of her. Leon. I am very faint and weary, yet I was resolv▪d not to rest till I had found you. D. Joh. Your unweari'd love has o'rcome and convinc'd me, there is not such a Woman breathing. Leon. This is a Sovereign Medicine for all my sorrows, I now, methinks, am happier than ever: but I am faint and ill. D. Joh. Here, Madam, I have an excellent Cordial, 'twill re∣fresh you; and I'll conduct you where you shall never be un∣happy more. Leon. From that dear hand 'tis welcome— To your health. [Drinks. D. Joh. And to your own destruction; you have drunk your last. Leon. What means my Love? D. Joh. Y'have drunk the subtlest poison that Art e'r yet in∣vented. Jac. O murder! murder! what have you done? D. Joh. Peace, Villain, leave your unseasonable pity—You cannot live two minutes. Leon. O ungrateful Tyrant! thou hast murder'd the onely Creature living that cou'd love thee. Heaven will revenge it, though to me 'tis kindness. Here all my sorrows shall for ever cease. D. Joh. Why would you persecute me with your love? Leon. I could not help it. I came to preserve you, and am de∣stroy'd for't. Jac. Oh horrid fact! D. Joh. To preserve me! I wear my safety by my side. Leon. Oh I faint! Guard your self. There's a young Gentleman pursues your life. Have a Care— I came to tell you this, and thus I am rewarded. Heav'n pardon you. Farewell. I can no more. [Dies. Jac. This object sure will strike your heart! Tygers would melt at this. Oh the Earth will open and swallow you up, and me for company. There's no end of your murders— D. Joh. This is the first time I ever knew compassion. Poor Fool, I pity her, but 'tis too late—
Farewell all sensless thoughts of a remorse, I would remove what e'r wou'd stop my course. [Exeunt. ACT IV. Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. D. Joh. THis nights success exceeded all my hopes. I had ad∣mittance to their several Chambers, and I have been contracted to both the Sisters, and this day resolve to mar∣ry 'em, and at several time enjoy them; and, in my opinion, I shall have a brace of as pretty Wives, as any man in Spain. D. Ant. Brave Don John, you are Master of your Art, not a Woman in Spain can stand before you. D. Lop. We can but envy you, and at a distance imitate; But both their Maids shall to pot, I assure you. Jac. How far will the Devil hurry you? D. Joh. 'Tis not the Devil, 'tis the Flesh, Fool. Jac. Here will be fine cutting of throats. Poor Jacomo, must thou be cut off in the flower of thy Age? Enter Don Francisco. D. Fran. Gentlemen, your Servant; I hope you rested well this night. D. Lop. We thank you, Sir; never better. D. Ant. We never shall requite this oligation. Jac. I warrant you my Master will; he's a very grateful civil person indeed. D. Joh. The favour is too great to be suddenly requited; but I shall study to deserve it. Jac. Good man, you will deserve it. Enter two Bridegrooms. D. Fran. Gentlemen, you are come, you are early.
1. Brideg. This joyful occasion made us think it late. 2. Brideg. The expectation of so great a blessing as we this day hope to enjoy, would let us have but little rest last night. 1. Brideg. And the fruition will afford us less to night. D. Joh. Poor Fools! you shall be bob'd. How it tickles my Spleen to think on't. D. Fran. These are to be my Sons in Law. D. Joh. And my Cuckolds before-hand. D. Fran. Pray know 'em, Gentlemen; they are men of Honour. D. Joh. I shall be glad to serve them; But first I'll serve their Ladies. [Asde. D. Fran. Come, Gentlemen, I'll now conduct you to my Daughters; and beg your pardon for a moment, I'll wait on you again. [Exit Don Fran. and Bridegrooms. D. Ant. These Fools will spoil your design. D. Joh. No, poor Sots; I have perswaded the Ladies to feign sickness, and put off their marriage till to morrow morning, to gain time; in the mean while I have 'em safe, Boys. D. Lop. But will not the Sisters betray you to one another? D. Joh. No, I have wheedled each into a jealousie of the other, and each believes, that if the other knows it, she, in ho∣nour, will reveal it to the Father. Jac. Sir, if you be so very weary of your life, why don't you make use of a convenient Beam? 'tis the easier way; so you may die without the filthy pother you keep about it. D. Joh. Away, Coward; 'tis a sign I am not weary of my life, that I make so much use on't. Jac. Oh Jacomo! thou art lost; 'tis pity a Fellow of thy neat spruce parts should be destroy'd. Enter Don ancisco. D. Fran. Come, Gentlemen, will you not refresh your selves with some cool Wines this morning? D. Lop. We thank you, Sir, we have already.
Enter a Servant Serv. Sir, here's a young Gentleman, a Stranger, desires to speak with you. D. . Admit him. Enter Maria in  habit. Your humble Servant. Mar. Sir, when I ve told you what I come for, I doubt not but I shall deserve your thanks. I come to do you service. D. Fran. You have'em, Sir, alread— Mar. You have lodgd within your house some shipwrack'd men, who are greater Villains than the Earth e'r bore; I come to give you warning of 'em, and to beg your power to revenge such horrid actions, as heart could never yet conceive, or tongue could utter. Ha! they are these—Revenge, revenge cruel, unnatural Rapes and Murders. They are Devils in the shapes of men. D. Fran. What say you, Sir? Jac. Now the snare is faln upon me; me-thinks I feel cold Steel already in my body. Too well I know that face. D. Joh. I know that face. Now, Impudence, assist me. What mad young man is that? D. Fran. These, by their habits and their meens, are Gentle∣men, and seem to be men of Honour. Mar. By these two, last night, I was robb'd, and bound to a Tree, and there have been all night, and but this morning was reliev'd by Peasants—I had a Lady with me, whom they said they would ravish, and t morning I saw her dead; they must have murder'd her. D. Fran. Heav'n! what do I hear? Jac. Oh! I am noos'd already, I feel the knot, methinks, un∣der my left ear. D. Ant. The youth raves; we never saw his face, we never stirr'd from the bounds of this house since we came hither. D. Lop. 'Sdeath, let me kill the Villain; shall he thus affront men of our quality and honour?
D. Fran. Hold, consider I am a Magistrate. D. Joh. The Youth was robb'd, and with the fright has lost his wits. Poor Fool! let him be bound in's bed. D. Fran. Do not persist in this, but have a care: These injuries to men of Honour shall not go unpunished. Mar. Whither shall injur'd Innocence fly for succour, if you so soon can be corrupted? Monster, I'll revenge my self; have at thy heart. D. Fran. What means the Youth? put up your Sword. D. Ant. We told you, Sir, he was mad. Mar. Oh impudent Villains! I ask your pardon, Sir: My griefs and injuries trnsport me so, I scarce can utter them. That Villain is Don John, who basely murder'd the Governour of Sevil in his house, and then dishonour'd his fair Sister. D. Joh. Death and Hell! this injury is beyond all sufferance. D. Joh. Hold, Sir, think in whose house you are. Jac. O Lord! what will this come to? Ah Jacomo! thy line of life is short. Mar. This is the Villain, who kill'd the Lover of Antonio's Sister, deflow'rd her, and murder'd her Brother in his own house. D. Joh. I'll have no longer ience. D. Ant. Such a Villain should have his throat cut, though in a Church. D. Lop. No man of honour will protect those, who offer such injuries. D. Joh. Have at you, Villain. D. Fran. Nay then; Within there: Ho! I will protect him, or perish with him. Enter two Bridegrooms. 1. Brideg. What's the matter? D. Joh. This rashness will spoil my design upon the Daugh∣ters; if I had perfected that, I would have own'd all this for half a Duccatoon— [To Ant. Lop. I ask your pardon fo my ill manners; I was provok'd too far: indeed the accusations are so extravagant and odd, I rather
should have laugh'd at 'em. Let the young Fool have a vein open'd, he's stark staring mad. D. Ant. A foolish Impostor. We ne'r saw Sevil till last night. Mar. Oh Impudence! Jac. No, not we; we never were there till yesterday. Pray, Sir, lay that young Fellow by the heels, for lying on us, men of Honour. D. Fran. What is the matter, Friend, you tremble so? D. Lop. 'Sdeath, the Dog's fear will betray us. Jac. I tremble, Sir? no, no, Sir: I tremble—Though it would make any one tremble to hear one lie, as that young Gentleman does. Have you no conscience in you? Mar. Heav'n can witness for me, I speak not false. Octavio, my dear Octavio, being dearest to me of all the world, I would in Sevil have reveng'd his murder; but the Villain there escap'd me: I follow'd him to Sea, and in the same Storm in which their Ship perish'd, I was thrown on shoar. Oh my Octavio! if this foul unnatural murther be not reveng'd, there is no Justice left among mankind. His Ghost, and all the rest whom he has bar∣barously murder'd, will interrupt your quiet; they'll haunt you in your sleep. Revenge, revenge! 2. Bride. This is wonderful. D. Fran. There must be something in this; his passion cannot be counterfeited, nor your man's fear. Jac. My fear? I scorn your words; I fear nothing under the Sun. I fear? Ha, ha, ha— D. Joh. Will you believe this one false Villain against three, who are Gentlemen, and men of honour? Jac. Nay, against four, who are Gentlemen, and men of honour? Mar. O Villain, that I had my Sword imbru'd in thy hearts bloud. Oh my dear Octavio! Do Justice, Sir, or Heav'n will punish you. Enter Clara. D. Fran. Gentlemen, he is too earnest, in his grief and anger, to be what you wou'd have him, an Impostor. My house has
been your Sanctuary, and I am oblig'd in honour not to act as a Magistrate, but your Host, no violence shall here be offer'd to you; but you must instantly leave this house, and if you would have safety, find it somewhere else. Be gone. D. Joh. This is very well. Mar. Oh! will you let 'em go unpunish'd? Whither shall I lie for vengeance? D. Fran. Pray leave this place immediately. Jac. Ah, good Sir, let's be gone—Sir, your most humble Servant. Clar. Oh, Sir, consider what you do; do not banish Don John from hence. 1. Brideg. Ha! what means she? D. Fran. What say you? Clar. Oh, Sir, he is my Husband, we were last night con∣tracted. D. Fran. Oh Heav'n! what do I hear? 1. Brideg. I am dishonour'd, abus'd. Villain, thou diet. D. Joh. Villain, you lie; I will cut your throat first. D. Fran. Hey, where are my people here. Enter Servants and Flavia. Flav. Oh, Sir, hold; if you banish Don John, I am lost for ever. D. Fran. Oh Devil! what do I hear? Flav. He is my Husband, Sir, we were last night contracted. Clar. Your Husband! Heav'n! what's this? 2. Brideg. Hell and Damnation! D. Fran. Oh! I have lost my senses. Mar. Oh Monster! now am I to be believ'd? Jac. Oh spare my life! I am innocent as I hope to live and breath. D. Joh. Dog, you shall fight for your life, if you have it. D. Franc. First, I'll revenge my self on these. D. Joh. Hold, hold, they are both my Wives, and I will have them. [Runs at his Daughters, they run out.
D. Franc. Oh Devil! fall on— Mar. Fall on, I will assist you. [They fight, Maria and Don Francisco are kill'd, the two Bridegrooms are hurt, Jacomo runs away. D. Joh. Now we've done their business. Ah, cowardly Rogue! are not you a Son of a Whore? Jac. Ay, Sir, what you please: A man had better be a living Son of a Whore, than a dead Hero, by your favour. D. Joh. I could find in my heart to kill the Rascal; his fear, some time or other, will undo us. Jac. Hold, Sir; I went, Sir, to provide for your escape. Let's take Horses out of the Stable, and flie; abundance of C∣pany are coming, expecting the Wedding, and we are i∣parably lost if we take not this time. I think my fear will now preserve you. D. Ant. I think he counsels well. Let's flie to a new place of pleasure. D. Joh. But I shall leave my business undone with the two Women. D. Lop. 'Tis now scarce feizible. Let's sly; you'll light on others as handsom, where we come next. D. Joh. Well, dispose of me as you please; and yet it troubls me. Jac. Haste, haste, or we shall be apprehended. [Exeunt. Enter Clara and Favia. Flav. O that I ever liv'd to see this day! This fatall day! 'Twas our vile disobedience Caus'd our poor Father's death, which Heav'n Will revenge on us. So lewd a Villain As Don John was never heard of yet. Clr. That we should be so credulous! Oh dreadful Accident! Dear Father, what Expiation can We make? our crime's too foul for Tears to wash away, and all our livs will B too short, to spend in penitence for this Our levity and disobedience. He was the
Best of Fathers, and of Men. Flav. What will become of us, poor miserable Maids, Lost in our Fortunes and our Reputations? Our intended Husbands, if they recover of their Wounds, will murder us; and 'tis but Justice: Our lies too now cannot be worth the keeping. Devils in the shapes of men are fled. Clr. Let us not waste our time in fruitless grief; Lt us employ some to pursue the murderers. And for our selves, let's to the next Monastery, And there spend all our weary life in penitence. Flv. Let's fly to our last Sanctuary in this world, And try, by a Rligious life, to expiate this Crime: There is no safety, or no hope but there. Let's go, and bid a long farewell to all the World; a thing too vain, and little worth our care. Clr. Agreed; farewell to all the vanity on Earth, Where wretched Mortals, toss'd 'twixt hope and fear, Must of all fix'd and solid joy despair. [Exeunt. The Scene is a delightful Grove. Ener two Shepherds and two Nimphs. 1. Shep. Come Nimphs and Shepherds, haste away To tappy Sports within these shady Groves, In pleasant lives time slides away apace, But with the wretched seems to creep too slow. 1. Nimph. Our happy leisure we employ in joys, As innocent as they are pleasant. We, Strangers to strife, and to tumultuous noise, To baneful envy, and to wretched cares, In rural pleasures spend our happy days, And our soft nights in calm and quiet sleeps. 2. Shep. No rude Ambition interrupts our rest, Nor base and guilty thoughts how to be great. 2. Nimph. In humble Cottages we have such contents, As uncorrupted Nature does afford,
Which the great, that surfeit under gilded Roofs, And wanton in Down Beds, can never know. 1. Shep. Nature is here not yet debauch'd by Art, 'Tis as it was in Saturn's happy days: Minds are not here by Luxury invaded; A homely Plenty, with sharp Appetite, Does lightsome health, and vigorous strength impart. 1. Nimph. A chast-cold Spring does here refresh our thirst, Which by no feavourish surfeit is increas'd; Our food is such as Nature meant for Men, Ere with the Vicious, Eating was an Art. 2. Nimph. In noisie Cities riot is persu'd, And lewd luxurious living softens men, Effeminates Fools in Body and in Mind, Weakens their Appetites, and decays their Nerves. 2. Shep. With ilthy steams from their excess of Mea, And clowdy vapours rais'd from dangrous Wine; Their heads are never clear or free to think, They waste their lives in a continual mist. 1. Shep. Some subtil and ill men chuse Temperance, Not as a Vertue, but a Bawd to Vice, And vigilantly wait to ruine those, Whom Luxury and Ease have lull'd asleep. 2. Shep. Yes, in the clamorous Courts of tedious Law, Where what is meant for a relief's a gievance; Or in Kings Palaces, where Cunning strives, Not o advance King's Interests, but its own. 1. Nimph. There they in a continual hurry live, And seldom can, for all their subtile Arts, Lay their foundations sure; but some Are undermin'd, others blown down by storms. 2. Nimph. Their subtilty is but a common Road Of flattering great men, and oppressing little, Smiling on all they meet, and loving none. 1. Shep. In populous Cities, life is all a storm; But we enjoy a sweet perpetual calm: Here our own Flocks we keep, and here I and my Phillis can embrace unenvi'd.
2. Shep. And I and Caelia without jealousie. But hark, the Pipes begin; now for our sports. [A Symphony of Rustick Musick▪ NImphs and Shepherds come away, In these Groves let's sport and play; Where each day is a Holy-day, Sacred to Ease and happy Love. To Dancing, Musick, Poetry: Your Flocks may nw securely rov. Whilst you express your jollity. Enter Shepherds and Shepherdesses, singing in Chor▪ We come, we come, no joy like this. Now let us sing, rejoyce, and kiss. The Great can never know such bliss 1. As this. 2. As this. 3. As this. All. As this. The Great can never know such bliss 1. All th' Inhabitants o'th'Wood, Now celebrate the Spring, That gives fresh vigour to the bloud Of every living thing. Chor. The Birds have been singing and billing before us, And all the sweet Choristers joyn in the Chorus. 2. The Nightingales with ging throats, Warble out their pre Notes, So sweet, so sweet, so sweet: And thus our Loves and Pleasures greet. Chor. Then let our Pipes sound, let us dnce, let us sing, Till the murmuring Groves with loud Eccho's shall ring. [Dance begin
4. How happy are we, From all jealousie free; No dangers or cares can annoy us: We toy and we kiss, And Love's our chief bliss; A pleasure that never can cloy us. Chor. Our days we consume in unenvi'd delights, And in love and soft rest our happy long nights. 4. Each Nimph does impart Her love without Art, To her Swain, who thinks that his chief Treasure. No envy is fear'd, No sighs are e'r heard, But those which are caus'd by our pleasure. Chor. When we feel the bless'd Raptures of innocent Love, No joys exceed ours but the pleasures above. General Chorus. In these delightful fragrant Groves, Let's celebrate our happy Loves. Let's pipe, and dance, and laugh, and sing; Thus every happy living thing, Revels in the cheerful Spring. [Dance continues. Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. D. Joh. So, thus far we are fafe, we have almost kill'd our Horses with riding cross out of all Roads. Jac. Nay, you have had as little mercy on them, as if they had been Men or Women: But et we are not safe, let us fly farther. D. Joh. The house I lighted at was mine during my life, which I sold to that fellow; he, since he holds by that tenure, will care∣fully conceal us. Jac. ▪Tis a Tenure I will not give him two moneths purchase for. D. Joh. Besides, our Swords are us'd to conquest.
D. Ant. At worst, there is a Churh hard by; we'll put it to its proper use, take refuge in't. D. Lop. Look here, here are Shepherds, and young pretty Wenches; shall we be idle, Don? D. Ant. By no means; 'tis a long time, methinks, since we were vicious. D. Joh. We'll serve 'em as the Romans did the Sabines, we'll rob 'em of their Women; onely we'll return the Punks again, when we have us'd them. Jc. For Heav'ns sake hold. D. Joh. Sirra, no more; do as we do, ravish, Rascal, or, by my Sword, I'll cut thee into so many pieces, it shall pose an Arithmetician to sum up the fracions of thy body. Jac. I ravish! Oh, good Sir! my courage lies not that way; alas, I, I am almost famish'd, I have not eat to day. D. Joh. Sirra, by Heaven do as I bid thee, or thou shalt never eat again. Shall I keep a Rascal for a Cypher? Jac. Oh! what will become of me? I must do it. D. Jh. Come on, Rogue, fall on. D. Ant. Which ae you for? D. Joh. 'Tis all one, I am not in Love but in Lust, and to such a one a Belly-full's a Belly-full, and there's an end on't. 1. Shepherdess. What means this violence? 2. Shepherdess. Oh! Heav'n protect us. Jac. Well, I must have one too; if I be hang'd, I had as good be hang'd for something. [Every one runs off with a Woman. D. Lop. Rogues, come not on; we'll be in your guts. All Shepherdess. Help, help. [They cry out. 1. Shep. What Devils are these? [Exeunt. [Three or four Shepherds return with Jaomo. 1. Shep. Here's one Rogue. Have we caught you, Sir? we'll cool your courage. Jac. Am I taken prisoner? I shall be kept as an honourable Hostage, at least— 2. Shep. Whee are thee Villains, these Ravishers? Jac. Why you need not keep such a stir, entlemen, you will
have all your Women again, and no harm done. Let me go, I'll fetch 'em to you. 1. Shep. No, you libidinous Swine; we'll revenge the Rapes on you. Jac. Good kind civil people pass this by: 'Tis true, my Ma∣ster's a very Tarquin; but I ne'r attempted to ravish before. 2. Shep. I'll secure you from ever doing of it again. Where' your Knife? Jac. Heav'n! what do you mean? Oh spare me! I am un∣prepar'd; let me be confest. 1. Shep. We will not kill you, we'll but geld you: Are you so ho, Sir? Jac. Oh bloudy Villains! have a care, 'tis not a season for that, the Sign's in Scorpio. 2. Shep. Down with him— Jac. O help, help! murder, murder! Have a care what you do, I am the last of all my Race—Will you destroy a whole Stok, and take away my Representers of my Family?— 1. Shep. There shall be no more of the Breed of you—▪ Jac. I am of an antient Family; will you cut off all hopes of a Son and Heir? Help! help! Master, Don John? Oh! Oh! Oh! Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio. D. Joh. How now, Rogues? do you abuse my Man? Jac. O Sir, this is the first good thing you ever did: if you had not come just in the Nick, I had lost my Manhood. D. Ant. 'Tis no matter for the use you make on't. D. Lop. But come, let's now to Supper. Jac. Come on, I am almost starv'd. [Exeunt. Shepherds return. 1. Shep. Let's not complain, but Dog the Rogues, and when we have Hous'd 'em, we will to the next Magistrate, and beg his pow'r to apprehend 'em. [Exeunt.
The Scene changes to a Church, with the Statue of Don Pedro on Horseback in it. D. Joh. Let's in, and see this Church. Jac. Is this a time to see Churches? But let me see whose Sta∣tue's this? Oh Heav'n! this is Don Pedro's, whom you murder'd at Sevil. D. Joh. Say you so? Read the Inscription. Jac. Here lies Don Pedro, Governour of Sevil, barbarously mur∣der'd by that impious Villain, Don John, gainst whom his innocent bloud cries still for vengeance. D. Joh. Let it cry on. Art thou there i'faith? ▪Yes, I kill'd thee, and wou'd do't again upon the same occasion. Jacomo—invite him to Supper. Jac What, a Statue! invite a Statue to Supper? Ha, ha—can Marble eat? D. Joh. I say, Rascal, tell him I would have him Sup with me. Jac. Ha, ha, ha! who the Devil put this ▪ whimsey into your head? Ha, ha, ha! invite a Statue to Supper? D. Joh. I shall spoil your mirth, Sirr; I will have it done. Jac. Why, 'tis impossible; wou'd you have me such a Cox∣comb, invite Mable to eat? Ha, ha, ha. [He goes several times towards the Statue, and returns laughing. Good Mr. Statue, if it shall please your Worship, my Master desires you to make Collation with him presently— [The Statue nods his head, Jacomo falls down and roars. Oh I am dead! Oh, Oh, Oh. D. Joh. The Statue nods its head; 'tis odd— D. Ant. 'Tis wonderful. D. Lop. am amaz'd. Jac. Oh I cannot stir! Help, help. D. Joh. Well, Governour, come, take part of a Collation with me, 'tis by this time ready; make haste, 'tis I invite you. [Statue nods again. Say you so? come on, let's set all things in order quickly. Jac. Oh fly, fly.
D. Ant. This is prodigious. [Exeunt Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. The Scene is a Dining Room, a Table spread, Servants setting on Meat and Wine. D. Joh. Come, our meat is ready, let's sit. Pox on this foolish Statue, it puzles me to know the reason on't. Sirra, I'll give you leave to sit. D. Ant. Let's eat, ne'r think on't. Jac. Ay, come, let's eat; I am too hungry now to think on the fright— [Jacomo eats greedily. D. Joh. This is excellent Meat. How the Rogue eats. You'll choak your self. Jac. I warrant you, look to yourself. D. Ant. Why, Jacomo, is the Devil in you? Jac. No, no; if he be, 'tis a hungry Devil. D. Lop. Will you not drink? Jac. I'll lay a good foundation first. D. Joh. The Rascal eats like a Canibal. Jac. Ay, 'tis no matter for that. D. Joh. Some Wine, Sirra. Jac. There, Sir, take it; I am in haste. D. Ant. 'Sdeath, the Fool will be strangl'd. Jac. The Fool knows what he does. D. Joh. Here's to Don Pedro's Ghost, he should have been welcome. Jac. O name him not. D. Lop. The Rascal is afraid of you after death. Jac. Oh! Oh! some Wine, give me some Wine. [Almost . D. Ant. Take it. Jac. So, now 'tis down. D. Ant. Are you not satisfi'd yet? Jac. Peace, peace; I have but just begun. [One knocks hard at the dor. Who's there? come in, I am very busie.
D. Joh. Rise, and do your duty. Jac. But one morsel more, I come. [Knocks again. What a pox, are you mad? [Opens the door. Enter Ghost. Oh! the Devil, the Devil. D. Joh. Hah! it is the Ghost, let's rise and receive him. D. Ant. I am amaz'd. D. Lop. Not frighted are you? D. Ant. I scorn the thoughts of fear. [They salute the Ghost. D. Joh. Come, Governour, you are welcome, sit there; if we had thought you would have come, we wou'd have staid for you. But come on, Sirra, give me some Wine. [The Ghost sits. Jac. Oh! I am dead; what shall I do? I dare not come near you. D, Joh. Come, Rascal, or I'll cut your throat. [Fills Wine, his hand trembles. Jac. I come, I come. Oh! Oh! D. Joh. Why do you tremble, Rascal? hold it steadily— Jac. Oh! I cannot. [Jacomo snatches meat from the Table, and runs aside. D. Joh. Here, Governour, your health. Friends, put it about. Here's excellent meat; taste of this Ragoust. If you had had a body of flesh, I would have given you cher entire—but the Women care not for Marble. Come, I'll help you. Come, eat and let old quarrels be forgotten. Ghosh. I come not here to take repast with you; Heaven has permitted me to animate This Marble body and I come to warn You of that vengeance is in store for you, If you amend not your pernicious lives. Jac. Oh Heav'n! D. Ant. What, are you ome to preach to us? D. Lop. Keep your Harangues for Fools that will believe 'em. D. Joh. We are too much confirm'd. Pox o' this dry discourse,
give me some Wine. Come, here's to your Mistris; you had one when you were living: not forgetting your sweet Sister▪ Sirra, more Wine. Jac. Ay, Sir—Good Sir, do not provoke the Ghost; his Marble fists may fly about your ears, and knock your brains out. D. Joh. Peace, Fool. Ghost. Tremle, you impious Wretches, and repent; Behold, the pow'rs of Hell wait for you— [Devils rise. Jac. Oh! I will steal from hence. Oh the Devil! D. Joh. Sirra, stir not; by Heav'n I'll use thee worse than Devils can do. Come near, Coward. Jac. O I dare not stir; what will become of me? D. Joh. Come, Sirra, eat. Jac. O, Sir, my appetite is satisfied. D. Joh. Drink, Dog, the Ghost's health: Rogue, do't, or I'll run my Sword down your throat. Jac. Oh! Oh! Here, Mr. Statue, your health. D. Joh. Now, Rascal, sing to entertain him. Jac. Sing, quoth he! Oh! I have lost my voice; I cannot be merry in such company. Sing— D. Ant. Who are these with ugly shapes? D. Lop. Their manner of appearing is something strange. Ghost. They're Devils, that wait for such hard impious Men. They're Heavens Instruments of eternal vengeance. D. Joh. Are they some of your Retinue? Devils, say you? I am sorry I have no Burnt Brandey to treat'em with, that's Drink fit for Devils—Hah! they vanish. [They sink. Ghost. Cannot the fear of Hell's eternal tortures, Change the horrid course of your abandon'd lives? Think on those Fires, those everlasting Fires, That shall without consuming burn you ever. D. Joh. Dreams, dreams, too slight to lose my pleasure for. In spight of all you say I will go on, Till I have surfeited on all delights. Youth is a Fruit that can but once be gather'd, And I'll enjoy it to the full.
D. Ant. Let's push it on; Nature chalks out the way that we should follow. D. Lop. 'Tis her fault, if we do what we should not. Let's on, here's a Brimmer to our Leader's health. Jac. Wha hellish Fiends are these? D. Joh. Let me tell you, 'tis something ill bred to rail at your Host, that treats you civilly. You have not yet forgot your quarrel to me. Ghost. 'Tis for your good; by me Heaven warns you of its wrath, and gives you a longer time for your repentance. I in∣vite you this night to a repast of mine. D. Joh. Where? Ghost. At my Tomb. D. Ant. What time? Ghost. At dead of night. D. Joh. We'll come. Ghost. Fail not. D. Lop. I warrant you. Ghost. Farewell, and think upon your lost codition. D. Joh. Farewell, Governour; I'll see what Treat you'll give us. D. Ant. And I. D. Lop. And I. Jac. That will not I. Pox on him, I have had enough of his company, I shall not recover it this week. If I eat with such an Host, I'll be hang'd. D. Joh. If you do not, by Heaven you shall be hang'd. Jac. Whither will your lewdness carry me? I do not care for having a Ghost for my Landlord. Will not these Miracles do good upon you? D. Joh. There's nothing happens but by Natural Causes, Which in unusual things Fools cannot find, And then they stile 'em Miracles. But no Accident Can alter me from what I am by Nature. Were there— Legions of Ghosts and Devils in my way, One moment in my course of pleasure I'd not stay. [Exunt omnes
ACT V. Enter Jacomo, with Back, Breast, and Head-piece. Jac. WEll, this damn'd Master of mine will not part with me; and we must fight five or six times a day, one day with another, that's certain: Therefore thou art wise, ho∣nest Jacomo, to arm thy self, I take it. Sa, sa, sa—Methinks I am very valiant on the sudden. Sa, sa, sa. Hah! there I have you. Paph—Have at you. Hah—there I have you through: that was a fine thrust in tierce. Hah—Death! what noise is that? Enter Don John. D. Joh. How now, Sirra, what are you doing? Jac. Nothing, but practising to run people through the bo∣dies, that's all; for I know some body's throat must be cut be∣fore midnight. D. Joh. In Armour too! why, that cannot help you, you are such a cowardly Fool; fear will betray you faster within, than that can defend you without— Jac. I fear no body breathing, I; nothing can terrifie me but the Devillish Ghost. Ha! who's that coming? Oh Heaven! [Leaps back. D. Joh. Is this your courage? you are preparing for flight be∣fore an Enemy appears. Jac. No, no, Sir, not I; I onely leapt back to put my self upon my guard—Fa, la, la— Enter Don Lopez and Don Antonio. D. Joh. Whom have we here? Jac. Oh where! where! who are they? D. Joh. Oh my Friends! where have you been?
D. Ant. We went to view the stately Nunnery hard by, and have been chatting with the poor sanctifi'd Fools, till it's dark; we have been chaffering for Nuns-flesh. D. Lop. There I made such a discovery, if you do not assist me, I am ruin'd for ever. Don Bernardo's Sister, whom I fell in love with in Sevil, is this day plac'd there for probation; and if you cannot advise me to some way or other of getting her out, for some present occasion I have for her, I am a lost man, that's certain. D. Ant. The business is difficult, and we resolve to manage it in council. Jac. Now will they bring me into some wicked occasion or other of shewing my prowess: a pox on 'em. D. Joh. Have you so long followed my fortunes, to boggle at difficulty upon so honourable an occasion; besides, here is no difficulty. D. Lop. No? the Walls are so high, and the Nunnery so strongly fortifi'd, 'twill be impossible to do it by force; we must find some stratagem. D. Joh. The stratagem is soon found out— D. Ant. As how, Don John? D. Joh. Why, I will set fire on the Nunnery; fire the Hive, and the Drones must out, or be burnt within: then may you, with ease, under pretence of succour, take whom you will. D. Lop. 'Tis a gallant design. D. Ant. I long to be about it. Well, Don, thou art the bravest Fellow breathing. Jac. Gentlemen, pray what became of that brave Fellow, that fir'd the Temple at Ephesus? was he not hang'd, Gentlemen, hum— D. Ant. We are his Rivals, Fool; and who would not suffer for so brave an action? D. Joh. He's a Scoundrel and a Poultroon, that would not have his Death for his Fame. D. Lop. That he is, a damn'd Son of a Whore, and not fit to drink with. Jac. 'Tis a rare thing to be a Martyr for the Devil; But what good will infamy do you, when you are dead? when Ho∣nour
is nothing but a vapour to you, while you are living. For my part I'd not be hang'd to be Alexander the Great. D. Ant. What a phlegmatick dull Rascal is that, who has no Ambition in him. Jac. Ambition! what, to be hang'd? besides, what's the in∣trinsick value of Honour when a man is under ground? Let 'm but call me honest Jacomo, as I am, while I live, and let 'em call m, whn I am dead, Don John if they will. D. Joh. Villain, dare you profane my name? Jac. Hold, Sir, think what you do; you cannot urt me, my Arms are Pistol-proof. Enter a Servant. Serv. I come to give you notice of an approaching danger: You must fly; an Officer with some Shepherds have found you were at our house, and are come to apprehend you, for some outrage you have committed; I came to give you notice, know∣ing our Family has a great respect for you. D. Joh. Yes, I know your Family has a great respect for me, for I have lain with every one in it, but thee and thy Master. Jac. Why look you now, I thought what 'twou'd come to: Fly, Sir, fly; the darkness of the night will help us. Come, I'll lead the way. D. Joh. Stay, Sirra, you shall have one occasion more of show∣ing your valour. D. Ant. Did ever any Knight Errant fly, that was so well appointed? D. Lop. No; you shall stay, and get Honour, Jacomo. Jac. Pox of Honour, I am content with the Stock I have al∣ready. D. Joh. You are easily satisfied. But now let's fire the Nun∣nery. D. Ant. Come on. D. Lop. I long to be at it. Jac. O Jacomo! thy life is not worth a Piece of Eight. 'Tis in vain to disswade 'em, Sir; I will never trouble you with an∣other
request, if you'll be graciously pleas'd to leave me out of this adventure. D. Joh. Well, you have your desire. Jac. A thousand thanks; and when I see you again, I will be humbly content with a Halter. D. Joh But, do you hear, Fool? stand Centinel here; and if any thing happens extraordinary, give us notice of it. Jac. O, good Sir! what do you mean? that's as bad as going with you. D. Joh. Let me find you here when I come again, or you are a dead man— [Exeunt Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio. Jac. I am sure I am a dead man, if you find me here: But would my Armour were off now, that I might run the lighter. Night assist me. Heaven! what noise is that? to be left alone in the dark, and fear Ghosts and Devils, is very horrible. But Oh▪ who are these? Enter Officer, Guards, and Shepherds. 1. Shep. We are thus far right; the Ravishers went this way. 2. Shep. For Heavens sake take 'em dead or alive; such despe∣rate Villains ne'r were seen. Jac. So; if I be catch'd, I shall be hang'd; if not, I shall be kill'd. 'Tis very fine. Thee are the Shepherds. I'll hide my self. [He stands up close againt the Wall. 1. Shep. If we catch the Rogues, we will broil 'em alive; no death can be painful enough for such Wretches. Jac. O bloudy minded men— 2. Shep. O impious vile Wretches! that we had you in our clutches! Open your Dark Lantern, and let's search for 'em. Jac. What will become of me? my Armour will not do now. 1. Shep. Thus far we hunted them upon a good scent: but now we are at a fault. Jac. Let me see; I have one trick left, I have a Disguise will fright the Devil. 2. Shep. They must be hereabouts.
Jac. I'll in amongst them, and certainly this will  . 1. Shep. Oh Heav'n! what horrid Object's this? Jac. The Devil. 2. Shep. Oh fly, ly! the Devil, the Devil! fly— [Exeunt Shepherds . Jac. Farewell, good Gentlemen. This is the first ti my face e'r did me good. But I'll not stay I take it; Yet whher shall I fly? Oh! what noise is that? I am in the dark, in a strange place too; what will follow? There lie. Oh! my Ams. Hah! Who's there? Let me go this way—Oh he Ghost! the Ghost! Gad forgive me, 'twas nothing but my fear— [A noise within, Fir, ire, the Nunnery's on re. Oh vile Wretches! they have done the deed. There is no ly∣ing; now the place will be full of people, and wicked Lights, that will discover me, if I fly. Within. Fire, fire, fire; the Nunnery's on fire; help, help— [Several people cross the Stage, crying Fire. Jac. What shall I do? there's no way but one, I'll go with the Crowd. Fire! Fire—Murder! help! help! fire! fire— [More people cross the Stage, he runs with them. Enter Don John, Don Antonio, Don Lopez, four Nuns. D. Joh. Fear not, Ladies, we'll protect you. 1. Nun. Our Sex and Habits will protect us. D. Lop. Not enough, we will protect you better. 1. Nun. Pray leave us, we must not consort with men. D. Ant. What would you run into the ire to avoid Mankind? you are zealous Ladies indeed. D. Joh. Come, Ladies, walk with us; we'll put you in a place of safety. 1. Nun. We'll go no further, we are safe enough; be gone, and help to quench the fire. D. Joh. We have another fie to quench; come along with us. D. Lop. Ay, come, you must go.
D. An. Come long, we know what's good for you; you must go with us. 1. Nun. ven! what violence is this? what impious men are thes? Hlp! help! [Allry Help. Enter Flavia and Clara, Probationers. Flav. Here are the bloudy Villains, the causes of our misery. Clar. Inhumane Butchers! now we'll have your lives. D. Joh. Hah! here are a brace of my Wives. If you have a mind to this Fool, take her betwixt you; for my part, I'll have my own. Come, Wives, along with me; we must consummate, my Spouses, we must consummate. Clar. What Monsters are these? All Nuns. Help! help! D. Ant. 'Sdeath! these foolish Women are their own Enemies. D. Lop. Here are so many people, if they cry out more, they'll interrupt us in our brave design. D. Joh. I warrant you; when they cry out, let us out-noise 'em. Come, Women, you must go along with us. 1. Nun. Heaven! what shall we do? Help! help! D. Joh. Help! help! Fire! fire! fire! D. Lop. Help! help! D. Ant. Help! help! [They hale the Women by the hands, who still cry out, and they with them. Enter several people, crying out Fire, Jacomo in the rear. Jac. Fire! fire! fire! Help! help! 'Sdeath! here's my Master, D. Joh. Sirra, come along with me, I have use of you. Jac. I am caught. D. Joh. Here, Sirra, take one of my Wives, and force her after me. Do you refuse, Villain?
Enter Shepherds, with Offcer and Guards. Nuns. Help! help! good people elp! rescue us from these Villains. 1. Shep. Who are you, committing violnce on Women? 2. Shep. Heavens! they are the Villains we seek for. Jac. Where is my Armour now? Oh my Armour. Officer. Fall on. [They fight, Women fly, Jacomo falls down as kill'd, two Shepherds and the Officer are kill'd. D. Joh. Say you so, Rogues? D. Lop. So, the Field's our own. D. Joh. But a pox on't, we have bought a Vicory too dear, we have lost the Women. D. Ant. We'll find 'em again. But poor Jacomo's kill'd. Jac. That's a lie. [Aide. D. Lop. 'Faith, let's carry off our dead. D. Joh. Agreed; we'll bury him in the Church, while the Ghost treats us, we'll reat the Worms with the body of a Rascal. Jac. Not yet a while. [Aside. D. Lop. Come, let's take away the Fool. Jac. No, the Fool can take up himself. 'Sdeath! you resolve not to let me alone dead or alive— Here are more Murders. Oh! D. Lop. Oh counterfiting Rascal! are you alive? [The Clock strikes Twelve. D. Ant. The Clock strikes Twelve. D. Joh. 'Slife, our times come, we must to the Tomb: I would not break my word with the Ghost for a thousand Doubloons— Jac. Nor I keep it for ten times the Money. D. Joh. But you shall keep your word, Sir. Jac. Sir, I am resolv'd to fast to night, 'tis a Vigil: Besides, I care not for eating in such base company. Wihin. Follow, follow, follow— D. Lop. D'hear that noise? the remaining Rogues have ais'd
the Moble, and are coming upon us. Jac. Oh! lt's fie—fie—what will become of me? D. Ant. Let's to the Church, and give the Rogues the Go-by. D. Joh. Come on, since 'tis my time, and I have promis'd the Governour, I'll go—You had best stay, Sirra, and be taken. Jac. No: now I must go to the Church whether I will or no. Away, away, flie! Enter two Shepherds, with a great Rabble. Here they went; follow, follow— [Exeunt omes. The Scene the Church, the Statue of Don Pedro on Horseback; on each side of the Church, Don John's Ghost, Maria's, Don Francisco's, Leonora's, Flora's, Maria's Brothers, and others, with Torches in their hands. Enter Don John, Don Antonio, Don Lopez, Jacomo. Jac. Good Sir, let's go no farther; look what horrid Atten∣dants are here. This wicked Ghost has no good meaning in him. D. Joh. He resolves to treat us in State; I think he has robb'd all the Graves hereabouts of their Dead, to wait upon us. D. Ant. I see no Entertainment prepar'd. D. Lop. He has had the manners to light off his Horse, and en∣tertain us. D. Joh. He would not sure be so ill bred, to make us wait on him on foot. Jac. Pox on his breeding, I shall die with fear; I had as good have been taken and hang'd. What horror seizes me! D. Joh. Well, Governour, you see we are as good as ou words. D. Ant. Where's your Collation? D. Lop. Bid some of your Attendants give us some Wine. [Ghost descends.
Stat. Have you not yet thought on your lost condition? Here are the Ghosts of some whom you have murder'd, That cry for vengeance on you— Fathers Ghost. Repent, repent of all your horrid crimes: Monsters, repent, or Hell will swallow you. D. Joh. That's my Old man's voice. D'hear, Old Gentleman, you talk idly. J. I do repent, O spare me. I do repent of all my sins, but especially of following this wicked Wretch. [Kne's. D. Ant. Away, Fool [Ant. kicks him. D. Fran. Ghost. My bloud cries out upon thee, barbarous Wretch. D. Joh. That's my Host Francisco, 'faith thou wert a good ho∣nest Blockhead, that's the truth on't— Flora's Ghost. Thou shalt not escape vengeance for all thy crimes. D. Joh. What Fool's that, I am not acquainted with her. eon. Ghost. In time lay hold on mercy, and repent. D. Joh. That was Leonora, a good natur'd silly Wench, some∣thing too loving, that was all her fault. Mar. Villain, this is the last moment of thy life, And thou in flames eternally shalt howl. D. Joh. Thou li'st. This is the young hot-headed Fool we kill'd at Francisco's. Pox on him, he disappointed me in my de∣sign upon the Daughters. Would thou wert alive again, that I might kill thee once more. D. Lop. No more of this old foolish stuff; give us some Wine to begin with. D. Ant. Ay, give us some Wine, Governour. D. Joh. What, do you think to treat us thus? I offer'd you a better entertainment. Prethee trouble us no more, but bid some of your Attendants give us some Wine; I'll drink to you and all the good Company. Stat. Give 'em the Liquor they have most delighted in. [Two of the Ghosts go out, and bring four Glasses full of bloud, then give 'em to D. John, D. Ant. D. Lop. D. Lop. This is something.
D. Joh. This is civil. D. Lop. I hope a good desert will follow. [Ghost offers a Glass to Jacomo, who runs round D. John, D. Ant. D. Lop. roaring. Jac. Are you stark distracted? will you drink of that iquor? Oh! Oh! what d'you mean? Good sweet Ghost forbear your civility; Oh I am not dry, I thank you— D. Joh. Give it me. Here, take it, Sirra. Jac. By no means, Sir, I never drink between meals. Oh Sir— D. Joh. Take it, Rascal. Jac. Oh Heav'ns! D. Joh. Now, Governour, your Health; 'tis the reddest drink I ever saw. D. Lop. Hah! pah! 'tis bloud. D. Ant. Pah! it is— Jac. Oh! I'll have none of it. [They throw the Glasses down. D. Joh. 'Sdeath, do you mean to affront us? Stat. 'Tis fit for such bloud-thirsty Wretches. D. Joh. Do you upbraid me with my killing of you; I did it, and would do it again: I'd fight with all your Family one by one; and cut off root and branch to enjoy your Sister. But will you treat us yet no otherwise? Stat. Yes, I will, ye impious Wretches. [A Flourish. D. Lop. What's here? Musick to treat us with? D. Ant. There is some pleasure in this. Song of Devils. 1. Dev. PRepare, prepare, new Guests draw near, And on the brink of Hell appear. 2. Dev. Kindle fresh flames of Sulphur thre. Assemble all ye Fiends, Wait for the dreadful ends Of impious men; who far excel All th' Inhabitants of Hll.
Chor. of Devils. —Let 'em come, let 'em come, To an eternal dreadful doom, Let 'em come, let 'em come. 3. Dev. In miiefs they have all the damn'd outdone; Here they shall weep, and shall unpiti'd groan, Here they shall howl, and make eternal mon. 1. Dev. By Boud and Lust they have deserv'd so well, That they shall feel the hottest flames of Hell. 2. Dev. In vain they shall here their past mischiess bewail, In exquisite torments that never shall fail. 3. Dev. Eternal darkness they shall find, And them eternall Chains shall bind To infinite pain of sense and mind. Chorus of all. —Let 'em come, let 'em come, To an eternal dreadful doom Let 'em come, let 'em come. Stat. Will you not relent, and feel remorse? D. Joh. Cou'dst thou bestow another heart on me, I might; but with this heart I have, I cannot. D. Lop. These things are prodigious. D. Ant. I have a kind of grudging to relent, but something holds me back. D. Lop. If we could, 'tis now too late; I will not. D. Ant. We defie thee. Stat. Perish, ye impious Wretches, go and find The punishments laid up in store for you. [It Thunders, Don Lopez and Don Antonio are swallow'd up. Behold their dreadful Fates, and know, that thy last moment's come. D. Joh. Think not to fright me, foolish Ghost; I ll break your Marble body in pieces, and pull down your Horse. Jac. If fear has left me my strength, I'll steal away. [Exit. D. Joh. These things I see with wonder, but no fear.
Were all the Elements to be confounded, And shul'd all into their former Chaos; Were Seas of Sulphur flaming round about me, And all Mankind roaring within those fires, I could not fear or feel the least remorse. To the last instant I would dare thy power. Here I stand firm▪ and all thy threats contemn; Thy Murderer stands here, now do thy worst. [It Thunders and Lightens, Devils descend and sink with Don John, who is cover'd with a Clowd of fire as he sinks. Stat. Thus perish all, Those men, who by their words and actions dare, Against the will and power of Heaven declare. [Scene shuts.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by Jacomo. THrough all the Perils of the Play I've run, But know not how your fury I may shun; I'm in new dangers now to be undone— I had but one sierce Master there, But I have many cruel Tyrants here. Who do most bloudily my life persue; Who takes my Livelihood, may take that too. 'Gainst little Players you great factions raise, Make Solemn Leagues and Cov'nants against Plays. We, who by no Allies assisted are, Against the Great Confederates must make War. You need not strive our Province to o'r-run, By our own stratagems we are undone. We've laid out all our Pains, nay Wealth for you, And yet, hard-hearted men, all will not do. 'Tis not your Judgments sway for you can be Pleas'd with damn'd Plays (as heart can wish to see) 'Ounds, we do what we can, what wou'd you more? Why do you come, and rant, and damn, and roar? 'Sdeath, what a Devil would you have us do? Each take a Prison, and there humbly sue, Angling sor single Money with a Shoo. What, will you be Don Johns? have you no remorse? Farewell then, bloudy men, and take your course. Yet stay— If you'll be civil, we will treat of Peace, And th' Articles o'th' Treaty shall be these.
First, to the men of Wit we all submit; The rest shall swagger too within the Pit, And may roar out their little or no Wit. But do not swear so loud to fright the City, Who neither care for wicked men, nor witty; They start at ills they do not like to do, But shall in Shops be wickeder than you. Next, you'll no more be troubl'd with Mchines. Item, you shall apper behind our Scenes, And there make love with the sweet chink of Guinnies, The unresisted Eloquence of Ninnies. Some of our Wom shall be kind to you, And promise free ingress and egress too. But if the Faces which we have wo'n't do, We will find out some of Sixteen for you. We will be civil when nought else will win ye; We will new bait our Trap, and that will bring ye. Come, faith let all old breaches now be heal'd, And the said Articles shall be Sign'd and Seal'd. FINIS.
