S3176A 99825262 29640
AN ANSWER TO THE SCANDALOVS ASPERSIONS OF COMMITTEES, By Mr. Walter Powell, in his Booke, called, NEWES for NEWTERS, &c. and in his Epistles preceding his Booke. By William Sheppard Esquire, one of the Members of the Com∣mittee for Gloucester, Hereford, &c. PSAL. 64. 2, 3, 7. Hide me from the secret councell of the wicked: from the insurrection of the workers of iniquity. Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bowes, to shoot their arrowes, even bitter words. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded. Printed in the Year, 1648.
The Epistle to the READER. COurteous Reader, one Mr. Walter Powell, a Mini∣ster (who cals himself Vicar of Standish) hath of late Printed, and published a new Book, named News for Newters, &c. and in his Dedicatory See his Epistles and the Book. fol. 28. Epistle; first to Major Generall Massie, and next to the Honourable House of Commons in Parlia∣ment, and in some passages of the Book he hath taken upon him the boldness freely to raile upon Country Committees, more freely upon the Committee of Gloucester, &c. but most virulently against one Mem∣ber thereof, for the injustice and hard measure he hath had by a sen∣tence Si accusare suf∣ficiat, ecquis erit innocens? given by the Committee of Gloucester against him, to out him of his Vicarage; whereby he pretendeth he hath suffered more injury (se ipso judice) then ever the Martyres did suffer by their persecu∣tors. Wherefore to vindicate the reputation of the Gentlemen of that Committee who joyned in that act, (some whereof are dead) to pull off the vizard from his impudent face, and to put a stop to his deceits that he may no longer amuse and abuse other men there with; I have been necessitated to take upon me this taske, to Examine the proceeding of the Committee against him, and his representation thereof, and charge therein against the Committee. In answer to, and for the clearing of both which, I shall do no more, but present you with the naked truth of the proceedings, and give you the whole case faithfully extracted and stated out of the Records of the Committee, with some short additionals, and brief observations there∣upon: entreating you that have read the one, to read the other also, Qui statuit ali∣quid parte inau∣dita altera, &c. that so by comparing the one with the other, you may be able to judge of both. If you read his Epistles, you find him therein affirme these parti∣culars See the Epistles against the Gentlemen of the Committee of Gloucester. 1. That their proceedings against him in the matter before them was unjust, and in the judgement of some Members of Parliament unpa∣rallel.
2. That they are ruining unjust Judges. 3. That the sen∣tence given by them against him was matchlesse, malitious, and ab∣hominable, such as the stones cry for justice against them for it. For answer to these Charges, if you will be but pleased to read his Crimes for which he was ejected, in the proofs of the witnesses against him, or (if that be too long) See it, fol. 16. in the sentence given against him, wherein they are abridged, and the manner of the proceeding of the Committee in his ejectment, and take this withall, that there was something more proved before the Committee, viva voce, at the hea∣ring of the cause then is Recorded; you will easily perceive that this slander of Mr. Powell, of the living and dead (not the sentence and proceeding of the Committee in his case) is matchlesse, malitious, ab∣hominable, and unparallel. But he tels you of some particulars where∣in this injustice was shewed. 1. That he was cast out of his Living See his Epistles. being unheard, and that his censure was before any witnesse of his could be heard, and that the Certificate of some of the Committee herein conteineth manifest untruths, &c. For the clearing of this Slan∣der (if his mouth or penne be a slander) if you please to looke into the See in the pro∣cess of the cause, f. 12, 8, 13, 14. Fatetur facinus qui fugit judi∣cium. proceedings, you shall find he did examine three witnesses, refused to answer the Articles exhibited against him, appealed from the Com∣mittee, to the Parliament, refused to be tryed by the Committee, ha∣ving as little mind to be tryed by them (many of whom were his neighbours, had lived more then twenty years by him, and knew him very well) as he hath to have his cause re-heard according to the or∣der of the Committee of Plundred Ministers made now more then two years since. But the truth is he had, and might have had (as others had in like case) leave to examine as many witnesses as he pleased. And you shall find in the process of the cause, that the wit∣nesses fol. 14. on both sides were to be present at the hearing of the cause. And that Warrants were to be sent forth to bring them in, which he might have had done if he had had any mind to it. 2. He will tell you he waited long. I shall say thus much to this, that had it been true, it had been no cause of complaint; for all men that had to do with the Committee in that time did so, nor could the Committee, having then so much to do, dispatch men sooner. But how long did he waite? If you view the case, you shall see the 19 Articles against him were exhibited against him Decemb. 3. 1644. and it was heard the 25 of Febr. following, which was no long time to examine above 40 wit∣nesses, and if it were long, it was made long by his delay. 3. He will
tell you he had additionall Articles put in against him, we do not find, remember nor beleeve this to be so, but this may be true, his crimes deserving it, and (if so it be) is just and no more but what was used before that Committee, and is used before other Committees in like case. 4. He complaines that he could not have Copies of the depositi∣ons, and be present at the examination of witnesses; For the first of these, I have examined the Clerke, who doth affirme, that he had the offer of the heads of the proofs against him, without the names of the witnesses, as other men in like case: But nothing would satisfie him, but the depositions at large with the names of the witnesses, a thing (in that time) not granted to any man in like case. But (by his favour) I thinke he ought not to have had so much granted to him till he had answered the Articles exhibited against him, which he alwayes refused to do. And that the party ac∣cused, should be present at the private examination of witnesses against him, was a motion against all reason, & that which the Committee did not thinke fit to grant to any one in the like case, but he might have been present at the publique examination. 5. He complaines yet further, and saith: That all that was done by the whole Committee (being eight of them) was done by the procurement of one Committee∣man; This is as true as the rest, and as sensles and ridiculous as false. Nor can these seven Gentlemen take this well, that they should be deemed so shallow and weake, to be all of them in so great a worke led by one, and one of the meanest of them. 6. But he finds fault further, and saith: That he was adjudged to be scandalous, to satis∣fie the greedy appetites of a new Committee-man, an old hangman, a posted Malignant, and a professed Newter: I must herein, as to the persons whose appetites he pretends were satisfied by this unjust cen∣sure, professe my ignorance of his meaning, except by old hangman he mean one Henry Gabb, who offered to give evidence against him, but was refused, For the greatest part, if not all the witnesses, who did depose against him were very substantiall, many of them Religious persons. And I dare say that as the Judges were discreet & just men, so was that judgement of theirs uncorrupt, and according to the merit of the cause, not to satisfie the greedy appetite of any, but to satisfie their owne Con∣sciences in the discharge of the trust put upon them. 7. But he tels you somewhere he sped the worse in his cause for his Sermon. This is as true as all the rest: And observe how probable it is when himself affirmeth, that the man that procured all this in-justice to be done, did not hear
the Sermon, and (if we mistake not the man) he doth assure you he never (to his remembrance) heard any thing of his Sermon, till now that he had made it so common by his Printing and publishing there∣of. 2. But in aggravation of all these wrongs, he boasts himself, for lack of neighbours to do it for him: and cries up what love he hath borne to, and how much he hath done, for the Parliament. Tell me for this Mr. Powell, when you began first to shew your self so friendly to the Parliament: for I do not remember I have heard any thing of your zeal for it, till first by their zeal against you, you were like by their Commissioners to be justly punished for your wicked life: and then (as your manner is) you begin to flatter with the Parliament: but what have you done for the Parliament tell me if you can: if not, I will tell you what you have not done for it. Did you out of your great estate lend the Parliament any money in the time of its extreamity? I will play the foole a little also, and tell Amicus certus, &c. you of a Committee-man, and (it may be) the man you are so much troubled withall, who out of his penury lent the Parliament 40. l. in the time of its extreamity, did you out of your plenty lend it 40. s.? Nay are not you the man that did and still do shew your self most averse and unwilling to the payment of all Parliament taxes, and See the case. fol. 11. threaten and reproach the Parliament Collectors and Officers in the execution of their office, yet more, I shall tell you what you have done against the Parliament. 1. You have, yet more to heighten and provoke the rage and fury of the people against the Parliament and their servants, charged all Country Committees with injustice, op∣pression, and tyranny, as one of the great causes of the staggering of the people, and in this do you not strike the Parliament through their Fol. 29. of his Book, Injuria servo illata re∣dundat in domi∣num. servants sides? you are doubtlesse in the right where you say, This doth reflect upon the honour of the Parliament, as moysture in the feet strikes up to the head. But can you make out this accusation well against all Committees as you have done the accusations you have made against the Committee of Gloucester? I dare say, if you were put to it you cannot prove two unjust acts to be done by all the Committees of England, your Tongue is your owne. 2. Are not you See the case. fol. 9. the man that placed and kept in Raudwick one of your Cures, one Mr. Smith, a man notorious for his scandall and ill affection to the Parliament, till he was for the same ejected by the Committee of
Gloucester, and did not you then indeavour to oppose their justice therein? and are not you the man that notwithstanding you were pre∣sent at the hearing of his cause, and the sentence of his ejectment, who did cause the same Smith to Preach in your own Church at Stan∣dish, your self being present, the next Fast day, after his ejectment? 3. And (if I mistake not) you placed and kept in Hardwick, A good cause is much wronged by a bad cham∣pion. (another of your Churches) one Mr. Swan (as great a Cavaleere as any you cry out so much against) till he was forced to flie from thence for fear of the Parliament Army. I dare not affirme that you do not love the Parliament: But if you do, I will tell you what is said of Ithasius hatred to the Priscillian heresie, it was all the virtue he had. 3. After this he tels you of his sufferings for the Parliament in his name, person and estate, which he tels you have been intolleraale, in∣credible, and to the losse of his lively-hood and danger of his life. For this we have enquired of his sufferings by the Kings Party, and can hear of nothing of value taken from him save what he had againe, except two Oxen, a Bullock and Bull taken by Sir Ralph Duttons meanes, for a debt of 8. l. Sir Ralph challenged from him for Rent, the which he had againe, and might have kept if he would have paid him, and foure Kine, and some small pieces of housholdstuffe; this we have heard to be the truth of that case. And as to his sufferings by this hideous sentence of the Committee, we cannot imagine how he should be much hurt by this: for the truth is (as he himself in one of his Epistles confesseth) that not long after this sentence given for his ejectment, he got an Order from the Committee of Plundered Ministers to restore him to the Vicarage of Standish, and his arreares, and hereby he hath ever since enjoyed it against the Order of the Committee. And we are credibly informed, that albeit Mr. Powell was absent from his charge at Standish almost a whole year, and (for the most part) the same was served by other Mini∣sters: Yet there hath not been above 30. l. of the profits of the Vie∣carage taken from him by any other Minister. And that he either hath, or might have received the rest. Runwick and Saule being places inconsiderable, not able to discharge the Curate: I do not find that the Committee have intermedled with them. And as for Hard∣wick (now worth about 40. l. a year) it was at or near the time of the Order of ejectment, in the hands of one Mr. Dowlman, who held
the same by an Order of Major Generall Massie then Governor of Gloucester, made by him before any Committee there setled upon the Petition of the Parish: After that Mr. Dowlman had left Major See the case. fol. 9. Generall Massie and others (as Committee-men) placed Mr. Ven there, who after he had been there about eight weekes, was frighted from it by Mr. Powell, and had nothing at all (that we can heare of) for his paines, and after this time the Committee did not at all inter-meddle with the disposall of this Church, till they placed Mr. Walker in it, who was there about five Moneths only; so that upon this ac∣count there could not be above 50. l. at the most of the profits of all his Churches, disposed away from him in all that time by order of the Com∣mittee, which is the thing he desireth the Parliament to consider, and to give him reparations for, as for intollerable sufferings. 4. But in this Mr. Powell finds great fault in the Committee, especially in one Member thereof, to place (for his supplanting) in his Chappell (as he cals it) a Minister that hath been taken in Armes against the Parliament, ejected out of his living in Monmouth shire, for being contentious against his neighbours, a common drunkard, a rayler against the Parliament, and one who said he was and would be a Cavaliere. And herein he supposeth he hath charged the Committee home, and so he hath, but it was without powder or bullets. To all this I answer, that if this be true of this man (which Turpe est do∣ctori, &c. See the Orders in the case. f. 17 is more then the Committee know) he is too too like Mr. Powell. But all that the Committee did herein was this. The place being void, upon a Petition under the hand of most of the parishioners, to have this man setled amongst them. The Committee knowing no more of the man but this only, that he was a man well gifted, able to pray and Preach very well, they passed an Order that he should be there upon tryall untill they might have better knowledge of him: and as soone as they had information against him, that he was a man ill af∣fected to the Parliament, they made another Order to put him out. The Copies of both which Orders you shall find at large in the processe of his cause. 5. He seemes to find fault that Committee men, who have no land, do act in the Committees, and thereby implies, that he thinks those men who have no land, unfit to be imployed in that worke. Is not this your meaning Mr. Powell? if it be, it is strange Logick to me, that because a man hath no land, he should be unfit for pub∣lique
imployment; if your arguing in your booke be no better, I mar∣vaile not, it hath so little esteeme amongst the wisest men: may not a man have a good estate that hath no estate in Land? But why may not a man without land be as fit for a Committee-man, as a Minister? I doubt not Mr. Powell was as honest a man, and as fit for his office when he had no Land, and before he bought the Mannor of Sir Ralph Dutton, and was to give 3000. l. for it, when I presume he knew not where to have 1000. l. to pay for it, and after when he had for want of money reconveyed it to Sir Ralph Dutton for his security of his money, as while he was by this purchase Lord of a Mannor. 6. But in his Errata upon his Book (not having spit all his venome before) he tels you of something he had forgotten: that some Com∣mittee-men had bought more Lands since they were preferred to their Committeeships then they sold before. I suppose be meanes by this that they sold their Land for need, and bought againe by their dishonest gaine in their new office, otherwise he saith nothing to purpose, and who these men are, I, nay I dare say he cannot tell. But being willing to tell you all I know, I shall tell you of one Committee-man, that having a piece of Land of 80. l. per. an. who did (not for lack of money) but for other weighty causes (as is well knowne to many Parliament-men) sell it for 2000. l. part of which he laied out before, and part since he was made a Committee∣man, upon Leases and Coppy-hold estates. And yet in all he hath not laid out by 100. l. so much as he made, it may be this is the man and matter you intend. Last of all, as to all that barking of his, in a rable of groundlesse, frivolous and senslesse accusations against one Committee-man, he cals his malevolent Committee adversary. That he procured all this injustice to be done, turned his back to his Sermon, went out of Glou∣cester at the Siege, &c. albeit the things are not worth answering, yet I shall give them this answer. There is no truth in these assertions. Aeque laus, est ab improbis, im∣probari, ac à bo∣nis probari. For first, men would have more easily beleeved, that one of the Mem∣bers of the Committee was his malevolent adversary, had the ac∣cuser shewed any reason why he should be his adversary, for the next thing (as I have said already) what was done by the Committee against the complainer was unanimous by all the Committee, without the consent of three, of whom no Committee act can be done; for the third Mr. Powell makes a very good improvement, but a strange
construction of that act: It is much he could thinke of no other occa∣sion which the man might have to go out of the Church, but disre∣spect of his Sermon, and fear of his presence, it is more like, Mr. Powell a guilty man as you were, might fear the presence of the Committee-man appointed to be one of your Judges, then that he should fear you. The going away of the Committee-man from Mr. Powels Sermon, (if we mistake not the man) was not out of fear of his person, or dis∣respect Parturiunt montes, &c. of his Sermon, nor for any other reason, but because he was sent for out of the Church about some speciall businesse. And for his going away at the Siege, he went away about a fortnight before the Siege, and staied out at the Siege: And what of this? is it (in your judgement) a crime for a man that had nothing to do in Gloucester to go out of it at the Siege? Thus have you the whole case: And now let the world judge by the promisses, what manner of man this is: and whether he hath not herein evidenced to all the world the truth of one of these Articles exhibited against him (not so fully proved before) to wit, that he is a common lyer; for he that will in so few lines print so many lyes, may be presumed in his ordinary discourse to tell many lyes. And whether the Committee of Gloucester have not more rea∣son to Petition the Parliament to have a Commission, to such Com∣missioners as the Parliament shall be pleased to name, to examine the falshood of these accusations, then that Mr. Powell should desire a Commission from the Parliament, to such Commissioners as he shall name, to examine the Combination and unjust proceedings of his ma∣levolent Committee adversay, &c. Your true friend W. S.
I Have left his Booke to be scanned by those that have more leasure, and ability then I have yet: I shall give you the suddaine sence of a witty Schollar upon it, in these Verses I lighted on by chance. To the Reader on Mr. Powels Booke. Laugh and be fat: for thou didst never tast So many kickshawes at a publike fast: He the first service prefaced (as appears) With Hedghogs, Eagles, Pussicats, and Beares. Whether this Cooke served it in Plate or Pewter, Were wise, or witty? Aske not: He is Neuter. Aske what he lent the State, himselfe can tell it, Much in a mouthfull, or a paper pellet. Aske what was offered on his Fasting day? They offered more then one to go away. Aske what he did? what grist he brought to th' mill? Then the mans groun'd, and neuter passive still. Here followeth a true Coppy of all the proceedings of the Committee of Gloucester, in Mr. Walter Powels case.
That Branch of the Ordinance, made the 10. of May, 1644. by which, the Committee of Gloucester, &c. are authorized to put out Scandalous, and il-affected Ministers. ANd be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the said Committees, or any three of them, shall have power to call before them, all Ministers and Schoole-masters within the said Counties and City, that are Scandalous in their lives, or il-affected to the Parliament; or fomenters of this unnaturall War, or shall wilfully refuse obedience to the Ordinances of Par∣liament: or shall have deserted their ordinary place of residence, not being imployed in the service of the King and Parliament. And they shall have power to send for any witnesses, and examine any complaint, or receive any restimony against them, upon Oath of any person that shall be produced to give Evidence against them, and upon such proofs of the aforesaid crimes, the said Committees, or any three or more of them, have hereby power to remove, and Eject, all such Scandalous Ministers, and Schoole-masters, and in their places nominate and appoint, such learned, able, and Godly persons as they shall thinke fit, and shall cause all such Ministers, and Schoole masters, so no∣minated and placed, to be put in possession of the said severall Churches, and Schooles, who shall and may representatively, take, receive, and perceive to their owne use, the profits, and revenues, belonging to the said severall Chur∣ches and places. Articles Exhibited to the Committee for the County of Gloucester, against Walter Powell Clerke, Vicar of Standish, in the said County, 3. Decemb. 1644. 1. IMprimis, That he keepeth and holdeth foure places, with cure of souls in his hands, and endeavoureth to do so still, and taketh lit∣tle care for either of them. 2. Item, That he is a common haunter of Alehouses, and hath been drunke oft. 3. Item, That he doth so exceedingly busie himself in secular affaires, that he is not fit to undertake the cure of souls. 4. Item, That he is a common lyar, and very deceitfull in word and deed.
5. Item, That he is a man very contentious, and given to Law suits. 6. Item, That he is a common Cheater, and doth usually over-reach his neighbours in bargaining. 7. Item, That he having the Cure, and charge of Rendwick Church under him, hath for divers years together, kept and con∣tinued Mr. John Smith, a Curate under him, who is a man very scandalous, and ill affected to the Parliament, and one who for the same is Ejected by the Committee, and yet a man much fa∣voured, and countenanced by Mr. Powell. 8. Item, That the said Mr. Powell the last year, was absent from all his Churches 12. weekes together, and made no provisi∣on for them all that time. 9. Item, That when the Committee (the presentation of the same Churches belonging to the Bishop of Gloucester) had at the suite of the Parishoners of Hardwick (they being then in distresse for want of a Minister) put (in Mr. Powels absence) one Mr Ven an honest Minister, who continued there diverse weekes, and ser∣ved the Cure, yet Mr. Powell when he came home, turned him out contrary to the Order of the Committee, and refused to give him any satisfaction for the time he had served the Cure. 10. Item, That Mr. Powell when he came from London, gave out speeches he had an Order from the Parliament to put out Mr. Ven, when he had none. 11. Item, That Mr. Powell in contempt of the Committee af∣ter they had Ejected Mr. John Smith his Curate at Rendwick, caused him the next Fast day after the said Ejectment, to Preach in his own Parish Church at Standish, he being present when the said Mr. Smith was Ejected. 12. Item, He hath caused divers persons of the Parish of Standish, to be presented in the Consistory Court at Gloucester, for going to other Parishes to hear Sermons, when as himselfe did neglect the said Cure once a day at least. 13. Item, That after there had been debate before the Com∣mittee, touching the Rents in question, between Sir Ralph Dutton and Mr. Pawell, and the Committee had told him that he should not receive the said Rents, he notwithstanding did cunningly practice with Mr. Hart the Collector, perswading him to abuse
the power committed to him, to get the said Rents into his hands. 14. Item, That since he hath been questioned before the Committee, he hath given out threatning speeches against the witnesses that have been summoned in against him. 15. Item, That since he hath been questioned before the Com∣mittee, he hath been seen drinking in an Ale house at Wethen∣hurst 24 houres together. 16. Item, That the said Mr. Powell did suffer his servants, with Waine and Oxen, to carry Hay certaine Sabbath daies together. 17. Item, That after Mr. Powels Cattle had been distrained for Contribution money, the said Powell gave out threatning speeches, that if ever the Kings Army came into the County again, he would be revenged of those that had distrained his Cattle. 18. Item, The said Mr. Powell is a man much given to fight∣ing and quarrelling. 19. Item, That when the Overseers of the poor for the Pa∣rish of Hardwick demanded of Mr. Powell his dues to the poor according to the Statute in that case provided; The said Mr. Powell answered them, that if they would make him pay to the poor. according to the Statute, then they should have Ser∣mons according to the Statute, that is, once a moneth, or when they could have them. Depositions of witnesses to the Articles exhibited against Walter Powell Vicar of Standish. Decemb. 8. 1644. 1. TO the first Article, John Bainham of Hardwick being sworne, saith, that the said Walter Powell being now possessed of the Vicarage of Hardwick, is for the most part a non-resident at Hardwick: And he saith that the last year 1643. there was but one Sermon in the Parish Church of Hardwick for 14 weekes together. Thomas Beard of Saul sworne to the first Article saith, that Mr. Powell hath the charge of foure severall Churches and Cures, (viz.) Standish, Hardwick, Rendwick and Saul. And saith, that the Privy Tythes of Saul and the Gleab-land there, is worth about 7. l. per an. And saith that Mr. Powell since he had the
Cure of Saul he sold away the Gleab-land and the Church-yard belonging to Saul for 60. years if he the said Powell so long live. And that Mr. Powell hath for the most part placed to serve the Cure of Saul Drunken Idle Ministers, such as he could get best cheape; one whereof (whose name was Floyd) the said Powell hired for about 40. s. per an. to serve the said Cure, and that the said Floyd was enforced to sue the said Powell for the said 40. s. before he could have it. And he saith diverse of the Inhabitants of Saul, have formerly been presented at the Consistory Court, some of them and their whole families by the said Powels bad Curates for going to other Parishes to hear able Ministers Preach. John Beard and John Ellis of Saul aforesaid say upon Oath, that what Thomas Beard hath spoken is true in all points. Robert Keylock of Hardwick sworne to the first Article saith, that Mr. Powell hath the charge of foure Churches and Cures, (viz.) Standish, Hardwick, Rendwick and Saul. And saith, that in the Parish Church of Hardwick they have had no Minister the last Summer for divers weekes together, but what the Parish procured of themselves: and saith he hath heard and doth be∣leeve that the Vicaridg of Hardwick hath been worth 50 l. per an. And saith that Mr. Ham being Curate of Hardwick about ten years since under Mr. Powell, was enforced to sue the said Powell for his wages at the Councell. John Niblet of Standish sworne saith, that Mr. Powell hath the Cure and charge of foure Churches, (viz.) Standish, Hardwick, Rendwick and Saul, and saith that Mr. Ham, his Curate at Hard∣wick, told this deponent, that he was faine to sue the said Powell for his wages, for serving the Cure of Hardwick. Edward Mill of Standish being sworne saith, that Mr. Powell hath the charge of foure Churches, and that Standish being one of them, hath been sometimes neglected for a fortnight or three weekes together, without any Preaching or Prayers. John Paine of Hardwick being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell Vi∣car of Hardwick, hath been very negligent in serving the Cure of Hardwick, and for three moneths last past, the said Parish of Hardwick hath been neglected six severall times. Richard Yealf of Hardwick being sworne saith, that Mr. Powell
hath and holdeth foure Churches with cure of souls (as this depo∣nent hath heard) and that Hardwick being one of them, hath been many dayes neglected once a Saboth. Giles Wyman of Standish being sworne saith, that Mr. Powell having the charge of foure severall Churches, of which Standish is one: and he saith, that in Standish Church they have been ma∣ny dayes neglected at least once a Sunday: And he saith, that when the well minded people of the Parish have (by reason of his neglect) gone to other Parishes, he doth usually raile at them, calling them Neuters, leane Witches, Gallopers, and Amblers to other Churches; And that when the Parliament doth settle things, he will be the first that shall question them for it, these have been his usuall expressions in the Pulpit. George Stratford of Standish being sworne saith, that Mr. Powell hath been very negligent in serving the cure of Standish, and he saith, that for two Saboth dayes within two moneths last, the Bell having rung for a Sermon, when the people came to Church, they had no Sermon at all. Henry Payne being sworne saith, that Mr. Powell is a man very negligent in serving the Cure of Standish, for this deponent saith that he hath lived many yeares in Standish parrish, and that the said parish hath been many Saboth daies neglected by Mr. Powell (in his duty) in serving the said Cure, which hath occasioned di∣verse of his parishioners (as the deponent beleeves) to go to other parishes to hear Sermons, whereupon the said Mr. Powell usually fais a rayling at them in the Pulpit for going to other pa∣rishes, calling them Trotters and Amblers, and that if the Par∣liament do not take course with such, they might pray that the Parliament would take course to pull downe the Churches. Oliven Haltham being sworne saith, that Mr. Powell Vicar of Hardwick was in the year 1642. absent from his parish of Hard∣wick about 14 weekes together, and that during all that time they had but on Sermon in Hardwick Church, and that the Church doores were shut up most of that time. Daniell Wats of Hardwick being sworne saith, that Mr. Ham Curate of Hardwick, was enforced to sue Mr. Powell often for his Wages: and he hath heard Mr. Powels Curates often com∣plaine for want of their pay from Mr. Powell.
John Rogers and Thomas Rols both of Hardwick, being sworne, say, that on Sunday the 16 of February last, they had neither Preaching nor Prayer in the parish Church of Hardwick; And they say, that on the said day the Bell did ring in the morning, and almost the whole parish came to the Church, but had no Minister there: And they say, that the Clerke of the said pa∣rish told them that Mr. Powell did appoint him to ring the Bell every Sabbath day, except he did hear from Mr. Powell to the contrary; and they say, that he rang the Bell twice accordingly, but Mr. Powell came not nor any else for him. Richard Watkins of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. Pow∣ell hath for many years last past, been very negligent in serving the Cure of Standish; and he saith that about three years since he gave out threatning speeches against this deponents son Wil∣liam Watkins, that if the said William would not keepe his owne parish Church at Standish (he sometimes going to other parish Churches by reason of Mr. Powels neglect) he would make him forsake the place of his abode: whereupon this deponent wished him to question those that never come to any Church, mentio∣ning one Henry Hall, and one or two more who did seldome go to any Church at all: To whom Mr. Powell answered, that if the said Hall and the rest do not come to his Church, yet they goe to no Church else, with which he the said Powell seemed to be well pleased. Thomas Fowler of Standish being sworne, saith, that the last summer Mr. Powell was absent from all his Churches for about ten weekes together, and sometimes they had Preaching in their Church at Standish, and sometimes none. 2. To the second Article Thomas Beard of Saul being sworne, saith, that he hath diverse times seene Mr. Powell sit drinking in an Ale-house at Fromyload passage, and other places. John Niblet being sworne, saith, that about ten years since, the said Mr. Powell drew this deponent into an Ale-house, and caused him to drinke Beere and Wine, more then did him good. Nathaniel Knight of Arlingham being swore and examined, saith, that about five or six years since, he saw the said Mr. Powell so drunke upon his horse back, that he could scarce sit upright up∣on his horse, and being Drunke he rod into an Ale-house at
Arlingham, and did drinke more Ale or Beere. Edward Norman of Haresfield being sworne, saith, that he hath often seene Mr. Powell sit drinking in Ale-houses. Jane Mill of Standish, widow, being sworne, saith, that she hath diverse times seen Mr. Powell sit drinking very freely & merrily at the Bull in Standish parish: And she saith, that about six years since she saw Mr. Powell at Sir Ralph Duttons house in Standish, and that the said Mr. Powell (as this deponent heard) had dranke hard in Sir Ralphs Buttery: And she saith, that as he sate in the Buttery drinking with other company, he fell a vomiting; and within two houres after, when he came to himselfe againe, he went home to his house. Thomas Parke of Whetenhurst being sworne, saith, that about three moneths since, he saw Mr. Powell drinking at Whetenhurst, in Turberviles house, at the Inne there, and that he was drinking above an houre in this deponents sight, and that he left him there, and how long he staied there afterwards, he knowes not, and how long he was there before this examinant came he knowes not. Richard Paine of Hardwick being sworne, saith, that about two years since he saw Mr. Powell sit drinking in one Coopers house, an Ale-house in Haresfield; & that Mr. Powell caused this examinant to drinke with him; and this examinant left him there drinking, and how long he staied there he knowes not. Henry Wintle of Arlingham being sworne, saith, that a little above foure years a goe, Mr. Powell being a Commissioner at Arlingham upon a Law suite, was so Drunke that he was not able to sit on his horse back; and being helped off his horse by a man that stood by, he was not able (by reason he was Drunke) to get up againe: And he saith that he saw the said Mr. Powell at the same time sit drinking in two Ale-houses in Arlingham six howers, and did drinke abundantly all that time till he was Drunke. William Harris of Hempsteed being sworne, saith, that about foure years since, he saw Mr. Powell sit reeling on his horse back, betweene Gloucester and Hempsteed, and he saith, that the said Powell was once almost ready to fall off his horse back; And he beleeves the said Mr. Powell at the same time was either Drunke,
or Mad, but he rather beleeves he was Drunke. 3. 6. To the third and sixth Articles, Robert Keylock of Hard∣wick being sworne, saith, that the said Mr. Powell is much given to Buying and Selling; and that he bought the Reversion of a Li∣ving in Hardwick over this deponents head (this deponents life & his wifes widdowes estate being in the said Living) as this depo∣nent was told by Nathaniell Hawkins of Elmore, and beleeves to be true. And he saith, that about eight years since, the said Mr. Powell bought a Bond or Specialty of the said Nathaniel Haw∣kins, in which Bond this said deponent stood bound to the said Hawkins for 40. l. and was turned over to pay it to the said Pow∣ell, to this deponents intollerable losse and damage. And he saith, that the said Powell is very contentious, and hath been much given to Law suits, and hath sued this deponent for the money before mentioned, since he bought the said debt or Specialty. John Niblet of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell hath, and doth spend most of his time in buying and selling, and medling in worldly matters. John Paine of Hardwick sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell is much given to buying and selling of Land, and to Law suits, and a com∣mon Commissioner, which renders him unfit for the worke of the Ministry. Rirchard Yealfe of Hardwick being sworne, saith, that about a moneth since, Mr. Powell Preaching at Hardwick upon a Sabbath day in the afternoone, and Sermon being ended, this deponent desired him to come to his house: and being come, he saw there one widdow Packer of Putley, and seeing her fell to threatning her, because she was behind for chiefe Rents of her Living in Putley, which Mr. Powell said was due to him, and in a threatning manner told her, that halfe her Cattle would not (or but) make him satisfaction for her neglect: The which widow Packers Living was part of the bargaine that Mr. Powell bought of Sir Ralph Dutton. And being admonished by this deponent for his threatning speeches, it being the Sabbath day; he notwith∣standing continued threatning her till he went out of the house. Mary Packer of Putley widdow being sworne, saith, that about the latter end of Aprill last, there came two Souldiers to this de∣ponents house, & distrained two of her Kine for Rent, which they
said was due to Mr. Powell, and they said that Mr. Powell sent them to do it: And this deponent saith, that the said two Souldiers drove her two Kine to Mr. Powels house, and kept them about two daies, and the deponents servants carryed them Fodder to Mr. Powels house or court: And this deponent saith, that about a moneth since she being at Richard Yealfs house at Hardwick upon a Sabbath day, Mr. Powell being there, and seeing this deponent there, fell to threatning her for not paying her Rent to the said Mr. Powell, and told her in a threatning manner, that halfe her Cattle would not satisfie him for her said Rent; the Rent being the chief Rent of her Living, being part of the Lordship which Mr. Powell bought of Sir Ralph Dutton. Joyce Gabb widow, and John Gabb of Haresfield say, that about five years since Mr. Powell caused Richard Gabb of Parkend in the County of Gloucester, late husband to the said Joyce Gabb, and a poore blind man to be Arested upon a Writ, and brought him to Quedgley, and afterwards to Standish to an Ale-house there, to bring him to a composition: And the reason why he did so, was, because he the said Powell, would have cozened the said Gabb out of his Living, for there were but two lives in the said Gabbs Living, and Mr. Powell had bought one of the said lives be∣fore, and now in all likelyhood thought by this meanes to have had the other. 4. 6. To the fourth and sixth Articles, Thomas Beard of Saul being sworne, saith, that about 12 years since, the Ministers house of Saul being decayed, the said Powell turned it off to the parish (whereas before he tooke rent for it) whereupon the pa∣rishioners of Saul bestowed in repairing the said house about 10. and within a short time after, the said Powell did sue Thomas Gree∣ning (now deceased) being then a Churchwarden of Saul, for the said house, and as the said Greening confessed, caused him to spend about 40. s. in the said suite, for deteining the said house from him: and not long after the said Powell had an order from Sir Nathaniel Brent, to take possession of the said house, and so had it from the parish againe. John Beard and John Ellis of Saul affirme the same. Anne Gabb of Standish widow being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell is a man very contentious, and given to Law suites,
and hath sued this deponent, and caused her to spend most of her estate in Law suits: And about four years since, Mr. Powell sent one of his daughters to this deponents house to tell her, that Mr. Powell her father had put Cattle in this deponents ground: whereupon this deponent going to see whether it were so or no, and comming to the said ground, the said Powell had there pro∣vided two Bailiffs to Arrest her: And saith, that Mr. Powell used this pollicy on purpose to Arrest her: And that when they had Arrested her, Mr. Powell refused to let her go upon Bayle, but ket her two dayes and a night as a prisoner, and made her pay all the charges of the Bayliffs before she could be let goe, and af∣terwards let her go upon her owne Bond: And she saith that Mr. Powell through his violent prosecuting her by Law suits, coze∣ned her out of 10. l. per an. because she was not able to defend her selfe in the said suits, she being a widow and not capable of Law suits. And she saith, that Mr. Powell keeps away from her six Acres of ground by violence. Margery Knight, the wife of Nathaniel Knight of Arlingham being sworne, saith, that about foure years since, she saw Mr. Powell as she beleeves, so drunke that he could scarce sit upright on his horse back: And she saith, that Mr. Powell at the same time did leane over his horse as if he had vomited: And she saith, that as many as saw him at the same time, were sorry to see a man of his coate so Drunke. Robert Chamles of Saul being sworne, saith, that about a year since, he was sent by the parishioners of Saul to Mr. Powell, to desire his approbation for one Mr. Summers an honest Minister to have the Cure of Saul: And the said Mr. Powell in answer, desired this deponent to give the said Mr. Summers all the encourage∣ment that might be: and withall promised that the said Mr. Sum∣mers should have the place if the parish of Saul would pay him their dues; And this deponent saith, that the next Sabbath day af∣ter, the said Mr. Powell (contrary to his former promise) sent one Mr. Grime of Woodchester to serve the said Cure: whereupon the parishioners of Saul, were enforced to Petition the Governour to have the said Mr. Summers, to be their Minister, who granted it unto them. 5. To the fifth Article, Thomas Beard of Saul being sworne,
saith, that Mr. Powell is very contentious, and hath been much given to Law suits, and hath sued this deponent and diverse others (as he hath heard) and he saith, that the said Mr. Powell is very deceitfull in his dealings, as appears in that after this de∣ponent had paid his money for Tythes, the said Mr. Powell de∣nied the receipt of the said money, and caused this deponent to prove the payment of it by witnesses. Edward Mill of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell is very contentious and given to Law suites, and that he sued this deponents mother when as she owed him nothing, and caused her to pawne her Coverlet from her bed to pay Fees, and that she hath not redeemed her said Coverlet to this day: And he saith, the said Mr. Powell hath sued this deponents mother, because she would not exchange foure Acres and a halfe of Land for three Acres and a halfe of Mr. Powels. Richard Cowly of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell is a man very contentious and given to Law suites, and saith, that the said Powell sued this deponent, and caused him to spend money upon an unjust suite. Edward Norman of Haresfield being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell is a man very contentious, and given to over reach his neighbours in bargaining: And he saith, that about 12 years since he tooke Land to halves of Mr. Powell, and after he had bestowed a whole summers worke in plowing and earing the said Land, and making it ready to be sowed, he the said Mr. Powell enforced this deponent to yeild up his bargaine, without giving him any satisfaction for all his charge and paines. 6. To the sixth Article, Edward Mill of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell is a man deceitfull in his dealings, and gi∣ven to over-reach and deceive in bargaining. 8. To the eighth Article, William Turner of Standish being sworne, saith, that the last summer Mr. Powell was absent from all his Churches or Cures for 10 or 12 weekes together, or there about; and that during that time they had neither Preaching nor Prayers in Standish Church, for three Sabbath dayes and one Fast day, and the last Sabbath day they had no Preaching nor Prayers in the afternoone. Michael Niblet of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell
was absent from his foure Churches the last Summer, from the beginning of May, to the end of July then next following, and he saith, that he being Clerke to Mr. Powell at Standish, knew not of any Minister that Mr. Powell provided to serve the Cure at Standish in his absence: And he saith, that during the time of Mr. Powels absence, he did ring the Bell in Standish Church two Sabbath dayes, expecting to have Preaching or Prayers, but had none at all. 9. To the ninth Article, Mr. George Ven now Minister at Whe∣tenhurst being sworne, saith, that about Midsommer last, he was placed by the Committee to serve the Cure of Hardwick in Mr. Powels absence (they being in distresse for want of a Minister) and that he served the said Cure seven or eight weekes: And he saith, that Mr. Powell when he came home, turned out this de∣ponent, contrary to the Committees order, and hath not yet gi∣ven him any satisfaction for serving the said Cure. 10. To the tenth Article, Mr. Ven saith (being sworne) that after he had served the said Cure seven or eight weekes, Mr. Powell came from London, and shewed this deponent an Order or Let∣ter under the hands of Nathaniel Stephens, and Edward Stephens Esquires & one Parliament man more, but refused to let this depo∣nent read the said Letter or Order, but said the substance of it was, that he should take the Cure of Hardwick into his owne hands. 11. To the eleventh Article, Richard Cowly of Standish being sworne, saith, that upon the last Fast day being the 27 of Novemb. This Smith was proved be∣fore the Com∣mittee to be a common Swea∣rer, a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, a common Gamester, a whoremonger, and a man ill affected to the Parliament: for which crimes he was Ejected by the Committee, Mr. Powell be∣ing present. Mr. John Smith of Rendwick Preached in Mr. Powels Church at Standish, the said Mr. Smith being Ejected by this Committee the day before, being the 26 day of Novemb. last. Thomas Fowler of Standish being sworne, saith, that Mr. John Smith of Rendwick Preached in Mr. Powels parish Church at Standish upon the last Fast day being the 27 of November, or up∣on the Sabbath day after, being the first of December last as he re∣members. William Turner being sworne affirmes the same. Michaell Niblet being sworne, saith, that Mr. Smith of Rend∣wick Preached in Standish Church the last Fast day, being the 27 of November last. 12. To the twelfth Article, John Niblet of Standish being
sworne, saith, that Mr. Powell hath divers times presented this deponent in the Consistory Court for going to hear Mr. Capel; and hath threatned to have him in the High Commission Court for so doing: And that Mr. Powell presented this deponents wife in the said Consistory for staying at home one Sabbath day af∣ter noone; And Mr. Powels man said, his Master did it because he thought she had been gone to Eastington to Church: And he saith, that Mr. Powell hath caused this deponent and his wife to be Excommunicate: And saith, that he is a man notoriously knowne to be false in his dealings; and is usually more conver∣sant with Drunkards and Usurers, then with good Christians, and therefore an unworthy man to be a Minister. John Window of Standish being sworne, saith, that about nine years since, Mr. Powell caused this deponent and about 20 per∣sons of Standish parish to be presented in the Consistory for not comming to his Church, they going to another parish to hear Sermons, when as in their owne parish of Standish they were sometimes neglected at least once a Sabbath. 18 Decemb. 1644. 14. To the fourteenth Article, Thomas Vick of Hardwick be∣ing sworne, saith, that a little after Nathaniel Knight had been examined before the Committee about Mr. Powell, the said Powell in the hearing of this deponent, gave out threatning spee∣ches against the said Nathaniel Knight, saying, he would have his ears nayled to the Pillory. Nathaniel Knight being sworne, saith, that he having been for∣merly summoned by warrant from this Committee, to testifie the truth of his knowledge concerning Mr. Powell, and having testi∣fied accordingly: About a weeke after Mr. Powell meeting this deponent in Gloucester, told him he would make him repent his oath taken against him. 15. To the fifteenth Article, Anne Parre of Whetenhurst aged 11 years, saith, that about three moneths since, Mr. Powell came to Whetenhurst Inne, and two others with him, and staied there almost two dayes and a whole night, and was there drink∣ing part of the time. James Perry of Standish Morton being sworne, saith, that since Michaelmas last he comming to the Inne at Whetenhurst; the Inne-keepers wife told him that Mr. Powell and an Inne-keeper
of Barkley and others were there: And the next day after, this depo∣nent comming to the same Inne, the said Inne-keepers wife told him, that Mr. Powell had continued in the said Inne from about 10 of the clock the day before, till 2 of the clock that present day; and that the said Powell and the rest, had been drinking in the said Inne. Margery the wife of George Turbervile of Whetenhurst Innekeeper, being sworne, saith, that about Michaelmas last Mr. Powell came into the Inne at Whetenhurst, and there sate drinking with other company (as this deponent beleeves;) And she saith that he continued there from about 10 or 11 of the Clock, till the next day after about twelve of the clock. 16. To the sixteenth Article, William Mill of Haresfield being sworne, saith, that about a year and three quarters since, he being a fer∣vant in Mr. Powels house, did for three Sabbath dayes together with a Waine and a Yoake of Oxen, carry certaine Loades of Mr. Powels Hay to fodder his Cattle, in a ground of the said Mr. Powels: And he saith, that the first of the three Sabbaths Mr. Powell knew not of it; but the other two (he beleeves) the said Mr. Powell did know of it. Edward Mill of Standish being sworne, saith, that about two years since, he saw Mr. Powels Teeme carry Hay upon a Sabbath day, about a quarter of a mile. 2. And he saith, that he hath seene Mr. Powell sit drinking in the Inne at little Haresfield, above forty and twenty times. Nathaniel Shatford of Standish being sworne, saith, that about two years since, he saw Hay carryed upon a Sabbath day morning: And he saith, he knowes not whether it were Mr. Powels Teeme that carried it: For he saith, that sometimes it was Mr. Powels Teeme, and sometimes Captaine Bayleys his son-in-law. 17. To the seventeenth Article, George Wild, William King, and Jo∣seph Probert, three of Captaine Singletons Company, informe that about three weekes since, they having distrained Mr. Powels Cattle for Contribution money: The said Powell fell a railing at the Committee, and said, he would make them ashamed of it when he came to London, and for keeping away his Rent, and that Mr. Sheppard was his only enemy, and that the Committee kept away 16. l. of his money from him. Item, About 3 or 4 dayes after this, the said Mr. Powell being before the Committee to have his Cattle againe, which they refusing to grant, till he had paid his Contribution money for which they were distrai∣ned: The said Mr. Powell said, he never found such dealing from the Cavaliers. 10 Feb. 1644.
Also Mr. Powell said before the Committee, that Mr. Sheppard of the Committee did alwayes speake as an adversary in his businesse, and not as a Judge. Also he said, that if there be five Articles exhibited against himselfe, he the said Powell hath ten Articles against Mr. Sheppard. Daniel Guilliam of Rendwick being sworne, saith, that about foure moneths since, Mr. Smith of Rendwick being questioned before the Committee for a scandalous Minister; and this deponent having be∣fore been called before the Committee as a witnesse against Mr. Smith: The said Mr. Powell came to this deponent, and would have him and the rest of the parishioners of Rendwick to Petition the Committee on the behalfe of the said Smith, that he might stay at Rendwick till S. Ma∣ry day, to take up a quarters pay, and his Easter booke: which this de∣ponent refused to do: whereupon Mr. Powell spake to this deponent to this effect, viz. Suppose the Kings Army should come into this Country againe, as it is like enough it will be so; what will you do if Mr. Smith, or some friend of his, should come on his behalfe? 18. To the eighteenth Article, Edward Mill of Standish being sworne, saith, that on the 26 day of March last, as this deponent was diging in his owne ground; Mr. Powell and three men more came up∣on him in a violent manner, and Mr. Powell with his owne hands smote this deponent on the face with his fist, and tare his doublet and hose; and told this deponent that he had not cared if he had killed him. 19. To the ninteenth Article, John Rogers of Hardwick being sworne, saith, that about seven years since, he being Overseeer of the poor of the parish of Hardwick, and comming to Mr. Powell to demand of him his dues to the poor of the said parish: he the said Powell answered, he had no money: This deponent replying, told him, he must pay accor∣ding to the Statute, whereupon Mr. Powell said, that if he would have money according to the Statute, then you must have Sermons accor∣ding to the Statute, that is, once a moneth, or words to the like effect. Mr. John Lygon of Painswick informeth, and saith upon oath, that about five years since, there was a suit in the High Commission Court, depending between Mr. Wild and Mr. Acson, sometimes Vicars of Pains∣wick. And they had a Commission to examine witnesses in the Coun∣try; Mr. Powell was Mr. Acsons Commissioner, and Mr. Wild had di∣verse witnesses from Painswick; and when any was examined who was a conscientious man, Mr. Powell with crosse interrogatories did en∣deavour to disparage his testimony; asking him whether ever he were at any Conventicles? whether he did kneele at the Sacrament? with
diverse other like queries touching Bishops and the Ceremonies. Testimonies of witnesses on the behalfe of Walter Powell Clerke, 7 Jan. 1644. Walter Powell the son of Walter Powell Clerke, saith upon oath, that at the time of the Siege against Gloucester, Mr. Powell his father had foure Oxen taken from him by the Kings Army, by warrant from the Lord Forth. And this examinants mother speaking to one of her friends to speake to a Gentleman of the Kings Army, that Mr. Powell may have the Oxen againe: the said Gentleman promised he would doe his endeavour therein upon two conditions: First that Mr. Powell should enter into Bond to bring his son-in-law Captaine Baily (a Cap∣taine of the Parliament Army) into the Kings Army. Secondly, that he should take an Oath never to pray for the Parliament againe. To which the said Mr. Powell answered to the said friend: To the first (said he) how shall I enter into Bond to performe impossibilities? To the se∣cond he answered: The Sun is the Sun though it be sometimes Eclip∣sed: The Parliament is the Parliament what ever the successe be: Have I stood for the Parliament thus long, and shall I now decline? shall I wrong my conscience or damne my soule to get four Oxen? I will ne∣ver do it while I live: And so he heard no more of his Oxen. Francis Yeat of the parish of Haressield, saith, that what Walter Powell hath deposed touching Mr. Powell his fathers answer to the two questions aforesaid, is true in all points. Robert Bright of Haresfield, Clerke, testifieth, that at the time of the Siege against Gloucester, the said deponent being at the house of Walter Powell Vicar of Standish, there was one William Rogers Constable or Tythingman of the parish of Standish, who by virtue of a Warrant had seized upon foure Oxen and a Waine of the said Walter Powels: the Warrant as far as this deponent remembreth, came from the Lord Forth, or Troth. And this deponent having some Corne ready to carry, borrowed of the said Constable or Tythingman Rogers, the said Oxen and Waine for that afternoone, conditionally that both Oxen & Waine should be delivered safely that night at Standish Court, which the said deponent did performe: And upon the entreaty of the said Walter Powels wife, the said deponent did endeavour the regaining of his said Oxen, and preservation of other Cattle, which he the said Walter after∣wards lost: But in regard he was absent from his house, he was taxed for a Rebell; and one Captaine Hanbury which quartered at this de∣ponents house, did say he did beleeve he would be enjoyned to
bring his son-in-law Bailey, and not to pray for the Parliament, or words to that effect: But this deponent never upon discourse betwixt them, could ever find the said Powell halting from the Parliament, but al∣wayes for it. 8 Februarii, 1644. A Warrant was sent out to call in Mr. Powell to answer to the Ar∣ticles, and depositions exhibited against him, upon Monday next the 10 of February. 10 Februarii, 1644. Upon which day Mr. Powell in person appearing before the Com∣mittee: And being by them required to answer to the Articles exhibi∣ted against him; he refused so to doe, and said he had an Order from the Committee, that before he had put in his answer to the said Arti∣cles, he should have a Copy of the depositions of the witnesses that had sworne against him; and said, he would not otherwise answer, till he had the Copy of the said depositions. It was thereupon ordered by the Committee, that Mr. Powell shall appear at Mr. Lanes house, near the Kings Board in Gloucester, to mor∣row in the afternoone by two of the clock, to answer to the Articles exhibited against him, else the Committee to proceed against him ac∣cording to the proofs. 11 Februarii, 1644. At which day and time Mr. Powell appeared not according to the former order, but Mr. Dorney the Towne-clerke appearing for him, moved the Committee to grant him a longer day to put in his answer, and to have a Copy of the depositions of the witnesses. It was thereupon ordered by the Committee that Mr. Powell shall have a Copy of the Articles exhibited against him if he desire it, and that he have time till Saterday night next to put his answer in writing to the said Articles; else the Committee to proceed against him ac∣cording to the proofs. It was then also ordered that Wednesday the 19 of this instant Febr. be the peremptory day for the hearing of Mr. Powels cause at Mr. Lanes house aforesaid, by nine of the clock in the morning: And that the witnesses on both sides do appear viva voce at the same time, and a Warrant to issue forth to summon them to appear accordingly.
19 Februarii, 1644. This day Mr. Powels cause being to be heard, Mr. Powell appeared not according to the last Order of the Committee, whereupon the Committee proceeded to the examination of the witnesses: and as the cause and witnesses were in examination before them, William Powell the son of Mr. Walter Powell aforesaid came in where the Committee sate, and told them his father was gone to London, and had sent an Appeale by him to the Committee; And being asked when he saw his father last, and when his father delivered him the said Appeale? he answered, that he had not seen his father since that day seven night, and that he saw him then at Leonard Stanley, where his said father delivered him the said Appeale: A Copy whereof here fol∣loweth. Whereas there are Articles of Scandall preferred against me Walter Powell Master of Arts, Vicar of Standish, with the Chappels thereunto belonging: And the same Ar∣ticles are prosecuted by the instigation of Malignants: and the Committee of Glou∣cester, by Warrant under their hands, did promise and conclude, that I should have the Copy of the depositions exhibited against me, reserving the names of the depo∣nents, and now have denied the same unto me: And the High Court of Parliament having promised that such as have been eminent in Action, and Suffering, and so continued constant, should not be slighted, but honoured and rewarded. I therefore do Appeale from the censure of the Committee at Gloucester for many good causes; and do demand, that the publique Notary or Clerke of the said Com∣mittee, do enter this my Appeale to the High Court of Parliament. In witnesse whereof I have put to my hand, this 18 day of Febr, 1644. Walter Powell. Ordered the same day by the Committee, that the cause of Mr. Powell be put off till Satturday the 22 of this instant Febr. at eight of the clock in the morning, at Mr. Lanes house: And that notice be sent to Mr. Powell that he be then there; and a War∣rant to be sent out, requiring the most materiall witnesses that have not appeared this day, to be then present in person to give their evidence viva voce, to the end that a finall sentence may be given in the said cause. 22 Februarii, 1644. William Watkins of Standish informeth upon oath, that upon Thursday morning last, he left at Mr. Powels house an order from the Committee, wherein the said Pow∣ell was required to appear before the Committee this present day, to hear the finall de∣termination of his cause. At which day diverse witnesses being examined viva voce, by the Committee: It was ordered that the censure in Mr. Powels cause be respited till Tuesday next, eight of the clock in the morning; Then all the Members of the Committee who have been at the hearing of the cause this day to meet, that so in the interim, a more serious and deliberate consideration may be had thereof, the proofs having been fully heard this day, and before, and Mr. Powell summoned to appear before the Committee, to at∣tend the said censure this day but came not. Present Mr. Mayor. Mr. Kyrle. Mr. Fettiplace. Mr. Wood. Mr. Clifford. Mr. Sheppard. Mr. Jones. Mr. Fowler. Mr. Catchmay.
25 Febr. 1644. To the Honourable Committee by Ordinance of Parliament for Glocester, Heref. &c. The Humble Petition of diverse of the Inhabitants of Standish, Hard∣wick, Rendwick, and Saul. Sheweth, THat the said severall Parishes, or places, doe consist of many people; and that M. Walter Powell hath for above 20 yeares past, been Vicar of the said Parishes, whereby the Cure of the Soules of all the said Parishoners have been under his Charge: The profits whereof, (as is conceived) have been worth about 200l. per annum, for the recompence of serving the said Cures. Notwithstanding, the said M. Powell hath, for a great part of the said time exceedingly neglected the Cure of the soules of the said people in the discharge of his duty in the said places: And sometimes the said Churches have been voide, and had no Minister for many Sab∣bath dayes together, not so much as to read Prayers. And when the Inhabitants of some of the said Parishes have procured an able Minister among them; The said M. Powell hath refused to allow them a competent maintenance for their support, whereby they have been forced to leave the said places: And to the knowledge of most of us, some of the said Parishes have been neglected ten or twelve weekes toge∣ther, And have sometimes been served (to many of our knowledges) by ignorant, scandalous, and wandring persons, such as the said M. Powell could gain best cheap; And scarce at any time have the said Cures been long served in an orderly way, whereby many of the said Parishoners have been forced to goe to other Parishes for performance of their services to the Lord: All which have been an exceeding bur∣then and grievance to the said Parishioners. For redresse whereof, (to some of us known) a petition hath been exhibited unto the Honourable Parliament, & since to the Honourable Governour of Glocester, but by reason of the present distractions, your Petitioners have not (as yet) obtained any relief in this Case. The premises considered, your Petitioners humbly desire, that you will be pleased to execute the power which the Honourable Parliament have entrusted you withall in this Case, for the Soules comfort of your Petitioners, And they shall ever pray. Will: Andrews. Henry Robins. Richard Yealf. Joseph Ellis. John Bainham. Richard Dowding. Thomas Brether. Jo: Merriman. James Haines. Thomas Pride. John Beard. Alice Tovie. Elizabeth Jones. Anne Bohan. Thomas Beard. John Kylock. John Niblet. George Stratford. William Chew. John Eliots. Daniel Gwilliam. Edmund Alen. John Spencer. John Barnard. Henry Nicholson. William Balden. Elizabeth Watkins. Elizabeth Balden. Daniel Wats. Thomas Rolls. Lewis Harris. Rebcceab Keylock. John Window. John Barnard. Thomas Mills. Anne Packer Edith Beard. Thomas Pride. Anne Haines. John Paine. Samuell Smith. William Pello. John Merret. John Rogers. William Whichurch. Giles Wyman. Elizabeth Beard. William Trevis. Richard Harris. Natha: Greneing. Richard Watkins. Joseph Greening. Richard Paine. Robert Chamneys. John Croome. Dorothy Nichalson. Thomas Beard. Thomas Dowding. John Ellis. Walter Fryer, John Beard. William Beard. Edmund Beard. Samuel Beard. Nich: Prosser. Alice Chew. Thomas Allen. Thomas Wintle. Mary Beard. Thomas Robins. Anthony Russell. Edith Wirtle. Robert Waite. Thomas Morweut.
Die Martis, 25. Feb. 1644. FOrasmuch as upon Complaint made to this Committee against Walter Powel Clerk, Vicar of the Parish Church of Standish, and the Chappels or Parish Churches of Hardwick, Rendwick, and Saul; for matter of scandall in his life, it did appear to them by the clear and pregnant testimony of many substantiall witnesses, beyond all exception, That the said Walter Powell having for diverse years together now last past, had the Charge and Cure of the Soules of the people of the said Parishes which have been many; and taken the Tithes, and other profits, incident and belonging to the said Churches: yet hath been notoriously carelesse thereof, and negligent of his Charge therein, sometimes absenting himself many moneths toge∣ther, and not leaving any to Officiate for him; so that for diverse Lords dayes to∣ther, the people had neither preaching nor prayers: And in one of his Churches they had not the Sacrament in a whole yeare, causing the Bell to ring, and the Con∣gregation to come together many times when there was neither sermon nor prayers. And yet notwithstanding, would not suffer his people that were well-affected, to goe abroad to other Churches, to hear godly and Orthodox Divines, but preached against them; presented and vexed them for it in the Chancellours Court: And substituting, and keeping under him, to officiate in his Cures, base and scandalous Ministers; which, when the people desired to remove, and suppresse, he did by all meanes labour to keep in and bear up: And when the people had sonetimes, by their owne care, procured honest and able men to supply the Charge, he did either by not paying off, or opposition against them, soone weary them, and make them desert the place. And whereas it did also appeare to the Committee, by a cleare proof, that the said Walter Powell hath been drunk diverse times, and that he is a great frequenter of Ale houses, and doth spend much time therein, and that he is very false, dishonest, and injurious in his dealings, contentious and litigious amongst his neighbours, one that doth exceedingly entangle himself in secular affaires, and is guilty of many other Crimes, and the said Walter Powell being required by the Com∣mittee, to answer those Crimes charged upon him, he wilfully refused, and behaved himself so before the Committee, as declared in him a manifest neglect and con∣tempt of them. It is therefore this day Ordered, that the said Walter Powell shall be, and hereby is ejected and removed from the Vicaridge of Standish, and Chappels, or parish Churches of Hardwick, Rendwick, and Saul: and of all the said Churches, and service of the Cures thereof, and from the Tythes profits, and Revenues thereof: And that in his place, some such godly, able, & learned person shall be placed, and put in possession of the said Churches, and Cures severally, and respectively as this Committee shall nominate and appoint, who shall receive, and have all the profits and revenues thereof, according to the Ordinance of Parliament made in that be∣halfe. Luke Nurse. Major. James Kirle. John Fettiplace. Sil: Wood. Will: Sheppard. Henry Jones. Stephen Fowler. Christ: Catchmay.
4 Febr. 1647. This day the Parishioners of Hardwick exhibited a Petition to the Com∣mittee, desiring them to admit of Mr. Henry Walker (a stranger) to be their Minister. Whereupon they made this ensuing Order. WHereas the Parishioners and Inhabitants of Hardwick have petitioned this Committee for the setling of Mr. Hen: Walker amongst them to be their present Minister there: And the Committee have not as yet received satisfaction concerning his godly life and con∣versation. It is therefore Ordered, That the said Mr. Walker shall Of∣ficiate in the said Parish, and be Preacher to the same Parish for his farther tryall, untill farther order be given by this Committee to the contrary. And that so long as he shall continue to serve that Cure, he shall receive all the profits incident thereunto. John Madocke Maior. Will. Sheppard. Jo: Dorney. After Master Walker had been there about five moneths, Informa∣tion came in to the Committee against him upon Oath, That he had been in Armes against the Parliament. Whereupon they  an Order to eject him. The Copie whereof followeth. 18 Julii, 1648. WHereas several Depositions containing matter of Delinquencie and ill affection to the Parliament are exhibited against Master Hen: Walker the present Minister of Hardwick in the County of Glouc. whereby it appeares by the oathes of severall witnesses that the said Hen: Walker hath been in actuall Armes against the Parliament, and was taken Prisoner by the Parliament Forces in the Kings Garrison at Hynam about five yeares since: And the Committee being informed that the said Walker is Ejected by the Committee of Mormouthshire for his Delinquencie, and other crimes proved against him: It is there∣upon Ordered, That the said Hen: Walker be and is hereby Ejected and removed out of and from the Vicaridge of Hardwick, and from ser∣ving the Cure there: And that from henceforth he shall no longer of∣ficiate in the Parish Church of Hardwick: And that in his roome, some godly, able Minister be placed, such as this Committee shall nominate and appoint, according to the Ordinance of Parl. in that behalfe. John Madocke Maior. Will: Sheppard. Jo: Dorney. FINIS.
