S5210 13584733 100509
A LITTLE HANDFUL OF Cordial Comforts, Scattered thorowout several An∣swers, to Sixteen Questions, and Objections following. Intended chiefly for the good of those that walk mournfully before God; And are worthy to be gathered up, and regarded, of all such as wish well to their own Peace. By RICHARD STANDFAST, Mr. of Arts, and Rector of Christ-Church in Bristol. Believe, and Live. The Fourth Edition. London Printed by T. Mabb, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve, in little Brittain, 1665.
A Little Handfull OF Cordial Comforts, Scattered thorowout several Answers to certain Questions and Objections following. The First Question. OH wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the wrath to come? for my sins are many, and mine ini∣quity is great; And if the Lord should
deal with me according to his Justice, and my Deserts, my Portion must needs be in the Lake of Fire, with the Devil and his Angels. For the Scrip∣ture pronounceth every Man cursed, that continueth not in all things writ∣ten in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. Shew me therefore, (I beseech you) shew me, what course to take, to come out of this Misery; shew me the way how to get the pardon of my sin, and the favour of God. I care for nothing but this, neither is there any thing in the World, that I do desire, in comparison of this. Answer. This is that (indeed) which of all other things doth most con∣cern us. For upon the pardon of our sins, and peace with God, de∣pends all solid comforts while we are here, and the Eternal Salva∣tion
of our most precious souls hereafter. And therefore for our better both direction and conso∣lation in this behalf, let us take notice of this that follows. There is a way for men to come out of the misery of sin, and to obtain and enjoy the mercy and favour of Almighty God, and that is Faith in Christ: This is the Way, and there is none but this; neither is there any thing in the World, that can help us to the pardon of our sins, to the love of God, and to the salvation of our souls, but only Faith in the Lord Jesus. That this is the way, is appa∣rent enough by the answer which was given by Paul and Silas, Acts 16.31. For when the Keeper of the Prison cryed out with trem∣bling, Sirs, what must I do to be sa∣ved? They made him this An∣swer,
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved. There is in Christ sufficiency enough, for the obtaining of our pardon, and the procuring of our peace; and there is in Faith ability enough to make us partakers of Christs Sufficiency. Christ is the onely way whereby we come unto E∣ternal Life, and Faith is the onely way whereby we come to be par∣takers of Christ; by Faith we come unto Him, and through Him un∣to God. And that we may the better know, that there is in Christ suf∣ficiency enough for the pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls, let us consider a little both who Christ is, and also what he hath done for the working out of our deliverance, and the procu∣ring of our peace. The Lord Jesus Christ is the E∣ternal
Son of God, who pittying that sinfull and miserable condi∣tion, whereinto we were all brought by the Disobedience of our first Parents, undertook to mediate the matter betwixt God and us, and to reconcile us again unto God. For the better effect∣ing of which great work, He came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made Man, yea in all things like unto other Men, save only in Sin, that so he might the better make us free from all Sin. Being found thus in fashion as a Man, he set himself in our stead, and for us Men, and our Salvation, he be∣came obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. And by his Obedience and Death He hath perfectly alone by himself ac∣complished whatever was re∣quisite
for our Salvation. The wretchedness of our con∣dition is briefly this: We all like Sheep have gone astray, nei∣ther have we only omitted those duties, which the Law requires, but we have also committed those evils, which the Law for∣bids; and as the want of Righteous∣ness doth exclude us from the fa∣vour of God, and the Kingdome of Heaven: so the Guiltiness of Sin doth expose us to the Wrath of God, and the Damnation of Hell. But the Lord Jesus Christ hath fulfilled all Righteousness. For in his life He performed as much Obedience, as the Law in ri∣gour could exact; and by suffer∣ing Death upon the Cross, he un∣der-went as much Punishment, as could be required of sinners, in the severity of Justice; and so by his Death and Obedience hath
he provided against our double misery. For by his Sufferings up∣on the Cross, the Justice of God is satisfied, and his Wrath appea∣sed; and by his Obedience, the Law is fulfilled, and we are Ac∣cepted. And as by his death comes the pardon of sin, and deliver∣ance from wrath: so by his Obe∣dience comes the imputation of Righteousness, and Life Ever∣lasting. All which, as they were done in our Nature, so they were done for us, and in our behalf, he stood in the place of sinners, that we might be numbred among the Righteous; He took our sins upon him, that he might put his Obedience upon us; the Chastise∣ment of our Peace was upon him, that with his stripes we may be healed; He was made a Curse for us, that he might Redeem us from it; He was made Sin for
us, that knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteous∣ness of God in Him, 2 Cor. 5.22. And the better to assure us that by his Death upon the Cross, there was paid a price sufficient enough for the procuring of our pardon, he Arose again from the Dead; which he could not have done, if the Justice of God had not been satisfied to the very full in every particular. For as Sin is the sting of Death, and the on∣ly thing that makes Death Ter∣rible: so it is the strength of Death, and it is that only that doth give Death dominion over us: Sin is the Lock, Bar, and Bolt, that makes fast the Gates of Death; and as the door cannot be opened to let out a Prisoner, till the Bar be removed; so there is no escaping from Death, until
Sin be taken out of the way. Christ therefore by Rising from the Dead, hath mightily decla∣red unto us, that he hath paid the utmost Farthing of our Debts, and that by his Death he hath fully satisfied the Justice of God. So that now, by virtue of his suf∣ferings, the greatest sins are made pardonable, and there is a way set open for the worst sinners, both to Grace and Glory. I say, even for the worst sinners. There is no man now that can deny him∣self to be capable of Grace; there are too many, who from the greatness of Gods mercy, do without any cause presume to sin: But there is no man, who from the heinousness of his sins, hath any just cause to despair of mercy; For though our sins be many, yet the mercies of God are more; though they be great,
yet his mercies are above them; He is rich in mercy, yea, his mercy is infinite, so that though he have spent much mercy al∣ready upon our Fore-Fathers, yet he hath mercy enough in store for us also; with him there is plenty of forgiveness, and his mercy endureth for ever: And the merits of Christ are of the same nature, for he is Mighty to save, and he is the same for ever, and through the riches of these merits of Christ, there is a way set open, even for the worst sinners, to become partakers of the riches of the mercies of God. Now if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the propi∣tiation for our sins, &c. 1 John 2.1, 2. And though the time of his abode upon Earth in the day, of his flesh were but short, though
his sufferings were but for a sea∣son; yet such was, and is the dignity of his person, (being the Eternal Son of God) that his Suf∣ferings and Obedience are infinitely meritorious, and his blood is able to clense us from all unrighteous∣ness: So that we may well say with the Apostle, Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that dyed, or rather who is risen again, and now maketh Intercession for us, Rom. 8.33, 34. But let no man turn this doctrine of comfort to a liberty of sinning: against the greatest sins there is hopes in Christ for pe∣nitent Believers. But because there is mercy with God, shall we therefore go on in sin? God forbid; there is mercy with him, and therefore he must be feared. But if any man shall presume to sin, because there is mercy with God, through Jesus Christ; in∣stead
of mercy, that man is like to meet with nothing but Ju∣stice: For as mercifull as God is, and as all-sufficient as the Death of Christ is, there is no mercy for such as go on still in their wickedness. And thus you see that Christ is mighty enough to save us from all our sins, and to reconcile us unto God: Now that we may have benefit by this sufficiency of Christ, we must lay hold upon it by a lively faith. This is that which unites us unto Christ, and makes us one with him; This is that which gives us interest in him, and makes us partakers of his merits; This makes the death and obedience of Christ as verily our own, and as effectual for the pardon of our sins, and the salva∣tion of our souls, as if they had been performed by our very
selves. So that if we do truly Believe in the Lord Jesus, then is God well pleased with us for his sake; and by virtue of his merits being made ours by faith, our sins are all pardoned, and our souls and bodies shall be Eter∣nally saved. And so much the Scripture doth plainly testifie in several places. As John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his onely begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have Life Ever∣lasting. And again, Acts 10.43. Through his Name, whosoever be∣lieveth in him, shall receive Re∣mission of Sins, (be they never so many, never so heinous.) And again, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you, that through this Man is Preached unto you the Forgiveness of Sins. And by him all that believe are justified
from all those things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. By the Law of Moses we could never have been acquitted either from the Guilti∣ness of Sin, or from the Wrath of God: But we are delivered from both, by Faith in Christ; for by it we ob∣tain the forgiveness of our sins, and the salvation of our souls. And thus it is manifest, That Christ is the Way by which we are to obtain the pardon of sin, and peace with God; and that Faith is the way whereby we are made partakers of the merits of Christ for our Justification and Salvation. Proceed we now in a word, to shew that nothing but Christ can reconcile us unto God, and that nothing but Faith can make us partakers of Christ for our Reconciliation. There is no way whereby to come unto God, but onely Christ:
It is onely in Christ that God is well pleased; neither is there salvation in any other. For there is no other Name under the Hea∣ven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. Neither is there any other means on our part, whereby to receive Christ, but onely Faith; And yet unless we do receive him, we get no benefit by him; and therefore unless we do believe in him, we shall perish in our sins. And to this purpose speaks our Saviour, John 3.36. He that believeth on the Son hath Everlasting Life; and he that believeth not the Son, shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abi∣deth on him. See the summ of all this, in that place of St. John, 1 Epist. 5. Chap. 11, 12, and 13 Verses: God hath given to us E∣ternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. He that hath the Son, hath
Life; and he that hath not the Son, hath not Life. These things have I written to you, that be∣lieve in the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have Eternal Life, and that ye may believe in the Name of the Son of God. By which place it is plain, that there is a way to Life; that Christ is the way to it; that Life is so in him; that it is in no other but him; that it is so in him, that by believing in him we obtain Life, and that it is so in him, that without believing in him, we get no benefit at all by him. And thus you have the truth of the former Answer En∣larged and Confirmed, according to it's severall Branches; by which it is manifest, That Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and nothing else but onely Faith in him, can help us to the pardon of sin, the Love
of God, and the Salvation of our Souls. Hereupon it may be thus re∣plyed. The Second Question. IF I cannot obtain the pardon of my sins, and the Favour of God, with∣out Faith in Christ, I doubt my con∣dition is woful, and that I am yet in my sins, and liable unto wrath. For I fear that I have not this Faith in Christ, and that I do not as yet be∣lieve in him. Shew me therefore (I pray you) how I may be comforted against this fear, and how I may know whether I do believe in Christ, Yea, or No? Answer. Doutless if we do not believe in Christ, our condition is woful:
For there is no salvation in any other; and without Faith in him, we get no benefit by him, but we are in our sins, and the obligation unto wrath is in full power and force against us. For though the ransome, which Christ paid by his Death upon the Cross, be a ransome abundantly sufficient for the sins of the whole World; yet the benefit of that Death of his is bestow'd on none, but upon such conditions as God himself plea∣seth; which conditions, for such as be of years, are Faith and Re∣pentance; which if we want, we shall be sure to perish in our sins, not out of any defect in Christ, but onely because we want those conditions, whereby we come to have interest in him, and to be partakers of his Merits. Now that we may the better know whether we have this Faith in us
yea, or no, (and so neither be deceiv'd with vain hopes, nor yet discomforted with false fears,) consider this which follows, and see what Answer you can make to these several demands. Are you sensibe of the misery wherein you are by reason of your sins? And do you finde that you need a Saviour? Do you know who is the Saviour of the World? Do you know in some good measure who Christ is, and what he hath done for us, and what the benefits that are to be had by him? Do you know what a necessity there is of having of him, and what a misery it is to be without him, and what we must do, if we would have any benefit by him? And do you verily be∣lieve that Christ Iesus; and none but he, is the Saviour of the World, and that he hath both
done and suffered, as the Scrip∣tures Testifie of him? Do you verily believe that there is no way to Heaven but Christ, that there is no way to get Christ but Faith, and that there is no part to be had in him, but by renoun∣cing all other Lords, and all o∣ther Saviours, and by adhering wholly unto him for all our Conso∣lation and Salvation? And do you now Desire from the heart to be made partaker of Christ? and do you sincerely endeavour to accept of him, and to embrace him? And can you be content for his sake, to forsake all things, and to undergo any misery, ra∣ther then to part with him? Can you be content to take him (as we say) for better for worse, and not onely for your Iesus, to save you from your sins, but also for your Lord, to command and dis∣pose
of you at his pleasure? And is it your care to know his Will? And is it your endeavour to yield him an Universal Obedience? And is it your practise in obedi∣ence unto him, to exercise your self to keep a Conscience void of offence both toward God, and to∣ward Men, and constantly and conscionably to deny all ungod∣liness and worldly lusts, and to live godly, and righteously, and soberly in this present world? Do you thus Accept of Christ, and Submit unto him? Nay, is it your hearty desire, and unfained en∣deavour so to do? Then you may be sure that you have some de∣grees of True Faith in Iesus Christ, and therefore that Christ is yours, that God is yours, that All is yours. For this is such a qua∣lification as hath the promise, both of the Life that now is, and
also of that, that is to come. By the Questions we may ex∣amine our condition. For after this manner is Faith wrought in us; Such are the preparatives, such is the nature, and such are the effects of a True Faith, as are implyed in these questions; So that if we can in some good mea∣sure make understanding and af∣fectionate answers to them all; Then we may be sure that we have a True Faith in Christ: But if either we know him not, or desire not to accept of him, or care not to obey him, we have then cause to think that we do not believe in him; and if we think otherwise, we do but de∣ceive our souls. Now if upon examination had, we finde that we want Faith, we must be diligent in using the means whereby to get it, which
is by reading and hearing of the Word of God, and conferring about it. For Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word. If we finde that we have this Faith, we must be careful to keep it, and to increase it, by the Word, by the Sacraments, and by Prayer. The Third Question. UPon this that hath been spoken, another question may be raised to this purpose. I do in some measure know who Christ is, and I do believe that he is a Saviour All-sufficient, and that there is no other way to Sal∣vation, but Him, and that whosoever believeth in him shall not Perish: and I my self would fain believe in him. But how may I know that I have right to believe in him, and that the invi∣tations to Faith do concern me? How
may I know whether I should be wel∣come, or not, if I should be so bold as to come unto him? Answer. For our encouragement here∣in, and that we may come the more boldly unto the Throne of Grace, we must know, that Christ is a Common Saviour, he is the Saviour of the World; and in regard of the All-sufficiency of his merits, there is not one of those, whose nature he took, un∣to whom his merits are not com∣municable; neither is there any one, who in that respect may not truly be said to be savable. The Promise is made to You, and to your Children, and to all that be afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2, 39. Now if you de∣sire to know, whether you be one
of those, whom he doth call to believe in him; consider then whether or no, you be sensible of your misery, and burdened with your sins; whether your desire be to be eased of your sins, and to be partaker of Christ, and of those benefits and comforts that be in him. For if we be thus qualified, we may be confident that we are of the number of those, whom he doth seriously in∣vite to come unto him, and to depend upon him. And hereof you have a witness in your self, and Gods own hand to shew for it, to your greater comfort. For these are his own words: Come unto me all ye that labour and be heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. And again, If any man thirst, let him come un∣to me and drink, Iohn 7.37. Un∣to such thirsty souls was Christ
sent, he came to speak peace to such as are weary, and broken-heart∣ed, and to set at liberty such as are bruised. So that if we, find∣ing what a misery it is to be in sin, and to want a Saviour, have thereupon an earnest desire to be delivered from this misery, we may be as sure, that he calls upon us to come unto him, as if our very Names were specified in these invitations: Being thus qualified, we may come boldly, and upon our coming shall be sure to finde Rest; But without this badge we have no warrant at all to expect a welcome. They that do thus hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be filled; but they that be rich in their own conceits, and are not sensible of any wants, these he sends empty away.
The Fourth Question. BUt if I finde that I want this sor∣row, what course should I take, to bring my heart to be humbled for my sins. Answer. To this end let a Man examine himself by the Law of God. For by the Law is the knowledge of sin. And let him duly think up∣on that fearfull Curse of God, whereunto every the least sin doth make us liable. Let him diligently consider, how ugly and lothsome sin doth make us in the sight of God, and what a fearfull thing it is to be deprived of the Love of God, and the Joyes of Heaven, and what a misery it is to be exposed to the wrath of
God, and the torments of Hell. Let him seriously ponder what a misery it is to lose the Soul. Let him throughly weigh the nature of Eternity, and the strictness of that Account that is to come; and the severity of that sentence, which in that last and dreadfull Day shall be pronounced upon all impenitent sinners, when they shall be adjudged to that Ever∣lasting Fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. All these are of singular use to wound our souls, and to affect our hearts with sorrow for our sins. It is the Law that makes way for the Gospel: For thus John the Baptist by denouncing the judgments of God upon wic∣ked courses, prepared the way for our Blessed Saviour. But especially, let him consider how great things' God hath done for
him. For as there is no greater obligation to obedience, then the loving kindness of the Lord: So there is nothing that doth more aggravate our sins, and so conse∣quently our misery; And there∣fore nothing that can tend more to the breaking of the heart, then the consideration of the bounty, and long suffering of God to us∣ward. And this plainly appears by that course which the Prophet Nathan, at the Lord's appoint∣ment took with David, 2 Sam. 12. For by fetting before his eyes Gods many and wonderfull mercies vouchsafed, and his own extream ingratitude, and ill re∣quital of so great goodness, he was constrained to cry out with shame and sorrow, I have sinned against the Lord. And amongst all the mercies of God, there is none that doth
more deserve to take up all our thoughts, then that departure of Christ, which he accomplished at Jerusalem; Neither is there any thing that doth more tend, either to preserve us from sin, or to umble us for our failings, then the death of our Saviour. For suppose the Lord Jesus should present himself unto us, when we are about to commit any sin, or after we have done it, as he was hanging upon the Cross, with his sides scourged, his face buffetted, his hands and feet nailed, his head crowned with Thorns, his very heart pier∣ced, his whole body upon the rack, and trickling down with drops of blood, and speaking un∣to us after this, or the like man∣ner: Behold, if ever sorrows were like unto my sorrows; And yet all this was but the pu∣nishment
of thy sins. It is thy sins that have brought me to all these torments; and canst thou delight in that which was the cause of such misery? All this have I done for thy good, and is this the requital of my Love? I have born thy sins, that thou might'st be eased; mine hands were bound, that thine might be freed; my sides were scour∣ged, that thine might be spa∣red; my cheeks were buffet∣ted, that thine might be kist: my head was crowned with thorns, that thine might be crowned with glory; and is this thy kindness to thy friend, thus to return me hatred for my good will? Hast thou not put me to pains enough al∣ready, but that thou must rake in my wounds, and make a sport of my misery? Or if thou
wilt not pitty me, yet pitty thy self. For can that be light to thee, which cost me so heavy? Or shalt thou escape the cup, that art a sinner, when my be∣loved Father would not spare me that was but a Surety? Suppose (I say) that the Lord Jesus should present himself and speak unto us, after this or the like manner, would not such a sight make our bowels to yearn, and such words cut us to the very heart? Doubtless it were enough to make the dryest eyes to wish for tears of blood, and the hard∣est heart of the most obstinate sin∣ner, to become in the midst of his body, like melting wax, thus to hear, and to look upon him whom they have pierced: Yea it is im∣possible for any man to think on this, and to go on in sin, but such as could be content to Cru∣cifie
again the Lord of Glory. And thus you see, what are the chiefest helps to humiliation, and by what means our hearts may be brought to be deeply affected with sorrow for our sins. Hereupon a timorous heart will be ready to reply yet further after this manner. The Fifth Question. BY this course, and by these, and the like Meditations, I confess that I have been brought in some mea∣sure to be sorry for my sins, and now I would fain be eased of them; And it is my desire to believe in Christ, but I fear that as yet I am not enough humbled; I fear I have not so great measure of sorrow, as may make me capable of this invitation; And my heart is so hardned, that I cannot grieve and mourn for my sins
so much as I should, and would do; and therefore I fear, that as yet I have no right to the comforts of the Gospel. Answer. True it is, that sorrow for sin makes ready an heart prepared for the Lord; and as usually in the course of Nature, there is no birth without some pain: So in the work of Grace, there is no re∣generation, (that of Infants in Baptisme excepted,) without some sorrow. But as there are degrees of pain in the Natural birth: So in the Spiritual birth, there are degrees of sorrow. Some Women have a quick Dispatch, others have a more tedious Tra∣vel: And so it is in the New Birth, all are not pained alike. Some there be that go mourning all the day long, yea day after day,
whereas unto others, heaviness indures but as it were for a night, and joy cometh in the morning. We must know therefore, and that for our comfort, that it is not the quantity, but the quality of sorrow, that God looks after; neither matters it so much, how great our sorrow be, as how true it is. If a Youth, upon due exami∣nation had, be found fit for the University, his Tutor never de∣mands how long he hath been at School, how harshly he hath been dealt withall, how often he hath been whipt, before he could come to that perfection; All that he looks after is, whether or no he be fit to be admitted: So it fares with us; The Law is our School-Master to bring us unto Christ; And this it doth, partly by disco∣vering unto us our sins, whereby
we see that we need a Saviour; and partly by threatning of us with the curse, whereby we are made more carefull to look out after this Saviour, and more wil∣ling to accept of him, and for our own ease to submit unto him, when once we have found him. Now when we can be content to accept of Christ upon any terms, then are we ready for him, then are we fit to be admitted into him. And when we do seek un∣to Christ for this admission, he re∣gards not so much, how long we were at School under the Law, how often we were lashed by it, or how sorely we have smarted under it: But all that he looks after is, whether we be fit to come unto him. Consider therefore with your self, had you ever such a sight and sorrow for your sins, as made you weary of them; and
out of love with them; and wil∣ling to be eased of them; and de∣sirous of Interest in Christ, and ready to accept of Christ upon any Terms, rather then to goe without him? Is it your grief that you cannot be more sorrow∣full, and do not you desire as much to be kept from sin for the time to come, as to have all that pardoned that is past? Surely, if you stand thus affected, then are you fitted, and made ready for Christ; and whether your sorrow were great or little, yet it is a to∣ken, that it was a true and a god∣ly sorrow, because it worketh re∣pentance unto salvation, never to be repented of. It may be yet further objected, Thus:
The Sixth Question. I Confess that I have been grieved for my sins, and I have been de∣sirous to believe in Christ: But I fear that my Sorrow is not good, nor my Faith sound, because my obedience is so faulty: For I am not so willing to forsake all my sins, nor so carefull to yield Christ Obedience, as I should be; or if I am willing so to do, yet mine infirmities, and my failings are such, and so many, that I fear my sor∣row, and my faith, are not such as they ought to be. Answer. Certain it is, that sorrow for sin will nothing avail us without amendment of Life; The wicked must forsake his wayes, if he ex∣pect pardon, Isa. 55.7. And it is
he that confesseth his sins, and for∣saketh them, that shall find mercy, Prov. 28.13. If we willingly allow our selves in the practice of any thing displeasing unto God, our condition is dangerous. If we say that we abide in Christ, we must walk as he walked, or else we deceive our own souls, 1 John 2.6. If we say that we have fel∣lowship with God, and yet walk in darkness, we lye, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.6. And if it be not our study and exercise to yield Christ an Universal Obedi∣ence, our Faith is but Presump∣tion; our Peace is but Security; our Hopes are but Shadows; and our Expectation will Perish. But if we have an hearty desire, and a sincere endeavour in all things to live honestly, we may not from our failings and imperfections, presently conclude that we are
not sanctified at all, that we have no Faith, no Interest in Christ, no love of God in us. For perfe∣ction is not to be attained unto, while we be in the body; But sincerity is that which may be had, and affords unto us matter of comfort; For the Lord loves them that do follow after Righteous∣ness, Pro. 15.9. And they whose sincere desire and endeavour it is to have respect to all the com∣mandments, are accepted of him. If it be our unfained desire, study and endeavour, in Obedience un∣to Christ, to do whatsoever he commandeth; If it be our care to cleanse our selves from all fil∣thiness both of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, and not wickedly to de∣part from him in any thing: I say, if it be our unfained desire, study and endeavour so to do, we
may safely conclude, notwith∣standing all our imperfections, that our sorrow is good, and our faith sound, and that our sins are pardonable, and our service is ac∣cepted, and our souls shall be sa∣ved. For in Gods account, and acceptation, that goes for a clean life which is not stained with wil∣full pollutions, and whose obedi∣ence is extended to the utmost of his knowledge, and hath withall a purpose to amend what God shall hereafter make him know to be sinfull; to that man is al∣lowed the opinion of gracious. See further of this point in An∣swer to Objection 16. The Seventh Question. IF these things be so, I find then that my condition at the present is good; And, if I were sure to dye in this
Estate, I make no doubt but I should be happy. But I fear that I shall not continue in this Condition; For my Enemies are Many, and Mighty, and Crafty, and Watchfull, and I myself am prone to Sin, and apt to fall from my own Steadfastness; And I finde by experience, that many who have be∣gun in the Spirit, have ended in the Flesh, and their latter Ends have been worse then their Beginnings. This makes me to fear that I shall not con∣tinue faithfull unto the death; And yet without this continuance, I shall never Obtain the Crown of Life. Answer. All these things I confesse are true; such are our Enemies, such is our Weakness; and the Mi∣sery of those that do turn back from the Holy Commandment given unto them, is such, that it
had been better for them not to have known the way of Truth, 2 Pet. 2.21. For they shall lose those things that they have done, and their portion shall be with unbelievers. So that a Man can∣not chuse but have cause to fear. Nevertheless, there is comfort in God against this fear also; Yea, This very fear of Falling Away, hath in it matter of consolation, for it is a means to keep us from de∣parting from God, Ier. 32.40. And I will make an Everlasting Co∣venant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Many there be, that having be∣gun well, do yet at length grow weary of well doing, and so lose what they have done; And there∣fore let him that thinketh that he standeth, take heed least he fall:
But yet let not our hearts be trou∣bled, let us not be dismayed with fear; for the perseverance of such as are justified and sanctified in deed and in truth, is certain, and the foundation of God standeth sure, the Lord knoweth who are his, and he knoweth how to de∣liver them out of Temptation. In further Answer to this Obje∣ction, and the better to comfort us against this fear, take special notice of these Texts of Scrip∣ture, 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. John 10.27, 28, 29. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never Perish, neither shall any Man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater then all: And no Man is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. 2 Chro. 16.9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards him. The Eighth Question. BUt if the Perseverance, and so Salvation of such as are in deed and in truth the Saints of God, be so sure and certain, what mean those frequent caveats which we meet with in the Scripture? What mean those frequent exhortations to Perse∣verance? Answer. The Perseverance of such is sure and certain, howbeit God brings it to pass by means; It is wrought in them by God, and yet
their own endeavours also are re∣quired; And these Caveats and exhortations are the means which God hath sanctified for the exci∣ting of their endeavours, and for their preservation from Apostacy. Caveats we have many, and many Threatnings; Exhortati∣ons many, and many Promises; such as are, Take heed to your selves. Watch in all things. Be steadfast and unmovable, continue faithfull unto the Death, and I will give thee the Crown of Life. The latter end of back-sliders shall be worse then their beginning, &c. By which, and other like passages, we are not to think either that perse∣verance is in our own power, or that the condition of Gods Peculiar People is mutable in regard of him; But they do imply how prone we are to sin, in regard of our selves; And they shew, that
our own endeavours are required for the working out of our Salva∣tion; and they are the means sanctified of God, for the prevent∣ing of sin, and for the exciting of our care, and so for the pre∣serving of us unto his heavenly Kingdome. And whereas we are said to be kept by the power of God; We may not so understand it, as if we our selves might in the mean time sit still and do nothing: We are kept by God, and yet we also must keep our selves: It is God that keepeth us, and yet we also must watch and pray. But we are said to be kept by God, for our greater encouragement. For if our endeavours be sincere, though they be but weak, yet they will be effectuall, because we have such a mighty helper: And withall it is to teach us, to
whom we ougth to ascribe all the glory when our endeavours be∣come effectual. It is God that must have the glory of it, for it is by his power that we are kept, who worketh in us both to will and to do, of his own good plea∣sure. Be strong therefore in the Lord, and in the power of his might; He that is with us is mightier then they that be against us. And therefore we need not fear; for neither the power, nor the policy of Hell shall prevaile against the People of God; And the mouth of the Lord hath spo∣ken it, Mat. 16.18. The Ninth Question. I Make no doubt of the power of God, I know that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him: but I doubt of his will, I fear that he will not do it.
Answer. Surely this is a needless fear; for his love is everlasting, his gifts and calling are without Re∣pentance; and whom he loveth, to the End he loveth them. And therefore Fear not, the Lord will not forsake his People, for his own Names sake, because it hath pleased him to make you his People, 1 Sam. 12.22. So that if once he hath loved us so well, as to set us apart for himself; He loveth himself better, then to forsake us. And though our unworthinesse de∣serve that God should deny us, yet his Faithfulness is such, that he cannot deny himself. Think therefore upon his love; Meditate upon his Power; Call to mind his romise; Forget not his Truth; And commit the keep∣ing
of your soul unto him in well doing. Care you to do well, God will care for the rest: For He pre∣serveth the Souls of his Saints, he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked, Psal. 79.10. The Tenth Question. BUt seeing that mine own endea∣vours are required for the work∣ing out of my Salvation; And seeing that my assurance of Salvation cannot be sound, unless my care and dili∣gence, in the constant using of all good means tending thereunto, be every way answerable: Shew me, I pray you, by what means I may be enabled to continue patiently in well doing, that so at the last I may obtain eternal life. Answer. Hereunto many things are
useful, the chiefest of which are these following. 1. Labour to be sincere, by con∣sidering that all our wayes are before God. To walk before God is the way to be perfect, and sin∣cerity is the way to perseve∣rance. For the Righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands, shall grow stronger and stronger, Iob 17.6. But he whose heart is not upright before God, will start aside in the time of Tryal; See 1 Iohn 2.19. Labour to overcome the World, that so neither the cares and glory of it may too deeply affect us, nor yet the crosses and trou∣bles of it, too much affright us. For each of these are great hin∣derances to the practice of piety. Perfecution is that heat, that doth wither the word, and by it some are made to deny their Master;
And the cares of the World, are the thorns that choke the Word, and a means whereby it becomes unfruitfull. For the love of Money, is the root of all Evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, 1 Tim. 6.10. Arm your self therefore against both these; and to this end con∣sider with your self, and think often upon that of our Saviour, Mat. 16.26. What is a Man pro∣fited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? And upon that, Mat. 8.38. He that is asha∣med of me, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, &c. And upon that, 2 Tim. 2.12. If we Suffer with him, we shall Reign with him: But if we Deny him, he will also Deny us. And learn to discern be∣tween those things that be seen, and the things that be not seen. For the things that be seen, are
but Temporall; but the things which are not seen are Eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. 3. Watch in all things, for our Enemies are many, and security is dangerous, and sin is so deceit∣full, that it will quickly harden us: And this is certain, a Man never yields to his own corrupt disposition for the committing of any evil, but he is ordinarily more willing to the second act, then to the first; And who then can tell how far he may go astray, that doth but once give way to his own Corruption. 4. Labour to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, by consider∣ing that our Labour cannot be in vain in the Lord. This endeavour to grow in Grace is a special means to keep us from being drawn a∣way with the errour of the wic∣ked:
But standing still, is in danger of turning back, and luke∣warmness is the way to grow key-cold. 5. Despise not Prophecying if you would not quench the Spirit; If we would not be weary of wel∣doing, we must wait upon the Word: For that is able to build us up, and to give us an Inheritance a∣mong them that are Sanctified, Acts 20.32. And lastly, We must pray with∣out ceasing, that he who hath be∣gun a good work in us would also finish it, and grant that our whole Spirit, Soul and Body may be kept blameless unto the com∣ing of our Lord Iesus. This is the way to continue in well doing, and so running we shall obtain.
The Eleventh Question. But though my soul may be cared for, yet my body may be in want. I want already many things that be necessary; Or at least I fear that I shall want such things as be needfull for me; And this fear makes my life the more fearfull. Answer. Doubtless, if our souls be cared for, other things may the lesse trouble us; Howbeit against those things also there is matter of comfort in Iesus Christ. He that regards the soul, will not neglect the body; and he knows what we have need of: And if we be of his family, he will be sure to pro∣vide for us. He is able enough to help us, for the whole Earth is
the Lords, and the fulness there∣of: And of his will we have no cause to doubt, for he hath pro∣mised that if we seek first the Kingdome of God, and his Righte∣ousness, all these things shall be added as it were over and above, and into the bargain, Mat. 6.33. And he hath said, that he will withhold no good thing from them that fear him, Psal, 34.9, 10. Whereupon we may safely con∣clude, that if he keep any thing from us, it will be good for us to be without it: So that we may well say with the Prophet David, The Lord is my Shepherd, I cannot want, Psal. 23.1. For he that hath given us Christ, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Rom. 8.32.
The Twelfth Question. I Have been a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief; I have gone through much Misery already, and many are the Crosses and Troubles that are upon me at the present, and I fear that there be more and worse yet to come: So that sometimes I begin to think that the Lord doth not love me, and I am ready to doubt what will be∣come of me; And I fear that my Pa∣tience will one day be tryed, and that I shall faint in the day of Evil. Shew me therefore, I pray you, how I may be comforted against this fear; and how I may be enabled to wade through all with Christian patience. Answer. True it is, that the crosses and troubles, which men shall meet
withall in the way to Heaven, are matters of offence, and unto some they are very powerfull, turning them back from the hope laid be∣fore them, to the embracing of this present World. But if we would think upon things aright, in the midst of misery, we should have comforts enough to refresh our souls. Neither is there any trouble that can befall us, in the midst of which they have not matter of strong consolation, which being justified by Faith, are at peace with God, through Iesus Christ. Now to the end that we may be the better comforted against all crosses, let us make use of these few considerations follow∣ing. 1. Consider that it is no new or strange thing to be exercised with Afflictions; Neither are Crosses and Troubles of them∣selves
an argument of Gods ha∣tred, but rather a token of his love, and a witness of our adop∣tion, if we bear them patiently, and make good use of them. There is not any affliction inci∣dent to the nature of man, which some one or other, even of Gods own dear Servants and Children, have not been exercised withall. Look upon David, and Jacob, and Ioseph, and Iob, and Paul, and all that cloud of Witnesses made mention of Heb. 11. And we shall finde, that through many Afflicti∣ons, they all entred into the King∣dome of God. Nay, look upon the Captain of our Salvation, and we shall finde, that even he himself was made perfect through Sufferings, Heb. 2.10. And this must needs be a special means to enable us to bear all with the greater patience, when we shall
know and consider, that though our afflictions be for number ma∣ny, and for nature grievous, yet they are but the measure of our Betters. 2. Consider that God hath pro∣mised never to leave us nor for∣sake us, Heb. 13.5. And his pre∣sence alone is support sufficient even in the worst of miseries. How can Iacob be afraid to go down into Egypt, when God him∣self hath said, he will go with him? Gen. 46.34. God hath made the like promise unto us, and therefore if he bid us go into troubles; If he command us to walk even through the valley of the shadow of death, yet we need fear no evil, as long as he is with us: For, if God be with us, who can be against us? Rom. 8.31. 3. Consider, that unto such as
do believe in Christ, the nature of Afflictions is wholly altered; for their sting is pull'd out, and their bitterness is allayed: They may savour of anger, of wrath they do not; Crosses they may be, Curses they are not: They may be Cha∣stisements for our correction, but they are not Iudgements for our confusion. For Christ hath suffer∣ed whatever wrath was due unto us by reason of our sins: And if we be once reconcised unto God by Faith in Christ, there is more mat∣ter of comfort in the assurance of his Love, then there can be of de∣jection in the greatest trouble. 4. Consider that God intends nothing but good unto us in his sharpest dealings with us: For it is all to humble us; and to prove us, and to do us good at our later end; all is for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.
For hereby he reforms what hath been amiss in us in times past; here∣by our iniquity shall be purged, and this is the fruit, to take away our sin, Isa. 27.9. Hereby he prevents sin in us for the time to come, as he did St. Paul, unto whom there was sent the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should have been exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. Hereby he doth wean us from the Love of the World, and Worldly vanities. As long as all goes well with us, we are rea∣dy to say with S. Peter, It is good to be here: But when once we be∣gin to be Afflicted, then present∣ly with the Prodigal, our minds are homewards. Hereby he deals with us as the Husband-man doth by the Vine, he pares and prunes us, to make
us the more fruitfull, Iohn 15.2. Hereby he doth exercise our Faith and Patience, and makes tryal of our sincerity, as he did by Iob. And so in this he lays the ground of our greater glory: For greater Afflictions require grea∣ter Patience; and the greater our Patience is, the greater shall be our future Happiness. And the consideration of this must needs be a means to per∣swade us to Patience: For if we can willingly endure smarting∣water for the clearing of our eyes; and bitter Pills, and sharp lances for the health of our bo∣dies: much more ought we to bear with patience the smarting hand of Almighty God for the health of our souls. There is no Affliction indeed joyous, for the present, but grievous; but after it worketh the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness to such as are ex∣ercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. Consider that if we do con∣tinue faithfull unto the death, we shall receive a Crown of Life. And if we do but have an eye to that recompence of reward, we shall easily be drawn, as Moses was, to esteem the reproach of Christ grea∣ter Riches then the Treasures of Egypt; and to chuse rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the plea∣sures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25, 26. For the happiness of that Kingdom, which is to come, is such, that our Blessed Saviour accounts it matter of Comfort a∣gainst all fear whatsoever, as it doth plainly appear by those words of his, Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the King∣dome. Where the onely Argu∣ment
that he makes use of for the encouraging of his little flock, is the hopes of the Kingdom. And again by that place, Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly for my sake. Rejoyce, and be exceeding glad; for great is your re∣ward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Wherein our Saviour doth hearten his Disciples against Per∣secution, only upon this ground, because their reward should be great in Heaven. And surely in S. Paul's Computation, the pre∣sent Affliction is not worthy the speaking of, in regard of that glo∣ry that shall be revealed, Rom. 8.18. Neither is there indeed, any comparison at all between them; for the one is but a light & momen∣tary affliction, the other is a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. So that this good∣ness of God in the Land of the Living, is enough to keep us from fainting under the heaviest burden: For though our outward Man decay, yet while we have an eye to this joy set before us, our inward Man will be renewed day by day. Fitly therefore is the hope of this Happiness, called the Anchor of the Soul, and the Hel∣met of Salvation; for by this An∣chor we are preserved in the deep waters, by this Helmet we are Protected in the times of danger; and by flying unto this Hope, we are sure to finde refuge in the day of evil. And thus we may be comfort∣ed against evils present. Now as for those that are yet to come, we may thus resolve, Either they shall not come at all: For God will
stand between us and harm, and keep us quiet from fear of evil: Without his providence nothing can befall us, and therefore no∣thing shall befall us to do us hurt: For he is a God that delighteth in the prosperity of his Servants. Or if they do come, Yet the Lord will deliver us out of all: there shall be an end. Enlargement will come, and he will deliver his people, even because he hath a favour unto them. And in the mean time, He will support us in them, till deliverance do come; and his grace will be sufficient for us. For God is faith∣full, and will not suffer us to be tempt∣ed above that we are able: But with the temptation also make away to es∣cape, that we may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. And he will also give us benefit by them; For he maketh all to work
together for good, to those that love him, Rom. 8, 28. And thus we may be comforted against our fears also. In a word, there's none can know the way to Hea∣ven, better then he that dwells there. And therefore which way soever God leads us, it is safe to follow him. The uneasiness of the way, makes us think that it is the farthest way about; but the Lord knows it is the next way home. And whatsoever they seem to us, Yet all the wayes of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies, Psal. 25.10. The Thirteenth Question. MY troubles are great, exceed∣ing weighty and burdensome, and there are no sorrows like unto my sorrows; and this is that, that doth
so break my heart, and drink up my Spirit. Answer. This is Answered in a word. It is but a conceit of our own, to think our own troubles the worst, when as indeed they are but common temptations: But say the worst, grant that there be none like them; yet if we shall compare them either with that which we have deserved; or with that which Christ himself for us hath suffered; or with that weight of glory that shall be revealed, we shall then esteem them all as nothing. And as great as they are, if we would out only look up and consider duly from whence they come, even that alone would be enough to make us patient: For thus was
it with David, he was dumb, and opened not his mouth, consider∣ing who did it, Psal. 39.9. The Fourteenth Question. But my Affliction is such, that I am kept from enjoying the li∣berty of the House of God, and from praysing him in the Congregation. Answer. This must needs be trouble∣some to minds well, affected; howbeit if God himself restrains us, we may then be sure that he requires not our presence. And in such a case, if our desires be with the Congregation, even that desire, will be sufficient. Neither is the Lord so confined to the Congregation, but that he is near to all, that call upon him
faithfully wheresoever they be, when necessity, and not neglect is the reason of their absence. And besides all this, if at any time, by reason of age or sickness, we are not able to do those things which we do desire, and did performe in the times of our health and strength, then shall a willing mind be well pleasing unto God, and good desires shall be accep∣ted. Yea furthermore, this we must know for our consolation, that a patient submitting to the good will of God, is a Worshipping of him, as appears by that, Iob 1.20, 21. Where Iob is said to Worship God, when he did with patience and contentedness sub∣mit unto him. This is indeed, a glorifying of God, and herein we acknowledge him to be our God, and in thus submitting we shall perform unto God as good
service as ever we did in all our lives. For this is the passive part of true obedience, and the tryal of sincerity in other things. To serve the Lord when all goes well with us, is much; and it is alto∣gether as much, if not more, to resolve to trust in him, though he should kill us. And if we can with Job hold fast our Righteous∣ness, and in the hour of sempta∣tion not fall away, this is a true note of pure Religion, and a ma∣nifest Argument of sincerity and truth. The Fifteenth Question. And yet after all this, I must die; and when a few years are come, I shall go the way whence I shall not re∣turn: and the fear of Death doth much amaze me.
Answer. Verily there is no solid reason why it should: for God hath gi∣ven us victory over death it self, through our Lord Jesus Christ. The death of Christ, was the death of death. Death fastning upon him, to whom it was not due, lost it's sting, and so became less able to hurt those that had deserved it. Christ hath pulled out the sting of Death, by dying for sin; So that now, like a Bee, or Snake without a sting, it may buzze a∣bout us, and afright us, but it can∣not hurt us. All the hurt that death can do to such as believe in the Lord Jesus, is to free them out of Prison, to put an end to their dayes of Sin, to carry them home, to their Fathers house, to let them into their Masters joy, to pull
down those mouldring Cottages, wherein they dwell, and to build them up to Immortality. For if we believe that Jesus Died, and rose again, them also that sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him, and they shall be for ever with the Lord. And of this Happi∣ness the worst kinde of Death, that can befall us, cannot deprive us. A Man may dye in Poverty, he may dye with Extreamity of Torments, he may dye by com∣mon Calamities, and yet he may dye in Faith; and so dying, his End shall be Peace: For Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, even so saith the Spirit, &c. Rev. 14.13. So that if we did but throughly understand the Nature of Death, and what it is to the People of God, we should be so far from being afraid of it, that with Saint Paul, we should rather
desire to be dissolved, because then we should be with Christ, which is the best of all. To shut up this Point, and so likewise the whole matter con∣cerning Afflictions, this let me adde to the rest; That if we do desire to get Good by these Me∣ditations, and to be upheld with Comfort in the time of Trouble, we must Continue instant in prayer. This is that Receipt, which the Holy Ghost prescribes to all sorts of Persons, against all manner of Grievances whatsoever, James 5, 23. This is that Remedy that is alwayes at hand, and never out of season. Yea, this is that Mes∣senger, which being dispatched aright, was never sent empty away. Believe it, If a Man were in a case more desperate then Death, in a place worse then Hell, yet if there he could pray
heartily, he should find Comfort and Strength, even beyond Hope: for our Prayers use to be with the utmost of our Hopes, if not be∣yond them; and yet God doth use to be better to us then our Prayers. The Sixteenth Question. I See now that there is matter enough of solid Comfort in the Word of God. But the unevenness of my walking makes me to doubt, that I have no Part nor Portion in those precious Promises, which God hath made unto his People. Answer. Promises I confesse that are misapplied, can afford to the Soul no solid Comfort. But from our Failings we may not presently
conclude, That they do not at all belong to us: For God looks up∣on the Heart; and where Ability is wanting, the Will is accepted. Are not your Failings your Grief? are they not besides your Will? are they not contrary to the current of your Desires, and the main bent of your Resoluti∣ons and Endeavours? Is it not your Endeavour to do the Will of God, though it cost you the parting with the Sweetest Sins, even your own Iniquity? And is it not your Resolution, that you will not wickedly De∣part from God? If it be so, then notwithstanding your Failings, you may say with David, I have kept thy Word: For though this be not such a measure of keeping as the Law requireth, yet it is such a keeping as God accepteth: For he accounteth such as keep them∣selves
from wilfull sins, upright and innocent, through Christ their Strength, and their Redeemer, as appears by that passage, Psal. 19.13. And this is a true Rule, where∣by to proceed in the judging of our selves. If a Man, that be∣lieves in Christ continues in an unknown Sin, that cannot hinder the uprightness of his heart, so the ignorance be not wilfull; but the least touch of knowledge, or wilfulness mars sincerity. So that if our failings be not wilful, though they be many, yet they cannot hinder our interest in the promises of God. And what can we now object more? Do we doubt the truth of all these promises? Surely we need not: For God is not a Man that he should lye, neither the Son of Man, that he should re∣pent:
Hath he spoken, and shall he not do it? Hath he said, and shall it not come to pass? Was he ever yet worse then his word? And have not we had experience of his Love, as well upon our selves as others? Is he not the Faithful and True Witness, and a God that is most zealous of his own glory? Why then are we disquieted? And why are our hearts dejected within us? Still trust in God, make straight steps to your feet: Pray for Faith in the Promises, and stir up your self to take hold of God, tarry the Lords leasure, and fear not; Light is Sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for such as be up∣right in heart; It may lye buried in the ground out of sight for a season, it may be somewhat long in coming up, and very unlikely to come to any perfection; Ne∣vertheless,
in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. And there∣fore cast not away your confi∣dence: For the worst is past, the good is begun, the best is at hand: Lift up therefore the hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees; and run with patience the Race set before us; and being partakers of such precious promises, let us think upon them, believe in them, and live in them: and in so doing, we shall rejoyce with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Hear the sum of all: There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.1. There is no Condemnation, and there's our comfort: The ground hereof, is Christ; the way unto it, is by Faith to be in him; the evidence of it, Is to walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. In the matter of merit, Christ is all; in matter of interest, and ap∣plication, Faith is all; in mat∣ter of evidence and manife∣station, new obedience is all. No∣thing can free us from Condem∣nation, but Christ; nothing can give us interest in Christ, but faith; nothing can assure us that we do truly believe in Christ, and shall be delivered from condemnati∣on, but a care to be obedient unto Christ in all things: wherefore let us so believe, and so live: for as many as walk according to this Rule, peace shall be upon them, and upon the Israel of God. Now the God of hope fill us with all Joy and Peace in believing, that we may abound in hope through the Power of the Holy Ghost, Amen and Amen. In the multitude of the Thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul, Psal. 94.19. FINIS.
