W382 13471961 99703
A REMARKABLE REVELATION OF THE WANDRINGS Of the Church of England in Idolatry, Supersti∣tion, and Ceremonies, from the first motion through each particular Station to the first great period. IN PARALLELL With the Children of Israel in the Desert from Rameses to mount Sinai. By H. Walker Cantab. Printed by Tho: Harper. 1641.
A remarkable Revelation. PAul tells us that the journeyes of the old Church, the Is∣ralites, is to be remembred of us, that wee may profita∣bly bring it to our owne estate; and he calleth their wan∣dring▪ and stations, and what in them fell out, types and examples to us, 1 Cor. 10. Their standings and journeyes were 42. which number, as Austin saith, is rare and excellent, comprehending 6. and 7. which being multiplyed make 42. to teach us, that as af∣ter six dayes of the worlds Creation the Lord rested on the seventh day, to the children of Israel after six sevens, that is 42. journeyes of pilgimage, entred into the land of Canaan, the country of rest. In parllell of which 42. moneth of yeares, or propheticall dayes, amounting to 1260. yeares, doth reveale the space of time of the English Churches pilgrimage and wandrings in the Popish Ceremo∣nies, before she be brought to the Canaan of true reformation. I. The first station of the children of Israel was at Rameses, Gen: 47. 11. where they being opprest by cruell bondage under Pharaoh, as is exprest in the twelve first Chapters of the booke of Exodus, were forced to wander towards the wilderesse. This was fulfilled in our English Christian Church in the dayes of Gratianus, who ruled this our Brittish nation, Anno Dom. 390. who being brought under foot, subdued and spoyled by the Picts, were forced to send to Rome for ayd, Siricius being Bi∣shop there: at which time the pride and unsatiable avarice of the Clergy was so great, that they drew the Emperors to assist them in the establishing of such wicked Lawes as proved then the undo∣ing and impoverishing of many subjects. Plat: de vita Pont f. lege 27. de Epis. & Clo. in c. Th. II. The Israelites removed from Rameses to Succoth, Ex. 12. 37, a journey of 8. miles, which they undertooke when like distra∣cted and forlorne people they were constrained to carry their dough to bake at Succoth, because they were thrust out of Rameses, Exod. 12. 39. This was fulfilled in this our Land, after Gratianus was dis∣patched, Anno Dom. 420. when the Brittish were without any certaine government, the Clrgy being the chiefe; and the people
were so sore distracted, that they were constrained to petition to Aldrocnus (a King in France) to send his brother Constantine to var∣quish their enemies, and be made their King, before they could bake▪ their dough in peace▪ Holl. fol. 108. III. The Israelitish Church removed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, Exod. 13. 20. a journey of 8. miles, which was the entry of so vast a Desert, that had not God been to them a pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night, they had all perished in the wildernesse, and beene uterly ruined and destroyed, vers. 21. This was fulfilled in our Brittish Nation in the dayes of Vortiger▪ who by treason, fraud, and great deceit, being made King, did with his Nobles and Prelates live in suh gluttony, lehery, and other vi∣ces, Anno Dom. 450. that practising so great enormities, each man turned the point of his speare against the godly and innocent per∣sons, Holl. fol. 110. It was onely Gods providence that stayed the utter destruction and ruine of the whole nation. IV. The old Church of Israel removed from Etham to Migdol, Exod. 14 2. that i 16. mils, where the people were in that distresse, that being prued by Pharaoh, when the Red Sea was before them, and mountaines (over which it was not possible for them to passe) on both sides of them, could see no way to escape: yet by Gods miraculous deliverance they passed over the Sea dry shod, and the waves fell upon Pharaoh, and drowned him and his hoast, as is exprest in the said 14 Chap. of Exous. This was fulfilld in our Christian Brittish Church, Anno 480. when whilst Vortiger, his Nbles and Prelates did cast off religion, and persecute the people of God, there fell miraculously fire from heaven upon the Castle where they were with the King, and the house fell upon them, and the fire burnt and consumed them. H. Hunt. V. They of the Israelitish Church removed from Migdol, and pitched in Marah, Exod. 15 23. a journey of 40. miles, where the water was too bitter for the people to drinke, untill God directed them to a tree, which being dipt in those waters did make them sweet, verse 25. This was fulfilled in this our Brittish Church, Anno Dom. 510. in the reigne of Uterpendragon, who being himselfe exceeding lust∣full, which vice did the more increase in him, because it was coun∣tenanced by the Clergy that were about him, by whose policy and magicke was mixt a bitter cup for the people, not onely to delude
the Ladies to uncleannesse, but to deprive the Nobles of their lives, till it pleased God to direct the grave Worthies of his Councell, through their consultations to contrive way for a redresse, Isa. cr. Holl. fol. 128. VI. The Israelites removed from Marah, and pitched their sixth station in Elim, Exod. 15. 27. a journey of 8. miles, where the peo∣ple like pilgrims were faine to it by the wells, where multitudes of Harts resorted, with other beasts from among the Palmes, to refresh themselves with the water thereof. Tr. Pet. This was fulfilled in this our Brittish Church, in the dayes of K. Arthur, Anno Dom. 540. when amongst the people the right faith was not nely brought into great danger by the Pelagian heresie, then broched by naughty persons, but the whole body of Christian Religion was utterly abolished, so far as the Saxons prevailed, who (at this time) disquieted the Brita nes by cruell wares, whereby they were driven to hide themselves in woods, and pitch their situa∣tions by the water brooks. VII. The Isralitish Church removed from Elim to Suph, that was 6. miles southwrd▪ where they rested themselves by the Red Sea, Numb 33. 10. Gd seeing thir murmurings at the waters of Marah, and knowing how ready they were to rebell against him, brought them backe to behold againe the place where Pharaoh and his hoast was overthrowne, to put them in remembrance that they give eare to Gods commandements, and keepe his ordinances, Ge∣nes. 15. 26. This was fulfilled in this our Brittish Church, Anno Dom. 570. when Almighty God seeing the uncleannesse of the Clergy, and the abominations of the Governours, brought them againe into great distresse, suffring their enemies to prevaile against them, by bring∣ing in Cutha, the brother of Cheuling, King of the West Saxons, to fall upon them, by whom their ungodly governours were slaine; admonishing them to repent and turne to the Lord, and give eare to his commandements, lest they also perish. Alesa. Gilda. VIII. The children o Israel passed from Suph, and pitched their eighth station at Sin, that is 16. miles journey from Elim, which they made two jurneyes of as bfore, Exod. 16. 1. where the whole Congregation fell againe to mumuring for want of victuals; for their hearts did hanker after the fleshpts of Egypt, yet the Lord looked in mcy upon them, and sent them Manna from heaven, as is exprest, Exod. 16.
This was fulfilled in our land, Ann. Dom. 600. when the people were turned to Paganisme, and had turned from the Lord, and were become as heathens, in the dayes of Ethelbert, whose heart the Lord directed to marry the Lady Bertha of France a religious Princesse, who with some godly Divines that came with her, and other religious pople that were about hr, who fearing God, used prayers in the Court, and practised other duties of Christian Reli∣gion, whereby, by the heavenly working of Gods spirit (in the processe of time) the thick mists of unbliefe was removed, and their hearts prepared to the receiving of the Gospell, which after∣wards was preached to the whole Church, and published through the whole land; at which time ustine, and others, sent from the Bishop of Rome, preached and baptized in our Church▪ and the peo∣ple received the Word of God, Isak Cro. Beda. Will. Mal. Math. West. IX. The old Israelitish Church removed from Sin, and pitch∣ed in Dophka, which was twelve miles, Numb. 33. 12. This jour∣ney was through many bushes and thorny places, which grew in this part of the wildernesse, Tr. atr. Tis was fulfilled in the dayes of Edwin, Ann. Dom. 630. a King of mighty power, yet through great difficulty brought to beleeve the Gospel: Hee lo∣ved the Lady Ethelburga, but could not obtaine her, except upon condition of permitting her, and whomsoever shee would have with her, to use and practise th Christian Religion, Bed. lib▪ 2▪ c. 9. He called a Councell to hve the matter treated on Having married her she used all the meanes she could for his conversion. Then againe he was held back by seeking revenge against his enemies: still his Queene used meanes to prevaile wih him as farre as shee could; whereupon he called together the wisst men of his Realm, and asked them the question, what they thought of this Divinity, Hol. fol. 161. They gave their consent, that it ought to be received; whereupon he gave license to one Pauline to preach the Gospell, and from that time forwards himselfe professed the Christian faith. And when he demanded of one Cifi, an idolatrous Bishop, who had beene very great with him, who should first deface the Altars of their Idols, and the Tabernacles with which they were com∣passed about, he answered, that he himselfe would doe it; for what is more meet, saith he, than that I, which through foolishnesse have worshipped them, should now for example-sake destroy the same, through wisdome given me from the true and living God;
and straightwayes (throwing away the superstition of vanity) re∣quired armour and weapons of the King; and being mounted up∣on a stately Steed, he rode forth to destroy the Idols. This was a strange sight to the people, for it was not lawfull for a Bishop of their Law to put on armour, or to ride on any beast, except it were a Mare; therefore the common people seeing him ride on the Kings horse, with a sword by his side, and a speare in his hand, had thought he had beene starke mad, and out of his wits; but he without longer deliberation, incontinently upon his comming to the Temple, began to deface the same, and in contempt, threw his speare against it, and commanded the company about him to de∣stroy and burne downe the same Temple, with all the Altars, Holl. pag. 161. X. The Israelitish Church removed from Dophka, and pitched at Alus, Numb. 33. 12. which was twelve miles. They began now to come into that part of the wildernesse which was both pleasant, fruitfull, and stored with variety of comfortable herbs, that so they might refresh themselves after their troublesome journey through the thorns and bushes, Tra. Patr. This was fulfilled in this Eng∣lish Church, in the reigne of Osy, Ann. Dom. 660. When the Gospell began to flourish, Penda, who ruled one part of this land, he was converted by a Lady, whom he loved, that was a Christian. The last Saxons also received the Christian faith, and banished their ungodly idolatrous Bishops, and the Word of God was preached thorow the whole land, to the great increase and enlarging of the Church of Christ, Beda lib. 3. cap. 21 & 22. Yet in these dayes sprang up weeds also, for now they began to sing Divine Service after the Popish manner. Theodore the Archbishop, finding the Church of Rochester void by the death of the last Bishop, named Damian, he ordained one Putta, a simple man, to make a Bishop, but well skilled in songs and musicke, to use such forme in the Church, after the manner as he had learned of Pope Gregories Disciples. XI. The Israelites removed from Alus, and pitched in Rephi∣dim, eight miles, Exod. 17. 1. and during the time of their abode there, three things are very remarkable. First, the people did mur∣mure for want of water, and God relieved them, Secondly, Ama∣leck fought against Israel, and was overcome. Thirdly, Rulers were set over the people, because of the hardnesse of their hearts. These three were all fulfilled, Ann. Dom. 690. In parallel of the first,
when Etholburga (seeing her Lord and King given to great wic∣kednesse, and ungodly living) did labour earnestly to bring him to repentance, but finding his heart like a rocke of stone, did cause hi stately hangings to be taken downe, and his rich bedding and fur∣niture to be taken away, and the chamber to be mired with dung and filth, and laid a dirty Sow with her Pigges, in the same bed where before they had lien. The King beholding such an alterati∣on in his pleasant Palace, was mightily humbled; wept, and mour∣ned, and was thereby cast downe so low, that he resigned up his Kingdome to his Cosin, and forsooke all his glory, Will. Malm. In parallel of the second, the same story doth expresse her conquer∣ing event against the innovation of sinne and Satan, wrought in her husband through Gods mercy, Will. Malm. In parallel of the third, it is recorded, that about this time also there was great strife about Church government, at which time Brightwald (the eighth Archbishop in number, but the first of the English Nation) was seated in the See of Canterbury, for his Predecessors were not born in England, but sent from Rome. Thus endeth the first great period or division of journeyes, be∣fore they came to Mount Sinai, where they received the Commandements in two Tables of stone. FINIS.
