16767 99844448 9261
A PROFITABLE AND necessarie Discourse, for the mee∣ting with the bad Garbelling of Spices, vsed in these daies. And against the Combination of the vvorkemen of that office, contrarie vnto common good. Composed by diuers Grocers of Lon∣don, wherein are handled such principall matters, as followeth in the Ta∣ble, before the booke. Printed at London, by R. B. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater noster Row at the signe of the Talbot.
To the Right Honourable Sir William Webbe Knight, Lord Mayor of Lon∣don, and to the right Worshipfull the Aldermen of the same Cittie his brethren. BEcause the complaintes of sundrye of the retayling grocers of Londō, to the cheefe officers the gardi∣ans, and to the first menne of that society, against the fact of bad gar∣belling of spices, betvveene them and the Marchantes, hath in lieu of reformation taught manye indigneties and vvrought som indignation tovvards the cōplaināts. Therefore no councell vvas better (that despaire of remedie amongst them, could then conceiue or bring forth) then to flie to your moste godly vvisedome for suche helps therein, as do beare an Anologie and proportion correspōdent to the mischiefs and diseases in the fact of garbling. Or if that doo faile to follovv the saieng of the Poet Musaeus, the vvhich is thus set forth: It is good sometime to sound in open street The wicked works which men do thinke to hide.
meaning that by publishing of some smal pamphlet touching the same, suche good maye ensue, either the vvorkemanne to grovv better, or the buier to be more vvi∣ser, in the office of garbling (a matter right Honorable and vvorshipfull, full of rash∣nesse to breake open a discourse, vvherein∣to a man may more easilie enter, then find the vvaie out againe.) But since that au∣cthoritie and povver (vvhich vvorketh by operation) to redresse these defectes, is as yet lefte, only in them vvhich are the auc∣thors of them, vve meane in the Garbeller and vvorkemen. Our vvit is such (vvhich ought to vvork vvith councell and discre∣tion) to allovv and aduance this smal trea∣tise vnder your Honors fauor and protec∣tion, the effect vvherof is to shevve the a∣buses doone in that office, vvith the right vse and motion therof: vvherin your vvis∣domes and Honor may be pleased, to ex∣cuse our boldnesse vnder this defense, that in great inconueniences, great Officers haue not despised the meanest voices. Then shall our duties to the cōmonvvelth be out of daunger, and the same aduanta∣ged
by your vvonted affection, to vvhat∣soeuer concerneth common good, & by this our labour. In the vvhich affection vve beseech the Creator of all thinges, to assist your Lordship and vvorships vvith his holy spirit, and to giue you the same for councel and conduction in the seruice of hir Maiestie, this Cittie, and to his glo∣ry, and your posteritie for euer heer∣after. Grocers Hall in London. Your most humble the Retailors Grocers. London.
To the discreet and vertuous Readers. IN discoursing with diuers wor¦shipfull Marchants of the com∣panie of Grocers and others, vp∣on the practises in garbelling of spices in London, a thinge to to the retaylors of such spices of no small im∣portance: aswel for that therby they are tou∣ched in honor and honestie, beeing inforced as it were to put to vtterance corrupt spices, as in conscience & care to haue reformation for such constraints: We speake our minds therein; not of things doone this day; yesterdny, or the daie before: but of things doone long since by expe∣rience, and of the obseruation of the said prac∣tises, and of the corruption therin daily vsed, & of the reformatiō now required (the which many yeeres more then some scores past was conceiued and foreseen.) Therfore to burie the hatred growne, both hetweene the seller and the buier, we proposed a possible means to pro∣fit the marchant, satitfie al the retaylers, and to assure the buier and occupier of the goodnes of such spiees without fraud. The meanes are grounded vpon the true knowledge of the na∣ture
of garbelling of spices, the which is not only the true sifting of the same, but the deui∣ding of the good from the bad, and the putting of them vp in their said deuisions, and vppon the due vnderstanding of the difference of gar∣belling vsed in time past, with the time present. And in that difference a iust choise is to bee made, and an ordinance to bee giuen, for the Garbeller to follow, for the benefite of all, the which our intent and meaning is, with the con∣sent of all, and in fauour of thee gentle Rea∣der to publish, to the end, the practises of gar∣belling may be garbelled (we meane reformed) and hir Maiestie and people of this realme bee better serued in such affaires. For whose sa∣tisfaction, we labour with hope, crauing of thee the like vtterance of friendship towards vs, and to accept our meaning, if thou finde not this discourse to be quallited to thy liking. Vale.
The Table. 1 WHy the Art of garbelling was first inuen∣ted & by whom. Folio. 1. 2 The auntient deuisions of spices vsed in Lon∣don, fol. 3. 3 The abuses now vsed in the said Art there. 11. 4 How the danger of those abuses, extendeth aswell to the retailors Grocers, as to the mar∣chant, and thereby the garbeller in danger of question of his oath taken therein. 13. 5 The abuses of the workmen, and the necessity of reformation thereof, and for whose sake it is to be doone, fol. 17. and 19. 6 Who may reforme these abuses in London, and the manner how to reforme them, 23. 7 The manner of true garbelling, 31. 8 The rate set and allowed by the maiestrates, for the garbeller to receiue in his office, 71. 9 The rate by himselfe aduanced, and recei∣ued, 71. 10 The orders necessarie to bee made and kept, betweene the chiefe garbeller, and his work∣men, fol. 50. 11 The briefe abstracte of the Actes of Com∣mon Councell, made in London for garbel∣ling, in Anno xviii. of king Henry the eight, and in Anno. second of king Edward the sixt fol. 63. 12 The othe therevpon appointed, for the said Garbeller. fol. 87
Reformation for Garbelling. 1 Heerein is shewed that king Henry the sixt did first giue the office of Garbelling of spi∣ces in London, to the Maior and Cominal∣tie of the same. 2 That the Marchants and Retailors Gro∣cers, did deuise the lawes howe the same should be garbelled for euer. 3 What Garbelling is. Chap. 1. IF the care which the Anti∣ent Romanes hadde, to per∣forme the iudgement and decrees of their law-makers be well weighed and obser∣ued: amongest the rest of great respect and honor, the obedience of Fabius Maximus to the ordinan∣ces of his sonne, is to be admired: who beeing a Maiestrate and in place of iudgement, and see∣ing his father a farre off comming towards him on horsse backe (a thing forbidden amongst the
Romanes) he commanded his father to set foote on ground, the which the father obeied, and embracing his sonne, made greater account of him, then if he had doone otherwise. And on the other side, one Vestius was put to death be∣cause he arose not when the Tribune of the pe∣ple passed before him, the which he with obe∣dience and patience endured. And diuers Ci∣tizens of Rome were disfranchised for breathing and yawning a little to lowd, in the presence of the Censors: wherat they nothing repined. This we set foorth, for that it should be remembred, that if the common breach of lawes & decrees be permitted, then ensueth not onelie the con∣tempt of the Maiestrate, but also the very ruine of that, for whose cause such ordinances were aduanced: a thinge befallen to the subiect of this matter now in hand; namelie in the fact of Garbelling of spices. The necessitie of clensing and purifieng whereof, in the time of the raigne of king Henry the sixt was then debated, and the office of Garbelling was by the same kinge giuen to the Lord Maior & Cominaltie of this The office of Garbel∣ling was by K. Henrye the vi. firste giuen to the Lorde maior and comminal∣ty of londō.famous Citie of London, but in such wise, not∣withstanding, that it is verie apparant, that as∣well the Marchantes owners of such spices, as the Grocers retaylors of the same Cittie, were called to giue aduice for the conceiuing & cre∣ating of such ordinances therein, as might best tend to the benefit of the Marchant, the vtte∣rance and sale of the Grocer, and the goodnes
of the thing garbelled for the health of the peo∣ple of this realme: vpon the which ordinances the Art of garbelling was pronounced to con∣sist, it being an habite of working according to right, reason, and mechanicall or a handicraft, the full knowledge whereof was partlie gotten by vse, at that time by Richard Hackdie and Wil∣liam Hackdie & Aunsell, first garbellers after the said gift.Aunsell Citizens, and partly by instructions and reason, taught & shewed by the marchants and Grocers then being, and was left to the ex∣ecution of the said persons the officers aforsaid, the which aduises, aswel of the said Marchants, Grocers, and of the saide officers, are thus sette foorth. 1 The deuisions of Spices by the sayde par∣ties, are particularlie set downe. 2 The same to be at no time altered. Chap. 2. FOrsomuch as euery thing hath his natural, proper and inward corruption, of which it is ea∣ten and at the last consumeth Euery thing hath his naturall corruption, whereof at the last it is consumed.and beginneth to spread it self in the best part to mar all, as rottenesse in spices is their proper euill. And for that also, the same spi∣ces are also subiecte (as all other thinges are) to accidents, and thereby also may be destroi∣ed
before their naturall ouerthrow, as bruses, water, dust, and age in spices. Therfore for the auoiding and curing of such naturall corrupti∣on when it hapneth, & thorowly to meet with all such hurtfull accidents to such spices, being aliments and nutrimentes to restore and pre∣serue the health of man, or to preuent some in∣firmitie and diseases, ready to ouerthrow their good estate: We (say they as skilfull physiti∣ons, preuenting diseases and labouring in for∣seene mischiefs, according to the causes wher∣on the effects of such corruption doo depend) haue ordained these deuisions to be obserued in the setting forth those spices, with their qua∣lities by way of garbelling and first of: Nutmegges. The operation whereof we meane not to set foorth, being no part of our charge: onely for the deuiding of the good from the badde, wee holde it necessarie that they bee deuided into three sorts. The first & the best we cal case nutmegs, the which are smooth, waightie, faire, & fullof oile. The second sort we call Bale, the which are also faire and great but somewhat wrinkled, and heere and there oile in them, and declining to corruption. The third and last sort we terme Rompes, so termed being wrinkled, brused, ill coloured, and do want their oile, and therby are become drie or rotten. The which sorts to be so seueral∣lie put vp.
Pepper. If the same by some accident shall receiue wet, or otherwise be euill conditioned: wee thinke it meete to be sorted by it selfe and to be kept from the drie. Both which to be garbelled and clensed from the dust and corrupt pepper, and to be vttered in one sort, in such manner as the same dooth arise from the place it came, and notwithdrawing the head sort of pepper from the small. Maces and Cynamon. We holde it best to garbell and clense them into three sorts, to wit: Lardge, middle & petit. Ginger, Gaules, Rise and Erreus. That the same shal passe into two sorts, (viz) Lardge and petit. Cloues, Graines, Woormseed, Anniseed, Commin∣seed, Dates, Senie, and all other things garbellable. We likewise think it best to garble and clense them into one good sort from the dust and gar∣bels, according to the nature of the thing it self. 1 The proofe that those deuisions were by thē so appointed to be made and kept. 2 That the L. Maior and comminalty by two seuerall acts of Common counsell haue al∣lowed the same. 3 That the Garbeller therby is excluded to make lawes by himself therein, or to alter the same.
4 That the common people haue receiued the same as a custome, and doo in euery faire and market, procure troubles for putting spices to sale, garbelled to the contrarie. Chap. 3. FOr the approouing of which Deuisions, besides the antient remembrance therof, lefte with Maister Blaze Saunders late gar∣bellor, the same may plainelie appeere in this. That in Flaun∣ders, Marchantes before then, and long since, brought from Antwerp, Brudges and Roane, their Nutmegs and other spices in such condition and sorts as is beforesaid, with a seale of the fi∣gure of the right hand vppon euery vessell or bagge of case nutmegs and other spices in such condition and sortes as is aforesaid. And on their baile Nutmegs, a hand with a barre ouer∣thwart, and the other sort without marke. And in such sorts the same were bought and sold, as by an acte of Common councell, holden by your predecessors it may appeare in Anno. 4. of K. Henry the viii. To the which deuisions, the Marchant, Retailor, and Garbeller (say they) shall hold themselues contented without alte∣ration; vnlesse there shall bee cause of correcti∣on of those sorts, vppon search of them by the Garbellor in London: as also by another act of
Common counsell made in An. 18. of K. Hen∣ry the eight, it is set foorth: the which may ap∣peare at the end of this present discourse. The filth and dust of which said spices, were helde vnwholsome and not vendible but to be reiec∣ted as vnseruiceable: your predecessors then were mooued with those reasons, to allowe and confirme those deuisions as reasonable and full of equitie betweene the marchant and the retailors, and were desirous that the same shuld also remaine and abide, for the auoiding of de∣ceipt or losse of the common people, who haue in such measure noted and felt the benefite of the said deuisions, that now in open faires and places corporate, they doo daielie procure the spices sorted to the contrarie, to be seysed on as goodes forfeited, and not garbelled as they ought to bee; to the great trouble of the retay∣lors, and notable detriment. Vppon these and such like beginnings, and by the acts of Com∣mon councell ensuing, the facte of garbelling Couetous∣nesse dooth worke con∣fusion of all right. The fact of garbelling a bond of vnitie be∣tweene the marchant and the gro¦cers. hath had continuance, vntill now of late that couetousnesse or ignorance in the principall of∣ficer, hath bred the change and ouerthrow of the pollitike deuise of this Art. These our pre∣decessors also thought the fact of garbelling (as is before appointed) to be a bond of great vni∣tie, for the retailors with the marchants, and of no lesse seruice for the Common-wealth: and in that sence, they all (by the humble petition of the garbeller) agreed, that it should be ena∣cted
by a common councell therefore especial∣lie made, that he might visite the garbelling of Antwerpe and Brudges, onely to refine if neede were, but not to alter their said deuisions: and that the Marchants and retailors should not af∣terwards alter their sortes of garbelled spices, but put the same to sale, in such wise as the same spices were garbelled (in such manner as is by the premises iustlie to be inferred) and not be∣fore they were so garbelled or refined, vppon a penaltie therein expressed; and to be accounted as an enimie to that forme, appointed therein for common good, as we before haue remem∣bred, for the obseruation of which indifferen∣cie, There is but one way to goodnes.the said officer taketh his corporall oth. And forsomuch as the fact of garbelling cannot bee good, but after one sort, but to the euill it may be many waies done: as to hit a white, there is but one waie, but to misse it there are many waies. We say as commonlie it is said, that that thing is rightly don, which is done to the order and institution of good pollicie. And for such we esteeme those deuisions to be, and that they are the only way of cleane garbelling, for the The Mar∣chant fee∣leth the hart by the garbellers presence in his house.common wealth, whereon that art dependeth, and for whose sake the Marchant is contented to make the Garbeller the maister of his mar∣chandize for the time, (the inconueniences whereof he best feeleth, but least knoweth) and the retaylor is appointed his instrument to put the same to sale, according to the deuisions so
made bought and sold, whereby it is made ve∣ry apparant to your wisedomes, that the soue∣raigntie of that and euery other good order, is the sure foundation thereof, with the vnion and bond of all the particulers, for whose cause the same was conceiued, made and aduanced, and heerein as in all other cases, if euery man should haue no other respect but to his owne, their vnity would soone be dissolued. Chap. 4. 1. The greefes of the Retailors grocers. 2. What it is they doo require of the Lorde Maior and Aldermen. BVt to resume & to continue the speech by vs alreadie begun, of the abuse of this art. We saye, that iniury is offered to those goods of Marchants, and by the sale of those goodes, to the ho∣nor and person of the seller: the which iniurie is not doone by force, for force may bee repel∣led by force, but by fraude, and by this fraud an iniustice passeth to all, the which is to be remo∣ued by reformation. And heerein wee are not called to do, but to demand iustice, the which wee require, euen no further, then that those lawes of your predecessors, made as touching the fact of Garbelling may be kept and obeyed
by those workmen, who are parties therevnto: the which belongeth to your offices to see per∣formed. And vnder this obedience, is contei∣ned The garbel¦ler is not to make lawes at his plea∣sure, nor to place nor displace a∣ny without consent of the l. maiorthat moderation which the officer in this Art of garbelling, ought to obserue, namelye, that hee must not of his owne motion directe such maner of Garbelling as himselfe pleaseth, nor abuse the manner of garbelling firste vsed; nor by the same abuse, take vpon him any parte of the maiestrates office, in iudging and making forfeit what hee liketh. It is for the Common∣wealths sake (whome he may thanke) that hee commeth into the Marchantes dores: & ther∣fore it is meet for him to speake, say, and do all thinges for the preseruation thereof by his fa∣cultie, as it was first appointed by your prede∣cessors, who were as you are, armed with po∣wer, to enforce his obedience to these their or∣dinances, or to punish the contrarie, or to re∣moue him. But forsomuche as couetousnesse, wherewith a man beeing surprised, shall want knowledge howe to command himselfe, maye entice him to fall from all antient orders, and to practise strange deuisions, as well of spices, as of profit and honestie, the which are neuer se∣parated in matters of good qualitie; for no∣thinge is iust nor profitable if not honest: and Nothing is profitable that is not honesthe that maketh a deuision of them, by setting foorth and separating his actions in this wise, saieng; this deed is honest, but that deed is pro∣fitable for me, he cannot be without fraud: but
will rend a sunder all equitie ordained by pub∣like power. Therefore wee haue set foorth the abuses nowe offered, and wherein the antient deuisions are not obserued, and howe these de∣uisions nowe vsed, bringeth detriment to the Marchant and losse to the retaylors, as we haue taken in hand, being the second point by vs set downe in the premises of this discourse, and to shewe wherein the antient order is obserued though corruptlie, and whye the garbeller of late sued to haue his manner of garbling, with further authoririe to be allowed to him, by acte of Common councell. Chap. 5. 1 The particular abuses of the Garbeller in this office, aswell in the clensing and deuiding of spices, as in the putting vp of the same. 2 By those abuses, he will conuert great be∣nefit either to the Marchant or to the re∣taylor at his pleasure▪ the which coulde not happen, if the antient orders were kept. Hast makes wast. ANd first in Nutmegs, for expe∣dition and hast (the first point of his gaine) though it make wast to all others. He woulde and oftentimes dooth drawe them into one sort, casting out
some of the Rompes, and by that one sorte he may vppon occasion of bribes, displeasure or ignorance, conuert the same somtimes to the benefit of the Marchante, and otherwhiles to the grocer retailor, as is heereafter declared: but to whomsoeuer it is, the common people haue the harme thereby, and the retailor is very often discredited: and by these meanes, con∣tentions are, maye bee, and haue beene mo∣ued, betweene the marchant, seller, and buier. For by this workemanship this fraud is maintai∣ned: Nutmegs falselie pac∣ked vp.that on the top of his vessell or bag, there are bestowed nutmegs of faire condition, and in the bottome or a foot downwards, there are found Nutmegs not so good, by vi. viii. and xii. pence in the pound: And to the contrarye when he list, the worst are laid vppermost, and in such sorte, that the retaylor must make sale thereof vppon forfeiture of the same; a thinge which could not happen by the ancient deuisi∣ons, for thereby the best are set foorth by it self, by the name of case, being such as is aforesaide, full of oile, faire and of good perfection, and more permanent and lasting then others, and is knowne by his marke. The next sort beeing called baile, is not halfe so oilie as the case, but declining and apt to corruption, and are not to be put vp among the best, for that it wil disgrace them speedilie, and in short time change into a Rompe: the which matter common and dailie experience proueth, the which by a man skilful,
and a cunning Garbeller may easilie be drawne frō the best, but not by the vnskilful; so that the remainder being rompes are left to themselues. The which we wish, for that the same is a spice of choise and prise, that the garbelling and put∣ting vp thereof, were committed to menne of better iudgement and skill, as by the garbellers owne petition it is required, and not to those whoe nowe are artificers therein, for that they know not how, or malitiouslie will not deuide the same as they ought to be, being a matter of great importance and of regard. Heereby and by the sequell, you may see the abuses, and easi∣lie discerne the differences of his garbelling to one sort (the which is no garbelling, but a prac∣tise tending to abuses as is heereafter prooued) & the ancient deuisions, & heerwithall you may The mar∣chant doth forfeit his wares by the manner of garbel∣ling nowe vsed.note the danger (if we may call it a danger) that by this practise of the deuiding of Nutmegs in∣to one sort, the marchant and the retaylor pre∣sent and to come heereafter, may and do incur by the said Act of common councell, made An. 18. of king Henry the viii, the said deuision be∣ing contrarie to the ancient custome: for where it is said, that no marchant nor other, doo sel in grosse or retaile within the Cittie of London, any manner of spices before it be garbelled, tri∣ed, and made cleane by the officer, as of olde time accustomed: whereby it may or shall eui∣dentlie appeare to the buiers therof, to be good perfect, cleane and wholsome, vppon paine of
forfeiture of the same spices so sold. The which matter is not nor can be performed in this one sort of deuiding; but to make it a danger (as we take it) the garbeller hath humblie besought The prac∣tise of the garbeller is to intrappe the Mar∣chant.your honour and worships of late, to giue him power by order and acte of common councell, to seize vppon all such wares and spices, as are made forfeitable by the same act, and other acts since made, the which authoritie (hee saith) is wanting in the same Acts. This being conside∣red, we cannot sufficientlie maruaile, what hath moued him to enter into so preposterous a course; for from this abuse in nutmegs, he hath fallen further to abuse the antient sort and man∣ner of garbelling of Pepper. The wet and drie pepper are to vs the retay∣lors sold and mingled togither, and in that sort by him garbelled, nay rather vngarbelled; but the same in that wise, we are inioyned to put to sale, whereby we are hindered and the people deceiued, and the Marchants still in danger of the statutes before mentioned, and the head or greatest pepper of both wet and dry are taken apart, & mingled with other sorts, from whēce it was not taken, and in briefe he maketh deui∣sions therein as himselfe liste, and contrarie to the ancient order, the which was, as is aforsaid, but in one sorte the drie pepper by it selfe▪ with∣out substracting the greatest from the same, and
the wet pepper by it selfe, the difference beeing noted by the seale thereon, the which was well knowne to our predecessors. But heereby the common people are much abused, being con∣strained to buy the small from the great, and the wet with the drie: the one tainted and corrup∣ted with salt water, and vnwholsome and alte∣red in colour, and the best thereby made worse. Maces and Cynamon. He obserueth the antient order of deuiding them into three sorts, but in such wise, that by the packing and putting vp of the same, no such indifferency is vsed, but that by his oath he may be called in question therein. Ginger, Gaules, Rise and Erreus. He likewise obserueth the antient manner of passing them into two sorts. Cloues, Graines, Woormseed, Anniseed, Commin∣seed, Dates, Senie, and all other things garbellable. He sorteth them into one sort, from the dust and garbels but corruptlie: the rather for that in all he reserueth this power to himselfe, to dis∣gvize the Marchant or the retaylor, for by se∣parating the great from the small, hee may laie the one or the other so vpwards or downwards that if his fauor be not bought, nor craued, hee may conuert the benefite which waye himselfe
listeth, either to the marchant or to the retay∣lor. And forsomuche as the substance of our greefe consisteth in the vnderstanding of these abuses and imperfections, therefore wee may with more safetie, and without the imputation of curiositie enter therinto; otherwise we might be thoght curious, in seeking after other mens faults (a matter from which wise men will di∣uert and quench the same) for as sometime, it is good to cease to inquire after lawfull things, as an exercise and practise of iustice: so it is like∣wise expedient, sometime to leaue vntaken that which a man may lawfullie take, whereby to re∣straine the desire of vnlawfull taking. But by Profitable aduersaries to the Gar∣beller.this our curiositie, we wish to bee more profita∣ble to the aduersarye of our good then to our selues, by shewing him of what he is to beware, and what to correct. And first to prooue these abuses to be such in this workeman, whom wee haue regarded as the principal body (the which being infected, the members his ministers can∣not doo their dutie.) We say, that albeit he pro∣miseth, that he will well and lawfullye behaue himselfe in the office of Garbelling, without a∣ny partialitie, taking reasonablie; and that after he hath packed vp the goods by him garbelled, he will set thereon a marke, that the common wayer may take knowledge therof: yet in these matters, and in many other things apperteining to that office, he departeth from his saide pro∣mise in behauing himselfe, as in this Chapter following it appeareth.
Chap. 6. 1 Whereas the principall Garbeller vseth di∣uers practises, tending to the slander of the office, therefore heerein are set foorth some of the same practises 2 The proofes thereof are set foorth by a peti∣tion of the workemen of the saide office, which remaineth with the bodye of this so∣cietie. FOrsomuch as the Garbeller af∣firmeth, that this maner of gar∣belling is a lawefull manner of garbelling: therein we (as our predecessors did) do not repute it lawfull garbelling, to put wet and dry pepper togither: a thing by him vsed. Item, To giue licence to any man to buy spi∣ces garbellable, and to licence one and not an∣other, to carrie the same hither and thither vn∣garbelled, vnder his passing seale, is not lawfull; a matter very notorious and enterteineth suspi∣cion of much euill. Item, to arrest some marchantes, and not o∣ther some for keeping their goods vngarbelled, longer then the Act of Common councell ap∣pointeth, is (so farre as hee can allowe) partia∣litie.
Item, To take money of marchants before their goods be garbelled, and to take more mo∣ney of one then of another for garbelling of like commoditie, is partialitie: likewise to take more money, then by the act of common coū∣cell is limitted, is vnlawfull. Item, To garbell Nutmegs into case & baile according to the ancient custome in one place, and not in another, is partialitie. Item, By skill and pollicie, to hinder the sale of marchants in their goods, requireth disfran∣chisement, the which may arise, by puttinge Nutmegs into one sort together in one place, and to hinder the sale of the like in another place, he wil deuide them into two sorts, wher∣in the retaylor, so long as hee may finde them so deuided, will neuer looke to him with one sort: and heereby oftentimes, the Marchant is constrained to regarbell them. But to wade further into these or other particularities of his proceedings were too tedious; & are not heer∣in for diuers good causes to be discouered: by these it is euident, that the Art of garbelling is not lawfully vsed, but by him vnlawfully abu∣sed, and the skilfull ruling or gouerning of a companie is to begin in himselfe: but the head being such, let vs behold the proceedinges of his ministers.
Chap. 7. 1 Diuers notable abuses doone by the worke∣men vnder the said garbeller. 2 They can deceiue both Marchant and gro∣cer, and their leader also. 3 The Marchantes may saue 2000 poundes yeerelie, if the ancient manner of garbel∣ling were obserued. NOt long since, a marchant had a commodity wherin the work∣men garbellers laboured, by the space of xiiii. daies: the which commoditie, for that it was bought or at the least agreed for, before the garbelling thereof, by certaine retailors, the Marchant promised his reward to these ministers, the retaylors also promised their reward, to haue the same well and duelie garbelled: but secretlie and vnder-hand, one of the said ministers required of one of the retay∣lors xx. shillings, promising therefore to leaue good garbell, if he bought the same garbell: the The decei∣uer is de∣ceiued.retaylor made his countenance to gratifie this friendship, but he would not parte with any of the mony required, vntill he saw this promise to succeed; in this hope these garbellers labored to
make good garbell vntil the end, and the retay∣lor made hast to buy this garbel at a good prise, hoping to haue had store of good stuffe in the same; and also to reteine his promised reward: the which by delaies these garbellers suspected. And therevpon one of them maketh sute to the marchant that he might buy the said garbell, he had his answer, that he came not in time, it was sold to the retaylor: to this the said workeman and his consortes gaue countenance of their good liking, but withall to couer their abuse, and to reuenge the breach of the retaylors pro∣mise, one of them closeth with the Marchant, and saith: Sir you promised vs a reward to take paines in this commoditie, for the true garbel∣ling thereof, the which is perfourmed on our parte, but if you will giue vs xx. s. the garbell shall be againe cast ouer, and thereby we doubt not, but to profit you very much. Whye saith the Marchant, my masters you know my mind, they that pleasure me, to them I will not be vn∣gratefull. Heere  and by regarbling of the garbell, the marchant saued v. pound, or more in money; their rewarde was giuen, and the garbell is packed vp, the which the retaylor with some gladnes and cost receiued, knowing nothing of the regarbling thereof, and in lieu of his reward, giueth fewe and cheape wordes of thankes to the Garbellors; whoe commen∣ding the same in derision, leaueth the same to
his further and gentle consideration. By this (beeing one of the least of their bad practises) your Lordshippe and worships may see the vn∣due regard, the saide Garbeller and workemen doo beare in these affaires to their duties, the rather for that there is as yet, no good lawe ap∣pointed to hold them therevnto: by these also we enforme our selues (and so some of vs haue This losse may be com¦pared to the Ecco which cannot bee found but yet is sensi∣bly heard & knowne.heard it deliuered, by the mouthe of some of those ministers) that the marchants in this citty (if reformation were heerein had by an expert garbeller) might saue 2000 poundes yearelie, whereof in this wise they are deceitfully defrau∣ded, besides the harmes the retaylor and the common people do sustaine by their bad prac∣tises, a great impietie in the suffrance therof, the rather for that vnder the colour of garbling, for the health and wealth of the people, the pro∣per owner of such goodes, dooth receiue abuse within his owne doores. Truelie the question why euery such proprietary of such goods, may not clense the same, aswell as to haue an officer therof, hath waightie reasons on both sides, but it is out of our purpose to dispute thereof. And for further proofe of the second point of our determination; the which is, that the de∣uisions nowe vsed, are contrarie to the causes, for the which the saide Act was conceiued. We say as is beforesaid, That by the impunitie of these offences; and from thence many shiftes and sleightes are raunged and deriued, the
which by the weakenesse and ignorance of the principall garbeller, is fostred in the members his workemen, cheeflie by the small account which is made of the accomplishment of the antient manner of garbelling, the which being misregarded, these mēbers (good fellows, right Honourable, that wil make you to beleeue that flies doo carry pyke-staues, in those countries from whence these spices doo come) are com∣forted, contrarie to the fourme and fashion of this Art, in the retch of the said principall offi∣cer, and before his face, strangelie and notablie to defraud him of his dutie, and corrupt theyr whole affaires, to the preiudice of the retay∣lors, but chieflie of the Marchants; & amongst many others, this one we thinke meete to haue it remembred for his auaile. A Marchant hath a commoditie of Cloues, Maces, Wormeseed, or such like to bee garbel∣led, the quantitie is waied, or otherwise known to this head garbeller, and founde to bee some 600. pound waight, it being clensed, the good of some one of these commodities, ariseth to 300. or 400. pound waight, from which quan∣titie, these members beeing confederates with the Marchants man (who maketh it no sinne to deceiue the deceiuer) withdraweth the thirde or halfe, hauing ready the like waight of olde garbell. Now this head garbeller, for the leuy∣eng of his dutie, reuisiteth the waight aforsaid; then to disguize him, they will thrust the olde
and new garbell togither to hold waight, and thereby measure and leuie his dutie, according to the good remaining: and the rest of his du∣tie is good prize to them, in which ouer-reach, the sealer likewise in his office is as handsome∣ly disguised: the manner howe is vnfit heere to be set downe. Chap. 8. 1 The notable and intollerable deuices of these workemen, to beguile the Marchant. 2 The meanes how to reforme them. THese inconueniences as is most apparant, may well bee preuen∣ted, by following the antient manner of Garbelling, associa∣ting the same with the petitions ensuing, all tending to one vni∣forme order in garbelling, to the benefit of all: for by dissorting of the said spices from the an∣tient deuisions; the said workmen in this office, to the great preiudice of all parties, take libertie to packe the commoditie vppe verie corruptlie, and will giue such secret marks, either by a knot made on the third, in the bagge made vp, or by A bad prac∣tise of the workemen against the marchant.a spot of Inke, that being confederate with ano∣ther of their friends, who shall come to buy the same of the marchant, may thereby know how much or how deepe, the best sort doo lie vnder
the second, or worst sort, the which is laied vp∣on purpose vpon the top of the bagge, & heer∣by a man of their intelligence, shall take vp the best commoditie, and leaue the worst to the retaylor; yea and pay lesse for the same, then for the remainder: the marchant beleeuing that he holdeth the best sorts stil, by reason that the best of his commodities is laid vppermost. Where∣in we informe our selues, that the marchant lo∣seth v. pound in the hundreth waight, by their differences in garbelling and putting vp of the same. The losse runneth not to the benefite of the retaylors, but by the bad handling thereof, his losse likewise ensueth. Besides we take that regarbling is intollerable, and falleth out as euil to the retailor, as filtching of the best falleth out to the Marchant, albeit the waight bee made vp by a little old garbel, bought of purpose (a mat∣ter if it be often vsed, for the marchant to looke vnto) all which considered, with manye more wherein euery one of vs haue a sufficient feeling thereof in himselfe by his owne harme. We say that the principall officer, may thinke that these abuses are contrarie to the meaning of the firste erection of garbelling, and that the good of the Common-wealth heerein, is the lawe of this Note.Art: and that hee nor his, can commit a fault, nor yet rest from their duties without the hurt of those, whose health and benefite is cheefelie considered in this art, the which is but a deuisi∣on of the good from the bad spices, and not to
hinder the marchantes sale or his distribution thereof, or the retaylors detriment by sleightes and practises of their owne inuentions, and fur∣ther if he hadde reason of the alteration of anye of these ancient ordinances; if these were euill established, and coulde obteine suche as are a∣greeyng with themselues: yet in reason hee is to bring, aswell the Marchant as the retaylor, in hart and mind to helpe the estate therof, and he is not of his owne motion, to intermeddle in the reformation thereof, it being not his pri∣uate affaires: and they all are to shewe it to the superiour, whom we know and take you to be, whose hands are vnbound, to dispose and to order these affaires, beeing more publike then priuate. But to growe briefe in this matter alledged, and to set foorth some resolutions in such que∣stions as may arise heerin. And first, where it is by some marchants; Ignorant in the qualitie of garbell and spices (the which sometime falleth Question.into their handes that expect not for them) alledged, that if the antient deuisions shoulde be vsed, that then they shoulde sell the best, and be constrained to keepe the other sortes: as in Nutmegges if they bee deuided into case and baile; the case may be solde and the Bayle shall remaine; And therefore they like the same to bee doone into one sorte. Heerevnto we saye, and will amende his account in this manner: That if the said marchante haue three bagges Answer.
of Nutmegs of some 600. waight, first suppose that all the rompes bee taken out, and that the rest doo way 400. waight, being made into one sort, worth to be sold at v. shillings the pound, it ariseth to the somme of 100. pounde, the which if afterwardes they bee deuided into case and baile, the case dooth arise to 250 pound The mar∣chant doth not knowe many times what hee dooth sell.waight, beeing worth six shillings the pounde, amounteth to 75. pound, and 150. waight of baile remaining, being worth iiii. shillings the pound, ariseth to 30. pound, the whole summe being 105. pound. So that it appeareth, that the Marchants gaine is greater by these deuisions, then by one sort. And it cannot be denied, but the retaylor shall know better heereby what he buieth then otherwise: and the Marchant what he selleth, being disguized as is aforesaide, and Note.as is heereafter set foorth. And thus much the officer herin could tel the Marchant; with this, that he findeth vpon the sight of the nutmegs, now sent from beyond the seas, that their fac∣tors in those parts care not, if the best sorte of Nutmegs be picked out from the second sorte, the which they account will serue well enough in London, to draw into one sort; but he com∣mendeth and coloureth these euils with a com∣mendable title of expedition, in that one sort is quicklie doone: wherein his gaine is singular, as thus. He appointeth three men, being hired at xii. pence the daie a peece, to garbell the saide 600.
waight of nurmegs into one sort, hee taketh as his due xvi. shillings. These three men can draw those into that sort in half a day, and do receiue xviii. pence for their labour, so his gaine is cleer xiiii. shillings vi. pence, the which if they were dulie garbelled would aske three daies worke, the labour whereof ariseth to nine. s. wherein it plainelie appeareth, that by passing this 600. waight into one sort, he gaineth xiiii. shillings six pence, in halfe a day, and by keeping the an∣tient The good of the com∣monwealth is the lawe of true gar∣belling.deuisions, he gaineth but six shil. in three daies, the which is the cause of his expedition: without care either to the welfare of the Mar∣chant, retaylor, or to the people into whose hands the same doo passe. But wee referre it to your Honourable consideration, to iudge what gaine this expedition bringeth in six daies, whē he hath xiiii. shillings six pence, in a forenoon. The which being by his workemen well noted for recreation sake, and to try the iudgement of the saide principall garbeller for a Dilemma in this expedition, they will sometime get a heape of small stones and laye them by their worke, and themselues will play the good fellowes and let all alone: wherewith if any discontentment doo grow by the master garbeller for expediti∣on, then they doo shewe these stones, and aske him if that be no labour to picke them out, and thereby these poore men sometime doo gaine a daies labor or two. Wherin for that these work∣men haue of themselues found out and requi∣red
certaine orders to bee kepte among them∣selues, and accordinglie haue made their re∣quest to the said officer, the which is correspon∣dent to the matter by vs required, therefore we haue caused the same their orders to be heerein set foorth, to the end, that the said cheefe gar∣beller may be enioyned to allowe thereof, as a meane and for a principall correction of theyr former abuses and conuersation, by the repeti∣tion whereof, these persons our friends will bee angred (as is very like.) But it is not materiall, so that they bee bette∣red, Anger bet∣ter to be tol¦lerated thā vice.and for that purpose, we are their friendes, and anger is better to be tollerated then vice, or such inconueniences as are aforesaide. But for∣somuche as reprehension will breede but small reformation heerein: we for that we know that your entent is to embrace the cause that run∣neth to the auaile of the common-wealth, and to suppresse the contrarye, do sue to your lord∣shippe, that by waie of your decree, confirmed by Act of Common councell, it maye bee per∣petuallie and irreuokeablie ordeined, that the auntient and firste ordinances aforesayde, may be obserued and kept, and all other exercise of Garbelling to bee abolished. And that inso∣much as the saide workemen therein, are fallen from their true labour, and by negligence of their gouernour, doo falsifie their workes, to the hurt of manye, partly for want of a reasona∣ble sallerie, the which may bee redressed, if the
orders by themselues contriued and heerein sette foorth may be granted, beeing such in our opinions, as doo tende to publike profite, as∣well as to the priuate gaine of the saide office. That the same their ordinances may likewise be ratified with this. He requi∣reth to vse men of skil, but he will vnskilfully vse them. That none doo worke, inthe sayde office, but able menne and suche as haue skill, as the Garbeller himselfe, by his petition requireth, and to bee by your Honourable assent first al∣lowed. And further, for that the enuie of their doo∣inges hath exposed and made the Retaylor; subiect to manye mislikinges with the people, whoe doo buie the saide spices (for an ease in this euill) it maye also please you, to giue your assent for the publication and confirmation of these ordinances also ensuyng; whereby ney∣ther the Marchantes, Retaylors, nor Grocers, beeing Chapmen abroade, nor common peo∣ple may reenter into any feare, to be abused by the enterprises of these needie workemen, bee∣ing no Winterlinges nor colde-hanlers, of and in the Arte of garbelling: wherein as wee haue The reme∣dies in the euils.noted the mischiefe, so wee haue founde out the remedie, by this necessarie pathe, beeing accompanied with the auntient order, the which hetherto hathe beene broken vppe and disturbed, by the mysse-regarde of the firste and chiefe Garbeller, whose practise hath byn and is (more & more) vnder sundrie pretenses
to abase the credite and authoritie of those an∣tient deuisions of spices, and to gaine partakers to ouerthrowe all that stande in his waye, by him taken to ouerreache the absolute power of handeling the saide office in London, to him giuen by your Honors predecessors, as he doth by his garbelling in other places, by force of hir maiesties letters pattents to his own pur∣poses: and hath indeuoured to possesse them diuerslie and their fauours, to the end aforesaid, and hath presumed to make lawes in some ca∣ses, and in other cases he craueth the same to be established by an act of common councell. And that also it may bee ordeined that his ministers and workmen vnder him, may take their oathe to obserue the same to their vttermoste, the which for that they be not contrarie nor preiu∣diciall to the order of the antient maner of gar∣belling, but onely doo tend to this end, that we may haue and receiue our spices duly deuided and so packed vp, or else that we may compasse our remedie, if those antient deuisions shoulde be falsified or corrupted. We therefore haue particularly set foorth the true vniformitie in garbelling of euery spice in his kind, for the more better and plaine direc∣ting of the said workemen, and all other therin. And that in case in the execution of these ordi∣nances and labour, the saide principall officer shall not receiue a sufficient fee, vppon euerye thing garbelled, that then his duty may bee in∣creased,
according to such iudgement as him∣selfe heeretofore hath required; especially, if the amendment of his rate in the things required as to little, may not be defaulcked out of thinges, that he dooth garbell, for which hee hath too much, as is heereafter declared. Chap. 9. 1 The true manner of Garbelling of euery particular spice, and of their deuisions. 2 That by the marks heerein sette foorth, euery sort may be knowne with the partie who put them vppe, and the time. 3 The which manner of Garbelling the Grocers doo sue, to haue confirmed, and expreslie set foorth, by act of common councell. PEpper of all Spices ought to be garbelled in the selfe-same na∣ture it first came in, whether case, callico, halfe barre wet or drie, the Garbeller ought not to alter the quallitie thereof, for feare of deceit; and to garbell it well, it ought to be thus handled by a workeman of skill. First the dust muste bee sifted through a siue, that ought to haue such holes, that not onelie the dust but also the grauell must go through: that being doone, it ought also to passe through an∣other syue, of such holes that they may bee all
equall, to the end that the stalks of the said pep∣per, may be seperatcd from the good pepper: that beeing doone, there remaineth then no∣thing, but that the garbeller doo fanne out all the light pepper, from the saide good pepper. And forsomuch as it is impossible for the gar∣beller (if he respect expedition) so to fanne, but that he shall throw out much small, hard, wrin∣kled pepper that is good, Therefore hee ought to regarble the saide light pepper againe. And that which he findeth to bee sound, although it be small, yet he ought to put the same into the good pepper, and so to mingle it, that hee de∣ceiue neither the marchant, nor Grocer, for in such a case as this is, many times it resteth in the disposition of the Garbeller, to please or dis∣please as is before recited. If he should mingle vpon the toppe, or within a little from the top it woulde hinder the sale of the pepper, perad∣uenture two pence in a pound: againe if it bee mingled in the midst, or in the bottome, so farre from the sight of the Grocer, that hee is not a∣ble to discerne the same, then is hee hindered many times two pence in a pound. And there∣fore to preuent this fault and such like in manie other spices, which may be so garbled and min∣gled togither, that the one or the other shall be mightilie deceiued. We therfore haue thoght it good, to deuise a marke for the workeman, that dooth garbell and put vp marchantes spy∣ces: that when he hath made vppe his worke,
the same marke with his name, may be set vpon the top of the bag, or other vessell; shewing thereby the deuision and sorte therein contained, and the goodnes therof (notwithstanding the seale of the garbeller to be vsed at his pleasure) the which marke may passe with Bonus, melior, optimus, according to the thing garbelled, as thus for an example. ✚ HORTON. the 26 of Marche An̄o 1592 Pepper. bo. ✚ HVXSLEY. the 2 of April An̄o 1592 Pepper. me. ✚ NEALE the 7. of Iuly. Anno. 1592. Pepper op. ✚ HAMBLETON the 16 of Septēber Ano 1592 Maces bo. ✚ DENSHEIRE the 8 of Decēber Anō 1592 Maces. me. ✚ WRIGHT the 12 of October Anno 1592. Maces op. ✚ NVTTINGE the 30 of August Ano 1592 synamon bo. ✚ FREEMAN the 3 of Iune Anno 1592 synamon me. ✚ BOMER the 9 of Maye Anno 1592 synamon. op.
A fit reme∣dy heereby if the retay∣lor or mar∣chant be at any time deceiued. The which marks may be printed in paper, and euery of the said workemen to carrie his owne marke. Cloues. Are a sweete spice, and profitable to garbell, The small cloue as good as the great.and in them there is no great cunning to bee shewed by the workemen, but to garbell them cleane, by picking them vpon a Table, and after that the dust is sifted out, the small cloue is as good as the biggest, and therefore there canne come no great hurt to the Marchant or grocer, if the smallest be put either in the toppe, bottom or middest: only this there resteth vpon the skil of the sworne garbeller, to certifie by his marke whether they be wet or drie, that is so put vp. Maces. Are a spice that ought to bee deuided by the Garbeller, into three seuerall deuisions, viz: large, myddle, and petit, and to performe this matter, he ought to haue a sieue of a reasonable These siues and such like are to be prouided by a man of iudgement & skill, that hath beene trained vp in garblingscantling to sifte the myddle from the large, and likewise a sieue fit for the purpose to take the dust from the petit. This beeing doone, the shelles, nuttes, feminine Maces, and such like stuffe beeing taken out, their resteth a kinde of honestie in the sworne garbeller, that putteth them vppe into the Barrell, bagge, or hogeshed,
to see whether the large maces be all of one like goodnesse, if the one halfe or part of them bee brighter then the other, by twelue pence or two shillings in the pound, and if two sortes of ma∣ces be mingled togither in the marchants house before the garbeller doo come vnto the owner thereof, or otherwise by himselfe at the request of the marchant: then in such cases as this is, he ought to put on his marke according to the goodnesse thereof. This course beeing once taken, it will little preuaile the marchant to de∣ceiue the Grocer, by putting on bright Maces vpon the toppe of his vessell; againe, by a true marke the marchant shall be releeued although they do appeare worst in sight, vppon the view of the grocer. Synamon. Also is a spice to bee deuided into three se∣uerall sortes, viz: Large, myddle, and petit, in this kind of Spice there is no great skill to be v∣sed, only this: that the Garbeller that shall gar∣bell it, ought to see that amongst the large Sy∣namon, Synamon blacke, ha∣uing taken salt water loseth his substance, & otherwise it may bee good.there be no midle Synamon, viz: Syna∣mon vnpiped, neither yet any great gouty sticks or otherwise blacke, which if he finde anye, hee ought to breake them in peeces, and to put eue∣rie sticke in his right place, the middle synamon which shall come from the large, ought to bee so handled, that the garbeller deale not parti∣allie
betweene the marchante and the grocer; their ought nothing to be taken from that sorte, but so much petit as will passe through a ginger sieue, that being doon, the dust with the strawes are to be taken from it, by fanning by a worke∣man of skill. And forsomuch as there are diuers sorts of Synamon of sundry goodnes, therefore the skilfull Garbeller, ought to haue this speci∣all regard, that is, that he after the garbelling of any such sort, doo set on a iuste and true marke, aswell profitable to the marchant as to the Gro∣cer. Nutmegges. Are a spice that are to bee deuided into three sorts, viz. Case, Baile, and Rompes: and with∣out a garbeller of iudgement and skill haue the handling thereof, they cannot be truely garbel∣led as they ought to be, for the benefit of the Marchant, and all those that shall buie them. And therfore to performe this true garbelling, they must be sorted and deuided out, euery one from the other according to their goodnes, the case nutmegs must be full of oile, the baile nut∣megges likewise must conteine so much oile in him, that if he be forced betweene the finger & the thumbe, and will not hold, he is then to bee cast among the Rompes: and for expedition, the workeman must sifte the duste and peeces from the Rompes and other nutmegges before they deuide them, and that workeman that ta∣keth the charge of their making vp, ought to set
a iust and a true marke vpon the top of the bag, answereable to their goodnes; to the ende that the Grocer may know what he buieth, and with out this order be followed, the marchant shall not iustlie know what hee selleth, nor the Gro∣cer what he buieth. Ginger. Likewise, is a spice that is to be deuided into two sorts, viz. large and petit: in this spice there is no great skill to be vsed, considering now the manner of his garbelling. Ginger garbelled at Antwerpe, or otherwise vngarbled frō by south: the manner of deuiding is all one, for by a sieue appointed for the purpose ginger is sifted, at the will and pleasure of him that taketh the sieue in hand, and assoone falleth the good through as Note.the bad, and thereby it lieth in the power of the garbeller, to please or displease whome hee will for a rewarde. In this kinde of spice there is no certaintie in garbling; for one while the sieue is too great, and another while too little, but be∣tweene too great and too little, it cannot be tru∣ly garbelled: but after the maner of his garbel∣ling, the one sort beeing taken from the other, with a few stones or strawes or other filth ther∣in contained, it is become clean, good, & whol∣some for mans body. But the manner to handle the same, is to sifte out the dust and lay the ginger vpon a table and to picke the same by hand, viz: the large from
the small, and euery rase of Ginger be it great or The true garbling of ginger, is to picke it by hand vpon a table.small hauing substance in it, is to bee tearmed large: and contrariwise, euery rase being long or broad wanting substance, is to be accounted of as petit. This course in garbelling of ginger, by a sworn garbeller being performed, the mar∣chant shal benefit more then heertofore he hath doone, by fiue pound vphon the hundreth, as hath beene prooued. And the retailing grocer shall bee no more deceiued; and the garbeller shall haue his fee (no doubt) answerable to his paines taking. Gawles. Gawles are a commodity for another man∣ner of purpose then for mans sustenance, they serue for Diers, and otherwise to bee vsed, yet notwithstanding therc is vnder a pretensed co∣lour of deuiding, some care had for the garbel∣ling of them, but not in such manner & forme as they ought to be; expedition in the garbeller is the ouerthrow of the antient deuisions, as it may appeere in the deuiding of these Gaules & other spices. These are deuided into two sorts, but in such manner and order, that it resteth in the disposition of the Garbeller whom hee will please or displease, no vniformitie in the garbel∣ling of them is vsed at any time; but according to the smalnes of the gaule, so is there a sieue appointed, nay rather we should haue saide ac∣cording to the greatnesse of the owner of them,
so is friendship offered. But nowe to speake of their true manner of garbelling, there ought to be a sieue appointed for the purpose, and the skilfull sworn garbeller ought to haue the hand∣ling thereof, to sifte and deuide as the sieue will giue him leaue: this being doone, there resteth then nothing, but to take out the stones, sticks, oake apples, and suche like, and then they are cleane. Ryse. Ryse is a graine good for mans body, and is to be deuided into two sorts, viz, large and pe∣tite. This commodity hath need of an honest, skilfull, and a sworne garbeller, to sift and fan, and otherwise to sorte and deuide the badde Ryse from the good, with such iudgement and skill, that all the good and sweete Ryse may bee knowne from the badde and mustie, and that by the marke he shall sette on, and without a iust and a true marke, al men may be deceiued. For the rise many times may and are oilye, mu∣stie, Corrupted Ryce.and full of wormes. There is no way bet∣ter to reforme what hath beene amissc in the garbelling of this Ryse, then firste to appoint a sieue of a true scantling, to the end to sort and deuide as is abousaid. Annyseedes. Are a commodity that for the most part come filthy and full of dust and had neede of skilfull
garbellers, otherwise through the foulenesse of the worke, there passeth many good seedes tho∣rough their sieue which are many times lefte a∣mong the bad to the great losse and hinderance of the grocer. To set forth the manner of their deuisions as they ought to be, is first to sift them cleane from the stalkes and other filth: that be∣ing done there resteth behind the greatest labor which must be performed by fanning. And for that the labour thereto belonging is painfull to the workemen, and nothing gainefull; therfore they doo manye times neglect their duties. But to preuent this mischeefe, there is no waie bet∣ter then to giue suche reasonable allowance as they may iustlie liue by their labour: that being doone, the marchant shall haue no good seedes left in his garbell, neither the grocer bad seedes left in his good. And forsomuch as Anniseedes come many times euillie coloured, and mustie, therefore the sworne Garbeller ought to make known the goodnes, and cleanesse of the seeds by his marke set thereon as aforesaid; otherwise the retaylors Grocers may be deceiued. Wormeseedes. Is a drugge that is much vsed for many purpo∣ses, this commoditie had asmuch need of a skil∣full garbeller as the Nutmegs, and in some re∣spects more needfull, for Nutmegs are to be de∣uided by hand vppon a table, and doo require but a little labour in respect of harde working,
only this, there is great iudgement and skill to be vsed in their deuisions: for wormeseed after that it is sifted, is to be made cleane by fanning, and that by much labour and paines taking. Of all commodities that are to bee garbelled, the workman deserueth not his money better then in this, if he garbell as hee ought to doo. That garbeller that shall handle this drug ought to be skilfull and iust, otherwise the marchants, Gro∣cers, and people shall bee all deceiued, the Mar∣chant in respect of the good seedes lefte among the bad; and the grocer & the rest, by the garbel which they buy among the good. But to pre∣uent the same, it lieth in the power of a skilfull garbeller to remedy at his pleasure, if hee may haue tooles and fee answerable to his skill and paines. And heere is a thing to be remembred, to the saide workemen and others, that wheras there is alwaies as much and more good seedes left in the garbell of wormseeds then bad seeds More good seedes left in the gar∣bel, thē bad seedes in the good.in the good, and yet many times there are foūd the fourth part garbel, when they haue doone with the best in such cases as this is: wee wishe with all our harts, that the marchant might haue the garbell which we receiue among the good, and we the good seeds which are to bee found among the garbell, the which mischeefe muste be auoided as is before said, and not else. Greines, Almonds, Dates, Seenie, Comminseed, Turmerick, and such like.
They are to bee garbelled in all fidelitie for the auoiding of deceit. But to set downe particular∣lie howe euery of these commodities in their kind ought to be garbelled, were a thing too te∣dious. But for that there is no better way then the antient manner of Garbelling of spices, and the iust packing or putting vppe of the same in such manner as is aforesaid, the which may the better be perfourmed, if your Honor and Wor∣ships doo make choise of some honest manne, skilfull in that Art and action, to reuisit and sur∣uey these workes and workemen, and to put vp the same as is before remembred. Therfore we pray your Lordship, that these causes maye re∣ceiue due hearing, the rather for that we are in∣formed that the Clerke of her Maiesties spice∣rie haue heerein found out the faults, and doo search after conuenient remedies, as is fit. Chap. 10. 1 The garbellers fee and dutie is set foorth. 2 His notable gaine by the labour of three men. 3 His exaction is intollerable, in that he will not bee contented with the small rates in spices, where his labour is great. FOrsomuche as it maye bee made knowne to all persons what the Garbellors duetie is, the same at large is expressed in an act of com∣mon councel heerevnto added vp∣on
purpose, and the rather that it maye also ap∣peere to all, the exaction doone by the garbel∣ler in exceeding the same without warrant. And for that he is not satisfied with the antient rates, nor with his owne exactions therein, but still practiseth to haue a higher rate, it beeing pro∣bable that he by the easie labour of three men in the weeke, may by the wages he now recey∣ueth, gaine cleerelie fiue pound and vpwardes, all his charges borne. Therefore wee haue par∣ticularlie set foorth some parte of his labours, with diuers reasons, prouing that he hath small cause to find himselfe agreeued, or to bee tedi∣ous to the marchant about his allowances, or to sue for higher rates, esteeming it a matter of more indifferencie, that the marchants myght rebate the price of those things wherin the gar∣beller his labour is little, and his gaine great, and to adde the same to such, as his paines are great and his gaines very small. And for proofe heer∣of we say as his workmen in their booke to him promised to performe, the which for that pur∣pose we haue also heerevnto annexed: That in Pepper. By the labor of three men he will garbell in one day viii. bagges of pepper from by south, waieng about xx. C. at vi. d. the hundreth after the maiestrates rate, ari∣seth to x. s.
But his extraordinarie rate is two. s. vp∣on By exacting vpon pep∣per, gained his mennes wages, and xii. pence more then his due.euery bag, amounteth to 16, s, out of which somme he dooth now allowe his men for their workmanship, 7, d, ob, vpon euery bag, the which ariseth to v, s so that his cleer gaine is 11, s, by the day, 11. s. Cloues. He will garbell by the labor of three men C, li, waight in one day, his rate which is allowed is two, d, for the pound, the which ariseth to 16, s, 8, d out of which somme he alloweth his workemen three farthinges for the pound, the which ariseth to 6, s, and his proper gaines de claro is, 10 s. 8. d Maces. Likewise by the labour of three men he wil garbel in one day 4, C, waight his rate allowed is 2, s, 8, d, the which ariseth to 10. s. 8. d By maces, his mennes wages gai∣ned extra∣ordinarie. But his extraordinarie rate is 4, s, vp∣on euery C, waight, groweth to 16. s out of the which rate hee doth allow his men 16, pence, vpon the C, the which is 5, s, 4, d, so his gaines de claro is, 10. s. 8. d Synamon. Also by the labor of 3. men hee will garbell in one day x, C, waight of Sy∣namon, the maiestraies rate is 16, d, the C, and thereby his due ariseth to 13. s. 4. d
But by his extraordinarie rate he re∣ceiueth 2, s, 8, d, vpō euery C. waight By Synamō gained hys mens wa∣ges, and 5. s. ouer.the which arriseth to 26, s, 8, d, out of which somme, hee alloweth his men x, d, vpon euery C, waight, the which is 8, s, 4, d, and so he gaineth, 18. s. 4. d Nutmegges. By Nut∣megs gay∣ned 5. shil▪ more then the ancient allowance, besides the ouerplus of his mens wages. Three men will garbell in a daye of this spice 6, C, waight and vpwardes, at xii. pence the C, beeing the olde rate ariseth to vi, s, for his due, 6. s. But by his extraordinary rate hee ta∣keth 2, s, 8, d, vpon the C, whereby he raiseth his dne to 16, shil, out of which somme his men haue x, pence vpon the hundreth waight. And so his gaines is cleerely, 11. s. Ginger. By ginger gained his mēs wages, and 9. pence more then his due. Ginger also by the labor of his three men he will garbell xxx, C, waight, receiuing for it 6, pence vpon the C, after the maiestrats rate amoūteth to 15. s. His extraordinarie rate is 9, d, vpon the C, waight ariseth to 22, s, 6, d, out of which sum hee alloweth his men for workmanship 2, d, ob. vppon the C waight, ariseth to 6, s, 8, d, so his gaines de claro is, 15. s. 9. d Gawles. By the like labor of three men he wil garbell in one day 40 C, waight of Gaules at six pence the C, after the maiestrates rate, ariseth to, 20. s.
But by his extraordinary rate he doth receiue vpon euery C. waight, viii. d. the which ariseth to 26. s. 8. d. out of which summe hee alloweth his men for workmanship 3. d. vppon the 100. waight, groweth to x. s. so his gaines is de claro, 16 s. 8. d Ryse. In this also by the like labour for one daies work wil arise for 40. C. waight at 6. d. the hundreth being the maie∣strates rate, 20. s. But his extraordinary rate, is 8. d. vp∣on the C. out of which hee alloweth his men three pence vpon the C. the which is x. s. And his gaine is, 16. s. 8. d Annyseedes. In these are great labor, yet three men will garbell ten C. waight at 6. pence the C. in one day, the which after the maiestrates rate is 5. s. His extraordinarie rate is viii. d. vpon the C. of which the workemen haue three pence vpon the C. the which is two s. vi d, and his gaine is, 4. s. 2 d. Woormeseed. These are alwaies verye fowle, yet by the labour of three men, 100 waight, may be garbelled in one day: the due rate is two pence vppon the pound, the which ariseth to 16. s. 8. d
Out of which somme he alloweth his men three farthings vpon the pound the which ariseth to six shillings three pence, and so he gaineth, 10. s. 5. d Graines, Senie.   Almonds. Comminseed.   Dates, Turmerick.   In these commodities and such like, which are not so profitable, but more painfull to be clensed then manye of the rest, yet be they neuer so fowle, by the labor of three men, in one day he doth gaine all charges borne, aboue 4. s. Chap. 11. 1 That the garbellers petition for reformation to your honor, may be conferred heerewith. 2 The garbell need not to be taken from the possession of the Marchant, if these ordinances be confirmed. 3 The manner how these ordinances may be briefed, and brought into the forme of lawe and actes of common councel. FInallie, forsomuch as for want of better iudgement, the prin∣cipall garbellor, by sundry peti∣tions laboureth to your Lorde∣ship: and we, that the garbel and dust might be packed, conuei∣ed and disposed, according to his constituti∣ons:
and wholie to bee drawne from the pos∣session of the Marchant. Whereby it is to bee inferred, that he accuseth and condemneth the marchant and others, to haue dubbed and fal∣sified the labour of his workemen, by mixing the same with the thing garbelled. And for his countenance therein, produceth the wordes of the Actes of Common councell before recited, the which we take to be friuolous and not in∣different, yet very sufficient to make the said gar∣beller maisterfull, and a readie meane to hide and colour his owne follies, making the same his proposition and subiect to talke of. There∣fore, and for the preuenting of that poore help, we haue the rather aduanced these old ordinan∣ces as aforesaid to be indifferent, and to qualli∣fie that point of the said Act, in yeelding vp the said garbell and dust to the chamberlaine, or to any other. For if by your wisdomes it shall bee enacted, that this manner of garbelling before recited, shall be obserued: and that such marks be set and made vppon euery sorts, as is heerein set foorth; Then no abuse can or may arise but it may bee knowne, by whome the same com∣meth, wherby remedie may be had according∣lie, neither can any garbell or dust, be imploied or vsed as the garbeller surmiseth againste the Marchant and others. And therefore not neces∣sarie for him to parte therewith to the garbeller or to any other: but more requisite to be from them deteined.
And nowe for an ende heerein, these shorte waies and manner of garbling, which wee haue remembred and set foorth being obserued, will bring vs all to an agreement, the which beeing denied or misregarded, these our petitions and reasons beeing once made knowne, the curses of those that shall suffer detriment in these af∣faires, we know cannot light vpon vs, but vpon the Authors of such offenses. And forsomuche Euery mem¦ber dooth carry helpe to maintain the body according to his pro∣portion.as the body is preserued, by reason of that pro∣portion, which euery member beareth towards it: so it is to be conceiued, that in this mysterie of the Grocerie, beeing compounded of the marchant, warehouse men, and the retaylors, each member shoulde carrie the same and like reason of proportion, for the sustentation ther∣of, the which cannot be had without the vnitie aforesaid. The which thing vndoubtedlie will come to passe, if these ordinances may bee by your wisdomes with the graue aduise of the councellors and cominaltie of this famous Ci∣tie, ratified and reduced into fourme of lawe. Whereby euery party to this exercise, may bee constrained to walke in his vocation. Wherein Al ought to liue for the seruice of their prince & countrey.we doo assure ourselues, that you doo care, to direct your wil and works to the seruice of god, the Queenes maiestie and this our country, for whose seruice we all do liue. FINIS.
Heere ensueth the petition and orders, required of the workemen in garbelling of the principall garbel∣ler, for the dissoluing of such complaintes as were mooued against them (as they pretend) the which for that the same do conteine many things worthie to be regarded: therefore we haue added the same to this discourse, as very pertinent thereto. IT may please your worship to be informed, that forso∣much as it hath pleased you to aduise vs the companie of workemen to your office of garbelling, to assemble togither, and to set downe such matter, as might shew the waies & meanes how to remooue the controuersies, which are oftentimes stirred againste vs, and mooued a∣mongst our selues, and how your Worshippe may reape more gaine by our common accord, then heeretofore you haue doone. Therefore we haue brieflie set downe in articles, the mat∣ters of our requestes, wherein if it shall please you, to answer vs in that mutuall care and con∣sideration, by vniting and preferring vs, where∣by our common gaines may bee multiplied: then wee shall not onely thinke our selues men altogither of myserable fortune, to haue ledde our liues in that exercise and office, wher∣by such dissention and preposterous orders are maintained, the which maye bee eased and re∣dressed,
without hindrance or preiudice vnto your office, but also we shall be inforced to seek our remedie, and complaine to the Citty, or to hir Maiestie and Councell, for that wee shall hold the deniall heerof, & your meaning there∣by to be suspected, and purposed to holde vs in debate and controuersie one with another. The which may and will bee auoided, in forme fol∣lowing; Inprimis, Omitting to moue your worship, for the obtaining of anye priuiledges for your workemen or office (albeit the like is vsed, to∣wardes the workemen of the mint by reason of that office) and laieng aside such benefit as doth appertaine to your office, by not garbelling di∣uers things, which by vertue of your grant, are to be by vs garbled. And for auoiding of in∣nouation or alteration of any matter to your office appertaining, we onlie beseech your wor. to grant vnto vs this rate and price, the which we haue set downe in certain, vpon such things as are vsuallie garbled by vs, the allowing wher∣of, will not draw you into so great charge, wee working according to the same rate, as our wor∣king now dooth at xii. pence the day, as is heer∣after prooued. Pepper the bag, 8 d. or else by the hundred waight, 4 d Cloues the C, 6 s. 8 d Maces the C, 18 d. Wormseede the hun∣dred, 6 s. 8 d Nutmegs deuided in∣to case, baile, & romps, the hundred, 2 s.
Synamon the C. 12, d Graines the C, 4, d Ryse the C, 3, d Anniseedes the C, 6, d Comminseed the C, 6, d Turmerick the C, 3, d Gawles the C, 3, d Senie the C, 2. s, 6, d Nutmegs the hundred, the rompes beeing onely taken out, 12, d Cassia fistula the C, 12, d Colianders the C, 3, d Gum arabeck the C, 3, d Bayberies the C, 2, d Dates the C, 4, d Orchall the C, 6, d Mastick the C, 4, d Frankensence the C. 6, d Orris the C, 3, d Staues acre the C, 3, d Gallingall the C, 6, d Setwall the C, 6, d Long pepper the C, 6, d Spignard the C, 12, d Ginger the C, 4, d But for such sorts of wares as are perished, wet rotten or worme eaten, wherein much labour is to bee bestowed, wee except the rate sette downe. The proofe of the gaine heereby. The gaines which shall or may redounde to you, by the labour of all your woorkemen now employed, and by their labourers associat, by allowing of the saide rates required, ariseth vn∣to in the yeere, aboue one hundreth poundes, more then you doo now receiue by their work (allowing but xii. pence to each workeman and viii. pence to euery labourer per diem) if they do worke all the yeere; or ratablie for the time of their worke, as by this example it may appeere.
Three workemen and their labourer, being allowed the wages of iii. s. 8, d. doo garbell six bags of pepper, for the which your dutie is xii, s. & your cleer gaines 8, s, 4, d, by the day, the which in the week, your charges defaulked is, 2. li. x. s But these foure being allowed 8, pence vpon the bagge, will garbell eight bags by the day, for the which they shall re∣ceiue v. s. 4 pence, and your due therby is cleer gains 10. s. 8 d, the which in the week your charges defaulcked is, three pound 4. s. and so your gaine is more in the week, by 14. s. then it was before 3. li. 4. s Thus it appeereth that your workemen shall multiplie your gaine, and better their wages, viz: to euery workman six pence, and to the la∣bourer two pence by the daye, more than they before receiued, so that the labourer shall haue x, d, & the workmen 18, d, a peece, by the day. Also that it may appeere to you, that the gain growing heerby ariseth not to so much by your allowing of this rate, for in this allowance of 8 pence vpon the bag of pepper, ariseth but to 4 pence more, then was paide for working of the same at xii, d, the day, as that it must be per∣formed by our dilligence and sore labor, wher∣in it may bee you will demand of vs, why wee should not accomplish that labour for you, vp∣pon that wages of twelue pence the day, as we would and offer to doo, if the rate of viii. pence
vpon the bagge were allowed vnto vs. Thervnto our answer is, that the first & chie∣fest fault is in your selfe, for that when som store of worke is in hand, you doo appoint vs (your workemen) in suche companies, that beeing some of vs placed where a monthes worke is; will lengthen and make the same six weekes, by reason, that they knowe that the workes of the rest of the companies by you appointed, will so soone bee doone, that they shall haue no busi∣nesse therein, and heereby some doo work, and some do play, & diuers other further mischiefs doo arise, the which matter must be redressed in forme heereafter expressed, with your fauoura∣ble assent or otherwise by some further auctho∣ritie. The second fault is, that some of these com∣panies so by you appointed, by imbecilitie can doo no better, and oftentimes you doo ioyne with vs new commers, whose workes are caste vpon the others necks, and the last and cheefest cause is for that men of iudgement and skil, can not haue such tooles, as they in truth ought to haue for expedition, the which they will pro∣uide, if accord be made as is decent. And forsomuch as these mischeefes & faultes haue produced other inconueniences, aswell to you as to vs, viz: for that your selfe is thereby growne into disfauour with diuers marchantes and grocers, and for your ease or fantasie, you giue out hard words against vs, whome neuer∣thelesse
you doo imploye; Whereby also often times wee are grudged at and disdained, the which we as no looking to the ground of these imperfections, whereby to seeke for better re∣medie, thinking our selues abused, returne the same againe. For the bettering and auoiding of which in∣conueniences, wee haue agreed amongest our selues, (if you shall please to yeeld to the sayde rate required) howe to liue by our worke, in loue and concorde togither, and by what com∣panies, and in what sorte. Whereby not onelie these discordes maye bee dissolued, but your gaine shall bee perfourmed to the vttermoste, and your selfe quieted; to our good reporte, and your owne profite, and for the commodi∣tie of all those whose businesse wee shall take in hand. Our agreement beeing nine workemen with eight Labourers nowe imployed, whose number are not to be increased, will handle all the businesse as is declared in this man∣ner following.
The nine Workemen. Horton. Hambleton. Huxsley. Nutting. Neale. Wright. Boomer. Freeman. Denshire The eight Labourers. Archer. Warner. Phillips. Aire. Harrison. Chadwicke. Smith. Morris. If the worke shal lie in one place, then thus. Horton. Huxsley. Hābletō. Freemā. Dēshire. Boomer. Neale. wright. Nutting Archer.
If the worke fall out in two places, then these shall worke. Horton. Huxsley. Nutting wright. Boomer Neale. Hābletō Dēshire. Freemā. Archer. If in three places, then thus. Huxsley. Horton. Nutting. Harrison. Hambleton. Wright. Boomer. Archer. Neale. Denshire. Freeman. Aire. If the worke shal lie in foure places, then thus. Horton. Huxsley. Nutting. Harrison. Wright. Hambleton. Boomer. Aire. Neale. Warner. Smith. Aire. Freeman. Denshire. Chadwicke. Phillips.
Our agreement further is, that the rate wee require being allowed, the ouerplus of the mo∣ney leuied by the saide rate, more then twelue pence the day, by anye companies that labour, shall be equallye deuided amongest them that labour not. Our agreement further is, that if the worke∣men in one place may be dispatched by three or foure, or fewer, that then those that shall work, to be elected by consent of all the rest, who shall giue an account to the rest, of their worke, and value thereof. Also we agree that one man shall bee named and appointed by vs of our said companie, not onely to trauell and to see howe and where our worke shall fall out, but also we agree that eue∣rie of the said companies which shall be disper∣sed, shal be placed and appointed to their work, by the said person so to be nominated amongst vs, who shall ouersee our workes in all places. Item, we agree that a booke shall bee made and kept by him, in the which the somme and particulers of our worke shall be set downe, as well for the preseruation of your dutie, as for many necessarie causes to our selues appertey∣ning about our owne gaine. Item, we agree euery morning in the time of worke, to repaire to your house, for your di∣rection notwithstanding, and to informe you of the premises; the which if you can aduise to better, or shall discerne any fault, then to giue
directions accordinglie. The which matters and agreements conside∣red, it will plainelie appeere, that the same ten∣deth not to our owne gaine so much, as to the credit of the office, our quiet, and your great a∣uaile. And for proofe also heereof if need shall be, we can and will produce a certificat, request, and petition of the best & expertest marchants, and Grocers in London, testifieng and desiring that the same may so proceed, for diuers resons by them vsed, not to be reiected, they finding themselues agreeued, and do surmise; 1 Firste, that by reason of our small wages ma∣ny of vs doo better the same, by imbezelling of their commodities. 2 Item, That we doo prolong our work, vppon purpose to be alwaies occupied, and therby doo trouble their houses longer then reason, to greeue them and to annoy their affaires. 3 Item, That there is no ouerseer in that worke, so that the Grocers affirme, that many things are badlie handled, and the marchantes doo impute it to vs, but the Grocers doo alledge that we are bribed, to amende our small wa∣ges. Therefore, and to auoid all surmises by mar∣chants and Grocers, wee haue further thought it good, to accept it by an oath from the Lorde maior, if these our requests be allowed and con∣firmed by authoritie. And the rather, not only to shew our true and plaine meaning in your af∣faires, but cheeflie to draw from you all suspiti∣on,
and obiections, which you for want there∣of may in any wise conceiue againste these our said requests howsoeuer. And vppon the saide oath taken, wee require to haue in our seuerall bonds, to you made, for our true and good dea∣ling, it beeing sufficient to passe our oathes in this behalf, without any bond or other writing. The Oath we meane to take. YOu shall sweare that you shall well and honestlie behaue your selfe in the of∣fice and action of Garbelling, within the Cittie of London, without stealing, imbea∣zelling, or vnlawfullle, or vnhonestlie conuei∣eng away any part of such spices as are lefte to your charges, in any Marchants house, or else∣where. You shall asmuch as in you shall lie, garbell and clense all manner of spices, drugs, and mar∣chandize iustlie, trulie, and indifferently, accor∣ding to your skill and iudgement, without re∣spect of any person or persons whosoeuer. And in these & in al other things, that to the office of garbelling apperteineth, during the time of your worke, you shall well and truelie behaue your selfe, so God shall helpe you. Furthermore our conclusion and request is, that you may be pleased to yeeld to our said de∣sires: and that if heerevnto you can obiect any thing to the contrarie, it may also please you, to
set downe in writing, and that with speed, your said obiections, to the end that we may answer the same: otherwise wee trust you will pardon vs, if wee doo sue for the censure of the Lorde Mayor to be giuen in our saide requestes, it be∣ing more conuenient to allowe of the said rates, then either to reteine six men to worke, & three Labourers at a certeine fee by the yeere, and to bind them to execute all the saide worke, or o∣therwise to allowe xviii. pence by the daye, for euery daies worke to the workemen, the rather, for that the rest will not bee dismissed, it beeing their exercise, nor they will not willinglye sub∣iect themselues to be appointed to anye places of worke, otherwise then by their owne accord and assent, as before is described, and as they haue agreed vppon, to the which agreemente, they doo subscibe their names, and doo require to haue it ratified and confirmed by your wor∣ship, to whome the office apperteineth as wee thinke. In witnesse whereof, wee haue caused this to bee made, and by vs vnder written the xiiii. day of October, in Anno. 1590. Subscribed. Thomas Horton, gro. Iohn Freeman, grocer. Iohn Neale. William Hambletō, gr. Thomas wright. Richard Huxsley. Iohn Nutting. Iohn Boomer. Robert Warner, grocer. Iohn Harrison, grocer. Iohn Deuonshire, Grocer.
Heere insueth the Acts of Common Councell before remembred, made in Anno xviii. of King Henry the eight: and in Anno the se∣conde of King Edward the sixt, concerning the Garbelling of spices, drugges, and Mar∣chandize, in London. Commune Consilium tent▪ apud Guildhall Ciuitatis London, vicessimo septimo, die Februarii, An. Regni Regis Henrici Octaui, xviii. in presentia. Ader∣men. Thome Seymer, Mil▪ Maioris. Iohannis Baker, Recordatoris. Gulihelm. Butler. Millit. Thome Exmew. Millit. Iohannis mundi. Millit. Thome Bauldry. Millit. Iohannis Allin. Millit. Iacobi Spencer. Michaelis English. Iohannis Rudstone. Radulphi Doder. Iohannis Hardy. Christopheri Ascue. Stephani Peacock, & Nicholai Lambert, Vicecomites ciuit. eiusd. &c.
AT this Common councell the Garbeller of spices exhibited a bill, concerning the garbelling of certain spices, & other things which then & there was open∣ly red and well vnderstood, and therevpon agreed and granted, that it shoulde bee entered of recorde as it is, and so to bee continued, adding therevnto this cause of pro∣uiso. Prouided alwaies that all such bagges of pep∣per being of the waight of two C. or aboue, that ought to be garbelled, and beeing marked with the marke of the hand of Antwerpe, vpon the opening thereof, by the garbeller or his de∣putie, be found well and truely garbelled, and no refuse or garbel in effect therin found, aboue the waight of one pound and a halfe; that then and so often the saide garbeller or his deputie, shall nothing aske or require, by reason of his said office, of the owner of any of the said bags, for opening of the same. And if any thinge bee misordered by the said Garbeller or his deputy, by reason of any partialitie, or othetwise in ex∣ecuting The garbel∣ler or his deputie to be punished for not per∣forming their duty.of the saide office: that then the refor∣mation thereof, and also the penalties to be laid vpon the garbeller or his deputie, to be doone from time to time, by the good discretions of the maior and Aldermen for the time beeing, &c.
To the right Honorable Lord, the lord Mayor of this Cittie of London, and the Worshipfull Aldermen, his brethren, and to the descreet commons, of this present Common counsell assembled. IN full humble wise sheweth vn∣to your good Lordship and ma∣sterships, your Suppliant & Ci∣tizen Robert Cooper garbeller. That whereas by Act of Com∣mon councell, holden the xvii. day of September, in the 4. yeere of the raigne of our most dread Soueraigne Lord that nowe is, K. Henry the eight, it was enacted, That all manner of spices, drugges, and other marchan∣dize, after that time to be brought and conuey∣ed from the parts of Flaunders, into this realme of Englande, marked with the marke of Ant∣werp, or Brudges, called the right hand, should not by the Garbeller be garbelled heere; forso∣much as it was then supposed, that all manner of spices, drugs, and other marchandize, that did bring the saide marke verye trulie garbelled and clensed: by colour whereof, diuers & sun∣dry marchants, sithence that time hitherto, haue vsed to bring and conuey, and yet daiely doo, from the said parts into this Realme and Cittie of London, great substance of spices, drugges, and other marchandize, bearing the said mark of the hand, and the same heere put to sale, with
spices, drugs, & marchandize, notwithstanding the said marking, being heere found ful of dust, fusses, filthes, and other garbell not onelye to the great deceite and losse of the Kinges liege people, of all degrees, eating and vsing the same in meates and drinkes, and otherwise, and be∣sides that manie great complaintes, rumors, and exclamations, haue therevpon ensued, by a great number of personnes which haue founde themselues agreeued in that behalfe. Where∣fore it hath pleased my L. Maior and my masters his Brethren, knowing the kings most high ple∣sure in that behalfe, at a court of Aldermen, to admit & authorise your saide suppliant vnto the saide office of garbelling, giuing him in com∣mandment, to garbel and clense al maner of spi∣ces, drugs, and marchandise, which ought to be garbelled, aswell those that be marked with the said marke of the right hand, as all other vnmar∣ked or otherwise marked, according to which authoritie and commandment, your said supp. and officer hath taken vpon him to garbell and hath garbelled amongst other, all such diuers & sundry spices, drugs, & other marchandise mar∣ked with the said marke of the right hande, and foūd in them great quantities of dust, filth, and garbell, which he hath heer in Guildhal redy to be shewed. Pleseth it therfore your good Land masterships, the said deceipts and other the pre∣mises tenderlye considered, to inact, ordeine, and stablish, nowe at this Common councel, &
by the authoritie of the same, that your said sup∣pliant and Garbeller, and all other succeeding in that roome, within this Cittie, may and shal haue all power and authoritie from henceforth duelie, truelye, and indifferentlie, from time to time, to garbell and clense all manner of spi∣ces, drugs, and other marchandize, the parti∣cular names whereof heereafter ensue, as well such, and as many of them as bee marked with the marke of the said hande, as all other beeing otherwise marked or vnmarked. That is to say. Pepper, Ginger, Cloues, Maces, Nutmegges, Woormseed, Galingall, Goome, Setwall, Cyna∣mon, Long pepper, Spignard, Graines, Comin∣seeds, Anniseeds, Frankinsence, Senie, Cassiae Fistula, Almonds, Morriswax, Gawles, Coli∣andersced, Bayberries, Dates, Rise, Masticke, Turmerick, Orris, Stauesacre, Orchall, and Littmus. And moreouer to enact and stablishe that no marchant or marchants, Freeman, or foriner, inhabiting within this Cittie or suburbs of the same, nee anye marchant stranger, from hence∣foorth, take vpon him or them, nor any other for them, or in their names, or in the name of any of them, to vtter or sell, ingrose or retayle, within this Cittie of London, any manner spi∣ces, drugs, or other marchandize aforenamed, before that it bee garbelled, tried, and made cleane, by the saide garbeller or his deputie or
deputies, for the time being, and sealed with the seale of the said office, as of olde time accusto∣med, whereby it shall or may euidentlie appeer to the buiers thereof, good, cleane, perfect, and wholesome, as well for mans bodie, as other∣wise to be vsed, vpon forfeiture of losing of all such spices, drugs, and other marchandize, so sould vngarbelled, and vnclensed, or to the va∣lue therof, to the vse of the Comminaltie of the Cittie, and for euery hundred waight or bags of Spices, drugs, or other marchandize, bought and sold, contrarie to this ordinance, the seller and buier thereof, shall forfeit and pay at euery time that they so offend forty shillings equallie betweene them to be borne and paied, and the same money to bee deuided into three partes, (that is to say) the one part thereof to the vse of the Mayor and comminaltie of this Cittie. The secònd part to the wardens and fellowship of Grocers, and the thirde parte to the taker, that first shall take, and seize any such spices, drugs, or other marchandize bought, or sold, contra∣rie to this ordinance. And moreouer be it ena∣cted and established by the authoritie of this Common councell, that it shall be lawfull for euery person or persons, vpon due proofe ther∣of made, if any forfeit or forfeitures, as dooth appeere aboue rehearsed, for to bee recouered againste euery manner of person or persons so offending by action of debt, and that it shall not bee lawfull for the partie defendant, in no
wise to wage the lawe, wherby the partie plain∣tife, shall or may loase his sute, nor yet no pro∣tection allowed in that behalfe. Prouided alwaies in that behalfe, and bee it further enacted, that the Garbeller his depu∣tie and deputies for the time being, shall take, beare, and carrie awaye, and towardes him or them to reteine all manner of garbell and gar∣bels, as dust, fusses, and other filth, that hee or they at any time heereafter shall happen to gar∣bell, trie and clense, out of all and euery manner drugs and other marchandize, to the intent and purpose, that no person shall eftsoones put, mix, or intermeddle the said garbell into or with any manner of spices, drugs, or other marchandize, in auoiding and eschewing the great slaunder and rebukes, that by occasion of such intermed∣ling might growe and redound vnto your saide officer, his deputie or deputies, beeing thereof giltlesse and innocent. And that the owner of all such dust, fusses, and other filthe, shall finde and prouide a bagge or bagges, to bestowe and put in the same garbelles and other filthe, and thereof shall take the iuste and true waight, the saide Garbeller his deputie or deputies, shall marke vpon the said bagge or bagges, and ther∣on the owner shall set on his seale, and the sayd bagge or bagges so waied, marked, and sealed, the said Garbeller his deputie or deputies, for the time beeing, shall immediatlie at the costes of the saide owner, carrie and conuey to the
Guildhall in London, there to remaine in sure keeping, vnder the keyes of the saide Garbeller and of the controller of the chamber of Lon∣don, vnto suche time as the owner of euerye such garbell and garbels, shall make and deli∣uer vnto one of the said two officers, or to their deputies a bill obligatorie, wherein they shall stand bounde vnto the chamberlaine of Lon∣don for the time being, in such somme of monie as by one of the said two officers shall be thoght good and reasonable, that the same owner shal conuey, or cause to bee conueyed the saide gar∣bell and garbelles vnto the parts of beyond the seas, by a certaine daye to bee limitted, by the saide two officers or one of them, and that the owner thereof shall pay for housroome and ke∣ping of euery such bagge, one halfe pennie eue∣ry weeke, as longe and by all the time thar hee shall suffer any such bagge to lie and remaine. Prouided also that if the owner or owners of anye such bagge or bagges of garbell, suffer the same to be and continue in the saide Guild∣hall, ouer and aboue the space of nine moneths, that then the said bagge or bagges with the gar∣bell to be and remaine there still as goodes for∣feited and confiscate to the vse of the commi∣naltie of the Cittie of London, And that the Maior of the same citty for the time being with∣in a moneth then next ensuing shal appoint and prouide for the sure conueieng thereof vnto the partes of beyond the seas, ther to be sold to
the most aduantage and the money comminge of the sale to be deliuered to the chamberlaine of London for the time being, to the vse of the common weale of the said Cittie, and all suche garbell, dust, fusses, and other filth, which is tri∣ed and clensed as is aforesaid, and beeing of no value nor substance, shall bee conueied into Cheape, or into some other conuenient place, within this Cittie at the pleasure and comman∣dement of the Mayor, for the time being, and there to be openly burnt in the sight of the peo∣ple, so that they maye well see and perceiue the good order and iustice truelie executed in that behalfe. The Rates and prises what the garbeller shall take for garbelling all manner of Spices, and other things that ought to be garbelled, rated, and prised, the xiii. of August, Anno 1526. by the wardens of the grocers in london, and the sociates, as heereaf∣ter dooth ensue. The rate of the Maiestrates. The exaction of the garbeller. Pepper from by south the C. 6, d. xii. d. Pepper and Ginger with the marke of Antwerp or Brud∣ges, if it need to bee garbled the C. 4. d 6. d Cloues not cleane that need to be picked by hand, the pound is 2. d.  
The rate of the Maiestrates. The exaction of the garbeller. Mases not garbled, the C. waight, 2. , 8. d. 4. s. Wormeseed the li. 2. d   Nutmegs the hundred, 12. d 2. s. 8. d Gallingall the C, x, d.   Setwall the C, 12, d   Synamon the C. 16, d 2. s. 8, d Long pepper the C, 16, d   Spignard the C, 2, s.   Graines the C, 6, d 8. d Almonds the C, 6, d 8. d Ryse the C, 4, d 8. d Anniseedes the C, 6, d 12. d Comminseed the C, 6, d 8. d Gawles the C, 6, d 8. d Moreswax the C, 4, d   Senie the C, 3. s, 4, d 4 s. Cassia fistula the C, 2, s.   Colianders seed the C, 5, d 8, d Gum arabeck the C, 4, d 8. d Bayberies the C, 2, d 4. d Dates the C, 6, d 12, d Turmerick the C, 4, d 8, d Orchall the C, 6, d   Litmus the C, 3, d   Mastick the C, 6, d   Frankensence the C. 12, d   Orris the C, 6, d 8. d Staues acre the C, 6, d 8. d
But all manner of wares wet with water, rot∣ten or brused wherein there is much labor, and long time, that then, as the marchant and the officer can agree for the dooing thereof, and if they cannot agree, that then the wardens of the Grocers for the time beeing, to bee indifferent iudges betweene them. Commune Consilium tent. apud Guildhall Ciuitatis London, desimo septimo, die Iunii, Anno. Regni Edwardi Sexti, secundo, Coram. Iohanne Gresham, Mil. Maioris. Ader∣men. Robarto Brooke, Ar. Recordatoris Randolpho Warren. Millit. Gulihelmo laxton. Martino Bowes. Iohanne Tolis.   Iohanne Wilford.   Andrea Iud.   Georgio Barne.   Gulielmo Locke.   Augustino Hinde.   Richardo Turke.   Henriccho goodier.   Iohanne lyon.   Iohanne ambert,   Gulihelmo garrerd.   Thome White & Robarto Chartsey. Vicecomites ciuit. eiusd. &c. Ac maiore parte Comunitatis, Comūis consilii ciuitatis predict. existente.
ALso at this court a bill was deui∣sed and drawne, by the learned councell of this Cittie, by the commandement and assente of the Lorde Mayor, and Alder∣men of the same cittie, for and concerning the garbelling and cleansing of all such spices, drugs, wares and marchandise, as heeretofore haue vsed or ought to be garbelled or clensed, within the said cittie and the lyber∣ties thereof, was redde and by the commons presentlie assembled, wel and ripelie conceiued and vnderstand, and because the same and the matter therin contained, vnto them to be good consonant vnto reason, and profitable for the common-weale, for all our said souereigne lord the kings subiects. It was therefore ordained, enacted, and established, by the said lord maior and Aldermen, and commons in the said coun∣cell assembled, and by the aucthoritie of the same. That the said bill shall be entered and in∣grossed of record, for a good & profitable law, act, and ordinance at all times heerafter, firme∣lie and inuiolablie to be obserued, obeied, and kept in euery point, according to the tenor, true meaning, and effect of the same; vpon the seue∣rall paines and penalties therein mentioned and conteyned, the tenor of which bill heereafter ensueth.
WHere by the Acte of Common councell, holden in the Cham∣ber of the Guildhall of the cit∣tie of London, the xx. of Fe∣bruarie 1526. in the xviii. yeere of the raigne of our late Soue∣raigne Lord, of most worthie memorye Kinge Henrye the eight, before sir Thomas Seimer knight, then Lord Mayor of the said cittie, and the Aldermen of the same, it was amongest o∣ther things enacted & established, by the said L. mayor aldermen & cōmons, in the same cōmon councell then assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all kindes of sortes of spices, drugges, and marchandize speciallie recited & perticularlie expressed, within the same acte wheresoeuer they were garbled, as well those that are marked with the right hande of Ant∣werp, Brudges, and Roane, as all other marked or vnmarked, & all other which of right ought and of long time then past, according to good and antient lawes and ordinanances, in that be∣halfe made and prouided, had beene accusto∣med to be garbelled within the said Citty, and the liberties thereof, by the common garbeller of spices, of the same citty, therevnto lawfullie appointed, by the Lord Mayor of the said Cit∣tie, for the time being, before that the same spi∣ces, drugges, and marchandise, or anye parcell thereof, were or should be put to sale, vttered,
or sold, and that the garbell, fusses, and dust ta∣ken, garbelled, and clensed, out of the said spi∣ces, drugs, wares, and marchandize, should be brought and conueied by the same garbeller to the Guildhall aforesaid, to be from thence con∣ueied and transported within a certeine tyme limited, by the said Act of Common councell, made the xx. day of Februarie, in the said xviii. yeere of the said late king, into the partes be∣yond the seas, and otherwise be disposed vpon certeine paines and penalties, in the same Acte mentioned and expressed, as by the same Act it doth and may more fullie appeer vpon record: By the which said act of common councell, or yet by any other like acte concerning the gar∣belling and clensing of the said spices, drugs, & marchandize, hitherto made and prouided, there is not any certein time limited or appoin∣ted, within which the owners and possessors of such spices, drugs, and marchandize, hetherto made and prouided, there is not anye certeine time limitted or appointed, within which the owners & possessors of such spices, drugs, and marchandize, keeping the same longe in theyr custodie and possession, doo many times by co∣uert, secret, and fraudulent waies and meanes, vtter and sell the same, before that it bee seene, searched, garbelled or clensed, by the said com∣mon garbeller, or his deputie or deputies, to the no little losse, dammage, and perrill, of all the buiers and occupiers thereof, for remedie
and reformation whereof: Bee it ordered, established, and enacted, by this present common councel, & by the auctho∣ritie of the same, That the same former Acte of common councel, made the saide xviii. yeere of the reigne of our late soueraigne lord K. Henry the viii▪ concerning the garbelling of spices, drugs, and marchandise, shall stande, continue, and remaine, in full strength, force, and effect; adding and adioyning therevnto, that if anye person or persons at any time heereafter, do re∣taine or keep, or cause to be kept, in his or their possession, or in the possession of any other per∣son or persons▪ any manner of bag, chest, vessell, or remnant of any of the saide spices, drugs, or marchandise, what marke or seale soeuer they are, or any of them shall haue or beare vpon thē, and do not cause the same to be dulie garbelled or sealed, by the said common garbeller, or his sufficient deputie or deputies, within the space of 4. months after the bringing of the same mar¦chandise, into the said citty or the liberties ther∣of, Almonds, Rise, and dates, alwaies excepted, that then all and euery such person or persons, hauing or keeping in form aforesaid, any parte or parcell thereof, as it shal please the owners of the same to reserue & keepe for his or their own proper expenses, in his or their own houses, be∣ing vnder the waight of one quarter of a hun∣dred vngarbeled, and vnclensed, contrary to the tenor and effect of this present Acte and ordi∣nance,
shall forfeit and pay or cause to be paid, for euery bag, chest, vessell, remnant, and par∣cell, of all the said spices, drugs, and marchan∣dize, except before excepted, so beeing vngar∣bled, and kept by the space of foure monethes, xxvi. s. 8. d. in the name of a paine. And further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforesaid, that if any chest▪ vessell, bagge, parcel or remnant of Almonds, Rise, and Dates, bee now or heereafter shall be in forme aforesaide, kept, or reserued, by the owner or owners, kee∣per or keepers of the same, not garbled & clen∣sed, by the saide garbeller his lawfull deputie or deputies, within halfe a yeer next after the brin∣ging of the same Almonds, Rise, and Dates, in∣to the said Cittie, or liberties thereof, That then euery such person & persons▪ shall forfeite and paie for euerie such chest, vessell, and bagge, remnant, and parcell of Almondes, Rise, and Dates so kepte vngarbled, other then suche as shall be kept for his or their owne necessary vse and expences, within their own houshold, con∣trarie to the tenor and effect of this present act, and ordinances, xxvi. s. 8. d. in the name of a paine. Prouided alwaies, and bee it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaid, that this present act nor any thing therein contained, do not in anie wise stretch or extend, to the hurt, damage, or greefe of any person or personnes, for not gar∣belling or cleansing, of anye of the saide kinde
of spices, drugs, and marchandise, which nowe are and do remaine in the custodie, and posses∣sion of any person or persons, of the said Cittie or the liberties of the same, within the seuerall times before limitted and appointed, for the same, so alwaies that all and euery such person and persons, now hauing as is aforesaid, any of the said sortes of spices, drugges, and marchan∣dize, within the said cittie, or the liberties ther∣of, doo cause the same, and euery part and par∣cell thereof (excepte as is before excepted) to be garbelled and clensed by the said Common garbeller or his sufficient deputie or deputies, within foure moneths now next ensuing, with∣out fraud or further delaie. Prouided also, and bee it enacted by the au∣cthoritie aforesaid, that if any person or persons at any time or times heereafter, doo vtter or sell or cause to be sold, or put to sale, or conuey out of the said cittie, any bag, chest, vessell, parcell, or remnant, of the said spices, drugges, or mar∣chandize, being of the cleere value of x. pound, and vpwards, before they or any of them shall be garbled, and sealed by the common garbel∣ler, or by his deputie or deputies, as is afore∣said, contrarie to the tenor, true meaning, and effect of this present act, or of the saide former act, That then euery such offender; and offen∣ders, shall forfeit for euery such bag, chest, ves∣sell, parcell, and remnant, of the spices, drugs, and Marchandize, ten pound sterling, and not
aboue, and for euerye bagge, chest, vessell, par∣cell, or remnant of spices, drugges, and Mar∣chandize, being vnder the vallue of ten pound, to forfaite such paine and penaltie for the same, as is conteined in the saide former Act, mentio∣ned or conteined, to the contrarye notwith∣standing. And further be it ordained, and enacted, by the said aucthoritie, That if anye person or per∣sons, at any time heereafter, do mingle or mix, or intermeddle any manner of kind, part or par∣cell of garbell or garbels of the spices, drugges, or Marchandize aforesaid, to the cleane spices, drugs, or marchandize, after that the same spi∣ces, drugs, & marchandise, or any of them haue beene clensed and garbelled by the common garbeller, or by his deputie or deputies, to the intent to deceiue any of the kinges liedge peo∣ple therewith, that then euery such offender, & offenders, shall cleerelie lose and forfeit, al such spices, drugges, and marchandise, so mixed or mingled, and forty shillinges more, for euerie such offence, to the vses and intents heervnder expressed. Prouided also and be it enacted by the auc∣thoritie aforesaid; That if anie maner of person or persons, at any time heereafter, doo conuey or bring, or cause to bee conueyed or to bee brought, to the said Cittie or the liberties ther∣of, any manner of garbell or garbels, of anie of the said spices, drugges, or Marchandise, by it
selfe, from any of the partes of beyond the seas, to the intent to vtter or fell the same within the said Cittie or liberties therof, That all & euery person or persons so offending, shall forfeit and lose all the said garbell and garbels, and also ten pound sterling, for euery time so dooing, and to be employed and deuided as heereafter shal be declared. Prouided also and be it enacted, that all and euery the forfeitures, paines and penalties, aswel of spices, drugges, and marchandize, as of the sommes of money aboue mentioned and ex∣pressed within this present Acte, or within the said former Act, before, in and by this present act, or within the said former act before remem∣bred & confirmed, shall at all times from hense forwarde bee recouered by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information to be commensed, with∣in any of our said Soueraigne Lord the Kinges Courts within the said Citty of London, in the name of the Chamberlaine of the same Citty of London for the time being, wherein none essoigne or wager of law shal be admitted, and shall be emploied, distributed and bestowed, as heereafter is and shall be appointed and decla∣red, That is to say, the one moitie or halfe deale of euery fuch paine, penaltie, and forfeiture, to be to the vse of the taker and presenter of the of∣fender and offenders, and the other moitie to be and remaine to the vse of the poore, for the time being, maintained and relieued in the new
Hospitall in West-smithfielde in the suburbs of the said citty. And also prouided, and be it en∣acted, that it shalbe lawfull at all times hereafter, to and for the Lord Maior and aldermen of the of the said cittie for the time beeing, to cause by their discretions, all such garbell of the said spi∣ces, drugs and marchandize, as at anie time her∣after shall be brought vnto the Guild-hall afore∣said, according to the tenor, forme, and effect of the said former act, made in the 18. yeare of the raigne of our said late King, which may be law∣fullie and conueniently conueied and put to a∣nie good and reasonable vse and occupation to bee retained, vttered, solde, and spent by it selfe, vvithin the said cittie, and elsewhere within the realme of England, anie thing vvithin the same former act, or anie other act or ordinance men∣tioned or contained to the contrarie in aniwise notvvithstanding. And also, be it enacted and ordained by the aucthoritie aforesaid, that in case anie person or persons at anie time hereafter, doe, or shal refuse or deny trulie to content or pay to the said gar∣beller for the time being, or to his sufficient de∣putie or deputies, by the lavves and ordinances afore remembred shall be due and belong, as it hath beene accustomed for the garbelling and sealing of anie of the said spices, drugs, and mar∣chandize: vvhen, and assoone as the same shall be so garbelled & sealed: that then it shalbe law∣full for the said Garbeller, his deputie, or depu∣ties,
immediatlie to plucke of and to take away euery such seale, so by him or them before put to the same spices, drugs, and marchandize, & that then and from thensefoorth the said spices, drugs, and marchandise, and euery parcel ther∣of, shall be taken, deemed, and adiudged, as not garbelled, clensed or sealed, but remaine and stande vnder the danger and penaltie aboue in this present act mentioned and expressed, anie thing in the same act comprised to the contrary notwithstanding. Prouided also, and bee it enacted by the au∣cthoritie aforesaid, that if at any time heerafter, any of the said spices, drugs, wares, or marchan∣dise, which ought to be garbelled and cleansed as is aforesaid, be found so full of stones, so wet with water, rotten, brused, worme eaten, or o∣therwise full of filthines and vncleane, that they cannot be garbled and clensed, as is aforesaid, in suche reasonable and conuenient time and space, as other drugs, spices, and marchandise of like kinds and sortes for the most part may bee, That then it shall be in the ellection of the saide Garbeller his deputie or deputies, for the time being, to haue the fee therefore vsed and accu∣stomed, or else to haue and take for euery such person as shall worke about euery such Garbel∣ling, for euery whole daies worke, after the rate of viii. d. by the daie.
The oath of the common Garbeller. YOu shall sweare that you shall well and lawefullie behaue you in the office of Garbeller, within the cittie of London, without any fauor or partialitie shewing to anie person, taking reasonablie for your labour. And all the powder or order within the Bales, and of marchandize by you to be garbel∣led, wholelie yee shall bringe or deliuer to the Chamberlaine of this Cittie, for the time bee∣ing, to the intent that the said powder or order after that, shal not be mingled in any such mar∣chandize. And after that you haue garbled any bale or marchandize, you shall marke and signe the same bale by you garbled, with a marke to the intent that the Common weigher may haue knowledge thereof. And in this and in all o∣ther thinges, that to the office of Garbeller ap∣perteineth, you shall well and truelie behaue your selfe, as God you helpe. FINIS.
An Appendix declaring, that forsomuch as the request of the authors, doo lie dispersed in this booke, and least it should seeme to car∣ry abroad, an vnseruiceable mention of mat¦ters therein: therfore they, for a careful re∣fining thereof, haue collected as readie (for such Commissioners as may be appointed, or if any such hap to be) for the due exami∣nation of the necessity of their saide petiti∣ons, the contents of the said booke, and the breefe of such things, as they do sue to haue reformed, and to haue passed to an Acte of Common councell in London, the rather, for that these presence may beare the better credit, by a conference with such commis∣sion, whereby the same Art of Garbelling, may be indued with the life of some lawe, for the benefit of the Common-wealth. The briefe Contents of the Booke. INprimis, they shew that King Henry the sixt, did giue the of∣fice of garbelling of spices, to the Lord Mayor and Commi∣naltie of London for euer, to the end that the spices broght
into this realme, should bee made cleane, and the corrupt to bee deuided from the good, for the healthe and good of the subiectes of this Realme. That therevpon the Marchantes owners of such spices, & the Grocers retaylors, of the same did at a meeting for that purpose, concord and agree vpon the maner of clensing of such spices, and also of the sorts that euery kind of such spice should be deuided and made into. That by force of this agreemente, certeine Actes were made by the said Lorde Mayor and Comminaltie, whereby the Marchants are in∣ioyned not to sell any spice, before the same be garbelled: and the Retaylors Grocers are in∣ioyned, not to alter nor mixe the saide sortes of spices, so made and garbelled, vppon paine of forfeiture of the said spices. The ground of the Abuses. FOrsomuch as in the saide actes, the saide manner of garbling of the said spice, so then agreed vp∣on, nor the saide sortes likewise, that the same spices shoulde be deuided and made into, were not expressed in the said Acts, nor sufficientlie recorded in any court, Therefore the Garbeller vnder the Lorde Mayor, garbelleth the said spi∣ces
as it pleaseth him: and the retaylors grocers by force of the said actes, are inforced to put the same to sale in such manner, as the said Garbel∣lers doo handle them, and in such sort: That hir maiestie is deceiued in the goodnes and price of the said spice, to a great value in the yeere. The marchant and owners before their faces are defrauded and deluded, with their owne goods. The Retaylors are discredited, and their spice in markets and faires are made forfeit, by reason of their corruption, and are in the said book at large expressed. The price is nothing abated. And all the people are deceiued. The conclusion of the booke, and the matters therein required, to be enacted and to be for euer obserued, if it shall be so thought requisite by the Commit∣tees appointed. THat the antient manner of gar∣belling of spices before agreed vpon, may be obserued, and all others to be reiected. That the said antient deuisi∣ons of such spices, may bee also kept, and the same so deuided, to bee seuerallie put vp. That none doo worke but men of skill, in
that office, as is in the ninth Chapter of the said booke set foorth, and the same persons to bee nominated and elected, by the companie of Grocers, out of the decaied brethren of that companie, as often as such place shall fall void, with one of that companie, to suruey the order∣lie putting vp, of the saide deuisions with theyr marks. That the rates for the common garbeller bee reexamined, and made equall to his paine. That the orders deuised and set forth, by the workemen in that office, and in the booke ex∣pressed, may be examined, and so much there∣of allowed them, as tendeth for the better pre∣seruation of the said goods, and their con∣cord in working in marchants houses.
