c4051 12589180 63825
ARTICLES OF VISITATION & ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the DIOECESE of LANDAFFE, In the First EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God HUGH By Divine Providence Lord Bishop of LANDAFFE. LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the Kings-Head in S. Pauls Church-yard, M.DC.LXII.
The Oath to be Administred to the Church-wardens and Sworn-men. YOu shall swear, That you and every of you shall diligently enquire of the Articles given you in charge; and without any affection, fa∣vour, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice of any person, you shall present all and every such person and persons that now is, or of late was in your Parish, as hath committed any Incest, Adultery, Fornication or Simony, and any misdemeanour or disturban∣ces committed or made in any Church or Chappel in time of Common Payer, Preaching or Divine Service there used, to the disturbance thereof, and also that have committed or done any other offence, fault or default, presentable in the Ecclesiastical Court, according to the Ar∣ticles now delivered to you. Wherein you shall deal uprightly, fully, and according to truth, neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth: ha∣ving in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain the truth and suppress vice. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of LANDAFFE. TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments and Fur∣niture thereunto belonging. I.ARE your Parish Church, Chappel or Chappels kept in good and sufficient repi? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or State? the Windows well glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastned, and conveniently placed, and all things so decently ordered, as becometh the House of God. II. HATH the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chappel, or any part thereof, been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto, been imbezelled, sold
or made away▪ In whose hands or custody doth the same, or any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard herein. III. IS there a Font of stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church or Chappel, for the Administration of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel, a decent Communion Table, for the Administration of the Lords Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen-cloath, and another Covering of white and pure Linnen to spread thereupon? And have you a fair Com∣munion-Cup, or Chalice of silver, with a Cover of silver, and one or more Flagons of silver, or pewter, thereunto belonging? IV. HAVE you in your said Church or Chappel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloath or Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Transla∣tion, in a large Volume, and the Book of Common-Prayer, both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Hmilies, set forth by Athority? A Book of Canons and Constitutious Ecclesia∣stical? And a Printed Table of the Degrées wherein Marriage is pro∣hibited? V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his Publick Ministration in the Church provided, and to be duely washed at the Charge of the Parish. VI HAVE you a Register Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are married▪ Christned, or Buried within your Parish? together with the Names and Sirnaes of both the Parents of the Children so Christened, expressing the day, month, and year of all such Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly, within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Registry? VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and Licences of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your Church or Chappel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the Churchwardens Accompts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein to kéep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hears-cloath, for the Burial of the Dead? VIII HAVE you a Box with a lock and key, fit to receive and kéep the Alms of charitable men given to your poor, according to the 84 Canon?
TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging to the Church. I. IS your Church-yard sufficiently senced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Catel? Hath any person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it out of his own ground or habitation, without al∣lowance from the Ordinar? Have any Crée there growing béen cut down? how long since, by whom? and to whose use and benefit? II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate; (with all the out-houses thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or, have any of the said Houses, or Out houses, béen defaced or pulled down without licence from the Ordinary? and by whom? Hath any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Cloe, belonging to your Par∣songe or Vicarage house? or cut up any Trees growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Parks and Bounds of the same? III HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages, belonging to your Par∣sonage or Vicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-tythes, and Portions of Tythes, or other yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same béen withhold from your Minister? or by whom; as you know, or have heard? IV. HAVE any of the Ancient Gleb-lands belonging to your Parso∣sonage or Vicarage béen taken away▪ or exchanged for other, without the frée consent of the Incumbent, and licence from the Ordinary? Have any Inclosures béen made in your Parish, to the detriment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage, and converting Arable-land into Pasture? by whom hath the same béen made? and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby in the yearly value thereof; as you know, believe, or have heard? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally Ordained, accord∣ing to the Laws of the Church of England? If so, let him produce his Orders.
II. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simoniacal compact? III. HATH he béen legally Iustituted and Inducted into his Bene∣fice? and did he within two months after his Induction, publickly in the Church, upon some Sunday or Holy-day, in the time of Divine Ser∣vice, read the 39 Articles of the Church of England, established by Au∣thority, without omitting any one, and there publickly declare his assent thereunto? IV. HATH he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend or Dig∣nity? Is he constantly resident upon his Benefice among you? How many wéeks in any one year hath he béen absent from it, without urgent necessity? V. HATH your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in Holy Orders? an able and discréet person, and conformable to the Lawes and Orders of the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bi∣shop to serve in your Church or Chappel? and doth he serve in any other Church beside and what yearly stipend doth your Minister allow him? VI. DOTH your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacra∣ments, celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child-birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any additi∣on, omission, or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book? VII. DOTH your Minister at the reading or celebrating any Di∣vine Office in your Church or Chappel, wear the Surplice, together with such other Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his Degrée? VIII. DOTH he observe the Holy-daies and Fasting-daies, as also the Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as in the Common-Prayer Book, or by the Ecclesiastical Canons, is ap∣pointed? giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next before? IX. HATH your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bishop, or either of the two Vniversities? If so; Doth he then constantly (unless in case of sickness, necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your Church or Chappel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed Preacher, or being so Licensed, be hindred by sickness, or otherwise, as aforesaid; doth he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a Licensed Preacher? or one of the Ho∣milies
set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest or Deacon law∣fully Ordained? X. DOTH your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Pa∣rish, in the Church Catechism? and doth he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to be confirmed by th Bishop? And doth he endea∣vur to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and other Sectaries (if any such be inhbiting within your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof? XI. DOTH he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant tht is in danger o Death? In there any Child pst Infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers default, yet remain∣ing unbaptized in your Parish? Doth he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or God∣mother to their own Children? XII. DOTH he in his Sermons preach sound Doctrine, tending to the edification of the people in the knowledg and faith of Iesus Christ, and obedience to Gods holy Commandments? or hath he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preached any false, heretical, seditious or schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into parties and fa∣ctions, to the disturbance of the publick Peace, and unity either of Church or State? XIII. HATH he presumed to marry any persons in private houses? or such as being under age, have not the consent of their Parents, or with∣out the Banes fist published on three Sundaies or Holy-daies in the Church? or at any other hours then between eight and twelve in the morning, unless he hd a Licence or Dispensation so to do? XIV. DOTH any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Hath he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Doth he before his Lecture read Divine Service, according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. HATH your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or private Fasts, Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority, or doth he, or any other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conven∣ticles or meetings in private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under the pretence of preaching, praying, thanksgiving or humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? If so, present them, with the time and place specified. XVI IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of sober, unblameable, and exemplary Life? Doth he familiarly converse
with ungodly, vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a fre∣quenter of Taverns or Ale-houses? a common Gamester? a profane or obscene Iester? a Swearer, Raer, Scoffer or Quarreller? Doth he set Neighbours at variance one with another? or encourage them to Suits and Contention? Is e noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or vehemently suspcted of Incontinency with any person, either within your Parsh, or without? Doth he wear his hair of an immoderate or un∣comely length? Is his apparel grave and decent▪ both for fashion and colour, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation, in any kind whatsoever, Disorderly or Scandalous, and unbeséeming a Minister of Iesus Christ? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I. JS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretick or Schismatick? any Papist, Presbyterian, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker or other Sectary, that refuse to come unto the publick Assem∣blies. Pryers, or Services of the Church, or that make profession of any other Religion then what is established in the Church of England? and if there be any such, what are their Names? II. IS there any person in your Parish that lieth under a common fame, or vehement suspition of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common drunkards within your Parish, or common sweaters, or blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be railers, un∣clean or filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction and discord amongst their neighbours? If so, who are they? III DO any of your Parish upon the Sundayes or Holy dayes, fol∣low their bodily and ordinary labour? or permit their servants so to do? are any shps kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Iun∣kéepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of Bear or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those dayes? Declare the persons so offending, with the time and place. IV. DOTH every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duely resort unto your Church, Chppel or Chappels, upon every Sunday and Holiday appointed for Divine Service? Do they then and there abde quietly with reverence, order and decency, during all the whole time of Common-Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God there used?
and are there any among you that come onely to the Preaching, and not to the Common-Prayers of the Church? who are they? V. DOTH. every person reverently uncover his head, and so con∣tinue all the time of Divine-Service and Sermon in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Créed and Gospel are read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Iesus is mentioned? Declare who do not, if any such. VI. ARE there any in your Parish, that refuse to send their Infant∣children to be baptized publickly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which case, the child may be baptized at home by a lawfull Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other form then the Church alloweth? And are there any Infants, or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized? If so, declare who. VII. DOTH every Houshoulder in your Parish cause their children and servants to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundaies and Holy-daies, as in the Book of Common-Prayer is appointed; that when they are well instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop? VIII. IS there any person in your Parish, who being 16 years of age, and well instructed in Religion, doth not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Doth any in your Parish refuse to receive the same knéeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Pa∣rishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? If there be any such, express who they are. IX. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared excom∣municate for any crime committed? How long have they been so excom∣municated? And do any of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved? If so, declare who they be. X. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully married, contrary to the Laws of God? Or any that being lawfully di∣vorced have married again? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? If so, express their several names. XI. ARE there any married, women in your Parish, who after their delivery from the peril of Child-birth, refuse to make their publick thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and make their offerings accord∣ing
to custome? If there be any such present them. XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their duty for Easter Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute and pay the rate assessed upon them, for the repair of your Church or Chappel, and for the providing of such books, furniture and ornaments, as be requisite for the performance of all Divine Offices there: If so, who are they? XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dd in your Parish, that be yet unproved? Or any goods administred, without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere, leave any Legcy to your Church or Chappel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and chritable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? XV. DO you know, or have you heard, of any Patron or other person in your Parish, having the presentation or gift of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, who hath made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any bargain, either for money, or pension, or lease, reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or any part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal compact whatsoever? XV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have anie new Pews béen erect∣ed in your Chancel, or in the Bodie of your Church or Chappel without leave from the Ordinarie? XVI. IF anie brawl or fight one with another in your Church or Church-yard, present them. TIT. V. Concerning Parish-clerks, and Sextons. I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelrie a Parish-Clerk, aged 21 years at the least? Is he of honest life and con∣verstion, and sufficient or able to perform his dutie in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are his wages and customarie duties duly paid unto him? or who with-holdeth the same from him? II. DOTH he or your Sexton (if there be anie such appointed in your Parish,) diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be
locked and opened at due time? And doth he kéep your Church or Chap∣pel clean from dust, cobwebs and other annoiance? Doth he toll or ring the Bels at the due accustomed hours before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when anie person is passing out of this life, doth he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as hth been accustomed, tht the neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying per∣son to the grace and favor of God? TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School masters, Physitians, Chirurgeons, and Midwives. I. IS there anie Hospital, Alms-house or Free-School founded in your Parish? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? and what is the yearly Revenue or Stipend belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, accor∣ding to the intention of the Foundor, and of such grants and ordinances as have been made concerning the same? II. DOTH any man keep a publick or private School in your Pa∣rish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Present such, if there be anie in your Parish or Chappelrie. Doth your School-master teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion, set forth by Authoritie? Doth he cause them upon Sundaies and Holidaies orderly to repair to your Church or Chappel, and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? III. DOTH anie man in your Parish practise Phisick or Chirurge∣ry, or anie woman take upon her to exercise the office of a Midwife, with∣out approbation and license from the Ordinarie? If so, name them. TIT. VII. Concerning Church-wardens and Side-men. I. ARE the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint consent of your Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? II. HAVE the former and last Church-wardens given up their due
Accompts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens, the moneys remaining in their hands, together with all o∣ther things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. HATH there been diligent care to see who of your Parishio∣ners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chappel, upon Sundaies and Holy-daies, and to find who have absented themselves without a sufficient cause? Hath there ben by Warrant or Warrants from some of the Iustices of the Peace, levied of such of∣fendors, by way of Distress upon their goods, the sum of 12 pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided: And hath the same been distributed among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law? IV. HAVE they been noted that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Have anie been suffered to stand idle, or talk together in the Church-porch, or walk in the Church-yard, during the time of Praiers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices? V. HATH no mis-behaviour or disorder been suffered to be done by men, women, servants, or children, in your Church or Chappel? Hath care been taken, that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hts upon the Communion Table? Have no Minstrels, no Morris, dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, been suffered to be brought or come into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation? VI. HATH there been provided against everie Communion ap∣pointed in your Church or Chappel, a sufficient quantitie of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of Communicants? VII. HAVE all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chappel, subscribed their names the same day, in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this Diocese? and have none other preached? THe Church-wardens and Sidemen are required to advise with their respe∣ctive Parsons, Vicars or Curates, concerning their several Presentments, that so they may be regular and direct in answer to the Articles given them in charge. HUGH LANDAFFE.
