F104 R31490 12011462 52425
Imprimatur, GEO: STRADLING, S. T. P. Rever. in Christ. Pat. D. GILB. Episs. Lond. à Sac. Domest. Ex Aed. Saband. Mart. 31. 1663.
Fair Warning: The Second Part. OR XX. PROPHESIES Concerning the Return of POPERY. BY Archbishop Whitgift Archbishop Laud Archbishop Bancroft Bishop Sanderson Bishop Gauden Mr. Hooker, & others. With the several PLOTS laid by Campanella, Contzen, and others of late, in Private Letters, for Restoring POPERY, now discovered. To justifie the KING'S most Excellent Maty and  Right Honorable the PARLIAMENT of nds jut Resolution to maintain the Act of UNIFORMITY, that onely great Remedy against the growth of POPERY. LONDON: Printed for H. Marsh at the Prince's Arms in Chancery-lane, 1663.
Prophecies of Godly Bishops and Mi∣nisters, concerning Popery. Archbishop Grindal. TWo great dangers I really fear, Atheism and Popery; both Let. 2. to W. C. C. me thinks, I see arising out of our needless divisions and differences, fomented and cherished, I fear me, by Satan the enemy of mankind, and the Pope, the enemy of Christendom, that Antichrist the mystery of whose iniquity yet worketh a∣mong us, but that she letteth who also did let, and will let, by her power and authority given her of God, for God, until (which God avert, though their enemies endeavour) she be taken out of the way.—By these differences the enemies of our Religion gain this, That nothing can be established by Law in the Protestant Religion, whose every part is opposed by one or o∣ther of her own professors; so that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists have their opportunity to urge their way, which is attended with Order and Government, and our Religion continuing thus distracted and divided, some vile wretches lay hold of the Arguments on one side to confute the other, and so hope at last to destroy all: In quae reservamur tempora? Archbishop Whitgift. THese inciples (though they little think it that uphold Against Mr. T. C. p. 106. c. them) ead directly to Anarchy, and these practises tend directly to Ltinism, sat whosoever maintains them they see to be the Engines  the Roman Conclave, whereby they inten e overthrow of this Church by our own folly, which they cannot compass with all their Policy; for if either we or our posterity, which God avert, should live to see the event and issue of these fancies of yours when prevailing: It would be no
other then this, That our Order and Government must give way to Anarchy, confusion and disorder, wherein the Recusants would demean themselves so Politickly, that they would at last have the advantage to appear either for a toleration or a settle∣ment: The children of this world are wiser in their generati∣ons than the children of light. M. Luther. NOn citiùs, &c. No sooner have we reformed, but those arise among us who speak perverse things, and destroy Ad Anub. P. 32. that in a week, which we had been some yeers setting up; whose hand is this, is it not the adversaries? who sows these Tares, but the Enemy? who finding he cannot prevail openly, under∣mines us secretly; who seeing he cannot succeed against us bare-faced, attempt us under the vizard of a deluded people: God of his mercy put a stop to these delusions, which if they proceed will ingulf us again in Popery: These cry down the Ministers of the Gospel, the Papists can do no more; they do the Papists work for them; alas, alas! &c. Mr. Hooker. VVIth our contentions their irreligious humor also is much strengthened; nothing pleaseth them better Lib. 5. p 2. mihi p. 189. then these manifold oppositions about the matter of Religion, as well for that they have the more opportunity to learn on one side how the other may be oppugned, and so weaken the cre∣dit of all unto themselves; as also because by their hot pursuit of lower Controversies amongst mn professing Rgion, and agreeing in the principle foundations thereof, time will cause White Quaker. altercation to grow: For which p when  occasio they stick not sometimes in other mn persons, ye sometimes without any vizard at all, directly to try, what the  reli∣gious are able to say in defence of the highest points, where∣upon all Religion dependeth. Now for the most part it so falleth out touching things that are generally received, that al∣though in themselves they be most certain, yet because men
presume them granted of all, we are hardly able to bring such proof of their certainty, as may satisfie gainsayers, when sud∣denly, and beside expectation they require the same at our hands, which impreparation and unreadiness, when they find in us, they turn it to the soothing up of themselves in that accur∣sed fancy whereby they would fain beleeve that the hearty de∣votion of such as indeed fear God, is nothing else but a kind of harmless Error, bred and confirmed in them by the slight of wiser men. Archbishop Bancroft. AS the Scottish Nation were ready upon all occasions to en∣danger Soliz. p. 36. our State upon the account of the French Interest: so the Scottish Kirk hath been ready upon all occasions to en∣danger our Church for the Interest of the Romish Religion; and as the Scots people set upon the Border, while the French attacked the main Continent: So the Scotch Disciplinarians oppose some Circumstances, which are as the Borders of our Religion, while the Papists attempt the main foundation of it: and if the foundation be destroyed, what shall the righte∣ous do? Dr. Sutliffe. HAnd vanus timor, &c. Its no vain fear which some wise Lib. 8. Sect. 13. men have entertained upon their experience of affairs, that these unhappy Questions about indifferent things are managed by the subtile Jesuites, thereby to disturb the peace and settle∣ment of  Church, until at last they enjoy their long expe∣cted opportunity to set up themselves, and restore the explo∣ded Tyran and Id of the Church of Rome.
Mr. Selden. MIrum quidem, &c. It is a wonderful thing that Azu∣arrus M. S. Bod. p. 104 M. S. Gal. M. S. p. 112. 400 years ago should say that indeed about the year 1500 the Catholick Religion should fall much in lustre, extent and authority (if I translate his words aright) onely I must confess the pride, vanity, and security of the Catholick Clergy seem to make way to it: yet (which is more strange) the same Religion should recover its self towards the years 1700, onely I must needs say that I think the late divisions ari∣sing no doubt from Roman Insinuations, seem to threaten the Late Reformation; weakening the Interest of Religion on the one hand, and opening advantages to the adversaries of it on the other; while the Jewish way was one and entire within it self, it was secure from forreign attempts upon its being or pu∣rity; as soon as it was crumbled into those minute parts and factions of Esseans, Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, Ze∣lots, &c. It yielded to the adversary, and at last was resolved to nothing: But that I think there is a providence in all ages remarkable, which doth at once bear testimony to, and secure Religion, I should much fear that our most excellent Religi∣on, so miserably confounded by its distracted followers, would one day give place to the two grand mischiefs of the world Popery and Profaneness; against which there are no other remedies below the merciful assistance of heaven, then sound Letter concerning Late Divi∣sion. Doctrine setled, severe discipline established, a decent and holy Worship secured, and a grand establishment enjoyned, which may sence in truth and virtue, and keep out errour and sin; whereby the Orthodox and the good part of the tion may be known and encouraged, as the Heterodox may be discove∣red and awed.
Bishop Gauden. THese, and such like, are the uncouth expressions used to usher it, under the names of liberty, curiosity, sublimity, Sighs of the Church. pag. 202. nothing but ignorance, idleness, Atheisme, barbarity, irre∣ligion, and utter confusion in this Church: or at best, (as I shall afterward more fully demonstrate) they are but vancourriers, or agitators for Romish-superstitions and Papal usurpations; the end of all this gibberish is, Venient Romani. Put all these fine fancies and affected phrases together, with all those strange phantasms in Religion, which of late have haunted this Church, like so many unquiet vermin, or un∣clean spirits; truly they spell nothing but, first, popular extra∣vagances, which are the embasings and embroylings of all true and Reformed Religion; next, they portend Popisb interests and policies prevailing against this Church and State, whose fu∣ture advantages are cunningly, but notably, wrapt up in these plebeian furies and fondnesses, as grocery wares are in brown pa∣per. Be confident, the spirit of Rome (which is very vigilant and active) doth then move most potently upon the face of our English waters, when there is to be seen nothing but a sea of confusion, a meer Chaos of the Christian and Reformed Religion. Which feared deluge, and (by wise men foreseen) devastati∣on of the Reformed Religion (once wisely established, honoura∣bly maintained, and mightily prospered in the Church of Eng∣land) is already much spread and prevalent among many people, under the plea and colour of I know not what liberty, to own any or no Minister, any or no Religion, any, none, or many Churches in England. The visible decayes and debasings of the true and Reformed Religion in England, as to piety, equity, unity and charity, as to the authority of its Ministry and so∣lemnity of its Ministrations, are so palpable, both in the out∣ward peace and profession, also in the inward warmth and per∣swasion, that it is high time for all sober and wise men, that love God, Religion, and their Country, mightily to impor∣tune the mercies of God, that breathing upon us with a spirit
of meekness and wisdome, truth and love, humility and honesty, he would (at length) asswage that deluge of contempt and con∣fusion, the troubled and bitter waters of wrath and contention, which have over-whelmed the highest mountains of this Church; over-topping by their salt waves and aspetsions, the gravest, wisest, most learned and religious, both Preachers and Pro∣fessors, of the Reformed Religion in this Church and Na∣tion. Which licentious insolencies have made all sober Christians so sick, weary and ashamed of them, that they cannot but be in∣finitely grieved to see and fore-see the low ebbe, to which the Reformed Religion in its purity and power, must in time fall in England, while the pristine dignity and authority of the Evangelical Ministry is so invaded, baffled and despised; while the authentick derivation, and Catholick succession of that holy power, is so interrupted, innovated, divided, de∣stroyed; while the reverence of primitive customes and exam∣ples is so slighted, abated, by fanatick innovators; while the cords of Christian harmony and Church-polity art so loosened and ravelled on every side; while the just honour and encou∣ragements of learning and learned men are so much damped and exhausted; while the Ecclesiastick Glory of this Nation, which was the chiefest (in being and owning it self as a true and Reformed Church of Christ) is so much eclipsed, to the great reproach of this present age, and the infinite hazard of posterity; which will bardly ever recover the honour, order, beauty and unity of Christian and Reformed Religion former∣ly enjoyed in this Church and Nation, when once the Jewels of it, the learned, ordained, orderly and authoritative Mini∣sters of the Gospel, with all the it Ministry and Mstrations, come to be either trampled under  by Schismatic fury, or invaded and usutped by vulgar in; which in time will rake them all up, and bury them in the dunghl of Romish su∣perstitions and Papal usurpations. From the Deformities, Divisions, and Degenerations of Religion, also the Falsifications, Usurpations and Devastations, Ibid. p. 300. which of later years have been made by the violent sort of A∣nabaptists and other furious Sectaries, against the Unity and
Authority, the Sanctity and Majesty of the Church of Eng∣land, destroying its Primitive Order and Apostolick Govern∣ment, its Catholick Succession, its holy Ordination, its happy and most successful Ministry, to the great neglect and con∣tempt of all holy ministrations and duties of Religion; I cannot but further intimate to your piety and prudence (O my honou∣rid Countrey-men) that which is most notorious, and no lesse dangerous, both in religious and civil respects, namely, the great Advantages, Applauses and Increases▪ which the Roman, or Papal party daily gain against the Reformed Religion, as it was once wisely, honourably, and happily established, pro∣fessed and maintained here in England: which is now look∣ed upon by the more subtil, superstitious and malicious sort of Papists, as deformed, divided, dissolved, desolated; so con∣clamat for dead, that they fail not with scorn to boast, that in England we have now no Church, no Pastors, no Bishops, no Pres∣byters, no true Ministry, no holy Ministrations, no Order, no Ʋnity, no Authority, no Reverence, as to things Divine or Ec∣clesiastick. Insomuch that we must in this sad posture, not one∣ly despair of ever getting ground against the Romanists, by converting any of them from the errours of their way to the true Reformed Religion; but we must daily expect to lose ground to the Popish party and their Proselytes: there being no banks or piles now sufficient to keep the Sea of Rome from over-flow∣ing or undermining us, in order to advance their restless in∣terests; which have been, and still are, mightily promoted, not by the reverend Bishops and the other Episcopal Clergy (who are men of Learning, Piety, Prudence, and Martyr∣like constancy) as some men with more Heat than Wit, more Spite that Truth, have in their mechanick and vulgar Orato∣ry of l miserably and falsly declaimed; but by those who have most done the Po work, while they have seemed most furiously to y in the Popes face, as popularly zealous against Popery, and yet at the same time by a strange giddiness, hea∣diness, and madneses; they have risen up against that Mother-Church which bare them, and those Fathers in it, who here∣to fore mightily defended them and theirs from the talons and gripes of that Roman Eagle: and this not with childish scuf∣flings
or light skirmishings, to which manner of fight the illi∣terate weakness and rudeness of our new Masters and Champi∣ons hath reduced those Controversies? but with such a Panoply or compleat Armour of proof, such sharp Weapons, such pon∣derous Engines, such rare dexterity of well-managed Powers, raised from all Learning, both Divine and Humane, that the high places and defences of Rome were not able to stand before them heretofore, when they were battered by our Jewels, our Lakes, our Davenants, out Whites, our Halls, our Mor∣tons▪ our Andrews, and the late invincible Ʋsher, who deser∣ved to be Primate, not onely of Ireland, but of all the Prote∣stant Forces in the world. All these were Bishops, Worthies of the first three, seconded in their ranks by able and orderly Presbyters, as Whitakers, Perkins, Reynolds, Whites, Craken∣thorps, Sutliffs, and innumerable others, while our Regi∣ments were orderly, our Marchings comely, and our Forces both united and encouraged. Whereas, now there is no doubt but the merciless mowing down and scattering of the Clergy of England, like Hay, with the withering and decay of Government, Regularity and Or∣der in this Church, these have infinitely contributed to the Pa∣pal harvest, and Romish agitations; the gleanings of whose Emissaries will soon amount to more than the sheaves of any the most zealous and reformed Ministers in England. By the Papal interest and advantages, I do not mean the Roman Cler∣gies preaching or propagating those truths of Christian Do∣ctrins and Duties, which (for the main) they profess in com∣mon with us and all Christian Churches: if any of them be thus piously industrious, I neither quarrel at them, nor envy their successes, but rather I should rejoyce in them with int Paul; because however Christ crucified i preached, by  whom common people will either more rence or sooner believe (than they generally do the decayed, despised, and divided Mi∣nisters of England) who seem to have (many of them) so small abilities, and carrying so little shew or pretence of any good authority for their work Ministerial; nor can they be potent or esteemed abroad, who are so impotent and disesteemed at home.
But I mean that Papal Monarchy, or Ecclesiastical Tyran∣ny, by which the Church, or rather the Court of Rome, (by such finister Arts and unjust Policies, as were shamefully used and discovered in the Tridentine conventicle) seeks to usurp and continue an imperial power over all Churches and Bishops, as if there had been but one Apostle, or one Apostolick Church planted in the world; also to corrupt and abuse that ancient Purity, Simplicity, and Liberty of Religion, which was preserved a∣mong Primitive Churches and their co-ordinate Bishops: Fur∣ther, without fear of God or reverence of man, opposing some Divine Truths and undoubted institutions of Christ, also imposing such erroneous Doctrines and superstitious Opinions up∣on all Christians, to be believed, and accordingly practised, as become not the severity and sanctity of true Religion, ad∣ding to that holy foundation (which was indeed first laid by the great Apostles, and continued happily for many hundred years by the successive Bishops of Rome) those after superstructures, not of ceremonies onely, which are tolerable (many of them like feathers, making but little weight in Religion) but of cor∣rupt Doctrines and superstitions Duties, as seem (at best) im∣pertinent to true Piety; but some of them are erroneous, sacrilegi∣ous, pernicious. In some things they are boldly adding to or de∣tracting from the Doctrine and Institutions of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ: in other things they impose for sacred and neces∣sary, such opinions and customes, which are but the rust and drsse, the disease and deformity of Christian Religion, contra∣cted in the long ignorance, darknesse, and almost barbarity of times, which God winked at: but now they appear highly and justly scandalous, yea, intolerable to more judicious and lesse credulous Christians, who are very sensible, not onely of that offence which many Papal Injunctions and Observations give to themselves, as Chris, but also to the very Heathens, to J Mahomerans, who cannot reconcile in any Rea∣sonable Religion the Idolatrous use of Images and Hoasts among Papists, to which they must submit, if they will be in com∣munion with them, or converted to be Christians; nor yet those Tridentins Terrours and Anathema's of eternal damna∣tion, which are thundered by them against all those who will
not, against Gods expresse Word; own as Truth, and sub∣mit to as necessary, those opinions and practices among Pa∣pists, which seem either impious or impertinent, as to true Faith and a good Conscience. Against all which burthens (too heavy for any wise and gene∣rous Christians to bear, when once duly informed of the wright and danger of them, and duly reformed from them) as the great Wisdome, Piety, and Order of the Church of England in its sacred Ministry and holy Ministrations, was heretofore the greatest barre and bulwark in all the Christian world: so the disadvantages of the Reformed Religion are now so palpable; and the danger of the people of this Nation, a so obvious in their returning to that Egypt and Babylon again, which is not the Church of Rome, but its disease and oppression; that I know not in ordinary providence any means can be used, or is left, to stop the daily prevalencies of Popery, and the great Apo∣stasie of England to the Romish superstition and subjection in after-times, unlesse God stir up such Wisdome, Zeal and Care in those that have honest hearts, joyned with publick power and influence, not so much to fleece and depress Popish Recusants by pecuniary exactions (which is to set Religion to sale, and to make merchandize of mens errours, rather then fairly to per∣swade and win them by the proper and perswasive engines of true Religion;) but (rather) duly to restore and speedily assert the Honor, Order, Succession, Unity, Authority and Maje∣sty of this Reformed Church and its Catholick Ministry: from which when the Papists see our selves to be such profound Re∣volters, with what face can we expect they should ever come in to our Reformation, which they now behold with joyful and disdainful eyes, so deformed, so massacred by our own hands? How can we with Justice, Honour; w Huma∣nity, inflict severe penalties upon P, as refusing to con∣form to our Church and Religion, when they pro with so much truth, to our faces, they cannot see any Church any Religion among us as uniform, publick, authentick, constant? What (they say) formerly had the goodliest figure and fairest presence of a Christian Church, and the best Reformed of any, i now deformed, ruined, demolished; nothing but scattered
rafters and pieces of that ship-wrackt vessel now appear float∣ing up and down in a restless and foming sea of faction, oppo∣sition and confusion, between Bishops, Ministers, and People: some are Episcopal, others Presbyterian, a third sort Inde∣pendant: all are disparate or opposite in Discipline, some are Heterodox in Doctrine: the Anabaptists rise against all, and the Quakers soare above all. To which of all these, with many other Sects, shall an ho∣nest-hearted Papist apply himself, to be safe and setled in Reli∣gion? If to the poor and depressed remains of Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergie, who yet adhere to the Church of England; alas, they are weak and exhausted, contemned by many, pitied by some, but asserted by few or none, according to their true merit in former ages, or their present Worth, Courage, Constancy and Patience in this. If the Romanists go to the Presbyterian party, which like small shoots sprang out so thick in England, upon the cutting down of Episcopacy, to which they all formerly submitted; these, besides their Levity, Parity, and Inconstancy, as to their former Stations, Opinions, and Oaths, seem so unseasonably insolent, and magisterially domi∣neering, before they had got a full and just dominion, that all sober men think them rather popular, plebeian and impertinent in their heats, transports and passions, than so modest, wise, and grave, as becomes those who will undertake to wrest Go∣vernment out of the hands of their superiours and betters every way, and to impose a novelty of untried and undesired Disci∣pline upon such a great and stout Nation as England is; which disdaining the insolency of Popes, and offended at the indis∣cretion of some Bishops, will hardly ever bear the pertnesse of pty Presbyters, who cannot want Vanity, Impudence and Arrogancy, when they fancy themselves in a supremacy of Power above people, Parliaments and Princes: for they ct no lesse, as Christs due and theirs too. If the tossed Ro∣manists  to the spruce and self-conceited Independants for shelter, because these fine new Masters seem to have patents for Christian Liberty, and urge a Magna Charta from Christ, to be accountable to none in matters of Religion, but their own lit∣tle Congregation, Church, or Body, in which, as in an Eccle∣siastick
Corporation or free Borough of Religion, they may hrng and draw, exercise high and low Justice upon mn souls as they list in their little Conventicles; yet here the poor Papist finds so much of a rude and exotick novelty, such a grosse shew of Schisme, such variety, such an inconsistency, such a plebeian petulancy, such pitiful and ridiculous affectations, and arrogating of Church-power in some of the plebs, and such con∣tempt of it in others, that he cannot think it is other than some pieces of Josephs bloody coat, or some corn▪ limbs of his bo∣dy, compared to what Splendour, Order, Strength, Beauty, Unity, Decency, and Majesty in Doctrine and Discipline, in Faith and holy Duties, was formerly to be observed, even to the envy and admiration of sober Papists, in the Church of England; how much more in the Ancient and Catholick Chur∣ches grand combinations, from which these petty fractions and crumblings of Christians seem most abhorrent and disso∣nant? This goodly Cedar, then, of the Church of England being thus broken and hewn down, and nothing like it, or compa∣rable to it, planted in its room, but such Shrubs and Mush∣romes as grow of themselves out of the rankness of the earth (vulgar humours and passions) under whose shade any Egyp∣tian Vermine, Frogs, or unclean Birds may hide themselves, no wonder if the Papists triumph in their sufferings and con∣stancies, if they despise all our Presbyterian, Independent, Ana∣baptistick, and fanatick Novelties; if they rejoyce in that vengeance which they conclude God hath made upon our Schismes, Errours, Obstinacies, and Persecutions against them, by our mutual confusions. Hence must dailnd necessarily follow set inclinatio and accessions to the Roman party, by all toe who e not well grounded in the Reformed Religion, or not ¦gainst the Popish Errours, or are indifferent for any Rn which is most easie or pleasing. These at length will  to the Roman party,  the most specious of any: so that unless there be a speedy restauration of the honour of the Church of Eng∣land, I see not how it is possible to prevent that fatal relapse, either to Romish serstition and slavery, or else to a dreadful
persecution, which will in time necessarily follow those dissipa∣tions and destructions of this Reformed Church, its Ministry, Government and Religion, which some men have already too much, and still do, beyond measure, so industriously promote, to the excessive joy and gratifying of the Popish party and de∣signs, which are not onely invasive upon the honour and free∣dome of this Nation, but highly scandalous to our Reformed Profession, and dangerous to our consciences, especially as we yet stand convinced of the Errors, Superstitions and Sacriledges of the Romish Religion since it lapsed from the Primitive Insti∣tutions of Christ, the patterns of the Apostles, the ancient Communion of Christian Churches, and the fraternal Co-ordina∣tion of Bishops, who were alwayes united in orderly, happy, and harmonious Aristocracies, rather then subordinate to any one Monarchical Supremacy, as to Ecclesiastical Power and Ju∣risdiction: however they had such regulation and primacy of or∣der, by Patriarchs and Metropolitans among Bishops and the representers of several Churches, as became wise men, that were numerous when they met in great Councils or Church-Assemblies. Nor do these wilely Romanists exercise their malice against Ibid. pag. 362. this Reformed Church, onely with their own strength and dex∣terity, but they have other oblique Policies and sinister Practi∣ces by which they set on work the hot heads and pragmatick hands of all other Sects, who pretend the greatest Antipathies to Popery, and yet most promote its interests by their Factions and fanatick Practises, by their heedlesse and headlesse, their boundlesse and endlesse Agitations, which blast all true Refor∣mation, and ing in nothing but Division and Confusion. For among these there are a sort of people who affect Supre∣macy in Church and State too, a spiritual and temporal Domi∣nion, no  than doth the Pope of Rome: there are among them many petty Popes, who would fain be the great and one∣ly Dictators of Religion, whose opinionative pride and pro∣jects are as yet of a lesse volume and blinder print, but they e∣very day meditate and agitate new Editions of their power, and larger additions to their parties and designes; being as infalli∣ble in their own conceits, as imperious in their spirits, and as
magisterial in their censures, as the proudest Popes of Rome; not doubting to condemn and excommunicate any private Christians and Ministers, yea whole Christian Churches, yea and the best Reformed in the world (such as England was) if they be not just of their form and fashion, or if they will not patiently submit to their multiform and deformed Reformations, by which they daily wire-draw true Reformation to such a small thread, that losing its strength and integrity, it must needs snap in pieces and become uselesse: the strange fires of blind, popular, preposterous and sacrilegious Zeal so over-boyling true Religion and sober Reformation, till they are utterly con∣founded and quenched with such sordid and shamefull deformi∣ties, as must needs follow their Divisions, Distractions and Despiciencies, as to all Church-order, Christian unity and Mi∣nisterial authority. Thus many heady and giddy Professors have been so eager to come out of Babylon, that they are almost run out of their wits, and far beyond the bounds of good con∣sciences; so jealous of Superstition, that they are Panders for Confusion; so scared with the name of Rome, that they are a∣fraid of all right Reason and sober Religion; so fearful of being over-righteous by following vain traditions of men, that they fear not to be over wicked, by over-throwing the good foun∣dations of Order, Honour, Peace and Charity, which Christ and his Apostles have laid in his Church: fierce enemies in∣deed against the Idolatry of Antichrist, but fast friends to Be∣liat and Mammon, to Schisme and Sacriledge; which having no fellowship with God and Christ, must needs belong to the party of Antichrist, which contains a circle of Errours, while Christ is the centre of Truth: and we know that parts diam∣trally opposite to each other may (yet) make up the same circum∣ference, and be at equal distance from the centre▪ so may Pra∣ctises and Opinions which seem most crosse agaich other, yet, as Herod and Pilate, alike conspire against Christ and true Religion, like vicious extremes, which are contrary to each other, and yet uncorrespondent with that virtue from which they are divided.
But the end or effect following their actius, (though possi∣bly Ibid. pag. 366. not some of their intentions) will be this, to prepare by these various windings, confused circulations and distorted wrestings of the Reformed Religion, the way for Roman fa∣ctors, Papal interests and Jesuitick designes, whose learned abilities, orderly industry, and indefatigable activity is such, that by that time the old stock of Reverend, orderly and au∣thoritative Bishops and Presbyters, (the truest and most un∣questionable Ministers of the Church of Christ) are worn out in England, and the reformed Religion is reduced with its titular and extenuated Ministers to a meer medly, or popular Chaos of confusions; (the most of sober people being either sick, or ashamed, or weary of their home bred disorders, and unremedied diseases in Religion) by this time (I say) the Romish agitators will not onely devour all these petty parties, and fee∣ble factions of Reformers, with as much ease as the Stork did the Froggs; but they will (in time) utterly destroy the remains of the defamed Doctrine and deformed Religion, which your fore fathers owned, and to the death professed, as most true and well reformed, with great Honour, Holiness, and Happiness, which yet the ignorance and insolence, the Il∣literateness, and Rusticity, the Barrennesse and Barbari∣ty of novel Sects have already rendred poor and despi∣cable, much to be pitied and deplored both at home and abroad. I must ever so far own my reason, as to professe that I look upon the Defamers, Dividers and Destroyers of the Church of England, (whatever they are or seem) to be no other then the perdues or forelorn hope of Popery, which by lighter skirmi∣shes open advantages to the Popes main Battaglic; the Van∣courriers, or Harbingers, sent and excited (in great part) from the Pragmatick Policies of Rome, whose grand interest since the Reformation hath been, not more to advance the House of Austria preserve the Papacy, than to regain the Church of England to the Romish slavery. Certainly these petty parties, who scarce know what they pag. 367. drive at, and are full of varieties in their Fancies, Forms and Fa∣ctions, these cannot produce so constant a current and so strong
a tide, as is alwayes urging against the Church of England and the honour of the Resormed Religion; but they are driven on by a subtil and secret, yet potent impulse, as waves of the sea, not onely dashing and breaking upon each other, but (all of them) bat ering the Honour and Stability of the Church of England, as the great rampart or bank which stands in the way of the Sea of Rome; mightily opposing and hindering heretofore both fanatick Confusions, Papal Usurpations, and Romish Superstitions; whose advantages now are evidently pre∣pared and carried on by those, that under the name of Refor∣mation will most effectually at last overthrow it. For after these petty spirits, who have been and are the great Dividers, Despisers and Destroyers of the reformed Church of England, have a few years longer played their mad pranks in this sometime so flourishing and fruitful vineyard of the Lord (pulling up the hedge of Ecclesiastical Canons, and Civil Sancti∣ons, throwing down the wall of Ancient Discipline and Ca∣tholick Government, breaking in pieces the wine-press of holy Ordination and Ministerial Authority and Succession, pulling up both root and branch of holy Plants and regular Planters;) what (I beseech you) can slinder these subtil Foxes and wild Bears of Romish Power and Policy, to enter in, and not one∣ly secretly, but openly (as occasion shall serve) to destroy all the remaining stock of the true Protestants and Professors of the Reformed Religion? who at first soberly protesting against Popish Errours and Deformities, afterwards praying (in vain) for a joynt and just Reformation, did (at last) reform them∣selves, after the rule of Gods Word, interpreted by the Catho∣lick Practise of purest Antiquity. What (without a miracle) can hinder the Papal prevalency in England, when once sound Doctrine is shaken, corrupt despised; when Scriptures are wrested by every private inter∣preter; when the ancient Creeds and Symbols e Lord Prayer and Ten Commandments, all wholsome foms of sound Doctrine and Devotion, the Articles and Liturgy of such a Church, together with the first famous Councils, all are slight∣ed, villified, despised and abhorred by such Englishmen as pre∣tend  be great Reformers; when neither pristine Respect nor
Support, Credit nor Countenance, Maintenance nor Reve∣rence shall be lest either to the Reformed Religion or the Mini∣stry of it? without which they will hardly be carried on beyond the fate of Pharaohs Chariots, when their wheeles were taken off, which is to be overwhelmed and drowned in the Romish red Sea, which will certainly overslow all, when once England is become not onely a dunghill and Tophet of Heretital filth and Schismatical fire, but an Aceldama, or field of blood, by mutual Animosities and civil Dissentions, arising from the vari∣ations and confusions of Religions. All which, as the Roman Eagle now fore-sees, and so fol∣lows the camp of Sectaries (as Vultures and Birds of prey are wont to do Armies) so no man, not blinded with private passi∣ons and present interest, is so simple, as not to know that it will in time terribly seize upon the blind, dying, or dead car∣kase of this Church and Nation; whose expiration will be very visible, when the Purity, Order and Unity of Religion, the Respect, Support and Authority of the Ministry is vanished and banished out of England, by the neglect of some, the Malice, Madnesse and Ingratitude of others, your most unhap∣py Countrey-men: Then shall the Israel of England return to the Egypt of Rome; then shall the beauty of our Sion be cap∣tive to the bondage of Babylons either Superstition or Persecu∣tion; from both which I beseech God to deliver us. As an Omen of the future fate, how many persons of fair Estates, others of good parts and hopeful Learning, are alrea∣dy shrewdly warped and inclined to the Church of Rome, and either actually reconciled, or in a great readinesse to imbrace that Communion (which excommunicates all Greek and Latine Churches, Eastern, Western and African Christians, which will not submit to its Dominion and Superstition) chiefly mo∣d hereto, becau they know not what to make of or ex∣pom the Relgion and Reformation of the Church of Eng∣land▪ which they see so many zealous to reproach and ruine, so few coerned to relieve, restore, or pity? As for the turn of you (my noble Countrey-men) and your Posterity to the Roman Subjection and Superstition. I doubt not but many of you, most of you, all of you that are persons
of judicious and concientious Piety, do heartily deprecate it, and would seriously avoid it to the best of your skill and power, as indeed you have great cause, both in Prudence and Consci∣ence, in Piety and Policy: yet I believe none of you can flatter your selves, that the next Century shall defend the Reformed Religion in England from Romish Pretensions, Perswasions and Prevalencies, as the last hath done, while the Dignity, Or∣der and Authority of the Ministry, the Government of excel∣lent Bishops, the Majesty and Unity of this Reformed Church and its Religion, were all maintained by the unanimous vote, consent and power of all Estates. Nay, the Dilemma and distressed choice of Religion is now reduced to this, that many peaceable and well-minded Christi∣ans, having been so long harressed, bitten and worried with novell Factions and pretended Reformations, would rather chuse that their Posterity (if they may but have the excuse of ignorance in the main controversies, to plead for Gods mer∣cy in their joyning to that Communion which hath so strong a relish of Egyptian Leeks and Onions, of Idolatry and Super∣stition, besides unchristian Arrogancy and intolerable Am∣bition; that their Posterity, I say) should return to the man party, which hath something among them setled, order∣ly and uniform, becoming Religion, than to have them ever turning and tortured upon Ixions wheel, catching in vain at fanciful Reformations, as Tantalus at the deceitful waters, olling with infinite paines and hazard the Reformed Religion, like Sisyphus his stone, sometime asserting it by Law and Pow∣er, otherwhile exposing it to popular Liberty and Loosenesse, than to have them tossed to and fro with every wind of Do∣ctrine, with the Fedities, Blasphemies, Animosities, Anar∣chies, Dangers and Confusions, aending fanatick Pnci and quotidian Reformations, which like ches or boiles from surfeited and unwholsome bodies do  break out ong those Christians, who have made no rule of Religion but their own humours, and no bounds of their Refo but their own Interests; the first makes them ridiculous, the second per∣nicious to all sober Christians. Whereas the Roman Church, however tainted with rank
Errours and dangerous Corruptions in Doctrine and Manners (which forbid us under our present convictions to have in those things any visible sacred communion with them, though we have a great charity and pity for them; Charity in what they still retain good, Pity in what they have erred from the Rule and Example of Christ and his Catholick Church;) yet it can∣not be denied, without a brutish blindnesse and injurious slan∣der (which onely serves to gratifie the grosse Antipathies of the gaping vulgar) that the Church of Rome, among its Tares and Cockle, its Weeds and Thornes hath many wholsome Herbs, and holy Plants growing; much more of Reason and Religion, of good Learning and sober Industry, of Order and Polity, of Morality and Constancy, of Christian Candor and Civility, of common Honesty and Humanity, becoming grave men and Christians, by which to invite after-Ages and your Posterity to adhere to it and them, rather then to be everlastingly exposed to the profane bablings, endless jang∣lings, miserable manglings, childing confusions, Atheistical indifferencies and sacrilegious furies of some later spirits, which are equally greedy and giddy, making both a play and a prey of Religion, who have nothing in them comparable to the Papal party, to deserve your or your Posterities admira∣tion or imitation, but rather their greatest caution and preven∣tion: for you will find what not I onely, but sad experience of others may tell you, that the sithes and pitch-forks of these pet∣ty Sects and plebeian Factions will he as sharp and heavy as the Papists Swords and Faggots heretofore were, both to your religions and civil Happinesse. Doctor Burges. IT is the Opinion  many wise, and the fear of more weak Rejoynder. men that Popery may return again and spread over this Land and Nation▪ although I must needs fay, there is not so great reason for those opinions or fears, as some men pretend, yet I confess the secret undermining of all established Government and Order, doth seem to tend that way; for what do they who will not submit to any In junctions of lawful Government, but endeavour to keep the hedge down for the Beasts of the Forrest
to enter in: If there be no Law submitted to, which may se∣cure the Church, the adversaries of Rome may impunely break in upon us; which God forbid, &c. Dr. Featley. WHat are our divisions but Romes triumph, Pr discerdias Spect. 16. civiles externi tollunt animes; Liv. What are our dif∣ferences but Campanellaes wishes, who advised the King of Spain above all things to breed dissentions and discords among our selves, if he would promote his Interest in England? If I see a∣ny thing into things; These Divisions maintained by Schism, when all the discontented, the ambitious, the proud, the cove∣tous, the revengeful, and the implacable, which are a considera∣ble party under any Government, fall in to the dissenting side by the dangerous practises of the Jesuites, they may attempt in Parliament against the very Government it self, and according to the same Jesuits advice overthrow all Law and Dscipline, and open them a gap to break in upon us like a mighty Flood. Lord F. THe design upon England is manifest, the Papists have made a shift to make the dissenting party, by some grievances by M. S. p. 16. An. 1633. them to that purpose promoted confiderable; they being consi∣derable are masters of the major voice in the Election of Parlia∣ments, the Parliaments they command the purse of the Nation; they put our gracious Soveraign upon chargeable undertakings against Spain and other places; he wants money, they will not supply unless he closeth with their Faction, if he closeth with them, it must be by indulgence to Dissenters, which the Papists look for: If he closeth not with them; then he must take such courses which his Prerogative directs him to, this will make a breach; In this breach the Papists will side that it may be able to ballance the other, and be encouraged to hold out. If it fall o to be on the Rebels side, it is but that side they have oen taken, and they may fare as well as others: If they happen on the Kings side, then either he conquers or not; if he conquers not, there will be perpetual wars which Spain, and Rome may at pleasure make use of for their advantage: If he conquers, they can say that their Loyalty and Faithfulness to him deserved at least an indulgence.
Mr. Baxter. VVHen the motion was first made, for the publishing of Baxt. a∣gainst Po∣pery, Epi∣stle to the Reader. these Papers, it seemed to me to be as the casting of water into the Sea; so great is the Number of the Learned Wri∣tings of Protestant Divines against the Papists (which will never be well answered) that the most claborate addition may seem superflu∣ous; much more these hasty Disputations prepared but for an exercise which is the Recreation of a few Countrey-Ministers at a monthly meeting, when they case themselves of their ordinary work. But upon further consideration, I saw it was, The casting of water upon a threatning fire, which the Sea it self doth but restrain. It's more Engines than a few that are openly or secretly at work at this time to captivate these Nations again to the Roman Pope. When so many hundreds, if not thousands are night and day con∣triving our seduction, (under the name of reconciling us to the Church;) if no body counter-work them what may they not de. Its not enough that we have had Defenders, and that their Books are yet in the World. Old Writings are laid by, though much stron∣ger then any new ones: But new ones are sooner taken up and read. The Papists have of late been very plentiful, and yet very spa∣ring in their Writings. Plentiful of such as run among the sim∣ple injudicious people in secret, so that the Countries swarm with them; But sparing of such as may provoke any Learned man to a Confutation: That so, they may in time dis-use us from these Siudies, and so disable the Ministry therein, and catch us when we are secure through a seeming peace, and fall upon us when we have lost our strength. And I am much afraid that the generality of our people (perhaps of the best) are already so much dis-used from these studies, as to be much unacquainted with the Nature of Po∣pery, and much more to sk for a preservative against it, and a through confutation of them. So that if Papists were once but  fully set out among us in their own likeness, as they are under the names of Quakers and other Sects, what work would you see in many places? I doubt many would follow their pernicious ways, and fall like Sheep of a common ret, or People in a raging pestilence, especially if they had but the countenance of the times: Not through their strength, but because our people are naked, and unmeet for a defence. The work that now they are upon, is, 1. By Divisions, and re∣viling
the Ministers, to loosen the people from their Guides; that they may be as a Masterless Dog that will follow any body that will whistle him. 2. To take down the Ministers maintenance and encourage∣ments, that they may be disabled so vigorously to resist them. 3. To hinder their union, that they may abate their strength, and find them work against each other. 4. To procure a Liberty of seducing all they can under the name of Liberty of Conscience, that so they may have as fair a game for it as we: and Ignorance and the common corruption of nature (especially so heightened by a custome in sin) doth befriend the Devils cause much more than Gods; or else how comes it to pass that the Godly are so few, and Error, Idolatry and Impiety doth so abound in all the earth! 5. To break the common people into as many Sects and Parties as they can, that they may not onely imploy them against one ano∣ther, but also may hence fetch matter of reproach against our pro∣fession in the eyes of the World. 6. To plead under the name of Seekers against the certainty of all Religion; that men may be brought to think that they must be either of the Popish profession or of none. And indeed when all Sects have done their worst it is but two, that we are in any great danger of (And of those I think we are in more danger, then the most are aware of) and that is, 1. Papists: who plead not as other parties, onely by the tongue, but by exci∣ting Princes and States against us, and disputing with the Fagot or Hatchet in their hands: And if we have not Arguments that will confute a Navy, an Army, or a Powder-plot, we can do no good against them. 2. Prophaneness, animated by Apostate Infidels: This is the Religion that men are born in. And men that naturally are so in∣deared to their lusts, that they would not have the Scripture to be true, will easily hearken to him that tells them it is false. Yea so much doth Popery befriend men in a vse, that some are apt to joyn those together, thinking at the heart that Chri∣stianity  but a Fable: but yet for fear it should prove true, they will be Papists, that they may have that easie remedy for a reserve. If God will preserve us but from these two dangers, Popery and Prophaneness animated by infidelity, it will go well with England.
1. Either Scripture is true or not true: If not, Popery is not true, which pleadeth its warant from it (and some of them argue, as if they purposed to disprove the Scripture and to imitate Samson, in pulling down the house on their heads and ours, in revenge for the dishonu they have suffered by the Scripture.) If it be true (as nothing more true) then Popery is not true, which palpably contra∣dicteth it, as in the points of Latine service, and denying the Cup in the Lords Supper, and many other is most evident. 3. Either the judgement of the Antient Doctors is sound or not: If not, then the Church of Rome is unsound, that is sworn to ex∣pound the Scripture only according to their consent: If it be sound, then the Church of Rome is unsound, that arrogate in Ʋniversal Government and Infallibility, and build upon a foundation, that was never allowed by the Antient Doctors (as in the third Disp. I have fully proved) and which most Christians in the World do still reject. 4. Either Reason it self is to be renounced or not: If it be, then none can be Papists but mad men. If not, then Popery must be renounced, which foundeth our very faith upon impossibilities, and teacheth men of necessity to beleeve in the Pope as the Vicar of Christ, before they beleeve in Christ, with many the like, which are after wards laid open. 5. Either our five Senses, and the judgement made upon them, is certain and infallible or not. If not, then the Church of Rome, both Pope and Council are fallible, and not at all to be trust∣ed: For when all their Tradition is by hearing or reading, they are uncertain whether ever they heard or read any such thing; and we must all be uncertain whether they speak or write it: And then we must not only subscribe to Fransc. Sanches. Quod nihil scitur, but also say that Nihil certo creditur. But if sense be certain and Infallible; then the Church of Rome, even Pope and Council are  onely Fallible, but certainly false deceivers ived. For the Pope and his Council tell the Church that it is read and Wine which they take, eat and drink in the Eu∣charist. But the senses of all sound men do tell them that it is. I see that its Bread and Wine. I smell it, I feel it, I taste it; and somewhat I hear to further my assurance: And yet if Popery be not false, its no such matter.  One would think the dullest Reader, might be quickly here resolved whether Popery be true or false. Look
on the consecrated Bread and Wine, touch it, smell it, taste it, and if thou canst but be sure that it is indeed Bread and Wine, thou mayest be as sure that Popery is a delusion. And if thou canst but be sure, that it is not Bread and Wine, yet thou mayst be sure that the Pope or his Council, nor any of his Doctors are not to be believed. For if other mens senses be deceitful, theirs and thine are so too. Reader, Adhere to God, and the Righteousness of Christ, and the Teachings of the Holy Ghost, by the Holy Scriptures, and a faithful Ministry, in the Communion of the Saints, and as a member of the Catholike Church, which arising at Jerusalem, is dispersed over the World, containing all that are Christians; renounce not right Reason, or thy senses, and live according to the light which is vouchsafed thee; and then thou shalt be safe from Popery, and all other pernicious damning Errors. Doctor Sanderson. BUt I have somewhat to return upon these our Brethren, who thus cause∣lesly suspect us. Possibly it will not please them: (.) Preface to the Reader. But I must speak it out, both for the truths sake, and theirs. To wit, that them∣selves are in truth, though not purposely and intentionally, (whereof in my own thought I freely acquit them) yet really and eventually, the great promoters of the Roman Interest among us: and that more ways then one. These three among the rest, are evident. First, by putting to their helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy. It is very well known to many, what rejoycing that Vote brought to the Romish party. How even in Rome it self they sng their Io Paeans upon the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now the day it ours; Now is the fatal blow given to the Protestant Religion in England. They who by conversing much with that Nation, were well acquainted with the fiery turbulent spirits of the Scottish Presbyterians, knew as well how to make their advantage thereof: and handled the matter with so much cunning by fomenting their discontents under-hand till they had framed them, and by their means some of the same party here, to become the fittest instruments for the cartying on of their great design. And this I verily beleeve was the very Master-piece of the whole plot. They could not but foresee (as the event hath also proved) that if the old Government, a ma pillar in the building, were once dissolved, the whole fabrick would be sore shaken, if not presently shattered in pieces and ruined; things would presently r into confusion; de∣stractions and divisions would certainly follow: And when the waters should be sufficiently troubled and mudded, then would be their opportunit ast in their ets for a draught. Some who have undertaken to discover to the world the great plot the Papists had of late years for the introducing of Popery in the several parts of it, might have done well to have taken some little notice of this also, (I wonder how they could look beside it,) being so visible; and in∣deed the fundamental part of the plot. Without which, neither could the spars of Errors and Heresies have been bown to that height, nor that Liber∣tinism (& some other things therewith mentioned) have so soon over-spread the whole face of the Land, as now we finde they have done.
Bishop Jewel. Now let us behold the present state of our country. These Sermons, p. 201 & p. 192. words of Christ our Saviour were never more true, then we finde them now in these our days. The harvest is great, and the laborers very few, the poore people lieth forsaken, and left as it were shéep without a guide: the afflicted in consci∣ence have no man to quiet them: they grow wild and savage, as it were a people that had no God: they are commanded to change their religion, and for lack of instruction, they know not whither to turn them: they know not, neither what they leave nor what they should receive. Some other defie, and spit at the holy Gospel of our Sa∣viour Christ, and refuse the covenant of everlasting life. Some other for lack of knowledge follow after wilfull and blind masters, and become Arrians or Pelagians, and thus they blaspheme the Son of God. Some other give them∣selves over to their own affections, and, as he saith, rejoyce and triumph in their filthiness, without fear of God, without conscience of sin, and so tread down the blood of the Testament under their feet: and this do they for lack of teaching, because they have not learned men and preachers to shew them what they should do. O, saith our Saviour Christ, the good shepherd and bishop of our souls, my harvest is beaten down and lost, and there is none that will go abroad and save it. My people run headlong to their own destruction, not of malice but of very simplicity, only because they are not taught, because they know not my father nor me. Alas, it is not my fathers will that any of them should be lost. But for the hope of posterity, I report me to all you which are fathers, and have children for whom you are careful. Al your ves have a zeal and care for the house of God: yet will you breed them up, keep them at School, un∣til four and twenty years old to your charges, that in the end they may live in glorious poverty? that they may live poor∣ly and naked like the Prophers and Apostles? Our posterity
shall rue, that ever such fathers went before them: And Chronicles shall report this contempt of learning among the punishments, and murrains, and other plagues of God. They shall leave it written in what time, and under whose raign this was done. Or if we grow so  arils that we consider not this, or be not able to draw it into Chronicle, yet forraign Nations will not spare to write this, and publish it to our everlasting reproach and shame. In the mean time, what may be ghessed of their meaning, which thus rabin and spoil the house of God, which decay the provision thereof, and so basely esteem the Ministers of the Gospel? they cannot say to God, The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up. Howsoever in other things they do well, howsoever they seem to rejoyce at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the safety and preservation of the Lords Anointed: yet needs must it be, that by these means forraign power, of which this Realm by the mercy of God is happily delivered, shall again be brought in upon us. Such things shall be done unto us, as we before suffered: the truth of God shall be taken away, the holy Scriptures burnt and consumed in re. A marvellous darkness and calamity must needs en∣sue. For, if the tempest be so dark in the sea, that the load∣star lose her light, and the needle fail to give token of the North Pole, no marvel though the ship lose her course, and be swallowed up in the sands. The Gospel of Christ is the fountain of light, and of knowledge? It cannot be maintained by ignorance and darkness. These be the props of their kingdom which take a∣way the Scriptures, which hold the people in blindness, which flie the light, which have their common prayers, mi∣nister the Sacraments, marry, bury their dead in a strange tongue, that the people may understand nothing: which make a famine of hearing the word of God: w up the springs of the waer of life: which ke ys of the kingdom of Heaven, and neither enter selves, nor er them that od enter: which say ignorance is  her of otion, and the Church is then in best order, and e people vour, when they are hoodwinct and nded, and see nothing.
These are not fit instruments wherewith we may over∣come the adversaried. This is not the sword of the spirit, these are not the spiritual weapons, which castdown holds, and every high thing that is exasted against the kingdom of God. What man that would keep out his enemy, will pull down his hols? what Captain that meaneth to give a for∣cible assault upon the enemy, will discourage his fighting souldiers? But our souldiers are out of courage, our Ca∣stles are falling? therefore that which we seat will fall upon us. Bishop Sanderson. But thirdly, and above all, I beseech them to consider, whi∣ther that , which many times marreth a good Pef. to his Sermons. business, hath carryed them; and how mightily (though unwit∣tingly, and I verily believe most of them unwillingly) they pro∣mote the interest of Rome, whilst they do with very great violence (but not with equal prudence) oppose against it: so verifying that of the Historian Poet, spoken in another case, —Omnia dat qui justa negat. I mean, in casting out not Ceremonies onely, but Episcopacy also, and Liturgy, and Festivals out of the Church, as Popish and Anti∣christian,—Hoc Ithacus velit. If any of these things be otherwise guilty, and deserve such a relegation upon any other account which yet is more then I know) farewel they: But to be sent away pack∣ing barely upon this score, that they are Popish and Antichristi∣an; this bringeth in such a plentiful harvest of Proselytes to the Jesuite, that he doth not now, as formerly, gaudere intus & in sinu (laugh in his sleeve, as we say) but , openly and is the face of the Sun triumph gloriously, and in every Pamphlet prlaim his victories to the world. If you should say, that the Sea taken by them, not given by you: it is (to all but your selves)  much as nothing: whilst the contrary is demonstrable, and that there is in these very pretensions, a proper (and as I may say a natural) tendency to produce such effects, as we see to have ensued thereupon. The truth whereof will evidently appear by stating the Case thus. A man otherwise rational and conscientious,
but somewhat wavering in point of Religion, yet desiring in since∣rity of heart to be of the true Church, if he knew which were it, hath some temptations offered him by his education, friends, books, the confusions among us, or otherwise, to encling him towards the Church of Rome. Which temptations being not able of himself to conquer, he repaireth to a Presbyterien (suppose) or Independent; he acquainteth him with his doubts, and desireth satisfaction therein: telleth him among other things, that he had a good o∣pinion of the Church of England heretofore, whilst she had E∣piscopal government, and a well-formed Liturgie, and did observe Christian Festivals, and some kind of outward decency in the wor∣ship of God, as all the Churches of Christ had and did in the purest and primitive times; but now that all these things are laid aside, he must needs be of another minde, unless they can fully satisfie him concerning the premises. In this Case, I would fain know what possible satisfaction such a man could receive from either of these, holding to their Principles. To tell him these things were Popish, and therefore to be cast out of the Church, were the next way to put him quite off: he would presently conclude (and it is impossible he should do otherwise, being already so prepared as in the Case is supposed) that certainly then that which we call Po∣pery is the old Religion, which in the purest and primitive times was professed in all Christian Churches throughout the world. That only  which is usually the last Reserve in these disputes, That the mystery of iniquity began to work betimes; will seem (to him) but a ridiculous begging of the Question; and he will tell them, that every Sectary may say the same to them. Whereas the sober English Protestant, is able by the grace of God, with much evidence of truth, and without forsaking his old principles, to justifie the Church of England, from all imputations of Heresie or Schisme, and the Religion thereof as it stood by Law established from the like imputation of Novelty; and to apply proper and pertinent answers to all the Objections of those (whether , or others) that are contrary minded, to the full satisfn of all such, as have not by some partial affection or other rendred them∣selves uncapable to receive them.
Bishop Reynolds. It is easily foreseen whither these distempers tend: they have Serm. before Par. 1657. all an aspect towards Rome. The deluded souls cry down Mini∣stry: the Papists desire no more. They disown the Magistrates coercive power in matters of Religion, and plead for an U∣niversal toleration: the Catholick wishes no more. They cry down Learning and Universities, that the subtle Jesuits may have none but ignorant people to deal with. Ministers main∣tenance is decryed, while cunning Emissaries, maintained by stipends from Rome, delude the Nation. Is not the hand of Joab in all this? Bishop Laud. In the mean time, you know what the Pharisces said against Speech on Scaffold. Christ himself, If we let him alone, all men will believe in him, & venient Romani, and the Romans willcome, and take away both our Place and Nation. Here was a causeless Cry against Christ, that the Romans will come: And see how just the Judgement of God was; they crucified Christ, for fear lest the Romans should come; and his death was it, which brought in the Romans upon them; God punishing them with that which they most feared. And I pray God this Clamour of venient Romani, (of which I have gi∣ven no cause) help not to bring them in; for the Pope never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he hath now upon the Sects and Divisions that are among us.
CHAP. II. The grand Plot of the Papists against the Church of England discovered, for the restoring of Popery, out of Contzen's directions, and their own Practices. SECT. 1. The way to bring in Popery, or the Jesuits directions for restoring Popery. YOu must shew that Princes must determine of nothing in Re∣ligion. Contzen's Politicks, l. 2 p. 16, 17, 18. That things be carried on by slow but sure proceedings, as a Musician tunes his Instrument by degrees: Lose no opportuni∣ty; but yet do not precipitate the work. Let no Prince that is willing despair, for it is an easie thing to change Religion. For when the common people are a while taken with Novelties and diversities of Religion, they will sit down and be aweary, and give up themselves to their Rulers wills. The Doctors and leading Pastors must be put out: but if that may be, all at once: but if that cannot be, let it be by slow de∣grees. When the leaders are down all will submit. The purpose of changing Religion, and extirpating Luthe∣ranism, must be concealed: Not but that some of the wiser sort may know it, but the People must not, lest it should move them. Some must be suborned to beg importunately of the Prince for Liberty to exercise their Religion, and that with many and gentle words, that so the People may think the Prince is not en∣clined to Noveity, but only to Lenity, and to a tenderness for tender consciences, and that he doth it not as from himself. For the Vuglar use to commend a Prince, that cannnot deny
the Subjects their desires, though they are such as were fit to be denied. One or two Churches only must be desired at first, as being so small a matter, that the people will not much re∣gard. When the Zeal of Professours begins to rise against the change, they are to be pacified by admitting both parties to conference before the Governours. Let there be a Decree for Pacification, that one party do not rail at the other, nor calumniate them. And so the errours that are to be brought in will have great advantage, when they are covered, and may not be contradicted, or so much as named: And so the Rulers will be brought to be onely Lovers of Peace, and not to intend a change of Religion. Next that, let there be some publick Disputation between the Parties, but with some disadvantage to them that are to be outed. Let all this be done but on pretence that the several Parties may be joyned lovingly together in Peace: And when the Mi∣nisters refuse this, let them be accused of unpeaceableness, and pride, and obstinacie, and disobedience against the Magistrate, and not for their Religion. When it comes to the putting out of some Ministers, and the People begin to Petition for them, let the matter be carried si∣lently; and in the mean time, let the People be told, that it is be∣cause those Ministers are heady, obstinate men; that the People may be perswaded that the Ministers are faulty, and have de∣served it, and may be put onely to desire Liberty for the more Peaceable men. When thus the people are deluded, and there is no danger of a resistance, then turn the Ministers out of the Churches, and put in those that you would set up in their stead. Then change the Universities, and tell all the Fellows and Scholars, that they shall hold their places if they will turn, else not, &c. many will change Religion with the Rulers. Next he instanceth in Asia, where the Prince pretended, that all the Professors and Ministers places were void at the death of his Predecessor, and he had the disposal of them, by Law.
And the change was there made (as he pretends) by slow de∣grees, one or two Opinions only changed at the first, and not the whole controverted part of the Religion; and so the people will think it but as a small matter to yeild in one or two Opinions, and be easily brought to obey. Lastly, they fall to writing against each other; and those that have the Court-favour seem to carry it. To put out of Honours, Dignities, and publick offices, all those that are most adverse to Popery: It is but just that those that hinder the safety of the Commonwealth, should be deprived of the Honours and Riches of the Commonwealth. If men are deposed for heynous Crimes, why not for Blasphemy and Contempt of Truth? (you must believe the Jesuite that this is the Protestant Case.) If those of a contrary Religion be left in honour and power, they will be able to cross the Prince in many things, and encourage the People of their own Religion. That when a Heresie (for so is the Protestant Religion to them) is wholly to be rooted out, and this must be done by degrees, and in a way of reason, and cannot be done by meer Command and Power, then you must first fall on those opinions that the Common People are most against, and which you can quickly make them think absurd: so be instanceth in some that would work out Lutheranism, that speak honourably of Luther, and fall on them only under the name of Flaccians: so the Arminians at Ʋtrecht, when they would extirpate Calvinisme, made a De∣cree, that no man should Preach any thing, that seemed to make God the Author of sin. Thus a Magistrate that would bring in Popery, must fall upon such heynous opinions, which the im∣pudent themselves are half ashamed of; and bring these into the light that they may be odious, and so the Teachers will lose all their Authority, when the people see that they are taken in a manifest fault. To make use of the Protestants Contentions. How easie is it (faith he) in England to bring the Puritans into Order, if they be forced to approve of Bishops? or to reduce the Puritans in the Low Countries, if the Prince adhere to the Arminians? For the variety of Opinions makes them doubtful, that before
seemed certain; so that when the Magistrate joyneth with one side, he easily overturns the other, and leaves the whole ob∣noxious: As Paul did by the dissention between the Pharisees and Sadduces, joyning to one side, he escaped. This (said he) I would principally perswade an Orthodox Magistrate to (that is, a Papist.) For he may with as much advantage make use of the Protestants disagreements, as of the Papists Concord, to extir∣pate Protestants. As in Wars, it is not only the skill and strength of the General, but often also the Carelesness of the Enemy, or his Mistake, that give very great advantages for success. When rigid Calvinism was assaulted by the Lutherans in the heat of the Paroxysm, it was exasperated, and the suddain restraint did much hurt: But now the Arminians have of their own accord let go the hardest part of their rigor, and judge the Calvinists to be impious, and persecute them in the very University, and in other Towns they force them to banishment; and would ven∣ture to do more and crueller things, if they were not afraid of the strength of the adverse Party. Verily if Prince Maurice alone did but stand for the Arminians, the rigor of the contra-re∣monstrants would flag, or be broken. To forbid the Protestants privately or publickly to Assemble together. To proceed to severity of Laws and punishments. Here he endeavours to prove this violence lawful, (Fire and fagot, is re∣served to the last.) But this violence though it must be for the change of all, need not be exercised on all. Cut off the Leaders, and the multitude will follow the Authority of the Rulers. Shame will retain some, and fear others; but a vain security will prevail with most, when they know not how to help it. With∣in these few years, (if he say true,) above an hundred thousand have been turned to Popery in France, and more in Germany. Not any of the Princes of Germany that did endeavour to draw over his People to the Catholicks, did ever finde any force or Resistance contrary to his Laws. Note this all you slanderous Pa∣pists that accuse Protestants so much of Rebellion to hide your own: Here's a Jesuites Testimony on Record for our vindi∣cation.
The good life of the Popish Magistrates and Clergy: (And that let them use as much as they will.) He commendeth many smaller helps: As 1. Musick, to entise people by delight. 2. To cause all at their marriage to profess the Popish Religion, and so rather then go without a Wise or Husband they will do it. 3. So also to deny Protestants Church-Priviledges, a Baptism, Burial, &c. Lastly he concludes, That where the work must be secretly done by degrees, the Magistrate must keep the Institution, Pre∣sentation, Confirmation, and Examination of Ministers in his own hand; and so (if he cannot cast them out at once) he must cast out the most dangerous, (that is, ablest Protestant Pastours) and put over the Churches, the disagreeing, and those that do not minde matters of Controversie much, and those that are ad∣dicted to their own Domestick businesses (worldly men,) and such as are addicted to the Rulers: Let him cool the heat of Heresie, (he means true Religion) and let him not put out the Unlearned: and so their Religion will grow into contempt. Let the Magistrate cherish the Dissentions of the erring (he means the Protestant) Teachers: and let him procure them often to debate together, and reprove one another. For so when all men see that there is nothing certain among them, they will easily yeild to the truth (he means Popery.) And this Discord is profi∣table to shew the manners of those wicked men. For he that will read the Contentious Writings of Lutherans against Cal∣vinists, or Calvinists against Lutherans, will think he readeth, not the invectives of men against men, but the furies and roaring of Devils against Devils. (A fair warning! But the Jesuite tells you not what is done at home.) From these things the Ruler may take occasion for a change: Let him enquire into the Original of these accusations: And if he finde them true; he may punish the Guilty: If false, he may punish, (that is, cast out) the Ac∣cusers.
SECT. 2. The Jesuites designe against the Bishops, Ministers, &c. and Go∣vernment of the Church of England, for restoring Popery. THe Jesuites crept into all societies, and acted all parts; and being a foreseeing generation, they lookt further before them then the short-witted men whom they over-reacht. They set up persecutions and clamours against Bishops, and the ablest Ministers in the Land: (for it was the Papist that set up the op∣position against Bishops, as appears by father Sibthorp's Letter to father Medcalf, who saith, And now they are pulling down that wall which at once adorned and defended their way, I mean their Government: their Vineyard (as they used to preach) is laid waste, and the wilde beasts of the forest (you know whom they mean) may enter in:) and upon that ground they proceed so sure, that how∣ever things happen, they have their advantage. They see this attempt will prevail against the Governours and Government of the Church, or it will not: if it doth, then all the ablest and wisest men are like to be removed, and their places filled with weak and ignorant men, unable to resist them; and ductile world∣lings, that will always be on the stronger side, and their ends will be easily attained. But if there be any opposition, murmuring, discontents, either it will provoke the Discontented to open de∣fence and resistance, or not: if not, their discontents will hurt none but themselve: if it do, then either they will be crusht in the beginning, or able to bring it to a war. If the first, then we shall have the day, and this to boot, that they will lie under the odium of Rebellion, and be trod the lower, and be the less able ever to rise, and we shall be able with ease to drive on the change to a higher degree, in opposition to so odious a party. But if they be able to make a war of it, either they will be conquered, or conquer, or make peace. The last is most unlikely, because jealousies and engagements will presently be multiplyed, so that an apparent necessity will seem to lie on each party not to trust
the other; and the flames are easier to be kept in, then kindled: and if so unlikely a thing should come to pass, yet it must needs be to our advantage. For we will openly all appear for the King, and so in England and Ireland we shall be considerable. He will remember that he was helpt by us, and look on the Protestants and Puritans as Rebels, and take his next advantage against them, or at least be at a greater distance from them then before: for such a war will never out of his minde, nor will he think him∣self safe till he hath disabled them from doing the like again. But if one part conquer, it will be the King, or the Puritans: (for so the Protestants must now be called:) If the King prevail, then will the Puritans be totally trod down; and we, by whose help the victory was got, shall certainly be incomparably better then we are, if not have presently all our will. For our fidelity will be predicated, the Rebels will be odious, so that their very names will be a scorn, and there will be no great resistance of us. But if the Puritans get the day, (which is a most unlikely thing) yet shall we make great advantage of it: For, 1. They will be unsetled and all in pieces, and not know how to settle the Government. 2. We shall necessitate the Puritan Protestants to keep the King as a prisoner, or else to put him to death. If they keep him as a prisoner, his diligence, and friends, and their own divisions, will either work his deliverance, and give him the day again by our help, or at least will keep the State in a conti∣nual unsetledness, and will be an Odium on them. If they cut him off, (which we will rather promote, left they should make use of his extreamities to any advantage) then, 1. We shall pro∣cure the Odium of King-killing to fall upon them, which they are wont to cast upon us, and so shall be able to disburden our selves. 2. And we shall have them all to pieces in distractions. For, 3. Either they will then set up a new King, or the Parlia∣ment will keep the power, changing the Government into a De∣mocracy. The first cannot be done without great Concussions, and new wars, and we shall have an opportunity to have a hand in all; and if it be done, it may be much to our advantage. The second will apparently by factions and distractions give us footing for continual attempts. But to make all sure, we will secretly have our party among the Puritans also, that we may be sure to
maintain our interest which way ever the world goes.] The e∣vent with common reason and many full discoveries shew, that this was the frame of the Papists plot. SECT. 3. The Jesuites Practices against the true Church of England for resto∣ring Popery. THerefore I desire them that can see a cause in its effects, but to follow these streams till they finde the fountain. VVhence came those motions against the Ministry and Churches into our Councils? I well know tha ll this came from hell. But whether by the way of Rome,  eave to your enquiry. Yea, whence was it that motions have been made to pull down all the Ministry at once? Was this by Protestants? VVhence came the Doctrine contended for by Sir H. V. and others, against the power of the Magistrate in matters of Re∣ligion, and for universal liberty in Religion? I know the Papists are not for such liberty in Spain, or any where, where they can hinder it: but withal I know, that it is one of their Fundamen∣tals, that such matters belong onely to the Pope and Prelates, and Magistrates must but be their Executioners; and I know that it is truly the Magistrates power for which the usurping Pope contendeth: and I know that the Papists are most zealous for li∣berty of conscience in England, though deadly enemies to it else∣where. Whence came it to pass, that Sarabras the Queens Confessor, was present at the Kings death, and there on horse-back, tossing up his Cap in the Air upon the fatal blow, and brandishing his sword? and when he was asked what he did there, and told it was a wonder to see him there: he answered, That there were twenty more Priests there besides himself; and that the greatest ene∣my to their Religion fell that day. Few knew the consequence of that fact. Whence came the Hiders Body of Divinity, that hath infected
so many high and low? How come so many called Seekers to seem to be at a loss, whether there be any Scripture, Church, or Ministry, or which be they? How came we contrived into a war with Scotland and Holland, when we could keep peace with Spain? With them, with us, or both, there was some sorry cause. How came our Armies so corrupted with principles of impie∣ty, licentiousness and Anarchy, that so many turned Levellers, (to say nothing of all the rest) and rose up against their Com∣manders, and were fain to be subdued by force, and some of them shot to death, and many cashiered? &c. How came it to pass that Papists have been discovered in our Armies, and in the several parties in the Land? And where are the swarms of the English Jesuites and Fryers, that are kno to have emptied themselves upon us from their Colledges bd Sea? How came it to pass, that the Petitions of the Protestant Pres∣byters of London, and of other Protestants for the life of the King, could not be heard? but that the Levelling party carried on their work, till they had set the forreign and domestick Pa∣pists on reproaching the Protestants as King-killers? and had (though very falsly) turned the odium of that horrid kinde of crime upon the innocent Protestants, which the Papists are known to be most deeply guilty of: and now in all Nations they make the ignorant people believe, that the death of that King was the work of the Protestants, and the blot of their Religion. Whence came it to pass, that so many Popish opinions were maintained? As, 1. The Authority of Scriptures was cryed down. 2. An infallible light set within every man, whereby he might be a Pope to himself. 3. Christ worshipped in a man the next way to have him worshipped in an host. 4. That the Mini∣sters of England were no true Ministers. 5. Th it was not law∣ful to joyn with us in publick Assemblies. 6. That Sacraments are not seals of the promises of God, nor instituted to confirm the promise. 7. That circumcision was a seal of the righteous∣ness of Faith onely to Abraham. 8. That the Ordinances of God are not effectual in the hands of unholy men; as if the effi∣cacy of the Ordinance depended on the goodness of men; and,
as the Papists say, the intention of the Administrator is necessarily required to the truth of the Sacrament. 9. That all that was established among us was Popish, until at last we have no Religion but Popery, &c. Whence comes it to pass that we cannot be satisfied under the best Government in the world? yea, under any? VVhence comes it that the best Governours have been deposed? I should (saith Mr. Baxter) with great rejoycing give a thousand thanks to that man, that will acquaint me of one Nation upon all the earth that hath better Governours in Soveraign power then those that have been deposed. Whence comes this restlesness of ours, but from the influence of a forreign power upon us? And what forreign power hath the like influence upon us to that of the Pope? VVhence comes it to pass, that Levelling went on with conti∣nued success, till the House of Lords, with the Regal Office, was taken down, and an Engagement put (on all those ductile souls that would take it) to be True to the Commonwealth, as established without a King or house of Lords? VVhence came it that the weekly News-books contained the Letters of the Agents of the Agitators from France, telling us how good men the Jesuites were, and how agreeable to them in their principles for a Democracy, (which they vainly call a Republick, as if there were no Commonwealth, but a Democracy) and tel∣ling us, what exceeding meet materials for such a Common∣wealth the Jesuites would be? The Agencies of particular men with Jesuites, I shall purposely omit. Whence came it that all the maddest dividing parties had their liberty, and the reproach and envy was most against the united Ministry? Much more may be proposed tending to a discovery, how far the Papists have crept in among us, and had to do in our affairs. But I think God hath yet much more in season to discover. Truth is the daughter of time.
SECT. IIII. What Parties they have insinuated themselves to, and how against the Church, for restoring Popery. ANd that we may see what they have done, let us discover what Parties they insinuated themselves to; in Mr. Baxters Key for Cath p. 326, 327, &c. to 335. own words. As for the old English Bishops and conformable Ministers, who were of the faith and doctrine publickly here professed, I con∣fess I finde but little evidence that ever the Papists had much to do with them. As for the Presbyterians, I do not see any reason to think that ever the Papists had any interest in them of any men, there being none that they more hate then these two sorts (the old sound Episcopal men, and the Presbyterians) But yet both in France and Scotland they have cunningly wrought upon them ab extra, alarming them into disturbances by the wild-fire which they have cast in. As for the King himself that was their Head, if any conjecture that he was a flat Papist, as I have heard many rashly say, I think there is much evidence to confute them. 1. That very letter to the Pope (forementioned) on which the suspicion is most ground∣ed, if you mark it exactly, doth intimate no more then a de∣sire of a union and Reconciliation, with some additio that may bear a tolerable sence. 2. His own Profession of the Protestant Religion is sufficient evidence. 3. His Disputation with the Marquess of Worcester cleareth it. 4. His speech at death, and Papers since published, clear it more. Yea for my own part I am perswaded, that the Papists were as much afraid of King Charls and the Grotion design, as of any thing that of long time hath been hatcht against them. They are not all of a minde at home. And hence was the malice of the Je∣suites against the life of the King (and withal, that he was faln into such hands where he was like to do them little service.)
The persecuted Nonconformists of the Protestant party, though they were most adverse to the Papists, yet had some of the Popish brood at last crept in among them, not only to spie out their minds and ways, but to head the party, and sow among them the seed of further discontent and errour, and to make them a Nursery for various sects. For every where by their good will the Jesuites will have some. If you ask me for my proof of this, I shall at this time give you but these two. 1. The fruits that sprung up from among them, and the manner of Pro∣duction, (of which more anon.) 2. The words of the Jesuites Letter recited by Mr. Pryn, Introd. pag. 90. [I cannot chuse but laugh to see how some of our own coat have re-incounted themselves: you would scarce know them if you saw them; and it is admirable how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans: The Cambridge Scholars to their woful experience shall see, we can act the Puritans a little better then they have done the Jesuites: they have abused our sacred Patron St. Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digression, for I confess it to you I am at this time transported with joy, to see how bappily all instruments and means, as well great as lesser, co-operate to our purposes.] Yet cannot I hear of any considerable infecti∣on among this party that way before Sir Henry Vane's dayes. How far they crept into all Societies under the name of Inde∣pendants, is opened by so many already in Print, that I shall add no more of it. And  thing notorious, that they have crept in among the Anabaptists, and fomented that Sect. The story of the Scotish Missionary that pretended himself a Jew, and gave the Anabaptists the glory of his Conversion, and Rebaptizing at Hexham, and was discovered a Newcastle, is published and commonly known: (whether he be yet in Prison, or releast, I know not.) And too ma∣ny more have more cleanly plaid their game. And though many of the more sober Anabaptists would not be so useful to the Papists as they expected, yet multitudes of them too far an∣swered their expectations. If you ask now what the Papists get by all this; I answer, you see in the Instance but of this one fact, and the products of it.
1. By this means our Councils, Armies, uches have been divi∣ded, or much broken. 2. By this trick they have engaged the minds and tongues of many (and their hands, if they had power) against the Ministry, which is the enemy that standeth in the way. 3. They have thus weakned us by the loss of our former adhe∣rents. 4. They have found a Nursery or Seminary for their own Opinions, which one half of the Anabaptists too greedily receive. 5. By this they have prepared them for more and worse. 6. By this means they got an Interest in our Armies, or weakned our own. 7. By this they have got Agents ready, for mischiveous designs (as hath been lately too manifest.) 8. By this they have cast a reproach upon our Profession, as if we had no unity or con∣sistence, but were vertiginous for want of the Roman pillar to rest upon. 9. By this they have loosned and disaffected the common people, to see so many mindes and ways, and hear so much contending, and have loos'd them from their former sted∣fastness, and made them ready for a new impression. 10. Yea by this means they have the opportunity of Predicating their own pretended unity, and hereby have drawn many to their Church of late. All this have they got at this one game. What then have they got by all the rest? I shall next tell you of some of those Heresies or parties among us, that are the Papists own Spawn or progeny; Either they laid the Egg, or hatched it, or both. And 1. It is most certain that Libertinism or Freedom for all Religions, was spawned by the Jesuits, who hate it in Spain and I∣taly, but love it in England. I have met with the masked Papists my self, that have been very zealous and busie to promote this Liberty of Conscience (as they deceitfully call it.) For by this means they may have Liberty for themselves, and Liberty to break us in pieces by sects, and also Liberty under the Vizor of a Sectary of any tolerated sort, to oppose the Ministry and do∣ctrine of truth. 2. But the principal design that the Papists have upon our Religion, at this day, is managed under a sort of Juglers, who all are confederate in the same grand principles, and are busie at the same work, and are agreed to carry it on in the dark, and with wonderful secrecy do conceal the principal part of their o∣pinions;
but yet they use not all one vizor, but take on them se∣veral shapes and names; and some of them industriously avoid all names. The principal of these Hiders are these following. 1. The Vani, whose game was first plaid openly in America in New England, where God gave in his Testimony against them from Heaven upon their two Prophetesses, Mrs. Hutchinson, and Mrs. Dyer. The next sort of Hiders, are the Paracesians, Weigelians, and Behmenists, who go the same way in the main with the former, and are inded the same party, but think meet to take another name, and fetch their vizor from Jacob Behmen. Another sort of the Hiders are those called Seekers, among whom I have reason to believe the Papists have not the least of their strength in England at this day. They practise the lesson that Boverius in Apparat. ad Consultat. taught Prince Charls long ago [Primum est, ut quoniam vera Religio tibi inquirenda est, ante∣quam ad eam investigandam accedas, omnem prius Religionem a∣pud te suspectam habeas: lubeat{que} tamdiu à Protestantium fide ac Religione animum ac voluntatem suspendere, quamdiu in veri in∣quisitione versaris.—] We must suspect all Religion it seems, and be first of no Religion, if we will become Papists. A fair beginning! We must then be unchristned, and suspect Christ and Scripture, that we may be espoused to the Pope. And this is the Papists work by the Seekers, to take us off from all, or from our former Religion, and blot out all the old impressions, that we may be capable of new. And if they can accomplish this, they have us at a fair advantage. For he that is not a stark Atheist or Infidel, but believes that he hath a soul to save or lose, must need know the Necessity of seeking his Salvation in some Re∣ligion or other; and therefore take him off from this, and you must needs g him to some other: And he that could pre∣vail to take him off his old Religion, is likeliest to have so much interest in him as may also prevail to bring him to another. And the Papist thinks that on the pretence of Unity, Antiquity and Universality (of which indeed they have but a delusory show) they can put as fair for him that is once indifferent, as any other can. Of these Seekers there are these sub-divisions, or Sects. The
first and most moderate do only profess themselves to be Seekers for the true Church and Ministry; holding that such a Church and Ministry there is, but they are at a loss to know which is it. The second sort of Seekers are to seek whether there be any Organized Political Church, or any Ministery, or any Ordi∣nances proper to a Church at all, or not. Not denying them, but Doubting and Seeking; that so when they have found them at Rome, they may prove but Finders, and not gross changlings. Another sort of Seekers are those that do not only Doubt of, but flatly deny any Ministry, and Political Churches, and Church∣ordinances on Earth, as things that are lost in an Ʋniversal A∣postacie. Another sort of Seekers do not only doubt of or deny these Par∣ticular Churches and Ordinances, but also they are to seek for the Ʋniversal Church it self, and the holy Scriptures; yea many of them not only Questioning them, but flatly maintaining, that we have no certainty that the Scripture is true, or that we have the same that was written by the Apostles, or that there is such a thing as a true Ministry, or Seat of Christianity in the World. It's most evident therefore that this is but a Juggle, and that such are either Infidels or Papists. A fifth sort called Seekers also there are that own the Church and Ministry, and Ordinances; but yet suppose themselves above them. And a sixth sort of Seekers there are that think the whole com∣pany of believers should now be over-grown the Scripture, Mini∣stry and Ordinances. All these sorts of Seekers are bred or cherished by the Jesuites and Fryars. And the truth is, when a man is ma Seeker, he is half made a Papist: As a Dog when he hath lost his Master will follow almost any body that will whistle him; so when men have lost their Ministry, Church and Religion, they are easily al∣lured to the Church of Rome: For they are a body as con∣spicuous to a carnal eye as any other. And who will not rather be of the Roman Church and Religion then of none?
Another sort of Hiders are the Quakers: an impudent Gene∣ration, and open enough in pulling down, but as secret and re∣served as the rest in asserting and building up. What interests the Papists have in breeding and seeding this Sect among us, hath been partly proved from the Oaths of witnesses, and Confessions of Fryars. A fifth sort of Hiders are those Enthusiasts that shun the affect∣ed bombasted language of Behmen, and such-like, but yet give us much of the body of Popery, headed by an infallible prophetick Spirit, in stead of the Pope. Such as the Authors of the Book a∣gainst the Assemblies Confession, owned by Parker, but said to be written by a London-Doctor. And many such Doctors I know and hear of abroad in England. They take upon them to be ad∣versaries to the Pope, but they are friends to his Doctrines, and maintain the necessity of an infallible living Judge, and send us to Prophets for this infallible judgement. And could the Papists bring men once to this, it is an easie matter to strike off the seign∣ed prophetick head, by disgracing such as meer fantasticks, and to set on the ancient Papal head, which onely will agree with the body they have received. So much of the Libertines and Hiders of their Religion, (of all sorts.) Another sort that are spawned by the Papists, are stark Hea∣thens, Atheists or Infidels. Not that they desire that men should be absolutely and finally Infidels: But, 1. They would make the world believe, that all must be Infidels that will not receive the Christian Faith upon the Roman account and terms: and in order to this, they industriously seek to disgrace the holy Scri∣pture, and overthrow all the grounds of the Faith of such as they dispute with; and so make them Infidels in order to the proof of that their affirmation. 2. And then they think they must take them off all Religion, to prepare them for the Popish Religion. 3. And the malice of some of them is such, that they had rather men were Infidels then Protestants: or at least they will venture them upon infidelity in the way, rather then not take them off from being Protestants. And no wonder, when they allow Infi∣dels so much more charity then Protestants, as to their salvati∣on: for Rome burneth Protestants, but giveth toleration for Jews. And thus by these Devillish devices, the Hiders in Eng∣land
that keep close their Religion, are discovered at last to be one part of them Infidels or Heathens, and another part of them Papists. And no wonder if they would lately have introduced the Jews here into England, and if they have so many other de∣signes to promote this Apostacie. SECT. 5. How the Jesuites hide themselves, and how they may be discovered. AGain, they carry on their designe by hiding themselves a∣mong us, and by peculiar dispensations coming to any of our Assemblies, or joyning in worship with any party either good or bad. Indeed the principal means by which they conceal them∣selves, is, By thrusting themselves into all Sects and Parties, and putting on the vizor of any side, as their cause requireth. It is well known that formerly we had an abundance of them that went under the name of Protestants, and were commonly called Church-Papists: but there is great reason to think that there is more such now. Some of them call themselves Independents, some creep in among the Anabaptists, and some go under the cloak of Arminians, and some Socinians, and some Millenaries, and all the other sects before-mentioned. They animate the Vanists, the Behmenists, and other Enthusiasts; the Seekers, the Quakers, the Originist, and all the Juglers and Hiders of the times: it is they that keep life in Libertinisms, and in Infidelity it self. Among every one of these parties you mm, if you have the skill of unmasking them. Another way of hiding themselves, is, By having a Dispensati∣on to come to any of our Assemblies, or joyn in worship with a∣ny party, good or bad: or else they will prove it lawful with∣out a Dispensation, where the Pope interdicteth it not. And their way is this: That all the old known Papists, especially of the poorer sort, shall be still forbidden to come to our Assem∣blies, lest they bring the blot of levity and temporizing on their
Religion, and lest there should not be a visible party among them to countenance their cause. But the new Proselytes, especially such as are of any power and interest in the world, and may do them more service in a masked way, and can fairly avoid the im∣putation of Popery, these shall have leave to come to our Assem∣blies, when their cause may make advantage of it. That you may see I feign not all this of them, (besides the proof from certain experience, which we dayly see) let me lay before you the Decisions of one of their principal Directors, in this work of propagating their Faith; and that is, Thom. à Jesu de Convers. Gentium. How far they are for favouring of Heathens and Infidels, and liberty of conscience for them, (for all their cruelty to Protestants) you may see him, lib. 5. Dub. 4. p. 207. VVhere he tells you, that the sentence commonly received in the Schools, is, That it is not lawful for Christian Princes to use any force against Infidels, for sins against the Law of Nature it self: and citeth Caject. Victoria, Covarruv. Greg. de valent. And him∣self decides it in the middle way of Azorius: That Pagans may not be punished for despising the honour and worship of God, though they may for not giving every man his own, and for theft, murder, false witness, and other sins that are against mens right Compare this with Sir H Vane's Doctrine of Liberty. And lib. 5. part 1. Dub. 6. pag. 220. he teacheth, That a Catholick living among Hereticks may (when the scandalizing of others forbids it not) for fear of death, go to the Temples of hereticks, and be among them in their meetings and Assem∣blies, because of it self it is a thing indifferent: for a man may for many causes go to the Temples of Hereticks, and be among them  Assemblies, as that he may the easilyer and more effect  and commodiously confute their errours, or on o∣ther just occasions, (unless accidently it scandalize others) Yea, as Azorius saith, he may do it to obey a Prince, though he be an Heretick, when he feareth the loss of his honor, main∣tenance or life: for in this he onely obeyeth his Prince: espe∣cially if among the faithful (that is, the Papists) he openly af∣firm, that he doth it onely to obey his Prince, and not to pro∣fess the heretical sect: for by that open attestation he avoid∣eth the offence and danger of Catholicks, and well declineth the unjust vexation of the Prince.
And that Papsts may not flesh on days when their Church forbids it, to hide themselves among hereticks, he determineth in Dub. 5. p. 218. 219. So that the Papists are abundantly provided for their security, against such as would discover them, when it stands not with their ends to disclose themselves. Another most effectual way of Hiding themselves is, by Equivo∣cation or mental reservations, which we use to call Lying, when they are examined about their Religion, their Orders or their actions. Lying that hurteth not another, they commonly main∣tain to be but a venial sin, which, say most of them, is properly no sin at all. And to equivocate or reserve one half of your answer to your selves, say the Jesuites, is not Lying, nor unlawful, in case a mans interest requireth him to do it. See the words of their own Casuists cited for this by Montaltus the Jansenist. Were it a thing that needeth proof, I would give you enough of it. Thom. a Jesu the Carmelite, ubi sup. Dub. 4. pag 218. secureth them sufficiently: His Question is [Whether one that denyeth it when he is asked of a Heretick whether he be a Priest, or a Religious man, or whether he heard Divine service, do sin against the confession of faith?] He answereth, [No: for that is no denying himself to be a Christian, or Catholick: For it is lawful to dissemble or hide the person of a Clergy man or a Religious man, without a lye in words, lest a man be betrayed and indanger of his life; and for the same cause he may lay by his Habit, omit prayers, &c.—because humane Laws for the most part bind not the subjects conscience, when there is great hazard of life, as in this case Azorius hath well taught. Just. Mor. Tom. 1. lib. 8. c. 27.] So that by the consent of most, there is no danger to a Papist in any such case from his own confession. Another way of Hiding their Religion and thees, is by false Oaths, which we called wilful perjury, but the Jesuites take for a Lawful thing, when a mental Reservation or Equivocation supplyeth the want of verbal truth, as their words cited by the forementioned Jansenian, testifie. And who will ever want so ea∣sie, so obvious, so cheap a Remedy against all danger of perjury, as a mental Reservation is? Yea that the Pope can sufficiently dispense with any of their Oaths of fidelity or Allegiance, or the like, I shall shew you under the last Detection. The Parliament hath imposed on them an Oath
of Abjuration: but do they not know how little the Clergy, and such as have their countenance, will stick at that? such Nets are too wide to catch them in. Hear the words of one of their own Priests (Jo. Browns Voluntary Confess. in Pryns Introduct. p. 203.) saith he, [It's strange to see the Stratagems which they use with their penitents concerning the Oath of Allegiance! If they be poor, they tell them flatly, (when they are demanded to take the Oath) that it is damnable, and no ways to be allowed by the Church: If they be of the richer sort, they say they may do as their conscience will in∣spire them. And there be some of them that make no conscience at all, to have it taken so oft as they are demanded.] What would you have more, then such discoveries by themselves? SECT. 6. How we may discover the Papists, when they are masked. YOu have cause to suspect all that use a Mask, and pur∣posely hide their minds. To suspect them, I say, to be Pa∣pists or worse: They walk not in Gods way that walk in Dark∣ness: It is the Kingdom of Satan that is the Kingdom of Dark∣ness, and it is he that is the Prince of Darkness, and his servants that are the sons of Darkness. And therefore the Vane and Steril language of Paracelsian Behmenists, and Popish Juglers, doth serve with me for no o∣ther use but to raise me into suspicion of their Designs and Do∣ctrines, and to signifie a Vain and Steril minde. The Jugling Papists may be known by this, that they are al∣ways loosening people from their Religion, and leading them in∣to a dislike of what they have been taught; that they may be re∣ceptive of their new Impressions. And therefore of any one Sect in England, there is none to be so much suspected of a spirit of Jesuitism, as the Seekers of all sorts. The Jugling Papists may be much detected by this, that they are all upon the Destructive part in their Disputes, and very lit∣tle on the Assertive part. They pull down with both hands, but
tell you not what they will build up, till they have prepared you for the discovery. They tell you what they are against: But what they are for, you cannot draw out of them. As if any wise man will leave his house or grounds till he knows where to be better: or will forsake his staff that he leaneth on, or the food that he feedeth on, till he know where to have a better provision or support. Do they think wise men will be made irreligious? They deal by the poor people, as one that should say to passengers on Shipboard [What fools are you to venture your lives in such a ship that hath so much encumbrance and danger, and so many flaws, and but a few inches between you and death, and is guided by such a Pilot as may betray you or east away your lives for ought you know?] They know now that none but mad men will be perswaded by such words as these to leap into the Sea to scape these dangers: and therefore they do this but to make men willing to pass into their ship, and take them for our Pilots. If you are wise therefore, hold them to it, and leap not over-board, but keep where you are, till they have shewed you a safer Vessel and Pilot: which they can never do. And you may strongly conjecture at the quality of these Juglers, by their constant opposition against the Ministry. It is Ministers that are their eye-sores; the hinderers of their King∣dom: Could they but get down these, the work was done, the day were their own: And therefore their main business, what∣ever vizor they put on, is to bring the people into a dislike or contempt of the Ministry. If they seem Quakers, they will rail at them: If they seem Seekers, they will dispute against their calling: If they seem the gentlest Behmenists, they have their girds at them, to acquaint the world that they are misgui by them. But at first, they will not let you know which is the true Ministry, if ours be not; or which is the true Church, if ours be not: Here they leave you. The Jugling Papist, what vizor soever he wears, is commonly putting in for his own opinions, of the Necessity of a Judge of Controversies, an Infallible Church, a state of perfection here, the magnifying of our own inherent Righteousness, without any great esteem of of Justification by the forgiveness of sin: and many such like.
Papists have still an aking tooth at the Authority and sufficiencie of Scripture; and therefore on one pretence or other are still disgracing and impugning it, and leading men aside to some o∣ther Rule. Papists have still an enmity against the Power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion: For in such matters their Vice-christ must be the only Judge. Whereas indeed, by that time the Magistrate hath judged, Who is Punishable by the Sword, and the Pastors and Particular Churches have judged, Who is excommunicable, (which are their undoubted works) there is nothing left for a Pope to do. Suspect them that are for Liberty for all; or at least for all that are no worse then Papists. They that set open this door, intend to creep in at it themselves at last. And it is a suspicious sign when you finde men enemies to the Unity, Peace and Settlement of our Churches, but would still keep us in division and distraction. And yet some of these men will lament our Divisions, and cry up Unity, but they will secret∣ly hinder it, or do nothing to attain it. And it is somewhat suspicious to see men hang loose from all our Churches in their practice, and joyn with none, nor com∣municate in the Sacraments. If they know not Sacraments and Church-communion to be both our Duty, and the Means of our strength and comfort, it is doubtful whether they are Christi∣ans or Infidels. But if they know this of the Necessity and use of Sacraments, and Church-communion in general, and yet joyn not with any of our Churches herein, it's a shrewd suspition that they have an eye upon some other Church. For sure a tender conscience would not be many years in resolving of so great and practical a point, no more then he would live many years with∣out prayer, on pretence of being unsatisfied in the mode of Prayer. And yet on the contrary side, there are some Jugling Papists, especially in our Councils, Civil and Ecclesiastick, that play their game by over-doing, and making every thing to be Popish and Antichristian, to drive us into extreams, and into opinions in which we may easily be baffled. And it's not a little that they have won of us at this game.
CHAP. III. The New Designe: Or, A Letter from Seignor Ballariny to father Young, found in his Study upon his decease, dated April 16. 1662. Translated out of the Italian. Holy Father, WE do here congratulate your endeavours for the pro∣pagation of the Catholick Faith, and cease not our prayers for you: yet we know that in vain do we expect a blessing from above, if we do not prudently apply all means here below. And now upon that wonderful Revolution in England, there must be great alterations in your Councils and Methods, although you must aim at one great designe, The ob∣struction of Settlement; especially upon the Fundamental Con∣stitutions of the Kingdome, whereunto if things should fall, they would be more firm then ever, (as some things when shaken take deepest root.) To this purpose you would do well, 1. To remove this jcalousie raised by Prynne, Baxter, &c. and other discontented persons, of our own Designe upon the late Factions; and set up that prosperous way of fears and jealousies of the King and Bishops. You know an enemy is then with suc∣cess established in his main hold, when he is with prudence a∣larmed elsewhere. We may easily break in upon the English Nation through Liberty and Anarchy, while they think we are coming in through Government and Order. Advice. To lay aside our fears and jealousies, and to have that charity that hopeth all things, endureth all things, thinketh no evil, 1. Of the King, whom neither Popish favours could invite to their way, nor Protestant affronts could provoke from ours. 2. Of the Parliament, who are so resolved against Popery. 3. Of the Bishops, who will be all mixed, if ever Popery should come. 2. Publickly to agree, declare and instruct men what is Pope∣ry, and what is not; lest under that notion all laudable, ancient,
necessary and pious instructions, when displeasing, should be cast off under the name of Popery; and lest any antiquated supersti∣tion or heresie should be received under the notion of new lights, or of order and decency. 3. That the Laws against all Insinuators, Whisperers, Tale∣bearers, and Slanderers of publick Actions, Authority and In∣ventions, be put in execution. Policy 2. You would do well to make it appear under-hand how near the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land comes to us: how willingly (as our good Brother speaks) See Jesuit. Letter, Pyan's Master-Piece. their Articles would be interpreted in a Catholick sence: at how little distance their Common-Prayer is from our Mass: where∣by you may perswade the world that the Protestant Religion is weary of it self, and that the wisest and ablest men of that way are so moderate, that they would willingly come over to us, or at least meet us half way: hereby the more stayed men will become odious, and others will run out of all Religion for fear of Popery. Advice 1. That we, considering that Rome hath been a pure Church, and so blessed with pure Doctrine, Usages and Ordi∣nances, think never the worse of any thing warranted by Divine Rule, for being like to what is used in that Church, and avoid nothing meerly because it is used in the Church of Rome. Policy 3. Let there be that odium by writing and secret pra∣ctices raised upon the Factious, that the Law may be so intent upon them that you may escape; and those troublesome persons may be disabled from speaking against you as they used to do, being odious in the eye of the Law and the people. Advice. Indeed there are those dangerous persons of all pro∣fessions, contrary to the established way, that make that use of all publick Dissents for private Designes, that the Law must watch all Dissenters. Yet so impartially should this be done, and so carefully, that one party should not over-run us while we are suppressing the other: yea, and while the Law doth lay hold of so many of our unhappy Brethren, we should endeavour that good understanding with those of them that are honest, as not∣withstanding all insinuations to the contrary, might bring them over to us, or at least might perswade them to joyn with us, as
in an unanimous Declaration against Popery. Policy 4. Let the power of the King in matter of Religion be decryed; or at least let there be an indulgence promoted by the Factions, and seconded by you. Advice. Let us (as all the Protestants, Jewel, Reynolds, Charle∣ton, Hooker, Andrews, &c. hitherto) maintain that great Scri∣pture-truth, The power of the Civil Magistrate, as a Nursing Father, to be a terrour to all evil-doers, and an encouragement to them that do well; that we may live under him peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and real honesty: i. e. his power in keeping up the true Religion, against all persons whatever, who have been taught by the Papists to deny that power. 2. Let us be perswaded that the Magistrate is to exercise this power according to his own conscience, and not according to his subjects opinion; according to the publick reason of the King∣dome, and not according to the private reason of any man; and that to indulge any known errour, is to destroy Government, it being the ready way to indulge all: and what use is there of Go∣vernment where all things are lawful? Policy 5. You may have such insight into the trade and trea∣sure of the Nation, that you may have the one engrossed between your selves and other discontented parties, and the other stop∣ped: so that the inhabitants will for want either endeavour an al∣teration at home, or transplant themselves among us abroad; so that we may either joyn with them, or they with us, in order to the main designe. Advice. It were well if those honest men that have got mo∣ney did lay it out by way of Loan, or otherwise, so as that trade might go on cheerfully; and that for their encouragement the interest of money were raised from 6 to 8 or 10 in the hundred: and that all traders were advised with touching the several ob∣structions in their Occupations. Neither were it amiss that a strict eye were had upon Dissenters, and that Poenal Laws did draw out some of that wealth for publick benefit which they retain for private designe. Policy 6. It were well if you took all just occasion to make it plain to the people, that there is no true ordination or succession of Bishops, Pastors and Ministers in England; and that they who
are pretended Bishops and Ministers, are either worldly and care∣less on the one hand, or so factious on the other hand, that it were well they were removed: however, it were well the peo∣ple should be taken off from them by a clear discovery of their unworthiness. Advice 1. Though we need not fetch our Ordination from Rome, yet as to them our people may truely know, that if they have any true Ordination or Ministry, then so have we: for our first Reformers were ordained by their Bishops. 2. And our people may know, that the Papists are as much at a loss as we: for they have had many Popes at a time, and no man knoweth which is the right Pope to this hour: yea, they have had such vacancies, removes and interruptions of Hereticks, Infidels, Murtherers, Adulterers, in stead of Popes, (as their own Histories make manifest) that there is nothing more certain then that their succession hath been interrupted in the persons upon whom their Religion depends: for their Religion depends wholly upon the Pope. 3. All sides among Protestants may now seasonably declare, That they finde our Ministry of God by the success it hath had for the saving of many souls, that poor people may not be brought into false conceits of their Ministers, so that they neglect their help, and too easily hearken to false Teachers; considering that they who have been abroad know, That there is not such a Mini∣stry in the world as in England. Policy 7. Father R. would usually say, That the best way to work upon the English, was to make use of their natural affections: and urge them with this: What is become of your fore-fathers who died in our Religion? where was your Religion before Luther? Advice. The people are to know, that whereas the Roman Catholick way is the greatest novelty in the world, our Religion was in all ages professed by our fore-fathers, who were saved in bearing witness to the testimony of Jesus: they were not saved by Popery, but by that truth which hath been corrupted by Po∣pery. Policy 8. We suppose that in England after twenty years con∣fusion, they are at a loss for the Revenue; and therefore it were seasonable such a way were proposed, that on the one hand might
seem very plausible to the King, the Nobility, and Cs, bu is indeed very grievous to the people, as any alterations in the ancient customes have their advantages for us, so especially n al∣teration in the Revenue: which will have that influence upon the people, which all your suggestions and insinuations cannot have. You know what counsel father P. give father E. of Brus∣sels, To part, the King upon the new way of imposition by Excise, which must be setled by a Mercenary Army of horse and foot, which shall harass the Country. Advice. Our gracious King hath spoiled this plot. However, we may hence see whence all our grievances come: not from the Government, but from the enemies and underminers of it. Policy ult. Your method for winning particular persons you know given by our fore-fathers, is this: 1. Be sure to keep the Respondents part, and not the Oppo∣nents. It's not so easie to prove, as to wrangle against proofs. 2. Follow them with certain Questions, which the vulgar are not verst in. As, 1. Where was your Church before Luther? or where hath it been visible in all ages? Q. 2. How prove you that you have a true Scripture that is the Word of God among you? Q. 3. What express, Word of God do the Catholicks (the Papists) contradict? Q. 4. How prove you that you have a truely called Ministry, that is to be heard and believed by the people? Q. 5. By what warrant did you separate from the Catholick Church, and condemn all your own forefathers, and all the Chri∣stian world? Q. 6. If you will separate from the Catholick Church, what reason have you to follow this Sect, rather then any one of all the st? Q. 7. What one man can you name from the beginning that was in all things of Luthers or Calvins Opinions? Q. 8. Do you not see that God doth not bless the labours of your Ministers, but people are as bad as they were before? what the better are you for hearing them? Our h prayers are for your . And, Sir, I  Yours to command, F. B.
FINIS.
