r455b 99825067 29439
A ready was to prevent Bribery, and to make good the Prince of ORANGE'S Declaration, humbly presented to the Honorable Convention. By a Lover of his Country. THE Use of the Balloting-Box being a sure way to prevent Bribery, and to make every Man give his Vote according to the best of his Judgment, because he can get nothing by doing otherwise, no Man can sell his Vote, when it cannot be known how he gives it. That this is necessary to be considered at this time; do but remember what hath been the constant practice here in England of our Court, City, Country, Westminster-Hall, and Parliament House. We will here only set down in a few Lines somewhat of the practick Part (for it is used in some Cases with more nicety than in others) in great Councils of State; we will mention the most facil here. The Electors being assemble in some convenient place, as a great Hall, &c. the Doors are shut up, and the prime Officers who assemble or call together the Electors, keep the Keys till the Election be over. The chief Officer chosen for that purpose, takes the Ballot-Box, and opens it in the view of all the Company, to see that it is empty, and without secret conveyances; then placeth it on the Table for that pur∣pose at one end of the Room, and calls such of the Company as set next one by one, and gives to each a Ball in the sight of the People, a little Ball made of fine Linnen, as at Veniceplace="inter" N="*" In some places they use Beans.; he puts it into the Box, either the Affirmative or Negative, and so departs to one side from the rest; and then he calls the next, and does the like to him; and so of the rest, till and are called: All who have Voted stand on one side the Room apart by themselves till the Voting is over. The Box is somewhat long, and hath a Partition in the middle, the which hath two Holes to drop the Ball in, which are Taper-wise, broader at the top and narrow at the bot∣tom, the Right-hand Hole is for theplace="inter" N="†" They may also be distinguish'd by the Colours Black and White. Affirmative, and the Left for the Negative. And because that no man shall know on which side a Man puts his Ball, (who is giving his Vote) there is a place roundish made in the Box, to put in the Hand and Arm almost half way to the Elbow, so as the Hand being in, the Party may let his Ball drop as he pleaseth. When all have done Balloting, the Box is opened, and what is in the Affirmative noted down. Then the next Competitor is Balloted for as the former, and so of the rest and he who hath most Votes in the Affirmative is elected. All very easily performed, as in East-India and other Companies and Societies, both here and some other Governments, in a short time, without Noise, without Tumult, without Animosities; and the most deserving is always endeavoured to be elected.
