E840_13 55081550 168169
THE REFORMED VIRGINIAN SILK-WORM, Or, a Rare and New DISCOVERY OF A speedy way, and easie means, found out by a young Lady in England, she having made full proof thereof in May, Anno 1652. For the feeding of Silk-worms in the Woods, on the Mulberry-Tree-leaves in Virginia: Who after fourty dayes time, present their most rich golden-coloured silken Fleece, to the instant wonderful enriching of all the Planters there, requiring from them neither cost, labour, or hindrance in any of their other emplo∣ments whatsoever. And also to the good hopes, that the Indians, see∣ing and finding that there is neither Art, Skill, or Pains in the thing: they will readily set upon it, being by the benefit thereof inabled to buy of the English (in way of Truck for their Silk-bottoms) all those things that they most desire. LONDON, Printed by John Streater, for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end of Pauls, 1655.
TO THE Reader. Ingenious Reader, I Have in my Legacy of Husbandry bequeathed some∣thing unto thee concerning Silk-worms, which hath wake∣ned many to search after the means to advance that part of Husbandry. But because the Letter of King Iames to the Lords Lievtenants of the severall Shires of England, for the increasing of Mulberry Trees, and the breeding of Silk-worms, for the making of Silk in this Nation, had not annexed unto them in that Treatise the Instructions ten∣ding to that purpose, and being but few, wholly out of print, and very much desired: I thought good upon the occasion of the printing of this Letter to those of Virginia, to publish it also for the benefit of those who shall be willing to employ themselves in this way of industry, which seemeth to be brought unto a more perfect and speedy accomplishment than heretofore hath been known either here or in France, as by the contentes of this adjoyned Letter (wherein the Experi∣ment of a vertuous Lady of this Nation for the breeding of Silk-worms, is addressed unto the Planters of Virginia) is set forth to encourage both them and others to set upon this work, to benefit themselves and the Nation thereby. And truly the Gentleman who doth addresse this Letter to the Planters of the Virginian Colonie is much to be commended for his affection to the publick, because he doth not conceal (as some Muck-worms do for private ends) the Advantages
which may be reaped by singular industrious Attempts or ex∣periments of profit; but desires the benefit of others, even of all, to be encreased. And it were to be wished, that every one to whom God (from whom comes every good & perfect gift) doth impart any rare and profitable Secret of Industry, would open himselfe towards his Brethren, as this publick-hearted Gen∣tleman doth; then would all hands be set a work, and every one would become instrumentall to serve himself and his Neighbours in Love, and overcome the burthen of povertie, which for want of employment and decay of Trade, doth lie so heavie upon very many, whose burthens might be either born, or made easie, if all the gifts of God were made use of, for the end for which he doth bestow them, namely, to profit withall towards others, as it becommeth the Members of the same Christian, and Human, and Nationall Society; for the same rule holds in all these respects among such as understand what it is to be a good Commonwealths-man in the State, as well as in the Communion of Saints: And to this good and gene∣rous inclination, which I wish may more and more abound in them with the grace of God, I shall leave thee and rest, Thy most assured and faithfull servant, SAMUEL HARTLIB.
Instructions for the increase and Planting of Mulberry-trees. What ground is fit for the Mulberry-seeds, how the same is to be ordered, and in what sort the seeds are to be sowed therein. THe ground which ought to be apointed for this purpose, besides the natural goodness of it, must be reasonably well dunged, and withall so situated, as that the heat of the Sun may cherish it, and the nip∣ping blasts of either the North wind or the East, may not annoy it: The choice thereof thus made; that the seeds may the better prosper, and come up after they be sown, you shall dig it two foot deep, breaking the clods as small as may be, and afterwards you shall divide the same into severall Beds of not above five foot in breadth, so that you shall not need to indanger the Plants by treading upon them, when either you water or weed them. The Mulberry seeds you shall lay in water for the space of 22 hours, and after that you shall dry them again half dry, or some what more, that when you sow them they may not cleave together: Thus done, you must cast them upon the foresaid Beds, not altogether so thick as you use to do other garden Seed, and then cover them with some fine earth (past through a Sive) about half an inch thick. In dry weather you shall water them every two dayes at the farthest, as like∣wise the plants that shall come of them; and keep them as clean from weeds as possibly you can. The time in which you ought to sow them for your best advantage, is either in March, April, or May, when frosts are either altogether past, or at the least not so sharp, or of so long continuance, as to indanger their upspring.
There is yet another way to sow them, and that is as fol∣loweth: you shall (being directed by a strait line) make cer∣tain furrows in the Beds above mentioned, of some four fin∣gers deep, & about a foot in distance the one from the other: After this, you shall open the earth with your hands, on either side of the aforesaid furrows, some two fingers from the bottom, and where you have so opened it, shall you sow your seeds; and then cover them half a finger thick with the earth which before you opened. When the Plants that are sprung up of the Seeds, are to be removed, and how they are to be planted the first time. IN the moneths of September, October, November, December, March, or April the next yeer after the Seeds are sown, you may remove their plants, (or in the moneth of January, if it be not in frosty weather) and set them in the like Beds as be∣fore, and about one foot the one from the other, but first you must cut off their roots about eight inches in length, and their tops about half a foot above their roots, more or lesse, according to the strength of the said plaints, for the weaker they be the lesse tops you shall leave them. In this sort you may suffer them to remain weeding and watering them (as need shall require) till they be grown six foot in length above their roots, whereunto when once they have attained, you may cut their tops, and suffer them to spread, alwayes having a care to take away the many branches or succours, that may any way hinder their growth untill they be come to their full length of six foot, as aforesaid. When, and how the Plants are to be removed the second time, and in what manner they are to be planted where they shall remain. IN the moneths aforesaid, (according as your plants are waxen strong) you may remove them either into the hedges of your fields, or into any other grounds. If in hedges, you must set them 16 foot the one from the other: if in other ground, intending to make a Wood of them 18 foot at the
least. But a moneth before you do remove them, you must make the holes (wherein you purpose to set them) about four foot in breadth, and so deep as that their roots may be well covered, and some half a foot of loose earth left under them, having alwayes a special care so to place them, that they may receive the benefit of the Sun, and not to be shadowed or o∣ver-spread by any neighbouring trees. When and how the Eggs of the Silk-wormes are to be hatched, and how to order the Wormes that shall come of them. VVHen the leaves of Mulberry-trees begin a little to bud forth, take the eggs of your Silk-worms, and lay them in a piece of Say, or such like stuff, and in the day time carry them in some warm place about you, in a little safe box, but in the night either lay them in your bed or between two warm pillows, untill such time as the Wormes begin to come forth: then take a piece of paper of the wideness of the said box, and having cut it full of small holes, lay it within the same upon the eggs, and upon that again some few Mul∣bery-leaves, to which the Wormes as they are hatched, will continually come. These leaves with the Wormes upon them, you must still remove into other boxes, laying fresh leaves as well on those that are removed as on the paper where the eggs are; and this is the course which must be du∣ly kept and observed, untill such times as all the Wormes be come forth of their shels, still keeping their boxes warm, as aforesaid; but no longer about you, but untill the Wormes begin to come forth, out of which boxes you may safely take them, when once they have past their second sick∣nesse, and feed them upon shelves of two foot in breadth, and 18 inches one above the other. The said shelves are not to be placed in any ground-room, nor yet next unto the tiles, but in some middle room of your house which openeth upon the North and South, that you may the more conveniently give them either heat or aire, ac∣cording as the time and season shall require. Besides you must not make them close unto the Wals, but so as you may
passe about them the better to look unto the Wormes, and keep them from Rats and Mice, which otherwise might de∣voure them. You must observe the times of their comming forth, and keep every one, one or two dayes hatching by them∣selves, that you may the better understand their severall sicknesses or sleepings, which are foure in the time of their feeding. The first commonly some twelve dayes after they are hatched, and from that time at the end of every eight dayes, according to the weather, and their good or ill usage, during which time of every sicknesse, which lasteth two or three dayes, you must feed them but very little, as onely to relieve such of them, as shall have past their sicknesse before the rest, and those that shall not fall into their sicknesse so soon. The whole time that the Worms do feed, is about nine Weeks, whereof untill they come unto their first sicknesse, give them young Mulbery-leaves twice every day, but few at a time; from thence untill their second sickness, twice every day in greater quantity; and so from their second to their third sicknesse, increasing the quantity of the leaves, ac∣cording as you perceive the Wormes to grow in strength, and clear of sicknesse: from the third untill their fourth sicknesse, you may give them leaves thrice every day, and the fourth be∣ing past, you may let them have so many as they will eat, al∣wayes having a care that you give them none, but such as are dry, and well aired upon a Table or cloth, before they be laid upon them, and withall gathered so neer as may be; at such times as either the Sun or Winde hath cleared them of the dew that falleth upon them. For the feeding of Worms you need observe no other or∣der then this, lay the Mulberry-leaves upon them, and every two or three dayes remove them, and make clean their boxes, or shelves, unlesse in times of their sicknesse, for then they are not to be touched; the leaves which you take from them when you give them fresh to feed upon, you must lay in some convenient place, and upon them a few new leaves, to which the Worms that lay hidden in the old, will come, and then you may passe them with the said new leaves
to the rest of the worms: And now lest any thing should be omitted, which serves to perfect the discovery of so excellent a benefit, I will advise you to be very diligent in keeping clean their Boxes, or shelves, as being a speciall means whereby to preserve them; wherefore when you intend to do it, you shall remove them together with the uppermost leaves where∣on they lie, unto other boxes or shelves, for with your hands you may not touch them, till they have throughly undergone their third sicknesse, and then may you passe them gently with clean hands, without doing them any harm: provided that the party that commeth neer them smell not of Garlick, Oni∣ons, or the like. The first five weeks of their age you must be very carefull to keep them warm, and in time of rain or cold weather, to set in the room where they remain, a pan with coals, burning in it now and then some Juniper, Benjamin, and such like, that yieldeth sweet smels. But afterwards un∣lesse in time of extraordinary cold, give them aire, and take heed of keeping them too hot, being alwayes mindfull to store the room with herbs and flowers which are delightfull and pleasing to the smell. As the wormes increase in bigness, you shall disperse them abroad upon more boards, or shelvs, and not suffer them to lie too thick together: and if you finde any of them broken, or of a yellow glistering colour inclining to sickness, cast them away, lest they infect the rest, and sort such as are not sick, the greatest and strongest by themselves, for so the lesser will prosper the better. When and how to make fit rooms for the worms to work their bot∣toms of silk in, and in what sort the said bottoms are to be used. AS soon as by the clear amber-coloured bodies of your worms, you shall perceive them ready to give their silk, you must (with heath made very clean, or with the branches of Rosmary, the stalkes of Lavender, or such lik) make Arch∣es between the foresaid shelves. Vpon the branches and sprigs whereof, the wormes will fasten themselves, and make their bottoms, which in four∣teen dayes after the worm beginneth to work them, you may
take away; and those which you are minded to use, for the best silk, you must either presently winde, or kill the worms which are within them, by laying the said bottoms two or three dayes in the Sun or in some Oven after the bread baked therein is taken out, and the fierceness of the heat is alaid. The other bottomes which you intend to keep for seed, you must lay in some convenient warme place, untill the worms come forth, which is commonly some sixteene or twenty dayes from the beginning of their work: and as they do come forth you must put them together upon some piece of old Say, Grogeran, the backside of old Velvet, or the like, made fast a∣gainst some Wall, or Hangings in your house. There they will ingender, and the Male having spent him∣selfe, falleth down, and in short time after dieth, as also doth the Female when she hath laid her egges, which egges, when you perceive them upon the Say or Grogran, &c. to be of a grayish colour, you may take them off gently with a knife, and having put them into a piece of Say or such like, keep them in a covered box amongst your woollen cloaths, or the like till the year following: But not in any moist room, for it is hurtfull for them, neither where there is too much heat, least the wormes should be hatched before you can have any food for them. The making of a Wheel, as likewise the way to winde the said silk from the bottoms, can hardly be set down so plainly, as to be rightly understood: Wherefore when time shall serve, there shall be sent into every County of this Kingdom, a Wheel ready made, and a man that shall instruct all such as are desirous to learn the use thereof: Till when, I will commend these brief instructions to be carefully considered of all such as are willing to benefit either themselvs or their Country, that being skilfull in the Contemplation, they may the readier, and with less errour apply themselves to Action, which painfull in∣dustry, with Gods assistance, will quickly perfect.
An Extract of a Letter from Germany, concerning Silk∣worms, written to S. H, Esquire. AS for keeping of Silk-worms I must confess I have spent likewise some time in the ordering and observing of them in as much as this very yeare (1653) I have had from them so much good Silk (and equal to that which is brought either out of Persia or Italy) as have made mee two paire of Stockings. And I have found by experience that they may be kept as well in Germany as in other Countries, and that Mulberry-trees will grow in abundance upon our Lands; wherefore I have often wished that the Emperour (of Germany) would follow the most laudable example of the K. of France, who having forbidden the importation of foraigne Silk into his Kingdom hath thereby so much obliged the industry of the People of France, that they are come to a great perfection in this Sil∣ken Manufacture. But concerning the Experiments of making Silk out of Nettles or out of Flax, I never have tried either of them. Only I remember that I have seene once a very fine and delicate yarne or thred, which was made purely out of Nettels. I do not believe, that those Artist of Hamburg and Wolfenbuttel which you have named unto mee in your Let∣ter, will communicat their Skil for a publique good, as long as they can get their own comfortable subsistance by it. A Letter written by Mr. Ra. Austen, from Oxford, Febr. 18. 1654. Imparting his Experiments about Silk-worms and how to wind off the Silk from the Bottoms, when the Worms have done spinning? COncerning my experiences about Silk-worms, I only say thus much. That I am fully satisfied upon good and sure grounds that the keeping of them (store of them) in these parts would be of very great profit, could we but get Mulbery leaves sufficient to feed them. For upon my own knowledge and ex∣perience (last yeare) upon some thousands of them, I see what
might be by more. For my great doubt and question was sa∣tisfied about the winding of the Silke from the Bottoms, when the Worms have done spinning. I plainly see it is very easy, Children of 6. or 7. yeares old can apprehend it, and do it. For the Worms having done spinning, which is within 4. or 5. dayes of their beginning, through out-mo silke is ravelled off, and the end is found immediately, which runnes on (5. or 10. or 16. or more bottoms together) in a bason of water, a little gum drag mixed. Some Bottoms (if the Worms were strong and well fed) run without breaking, scarce once or twice till all be off, and such as break, are quickly found again. The truth is, if the Worms are scanted of leaves, their silk is so small, that it holds not so well as that of lusty Worms. I saw many brave Skains of Silk wound off the last yeare, and help't to do part of it my self. Now the great matter is, How to propa∣gate Mulberry-trees enough. As for the ordinary way, by boughes, we can have but few that way. I am from time to time experimenting other wayes by Seed, Inoculating, Graft∣ing, &c: what will be the result, as yet I know not: I doubt not, but God will in his good time bring to light and set on foot many good and worthy designes, more then are in these Nations. We had need to labour to be of the like Principles of that worthy person, whose Paper you enclosed, patiently and humbly to waite the Lords season, and to designe for God in all we go about, which will crowne our endeavours with comfort and success. A Rare and new-discovered speedy way, and easie meanes of keeping of Silk-worms, being thus made knowne to the Colony in VIRGINIA. HEarken wel you beloved Planters, to what in these few lines I shall declare unto you; and is thus sent you in Print, that all of you may communicate the great and superla∣tive good and benefit will be unto every one of you: who so is wise, will ponder these things, and give the praie and glory to God, the Author of all good Inventions, how Providence ha∣ving
brought this to pass for ll your exceeding great happiness and increase of store of wealth, with so much eae, so little la∣bour, no cost unto you; and in so short a time as fourty daies, this wealth flowes in upon you. You now I conceive desire to know it, and I am as willing to impart it unto you: thus then in brief, in a plain manner, that all may understand it, The same Lady, who last year sent you her Books of Health and Wealth, (who hath the happiness to beare the honourable name of your incomparable Countrey) continuing her sincere affections to the advancing of your welfares in all kindes; and amongst the rest in this rich work of Silk, knowing Virginia to be in all respects most proper for it, (as by a late Book ent you published by Mr. Williams,) not onely in regard of the Climate being the same with China, from whence the infinite quantity of silk comes, but abounding (as it doth) with Mulberry-trees naturally growing there, and exceeding it by the Silkworm-bottoms found in her Woods. She hath I say this Spring found out (by the speciall blessing of God upon her inten∣tions) so rare, so speedy, and so costless a way and means for the feeding of Silkwormes: by the triall and experiment she so luckily made, to the admiration of all that have seen or heard of it, as a thing scarce credible; because not heretofore thought of, nay, as it were, held impossible by such Au∣thours as have written of the ordering and feeding of Silk∣worms: that this her invention being thus made known unto you, her beloved friends in Virginia, she is most confident, and assures herself you will all there instantly without further de∣lay (which will be the joy of her heart) become great and rich Masters of this noble Silk-work to all your unspeakable wealth.The way to speedy wealth was by some hundreds o you to remov some 60 mile miles South by land, and to attempt th discovery of the Westerly Sea, on the border of Vir¦ginia, and both two ve easily atchieved, &c. The lady ha of these Sil bottoms in h Cabinet as Jewels to co¦vince the i¦credulous, they are ten times bigge then any in Europe to a¦miration, a of infinite in¦couragemen to the work. Do but as she hath done; follow but with good courage your cheerfull leader, and doubtless you shall finde (what she desires you may,) namely, Great profit and pleasure in an ho∣nest imployment. This Silken-Mine will be to you of more benefit then a Mine of silver. In the beginning of May last 1652, when her young Mul∣berry-tree in her Garden began to put out its buds, Contrary  Book Rule. then her
Silkworm-eggs began to hatch, These eggs were purpose∣ly posed to re, cold, winds, and ost, being aid & spaw∣ed on a wall  a chamber, nd there re∣ained all inter long to y the vertue f the Eggs, c. And twice efore they me out of eir bottoms, x times in l. he seventh, ey appear, en come t, a gallant ken white-nged Fly, as the nature of this wise crea∣ture is, when her food begins once to appear, she comes forth of her shell: she presently laying a Mulberry-leafe upon these little crawling creatures, they came all upon it instantly; then she carried the leafe and them upon it to the tree, upon whose leaves they made hast to be; and there they day and night fed themselves, creeping from leafe to leafe, and branch to branch at their own liberties most pleasing to themselves; they grew and thrived wonderfully, and surpassed in largness of body those other wormes she kept in her chamber (she having been many a year a Mistris of Silkworms, and kept them by the Book-rules) this good and prosperous beginning heightened her hopes. The wormes, as their nature is, cast off or slipped out of their skins four severall times, still growing greater and greater to the singular delight and content of their Mistris. About 45 dayes thus feeding upon the leaves, they▪ began that rare and glorious work of spinning their Silk-bottomes upon the leaves and branches of the tree; such a gallant sight to be∣hold, it ravished the Spectators, and their Mistris joy was crowned with excess of happiness herein and hereby, apparent∣ly finding the incomparable felicity this would prove to her dearly beloved Virginia, (for so you must give her leave to call it,) for she concluded, and so must all you, that this being thus effected in England, how much more with assured confi∣dence will the wormes live, feed, and spin in Virginia?  weather it ms hurts m there;  heat and as they ter them∣es under  great ves as with eld, but ther do m them,  easie is a vasse cove∣ reared o∣ the trees ave them  either of . she upon serious and due consideration of this thing, gave God hearty and humble thanks. And what can any of you now wish, for more incourage∣ment? the full proof is made, the work (or rather let me call it) the pleasure is effected with so much ease, so little cost, ha∣zard or pains, as all may admire it. 'Tis not the hundreth part of your care, labour, or toyl you take about your Tobacco, and an hundred times (as I may say) all things put together more gain and profit to you then you make by Tobacco, which in truth is but smoak and va∣pour, but this a reall-royall-solid-rich-staple Commodity. And yet if you will have still smoak, so this neither will nor can hinder your labour in that, or take from you any o∣ther employment you have a minde unto.
Consider, consider I pray you (beloved friends) your in∣comparable happiness in this thing, and bless God for it. Surely I should much wrong your judgements and patience if I should spend any more arguments to perswade you to this so great benefit to you, and should be like to him that to ma∣nifest the clear Sun-shine at noon-day, brought in a candle. In a word, there's nothing is or can be wanting but your true thankfulness to God for compleating this happy inventi∣on, and your present speedy putting it in practice. Yet give me leave, before I bid you adieu, to add the in∣comparable joy this Lady hath, who is confidently perswa∣ded (her daily prayers are to God for it) that this new invent∣ed way of thus keeping Silkworms on the Trees; it requiring neither skill nor pains, (this last being the only Remora, in the Savages nature, which witholds them from attempting any thing of labour) that when the Indians shall behold and see you begin the business, they will with all alacrity set upon it likewise, and imitate you. And that you to incourage them (as well you may) do agree with them, that for every pound-weight of Silk-bottoms they bring unto you, you give them (as well it deserves) 5 shil. worth in any Commo∣dities they desire. And thus by the blessing of Almighty God, there may be good hope of their civilizing and conversion; so that they may be likewise great gainers both in body and soul by this thing. And if this prove so, (Gods mercies and workes be∣ing far beyond our capacities) how much then indeed will Virginia's happiness be every way raised to the height of Blisse. The promise being made, That they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousnesse, as the stars for ever and ever; which the God of wisdome and power grant to you all in Virginia, and so, Lord, prosper this work in their hands, Lord, prosper their handy-work; good luck I wish you all in the name of the Lord, Amen, Amen, Amen. Memorandum; that you take notice, that the Birds will eat up the Silkworms on the trees, so that care must be had (and it's easily prevented by severall wayes and means, as you will
devise) to scare away the birds; if all fail, a boy may be set that may affright them them al away with some noise, or by nets encompasing the trees, and the birds will also carry the Silk-bottoms off the trees, if they be let there remain; but thats soon preented, by taking them speedily away. And this of the birds is the chief reason, that Virginia abounds not with plenty of the naturall wilde Silkworms, they devouring most of them: and it's a wonder how any at all escape them, but that God preseres some few of the race, that his power and wis∣dome may be seen, and the aptnesse of the Countrey to invite you to the work. It will be good for you to incourage the Savages, when they finde any bottoms in the woods, to bring them to you, that you may get of the race, and seed to increase it. For their Bot∣om being ten imes bigger hen ours, hat mighty reat Worms ust they be, nd what in∣ouragement  this to the usinesse, and ow much ore silk they ake then rs, &c. Some say, the originall Silkworm is produced by the corruption of the old Mulberry-tree and leaves, by the Sunne and moisture. But that none of you may want a stock to begin your Silk-work, the Lady aforesaid hath sent you store of Silkworm-eggs to be di∣stributed amongst you: Till you can et and gain e Egg and eed of your aturall gal∣nt large Silk orm: which chiefly that u must en∣vour to store ur selves th, no Eggs mparable to , &c.and if you begin but with an 100 eggs this year, they will next year be above 1000; for one female Silk-fly will lay 3, 4, 500 at a time, all things more and more concurring to your incouragement. Now the two Propositions that tend to infinite welfare, benefit, and wonderfull advantage both to England and the Colony joyntly, are those that follow, they which upon no terms are to be omitted to be published and effected. First, that with all speed some kinde of Coyne be sent to Virginia, that may be authorized to passe there for their Com∣merce and better trading. But whether all silver somewhat va∣lued above its worth, or part silver and part copper, is left to the wie judgments in that case. But of this confidently be as∣sured, that without some kinde of coyn or other, that Colony can no way prosper or thrive, nor any staple-commodities be set up, or Artificers in any kinde follow their professions: for Tobacco being now their money, and that with which all Commerce is driven, and paiments made in, and passeth from man to man; all men are set upon that thing with the neglect of all other rich and solid innumerable Commodities that are
in that land to be had: and till this remedy of Coyne be ap∣plied, there can be no prosperity in that Colony. Were not the thing as apparent to all mens understandings as light is from darknesse; I should alledge many reasons for it, but it's so needlesse to spend time about it, as it might well be thought a great absurdity. What then remains? but that some publique spirited Patriot that would immortalize his name and honour in the procuring of this so necessary a thing to be speedily effe∣cted, wherein also as the generall good he shall do, so the be∣nefit will be ever great to those that shall undertake the carry∣ing over this Coyne; be it what it will be, all men know it so well what the gain will be, as there's no need to name it in particular manner, they cannot wish for more profit then that will be to the undertakers, and the Colony will with all their hearts be content with it, and esteeme them happy and thrice happy Benefactours. The second thing is, that a Publication be procured and sent to the Colony in Virginia, declaring unto them, that there shall be liberty for all men to bring from thence for the space of ten years to come, any commodity that they shall there raise, into England, Custome and Excize free, (Tobacco onely excepted, which may pay double Custome, if so thought fit:) and further that to what value of money such commodities shall be sold for here in England, (being rated at the Custome-house at their entry;) it shall be lawfull to carry out to Virgi∣nia any Commodities again to the same proportion & worth, Custome and Excize free. These two reasonable things granted; as they shall infinitily with all speed advance the Plantation, so shall they (all things duly weighed in the scale of prudence) be no lesse beneficiall to England, as all men that have their eyes in their heads, and English hearts in their bodies, see and apparantly know, no∣thing more sure and certain; and all stable and needfull Com∣modities brought out of all-liberall-Virginia into England at a very reasonable rate and price, much cheaper then now we have them, and are fain to fetch them with great hazard from doubtfull friends, or Heathen Nations, to their great enrich∣ing and our own impoverishing, as to all knowing men is
most apparent; we shall be free from the usurpation of forreign Princes and States in our Estates, Lives, Liberties and shipping: and we may conclude boldly and rejoycingly, that Providence hath provided this all-sufficient Countrey of Virginia against these times, and to these intents, that hence we may have all we want from our own brethren, our Navy there increased to what number we please; for this incomparable land affords na∣turally all whate're belongs to the building and rigging of a Navy in all compleat manner from top to toe, as may be said; and by a safe, a sure, certain, easie, near at hand westerly dis∣coery, (part by land, and part by Rivers and Seas) contract all the riches of the South-sea, the Molocos, Philipines, China, &c. by 3000 leagues neerer to us, without molestation by any Prince or Pirat, and shall not need at all to be troubled, if Ru∣shia, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Germany, yea France Spain, Italy, Constantinople were removed 5000 times more distant from us: Sir Francis Drake was An. 1577 in a We∣sterly Sea one the back of Virginia, in 37 degrees in opposite to the head of James Town in Vir∣ginia and he failed from that Countrey which he cal∣led Nova Al∣bion, in an o∣pen Sea to the Molocos and China, and so that also this way a trade may be made to those places to the back of Virginia, &c. for in one word, what ever these Countreys afford, either necessary or superfluous, all-sufficient Virginia within its limits will produce unto us. And shall there not I say then now be found a zealous Patriot, that will stand up for his Countrey, and procure these things to be done out of hand? Now God forbid; I commit the businesse to God, ha∣ving done what I conceive my part is, who onely have good wishes, and daily prayers to attend this enterprize, which God prosper, Amen. POSTSCRIPT. At a friends importunity, (the former part sent to the Presse) I am thus enforced to make this Addition, and upon the great hopes that upon triall it will be found, that you may have two Silk-harvests in one six moneths time; of the eggs a second brood may be hatched in June, and so fed by Mulberry-leaves, though then it may be it must be in an house, that then for the promoting of such a good designe nothing of incourage∣ment may be wanting, nor any obstructions in the businesse, under pretence of wanting needfull housing for to feed the wormes in. Thus much I will assure you,
That the slightest and simplest kinde of housing or coverture (though the books are too superstitions and ceremonious in the rules which are many that they give concerning the or∣dering of the worm, which are not so necessary as they pre∣tend;) I assure you, you will abundantly content and satisfie this, though noble, yet most humble creature, even with any habitation to do her work in. And to this intent I now declare unto you, (that all excuse may be taken from you) that the poor simple people in Italy, Spain, Languedock, Provence, &c. do keep and feed their Silk-worms in the same low earthen-floored Rooms, wherein themselves lodge and do all their houshould-affairs, feeding them on shelves and on tables, gi∣ving them leaves without any more curiosity, and they thrive and prosper with them as well as in the greatest Cities and stately chambers of the greatest rich mens Palates. Sicily. And that in Sicilie and Calabria, the common Silk-Masters there do at time of year in the Spring, set up only slight boar∣ded houses in the fields round about the Mulberry groves, and placing shelves in the inside of them, two foot one above the other to the roof, and a table all a long the mid of the room, they strowing their leaves on these shelves and table, there feed their wormes, and there they spin in the room their Master lies for the space of five or six weeks time, and they have abundance of silk without more ado, and a man and a boy will tend all the worms that come of six ounces of eggs, and those wormes will spin 60 pound-weight of silk, and that but at 20 shil. the pound, is worth 60 ls. in ready money, a sufficient gain to allure a man to the work I tro; The great ga of the Silk∣works in a house, how much more i the trees, wil it be to you. The simplest and slightest houses or co∣vertures will be sufficient for the Wor to feed in, a live and spin let no man doubt it, &c. but the gain by the na∣turall worme multiplying will farre exceed it. And I may not forget yet more that the Persian manner is to pitch up onely tents of Canvas, and Booths round their Mulberry-wood, and there-under they strow the Mulberry-tree leaves on the ground there their wormes feed and live and spin, and do well in all kindes, the Persians living also the time of five weeks in the tents. Thus all these examples do manifestly prove unto you that very simple and slight housing and  coverture will content the Silk-Worms, and they will thrie we in them. And thus you see that very poor and slight houses in Virginia
will do the deed. Nay rest assured that the very Savages houses built but with Poles Arbor-wie, and covered top and sides with mats, wil be abundantly satisfactory to the wormes, and they will thrive in them as you shall finde upon triall. And let me tell you, being desirous that you may do all things with the least cost and labour to you, and to invite also the Savages to the work for their own gain; do but take your Reeds and small Canes in Virginia, and run but a strong neede and threed thorow the Reeds which will hold them together, and so you may presently make shelves and tables with them as narrow and as broad as you please; and in truth you shall finde this kinde of shelf and tabling to feed your worms on much better in many respects then boards: Concerning the winding off your Silk, this Lady hath lent you one of the wheels, so hat by it all of ou may make he like to do hat work, so ou shall want othing to peed the work but you may make triall of the Persian way also by strowing your leaves on the ground in these houses, and so feed them, and so your second brood of Silk∣worms may also be thus kept and nourished in this kinde of housing and coverture; Experience is the Mistris of fools, saith the Proverb: and it is not an unwise mans part often to make trials, though to some men they may seem impossibilities, yet rare and strange things have upon triall often been found out; and if you would but shew the Savages samples of all kinde of things, you should soon by them know more in a moneth what is in that Countrey to be had then you have done these 40 years; and for reward they would bring in of all kindes unto you, what they have and you desire to know, so a sudden dis∣covery may be made of all things in that land to your infinite gain. To conclude with this Memento, that there are nine things that appear, are of no or small difficulty to you and the Savages to enterprize, and get gain and wealth to be produced from these Commodities; I will but name them and leave them to your better judgements and thoughts. 1 This Silke, so easie, speedy, and profitable a thing. 2 The Silk-grasse naturally there growing, which to the Indians the onely labour is of putting it up, and bringing it to you at such a price; a rich Commodity if known. 3 The planting Vines, small labour, little cost, long en∣during.
4 The multiplying of Cunny-warrens, so easie a thing, the wool of a skin now worth 8 pence, which is more then the body, yet the flesh is considerable meat; the wooll is and will be very vendible for this new Invention, not onely of these fine light hats now sold at 15 and 20 shil. but the spining of the wool, and making stockings of it as fine as those of silke. 5 The increasing of abundance of Bees for wax and honey, their food so plentifull in Virginia, as in no Land more, and if with an hatchet you do but slash your Pine-trees, Firre-trees, Locus, and other trees, there will store of liquor come out of them, on which the Bee will gather infinite store of honey and wax, as in Russia and other Countreys they do. 6 The planting of Sugar-canes, that being no more labori∣ous then the Indian wheat, setting it, and once set in good Land they grow eight or ten years, and the Indians pains will onely be to cut them yearly down, and sell them to you. 7 That of the Cotton-tree is the like for many years, ga∣thering of the cods of woll from them, as we do Roses from the Rose-bushes. 8 That of Ginger soon done, the planting and the gathe∣ring of it. 9 That of grafting your Crab-trees with Apples and Pears for Sider and Perry, you knowing that a man in one day will graft an 100 stocks, and they will grow night and day, while you eat, sleep, and play, and last 100 years to your great gain and profit. I may not further inlarge my self for the present, these are but tastes and hints for your better wits to worke on: so with a thousand good wishes, I bid you adiew. Floreat VIRGINIA.
The fashion of the Botome. The Silke Bottome of the naturall Worm in Virginia, found there in the Woods, is ten Inches about, and six Inches in length to admiration: & where∣as ours in Europe have their Sleave and loose Silke on the outside; and then in a more closer covering they in∣tombe themselves. These rare Worms, before they inclose themselves up, fill with Silke the great emptinesse, and afterwards inclose them∣selves in the middle of it, so they have a double Bottom. The loose Sleave Silk is all on the outside of this compass, for if that were reckoned in, the compasse of the Bottom would far exceed this proportion: But this is sufficient to be the Wonder of the whole World: to the Glory of the Crea∣tour, and Exaltation of VIRGINIA.
A Loving Advertisement to all the Ingenious Gentlemen-Plan∣ters in Virginia now upon the Designe of Silk. By V. F. Gentlemen, SVch hath bin the singular favour of Providence to you and the Lady, that since the publishing of this Book; it hath so happily lighted into the hands of divers worthy persons, be∣ing not only Gentlemen-Travellers of credit, & Merchants of reputation; but likewise wonderfully taken with the love of Virginia, and no less zealously affected to the advancement of the Silk-trade in that Land, which they judge (not of their ex∣perience and knowledge of what they have and observed in the Easterly parts of the World, where abundance of Silk is made) that no part of the World is more proper for Silk then Al-suf∣ficient-Virginia: In regard of the excellency of the temper of the Climate, which naturally produceth not onely Mulberries for food; but the Silk-worme it selfe, in that wonderful great∣ness of the wilde Silk-bottom: which as they say, The whole Vniverse affords not, nor brings forth the like to their own small admiration. And that there is no greater quantities of them found or seen they conclude, it is in regard of the birds who are their natural enemies, & devoure most of them. And these Gentlemen are confident, that you did not know & practise those ways and meanes, for the feeding and preservati∣on of them, as in some far remote Regions is practised by those Nations, that are expert Masters of Silk-wormes, Virginia would instantly abound with great store of Silk, and surpass all those Countreyes in that rich commodity, and you all be∣come with great speed and small cost, or ltle labour one of the happiest, wealthiest people that the World affords. And to the intent that such a blessing may not be longer wanting to you, they hae out of their superlative benigne affections, and publike spirit, imparted to the Lady these ensuing Relati∣ons, with their earnest desires and advises, that you all in Virginia may out of hand be made partakers of them. And then knowing them, you may no longer live in gross dark∣nes and ignorance of so great a treasure that you are possessors
of, and may now have and enjoy the full use and benefit of, which hitherunto hath most straingely been hidden from the eyes of body and mind; They conceiving that the chief cause thereof hath been the pernicious blinding smoak of Tobacco, that thus hath dimmed and obscured your better intellectuals; but when you begin to put these wayes & means in practice, they say you will blesse your selves (as they do) that you have not in this long time discovered the infinite wealth and hap∣piness that will arise unto you out of Silk. But not longer to detain from you this most precious eye-salve, for the speedy curing of your infirmity, and making you all rich (which is your main aime in that new world). Hearken well to these Informations, which the Lady earnestly de∣sires may thus be with all speed made known to you all. THe one Traveller declared, That he passed a Countrey where he saw those people had their Silk-worms feeding on their Mulberry-trees in the fields & there they live & spun their Bottoms on the trees, And to protect this noble profi∣table creature & to defend it from the birds, they used a most slight, simple, plain invention speedily effected & of no cost or labour to them, which was certain great sheets of Reeds or Canes, that they hung over and about their trees, tied to cer∣tain poles that incompassed them. And in this easie manner they obtained great abundant quantities of silk, to their won∣derful inriching. The sheets of Reeds were joyned together by a neede and thred, running through each Reed at several equal distances, and so drew them close and firm together. This for you to imitate, is in every respect to your wonder∣full happiness. Another of these Travellers saith, That he passed a Coun∣trey where the inhabitants did make large Tents or Boothes all of Reeds and Canes, and in them placed shelves and tables made likewise of Reeds, on which they fed their Worms, strewing leaves on them. These tents they set up round a∣bout their Mulberry-Groves, and with much celerity, and no cost. A third Gentleman and Merchant, that lived long in the
farthest parts of Turkey, affirmeth, That there the inhabitants begin every Spring, March, to feed their Worms, and con∣tinue it till October, six moneths time: their Worms hatching & re-hatching, one generation or brood succeeding the other: so that they have three harvests of silk-bottoms, in that space of time, every five or six weeks one: they feed their Worms in great long Barns made of Reeds or Canes, the walls and roofs of them, and shelves as aforesaid, and the Wormes when they have done feeding, spin their bottoms upon the reedy walls and roofs; and that they have two crops of leaves from their trees: for those trees that have their leaves pull'd off in March, April, and May, do re-leave again, and have new and fresh leaves in June, July and August, wherewith they feed their latter generation or brood of Wormes very profi∣tably. And in confirmation of this, you shall know, the same hath been found true in England, that the Mulberry-tree will leave twice in a Summer, the Lady had the experience of it, and therefore much more will it do with you, which will be a most singular advantage to you. I must not omit to add what these Gentlemen farther ad∣vise, that you can never sufficiently augment the store of food for this Noble Creature: for store of food is the main foun∣dation, upon whose speeding the Silk-trade is to be erected: for if that be not wanting, no obstruction can be in it. For the glorious Worm is so infinite in multiplication, with that celerity as is incredible, so that she will never be defective unto you: they therefore counsell, that you graft your Mul∣berries with all care and speed upon these severall trees, upon which they will exceedingly thrive, viz. the Popler, the Elme, the Chesnut, Beech, Quince, Medler, Fig, Peare, Apple, and Cornell-trees. And also upon any other trees, of which upon a trial you find the Worm will taste or eat their leaves. Like∣wise that you set of your Mulberry-slips as big as your thumb, about two foot long: and put them into good wel-digg'd ground in September, setting them a foot in the ground, brui∣sing the ends of them, and watering them the next Summer well, if need be: in the same manner as in Kent, they set the
Codling-slips. That you also cause the Indians to bring unto your habitations all the young Mulberry-trees that are with∣in an hundred miles of your Colony. But let me acquaint you that they admire what some Gentlemen Planters of cre∣dit tell them; that your brave Wormes do not onely live, feed, and spin upon the Mulberry-trees in the Woods, but do the same upon the Poplar-trees, Plum-trees, and Apple-trees:: such an incouragement to the Silk-trade, the World (say they) never yet heard of before, which must needs lift you up to a most speedy and incomparable height of wealth and riches, in a moment of time. And by your gentle patience and generosity, give me leave to propound unto you, the earnest request the Lady hath to all of you; that you please to inform her (being also the desire of many others) how it comes to pass that your Wormes get to your severall trees, not only to the Mulberry, but to others: For in no other Countreys the Silk-worme-flie doth use her wings to flie with: so that yours must either do it (and so at time of yeer couple and flie to sundry trees; and there lay their eggs which remain till Spring again) or that your trees do naturally ingender and produce the Wormes (as it is con∣ceived, the original of them so hapned at first) but which way soever it be, it's rare and remarkable; and proves Virginia to be one of the most superlative Countreys in all the Vniverse for the Silk-trade; and none comparable unto the excellen∣cy of its naturall temper for Silk. Then that you also inform her all you can of the nature, actions, qualities and dispositions in all kindes of this most wonderfull Creature, every way so admirable, what by any English or Savage hath bin any way observed in her: when her eggs first hatch, then how long time she is feeding before she spins, upon what part of the trees she fastens her Bottom; How long she continues in her Bottom before she comes out a Fly, then when they couple, where they lay their eggs, up∣on what part of the trees? How long they live after that time? For these in the old World never eat after they once begin to spin: how large in bigness and compass are commonly their bottoms? if all of one colour, or divers? In what part
of the Countrey are most of them seen and found? what do the Savages call them, or know any use of them; what birds are they that most devoure them? (for did they not, they would swarm all the Land over in a very few yeers); if any thing besides birds be hurtfull to them? Their greatness and doubleness of their Bottoms are wonderful, none ever known to be so, which argues the strength and richness of this noble Worm, her vigour and hardnes exceeds, that can endure all wethers and seasons both alive and in her eggs. A great in∣couragement to you all that she is not a nice curious kinde of Silkworme; but stout and robustous, that will require little care or attendance, of small cost unto you. But her food and protection is all she requires, and pays you ten thousand-fold for what you bestow on her. That you please to send of her Bottoms to satisfie all men, who are like the Queen of Sheba, much better trust their eyes than eares; some of their eggs likewise upon that which they lay them, and the Fly (though dead) which will many a yeer retain her perfect form in a box: do not the wormes hatch and spin twice or thrice in a Summer? Let me add one Petition more, and I have done. viz. That some of your precious Silk-grass may be sent the Lady, who is confident upon the triall she will make of it, she will give you so pleasing an account and so profitable unto you, in ma∣king known unto you what an unknown wealth you have: she prays you (and all is for your own gain) to bore and cut all your trees (a most easie thing) and thereby you shall discover presently, what rich Gums, what Balsoms, what Oils, and precious healthful Liquours they will yield you for profit & necessity: For all men know that many kindes of trees do yield most pleasant and healthsome Wines (as I may call them) for man to drink; so also you will finde out all sorts of Dies and Colours (instantly done): cut and bruise all kindes of your Woods, Barks, and Leaves of Trees, Roots, Berries, Nuts, Fruits, Plants, Weeds; and but boil them in a Skillet, and then put in a little piece of white Woollen or Linnen cloth with some Allom, and you shall instantly finde and see what rich Colours they will make. What is Indico but a Weed, so
Woad and Madder? What is Brasil, Fustick, Logwood, and many more kinde of Dies, but Woods? what Coucheneal the rich Scarlet die, but a Fly, or the excrements of the Indian Fig-tree? what is the new-found rich dying stuff of 25. l. a Tun, but of a tree that is brought from the Island of Liberty, neer Cape Florida where Captain Sailes plants? And shall Virginia not yield a drop of good Liquour or Colour? It cannot be; if but a triall thus easie were made. By burning of all kinde of Woods and Gums, you'le soon finde by your nose what sweet Perfumes they yield. And by the ponderousness or weight of earths, you may know if Mi∣nerals or not? Let it be known also, if you have not Waters of more than ordinary qualities; for taste, colours, smell, weight, hotness, or coldness? there is much depends upon them. And you shall know if they proceed out of any Mine∣rals, by taking a glass full, and putting into it a Gall beaten to powder, which will turn the water into a reddish colour: and send samples of all kinde of strange earths, and of all other kinde of things without fail. And lastly, (if it be not too much presumption to beg the favour to receive that honour from you) which she no wayes deserves nor can hope to requite: To inform her what be the things, the wayes, the means to advance Virginia's Prosperity, if they may be procured and effected. If any errour be committed in telling you all this: there is hope your pardon may be obtained, seeing your onely good and benefit hath caused all this that hath been said: and the zeal of your wealth and happiness hath drawn all to this length: Sirs, you have the faithful testimonies of those aforesaid worthy Gentlemen, and nothing can be now wanting unto you but putting all in practice, what they have declared; and for your good are such invitations and incouragements unto you, that more cannot be wished for. There remains nothing but humble thanks to God, and to these Gentlemen your due respects, whom God hath made such Instruments for your happiness, hoping their noble courteous examples will allure all other Gentlemen Travellers to cast into this good work some mites of their further knowledges, and every man
to contribute his prayers and help to this or any other hope∣full designe: seeing the consequence of them may be so good and great, not only to the English Nation at home and abroad; but to the poor Savages their welfare of souls and bodies, which God grant. An Other Advertisement. THe Silk-Trade, (unlesse we will be deaf to Reason and Ex∣perience) cannot be denyed the precedency of all Trades that are at this day a foot, in either World: And that in regard of its great and certain gain in so small a time; A man and a Boy being able to tend as many Silk-worms in two Moneths space, as will yeeld you sixty pounds: According to that is made Sicille by a Man and Bo which done, they leave you ten Moneths free for any other imployment. In re∣gard of its small skill, lesse pains, care and labour, no hazard, no cost or charge, (more then a twelve-penny Reel) no trou∣blesome tools or Implements: in regard of its incredible ease and pleasure, as not requiring strength of Body, of Wit, of Purse, any stock to begin with, only hands and eyes to gather leaves and feed the Worms with, or protect them from the Birds: if kept on the Trees (their natural Mansion:) Admitting of all Ages, (for a Child can do all that belongs to it) all Sexes, all Qualities, (a most fit recreation for Ladies, especially being begun and ended in the two pleasantest Moneths of the year, March and April.) And all Callings too; for if Saint Paul made Tents, who can plead exemption from tending Silk∣worms? A most prop imployment  the lasie In¦ans. Again, Silk is lesse chargeable in Ware-House, Fraight, &c. then any other Commodity, and yet none more durable, lasting, neat, vendible, nor more easily transpor∣table: for Fie hundred pounds worth of Silk, fraights lesse, and takes up lesse room then ten pounds worth of Tobacco. Now where Worms and Food abound naturally, and the Inhabitants are born with Brains, the advancement of the Silk Trade must needs be proportionable: upon which double score Virginia hath the advantage of any place in the yet dis∣covered World; I mean for Worms and Food, which may be thus severally demonstrated. Their Worms (partly annually
produced by heat and moysture as our Caterpillars and other Insects each Spring, partly by Eggs which have escaped the Birds who are the greatest cause of their scarsity (which other∣wise would swarm over all the Land) devouring them when they are Worms, Eggs and Bottoms) exceed ours not only in strength, hardinesse and greatnesse, (being when Flyes as big as mens Thumbs) but also in the largenesse of their Bot∣toms, which are as big as Limons; (for Mr. William Wright of Nansamond found of them above seven inches round) and one of them weighs more then a score of ours; insomuch that whereas a Thousand of our Worms made but one pound of Silk, worth at most here 30s. a pound, a thousand of their na∣tural Worms will make ten pounds of Silk, worth here twenty shillings the pound. And certainly they need not object or be troubled at the somewhat more coursnesse of their Silk, since they from the same number of Worms receive ten pounds in mony for our thirty shillings. As for their Food, the Virginia Worms feed not only on the Mulberry (their sole food in all other parts of the World) but also on the Crab, Plum, Poplar; Oake, Apple, Cherry and Pohickerry-tree leaves, with sundry other shrubs and bushes. For proof whereof, Mistresse Mary Ward sent over to her Couzen ten bottoms taken from Apple trees. Esquire Ferrar her Kinsman likewise sent her ten more, pulled off from Oaks and divers shrubs. Mr Laurence Ward some taken from the Pohickerry tree, Mr Wright from the Cherry tree. So Dr Russel and others. The Objection, or rather groundlesse surmise of the Worms being hurt by Thunder in Virginia, is sufficiently cleared, not only by the Natural Worms living so well, and thriving there so admirably on the trees; but also by trial made there this Spring of our Worms. That ever to be honoured Noble Squire Diggs having (at his very great charge) sent for two Arme∣nians out of Turky skilful men, and made ten pound of Silk, which had not want of Eggs hindred him, would have been so many Thousand pounds. Nothing then wants to make Virginia rival Peru for wealth, more then to perswade the Planters to provide themselves this
Winter (to lose no more time) of as many of the Natural Worms bottoms as possibly they can. They will now be found in the Woods on the dis-leaved trees, though most of them are spun by the Worms on the tree leaves, which falling to the ground, they perish with them; and this is another great cause that so few bottoms are to be found. The Bottoms thus gotten must be carefully kept in some long boxes till the Flyes come forth, happily in February or March. For they remain in their bottoms 300. dayes, ours but 20. so that their Eggs (whereof one female will lay a spoonfull, suppose 500.) lye unhatched but about nine dayes, ours nine moneths. When your Worms are hatched, you may keep them either on the trees (being assured that they will live on that kind of Tree whatsoever it be from whence you took your Bottoms) and then you shall need onely to protect them from the Birds; or else in some slight kind of housing, Reedy arbors, Indian mansions, or what else you can devise there cheapest and spee∣diest, and then your onely labour and care is to give them leaves, which you may either strip off, or clip from off your Trees, or if you will, lop off little branches (which may per∣haps prove a good way for you: for thereby the leaves will remain the longer fresh) and give them to your Worms, who for the labour of every Man and Boy thus inployed only in two moneths time, will repay you with threescore pounds worth of Silk. Your own Experience (Gentlemen) will I hope ere this time twelv-moneth certifie you of the truth that is here set down, unlesse you shall rather chuse to hugg your own poverty, and make much of that slavery and drudgery you wear out your selves with, in toyling about that contemptible, beggarly Indian Weed, TOBACCO.
The Copy of Esquire Diggs his Letter, to his much honoured freind, John Ferrar, Esquire at his house at little Gidding, in Huntingtonshire. From Virginia, June 21. 1654. Sir, I Have received your many and severall Letters, printed papers, and Quaeries; and, would my occasions have permitted, I should ere this, have given you that due thanks you deserve, and punctually have answered all your judicious and pleasing Quaeries: But I was so taken up in sending dayly for Mulberry-leaves, as they are now so far scattered from my present Plantation, that I could not possi∣bly answer your expectations; That onely difficulty made me to make but 400. pound weight of Silk-bottomes, which I caused to be wound of 7. or 8. l. of Silke in a day: Sir, I doe very well ap∣prove of your last well printed Paper, sent the Colony for making triall of the Naturall Silk-worme, but such was my ill happe, that I could not this spring meet with any of those Bottoms, but shall this next Winter procure of them, all I can; Sir, I am now confi∣dent, I have conquered all the great feared difficulty of this rich commodity, and made its sweet easy and speedy Profitt so evi∣dent to all the Virginians (and that it doth not at all hinder their too much beloved Tobacco, but that they may proceed with both together) that now I doubt not (nor they) but that in a short time here will be great quantities made of Silke; you in England will reape much advantage, and gaine many waies by it, (more then most men can pet see) and I by Gods blessing the comfort and joy, in setting up so noble, so beneficiall, a staple vendible commodity. My people differ very little from the rules set down in your, Mr. Williams his Booke, and as Esquire Samuell Hartlib hath also directed in his advertizement of Silk-worms unto us; only in the hatching of the Worms-Eggs, they are more curious, of which I shall, when I have more time, give you a more particular accompt: I made 10. l. of seed or Eggs this spring to give away to diverse Planters, that are very earnest (seeing so great a benefit before their eyes) to become also Silk-masters, you need not feare it but that this next spring there will be divers tryalls made of the hope∣full Naturall Worms, that you so highly prize (and not without good cause) and which is more, perhaps they may fall one after ano∣ther
and be re-hatched that we may have a double Silk harvest in one summer (as you have formerly hinted to us). Pray Sir will you be pleased at this time to excuse my too much brevity in this great business of so much concernment, of so much happiness to this Country, and attribute it to my great hast, and much business upon the ships sudden departure, having many more dispatches to make to Freinds; But in my next, I shall make you double amends; I pray present my service to the vertuous Lady Virginia: Sir I daily pray for your long life, and well-fare, and now rest. Sir your most humble Servant, Edward Diggs. A Way Experimented by Mr. Farrar, to make the Gummy-hard Naturall Virginia Bottoms (which hetherto by no art could be be prepared to unwind by reason of the Gummy hardness) to un∣winde with ease, to the great advantage of the Planters of the Silk-trade in Virginia. YOu must take Sope-boylers lye or liquor, which is very sharp and strong, and set that in a vessel over the fire till it be warme, then put in as many of your hard gummy Bottoms as you please, and let them rest in that liquor, till it be scal∣ding-hot, and so remain half a quarter of an houre more or less, till they be so dissolved that you may take out one and find it fit to unwind; which you must thus doe. First put the Bottoms into scalding clean water, and having layen a while therein, then take them out and proceed to un∣wind them as the custome is. In case Sope-boylers lye or liquor be not to be had, you may make a strong liquor of the Ashes of any Wood, with boyling water, the stronger the better, and this may and will also perform the work. And this is just as you make a lye to buck clothes withal. Only note it must be very strong made.
An Extract out of a very Ingenious Gentlemans Letter from Dublin, Concerning the Reformed Virginian Silk-worm. I Thank you for your Virginian Paper. Me thinkes the Ex∣periment is most Natural to my apprehensions, that the Worms should feed and thrive best upon the leaves growing on the Trees, rather then in the Houses, and that they, like other Caterpillers (of whom these are a sort) did at first breed so, and that Houses were rather an Invention for expedi∣ency, But their Proposition about Money to be carried to Virgi∣nia, I utterly dislike; even somuch as if it were possible, I would banish Money from Ireland. An Animadversion upon the Letter from Dublin. I like not the Gentlemans Reason why he likes the Pro∣position concerning feeding o Silk-worms upon the Trees. For almost all Plants, even the most rare now in use were Originally (namely since the deluge) wild and past muster amongst Weeds, & are improved to such a degree of excellen∣cy to the eye, nose or palat, by industry and home-helps and contrivances: So Iohn Tradeskin by Lambeth, by the advan∣tage of putting his Trees, and other Plants into a warm house in winter or a stow, nurses up those things faire and fra∣grant, which would without that help either dye or be dwarft. This is the reason why tame Pigeons or Conies are larger, and breed better, and oftner then wild. Yet I con∣clude not a gainst the thing it self; for questionles, that the leaves have more heart, fresh and greene, then halfe withered, if the cause of their withering were known or considered, But I can say little to this, as having no experience, A new observation, concerning the feeding of Silk-worms with Lettice, imparted from Dublin. I Have only to present you with some observations I made concerning the feeding of Silk-worms (meeting here ac∣cidentally
with a kinswoman of mine that keepes great store of them) whih generally is beleeved only to be don, with Mulberry leaves: the contrary of which is here by some pra¦ctised. viz. to feede them with Lettice; which the worms eat very readily, grow as those big as that are fed with Mulberry leaves & spin as much Silk: They wil also eate the hearb called Dantedelyon, but whether that will so well agree with them as Lettice, I have not tried, but with Lettice they will thrive very well, eating nothing else all the yeare. More Observations concerning the feeding of Silk-worms with Lettice, SIR, MY good Cosen Mr. W. sent me the letter, you wrote to him; and the note sent you out of Ireland, that intima∣ted the happy success the Gentlewoman had then in keeping Silk-worms, not only on the Mulberry-tree-leaves, but with Lettice leaves, the thing you much desired that my Daughter should have made known unto her. Truly Sir your singular humanity and goodness in all things more and more extends it selfe for the publique benefit of all, and I see to the particu∣lar satisfaction of your Freinds, though Strangers to you yet those that have daly cause more and more to honour you, as we justly do. Sir, this your favour is both by my-self and Daughter so much resented as it requires from us, very hearty and particular thanks to be tendered to your worth. She is a lover of Rarities in these kinds, and to try conclusions upon her Silk-worms, and no way envious, but much rejoyces to heare that any have had that good success with Lettis as you write of, and shall her-self againe make a third triall in that kind, for she hath 2. yeares last past tryed her-self to have kept some with Lettice leavs & so did & they thrivd as well as they kept with Mulberrys, but stil when the time of spinning came they would not spin, but then dyed and this put her out of heart to try further, yet I may tell you, she perswaded a Gen∣tleman near her to keep some with Lettice 25. daies and then fed them with Mulberrys at last, and these did very well and spun as good Bottoms as those wholly kept with Mulberry
leaves. But now she resolves upon your intimation of the ex∣periment made in Ireland to try a third time, and to give you an accompt of her success in June next, if God permit. And now Sir she presents this printed inclosed paper to your worthy judgment, if you find not it matter of considera∣tion and reason for her to send it as a second new yeares gift to Virginia, hoping that it may do good there to the Planters and informe them of much truth; and invite them to the busi∣ness of Silk, which God grant, Amen. This other paper of Ryming lines (for Verses they deserve not the name) yet being that what her Brother a young Scho∣lar hath collected out of Letters, that were sent her from Vir∣ginia and given her, she also sends you to further informe you of things done, last spring. Thus worthy, Sir, with the due respects of both our kindest salutes, wishing you all happiness in this and the better world, I rest ever. Yours in all love and service JOHN FERRAR. Littell Gidding Huntingshire. this 28. Novemb. 1653. SIR, She makes bold to present you with a sample of Virgi∣nia Silk-grass sent her by a freind. It's a rarity, and she hopes will delight you who have such a publique Spirit to rejoyce, and further a Common good; as she hath great hopes this will prove a commodity next to the Silk there, as skilfull men and Artists do assure her of it, and thousands of poor people will be set a work with it, if it prove there to be in quantity.
Upon the most Noble, Virginian natural Silk-Worm her wonderful, various, plentiful food; The infinite, speedy, great wealth she will produce to her prote∣ctor; (in 45. days the time of her feeding) with small labour, cost, or skill, (learnt in an houres space by any child.) The singular aptness of that rare Su∣perlative Climate, in Breeding them on so many se∣veral kinds of Trees in her Woods where they live, Feed and Spin, their mighty large, strange, double-bottoms of Silk: To the admiration of this our Old World; but to the exaltation and glory of incompa∣rable Virginia, in the New. WHere Wormes and Food doe naturally abound, A Gallant Silken Trade must there be found: Virginia excells the World in both, Envie nor Malice can gaine say this troth. Many a man the causes faine would heare, How these rare Worms came first or still come there. Insects produced are by heat and moisture Who in strange shapes and formes do oft appeare. In Spring our trees the Caterpillers reare; Their trees likewise these noble creatures beare. And some proceed from eggs that scaped are From their enemies sight, which thing is rare. They feed not only on the Mulberry Which in our World sole food is held to be
For all such precious Worms of that degree: But Popler, Plum, Crab, Oake, and Apple tree, Yea Cherry, and tree called Pohickery: So on the Shrubs and Bushes feed full many Her Worms are huge whose bottoms dare With Lemmons of the largest size compare. And twenty one of ours will sure poize less Then one of theirs for weight and ponderousness. Master William Wright of Nansamound Found Bottoms above seven Inches round. And though the Silk prove not all out so fine As Persian, that's no let to the designe. For since a thousand of our Bottoms make But one pound of fine Silk, you'l ten pounds take From theirs. If we at Thirty shillings sell Our pound, for twenty they'l afford theirs well. The paines that's taken is alike in either But the gaines by theirs eight times greater: Then, we confined are to the Mulberry For food, their Worms have great Variety. Her dainty coloured flies and large Worms In length and bigness do surpass mens Thumbs. Whereas ours short of little fingers come. Our flies come out in twenty days and lay Eggs, theirs not still three hundred as they say O wondrous thing! a Worm to fast so long And then come out a painted Fly so strong. Nine mouths full out our eggs unhatch't remaine Nine daies in Spring makes theirs revive againe A Planter (I wish they had him named) A spoonfull eggs from one fly he gained Which to five hundred at least amounted Loe shortly endless they must be counted.
In March they first begin to live and feed In Aprill they have done the Silken deed The sweetest, pleasantst time in all the yeare. You to this Wealth the chanting Birds will cheare And ten moneths time they leave you with great ease To spend it in what profit you shall please. Rare Worms who feeding five and forty daies On leaves of sundry Plants and shrubs repaies Their keepers with fine Silke which wants no strength And yet extends it selfe some miles in lenght And for the labour of a Man and Boy They gaine you Sixty pounds which is no toy. If you from Birds protect them on the trees (Their naturall mansions) t'will them best please Your paines is spar'd in giving them the leaves By which alone you gaine their Silken sleaves For non-parrel Virginia in her Woods, Brings forth as all men know these precious goods: Where thousand fleeces fit for Princes Robes On Virgin-trees shall hang in Silken Globes. The noble Worm so hardy, strong and stout No weather ill is able them to rout. The reasons why the numbers are so small Less Cruell Birds devoure most of them all When they are Worms yea Eggs or Silken ball. Most bottoms likewise on the leaves are spun Both falling to the ground do perish soon Those only found that spun are on the branch Not by their care but providentiall chance Which only show themselves when all is bare To Find in Summer any 'tis most rare. If to prevent both dangers you intend A Reedy-Arbourwell will doe't, you'l find
Or slightest coverture in any kind The skill and paines to all each Child can do: As you shall find on triall tis most true. And may in Wealth compare with rich Peru. And for all Tooles that appertaine thereto A Twelve-peny Reele is all it will cost you, No wit, no strength, no purse, no stock will need But Eies and hands, the Worms to guard and feed. And thus you see done is the Silken deed: Which brings you so great wealth with so much speed. Five hundred pounds worth of rich Silk, all know Fraights less then ten pounds in poore Tobacco Silkes are no trash, no toy, nor Pedlars ware; Staple, good, and ready chinke every where. Twenty shillings a pound t'will yield you cleare And Ships to fetch it will come flying there. Queenes of the best edition need not scorne In her owne Livery to serve this Worm: Only to give her leaves is all she craves And in reward with Silk shee'l make you brave. Out of her rich belly by her mouth spun Weaves it into a most curious bottom Which by a Reele turning with hand of man Is wholly wound off most neatly againe. To feed Silk-Worms no Caling can disdaine Seeing they yeild you so much honest gaine No imployment in the World so likely To make so soone your lasie Savage Wealthy. For his Silk bottoms in exchange shall have From English, what he so needs, begs, and craves Red coats, hose, shooes, knives, they highly deeme Jewes-Trumps, Bells, Beads, all toys, no less esteeme. If all be thus the cause you now demand
Why hath this knowledg been thus long detain'd And but now by the Ladies Books inflam'd Ignorance of Planters so strange hath been Till now ne're knew nor dreamt of this rich thing Confest it is, that of't some they have seene Regardlesly, but ne're did them esteeme. Which loss of Wealth and Honour they'l regaine And Virgins Counsell follow will amaine. The happy onset they this Spring have made Assures them all a stately pretious trade. Sir Henry Chichly that Heroick Knight Affirmes ther's not an ingenuous Wight. In Virginia but makes all speed he can To be e're long a Silken noble man. And say, Colonel Ludlow certifies That thence from Silk great profit will arise; Yea worthy Bernard that stout Colonel Informes the Lady the work most facile And of rich Silken stuffs, made shortly there He hopes that he and others shall soone weare. So major John Westrope saith, Silk will be A gallant designe for their brave Country. Thunder was that, that some men onely doubt But triall made this Spring puts that feare out. In all Lands where Worms are kept tis wonder To heare that any were harm'd by thunder. Their naturall Worm proves this more truer. Mr. Gorge Lobs that prudent old Planter Tels her that Worms ne're spun Silk daintier. Lets give those Gentlewomen their full dues Mistress Garret and Burbage for Silk clues That Colonells Wife needs not farr to rove Her Court affords a pleasant Mulberry Grove:
But noble Diggs carries the Bell away (Lass! want of eggs made so small the essay) His two Armenians from Turky sent Are now most busy on his brave attempt And had he stock sufficient for next yeare Ten thousand pound of Silk would then appeare And to the skies his worthy deeds upreare. Loe here what mistress Mary Ward hath sent And to her Lady Cosin she presents Ten rare Bottoms took from her Apple-tree That all England may it beleeve and see. Her honour'd Kins-man Esquire Frrar, To confirme and make the wonder greater Ten more likewise hath sent her, which he found On stately Oakes and Shrubs that kiss the ground And Doctour Russell that learn'd Phisitian Hath with his, made a full addition. For things more slowly do affect the minde Which eares do heare then those that eies do find. Now from smoke Virginia shall be raised And throughout the World be duly praised. Ah Blest be God that now in his due time This Silken light apparently doth shine Then come, O come with sacred Days Let us sound the Almightys praise I. F. To the most Noble deserving Esquire Diggs: upon the Arrivall of his two Armenians out of Turky into Virginia. Courage, brave Sir: sith Ayde from God is sent Proceed, go on, drive forth thy great intent.
A Comparison between the gain and labour of TOBACCO and SILK. TObacco requires 9 moneths time, much care and labour, both without and within dores, and a mans Crop is commonly 15 hundred weight of To∣bacco, and this at two pence a pound is 14 pound gain. Silk requires six weeks time, if done in a house, and by the labour of a man and boy, in gathering leaves, and tending the worms that come of six ounces seed, there is by so many worms spun as much Silk as will weigh sixty pound weight, and this but at 20 shil. a pound, yeelds 60 l. in ready money. Tobacco, leaves a man but 3 moneths in the year for other business. Silk, leaves a man ten moneths time in the year, for any other imployments. 14 pounds a man gaines by his Crop of Tobacco. 60 pounds a man and boy gains by his Crop of Silk. Then let all men judge which is the more gainfull. But what will be the gain and profit, by the worms feeding and spinning on the Trees is more considera∣ble, and also the naturall Virginia-Worms bottome exeeding ours in Europe 20 times in bigness, and in weight: what a Treasure then will this be, and no labour, cost, hazard, expence of time at all, a Boy onely to keep away the Birds from eating the Silk∣worms on the Trees, &c.
Thus learned Bartas upon this noble & admirable Creature. YEt may I not this Wonderous Worm pass by, Of fly urn'd Worm, and of a Worm a Fly. Two Births, two Deaths, here Nature hath assign'd her, Leaving a Posthum, dead-live Seed behind her; Which soon transforms the fresh and tender leaves Of Thisbes pale tree, to those tender sleaves (On Ovall Clues) of soft smooth silken Flax, which more for us then for her self she makes. O precious fleece! which only did adorne The sacred loins of Princes heretofore: But our proud age, with prodigall abuse Hath so profan'd the old honorable use: That Shifters now, that scarce have bread to eat Disdain plain Silk, unless it be beset With one of those brave Metals, whose desire Burns greedy soules with an impartiall fire. Had Du Bartas fully known all the vertues and rarities in this incomparable Creature, even a miracle in Nature, he would have inlarged his Poems in a more ample manner in the praise of it, to the great honour of the Creatour.  Cui Gloria, Amen. Homo Vermis. Wee all are creeping Worms of th' earth, Some are Silk-Worms great by birth, Glow-Worms some that shine by night, Slow-Worms others, apt to bite, Some are muck-Worms slaves to wealth, Maw-Worms some that wrong the health, Some to the publique no good willers, Cancker-Worms and Cater-pillers; Found about the earth wee'r crawling, For a sorry life wee'r sprawling, Putrid stuff we suck, it fills us, Death then sets his foot and kills us. FINIS.
