B3246 E562_12 99865269 165233
A BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND: And a Great VICTORY Obtained by Sir CHARLES COOT Lord President of the Province of Connaught, and Commander of those Forces, and of London-Derry, against the Brittish Forces of Laggan; with some Regiments of Irish and Highlanders, and Irish, under Major Generall George Monro. Major Belfore, Cap. Madder, and divers others slaine: And Lieu. Col. Galbryth, Maj. Hambleton, Cap. Steuart, Maj. Graham; and many other Officers taken pri∣soners: And nine Colours taken, and great store of Arms and plunder. And Sir Robert Stuart, Col. Mervine, and Col. James Erskine, Their Regiments beaten. With the particulars of the fight, and a List of the chiefe that are slaine and taken. And twenty Garrisons in the Provost of Connaught, now possest by Sir Charles Coot, for the Parliament of England. July 2. 1649. These being faithfully collected out of the Letters this day from London-Derry, are appointed to be Printed. Imp. Theodor. Jennings. LONDON, Printed by R. I. 1649.
A BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND: And a great Victory obtained by Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of the Province of Connaught. FRiday last, the 29. of June 1649. in the Perfect Occurrences, was the particulars of some part of the past, and then present hard condition of Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of the Province of Connaught, as it was represented to the Lord Liutenant Crumwell; to which book I must refer you unto. And here onely acquaint you with the certainty of the particular relation of the gallant and desperate sally of Sir Charles Coot out of London-Derry (being closely besieged by the Laggan Forces) as the same hath been represented by Letters of the 21. of June from London-Derry. Wherein is set forth, how he tooke prisoners, Lieutenant Collonell James Galbryth, Major Hamilton, Captaine John Stewart, Major Graham, two Lieutenants, two Ensignes, nine Colours, forty private Souldiers, brought home good store
of Armes, and plunder, Major Belfoure, and Captaine Moder slaine, with many more, their Leagure is now within two Musket shot of the Towne, since which he hath on severall other sallies beaten them most shamefully, killed of their men, taken of their chiefe officers, and killed many, with∣out any more more losse, then of three common Soul∣diers. The Enemy have divided themselves thus; Sir Robert Stewart, and Collonell Mervine, with their two Regiments for the greatest part, lye at a place called Fine, to prevent the advance of Sir Charles Cootes Connaught Forces, in com∣ming for his reliefe, who lye about Ballishanon, Major Ge∣nerall George Monro, having lately gotten the Towne of Coleraine into his hands, without a stroke striking (though Collonell Conaway was the Governour thereof.) Monro is now eturned into the Laggan, for Sir Robert Stewarts assistance, with his Regiments of Hilanders, and Irish, whereof his strength consists, and these with their Priests, are to settle the Protestant Reformed Religion, the Ministry of this Country, being clapt up close prisoners by them. Sir Alexander Stewarts Regiment is now put into the hands of Major James Erskine, who attends this Siege, with part of Sir Robert Stewarts and Collonell Mervins Regiments, and the Country Forces, besides some of Monroes. The Parliament Ships with about 500. Quarters of Wheat, and 200. Men came safe to Derry; bread at present they have plenty, but other provisions will very suddenly be exhausted, whereof he hath given the Councell of State a true and an exact account of their affaires, whereby they may prevent any prejudice to London-Derry, the Fort of Culmor, and the Connaught Forces, who are (of all others) in a most starving condition. Sir Charles Coote hath also sent some intercepted letters of Collonell Mervines, which most clearly declares him, both before he came out of England, and since, so that his great friends, who have so highly ingaged for him, he doubts not will be ashamed of these practices, and in publishing
of his letters out of Scotland of this City of London-Derries being taken, a purpose to divert reliefe; but God hath prevented them, as he wil ever, and that a little more time will cleerly discover the most close working of theirs: And doth not doubt but they will also divert and retard reliefe to Sligo, and the Con∣naught Forces, who are still faithfull to the Parlia∣ment. Now you may cleerly see, when with a poor hand∣full, this gallant Gentleman, Sir Charles Coot, hath done such brave and acceptable service against a mul∣titude; what might he not have done, having had addi∣tionall Forces and Recruits of Horse and Foot, as hath been sent to the other three Provinces, which hee ne∣ver had, as you were acquainted by the last Fridayes Booke: He now craves Collonel Huncks Regiment, with some Troops of horse, provisions and monies with them, may be sent; also provisions and monies for his Connaught Forces, which no doubt but the State will speedily send. These three active Collonels against the Parliament, Sir Robert Stewart, Collonell Marvin, and now Col∣lonel Erskeine, were carefully sent over hither by Sir Charles Coot, prisoners to the Parliament: but how they were secured or released, he knoweth not, yet fit to be enquired after for the advantage of the State. Abstracted out of the Letters dated at London-Derry, 21. June, 1649.
A Relation of the present condition of the Province of Connaught where the Honourable Sir Charles Coot, Knight and Baronet, Lord Pre∣sident of the said Province is cheife Commander, given in by me George Wood, who came from thence in a poor and sad condicirn, about the be∣ginning of June. 1649. THey are there in a sadde condition for want of provisions, there being no mo∣ny, corne or meale, in the store at Sligo. They are in great feare and daily expect that the Marquis of Clanrickard, and George Mun∣roe, will fall downe on them, they having no means to subsist but must perish, and lose the Country, and whole Province. They have no contribution out of the Country, nor any thing brought to the Market, nor out of the Laggan neere Derry, from whence they were formerly furnished with meale, notwithstanding all which wants and feares, they are faithfull and con∣stant to the Parliaments service, and resolved to live and dye therein: Howbeit they are falsely aspersed by some ill affected persons,
whereby to retard their provisions. Their Forces is three Regiaments of Foot and two of Horse. The Lord Presidents Regiment of horse Col. Richard Coote his Regiament of horse. The Lord Presidents Regiment of Foot. Colonell Sandersons Regiment of foot. Col. Thomas Coote his Regiament of foot. The severall Garrisons betweene the Ladies Bridge, and Ballishanon 24 miles from each other, being the Parliaments footing in that Province, of Connaught, viz. At Ardterman, the Lord Presidents troope of horse, Cap. Mountgomeries, & Cap. Jo. Orms∣bys horse, And Cap. Hare his foot Company. At Sligoe, the Lord Presidents foot, Col. Sandersons foote, Lieut. Col. Newburgh, and Cap. Duns foot. At Armagh, Col. Richard Cootes horse. At Larras, and Scardan Col. Thomas Cootes foot. At Burndrusse Lieut. Col. Jacksons foot.
At Grange, Major John Kings horse, and Cap. Francis Kings horse and foot. At a Fort neere Drumclisse, Major Ormsbys horse and foot. At Lisdill the Lord Bannalaghs horse, and Cap. Blacknies foot. At the Court, Maj. Gores foot. At Bradcullin, Maj. Hendersons foot. At Clandarara Sir George St. Georges foot and Cap. Oliver St. George his horse. At Newtowne, Cap. Robert Parks foote. A Mannor Hamilton, foot and horse: At Cargin, Captaine Wiers foote. At Din-Carbry Captain Taylors horse. At Castlegall, Col. Sandersons horse. At the Ladies Bridge Cap. Olivers horse. At Drumaheere, Cap. Gores foot. At Grange Knockree, Cap. Boules foot. GEORGE WOOD. FINIS.
