B3280 E655_16 99865176 166068
BLOUDY NEWES FROM THE BARBADAES, BEING A true Relation of a great and terrible fight between the Parliaments Navie, commanded by Sir George Ayscue; and the King of Scots Forces under the conduct and command of the Lord Willoughby. With the particulars of the Fight; the storming of the Island; the manner how the Parliaments Forces were repulsed, and beaten off from Carlisle Bay, and the Block∣house; and the number killed and wounded. Likewise, a dangerous Fight in Scotland, between the Parliaments Forces, and the Red∣shanks; the manner of the Fight; and the event and success thereof. Published for general satisfaction. London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1652.
A bloudy Fight in Scotland between the Redshanks, and the Parliaments forces, the particulars thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners. SIR, THe reducing of the Wild Scots, we fear will prove a work of great diffi∣culty; for many of them are brake forth in∣to new distempers and Rebellion, being headed by the Clans and Mac-Donals; and on the 12 of this instant Feb. advanced as far as Innerness, where they fell upon the Parliaments forces, and put almost all to the sword that they met withall. However, we have since pretty well paid them home; for on the 14 instant a party of Col. Okey's Dragoons met with them neer Chivy-chase
where they hunted them handsomely, killed about one hundred, and took about two hundred priso∣ners. Yet notwithstanding, they declare high for their King; but we doubt not, but (in process of time) to bring them low for the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England. And upon these prin∣ciples, we may presume to build our foundation, viz. For whereas the Commoners of England in this Age of the world are risen up in an Army, and have cast out that Invasion of the duke of Normandy, and have won their Land and Liberties again by the Sword, if they do not suffer their Councels to be∣fool them into slavery again upon a new accompt. For if so be that Kingly Authority be set up in your Laws again, King CHARLES hath conquered you and your Posterity by policy, and won the field of you, though you have seemingly cout off his head. for the strength of a King lies not in the visible ap∣pearance of his body, but in his Will, Laws, and Au∣thority. But if you remove Kingly Government, and set up true and free Common-wealths Govern∣ment, then you gain your Crown, and keep it, and leave peace to your Posterity. Dundee 16 Feb. 1652:
POSTSGRIPT. SIR, SInce the close of this Letter, we have received an Abstract, or Narrative, of the Transaction of Affairs in France; a breviate whereof take as fol∣loweth: Since my last of the 14 instnt, The Prince of Conde hath obtained a grat Victory against the Kings Forces, having routed a great part of the Cardinals Army, and killed and taken above 3000 men. But by raon of a great Conpiracy in the City of Angiers, for deliver∣ing up of the Town to the King, his Highness was in forced to de∣sist from from his further pursuit, to endeavor the composing of all differences, and extinguishing the flames, which were so unhappily broken forth amongst them. For effecting whereof, the Duke of Rhone seized on the persons of the Earl of Montag, the Lord Mar∣shal, and divers others, and immediatly brought them to a Tryall before a Councel of War, where a Charge of High-Treason was rd against them, For their perfidiousness, in betraying their Trust, and rolting from the Parliament to the King, &c. After the erading of the said Charge by the Judge Advocate; the prisoners at the Bar were required to answer unto the Articles exhibited against them: But they denied to acknowledge the Authority of the Court, saying, That here was no lawful Judicature in any Kingdom, that took Rebellion to be their Bamer: Whereupton the Court resolved to proceed to Sen∣tence; and accordingly the Judge Advocate denounced the same; which was, That the Earl of Montg should have his head severed from his shoulders; and the Lord Marshl, to be sht to death. The King of Scots hath sent a Letter to Sr Jacob Middleton, and di∣vers other Gentlemen in Waler, imploring them to use the utmost of their endeavors for his restauration, and to fight for a just King, an oppressed Countrey, and for a Religion truly Christian, against all those who endeavour to alienate the Crown from him and the roy∣all Posterity. These fair adjutations and perswasions wrought up∣on the hearts of man discontented spirits, who began to talk high, saying, That before Easter her doubted not, but to see her good King in her own Countrey again with 40000 fighting men: Whereupon the Well-affected rose, apprehended divers, and hath quelled the humours of the rest.
A Declaration for Freedom. Whereas if an Army be raised to cast out Kingly op∣pression, and if the Heads of that Army promise a Common∣wealths Freedons to the oppressed people, if in case they will as∣sist with person and purse; and if the people do assist, and prevail over the Tyrant, those Officers are bound by the Law of Justice (who is God) to make good their Engage∣ments: And if they do not set the Land free from the bran∣ches of the Kingly oppression, but reserve some part of the Kingly power to advance their own particular Interest, whereby some of their friends are left under as great slave∣ry to them, as they were under the Kings; Those Officers are not faithful Commonwealths souldiers, they are worse Ty∣rant and Thieves then the King they cast out; and that ho∣nor they seemed to get by their victories over the Common wealths Oppressor they lost again, by breaking promsie and engagement to their opressed friends who did assist them. For what difference is there between a professed Tyrant, that declares himself a Tyrant in words, laws and deeds, as all Conquerors do, and him who promises tofree me from the power of the Tyrant if I'le assist him; and when I have spent my estate and bloud, and expect my bargain by his Engagements to me, he sits himself down in the Tyrants chair, and takes the possession of the Land to himself, and ealls it his, and none of mine, and tells me he cannot in con∣science let me enjoy the freedom of the Farth with him, be∣cause it is another mans right? Such a souldier as this Engagement-breaker is neither a friend to the Creation; nor to a particular Commonwealth, but a self-lover, and a hypocrite; for he did not fight to set the Earth free from the bondage of the Oppressor, as he pretended by his Engagements; but to remove that pow∣er out of the others hand into his own. And this is just like the Beasts who fight for mastery and keeps it, not relieve∣ing
but still Lording and Kinging over the weak. These are Monarchical souldiers, not Commen-wealths souldiers; and such a souldier is a murderer, and his warfare is unlaw∣full. But souldiers of true noble spirits will help the weak, and set the Oppressed free, and delight to see the Common∣wealth flourish in freedom, as well as their own gardens. There is none of this true Nobility in a Monarchical Ar∣my, for they are all self-lovers; the best is as a bryar, and the most upright amongst them is as a Thorn: speak you Prophets of old if this be not true. A Monarchial Army lifts up Mountains, and makes val∣lies, viz. Advances Tyrants, and treads the Oppressed in the barren lanes of poverty. But a Common-wealths Army is like John Baptist, who le∣vels tha Mountains to the Valleys, pulls down the Tyrant, and lifts p the Oppressed; and so makes way for the spi∣rit of Peace and Freedom to come in to rule and inherit the Earth. And by this which hath been spoken, an Army may see wherein they may do well, and wherein they may do hurt. Therefore you Army of Englands Common wealth look to it; the Enemy could not beat you in the field, but they may be too hard for you by policy in councel, if you do not stick close to see Common Freedom established. From Holland they write, That Mr Lilburns declares high con∣cerning the parl. but we may give losers leave to talk; The Hollander seems to fly high against England and the English are warned not to come upon the Exchange, left they should be taken for Spies. O horrible ingratitude! What have you forgotten the dayes of old? They give out, that they will set forth 150 Men of War in six weeks, and 100 more with Letters of Mart; telling the people, that the parl. demands 800000 li. for Amboyna business, besides the tenth Herring, Flushing, Rammekins, free Trade to Antwerp, and through the Zound: It seems they love their money, better then ancient courtesies.
By an Express from the Parliaments Fleet lying before the Barbadoes, it is certified, that Sir George Ayscue finding the Lord Willoughby to be very resolute and obstinate, called a Councel of Officers; whose result was, forthwith to storm Carlisle Block∣house; for effecting whereof, about 60 Long-boats were compleatly man'd with Sea-men, who endea∣vor'd to storm the fort, and to enter the Bay; but so great was the Repulse which they received, that they was inforced to make good their Retreat, with the loss of 15 men, and to betake themselves for sanctuary to their ships again. However, the loss is supposed to be equal on both sides: And the Lord VVilloughby is exceeding vigilant, to make the best of a bad cause; for he rides the Rounds (in person) every Night, from Fort to Fort, promising his soul∣diers the free prize of the Parliaments Navie; but with this provisoe, I befeech you, when they con catch it. FINIS.
