C142 E603_3 99865065 165648
STRANGE NEWES From the NORTH. CONTAINING A True and exact Relation of a great and terrible Earth-quake in Cumberland and Westmerland. With the mira∣culous Apparition of three glorious Suns that appeared at once. And o∣ther wonderful Appearances that happened in Yorkeshire, of divers bodies of armed men marching, and riding through every Town for twelve miles compass about Malton, with the strange accidents that befel the Cattel therabout through fright thereof, to the admiration of many thousand be∣holders. Together with, the Charge against Charles Howard Esquire High Sheriff of the County of Cumberland. Ʋerefied by severall Gentlemen of known and approved credit. TINMOUTH-CASTLE depiction of Tynemouth Castle LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange and without Cripplegate, June 11. 1650.
STRANGE NEVVES FROM THE NORTH. SIR, I Have often mentioned in my let∣ters to you, the many and mar∣velous signs and sights, which before and since these Warrs, have been seen in these our Northern parts, the Lord war∣ning us as it were thereby, not only of our late troubles, but of the continuance thereof; if by righteous judgements our Governors do not appease his anger, I form∣erly related to you how shortly after the Scots march into England in aide of our Parliament, it rained blood, and covered the Church and Church-yard of Bewcastle in Cumberland, of three Suns seen there the day before Edg-hill battle, and a little before Hamble∣ton with his Army came into England, two Armies
were in Yorkshire, seen in the aire vissibly, discharg∣ing and shooting one against the other; and seeming∣ly after a long fight, the Army which rose out of the North, first vanished. This last Winter in the North we have had very strange and fearful storms, with much thunder and lightnings; But to admiration that of the 18. of January last was most remarkable, in the night time the storm began very fearfully, Armies and Armed Troops, (in every town for twelve miles com∣pass about Molton in Yorkshire) were heard to ride and march through the Towns; their Cattle and beasts in these Towns, were so frighted with the storm, as most of them broke out of their pastures, some break∣ing their necks and some their legs in this madding fit, some run away four miles, some more, who when found and brought home, were so wild and heated, as if they had been chased with a hundred mastive Dogs; one Oxe where he lay in a stake-yard lame, and not a∣ble to rise without the help of man, in this storm broke out, and the next day was found lying above a mile from the place he was in the night before, and was brought home on a sledge; for a month after the the storm, the beasts thereabouts run madding about, and would not be kept in their Pastures, people were so astonished therewith, as for a long time they had little other discourse then of the strangness of the storm. I see a Relation of three Suns, lately seen a∣bout Manchester; but sure it is, that in the beginning of March last, there were seen at one time in Cumber∣land and Westmerland, three glorious Suns, to the ad∣miration and great astonishment of many thousands of the beholders. And further, upon the 11. of April last about 5. of the clock in the afternoon, in the Counties of Cumber∣land
and Westmerland, we had a general Earth-quake; the people were so frighted therewith, that they for∣sook their houses, and some houses were so shaken, that the Chimnies fell down; Some may doubt and question the verity of these things, be confident I have related nothing but what I know to be true, and have had from men of known and approved credit. These things I thought good to communicate to you, as I have done before things of like nature; for news we have little in these parts, only great fear of the Scots in∣vading us again; I could wish our honorable Parlia∣ment and Councel of State, as they are very sensible of the ensuing threatned troubles, and for prevention whereof, as they have increased their forces: so they would be pleased, to make diligent inquiry of all in Magistracy, how they stand affected to the Common-Wealth under this present Government, especially in these our bordering Counties, which will be a dore to let in, or kepe out any enemy from Scotland. Here the honest party are much cast down, our Justices of the Peace do countinance such Ministers as be against the Engagement, and Mr. Baldwin the Lecturer of Penreth and other Ministers there, have had sundry privat mee∣tings, and do work privatly against the subscribing the Engagement, if somewhat be not speedily done here∣in, all our County will be against the Engagement. Our new Sheriff of Cumberland the most powerful man of the County, we find he hath been in Arms, both in the first and second War; and now hath for his Agent and Councellor, one Lawyer Fallowfeild a profest Papist, and now said to be a Priest; and the o∣ther day came from the Irish Rebels (as I hear) in Ire∣land. How in the last War our Sheriff behaved him∣self,
by the Charge and proof before the Commissio∣ners for Sequestrations in Cumberland against him wil appear, a Copy thereof being come into my hand I send you, desiring it may be published for publick good. It were good the Councel of State would take notice of those, who recommend such dangerous per∣sons to so great offices of trust; by this means honest men are still kept under, and till such be removed out of these places of trust, we are never the more secure for all our great successes and victories; for our ene∣mies though they have lost their swords in battle, yet by regaining the sword of authority, are in hopes to recover their former estate, and bring us under them; in the mean time, by their ill Government they do dis∣affect the people, and bring them in dislike of the pre∣sent Government, and oppress the honest party, and will be ready as formerly, to invite a forraign enemy, and at home raise tumults and insurrections upon any opportunity; therefore I pray improve your interest & credit, that such withus as have been in Arms against the Parliament, may no longer continue in such great pla∣ces and offices of trust, and I shall as opportunity serves from time to time, let you know the state of our Coun∣ty, in the mean time, I bid you farwel. Penreth 30. May 1650. T. C.
The Charge against Charles Howard Esquir High She∣riff of the County of Cumberland, Exhibited to the Commissioners for Sequestra∣tions in Cumberland. THat the said Mr. Howard, having a Commission to be a Col. for the King in the last war, which he did confess was as large as any man had, did by vertue therreof, send out his warrants to the several Consta∣bles of Gilsland for three several musters; Requiring, all men above sixteen, and under threescore to appear before him at Brampton, And the Constables to pre∣sent their names upon Thursday the 10. of August, 1648. and the fourteenth, and the sixteenth day of the said moneth following at the several days, the said Mr. Howard came to the abovesaid place, accompanied with many Soldiers in Arms, under his command, and gave order for free-quarrer for his Soldiers; And that the Constables should Leavy monies to pay for the horses he took in every place. Proof to this Article, Tho. Milburn. Tho. Bell. Anthony Hevyside. Secondly, That the said Mr. Howard, took 10. horses in Hayton parish for the said service, and proportio∣nably in other parishes within Gilsland according to the purvey. Tho. Bell abovesaid, Anthony Heviside. Thirdly, That the said Mr. Howard, did declare o∣penly at the said Musters, that the men and Horse so levyed, was for the Kings service; And that he was to meet the Prince with his men at Barwick Satturday the 19. of August following. Tho. Milburn. Tho. Bell.
Fourthly, The said Mr. Howard sent a Letter to ten Cavileers that had horse and Arms, quartering upon Leonard Hodgson Constable of Hartleburn in Nor∣thumberland, That if they would ride in his Troop to Barwick as Reformadoes, they should have Command as places fell; and they should come to Francis Grames of the Stone house in Gilsland, and there abouts they should have quarter till they marched to Barwick. Proof to this Article Leonard Hodgson. Fifthly, The said Mr. Howard, repared several times to the enemies Garrison at Carlile, and walked abroad with his Arms. Richard Hutton. Sixthly, At two several Musters by warrant from the said Mr. Howard in the first Article mentioned, the said Mr. Howard had made his speeches to the Coun∣try, his Soldiers drew their swords and cryed, a King a King. Thomas Addison. This Charge was presented to us, and the several witnesses names to every Article, that will make good the same. Tho. Craister. John Musgrave. John Priscoe. Thomas Laughorne. FINIS.
