C1690 E341_11 99872863 159754
CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS AND CAUTIONS Agreed upon by the Ministers of London, Westminster, and within the Lines of Com∣munication, June 19. 1646. According to which they resolve to put the Presbyteriall Government in execution, upon the Ordinances of PARLIA∣MENT heretofore published. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill. 1646.
Certain Considerations and Cautions agreed upon by the Ministers of London, West∣minster, and within the Lines of Communicati∣on, June 19. 1646. according to which they resolve to put the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment in execution, upon the Ordinances of PARLIAMENT heretofore published. WE Ministers of Christ, re∣siding within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Lines of Communicati∣on, having seen and read an Order of the Honorable House of COM∣MONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
bearing date June 9. 1646. Requiring and Injoyning all the Ministers of the Province of London forthwith to put in execution the Ordinances concerning Church Government, Hold it requisite humbly and faithfully as in the sight of God to shew our judgements and reso∣lutions about this weighty matter, for the clearing of our Integrities, and pre∣serving our Consciences void of offence both towards God and towards man. We have seriously pondered the pre∣sent state of things; and find our selves, whether we act as is required, or act not, to be in a very great streight. On the one hand, Prelacy, being justly pulled down, and the Church miserably groaning un∣der Disorder & Confusion, many things cry aloud upon us in our places to put Church Government into actuall execu∣tion;
The Glory of God, the edification of his Church, the Duty of our Functi∣on, the Ingagement of our solemn Cove∣nant with God, the command of the Ci∣vil Magistrate (which so far as we can with a good Conscience, we are resolved and hold it our Duty to obey,) and the present unspeakable miseries of the Church by wofull Divisions, Blasphe∣mies, Heresies, abominable loosenesse, Libertinisme, and Atheisme, and the spirituall Ruine of many Congregations through false Teachers, or want of faith∣full Pastors for lack of Ordination. On the other hand, upon consideration of all the Ordinances of PARLIAMENT about Church Government, wee finde ma∣ny necessary things not yet established, and some things wherein our Conscien∣ces are not so fully satisfied: And there∣fore
in our beginning to act, we cannot but foresee, how likely we are to be sini∣sterly interpreted by many, who are prone to misconstrue all our actions of this nature. We thereupon hold it neces∣sary to expresse upon what Grounds we may proceed, to act upon the Ordinan∣ces already established by Authority. Although we conceive the power of Church censures, and in particular the keeping off Ignorant and Scandalous persons from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be in Church Officers by the Will and Apointment of Jesus Christ, and from him they receive their Office and Authority: Yet we acknowledge, it belongs to the Magistrate to have his Conscience satisfied in the truth of that Government of the Church which he will set up by his Authority, from
whom the Church Officers do receive Authority of the publike exercise of their Offices in his Do∣minions. And in case the Magistrate be not so ful∣ly informed, as to set up a right and perfect Rule in every particular, the Church officers may yet act under that Rule; Provided, that they do not subscribe to, or otherwise acknowledge that Rule to be intire and right in all points. And therefore for these particular Ordinan∣ces, although we humbly conceive that they do not hold forth a compleat Rule, nor are in all points satisfactory to our Consciences: Yet be∣cause we find many things established in them, agreeable to the Word of God (for which we desire heartily to blesse God; and to be thank∣full to the Honorable Houses,) Provision being made for inabling the Elderships by their Au∣thority, to keep away from the Lords Supper all Ignorant persons, and many Scandalous per∣sons, with a Declaration of their Resolution, that all Notorious and Scandalous Offenders shall be kept from the Sacrament, and that there shall be a further addition to the Scandalous of∣fences formerly enumerated; We conceive it is
our duty to begin to act in reference to Church Government by Congregationall, Classicall, Provinciall, and Nationall Assemblies; Resol∣ving by the Grace of God to walk in al things ac∣cording to the Rule of the Word, and according to these Ordinances so far as we conceive them correspondent to it; and to be accountable to the Magistrate whensoever he shal call us there∣unto; Hoping so to carry our selves, as not only to injoy his concurrence with us on al occasions; but also that he will supply what is lacking to make the Government intire, and likewise make alterations in all things that shall appear to be a∣misse. And in thus doing, we trust we shall not greive the spirits of the truly godly either at home or abroad; nor give any just occasion to them that are contrary minded, to blame our proceedings. FINIS.
