C2395 E377_20 99861890 159960
THE KINGS Maiesties Letter, Sent from Holmby to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, With his Majesties Propositions for some Bishops or Doctors appointed to attend his Majestie for the exercise of his Conscience, and clearing of his judgement in the present differences in Raligion. With other Papers concerning the Propositions of the King and the Commissioners at Holmby-House. And his Majesties desire to have some of these to be sent to him; viz. The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of Peterborough. Dr. Shelden. Dr. May. Dr. Saderson. Dr. Bayly. Dr. Heywood. Dr. Beale. Dr. Fuller. Dr. Hammond, Dr. Taylor. London Printed Anno Dom. 1647
The Copie of a LETTER Sent from the KINGS Maiesty at Holmby, to the Speaker of the House of Peeres, pro tempore, to be communicated to both Houses of PARLIAMENT. With a List of the names of the Bishops and Doctors propounded by the King to attend his Majesty. CAROLƲS REX. SInce I have never dissembled, nor hid my conscience. And that I am not yet satisfied, with the alteration in Religi∣on, to which ye desire my consent; I will not loose time in giving reasons, (which are too obvious to every body) why it is fit for me to be attended by some of
my Chaplains, whose opinions (as Clergy∣men) I esteeme and reverence. Not onely for the exercise of my consci∣ence; but also for the clearing of my judge∣ment, concerning the prsent differences in Religion; as I have (at full) declared to Mr. Marshall, and his Fellow-Minister: having shewed them that is the best and likeliest meanes of giving me satisfaction (which without it, I cannot have) in these things; whereby the distractions of the Church may be the better setled. Wherefore I desire, that (at least) two of these reverend Divines, whose names I have here set downe, may have free liberty to wait upon me, for the discharging of their duties to me, according to their Function. Holmby Feb. 17. 1646. Charles Rex. For the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, to be communicated to the two Houses of Parliament at Westmin∣ster assembled. The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of Peterborough. Dr. Shelden, Clerk of my Coset. Dr. May, Deane of York. Dr. Sanderson. Dr. Baylay. D Heywood. Dr. Beale. Dr. Fuller. Dr. Hammond. Dr. Taylor. Thus far the Kings Letter
These or two or more of these Bishops and Epis∣copali Doctors, his Majesty desires may have free libertie to wait upon him, to officiate for the exercise of his conscience, and clearing of his conscience. The Copie of a Letter from Holmby-House, concerning some assaires since his Majesties and the Comissioners comming thither. Noble Sir, BEing come so neere, I cannot chuse but kisse your hand with a salute of my reall affection: I am not ignorant, that as we expect determination from your Orb, so you resolution from this. I wish I coud sa∣tisfie your expectation in letting you understand what we so much dubt, and therefore are the sadder. What I have to communicate (at present) as a cer∣tainty is this, concerning the King, the Commissio∣ners, the Ministers, and their endeavours with his Ma∣jesty. 1. Concerning the King, his Majesty is very cheer∣full and pleasant, but much grayer then he was when he went from his Court at White-hall: he is very fa∣miliar with the Lords and desires to be as neer Lon∣don as may be. His Majesty came hither yester night, all things being so well prepared, that his Maiesty shewed no dislike at all: he desired Sir Fulk Grivell might be his Cup-bearer, and Mr. Mildmay hath his place by the Kings appointment also. No Malignants are permitted, nor dare attempt to come to come to his Majestie, his Majestie being freed from those late fittings up and watchings that he had before, begins now to look better.
2 The Commissioners are tyred with a long and tedious journey, tyresome wayes, and a carefull charge and would take it for a very great favour, if they might be called home, being very willing to resigne up their places. 3 The Ministers, Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Carol preached on the Lords Day, but the King will not hear them, His Majesty hath often conference with them, and argues very stifly for Episcopacy, and the Book of com∣mon prayer, and against the Covenant, and they endeavour to give his Majesty fatisfacti∣on in every scruple; one of them sayes grace every day at his Majesties table But his Maje∣sty would faine have some of his own Chap∣lains that are not for the Presbyterian way; yet do we not so despaire, but that wee hope in good time, his Maiesty will bee wrought vpon to joyn with the Parliament, if ill in∣struments be still kept from him. God grant an happy union. Thus I conclude, Holmby Feb. 17: Your obedient servant, C. W.
The Copy of another Letter from Holmby house, concerning his Ma∣iesties Letter sent by the Commif∣sioners. Honorable Sir, His Majesty told the Lords, that hee had a Letter to send to the Parla∣ment, for some of his own Chaplaines, to have liberty to be with Him; And offe∣red their Lordships to read the said Let∣ter before his Majesty had sealed it, and to send it to the Parliament. But their Lordships acquainted his Majesty, that they could not do it safely by their Jnstru∣ctions; but if his Majesty would seale it up, they would send it to the Parliament,
which his Majesty did, and gave it to their Lordships, who have sent it up ac∣cordingly, Their Lordships desiring liber∣ty to come to London, being weary of the present imployment. Sir, no more at pre∣sent, but that I subscribe my self, Your most humble servant, W. SMITH. Dated at our quarters at Holmby; this 18. of February 1646. FINIS.
