c6905 e370_3 99861805 113950
Crete Wonders foretold BY Her crete Prophet of Wales, which shall cer∣ainly happen this present year 1647. by strange fires, and crete waters, by spirits and Tivills appearing in many places of tis Kingdome, especially in and about te Cities of London and Westminster, and the effects that will follow thereupon. Also her Kings coming home to her Crete Counsell. portrait of the great prophet of Wales Jan. 2d Printed with her free consent and leave, to be published and sold to her teere Pretren of England, with all her plood and heart. 1647. 1646
Wonders foretold by her Welch Prophet. HER needs not foretell tat her cood King Charles is at distance from her crete Lords in Parliament, and her crete House of Commons, mark you tat now: for to her crete creefe all her whole countrey-men of Whales, d Pretren of England, know tat well enough already; her doth therefore ay to Cot Almighty, tat her cood King may returne in peace to her crete Coun∣ll againe: but for all tat her can tell a crete many more strange wonders tat will rtainly fall out tis present yeare. 1 Her dus foresee, tat a crete many widows when tey have puried cood husbands t did pie them prave fine Pever hats, silk Crowns and Peticoats with silfer lace, d allow them a crete deal of gold and silfer to spend a gossipping, and all such e thing, what they would have, and they are left in debt 209.l. to the Tailors, 63.l. to the Drapers, 19.l. to the Butchers, 17.l. to the Comfit-makers, 11.l. 6.s. .d. to the Crocers, 13.l. 6.s. 5.d. ob. for silk stocking, 7.l. 3.s. 2.d. ob. q. for, irdles, Cloves, knots and Ribbon, 101.l. 3.s 4.d. to the Doctors, and Proctors f the Civilian Law, &c. and are faine to sequester, and afterwards weare their d cown a Sundayes, it is a crete fore-runner of rain, and that many crete show∣s of tears shall fall from their cloudy eyes. 2 Tat many young callants tat has teir dear fathers dead tis yeare, and all the eanes left them to spend will be very merry, and like so many students of the ack art, tey wil raise Angells, out of the golden myne, which teir fathers left them  flie like Gold-finches, and glittering sparks up and down all place where they, me, and cause sack and clarret to raine in Tavernes till the clouds of teir pa∣imony be all spent. 3. There shall also crete inflammations of Lightning tis happen year about the ortune in Colding-Lane, if the players can get leave to act the tragedies of Do∣our Faustus in which Tempest shall be seen shag-haired Tivills, runne roaring with squibs in teir mouthes, while drummes make thunder in the riring house nd the twelve pennie hireling make artificiall lights in her heavens. 4 Tere shall a crete tarknesse happen among many of her dear countreymen of Whales, as also of her pretren of England, when they shall sit at the Taverne or Alehouse till tei be so blind tat tey cannot see day light. 5 Tat a crete many Citizens wives, and many bauds and whores, and lasses of ll sorts, tat in teir younger taies painted teir faces to look beautiful to please teir
Paramour, shall now forsake teir Venetian tinctures, and walk under so crete heate as shall transform their beuty to an old withered face. 6 Tat there shall also tis present yeare be many crete fires in many parts of t City of London (mark you tat now) for her doth fery well understand tat te will be many hot fires in Pick-hatch, Turnbull-steet, the Myneries, Coven-Garde te Strand, Holborne, and poth te Friers, and other such religious places, whe Venus Nunnes are cloystered, and Tom Tod and his fellow flesh-dressers do  quench those inflammations, many a three chind baud, dry fisted punk, and bis handed pander, shall have all their haire burnt off with the heat thereof. 7 Tere will once in a month or tereabouts (in te Old-Bailey) be many cr fires which shall burne many whose hands are touched with te heat of it;  glad shall tey bee too tat tey scape with teir lives, for all te purning, mark y me tere now, so tat is not to be passed by, put to be taken notice of still. 8 Tat many trunkards shall be much troupled with the terrible heart-burnin with trinking stale beere, and fehement hot inflammations at teir stomacks tr¦king hot water, so tat many of them shall not dare to go to bed without a Th¦rundell pot of six shilings beere to stand by them all night, for fear their throats  set on fire before te next morning. 9 Tat many a prodigall younger brother shall have many casualities of ill suc∣cesse befall them, and shall plunge themselves into so great a deluge, tat many o them shall not be able to reach nearer to te shore, ten te two Counter Ilands o Woodstreet and te Poultrey. 10 Tat many giddy heads shall have so many firy sparks of phantasticall h∣mours fall upon them as shall set on fire teir brains, and burn up all teir wit. 11 Tat most of te students belonging to te City Colledges, (I mean both t prodigious Counters) shall have such firy red faces, tat tey cannot put a cup of i∣pitato to teir snouts, put tere shall be seen such an extraordinary heat to clow from them, tat tey shall make it fery hisse againe, as if tere were a cad of burning steel flung into the pot, but because I do truly love tem, I will be teir Esculapius, and prescribe this medicine following, viz. 12 Let them every morning take a spoonfull of Aqua fortis, rather Aqua Re∣gis, as much oleum Origanum, and mingle it with a little Mercury sublimate, the take a piece of the coursest haire cloth, and dip it in this liquour, and so every mor∣ning till their noses bee well, wet them with this medicine, and it will doe all the Counter Kites as much good as the world can desire, for it stands io crete reason it should cure them, for one heat alwayes drives out another, why els do Cooks tat purne teir fingers hold them to the fire, put tat te creater heat should ex∣pell te lesser, or why do foot-men in te hottest weather after tey have runne a race
trinke so much Vsquebah, and Rosa solis but tat it frights away the other. 13 Tat tere shall be day and night continuall fires in Fleet-street, te Strand, and any other places both in and about te City, but especially in tobacco-shops, so t tere shall scarce a man come in, whose nose shall not smoke with it. 14 Tat many tat ride up Holborne shall be set upon at Tiburne, and lose both eir lives, and and be stript of all tey have tere by Gregory and his company. 15 Tat many maids where te Cavaliers come shall trust tem with teir maiden∣eads, who will carrie it quite away and leave tem nothing but a — 16 Tat if knick knock go on thus among her countrey-men and her friends of ngland and of Whales, tere will be a crete deal of bloud shed. 17 Tat when tese troubles (tat makes us tat we know not what to do) are past & one, ten tere will be peace, and truly her will be fery clad of it; for her did never elight to shed bloud in all her life, no nor to be in such dangers her self (mark you hat now) her never see such doings before. O by Saint Taffie her was almost be∣hit for feare, when her did run away from te fight at Edgehill, for te Cavaliers did ill her deare pretren in good earnest. Bounce, bounce, bounce went te Cannon nd te Gunne, and then came scurvy bullets among us, and downe fall one here, nd another tere, and tyed: then te Cavaliers came upon us with teir naked swords, and pole axes, and run some through, and cut others in pieces. O it makes her tremble to think of it, te bloud was all about her countrey-men tat lay tead: was not tat a pitifull fight? well, her did swear never to go fight again, and was ery clad to get away, and truly her dus not dissemble to tell you, tat her desires peace. 18 Tat if any thing be lost amongst a company of servants, and they shall af∣terwards use the trick of the sive and the sheares, they shall thereby find tat which tey have lost, and know who stole it after he tat had it restore it them a∣gaine. 19 Tat tis present year whosoever shall be troubled with te tooth ache, Ague, Cramp, or a Feaver, or any other disease whatsoever, if they weare a writing in teir bosome till the Physitian cure them, tey shall ten be whole. 20 Whosoever takes good heed of te hind most lock in te nap of his neck till his wife be buried, shall be sure to know when he shall be a widower. 21 Whosoever looketh upon a dial tat goeth true, may with a ring and a silfer peaker (if he understand te figures of te dial) easily tell what a clock it is. 22 Tis yeare will be fery unfortunate to those who have at any time a Hare crosse them in te high way, when they are alone, because tey have never a dog with them to catch her, or if tey shall first catch her, as my brother Taffie did, let her go againe.
23 When any one hath any yellow speckles on te nailes of her hands, is broug to te bar, and accused of Purglary, treason or murder, and by te Jewry fou guilty, he is in crete tanger to tie within a short time after. 24 When te left cheek purns, at te same time, tat one friend vindicates te fo of another, then doth tat chek purn at the same time he is well spoken of, but when her is cursed and railed on, then doth it purn when it is ill spoken of. 25 When a mans nose bleeds to cleare his head, and to empty his veines of  ploud, ploud, it is a token tat her shall be better in health thereby, but when it blee so much tat he cannot stop it till his body be out of temper thereby, it is a sign  will be worse in health after it. 26 If any man stumble in a morning as soon as he goes out of doors, it is  fore-runner of ill luck, if he break his nose or hurt himselfe. 27 If any man that is a batcheliour walking in te field chance to finde a fou leaved grasse, he shall be sure to be married tat year, if his sweet heart and  can agree, and so shall it happen to any man tat findeth te like. 29 It is not good to put on a new sute on Childermas day, except he can te where to have of his own, neither is it cood to pare ones nailes when y a like to lose a cood dinner for teir labour: nor to begin tat on tat day, for which tey shall repent te next day after. 29 It is ill luck for a man to be drowsie, tat hath cot store of businesse to to of crete concernment, for then his businesse shall fery probably be either negle∣cted, or at te least much sleighted. 30 It is ill luck to find a bag of money when it proves counterfeit, or is chal∣lenged, or taken away by te true owners tereof, or lost again. 31 It is ill luck to lose a hose-carter, especially if it be a cood one, for then re∣charges will be creter to buy another. 32 It is a fery unfortunate thing for a man early in te morning, to meet with an ill favoured man, or woman tat wait purposely to do us a mischief, & are ready ar∣med for it, especially when a man is unprovided for his own tefence: so it is also  meet a rough footed hound, if she flie upon him, and shit upon his cloathes, for hen he must be troubled to make them clean; so it is also to meet a shag-haired og, if he bite a man by te leg, and send him to te surgeons to ket it cured. 33 If where crickets use to a rotten house they go away on a sudden, by reason of te ruines of te chimney, 'tis a sign tat some body in te house will be in danger of death if tey stay (without mending te house) to let te house fall down upon teir heads. 34 Who ever dreames of egges or fire, he shall hear of anger, if his wife chance to break his head.
35 To tream of te Tivell is cood luck, if a man treby take heed of him ever er. 36 To tream of gold is cood luck, if te next morning a man receive good store,  tis ill to tream of silfer, and can keep never a penny. 37 If a man be born in te day time it is unforrunate, I mean to prison, for prison n unfortunate place. 38 If a child be born with a caul on te hand, it shall be fery fortunate, if it ne∣ live to want. 39 When te palm of te right hand itches, it is a sign tat man would willingly eive money, if any man will bring it. 40 It is a crete sign of ill luck, when rats knaw a mans cloathes, for he must er be faine to buy new, or weare them patched, both which will cost money. 41 It is naught for a man to give a pair of knives to her sweetheart, to cut away e, except her marrie her after, for her will never pay her for them, nor restore m againe. 42 It is ill luck to have te salt-seller to fall towads one at meat, when a special  is eating, for whilst he is taking up te salt tat he spilt, te rest of te company are  to beguile him of his share. 43 When te pot falls next to a man it is cood luck if he be try, and wants on∣ cup to trink in. 44 When a candle burns blue, in her house whose wife is a shrew, there is no stion, but tat tere is a spirit tat useth te house. 45 When te cat washeth her face over her ears, it is a sign of wet, if she scratch  one, from whose bloudy eies shall issue forth tears. 46 It is ill luck for a horse to stumble on the high way, if te rider cannot scarce at all. 47 When an apprentices nose (who loves a cup of sack) doth itch, it is a sign tat either trink wine when te glasse is at his mouth, or kisse a fool when his mistris raceth him. 48 It is an ill signe to be melancholly, for seldome any one is so, put one cross other prings them to it. 49 Tis year te chiefest nourishment which te shry Tivels shal feed upon, (I mean oaring boyes, tat like te Salamander alwaies live in te fire) will be smoak, and  spirits wil be most resident in tobacco shops, hot water shops, taverns, brothel erns, and such places, if tey be not conjured down by some everlasting con∣le, or new elected beadle tat resires to be knowne in his office, or rather some ice of Peace to charm them in te small circumference of the Compter. 50 Te fine mercurian fingered cut purse spirits will often appeare in play-hou∣ses,
cockpits, prises, and such like fertile places, except Porridge or Pulman cha them under the gallowes. 51 Te watry spirit will be refident about te French or Irish coasts, except letter of mart pring them as farre as Saint Thomas a watrings, or Wapping, and  sink them. 52 Lastly, tere shall be many earthly Tivills arise in many parts of te Kingdo which shall most appeare in Scriveners shops, teir office, or at teir paper houses  both te compters, except tey be layed by a privie seal to borrow money of the or a sub paena ou of the exchequer for extortion. Besides tese Tivills, her doth foresee many more in te City her shal seldom  into Turnbull street, put tere shall be a three chin baud or whore, sitting in an ∣ning enticing young men to sin. Her shal seldom go into Cheapside, Lumberstr te Strand or Feetstreet, put you shall see some spirits in te likness of Goldsmit Merchants, and Silk-mens wives, wearing most prodigious hornes on teir he like a half moon, te emblem of change & mutability. Her cannot walk into Hou¦ditch, charter-house-lane, put spirits wil appear, standing at te most of those do in te likeness of griping Brokers. Put of all spirits tat are likely to appear tis ye in te City those tat stand before both te Compters do appear most horrible, a fearful to all her countreymen tat are in debt. I intended to have foretold at la some other thing which do here follow in brief, fiz. Trunkards shall often tre tat tey are in te bottome of cellars carousing and drinking healths, Lawyers sh tream of Angells and talk of demurres, habeas corpus, &c. the Physicians wi treame of a crete plague, and talke of pills, vomits, &c. The cut purse and catc¦poles of Michaelmas Terme, and every one of tat teir love, like te player tat h had his braines beat out with a cork of a bottle of Ale, and as he was speaking i hit at him because he spake it so scurvily. Many other wonders will happen, which her is forced at tis time to omit to  you of, and terefore her do now conclude and bid farewell to all her deare cou∣trey men, friends and pretren. FINIS.
