D726 E417_10 99864016 161319
A DECLARATION OF THE NORTHERN COUNTIES. SHEWING Their diligent care, and willingnesse to oppose all Forces that shall endeavour to enter into this Kingdome against the Parliament and Generall. ALSO, The Effect of the Generals Letter to Collonel Hammond Governour of the Isle of Wight. TOGETHER, With his Majesties Desires to both Houses of Par∣liament, for the setling of a firme and well-grounded peace, within his three Kindgdomes. Novemb. 26. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbot. London, printed by B. Alsop, and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange. 1647.
THE LAST NEVVES From the Isle of WIGHT. SIR, I Have received yours of the 21. of this instant, and thank you for those Books which you sent me, which hath sufficiently furnished me and my friends with newes: you still delight in obliging such as are most be∣holding to you: I am witnesse of it, and your late cur∣tesie is the triall; so that I am ashamed to be alwayes engaged, without so much as the hope ever to acknow∣ledge the favour rightly. Neverthelesse to satisfie your desire, I have sent you herein enclosed a copie of Collonel Hammonds Letter, which will sufficiently inform you of all or most of the proceedings in this Island, thus for the present I remain Yours engaged R. W.
A Letter sent from Colonel Hammond, to the Speaker of the Lords House. My Lord, THis morning I received by the hands of a mes∣senger from the Generall, a paper of Votes and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, bearing date Die Martis, 16. November, 1647. relating to the security of his Majesties person, which although they came not to me with directions from the Houses, yet I thought it my duty to take notice of them (by what hand soever received) as their commands, and accordingly to see them put in execution. As concerning that Vote, not permitting such as have been in Armes, or acted against the Parliament to come into this Island; it tending much to the se∣curity of his Majesties person, and the preserving the peace of the Island, I have (as I acquainted your Lordships in my last letters, before I received these Votes) given orders to that effect (which are careful∣ly put in execution) commanding all masters of Boats belonging to Hampshire and this Island, that they land neither persons nor goods, in any part of this Island, save onely at Yarmouth Castle, Cowes Castle, and Ryde, at which place I have also appointed a guard to whom order is given (as to the other two Castles) for the examining of all persons so landing, and to detain and secure any that cannot give a very good account of themselves or their businesse. As concerning your Lordships other Votes (now they are come to my hands) I shall with the best of my endeavours see them put in execution.
My Lord Yesterday there came to me an Officer, belonging to the Serjant of the House of Commons, with particular warrants for the apprehending and bringing up in safe custody the persons of Mr. Iohn Ashburnham, Mr. William Leg, and Sir Iohn Barkley who came hither with the King. The said warrants re∣quiring my assistance to him in the execution of them but with no order to me from either or both Houses to that purpose. And finding the matter to be of very great im∣portance, I have desired the messenger to forbeare the execution of his said warrants till I have given the Houses to understand that in case the said warrants should be served and put in execution, it would be impossible for me to answer the expectations and commands of the Parliament in preserving the per∣son of the King in security to be disposed by them, unlesse I should keep him close prisoner, which is a businesse of the nature, that it is neither fit for me to do, especially of my selfe. The grounds from whence I gather this, are plain∣ly thus. The King hath declared himselfe to me, That he came from Hampton-Court for no other cause but for the preservation of his person, which was (as he apprehended) in such danger, that he could not with safety continue longer there: That if he could have been there with safety, he would not have departed thence, nor from the Army: And that he chose this place rather then any other (when he was at liberty to have gon whither he pleased) that he might still continue under the protection of the Army (my selfe
being a member thereof) and that he might have con∣veniency of free entercourse betwen himselfe and the Parliament for the settlement of a generall peace, to which he professes greater inclinations and desires then ever, and that there shall be nothing wanting on his paat, that may be reasonably expected from him. He further saith, That in case these Gentlemen be taken from him, and punished as evill doers, for coun∣celling him not to goe out of the Kingdome, but ra∣ther to come to the place where he now is, for the ends aforesaid, and for their endeavouring according∣ly in attending him hither, he cannot but himself ex∣pect to be dealt with accordingly; his case being the same. And from such apprehensions your Lordships may easily judge, what he will doe, by his former actins: He having that liberty which hath ever been allowed him since he hath been disposed of by the Parliament. My Lord, I shall further let you know, that be∣sides the care I shall alwayes have of these Gentle∣men, they have ingaged their honours, not to de∣part from me, so that I am most confident of their security. And truly were not their ends the same with their pretences (in relation to the peace of this Kingdome) I am confident they would never have advised nor conducted the King to this place. Besides, were they at this time removed from the King, there would be none left for his attendance, which (besides the offence) how great the inconve∣nience
would be to him, your Lordships cannot be ignorant. And further give me leave to adde (if so unworthy a servant of your Lordships as I am (and that which concerns my honour were at all worthy your consi∣deration) whether it would not much reflect upon me in case these gentlemen should be thus removed from hence: The King and themselves having freely throwne themselves upon me for safety upon confi∣dence (as they please to say) of my honour and ho∣nesty, and the satisfaction they expected it would have given the Parliament, The King being necessita∣ted to remove. My Lord, My duty to you and the Kingdome, whose good and peace I most desire and shall most faithful∣ly endeavour, calls for this account, which with my selfe and these Gentlemen, I leave to your Lordships consideration with this conclusion, That whatsoever is commanded by Authority, especially that of Par∣liament, though never so contrary to my sense or ho∣nours shall never be disobeyed by My Lord, Your Lordships most faith¦full and humble servant, RO. HAMMOND. Carisbrook Castle, Nov. 19. 9647. My Lord, Since the conclusion of my letter, I re∣ceived the letter, and Votes of both Houses, of the 16 present, which shall be carefully put in execution, by Your Lordships most faith∣full and humble servant RO. HAMMOND.
His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax hath likewise written a Letter to Col: Hammond, the effect hereof is as followeth: That he should with all speed and conveniency send up Sir Iohn Barkley, M. John Ash∣burnham, and M. William Legg, and the Gentlemen that went with his Majesty from Hampton, now resi∣ding in the Isle of Wight, that they may give an ac∣compnt to the Parliament of his Majesties procee∣dings, and carriage in his journey, from Hampton to the Isle of Wight; and in case he should stand in need of men to guard them up, or the like, His Excellency hath ordered Captain Pecks Troop to Redbridge near Southampton. From the North we have received intelligence as followeth; Sir, YOurs of the 18 instant hath given me ample satis∣faction, and I am still more and more obliged unto your goodnesse; for you still overcome me with your cur∣tesies, which though I cannot requite, I shall never for∣get. For news, in these parts we have little but what comes from London, onely this for the present. There is great feares and jealousies in these parts, that some ill-affected persons, should raise or bring in forces against the Parliament; whereupon, there hath been severall meetings in divers places, and the inhabitants have unanimously declared, That they will rise as one man, in case any forces from [Scotland, or] forraign parts, should enter to oppose the Parliament, or their Generall. We are in good hopes here, that there will be a speedy ac∣commodation between His Majesty and the Parliament, which that there may, Sir, is the prayer of Your obliged friend▪ Rich: Soaresby. Craston, Nov. 22. 1647.
