E2213A E1060_74 99867710 120032
THE RATES OF THE EXCISE AND NEW-IMPOST Set and imposed by Parliament on the severall Commodities imported, hereafter mentioned, to be paid and Collected from the 21st. day of December 1649. blazon of the Commonwealth Die Veneris 21. Decembris, 1649 Hen. Scobell. Cleric. Parliament. London, Printed by Richard Cotes and T. Newcomb. 1649.
The Rates of the Excise and New Impost set and imposed by Parliament on the severall Commodities imported, &c. Die Veneris 21. Decembris, 1649.   l. s. d. Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament. THat all Tobacco which is not of English Plantations, as well al∣ready imported having not paid Excise, as hereafter to be impor∣ted, shall pay per pound weight two shillings Excise to bee paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 02 00 Resolved, &c. That all Tobacco of the English Plantations, as well already imported not having paid Excise, as hereafter to be imported in English ships or vessels, shall pay four pence a pound weight, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Mer∣chant or Importer. 00 00 04 Resolved, &c. That all Tobacco of the English Plantations, as well already imported which hath not paid Ex∣cise, as hereafter to be imported in forreign ships or vessels, shall pay six pence per pound weight, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00 00 06
Resolved, &c. That all Pepper as well already imported into this Nation immediately from India, which hath not paid the Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported immediately from India, shall pay three pence in the pound weight for Excise, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00 00 03 Resolved, &c. That all Pepper as well already imported not immediately brought from India, which hath not paid Excise, as that shall hereafter be imported being not immediately brought from India, shall pay four pence per pound weight for Excise, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Mer∣chant or Importer. 00 00 04 Resolved, &c. That all refined Sugars double or single in the Loafe, as well already imported which hath not paid Excise, as which shall be hereafter imported shall pay per pound weight six pence, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00 00 06 Resolved, &c. That all white Sugars of the growth of Eng∣lish plantations, as well which are already im∣ported not having paid the Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay a pound weight three pence, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00 00 03
Resolved, &c. That all other Sugars under Whites from Eng∣lish Plantations, as well which are already impor∣ted not having paid Excise, as which shall hereaf∣ter be imported, shall pay per pound weight two pence, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 02 Resolved, &c. That all White Sugars from other places, as well which are already imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay per pound weight three pence half peny, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Mer∣chant or Importer. 00: 00: 03½ Resolved, &c. That all other Sugars under Whites, as well Muscovadoes as others, which come from other places, as well already imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay per pound weight two pence half peny, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 02½ Resolved, &c. That all Candy white Sugar, as well which are already imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay per pound weight for Excise eight pence, to be paid by the first buyer from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 08
Resolved, &c. That all Candy brown Sugar, as well which are already imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay per pound weight for Excise six pence, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 06 Resolved, &c. That all other Grocery-wares not herein for∣merly mentioned, as well which are already im∣ported not having paid Excise, as which shall here∣after be imported, shall pay after the rate of five pounds per cent' according to the values set upon them in the book of Rates of Merchan∣dizes, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all Drugs, as well already imported not having paid the Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of five pounds per cent', according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buy∣er thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all Mercery-wares, as well which are al∣ready imported not having paid the Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of seven pounds ten shillings per cent', ac∣cording to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buyer there∣of from the Merchant or Importer. 07: 10: 00 per Cent'
Resolved, &c. That all Raw-Silk as well which are already imported not having paid the Excise as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of five pounds per cent. according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all Silks in the Gums ready thrown, as well which are already Imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of seven pounds ten shillings per cent' according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates; to be paid by the first buy∣er thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 07: 10: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all other Silks Dyed, as well which are al∣ready imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of seven pounds and ten shillings per cent' accor∣ding to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates; to be paid by the first buyer therof from the Merchant or Importer. 07: 10: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all Saltry Wares as well which are alrea∣dy imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of seven pounds ten shillings per cent' according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 07: 10: 00 per Cent'
Resolved, &c. That all Linnen fine and course, as well already imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of five pounds per cent' according to the values set upon them, in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all Upholstery, Habberdashery, Sope, Paper, Skins, Leather, Glasses, and Earthen-ware, as well already imported, not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay af∣ter the rate of five pounds per cent' according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, &c. That all Spirits imported made of French-Wines, called Brand-Wine, as well which are al∣ready imported, not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter he imported, shall pay after the rate of four pence per Gallon, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Impor∣ter. 00: 00: 04
Resolved, &c. That all forreign Spirits, and domestick, frau∣dulently sold in stead of Aqua vitae or Strong∣water, shall pay One shilling per Gallon 00 01 00 Resolved, &c. That all Strong-water perfectly made, as well already imported, not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay after the rate of One shilling per Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 01 00 Resolved, &c. That for every Tonne of Wines, as wel already imported, not having paid the Excise, as which hereafter shall be imported, shall be paid Five pounds for Excise, & so after that rate for a grea∣ter or lesser quantity, the same to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the merchant or importer 05 00 00 Resolved, &c. That all forreign Salt, as wel already imported, which hath not paid Excise, as which shall be hereafter imported shall pay three half-pence upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer of such Salt 00 00 01½ Resolved, &c. That all Salt made or to be made within Eng∣land, Wales, or Town of Berwick which is or shall be shipped or conveyed by water, shall pay One half-penny upon every Gallon, to bee paid by the first Buyer of such Salt, at the place of lan∣ding or unloading thereof 00 00 0012;
Resolved, &c. That all other Salt made or to be made within England, Wales, or towne of Berwick, and not shipped or conveyed by water, shall pay One halfe-penny upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer of such Salt upon the first delivery thereof 00 00 00 Resolved, &c. That all Salt upon Salt that is made of Salt, within England, Wales, or town of Berwick, which hath once paid Excise, shall pay One farthing upon every Gallon, to be paid by the maker of such Salt upon Salt, before such time as the same shall be put to sale 00 00 00 Resolved, &c. That no Salt expended upon Fishing shall bee lyable to this Excise 00 00 00 Resolved, &c. That all other Goods and Merchandizes (except Bullion, Corn, Victuall, Arms, Ammunition and Spanish Wools) aswel which are already impor∣ted, not having paid Excise, as which shall here∣after be imported, which are not by any of the votes above said to be chargeable with the Excise, other then such Goods and Merchandizes, as shal hereafter by Parliament be charged with Excise, shall pay after the rate of Five pounds per cent. to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Mer∣ant or Importer 05 00 00   per cent.
Resolved, &c. That all other Goods and Merchandizes to bee imported, upon which no values are set in the Book of Rates, shall pay Five pounds per cent. to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Mer∣chant or Importer 05 00 00 Resolved, &c. That the Commissioners of Excise, and their Sub-Commissioners, and Officers shall collect, re∣ceive and take the Excise and Impost set and rated upon the Goods and Merchandizes above mentioned, and no other Exci1395 se or Impost upon the said Goods and merchandizes.   Resolved, &c. That the severall Votes abovesaid, touching the Excise be forthwith printed and published, and that the same be sent to the Commissioners for the Excise: And that they and all Sub-commis∣sioners, and all other Officers and Ministers of the Excise under them, bee authorised and enjoined to put the same in execution forthwith, and to collect and gather the Excise according to the said Votes, & according to their former powers, and under the paines and penalties expressed in the former Ordinances and Acts of Parliament touching the Excise and New-Impost.   Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliamenti. FINIS.
