E2230B 42475026 151129
A Replication of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. TO His MAJESTIES last Answer, sent by the Right Honorable the Earle of HOLLAND. THE Lords and Commons in Parliament having taken into their consideration His Majesties Answer to their Hvmble Petition for Peace, delivered by the Earle of Hol∣land, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Sir John Holland, and the demands which he is therupon pleased to make concerning the present delivery of the Towne of Hull, the Maga∣zine, the Navie, disavowing the Ordinance of the Militia, the laying down of all Armes raised by Authority of the two Houses of Parliament and adjourning themselues to some other place, doe beseech His Majestie to accept this their most humble, and just excuse that they cannot for the present with the discharge of the trust reposed in them for the safety of the KING, and Kingdome; yeeld to those demands of His Majesty; the Reason why they took into their custody the Towne of Hull, the Magazeen, and Navie, passed the Ordinance of the Militia, and made preparation of Armes, was for the securitie of Religion, the safetie of His Majesties Person, of the Kingdome, and Parliament, all which they did see in evident, and eminent Danger, from which when they shall be secured, And that the Forces of the Kingdome shall not be used to the Destruction thereof, they shall then be readie to withdraw the Garrison out of Hull, to deliver the Magazeen, and Navie, and settle the Militia by Bill, in such a way as shall be Honourable, and safe for His Majestie, most agreeable to the Dutie of Parliament, and effectuall for the good of the Kingdome, as they have profest in their late Petition, and for Adjourning the Parliament: they Apprehend no Reason for His Majestie to require it, nor securitie for themselves to consent to it. And as for that Reason which His Majestie is pleased to expresse, they doubt not but the usuall place will be as safe for His Royall Person, as any other, considering the full assurance they have of the Loyaltie, and fide∣litie of the Citie of London to His Majestie, and the care which His Parliament will ever have to prevent any danger, which His Majestie may justly Apprehend; besides the manifold con∣veniences to be had there, beyond other parts of the Kingdom. And as for the laying down of Armes, when the causes which moved them to provide for the Defence of His Majestie, the Kingdome and Parliament, and shall be taken away, they shall very willingly, and cheerefully forbeare any further preparations, and lay down their Force already Raised. Die Jovis 28. July, 1642. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament; That the Petition of the Lords and Commons in Parliament delivered to His Majesty the sixteenth Day of July, together with His Maje∣sties Answer thereunto, and a replication of the said Lords and Commons, to the said Answer, Dated the 26 of July 1642. shall be Read in all Churches and Chappels within the King∣dome of England and Dominion of Wales, by the Parsons, Vicars or Curates of the same. John Brown Cleric. parliamentorum. Printed at London, August 1. 1642.
