e3122 e569_4 99862423 114582
THE ENGLISH TYRANTS. OR, A brief Historie of the Lives and Acti∣ons of the high and mighty States, the Lords of Westminster, and now (by usurpa∣tion) Kings of ENGLAND. Containing all their Rebellious and Trai∣terous Proceedings and Transactions in Parliament. With their levying of War, and bloudy practises against their Soveraign, their sinister and Military designs to alter and subvert the Fun∣damentall Government in Church and Com∣monwealth, by destroying Monarchy, and making themselves Free-States, by the power of the Sword. Continued from the first Convention of this Parliament, 1640. untill the Kings Death, Jan. 30. 1648. Ʋsurpers are Murderers, 2 Reg. 11.1. and Math. 12. 38, 39. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.
THE ENGLISH TYRANTS. Policy of Princes.Policy in Princes, or States, is but circumstan∣tiall dissimulation, pretending one thing, in∣tending another: Some will so far allow it, and say, That faith is but a Merchants, or Me∣chanique virtue; and so they may make it higher, by making it a Regall vice. There is an order that out-goeth Michiavel, where he confesses, Ʋsus fraudis in caeteris actionibus detestabilis, in bell gerendo lau∣dabilis: That fraud which in war is commendable, is in other actions detestable.Prerogative of Princes. 'Tis certain, there is a preroga∣tive in Princes, which may legittimate something in their negotiations, which is not allowable in a private person or subject: But even the grant of this liberty hath en∣couraged them to too great an enlargement.State policy. State poli∣cy is now become an irreligious riddle; As Lewis the 11th of France, would wish his Son to learn no more Latin, then would teach him to be a dissembler:Godly preten∣ces. But when god∣ly pretences, back'd with frequent promises, and sealed with Oaths, Covenants and Protestations, appear defor∣med under the veil of hypocrisie,Self-interest. self-interest and private ends, especially when the safety of a Nation and people solely depends thereupon: The hands of the Omnipotent shall uncover their nakednesse, and their shame and acti∣ons shall be punished with speedy ruine. Plausible be∣ginnings.Fair and plausible beginnings are not alwaies the fore∣runners of good end; many honest meaning, and loyall
English-men (who eight years since viewed the Parlia∣ments Actions, and judged of their integrity by their Protestations and Declarations) entertained a very cha∣ritable and honourable opinion both of them and their Cause, and therein hazarded both their lives and estates with them, who are long since sate down in the Chair of repentance; having found by sad and wofull experience, their fair and large pretences to prove but shadows of weak performances, and their greatest labours to produce no other effects, then to burden this distracted Nation with unheard of tyrannie, and miserable oppression. But they that beheld their proceedings and actions, even in their primitive and best times, with a considerable and judicious eie, did easily perceive them to pursue their own ambitious and self-ends, more then the welfare of their native Kingdom: That they were men whose thoughts and intentions were filled with bloud: Who could expect better things from the illegall and rebelli∣ous proceedings of those men, who presumed from Ser∣vants to become Masters, and endeavour to bring in De∣mocracy and destroy Monarchy? Whose horrid and bloudy actions hath produced such monstrous and strange effects, that it hath set open the floud-gates of ruine to overflow this miserable and bleeding Kingdom. Courteous Reader,Beginning of the Par. 1640. Take here then a Breviate or Narrative of all the proceedings and traiterous actions of this Par∣liament and Army from their first convention by the K. Writ, 1640. where in the space of ten years you shall find the greatest mutation and change of Government in this (late flourishing) Kingdom of England, that hath befallen any Nation or State in Europe, since it was a Monarchy, acted (under the specious pretences of Religion,Monarchy tur∣ned to Anar∣chy. Laws and Liber∣ties) by the most rebellious, perjur'd and bloudy Tyrants, that ever carried the name of Subjects or badge of Chri∣stianity in the whole Universe. Take here also a view of the illegall Acts of these trai∣terous Tyrants at Westminster,Illegall Acts. for the accomplishment of
their private and bloudy designs, to subvert the ancient sundamentall constitution and government of the Kingd: in destroying the King, his Posterity, together with Mo∣narchy, and to invest themselves with power and greatness thereof, as States and Lords of the Land. 1 Act. The Earl of Strafford.First They strike at an eminent pillar that upheld the fabrick of the Commonwealth; a wise States-man and Councellour unto His Majestie (as a great obstruction in their original designs) by taking away his life, Ap. 12. 1641. A Bill against Bishops. And the Mili∣tia.Next, they perswade His Majestie (and bring in a Bill) to take away Bishops, root and branch: Another, for taking away the Militia from the K. and setting it in other hands (both which Bils were rejected in a full and free convention of Parlia∣ment) Also to passe by tumults raised in Dec. and Ja. 1641.Tumults in Dec. and Jan. 1641. For reviving and carrying on the Bils before rejected, by driving a∣way the dissenting Memb. and new moulding the 2 Houses of Parl. Acts for a Tri∣enniall and perpetuall Parliament.His Majesty after this (according to their desires in their petition) passed two severall Acts, the first, for a Trienniall Parliament; the second, for a continuance of this Parliament: In which Acts he gave his prerogative and power out of his own hands, which proved his and the Kingdoms ruin. Fears and Jea∣lousies.They begin to invent Fears and Jealousies, and possesse the people with pretences or designs for destroying the Parl. City and Kingd: But these Fears and Jealousies (of their own contri∣ving) hath destroyed the K. and People, and preserved themselvs. Petition for the Militia.This party of the House of Commons thus possessed with Fears and Jealousies, petition His Majestie to put the Tower of London, and all other Forts, and the whole Mili∣tia of the Kigndom into their hands, Jan. 28. Also they tender His Majestie an Ordinance for setling the power of the Militia in the Houses of Parl. Feb. 24. The Kings Fears and Jealousies.Which Petition and Ordinance begot in His Majestie also Fears and Jealousies of a design against Himself, and against the Crown, to take away His Rights, and to alter the Fundamentall Laws and Government of this Kingdom: as appears by His An∣swer, Jan. 28.
The K. gives the Parl. the Tower, Forts and Custles.His Majestie (to comply with them) promised, That the Forts and Castles should be in such hands ( only such) as the Parliament may safely conside in, Jan. 28. Also His Majestie accepted of Sir John Conyers to  Lieutenant of the Tower of London, in place of Sir John Byron, Feb. 11. The Militia of the Kingdom.Lastly, He accepted of the Lieutenants by them nomi∣nated to be entrusted with the Militia of the Counties, and offered to grant them Commissions and powers; promi∣sing also to continue the same so long as there should be cause, Feb. 28. Vote the set∣ling of the Militia.But they are not herewith satisfied, they enforce their petition, March 1. They vote the setling of the Militia, and they set forth a Declaration of the grounds of their fears and jealousies, March 9. They resolve and vote, in case of extreme danger (as at this time) and upon His Majesties refusall; the Parliament have power to order the Militia of the Kingdom; and the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the Militia, doth oblige the people, and ought to be obeyed by the Fundamentall Laws of the Land, March 15. The K. grants the Militia to them.His Majestie condescended, That as the Militia was di∣sposed according to their desires, so it should not be exe∣cuted without their advice, April 28. 1642. And then also he granted the same for Corporati∣ons, which he had formerly done concerning the Coun∣ties. They seize the Navy Royall.But yet they are not satisfied; and secure they cannot be (in their own opinions) unlesse they have the sole power of disposing and executing the Militia without the King; nor unlesse they have the Navy Royall also, which they seized and disposed of, March 28. Now whether those Lords and Commons did put themselves into the strength of the Kingdom, to prepare against danger, or for a design, let the sad consequents
manifest: preceding actions of this nature (set the de∣ceitfulnesse of mans heart) being not rightly to be under∣stood but by subsequent managements. Deportment to the King.And in their deportment afterwards you may find more of confidence then of fear, more of andaciousnesse and conspiracy against the King, then of solicitousnesse for the Kingdom; an endeavour rather to subvert and destroy, then to preserve and maintain the fundamentall constitution and government of the Kingdom and Par∣liament. Sir John Hotham keeps the King out of Hull, April 23. and the Parliament justifies his traiterous act,Sir J. Hotham. April 28. When to hold a Fort or Castle against the King, is to levy War against the King; which is high treason by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. Not long after,Mr Martin. Mr Henry Martin saies openly in the House of Commons, and unreproved, That the Kings office is forfeitable, and that the happinesse of this Kingdom did not de∣pend upon His Majestie, or any of the Royall branches of that root. And Sir Henry Ludlow,Sir H. Ludlow. That he was not worthy to be King of England; which doubtlesse was the sense of the Parlia∣ment; for May 26. 1642. both Houses declare, That they should not want duty or modesty, if they followed the highest presi∣dents of other Parliaments: That is,Of deposing & murdering the King. if they should depose and murder the King, as other unparallel'd Parliaments had done Edward and Richard the Second. Declare a∣gainst the Kings Nega∣tive Vote.The Crown it self cannot escape them; for in the same De∣claration they deny the Kings Negative Vote in Parlia∣ment. And to deprive the King and Crown of their power, not only in Law making, but also in governing,Propositions destructive to Monarchy. June 2. they offer to His Majestie Propositions destructive to Regality and Monarchy, viz. for the Parliament, 1. To nominate all the great Officers and Ministers of State, and the chief Judges of the Land.
2. To the reform Church-government, and the Li∣turgy as they shall think fit. 3. To dispose and execute the Militia of the Kingdom according to their Ordinance. 4. To approve those to whom the command and cu∣stody of Forts and Castles shall be committed. 5. To admit such Peers as shall be made hereafter, to sit and Vote in Parliament. Parliament take up Arms.June 10. They sent forth Propositions for bringing  Plate and money, and raising an Army, To make good what they had taken from, and declared against, and proposed to His Majesty, viz. to keep the Forts and Castles, and the Militia, and Navy from him; and to take from Him, and from the Crown, the power of making Laws, and governing the Church and state: and to depose and destroy him; and to root out his posterity, together with Monarchy. Is not this by force of arms to shake off subjecti∣on and to rebell? Declaration to raise an Army.Then put they forth their Declarations to the King∣dom, telling the People, that the King, seduced by evil councel, intended to levy Warre against the Parliament, City, and Kingdom; And to destroy their Religion, Laws and Liber∣ties: perswading them to rise (as one man) for defence thereof (with these delusive pretences) Protestation and Vows.That they did not sight against his Majesties Person, but to deliver Him from His popish and wicked Counsel▪ and under this notion, they raised their Armies; and to that end they made Protestations, Vowes, with Leagues and Covenants, and (upon invitation of the Scots (into this Kingdom) to their assistance, declared that they sought for the preservation and maintenance of the Kings Person, Crown and Dignity; the true Protestant Religion, Laws and liberties, with the priviledges of Parliament, against all Popish and Malignant Cavaliers, and all other disaffected persons. These were the golden baites,Delusions. the poor delude peo∣ple of England, were insnared with; and in prosecution
of their demands, and Rebellious sinister ends, did they prosecute and continue the War, untill they had sub∣dued the King and all his party. 1646. The misled people of En∣gland.And how could the abused and misled people of England, but be enraged against you, who under the pretence of preventing present dangers, wound them∣selves into the chief power and government of the Kingdome? And under the specious pretences of fight∣ing for Religion and Liberty, engaged them in the main∣tenance of their usurpation, and made them instrumen∣tall to promote Rebellion, under this vaile of Hypo∣crisie, and under the glosse and notion of Reforma∣tion, have they hatched all their bloudy practises, whose ambitious ends, private interests and designes, was to destroy our Religion, Lawes and Liberties, Murder our King, and triumph in our destructi∣on. The King comming to the Scots Ar∣my. Bought and Sold.After His Majesties comming to the Scots Army, The Parliament disburses 200000 l. for His Person (a Royall exchange) the Parliament got the King; the Scots their Arrears; bought by the Parliament, sold by the Scots; sold to be restored to His Crowne; bought to be made a Glorious Prince, as they promised him; sold by His Native Subjects for gains, and bought by His Traiterous Subjects to be Murde∣red. His Majesty being now in the hands of the Parlia∣ment, they restrained him at Newcastle, and Holmeby:The King Re∣strained at Holmeby. where Cromwell gave command to the private Souldi∣ery, to seize upon His Person: being now in the power of the Army; observe how Lieutenant Gene∣rall Cromwell corrts His Majesty (both by members of the Army, and Gentlemen formerly in the Kings Service) into a good opinion and belief of the pro∣ceedings of the Army, and into a dis-affection and
dislike of the proceedings of the Parliament; preten∣ding to shew, that His Majesties Interest would far better suit with the principles of Independency, then of Presbytery; when the King was at Newmar∣ket, did not Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, and Com∣missary Generall Ireton promise His Majesty any thing he should desire, as Revenues, Chaplaines, Wife and Children, servants of his owne, Visitations of friends, accesse of Letters saying also, they were not a people hating His Majesties Person, or Monarchi∣call Government, but that they liked it as the best, and by him; saying further, That they did hold it a very unseasonable thing for the Parliament to a∣bridge him of them: oft promising with vows, pro∣testations and oathes, that if His Majesty would, and not act against them; they would restore him to all his desires, settle him in his just Rights and Liberties, and make him the most glorious Prince in Christen∣dome, that they would carry such an equall hand, between him and the Parliament, in order to the settlement of the Kingdom by him, which besides their own judgement and conscience, they did see a ne∣cessity of it as to the people: Commissary Generall Ireton, saying, that what was offered in the proposals to him, should be so just and reasonable, that if there were but six men in the Kingdome that would fight to make them good, he would be seventh, against any power that should oppose them: See how they kept a faire correspondency with His Majesty, untill they had obtained their owne ends;The King at Hampton-Court, Crom∣well & Ireton plot to con∣vey him to the Isle of Wight. Then Lieut: Gen: Cromwell sending a Letter to Collonel Whaley at Hamp∣ton-Court (where the King then was) intimating that His Royall Person was in some danger, by the commotions of Collonel Martin, and Collonel Rainsbrough, and their adherents, which Letter was shewed to the King by Collonel Whaley; which Tray∣terous
designe of Cromwell and Ireton, and the rest, was to convey away his Majesty privately into the Ile of Wight,The King pri∣soner in C∣risbrook Castle where they did strictly imprison him in Caris∣brook Castle: Never was any King of England impriso∣ned by his Subjects, but he was deposed and murdered. Thus they who at first took the King from Holme∣by into the power of the Army; cried down the Presby∣terian Government,Policy and power. and proceedings of the present Parliament, and their perpetuity: And in stead there∣of held and earnest inclination to a moderate Episcopa∣cy,11 Members impeached. with a new Election of Members to sit in Parlia∣ment, for the speedy settlement of the Kingdom;7 Lords im∣peached. and afterwards when the eleven Members had left the House, and the marching through London with the Army, the seven Lords impeached,4 Aldermen committed. four Aldermen of London com∣mitted to the Tower; then again, they coyed up the Presbyterian Government, and the perpetuity of the Par∣liament: Cromwell further pleasing himself with the great sums of money, which was his Arrears, due to the Army, and the Tax of 60000 l. a moneth;Tax of 60000 l. per month. Now saith he, we may be an Army (for ought I know) as long as we live. After this, Orders of Parliament were sent forth for calling their Members together: Cromwell perceiving the Houses will not answer his expectation,Self end. he utters forth words to a prejudice against the proceedings of Parliament,Cromwels in∣terest. again crying down Presbyterian Govern∣met, setting up a single interest, which he cals an ho∣nest interest. The Army seized of sixty Members som Citizens and imprisons them.To this purpose he puts the Army upon chusing new Adjutators, and to draw forth of the Parliament sixty or seventy of the Members thereof. And a consi∣derable party of the chief Citizens, and some of every County, to be clapt up in the Castles; saying what a sway these men keep, and that he was as well able to govern the Kingdome as any of them; so that nothing
more appeareth then his seeking after the Govern∣ment of King, Parliament, City and Kingdom. Concluding further,Hypocrisie. that it is lawfull to passe through any forms of Government for accomplishing his ends; and therfore either to purge the Houses, and support the remaining party by force everlastingly, or to put a period to them by force, is very lawfull and sutable to the interest of honest men. No addresses to the King, January 1.After this, they passed those Votes; Of making no more Addresses to the King, nor receiving any Message from him, Jan. 1. And they set forth a Declaration expres∣sing the reasons of those Votes, Feb. 11. And the Ar∣my resolved to live and die with them in maintenance of those Votes, and in setling their designed Government without the King, and against him, Jan. 9. Their resolu∣tion to go∣vern without a King.And though they seem to prosecute the King upon emergent provocations (that He made War against them, &c.) yet from Harry Martins and Sir Henry Lud∣lows speeches, and from the Declarations of the two Houses of Parliament (before Arms were taken up, and before any Propositions sent to the King) it ap∣pears, that from the beginning they had a design a∣gainst His Majestie to murder him,Their designe to murder the King and de∣stroy his po∣steriy. His death. and to destroy Mo∣narchy: And what was spoken and declared then, was agitated and pursued at last. In order whereunto, they declare against His Fami∣ly and Posterity. Thus you see, Ʋsurpers are ever Murderers, 2 Reg. 11.1. and Math. 12.38, 39. I am come now to speak of His Death, who was butcher'd and murder'd by the most barbarous, perfi∣dious and perjur'd Villains under the Sun, whether Christian or Infidell. Which whosoever takes into their sad and serious consideration, the proceedings and actions of this
confederate party of Rebellious and bloud-thirsty Cannibals, sitting and acting in the Parliament and Army, who (contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, their Protestation, the Solemn League and Covenant, and sundry Declarations and Remon∣strances of both Houses, to His late murder'd Majestie, His Heirs and Successors, to the whole Kingdoms of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland, and to all forraign States and Nations; and have most presumptuously arrogated and usurped to themselves the title of, The Supreme Au∣thority of this Kingdom; and by colour and pretence thereof, have wickedly and audaciously presumed, without and against the privities or consents of the people and His Subjects of England,The unjust Court of Ju∣stice. and against the Vote of the House of Peers, to erect a High Court of Justice, (as they tearm it) though never any Court them∣selves, to arraign and condemn His Majestie, against the Laws of God, and the Municipall Laws of the Realm: Which Court (consisting for the most part of such partiall and engaged persons, who had formerly vowed His Maje∣sties destruction, and sought His Bloud) most illegally and unjustly refused to admit of His Majesties just Rea∣sons and exceptions against their usurped Jurisdiction; and without any lawfull Authority, or proof against Him, or legall Triall, presumed most traiterously and impiously to condemn and murder Him. And since that, have arraigned and put to death some Peers, and other free Subjects of this Realm, con∣trary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right,Duke Hamil∣ton, Holland, and Capell. the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Subjects, to the great enslaving and endangering of the lives and liberties of all the free-people of England. And whereas the said confederated Commons have likewise tyrannically,Acts of Par∣liament made by the Com∣mittee. and contrary to their Oaths and Engagements aforesaid, to take upon them to
make Acts of Parliament (as they tearm them) with∣out the joint consent of the King and House of Lords, contrary to the use and priviledges of Parliament; and known Laws of the Land: And by pretext thereof, have traiterously and wickedly endeavoured to dis∣inherit the Illustrious CHARLS, Prince of Wales, next Heir to the Crown,Treason to proclaim Charls II. King. and Actuall King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, immediatly after His said Royall Father, barbarous murther, by right of Descent; and proclaimed it Treason for any person to proclaim Him King (whereas it is high Treason in them thus to prohibite His proclaiming) and have likewise trai∣terously and impudently encroached a Tyrannicall and lawlesse power to themselves to vote down our Anci∣ent, Kingly and Monarchicall Government, and the House of Peers;Change of Government and to make a New Great Seal of England, without the Kings Pourtraicture or Stile; and to alter the Ancient, Regall and Legall Stile of Writs, and pro∣ceedings in the Courts of Justice; and to create New Judges and Commissioners of the Great Seal; and to di∣spense with the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and to prescribe new Oaths unto them, contrary to Law, Statute or Custome to administer. And have traiterously attempted to change and alter the Funda∣mentall Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and to subvert the being, freedom and priviledges of Par∣liaments: For which Treasons, Strafford and Canterbury (though lesse criminall) lost their heads this Parlia∣ment. States and Lords of the Land.To conclude, you are become (by Rebellion, Trea∣son, Tyrannie, Bloud and Murder) Lords of the Land, Kings of a poor distressed and miserable Kingdom; And you are pleased in your greatnesse to stile your selves (The Free Estates of the Kingdom) you have vio∣lently, forcibly and unjustly got the riches, treasure
and wealth of the Land into your hands by the power of the Sword, under which the poor people of England are ruinated and destroyed. Yet consider this (you that forget God) the venge∣ance of Heaven hangs over your heads for oppression and bloud; your reprieve is not your salvation; you are grown to a height of confidence and presumption upon your successes; your necks are as iron, and your brows brasse, and you walk uncontroulable in your way, tri∣umphing as the only Princes of the Earth; as fit to sway the Scepter of England, and all Nations; as the only righteous and honourable people in the world, the great Lords of the Land: Yet, Remember for all these things you shall come to Judgment; you shall give an accompt for all the treasonable and bloudy actions you have perpetrated against the King and Kingdom. Thus far have I traced your footsteps the space of eight years, not without admiration, from the time His Majestie sate on His Throne, to His unfortunate Death by His Subjects, before His own Palace; where you may observe the most Virtuous and Wisest Prince in the Christian world murder'd and put to death by the most villanous, barbarous and bloudy people up∣on the Face of the Earth. FINIS. I shall shortly recommend to you the second part of this Historie, which (as yet) is not finished, containing all their Actions from His Majesties Death to this present.
