e3718 e115_6 99858930 110990
THE EXAMINATION OF GEORGE LEDDOZE OF DORCHESTER MERCHANT, Taken before Master Henry Maber Mayor, and Mr Richard Burce, His Ma∣jesties Iustices of the Peace, the 27 of August. 1642. Wherein is discovered the inveterate malice of the Lords and Cavaleers at Sherborne, against the Parliament and all good men, falsly scandali∣zing them under the nickname of Crop-eard-Round-Heads. Sent from a Member of the House of Commons in that County, and read in the House, and ordered to be Printed. Hen. Elsynge Cl. Par. D. Com. Whereunto is added a Letter from Coker, near Sherborne in So∣mersetshire, of the War-like preparations there intended. LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock. Septemb. 1. 1642.
THE EXAMINATION OF GEORGE LEDDOZE OF DORCHESTER, MERCHANT, Taken before Master Henry Maber Mayor, and Richard Burce, His Majesties Ju∣stices of the Peace. August 27. 1642. WHo upon his Oath saith that upon Thursday last, This Examinant being at the Town of Sherborn, was taken for a spie, and was examined at the Lodge there by the Lord Paulet, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Iohn Stowell, and Sir Henry Barkley;
And in his examination, being demanded, of which side he would be, whether for King or Parliament; This Examinant answered, that he was for both. The Lord Paulet answered, that all the Parliament that were for the Militia, were proclaimed Traytors and were crop-eard Rogues, and that Earle, meaning Sir Walter Earle of whom they had had conference before, was the wickedest Rogue of them all and one of the Divels limbs, and so they were all: And the said Sir Ralph Hopton spake the same, and the said other Gentlemen spake to the same effect: and that they were come thither to keep a Parliament them∣selves, and that the King would be there shortly to assist them with a great Army, and if it had not been for Earle and such Rogues, these tumults and sturres had not been; and the said Sir Ralph Hopton further saith, that we may see the hand of God to be with them in protecting them, being but a small number, and they great in number that were against them, and that they being shot twice at with many shots and bullets about their eares, yet were not touched by one of them, and that their company shot but once and killed two men, and maimed or hurt fifteen more, & that those that took up Armes for the Parliament; were bloud sucking Rogues; and these their words they confirmed with many oaths; Further, Sir Ralph Hopton demanding what strength there was in Dorchester, this Examinant answered, there were
six great Gunnes, the said Ralph replyed, that those Gunnes did belong unto them, and they would have them, and would cut off all the Round-Heads in the Land. George Leddoze.
A LETTER out of SOMERSET-SHIRE, Concerning the VVarlike Preparations AT SHERBVRNE. Loving Brother, I Thought fit to let you understand in what posture Sherburne stands in: The Lord Marquesse of Hartford and his two sonnes, and his brother, the Lord Seymor, the Lord Paulet, and his two eldest sonnes, and of Somerset Knights Hopton, Stowell, and Rodney; and of the Gentry, Iohn Coven∣try, and the rest, who accompanied him at Wells, yet keep with him, and the two Lunsfords, and are for∣tifying
the Castle at Sherburne, their strength not exceeding six hundred Horse and Foot; against whom are marching the Earle of Bedford with his six hundred Horse, and about eighteen great pieces of Ordnance from Bristoll, besides twenty thousand Horse and Foot at least out of Somersetshire, and great Companies out of Dorsetshire, who promise to bee at Sherburne at a dayes warning; which causeth the Lords and Cavaliers to droope, and to desire a free passage; and it is thought they will endeavour it this day. Yesterday the Marquesse sent a Letter to my neighbour Master Harby, one of the Deputy Lievtenants for the Militia, de∣siring his assistance and advice; he desired to be conducted to Poole, and from thence by sea to his owne house, as is conceived. What will bee the issue wee know not yet: Our Country men are angry they took him not at Wells, who then visited the Bishops pallace, where they did not hurt, but to his Wine, Pictures, Organs, &c. I purpose, God willing, to stay here, and expect the Issue. From Coker neere Sherburne in Somersetshire Aug. 26. 1642. FINIS.
