E3907 E107_12 99864640 116872
Charles' royal blazon C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
AN EXTRACT Of all the Passages from HULL, YORK, and LINCOLNSHIRE, being taken out of sundry Letters, and sent by the last Post. BEING A true relation of His MAIESTIES Proceedings in those parts. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen and Iohn Bull. July 19. 1642.
Kind Sir, I Thank you for your news of your pro∣ceedings in the South, I pray continue the same, and I shall weekly write to you the news out of the North, if it may be conveyed safe; for we have so many in∣tercepting Cavaleeres, or rather Cava∣leeres upon the high way, that we are neither confident of our peace nor safety of persons nor goods. On Wednesday the King was at Lincoln with the Prince, and the Lord Linsey, where was two peeces of Ordnance presented to him by Sir Iames Stroobe, to make an attonement to procure pardon for killing one some 14 nights since. There was many of our County of Lincoln came in, but with no courage to sight against Hull, and I am sure they have no mind to starve Hull; for there is divers Hull people comes to our Town dai∣ly, and they are heartily welcome to us, and we shall do our best to releeve them. When all the people came together to the King at Lincoln, there was not one in twenty had so much as a Sword about them; you may perceive by that, they came not to fight. The King desired to be excused of his not speaking to them, for they should have his mind in paper. He bid them not to feare for he would not make their County the seat of Warre, but as I remem∣ber
it was so declared to the County of Yorke: but we heare they are now drawn forth upon paine of death, and forced with Swords and Pistols to stand in danger of their lives. Sir Iohn Hothams sonne, had a Horse taken from his man of good valew, being at his house, eight miles from Hull he hath since got satisfaction and hath taken 8 Cavaleeres with their Horses, one Horse amongst them worth foure score pound, and amongst them a Gentleman that did owe his father two thousand pounds, he hath layd out these foure yeeres to catch him, but could never lite on him till now, and now he hath him in safe custody; he might well fight against Sir Iohn, for he had no mind to pay his money. We have the Countrey people come to us every night, and tell us of the proceedings of the Kings army, the Lord Newport was over head and cares that night they burnt our Mils, and had much adoe to escape drowning: they came againe the third night to burne our other Mils, but our Ordnance was so fierce upon them there, that they runne away. We heare of 5. of Captaine Duncombs Souldiers slaine. We sent out a small Pinnace towards Becton where espying some of the Cavalceres that would starve us, we shot two or three Guns amongst them; and now we are resolved to kill them if we can, that would starve us if they can.
SIr, in much hast I have writ two words of that I have seen, God be thanked our Town is safe and strong, and if supplies come from the Parlia∣ment we feare not for all their words, although yesternight it should have been fired by some ill disposed in our Town, but God be thanked we are all in generall in an union, and are resolved to fight it to the last man. We pack out knowes daily which makes the rest conforme, it is marvelous to one to see all men in our Towne muster and fight, that was on the other side before. Yester night there was divers before our Town, but the great Guns and Muskets did sing sweet∣ly on them; we are daily yet eere victory, for Captain Paget that let the Providence loose for want of care, hath now playd his part, and redeemed his credit, in taking a Hoy and three great Guns that we agoing to be plan∣ted on Cuntolpher side for stopping passage by Water to us and did beat all the Musqueters, and made them runne ashore by the West, to fly his Ordnance; our Mils was three of them burnt one night, which is the worst they have done us, but I believe it cost them deere, for the next morning some of their swords, bri∣dies and saddles were got from them by the way, being full of pats beds; the Countrey doth loath them but that they constrain them to fight, and with spader to worke for them, to make Forts. I cannot have leave to enlarge it further, Farewell. 15 July 1642.
SAturday, we heare that Sir Iohn Penning∣ton is gon to Sea, Pollard, Barkley, Ash∣burncham to Holland, yesternight one Master Reeve had his windowes all broke, and the pillers of his windowes cut by Souldiers in Walmegate; yester∣night the King was exceeding serious which some of the Nobility, the Lord Keeper, and the Lord Bankes, to day a Declaration came out concerning his Majesties intentions. Sunday, about two a clock in the morning, the Trum∣pets sounded out 200 Horse speedily to horse away, at five a clocke I heard of it, about 8 a clock 200 rid away compleatly armed, at noone a command came from the King to the Lord Major, for horses for 300 foote because they had hast, and could not march fast enough on foote, upon a Common they call Knais∣mire was driven some 200 Horse, another they call Tinghall was driven about 100 horse, at one a clock out Belman cryed that all which had Horses in those pa∣stures should goe with bridles and sadles thither, or else if bridles and sadles were not brought when the Horses came back, we were to pay for the bridles, and sadles as they cost, to night they went away, a Ship within 10 miles of Hull run a shore with provision with came from Holland, which we heare had like to have been taken; Mr. Murrey being one was in it. Munday, we heare L. Digby is come to York, and hath been at Hull 3 dayes in a mariners coate all tarre and pitch, this day 300 foote and 100 horse are presently
commanded to be at an howers warning. Also the Re∣giments of Sir Wlliam Pennyman, and Sir Thomas Mettam, are commanded on paine of death presently to goe forward, we heare that 6 Regiments shall incompasse Hull suddenly. the high Sheriffe was on his knees to beg that he might perswade with Sir Iohn Hotham to yeild the Town ere it was besieged, he was confident to perswade him, which his Majesty consented to, this day there was about 300 horse brought out of adjoy∣ning Towns, and our City, for more foote to rid, and a∣bout 300 horse more went with thē; Colonell Ashburn∣ham with Sir Edward Stradling, and another was taken in a boate on Humber when the Ship came in that the trouble was about, the Ship they call the Pro∣vidence, so these are with Sir Iohn Hotham. Lincolnshire we heare and believe is secured for the King. Tuesday, there was aboundance going towards Hull, both horse and foote, only a few lest at Court, we heare that Sir Iohn Hotham made tryall of his fluces to let out the water, and it would not doe, his Majesty goes on Fryday to Hull, and intends to have Hull ere hee come back as we are informed, many aspersions are reported of Mr. Pim that except 3 voices, he had been cast out of the house, that the Militia by the Parliament is yeilded to his Majesty on condition, that he call in his Commis∣sion for Array, Serjeant major Duncombe is made Knight and Barronet; also we heare to day that one of kindred (I thinke brother in Law) to sir Iohn Hotham, was by intreaty allowed to perswade him to yeild the towne, but I heare he sent a resolute letter back that he would not. Wensday morning at 4 a clock, the King rid with a few attendants to Paule, and came back about 5 a clock,
out of the ship which is for his Majesty, 34 peeces we heare are mounted neere Paule, with 2 other huge ∣ces. Five miles from Hull, they have taken a flax ship, and out thereof 4 pieces of Ordnance, and let the ship  Also a ship with coales and one with cheese; this they report, but unlesse at night ships cannot passe them. Lincolneshire shore is planted with Souldiers for the King, that ere long tis thought the men of Hull will scarce got victualls, or supplies. To day its reported that one Mr. Thorneton for  expelled Hull, being upon this expedition, is  Captaine of a troope of horse, who yesterday (Or this morning) with his souldiers, and to Alaby (whether with, or without commission, I know not) he plund and pillaged Lieutenant Colonell Legards house,  hearing this newes at Hull, Legard plundred with  Company, and pillaged Thornetons houses in the Town, at which newes Thorneton) and his troop come  and cleares the fields of his sheepe, horse, kine and o∣ther Cattell: Captaine Jossard with 60 musk  comes by a compasse upon them, and they must  fight or leave their prey, but they run away,  Ieffard, Captaine Thorneton I will snd away my  dier, send you away yours,  it,  gave no heed to these vain words, but they al  we heare that sir Iohn hath drawne a writing, and  that will stand by him in the Towne are to under  it, 300 have already done, what intention hath how) to deale with the other is not yet known. FINIS.
