F1114 E199_32 99859092 157530
FIVE MOST NOBLE SPEECHES Spoken to his Majestie returning out of SCOTLAND INTO ENGLAND. The first spoken by the Recorder of Yorke. The second by the Major of Stamford. The third by the Major of Huntington. The fourth by the Lord Major of London. The fifth by the Recorder of London. Also the Relation after what manner and where his Majestie Knighted the Lord Major and the Recorder of London. With the Discription of what honoura∣ble Tryumph his Majestie did ride into the City of London, being accompanied with the Queene, the Prince, the Duke of Yorke and the Lady Mary. LONDON Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.
THE Recorder of Yorkes SPEECH to his Majestie. Most Royall Soveraigne, WIth a cheerfull auspicious eye, behold your well affected and loyall subiects gather them selves together to expresse their duty, & love to your most Sacred Majesty, whose indul∣gent, and vigilant care hath beene expressed to this our Citie, and populated Kingdome, by the tedi∣ous and irkesome travels, which for our sakes you have vndertaken. For which we are so farre oblieged to your Sacred Maiesty, that should each person here present, either man, woman, or child, live a double Methusalaes age, yet are we not able to recompence that love, which your Maiesty hath extended vnto vs. Our well tun'd Bells at this present time, to congratulate the welcome of so great a Prince, turne themselves, and doe willingly stand, as if time commanded them so to doe. Dread Soveraigne our hearts through a Sea of joyfull teares doe endeavour to swim vnto your Grace, being more then abundantly ioyfull of your most sacred Maie∣sties returne, our most fertile shire, received not so
much discontent in the billiting of vntutord Soldiers, as it doth this time joy, at the the safe returne of so good a King. Our wives conceive with ioy, our childrens tongues are vntyed with alacrity, and each one doth strive to cry welcome home to so indulgent a Soveraigne, our fields doe seeme triumphing in their gay diapry to welcome home your Sacred Maiesty, the woods doe seeme to contemne a falling autumne or a nipping winter and assume vnto thmselves their Spring Liveries and all to wellcome home your most Sacred Maiesty. Which is the totall eye of this our Land, which with∣out your Royall Presence seem'd deiected and cast downe, but now like as the Spring after a chill and fro∣zen winter, is welcome being accompanied with the comfortable and glorious funne-beames to each sensi∣tive and visible creature, even so your Sacred Maiesty being the mortall Sunne, from whom we Brittanes re∣ceive our safest warmth, doth tha each frozen heart, and makes it free from the least of chillnesse, and cheerfull is to welcome home our most Royall and lawfull King, O may your Majestyes Raigne heareafter be more happy and peaceable: that Sion may flourish with the truth, so shall your Maiesties Piety be eternally croni∣cled, in the meane while heere is not a heart so farre from allegiance to his soveraigne King but that will say Long live King Charles. Amen Amen,
The Major of STAMFORDS SPEECH to his Majestie. MAy it please your most acred Majesty whose piety is so much admired throughout the Caristian world to giue liberty vnto your abject Lieutenant in his owne Language to expresse the loue of this well affected Towne. Each would have bin glad to have entertained the place of a Speaker, their hearts unto your Sacred Majesty are so Loyally bent, whose wishes have hitherto been nothing more but for the safe returne of your most Sacred Majesty, which to behold each man from his disturbed breast doth griefe exile, being happy onely in their Soveraignes returne. Their daily Votes are these that all ill effected Traytors may be destroyed, your Majestie may be eternally blessed, your Spouse and Offspring perpetually flourish. The Major of HUNTINGTON'S Speech to his Majestie. Dread Soveraigne, VVHose absence onely did cause our present griefe for the foot to be without a head how is it able to subsist, no more can a disturbed kingdome without it's King. Religion hath beene daily abused, and Traytors have and doe daily strive to enterprise our fatall woe but now we are so much animated in your Sacred Majesties presence, that although Romes Hens should daily hatch of its Preposterous Egges, crocodilicall chickens, yet under the shield of Faith by you our most Royall Soveaigne defended, and by the King of Heavens as I stand, and your most medicable councell would we not be fearefull to with∣stand them.
Your Sacred Majesties presence is our sole delight and sufficient proection against all our enemies, in thy deence O King shal God arise, and his and thy enemies and shall be destroyed, for you are Religions Gardian, which we wanting were feareful of pernitious erours. May it please your Majesty to give me Lycense to tell how dangerous times are brother is timerous and fearefull to trust the other, Sects and Schsmes doe daily encrease, but your Royall Majesty being returned our confidence is this, that truth shall take place, and the Religion which was imbraced in the time of Q. Elizabeth and your most wise and Royall Father of blessed Memory King Iames shall be constantly adored, which being granted Loyall and well affected Subjects will be perpetually your humble slaves, presenting unto the God of Heaven their ser∣vent votes and prayers, that he woud, be pleased to blesse your Sacred Majesty, that you may enjoy the happnesse of this world and Eternall bhsse in this world to come. Now followes the Relation of the Enter∣taiament of his Majestie from Kingsland to London being met there by the Lord Major, the Recorder and the rest of the Aldermen accompanied with the chiefe of the Twelve Com∣panies. THere was at the end of Kingsland at the first field to∣wards London a Tent pitch't where the Lord with the Lord Major and the Aldermen did attend his Majesties comming, who having stayd about an house his Maje∣sty came by. Then the Lords, the Lord Major, the Recorder, and the rest of the Aldermen went to the Kings Coach, and having saluted his Majesty with a welcome home, the Major delivered up his Sword to his Majesty. After which both he and the Recorder did make a SPEECH to this effect.
The Lord Major and the Recorders Speech. Most Renowned Soveraigne. After the dangers and troubles of the times, your Maje∣sties humble subjects are vnexpresseably joyfull at your happy and safe returne from Scotland. The maner of his Maiestyes knighting the Lord Maior and and the Recorder of this Citie of London. After their sallutations were inded it pleased his Maiesty, to draw his Sword and immediately in the field in the presence there asembied created them both knights. After which his Maiesty mounted his steed, provided there ready for him with a stately dle imbroydered with gold & silver. Then the Prince alsoe mounted his steed, cloathed with an ex∣traordinarie rich cloath hanging downe almost to the ground very sumptuously. The Queene also and the Duke of Yorke and the Princes and and some other Lades were also caried out of the coach in which they came, into a rich coach that there was in readnesse for them his Maiesty honored the lord Maior so farre after wards as for that day to beare the sword before him, for which he gave his Maiesty thanks. The Relation of the great Triumph. First of all did ride the officers and Sergeants of the Citie arayd in decent cloaks of scarlet colour trim'd with gold lace. Next followed the 24 Companyes each Company with a trum∣peter before them likewise a horseman which bore a Pendant with the armes of the Company in it. After them the twelue Companyes having every man a lackey running by his side cloathed with cassocks trimb'd with ribins of colours of the Companies, thus they marcht in order having rich cloathes and gold chaines about their necks.
In this manner came the Aldermen First the Trumpeters, then the Atorneys of the Citie with two maces, after them the Iudges of the citie in blacke gownes, then followed the Aldermen in their scarlet gownes then the kings Trumpeters, after them the gentlemen pentioners, next the Heralds, and after them the Lords, in great pompe, then follow∣ed the state, first foure maces then the Lord Major with the Lord high Martiall on the one hand of him, and the Lord high cham∣berlaine on the other hand. Then did his Majesty in the next place his Groome leading his horse, and all the people crying God save king Charles, In the next place rod the Marquisse, and after him the Queen and the Duke of Yorke, and the Lady Mary and after the Guard, and after them many thousands of people both on horse & foot. Thus they rod in Tryumph to Guild-hall where his Majesty din'd, and afterwards was conducted to his Palace at VVestmin∣ster. FINIS.
