F1638 E707_8 99866191 118455
THE Deep Sighes and Sad COMPLAINTS OF Some late Souldiers in Captain NEEDHAMS Troop, in Colonel HACKERS Regiment, for wanting of Justice and Judgment, To our Brethren and Fellow-bondslaves, who as yet are compelled to gather straw, and make up your taile of Brick, and hath no ease nor abatemant in your burdens, We do complain. We look for Justice but find Oppression, We wait for judg∣ment, but behold a cry. DEar friends and Countreymen, you Com∣moners of England, whom we dearly love, and whose Freedom and Liberty we have long desired, and the Lord that knowes the hearts of men, knows that we are yet free and willing to leave Father and Mo∣ther, Wife and Children, and all the estate that we have in the world, and to adven∣ture our lives for your freedome, and truely of late we have had great hope that this year had been appointed of the Lord to be your year of lubile, which thoughts of freedom was no smal joy to us, and that which caused our hopes was, that the Lord has put such an oppertunity into the hands of the Army, who was the great power that then late at the Stern of Englands
affairs, and might at pleasure have taken of burdens and loose bands of wickednesse, and have let the oppressed go free, which they did much pretend, and we hearing their fair pretences, could do no lesse but believe them, and wee our selves in our pla∣ces which God had set us, being Members of the same Army, though the least belonging thereto, thought our selves bound in conscience as far as we are able to help forward with the work, and considering that the first work to set about to do, for men that pretends themselves to be instruments of working out a Na∣tions freedome, is to look into themselves, and amongst them∣selves, and there to try seriously whether they doe lay any part of the burthen upon the people, whose freedome they doe pre∣tend or no, and if upon Examination they sind themfelves to be oppressours of the power in the least, or layers on of those hea∣burdens. I say, the first work they ought to do is, to remove that op∣pression wherewith they do oppresse, and then they may pro∣ceed boldly to do as Moyses did, when he saw one Israelite smite another, and seek the destruction one of another; use meanes to asswage their Tyranny, and bring down the Oppressour: so I say, we being bound in Conscience thus to do, looking in our selves, and amongst our selves, did find out the Acon, one Cap∣tain Needham, as we do conceive, that did disobey the Command of God, in not being content with his wages, for God commands all Souldiers whatsoever, to do violence to no man, and bee con∣tent with their wages; but he like that covetous Acon did pro∣ceed to wrong his Masters, the Commoners of England, and the poore souldiers who served under his Command, and being right sensible of this his unjust dealing, one Thomas Fothergill a Soul∣dier under his Command, having his spirit burdned with his and other mens unjust dealings, could no longer forbeare, but did proceed to exhibit these nineteen ensuing Articles, which I do commend to your judicious considerations.
Articles exhibited by THOMAS FOTHERGIL against Capt. NEED∣HAM, in Colonel HACKERS Regiment. Imprimis, that the said Captain mustered in his Troop Robert Lavender in October 1653. and re∣ceived his pay who never was yet seen in the Troop. 2. That the said Captain mustred Thomas Vasse in April and May 1653. Who was never yet seen in the Troop. 3. That the said Captain mustred John Rumfard in April and May 53. who was never yet seen in the Troop. 4. That the said Captain mustrea Jervis Price in Sept. 1651. who was with Charls Stuart at Worcester fight, and the said Jervis Price ranne from his Colours, in October 51. and the said Capt mustred him four months after he was run away, as il appear in the Muster-roles. 5. That the said Captain mustred, and suffred to be mustred William Stephenason the space of five moneths af∣ter he was run away from his Colours, and when orders came to reduce ten men out of a Troop, old suldiers were reduced, and the said William Stepheason was continued in the roles.
6. That the said Captain mustred John Ross a little Scotch Boy, who ran on foot after the Troop, and was not any way capable in doing a souldiers duty. 7. That the said Captain contrary to the orders of the Army, mustred three servants of his owne as souldiers in the Troop, and received pay for them, one of those ser∣vants being a child, not any way capable in doing a souldiers duty, and hath been mustred since November 1653. as will appear by the Muster-roles, and was never yet seen in the Troop. 8. That the said Captain did re-entertain George Hubbert, who was reduced out of the Troop for disobeying Command, and being drunk, and when the said Cap∣tain had orders to reduce all servants out of the Troop, he continued the said George Hubbert still in the Troop; and reduced an old souldier against whom he had no ac∣cusation, 9. That the said Captain bath detained the Pay of severall souldiers above a year, as will appear by evi∣dence. 10. That the said Capt. when he quartered at Kinar∣dy in Bamph-shire, he drunk so much Ale and strong waters, tell be was so drunk, that he could not find the way into his Chamber, though he had before quartered a long time in the house. 11. That the said Captain left his Troop when we were in the highlands of Scotland, and came for England about the beginning of July, and hath not been with the Troop in all above twenty dayes since the aforesaid time. 12. That the said Captain mastered Henry Hill and his man in April and May 1652. and received
their pay, who never was as yet seen in the Troop. 13. That the said Captain mustred Henry Eden and Ron∣land Scaife in March 1652, and when he had mustered them, he reduced them, and received their pay. 14. Tat the said Captain mustred Thomas Fihther, Edward Morley, and Thomas Rigg in Aprill 1652. and detained each man of fifteen shillings of the said Moneths pay, and the moneth of May next following, the Roles being lost, the said Captain did affirme that the aforesaid men were mustrod in the said May: and caused the Clark of the said Troop to pay him for each of the said men. one moneths pay, which they never had, they being reduced before in Aprill muster. 15. That the said Captain in November 1651. having a drunken and a prophaue person to be his servant, he being so sen∣sible of his drunkennesse, he could no longer for shame, for the sa∣tisfaction of the Troop, but reduce the said servant, and within three dayes after that he had cashiered him, hee re-entertained and continues him him in the Troop almost a year, and received a souldiers Pay foor him, notwithstanding the said servant stil continued in his prophanesse. 16. That the said Captain being present with the Troop in September 1651. deprived John Lowes, an old souldier, and a∣nother ouldier of their muster pretending there was not Roome, yet notwithstanding his pretence, mustred one Summerskill, and received his pay though he never was yet seen in the Troop, and further in October next after, his name being in the role, he was called at the Muster, the Golonells Clerk being there present, affirmed that he was mustred in their Troop, so upon that our Cap∣tain being absens our Leiutenant croffed him out of the roles, as will appear by evidence. 17. That the said Captain when we wee called into the high∣lands of Scotland, had five or six servants, for which he receiv∣ed the States pay, besides a little Scotch boy which he mustred, whose imployment was the leading of a dogge, and the said ser∣vants did not perform duty; but was imployed about his particular occasions.
18. That the said Captain and another Gentlemen riding on the high way, and discoursing of some Gentlewomen, and at length pitching their discourse on a particular woman, the Captain said, O she is a pure creature, I wish I were in bed with her, the Gentleman judging his words very uncivill, reproved him, and said, why are you so vainly given? the Captain replyed with a light answer, and said, are we not all Flesh. 19. That the said Captain mustred Henry Hill and his ser∣vant mentioned in the twelfth Article upon the third of May 1652. when as orders was fos reducing of thirty men, notwith∣standing the reducement, the said Hill and his man, continued in the roles another muster, though never seen in the Troond the said Captain received their Pay. These nineteen Articles is either confest by the Captaine, or otherwise punctu∣ally proved. ANd I desire you to take a little notice of the ninth Article of detaining of pay, the Ar∣ticle is but short, but much contained in it, for twelve severall men did make it ap∣peare that he had defrauded them of their due; Now Frinds, that which I desire you to take notice of, is, that there was a Court chosen by whom we know not, nor by what meanes this Court was
procured, we know not, but it was not the usual Court by which others used to be tryed; and whether they were chosen of purpose for some end or no, wee know nor, but we have just cause to fear. And to say we had no justice, I do not, (neither dare I say it) but I leave it to your consideration, but this we proved, that Captain Needham mustred several men that was never seen in his Troop, and received pay for them, and mustred some foure moneths after they run from their colours, and was gon to the Enemy, and he received pay for them, and the Cout did not find him guilty of the breach of that Article of warre for false musters but did fine him twenty pounds for the fact. An un∣heard of thing by us; againe we proved that he had kept from many of our Troop, severall summes of money above a yeare and a halfe; and after the exhibiting of the articles, compoun∣ded with several men, payiog some twelve pounds fifteen shil∣lings, and some lesse, and was not found guilty of that article of war for detaining of pay, but was judged blame worthy by the Court, and reproved for not counting with his souldi∣ers, and paying to every man his due, and ordered to pay to every man what he could challenge, and desired him not to be ready again to stretch out his hand to draw to himselfe; So we leave it to men of abler judgment then we are to judge, whether we had justice done or no But dear friends, this is not all that we have cause to com∣plaine of, for here is more injustice offered unto us yet, nay, such as was never yet heard of, for fince his, tryal they have gone to the Generall enforming against us, wee know not what, but one thing we know, if for matter of fact, unjustly, for they have not any thing against us in the least, but that we brought these deed of darknesse to light, and possibly they feared if we were suffred, that more of their base dealing would be brought to light, and so upon their in∣formation, the Generall hath granted an order to reduce (as they say) as many, and who they please, denying us ab∣solutely of the priviledge of the law under which wee live.
A sad story, and much to be lamented of all men, that men should pretend nations freedome, and say that God hath used them as instruments for the procuring of it and yet deny their fellow labourers of the priviledge of a known law and severe, the which will take hold of a man for the least offence that may be, what shall we say in such cases, all that I have to say to you my friends the Commoners of England, cease you from man whose breath is in his owne nostrils, and learne to wait upon the true and everliving God, who is that Moyses that must lead you out of bondage, into that land of true rest and happinesse, which if you do in faith, patience and obedi∣ence, you are sure to have your expectations answered, for though man fail us, yet he never failed those that waited on him. A VVORD TO THE ARMY. OH gallant Army of England whom the Lord hath made valiant, and hath crowned with as much ho∣nour as ever was Army crowned with since the world began, and hath made the enemies of this na∣tion flve before you with shame and confusion of face, and those was the Enemies of England which the Lord had a con∣troversie
with, whom he had formerly made great, and put power in their hands, and set over the people in this nation, to lead and to keep in safety and freedome, and without all doubt gave this command, both to King Charles, and the late Parliament, to take off heavy burthens, lose the bonds of wickednesse, and let the oppressed go free; which command they disobeyed, and continued the poor oppressed people of this Nation in as much bondage and slavery as might be, so that the poore was forced with many sad groanes to cry unto the Lord, and the Lord heard them, and without all doubt, his wrath was kindled against those unjust men, who had not obeyed his Command, and set his people free, but continued them in their bondage, and raised you up to bring them to confusion; well hath the Lord raised you up to do this great work, and made you instruments to pull downe those great and mighty Powers, which in the eye of reason was invincible: Now I beleech you consider, whether the Lord hath put that power into your hands that was in theirs or no? now if it be in your power to loose the bands of wickednesse and let the oppressed go free, oh do it! and then you are sure to be glo∣riour indeed, and crowned with more honour then ever, and shall eate the good things of the land, and the Lord will de∣light to dwell amongst you; but on the contrary, if you will be like the rest, and make your hearts far, and your ears hea∣vy, and will not heare the cryes of the poore oppressed of this nation, and bring them into that freedome which they have so long expected and waited for. Surely the Lord will have the same Controversie with you, that he had with those before you, who disobeyed his com∣maed, and if his wrath be once kindled, who shall be able to deliver you our of his hands? nay, though you be great and mighty, he can rais up poor contemptible creatures, to bring you down, and make you fall with as much shame as the rest. Therefore looke about you, and work while it is called to day, least
a night befall you, in which you cannot work, and to will day overtake you at unwares, and then you be if reed to ery for help, when none will deliver you. Now my desire and prayer to God for you is both Generall and Army, that now when you have put downe those great and unrighteous men, that you may not endeavour to seat your selves in their places, and make your selves Kings and Lords, to lord over the heritage of God, and the Commoners of England, who is as freeborne as your selves: but instead of so doing, learne to do justice, and love mercy, and to walke humbly with your God, and endeavour to take off those heavy burthen:, under which the people do so extreamly groane, and at last let the oppressed goe free, and remember your faire promises in all your declarations, which did ingage all honest hearts so freely, to take your part, and let our ears be no longer filled with those empty sounds of fare promise, but let our hearts be filled with the sence of the enjoyment of Freedome, and that the people of this Nation may have no more cause as they have had, and as wee have just Cause to complaine of, now of injustice and oppression, but that every one may doe as he hath just right, sit downe under his owne Vine, eating the fruits of his owne la∣bours, and that he may not when he hath laboured all day, have some lyon or other at night to come and eat both him, and the fruits of his labours up. And now my friends, as many of you as desires to live godly in this present world, strive not to contend with the great men of the world, for it is in vaine for you so to do, but wait upon that king of peace, who if you do, will give you peace that passeth understanding, and bring you into that free∣dom, that al the great men in the world cannot deprive you of, so hoping that my God will give me so to do, I rest. He who desireth your greatest good. THO. FOTHERGILL.
The Names of those that com∣plaines for want of Justice, reduced out of Captain Needhams Troop. Tho. Fothergill. Tho. Bruce Corporall, Christophar Pyhurn Clerk. John Wardell. William Poyd. William Bunkin. John Hall. Joseph Brooks. Francis Kuowles. FINIS.
