f2374 e396_9 99862145 114294
A FULL RELATION OF The whole Proceedings of the late Rising and Commotion in WALES, Under Pretence for The King and Sir Tho: Fairfax. Represented in several LETTERS to the Parliament, and His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. With the ANSWERS and REPLIES. ALSO The Names of the chief Actors. LONDON: Printed for Francis Leech, Iuly 2. 1647.
A LETTER FROM Major General Laughorn, TO The Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. Mr. Speaker, THe first rumor of His Majesties departure with the Army, hath put the Delinquents in Glamor∣ganshire into their old Frenzy; the inclosed Papers will express their present Posture, and shorten my Rela∣tion: The Leaders of them are of the prin∣cipal Delinquents engaged in the former
Revolt of that County, and whom the Par∣liaments clemency for offences past hath oc∣casioned to this ingrateful relapse: Divers of the well-affected Gentry of that County disfavor their courses, and cast about for their own security; some of them are come hither to me, and I am drawing up my Forces thi∣therward, to suppress the Insolency; and finde my Soldiers, I thank God, very chearful and inoffensive where they come, not capi∣tulating for any Conditions: I shall (God willing) never desert my first Principles for the Parliament of ENGLAND; The issue of this Insurrection probably will occasion speedy and frequent seconds of this Address, by him who is, Sir, The States and your loyal Servant, Rowland Laughorn. Carmarthen, 17 Junii, 1647,
To the Honorable, Major General LaƲGHORN. SIR, IT hath pleased God to make Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army a miraculous means of the KINGS Restitution (in appearances) These Counties, very apprehensive of their long desired Liberty and present Sufferings, have already declared for the King and Sir Thomas Fairfax: Now that there might be nothing untimely done to your prejudice, We thought it fit to communicate so much of our business as can be no way prejudicial to yours; We should be very glad to hear how you look upon our proceedings, and un∣feignedly rest, June 4. 1647. Your humble Servants, Tho: Not. Edward Thomas. Rich: Basset. Jo: Stradling. Tho: Thomas.
To the Honorable, Major General LAUGHORN. SIR, THere hath hapned a business in Cow∣bridge, which may (except you be plea∣sed to interpret it in a fair sence) be lyable to a misconstruction; The truth is, the Com∣mittee, as is known, had an intent to seize on the persons of divers Gentlemen, some whereof for their security betook themselves to Cowbridge, and there made bold with the Magazine, without any the least meaning of opposition or disrespect to you, to whom by many civilities they are much obliged: And being certain of His Majesties conjunction with Sir Thomas Fairfax his Forces, they conceived they had been wanting to them∣selves, in not providing so well for their safe∣ty as they could. And they more then hope you will be so far from being any way dis∣pleased
with it, as to receive assistance from you in their just and necessary Defence; whereby you shal eternally oblige the whole Countrey, and more particularly Cowbridge, 14. June, 1647. Your most humble Servants, Jo: Stradling. Tho: Stradling. Jo: Vanne. Will: Basset. Rich: Gwyn. William Merrick. Edward Seis. George Gibbon. William Flemming. Theodore Basset. Richard Basset. Henry Stradling. William Basset. Robert Thomas. Thomas Basset. David Buckley. Jo: Walter. Miles Watkins. Jo: Powel. Rich: Wilcoke. John Stradling. John Jones. Rice Merrick. Robert Corroche.
To His Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Forces. May it please your Excellency, THese last days there appeared a sudden and violent Distraction in Glamorganshire; I shall use all my power and diligence to alay it, and expect your Ex∣cellencies Orders for my proceedings, and the rather, in that the turbulent party, as I am informed, pretend your Excellencies Authority for what they do. The inclosed copies of some Expresses I received out of these parts, and of one of the Delinquents Warrants, will supply what I here omit: The chief actors are an∣cient Malignants of a deep stain, and can pretend no Grievance but the just and conscientious proceedings of the Committee, according to the Ordinances of Parliament: Other Gentlemen well-affected and of good quality in the countrey, are not ingaged among them, but stand upon their Guard. This is all I can at present in that affair present to your Excellency, with my humble service, and readiness to obey what com∣mands you will please to impose on Carmarthen, 17 June, 1647. Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Rowland Laughorn.
To Major General Laughorn. Noble Sir, WEE have in a former Letter made bold to intimate unto you the ne∣cessity of our present Posture, which we in the Name of the whole Countrey must still affirm to be no ways tending to the di∣minution of your respects with us, but meant onely for the vindication of our E∣states and Liberties from the unjust and Ar∣bitrary disposition of Committees here; on the mediation of whose Friends, we have not∣withstanding thus far complied with their desires: Yet upon assurance given, The In∣habitants of this County may enjoy their Liberties and Estates, and all Taxations (o∣ther then such that are for the Army) be for-born, until, by Gods blessing, the present unsettledness of Supreme Affairs be compo∣sed, we shall not farther proceed on these terms whereon we now insist: This, for ought we can yet discover to the contrary,
may in a very few days determine our in∣stant Differences: However we shall not fail to advertise you of what farther courses the prosecution may engage us to, and ever remain, St. Lythins Down, 15 Junii, 1647. Your humble Servants, Richard Basset. Henry Stradling. Thomas Stradling. Charls Kemis. John Stradling. Thomas Not. Henry Basset.
To the High Constables of the Hun∣dred of Miskine, and to eve∣ry of them. VVEE require you forthwith to di∣rect your Warrants to the Petty-Constables of the several Parishes within your Hundred, That they summon all able men from Sixteen to Sixty, to appear before us at Cowbridge, to morrow, by Nine of the clock in the morning, with all Horses fit for Service, or Dragoons, and all such Arms as are Defensive or Offensive, as they have or can come by, for the use of the Kings Ma∣jesty and Sir Thomas Fairfax General, for the preservation of the Peace and Safety of this County: Hereof fail not, as you owe your Allegiance to His Majesty. Dated 13 Iunii, 1647. Edw: Thomas. Richard Basset. Tho: Not. Greenvile Weeks.
To the Honorable, Major General LAUGHORN. SIR, I Am very glad, that by your watchfulness and dili∣gence you have so timely prevented the inconve∣nience of the rising of these Men in Wales (according as your Letters mention;) I believe too many are apt to make advantages of the present discomposure of Affairs to work their own ends, though it be to the disturbance of the whole Kingdom. Its very true, I have made some Representations to the Par∣liament, and I hope their Wisdom and Justice will so answer our Expectations, as that we shall speedily see an happy composure of all Differences, and a settlement of all Rights, both to the King, the Par∣liament, and the People, to the comfort and satisfa∣ction of all men that wish well to Peace and Righte∣ousness: I desire you still to continue your care in those parts to prevent any evil of this kinde, and to let all men know, That I cannot in the least allow of such proceedings, but shall send to your assistance to suppress them, if need so require, and that you do give me seasonable notice thereof: I rest, Barkhamstead, June 25. 1647 Your very loving Friend, Tho: Fairfax.
To His Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Forces. May it please your Excellency, MY Letter of the 17. instant informed your Ex∣cellency of a violent Distraction in Glamor∣ganshire, which I have been diligent to alay without the effusion of innocent blood: The Countrey hear∣ing of my approach, deserted the chief Actors, whom to the number of Fifty, all well mounted, are fled the Countrey; the Names of them are sub∣scribed to the Letters I sent your Excellency, onely some few added: They had convened Fifteen hun∣dred or Two thousand, pretending Authority for so doing; but the Countrey are made sensible how they were seduced, and I shall neglect no diligence to settle quietness, and remove the disturbers of it. This Accompt in duty I conceived my self bound to give your Excellency, and remain, Cardiff, 21 Junii, 1647. Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Rowland Laughorn.
His Excellencies answer to the former Letter dated at Ʋxbridge, Iune 29. 1647. SIR, YOurs from Cardiff of June 21. I received this day; I hope my last unto you from Barkhamstead, will give you satisfaction con∣cerning the proceedings here, and how far we are from countenancing any that shall raise Forces against the Parliament, or those imployed by them. Your care and diligence in preserving those parts in peace, will be an acceptable service to the Kingdom. Things here are like to come to a speedy composure, both Houses having agreed to send Commissioners to Treat and Debate of business in order to the present settlement of
the peace of the Kingdom, which is a thing much desired by all, and I hope in a short time will be effected, to the quiet and con∣tent of the Kingdom. For those Forces of Horse and Foot which you brought lately into Glamorganshire upon the late occasion; I desire you to remove them back into those counties where they were formerly quartered. I remain Your assured Friend, Tho: Fairfax. Vxbridge, June 29. 1647. FINIS.
