F2278 E470_4 99864866 162379
A full and exact RELATION OF THE Horrid murder committed upon the body of Col. Rainsborough, The persons that did it, and the cause thereof. Also the killing of Capt. Layton, and divers others: And a fight neere Pontefract; with the relieving of Scarborough, and a Pinnace taken there. Likewise the List of the names of some Members of both Houses of Parliament, and chiefe Officers of the Army, against whom there is a Designe to take away their lives. Certified by Letters to both Houses of Parliament. VIZ. His Excellency the Lord Generall. The Lord Say and Seal. The Lord Wharton. Lievt. Gen. Cromwell. Mr. Challenor. Mr. Pury. Mr. Corbet. Major-Generall Skippon. Serjeant Wild. Colonell Hammond. Colonell Rich. Colonell Pride. Colonell Hewson, &c. nou: 3d London: Printed for R. A. 1648.
A full Relation of the killing of Co∣lonell Rainsborough, Capt. Layton, and others: with a discovery of a further Designe to take away the lives of eighty other eminent Persons; and a List thereof. SIR, ACcording to your desire by the last Post, I shall weekly communicate unto you such Intelligence as is stirring in these parts; which at present may be truely represented thus. Sir Henry Cholmley, (with some Country Forces) for severall weeks past hath laine a∣gainst Pontefract, to block up the enemy in the Castle, but wanting strength to keep them in so little roome, the Pontefract-men did daily make severall inroads upon the Country, tooke away their Cattle and o∣ther goods, brought them without let to the Castle, and then exchanged them for such other necessaries as they wanted, even with some of Sir Henry Cholmleyes owne men; and the Pontefract-men being strong in Horse, and very desperate, have made a practice to fall upon our Guards, and into our Quarters; and have done much execution amongst us: On Tuesday last they beat up our Quarters at a village six miles from Pontefract, killed Captain Layton, and two
others, wounded many, and carried away 6. prisoners: they have also taken Mr. Clayton, Steward to the Lord Generall, and carryed him wounded into the Castle; and many others, which I shall not here particularize: yet when those in the Castle, and the others which keep the next Guard, are making their markets, they drink one to the other, saying, Here is to thee brother Round∣head: and the other replies, I thank thee brother Cava∣leer. Sir Arthur Ingram, who was lately taken by the Pontefract Forces, and imprisoned by them in the Castle, is gotten off; paying 1500. l. redemption: All this, and much more mischief having been done, to the intolerable sufferings and damage of the Country; it is now time to seek better to prevent it, and therefore we are strengthening the Forces so as to compleat a Siege: Colonell Rainsborough for this purpose came into these parts by directions from his Excellency, but by reason of some difference between him and Sir Henry Cholmle, he took up his Quarters at Doncaster, intending to stay there untill the matter were decided: in the mean while the Devill appearing strong in his instruments, they consult together by a private and base way of revenge, to effct that by treachery which they could not otherwaies accomplish; and as execu∣tioners of this bloody designe, came three men in the habit of Gentlemen, from Pontefract Castle to Colo∣nell Rainesboroughs owne Quarters early in the mor∣ning, and pretended they had a Letter for him from Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, whereupon they were no sooner gotten in, but they in a sordid manner stabbed him, dragged him to the chamber doore, cut
his throat, turn'd him down staires, and escaped while those of the house were either in bed, or so much ama∣zed at this horrid murder, that they knew not what they did: And we heare that the malice of that party stayeth not at this, nor will be satisfied only with this new manner of murdering one that was faithfull to the Parliament, and a Member thereof, but have a further designe to take away the lives of at least fourscore o∣ther eminent men, which have been active in the Par∣liaments service, for the good of their Country, which I pray God to discover and prevent, and unite the hearts of his People together, that the wicked One by sowing his seed of dissention may not gaine advantage against his chosen: And so I rest, Doncaster, Octob. 30. 1648. Your affectionate friend, J. Barnard. Another Letter concerning the horrid murther commit∣ted upon the body of Colonell Rainesborough, with the last News from Scarborough. Honoured Sir, I must now be a Harbinger to bring sad newes to you and the rest of our friends at Wapping, which I am sure cannot but with me condole the losse of our old acquaintance Colonell Rainsborough, who after a long preservation from the force of the Cannon and open
hostility of the common Enemy, was at the last most unfortunately murdered in his Chamber, it being done in a base and unworthy manner; Some say it was to be farther avenged for the death of Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, and thereby think to mitigate the fact; but I will assure you they will find it otherwise: for the whole Souldiery with us lay this businesse much to heart, and although the losse of such an instru∣ment as he, cannot be small: yet are we confident that we have this gain, that the hearts of all the well-affect∣ed party in the Kingdome will be the more firme in conjunction with each other; I heare his wife is now in London, I pray God give her strength to take it patiently, which is one generall use we are to make of such trialls and afflictions. And as for those that are such implacable enemies to peace, and secretly thirst after the blood of such as would live quietly in the Land, we hope care will be taken to preserve us from their malice, and to bring those to condigne pu∣nishment which do justly deserve it, that they may be a terrour to others from running into the like mischiefs: The enemy in Pontefract Castle have about sixscore horse well armed, which oftentimes sally forth, and do great mischiefe, and have (as some report) fitted them∣selves with all things for a twelve moneths siege: the weak Leaguer by the new Militia of the Countrey hath so wasted the parts adjacent, that what with freequarter and large assessements, with the spoile made by the E∣nemy, the Inhabitants are very much impoverished; Here hath been levyed for many weekes together the value of 30000. l. per mensem, but we have better hopes
of those which are now coming to doe the work, the Lievtenant Generalls forces being drawn neer: and tru∣ly it is high time, for some further course to be taken not only against this Castle, but also against Scarbo∣rough, for the Enemy there have made divers late sallies forth, and have taken a Pinnace which was come into the Harbour with some Provisions, whereby some relief hath been gotten by the Enemy; but another course is tking with them also. Thus with my best re∣spect to your selfe, and all our friends, I remain Whetherby, 31. Octob. 1648. Your obliged friend, S. T.
A List of the names of the chiefe of the Members of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, and Officers of the Army, against whom the design is discovered to take a∣way their lives. His Excellency the Lord Generall. The Lord Say, and Seale. The Lord Wharton. Lievtenant-Gen. Cromwell. Mr. Challenor. Mr. Pury. Mr. Corbet. Major-Gen. Skippon. Serjeant Wild. Colonell Hammond. Colonell Rich. Colonell Pride. Colonell Hewson. Colonell Okey. Major-General Lambert. Major Salway, and di∣vers other Members of the House, and Officers of the Army, whose names cannot be here inserted. Moved in Parliament, that a Regi∣ment of Horse and another of Foot come up, and be a Guard for the security of both Houses. FINIS.
