F220 E537_36 99860744 112869
His Majesties DECLARATION Concerning The Proclamation of the Army, proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, throughout the Cities of London, and VVest∣minster; and His Resolution touching their bringing of Him to Tryall. With a Letter from Denmark; a Message to His Majesty; and His new and latter Game, to be disputed with the Army. Dated from Windsor, on VVednesday Jan: 10. 1648. Also the Scots new Declaration, in behalf of their Native Soveraign; and their Desires and Proposals to the Commons of England. Together with a Declaration from the honest party in the West of England, touching the King, and their raising of 12000 Horse and Foot, for preservation of Liberty and Freedome. C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of arms Printed for John Gilbert, neer Temple-Bar, 1648.
A DECLARATION From the Kingdom of SCOTLAND Concerning The apparent danger of his Majesties Royall person, and the present proceedings of the Parliament and Army in order to the deposing of Charles King of great Brittain, their native and law∣full Soveraign. Right Honorable, THE Parliament of Scotland, are conveened at E∣denburgh, and begin to debate and consult much upon the transaction of affaires in the kingdome of England, divers pressing hard for unity & concord between the two Nations; others, That their Native Soveraign may
be inthroned, and his just Rights and priviledges confirmed and established; and to that end, forthwith sent post to their Commissioners resident at London, purporting the sense & desires of that kingdom, requiring them to negotiate with the two Houses of Parliament, and his Excellency the Lord Gen. Fairfax, in behalf of their dread Soveraign, to the end, that no prosecution so tryall, may bee put in execution a∣gainst his royal person, without the advice and concurrence of the Nation thereto, and that nothing be done or acted, contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant between the two Kingdoms. Our intelligence from thence further saith, That divers of the Scottish peers have transmitted a Mes∣sage to the Kings Majesty, intimating, Their loyalty and affe∣ction to his Royall person, and their Resolution to leave no means unassayed, for the advancing his Honour and Great∣nesse. But notwithstanding their great forwardnesse, to make the Royal party glorious, yet there are many dissenting Bre∣thren amongst them, who are resolved to confide with the parliament of England and the Army. The revolutions and transactions of affairs in this kingdom, now give a caution to all the well affected in our Neighbour Nation, to carry a strong hand, and an Eagles eye, over the proceedings of the Adverse party. We hear of a new storme arising in Lanca∣shire, and of great under-hand listing there; but the well-affected are putting themselves in a posture to receive them and have in readinesse 4000 Horse and Foot to attend their motion. We hear that the honest party in the West of England have also put themselves into a posture of defence, and have raised and listed 12000 Horse and Foot, to ingage with the parliament and army (upon any occasion) for com∣mon Justice, Freedom, and Safety, and for promoting the Remonstrance of the Army, to the end, that impartiall Ju∣stice
may be executed upon the capitall Enemy of this Na∣tion, viz. Charles Stuart, for the high crimes and misdemea∣nours committed by him against his subjects of England, in levying war, massacring, and spilling the bloud of neer upon 400000 soules, within the Bowels of these his Realms and Dominions. Hallifax 6 Jan: 1648: A Declaration of the proceedings of the high Court of Iustice, against the said Charles Stuart. Munday the 8 of this instant, the Lord Gen. Fairfax, and the rest of the Commissioners appointed for the tryall of Charles Stewart king of England, met in the painted Cham∣ber at Westminster, about 3 of the clock in the afternoon, and after some debate touching the tryall of his Majesty, they came to this Resolution, viz. That on Wednesday mor∣ning a Herauld should be appointed to make proclamation, and proclaime throughout City and Country, That the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, and the Com∣missioners for tryall of the King, Do (in the name of themselvs, and the free-born people of this Nation) declare, That all per∣sons whatsoever, who have any matter of Fact, against Charles Stuart, King of England, are desired, and invited, to bring in their Charges, on VVednesday the 10 of this instant January, to the said Commissioners sitting in VVestminster-Hall, for tri∣all of the King, to the end, that Iustice may be executed, and peace and Righteousnesse established. Having thus named the time and place, his Majesty is ex∣pected to be sent for from Windsor, this present Thursday, and to be guarded to St. James'es, by two Regiments of Aorse, there to remaine during the pleasure of the High Court of Justice.
The presbyterians Declaration touching the King. AFter mature deliberation upon the proceedings of the Lord Generall Fairfax, and the General councel of Officers, in relation to the establishing of a firm and lasting peace within this bleeding, torne, and tottering kingdom, and the erecting of a pure and sound Government according to the Law of Nature, and the fundamental laws of this Realm, and after several conferences and disputa∣tions in order thereunto, divers of the Presbyterian party frequented to Westminster, and other places, where they had severall disputations and conferences with the Officers, and other members of the Army; and after some debate upon the Foundation, of the grounds and principles of the Agreement of the People, the Presbyterians declared a great dislike thereof, remonstrating, That it was not founded upon a firm Rock; to which objections, severall answers were made, for cleering such scruples and cautions, as seemed dif∣ficult to many; And as for the person of the King, they further declared, that notwithstanding the present Ordnance of Attainder against his Maj. yet they conceived it requisite and lawfull, that the prayers of the Ministery bee still conti∣nued in every Congregation throughout his Maj. Realmes and Dominions; desiring, that he may have a legal tryall, and that Hee may not be degraded of his Titles and Honours: Concerning which, be pleased to peruse this ensuing Letter from Holland, touching the degrading of his Majesty. Sir; We are here in a kind of amazement, to hear that your King should be designed for the grave before his time: Be∣lieve it, there's nothing more characterizes men wise in the opinion of the wisest meer man, then that they see a far off, not the plague of the body only, though that, but judgments somtimes for evildoing, somtimes for acting indiscreetly in
matters that may be done. That which may lawfully bee done, it may be absurd to do at some time: The taking away life, which is that prized above all, by him that all account wise, is not just (say some) at any time, unlesse there be a law that makes the thing done death, and death to him that doth it: The supream power of England that forbids any to judge of treason in a constructive way, but themselvs have retaind in themselvs a power to judge such and such practises and endeavours to amount to treason or death. In particular, supose there were law, or it were in the power of the Lords and Commons to take awoy the life of the present King, yet if England, Scotland, and Ireland shalbe made more misera∣ble thereby in reason, and the waas renewed, to the probable ruine of the Nations, and chiefly to those who pretend most to piety and justice therein, it were better not. That it's dan∣gerous this may be said: If you cut off, you must set up, va∣cuities of that nature suddainly introduce confusion: If you set up, it must either be a new King, or a new Government; if a new King, then the next of kinne, and if him, then let his complyance be what it will, his Fathers death cannot bee forgot: no, the danger of his mothers influence, who will re∣main in banishment, be easily got over, refuse he to come in, as it's most like, he hath the afore-named written upon his brest, hesides his hereditary claim, his marriage, which no man that hath a purse, but will endowry with a daughter, raise an army of 20000 to restore a son in law, and make his daughter Queen of 3 kingdoms, which by reason of sci∣tuation, and inherent accommodations may (well managed) be the ballancing power of Christendom. If any other, or a new Government, the objections are the same, & all the line & that successively are made enemies to boot; besides hath the Parl. or army yet got so much love? are they so deep in
the hearts of the people, that they can assure them selves the newtrals, or those who have gone farre with them will quiesce? But the answer is ready, we have an Army that can not be overcome, neither by what can rise here, or come from a∣broad. So had Alexander, but Alexander was poysoned, and what then became of his Army? ruin approached. &c. Copenhague Jan: 4. 1648. Sir, Yesterday in the evening, here arrived a messenger from London, who secretly conveyed a Letter to his Maj. hands, purporting, That the Commissioners for his tryall, had (by an Act of the Commons assembled in Parliament) made proclamation throughout the City of London, for the speedy bringing of him to tryall, and executing of Justice and Judgment upon his person, proclaiming him by the name of Charles Stuart, &c. And after serious meditation upon the said lines, It is given out, by some Gentlemen resi∣dent with his Majesty, That (after reading the same) Hee declared, That if his Charge and Tryall were legall, and accor∣ding to the known Laws of the Realm, He feared not what man could do against Him; but if they acted contrary, He was re∣solved not to make any answer thereunto, not doubting but Hee should have a time of redemption, and that with honour and freedome. Thus confident is He of restauration; For, not long since. He publikely declared, That He had a new and latter Game to dispute with the Army, which might prove more fatall then all the former. FINIS.
