h1052 E199_38 99858986 111047
A SEASONABLE SPEECH MADE TO THE LORD MAIOR AND Common Councel of London, by Mr. Harvey, being accompanied thither with many Citizens of Qualitie. Concerning the great Distem∣pers of the times. LONDON, Printed in the yeare 1642.
My Lord, WEe are all come with one Errand consisting of two parts; First, a discharge of our duties, Second∣ly, the endevour of our safety. The discharge of our dutie ly∣eth in acquainting your Honour, and your Worships, with the causes of our feares, per∣plexities and dangers, with which we are en∣vironed, which arise from divers particulars. My Lord, lest any here should judge our feares to be groundlesse, and but fancies, give me leave to premise, That as his Majestie is the head of this King∣dome, and our prayer, with all loyall Subjects, is, and ever shall bee, that his Highnesse may long, and happily continue so to be: So the two eyes in the head, are the two Houses of Parliament, the house of Lords, and house of Commons. My Lord, Naturallists tell us, that although
the act and office of both eyes be one and the same, yet each hath his particular and peculiar distribution of light and knowledge to the fa∣culties, as appeares, in that the soule receiveth light and knowledge by one eye, when the o∣ther is fast shut, or wincketh. My Lord, if one eye winck, yet the eye of the house of Commons is wide open, it seeth cleerely, and by that eye only the Commons of England, which are not starke blind, may receive knowledge of and discerne their dangers. My Lord, the Honourable house of Com∣mons unto all their actions lay the line of Iudgement, and the plummet of prudence, and they have seene, and we by them, our dan∣gers, at a distance, and in the approaches, with the many good provisions for our safety which that honourable Assembly have resol∣ved upon. As 1. First, that the Kingdome should bee put into a warlike posture of defence. 2. That a Navy of ships should be at Sea, to surround our Coasts, and to hinder the invasi∣on of a Forraigne enemy. 3. That the Castles and Cinqueports and
other Maritine ports should be repaired, & put into the custody of persons of honour & trust, deputed thereunto by the Authority of the King, to them conveyed by an order of both houses of Parliament: all which the house of Cōmons would not have done upon fancies, they being most studious how to settle and compose, not to affright, charge, or distract, the people of this Kingdome. 4. That Sir Iohn Biron the now Leivtenant of the Tower is an unfit man to be Cōmander of that Cittadell which hath so great a com∣mand of this City. And surely, my Lord, it appeareth by the Merchants Petition, that his being Lievtenant much hindereth Trade, for those Merchants that formerly did Mynt or put to coyning are now deterred, both from importing, or coin∣ing of Bullion. My Lord, we sensibly feele the smart of Trades decay. Who seeth not the whole Fa∣brick of the City and Kingdome, whose foun∣dation is Trade and Commerce, much shaken, and, if not speedily repaired, like to bury it selfe in its owne ruine? My Lord, Trade is like a clock, if one pinne
or wheele be out of order, the whole stands still, or moves disorderly. And now my Lord, give me the liberty of an Oratour, although I bee none, to end, and close with the highest. My Lord, the hous of Cōmons have long since resolv'd, that considerable forces from England, and 10000. men from Scotland, should be sent for Ireland, to relieve that poore gasping Nation, against those bloody popish Rebels, who most cruelly and barbarously Butcher-like murder and make desolate that Nation. The knowledge of all which resolutions by the house of Commons hath beene communi∣cated to the Honourable house of Lords; but there all still dwels while Ireland and we in it bleed on to death. My Lord, give me leave to soare a littl higher; can any History relate so sad a story, as that a Kingdome involved with others under one Crowne, all holding one faith and profes∣sion in Religion, was laid waste by an incon∣siderable party, as are those bloudy Rebels, compared with the strength that England and Scotland might afford them: and the desolati∣on
not made all at once, but gradually, in three moneths space of time 30000. persons slaine, 100000. Families undone, and utterly ruined, and an innumerable company that have tasted of lifes sweetnesse, meerely upon that conside∣ration, turned to the popish partie, and none or no considerable forces to controll that bloody enemy dispatcht? and yet all this may be truely predicated of England and Scotland, in reference to Ireland. And this day, my Lord, newes is come from Ireland, telling us that Waterford, and the Coun∣ty of Munster, is revolted. Who is not secure may see cruelty upon the legs of fury comming in a Iehu march towards us. If any be as fast asleep as was Peter, let him awake, it's now a time for Peters prayer to be made use of, there is now no time for neutralitie or indifferency, it befits all to be positive, and let none think that if that flame which burneth Ireland, an al∣ready sore scorcheth us, be not presently quen∣ched, but that it will totally devoure us also. And now, my Lord, we are come to the second part of our Errand, namely to endea∣vour our safety, for which we fight with the
all-ages-allowed weapons, our supplications, and in all humble manner pray your Honour, and right Worshipfull you the Aldermen, and the rest of this Assembly, to be pleased to joyne together, heartily, effectually, and speedily, to petition the honourable house of Lords, that the Kingdome may be put into a warlike po∣sture of defence, and chiefly that to Ireland may be sent speedy and sufficient aide, and that the fore-named, or what other resolution of the house of Commons tending to Englands safety or Irelands succour, and lye obstructed in the House of Lords, may be thence discharged, and have life given unto them by executi∣tion, and use, as may tend to the re∣stauration and peace of the Kingdomes. FINIS.
