H2755 E546_12 99862723 114898
A MESSAGE Sent from the Kingdom of IRELAND TO A Member of the ARMY, under the command of His Excellency the Lord Generall Fairfax, concerning their proceedings in this Nation, and the crowning of their heads with Laurel. WITH Severall Quaeries, touching the bleeding condition of both Nations, VIZ. I. Whether there be any way to unite the Representative Body of a State, and cut the heart in the middle. II. Can a Kingdom think you stand fast, and the affections of men in it tatter to and fro. III. Shall the Presbyterian strive to get a Vote one day, and the Independent another the next, that so the day following you may be the fitter to clash one another a pieces; and doe you think this way to better and settle a Kingdom? Imprimatur, Theo: Jennings. Imprinted at London, by B. A. MDCXLIX.
New Newes from Ireland. Noble Captain, MY unfeigned love, and courteous respects remem∣bred unto you, I understand by your last, that you have left Col. Whalleyes Regiment, and have now a command under the Lord Generals Brigade. . I likewise hear that God of late hath done great things for you, I pray the Lord of Hosts to make you humbly & sincerely thank∣full, and that you may not bury in oblivion, those memora∣ble mercies that are yet among you: for truly, I do wish your reall happinesse, and the continuance of your splendor with my heart, and that your light may so shine forth on earth, that it may glorifie your Father which is in Heaven: But I hear there are divisions among you, and indeed I part∣ly believe it, yet if any man seems to be contentious, you know we have no such custome, no nor the Ghurches of God, but there must be Heresies among you (I do not mean with consent and toleration) that those that are made mani∣fest, may be the more approv'd. Now if it be not so, how comes it then to passe, instead of helping of us in our quar∣rell, you earnestly dispute the lawfulness thereof. Methinks that Bittain degenerates from himself, that goes about not only about to prejudice, but circumvent himself, and as our proverb, though a homely one relates, 'Tis a very ill Bird that defiles its own nest. Shall David, Ioshua, or Iehosaphat be
afraid to fight against the Moabites, Hittites; or the Aorits, because it was their native Country: but it may be you'l object, they had immediate command for what they did, & truly so have we, only here is the difference, God spake to them by his Prophets, and sends us word out of his Holy Word and preaching Ministers; or thus, Shall Esau let fall his birth-right for messe of pottage, and may not his brother stoop to take it up; or shall some great man born to a vast estate forfeit and surprize it by rebellion, and shall not this great man, notwithstanding his great birth, be punisht and made sensible thereof: Doe but impartially examine the present course of Justice, that you are now upon; but to wave this, seriously (acquaintance) let me tell you, did you but walk so exactly, and so close as many in the world sup∣pose you do, you could not chuse but in some measure sim∣pathize with grief mourning with them that mourn, consi∣dering those in bonds as being bound your selves: then pray resolve me friend, is it not a sad thing that we which have ex∣pected some comfort and relief this 6 or 7 years together, now that the Lord has put into your hand a gracious op∣portunity, crowning your heads with Laurell where ever you go, making you Victors of a spacious field, that you should be so churlish and unkind, as to deceive us of our expectation. Are we not your Brethren, or do you out us in the state of grace, because we jump not with you in opinion; you do confesse your selves, that difference in judgment, should not differ men in love. But may be you will say, when a safe and well grounded peace is setled here, and the kingdom quiet, then youl do somthing for us; indeed, should I see some impotent poore sicke man ready to perish for want of bread, and hereupon should tell him, I would but step home, and see if my own family wanted not themselvs, and ere I should returne, this same poore Creature should
faint and die in the street, my conscience would go neere to trouble me for this. If whilest you are setling one kingdom another should be lost, I cannot see by any rule thats right, that you should any way be gainers by it. Besides, do you ever think to settle a kingdom, till your affections be so? is there any way to unite the Representative Body of a State, and cut the heart in the middle? Can a kingdom think you stand fast, and the affections of men in it tatter to and fro? Shall the Presbyterian strive to get a Vote one day, and the Independent another the next, that the day following you may be the fitter to clash one another a pieces? And do you think this way to better a kingdom? Shall the Presbyter complain in the Pulpit, and the Independent revile in the Presse, and will you yet presse forward for a peace? Shall the Presbyter diminish his affection where a steeple is, and an Independent that makes it their chiefest pretence, neglect the duty of love, and do you think this way to settle a king∣dom? Do you imagine when a fountain is corrupted, that the streams will ere glid clear? Can the heart of a kingdom be sick, and the Suburbs of it be sound? Come Christians, be wise, and take a fooles advice, give some visible demon∣stration, and manifest testimony to the world, that though some of you dissent about the Law, none of you do so in love; and though you differ in the Mould, yet you agree in the mettle: to that end, let the Presbyter preach, and pray against known and scandalous offences, and the Independent against Sects, Heresie, and Schism: Let the Presbyterian practise what he doth know, & the Independent know what he doth practise: Let the Presbyter lend his hand to set up the Scepter of Christ, and the independent joyn his to pull Dagons down, and both in the simplicity of soul, and since∣rity of heart, indeavour to keep unfeinedly the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; by which means you will quick∣ly purchase joy, and we gain some relief from England.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understan∣ding in all things, which yet hath been, and still shall be the prayer of Your assured, though forgotten iriend, William Hopkins, Dublin ult. Feb. 1648. Luke 10.36; 37. Which now of these three thinkest thou, was neighbour unto Him that fell among the Theeves. And he said, he that shewed mercy on him; then said Iesus vnto him, Go thou, and do likewise. Luke 6.33, 34. For if you love them, which love you, what thanks have you; for sinners also love those that love them; and if you do good to them, which do good to you, what thanks have you, for sin∣ners also do even the same. Postscript. SIR, I Have sent your son Samuel a Copy of Verses; We can spare you a few of our Irish Cries, though you cannot spare us a little of your English love; but we hope the next fair wind to hear or see better things from you. VALE.
Contribution for Heaven. THis is a taxing Age wherein we live, Then blest Emanuel, let me ever give Due praise unto thy Name, that taxes no man To pay the least of things more then he can; And let my Soul, my poor Soul ready be To pay a Contributiall Fast to thee. And since my sins so evident appeares, Oh let me pay Excize of sighes and teares, Unto thy Name for aye; but let them be Never repaid with base Reluctancy: But let me freely sorrow, and bewayl My sinnh 'gainst thee, and my most blessed Bayl, My arrears are all behind; 'tis very right, If thou strainst for 'em, 'tis my undoing quite; But if thou please to set me but a day, I am perswaded that thy Son will pay: I cannot work with so much art, 'tis true, As many of thy Saints and Servants do: And yet I hope thus far to prevaile, To bring a Trowell, Hammer, and a Naile, Towards the perfecting what is begun, By thy all holy, and most sacred Son: And do not doubt in everh fitting place, To purchase so much grace, as call for grace. And truly Lord, I do conceive I ought To tax my heart for every idle thought.
And if thou wilt thy heavenly grace afford, Ile taxe it too for every idle word: And if thy breathings do apace distill, Ile make my deeds to pay against their will, The Incomes of thy spirit will suffice Far better then an Army when they rise: Then rouze my soule, and see thou never be A sad Antagonist to thy self and me. Perfect, O perfect, what thou hast begun, Dear Father speak the word, the deed is done; My feeble prayers may perchance molest thee, Yet Ile not leave the Lord, untill thou blesse me. Then grant me my desire, for fear I bee A second Widow, in my woing thee: My eyes have seen salvation; I surcease, Now when thou wilt, let me depart in peace. FINIS.
