H3366 E14_8 99860217 112334
A LETTER From NEVV CASTLE, To the Right Honourable the Lord High Chancellour of Scotland, and the rest of the Scotish Commissioners at London. Containing a RELATION of the taking of the Town of NEVV CASTLE By Storm. Dated the 19 of October, 1644. Published by Authority. London, Printed for Robert Bostock and Samuel Gellibrand, Octob. 26. 1644.
Right Honourable, I Should have gone into Newcastle at the time when the Packet went from hence, on Thursday, but was put off till Friday by these obstinat mischreants, espe∣cially the Maior of that Town. Sir David Hume, John Ratherford of Jedburgh, and I, went in on Friday at nine in the morning; we had Commis∣sion from the Generall and Committee (if we found reall dealing) to yeeld to all honourable Conditions, for preventing the effusion of blood, notwithstanding all the Provocations we had from them. The Maior, Sir Nicholas Cole, and Sir George Baker were treating with us: they gave us big words: do what we could, they would not so much as come to speak of Conditions of rendring up the Town: And, after three or four hours Debate, all they would condescend unto, was, To think upon their Propositions, and send them to the Generall within three days; one of which Propositions to be as they affirmed, and Mordicus adhered unto: That when all Conditions were agreed upon, they should give Hostages for delivery up of the Town
after twenty days, if Relief came not to them. And because we who were commissionated from the Army, were limited to Friday at night, to conclude or give over Treatie, we desired them to write to the Generall, to know his minde concerning those delays, and we should either stay till his Excellen∣cies Answer did come, or would carry it, and re∣turn, if we had further Commission. They would not grant this favour to us; but told us, They would let us go, and they should write to the Ge∣nerall to morrow. I went thus far on with them, which was more then in Policie I should have done: yet so fain would I have effusion of bloud shunnd, that I told them in plain terms, That if they did write any thing, it should be that night. They sent out a Letter that night, about eight of the clock, wherein they averred many untruths, and told, They would send their Propositions on Mun∣day next. It was late before many of us could be got together, to give Answer: Those who met, thought it fittest to return an Answer, and to send such Conditions as we would grant; and to certifie them, That if they did not accept them, and send out Hostages for performance, the Generall would no more treat. The substance of the Conditions were: 1 That all Officers and Souldiers who are desirous to go out of Town, should have liberty to go with Arms, Bag and Baggage, to any Garrison not beleaguered, within sixty
miles; and should have a Convoy, Waggons, and meat on the way. 2 That all Strangers, Sojourners, or Inha∣bitants, who desired to go with the Souldiers, should have the like Liberty and Accommo∣dation. 3 The Town shall enjoy their Priviledges and Jurisdiction, conform to their ancient Charters. 4 The Persons, Houses, Families and Goods of the Citizens and Inhabitants should be free and protected from violence. 5 They should have their free Trade and Commerce, as other Towns reduced to the Obe∣dience of the King and Parliament. 6 That any of them who desired to go into the Countrey, and live in their Countrey-hou∣ses, should have safeguard for their Persons, Families, Goods and Houses. 7 That no free Billetting shall be imposed on them, without their own consent. 8 The Army should not enter the Town, but onely a Competent Garison.
I have not the perfect copie of the other Instru∣ctions sent to them, which was signed by the Ge∣nerall, with that caveat, That they should send out Hostages this day, at eight in the morning, for the surrender of the Town upon these Conditions, betwixt this and Munday the one and twentieth, before two in the afternoon, otherwise the Condi∣tions to be void. In stead of sending out Hosta∣ges, or desiring a new Treaty, this morning they sent a bitter Invective-Letter, standing to their former Resolutions. We had been so long ex∣pecting that these men within the Town should have pitied themselves, all our Batteries were rea∣dy; so many of our Mynes as they had not found out or drowned, were in danger of their hourly finding out; the Winter was drawing on, and our Souldiers were earnest to have some end of the bu∣sinesse; which made the Generall (after so many slightings) to begin this morning to make Brea∣ches: (whereof we had three, and four Mynes) the Breaches were made reasonable low before three of the clock at night. All our Mynes played very well: They within the Town continued still obsti∣nate: My Lord Chancellors Regiment, and Back∣leughs, entred at a Breach at Close-gate: The Gene∣rall of the Artillery his Regiment, and that of E∣dinburgh, entered at a Myne at the White-Tower Colonel Stewart and Gasks Regiment, entered at a Myne, after not dispute, beside West-Gate: this was one Quarter: Lieutenant-Generall Baylie had another Quarter at New-Gate, with five Regiments,
viz. his own (which was formerly Dudhops) Waugh∣tons, Cowpers, Dumferlings, and who en∣tred by a Breach: Great dispute was made here, and some of our Officers killed, whereof one Ma∣jor Robert Hepburn cannot be enough lamented. Cas∣silis, Kelhead, Wedderburne, Marshall, and the Master of Yesters, had a third Quarter, who entred by a Breach, not without dispute. Lord Sinclare, Aytoun, Niddery, the Master of Cranstoun, and the Lord Le∣vingston, had the fourth Quarter, who entred at two Mynes. They would have had more hot work, but the Resolutions of the Officers and Souldiers made a quick dispatch. They within the Town made all the Opposition they could, on the Walls, and in the Streets. Some houses are burnt. The Maior and some others fled to the Castle, and did present∣ly beat a Parley, which the Generall would not hear, at that time, in respect they had been the in∣struments of so much bloodshed. The Lord Rae, and some others of our countrey-men, are prisoners with us. You shall hear more particularly, within a day or two, by an Expresse. Octob. 19. 1644. Your Lordships humble servant, A. HUMBIE. FINIS.
