h3634 e1000_5 99862733 168709
The humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION OF THE OFFICERS of the ARMY, TO THE PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England. Presented to them Wednesday the 5th of October, 1659. by Maj. General Disbrow, accompanied with the Field-Officers of the Army, and subscribed by above two hundred and thirty Com∣mission-Officers in and about London. Together with the Parliaments Answer thereunto. Wednesday, Octob. 5. 1659. ORdered by the General Council of the Officers of the Ar∣my of this Commonwealth, That this Representation and Petition be forthwith printed and published. Tho: Sandford, Secretary. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills dwelling in Aldersgate Street next door to the Peacock. 1659.
The humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION OF THE Officers of the Army, To the Parliament of the Com∣monwealth of England, Sheweth, THat having had by Your order some late Votes of Parlia∣ment communicated to us by Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood, our Commander in chief, occasioned by a Debate in Parliament, upon the Petition and Proposals of the Officers, under the Command of the Lord Lambert in the late Northern expedition; We have inquired diligently into our hearts and wayes, with reference thereunto; and finding nothing amongst us but faithfulness and integri∣ty to the Parliament and this Commonwealth, we cannot but be sensible that there hath not
wanted some persons, who have endeavoured to beget mis-understanding between the Parli∣ament and Army: and to that end have re∣presented our Actions and Intentions so, as it is taken for granted there hath been irregularity amongst us, at which we fear you have taken offence. Whereas we are perswaded, that if there had not been an anticipation, it would have appeared to all unprejudiced Spirits, that neither we, (who for the generality of us, were utterly ignorant of that whereat the offence is taken) nor our faithful brethren of the Nor∣thern Brigade, who Signed the said Petition and Proposals, did Design or Intend any thing tending to the interruption of the Parliament, the prejudice of the Peace of this Common∣wealth, or any other by, or sinister respect, not becoming the Trust reposed in us. Wherefore being sensible of the evil Use that persons a∣broad may make from the least apprehensions of Difference between the Parliament and Army, and that we may as much as in us lies, remove all occasions of Surmize, justifie our own inno∣cency before you, and frustrate the expectati∣ons of any, who by blowing up the Coals of Dissention, hope to warm themselves thereby: We have thought it our duty to present our naked thoughts to You, and hope You will find so much of integrity and approved faithful∣ness in us, for the welfare of this Common∣wealth, as may continue a firm confidence of us, and engage Your zeal against all such as
shall go about to reproach Your faithful Army, or any Member thereof for the future: especially considering that the Peace of these Nations, next under God, depends so much upon a Cor∣dial and Affectionate Agreement and Union of the Parliament and Army, and an un-interrupt∣ed good understanding of each other, and there∣fore we do humbly and plainly declare, 1 That notwithstanding what any persons may suggest or say to the contrary, we are not for, but against the setting up of any Single Person whatsoever in Supreme Authority: and for a demonstration hereof, we may appeal to Your own judgements upon our late Actings; where∣in, since our Declaration of the sixth of May last, we have with all industry and faithfulness, endeavoured to render our selves serviceable to you and this Commonwealth, and have chear∣fully observed your commands; some of us with our lives in our hands in your late service, wherein to our great encouragement the Lord hath once more appeared to own You and Your Army, & the good old Cause for which we have contended. And, at the late return of this Par∣liament to the discharge of their remaining trust, We did with simplicity and plainness in Our Humble Petition and Address presented to you, manifest Our hearts and desires, and that with much unanimity and fullness of consent, which we apprehended was well accepted by you. 2 That we have not since changed our prin∣ciples, (leading to a well regulated Common∣wealth,
wherein the Liberties of the people thereof, both spiritual and civil, may be sully secured, and persons of known integrity, piety, and ability, employed in places of trust and concernment) but resolve by the assistance of God to remain constant to them. And make it our humble prayer to God, that he would incline your hearts effectually to prosecute the same; and make you instrumental in bringing forth such a foundation of Government, whereby all the good people of these Nations may rati∣onally expect that such Liberties and Rights shall be preserved to them and their posterities. And we can truly say that it is in our hearts earnestly, to desire that God would crown you with the honour of making these Nations happy by such a settlement, as may not be liable at every change of Governors to have the peace thereof disturbed, by introducing new Govern∣ments. 3 Whereas a Petition and Proposals were lately drawn up by the Officers of the Bri∣gade that (under the Command of Major Ge∣neral Lambert) hazzarded themselves in your ser∣vice with good success, whereby through the blessing of God upon them and others of your faithful friends and servants, the peace of this Commonwealth is still continued; And the said Petition was sent up to some Officers here, to be presented to the Lord Fleetwood, which hath been by some interpreted to evil and si∣nister ends, and from thence suggestions deri∣ved,
as if there were intentions to violate the Parliament, to set up a single person, or another General, in order thereunto; We do sincerely profess (what ever the designs of any persons may be to promote such causeless jealousies) We have had no other then faithfulness and candor in our hearts and actions towards the Parliament, nor do we apprehend (with sub∣mission we speak it) any reason or cause of offence to be conceived against Your faithful servants, who lately gave so ample proof of their fidelity and courage. 4 We cannot but esteem our selves unhappy to have been so mis-represented to the Parliament, as should occasion such a publique admonition upon record; And considering what evil use may be made of these things by the publique Enemy, and to the end they may be disappoint∣ed of their hopes, and all such persons discou∣raged as shall go about for the future, to pro∣mote jealousies, or by misinformation to beget divisions betwixt the Parliament and their faith∣ful servants the Army, and that a good under∣standing may be preserved between them, We humbly pray, I. That the Officers of the Army, and particularly those who have reason to bear the marks of your favour for their faithfulness in the late Northern expe∣dition,
may stand right in your opini∣on and have your countenance. II. That whatsoever person or persons shall for the future groundlesly and causlesly inform the House against your Servants, thereby creating jealousies, and casting scandalous imputations up∣on them, may be brought to exami∣nation, justice, and condign punish∣ment. III. That it being an undoubted Right of the people to have a Liberty in a peaceable and submissive way, to pe∣tition the Supreme Authority, which liberty hath been by your selves assert∣ed, allowed, and approved of, we cannot but also assert the said Liberty, and humbly conceive that your faith∣full Servants of the Army have no way forfeited their Rights as Free-men: And that therefore they hope it will be no offence for them to submit their hum∣ble desires to the Parliament. And we
hope and pray you will not discourage them from so doing. IV. That you would be pleased to take into your serious consideration the ne∣cessitous condition of the poor Soul∣diers of your Armies, and that all pos∣sible care may be taken for their timely supply, their wants being such as ear∣nestly call for it; And that some spee∣dy and effectual course may be taken to provide for the maimed Souldiers, and the poor Widows and Orphans of such as have been slain in your Ser∣vice, that the blessing of the desolate may be upon you. V. That such who have freely offered themselves in the several Counties and Cities of these Nations, to own and stand by you and your Cause in the late Insurrection, with the hazard of all that is dear unto them, may have your en∣couragement, and be employed in pla∣ces of Trust and Command.
VI. That (it being a thing granted by all, that without the due execution of martial Discipline, the peace, union, and good government of an Army can∣not be preserved) the discipline of the Army may be preserved inviolable, and in particular that no Officer or Souldier of your Armies may be Ca∣shiered or dismissed from their pla∣ces without a due proceeding at a Court Martial, or by his own con∣sent, except in Cases of Reducements or Disbandings. VII. That it being judged necessary by the Parliament for the keeping of the Army under such a Conduct as may render the same serviceable to the Commonwealth, to appoint a Com∣mittee of Nomination, for the propo∣sing of Officers to the Parliament for their Approbation, we humbly pray, that no Officers may be brought into the Army but such as shall first come
under the consideration of the said Committee, and be by them presented. VIII. The office of the Commander in chief of the Army being of so great concernment to the peace of this Com∣mon-wealth, and his Commission at present (as we conceive) expiring within a few moneths, we humbly pray, that the consideration of that mat∣ter may come before you, and some such effectual course taken therein, as may prevent our fears, and the ha∣zard of leaving the Army to confusion. IX. And that you would retain a good opinion of your Army, and, against all discouragements whatsoever, proceed in the carrying on of that good work in∣trusted in your hands for the glory of God and advantage of these Nations. In the prosecution whereof through the help of our God we shall be found (not∣withstanding all endeavours to the con∣trary) faithful to you and this Common∣wealth.
Wednesday Octob. 5. 1659. ORdered by the Parliament, That the Petition and Representation of the Army, and the par∣ticulars thereof be taken into consideration on Sa∣turday next. The Officers being called in again, M. Speaker, by the direction of the House, gave them this Answer. Gentlemen, THe Parliament hath read your Represen∣tation and Petition, and taking notice of the good expressions of your affections and faithfulness to this Parliament and Common∣wealth which are therein, have commanded me to return you the thanks of this House, and in their Name I give you thanks accordingly. I am likewise commanded to let you know, that the Parliament hath already taken into consi∣deration the relief of the poor Widows, Or∣phans, and maimed Souldiers, to whom Pen∣sions have been formerly allowed, and a way for satisfaction of the Arrears due to the Offi∣cers and Souldiers, and shall endeavour to bring the same to a speedy effect. The other matters of your Petition are appointed to be taken in∣to consideration on Saturday next. Thomas St Nicholas Cler. of the Parliament.
