J1215A 99899243 152680
The Juries Right, Asserted and vindicated by the Ancient and good Law of England. VVherin is clearly discovered the necessity, benefit, and safety of Juries, in opposition to those corruptions, and many evils that are incident, and do attend Judges (as they are cal'd) both in Civill and Common Courts. Occasioned by the late unjust, cruell, and illegall Triall of Mr Tho. Webbe, at the Sessions held for London and Middle-sex in the Old Bayly. By Abraham Lawmind, ear-witnesse of the said Triall, a hearty Well-wisher of the common good. Deut. 17.6. At the mouth of two Witnesses, or three Witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one Witnesse he shall not be put to death. Chap. 9.15. One Witnesse shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sinne wherein he sinneth; but at the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of three Witnesses shall the matter be stablished. LONDON, Printed for H. J. 1654.
The Juries Right, &c. Gentlemen: SEriously considering of the great weight of your imployment and the great trust reposed in you, by the Constitution of our good an∣cient Lawes, placing the Issues of life and death of the Prisoners (whose cases come within your cognizance) in your honest and judicious consideration. The Law of this Land constituting you Judges both of Law and fact; and indeed making you the chiefe Judges in the Court, all others but inferior to you, as appears by the Lord Cookes Cōmentaries on Littleton, viz. In this case the Recognitors of the Assize may say & render to the Justices their verdict at large upon the whole matter: and in another place he saith, viz. for as well as the Jurors may have Cognizance of the Lease, they also may as well have Cognizance of the Condition: And further, Cook there saith, Here its to be observed that a speciall verdict, or at large may be given in any action, and upon any issue, be the issue generall or speciall: and in Section 368. Littleton hath these words, also in such case where the inquest may give their verdict at large, if they will take upon them the knowledge of the
Law, upon the matter they may give their verdict gene∣rally. Cooks words upon it are to the same purpose, viz. That the Jury if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law (as Littleton here saith) may give a generall verdict: and this we see made good in all , where Juries doe not onely judge of the validity of the proofe of the fact but also of the Law, by assigning what ∣ges they thinke is just, I say these things induced  to offer unto your serious thoughts these following lines, in part disburthening my selfe of those many sad thoughts, which I contracted to my selfe at the last Sessions, held in the Old Bayly for the City of London and Middlesex, at the Triall of one Mr. Tho. Webbe, a Gentleman to whom I am altogether a stranger, onely being present in the Court when he was call'd to the Bar, and perceiving a high designe carried on by the Court against him, I was very intentive in hearing the triall, for the information of my selfe. And having heard it, and strictly examining the se∣verall passages thereof, and then inquiring of an Officer how long the Gentleman had been in custody? I was in∣formed, that hee was committed by Lievetenant Collonel Barksteed, and Mr Baldwine Gent. Porter of the Tower, for coyning, and had been in Newgate 9 weeks. At which I could not but much wonder, that a Gentleman (and in∣deed any) should be committed to Prison for one fact, and when Sessions comes to be indicted for another, it being a ready way to destroy even the innocentest of men. For when one committed to a Goale, makes preparation a∣gainst his Triall for what hee was committed; when hee comes to be arraigned he shall bee arraigned for another thing, unthought of by the Prisoner, and shall bee forced to joyne issue thereon. What a most sad condition is that Prisoner in? And what illegall and cruell dealings are these, putting the Prisoner on the greatest hazard and dan∣ger of his life, being so suddenly surprized by an Indict∣ment against which he hath made no provision?
This I perceived was the case of Mr. Webbe, who had hee not undauntedly withstood the malice carried on a∣gainst him, and the Gentlemen of his Jury had not beene men of honest mindes, Gentlemen discreet and knowing, the danger was so great, by reason of the mallice carried a∣gainst him, that nothing but life would satisfie, which fully satisfied me of the necessity of Juries, the only equall and best way of deciding and terminating of Causes, whether civill or criminall, they being the Guard of our Estates, Li∣berties and Lives. The Court many times are interested by made friends; and indeed the chiefe thereof their pla∣ces are their trades: and where there is continuance in any Office, oaths (though never so binding) weare out, and little regarded, (the great grievance and crying sin of this Nation) as is witnessed by daily, wofull, and sad expe∣rience. But now a Jury consisting of 12 honest and indifferent men, whose places are not their trades, who have not yearly allowances for the same, and who only serve being electd, and not perpetuated in their places, I appeale to all rationall men, whether such a way bee not most equall, most safe and secure? and whether there be that probabi∣lity of the Juries being corrupted, made friends, &c. as of the Iudges? (as they are called) No, I conceive it's the standing water corrupts and gathers filth, and not the run∣ning stream, &c. And now Gentlemen whose lots it shall fall out to be to serve in the Iuries for London and Middlesex, your Of∣fice being of such necessity, and beyond which the wisest of men cannot invent and finde out a more equall, safe, and beter way. I shall proceed to give you a true and briefe relation of the Gentlemans Triall before mentioned, wherein you may see the hazards poore prisoners are many times put upon, and how much the Court stops the legall Current of your right, as you are Iudges both of law and fact, and
sworn equally between the Common-Weale and Prisoner at the Bar, and be rouzed up like so many English men to claime your right, to lose no part of it; it's not onely the Prisoner at the Bar suffers, but many times endeavours are made to stifle the light of a good conscience in you: there∣fore Gentlemen know what you are; stand fast in it; let a good conscience alwaies dwell in you; for Divine Pro∣vidence hath call'd you forth to stand betweene life and death, to judge betweene the nocent and innocent, that the evil may be punished, and the good justified. Now Gentlemen, I desire you to understand, that the last Sessions held in the Old Bayly began on a Wednesday, the 12. of December last, and ended Saturday following, on which day I being there indeed only to see passages, and to informe my judgement, Mr. Webbe aforesaid was call'd to the Bar, who appearing, after holding up the hand, the Indictment for Adultery being read, and guilty or not guilty being asked him, hee desired liberty before he plea∣ded (as was but right for to bee granted him) to speake; but it was very angerly denied him, and hee urging it as his due, the Court caused him to be turned to the other side of the Bar, and there Mr. Briscoe threatned to gauge him if he spake, when what I perceived the Gentleman had a desire to speak, was only to have a Copy of his Indictment and a little time given him to provide an answer to it, hee expressing himself there in the Court, that he had no notice of any such indictment, being committed for coyning, & so had not provided any thing for his defence, and the Act against Adultery allowes witnesses to be heard and sworn on the Prisoners behalfe, therefore the Gentleman desired a little time, but it was most illegally and cruelly denied him, and the Gentleman forced to a Triall; so that had he not stoutly withstood their prejudice against him, and a judicious Jury to consider the matter of fact &c. I desire you to consider what eminent danger his life had been in, being suddenly surprised by an unknow indictment, and
not having any time to provide any Witnesses for his de∣fence? Oh, how many innocent persons have thus been cast away! and how many more may, if you Gentlemen stand not in the gap in the claime and use of your owne Right? And after the Gentleman was put upon these disadvan∣tages, and like a naked man seized on by the prejudice and will of the Court, and forced to plead. After that he had pleaded not guilty, and when it was expected that evi∣dence should bee sworne and heard to the matter of fact mentioned in the Indictment, there stood up a Councell at Law, one Mr. Hilbey, in the behalfe of the Protector, a∣gainst the Prisoner at the Bar, (another strange unheard of disadvantage, especially for a naked and unprovided man, as the Gentleman was) who instead of pleading either to the fact, or matter of Law, fell to railing and abusing Mr. Webbe very grossely, and that with matters of opinion of 4 or 5 yeares standing. Mr. Webbe desired the Court, that since a Councel was entertained against him, that he might heare the Witnesses sworne, and then if the Councel could inform the Iury, as to matter of fact from the evidence, he might freely speake; but for the Councel to wave the matter in question, and to run back to opinions of foure or five years standing, and they such also which are false, hee could not but looke on it as very hard measure: and truly Gentlemen you may consider of it, for the Prisoner was not onely in hazard by that irregular piece of malice, but the judgements of the Iury was edeavored to be traduced, and to entertain a prejudice against the Prisoner, and ther∣fore the Counsel laboured to possess the Iury with dange∣rous opinions the Prisoner held, and what a dangerous per∣son he was, and therefore, said he, not fit to live; and so would have taken off the Iuries consideration of the fact, and have fastened their thoughts on his invectives against the prisoner, which (Gentlemen) if the Iury had so done, or at any time should do (which God forbid any should)
What a sad condition may an innocent person bee brought into, their lives taken away, Juies traduced and abused,  our whole Law made invalid and to become a thing of its word? Yet for all this, the Pr could not bee heard, but the Counsll suffered to poceed in his invectives, and to be spatter his good name and reputation, till at last, whe∣ther it was shame, of because the Councell had no more rayling matter against the Prisoner, he ceased, & then about sixteene or seventeene witnesses were sworne; some from Dover, some out of Southwarke, and some in London, but not one of them all swore to the matter of fact. viz. (carnall knowledge;) nay not any of them swore that ever the Prisoner was seene in bed with the Gentlewoman? onely one Ms. Neale whose evidence was contradicted: for when the Prisoner desired the Court to aske her where it was she could not tell, onely in gene∣rall it was in London, but where about or at whose house she could not tell. Besides she is known to be a ve∣ry idle person, who hath beene a companion with her husband in abundance of evils, & her husband was hangd the Sessions before for an high way man; so that though there was many witnesses and abundance of dirty mat∣ters, yet not one to the fact, nor from all could handsomly be deduced and drawne, the least shadow or circumstance to prove the fact. Now when the witnesses were sworne and had given in their evidence with the help of the Councell, who would have drawne some of the witnesses by tricks and quirks to evidence what they knew not, the Councell instead of making use of the evidence, to prove the mat∣ter of fact, waved that, and falls to his former raylings with abundance of demureness, first premises solemnly that hee had no knowledge of the Prisoner, nor never see him till then at the Barre; yet in the next place backs the evi∣dence with telling the Jury that the Prisoner was not fit
to live, for he was a man of erronious and dangerous prin∣cipalls, and so vented his foule mouth against the Priso∣ner, who all that while with abundance of patience heard it, not being suffered to speake, till at last the Councell having shot out his venome, the Prisoner did himselfe in a very short, but full, answer to the evi∣dence, applying himselfe very discreetly to the Gentle∣men of the Jury, desiring them to consider the matter of fact for which hee stood there arraigned, and for which they were sworne to passe indifferently betweene the Protector and him the Prisoner at the Barre, and the evi∣dence to the fact; withall acquainting them, that though the Gentleman Lawyer was pleased to take a fee to abuse him, and so to make that his chiefe worke, neglecting all things of Law, matter of fact, and indeed common civillity, yet hee hoped better things of them. viz. that they would mind their worke, the fact, the evidence to it, and not be seduced by the Councells evill example; in confidence whereof he most chearfully resigned himselfe to their Uerdit, desiring the Lord to goe along with them &c. After this the Councell offered to speake and to that end puld out some papers out of his pocket, but what hindred whether they were blankes or stuffed with such malice as hee had sufficiently before vented, I know not, but the paper he put up againe, and onely sayd mum; and so after some debate the Jury brought their verdict, not guilty, onely one remarkable passage happened and that was the Jury; while withdrawne to consider of their verdict sent three times to the Court for to have the Act. but it was denied them, & answer returnd, that they were onely to consider of the matter of fact, but if any thing of Law did arise they were to come to the Court, and the Court would resolve them; a most strange kinde of pra∣ctise that the Jury who are sworne, and who may as is cited in the beginning, take the cognisance of the whole matter both as to fact, and Law, should bee denyed the
Law, that the Court shall hedge all in their owne breasts, certainly congruant with this practise would be illiterate men, men that can neither write nor read; a Jury of such men will never trouble the Court with businesse of Law, they will never send to the Court for their Statute and Law books; and its much to bee wondred what the reason was why the Court should deny the Jury the Act; certainly it to bee doubted their ends were not good in the thing. But so noble and gallant were the Gentlemen of the Jury, that they keepe close to their owne, and would not yield one inch to the unjust deteiner of the Court, a good example and president for all Gentlemen who shall bee imployed in that honourable service of the Common∣weale. Now Gentlemen, you have had the relation of Mr. Webbs tryall, I shall now present you with the ends I proposed to my selfe, in the publication herof, and they were, viz. First, the asserting of that good old principall of our English Lawes; viz. that the Jurie are Judges both of Law and fact, it being a principall as good as its ancient; indeed its of that weight as that our weale and woe rests wholly upon it. Judges, as they are cald, may be byassed and corrupted; long continuance in their places may doe it, favour and affections to great men may doe it, as when a businesse comes in competition, with the power ruling, under which they are Iudges; as in the Case of Iohn Lil∣burne, in whose case its manifest how the Law was abu∣sed, not suffered to bee read, but now Iuries have none of these cloggs, they are not men perpetuated, nor men in∣terrested, but men indifferent and sworne to goe accor∣ding to evidence, a most sure safe and equall way of doe∣ing right to all men, and betweene man and man; so that Gentlemen, your imployment is not meane, you are not servants in the Court, your employment is Honoura∣ble,
and you are Masters of the Court, and therefore Gentlemen this assertion comes in. The second place, viz. That both Law and fact ought to be plaine and cleare before you, therefore the evidences ought to direct their speech unto you, and both evidences for the Common weale, and on behalfe of the Prisoner, ought to bee free without interruption, and the Prisoner, himselfe to be free to speake without the awe and threats of the Court; for Gentlemen the evidence is to you, and for you to judge of, and if the evidence should bee inter∣rupted, your judgement cannot but bee very imperfect, and the Prisoner many times may have something to say that may give great satisfaction; but if hee bee awed and not suffered to speake, such satisfaction may not be recei∣ved as may be requisite; therefore Gentlemen, all things of this nature comes within your cognisance, and you ought, its your power and duty to see a free and cleare current for the evidences and Prisoner, that one bee not stretcht forth on the tenters by tricks the Court many times uses, and the poore Prisoner abridged and debarred of his liberty; its your worke, it chiefly concerns you, and therefore none ought to intermeddle with it. The next thing I have to offer to you, as my end in these, is a great cheat that I then at the aforesaid try∣all perceived to bee; put on the Prisoner; viz. there being some crimes, as Treason and Adultery, that are to be pro∣secuted within twelve Months, and that all prosecution out of that time is made null and invallid, and that some mens malice may be answered, who covet as much after blood, as the babe after its mothers brest, so that though they have nothing within the time, yet will they lay their inditement within the time, when their witnesses all sweare to circumstances beyond their time a great while, as was in the forementioned tryall, wherein the inditement included a fact done on the first of June last, and not one of the witnesses swore neare the time, but all
swore beyond the twelve Months, a very great abuse, and of dangerous consequences: for suppose a Prisoner be ig∣norant of the Law in such cases, (as alas how many poore wretches doe perish at the Barre in the Old Bayly, for want of knowledge) what great danger is his life in? how will his life become a sacrifice through his ignorance of the Law, to the malice of bloody minded men? Oh! therefore Gentlemen consider you are sworne, the Law hath made you superiour in the Court, the lives of many lies in your breast, and honesty, and how it behooves you to weigh and examine every perticular, both of indite∣ment and evidence, particulars of the inditement. First, the fact. Secondly the time on which the fact was com∣mitted, both being equally materiall and in the evidence. First whether they bee to the fact plaine and cleare. Se∣condly to the time true and certaine, both which being as necessary as the proofe of the fact, which most evident∣ly appeares in the two cases of treason and adultery. First, in the case of treason, whether it bee in words, plots against his highnesse or the present government, or the coyning or counterfeiting of money, all being limi∣ted within 12 Months for prosecuting, as appeares by the words of his highnesse declaration published in Ian. 165 3. the words are these: Provided alwayes that no person or persons, shall bee indicted or arraigned for any of the offences before mentioned in this ordinance, unlesse such offender or offenders shall bee indicted or prosecuted for the same within one yeare after the offnce committed, so that the time must bee punctually sworne to as well as the fact, or else its imperfect; for if it bee without the time that is above twelve Months its invalid, and no person ought or can be arraigned for any act of Treason. Againe, to every fact of Treason, the Law requires two sufficient plain and cleer Witnesses, appeares 1 Ed. 6. chap. 12. and 6. Ed. 6. chap. 11. to all Treasons whether high or petty Treasons, there shall be two clear, legall, and suf∣ficient
Witnesses. Sir Edward Cooke in 3. part Institutes cha. of High Treason, is of the same opinion. So that if there be not two Witnesses, and they plain and cleer (not circumstances and inferences) to a treasonable fact, its not sufficient in Law for you to ground a Verdict on; and if two Witnesses should swear to one and the same fact, yet if they differ in time one from another, one sweares to one time, and the other to another time, it's but one Wit∣nesse: the Law so deemes it, and (Gentlemen) you are Iudges of Law as well as of fact. This ought to be consi∣dered by you. And then as touching Adultery, the Act of Parliament of Iune 24. 1650 saith, the words are these: Provided alwayes that no person or persons shall incur any of the penalties in this Act mentioned, unlesse the said person or persons be therefore indicted within twelve months after the offence committed; And evidence must be sworn for the prisoner, the words are these: Provided also, that it shall be lawfull for any person or persons who shall be in∣dicted for any of the offences aforesaid, to produce at their respective Trials, any Witnesse or Witnesses, for the clearing of themselves from the said offences whereof they shall be so indicted, and the Iustices before whom such triall shall be had, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to ex∣amine those Witnesses upon oath. So that both the fact and the time must bee cleere and certaine, both in the Indict∣ment and evidence; and the reason is this, that the Priso∣ner may (if hee hath any) produce his Witnesses, which that he cannot doe, if the time be not certain, it being the company the Prisoner is in at such a time that must either cleer him, or lay him open to your Verdict: and therefore (Gentlemen) indictment and evidence must both agree in fact and time; if not, they are both invalids, and ought to be rejected, and no proceedings can or ought to be upon the same: and further, the Prisoner ought to have notice of both fact and time, before he be call'd to a triall, that
so he may provide his Witnesses, since the Act requires them to be heard and sworn, and not so suddenly surpri∣zed by an Indictment, as Mr. Webbe I perceive was, who being committed for coyning, was unexpectedly arraigned for another thing, not having any time to provide for his defence, quite contrary to the Act which allows Wit∣nesses to be heard and sworn, which cannot be without no∣tice and time given. And Gentlemen, the Law hath put you into a place of great trust, and in case the Court should have such preju∣dice against any Prisoner as thus to surprize him, and to lay him open to the mercy of death: It's your care to prevent it, and do the Prisoner right therein; and indeed so much the more, for that your Verdict is to be grounded on cleer and plain proofes, which cannot be where the Prisoner is call'd to a Triall for a fact which he dreams not of, especially in the case of Adultery, where the negative is as good as the affirmative. Gentlemen, life and death is in your hands, the weale and woe of many a poor Family: your place is of great weight, the highest and greatest in the Court; the Court moves as you move; if you move amiss, the Court must move so also. The things that I have taken liberty to offer you are necessary; such Causes may come before you: the Court may have that prejudice against the Prisoner, as to throw them in many disadvantages, and may so much undervalue you (who indeed are the life of the Court) as will not allow you the Law to read and examine, as they did by Mr. Webbes Iury. Therefore Gentlemen, as you are English men, and pro∣fesse the Lord Christ, and are now call'd to so great an im∣ployment (wherein you have a very large opportunity of immitating our blessed Saviour, and following his golden Rule: Doe to all men as your selves would be done unto.) Rouze up your Spirits; claim your Right; let not might and greatnesse sway you, but in all things cleer and plaine evidences,
and a good conscience; so will you purchase praise both of God and men, and be examples of great good to your Countrey-men: For which the Lord in his infinite mercy go along with you, according to the weight of your im∣ployment. FINIS.
