L1023 E172_5 99873270 157057
A DECADE OF GRIEVANCES, Presented and approved to the Right Honourable and High Court of Parliament, against the Hierarchy or government of the Lord Bishops, and their dependant offices, by a multitude of people, Who are sensible of the ruine of Religion, the sinking of the State, and of the plots and insultations of enemies against both. clergymen with high church accoutrements fall in disorder from a tree by a church in disrepair The tottering Prelates, with their trumpery all, Shall moulder downe, like Elder from the wall. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
SIONS PLEA Against The Prelacy. RIght Honourable and high Senatours, you are not unacquainted how the affrighting and turmoyling troubles of the heart speake in the faces of all true hearted subjects, expressing of∣ten by their sighes and grones, and also vented by their patheticall complaints, the moving cause whereof is our calamity, partly already seized, and partly making haste (as it is further threatned) to seize upon us. But to our shame and confusion of faces, we must confesse, that of the provoking cause of this calamity, (namely sinne) we are nothing so sensible as we should be; or if wee complaint of sinne, yet we finde not out that Ashteroth or maine nationall sinne which is the conjunct or immediate working cause of all the evill that is upon us. When a body politique is runne all into one festered sore
of sinne, and one benumming bruise of judgement, then the universall and painfull distemper taketh a∣way the discerning faculty of the master sore that hath bred and fed all the rest, which indeed must either be sought out and removed (as the principall cause) or it will never prove a cure. Though the wrath of God be revealed against all ungodlinesse and unrighteousnesse, yet for some one capitall sin especially, the Lord departeth from a State, and turneth it upside downe. This might be instanced in Israel, joyning himselfe unto his idols, which made the Lord unto him as a moath, and unto the house of Iudah as rottennesse. This principle Israel understood, when they sought againe and againe, and sought out the cause why he fell before Benja∣min. The same course took Iosua in humbling him∣selfe to finde out Achan, and the excommunicate thing. He might have found out, and also removed many other sinnes, yet if he had not found out the thing of the curse, he might have mourned his heart out, before he had prevailed with the Lord against the enemy. How to finde out Achan, or golden wedge and Babilonian garment, hoc opus, &c. for it is not ob∣vious to every man: Yea this spirit is neither found out, nor cast out, but by fasting, and prayer. Yet wofull experience, the common schoolmaster, hath formerly discovered to the Chariots and horsmen of Israell, and now doth discover this very same to be the very cheefe cause of our calamitie that wee pitch upon; we do not exclude our own sinnes, nor
others sins, for many sins and many enditemens are against us; but this is the master sin, as we con∣ceive, and that upon this ground, that the capitall sin of a nation is not the higest sin abounding in the highest measure (against which there is any lawes established;) but that is the maine and master sinne, which is established by a law. And this is that fra∣ming of mischife by a law, that the prophet speak∣eth of, called in another place, the commande∣ment of man establishing sin. Now give us leave (Right Honourable) to de∣mand, what sin is established by law in this com∣mon-wealth, but the hierarchy and their acoutre∣ments? and therefore we verily believing by the grievances following, offer to demonstate that the hierarchy and their housholdstuffe, is the capi∣tall sinne and maine cause why all this evill is come upon us. I. First, may it please your honours to take notice, that the calling of the Hierarchy, their dependants, offices and ceremonies, whereby they subsist, are all unlawfull and Antichristian. II. The hierarchicall government cannot consist in a nation with foundnesse of doctrine, sincerity of Gods worship, holinesse of life, the glorious power of Christs government, nor with the prosperity and safety of the commonwealth. III. The present Hierarchy are not ashamed, to
beare the multitue , that their calling is Iure divino. Bu they dare not but confesse, when they are put to it, that their caling is a part of the Kings prerogative. So that they put upon God what hee abhorreth, and will hold of the Kng when they can doe no other. IV. They abuse many wes that power from the King, by changing, dding, and taking away at their pleasure, to the greevous vexation of the subject, the dishonouring of his Majesty, and the making of the laws of none effect. V. The priviledges of the laws and the hierarchiall goverment cannot consist together. VI. The loialty of obedience to the Kings Majesty and his laws, cannot possibly stand with the obedi∣ence to the hierarchy. VII. All the unparalleled changes, bloudy troubles, devastations, desolations, persecutions of the truth, from forraines or domesticks, since the yeare of our Lord 600. arising in this Kingdome; and all the good interrupted or hindered, hath had one or more of the hierarchy, as principall causes of them. VIII. All the fearfull evills of sin and judgement, for the present reigning amongst us, and threatning a∣gainst us (to omit the black desolation of our sister
Churches) wee conceive to bee the birth of the womb, and the nuslings of the brest of the hie∣rarchy. IX. If the herarchy be not removed, the scepter of Christs government, namely disciplin, advanced to its place, there can be no healing of our sore, no ta∣king up of our controversi with God; yea our desolations, by his rarest Iudgements, are like to be the astonishment of all Nations. X. Lastly, right Honourab; I you strike at the hie∣rarchy, removing that Ashteroth or grand Ioll, and erect the purity of Christs ordinances, we are confident that there shall be a ceasing from exor∣bitant sins, a removall of judgement, a recovery of Gods favour, a repairing of the breaches of the Church and Commonwealth, a redeeming of the state, a dashing Babells brats against the stones. Yea this shall remove the wiked from the throne, strike a terrour, and astonishment to the hearts of all for∣raigne and domesticke foes. In a word, God will goe forth with us, and smite our enemies. Yea a glo∣rious prosperity shall rest upon Zion, King, State, and Common-wealth. Thus having laid a Decde of evils arising as so many corroding ulcers out of the body of the hie∣rarchy, wee wish your Honours might prevaile with them by faire meanes; to take Hierax for a pre∣sident without exception: who forsook the Prelacy (as Isidore witnesseth in his epistle 223.) meeerly
for the unlawfulnesse of the calling; which calling was not then come to that height of unlawfulnesse by many degrees that now it is. A certaine Monke being chosen Bishop, refused the burthen, who after his death (as they say, Caesar. Histerb. Illustr. miracl. lib. 2. cap. 29.) appeared to his friend, speaking to him thus, Si Episcopus fuissem peritssem, If I had beene a Bishop, saith he, I had been dam∣ned. To conclude, wee desire to say no more to your Honours, but up and do what the Lord hath bidden you. Magnum iter ascendis, sed dat tibi gloria vires, Non est è terris mollis ad astra via. FINIS.
