L1780 E538_9 R202723 99862918 164873
LETTERS FROM PARIS, Received the 15. of JAN. 1648. DIRECTED To severall COMMITTEES and Members of PARLIAMENT. Printed by speciall Order, and for full satisfaction to all Nations, con∣cerning their late Transactions. 15. Jan. 1648. Imprimatur GILB: MABBOTT. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, in Aldersgate-Street, 1648.
Letters from PARIS. Right Honourable, YOUR Honours may have heard of this King's going out that morning before day for St. Germans. As that resolution had been very secretly managed, so most part of his Majesties servants, and of the Queens wo∣men (amongst others Madam le moiselle de Breauuais, her Confident of the Closet) were left behind, and were not since suffered to goe out of this Towne, nor yet the baggage and wearing things of their Majesties, and of the Princes, by the precise order given at the Towne gates, some being wholly shut up, and the rest so strictly guarded, that none goes out either in Coach or on horse-backe, much lesse any Chariot or Foot-man with arms, without a very exact Passe from the Towns-house of Paris. Madam de Longue∣uille, who, though big with child, ventured to follow, hath been stay∣ed, declaring that if they were forced to fast and suffer, she should suf∣fer as the rest. That order hath hitherto proved very usefull, the rich Families, namely of the Parisians and Financiers, who, without that, would have gone out with their most precious goods, being now com∣pelled to submit to this Parliament, and to contribute and stand at the peoples side. Great number of Courriers were that day, Wednesday, dispatched by the said Parliament towards all the Parliaments & pla∣ces of this Kingdome that are of any importance, to acquaint them with that departure, as being a ravishing of the Kings Person to trou∣ble the peace of this State, interrupt the Justice, and crosse the good resolutions of the Parl. towards the publique. His Majesties French & Switzer guards following to St. Germans, plundered in their march the Village of Nanterre, which hath been a bad president for his said Majesty. The same day his Majesty sent a letter to the Prevost des Mar∣chands of Paris, whereby he adviseth him, that having been informed, that some ill-affected persons in league with the Enemies of this State had a designe upon his Person, he had been forced to with-draw: The Duke of Orleans and Prince of Conde, wrote then to the said Prevost, that they could doe no otherwise then to follow his Majesty. The said Letters having been communicated to the Parl. they sent the next day,
Thursday, the Kings Attourney and Advocates to the said St. Germans to intreat their Majesties to name those ill-affected persons, that they might inform against them, or else to suffer the said Parl. to inform a∣gainst the Accusators, and make their processe. Those Deputies were so ill received there, that they would not suffer them to come above the staires of the olde Castle at the said Saint Germans to speake with their Majesties. The same Thursday the Earl of Brienne came hither from St. Germans with some Letters from the King for the Soveraign Courts; those for the Parl. were carryed by M. la Louueire, Leiftenant of the Guards, with order not to deliver them but in a full Assembly: but they, either being informed of the contents, or it being against the forms, refused to accept of them in body, bidding him to deliver them to the Kings Officers, as it is wonted. The said letters commanded the said Courts to repaire to the following places, viz. the Parliament to Monturgis, the Chamber of Accompts to Mante, the Court des Aydes to Melun, the grand Councell to — and the Privy Councell to Poissy. Some of the Courts answered not upon the present, only the grand Councell, (which is a Jurisdiction distinct from all others, sitting upon movea∣ble Chaires, for a token that of old it is an ambulatory Court) answe∣red they would obey his Majesties command, desiring to have 8. days time to prepare themselves. That day order was given to all the hou∣ses in Paris to provide arms, and stand upon their guards under great penalties. The said Earl of Brienne thinking to returne to the said St. Germans, was stopped at the gates of Paris, though he had a Ticket of the Towns house, and was compelled to goe backe to his house, from whence he went the next day after, being Friday very early in the mor∣ning on hors-back with M. Brisacier, to go by some by-ways to the said St. Germans. The same morning came advice that the Kings Councel had given Arrest bearing defences to the Inhabitants of Poissi, & to the Butchers of Paris, to sell or buy any Oxen or other Cattle under pain of death: That the Kings Forces had seized on the Bridges of Pon∣toise and St. Clou: That the Regiment of the Guards was come, & quar∣tered at Gonnesse to stop the bread: That 2000. Switzers were quarte∣red in St. Denys: Some Troops at Aubervilliers, and other places adja∣cent to this City; and that that night 3. or 4000. horse were to come about it to block it up wholly, and stop victuals. Thereupon the said Parliament having met, resolved in the froenoon that 6. Councellors should repair in the afternoone to the Towns house, to hold there a Councell of War for a speedy levy of 20000. Foot, and 6000. Horse.
Mr. des Landes Paien, Councellor in the grand Chamber in the said Parliament, a man of courage & wit, Batchellor, and who long bore Arms in the Low Countries and elsewhere, offered to command them till they had provided some man of greater condition then hee: they presently returned thanks unto him. The same afternoon their Ma∣jesties sent an order to the Duke de Bovillon (who stayed here under colour of being sick of the gout) to come to the said St. Germans. Few hours after, 8. Councellors of the Parliament went to offer to the said Duke the Generall-ship of the said Parisian Army: he is to return his answer this morning; It is thought hee will accept of it, upon the dis∣contents he received by the Court, who hitherto would not indampni∣fie him of the compensation promised to him for Sedan and his Domi∣nions. At the same Session yesterday morning an Arrest was given a∣gainst Cardinall Mazarin, whereby he is declared perturbator of the publique peace: commanded him to with-draw the same day from Court, and within 8. dayes out of the Kingdome; bidding all his Ma∣jesties Subjects after that time expired to fall on him, and forbidding all persons to harbour him. Immediately after the reading of that Ar∣rest, the Assembly of the said Parliament and all the Assistants in the Chamber and great Hal hard by, cryed aloud, Vive le Roy, for a token that they will only prosecute such as have stoln away the King, a∣mongst whom Marshall de la Milleraie, and de Villeroy (who promised to the said Parliament they would answer for his Majesties Person) are written in the black booke. The Earl of Harcourt went not with them as it was then reported, but having soone after repaired to the said St. Germans, he e out with Mr. de Beringhan, and had bitter words with the Prince of Conde, for that being Officer to the Crown, they had car∣ryed so the King awy without his privity. I hear that fince hee hath been offered some mploment against the Parisians, which he hath re∣fused, alleadging that hee cannot take up Armes against the people, without taking them against the King. The chiefest that are employ∣ed in that Expedtion from their Majesties, who have already their Quarters, to molest Paris, are the Pince of Conde, the Marshals de la Milleraie, and de Grammont, Mess. de Ʋilleguier, and de la Fersè Im∣bault. Every one blameth the Duke of Orleans his proceedigs, and of the Prince of Conde, to expose to all the State for the meer interest of the said Cardinall, whose birth, his passions, and actions are so well known. The said Pince hath beene chiefly moved thereunto by the great advantages he received of him, and the said Duke who so long opposed that going out, yeelded at last thereto for 800000. Levers. I
am informed were given him (whereof the Abbot de la Riviere had 200000. besides the assurance the said Prince gave him that the Prince of Conti shal pretend nothing to the Cardinals Cap) & under the assu∣rance that the Duke of Lorraine shall be restored to all his Dominions; for the execution whereof, the Duke of Orleans (upon the promises he and his Wife tooke for currant money) passeth his word to his High∣nesse upon condition that his Army, which is said to be of 15000. men doe presently passe to the service of France, to whom at his en∣trance they give in prey the Picardy to refresh themselves. That pro∣ceeding of offering to restore that Duke into his Dominions (during this Kings minority) he being a Prince active, vindicative, and of a house ancient Enemy to this Crowne, doth much discredit the said Princes. The Duke of Longueuille's returne is expected as being a spirit much usefull for a Mediation, though many doe thinke that things being come thus farre, it wil be necessary henceforth that one party submits to the other. It is clearely seen now that when the Court came from St. Germans in November last, it was onely on purpose to get into the Kings Coffers the 16. Millions of Liuert-Marshall dela Milleruie hath actually received and kept without paying any body, to make with it this present expedition afore the Spring, thinking to starve Paris in three dayes, and by a generall rising of the people, cause some twenty of the most active in the Parliament to be hanged. They have part of that money with them at St. Germans, the other hath beene sent to Marshall de Thurenne, whom they thought to intrust with the chiefest command of the Duke of Lorraines Army, not beleeving that the said Generalship would be offered to the said Duke of Bovillon his brother, and the rest hath been dispersed in gifts to the said Princes and other Grandees, and to the re-imbursing of the Loans lent by the Prince of Conde, the said Marshall, Madame d' Liguillon, the Chancellor and others formerly to his said Majesty. The said Parliament resolved likewise yesterday morning to demand the Keys of the Castle of la Ba∣stille from Mr. du Tremblay Governour thereof, and in case of refusall, to force him; and even it was debated to keep his Son, Councellor in the said Parliament, untill the said Keyes were delivered, but at last he was left free upon the facility they see to be Masters of the said Castle and of the Arsenal when they will. The Court afore their going had so much made themselves sure of the affection of the Duke of Vendosme and his Son, that they doe not stirre yet in this occasion. The Duke of Elboeuf came back Thursday last from St. Germans hither as discontented of the Court, but the
Duke of Bovillon is preferred hitherto to the Lorraines in this Con∣juncture. They resolve here to make all at once a great endeavour that at first they might not miscarry: It is likely that the Army that shall go out of Paris shal goe directly to the said S. Germans, to seize, if pos∣sible, on the Court, or else oblige them to remove further off, and ther∣by to have out from about this Towne their Majesties forces that are not esteemed above 10000, men, both Horse and Foot. Great number of Cattell is come into the Towne by St. James Suburbs, and for faci∣litating the bringing in of provisions, the said Parliament hath order∣ed that all such as shall be brought in this fortnight shall be free of paying any Impost; so that there came in already abundance of Wine and it is thought there is corne sufficiently, whilst the Army that is to goe out be in posture to convey more: the onely disorder that appears is in the distribution of the Bread, whereunto they are about to put order. They speak of an Assembly of the Notables of the Kingdome. The said Townes house sent word Wednesday last to the said Parlia∣ment, that as long as the King was here, they received orders from his Majesty, but that having been so stolne away, they know now no o∣ther power but that of the said Parliament. The first President decla∣red at the same day in the open Parliament, that he ever thought to carry things to some moderation, and that nowadayes he had rather to dye by the hand of a seditious man, then by his removing, sever himselfe from their Assembly, and bring in any division. The said Par∣liament gave order to the Inhabitants of Charenton to guard their towne, and not suffer any Souldiers to come in: those of Corbeil and Melun hold for the said Parliament, so that the upper end of the River is free to this day. This day the President Feron that was suspected by the people hath been removed from his place of Prevost des Marchands, which was con∣ferred on President de Novion. They offer to the Duke of Bovillon to restore him into his Principa∣lity of Sedan, if he will accept of the Generalship, and leave his Wife and Children to the Parisians for Hostages: Command hath been gi∣ven to all houses where is a Coach gate in Paris, to set out at their own charges an Horsman, and the small gates to send out a single Soldier. Severall Commissions are delivered, they give to every Horseman a crown a day, and to the Foot 20. solz. which doubtlesse will draw ma∣ny out of the Kings forces. It is reported that the Prince of Conde hath seized on Charenton with 500 horse: I am informed that the division begins in the Kings Councell, and that the Duke of Orleans and his
Wife acknowledging their faults are willing to come back, even in the advice they have that the Duke of Lorraine mocketh at present the of∣fers made to him by the French Court. Rouen and Orleans do promise to send some supply to Paris: they have already provided here a stock of 1200. Crownes ready for the War. The Deputies of the Chamber of Accounts and Court des Aydes that went yesterday to St. Germans were exhorted by the Chancellor and M. Teuboeuf afore they were presented to their Majesties to sever them∣selves from the Parliament of Paris, and not mention the said Parlia∣ment: yet they were admitted to their Majesties, and performed their Errand, shewing that the said Parliament hath no other aime but the good of the King and of the State. Their Majesties for to divide them, exhorted them as they had done the President Feron to take great care of their good City of Paris, where they would come againe as soone as the Parliament should be gone to the said Montargis. We doe not know yet how the Queen Regent hath taken the news of the aforesaid Arrest (the copies wherof are here inclosed) against Cardinal Mazarin. The Queen of England having heard nothing of the designe of the Kings going, being in great perplexity and without money (saith shee) thinking to send on Thursday morning Mr. Jermyn to their Majesties, to know what shee ought to doe; the said Mr. Jermin was Arrested at the gate: He got a Passe of the Townes house, which being not sealed, he was againe sent back to have it sealed, which having caused him to lose much time, he could not get out but in the afternoone; I know not what answer he wil bring, not knowing as yet that he be returned. The Duke of Yorke is expected here daily; they say he brings but six men along with him, amongst whom is Prince Palatine Maurice, and the Duke of Buckingham; but they fear in this Court his Train will be greater, seeing the disbanding the Prince of Wales made of most part of the persons of note that were by him. The Queen Regent sent a Com∣plement on Wednesday last to Monsier Browne, that in case he should not thinke himselfe safe in Paris in this occasion of the hatred against the Royalists, shee would provide him a place some where else. The Domestick disorders here cause them not to take much notice, nor care much of what may happen to the King of England. I am, Your Honours most humble, and most obedient Servant. Paris, the 9th./30th. of January,/December, 1649./8.
Right Honourable, THey have now taken an order for the command of the Parisian Army. The 8 Councellors of this Parliament who propounded it on Friday last to the Duke of Bovillon having spoken of a Partner, he told them the next day that for the good of these affaires, it was necessary that the di∣rection should be left in one, representing at the same time his indisposition of the Government, and other incommo∣dities. In that incertainty; and being necessary to have a Prince to be the chieftain, they conferred the Generallship on the Duke f Elboeuf, who offered his family for Ostage, and was Kings sworne that night. The next day, Sunday morning, the said Duke of Elboeuf was proclaimed by the sound of Trumpet, Generall of the Army for the Parisians. The same morning the Prince of Conti, and the Duke of Longueville, who formerly disapproved at St. Jermains of that ravishing of the King without their privity, having gotten out of that place in disguise (for they doe keepe as strict a guard there, and hinder every one to go out, as well as here) and being come hither to offer their service, the Parliament met that afternoone thereupon: The Prince of Conti repair∣ed thither but Mr. Longueville came not because of the ranck, the Duke of Elboeuf by reason of his quality of Duke and Peere of France being like to take a place before him, who is Duke but no Peere of this Kingdome. The Prince of Conti blamed first the stealing away of the King, and then the pre∣sent proceedings of the Prince his brother, speaking much against his violence, and the il usage he had received of him in severall occasions, insomuch (said he) that of late hee had preferred unto him a man of nought the Abbot dela Riuiere, to whom he promised the Cardinalls cap to his prejudice: Then hee offered his service to head their Aringo, well knowing they had no other aime but the honor of the King and State, and made the same protestation in the Duke of Longueville's name. The Duke of Elboeuf replyed then that he well knew the respect he oweth to the Princes of the house
of Bousbon, but that having sworne already, and broke the Ice, he could not suffer his honour to be any way wronged in this occasion. The Parliament returned thanks present∣ly to the Prince of Conti in generall words, and sent foure Councellours to the Duke of Longueville to doe the like un∣to him, and confer with him about the means and security to make their offers to succeed. The night affording coun∣cell, and the consequence being well weighed to have a Prince of the blood on their sides, as also considering the great interest the Duke of Longueville hath both within and without this Kingdom, the great share he had in the coun∣cells, and his great credit and power in the Government of Normandy, it was resolved to give them content, provided they should both give Ostages of their fidelity, and truly had they not come, I surely beleeve this Parliament would have already proceeded before this time against the legiti∣mation of the late Prince of Conde. Therefore the Prince of Conti and the Duke of Longueville having repaired Munday morning to the Towns house, the conditions of the Union having been there signed, and ha∣ving agreed to the offers made unto them, the said Prince of Conti was declared Generalissimo, on that condition hee should obtain Paris, being assisted amongst others, with the councell of the Dukes of Longueville and Bovillon and of the Marshall dela Mothe Oudemoust, who likewise subscribed the Union. The Duke of Elboeuf was then confirmed Generall within 20 leagues round about Paris, and it was propoun∣ded to make the Duke of Longueville Generall also to com∣mand beyond the said 20 Leagues, to get some more advan∣tage of his Government of Normandy, but it was waved, Mr. de Longueville chusing rather to stay in Paris for avoiding of jealousies, whereupon it was ordered that the Dukes of Elboeuf, and de Bovillon, and the Marshall dela Mothe should be meerly Lieutenant Generall under the said Prince of Conti. The Marquisse dela Boulay Cozen to the Duke of Bovillon. Major Generall Lambert, and severall other considerable Officers signed then the said Union. The said Marqusse was made Master of the Artillery, and tooke possession of the
Arcenal on Saturday last. The Duke of Longueville gives hopes shortly of 1000 horse, and 4000 foote from Normandy. The Union is very great between the Parliament and the City. The President Feron Provost of the Marchants, who hath been like to bee plundred and massacred at his house (whereby his Lady was forced to run away from the City in a Country-womans habit) is continued in his place, as your honour will see by the here-anexed Arrest of the tenth instant, given to the said Parliament in the presence of the said Prince of Conti. It hath been a prudent action of the said Parliament, to have protected, so the said President, to keepe this people from massacring, who having once be∣gun, would hardly have been refrained. The Duke of Elboeuf hath since his General-ship written a Letter of Complement to the Duke of Orleans, exhorting him to return to Paris, where all the people was mightily desirous to see him again. The Dutchesse of Orleans (who retired from hence with great regret, and before his going cruelly spoke a∣gainst the Abbot De la Ravere, in the presence of his Royall Highnesse, as being the Author of all these misfortunes, & one of the chiefest Actors of that pernicious departure) did what she could to hinder him to goe out of Paris, representing unto him, that when he should be at Court, and the affaires should fall into the extremities, he would be there either imprisoned, or impoysoned, & she doth still doe her best to draw him back, but it is not thought that now the Court will suffer him to with∣draw, in which case it is likely this Parliament will provide of a Regent to his own exclusion. The Parisians do contribute very largely & very heartily to∣wards those Leavies; they can presently set forth 60000 men, whereof they make account to chuse 30000. Viz. 20000 Foot, and 10000 Horse, They have already on Foot about 8 or 10000 Foot, & 3 or 4000 Horse, The Basoche, that is the Clerks of the Pallace, doe furnish 800 Horse, & the Clerks of the Cham∣ber of Accompts, and Court des Aydes 400. The Court hath been ready to goe to Chantilly, or to Pontoise or Meulan for their greater safety. The Prince of Conde, who hath seized on Chasenton Bridge, with 5 Regiments of Horse, making in all some 800. forsook that quarter yesterday mor∣ning,
to come to St. Dennis, where he fortifieth himself, and ga∣thereth a body, upon the advice he had that the Parisian forces, that are ready, were to make a sally last night, to open the pas∣sage of the Bread that use to come from Gonnesse. During his abode at Charenton, for a greater safety he lodged in a house at the end of the Bridge, between the River of Moone, and the Ri∣ver of Seine. He protected the Protestant Church, and caused on Munday last, the Lutheran Ministers of his German Cavalle∣ry to preach therein. I am told that the Court is comming from the said St. Germans, to St. Denis, to goe from hence in case of need, into Burgundy for its greater safety, and in particular for the security of Cardinall Mazarin, who hitherto jeares at the Parliaments Arrest against him, and thinketh the Souldiers rais∣ed here, to be so many Phantasmes against his Designes? But it is a meer blindnesse, for it is certain that the Par∣liament and City, who doe wisely cast all the aspersion of the present distractions upon him, to render the Courts cause the most odious, will never forgive him nor his Adhe∣rents, against whom I see them wholly bent to proceed cri∣minally, among others (by a just retribution of God) a∣gainst the Chevalier de Jars, Bautre, Sanneterre, the Chancel∣lor, and other Incendiaries and Abettors of the Brittish Wars, as also against the Marshals de la Milleraie, and d' Estel (though this last be retired to his house of Estell hard by Soiffons) de Villeroy, the Sirs d'Eymery, le Tellies, la Riviere and Partisants already adjudged by them. They have here great hopes of successe, and that their good intentions will be generally knowne and followed throughout all France, that having purged the Court by degrees, and reformed the abuses in the State (which doubt∣lesse would bee from head to foot, should the King bee in his majority, and a Delinquent) they might frustrate the Spaniards of the advantage they hope to get by the present division of the state, by sending against them the next Spring the said 30000 men and their other forces, and thereby force them to a firm peace. But all their things are as car∣nall as the events of the beginnings, and Armies are doubt∣full; therefore wee ought to see first what shall happen by
that coming to St. Denis, and what will be the issue, for the motto of the Parisian Colors being Quaerimus Regem nostrum, it is a question whither they shall catch him and his Coun∣cellors against whom they are incensed. The said Parliament having debated to set the said Car∣dinals head at 100000 Crownes by the same Arrest given a∣gainst him, Mr, Bugnon the Kings Advocate hindred it, al∣ledging that the Pope might take an offence at it, because of his quality of Cardinall. Here your honours may observe that the said Cardinall hath caused the Courcier of Lyon that carried the said Arrest to bee stopped at Essone, well knowing that assoone as the Pope and the Consistory at Rome shall see that condemnation (which they doe long af∣ter) they will depose him of his Cardinallship. He hath ve∣ry basely acknowledged the favour granted him by the Ve∣netians to admit him into the number of their Nobles, and his kindred also, having differed above 40 dayes, after the advice he had thereof by their Ambassadors, to return them thanks, and yet I know not whither he hath done it to this day, wherat the said Ambassador hath been extreamly angry The watch is continued here more exactly every day, all the comings in are barricadoed; no horses are suffered to goe out but those of the Messengers and Purveyors, which is of a very great use for the setting up of this Cavalry: The Merchants of Horses doe offer a thousand Horses to be paid only after the wars ended: The Match is the commonest, Sent through all the Streets, and number of Chains being set up, the Coaches do now keep lesse noise then the Trum∣pets and Drums: That which is yet more considerable is, That the Money is very plentifull by the liberallity of the Citizens and others, so that at this instant they are sure of above six Millions of Livers, whilst the Finances are melt∣ing away at the Court, and will soon come to nothing, without any apparent hope of recovery, most part of the Grandees who followed unprovided, being already in great distresse, the means being stopped of getting any thing out of Paris. Last Munday the here annexed Arrest was given in the
said Parliament against the Souldiers that have forsaken the Borders to come and stop the Victuals of Paris. That day the Dutchesse of Longueville and her Children went to the Towns House, where they doe lodge now. The other Generalls doe likewise offer their Children in Ostage. There are entred into Paris three daies since by St. James his Gate above 800 Oxen, and above 1200 Casks full of Corn coming from Beausse. The Country people doth arm in the neighbouring Villages, so that we hope short∣ly to see this City wholly released, the Bread (the Price whereof was raised double since six daies) being yesterday come almost to its ordinary value. Mr du Tremblay having offered to keep the Bastille with∣out undertaking any thing against the City, and for an as∣surance thereof, having removed his Ordnance to the out∣side of it towards the field; saying, That unlesse the King by a Letter of Cachet should command him, he could not forsake the Prisoners committed by his Majesty to his keep∣ing, was yesterday forced to surrender the place, after shot from the Arsenall against the door thereof; the Parliament hath put therein 500 men in Garrison, they have likewise seized on the Tower of the Temple and the Ammunition therein, and hath garrisoned the Palace of Orleans, and the extremities of the garden thereof at the outside of the Ci∣ty; they are about to assault the Bois de Vincennes where the Prince of Conde hath put a Garrison. The Marquess de Ʋxellis hath seized on Corbeil for the Court, but with so small Forces, that it is thought an easie thing to force him out. The Inhabitants of Melun having received a Garrison have disarmed them and keep them at mercy, thinking it better to do so, then by letting them to goe out, give them means to doe hurt somewhere else. The said Court hearing of the Duke of Longuevilles pro∣ceeding, offered presently the Government of Normandy to Mr de Merieur, who is not thought to accept of it, their Majesties having written here, for to have their Baggage suffered to come to them at S. Germans, the Duke of Elboeuf
conveyed the same himselfe out of the Fauxbourg S. Honore, as far as the Village of Roulle. This day a Councel of War was setled here, consisting of the Prince de Conti, the Duke of Longueville, the 3. Generals, the President de Mesmes, and some others of the Parlia∣ment; they gave order then to the President le Coigneux, and to Master de Maison Councellor, to dresse a Manifest to ju∣stifie before the publike, the proceedings of the said Parlia∣ment, to whose service the Marquess de la Fone is to enter very suddenly. The Theatin Priests, whom Cardinall Mazarin had called into this City are fled, the chiefest of them his Confessour ha∣ving disguised himselfe as a Country-man to escape, hath been arrested prisoner. The Duke of Beaufort is wandring about Paris with 5 or 600 horse, expecting (say they) to joyne the Army that shall go out. Mr. Jermin being come from St. Germans on Friday last, and the Queen of England, thinking to goe out the day after by the Thuilleries, and by Mr. Renards garden to repair to the said St. Germans, she was stopped by the Guards at the Port du Court, and compelled to returne to the Lomer, where the Parliament passed since a complement to her, That she should want nothing. The said Renard hath been imprisoned for that connivence. The said Queen since these disorders hath countermanded the Duke of Yorke. My Lord Digby hath likewise endeavou∣red severall times these last past dayes to go out of Paris disgui∣sed, and otherwise to go to Jersey, but could not get out to this day. The Governour of the Bastille, hath demanded time for the surrendring of the place untill this morning, till he could get an answer of a Letter, he was permitted to write to the King thereupon. The Court hath disposed of the government of Champayne belonging to the Prince of Conti in the behalfe of Mr. de Ne∣mours, and of that of Picardy that was in the hands of Mr.
de Elboeuf, and bestowed it on the Count of Harcourt his brother. The said Duke de Elboeuf went out this night to convey the bread of Gonnesse, but could bring in but some Carts full, the Prince of Condee having already seised on the rest. The City of Angers hath declared for the Parliament, and seised on the Castle therein. The Duke of Elboeuf, and the other Generalls, do desire to have the nomination and choice of the officers: If fidelity hath place, it is likely the Parliament will have a speedy ad∣vantage. Paris 13. Jan. 1648. Right Honourable, WE have been more assaulted here by the over-flowing of the River of Seine, then by the Court-forces, who had likewise such share of that flood, that it hath been im∣possible to undertake any thing on either side, it having not been in the Prince of Condees power to have any Ordnance drawne to St. Denis, where are five or six hundred men, much lesse to make any Worke or Fortification. The Duke of Or∣leance repaired thither on Wednesday last to hold a Councell of War. That day about the night begun that over-flowing, which hindred their Majesties to come thither the next day, and compelled these Princes to returne to St. Germans, where all the Court is still. That Inundation is so terrible that to this day the waters do surmount by above a foot the height of the walls of the Quay in the Isle nostre Dame, so that the Boats do swim through all the streets thereof, the water reaching to the middle of all the gates of the said Quay; the Boats do like∣wise walke before the Arsenal, in the Rue St. Anthony, all over the Greue, and almost from one end of the Rue de serie to the other, and through severall other streets. That flood hath car∣ried away above 400. thousand pounds worth of wood to burn, that was gathered along the River above the Arsenall and in the Pre aux Cleris, broke severall great Boats laden with wood and other wares, drowned the Mills between the Greue, &c. The Pont nostre Dame, where fifteen or sixteen souls perished, and broke three arches of the Thuilleries bridge by the said
Pré aux Cleres. One of the Arches in the Pont au Change, and most of St Michaels bridge are wholly surmounted with the water. All the parts of the Mazaio du Temple, as far as the Thuilleries, and all the Cours, and Pré aux Cleres, are so drowned, that it might seem that Paris is in the middle of the Sea. During that flood no commodities can come here by neither side of the river. The Ponds and Warrens about this Citie are all ruinated, and the wine vessels do swim in most of the Cellars. That over-flowing is attributed to the late great rain, and specially to the abundant snow this Winter, which melted on a sudden. Such a thing is not observed to have hapned since Ianu∣ary 7. 1496. at which time a like flood gave the name to the vally de la Mi∣sere, at the North Quay, between the Pont neuf and the Pont au Change. Their Majesties Baggage that had leave to goe to St Germans on Tuesday last, was searched afore it went from hence, to see whether any thing should be found therein belonging to Cardinall Mazarin. Two Carrs were found there laden with his wares, that were arrested and inventoried: his Palace hath been found full of moveables, whereof Marshall de la Mothe took pos∣session, pretending to have been wronged by the said Cardinall of 150000. crownes for which he maketh his responsible. The Duke of Orleans baggage and of Madammoizile were likewise permitted to goe to St Germans. The said Wednesday the Duke of Beaufort came hither with a small Train, hee presently presented his petition to the Kings Officers in the Parliament, to justifie himselfe of the crime Laesae Majestatis, of which he was impeached by the said Cardinall. Thursday he made his submissions ac∣cording to the formes: and yesterday being Friday, he was absolved, the said Cardinall condemned towards him to 200000. Crownes for his expences and redresses, and to purge himselfe of that accusation, upon the falsity where∣of they are about to proceed against him. The onely respect they do beare to the Pope, might retard the execution thereof: whereupon they were in great consultation on Thursday last and yesterday in the Town-house, with the Nuntio, who (say they) sent an Expresse to Rome about it. The upper Councell by an Arrest cashiered all such Arrests as the said Par∣liament hath given against Cardinall Mazarin, forbidding him to leave the Court, considering the necessity of his counsell, his ability and experience in the affaires, &c. It is certaine he offered to with-draw, but the Prince of Cod∣de hindered it. His two Neeces went on Wednesday last from St Germans towards Sedan, though some say they are gone to Lyons. The books belonging to the St Conterien & Sesonton Bournguerie, who managed his mony, were siezed on, and two Councellors of Parliament appointed to examine the whole. Yesterday the Arrest here annexed was published for the sequestra∣tion of all his goods and Revenues. The preparations for the warre are continued here with great heat, and
the Guard is very strict, the Barricadoes three times more in all the Suburbs then formerly, namely in the Fauxbourg St Germans. There happened daily some skermishes with Mr le Prince's German Cavaliers, that came to plunder about this Towne, some having been killed by the Souldiers and Countrey folke, and some brought prisoners to the Town-house. Last night some Horse made a sally to goe and meet the bread of Gonnesse; and ano∣ther of 500. Horse out of the Port St Jaques, to convoy the provisions that are to come out of Beausse; but they are resolved not to send out the whole Body of the Army, untill the waters bee decreased, and they be in posture to gain a victory, the reputation whereof might be an example and an en∣couragement to the rest of the Kingdome, who is already inclinable enough to second the said Parliaments intention. The three Generalls that are to command by turnes, received on Thursday each 25000. Crownes. The Dukes of Elboeuf and Bavillon had great need of that money. The Parliament taketh more and more the authority: they passed an Ar∣rest of Junition, all the Chambers being assembled, more firm then ever, which hath been subscribed by the Common-Councell of the City. The Prince of Conty expected, that being Generalissimo, all Passes and other Acts would be done in his name, but the Parliament took it upon them∣selves, having appointed severall Committees of their Body, who do sit daily at severall Boords, dressed for that end in the Town-house. It is still beleeved that the said Prince, and the Duke Longueville came here by the Court's consent, that in case of need they might be Mediators. The Duke of Angoulesme, and Mr de Metz went yesterday from hence to St Germans, to endeavour to doe that Office, but in all likelihood they will advance little, this side willing to have all the security on their side, so that in all appearance they will settle shortly a Soveraigne Councell, specially the Prince of Con∣de being obstinate to his designe, as he is, and the Duke of Orleans being still drawn by the Abbot de la Runies Counsell, who hath no other security then by keeping his Master close to the interests of the said Cardinall. Mr. dts Ouches one of the said Duke's confidents is observed at the St. Germans for having spoken the truth to the said Abbot. Mr. de Leiuncourt is likewise observed being suspected to have been willing to come hither, and the Mar∣shall de l' Hospitall is guarded; being impeached to have endeavoured to bring the King hither, under pretence of bringing him to. St. Denys, to see the designe of the Fortification. The Prince of Conde is at Lugni, between this and Meaux upon Marn, his forces doe plunder wheresoever they come: he hath sent for the Marshall d' Estree, to command in the roome of the said Marshal de l'Hospital: He cals to these parts for so many forces as he can, som are coming down the Loire; and Mashall de Villeroy is gone to Amiens to fetch the forces in Picardie, and the great ordinance to St. Monts, being as∣sisted
therein by the Vidam d Amiens his son in law. Marshal de la Milleraie is extreamly sick at the said St. Germans. Duke de Luines and Mr. de Vetry are fled from thence, hither, Orleans hath sent hither to the Town-house to offer 600. thousands Muids of Corn, and to convoy them as farre as Estam∣pes, if the Parliament doth desire it. The new Semestre sitting now at Roan in the Parliament having sent Deputies to Court, to assure them that no body would stirre in the said town against their Majesties, the antient Officers of the said Parliament; and the Town-house of the said Rouen disavowed the said Deputies, and seized on the Gates and Buseaux of Receipts of the said Town-house, and sent here to this Towns-house to assure the Parisians of their zeale to thir Cause. The Cities of Troys and Chaalons in Champagne, have kept their Garri∣sons from comming to their Rendezvous given them by Monss. le Prince. The inhabitants of Mulan offered the entry of the town to King, the Duke of Anjou, and twelve of their Servants, but not to the Quen Regent, nor to the Cardinall Mazarine. Meaux hath declared for Paris. Thursday last they took order here at the Golice for Ammunition bread, and other bread, the brown bread 20, the wheaten bread 22, and the white 24. deniers turnois a pound. The Coadjutor of Paris doth furnish a Regiment of Horse and one of Foot under the Command of the Earle of Mose. The Queen Regent and the Cardinall are more angry at him then at any other whomsoever. The Duke of Bouillon doth promise that his brother Marshall de Thurine will do nothing against the Parliamentary Cause. The Advocates of this Parliament have taxed themselves to 50 crowns each, and the Atturneys to 20 crowns. The Scriveners of Paris offer to find 30 millions of Livers, if the Parlia∣ment, the Chamber of accoumpts, and the Court des aydes, doe oblidge their Faith. The Government of the Bastille hath been given to Mr. de Broussel, & the Leiutenant ship to his Son Mr. de Louuiers, formerly Ensigne of the Guards. The Duke of Beaufort, who formerly obtained a Breviet of Duke and Peer of France, is this day admitted in this Parliament in that qualitie, and shall be Generall of the Horse of Paris. This Parliament offered 20000 Livers to the Queen of England, with as∣surance that from time to time she will be supplied for her subsistance. Shee would send Thursday last, one of her Servants Mr. Fremyn, to St. Germans to know whether she may receive that summe, and such subventions, but he was stopped at this Cities Gates, so that I hear she hath not as yet received that money. Our English Letters that were to be here last Tuesday and yesterday, are
not yet come; we think they are stopped at St. Germans to keep this pla, in darknesse. The Treatie with the Duke of Lorraine is so unlikely, that it is reported he will accept of no Peace, unlesse all his Dominions be restored to him, and Champagne be given him for to indamnifie him. I heare likewise that the Sweds will not exchange their Ratifications at Munster, untill the money for their satisfaction be first paid, and all the Ar∣ticles of the Treaties bee executed. No Ambassadours or publique ministers doe stirre out of this City: The dearth is exceeding great at St. Germans, and the suspicions and jealousies each of other are so extreame, that in all likelihood the Court cannot subsist there long in that posture. I hear that the Duke of Longueuille having heard that the Queen Regent had given away his Government and called the Ar∣rierban of Normandy, is gone this night from hence to Rouen, saying in laughing, that the said Queen had much obliged him in calling the said Ar∣rierban, for at his comming he will finde the people so much the readier to follow him here to serve the Parisians. By Letters from Thurin of the first instant stilo novo, I am informed that the Spanyards make great preparations in the Sate of Milan: That they re∣ceived out of Spaine a considerable summe for the subsistance of their Army: That it doth increase daily, & that doubtlesse they wil fall on Cazal; where the Garison is so poor & beggerly, that that place though very strong cannot endure a long siege: and that this Kings Army in Piedmont is wandering in a pittifull State; the Dutchesse of Sauoy refusing still to give them the worst of her Lands to quarter in, untill the orders from this Court be come; who as I see, is not now in posture to remedy it. I am The Mashall de l' Hospitall hath been commanded to re∣tire to his Government of Vitry in Champagne, for having counselled among others, that Cardinall Mazarine should withdraw for a while to some distance, where they could conferre with him of the affairs, &c. The Duke of Beaufort went the last night with 500. Horse to Scout the advenues of St. Germans and came back this morning: The Court is intrenched there, The Qu. Re∣gent is angry to the utmost, and is willing to hazard all. They perswade her that Paris is at the extremity for want of Bread, and that they are cutting one anothers throats: So Princes are willing to be deceived on all sides, &c. Paris the 16/6th of Ianuary 1649/8. Finis.
