L2112 E411_21 99862924 115104
The grand Plea of Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, Prerogative Prisoner in the Tower of London, against the present tyrannicall House of Lords, which he deli∣vered before an open Committee of the House of Com∣mons, the twenteth day of October, 1647. Where Mr. Iohn Maynard the Lawyer had the Chaire. Mr. Maynard, I Have undertaken a mighty hard and difficult worke, to contest with so many powerfull and great men of this Kingdome, conjoyned in a House of Peers, (and thereby claiming the exercise of a greater pow∣er, then any other Court of record in England) for the Lawes and liberties thereof, but when I read over the 19. Chap. of Magna Char∣ta, and the Petition of right, and other the good, and post knowne, and declared Laws of this kingdome, made for the Common good, benefit, profit, protection, and preserva∣tion of the lives, liberties, and estates of all the free Denizons thereof, and seriously consider of them, and compare the present house of Lords, violent and irregu∣lar practises and dealings with me thereunto, it makes my worke to seem very facile, pleasant, and easie to me? And therefore for the clearing up of the just∣nesse of my present Contest with the present house of Lords, I shall desire from you a little liberty to speake a few words unto two things, before I come to my maine Plea. And in the first place, I intreate a little libertie to make some short repetitions of my desires unto the Committee that examined my businesse now about 12. Monethes agoe, where Mr. Martin had the Chaie; who I know cannot but remember that at my first pleading of my cause before him, and the rest of that Committee, in the Inner Court of Wards; J made it my earnest desire unto them, that they would deale fairelier and iustlier with the Lords then they had dealt with me, that so they might not justly complaine of them for iniustice, as I had to just cause to complain of the Lords themselves, & seeing that it was not the manner or law of the Heathen, Pagan, Romans to condemn any man before that he which is accused hath the accuser face to face, & have liberty to answer for himself, concerning the crime laid against him. Acts 25.16. and therfore I earnestly pressed th  Lords might be summoned to send their Lawyers or Proctors to the Committee to plead for them, and that they might condemned  was prest at present to speake to my own businesse, whereupon I desired them to give me leave to speake to two things, and the first was to
matter of law, and the second to matter of fact.  And first to matter of Law, I desired liberty to lay before them my grounds, reasons, and arguments (and to read my law proofes) which did fully convince my under∣standing that the Lords originally, had no iurisdiction over any Commoner of Eng∣land what ever, either to try him or passe judgement against him, either for life, limb, liberty or estate. But Mr. Martin told me, that for his part he was as fully satis∣fied in the point as my selfe, and so he thought was all the whole Commit∣tee, and thereupon addressed himselfe unto them, to see whether they were or no. And they all unanimously declared their satisfaction, without any one then scru∣pling, and therefore commanded me to goe on to matter of fact, which I did and laid down this assertion then before them. That in case the Lords had had iurisdiction over me (which I then and still do de∣ny) yet I did aver and would by particulars make it good, that there was not the least legall formallitie in any of their Proceedings with me, (and therefore also void in law) summoning me before any charge, impeachment, or indictment was filed against me, which was and is expresly against the fundamentall common law of the land, and also against the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, and the Statutes of the 5. E. 3. 9. and 25. E. 3 4. and 28. E. 3. 3. and 37. E. 3. 18. and 42 E. 3. 3. Which Statutes are the true expositors of the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, and what is meant by lex terrae there mentioned, which is as all those Statutes shew, That no man be put to answer without presentment before iustices or matter of record, or by due processe or writ originall, according to the old law of the land, and if any thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in law and holden for error all and every of which Statutes are confirmed by the Petition of right, in the 3. of the present King, and in that act made the 17. of the King, this present Parliament, for the abolishing the Star Chamber. I then further went on, to shew multitudes of errors in all their proceedings with me, and by speciall order and command of that Committee, the 6. of Novemb. 1646. brought in my said plea in writing under my hand, and the 9. of Novemb. 1646. Delivered it to the hands of Col. Hen. Martin, and since caused it to be printed and intitulnd an Annotamy of the Lords tyranny, to which plea in point of fact I desire to referre my selfe. 2. And secondly, I desire liberty by way of introduction to my plea to state the occasions of my being summoned before the Lords barre in Iune 1646. which were these, that after my deliverance out of Oxford Castle, I was by L. Gen. Cromwells meanes made Major to Col. Edw. King, then Governour of Boston. &c. under the Earle of Manchester which said Edw. King proved unfaithfull to his trust, and committed besides divers transendent inormities and misde∣meanors, for which by the rules of warre (which both he and I was under) he ought to have lost his life, of which I according to my duty and trust reposed in me complained to my Generall
and Lievt. Gen. Cromwell, and laboured hard to ob∣taine  a tryall for his life before a Councell of Warre. But as I conceive by reason of the great interest of Kings two Chaplaines, Mr Lee, and Mr. Garter, with the Earles two Chaplaines, Mr. Ash and Mr. Good I nor the Committee of Lincoln∣shire, nor the Magistrates of Boston (who then were persecutors of him as well as my selfe) could get no effectuall justice upon him, saving the casheering him of all, or most of his great and profitable commands. Whereupon in August, 1644. Mr. Mussendon, Mr. Wlley, and divers of the Committee of Lincolnshire, preferred 22. Articles to the house of Commons against the aforesaid Coll. Edward King in the 4. ct 12. articles of which they expressely accuse him for betraying Crow∣land and Grantham into the hands of the professed and declared enemies of the Par∣liament, and my selfe in discharge of my duty to my Country, and the Parlia∣ment being an active prosecutor of the said Col. Edward King to bring him to a tryall in the House of Commons upon the said impeachment, whereup∣on by way of diversion and revenge to save his own head upon his shoulders, he maliciously and designedly confederates with Dr. Bastwick, and upon the 12. of Iuly. 1645. joyntly under both their hands, send into the Speaker a most malicious, false note by way of accusation against me about 60000. l that then was said to be sent to Oxford by the Speaker, whereupon without being called into the House (though then at the doore) either to justifie or deny the charge fixed upon me I was by vote of the House committed a prisoner to the Ser∣jeant at Armes, and from thence by Mr. Lawrence Whitaker, was sent to New∣gate and being there, there was an expresse order of the House of Commons (for any thing I know to the contrary by Col. King procured) for the arreign∣ing of me at Newgate Sessions, where I was acquitted by proclamation as guiltlesse of any crime, and afterward by the certifying thereof by Mr. Glyn, Recorder of London to the House of Commons, I was by vote thereof the 14. of Octob. 1645. freely and cleerly discharged. But King being conscious of his own guilt, and judging himselfe not safe nor long lived, unlesse he crushed me to peeces, and therfore most maliciously, and unjustly upon the 14. of April, 1646. contrary to the just priviledge of Parlia∣ment and the Common law of England, caused me at Westminster (as I was following my businesse) depending (and then in agitation before the house of Commons (by whom I ought therefore in justice and law to have been protect∣ed, comming, staying, and going, till I had beeen dispatched by them) ☞ to be arrested by the Bayliffe thereof into the Court of Common Pleas, in an action of trespasse for 2000. l. pretending that I the day I was delivered out of New∣gate had said, that he the said Col. Edward King was a Traytor, and I would prove him one (which according to your Articles of Warre, or your own Or∣dinances had, and still is easie to doe, if you will doe iustice) whereupon by petition to your House I pressed hard that he upon his
impeachment might spee∣dily  come to his tryal, or else that I (as in justice, law, and equity ought to be) might be protected, and the Judges of the Common pleas might be commmanded to sease their proceedings, till King upon his impeachment (then depending in the house of Commons) might either be condemned or iustified, but I could get no answer to my petition, although I followed it with all the interest, might and strength I had, wherupon being in very great straits, I was necessitated to pen my plea my self to I. Reeves and print it, in the penning of which I was necessi∣tated, for my own iustification, to touch a little upon the Earle of Manche∣sters refusing to doe me and the kingdome iustice and right, in an open Coun∣cell of War against Col. King, and having by L. G. Cromwells meanes beene deeply with him engaged against the said Earle, in actively prosecuting of that impeachment of Treason and breach of trust, which he exhibited to your house about two yeares agoe against the said Earle of Manchester, he the said Earle of Manchester being then Speaker of the house of Lords, (and so chief Iudge in his own case) caused me as  conceive (though most illegally and uniustly) upon the 10. of Iune 1646. to be summoned up to their barre to answer (as by their war∣rant appeares) such things as I should be there charged with, for writing that book or plea, which if there had been any thing in it scandalous, it was only tryable by a Iury of my Peers or Equalls (which are Commons or men of my own con∣dition) at the Common Law, the house of Lords having not by law the least cognizance or iurisdiction in the world of it, and therefore all their proceedings upon me from the beginning to the end are most illegall and uniust, and coram non iudice, And now in the third place, I come unto my plea, but by the way I desire to premise this unto you, that by your own Declaration of the 15. of December, 1641, and 17. of Ianuary, 1641. and the 12. of Iuly. 1642. I find the law of the land, and the ordinary course of iustice, called by you the common birth-right of all the free men or people of England. 1. part book Decl. pag. 7. 38. 39. 459. and in your Declaration of the 23. of October. 1642. you aver, that it is the birth right of the meanest of the Commonalty of this Kingdome, to inioy the freedome and libertyes of the lawes of the land, being (as there you say) intituled unto it, with the greatest Subiect. The inviolable preservation of which in divers of your Declarations you declare, is the maine and principall end of all your undertakings, mannaged both by your swords and councells. And this is that for which you have compelled the kingdome to sweare divers oaths to maintaine with the uttermost hazzards of their lives and estates, and you have also imprecated (in your Declarations) the fearce wrath and vengeance of the great God of heaven and earth to fall up∣on you when you decline thse ends.
And therefore Mr Maynard considering all these your own words, and considering your own deepe knowledge and understanding in the lawes of England, by the practize of which you have got a great part of your estate, and by the destruction whereof you are not worth a groate in all the world, having no propriety in that you possesse, being subject every moment of time to have all you have, taken from you without remidie, by him that is stronger then you; and therefore well did Mr. Iohn Pym say in his speech against the Earle of Straford (recorded in your own booke of Declarations, 1 part: page 140.) that the law is that which puts a difference betwixt good and e∣vill, betwixt just and unjust, if you take away the law, all things will fall into con∣fusion, every man will become a law unto himself, which in the depraved con∣dition of human nature, must needs produce many great inormities, Lust will become a law, envy will become a law, coveteousnesse and ambition will become a law, and what dibates, what divisions, such lawes will produce, may easily be discern'd. And truly Sir, neither the Lords, nor you, can lay it to my charge, that I am leagally convicted of the least crime that doth disfranchise me, or render me in the least uncapable of injoying the utmost benefit and priveledge that the Law of England will afford to a freeborne Englishman; neither can the Lords nor you, justly pretend against me, that I have drawne my sword a∣gainst, (or otherwise publickly or privatly, engaged with any interest in England, for the destroying) the lawes and liberties thereof, nay, so farre have I beene from any of those things, that I doe with confidence avere it, that I have as freely with my sword in my hand (upon your and their primi∣tive declared principles) adventured my life and blood for the preservation of the lawes and liberties of England (with as much resolution as any Lord in England, and though it may unjustly be bruted abroad to my disgrace, by the House of Lords, or some other of my adversaries, that I am now falen from, and forsaken my first principals, and would have neither law nor govern∣ment, yet I doe with abundance of confidence avere it, that I am not (if I know my own heart) changed or falen from my first principles in the least, but that the Lords themselves are the true apostates: and that they are the men, that in their constant practizes now of late yeares; strongly endeavour to destroy all law and government: and to set up in themselves an absolute arbitrary Tyranie, worse then either Starre Chamber, Councell Table, or High commission, or all three of them put all together in one, which I doubt not but in my following plea, to make as apparant to this Committee, as the Sun that shines at noone day, for which end I desire this Committee to take notice in the first place.
That the Lords doe not sit in their House by any power or authority, de∣rived from the peoples free election and choice, (who cannot in justice, rea∣son, and equitie, be bound, but by their own free consents, neither in reason, iustice, or equity, can any be law-makers to them, that are not thereunto justly impowred by them, which the House of Lords are not in the least) but are meerly and altogether the creatures of the King made by his prerogative, some times of the basest and corruptest of the people, being the meere issue of his will, sitting by his command, who himselfe in referrence to the bodies and estates of the people, is lymitted and bounded by the law. 1. As for instance by the 29.th of Magna Charta, the King himselfe can∣not imprison any man, nor dispossesse him of his freehold, liberies or free customes, or outlaw him, exile him or any otherwise destroy him, but by due processe of law, according to the law of the Land, neither can he sell, de∣ny, or deferre, to any man either justice or right. 2. And by the Statute of the 2, Edward, 3 8 and 14 Edwaard 3, 14 and 11 R. 2. 10 the King is tyed that he shal not hinder, disturbe, nor delay com∣mon right and justice according to the Law of the Land, by any command under the great Seale, or the little Seale, neither by any letters of his Signet or privy seale, and if he shall send any such commands, the Judges notwithstan∣ding, shall and ought to goe on to execute the Law in every point, as if any such command had never been. 3. And by the Petition of right, made in the 3.d. of the present King, all those lawes, and liberties are not only confirmed, but it is there inacted and fully declared, that no man be adjudged or condemned, but by the lawes already established, and declared, and that all the Administrators of the lawes of England, and all other of the Kings ministers shall serve him and the Kingdome, according to the declared lawes thereof, and not otherwise. 4. And in the acts that abolished Shipmoney, and abolished the Star Chamber, and rectiffeth the Councell Board, all and every the particulars of the said Petition of right is not only confirmed, but it is inacted further, that neither his Majesty, nor his privie Councell, have or ought to have any jurisdiction, power or er authority, by English Bill, Petition, Articles, libells, or any other arbitrarie way whatsoever, to examine or draw into question, deter∣mine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, heredetaments, goods or chat∣tels of any the subjects of this Kingdome, but that the same ought to be try∣ed and determined in the ordinary Courts of justice, and by the ordinary courses of law, which last clause is extraordinary pertinent to my purpose, that the ordinarie Courts of iustice, and the ordinary Courts of the law, are to be tryers of all causes and differences, betwixt partie and partie.
And in that act there is a remedie provided for any man that shal illegally suffer imprisonment: or hereafter be committed or restrained of his libertie, by the command or warrant of the King himselfe, his heires or successors in their own person, yea and the Kings oath, that he takes when he is made King recorded. 1. part booke decla. page 712, 713, 714. tyes him to govourn his people, according to the established Lawes, and to preserve unto them their liberties and freedomes. Now Sir, if the King the creator of the Lords be thus restrained by Law as he is, that he shall not doe to the freemen of England what he pleaseth, nor exercise an arbitrarie, tyranicall, illegall, power over their bodies or estates. It is impossible for him to give unto the Lords the exercise of an arbitrarie tyranicall, illegall power, over their lives liberties, or estates, for it is a max∣ime in nature, there is no being beyond the power of being, neither I am confident are they able to produce any soled testimonie that he ever gave them any such power. And though I grant that the King to the iudges gives such a power, as he can not, nor doth not in his own person execute,  I say that it is al∣wayes a power, not flowing from his owne will, but limted by the Law, by which he is authorized so to doe by acts of Parliament, and I am sure by the words of the writt by which he summond them to sit in Parliament, (as I find it printed in a late printed book, called the manner of holding Par∣liaments: pag.) which writt is the foundation and roote of their power) all the power that is given them by that writt, is to come to the Parliament, to confer and treat with the King (or afford their councell) of certaine hard urgent affaires, concerning the King, the State, and defence of the Kingdome of England, and the Church therof. But my pretended offence, touching none of these things but at the most is meerely an action, or offence tryable at common Law, Cooks 5. part reports delibellis Famosis, and besides the Lords about me had no conferrence nor treatie with the King their prorogative fountaine, as by their writt of summons, which is the foundation and ground of their power they ought to have. And therefore the Lords not only by the common law, but by their own law, and principles had not the least ground to pretend to a power or jurisdic∣tion in the least of my cause. 2ly I am summond by the Lords Warrant to come to their Barre, and to answer such things as I stand charged with before their Lordships, concerning a pamphlet intitulled the iust mans iustification. Now Mr: Maynard, admit that that pamphlet as they call it, were mine, and full of scandals in the high∣est nature, yet lybells and scandalum magnatum is not to be tryed by the House of Lords, but is to be tryed only (now the Starchamber is downe) by
an action at the common law, as appeares by the 5. part of Cookes reports, Page 125. and the 13. Hen. 7. Kelay. 11. Eliz. Dier 285. and 30. assis Pla. 19. all which is fully confirmed by your own words in your own decla∣ration, of the 19. May 1642. 1. part booke Decl. pag. 208. where you af∣firme against the King, that he hath wayes enough in his ordinary Courts of justice, to punish such seditious pamphlets, and sermons as are any way prejudiciall to his rights, Honour, and authority, and if any of them have been so insolently violated, and vilified his Majesties own Councell and offi∣cers have beene to blame, and not the Parliament, who did never restraine any proceedings of that kind in other Courts, and what you there avere of the King, I much more avere of the Lords, that their remedie in case of libil∣ling (which yet I deny mine to be) is onely at common law where there is a writte, and action by the law ordained, de scandalis magnatum (as also for libells only triable by a Jurie, upon an indictment at common law and not others wise, and this also seemes to me to be very cleare, and evident by the Sta∣tutes 3. E 1. 33. and . E. 3. 18. and 38. E. 3. 9. and 42. E. 3, 3. and 2. R. 2. 5. and 12. R. 2. 11. none of which I am sure gives the House of Lords, any cognizance of my pretended crime, & therefore for them to meddle with me, having no iurisdiction of my cause, it being neither about errour or delay of iustice in inferier courts, their proceedings are thereupon all Coram non iudice, and so void and null in law, from first to last it being a maxime in law, that that which from the beining is not valid, can never be made good by tract of time, or those things which are begun from an evill principall, can never, attaine to a legal Issue. 3. My third argument against all the Lords proceedings with me is this that no man what ever he be is to be imprisoned, but by the established lawes of the land, they are the very words of the excellent Petition of Right, but there is no esta∣blished Law for the iudgement of the Lords in any thing where the King their Creator is not concurrant 14. Edward 3, 5, for the Lords as I said before are only there, not by any election, or power, from the people, but as persons of honour created and made by the will of the King to assist him as before, and let their Lawyers or any of their Proctors shew me one president before this Parliament to the contrary, without the Kings Writt for Execu∣tion
For in the Writ of Error, wherein lyes the main and principal power of the Lords, there must be a Petition to the King for the allowance thereof: and the King must give them a particular Commission, and power to take Cognizance of it before they can have Jurisdiction of it, as is clear and plain by the express words of the 14. E. 3. 5. which Statute is the principal strength and basis of the Lords power; but my case is neither delay of Justice in an other Court, nor corruption of Judgement in another Court, which is all the cases the Lords have juris∣diction of by Law, which is as binding to them as to any other Courts of Justice in England, as is cleer by the 4. H. 4. 23. which Statute positively declares, it is a subversion of the Law of the Land, for the Lords originally to take cognizance of causes, or to over-rule the just and ordinary proceedings of the Law in other inferior Courts: As was lately fully plea∣ded at the Lords Bar (as I am from very good hands imformed) both by Mr. Recorder Glyn and your self Mr. Maynard in the remarkable case of Lim∣bry, against Alderman Langham, unto which Plea concurred the opinion of all the Judges then in Eng∣land, which they were commanded to give by the Lords speciall command, upon which very Plea as I am told, the cause is since dismissed from before the Lords as not legally proper for their Jurisdiction, which at least serves thus far to my end, that an Act of Parliament is as bind∣ing to the House of Lords as to any other Court of Justice in England: I might here also make use of the Duke of Eper∣noones case about 2 years agoe if I wanted matter & Law against the Lords.Neither was there made in my case any Petition to the King, nor any Commission of his granted to the Lords to autho∣rize them to meddle with me, and therefore all their proceedings against me are illegall from first to last in the highest nature. Again, it is plain by the Law of the Land, That no man shall be put to Answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of record, or by due processe, and writ originall, according to the old Law of the Land. See the 5. E. 3. 9. & 25. E. 3. 4. & 28. E. 3. 3. & 37. E. 3. 18. & 42. E. 3. 3. and the Petition of Right the 3d of the King, and the Act that abolished the Star-Chamber the 17. of the King. And Sir Edward Cookes Exposition of Magna Charta, but not any of this, was done in my case; for the Lords sum∣moned me Oretenus before my charge was filed a∣gainst me, and examined me Viva voce upon inter∣rogatories against my self, without letting me know either Accuser, Prosecutor, Witness, Jury, or Charge, and therefore all their proceedings with me from first to last are totally illegall and most unjust. 4 My fourth Argument against the illegal proceedings of the Lords with me is, from the 29 Chap of Magna Charta and the 3 E. 1. 6. and the Petition of Right, which expresly declares, That no
man is to be judged but by his peeres,  and by due processe according to the Law of the Land (see Clarks case in 5 part Cooks Reports) that is as learned Sir Edward Cook in his Exposition of Magna Charta (published for good Law by two speciall Orders of your House) saith, by his equals, that is, men of his own condition, Commons only being peeres to com∣mons, as Barons of Parliament are peeres to Barons of Parliament. 2 Part Insti∣tut. fol. 28, 29. 46. 50. where also he declares what title they bear that are com∣prehended within the name of peeres of Parliament, and also what titles they have that are comprehended within the title of Commons. And notable to this purpose is the Record of Sir Simond de Berisford in the 4. E. 3. Ro. 2. which M. Henry Martin had from me at large last year under the hand of the Record-Keeper of the Tower of London▪ the substance of which Record is, That E. 3. in his own person did charge the House of Lords to give right and lawfull Judgment against Sir Simond de Berisford for his treason and murder in murdering his Fa∣ther King Edw. 2. but the Lords to the King in Parliament said all with one voice, That the aforesaid Sir Symon was not their peer, wherefore they were not bound by the Law to give judgment against him, yet neverthelesse at the Kings importunity they did, but it was assented, agreed and enacted (saith Sir Ed. Cook 2 part Inst. fol. 50.) by the King and all the grandees in full Parliament, That that judgement should never be drawn into example, or consequence for the time to come: And they there gave the reason of it, because it was against the Lawes of the Land, for them to judge those that were not their peeres and equals. From whence I observe, That if it be illegall for the House of Lords with the Kings presence, consent and concurrence, (as they here confesse) to con∣demne Sir Simon de Berisford for Treason and murdering the King, (because he was none of their peeres) although vigorously put upon it by King Edw. the Third in the behalf of his father, who in his own person sate and concurred with them in it; much more is it unlawfull for the Lords to presume, to passe judg∣ment upon me a Commoner, for a triviall supposed case, without the King their creators presence, Commission or Concurrence, which by their own principles, and by the principles of the Law yet in force, gives life, power and strength to all such their Judiciall actions, and therefore all their proceedings with me are most illegall and unjust, and utterly null and void in Law. 5 My Fifth Argument against them is, That by the Lawes of this Land no man is to be Judge in his own case, 8. H. 6. fol. 21. 5. El. Dier. 220. and Doctor Bonbams case 8 part of Cooks Reports, yea and an Act of Parliament in such a case, is a void Act by Law. Therefore the Lords ought not to have judged this cause of mine, for that it concerns themselves, or at least the Earl of Manchester who was Speaker all the three severall times I was before their House, who with the rest of his fellow Lords, were not only Parties, but Complainants, Persecutors, Witnesses, Jury and
Iudges, which practise is against all the Lawes of England and the formes there∣of, as you your selves notably confesse and declare in the case of the five Members, 1 part Book Decl. pag 201. and a greater act of injustice then ever I heard done, by either the Starre-Chamber, Councell-Board or High Commissi∣on Court, in the dayes of their greatest tyranny and oppression. 6 If the Lords judgement originally were binding in my case, then a few Lords would bind not onely me, but all the Commons of England, who all one after one, may be so served by them, as I am, and that without any hope of redresse in the world, (which both Law and reason abhorres) either by Writ of Error or Appeale, Attaint or Certificate of Assize to any Court whatever, no not to the Parliament it selfe, for then it would come before themselves againe, who would never condemne themselves nor their owne Decrees. And if the House of Commons suffer the Lords to excercise such an arbitrary illegall tyranny as they have done upon me, and without all grounds, rules or formes of Law, suffer them to send for whom of the Commons of England they will, and at their will and pleasure condemne them in what and how they please, then the House of Commons stands for meere cyphers, the Judges in Westminster-Hall for cyphers, and all the Lawes in England for cyphers, and we the Commons of England are become the perfectest slaves this day upon the face of the earth, and by this practice the end of all Government is over∣throwne, viz. the weale and safety of the people, as your House declares it to be in your notable Declaration of 17. April, 1646. 2. part Book Decl. pag. 879. where you also declare, (but I may say by your dealings with me, without any inten∣tions to performe it) that you will not nor any by colour of any authority derived from you, shall interrupt the ordinarie course of justice, in the severall Courts and Judicatories of this Kingdome, nor intermeddle in cases of private interest, other∣where determinable, unlesse it be in case of male administration of justice, wherein ye shall see and provide that right be done and punishment inflicted as there shall be occasion, according to the Lawes of the Kingdome, and the trust re∣posed in you. Yea, and hereby the people of the Kingdome are left without all meanes to preserve themselves, which your selves say, it never ought to be, being as old a Law as any is in the Kingdome, 1 part Book Decl. pag. 207. in that you suffer the House of Lords without controule to exercise at their pleasure such a power over the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the Free-men of England, as I confi∣dently aver it, cannot legally nor justly be exercised by King, Lords and Com∣mons, joyned and agreeing altogether, who are (when the most is said that can be said of them) but Magistrates (as all other Magistrates are) appointed for the protection and preservation, but not ruine or destruction of the people, 1 part Book Dec. pag. 150. yea and de facto, habitually to doe that, for but
en∣deavouring  of which, the Earle of Strafford lost his head by the decree of this very Parliament, and for which I doubt not but either I or my posterity shall see the proudest and stoutest of them to do theirs; it being more just, equitable, and rationall, to destroy a man for acting and doing of a mischiefe, then intending it, Strafford being a Saint and a just man upon their owne principles in compa∣rison of themselves. And therefore Sir, if you or the Lords shall shew me as many Presidents as will fill Pauls, that they have done to others as they have done to me, I va∣lue them no more in comparison to the severall Acts of Parliament, and the Common Law of the Land, which are above Acts, that I have cited, which are point blank against their usurpations, then I value a dirty rag on the dung∣hill, and I say unto you, that if the Lords in their House can make Presidents to de∣stroy Acts of Parliament, (and plucke the fundamentall common Law of En∣gland up by the roots) yea such Acts as have been confirmed by scores of Parliaments, then why doe you cozen, blind, deceive and delude the people of England, by sitting for cyphers in the House of Commons, and there∣fore awake and rouze up like men, and powerfully and effectually rescue our Liber∣ties from them, least we doe it our selues, and punish you, as justly you deserve for your cowardly or treacherous negligence. 7. The Lords being the meere creatures of the King, made by his will and pleasure, and set there as Prerogative persons, and yet in Law and by their own principles, as Lords without the King, they have no Prerogative, and yet have acted upon mee, without the King or his particular Commission, which makes all they have done unto me, to be null and void both in Law and reason; yea, and I may justly say, that they, both in reference to the King and people there∣by have forfeited their power and honour, and cannot justly by you the Trustees of the people, (and who should be the Guardians of their Lawes and Liberties) any longer be owned or acknowledged, either in equitie, reason, honour, justice, safety or conscience to be a House of Peers, but a company of Apostats falne from their first institution and degenerated into Tyrants, and therefore deserve at least from you and the Kingdome the Starre-Chambers doome. Object. But contempt of a Court, by the Law, subjects a man to Fine and Impri∣sonment. Answ. I answer first, I doe absolutely deny, that I did either contemne or affront their Court, for I obeyed their Writ of Summons, and withall re∣spect and Complement came to their Barre, (which I aver was more then by Law  to have done) where being examined upon Interrogatories against my selfe, I pressed hard to be dealt legally with, and to see my charge in writing, and to know my accuser and persecutor, both of which was denied me, contrary to Law and Iustice, and a judgement in my owne case given by
themselves, but the  February before against the Starre-Chamber, where they declared that the Starre-Chambers sentence and all their proceedings against me (which was upon the ve∣ry same for refusing to answer Interrogatories) is illegall and most un∣just against the Libertie of the Subject, and Law of the Land, and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon Record, yea and in another Decree gave me 2000. l. damages, against some of the Judges and Executors of that sentence; all which I pressed againe and againe at their open Barre, which was to no pur∣pose; for they angrily pressed me to give a positive answer to their illegall questions, and beleeving in my owne brest, I should be committed for re∣fusing to answer, I delivered in my Plea by way of protest, against their Juris∣diction, as justly I might do, (it being a maxime in Law, (as I said before) that that which is illegall in the beginning, by tract of time cannot be made lawfull) for which and nothing else, they most illegally committed me to Newgate, the 11. June, 1646. which Warrant I desire may be read, as also the Decree. 2. I answer, their Court was no Court to me in my case, having no Juris∣diction of the cause, being not any of the causes that they by the 14. Ed. 3. c. 5. have Jurisdiction of, and if it had yet by that Statute they could not meddle with me without the Kings concurrence, and his speciall Commission, which they had not in the least, and therefore in a double respect all their proceedings with me, are most illegall and unjust, and therefore null and void in Law. 3 But in the third place I grant, that contempt or affront of a Court that hath jurisdiction over the Cause is fineable and imprisonable, but to affront, con∣temne, or abuse a Court that hath no Jurisdiction of the cause for which the party is convened before them, I say by Law is neither fineable nor imprisona∣ble: As for instance, if a Court of Sessions questions me for my Freehold, and I refuse to answer them, and give them contemptuous words for medling with that which by Law they have no jurisdiction of, they may by Law bind me to my good behaviour, but cannot fine or imprison me, much lesse dis-franchise me of all the priviledges of an Englishman, as the Lords have done to me, as ap∣peares by their sentence: the same holds good in the Court of Common Pleas, who if they go about to hold Plea of Murder before them, if the party refuse to answer, it is no contempt of the Court, because they have no jurisdiction o∣ver such causes. And pertinent to this purpose is Baggs Case in the 11. part of Cooks Reports, who being summoned before the May or of Plymouth, in open Court called him cozening Knave, and said unto him, come kisse &c. for which the Mayor dis-franchised him, and it was resolved, that the dis-franchisement was ille∣gall, because it was not according to Law, for that the Mayor in Law had no power to do it, and at most could have onely bound him to his good behaviour. So that the Lords assuming over me a power of Jurisdiction without Law, and the Kings Commission according to the forme of the
Statute in that behalf, they  are no Court to me in my case, nor capable of the cause in controversie betwixt us, and therefore I say again in a double sense, they have not the least ground or colour in Law either to Fine or Imprison me, but at most (in case there were an affront, as I deny) to bind me (or cause me) to be bound to my good be∣haviour; and as for keeping on my hat, refusing to kneel, and stopping of my eares a moneth after my first commitment in contempt of their illegall usurpations, ha∣ving long before that justly appealed to the House of Commons, I am not in the least sensurable therefore as they have sensured me, even to 4000. l. fine, 7. years imprisonment, and everlasting disfranchisement, seeing it is a Maxime in Law and Reason both, That that which from the beginning is not valid, can never be made good by tract of time; or those things that are begun from evill principles, can never attain a legall or just issue. Object. But if it shall be objected, That this Argument destroyes the Act of the continuance of this Parliament, because the King is and hath bin absent, and not in a capacity according to the Statute to grant His Commission and Concur∣rance. Sol. I Answer, That the act of continuance gives the Lords no more power then what they had by the Law before, for it gives them nothing but continuance, and therefore the Argument is legal & just against them, that the Prerogative Lords forsaking their own creator, and dealing with me contrary to the Lawes and Statutes of the Kingdom; yet as much in force as ever, and not appropriating or assuming to themselves any formall new power, but meerly stand by the Pri∣mitive power derived from him (he being by their own declared principles as much their King as ever, all Writs, &c. still running in His Name) they have lost their Honor and Justice in going beyond their bounds, and dealing so illegally, tyranically, and unjustly with me as they have done. Therefore from all the premises and authorities before mentioned laid together, I do draw my con∣clusion which is this, That I was originally and still am most illegally impri∣soned by the House of Lords, and illegally fined, and illegally disfranchized; in such a manner that in all ages by the most oppressive and worst of Courts of Justice in England, was never known nor heard of before, for a bare and sup∣posed Misdemeanor. And therefore I most earnestly and most pressingly crave as my right, the Judgement of the House of Commons upon my appeale to them against the Lords, (for which I have waited upon them almost seventeen months) and that I may no longer run the hazard of ruine and destruction, of me, my wife, and little children, for contesting for my own, both in the sight of God and man; and which is mine both by the law of God, Nature, and my Country; that is to say, My sentence vacated, my liberties for future secured, and the Lords exemplarily punished, as well as the Star-Chamber,
High-Commission, or  Councel-d, being they may more justly be charged then any of them, for not keeping themselves to the points limited upon them by the Lawes and Statutes of the Kingdom, but have (not only with me, but with multitudes of others) under∣taken to punish where no Law doth warrant, and to make decrees for things, for which they have no such authority, and to inflict heavier punishments then by any Law is warranted, which as the act it self expresseth were the principle causes of their abolition, and may more justly be of the House of Lords, for that there was hopes of remedy (in case of injustice done by them) by appeale to a Parliament, which cannot in the least be expected against the House of Lords, the appeal be∣ing still to themselves, unlesse the House of Commons do instate appeales a∣gainst them soly in themselves: "And by how much the more they judge their Court to be higher then other Courts, by so much the more they ought in law, justice, equity, conscience and honor, to be transcendent in the equal, le∣gall, just, and impartiall administration of Justice:" an act of tyrany and op∣pression being ten times more odious in them then in any other inferior Court, as learned Sir Edw. Cooke well observes in his Instituts. And also I demand as my right and due, ample reparations from the Lords for all their tyranny illegally without remorse, pitie, and compassion exerci∣sed upon me, to the apparent hazzard of my life and being, and that I may also have from them so much money for my legall maintenance, as in all ages for these three or foure hundred years hath been allowed to men in my condition and prison, and may be provided for for the time to come during my stay there. And that I may freely be left to take my course at Common Law upon all Jaylors, Keepers of Prisons, and the Sheriffe of London, as have most illegally and unwarrantably executed their illegall, arbitrary, and unbinding tyrannicall Orders and Decrees upon me, and that now after seven yeares delay by you, I may also immediatly be put by your House into a certain capacity to receive of the Earl of Salisbury, old Sir Henry Vane, the Lord Chief Justice Bramston, and Doctor Allife, who have visible and plentifull estates in being, my long-since decreed reparations against my Star-Chamber Judges, with just additions for my long stay, large expences, and great troubles therefore, and not be put to seek it from the Lord Cottington, Sir Francis Windebank, and Mr. Ingram, late Warden of the Fleet, whose estates are so wasted and destroyed by sequestrati∣on, &c. that I know not where to find them, and may be hereafter, as I have been already, seven years in obtaining my just right and due from them. And lastly, I earnestly desire and presse, that speedy care by your House be taken, to put the Earl of Manchester and Col. Edward King upon their tho∣rough Trialls, upon the foresaid Impeachments, either to their justifications or condemnations; and that all Suits of theirs at Common Law against me for words spoken about or
concerning the said Impeachments, may be stopped, as  in Justice, Law, and Equity they ought to be, till they be either condemned or justified upon the said Impeachments. And now Sir, I have done with all and every thing that in point of Law I have to say aganst the Lords irregular dealings with me till they reply: some o∣ther things in reference to the House of Commons (I think as essentiall to my own welfare as any thing I have already said) I have ready to say, but that my present strength and voice is in a manner quite , so that I cannot well go on at present, though I have all my matter ready; and therefore I earnestly in∣treat a new day to say out the rest, and so leave it to your judgment: and Tues∣day next (being the 26. of October 164. at two a clock in the afternoone in the same place) being your own appointed time, I earnesty desire your presence there, when and where I doubt not but I shall demeane my selfe with as much honour and respect towards you, as you upon Wednesday last, with justice, can∣dor and fairnesse did demean your self towards me, and the Kingdome, so much concerned in me, in giving me so faire, publike, free and uninterrupted a hear∣ing, which can not but in ingenuity be acknowledged a great obligation to him that in sincerity subscribes himself, Sir, Yours and the Kingdoms faithfull Servant, John Lilburne. FINIS.
