M1452 E277_2 99860802 112927
A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, At their late Solemne FAST, Wednesday, FEB. 26. 1644. BY JOHN MAYNARD, Minister of the Word of God at MAYFIELD in SVSSEX, and a Member of the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES. LONDON, Printed by George Bishop, for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brasen Serpent in Pauls Church-yard. 1645.
A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of Commons, at their late Solemne FAST, Febr. 26. 1644. PROV. 23. 23. Buy the Truth and sell it not. TRUTH is the great busines of these stirring Times; enquiries after Truth, discoveries of Truth, contending for Truth. This (I sup∣pose) all parties pretend to, though never so contrary each to other. And among those who doe really aime at Truth, and meete in the maine; no wonder though there be diffe∣rences in judgement, and conflicts about some particulars, the parts of Truth being so exceeding numerous, the conceptions of men so various, the eye of the inner man so dimme-sighted,1 Cor. 13 12. and apt to mistake, whilest it looketh but through a glasse. And indeede that the cause of Truth is of a transcendent na∣ture, and exceeding high concernement, the Wiseman here shew∣eth, so advancing the worth of it, as to be bought at any rate, so
heightening the price of it, as not to be sold upon any termes. Buy the Truth, &c. This being one of those entire portions of Scripture (as I con∣ceive) which have no necessary connexion with that which goeth before or followeth, some time may be spared, which otherwise should have been spent, in shewing the Coherence. Neither doe I discerne any such difficulty in the words as needeth much to retard our progresse. [Buy] The Originall word may signifie either to buy or to pos∣sesse, to get or keep possession: and so the exhortation may suit all sorts, Thou that wantest the Truth, buy it: thou that hast it, keep it: but the latter is manifestly included in the negative, sell it not. [The Truth] The Hebrew note used for emphasis, demonstra∣tion, specification, is not in the Text, and therefore I thinke our English particle [The] (which answereth it) may be omitted, and we may read it, Buy Truth, as afterward Wisdome, &c. Not the Wisdome: and so leave the word Truth in its just latitude. Here then is a point of Heavenly negotiation or Spirituall traf∣fique which the Holy Ghost commendeth to all who desire to make a wise improvement of that short span of time allotted them in this world, and to give up their account with joy. That sense which one Expositour giveth▪Pellican. maketh this place paral∣lell to that, Gal. 6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate, &c. though it be a truth cleerly held forth in Scripture, and may be ei∣ther included in this Text as a part of the sense, or inferred from it as a consequent, yet I conceive it is farre short of the full and direct meaning of the place. I concurre with those who understand it thus,Mercerus. Junius. Jansenius. Get possession of the Truth whatsoever paines it cost thee, whatever hazard it may lead thee into, whatsoever losse or suffering it may bring upon thee. Sell it not: Doe not part with it to gain a world, leave it not, lose it not, for the great∣est advantage under Heaven. In the words ye may easily see two Propositions, 1. An affirmative, or precept, Buy Truth. Secondly, A negative, or prohibition, Sell it not. In these observe 1. The Acts. 2. The Object: the Act enjoyned in the precept or affirmative is, To buy, the Act for∣bidden in the negative or prohibition, is, To sell. The object is the same in both, Truth. The precept and prohibition of these two Acts in reference to
the same object, are both of them absolute and peremptory, we are absolutely commanded to buy Truth, peremptorily forbidden to sell it: and so the parts of the Text mutually give light each to other, shewing that Truth must be so bought as never to be sold: that he who buyeth it, cannot overbuy it, that he who selleth it, shall be sure to underfell it. It can never bee bought too deare, it can never be sold at the true value. He that buyeth it at the highest rate shall be an happy gainer, he that selleth it to the best advantage, putteth it off with losse, he maketh a miserable bargaine. But it may be said, the parts of the Text seem rather to crosse than to cleer each other: for if there be no seller, there can be no buyers. If the prohibition be observed, forbidding all to sell, the precept cannot be performed, commanding all to buy. I answer, the pre∣cept and prohibition are of the same extent: all men are comman∣ded to buy, all men are forbidden to sell: but they are not com∣manded to buy of men, who are forbidden to sell, but of God, who is the onely Proprietary of this rich treasure, and doth not impose this Law of not selling upon himselfe.. Rev. 3. 18. Mat. 25. 9. And therefore Christ saith to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, I counsell thee to buy of Me, gold tryed in the fire, &c. But the wise Virgins though they had oyl for their owne lampes, yet they had none to fell or give. From the precept or affirmative part, to which at present I in∣tend to confine my selfe, give me leave to offer unto you this one point of Doctrine, That The purchase of Truth is of absolute necessity to all who will be wise for their Souls. In trading for things of the world there is a latitude, Merchants have their liberty: they are not limited to one Port, nor restrained to one Mart, or to deal in one commodity: so they make a good return, it mattereth not much what kinde of wares they bring home. But they who approve themselves free of that  that glorious Corporation in heaven,Phil. 3. 20. & trade to purpose for the things above, and not prove bankrupts in the great day of account, a necessity lieth upon them, and woe unto them if they buy not Truth. Let their Ships seeme never so well fraighted, their Shops and Ware-house never so richly furnished, yet if they want this pearl of great price, they are broken and undone for ever. The foolish virgins had their lampes, and it may be for a time made as faire a blaze in shew as
those of the wise: but they wanted Truth: their oyl was spent, their lamps were extinguished, they went to buy when market was done, they called and knocked when it was too late, the doore was shut. For the cleering and proofe of the point, and our more orderly proceeding, I desire you to consider with me these four things. 1. What this Truth is, which we are required to Buy? 2. What it is to buy Truth? 3. Of whom it must be bought? 4. The necessity of making this purchase. For the 1. Of these, what this Truth is which we must buy, 1. There is veritas rei,1. Veritas rei. or veritas in essendo, The truth of things, the truth of their essence or being: and so all things that are, are truly the same which they are, so gold is true gold, opposed to that which is false and coun∣terfeit, but pretended to be gold. And this truth of things, is the con∣formity of things to the Divine intellect or knowledge of God. And therefore (by the way) I conceive that those lies are untruths which are called mendacia iocosa or officiosa, officiouslies, or lies in jest, if they be such as in no regard tend to our neighbours prejudice, are not so fitly ranked under the 9. Command. as reduced to the first: because they contradict that Truth which is in the minde of God: for the Lord in His infinite knowledge comprehendeth, and (as it were) as∣serteth all truth: and every untruth uttered by men is either a deniall of some Truth which God affirmeth, or an affirming of some false∣hood which God denyeth: and so no man can utter any falshood (though concerning matters of small moment) but in so doing he giveth God the lie. God His knowledge is the  or originall Truth: and the truth of things is their correspondency thereunto, as the truth of a copy is its correspondency with the originall. For Truth carrieth a respect to knowledge, omne verum est intelligibile, every Truth is in a capacity to be understood, and the Truth of things is their conformity to a right understanding. Now the truth of things may come under a two-fold Considera∣tion, 1. Metaphysicall, 2. Morall: and in both of these it still hold∣eth good, their truth is their Conformity to the knowledge of God. For 1. God knoweth what every person, action or thing is, and such it truely is, as God knoweth it to be, and no other: and this I call a Metaphysicall Consideration. Secondly, God knoweth what eve∣ry person, Action or thing ought to bee, and so farre as any of these crosse this knowledge of God, they are false in a morall Con∣sideration.
They are true in a Metaphysicall apprehension, because they are such as God knoweth them to be, but they are false in a Morall notion,Psal. 1. 6. because they are not such as God knoweth they ought to be. The Lord knoweth the way of the Righteous, how? with approbation. This is true: but I think there is more in it: The Lord knoweth what is that good way wherein men are to walk: and the way of the Righteous is sutable to this knowledge of God, and so the Lord knoweth it, that is, looketh upon it as an object con∣formable to this knowledge of His; on the other side, He saith to the wicked,Mat. 25. 12 I know you not. I know what manner of persons ye ought to be, but ye are men of another shape, ye are not objects conformed to this knowledge of Mine. Secondly,2. Veritas. Scientiae. There is Veritas scientiae, or veritas in cognoscendo, Truth of knowledge, and that in the creature is twofold, 1. Speculative, which is a conformity of the understanding to the nature of things, when the understanding of man so judgeth of things as they are, and the notions or conceptions of his minde are the very images of those things, this Conformity of his understanding to the nature of things apprehended by him, is truth. Things are true, as they agree with the knowledge of God: because his know∣ledge is the Fountaine of all truth, as his essence is the Fountain of all being: But the knowledge of man is true because it agreeth with the nature of things. Secondly, The practicall truth of mans knowledge is when together with a right apprehension of the true nature of things in the understanding, there is a frame of heart and affections toward those things, sutable to that apprehension, when the understanding rightly judgeth of things good or evill, and the will and affections are regularly guided by such a right apprehen∣sion, loving, imbracing, desiring, delighting in that which the understanding rightly judgeth to be lovely, desirable, &c. Hating, abhorring, shunning, &c. According to that true intelligence which the understanding giveth in of the nature of things or actions; then there is a practicall truth in that mans knowledge. But when the understanding rightly apprehendeth, and yet giveth way to the per∣versenesse of the will and distempers of the affections, this know∣ledge though speculatively true, is practically false. Thirdly,3. Veritas Signi. There is veritas signi, Truth of expression, Speeches, writings, gestures, Actions, when truth possesseth the minde and heart within and shineth out at the windowes (as it were) when a
mans words and conversation are the very image and Characters of that truth which dwelleth in him, when hee knoweth and loveth the truth, and speaketh and walketh according to that truth which he knoweth and loveth. Now then what is that truth which we must buy? 1. The true knowledge of those things which serve for the perfecting of the inner, and for the ordering of the outward man: the true know∣ledge of God, of Christ, of the mysteries of grace, of the wayes of God, of the power of godlinesse, of the will of God in things concerning the matter and manner of his worship, and in those things that belong to our Places, Callings, Relations, in ordinary and extraordinary occasions. Secondly, The Practicall truth of these things, such a frame of heart as suiteth with the nature of these things rightly apprehended: which cannot be with∣out the possession of the things themselves. Thou must have God dwelling in thee, thou must possesse Christ and be made one with him, thy body and soule must become a temple of the Holy Ghost, otherwise thou hast not this Practicall, through, and effectuall knowledge of God and Christ: thou hast a shadow of the truth rather then the truth it selfe. Thou must have the truth of all saving Graces in thee, otherwise thou canst not have an heart suited to a right apprehension of Divine truth. Lastly, thou must be so possest of the truth as to speak the truth from the heart, and to walk in the truth. The second thing to be enquired,2. What it is to Buy Truth. is, what it is to buy truth. To buy in generall, is, For a considerable value with consent of the owner, to get the propriety and possession of something which formerly was not our own. He then that will buy truth,  1. Must look upon it as none of his own. A man doeth not buy that which hee is born to. That which hee hath by inheritance he needeth not purchase.Pro. 14. 18. The simple inherit folly. Such silly ones we are all by nature: and our in∣heritance is folly & falshood. This inheritance we have by descent: our first Parents changed the truth of God into a lye, forfeited their possession of truth, and left us lies to inherit after them: and now if we will enjoy any of these forfeited and confiscated goods, which the Lord hath justly seized into his own hands, we must, buy them as things which are no longer our own. He that is not convin∣ced of this, is never likely to buy. He that wil buy truth indeed must be of such a poore and humble spirit as Agur was,pro. 30. 2, 3 surely I am more
brutish then any man: so the translation: but (as ye see) the word [any] is in a smaller Character, not being in the originall: neither doe I think it ought to be supplied, but we are to read it thus, I am more brutish then man, Psa. 49. 12 according to that of the Psalmist, man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish. Man being ho∣noured with the image of God in wisdome and Holinesse, his spirit shining with the Beauty and glory of Divine truth, did not abide in this condition, but lost the truth, yeelding himselfe to be seduced by the father of lies, and so no longer had the wisedom of man in him, but degraded himselfe from his created Dignity, debased himselfe to the ranke of brute creatures, enthralled his immortall Soul, and intellectuall nature to his brutish senses and affections: and the next words of Agur confirm this sense, And have not the understanding of Adam in me: that understanding and knowledge of Holy truth which was in Adam, and was properly belonging to the nature of man. He that knoweth not thus much of himselfe, knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know, and is no fit Merchant to Trade for truth.Revel. 3. 17, 18. Christ first informeth the Laodicean of his wants, Thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blind, and naked: and then counselleth him to buy, vers. 18. Secondly, He that buyeth giveth a considerable value. But alas, what have we to give that is considerable? If we offer gold, or silver, what can we expect but such an answer as Simon Magus had?Acts 8. 10 Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. And Solomon telleth us,Pro. 8. 11. This wisdom of Divine truth is better then rubies: and all the things that may be desired, are not to be compared to it; which maketh good what I said before, we cannot buy truth too dear: all outward things that can be desired, are not to be compared to it. And therefore, we may conclude, This buying is not of the nature of common contracts, in which there is a just proportion between the price and the purchase, but rather such as hath some remote Analogy or resemblance to it: such as that, where the Lord by solemn Proclamation offereth a free and open market,Isai. 55. 1. H, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money: Come ye, buy and eat; yea come, buy Wine and milk without money and with∣out price. And indeed whosoever getteth possession of saving Truth, he hath it by a free gift of meere grace: yet so that we must give up whatsoever is necessary for the obtaining of Truth, and cast away whatever may hinder us in the receiving or retaining of Truth, or is
inconsistent with it.  1. We must give up our selves, our hearts, spirits, souls, bodies to the God of Truth. We must bee content to part with any outward things for the procuring and promoting of Truth, for the supporting and maintaining of Truth: we must ac∣count our selves gainers by every losse which we can possibly suffer for Truth.  2. On the other side we must renounce and cast away our lusts, our own corrupt reason, blind, carnall notions and prejudices: in a word, we must out our selves of our selves, and yeeld up our selves into the entire possession of the Truth: and in all this we give nothing unto God: for whatsoever we give up to him for Truth, is his own already, and cannot bee withheld from him, without wrong and robbery, what wee cast away is worse then nothing, and if we leave it not, we keep it to our losse and utter undoing. It remaineth then, that though we are said in some sort to buy, yet Truth is a most free gift of God, and conveyed to man by a meere Act of grace. Thirdly, If we will buy Truth, we must get the propriety of it, we must make it our own, get it into our possession, have a sure interest in it and title to it.2 Iohn 2. For the Truthes sake which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us for ever. Then hath a man bought the Truth, when he hath so owned it, and given it such possession of his heart, that it is in him, as in an everlasting Mansion, so as to dwell in him and be in him for ever: when he is so possessed of the Truth, and the Truth hath such possession of him, as to denominate and Characte∣rize him:1 Ioh. 3. 19 according to that, Hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. As great Persons are denomina∣ted from their Seates, Mannor-houses, &c. Such a Lord of such a place: So he that will buy Truth must get such possession of it and propriety in it, as that he may by good right take a title of honour from the truth, his own conscience bearing him witnesse in the Holy Ghost, that he is of the Truth. Thirdly, Of whom must we buy Truth? This hath been intimated before,Deus est summ & maxima Veritas. Snarez. even of him who is the God of Truth, who is the first, the Highest Truth, the Fountain of all Truth, who calleth himselfe [I Am] because he is in and of him∣selfe, the onely infinite perfection of being, and so the infinite perfection of Truth. He seeth and knoweth his own essence infinite∣ly perfect and glorious, with a most exact knowledge of infinite perfection: and some have conceived that this contemplation of
God the Father reflecting upon His owne Majesty and glory is the eternall and unspeakable generation of the Son. But we are to speak soberly of these mysteries so farre above us:. Hebr. 1. 3. Howsoever when we use Scripture-language, we are warranted by the highest Authority, which calleth Christ the brightnes of his Fathers glory, and the ex∣presse image of his Person: and the Son of God saith of himselfe, I am the Truth.Ioh. 14. 6. 17. And the Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, is called the Spirit of Truth. To this fountain wee must bring our empty pitchers if we would be filled with these living waters, and take in these pure streames of Truth.Rev. 4. 6. John being in the Spirit saw before the throne of God in heaven, a Sea of glasse like unto Crystall. The Saints may have their Vials filled with Truth: but here is verita∣tis plenitudo, An Ocean and full Sea of Truth, and that without mud or mixture, cleere as crystall, wherein the faithfull Soule may see the glory of God shining in the Face of Christ. Here is the Springhead of Truth: and they which come not to God, and are not inwardly acquainted with him in Christ, are strangers to the Truth, they never looked into this Sea of crystall, which is before the throne of God. And so I come to the fourth and last particular, to shew the ne∣cessity of making this purchase,  ye see it is absolutely commanded in the Text: and because a threefold cord is not easily broken, ob∣serve how Solomon strongly twisteth together a threefold charge in a quick and pressing stile.Pro. 4. 13. 1. Take fast hold of instruction, 2. Let her not go. 3. Keep her: and fasteneth all with this knot, for she is thy life. If thou lose her, it is more than thy life is worth: it were better to part with thy dearest heart-blood: if thou get and keep the Truth, it will keep thee alive in the very jawes of death: if thou lose it, thou art dead whilest thou livest, and in the road-way to everlasting death. What need we any farther witnesse? yet if ye please to hear an ar∣gument or two, take these briefly. 1.Whilest we are travailing here in this world toward our long home, our way lieth through a wildernesse, wherein are many by∣pathes, multitude of passengers wandring out of the right way, a∣bundance of snares and dangers, and above all we are wofully be∣nighted with the naturall darknesse and blindnesse of our mindes: now Truth is that Pillar of fire which should guide us in the way wherein we must walk, and direct us to the promised rest. And though this Truth be never so cleerly held forth unto us in the mini∣stry
of the gospel, yet unlesse we buy it and get possession of it, so as to make it our own, and to have it dwelling in us, we are not able to follow it. It is not enough to have the light of the Sun, ex∣cept withall there be a light in the eye to meet with that light with∣out, and take it in: so that lumen externum, that externall light of Truth which shineth forth in the word, will never lead us to that rest which remaineth for the people of God, except there be also lumen internum, an inward light of Truth, and principle of saving know∣ledge set up in the heart. The Apostle having notably magnified his office,2 Cor. 3. & 4. 2, 3. as in other re∣spects, so in regard of that lustre and brightnesse of Divine Truth which shined in his Ministry, 2 Cor. 3. proceedeth in the next chap∣ter, and saith that he had not handled the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth &c. It must be objected, What is the cause then that your Gospel is hidden to many thousands? his answer is ready: If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which be∣leeve not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them. They want inward light, Satan the prince of darknes hath filled them with darknesse within, they will not buy the Truth, and so the Gospel of Christ, though it shineth out never so gloriously in it selfe, yet it shineth not at all to them: as the Sun when it giveth the greatest light, shineth not to the blind. 2. If we do not buy Truth, the Truth will witnesse against us and condemne us. A necessity lyeth upon us, either wee must make the Truth our owne, or else we shall be sure to have it our Enemy. Consider that weighty speech of Christ,Ioh. 12. 48. He that rejecteth me, and re∣ceiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him, the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day: Who is he that rejecteth Christ? he that doth not receive his words, he that doth not buy Truth, but shutteth his eyes or heart against that light of Truth which shineth from the face of this Sun of Righteousnesse. These men perhaps may think in their hearts, We will have nothing to do with this, which they call Truth, for which there is so much con∣tention, nor with the way wherein it leadeth those that receive it, we will neither embrace nor oppose it. Nay, but saith Christ, this will not serve thy turne, either thou must receive it, or be judged by it; if thou doest not buy this Truth and embrace it with thine
whole heart, it will condemn thee at the last day. If men could ap∣prehend with what Majesty and authority that Truth of God which now they cast behinde their backs will appear against them in the day of Christ, how would their Souls tremble to despise it? How would they yeeld themselves convinced that the purchase of Truth is of absolute necessity, whatsoever it may cost them? The proudest spirits which now may think to out-face the Truth of God, shall then not be able to hold up their faces before it. So much for the proofe and opening of this point: Let us see the Use of it: and that may be, 1. For Reproofe, 2. For Exhortation. Reproofe. 1. For Reproofe. 1. of those who are so farre from buying truth, that they labour to stop the trade: Such were those Expounders of the Law,Luke 11. 52. to whom the Lord Christ saith, ye have taken away the key of knowledge, ye entred not in your selves, and them that were entring in ye hindred: they kept the store-house of truth locked up, and carried away the key. How many have we had of late in this land led by such a spirit, who when the truth had many buyers beheld it with an evill eye, like the Pharisees complaining of the multitudes that followed Christ?Ioh. 12. 19. the world is gon after him, It was a vexation to their false hearts to see the streame of trade bend towards the Coasts of truth: and especially when any upon whose habitations was a famine of the word, travailed abroad to buy themselves a little food.Gen. 41. 56. But how are we bound to blesse God who hath stirred up your spirits, like so many Josephs, already to open many, & to indeavour to open all the store-houses of truth in the Land, that none may com∣plaine of want, who have hearts to buy? No wonder if the enemies of truth oppose you in this worke. It crosseth their maine designe. He that doth evill hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest his deedes should be reproved. Can the Blackmore change his skinne, or the Leopard his spots? Doe we expect a reconcilement betweene light and darkenesse? Let all tremble to give them the right hand of fel∣lowship in stopping the course of the word of truth, and hindring the worke of reformation. 2. Of those that are ashamed of the truth: what hope is there that such will buy it? He that will buy it must looke upon it as his crowne.Rev. 12. . The Church was presented to John in a vision, cloathed with the Sun, and the Moone under her foote, and upon her head a Crowne of twelve Stars. The Churches cloathing and her Crown is Light and Truth: Can any true-borne Childe of the Church account that his
shame which is his Mothers glorie? Let such weigh those words of him who is not ashamed to call himselfe the Truth, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinfull generati∣on,Mar. 8. 38. of him also shall the Sonne of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy Angells.  3. Of those who will not take so much paines as to resort to the market though it be neere their owne doores: who grossely neglect precious opportunities of hearing the word upon slight pretences. Did they know the worth of truth, and looke upon it as their life, they would not think every petty in∣convenience a just excuse. A little change of weather or distemper of body will not keepe those within doores, who are necessitated to seek out for that without which they cannot live. Those that fol∣lowed Christ sometimes three dayes together,Mat. 15. 32 having nothing to eat, might have had a fair plea in appearance to shift off their atten∣dance. Such as will suffer nothing in this case, but make the hear∣ing of the word a meere recreation, when they can doe it with ease and at pleasure, are not likely to go to the price of truth.  4. Of those that come onely as meere spectatours rather than buyers, who view many glorious Gospel-truthes openly proposed and freely tendred to all, but are content to looke on whilst others buy. Such are our common sort of ignorant hearers, compared to the way side, who hear the word and understand it not. The seed lieth above ground:Mat. 13. 19. then commeth the wicked one and catcheth away that which was sowne in his heart. The father of lies easily robbeth such a one of the word of truth.  5. Of such as seem to cheapen, but doe not buy: those who are somewhat affected with the truth, and think it worth the carrying home if they might have it at their own price: they hear it, perhaps talk of it, repeat it, &c. And of these there are two sorts: the one compared to the stony, the other to the thorny ground: the former would own the truth, were it not accompanied with the crosse: but when persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by they are offended. They never gave the truth rooting in their hearts, and so when the Sun ariseth it is scorched and withered. The latter suffer it to be overgrown and choaked with thornes: there may be some stirrings in their spirits, some springings of their af∣fections upon the receiving of the seed of truth,Mat. 13. 22. Luke 8. 14. but then their un∣mortified lusts, the care of this world, and the deceitfulnesse of riches and pleasures of this life draw away the strength of their hearts from the truth, and it becometh unfruitfull: they will not
renounce their earthly-mindednesse or their voluptuous, ambitious, corrupt affections to make a full purchase of truth. Herod did many things and heard John gladly, but would not yeeld so far to the com∣mands of truth, as to forsake his Herodias: there was a thorny lust which choaked all.Mat. 19. 16. The yong man also seemed willing to buy, What good thing shall I doe that I may have eternall life? what shall I give to buy truth? again, All these have I kept from my youth; what lack I yet? Thus much I have offered if this be not enough, I am willing to give more. I beleeve he thought hee offered like a chapman: But when he heard Christ raise his demands so high, Goe and sell all that thou hast and give to the poore, he brake off, went away sorrowfull, as if the price had been unreasonable. I feare, many who counte∣nance the cause of truth, some who are great actours in it, yea some who may venture their lives in the prosecution of it may de∣ceive themselves. There may be some thornes not rooted up, some root of bitternesse not killed, some corrupt principle which may carry men far this way, some by-end which may poison all. If I give my body to be burned and have not love,1 Cor. 13. 3 it profiteth me nothing. A man may seem to die for the truth, and yet never buy it. Ex∣hortation. 2. This is for for exhortation: 1. In generall to us all: 2. In speciall to those whom the Lord hath honoured above others for the pa∣tronage and promoting of the great cause of his truth.1. Generall And 1. let me stir up you and my selfe by all meanes to make this purchase.1. to make this pur∣chase. 2. Not to think any cost too much for that purpose: concerning the former, 1. Get a cleer and solid understanding of all the main and most ne∣cessary truthes. Learn to be throughly acquainted with the Funda∣mentalls of Faith.1 Tim 3. 16. Great is the mystery of godlinesse: And the know∣ledge of it is of great concernment: it is a great mystery, and re∣quireth a deep search. An overly, slight, and superficiall view of those great secrets which the Angels desired to looke into, must not satisfie them who will indeed buy truth. Labour for a right understanding of the Alsufficiency and infinite excellency of God in all his attri∣butes, as hee hath revealed himselfe in his word: of the per∣son, natures, offices of Christ, of the covenant of grace, of the fountain of all spirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ, the eternall love and good purpose of God toward his, and those glorious wayes and meanes whereby the Lord is pleased to bring poore lost soules to glory, reconciling them to himselfe by the death of his Sonne, calling them by his Word and Spirit, uniting
them to Christ, adopting them for his children and heires, justi∣fying them freely by his grace, sanctifying, quickning, and keeping them by his mighty power through Faith unto salvation. These and the like are especially to bee studied, and wee are to take heed lest Satan intangling us in doubtfull disputes about things of an inferiour nature, should cunningly divert our thoughts from searching into these hid treasures. I confesse the rents and divisions which follow upon contrariety of opinions are sad, and such as we have cause to lament: but I am perswaded this is not the onely, nor the greatest mischiefe. I feare Satan gaineth much advan∣tage by engaging young beginners and wanton wits in the agitati∣on of controversies ere they have laid the foundation, much more before themselves have taken root in Christ, or so much as proved themselves to be in Christ, and Christ to be in them.  2. Let us la∣bour to make those Truths which we understand, our owne: 1. By mixing them with faith. Heb. 4. 2. The word preached did not profit the un∣beleeving Israelites, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it: they did but view, not buy the truth; we cannot make the truth our owne, nor truly say, we have bought it, unlesse we so mixe and tem∣per it with faith as that it becometh one with our soules, or rather our soules become one with it, faith strongly closing with the word, digesting it, and so leavening all the powers of the soule with the truth, and causing them to relish of it. 2. By receiving the truth in sincere love. No man buyeth truth, who doth not truly love it. So much truth as thou lovest is thine owne. Some may hastily con∣clude from hence, Then all the promises of pardon are mine: for these I love from my heart, though not those precepts of obedience, and qualifications of repentance, morification and holinesse. But know this, It is easie to mistake lies of our owne coyning, for God his holy truth: for those promises carrie a respect to their qualifica∣tions, and are true in relation to them: if thou seperatest what God hath joyned together, thou huggest an Idoll of thine own braine and dost not embrace the truth of God, as the Devill in his temptations mangleth the truth of God,Math. 4. promissionem objicit, conditionem abjicit: he objecteth the promise,Jun. in Pa∣rallel: Res transit cum onere. rejecteth the condition. But this is rather to prophane the truth then to buy it. He that will buy, must take the commodity with all the appurtenances. This not receiving the truth in love was the roote of that great Apostasie of the world.2 Thes. 2. 10. This beggered and undid them, they played with the light, and dal∣lied
with the Truth of God: and did not buy it and enrich them∣selves with it, by receiving the love of the Truth, that they might be saved.  3. Labour to abound in the knowledge of the truth. A Mer∣chant who hath made a good voyage, finding such a commodity ad∣vantagious, is encouraged to new adventures: that man never bought any saving truth, who sitteth down and thinketh he hath enough. If once thou wert possest of the truth indeed, thy desires would bee more and more enlarged toward it; many seem to think they have got truth enough already, more then they know what to do with, so much that they are troubled with it, it disturbeth their slumbring spirits, disquieteth their consciences: These men are far from buy∣ing the truth; rather some truthes have surprised them against their wills,1 Kings 21. 20. and are as welcome to them as Elijah to Ahab, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? But all that will buy truth let them hearken to the Apostles Counsell,Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdome.  4. They that will buy truth must subject themselves to the power and command of it. A man must not buy truth as he purchaseth outward things, to dispose of it at his pleasure: thou must not buy it as men were wont to buy slaves, to keep it in bond∣age, to make it serve thy lusts and ends, or to fetter it and impri∣son it by withholding the Truth in unrighteousnes: but as a man would buy an office at Court, a place of service and attendance upon a Prince: in buying truth thou must sell thy self a servant to the truth, give up thy self to be ruled & guided by the truth. Some (I beleeve) are troubled that they have more of the truth than they can well rule: it meeteth and faceth them in many of their crooked by∣pathes, it is as a lighted torch to them when they are most of all retired in acting their works of darknesse: it is apt to interpose, yea and to controll, it will not suffer them to bee private when they would: these would have truth enslaved, and lust predominant. But to pretend to truth and not to allow it that Soveraignty which belongeth to its place and dignity, is indeed to reject it. Let truth rule thy judgement, will, and affections in all things.  5. Do not rest in meere notions of truth, but endeavour to have the truth of God realized to thy soul. Labour to have thy heart possest with the sub∣stance and reality of Divine truth, to furnish thy selfe with those very things which thou findest cloathed with the truth of God in Scripture.Eph. 5. 8 Saith the Apostle, Ye were sometime in darknesse: but now are ye light in the Lord. He doth not say, ye have light, but ye are light, the light is realized in you, ye are transformed into the light,
ye are become such indeed and in truth as the light discovereth those to bee who are children of light. The word and truth of God hath many beames of light in it, and we must seek to take them in so, as to find the reall effects of them in our selves. Beleeve, and thou shalt be saved: there is a beame of truth: and then do we buy this truth indeed, when we get that precious Faith of God his elect, that Faith unfeigned which really uniteth the soul to Christ, taketh root in him, draweth life and spirit from him, conformeth and sub∣jecteth the soul unto him. Take heed of Satans jugling, lest he sell thee a counterfeit stone instead of this precious Pearl: a false Faith, a vaine fancy, an empty shadow of Faith: how many content themselves with this, because it is of a low price, or rather may bee had for nothing? But if ever that caution be needfull, it is in this case,Caveat Emptor. Caveat Emptor, Let him that would buy truth, beware. It is not in this case, as when a man would buy a thing to please a childe, a slight toy of small value will serve as well as a better: but it is as if a man were to buy a ship to transport himselfe, his whole family and all his goods into a far-country: were it not the extre∣mity of folly to venture all in a rotten vessell for saving of charges, rather then with greater cost to provide a substantiall bottome? Oh let us tremble to embark our souls (more precious then the world) together with all our eternall hopes in a leaking ship of a rotten faith, being to make so great a voyage, among so many dangerous Rockes and sands, through so many stormes and waves, which were too much for the soundest Faith to breake through were it not kept by the power of God unto Salvation.Luke 13. Again, Ex∣cept ye repent ye shall all perish. Doe not think thou hast bought this truth, so soon as thy judgement is informed that this grace of re∣pentance is necessary to salvation, thou hast but viewed it yet, thou hast not purchased it. If thou wilt buy it indeed, thou must have a through change wrought in thy heart & soul, repentance from dead works, repentance unto life: thou must look upon thy sweetest sins as thy bitterest enemies, and feel them as they heaviest burthens, fleeing from them as from a Serpent, inwardly loathing, outwardly leaving them. Thou must labour for the truth of mortification, the reall destruction of thy lusts: as it is said of Cassius Chaerea, a Pre∣torian Collonel or Tribune, when he and others conspired the death of that cruell tyrant Caligula,Suet: in Calig. the signall word agreed upon was Repete, strike again: So thou must not content thy self to make some faint attempts against thy sinnes, or a light skirmish as souldiers, at a
muster, but thou must do it with all thy might: hast thou wounded them, and do they yet resist? Repete, strike again and again, hate them, pursue them to the death, give them no quarter, spare them not so long as thou findest them stirre or breath. Again, the Apostle saith,Rom. 14. 17. The Kingdom of God is righteousnesse, peace, joy in the Holy Ghost. This is a most sweet and precious truth: wouldst thou buy it? If thou doest, thou buyest a Kingdome, yea a Kingdome more worth then all the Kingdomes of the world. But if thou wilt buy it, indeed, thou must have this Kingdome set up in thy heart. Righteousnesse must reigne there, or Christ must reign there in righteousnesse, and thou must have a soul subdued to his Scepter. The Peace of God must rule in thy heart:Col. 3. 15. and that is peace in truth: when sin reigneth, the soul hath no peace with God, it may be in a dead sleep. Then hast thou this truth of peace with God, when the Peace of God ruleth within thee, suppresseth mutinous affections, subdueth rebellious lusts, when the winds and sea obey it, and it hath power to calme all the turbulencies and disorders of thy spirit. So concerning joy in the Holy Ghost, Thou must have thy heart pos∣sest with this joy, if thou wilt purchase this truth. How many read and hear of joy in the Holy Ghost unspeakable & full of glory, but yet content themselves with such joyes and delights as are full of shame, at least full of vanity, and end in mourning and misery? these are false joyes,. as one saith, Voluptates animi febres, earthly joyes are soul-feavers, carnall, sensuall, sinfull delights are even the agues of the inner man. For what is the condition of a soul given up to pleasures of this nature but to be in a continuall agitation be∣tween hot paroxysmes or burning fits of lust, and cold shaking fits of shame and horrour. Now as there is a great difference be∣tween that unnaturall inflammation of a feaverish body, drinking up the radicall moisture, & wasting the spirits, and that kindly wel∣tempered heat of an healthy body: so there is a vast distance between those vaine and earthly or impure and sinfull delights, which waste the conscience, and those soul-ravishing, sweet, serene and heaven∣ly joyes which flow from the bosome of Christ into the breasts of beleevers. I might adde many other instances, but I forbear. Lastly, if ye will buy truth, ye must improve it. It is none of those commodities which a man may buy, and then suffer it to lie dead by him:2 John. 4. no man buyeth the truth, but he that buyeth it for use. I re∣joyced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth: as we have
received a commandment from the Father. It is no arbitrary thing or matter of indifferency, but one of the great commandments of God, that we should walk in truth: and Paul having told the Ephe∣sians, Ye are light in the Lord, he inferreth, walk as children of light. Then a man hath bought the truth, when he walketh in the light, and power of Divine truth, when he prayeth, humbleth his soul, heareth the word, and performeth every act of Divine worship in spirit and truth, out of such true principles, in such a manner, with such a frame of heart and such aimes as the truth of God his word requireth, when in his place and calling he improveth the truth of God to all purposes. Those things which men buy at high rates, they desire to make the most of. The truth of God being so exceed∣ing precious and costly, those that buy it should labour to improve it to the uttermost. It is none of those things▪ which are the worse for wearing. 2.2. Part of the generall Exhortation Let us be perswaded not to thinke any cost too much that we may buy truth. And first, consider (I beseech you) what we must cast away, which otherwise might hinder us either in getting or keeping truth. 2. What we must be content to resigne and yeeld up into the Lord his hands, that wee may buy truth. The former are such things as are better cast away then kept, the very losse of them will be our gain. 1.Mat. 5. 8. In generall our lusts and sinnes. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God: an heart cleansed from the filthinesse of flesh and spirit, is like a cleer glasse fittest to give a reflection of those beams of truth, which shine from the face of God in Christ. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will shew them his Cove∣nant. They that will see cleerly, must do away these scales from the eyes of the inner man. 2. In speciall, let us renounce our carnall and naturall wisdom.1. Cor. 3. 18 &c. Intus xi∣flens prohi∣bet . 1. If any man among you seemeth to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise: for the wisdom of this world is foolish∣nesse with God. A spirit emptied of all self-sufficiency, and selfe∣conceitednesse is best fitted to receive the wisdom of God, and to purchase His truth. 2. Lay aside all prejudices against the truth: and first quit all prejudices against the dignitie of Truth. Take heede of thinking any Truth of God to be below thee, too meane for thee to stoope to▪ Do not thinke thy selfe, thy place or parts too high for the least of God his holy Truthes.2 Tim. 4. 2 Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, is a Truth of God which once was given in
Charge to Timothy: but (some I beleeve) who pretended to be of Timothy his Ranke, looked upon this truth as a thing below their places. On the other side when a cause of Religion was brought be∣fore Galli, he cared for none of these things, he had no leisure to spend time about words and names, his place ingaged him in Realities, State-matters, such as were worthy of a Proconsuls Cognizance. 2. Take heede of prejudices against the necessity of truth, looke not upon it as a matter of indifferency. Regard it as that one thing ne∣cessary. 3. Renounce all prejudicate opinions of dangers or in∣conveniences, which seeme to attend or follow truth, such as divi∣sions and commotions: these (though accidentall to truth) doe or∣dinarily throng in after it.Luke 12. 51. Suppose yee that I am come to send peace on Earth? I tell you, Nay, but rather division: and that betweene those of neere relations, as it followeth there. Hereupon some seeme to be as much afraid of the truth, as of a ball of wilde-fire, they dare not buy it: they would rather banish it out of their Coasts: where∣as truth is no way the cause, though the corruptions of some men and their malignity against it, and the weakenes and mistakes of o∣thers, often make it an occasion of those ruptures. That there are op∣positions betweene the friends and enemies of truth, is not strange: but that there are dissentions among some of those, who unfained∣ly love and seek truth, and agree in the most and principall parts of it, is sad: yet let not this prejudice hinder us from buying and im∣bracing truth. Amongst those who in the Apostles daies received the Gospell, and with joynt consent acknowledged the Lord Jesus to be the Christ, there were differences about the observation of Mosaicall Rites, and Ceremonies: this prejudice did not keepe the faithfull from imbracing and holding fast the truth of the Gospell. In Luthers time there were controversies betweene those who were newly come out of Babylon: this prejudice did not so far prevaile with the Godly, as to make them preferre their slaverie under Anti-Christ above the sweete yoake of Christ. Let the unanimous and full consent of the Godly in many, and those the most substantiall parts of truth, encourage thee to buy the truth: let not their diffe∣rences about few and lesse materiall things discourage thee. 4. Cast off that prejudice which Satan may suggest unto thee, in re∣gard of the meanenesse of those persons who hold forth the truth, either as the Lord his Agents, whom he maketh use of to invite buy∣ers, the Ministers of the Gospell, or as purchasers, who having
bought the truth, desire to commend their penny-worths to others, as Philip did to Nathanael,Joh. 1. 45. We have found him, of whom Moses and the Prephets did write, Jesus of Nazareth: Come and see. If any such be contemptible in the eye of the world, as those were who fol∣lowed Christ, whom the proud Pharisees overlooked with so much scorne,Joh. 7. 49. This people who knoweth not the Law are cursed: Let not this seeme any disparagement to the Truth of God which needeth not borrow any thing from man: its owne soveraigne Authority is e∣nough to command all, its native beauty and proper worth is suffi∣cient to commend it to all. When King Amaziah had set up and worshipped the Idolls of the same people, whom himselfe had late∣ly overcome in battle: the Lord sent him this Message by a Pro∣phet, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people,2 Chro. 25. 16. which could not deliver their owne people out of thine hand? This was a Truth which carried so much strength and evidence of Reason in it, that it seem∣eth to preclude all contradiction: yet see how pride and prejudice against the person that held it forth, prevailed! saith the King, Art thou made of the Kings Councell? forbeare, why shouldest thou be smit∣ten? Art thou a fit person to reprove a King? thou art none of the Privie Councell: marke how the Prophet replyeth, and twice de∣scanteth upon the Kings words; I know that God hath Counselled to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened to my Counsell Doest thou despise my Message because I am not made of thy Councell? Know this, that in this particular, the King of Kings hath made me of his Councell, and the word which I brought is the very Truth and Counsell of the great God, as thou shalt find to thy ruine, inasmuch as thou hast despised it. The Truth of God nee∣deth not receive any reputation from rotchets or scarlets, if thou despisest it for the meannesse of those that bring it, thou despisest Him that sendeth it. 2. Let us consider what we must give up or lay out for Truth when the Lord calleth for it. And here observe that although truth be alwaies alike precious in it selfe, yet at some time the purchase of it is more costly then at other. Bread-Corne it is as good in it selfe, and as necessary for the life of man at one time as at another, yet ye know in some time of scarcity one bushell may cost as much as three or foure in times of plenty; but whatever it cost it must be had, Men must live: so Truth hath its deare yeares, when those that will buy it, must give greater rates than ordinary: but whatsoever
it cost, it must be had, we must buy it, or else we perish: Now we must alwayes give up our selves to God, that we may buy truth, our understandings, wills, affections, our soules and bodies to his guidance, soveraigne command and disposing. And as it is said con∣cerning God,Rom. 8. 32 He that spared not his owne Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? so on our part, he that sincerely giveth up himselfe to the Lord, to be wholly his, how can he thinke any thing too dear when the Lord requireth it? why did not the young man give up his possessions upon Christs demand? because he had not given up himselfe. When the Lord told Peter what he should suffer for the truth, and by what death he should glorifie God, he questioneth about his Fellow-Disciple, (whether out of curiosity,Joh. 21. 21, 22. or some spice of envie, I know not) And what shall this man doe? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? If I will that he live till I come, and call him in an ordinary way of visitation, and that the Truth of the Gospell shall prove more costly to thee than to him, what doeth that concerne thee? If both of yee give up your hearts to mee and my truth, it is no great matter, whether it cost you more or lesse in other regards.  2. Then yee must buy truth though it cost yee ne∣ver so much of your treasures, either to procure the meanes, or to maintaine the cause, or to retaine the profession and practice of Truth. All these things must be looked upon as losse and dung in comparison of the excellency of Christs truth.Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited if he shall gaine the whole world, and lose his soule? and if he leave the truth, he loseth his soule. It may seeme the times are come upon us, wherein the Lord will make discoveries, who they are that prize this earthly drosse above those rich treasures of his Kingdome. Let us not say in our hearts, we could willingly purchase truth, if it might be had at such easie rates as our Fathers bought it. No, if we will not buy it now at such a price as it may be had, whatsoever it be, neither would we have bought it then, though at a lower rate. And those who lived and died in those times, and purchased truth indeed, would have bought it at a farre higher rate, had it beene ex∣acted of them. He that giveth up his heart to God for truth, will never breake off for the price: he that doth not yeeld up his heart, doth never truly buy, though he liveth in the cheapest times.  3. Be content to lay out your strength for truth, to take any paines, to un∣dergoe any labour. What if any of you be forced to travell more
miles than others? such a reason doth not keepe people from Faires and Markets: although the English Merchant hath a longer voyage to the East Indies than the Portugals by many leagues, this doth not make them give over trading. Though it cost thee more paines in reading, studying, meditation, by reason of the slownes of thy ap∣prehension, weakenes of judgment or memory; more striving in prayers, more fears, more labouring with thine own heart to bring it in subjection unto truth, than it doth some other, let nothing beat thee off, buy it whatsoever it may cost thee.  4. Be content to en∣gage all the credit which thou hast with the world for the purchase of truth: Buy it with the hazard, and (if need be) the losse of thy reputation.Mat. 12. 42 43. Among the chiefe rulers many believed n Christ, but because of the Pharisees they did not confesse him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. They valued their credit with men above the truth of God: miserable folly! though the way of truth should be called here∣sie (as in Pauls time) though the truth be scorned, reproached, evill spoken of, though the wise men of the world thinke no better of those that buy truth than of such as pay dear for a trifle, and say of them in their hearts,Act. 26. 24 A fool and his money are soon parted, though thou must bee counted a fool and a mad man, as Festus termed Paul, yet buy it howsoever.  5. Be content to buy Truth with expence of time, though that be very precious, esteem that time well bestowed, which is laid out for Truth. Doe not say, Wherefore is this waste?Aelian:  Though time cannot be bought with gold, yet it is well spent for the purchase of Truth. Apelles beholding a curious picture Drawne by Protogenes, admired the wormanship: but understanding that it had been seven yeers in hand, he said the grace of the work was not answerable to the time and paines be∣stowed upon it. But if those whom the Lord in his providence hath called together, shall be able by the good hand of their God upon them, to draw to the life that glorious body of Truth in all its lineaments for matter of doctrine, worship, government, discipline, I doubt not but in conclusion it would be found time well imployed, though it should cost more moneths then some expected. And as in this more publike enquiry after truth, so in particular searchings after it, bee carefull to redeem time from other occasions, that thou mayest spare it for buying of truth. It is part of the blessed mans descrip∣tion, His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law, he
doth meditate day and night.  6. Peace is one of the great blessings of God upon a people, and yet if need be we must part with this also to purchase truth. If peace may be hadwith truth, it is exceedingly to be desired, as in toher respects, so for truths sake, to which (if well improved) it may be very serviceable and usefull towards the opening of a free trade for truth, which is many wayes obstructed and interrupted by war. But when truth cannot be secured but by the sword, and all wayes are tried which are consistent with the purity, safety, and honour of truth, and recourse is had to warre as the last remedie, in such a case peace it selfe must be broken, that truth may be preserved and purchased.  Some may say, there is no sufficient cause at this day in relation to truth,  and the businesse of Religion, to ground a necessary warre upon. I answer, 1. I doe not take upon me to assert that this warre was primarily and originally a warre of Re∣ligion. But secondly, if that were granted, I desire that case be∣tweene the Tribes of Israel may be considered: The two Tribes and an halfe beyond Jordan built an Altar by the River:Josh. 22. 10. &c. tidings came to the rest of Israel, who apprehended this as an Act ten∣ding to the falsifying and corrupting of the Truth of God, and the Ordinances of his Worship. This was conceived a just ground for a Warre: For the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shilo to goe up to warre against them. But yet desiring a peaceable accommodation, if it might be had without prejudice to truth, they resolve to treate with them, and send Phineas a man of great eminencie, and ten Princes with him. These deale throughly in the businesse, and presse it home upon them: the Defendants make a free and candid declaration of their intentions, shewing that this Altar was not erected for Burnt of∣fering nor for Sacrifice, but onely for a Monument of their interest in the God of Israel: whereupon both the Ambassadours and (at their returne) the people were fully satisfyed. Now suppose this Altar had beene built for sacrifice, as was suspected, and compare with this the many hundred Altars (I beleeve) lately erected in this Land, to the darkning at least of those great Truths of the Gospel, that Christ is the only Altar which sanctifyeth all the offerings of the faithfull, that His Sacrifice of himself once offered by Himself is the onely Propitiation: adde hereunto the Idolatrous bowings
and cringings, the Crucifixes and Images set up in many places, the indeavours to corrupt the Truth and Doctrine of Christ in di∣vers points of great importance, the plots laid to stop the course of the Gospell & propagating of the truth, the obstinate resistance against such a Reformation as the Truth of God cleerely revealed in His Word, requireth. &c. And see whether there were not many causes for a Warre against the Enemies of the truth in Eng∣land, for one which Israel had, though that had beene such as was surmised. Oh, that the Lord would deliver our King from those that are Adversaries of his Truth, and make him an Instrument to execute His wrath upon the great whore, that so the Truth of God might have a free passage through the severall Regions of the World. I have read of some Mariners who being tossed on the sea in a Tempest, were so superstitiously slavish, as to vow or pro∣mise at least upon their safe arrivall on the shore, to build a Temple, the mortar whereof should be tempered with Malmsey: I desire it may be considered whether those be not more lavishly prophane, who being terrifyed with the stormes of warre, could be content to make the sacred Truth of God (more precious then all the golden veynes in the bowells of the Earth) to serve in stead of mortar for the cementing or rather daubing up an unsound peace with men.  But it may be said, the losse of peace implyeth by con∣sequence the losse of life, the expence of bloud: and precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.Psal. 119. 15.  I answer, it is true, and doubtlesse The Lord will make inquisition for their bloud. And yet in the last place, even this precious bloud of God his people is not too precious to be adventured or spent in the necessary defence of Gods Truth. Did not Christ himselfe shed his most precious bloud (worth more than all the best bloud under Heaven) to seal the Truth of the Gospell, the truth of all the promises of the new Covenant? none of all which had been true, if Christ had not shed his bloud to verifie them.2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. The Law is true, in it selfe: but the Truth of the Gospell and Word of Promise dependeth wholly upon Christ. The Law hath an intrinsecall and native truth: Cursed is he that continueth not in all things written in the Booke of the Law to doe them. But the Truth of the Promise is borrowed: the promise of the pardon of sinne, of justifying the ungodly, of being mercifull to
unrighteousnesse, passing by iniquity, blotting out transgressions, &c. seemeth to crosse the Truth of God, His Justice and Holi∣nesse, if ye consider it without reference to Christ: It is true then onely in Christ: the Truth of this Testament dependeth wholly upon the death of the Testatour.Ioh. 18. 37 To this end (saith he) was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should beare witnesse to the Truth. How many thousands of God his Saints have drunk of the same Cup in severall Ages? It is appointed to all men once to dye: and that is a blessed improvement of death, when a man dyeth not onely in the Lord, but for the Lord and His Truth: He that loseth his life shall find it: He shall find mortality swallowed up of life: His life is hid with Christ in God, far above the reach of any weapons of warre, and when Christ who is his life shall appear, then shall he also appeare with him in Glory. And now give me leave,2. A more speciall ex∣hortation. Much honoured Worthyes, to bespeake your selves in the Name of the God of Truth: whom I looke upon as precious Instruments▪ of the Lord, for the advancing and promoting of His Truth, Truth of doctrine, of worship, of discipline, truth and power of Godlinesse. Ye are farre engaged in this Cause of truth already, and it concerneth you to goe on, both in Conscience and in point of Honour, but chiefely for the Ho∣nour of your God, who hath so highly dignifyed and so many wayes encouraged you by notable testimonies of His Presence. Let it appeare that ye are so possessed with the truth, so overpow∣ered by the truth, that ye may justly apply that of the Apostle to your selves,2 Cor. 13. 8. Rev. 3. 14. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: and then Christ will not fayle to make good that title, which he hath assumed to himself: The Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse. The People of God have reposed a great trust in you▪ and they ex∣pect truth from you. And (blessed be God) they have had their desires in great measure already answered: and the Worke is yet in your hands, these first-fruits seeme to be pledges of a full Har∣vest, if our sinnes doe not blast our hopes. One of the cleerest evi∣dences (I conceive) which ye can give of the truth of your hearts to the Publick Cause, is Selfe-denyall and quitting of Private In∣terests. Of this ye have given reall demonstration in your readines to devest your selves of militarie and civill dignities, that ye might reserve your selves for your proper worke. Hereupon yee may
with greater Authority exact truth from those whom yee shall imploy, a true accompt of the publick service, and for the future (at least) a true accompt of the publick treasure, though perhaps for the time past it may be difficult, if not impossible, in regard of those many sudden exigents, confusions, unexpected occurren∣ces which have happened: yea, inasmuch as ye have made your selves such eminent precedents of self-denyall, how can others in modesty refuse, if you require them not to seeke great things for themselves, in making over much advantage of the publick mise∣ries: especially such whose service is attended with no hazard, and very little labour? some redresse in these things might encou∣rage the well affected to more cheerefulnesse in assisting the com∣mon Cause, and stop the mouthes of others. More particularly, let me beseech you in the first place to exa∣mine every man the truth and sincerity of his owne heart in managing the great businesse which yee have in hand. To professe a mans selfe engaged in the Cause of truth, and yet to be salfe-hearted toward it, and to harbour treacherous aimes against it, is not onely con∣trary to the duty of a Christian, but a thing far below the spirit and ingenuity of a Gentleman: it suiteth better with the basenes of common cheaters, then with men of place and worth. A man who by his corrupt principles is led out of the way, and put into a posture of defiance and open hostility against the truth, is lesse odious by many degrees then a false brother. I am perswaded there was more of the Devill in one Judas, then in all the High Priests Cavaliers, and that Christ resented more hellish maligni∣ty in that one Traytours kisse, than in all their swords and staves. Wherefore,Gal. 6. 4, 5. Let every man prove his owne worke, and then shall he have rejoycing in himselfe, and not in another. For every man shall bear his owne burden. It is not enough to joyne with those who are sin∣cere in the Worke of the Lord, but every man must prove his own worke, with what heart, out of what inward principles, to what end. upon what grounds and motives, in what manner he doth it, that he may have rejoycing in himselfe, and not in those with whom he joyneth in a good cause, nor by comparing himselfe with those who either directly oppose, or basely desert it. For in the great day of account every man shall beare his owne bur∣den: men shall not be ranked on the right hand by whole Com∣panies,
Corporations, Regiments, Brigades, Armies, Houses of Parliament, but as in that search which was made in Achan his case, they shall be singled out man by man, and every mans worke shall be tried in particular. 2. Be united among your selves in the great cause of Truth: according to that of the Apostle,Phil. 1. 27. Stand fast in one spirit, with one minde striving together for the Faith of the Gospel. The expres∣sions are strong: he speaketh to them as to Champions of the Truth,. ide Athleta. . as the originall word importeth: and to whom may it bee applyed if not to such oble Champions as your selves? stand fast, keep your ground, Servate gradum (as Beza.) main∣tain your station, and that in one spirit, in the power and strength of that Holy Spirit of Truth, with one minde or one soul, wrest∣ling or striving together, as if ye were a combination of many bodies associated and concentred together by one soul, as one man with joynt forces contending for the Truth of the Gospel, and for the cause of Truth: so should ye be able to strengthen your spirits with that encouragement following,Verse 28. In nothing ter∣rified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of per∣dition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. Your uniting would be a terrour to the adversaries, a strengthening to your selves, an encouragement to those who are friends to the truth, and your friends and servants for the Truthes sake. If a noble Heathen out of a morall bravery of spirit, could privatas inimicitias reipublicae condonare, passe by private quarrells for the Common-wealthes sake: far be it from any Member of a Christian Parliament not to lay down all private grudges and crosse designes at the feet of this afflicted Church and State, far be it from them not to quit them for the truthes sake, lest the cause of truth should miscarry through their default. If the greatest persons who will approve their hearts to God, must throw down their Crownes at the foot∣stoole of Christ, how much more their corruptions? But espe∣cially let every one take heed of raising or fomenting divisions out of a secret desire to hinder the carrying on of the great work. Differences in judgement about things directly relating to con∣science are to be pitied in contemplation of the common imbecil∣lity of mans understanding. But when men for sinister ends de∣light to make rents or cherish factions, this is fearfull: let none
such deceive themselves, God is not mocked. In extraordinary times, such as these upon which the providence of God hath cast us, men have extraordinary opportunities of doing God more then ordinary service: and on the other side they have extraordi∣nary occasion of bringing more then ordinary guilt upon them∣selves, and wrath upon their posterity. This is a time when those who have hearts to improve it, may wonderfully further their ac∣count: and a time when men may exceedingly aggravate their condemnation.  3. Let me beseech you to go on, as you have begun, in opening a free passage and procuring a free trade and open market for the truth of God, that all may have liberty and be encouraged to buy and furnish themselves. And for this end to remove of obstructions, in restraining the spreading of grosse and dangerous errours and heresies. I am confident in your wise∣dome and piety, that ye are far from entertaining those motions for an unlimited and prodigious licentiousnesse, which some have seemed to plead for.Veitatem sub hasta vendere: vel potius praedae et di∣reptioni ex∣ponere. What were this but to make port-sale of the truth, if not rather to give over the protection of truth, and to expose it to be spoiled, sacked, and plundred in a promiscuous way by all sorts of enemies? Let it bee free for all sorts to buy any truth of God, but let not Satans factours and pedlars have liberty to vent his falshoods. Object.But some may say, either ye must give liberty to all, or else shew no indulgence to any, who doe not in every point comply with that which is established by authority.  I answer, I was never yet able to understand this Logick, the consequence seemeth very strange; I am sure it will not be admitted in Chirur∣gery: if a man be constrained to cut off a limme desperately in∣fected with a gangrene, must he therefore part with an usefull member for every little inflammation and distemper?Agelius, Sisinnius.  Soz. lib. 7. cap. 12. Socr. lib. 3. cap 10. Soz. lib. 2. cap. 30. That famous Emperour Theodosius did not only bear with the Novati∣ans, but countenance and familiarly consult with some of them about Church-affairs (though differing in matter of disci∣pline) being sound in the Faith and having pastors of eminent gifts and godlinesse. And it is recorded of Constantine, that though he made a law in terrorem which was so comprehensive that these were obnoxious to it, yet in point of execution he spared them. And the Apostle maketh a cleer difference: of one sort he saith,
A man that is an heretike,Tit. 3. 10. after the first and second admonition reject, knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sinneth being condemned of himselfe. Of the other he writeth in a far different straine, Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye,Rom. 14. 1, 2. but not to doubtfull disputations. For one beleeveth that he may eat all things; another who is weak eateth herbes. Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not: and let not him which eateth not, judge him that eateth: and the reason is very observable: For God hath received him. Surely much respect is to bee had to those who give forth strong convincing evidences that God hath received them, and that they have re∣ceived his Truth in love. If those are to bee tenderly dealt with in whom there is aliquid Christi, something of Christ, how much more they in whom there is plurimum Christi, very much of Christ, much of that unction wherewith hee was anointed above his fellowes, much of those graces which serve for the edifying of his mysticall body, and much of those which ac∣company salvation.Comment. de statu reipub. et relig. sub Carol. 9. An: 1561: Osiand Cent. 16 There is a passage recorded, which hapned between Anthony of Bourbon King of Navari and the Ambassa∣dour of Denmark: The King being a Peere of France and first Prince of the blood, challenged the Regency of that kingdom du∣ring the French Kings minority, and told the Danish Ambassadour that he hoped in short time to procure a free passage for the Go∣spel throughout the Kingdome of France: the Ambassadour shewed himselfe pleased with this, but withall admonished him to take care that Luthers doctrine, not Calvins might passe for current: the King replyed, Luther and Calvin agree in forty points against the Pope, and differ from each other but in one: let those then who follow the severall tenents of these two, joyn their strength against the common enemy, and at better leisure, in a more convenient season compound their own differences. I am perswaded, it is far from your Christian Wisdom and mode∣ration to esteem alike of those who obstinately shut their eyes a∣gainst the bright beams of truth where it shineth out with full rayes, & those who vary from you in lesser things, wherein Scrip∣ture-light is not so cleer, but that good eyes may judge diversly, and hearts cordially affected to the truth, may for a time dissent. I grant much prudence and many cautions are needfull: as 1. That the persons be known to be modest, pious and peaceable, lest
some of another spirit for evill ends should make claime to, and so abuse such a liberty. 2. That all bitternesse, insolency, tur∣bulency of spirit, all reproachfull language and tumultuous car∣riages be forborne: for these (I am sure) are no parts of liberty of conscience 3. That no Church-meetings for worship be al∣lowed but in places known, that there may be free accesse for any: in which respect I have often commended both the wise∣dome and ingenuity of the French Protestants, who in one of their Treaties of peace (I take it) made this motion, that some officer of the King might be deputed to be present at their assem∣blies, for preventing of State-jealousies and vulgar calumnies. For he that doeth truth commeth to the light,Joh. 3. 21. that his deedes may bee made manifest that they are wrought in God. Many other meanes the Lord may suggest unto you, for the ordering of things in such a way, that some mens priviledge may not be other mens prejudice, but that brethren may walk together in love, so far as they have attained, untill the Lord may please to give farther light. 4. It is a busines worthy of your care to encourage the Ministers of the Gospel with a competent and comfortable maintenance, that they may attend upon their calling without destraction, and that their hands may be strengthened in the work of the Lord: in so doing ye shall be fellow-helpers to the Truth: for these are persons entrusted by the Lord, as his agents, to call in men to buy his truth. And for the same cause be pleased also to vindicate them from the foul reproaches of those,Rom. 3. 13. 1 Cor. 4 3. . who have The poison of aspes under their lips. A faithfull Minister may say with the Apostle, With me it is a very small (or the least) thing that I should be judged of you, or of mans judgement. But let it be considered whether the truth be not concerned in it, if any through their own weak∣nesse shall be discouraged from buying, when they hear those whom the Lord imployeth as his trustees and factours to be cried downe and stigmatized for Baals priests, limmes of the beast, Mini∣sters of Antichrist. The way to bring a shop out of custome, is first to bring it out of credit. 5. Procced in that worke (wherein ye have already made so good a progresse) in removing those who are either unskilfull or unfaithfull dispensers of the truth, or whose fingers are so foul
that they fully the truth by handling it, causing the word and way of truth to be evill spoken of, and discouraging men from buying. The very heathens may shame those who censure you in this: who seem to have been very tender of the honour of their idol-gods in this kinde.Livy. Livy (as I remember) hath a story to this purpose:As they worshipped goddesses or female gods, so they had female Priests. Soz l. 5. 15 . Senec. A Vestall virgine was suspected of incontinency because of her neatnesse in apparell, courtly deportment or some such thing, but being called in question no such crime ap∣peared upon examination, yet was she sent away with a check or admonition, & willed to remember, Sancte magis quam scite co∣lendas esse religiones. That the services of their gods required rather sanctity in those that were actours in them, than any such curious dresse as might carry an appearance of evill. And Sozomen insert∣eth the Copie of a letter written by Julian the Apostate to Arsa∣cius Arch-Priest of Galatia, requiring him to charge those hea∣thenish priests under his superintendency, neither to haunt Thea∣ters, or (according to our times) stage-playes, nor to frequent Tavernes, and that upon paine of deprivation. Seneca in his Con∣troversies hath such a case as this. A Virgine being taken captive by Pyrates, was sold to a Pandour, prostituted in a Stewes, yet preserved her virginity, and at last slew a man in defence of her chastity: whereupon she was arraigned, and upon hearing of her cause, acquitted: after this she sueth to be admitted as a Priest to attend on one of their goddesses: this barre was put in against her plea by way of supposition: Tres petunt Sacerdotium: capta, pre∣stituta, rea: Suppose three severall Virgins should come in com∣petition for the Priesthood, whereof one had beene captivated, the second prostituted, the third arraigned, Omnibus nego: I re∣ject them all: much more when all these meete in one: and yet in all these three was nothing criminall, but rather something of disparagement. How much more when the question is concer∣ning the admission of men to the Ministry of the Gospell, or re∣tayning those that were formerly admitted? suppose one of them a drunkard, another a swearer, a third superstitious, a fourth an ignorant person, a fift idle, &c. Omnibus nego: none of them shall have my voyce, and what shall we say of them in whom many of these meete? It was further pressed in behalfe of that virgine, that her suite should be regarded out of compassion to her
sufferings, it was answered, Non facimus miserandos Sacerdote: In choosing Priests we must respect the honour of our gods, not the miseries of those who desire the office: the wants and neces∣sities of persons and families in this case are not to be looked at, but the glory of Christ and the wants and miseries of poore soules: yet I desire from my heart that mercie may be shewed them in other kinds, that they may have meanes of subsistance, and those who are knowne to be learned and studious may not be deprived of their Libraries. Lastly, I beseech you, shew your selves tender of the honour of Truth it selfe, in bridling those who cast foule aspersions upon it: rich wares troden under feele, and spoi∣led, may lie by neglected: buyers are nice, and will hardly come off, unlesse that which is tendered to them be sightly. This the Devill knoweth, and therefore stirreth up his Instruments to throw dirt upon the beautifull face of truth, not onely in blinde corners, but also in pulpits and printed pamphlets. And, if it be∣long to a Court Martiall to do right to a man of quality in poynt of honour, surely it well becometh the supreame Court of Parlia∣ment to vindicate the Honour of God his everlasting Truth. Many motives might bee used to set on the Exhortation both generall and speciall,Motives. exciting us to this great purchase of Truth, and to the promoting of the cause of Truth. Much might bee said of the glory, riches, majesty, beauty and di∣vine excellencie of truth and heavenly wisedome, for which I re∣ferre you as to other Scriptures, so in particularly to the eighth chapter of this booke of Proverbs. Give me leave for the present in few words to touch upon these three things, and so conclude, 1. The power of truth, 2. The speciall engagements obligeing us of this Age and Nation to purchase and promote it, 3. A serious consideration of what value the truth will be at the last. Admira∣ble is the power and strength of truth, for all that buy and pos∣sesse it, against all that either oppose or neglect it. All the most unlikely Prophesies of Scripture, have beene or shall be accom∣plished by the power of divine Truth: all the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospell have beene or shall be per∣formed by it: all the dreadfull threats verifyed. The Power of truth raysed a Seede of the vanquished woman, to bruise the head of the Serpent and god of the world. It brought the Son of God to descend from His Throne of Supreame Majesty, to cloath him∣selfe
with flesh, subject himselfe to the guilt of sinne and curse of the Law, to the death and shame of the Crosse, to drinke the bitter Cup of his Fathers Wrath, and for that end to suspend the excrcise of His Authority in calling downe Legions of Angels from Heaven to rescue him out of the hands of his enemies. The Power of Truth,Dan. 2. which is the Power of Christ Himselfe, raysed Him from the dead, and advanced Him to the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty on High, &c. Yea this Power of truth what wonderfull alterations hath it wrought in the world? how hath it dissolved the severall Mine∣ralls whereof that Image was composed, the gold, silver, brasse, and iron? broken in pieces famous Monarchies and Em∣pires of the world, blasted, and in great part already consumed the power of that man of sin, enfeebled the strength of that Beast whom the world worshipped and wondred at? It is admi∣rable to consider, how the strength of divine Truth breaketh tho∣rough all opposition,Rev. 3. beareth downe all resistance, Pulleth downe the mighty from their Seates, Exalteth the humble and meeke: wit∣nes a late and notable example in this Land, The Ruine of the Pre∣lacy: Truth had long since spoken it, I will spew thee out of my mouth: yea, such is the power of truth that it maketh its very enemies serve its ends, and in the midst of the most perplexed concurrence of second causes, crosse interferings and overthwart interposings of inferiour Agents, holdeth a steady course towards its full accomplishment, and moveth on in a streight line to its finall period: where it arriveth most exactly in its owne proper poynt of time. The Power of God his truth brought Israel out of Egypt,Exo. 12. 41 at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self∣same day it came to passe. All Pharaohs oppositions, all his tergi∣versations could not prorogue the terme of Israels bondage one day beyond that terme which truth had prefixed: nay, these ser∣ved rather to spinne out that interim, to fill up that voyde space of time, that the truth might take place in its owne time. Woe to them, who stand up against the Power of truth at such a time when any of its great workes are to be accomplished for the Is∣rael of God. Those persons or what degree soever, Meane men, Nobles, Peeres, Princes, who happen to stand up as Adversaries against the truth at such a time, seeme to have beene borne in an
evill houre. Pharaoh (I am perswaded) might have gone to his grave with a great deale lesse guilt upon his conscience, had he lived and reigned in another Age, and not at that time when the Power of truth was to be put forth in. Israels deliverance: some of his Ancestours (perhaps) had hearts as bad, but had no such occasion in so high a degree to treasure up wrath against their owne soules: the like may be said of his Courtiers and People, that joyned with him in that designe. When the Lord by visible and glorious signes of the times and extraordinary dispensations of providence, owneth the cause of his People in bondage, and saith againe and againe, Let my People goe, let my People goe, that they may serve mee according to mine owne minde and direction, then let men tremble to hearden their hearts and oppose God, lest in the issue it appeare that for this cause they were set up, that the Lord might make his Power knowne upon them. On the other side the Power of truth is strong for all that embrace it, and labour to promote it. It will carrie them through all dangers and difficul∣ties, and in the end crowne them with Glory. In a word, this Power of truth is sufficient to deliver poore slaves and captives out of the power of Satan,John 8. 31. 32. and to make them free. Then said Jesus to those Jewes which beleeved on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed: and ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make ye free. In a Sea-fight betweene the Spanyards and Hollanders,Triumphs of Nassau. it is sayd that a poore captive in one of the Spa∣nish Galleyes, had his chayne wherewith he was fastned, broken asunder by a Cannon shot, himselfe not hurt, and perceiving that he was loose, leapt into the Sea with a Peice of his chayne and escaped to the other ship, by this strange providence regain∣ing his liberty: many seeme afraid of the truth, especially when it commeth thundring like a Cannon shot from the mouth of some Boanerges, but if thou receive it, yeeld and subject thy self to it, it will never hurt thee: no, it will breake thy chayne, those chaines of death and darkenesse whereby Satan holdeth thee captive, and make thee free, and though thou mayest carry a piece of thy chaine with thee to thy dying day, yet it will wholly free thee in the end. Buy Truth, and walk in the power of the spirit of Truth, and ye shall be mighty in the strength of Christ to over∣come, and shall sit downe with Him in his Throne, even as he over∣came
and is set downe with His Father in his Throne. 2. Many and great ingagements lie upon us of this Nation, and in particular upon us of this generation,Motive. to make us buy truth and stand for Truth to the uttermost. Wonderfully hath the Lord wrought for the bringing in, the restoring, preserving and propagating of the Truth among us. To say nothing of the first introduction of the light, in or neere the Apostles times, How graciously did the Lord visit this Nation about 200. yeers before Luthers dayes, by the ministery of Wickliffe and others, raising up a succession of faithfull witnesses to seal the Truth with their blood in the severall Reignes of our Kings, who according to the blindnesse of those times gave their power to the Beast. Then followed that strange act of Henry the eighth, in abolish∣ing the Popes Supremacy: next, the wonderfull workings of our God upon the heart and by the hands of our English Iosias King Ewr 6. In whose Reigne it is very observable, that by an admirable conjuncture of providence, the Churches of Ger∣many should be under persecution, and the Churches in this Land should enjoy a short breathing time of Peace, that so England which had need to borrow light from forreigne parts, might be supplyed; from Germany Divines were called, both such as were Orthodox, and such (it seemeth) who were tainted with the Lutheran errour, one at least, viz: Brentius a man noted to bee much infected aswell with that great errour of ubiquity, as that of the Corporall presence in the Sacrament, a person of eminent authority for his Learning and manifold accomplishments, and one who had he accepted of the call,Vocatus a rege Angliae Edvardo amplissimis promissioni∣bus. Mel: Ad: in vita, Brontii. might have sowed such seed in one or other of our Universities as might have overspread the Land, & perhaps those weeds which might have sprang from it, would not have been rooted out unto this day, especially if that be considered that our leading men Cramner, Ridley, &c. were supposed not to be wel informed in that point at that time. I con∣ceive there was a gracious overruling providence of God in it, diverting him, and moving him to decline so faire an offer, though (it seemeth) hee was troubled to finde a place wherein to hide his head with safety. On the other side the Lord was pleased to incline the hearts of Martyr, Bucer and Phagius, three pious and Orthodox Divines to accept the call. What were all our multi∣plied
deliverances in the Reigne of Queen Elizabeth, among the rest that of 88. And since her time from the Powder-treason, and now of late a wonderfull series or large Catalogue of extraor∣dinary events brought about by the mighty hand of God; what are all these (I say) but the glorious workings of our God for the procuring and continuing unto us these precious opportunities of buying truth? and therefore they ought to be mighty provo∣cations to our spirits not to neglect such a price put into our hands, unlesse we will shew our selves of all people upon the earth most unthankfull,Josh. 10. 12 and so most unexcusable. Let me name one of the last sort: that as in the dayes of Josh. The Lord hearke∣ned to the voice of a man, saying, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon, and the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about an whole day: so whereas our Parliaments have formerly been made like fleeting meteors or falling stars, giving some glimpse of light and suddenly vanish∣ing, the Lord should now hearken to the cryes of His people, and give us a fixed Parliament, like the Sunne standing still in the midst of Heaven, that so there might be time for the disco∣very and establishment of Truth and for the scattering of the enemies of Truth. 3.Motive. And lastly consider what will be the value and price of truth at the last on the death-bed, in the day of judgement. How many thousands of gold and silver, yea of worlds (if they had them) would the greatest enemies or contemners of truth give at that day, if then it might be had, if then they could purchase the saving knowledge of God, of Christ, of the Gospel, the Truth of Faith, repentance, sanctification? then a whole world for a lamp full of this precious oyl. Certainly Truth is alwayes of the same value, every whit as much worth now as it will be then: But now men looke upon Truth as they do upon rich wares in a dark-shop, and so undervalue it, whereas they take a full view of the things of the world, and look upon them in the open Sun. But then the Truth shall be fully discovered, men shall see such a light as they never saw, a glorious irradiation, and Divine brightnesse from the face of Christ, and Truth shall be exhibited sub dio, in the broad day-light in the cleer light of that Great Day, to which the light which now we see by, is but as a twi∣light
or evening light. Then the worth of Truth shall be fully known: they that would not goe to the price of it shall know their losse.2. Pet. 3. 10 . Oh ye that prize your wealth above the Truth, ye will be of another minde when the pillars of the earth are trembling, the heavens gathering together as a scroll, and passing away with a great or hideous noise, the elements dropping or melting, the earth and the works in it burnt up, if yee will seeke for that wealth which now yee value above the Truth, ye must seek it in that heap of ashes: and ye that preferre your pleasures above it, as they are but shadowes now when they are at best, so then they will be torments, and ye that esteeme your honours, credit, re∣putation and the praise of men above the Truth, ye will then see that this was but a blast, an empty breath when ye enjoyed it, and then it will be nothing, yea, it will turn into shame and con∣fusion of face for ever. On the contrary, the beauty and glory of truth will then shine forth in perfection, & they that bought it at the highest rate shall cleerly understand what a blessed advantage they have made. Oh that now we could be wise for our souls! Let us be content to begger our selves (if need be) that we may bee rich. Give any thing to buy Truth. The time is short (as the A∣postle saith) it remaineth then that those which buy the things of this world be as if they possessed not, as men ready to part with them at any time, looking upon them as things that little con∣cerne them, carrying their hearts above them, keeping their spi∣rits weaned from them:1 Cor. 7. 30 but that those who buy Truth, bee as those that possesse and improve it to the best advantage: For the fashion of this world passeth away: but the Word and Truth of God, and the fruit, comfort and benefit of it endureth for ever. FINIS.
