M1898 E468_20 R205369 99864769 162338
A MESSAGE Brought to the Parliament, concerning the TREATY, Between the KING and the COMMISSIONERS Brought by Sir Peter Killeygrew on Tuesday 17 Octob. 1648. With the Commissioners Propositions, and His Majesties Answer, Newport the 12 of October, 1648. royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT Printed for R. Smithurst, neer Pye-corner 1648,
A Message brought to the Parliament, concerning the Treaty between the King and the Commissioners. May it please your Majesty, WE do pray your Majesties assent for the passing of such Act or Acts for raising of monies for the payment and satisfying of the publick debts and damages of the Kingdome, and other publick uses as shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, and that if the King doe not give his assent thereunto, then, it being done by both Houses of Par∣liament, the same shall bee as vallid to all in∣tents
and purposes as if the Royall assent had been given thereunto. Newport 13 October. 1648. CHARLES R. HIS Majesty doth give His con∣sent to the passing of their Propo∣sition of the 12 of Octob. as is desired. The time for bringing in Accounts being limiting for two years. Newport 13 Oct. 1648. May it please your Majesty, VVE do pray your Majesties assent, that by Act of Par∣liament, all Peeres made since the day that Edward Lord Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seale dis∣serted the Parliament, and that the said
Great Seale was surreptitiously con∣veyed away from the Parliament be∣ing the 21 of May 1642. And who shal be hereafter made, shal not sit or Vote in the Parliament of England without consent of both Houses of Parliament And that all Honors and Tittles con∣ferred on any, without consent of both Houses of Parliament since the 21th day of May 1642) being the day that both Houses declared, That the King, seduced by evill Counsell, intend∣ed to raise War against the Parliament) be declared null and void. Newport 14 Octob. 1648. CHARLES R. HIs Majesty doth give His consent to the passing of your Proposition of the 13th of October. Newport 14 Octob. 1648.
A List of the names of persons presented to His Ma∣jesty to be excepted out of Mercy. Prince Rupert Prince Maurice James Earle of Darby, John Earle of Bristoll William Earle of Newcastle Francis Lord Cottington, George Lord Digby, Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely Sir Robert Heath Knight, Doctor Brambal Bishop of Derry Sir William Widdrington, Colonell George Goring, Henry Jermin Esquire, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Francis Doddington, Mr. Endimon Porter, Sir George Radcliffe, Sir Marmaduke Langdale Henry Vaughan Esquire, now called Sir Hen∣ry Vaughan. Sir Francis Windibanke,
Sir Richard Greenvill, Mr. Edward Hide, now called Sir Edward Hide. Sir John Marley, Sir Nicholas Cole, Sir Thomas Riddell Juniour, Sir John Culpepper, Mr. Richard Lloyd, now called Sir Richard Lloyd. Mr. David Jenkins Sir George Strode, George Carteret, Esquire, now called Sir George Carteret, Sir Charles Dallison Knight, Richard Lane Esquire, now called Sir Richard Lane, Sir Edward Nicholas. John Ashburnham, Esquire, Sir Edward Harbert Knight, His Majesties Atturney Generall. FINIS.
