m71 e116_13 99859109 111175
A COMPLEAT SCHOOLE OF VVARRE: OR, A direct way for the Ordering and Exercising of a Foot Company: Whereby may bee attained with ease, the perfection both of Musket and Pyke in short time. Now, as most necessary, thought fit to be set forth for a generall good. By an expert Commander, R. M. Printed at London for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield. 1642.
The Order for exercising of a Foot COMPANIE. STand right in your Files. Stand right in your Rankes. Silence. To the right Hand. As you were. Note, when you are commanded to be as you were, you are ever to turn to the contrary hand from whence you came. To the left hand. As you were, As you were. Rankes to the left hand double. To the right hand about. As you were. As you were. Files to the right hand double. To the left hand about. As you were. As you were. Files to the left hand double. Rankes to the right hand double. As you were. Halfe Files to the right hand, double your Front. As you were. Halfe Files to the left hand, double your Front. As you were. Rankes to the right hand Counter-march. When you will Counter-march to the right hand, the first Rank of Leaders onely must advance one step forward with the right leg, and then turne; and all the other Rankes must march first up to the place from whence the first Ranke did counter-march before they turned. Rankes to the left hand counter-march. Observe that if you will now counter-march to the left hand, the first ranke must step forward one step with the left leg, and then turne; and all the other ranks behinde, must come up to that place before they turne, where the Ser∣jeant stands. Observations before you wheele. If you will wheele to the right hand, you must double your rankes to the left; and if you wheele to the left, you must double to the right. Rankes to the right hand double. Files close to the right hand, to your close order. Rankes close up to your swords point.
Note, that when you will wheele to the right hand, that the Leader of the right hand File must keep his Musket Rest fixt to the ground, and must onely turn his body without losing of any ground, and also the left hand Leader, if you wheel to the left. To the right hand wheel. Or to the left hand wheele. Having wheeled to bring them in their former order, you must use these wors of Command: First to the rankes that were closed to the swords point. Rankes backward to your double distance of twelve foot. Open your Files to the left hand to your order of three foot. And then speaking to the Rankes that were first doubled Rankes as you were. Having performed the former motions, you may afterwards exercise your Company of Pikes and Muskettiers together, or each a part. To begin with the Pikes, you may command them to doe these motions standing, viz. Advance your Pikes. Order your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes, Charge your Pikes. Order your Pikes. Traile your Pikes. Cheeke your Pikes. But these motions are to be performed both standing and marching, vi. Charge your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes. To the right hand charge. Shoulder your Pikes. To the left hand charge. Shoulder your Pikes. To the Reere charge. Shoulder your Pikes. Comport your Pikes. Charge your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes. Stand. Charge under hand. Charge your Pikes at the foo Shoulder your Pikes. Order your Pikes. 1. First, note that in charging, halfe the Rankes onely must charge their Pikes, the other hindmost halfe of the Rankes doe but port their Pikes, that is, they carry them so couched over the heads of the foremost, as any give them no offence in charging or retiring. Besides, this way the Pikes are not so subject to broken by the shot of the enemy, as when they are advanced. 2. They must likewise observe when they charge, standing to fall backe with the right legge and marching to step forward with the rest. 3. The exercising of your Muskettiers is likewise performed either stand∣ing or marching; that is, either by Rankes or Files, after three, manner of wayes, alwayes blowing your Match, moving your right leg foremost when you are ready to present.
1. Having an enemy in your front. 2. In your Reere. 3. Upon your right or left hand Flanke. Note also, that the first Ranke falling backe with their right legges, lies on, gives fire, and the first Ranke falling away, the second in Ranke presenting, having their pans guarded, blowes their matches, open their pan, and step forward with their right legges into the place of the first ranke, lies on, gives fire, and fall away, whiles the rest of the body of Muskettiers move up to their places, and so two rankes at a time making ready, you may give fire so often as you list. Observe that in charging of an enemy, that the right hand wing fall off the right hand, and the left hand wing to the left, and the officers are to give the same word of command. The Muskettiers are to have a singular care to carry the mouthes of their Muskets aloft, as well when they are shouldred as in priming, as also when they keep their pans guarded, and come up to give fire. Moreover, if an enemy should appeare on either your right or left Flanke, and that you resolve to maintaine your ground, and would gall him from ei∣ther Flanke, it is performed by giving first this word of command, To the Right or left hand, which you please; and then making an intervall of six foot distance betweene the middlemost Leaders of the halfe Files, for the halfe Ranke on the left hand doe fall away between the Files to the Reere before the Pikes, and the halfe Ranke on the right hand, on the right Flanke; likewise you may give fire from either or both flankes, so often as you list. Againe, if an enemy should shew himselfe in your Reere, the like is done by this terme of direction: To the right hand about. And having given fire upon them, fall away to the place where the Front stood, even in the same manner as you did before. In advancing towards an enemy, two Rankes must alwayes make rea∣dy together, and advance ten paces forwards before the bodies: at which distance a Serjeant, or when the body is great, some, other Officer, must stand, to whom the Muskettiers must come, before they present and give fire▪ fir he first Ranke, and while the first Ranke gives fire, the second keep their Muskets close to their rests, and their pans guarded; and as soone as the first are fallen away, the second presently presents, gives fire, and fall after them. Now as soone as the first Rankes doe move from their places in the fro the two Rankes next it, must undershoulder their Muskets, and make ready, so as they may advance forward ten paces, as before, as soon as ever the
two first ranks are fallen away, and are to do in all points as the former; so all the other Rankes through the whole Company or Division, must do the same by twooes one after another. A way how to give fire retreating from an enemy. As the troop marcheth, the hind most ranke of all keeping still with the troop, maketh ready; and being ready, the souldiers in that rank turne all toge∣ther to the right hand, and give fire, marching presently away a good round pace to the front, and there place themselves in ranks together, just before the front: as soon as the first rank turne to give fire, the rank next it make ready, and doth as the former, and so all the rest: Last of all the troop or wing of Muskettiers make ready all together stan∣ding, and the first without advancing gives fire in the place it stands in, and speedily as may be, yet orderly, falls away, all the rankes doing the same suc∣cessively one after another. A manner how to give fire either from the right or left hand flanke. The company or division marching, the outmost File next the enemy, are commanded to make ready, keeping still along with the body, till such time as they be ready, and then they turn all to the right or left hand, according to the sight of their enemy, either upon the right or left flank, and give fire all to∣gether; when they have discharged they stirre not, but keep their ground, and charge their peeces again in the same place they stand. Now as soon as the aforesaid File doth turn to give fire, the outmost next it makes ready, alwayes keeping along with the troop, till the bringers up bee past a little beyond the Leader of that File that gave fire last, and then the whole File must turne and give fire, and doe in all points as the first did, and so all the rest one after another. A Serjeant (or if the troop be great) some better qualified Officer) must stand at the head of the first File, and as soone as the second File hath given fire and hath charged, he is to lead forwards the first file up to the second file, and so to the rest one after another, till he hath gathered up again the whole wing, and then he is to joyn them again in equall front with the Pikes. The manner of ordering a Regiment. If there be ten Companies in a Regiment, consisting of 1000. or 1200. men, they must be drawne into two Divisions, five Companies in one Divisi∣on: and because it is not sit that the eldest Captaines should be all in one di∣vision, they are thus divided, viz. Colonel. Leivtenant Colonel. 1. 4. 5. 7. 3. 6. Sergeant Major. .
The first Captaines company next to the Colonels company. 2. The second Captains company the left hand of the second division. 3. The third next the Serjeant Major in the first division. 4. The fourth next the Lievtenant Colonel in the second division. 5. The fifth in the middle of the first division. 6. The sixth next the second Captaine in the second division. 7. The seventh next the fourth in the second division. The Serjeants are to march upon the flanke of the divisions, as neere as they can to their owne men, to keep them in their rank, and from straggling. The Drummers betwixt the third and fourth rankes. But if the Regiment march in battaile, then in the flankes of the Regiment, as equall with the third rank in the Front, and also to the third rank to the Reere; and so likewise in the flankes of the Pikes. The demonstration of Places in a Regiment. The first Captaine leads the Van of the Pikes. The second the Reere of the Pikes. The third the first division of Muskettiers. The Colonels Captaine shall lead in the Vangard of the Muskettiers, in the right wing upon the left hand of the third Captaine. The first Lievtenant to lead the second division of Muskettiers. The second to bring up the Reere of all. The third to lead up the second division of Pikes. The fourth to bring up the right wing of Muskettiers. But because the absence of Captaines may be such, as the Regiment may want the principal places of leading, it is in the Colonels will to dispose of the places of leading as he shall finde fitting. The Serjeant Major of every Regiment to have a speciall care before the Regiment moves out of the quarter, to call upon the Captaines for their old men of every company to make files of them; and for the over∣plus, which cannot be above 7. in number, shall march in the Reere of the Regiment before the Officer that brings up the Regiment, not disbanding themselves. Upon the very motion that the Drummes begin to beat a march, the hind∣most rankes shall march forward together as well as the first rankes, that the hindmost ranks need not run or march away faster then the foremost. The distance between the ranks in marching, shall be six foot distance one from the other so that the but ends of the Pikes shall almost touch the heels of them that march before them. The files shall be no more then three foot distance one from the other. When a Regiment marcheth in division, then the halfe of the Muskettiers
shall march before the pikes, and the pikes in the midst, and the other halfe of the Muskettiers to be in the Reere of the pikes. Observing well that they must march ten in front at the least, if the way bee sit thereunto, keeping alwaies their distances both in rank & file, as aforesaid. The Officer that shall lead any part of the Regiment, shall take up no more place then the space of a rank, which is 6. foot, to the end they may follow one another the better, and so neither lose time nor place. As for the officer that shal march after any part of the regiment or division, he shall follow the last rank of them that march before him, observing like∣wise the distance of six foot, to the end that betwixt him and the officer that shall lead any part or division of the regiment following, there may be like∣wise six foot, and so between the first and second division there must bee 18. foot distance. If the regiment be divided, and led in two troops, the second division of the regiment shall follow the first about the distance of ten or twelve paces, and no larger. The distances between the regiments that march one after another, shall be 18. or 20. paces, to wit, 6. foot for the officer that marcheth in the Reere of the regiment, and six foot for the officer that leads in the front of the next regiment, and the rest of the places between both the officers aforesaid. And where there is roome enough, the regiment shall march close and in one body, observing evermore the distance of rankes and files aforesaid. Between every 5. files at be most, and between every 3. files at the least, of Muskettiers, they shall leave a space of six foot broad, keeping as much as possibly may be, the Muskettiers of one company together, not marching but in fight. When the regiment stands in battaile, and that the regiment consists of two divisions, each division shall be 50. foot distant one from another. And the Muskettiers of a regiment being more in number then the pikes, and consequently falling out broader then the front or division of pikes, they shall close inward towards both the Troops of the pikes which stand before them. But if so the number of Muskettiers be too great, and that by reason of the intervals or the spaces of six foot that are to bee made betweene them for their number, having no place to fall or close inward, without touching one another, then the two Troops of Muskettiers on both sides of the Pikes, after whom they stand, shall fall outward. The Ensignes of every regiment are to march with their Colours in the front 6 foot before the pikes when they move in a body, and in this parodo to bee alwayes ready to veile their Colours when the Generall passeth
by: but when they march in battell, as command shall bee given, all the En∣signes of each Division are to goe downe before the fourth and fifth Ranke, but the Colonels own Colours to flye in the second Ranke; the same to bee done in the second Division: If you come to charge with an enemy, then for good reasons let the Colonels Colours fall back to the rest: If the Lord Ge∣nerall passeth by, make the body move their faces either in Flanke or Reere, which way he passeth. That no Wagons shall be suffered to passe between the Regiments or Di∣vision, only each Colonell one, which is to march in the front of his Regi∣ment, and the Commander of every Tertia to have two in the head of every Tertia, besides one of their owne wagons in the head of their owne Regi∣ment; and if their own Regiment have the Vangurd of the Tertia, then they are to have three wagons. And for the wagons of the Captaines to march in the Reere of the Army in their Signiority, according as their Colonels march that day, and are to be so ordered by the Garriage Master. And when the whole Army is thus marched, and at any time shall come to make a stand, either at noon tide to eat and repo, or at even tide to rest till the Quarter be made, then the Tertia shall be led up to the places all three in front, each Regiment in division one after another at fifty foot, and each Re∣giment at an hundred foot, and each Tertia distant in flanke from other about 150 foot somtime, if the ground would give in, then the two divisions of each Regiment shall stand in front, and so the Regiments following in that order; and also in this order conformable all the three Tertias side by side, and so shall all the Cannons and Wagons front up in this wise in breadth, that traine may be shortned in a neere compasse, which is done to keep the Army close, and in farre distance in the Reere. This order is to be observed especially as the Generall shall finde fitting to give command for it, or otherwise not, FINIS.
