R976 E365_9 99861780 160068
A REMONSTRANCE Concerning the MISDEMEANOVRS of some of The Scots Souldiers in the County of Yorke. Subscribed by divers Gentlemen of the Committee of Sequestrations in that County; And sent up to Thomas Westrop Es∣quire (publique Agent) to be presen∣ted to the House of Commons. December 6. 1646. THis Remonstrance is Appointed to be printed, and is signed, by Richard Wynne, Edmond Hall, Tho∣mas Bate, Henry Lyle, Thomas Peeres, Iohn Hum∣fray. Sub. Com. Seq. LONDON, Printed for T. V. 1646.
A Remonstrance concerning the Misdemeanours of some of the Scots Souldiers in the County of York. Sir, THere is but little possibility that the Scots will leave us this win∣ter, for they have charged horses to goe to Newcastle for more armes, and planted themselves by Troopes in severall places of the Coun∣try: I will give you some particulars of their deportment. Five Souldiers quartered with a Widdow of Hutton a fortnight together, and though they had twelve pence a day allowed them for dyet, they paid her onely six shilling for them all, she told them they must provide other quarters, for she was not able to maintaine them at that rate, they answered they would; bought a six penny loafe, caused her give them milke to it, and went into the fields, brought home a fat sheepe where with they supplyed
their leane Commons: Thus are quarters paid, Easton men were forced to pay a penny per diem for every shilling that wanted of their Assesse; thus are monies collected. A Souldier at Hemlington broke his Land∣lords head, cut his servants lip, threw the meat about the table, broke the Pales, Kettles, and Piggons, because his Landlord would not give him two shillings per day, and bid him complaine if he durst; thus is the Coun∣try abused; the Officers have double pay for themselves and unseen souldiers. The Post boy of Durnton was robbed by the souldiers of Worshall, and his horse and purse taken from him; no wonder though letters miscarry. A Gisbrough man had two Horses and three pound in money taken from his servant, by one Hamilton, as he was coming from Thrisk Market, the man and horse was found out by the owner, and complaint made to the Captaine but no restitution; whereupon a Petition was presented to the Lieutenant Generall upon Saturday was seven night at Gisbrough, who seemed to be very much of∣fended, and commanded that the party should
be brought before him, but he was kept close enough till the Lieutenant Generall removed, and that very day the Captaine and three more fell upon the owner (being Constable) and beat him very sore, three swords being drawn upon him at once, and had slaine him at his owne doore, if very good helpe had not been presently made, since which time the Constable is forced to abandon his owne house; this is sharpe law. The Country at the same time when the Lieutenant Generall was at Grisbrough, was about to present a Petition wherein was re∣presented their great sufferings by the Scot∣tish Army in particular expressions: and their humble suite for the removall of the two Re∣giments before the Petitioners were totally consumed; but the Lieutenant Generall was gone by three of the clock in the morning, whereby the Countries intentions was pre∣vented, yet three men were sent after him to Richmond with the Petition; but of their suc∣cesse I cannot write because the Messengers are not yet returned that I heare of. The Justices of Peace of our Wapentakes, and other substantiall Inhabitants have quite
left the Country. It would mollifie an Ada∣mantine heart, to heare the bitter complaint and rufull moanes that are ecchoed out in e∣very quarter; this is but cold comfort to hun∣gry soules that have sold their goods, borro∣wed monies, and morgaged their lands to sa∣tisfie the souldiers: I wish the Commanders of that army would read the fifth Chapter of Ne∣hemiah, and make him their pattern; or that they would make a generall (not a particular use) of the Covenant, they would then finde that delinquents are not brought to condigne punishment, but protected and quartered a∣mongst us, that the liberty of the subject is not maintained, but grosely abused. God in mer∣send them out of this Kingdome, that the Country be not totally consumed, nor like to this poore Wapentake in a ready way to ru∣ine and beggery, divers that have lived in an honest and substantiall way, wanting bread to put in their childrens mouthes when they cry out for hunger; Sir no more for the present, but that I am, Your Worships most humble Servant, Tho. Bate. Stampton. 20. Novemb. 1646.
Vpon a meeting of us whose names are subscribed we doe not only ratifie what is within written but also Certifie, THat one Bogden a Wollen Draper of Rippon, was slaine neare Cattericke bridge upon the tenth of November last, by foure Scots, who tooke both his horse and money. That upon severall complaints of the coun∣try, the Lieutenant Generall hath issued some Orders for regulating the souldier, but to no purpose, for both Officer and souldier exact to their liking, some a third more, some halfe, or to speake more properly e∣very man what he please; and when one man is utterly wasted and his estate spent, (as in every township some fall daily) then they inforce the rest of the Inhabitants of that Township to pay the decayed mans propor∣tion,
which tends to the generall ruine of all; and if a Landlord complaine to any superiour Officer, for the exaction of the souldier, he is referred to make peace with the souldier, and that is his doome. Wee have intreated Mr. Lyle, to repaire to the Committee at Yorke with the Petition and answer of the Lieutenant Generall, who will report their result to you and so rest, Dated at Ayton 21 November 1646. Your very humble Servant, Rich. Wynne. Edmond Hall. Thomas Bate. Henry Lyle. Thomas Peeres. Iohn Humfray. For the Worshipfull Thomas Westrop, Esquire. London. FINIS.
