S1429 R229978 99899387 153312
W R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and flanked by the Scottish unicorn on one side and the English lion on the other ACT For publishing His Majesties most gra∣cious Letter. HIS Majesties high Commissioner, ad Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, having received from His Majesty, the graci∣ous Letter subjoyned, with the Order therein contained; Appointing the same to be Published, for the Satisfaction of all His Majesties good Subjects, do hereby Ordain the same to be published accordingly: And do therefore grant War∣rand, and Ordain His Majesties Heraulds, Macers of Privy Council, Purse∣vants, Messengers at Arms, to pass to the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and there make due Publication of the said Letter with sound of Trumpet, and all other Solemnities. And Further, Ordains the same to be Printed, and His Majesties Solicitor to transmit Copies thereof, and of this Act, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the Stewartries, their Deputs or Clerks, who are hereby▪ required to cause publish the same at the Head burghs of their respective Jisdictions, after the Manner and Form of publick Proclamations, as they will be answerable. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. Follows the Tenor of His Majesties Letter.
crown surmounting the French fleur-de-lis flanked by the Scottish thistle on one side and the Tudor rose on the other His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS LETTER: Directed to His Grace JAMES Duke of Queensberry, His Majesties High Commissioner, and the Privy Council of SCOTLAND. WILLIAM R. RIght Trusty and Intirely Beloved Cousin and Counsellor, Right rusty and Right well Beloved Cousin and Counsellor, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins & Counsellors, Right Trusty and well Beloved Counsellors, and Trusty and well Beloved Counsellors, We Greet you well. We heartily wish that the last Meeting of Parliament had proceeded, so as that the Kingdom might have been made Partakers of these Advantages for which Our Commissioner was so fully Instructed: If it had been possible for Us to have agreed to the Resolve offered to Assert the Right of the African-Companies Colony in Ame∣rica, tho' that Method had appeared to Us more unnecessary, yet We had from the beginning readily done it, at the earnest Desire of Our Ministers, and for Our Peoples Satisfaction, all other Considerations set apart. But now that Things are much changed, (wherein We are truely Sorry for the Na∣tions Loss) And We being most willing to Grant what may be needful for the Releif and Ease of the Kingdom, and the Advancement of its Welfare in all its Concerns: We have thought fit to Declare this Our good Mind to be made Known to all Our loving Subjects. And for the Companies Concerns, We Assure you, that We will be so ready to concur with Our Parliament, in every thing that can be reasonably expected of Us, for Aiding & Supporting their Interests, and Repairing their Losses, that Our good Subjects shall have just Grounds to be sensible of our heartie Inclinations to advance the Wealth and Prosperity of that our Antient Kingdom. And as for Captain Pinkerton and the other Prisoners in Spain, We have alreadie, and We hope Essectual∣ly Interposed for their Liberation. In the next place, As We did fully In∣struct our Commissioner, So We are still Resolved, to pass all such Laws as
shall be offered for the better Establishing the true Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian Government of the Church, which you at present Enjoy; For the more effectual preventing the Growth of Popery justly feared, for the Repressing of Vice & Immorality, for the Preserving & Securing the Liberty of Mens Persons, for the Encouraging & Advancement of Trade & Manufacturies, and generally, to give Our Assent to such other Laws as shall be brought in for further clearing and securing Mens civil Rights and Properties, promoting the Administration of Justice, and setling the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, demanding nothing on Our part, save what shall be necessary to Maintain that Our antient Kingdom in so happy a Settlement against Our and Their Ene∣mies. And this Declaration, We are confident will be satisfying to all good Men, who will certainly be careful both of their own Preservation, and of the Interest and Honour of the Government, and not to suffer themselves to be Misted, nor to give any Advantage to Enemies & ill designing Persons, ready to catch hold of every Opportunity, as their Practices do too manifestly wit∣ness. Our necessary Absence hath occasioned the late Adjournments, but as soon as God shall bring Us back, We are firmly Resolved Our Parliament shall Meet, where We do again Assure all Our good Subjects, nothing shall be Wanting on Our part, that may contribute to their Welfare and Happiness. And this Our Resolution and Declaration, We Allow you to Publish for the Satisfaction of all concerned. So We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at Our Court at Loo, the 26th day of July 1700. And of Our Reign the 12th year. By His Majesties Command, RO. PRINGLE. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.
