S1391 99896346 154347
and Order of Council, for Sequestrating the Rents of such as are in Rebellion against Their Majesties. At Edinburgh, the 3d day of January, 1690. THE Lords of His Majesties Privy Council Considering, That by the Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom, and particularly by the 2d. Act, 12. Parl: K: Ja. 2. It is expresly Provided and Declared, That where any person or persons are sus∣pected or scandelled of Treason, that they be taken and remain in Firmance, and their Goods under sure Borrows, untill they suffer an Assize, and be Tryed, whether they be guilty or not; And that the persons afternamed, viz. John Earl of Melfort, Sir Archibald Kennedy of Cullean, Collonel  Cannon, John late Viscount of Dndee,  Earl of Dumfermling,  Earl of Bu∣chan, Viscount of Frendraught,  Lord Dunkell, Mr. Colin Mckenzie Uncle to the Earl of Seaforth, Sir John Drummond of Ma∣chany, Sir William Wallace of Cragie, Sir James Hamilton of Eliston,  of Archarach,  Crawfurd younger of Ardmillan and Crawfurd his Brother, Mr. David Graham Brother to the late Viscount of  Dundee,  Robertson of Strouan,  Stuart of Ladywell,  Ogilvy of Clova, James Edmiston of Newtoun of Down,  Grant of Balindalloch, Sir Ewen Cameron of Lochel, Camero his eldest Son, Sir Donald Mcdonald of Slait,  Mcnauchton of Dundorow, Major  Middleton, Ensign Winster, Captain  Charters, Captain John Ramsay, Son to the late Bishop of Ross, Major William Grahame of Boquhaple, Cap∣tain Patrick Blair, lately Captain in the Earl of Dunmores Regiment of Dragoons,  Cleiland of Foskin, Halybur∣ton of Pitcur,  Grant of Glenmoristoun,  Frazer of Foyer,  Blair of Glessclune, Archibald Mcdo∣nald of Largie,  Mcdonald his Brother, Alexander Mcallister of Loup,  Mcilvernock of Oib, Donald Mcneil of Galochellie, Hector Mcneil his Cousin German, John Mcnauchton uncle to the Laird of Mcnauchton,  Mcnauchton his two Sons, Stuart of Appein, John Stuart of Ardsheil, Stuarts his Brethren, Alexander Stuart of Innernahyle, James Stuart of Fasnacloich, John Stuart Fiar thereof, Alexander Mcdonald alias Mcean of Glencoe, Mcdonalds his two Sons, Mcdonald of Auchatricha∣ten, Sir John Mcclean, Laird of Mcclean, Hector Mcclean of Lochbuy,  Mcclean of Kingarloch,  Mcclean of Kinlochhalin, Mr. Alexander Mcclean, late Commissar of Argyle,  Mcclean of Coll,  Mcclean of Tarbet,  Mccleans three Sons, to Charles Mcclean in Arros,  Mcclean of Ardgour elder, and  Mcclean of Ardgour younger, his Son,  Mcclean Grand Child to the said Laird of Ardgour elder, John Cameron of Glendishorie,  Cameron his Brother,  Cameron of Callort,  Mcmartin alias Cameron of Latterfindlay,  Cameron his eldest Son,  Cameron of Glenivish,  Mcquar of Uluva, Mcdonald Captain of Clanronnald,  Mcdonald of Glengarie, Mcdonald of Ochterraw,  Mcdonald of Ferset,  Mcdo∣nald of Benbecula,  Mcdonald of Keppoch, Major Duncan Menzies  Stuart of Ballachen elder, Alexandr Stuart his bro∣ther, Farquherson of Inverrey, Mr. Robert Stuart late Minister at Balquhither, Andrew Clerk Feuer in Down, Mcdonald younger of Slate, Robert Stuart Brother to  Stuart of Annat,  Grahame of Duntruin, William Livineston of Kilsyth, Captain James Murray, Lieutennent James Murray, Captain Lieutennent  Crichton, Lieutennent Collonel Donald Mcgreigor, Mcgreigor of Braikley,  Chisholm of Strathglass,  Chisholm his Uncle, Patrick Stuart alias vic Domachie, Mcinteirn Wodsetter in Athole, John Stuart Wodsetter of Salichan, Dougald Stuart of Ach. , Alexander Stuart Wodsetter in Baloch, Dougal Stuart of Auchicon, Mr. Archibald Mccalman of rivain, John Mceanroy, alias Mccoll, and Ewen his eldest Son, John Mccoll, Portioners of Glasdrum, John Reid alias Mcnaughton Feuar of Finchocken in Lismore; Have been in actual Rebellion, and in Arms against Their Majsties Government and Laws, or at least accessory to, and Art and Part of the Crimes of Treason and Rebellion, and many of them are yet continuing to perpetrat and carry on their wicked designs against Their Majesties Interest, and for disturbing the publick Peace of the Kingdom; And it being requisit and ne∣cessary, that these persons, and the Successors of such of them as are dead, should be disabled from the prosecution of such Rebellious Pra∣ctices, by withholding from them their Maills and Duties, Debts, Sums of Money, and others due to them; Therefore the saids Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, Do hereby in their Majesties Names Require and Command, the Sheriffs of the whole respective Shires within this Kingdom, and the Stewarts of the Stewartries of Kirkcudbright and Orkney, and their Deputs or Clerks of Court, and in case of their absence or neglect, the Town Clerks of the Head Burghs within the said Shires and Stewartries, immediatly upon receipt hereof, to cause Messengers at Arms, or Sheriff Officers, conjunctly and severally, pass, and in Their Majesties Name and Authority, by vertue hereof, Fence, Arrest, and Seque∣strat in the hands of the Vassals, Tennents, Cottars, Feuars, Fermors, or any other person or persons whatsomever, subject and lyable in pay∣ment, or adebted and resting, owing to the forenamed persons, Rebels, or the Successors of them that are dead, all and sundry the Maills Farms, Kanes, Customes, Casualities, Profits, Duties, Goods, Gear, and others whatsomever, due, Adebted, Resting and Owing by them to the forenamed persons, who are, or have been in actual Rebellion against their Majesties Authority, and Laws, or accessory to, or Art and Part of the Crimes above-specified, by Bond, Word, Writ, Promise, Paction, Condition, or any other manner of way whatsomever, and that for the year of GOD, 1689. and in time coming, and the Rests of preceeding years; And like∣wise, all other Debts, Sums of Money, and others whatsomever, due, adebted, and resting, owing by them, to the forenamed per∣sons any manner of way whatsomever, wherever or in whose hands soever the same can be apprehended, to remain under sure Fence and Arrestment, ay and while the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council or Thesaury shall give Order, how the same shall be disposed of for Their Majesties use, in manner following, viz. Where there is Tutus accessus in the hands of the foresaids persons personally, or at their Dwelling-places, by delivering to every one of them a short copy, subscribed by the saids Messengers, or Sheriff-Officers; and where there is not Tutus accessus, by Crying of three several Oyesses, open Proclamation and publick Reading thereof at the Mercat-Crosse of the Head-Burgh of the saids Shires and Stewartries where they live, or where their Lands and Estates lies, and affixing and leaving a just double upon the saids Crosses, containing upon the end thereof, a Copy of the said general Arrestment, Signed by the Messenger: And also to make strick inquiry after all persons in whose hands the foresaids Arrestments should be made, and lay on the same accordingly, and with all convenient Diligence, after so doing, to return to Sir William Lockhart His Majesties Sollicitor, both the particular Executions made in the foresaids persons hands personally, or at their Dwelling-places, and the general ones made at the Mercat-Crosses, as they will be answerable; For doing of all which, this to the Sheriff Principal, their Deputes, Clerks of Courts, Messengers, Sheriff Officers, and all others concluded, shall be a sufficient Warrant. And Ordains thir Presents to be Printed, and Published accordingly. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, By Order of Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1690.
