S3909 E168_8 99860400 112520
The Sisters of the Scabards HOLIDAY: OR, A Dialogue between two reverent and very vertuous Matrons, Mrs. Bloomesbury, and Mrs. Long-Acre her neare Neighbour. Wherein is Discoursed how terrible, and costly and Civill Law was to their Profession; and how they congatulate the welcome Alteration. PRINTED, 1641.
The Sisters of the Scabards holy-day, OR A dialogue between two reverent and vertuous Matrons Mrs. Bloomsbu∣ry, and Mrs. Long-acre her neare neigh∣bour. Wherein is discoursed how terrible and costly the civil law was to their profession, and how they congratulate the welcome Alteration, &c. Blomesbury. MY great friend mistris Long-acre, you are very happily met. L. My large friend Mistris Bloms∣bury, not so great as your self, thogh (thanks to our fat-feeding ale) I am prettie well growne, I am prettie plump I'faith. B. So it seemes, for your belly is plumped up as big as a Bucking-tub. L. And yours is not much lesse, for in my opi∣nion any one might judge your fat Ale, (as you call it) had ingendred a Land Porpus in your belly, but I pray thee let's leave off this discourse, and tell mee what newes you heare, what is the cause you look so pleasantly?
B. Better news then ever I looked for. L. I pray thee kind sister proceed let's heare it. B. All the Civil Lawyers, the Judges, Doctors, Advocates, Proctors, Registers, and all their Co∣ney-hunting Clarkes, that love handsome wenches so well as their Masters, shall now ready pay for their venery, if they have it, they shall bee no more pri∣viledged. L. Why neighbour Bloomsbury, did not your Ci∣vill Lawyers use to pay ready money for your com∣modities, I hope they did not use to stop in with you for their fees; for my part, I never priviledged them; and if at any time they traded in my ware, (as many times they did) I would never trust them without readie money no more then they would me for their fees, yet I used them ever more conscionably then they did mee. B. But what had you alwaies ready money of their Clerks too? L. No apoxe on'em, those were the basest fellowes, they were worse then Apparators especially in a long vacation, yet many times (to give the Devill his due) at the latter end of a Michaelmas Terme, they were more liberall then their Masters. B. Good neighbour Long-acre, tell me what these Gent. in the cut-finger'd gloves would doe in a long vacation. L. Why I tell you, in either terme or vacation, these Gentlemen were more curious with what ware they dealt then their Masters, for many times wee could put off any Commodities to them, and they
would be content (though they were fain to imploy a Surgeon when they came home) but these Gentle∣men Clarkes they must have fresh wenches and hand∣some ones too (though their faces were plaistered halfe an inch thick or beautified with Ladies face Physicke) those same mackereltaild Gentlemen would swallow up whole bottles of strong water, and when they were got a little in drinke would kick me and my whole family out of dores, both male and female, young and old, pimps and rogues, whores and bawdes, and goe their wayes and pay me not one farthing. B. Truly they used you unconscionably. L. Nay this was not all, the very next day they would send an Apparator, who would warne both me and my whole harmlesse houshold to appeare in Pauls the next Court day, to answere for keeping a common bawdy-house, ready furnished with merce∣nary whores, who daily commit the carnall act of incontinency, and for many other misdeamea∣nors. B. Trust mee Mistris Long-acre, I have beene served in the like manner; but I pray how came you off. L. First I must pay the Apparator his whole fees, with large considerations for his extraordinary pains and attendance, then must I repaire to these Gentle∣men who had so abused us, and invite them to a breakfast forsooth, and make my composition with them and give them larger fees then their Mr. to take off the businesse, or else leave off the trade and be ut∣terly
undone, I assure you sister Blomsbury, there is I know not how many of those Clerks about Doctors-Commons that live upon nothing else every long vacation, then upon such projects as these; but now (thankes to the impartiall Parliament) their trading begins to faile them. B. Is that possible, sister Long-acre? L. 'Tis true as I tell you: And all the smel-smock crew of Messengers, Sumners, Apparators, and Promooters whatsoever must now either turne shoul∣der-clapper Bailiffs, Setters, Knights of the Post, or else goe hang themselves; I intend to pay no more quarterage to these skruing Gentlemen I'faith. B. As I am heere, I should rejoyce more at the downfall of these Gentlemen you named last, then of all the rest, for I paid them constantly ten pound a year, and yet still was in feare of them for all that, and was sure to ride once a yeare in a single Coach with two wheeles up Cheapside, where I make no question but you know how I was used. L. Yes truly, for it hath been my owne case many times. But let these things be forgotten, lets think how to increase our trading: for my part I intend to do this for the renewing of my trade, what Gentle∣women I have I will keep: And I will send Henry Hackester my chiefe pimpe to collect, gather, and bring home all my fugitive and straid Gentlewomen, viz. Mistris Lacy, Mistris Skinner, Mistris Butler, Mistris Webster, Mistris Glover, Mistris Symmons, and Mistris Clayton, if shee be not spoyled already, for shee hath great resort to her lodging at a Barbers
in Fetterlane) with many others, whereof hee hath a catalogue; And for the further upholding of our trade, if it please you to joyne with me (sweet Mrs. Blomsbury) when wee grow rich which I doubt not but it will be ere long, wee will build an Hospitall for all of our societie that are old and not able to keepe up trade, and for these that are young and faile in their trade by their over-much practise or im∣moderate dealing in their trade, wherein wee will have twenty Apothecaries and forty Surgeons gal∣lantly maintained, and other necessarie instruments to our trade belonging. B. But stay there sweete Mistris Long-acre, for though the Civill Law be likely to have a fall, and the greatest part of our enemies breake, yet I beleeve our profession (though never so necessary) wil have new enemies, our prosperity wil be envied; we shall stand in awe to one or other, by whom we shalbe cor∣rected in case we transgresse. L. That is to be considered truly: However lets at the downefall of our enemies, rejoyce and send pro∣clamations through Turnmill-street, Goulding-lane, Beech-lane, Pick-hatch, and in all other places where any of our societie remaines to proclaim a generall feast, and Let Doctors Commons, and our foes doe what they may, Wee Sisters of the scabard will keepe holiday. FINIS.
