S4836 E240_24 99873067 125520
SPECIALL AND LATE PASSAGES FROM THE MOST EMINENT PLACES IN CHRISTENDOME: Containing amongst others these particulars. The winning of the City of Perpinian from the Spaniard. The late proceedings of the Spanish Army about Calis. Divers late Victories of the Sweedes. The taking of John de Werth. The preparations in Holland for the Queens return. The taking of many Spanish ships by the Dutch Admirall. The distresse of Cullen. The tottering condition of the Kingdom of Spaine. The late Conspiracie in France, with many other matters of great consequence. Sent from a Gentleman to his friend in London. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Ʋnderhill. Octob. 6. 1642.
THE LATEST REMARKABLE FORRAIGNE NEWES. From Rome the 4. of September, 1642. THere is a great Tumult between the Spanish Ambassadout and the Portingall Ambassadour, so that the French that live in Rome tooke the Portingalls part, and came so far that if the Spanish Ambassadour had not saved himselfe in the Popes house, he had been slaine. Thereupon the Pope hath caused to be proclaimed, that all vagabonds and idle persons shall depart Rome; which if this Proclamation be well executed, they will halfe unpeople Rome. From Uttecht the 7. of September. Here is no Trading that flourisheth better then those that make inventi∣ons to kill folkes, they worke night and day and cannot make enough, for they buy all sorts of Armes, and are sent not onely for England, but for Ger∣many, and other parts. Here is for certaine, that the Prince hath given leave to draw out of every English Company, two Souldiers, experienced in Armes, and three out of every Colonels Company, to goe they know not where, but sure it is that they goe for England, but for whom I know not. From Calis the 15. of September. There is a great dissention between the two Generalls, to wit, of Horse and Foot, the one puts the fault in the other, because their exploit did faile in France: The Spanish Generall Don Francisco, and the Italian Don Cantelmo, so that they have small hopes this Sommer: For we have certaine Newes, that the Prince of Orange breaks up and draws his Army, both foot & horse, into Garrison, and leaves the Hessens and Wymers in Feild, how they will doe this Winter we shall heare. From Paris the 19. of September. There is sent to Perpinian 500000 Gilders in Victualls and other provision, to furnish the Towne, for it is the greatest Victory that ever the King of France hath had of the Spaniard, for this Towne makes all Spaine to quake; and now the King of Spaine must keepe an Army alwayes on foot to secure
his Countrey. The great Master of France, and the Duke of Bullion, with the Secretary of France, are brought prisoners, and there are 24 deputed to heare their Examination, and it is thought that they will hardly escape with life; yet the Duke of Bullion has great friends, the Prince of Orange, the Queen of Bohemia, with divers Princes of Germanie, seeks to mittigate the busines, being that they had attempted something against his Majesty of France, which was not, and is not to be written. The Swedes continue Victorious in Moravi and Silesia, takes in Townes and Castles, they have gotten great supply of men and money, so that the Emperour is not able to resist them, specially now that the King of Spaine can send no succours, and the Pope hath enough to doe with the Prince of Parma. Cargo or loading of 8. Shippes. From Brasil the 9. September arrived: For the West Indie Company - 1446 Chests of Sugar. Item 692 Marck 17 ounces Gold. Item - 33005. pound of Brasill wood. Item - 600. pound Violet wood. Item - 17080 pound of Copper. Item - 50155. pound of Ivory. For the particular Merchants. 23. Chests of Tobacco. Item - 2349. Chests of Sugar, and daily to expect more, for there are mote Ships to loade, being a number of Sugars and other wares to be expected. From Perpinian the 20. of September. We have certain Newes, that Perpinian is delivered up unto the King of France, after 14. moneths besieging, and the greatest miserie as hath been heard since the destruction of Jerusalem; for Mothers hath eaten their owne Children. Their Conditions to march out in a warlike manner, with six pie∣ces, flying Colours, full Armes, light match, Bullet in mouth, pack and pack, bag and baggage, and to be conducted with a safe Convoy. From out of the Kingdome of Sweden. The Elector of Brandenburgh seeketh to marry the Queene of Sweeden that now reigneth; and it is likely that it will be a match, because that they are of one Religion, and both enemies to the Emperour. From out of the Hage 23. of September. This day a mischance is fallen in the Portingalls Ambassadours house, that his whole house is burnt, and great losse of plate and jewells; this fire came through default of his owne servants. From Dunkerk the 22. of September. Those of Dunkerk seeing that the States Ships lie so neare them, and pas∣seth so upon them, that they cannot come out, they are wholly discomfor∣ted,
and run away by multitudes, begging through the Countrey. And we hear daily that the States catch sometimes 1. or 2. of their Fregats, which are their best plundering vessells, for they have nothing loden but men, ammuni∣tion, and victualls, and the last weeke the States men of warre tooke two of them, so that of foure that came out three are taken. From Bohemia the 14. August. 1642. IN Vienna there is a Spaniard taken prisoner for having correspondence with the Sweedes, he will suffer a fearfull death: the Castle Troupan where Collonel Slang lay is given up in hope of mercy. His Excellence Generall Torstenson lies with his Armie of 24000 foot, and 13000 horse, between Hernstat and Crahenborg. From Prage, 6 August. ARchduke Leopoldus is marched towards Torstenson, and hath ruined Collonel Slangs whole Army, and himself prisoner. From Cullen 19. THe Countrey here about is all spoiled with sundrie Armies which lyeth here, so that every thing is very deare, for all the countrey people are fled into this Fown, and lest goods and houses to the disposition of the enemies, being glad onely to save their lives; for we can get no provision from Hol∣land, as we were wont to do, because the King of France his Army lies be∣tween us and them 30000 strong: likewise the Prince of Orange lies with his whole Army but two houres going from them. So that if this continue, we shall be constrained to fall into our enemies hands From Breslo in Hungaria 10 August. VPon St. James day the Sweedes have taken the Town of Briegh, plun∣dered the Town of Neus, and taken the principallest of the Land with them; and sets upon them an extraordinary ransome: took a number of cattell with them. The Friday after came 2 Regiments of the Emperours Army, and afterwards the whole Army to fight with the Sweedish, but durst not fall on, although they were almost two for one. From Basel 15 August. ABout this Town is fallen such hail stones that no man alive ever saw the like, they have beaten down the corn, and spoiled the vineyards so, and withall the enemies parties comes and drives away all our catrell: so that in out town and round about the town thousands dies for hunger. In a Town of Germany 2 Taylors wife is brought to bed with a child ha∣ving two heads, foure arms, foure legs, fastened together, two bodies, at the navell and liveth yet: so it is credibly reported. From Arien out of the King of Spaines Army the 15 ditto. Don Francisco Melo the Spanish Generall having mustered his Army, and
finds them 25000 strong, with 80 peeces of Ordnance, besides the horse which is the flower of his Army, payd the whole Army every one a moneths pay, then they marched towards Valliciens, and causeth much ammunition bread to be baked, and commands every Souldier to provide his knapsack for 8 dayes; and came hard by Callis, and took the strong Castle of Oye, Don Cantelmo Generall of the horse, dividing his Army into three wings, march∣ed by night between Ardes and Bullin, and took in two Forts by Callis, cutting off the passage of the Town of Ardes that Callis could have no succour. Can∣telmo hath also taken the Fort St. Lewis, so that it will be hard for the French to get out the Spaniard: The French Generall Count Harcourt lets them alone and is marched into the Count of Haynow, whas he will do we shall hear. From Ostend, Newport and Graveling, we hear they make great preparation to send out great store of armed shipping, but the Hollanders ships keeps them in And this last week our Statesmen of warre hath taken a well mounted ship with 16 peeces of Ordnance, and 100 men, being the first voyage that it made. We have certain news that the French men hath taken all the Castles and Forts that they had lost, and were taken by the Spaniard, but they are beaten out with great losse of blood. The Duke of Bullin is brought prisoner to Lyons, the Cardinall is likewise gone thither: tis greatly to be feared but he will suffer, being that the Cardinal is his great enemy. The Princesse of Orange is brought to bed of a young daughter, which is the cause of much joy. There are letters come to the States of certain news that Perpinian is taken by the King of France, after foure moneths beleaguering, and enduring such hunger that the souldiers have stolne little children and eaten them, after they had eaten all the leather and goat skins that were to be found. The con∣ditions whereupon they rendred, at the next return you shall hear. A fearfull accident is befallen in one of the States towns, called Wesell, some 7 or 8 Waggons going to the Leaguer loden with powder, it seems that there was a barrell that scattered powder as it went, which was the last saving 2. and being behind, the bore whipt his horse to be by the others. The horse strikes fire with his iron shooes, so that waggons, horse, men, all flies in the aire: 60 persons, 25 houses, besides other harms. Here is a ship come from Portugall, brings news that there is a fleet of ships from Brasillia with 12000 chests of Sugars, with other Marchandise: and that there was a fleet of ships sailed out, but not knowing where. A Poste came from Cullen saying, that the Sweedish troops set upon the Emperours arreareguard, taking from them 1500 waggons, with baggage and rich pillage, 2 halt Cannons, 6 small field Peices, 1 Morter, and a great many of prisoners taken, and many killed, the number is not justly known. Moreover tis said that a whole Dutch myle the ground was covered with dead bodies. Within these foure dayes there happened a battell between the Wymars Army and the Emperours, here in our low Countreys, since that the States
Army departed and came lower into the Land: the Wymars are payed by the King of France, and the other belonging to the Emperour, and lieth there to defend the City of Cullen, these two Armies it seemed fell foule the one of the other: so that there are 3000 horsemen taken prisoners, and 500 slain. The Generall John de Werth is likewise taken, which causeth great joy. For this unhappy Generall, if so he may be called, hath been taken once before by the King of France, and kept prisoner 4 yeers in the Castle of Paris, and now is likely to return again, but hardly never to be relieved. Here is great talk of the Queens returning into England, for the States of Holland makes readinesse to give her ships for her safe convoy: if she were go∣ing, there are none would hold. Her Servants finds great difference between England and these Countreys; wishing they might change aire, the sooner the better. In Rotterdam. A few dayes past, Captain Colster took a Fregat that came out of Dunkirk mounted with 30 Peices of Ordnance, 300 men: this was one of the three which desperately ventured out of Dunkirk some ten dayes ago in spight of our Holland fleet: the second is taken by the Zelanders, and brought to Flu∣shing, the third is sunk. The 300 men are brought prisoners to Rotterdam. From Bergamopzom. One night a party of the enemy came from Lyer about 200 strong, with boats upon waggons, and came into the Land of the Cluniard, where they plundered onely 3 houses, and took 5 prisoners, and was forced to run away: for had they tarried a little longer, Collonel Morgan had been at their heels. Last Wednesday 9 ships went out of Dunkirk full of men & ammunition, and bound for Spaine, but were followed by our Admirall Martin Tromp, and after 3 houres fight, one was taken mounted with 20 Petces, 100 Sayl∣lers, and 250 souldiers, being most of them Bourgunnians, and Wallouns: making their account to go fetch some Spanish Gold, but tis mist, upon this ship that was taken in the fight, there was slain 18 men, and 34 hurt: The ship that took her lost 3 men. From Clogau in Silesia the 19 of September. The Swedish hath had a great Victory against the Emperialists in Germany, so that the Emperours Armie is wholly deleated, and the Swedes make them∣selves Master of Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia; and now that the Swedes have got ten thousand French men to supply their Army, and that the King of Spaine cannot helpe the Emperour, so that it will be a cause that the Swedes will have a great Victory. From Gorlits in Saxony the 23. September. Eighteen Sutlaers with horse and carts being set upon by 50 Saxish horse-men, pillaged them, and found 8000. Duckets in courant, the Saxsiser Army doth much harme about this Towne, they have burnt 24. Brew-houses, and 100. other houses, and the Church of S. Niclaes.
The losse of the Towne of Perpinian, and likewise the whole Spanish Fleet, coming from Terra Firma, with all his treasure, puts him into a great per∣plexitie, that he knows not which way to turne him; for this Fleet before it was cast away, was 17. Ships, and esteemed to be worth 30. Millions of gold. From Cullen the 21. of September. Here is no great Newes, onely the foure Ledgers which lay here, two of the which lyeth still; the King of Spaines Ledger and the Prince of Orange, they be retired, but we beleeve they will doe nothing this year, for the time will come shortly, that they will be forced to retire into Garrison. What the Wymers and the Emperours Armie will doe which lyeth here, we shall short∣ly see. His Highnes the Prince of Orange is come with his Armie to the Maze, and in his way hath taken in a strong House called Bosbergen, which the Spaniard thought to fortifie, where he hath found great store of Ammu∣nition and provision, and so soone as he hath well fortified the same place, he will retire home to Garrison: it is a place of great importance for these Countreys. The Generall of the Wymers is marched over the River of Rhyne with part of his Armie, to fetch in provision out of the neighbouring Countries, and in his going over the Bridge, he gave the keepers of the Bridge 400. Duckets to drinke to his health. There were two Souldiers of the best experimented out of every English Company, to goe, as it is thought, for the King of England; but they are stayd, and Captain Flood, who should have conducted them, is imprisoned in Dort, a Towne in Holland, and is like to suffer for it, being that the States are very discontented that such things should be done without their knowledge. From Paris the 26. of September. It is for certaine, that the King of France since that he hath taken Perpinian, and hath strengthened his Army so strong, that he may goe into Spaine where he pleaseth, into the Kingdome of Arragon, Vallencie, or Navarre, so that the Kings of Spaine never saw themselves so near home this many years, and is like to see more troubles, for we heare that the Kingdome of Vallencie doth follow the steps of Portingall, that if they had a sure Head, they would soone rise. It is likewise assured that Monsieut le Grand, and Monsieur le Thon, are both beheaded; and for any thing we can heare, that the Duke of Bullion is in great danger, his Mother being dead, and all his friends flie from him, excepting the Prince of Orange his Unkle; He hath offered the King of France the Towne of Sedan, whereof he is a Prince Soveraigne, to save his life; But the Cardinall which governeth the King and Kingdome, saith, that there is no trust in him, and that if he were let goe, he might doe worse then before: It seemes that his fact is hainous, he is here much bemoned, for since his mar∣riage, and his revolting from his Religion, the leaving of his Government of Mastrich, and now this bad Enterprise, so that we feare the worst. FINIS.
