S6241 E25_1 99873171 125631
A LETTER FROM Captaine RICHARD SVVANLEY, TO The Right Honourable, THE EARL OF WARWICK. BEING A full Relation of the taking of the Towne and Castle of Cardigan in Wales, by Major Generall Laugharne, with above an hundred Commanders and common Souldiers, and all the Arms and Ammunition therein. ALSO The taking of the Irish Commissioners at Sea (that were going from the King in to Ireland) by Capt. Coachman, who are to be sent up to the Parliament; a List of whose names are here inserted. Published by Authority. LONDON Printed for John Thomas. 1645.
A Letter sent to the Right Honourable, the Earle of VVarwick, from Captain Richard Swanley. Right Honourable, SInce my last of the 20. of No∣vember by Captain Green in the Doggerboat, Major Ge∣nerall Laugharne keeping the Field, with such Forces as the indigencie of the County gave a possibility of subsistence, pretending for Carmarthen, lying still, working by double policy, to draw the hearts of the inhabi∣tnnts of Cardiganshire to the State, and the
Force of Carmarthen with their adherents, into the said towne, for their defence, and the indempnity of their adjacent Gari∣sons, opportunely rise and advanced from his Quarters to the towne of Cardigan, where the Countrey, formerly invited, made a party to assist the Generall, to com∣plete the designe in agitation, and the town (faced at distance) willingly surrendred and complyed; the Castle (being a consi∣derable place, ably manned, having the ordnance of the Convert-Frigot, there ship∣wrackt) most obstinately held out, til a De∣mi-Culverin of brasse, belonging to the Leopard, was mounted, and played three dayes upon them, forcing a breach, which was gallantly entred and made good by our party, and the Castle stormed, where∣in were 100. Commanders and Souldiers, with their Armes and good plunder; not
forgetting the Converts Ordnance, retur∣ned by divine providence, and works of mercy in a Commander, adding honour to acts of chivalry, invited the Generall to give the Steward life, who contemned quarter. The town and castle reduced, and the Country in the major part (as concei∣ved) wel-affected, our Army are advan∣cing towards Newcastle, the enemies next Garrison, which (as conceived) will bee slighted or acquitted by the Enemy, and that County brought to a right understan∣ding of their duties, and Parliamentary just and honourable proceedings: to God be rendred the due praises of his mercies. Vessels of late have been designed to the wel-affected Garisons in Ireland, but none (in regard of contrary winds) returned; and Shipping to ply up the channell as high as Miniard have also been commis∣sionated
to give intelligence and assistance to our Forces in those parts: Sir THOMAS MIDDLETONS Magazine of Ammunition since disposed of to Leverpoole. Nothing that integrity and action may add life to the publike good, shall by Gods assistance, be wanting, and my faithfull endea∣vours shall comply with your Honours great trust, whose happinesse shall ever consist, my very good Lord, to be 1. Jan. 1644. Your most humble, and faithfull servant, Rich. Swanley.
Postscript. My Lord, IN the night of this date, arrived Captain Coachman, in the True-love, from Le∣verpool, Colonell Moores Letter from thence directed to me J have herewith presented, who brought in the Content-prize with the passen∣gers, as per list: J have included a paper that from Dublin came to hand, to whom J can yeeld no compliance, for want of Ammu∣nition. Pray take present order to supply mee with Ammunition, and all stores, otherwise J shall burthen the State, and be disable to do service. A List of tie Passengers names, taken in the Content-prize bound for Dublin, by Cap∣tain Coachman in the True-love. The Lord Brabison.
Sir Henry Tichborne. Sir James Ware. M. Thomas Wakefield. M. Robert Price. M. Thomas Williams. M. John Smith. M. Alexander Nugent. M. Richard Holland. M. Patrick Pue. with their servants. All which are to be sent to the State, in the Honour, by Captaine Seaman, being of con∣siderable force, with the first conveniency. FINIS.
