t3021 e42_19 99859061 111122
A True RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF COLONELL LANGHARNE, and others, in the County of Pembrooke, against the Earle of Carbery and his Forces. Together with The names of the Ships appointed by the Right Honourable ROBERT Earle of Warwick, for the guarding of the Coasts of Ireland. WITH A Schedule of the Prisoners of note and quality, with the Ordnance and Armes, together with the Ships there taken. Attested under the hand of Captaine Richard Swanley Reare Admirall. Printed according to Order LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Francis Eglesfeild, and are to be sold at the signe of the Marygold in Pauls Church-yard. 1644.
A Copy of the Relation of Colonell LANGHARNE, and also their proceeding in the Countie of Pembrooke. A True Relation of the discomfting and routing of the Earle of Carbery and his Forces out of the County of Pembrooke. Managed and performed under God, by the valiant and cou∣ragious Gentlemen, Colonell Rowland Langharne, Iohn Poyer, Major of Pembrooke, Esquire: Mojor Thomas Langharne, Si∣mon Thelwell, and Arthur Owens, Esquiers; Captaine Powel, Captaine Kenne, and other well-affected Commanders and Gentlemen; with the ayde and assistance of the renowned Sea-men, ordered by the Ad∣mirall, to be landed out of the severall ships for that service, under the command of Captain Whittey, and Iohn Greene Lieutenant; The Fleet consisting of five ships and a Friggate, appointed by the Right Honou∣rable Robart Earle of Warwick, Lord High Admirall of England for the service of King and Parliament, for the guarding of the Coast of Ire∣land, &c. The names of the Ships, &c. LEopard Reare, Admirall, Captain Richard Swanley. Swallow Reare, Vice-admirall, Captain William Smith. Prosperous, Captain Nicholas Gettonby. Providence, Captain William Swanley. Leopard, Merchant, Captain Iohn Gilson. Crescent Friggate, Captain Peter Whittey. The Squadron of ships arrived in Milford-Haven the 23. of February 1643. and at that time the said Earle of Carbery, His Majesties Lieute∣nant general for those parts, had possession and command of the whole entire Country and County of Pembrook (only part of the Hundred of Castlematin) his Garrison Towns and places, were Tynby Haverford∣west, Treflyn, Stackpoole-house, Carew Castle, Roach Castle, Prick-spill, and the Dale, all which were considerable places, well manned and fortified. The next day after the arrivall of the Fleet, there came a∣board the Admirall, the said Colonell and Captain Poyer, with some o∣ther Gentlemen of Pembrook, in the Hundred of Castlemartin, who de∣clared
the sad, miserable, deplorable state and condition of the well affe∣cted Protestants of Pembrook, and the country adjacent; and that the Enemy gave out and reported, that they would kill the Dogs, and ravish the Bitches, and root them out to the third and fourth generation: and how it pleased God, by his out-stretched powerfull arme, and infinite mercy, (mauger the Earle of Carberies Forces) with their infernal ad∣herents, they had kept the Towne with plunder of the Hundred, being not above 200. foot and 50. horse, and with forcing importunity, not silencing their heavie pressures, and weighty cares, prayed the aid and assistance of the Fleet, presuming with Gods help and mercies, and the furtherance of them, to expell the said Earle with his unworthy rabble of Damy-boyes out of the country, and upon agitation, it was agreed to land 200. Seamen, one Demy-culvering, one Sacor, and one Faulco∣net of brasse, with powder, shot, match, &c. The 30. of January last, Colonell Langharne with his Sea and Land Forces, being about 300. foot, and 50. horse, with his Artillary and Amunition, advanced to Stackpoole-house, some two miles distant from Pembrook, and approa∣ching neare the Enemie, they played with their small shot uncessantly upon them, and our Ordnance at the House, but the walls thereof so strong, that they performed little execution: At last our men gaining some part of the out-houses, neare the walls; the Enemie seeing the place no longer wardable, and themselves hard beset, yeelded upon Quarter, which was granted, and nobly performed. In this action and assault, there was two of our men slaine, eight or nine wounded, and some few of the Enemy fell, and were hurt also, there being sixty soul∣diours in the House all compleatly armed; the House being taken, the Colonell left a Garrison, and returned to Pembrook, where after a short time of repose to refresh his men, they martched to Treflyn-House, where was a strong Garrison of 150. foot, and forty horse, with one peece of Ordnance. Our Forces making their approaches, the Enemie played their parts manfully, by plying their small shot, and using all marshall endevours in matter of defence and opposition; yet our Forces martched up to their walls, gained their Out-houses, our Ordnance playing upon them, having made an assaultable breach; the Enemy with∣out hope of reliefe, and seeing an impossibility of maintaining their hold, without a present dis-ingagement: After some losse of bloud desired Quarter, which was granted, and honourably performed. In which enterprise some few were killed and hurt of each side, and there were taken in the said House forty horse, with their armes and furniture, and 150. Foot armes. All this while the said Earle durst not march out of
his strong hold, which was at that time at Tinby, which was not above a mile from the said House (to shew himselfe in the field) only himself with some of his Forces faced ours, keeping a River betwixt them, up∣on which our Gunners making some shot, they retreated, the said Co∣lonell slighting the walls thereof, retired to Pembrooke to refresh his men. That done, seeing God had given such prosperous successe and in∣couragement in their proceedings at the beginning with unanimous consents, and couragious hearts, resolved to go over on Rous side, pos∣sessed then by the Enemy, there to engage themselves, and trie their for∣tunes against the Enemy. Upon which the said Colonell and Captain Poyer, came aboard the Admirall, desiring further aid and assistance to set forward and advance the designe, which was willingly condescen∣ded to, and the time agreed on, to send up all the Boats belonging to the Fleet, with a great Gabbard which God sent accidentally out of Ire∣land, which stood in very great stead for transporting the souldiers and Artillery, and accordingly the 22. in the night, the Boats were sent to the place appointed, being neare Pembrooke Ferry, and the Crescent Frigate to inable and guard their landing the three and twentieth by eight in the morning the Forces and Artillery were landed on the Enemies side. And that morning the Admirall appointed Cap∣taine Gettonby and Captain, Gilson, to goe to the East-wards of the Fort, the Admirall and Vice-Admirall, anchored on the West-side, and Captain William Swanly left to guard the two Vessels of ammuni∣tion: part of our forces drawing up two peeces on a hill, which com∣manded the enemies workes on the East-side, where they guarded all night, and the Colonell next morning with the rest of the forces bring∣ing up his men in three devisions, and comming neere the enemies am∣buscadoes on the north-side, after a small skirmish ware routed and bea∣ten into their Fort, the ships then playing upon them, and the two peeces on the east-side flanckoring their workes, the Demy-cannon on the south-side, and our forces giving a gallant and fierce assault, the the enemy dismaid as in a toile or laborinth, caste down their armes and cried for quarter: And there were taken in the said Fort about 240. prisoners, wherof some of note & quallity, whose names with the ships lying in Pricks-pill, neere to their said workes then also taken, with the number of their Ordinance, as in a Schedule herein contained ap∣peares. Our forces being landed, intelligence thereof was brought to Sir Henry Vaughan, who was then in Haverfordwest in Garrison two or three hundred foot and horse, guarded with ten peeces of Or∣dnane, upon which he presently dispeeded away Captain Richard
Steele with a letter to the Admirall and the rest of the Commanders and Gentlemen, praying a Parley or Treaty for Peace, but before the messenger arrived, the said Fort was taken: Newes thereof was car∣ried to Haverfordwest; the old Knight with the rest were strucken with such horror and amazement, and a palsey or anguish condition fearing our forces would presently march thither, that they caused a strict watch or centrey to be duely kept, to give notice of the enemies approach, that when they saw them comming, they might the more safely make their escape: And at that time there was one Wheelor a Grasier, who had a heard of Cattell grasing upon the hills, the watch having a circumspect viglant eye to performe their dutie and charge, looking sharply forth in the evening, the said cattell then getting head and running towards the Towne, the watch conceaved them to be our Army, poasted amain into the Town, and cryed God dame them, The Round-Headed Rogues were comming; The which struck such further terror into the said old Knight and Cavaliers, that happy was he that could run away first and fastest: By that meanes the Towne was fre∣ed and acquitted of them; and in their escape they indeavoured to have carried three or foure barrels of powder along with them. But fearing the Round-head black cotes (as they tearmed them) which were the beasts, cast the said powder into a river, leaving behind them ten pieces of Ordnance, with a good quantity of provisions and red coates made ready to cloath our Souldiers. Thus hath the great Iehovah the Lord of Hoasts blest our endeavours and proceedings hitherto, and made the the wicked to flye, when none persued them; to whom with all reve∣rence be attributed all praise and glory &c. The people of that Town and Country afore inslaved & titannicably intreated, being heavily op∣prest, declared great joy of this victory and deliverance, and by au∣thority Summons issueing forth, for the Gentry and able Inhabitants, on a certain day to meet; the Town aforesaid with the rest of the Coun∣try therabouts came in, submitted, and presented their service to the Colonell; Whereupon was placed a Garrison into Haverfordwest, the whole Conntrey reduced and freed from the Catterpillers or Cava∣liers (saving Tynbye and Carew Castle) which places are strongly fortified (as informed:) The Colonell and well-affected Gentlemen conceaving themselves in no safe condition, till they had gained and ta∣ken in Tynbye also, to extirpate and roote out the Ante-christian Malig∣nant party, out of the said County: desired the Admirals further aide for the recovering of the foresaid Towne, which would satisfie their religious and warrantable desires, and reduce the whole Country into
a happy and peaceable condition and government, to the advancement of Gods glory, the Kings honour, the Countries safety, and Subjects liberty. The which tendred to a considerat debate, it was granted, and with all allacrity furthered; and the Admirall for the better effecting of the designe, sent a Demy-canon into Pembrooke, with as many sea∣men more, as could be well spared out of the Fleet, with powder, shot, match, &c, The same day sent away his vice-admirall, Captain Gettonby and the Crescent Frigate into Caldye roade, neere to Tynbie, there to do such service against the Town as God in mercy should in∣able them. Upon Wednesday the sixth of this instant March Colonell Rowland Langharne with the rest of the Commanders, drew their forces into the field, which consisted of 500. horse and foot, or there∣abouts, with a demy-canon, demy-culvering, and a sacree of brasse, with other Ordnance and ammunition, and marched to Tynby, where planting their Ordinance, summoned the Towne on Thursday follow∣ing, being the seventh, by trumpet to surrender the Towne to King and Parliaments use, the which obstinatly refused: The Ordinance played at the town from Sea and Land, and the Garrison of the Towne with great resolution defended the same; but after three dayes siege, a great party of the Towne beaten down, a breach made, and one of the chief Commanders in opposition wounded, their courage was rebated, and our forces making a gallant and desperat assault, entered the breach, gained the Towne by the sword, with the lose of one man, and some few hurt; where many of the enemy fell and were hurt also: And there tooke betwixt 3. or 400. prisoners, whereof some Commanders of note, as relation being had to the Schedule may appeare: eight pieces of Ordinance, about 300. foot armes, with store of plunder for the souldiers. By gaining which Towne the whole and entire Coun∣try and County of Pembrook was reduced saving Carew Castle, which the tenth of this present, was upon summons surrendered upon quarter, to acquit the said hold, and to leave their armes, and to have convoy for their secure passage out of the Country &c. The SCHEDVLE mentioned, of the Prisoners of Note and Quality, with the Ordinance and Armes, together with the Ships then taken, &c. Viz. At the PILL. Captain John Barlow, Master of the Ordinance, and Captain of a Troope of Horse; a Church Papist. Capt. Edmund Bradshaw.
Capt. John Bradshaw. Capt. John Butler, Capt. Arnold Butler, Capt. William Mauriechurch. The Globe and Providence of Bristoll. HAVERFORDWEST. The Commanders names that Ranne away out of Haverfordwest, being thereto forced by the Horned Beasts, as before mentioned, &c. Sir Henry Vaughan Serjeant Major generall of the three Counties viz. Pembrooke, Carmarthin, and Cordagin, Sir Francis Floyde Major of the Horse. Sir John Stepney, Governour of Haverfordwest Leiutenant Colonell Butler, High Sheriffe of the County of Pembroke, Capt. John Edwards, Commissioner of Array in Coram. Capt. Hull of Bristoll with a 100. Seamen, who all run away, and acquitted the place as afore declared. March 9th. 43. Prisoners of Note taken at TYNBYE. John Guyn Governour of Tynbye. Colonell David Guyn. Leiute∣nant Thomas Butler, High Sheriffe of the County of Pembrooke, that ranne away from Haverfordwest, Capt. George Leweis. Capt. Metholl. Capt. Rice Prickhard. Archdeacon Rudd a Malignant Priest. A particular of the Ordnance, Armes, Powder taken, &c. Taken at the Pill, aboarde the Ships, Haverfordwest, Tynbye, Treflyn, and Carew Castle of Ordnance 53. Armes for Foot and Horse, fixed, and unfixed 700. Powder barrelles 6. or 7. Seamen slaine 6. Sea∣men wounded 20. Rich: Swanley. FJNJS.
