W1528 E405_4 99862363 160470
A LETTER SENT FROM Col: VVhaley, BEING Commanded by the KING to declare His MAIESTIES great dislike of a late Pamphlet scan∣dalous to his MAJESTY: Being Intituled, His Majesties Declaration to all His Loving Subjects, touching his inclination for peace, dated the 27. August 1647. THE Which Pamphlet, his Majesty utterly dis∣avows, as being published without His knowledge or consent. Aug: 31 London, Printed by I. Coe, for Henry Overton in Popes-head Ally, 1647.
FOR HIS HONOVRED FRIEND Sr. Arthur Haslerig, These present. SJR, THere is a paper of the twen∣ty seventh Instant, (intituled His Majesties Declaration) made publike, it is patronized upon the King, but I assure you, His Ma∣jesty
is much abused in it; he hath many times to my selfe and others expressed not onely his disavowing, but utter dislike of it; at first it som∣thing troubled him, but it being so unlike any thing of his, and so con∣trary to his knowne intentions, he was confident it would not gaine credence with any; yet since, hearing that divers both in City and Coun∣try, and Army, were so fondly cre∣dulous as to deeme it to be His Ma∣jesties, and so were much offended at it, it was the Kings Command J should certifie my friends how ex∣treamely he is wronged, and truly Sir, you would do the King but right, and discharge J conceive no more then your own duty to indea∣vour
the finding out the Author, and making him exemplary, and J am confident the King expects so much justice therein. Here is little newes in Court more then this, that the King yesterday was a hunting in New Parke, killed a Stag and a Buck, af∣terwards dined at Syon, stayed three or foure houres with his Children, and then returned to Hampton, where there is great resort of all sorts of people to him, but not so many Cavaliers as is reported, it is confessed, no Gentleman is debarted the liberty of kissing the Kings hand, yet no stranger stayes long, we have fresh and fresh appearances, the faces which ap∣peares in the morning, you sildome see in the afternoone, at the farthest, but the next
day. The Lord Convoway hath taken his leave of the Court for present, I have no more to acquaint you with; I shall onely againe mind you, that to vindicate the King by discovering and punishing the Libeller cannot but give great satisfaction to his Majesty: I remaine, Hampton Court. Aug. 29. 1647. Your very Faithfull and affectionate Servant, Edw: Whaley
