11620.5 99893119 182314
The shamefull downefall of the Popes Kingdome Contayning the life and death of Steeuen Garnet, the Popes chiefe Priest in England: being executed in Paules Church-yard in London the 3. of May last. 1606. To the tune of, Triumph and Ioy. Garnet, the Popes chiefe wandring Priest, his habite and attire. LEt all true English heartes now sing Vnto the Lord our heauenly King, Which Treasons vnto light doth bring, To th' Authors endlesse shame. N Treason was more vild and bad, Which Popish crew conspired had, To make all England more and sad. To Papists endlesse shame. Nor former age was euer bent, Such Treasons strange for to inuent, And turne them to so ill intent: To Papists endlesse shame. The Treasons all, God hath bewraide, Which Pope & Priests and Papists laide: For God aboue is still our ayde, To Papists endlesse shame. These thirtie yeares no Traytors spight Was wrought against the Gospels light, Nor yet against our Soueraignes right, To Papists endlesse shame. But Steeuen Garnet (voyde of grace) Knew when, and how, and where the place That Treasons plotting were apace, To Papists endlesse shame. He trauaile did both farre and neare, Like to a Woolfe and rauenous Beare, To keepe poore silly soules in feare, To Papists endlesse shame. He hath seduced many a soule, And in his Booke did them inroule, To make them pay the Diuell toule, To Papists endlesse shame. For he to bring them in criers, Hath sent part hence for to Friers: And trayterous seducing lies, To Papistes endlesse shame. The Women Nues he ath ordayn'd, Thinking thereby that be hath gain'd: Their soules in Hell for to be hain'd. To Papists endlesse shame. His Pardons and his Buls are cros, His Popish dignitie is lost: His Reliques eke, to his great cost, And Papists endlesse shame. His holy Bones, and holy Stockes, His holy Shirtes, and holy Smockee Are come vnto the Hang-mans boxe, To Papists endlesse shame. His (Holinesse) pride is now puld downe, Which Traytors lou'd in Citie & towne Derricke (the Hang-man) hath his gowne to Papists endlesse shame. Now naught be auailes his holy Masse, For time hath brought it so to passe, That he is prooud worse then an Asse, To Papists endlesse shame. His Abbots, Priors, Monks, & Friers, And other his religious squiers, Haue prooud themselues all to be liers, To Papists endlesse shame. Their great Commaunder he is gone Which Holinesse seemde to put on: But prouide himselfe a trayterous on To Papists endlesse shame. And by the Shirifes of London Hee thence was brought with Euen as a Woolfe for  from his To Papists endlesse shame. In Paules Church-yard on Sca Was built a Gibber painefully On which this rauenous To Papists endlesse shame. Vnto which place they did him There for to learne him for to And take his farewell in a string, To Papists endlesse shame. Hee traytor-like was hanged ther But that to hange they did him Till he was dead: that was his to Papists endlesse shame. Hee then was quartered presently, By Derricke and his men then y, To be set up in places hie, to Papists endlesse shame. Hee well was called Garne Being counterfayte to For his reproch will still to Papists endlesse sha. Let Poope and Papistes That such a Counterfayte Which hath their Kingdome to Papistes endlesse shame. And let them with Cand Curse all the Diuels a Which makes thē against to Papists endles shame. Let Christians Which brought And hath to Pr which
