11797.2 52633254 174054
_ the he!  of God d dyseases n s, what rt  namely any man or chyldren that be broken in theyr coddes, so that theyr guttes be fallen doune into theyr coddes, or  other swellynges: The canker or tytle, the colyck and  e skarre in the lyppe, or other dyseases in the moh. Also yf any man haue any dysease in his eyen, whe it be with spurblindnes, or a wem or any other skynne wen ouer the syghte. These and other such lyke diseases an this forsaid mayster auoyde and heale by the grace and helpe of God. ❧ Moreouer yf any be diseased with the pockes, or other pryuy diseases, or haue sore legges of olde or newe greues: let hym come to the forsayde maister Geruaes, which is lodged in it long Southwarck, in saint Thomas hospital. And he wyl heale him with the grace of God: the poore frely for the honor and loue of God: and the ryche for a reasonable rewarde. ¶ God saue the Kynge.
LIBRARY OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS THE HOUGHTON LIBRARY 16 November 1959 Dr. W. R. LeFanu, Librarian Royal College of Surgeons of England Lincoln's Inn Fields London, W. C. 2 Dear Dr. LeFanu: Many thanks for the photograph of your quack bill. I cannot of course be certain of this, but I think it was printed by William Copland about 1550, that is it must have been not after the reign of Edward VI. Copland used the ornament on the right hand in his edition of the Four Sons of Aymon, 1554, he having derived this ornament from Wynken de Worde where I have traced it in several uses. The zig zag ornament was also Wynken de Worde's, but about this period I haven't found it used except "in the house of Berthelet", which should mean Thomas Powell, where it occurs in STC 10477. However the type is Copland's and not Wynken de Worde's or Berthelet's, and I think that as Copland inherited a good many of these minor cuts of Wynken de Worde's and as the type is his, it would appear to be reasonably certain that Copland was the printer and that it's rather later than it's been hitherto dated. The difficulty of course is that the state of the cuts from the tears in the paper is difficult to establish, but certainly they look later than when used by de Worde. With kindest regards, Very truly yours, William A. Jackson WAJ:mbd
