17189.7 99884543 183140
The true Mayde of the South: OR A rare example of a Maide dwelling at Rie in Sussex, who for the loue of a young man of Lester-shire, went beyond Sea in the habit of a Page, and after, to their hearts content, were both marryed at Magrum in Germany, and now dwelling at Rye aforesaid. To the tune of, Come, come my sweet and bonny one. VVIthin the Hauen Towne of Rye, that stands in Sussex faire There dwelt a Maide, whose constancie transcendeth all compare: This Turtle Doue Did dearely loue A Youth, who did appeare In minde and face, To be the grace and pride of Lester-shire. This young man with a Noble Péere, who lik't his seruice well, Went from his natiue Lester-shire, in Sussex for to dwell: Where liuing nye The Towne of Rye, this pretty Mayde did heare Of his good parents, Who by deserts, was pride of Lester-shire. For comming once into that Towne, it was at first his chance, To méet with her, whose braue renowne all Sussex did aduance: And shée likewise, In his faice eyes When once sue came him néere, Did plainely see, That none but hee, was pride of Lester-shire. Then little Cupid god of Loue, began to play his part, And on the sudden from aboue, he shot his golden Dart, Which did constraine These Louers twaine to prize each other deare: Sweet Margery Lou'd Anthony, the pride of Lester-shire. Thus with concordant sympathy, these Louers were combin'd, Oue lou'd the other heartily, yet neither told their mind, She long'd to speake, Her minde to breake vnto her Louer deare, She durst not tell, Though she lou'd well the pride of Lester-shire. Within short time it came to passe. to Sea the young man went, And left this young and pretty Lasse in woe and discontent: Who wept full sore, And grieu'd therefore,, when truely she did heare, That her swéet-heart. From her must part, the pride of Lester-shire. The second part. To the same tune. IT was his hap that time to goe to trauell with his Lord, Which to his heart did bréed much woe, yet could he not affoord A remedy To's misery, but néeds hée must leaue here His Madge behinde Who grieu'd in minde for the pride of Lester-shire. She being then bereaued cleane of hope, yet did inuent, By her rare policy, a meane to worke her hearts content: In garments strange She straight did change her selfe, reiecting feare, to goe with him Whom she did déeme the pride of Lester-shire. And in the habit of a Page, she did intreat his Lord, That being a Boy of tender age, he would this grace afford, That he might goe, Seruice to show to him both farre and néere, Who little thought What loue she ought to the pride of Lester-shire. This Lord did take her, as she séem'd to be a prettty Lad, And for his Page he her esteem'd, which made her heart full glad: To Sea went shée, And so did hée, whom shee estéem'd so deare Who for her sake Great moane did make, and shed full many a teare. Thus he poore Lad, lay with his Loue full many a tedious night, Yet neither of them both did prooue a Louers true delight: She heard him wéepe, Who he should sléepe, and shed forth many a ea For Margery, Who th lay by the pride of Lester-shire. Long time these Louers trauelled, and were bed-fellowes still, Yet she did kéepe her Mayden-head, vntill she had her will. Shée heard his moane, Yet still vnknowne she kept her selfe for feare, Yet at the last She cleaued full fast to the pride of Lester-shire. For hauing trauelled sixe wéekes vnknowne vnto her Louer, With roisie blushes in her chéekes her minde she did discouer: Sée here, quoth she, One that for thée hath left her Parents deare: Poore Margery The Mayde of Rie I am, behold me here. When Anthony did heare this word, his heart with ioy did leape, He went vnto his Noble Lord, to whom he did report This wonderfull thing, Which straight did bring amazement to him there: Of such a Page, In any age, quoth he, I did not heare. At Magrum then in Germany, their Lord did sée them marryed, From whence vnto the Towne of Rye in England were they carry'd; Where now they dwell Beloued well of neighbours farre and néere, Swéet Margery Loues Anthony the pride of Lester-shire. You Mayds and young-men warning take by these two Louers kinde, Who euer you your choyce doe make, to them be true in minde, For, perfect loue, Comes from aboue as may by this appeare, Which came to passe By Suffex Lasse, and the Lad of Lester-shire. Finis. Printed at London for Francis Coules.
