C3099 52211979 175564
A Letter from the KING to F. M. WHen We daily perceive how many loyal Subjects We have in England and how zealous the most moderate of them are to redeem their Reli∣gion and Liberties from prophaneness and oppression, and therby  restore Our Kingdoms to peace, and Our Self to the just government of them, it will be no great danger to one of them to own his intelligence to Us of their af∣fections, and to be instrumental to assure them, how ready We shall be to grant, and faithful to perform, whatsoever shall be most conducing to establish a just and lasting Peace. And because by a part of your last, We discover that there are some so irreconcileable to Our Person, and the Nations settlement, that the con∣tinue by an industrious malice, to represent Us by false and odious lights so our People, and being by a long experience become perfect Artists in their Trade,  so exactly fit their designs with proper instruments to accomplish them, as  they hoped by their forgeries to deceive other mens reasons, and to blast Our In∣nocence and Honor: Sometimes perswading the credulous sort of their own party that We are Popish, revengeful, debauch'd, and what not? that may bring Our Person and Honor into contempt, and them into despair: At another time, setting up the looser sort of those who have been, or pretend to be, engaged so ,  threaten all with fire and sword who are not of their own wild opinions, scribe men by names, confiscate their estates, dispose of offices, and endeavou  perswade the world We have authoriz'd them, to be the sole directors and go¦nors of Our and the Kingdoms affairs; thus the phanatiques of both Parties made use of to work a bad understanding between Us and Our people there b¦ing no other difference between those two extremes, than that the first wo  have a King, because they would still keep, the Nation in distraction; the othe ¦deed wish a King (but with no less confusion) whose authority might be pro¦tuted to their wicked ambitious ends: Nor do they want their creatures to b these exorbitanies (of their own inventing) through magnifying glasses to  wel-affected in present power, who being altogether strangers to Our Conversati∣on, may thereby be stagger'd in their duties, and become jealous of Our integri and their own safeties. We therefore think fit to assure you by this Our Lette (which you may publish if you think fit) That We dare cast Our selves upon  Jury of sober and judicious men, whether We have exercised or willingly tolerate debauching and swearing: And for Our Religion, both Our Self and our dea Brothers have given a sufficient testimony to all the world of Our steddiness there¦in, and our late celebrating of the Lords Supper (according to the institution o the Reformed Churches) may clearly vindicate Us from so groundless an aspersi¦on, to which holy duty, We came in such a Christian temper, as did not onely o∣vercome all desires of revenge, but sincerely forgive our greatest enemies: An We are so far from approving those insolencies of your Hectors(as you cal them that We abhor and detest their words and actions, and whensoever it shall pleas God to put an opportunity into our hands, shall further manifest our dislike thereof. We doubt not but We have said enough to convince the folly and mad∣ness of those idle persons, and to satisfie all knowing and conscientious men of the integrity of Your Loving Friend, C. R. Bruxels 10. April. 1660.
