C5502 99884650 181783
Come turn to mee thou pretty little one, and I will turn to thee. To a pleasant new Tune. SWeet if thou wilt be As I am to thee, Then by Cupids Mother, I have vow'd to have none other she: Then turn to me thou pretty little one, And I will turn to thee. Those bright eyes of thine Which do dazzle mine Like the stars of Heaven, Which do keep their even course and shine: Then let us in conjunction meet and both our loves combine. If that lovely Face, Will to mine give place, That with loves devotion We may use the motion, of imbrace: Then sit thee down my pretty little one and let us love a space. What hurt is in this? For to take a kisse If it may be granted I that long have wanted such a blisse: Then be not sparing of a few, whereas such plenty is. If thy breasts do pant For the milk they want, Every Hill and Mountain To supply each Fountain, be not scant: Then give to mee thy lilly white hand, and I thee mine will grant. If so be that I, May but thee come nigh, The Vine and Elm shall never, Ioyn more close together then will I: Then shew thy fruits my amorous joy and Ile with love supply. If that thou dost crave, Silks and Garments brave Or what rich attyre Could thy heart desire to receive: Declare to me thou pretty little one, thou canst but ask and have. From the Indies far, Where rich Iewels are; I will bring thee treasure Far beyond all measure and compare: Then be not coy my pretty little one for I no cost will spare RI RI SWeet-heart for thy sake I will never make, Choice of any other, Then by Cupids Mother freely speak: It's at thy choice my dearest Love, either to leave or take. I thy Mary gold Wrapt in many fold, Like the golden Clyent To the Sun supplient shew it's gold: Display the beams my glorious Sun and I'le to thee unfold. Those bright locks of hair Spreading o're each ear, Every crisp and curle Far more rich then pearl, doth appear: Then be thou constant in thy love and I will be thy Dear. Till I have possest, Thee whom I love best, I have vow'd for ever, In thy absence never, to take rest: Deny mee not thou pretty little one, In whom my hopes are blest. If a kisse or two Can thee a favour do Were it more then twenty Love's indu'd with plenty Lovers know: For thy sweet sake a thousand take, for that's the way to wooe. It doth grieve my heart From thee for to part It is to mee more pleasant, Ever to be present where thou art: Yet in the absence of a friend, my love shall never start. As to mee thou art kind, Duty shall mee bind Ever to obey thee, Reason so doth sway mee to thy mind: Thou hast my heart where e're thou art although I stay behind. In thy bed or bark I will be thy mark, Couples yet more loving Never had their moving from the Ark: Welcome to mee my onely joy, all times, be it light or dark, London, Printed for Charles Tyus at the three Bibles on London-bridge. Finis
