D1225A 47012394 174364
The Devils Conquest, or, a Wish obtained: Shewing how one lately of Barnsby-street, in Leg-Ally, in St. Olaves Parish, South∣wark, one that Carded Wooll for Stockings, carried home some work to her Mi∣stris, living upon Horsly-Down, who asked her how much shee owed her for; the Maid answered eight pounds; her Mistris said 'twas but six whereupon the Maid began to Swear and Curse, and wisht the Devil fetch her, if there was not eight pounds owing for; the Mistris loving quietness, paid her for eight pound: the Maid, with two of her Companions, walking over Horsly-Down, she having a Childe in her arms, one came and throwed her down, and presently took her up again, which caused her to say, Thou Rogue, dost thou fling me down and take me up again, and suddainly he vanished away, neither she, nor the two women with her, could discern which way he went, which caused them to say, It was the Devil, which for all this, nothing terrified the Maid, who went boldly home, and to bed, and the two Women with her; at midnight she heard a voice, which called her by her name very often; she answered, I come, I come; but the voice still continuing, she swore she would come, and being got out of the Bed, fell down upon her face, and was taken speechless, yet her body moving in most terrible manner, manifesting her inward pangs; her Mistris was sent for, who freely forgave her, and wisht God might forgive her too, and then shee departed, and her body was found as black as pitch all over; and all this was for no more than the value of eleven pence, which was done on the 6th. of this instant May, 1665. and was written for a warning to all, to avoid the like course. The Tune is, Summer Time. PI ATtend good Christian people all to what here I do mean to write, You Muses nine, to you I call, help me these verses to indite. A story true I shall relate, I wish it may a warning be, That all may now avoid that fate, and shun that cruel destiny. Full sore & dreadful judgements we have often heard and séen abroad, The righteous God, he doth decree, as we have it upon Record. Many a time we do provoke, yet still his mercy doth indure, But at the last hée'l give a stroak, which art of man can never cure. Examples many we have had in former and in latter years, But sure you ne'r heard one more sad then this, therefore attend to hear. In Barnsby-street of late there dwelt one Margery Perry called by name, With whom it séems the Devil dealt, and played his subtil cunning game. In carding wool she imploy'd her self, a lively hood for to obtain, But Satan that old subtil Elf, tells her 'tis not sufficient gain. TO swear and curse she was inclin'd a Vice too common in this Land, In this the Devil with her was joyn'd, as you shall shortly understand. She carried home some work one day unto her Work-Mistrisses home, Who asked how much she had to pay for all the wool that she did combe. Saith she, you owe me for eight pounds nay, saith the Mistris, it is but sir, But now she goes beyond her bounds, to swear and curse she doth not stick. This caused some contest to arise betwéen them both, for a short space, The Devils flame in her breast fries, O woman! what made thée so base? She wisht the Devil fetch her strait, if that she had not done eight pounds; Ah woman! caught with such a bait, that came not all to half a crown. Her Mistris paid her, away she hies, & with her Comrades walk ye stréets, she little thought how conscience cries but now at last the Devil méets. On Horsly-down she down was thrown and presently caught up again, Alas she is so hard hearted grown, she can't perceive her inward stain. Those women with her were amazed, because he vanished quite away That took her up, although they gazed, no more of him they saw that day. Then home she hies with her consorts, to bed she goes and thinks all well, But vengeance will at length arise, & death will come with passing bell. Oh little did she think, but she should rise again as she was wont, Iudgement must come by Gods decrée, he will not alwaies bear the affront. At midnight then she heard a voice, which frequently called her by name, Surely she could not then rejoyce, knowing her guilt deserved blame. She answered straight, I come, I come, and presently begins to swear, The Devil hée'l not stay too long, but takes her in her chamber there. They took her up from off the boards, whereon ye Devil her down did throw She spéechless was, no breath affords, which made ye womens hearts to glow Then for her Mistris they did send, who came immediately to sée That, which almost her heart did rend, a spectacle of misery. Some that were present there did say, forgive her though she did forswear, I and God forgive her too I pray, and so she died whilst she was there. They stript her naked being dead, and found her body black as pitch, The hellish fiend her prepared, according to her cursed wish. Oh that a warning this might be to all, that these few lines do read, Here plainly we may learn and sée and not such wicked paths to tread. Wish for true riches and true grace, and labour for it earnestly, The Devil he will come apace, wish not for him, such courses fly. And now lets study to amend, and frée our selves from slavery, That all our lives may have good end, and full assurance when we dye. So to conclude remember still, Swearing and Cursing ends in woe, If you let the Devil have his will, hée'l prove the worst & greatest foe. London Printed for S. Tyus, on London-Bridge. With privilege. Finis.
