E377 99890124 182605
AN ELEGIE On the Death of Mrs Rebecca Palmer. Daughter of A. P. M. Who died in the Fifteenth Year of her Age, November 17. 1667. Here lies the Cask, the Jewel it self is gone: To be refined more, and shine alone. The Virgin-Soul that breathed in this dust, Makes haste to Rest, and take her journey must To Saints above, and there must Iesus see, Whom Saviour, Bridegroom, Love, and Lord, to be She chosen had: Whose Call betimes she hears; Her Ear and Heart inclin'd: VVhen come to years, Th' afflictions of the Saints was made to choose, Refusing vain delights; nor run with those Who for a while pleasures of sin enjoy, Best time mis-spend, and precious Souls destroy; Hence she repin'd not at a suffering-state, Reproach for Christ she knew how t' estimate. She lov'd his word, and sat at Jesus Feet, And tell she would, that all his words were sweet. Th' Assemblies of the Saints were her delight, Christs Voice to hear, and of Him have a sight: Her Closet-Cries and Tears observed were, Though she closest retirements sought, with fear, (As oft exprest) of Heart-hypocrisie; Of which she kept a gracious jealousie. Her gentle sweet Behaviour, Modesty, Lovely with Natures Ingenuity, Gave her acceptance with the Saints, won Love And kindness from them, who her Spirit did prove: To Parents, tender, chearful, and content; Still saying, God will provide, we shall not want: To fellow-Children, carriage sweet and dear; To Friends, to All, her Words endearing were. Example to all youth, helpt to deny, By Cboice, fond triflles, and their vanity. The sins and troubles which her future Age Might have expos'd her to, which times presage, Prevented are, b' an early sudden flight Int' her best Fathers House and Mansion bright: Her compleat Marriage-state with Christ to make, Scarce staying a farewel of her Friends to take Leaving a savour here; and Those she left To Bless and Praise, not sorrow, as if bereft. Go Heav'n-born Soul, soon ripe, till we shall meet Before the Throne, and sing at Jesus Feet: Till Dust a fitter Cabinet shall be, When raised up, for Immortality. Sic Ebullivit Affectus.
