h219 53981659 180241
AN ADVERTISEMENT, Shewing that all former Objections AGAINST THE MILLD-LEAD Sheathing Have been Answered by the NAVY-BOARD themselves. And what's lately Objected, is Answered, herein, as follows. ALthough the Objections against this Sheathing have been fully answered by the Mill'd-Lead Company's Reply, made to the late Navy-Boards Report (which was dated, Octob. 28. 1682.) to the then Lords of the Admiralty, printed in the Year 1691. and by the other Papers since published by Mr. Hale, the same might all have been well enough spared, that Board having indeed sufficiently answer'd themselves by their own Contract with the said Company, dated March 3. 1675. and their said Report it self, if nothing but what they say therein had been taken notice of: For, 1st. In the Preamble of their said Contract (after five years Trial upon ten Ships within that time sheathed) they owned to have entred into the same upon sufficient Proof and Experience of the Goodness and Usefulness of the said Sheathing, having forborn to enter into a formal Contract till then, that they might make what Observations of any defects they could themselves, or what its watchful Adversaries should discover to them, a time long enough to have discerned its monstrous eating of the Ruddar-Irons (so much complain'd of afterwards) if there had been any such thing. 2dly. By their said Report, in 1682. made after twelve years Experience upon twenty Ships that had been sheathed within that time (having nothing to object against its keeping on, duration, and certain security from the Worm, or any thing else) they complained only of this Sheathings extraordinary eating and corroding the Bolts and Ruddar-Irons, and that but of eight of those twenty, saying no∣thing of the rest; and, by their Complaints, those eight differed exceedingly amongst themselves; some lasting above twice as long as others, and some of the Irons of the same Ruddar, complain'd of, to be very much eaten, whilst others were said to remain good and serviceable; which different Effects not being possible, in the Nature of Things, to proceed from one and the same Cause, [Lead-Sheathing] they should have found out another, or have been willing to have hearkened to those that did, who charged this different duration upon the Smith's better or worse mixing, welding, and working his Iron with Fire and Hammer, and proved it by an ocular Evidence upon view of the Henrietta's Iron∣work, produced at their own Board, as in Pag. 14. of their said Reply, that alone, and only that, be∣ing able to answer the great variety of decay that now is, and ever was upon all Ships sheathed, or not sheathed, before Lead-sheathing was ever thought of; which could not be, but the decays must be always conformable to their Causes, if the sheathing either way, or not sheathing at all, were any wise concerned therein; And thus from their own Act, and the very Complaints annexed to the said Report, they may find all their Objections fully answered: So hard a thing it is for Men not to contradict them∣selves, when once they go about to contradict the Truth. But since these Reasons (being now generally taken notice of) expose those Objections to Contempt, another is advanced, which at first, seeming somewhat plausible, ought to be answered as well as the rest; viz. That there having been so many Persons (some of Wealth and good Quality) all along concerned in this Work, till now of late, it could not be, that this Sheathing should be so laid aside all this while, but that it must in sixteen or seventeen years time have been restored again to the Ʋse of the Na∣vy, if there had been any Truth in what Hale says, and so much real Worth and Excellency in the thing it self, as he pretends. This Insinuation being natural enough, and likely to prevail with some, not to trouble themselves to read, or mind what Hale has printed upon this occasion, he finds himself obliged to give some An∣swer to it, and hopes he may be excused, if in his own Defence he mentions some Persons and Cir∣cumstances, that did occurr in this Affair, which he hath hitherto omitted, that the World may judge who, and what sort of Men they are beholden to, for this delay, and depriving the Publick of the benefit of so useful an Invention all this while, or whether it be in truth owing to its own Deficiency, and want of Merit in it self; which he proceeds to do by these following steps; viz.
1. While the Complaints about the Ruddar-Irons lay before that Navy-Board, the Parties concerned attended them, and thought they had then given them sufficient Reasons from the different duration always observed in the Iron-work, that the Lead-sheathing could be no wise concerned therein; or if they were not presently satisfied, they believed at least (the King having commanded them by the Admiralties Order of Dec. 20.1673. printed in Pag. 6. of the said Reply, positively to sheath no otherwise than with Mill'd-Lead, without their Lordship's express Order; and they having by several Orders in April and May 1678, as in Pag. 10. & 44. made for their better Enquiry into this Matter, and directed them to demand Ruddar-Irons from the Mill'd-Lead Company, for such Ships they should af∣terwards sheath, upon their Proposal to undertake the making of them) that they would not leave off this Sheathing totally without Order, tho' they had had no Demands from the Board for a long time, when they had heard several Ships had been sheathed with Wood, for which, Age, Weakness, or some reason or other was pretended, but never that they had wholly laid it aside: So that the Company re∣mained in continual Expectation of Demands at one time or other, till they were surprized with the said Report, by which means they were abused and deluded out of above four years of their time, all which is set forth in their Reply, Pag. 10. 24, 25. 2. The Mill'd-Lead Company having put in their Reply to the said Report, and the Lords of the Admiralty having order'd the Commissioners of the Navy to attend, read the same to them, telling them, they must in some convenient time put in their Answer in Writing, to which they excusing themselves, say∣ing, they had not leisure nor skill to write such fine Discourses, but were well assured there was Cause enough for the Complaints they had exhibited. My Lord Nottingham told them, the thing importing such great Pretensions to His Majesty's Service, it was too hot for their Fingers, they would lay it before the Council Board, let them get what time they could, or do as they pleased there; which his Lordship, being one of the Members of that Board, as well as of the Admiralty, accordingly did; and the Council upon hearing both sides, Dec. 22. 1682. (the Particulars being many) referred the same back again to the Admiralty to examine and report, as in Pag. 51. Whereupon the Company made their farther Address to that Board, printed, Pag. 54. but were kept in hand by delays, and one pretence or other, not being able to obtain any Report according to the Reference, before their Com∣mission was determined, which was in May 1684. so that here there was above a year and an half's time more lost. 3. Afterwards King Charles took the Office of Lord High Admiral into his own hands, managed by the Duke of York, and Mr. Pepys his Secretary, of which the Mill'd-Lead Company had great hopes to find the good effects, he having always approved their Sheathing, and himself having penned their Reply abovementioned, and Mr. Hewer his Chief Clerk being, as he knew, one of their Partners, re∣commended by King Charles under his Sign Manual, to avoid Envy, with particular Directions to take care that their Work should be duly promoted in the Navy; but the same Navy-Board being continued in Commission the remainder of King Charles's and beginning of King James's, Reign, they pretended not to have Power enough, but doubted not in convenient time to see the Lead-sheathing restored, which the Company might be sure they would take all opportunity to promote, so that almost two years more was spent in these Expectations. 4. But now that the oeconomy and method of the whole Affairs of the Navy, and even the Navy-Board it self were new modelled and managed, according to Mr. Pepys his Proposal to King James, upon a Commission, dated April 17. 166. (as appears by his Memoirs printed in the year 1690.) when himself was in effect Lord High Admiral, and Sir Anthony Deane a professed Friend to the Lead-sheathing from the beginning, and Mr. Hewer, and others, who Mr. Pepys approved, were made Commissioners of the Navy: Upon this Project of Reformation and good Husbandry to the Crown, one should have thought that this Lead-sheathing had not been far from its Restauration; but whatever occult or corroding Quality there may lye conceal'd in the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing, in respect of the Ruddar-Irons, there seems to be something extraordinary in the very Essence and Constitution of a Commissioner or Officer of the Navy, in respect of that; for after this new Commission, the Company thought themselves sure of a speedy dispatch, and therefore made little Application for some time, depending upon their Partner Mr. Hewer (and his known, and their seeming Friends, especially it now becoming their Duty, as they knew it to be a great Service to the King) for encouragement to apply themselves formally to their Board, but were kept in hand, by one pretence or other still, for nine months more; when Mr. Hewer, being able to excuse the delay no longer, advised his Partners to make a new Proposal to their Board, to sheath at a rate certain per yard square, and to wave the old Contract, and all Discourse about the Complaints, saying, he believed those that had been concerned therein were now better satisfied they had been misled, and would take it well to hear no more thereof; so the Company laid before them their Proposal, dated Dec. 20. 1686. printed Pag. 60. But even after this they were (upon the like pretences of unseasonableness from pres∣sing Business, or want of compliance in some of their Members, which they hoped to satisfie, though there was but one of those that had subscribed the Report remaining at their Board) delayed about four months more: At length, finding Mr. Hewer did nothing, Dr. Davenant, one of the Partners, being related to my Lord Falkland, prevailed with his Lordship to move the Board, that their new Proposal might be referred to some of their own Members, to consider and Report their Opinions, which could not easily be deny'd; and so it was referred to Sir Annhony Deane, and Sir Phineas Pett, Commissio∣ner at Chatham, Sir Anthony being there, when Mr. Hale writ to them from the Company, to put them in mind of making their Report before they parted, not doubting but it would be a fair one, Sir Phineas having also certified formerly in favour of the Lead-sheathing, and refusing to sign the said Report against it, with the rest of that Board.
5. Hale waiting upon Sir Anthony at his Return, which was about a fortnight after, asked him if they had made their Report? What Report, says, he, (seeming strange!) Why, yours, says Hale, and Sir Phineas Pett's, upon the Boards Reference to you of our Proposal: That, says he, I have reported forty and forty times, That I am satisfied your Sheathings an excellent thing, and best for the King's Service, but you must speak to Narbrough and Berry, you know that I am always ready to promote it. They mind not (says Hale) what we say; you must satisfie them with the Reasons you are satisfied your selves, or the Board must proceed without them; but if you don't report your Opinions in Writing, how can the Board go on with their Reference to contract with us? Why, says he, you would not have us report it is cheaper? Yes, says Hale, but I would, it 150 per Cent. be cheaper; which you know Mr. Pepys, Pag. 57. Mr. Hewer, and your Self found by Calculation, with respect to its duration, from the Navy-Books, I being present. Ay, duration, says, he, (sheering off) you must speak  them, you may be sure I'll do what I can. Thereupon Hale having writ to Sir Phineas Pett, received his Answer, That Sir Anthony Deane had the Papers from the Navy-Board in his keeping, saying, You must get Mr. Hewer to speak to him to dispatch it; for my part, I am ready to sign a Report at any time. Mr. Hewer was told this; and Sir Anthony said, he would acquaint the Board with what they had to say, as well as if 'twere in Writing, all pretending fairly, blaming others, but still with promising hopes, whilst those concerned began now to discern how they had been deluded for about two years more, which will appear farther confirmed in the next Paragraph. 6. The Company now thought it adviseable to apply themselves to some Person of Quality at Court for their assistance, in hopes of fairer Quarter, as they found at the beginning, while my Lord Carlisle was their Partner, which my Lord Marlbrough having accepted of, they mentioned it to his Lordship to present a Petition to the King, that whereas they had such a Proposal that had lain so long before the Navy-Board, His Majesty would be pleased to order them to admit thereof, or to give their Reasons in Writing why they did not, which his Lordship approved, and accordingly such a Petition was pre∣pared, and by him put into the hands of Mr. Pepys to be delivered, not doubting Success if He should but appear sincere at last, who had taken such pains throughly to inform himself therein, and had so often declared his approbation thereof, upon full Conviction (to use his own Words) that it was a great Service to the King, and promised the Company at his first Return to his Office to promote the Use of it, whenever it came in his way to do't; and sure that could not be question'd now. 7. But even he also appeared plainly to have another Interest now to preferr, pretending difficulty to restore, it having been so long laid aside, and the Commanders so much prejudiced against it, fearing the loss of their Ruddars, and consequently the King's Ships and Subjects. He proposed also a new Trial upon two Ships, to be sheathed one with Wood, the other with Lead, and new Ruddar-Irons put on together, to see which proved best, which had been formerly mentioned. To all which he received Answers: To the first, That 'twas not their fault, but their loss, as well as the King's that it had been discontinued so long, as he well knew. Secondly, That it was not likely a Captain would refuse his Commission, or be un∣willing to go in a Lead-sheathed Ship (which he had shewn would sail better) if once that Sheathing had passed Approbation above. Thirdly, That it was not reasonable now after seventeen or eighteen years Trials already, to wait three or four years more for the Success of another; which, as he had formerly observed himself (the Ruddar-Irons being liable to so much Uncertainty) could not deter∣mine the truth of the thing with any certainty at last; though when it was first proposed, the Com∣pany was willing enough to make Trial thereof, the course of their Trade being not intended to stop till the Trial made: he replied that if those Fears prevailed with the Captains, 'twas no matter how self-convinced soever we were that there was no cause for't; but he would take some opportunity to present the Petition, for which he should have time enough, before there could be occasion for any sheathing, but never did, nor did they expect (with any advantage to them after these Evasions) he ever would: So that the other Parties concerned seeing their whole Interest, which they had so long depended on, and which was now in power, turned against them, they in some time afterwards par∣ted with their Concerns to Mr. Hale (who had the greatest share therein, and having exhausted his Fortune by it, most of all depended thereon) upon Terms agreed between them. From thenceforwards Hale being only concerned, he applies himself to the World in Print, by Publications of the great Use, Excellency, and preference of the Mill'd-Lead, as well for covering of Houses, &c. as sheathing of Ships, the Plumbers and their Friends having also decried it, as the Ship∣wrights and theirs do. And, in the year 1691. in a small Book, amongst other things, he printed the said Reply to the Navy-Board's Report, and the Proceedings that had been thereon before the then Lords of the Admiralty and Council-Board, as the same were in Fact, for the satisfaction and encou∣ragement of Merchants, and others, as they should judge thereof. Amongst many that had read the Book, and approved of the Lead-sheathing, some eminent Mer∣chants having within these two years sheathed several Ships with it, and Hale hearing there were about half a score Ships ordered to be sheathed for last Summer's Service, addressed himself to the present Navy-Board, that they would be pleased to sheath one or two of these Ships (at least) with Mill'd-Lead, that they might within their own Time, and under their own Order and Observations, make some Trial thereof themselves, and encourage the farther use of it, as they found it deserved, and not to de∣pend altogether upon the old Complaints and Objections, which some think have been fully enough answered. Their Answer was, that the thing had been long agoe contrasted at that Board by their Predecessors, who they believed, being Men of Judgment and Understanding in their Business, had fully examined and considered the Matter, and laid aside the use thereof, upon very good grounds, which they had reason to be satisfied in, and not to question their Proceedings.
By this time it may appear, who have been the Cause that the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing was thrust out, and its Use been discontinued in the Navy all this while, and what Hardship and evil Treatment this unfortunate Invention hath met with ever since it came into the World, not only by its Enemies, but its most intimate seeming Friends, for all the manifest Benefits and Advantages it brought, and proposed to the Publick, by preserving the Hulls of our Ships from their mortal Enemy the Worm, without hindrance to Sailing, at a Rate above Cent. per Cent. cheaper than the Wood-sheathing, as has been proved, and that by imploying and exhausting the Product and Manufacture of our own Country, instead of the foreign hitherto used therein: And it were harder yet, if these its past Sufferings should by Insinuation be charged upon it as a Crime, to condemn it to a perpetual Banishment hereafter, as this ill-natured Objection drives as. The said Book may be had a these Book-sellers Shops; viz. Mr. Hensman's in Westminster-Hall, the Harrow and Crown by St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, the Golden Harp in St. Paul's-Church-yard, and at the Leg and Star, near the Royal Exchange, Cornhill: And the Mill'd-Lead it self of any thiness, from one pound in a Foot square to twenty or more, if required, of the usual breadth of three Foot and an half, and above twice as long as any Plumber pretends to cast, if desired; for all Ʋses of Churches, Houses, &c. better, and at least 20 per Cent. cheaper than Cast-Lead can be, as well as for sheathing Ships, above Cent. per Cent. and for all other purposes where Sheet-Lead may be used, and many that Cast-Lead cannot be apply'd to, as is fully proved in the said Book, and the said printed Papers, which Papers, as well as this, may be had gratis at the Book-sellers, aforesaid: Or, At the Milld-Lead Sign in urange-street, by Red-Lyon-Square, where Mr. Charles Hale lives, who undertakes the said Sheathing, or any other Work about Churches, Houses, &c. having able Plumbers, and sufficient Workmen to perform the same; and sells his Solder for 6 d. a-pound, which the Plumbers have by Combintion hitherto kept up at 9 d. LONDON, Printed May, 1696.
