H12 99887137 181855
Fancies Favourite: OR, The Mirror of the Times. Being a young Ladies commendation of a young Gallant, which hath a long time shewed her much love; which by his civil carriage, and long patience in waiting on her, at last conquered her, who was once resolved to lead a single life, and therefore he termed her the Phoenix of the Times. To the Tune of, Fancies Phoenix. COme, come, away you Maidens fair this Song to you I will indite, 'Tis of a Young Man I'll declare. who in his praise I needs must write: The City if I search about, I scarce shall find his fellow out. He hath been constant now to me, The mirrour of the times is he. I must confess, I once did mind, a single life to live and dye; But such rare parts in him I find, his civil Suit I can't deny, But am resolved to set him free, And grant him love and libertie: So civil he hath been to me, &c. I once did think I never should so much as know what love should be, Nor did I dream he ever could with patience so have conquered me: His comely gesture I did spie Made me delight in's company. That all may say that doth him see, &c. Did you e'r see that glorious Star that ushers in the morning bright, How he exceeds all other far by casting forth his sparkling light, So all do say as much by he, That e'r did keep his company. His carriage doth his gesture show, he is admired where-e'r he go. He bashful is, yet bold also, and shews it with a gallant grace, All vaporing Blades he scorns to know, yet scorns he for to hide his face, He'll take no wrong, nor quarrels bréed, but stick to's friend in time of need: He's civil, yet he'll merry be, &c. If any where you should him spy, in Maids or Womens company, No wanton looks comes from his eye, at any time as you e'r shall see, He'll court, he'll kiss, he'll sing or play, but it shall be in a modest way, For Men or Womens company, &c. BVt stay, my Pen doth run too fast, in setting forth his gallantrie, For Fear I lose him at the last, then cause you'll have to laugh at me, When some do hear of him they may persuade his love from me away: But if they gain his love from me, None constant then I think there be. But his name I have not told, nor will not yet, you may be sure Till of him I can get faster hold, there's no one here shall it procure. You Maidens all that hear my Song, I would not have you for him long. But if you do, persuaded be, You may find some as good as he. A Phoenix he hath termed me, because I thought to lie alone, But if that such a Bird there be, out of this Climate sure she's flown, Our Land is cold, and therefore I, resolve no Phoenix for to die. But though I don't his Phoenix prove, Yet I will be his Turtle Dove. There's many maiden that doth say, a single life is best at ease, How oft I peay will you say nay, if once a Young man doth you please, I must confess sometimes you'll prove, most coy to him you most do love. What by experience I find true, Pray blame not me to tell it you. Let me advise you Maidens fair, not to be coy, nor proud at all, For those that count themselves most rare most times doth get the greatest fall: You seldom see a scornful maid, but at the last she is betray'd: Be courteous, yet be vertuous still, And let not young men have their will. Chuse not a Husband for estate, unless you fancy him beside, You may repent when 'tis too late, 'tis for a life time you are ty'd: No Ranter take, if you be wise, nor yet none of the new precise: The one will rant and spend thy means, The other closely may love queans. But now my Song grows to an end, I must be gone, my love doth stay, Last night I did unto him send to meet me at a place to day; Where we intend so to agree, in what Church we will Married be: Then Phoenix like we'll live and dye In the pure flames of Chastity. One Love, one Faith, we do express, and therefore we one name will have, Our love so great is I confess, we likewise do desire one grave; To his desire I will incline, his ashes shall be joyned with mine, So Phoenix like we mean to lie, And Turtle like we'll live and dye. C. H. London Printed for F. Coles, T. Veres, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
