j163 52612184 179479
A DECLARATION. JAMES R. AS We cannot consider this Invasion of Our Kingdoms, by the Prince of Orange, without horror, for so unchristian and unnatural an Undertaking, in a Person so nearly Related to Us; so it is a Matter of the greatest trouble and concern to Us, to reflect upon the many Mischiefs and Ca∣lamities which an Army of Forreigners and Rebels must unavoidably bring upon Our People. It is but too evident by a late Declaration Published by him; that notwithstanding the many speci∣ous and plausible Pretences it carries, his Designs in the bottom do tend to nothing less than an absolute Usurping of Our Crown and Royal Authority; as may fully appear by his assuming to himself in the said Declaration the Regal Stile: Requiring the Peers of the Realm, both Spiri∣tual and Temporal, and all other Persons of all Degrees to obey and assist him in the Execution of his Designs, a Prerogative inseparable from the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and for a more undeniable Proof of his immoderate Ambition, and which nothing can satisfy but the immediate Possession of the Crown it self, he calls in Question the Legitimacy of the Prince of WALES, Our Son and Heir Apparent, Tho' by the Providence of God, there were present at His Birth so many Witnesses, of unquestionable Credit, as it seemed to have been the particular Care of Heaven on purpose to disapoint so wicked and unparallel'd Attempt. And in Order to the Effecting his Ambitious Designs, he seems desireous in the Close of his Declaration, to Submit all to the Determination of a free Parliament, hoping thereby to ingratiate himself with Our People; Though nothing can be more Evident, than that a Parliament cannot be Free, so long as there is an Army of Forreigners in the Heart of Our King∣doms, So that in truth he himself is the Sole Obstructer of such a Free Parliament: We being fully resolved as we have al∣ready Declared, so soon as (by the Blessing of GOD). Our Kingdoms shall be Delivered from this Invasion, to call a Parlia∣ment, which can no longer be liable to the least Objection of not being Freely Chosen, since We have actually restored all the Burroughs and Corporations of this Our Kingdom, to their Ancient Rights and Priviledgs, and in which We shall be ready, not only to receive and redress, all the just Complaints and Grievances of Our good Subjects, but also to repeat and confirm the Assurance, We have already given to them, in Our several Declarations of Our Resolution by Gods Blessing, to main∣tain them in their Religion, their Liberties and Properties, and all other their just Rights and Priviledges whatsoever. Upon these Considerations, and the Obligations of their Duty and natural Allegiance, We can nowayes doubt, but that all Our Faithful and Loving Subjects will readily and heartily Concur and Joyn with Us in the entire Suppression and repelling of those Our Enemies and Rebellious Subjects, who have so Injuriously and Disloyally invaded and disturb'd the Peace and Tranquillity of these Our Kingdoms. Given at Our Court at Whithall, the 6th. of November, 1688. And of Our Reign the Fourth Year. A List of the Foot and Horse that are come with the Prince of Orange, as Printed in Holland. HORSE. The Life Guard, Regiment of Guards Commanded by Benting. VValdeck's Regim, Nassaw, Mompellian, Ginckel, Count Vander Lip, The Prince's Dragoons, Marrewis Dragoons, Sgravemoer, Sapbroeck, Fioddorp, Seyde, Oye, Suylestein, In all. Troopers, Life-Guard, Regiment of Guard Prince's Dragoons, Marreuis Drago In all FOOT. Foot-Guards Commanded by C. Soe 25 Comp. 20 Mackay  Comp. Balfour,  Comp. Talmash  Comp. Regiment which was for∣merly Bellises,  Comp. Regiment which was for∣merly Wachops,  Comp. Regiment which was the late Earl of Ossori. 0 Comp. Barckevelt, 0 Comp. Holstein 0 Comp. Wirtemberg, 2 Comp. Hagendorn, 0 Comp. Fagel 0 Comp. Nassaw 0 Comp. Carelson,  Comp. ander, 0 Comp. of  0 Comp. Comp. In all  Comp. a Comp. 86 Of Guards, 2000 06 List of of Wa y-Boats, 0 incks, 0 Fire-Ships, 0 In all 635 All these Troops ( compleat) would have amounted to this Number, but as they are not they amount but to Holy-Rood-House Printed by Mr. P. B. Enginier, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for his Household  and Colledge. 1688.
