L3058 99887083 181809
Lord WILLOUGHBY: Being a true Relation of a famous and bloody BATTEL fought in Flanders, by the Noble and Valiant Lord Willoughby, with 1500 English, against 40000 Spa∣niards, where the English obtain'd a notable Victory, to the Glory and Renown of our Nation. To the Tune of, Lord Willoughby, &c. THe fifteenth Day of July, with glistering Spear and Shield, A famous Fight in Flanders, was foughten in the field: The most couragious Officers, was English Captains three; But the bravest Man in Battel was brave Lord Willoughby. The next was Captain Norris, a valiant Man was he; The other Captain Turner, that from field would never flee: With fifteen hundred fighting Men, alas, there was no more, They fought with forty thousand then upon the bloody shore. Stand to it noble Pike-man, and look you ound about. And shot you right you Bowmen, and we will keep them out. You Musket and Cavalier Men, do you prove true to me, I'll be the foremost Man in fight, says brave Lord Willoughby. And then the bloddy Enemy they fiercely did assail, And fought it out most valiantly, not doubting to prevail: The wounded man on both sides fell, most piteously to see, Yet nothing could the courage quell. of brave Lord Willoughby. For seven hours to all Mens view, this Fight endured sore, Unil our Men so feeble grew that they could fight no more: And then upon dead Horses full favourly they eat; And drink the Puddle-water, no better to  they get. When they had fed so freely, they kneeled on the ground, And praised God devoutly for the favour they had found: And bearing up their Colours, the fight they did renew, And turning towards the Spaniards, five thousand more they slew. The sharp steel pointed Arrows, and Bullets thick did flye. Then did our valiant Souldiers charge on most furiously: Which made the Spaniards waver, they thought it best to flee; They fear'd the stout behaviour of brave Lord Willoughby. Then quoth the Spanish General, Come let us march away, I fear we shall be spoyled all, if that we longer stay: For yonder comes Lord Willoughby with courage fierce and fell, He will not give one inch of way for all the Devils in Hell. And then the fearful Enemy was quickly put to flight, Our Men pusu'd couragiously, and rout their Forces quite: But at the last they gave a shout, which ecchoed through the Sky, God and St. George for England, the Conquerors did cry. This news was brought to England with all the speed might be; And told unto our gracious Queen of this same Uictory: O this is brave, Lord Willoughby my love hath ever won, Of all the Lords of Honour 'tis he great deeds hath done. For Souldiers that were maimed and wounded in the fray, The Queen allow'd a Pension of eighteen-pence a day; Besides all cost and charges she quit and set them free; And this she did all for the sake of brave Lord Willoughby. Then courage noble English Men, and never be dismay'd, If that we be but one to ten, we will not be afraid, To fight with forreign Enemies, and set our Nation free; And thus I end the bloody bout of  Lord Willoughby. London: Printed for A. M. W. O.and E. Thackery, inD-Lane.
