M275AB 99887545 182278
The Maids Chastity that is troubled in mind, Against Young-mens unconstancy who proveth unkind: She gives warning to all Maidens that are in the Row, To take heed of false young men wheresoere they goe, To a pleasant new Tune. YOu young Maids that would live chary And live single and not marry, Nor contract your selves to none, For the Maid is the best that lies alone. Cupid, Cupid, thou hast done me wrong I have béen thy servant now too long, My heart was never frée from care, Since I was intangled in thy snare. In thy snare I have béen settered, And often have my businesse letted, In following after Venus train, But the Maid is the best that lies alone. Young-men they will cog and lye, Maidens they may wéep and cry, Truth and Conscience they use none, But the Maid is the best that lies alone. In this Breast a heart I hear, It's none of mine, I wish it were, Once it was mine, if I could but a kept it, But now where it is, it's not respected. Now I hope to have my heart again, And kéep it fast from Venus Chain, Lock it in this Breast of my own, But the Maid is the best that lies alone. When I have gain'd it safe again, Then I am frée from all Young-men, And never like to make this moan, But live a single Maid alone. Love is a torment, who can abide it, who better knows than them ye has try'd it I count her a mad Woman shill, That seeks for to humour a young-mans will.
The second part to the same tune. YOung-men they be much blinded. Onely to know a Maidens mind, Maidens do not believe them if they swear, Lest after they leave you in a snare. But try their hearts and if you can, Before that you love any Man, Love it is fond and fickle still. Then do not humour a young-mans will. If a Lover be humoured in his condition, Then he pleads with a strong Commission, To get his intention if he can, The Maid is the best that lies alone. For in lying alone there's no harm taken. And being of an unconstant Love forsaken. Is better than Gold and Silver store, If that she do never see him more. A Maid that lives in an honest carriage, Must be careful in her Marriage, Young-men are so deceitful grown; The Maid is the best that lies alone. True Lovers knot may soon be tyed. And a Maid too may be made a Brid, That's not all in the conclusion shown, But the Maid is the best that lies alone. There is many things for to consider. If a Man and a Woman goe together: If Love be wanting betwéen them twain, She had better still to lie alone. When they come to a Maid a wooing, They mak no conscience of their doing. But use all the deceit that ever they can, But the Maid is the best that lies alone. There is false young-men in my mind, Some proves crosse, and some proves kind, I will not condemn them all for one, The Maids are best that lies alone. Now I would have you consider my song, I write to Maids fle do them no wrong And still I do tell them every one. The Maids are best that lies alone. London, Printed for Richard Burton at the sign of the Horshooe in Smithfield.
