p2700 52614841 176009
POEM On the most Ancient, Hoourable, and Necessary THE HAMMERMEN—TRADE THIS TRADE all other Trades doth far Outvey; For it surpaslech in Antiquity, All we can name, The Sacred Page is clear That lubal Cain was an Artifiicer. In Brass, and Iron, and that his Skill was such That way, that Others he the same did Teach; And it Tradition we may but believe, Which Authors to the several Trades doth give, And them for their Invention highly Praise, And in due Order doth them Canonize; We find that the first Author of this Trade Was before For Doth Ʋulcan aptly sound, whose Trade it was To be a SMITH to Jupiter, and Hee Was the first worship'd for a Deitie. 'Mongst all the Authors of the Trades, which show's That as he was Anteriour to those In time, likewise his Trade in Dignitie Was so in Judgement of Antiquitie, And justlie: for no Trade's more necessar; Whether it be in Time of Peace of War; The Scripture doth Remark when Israel VVas most distressed in the Reign of Saul, That there was no SMITH found throughout the Land, That neither Sword nor Spear was in the Hand Of any of the People, to mantain Their Liberty against the Philistine. No wonder then that they were in a strait For want of SMITHS, they wanted Armes to Fight; And if we view the Numerous Arts that are For Ornament, or Highly necessar. We find that Tools for These cannot be had, Without th' Assistance of this Noble Trade. The Gardiner can ne're use for his Life, His Trade without a Spade, and Prunning Knife The Husband Man to whom so much we Owe, Needeth a Coulter and Share to his Plow. The Taylors need a Knife, a Goose, and Sheers, The Mason Irons and a Mattock bears The Wright his Cousin, needs an Ax and Saw, The Flesher needs a Knife, to cut the Maw, The Weaver needs for Stenting Temple Heads, For cutting Thrumbs, and Ends, a Knife he needs, Baxters the Scraper and the Rake, Furryers, Wakers, and Glovers cannot want such sheers, Skinners a Woodie, and Round Scraper have For Leather, Tanners have a Knife to shave, and a Morter, and doth ay The Gardener with a Knife Pates away The Leather▪ And the Litster cannot Dress The Cloath, without a Cauldron and a Press His Brother needeth VVires (its understood) To make the Ancient Covering for the Head. Thus every One of all the Trades I mind, Beholding to the Hammer-Men I find. It addeth to the Honour of this Trade, That the most Precious Things that Nature made, It hath for Objects, Silver, Gemms, and Gold, Than which what weighs more, and less bulk doth hold? What's of more General Use? with them we buy The Things that are of greatest Dignity, And Usefulness, for Meat and Drink; and All That necessar for Humane kind we call. We buy for Gold and Silver; which is more, Some sell Themselves for These, and them Adore; I like the Object of the Art so well, That I account them Happy who it Feel, And Handle oft, and have the Liberty It to Engrave upon, or Liquify: In Fine, it addeth to the Trades Renown, They wear for Ensigns Hammer and the CROVVN, FINIS. EDINBURGH, Printed by JOHN REID, in the Year 1698.
