r558k 99887643 182448
REASONS Humbly Offer'd to the Honourable House of Commons, FOR Continuing the DUTY or some Part thereof, formerly granted for Rebuilding St. PAUL's Cathedral and other Churches in London, for some time longer. THE Quarries of the Island of Portland, are of great Use and Publick Conern; having the largest Blocks of beautiful Stone, and the most proper for magnificent Buildings; and in regard of their Situation upon Sea, supply all the West Coast, and the City of London in the Building of St. Paul's and other Churches, and all both Publick and Private Works; much being also used in the Docks of Portsmouth, Plimouth, and the Forti∣fications upon the Coast, and other His Majesty's Works. The whole Subsistance of many Hundreds of Families in London, the said Island, the Neighbouring Counties and Coasts de∣pend upon these Quarries; and the Shipping of Weymouth, Brighthelmston, and divers other Ports, manage this Trade to several Parts of England; and in time of Peace transport considerable Quantities of this Native Product. Upon the Third of this Instant February, 1695. a prodigious Calamity befel the said Island; all the Ground betwixt the Quarry and the Sea extending at least sixty Acres, moving for three Days together, and sinking thirty Foot and more, and spread∣ing it self farther into the Sea; whereby the Harbours and Peers of Moles (built at great Expence) were ruined and destroyed; the Cranes lately built of vast Timber, Broke; the Ways and Passages, cut through the Rocks to the Peers, sunk and intercepted; so that without great Expence the Quarry is become useless, and Thousands of People are depriv'd of their Subsistence. The Use of the King's Quarry there, was granted by King Charles II. to the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, to raise Stone for Rebuilding the Church of St. Paul's; but the Ways, Cranes and Peers, have been upheld and repaired out of the Coal Duty of Eighteenpence per Chaldron, appointed for Rebuilding the Cathedral and Parochial Churches of London, by Two Acts of Parliament formerly made for that Purpose. The said Duty determines at Michaelmas in the Year 1700. after which time Sixpence per Chaldron is granted to the Or∣phans of London. For some Years past Fraight of Shipping hath so increased, that it is become near double to what it was formerly: By reason whereof, and the Impositions upon Forreign Timber and Iron, and the great Rate of Oak Timber (altho the Works of the Cathedral are very far advanced) it will not be possible to compleat the same by the Duty aforesaid within the time allotted. Also some Parochial Churches tho used at present for Divine Service are not finished; and it is adjudged convenient, that some Houses which are too near to the North side of St. Paul's be removed farther, to prevent the danger of Firing that great and expensieve Fabrick. VVherefore it is Humbly desired, that in order to Compleat the said Cathedral and other Churches, and to recover the Quarries and defray the Charge of Repairing the Peers, Cranes and VVays (without which also they cannot be Built) the said Duty upon Coals, or such part thereof as shall be thought necessary, be continued for  Years after Michaelmas 1700. without which a great part of what has been already done to St. Paul's Church will go to Decay again, and be in danger of being Lost.
