S1628A 52612294 179598
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Anent carrying of ARMS. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To  Macers or Messengers at Arms, and to all and sundry Our Lieges and Subjects whom these presents do or may concern, Greeting: Forasmuch as We considering, that several per∣sons who did fall under Our Act and Proclamation, of the date the twenty fifth day of March last; Intituled, Act for bringing in of Arms out of some Westerne Shires, have given sufficient testimony of their Loyalty and Obedience to Our Laws, by taking the Oath of Allegiance, and subscribing the Declaration, or by carrying of Arms for Vs and Our Authority against those in the late Rebellion; And thereby have deserved the same allowance for carrying of Arms, as others Our good Subjects, without any hazard of being lyable to any pains or penalties. Therefore We, with advice of the Lords of Our Council, do declare all such persons who are qualified as said is, to be free of all re∣straints, fines and penalties contained in the said Proclamation, as to the carrying of Arms; So that as to these persons, the said Act is so far void and null, and no wayes obligatory against them, as if the same had never been made; and that by vertue thereof, they shall never be troubled nor called in question as Contraveeners of the said Act, before any Iudicatory whatsoever. Likeas, the said persons have as full liberty to carry their Arms, as any others Our good Subjects, provided alwayes that these presents shall no wayes be derogatory to that part of the said Proclamation, anent the securing of the Persons, Families and Goods of Ministers from injuries and violence, but that the same shall stand and abide in full force to all intents and purposes, any thing in the con∣trair hereof notwithstanding. And ordains these presents to be printed, and published at the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and other places needfull, that none pretend ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the ninth day of October, one thousand six hundred and sixty seven, and of Our Reign the nineteenth year. Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, 1667.
