s1741 52615081 176109
A PROCLAMATION Discharging any Persons to travel vvith Arms vvithout Licence. CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: To  our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch, as the bearing of, and shooting with Fire-arms, such as Hagbuts, Culverings, and Pistols, without Licence from Us, is prohibited and discharged by several Acts of Parliament, under diverse great pains and penalties, especially by the eighteenth Act of the first Parliament, eighty seventh Act of the sixt Parliament, and the sixt Act of the sixteenth Parliament of King James the sixt; And We, taking to Our consideration what Attrocious Facts are committed by rebellious and disorderly persons, who go in Arms to Field Conventicles, these Rendevouzes of Re∣bellion, and presume to make resistance to Our Forces when they offer to dissipate them: Therefore We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do prohibite and dis∣charge all Our Subjects of this Kingdom, except the Officers and Souldiers of Our stand∣ing Forces, and of the Militia, to travel with any Fire-arms, as Muskets, Hagbuts, Cul∣verings and Pistols, unless they have a Licence from One of Our Privy Council, or the Sheriff of the Shire where they dwell, under the pains and penalties contained in the saids Acts of Parliament. Likeas, We with advice foresaid, do hereby Authorize and require, all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, and Officers of Our Forces, that they take notice of all persons whom they find travelling, not only car∣rying the saids Fire-arms, but also carrying Swords, Durks, Whingers, Halbards, Poll-axes, or any other Weapons in∣vasive; that they seize upon the saids Fire-arms, and secure the persons carrying the same, not having Licence from one of Our Privy Council, or from a Sheriff, or Stewart granted to these within their Jurisdiction, until they give Bond and Cauti∣on to compear before Competent Judges, and answer for their transgression of the saids Acts of Parliament; and in case the saids Travellers be found to carry any of the saids Arms, they not being Noblemen, Landed-Gentlemen, or their Chil∣dren, or Servants travelling with them or their Children, and not having passes expressing whence they came, and whither they go, under the hand of one of Our Privy Council, Lords of Session, Sheriff, Stewarts, Bailies of Royalties or Re∣galities, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, or Commissioners of Excise granted in favours of these within their Bounds; that the saids persons be examined by Our saids Judges, and Officers in whose Bounds they shall be found; and in case they cannot give a sufficient account of themselves, that they are none of these vagrant persons, disturbers of the peace, and com∣mitters of the saids Insolencies; We do Command Our saids Judges, and Officers to seize upon their Arms, and secure their persons in the next prison, and with all diligence to send an account of their Names and Examination to Our Sheriff-Deputs, specially Commissionate for punishing of Conventicles, and other disorders of that kind; that without delay they may pro∣ceed to the tryal of the saids persons, according to their Commissions and Instructions. And We Ordain these presents to con∣tinue and endure until the first of November next. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straitly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there make publication of the Premisses, that none may pretend ignorance. And Ordains these presents to be printed. Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh the eight day of May, 1679, and of Our Reign the thretty one Year. Alexr. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty. 1679.
