S1893 53981740 180373
JR royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, For putting the Kingdom of Scotland in a Posture of Defence against the Enemies of the King and Government. JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To Our Ly∣on King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, and Messengers, at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as these Traiterous Conspirators, who designed the horrid and Sacrilegious Murder of Our Dearest Brother, the late King, of Renown∣ed and Eternal Memory, and the Destruction of our ancient Monarchy, continuing still in the same Hellish Project and Fury against Us, and Our Royal Government; Are now again setting their Designs on Work, to raise Com∣motions in this Our ancient Kingdom, as being the last Struglings of them, and their Execrable Party, and the out∣most Effects of their absolute Despair: For preventing whereof, and bringing these Desperat and Execrable Trai∣tors to just and condign punishment; We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby strictly Re∣quire and Command, all and every of the Subjects of this Our Realm, That they be in a readiness in their best Arms concur and assist Us against any the aforesaid Commotions, or Insurrections, as they shall be advertised; And particularly, We hereby Re∣quire and Command, all and every the Collonels of Our Militia Regiments of Foot, and Captains of Horse, and the inferiour Officers and Souldiers under their Command, in the Shires respective under-written, viz. The Merse Teviotdale, Peebles, Selkirk, East, Mid, and West Lothians, Town Edinburgh, Stirling Shire, Fife and Kinross Shires; The four Companies of the Low-countrey, of the Earl of Perth Our Chancellors Regi∣ment; and the three Companies of the Low-countrey, of the Marquess of Athol, Lord Privy Seal, his Regiment; The Sheriffs of Forfar and Kincardin; and all the Heretors, Liferenters, Feuars and Wodsetters in the Shires of Air, Renfrew, Clidsdale, Wigtoun, Dumfreis, and Stew∣artries and Bailliaries within the same, to be in readiness with fourteen Dayes Provision, to March when, and whether Our Privy Council shall give them Orders; And to that end, to have their Arms fixed, and their several Companies of Our Militia, presently Mustered, and the He∣retors and others aforesaid, Listed Modelled in Companies, and Mustered for the putting them in a condition of a greater readiness. And further, We hereby Require and Command all persons, Fenciblesmen, betwixt sixty and sixteen, within the Shires of Aberdene, Bamff, Elgin, Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland and Caithness, to be in readiness in manner foresaid. As likewise, We hereby Require and Com∣mand all Our Liedges on the Sea-coasts of this Kingdom, or near to them, or to any of the Islands thereunto belonging, so soon as they hear, or get notice of any Vessels arriving at any place from abroad, or at home into any Coasts, Ports, Creiks, or Harbours, with Men, Arms, or Am∣munition, forthwith to Convocat, and rise in their best Arms, and to Beat them off, or seize upon, and secure the Ships or Vessels, and the Men, Arms, and Ammunition, and give immediate Advertisement to Our Privy Council, And for their Security in obeying these Our Royal Com∣mands, We hereby fully Pardon and Indemnifie them forever, of all Slaughter, Blood, Mutilation, Fire-raising, burning of Ships, or suchlike Warlike Inconveniencies as may follow, in case they meet with Hostile-Opposition: And We hereby Require and Command all Our Col∣lectors, Customers, or Waiters, to make strict and Diligent Search and Inquiry in all Ships, arriving in any part of this Kingdom, for Traitors, Rebels, Fugitives, or Disaffected Persons, and for Arms and Ammunition, and to seize upon the Ships, Men, Arms, and Ammunition, until they acquaint Our Privy Council, and receive their Directions thereanent: And to the effect they may the better be able to perform this Service, We do Require all Our Subjects nearest to them, as they shall be by them Advertised to Rise, Concur with, Fortifie and Assist them, who, and these so assisting, are hereby Declared to be fully Indemnified in manner foresaid. And that all the persons aforesaid may know their hazard, if they fail in any of the Premisses. We hereby Declare, That they shall not only incur Our high Displeasure, but also shall be pu∣nished with the outmost of severity, conform to their Demerit, and the Laws and Practice of this Kingdom, and that the Heretors which shall be Deficient in sending out their Tennents, and other Fensible Men, or shall not give advertisement as said is, and of any Rebels and Traitors appearing on their Lands, that they shall be punished accordingly. And to the end the saids. Desperat Trai∣tors and Rebels may have no Reset, Harbour, Comfort or Refuge from any of the Subjects of this Our Realm. We hereby strictly Pro∣hibite and Discharge all and every of Our Subjects therein, fo furnish House, Meat, Drinks or any other thing comfortable to them, or to keep Intelligence, or Correspondence with them, by Word, Writ, or Message, or to Transport them to, or from Ferries, or any wayes to be aiding, abating or assisting to them, under the pain of being Repute and esteemed Art and Part with them in all their wicked Deeds and Practices, and proceed∣ed against, Demeaned and Punished accordingly. And that Our Plesure in the Premisses may be fully known to all Our Leidges, OUR WILL is, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Mer∣cat Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom (and all places else needful) and there by open Proclamation, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of Our Royal Will and pleasure in the Premisses, that none pretend ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Haly-rude-house, the 28. day of April 1685. And of Our Reign the first Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.
