S1835 52529300 179068
PROCLAMATION, For apprehending Patrick Grahame of Inchbraco, with promise of a Reward. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits,  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch, as it is informed, that Patrick Grahame younger of Inchbraco hath lately killed John Master of Rollo, without any occasion or provocation; and after the commit∣ting thereof, hath withdrawn and fled from underlying the Law. Therefore We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to certi∣fie all our Leidges, of this inhumane Slaughter, and to require all Magi∣strats, and all Our other Officers, Civil and Military, with all Our other Leidges, to do their outmost to apprehend the said Patrick Grahame, that he may be brought to condign punishment; Indemnifying hereby any person from the ha∣zard of Slaughter, or any other Act of Violence which they may be necessitat to commit against the said Patrick Grahame, or any who shall joyn with him, in his resisting to be apprehended. And further, We do promise and assure the Sum of Eighteen hundred Merks Scots to any person or persons who shall Seiz and apprehend the said Patrick Grahame, and deliver him to any of Our Ma∣gistrats, or Officers of Our Army, to be by them safely keeped, in order to his Tryal; discharging hereby all Our Leidges to shelter, harbour, or any ways assist or supply the said Patrick Grahame, upon their highest peril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Commands that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edin∣burgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several-Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority make Publication hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And ordains these presents to be Printed and Published. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth day of June, and of Our Reign the Seventh Year, 1695. Per Actum Dominorun Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.
