S996C 52529178 178869
BY THE COMMISSIONERS At LEITH. FOrasmuch as by the blessing of the LORD upon the late proceed∣ings of the English Nation in their councels, enterprises and engage∣ments with Scotland, the Common-VVealth of England hath obtained lawfull Right and Title to all Dues, Debts, Rents, Royalties and Reve∣nues, what or wheresoever belonging to the late King of Scotland, of which, a just and true accompt is expected from all and every person or persons concerned in the premisses. These are therefore to require, That within the space of  dayes after publication hereof, in the County of  all Fue-Duties, Rents, Profits and Casualities within the County aforesaid, (being such as aforesaid, and immediatly payable to the Exchequer, and which have been usually so paid by the Tennants, Fuars, or Subtennants, from whom the same are due) be for time to come, brought in, and ten∣dred to the Commissioners in Leith. And forasmuch as the Petty-Imposts of the respective Counties and Towns of this Nation, have been Farmed out to divers Persons; These are therefore to require all such Persons, Colle∣ctors, or Farmorers of the aforesaid Peny-Imposts, with all convenient speed, to bring in what is presently remaining in their hands; And such of them as are willing to hold the same, as former∣ly, shall (for the space of a year ensuing) be continued in the said Charge, and have power given them to Collect what shall be judged to be justly in Arrear. And if any person (after such publication as aforesaid) shall presume to fail hereof, or be found to deal deceitfully herein, by denying or concealing any part of that Rent or Duty paiable as aforesaid, he shall thereby forfeit so much as he hath, holds and claimes, by the paiment of such Rents and Duties. And that the aforesaid Tennants and Fuars (upon paiment of their respe∣ctive Rents and Duties) may receive a full Discharge from the Commissioners aforesaid, they are required to produce such Acquittances or Discharges, (as they last and formerly received from the Exchequer) whereof they may not fail. And upon the aforesaid Penalty, all Tennants, Fuars, and Subtennants, who are not bound (as aforesaid) to bring in their Rents and Duties to the Exchequer, but to make paiment thereof to Collectors, Chamberlains, or other Officers within the said County, are required by these presents, to make paiment of their said Rents and Duties (either present, or in arrear) to Master  and Master  being by Us appointed and authorized to Collect the same: discharging all Chamberlains, and other Officers for the late King, from dealing or intermedling therewithall, as heretofore. Furthermore, VVe require and charge all other persons, of the aforesaid County, indebted to the late King, upon any Accompt whatsoever, to make paiment thereof to the aforesaid Par∣ties, within such reasonable time as they shall see cause to set. Lastly, all Chamberlains, Collectors, and other Officers, being of, or for the said County, and concerned in the premisses, as accomptable and indebted for what they have received and uplifted (or for any part thereof remaining in their hands) are hereby charged and required to accompt and make paiment thereof to the Parties above-named; which is accordingly to be performed upon pain of forfeiting the double value. Given under our handsthis first of March 1651. Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler. 1651.
