U32 99887972 183638
THE Unconscionable Batchelors of DARBY: OR, THE Young Lasses Pawn'd by their Sweet-hearts, for a large Reck∣ning, at Nottingham Goose-Fair; where poor Susan was forced to pay the Shot. To the Tune of, To thee, to thee, &c. YOu lovers of mirth attend a while, a merry new Ditty here I write, I know it will make you laugh and smile, for every line affords delight: The Lasses of Darby with young Men, they went to Goose-fair for recreation, But how these Sparks did serve them then, is truly worth your observation, Truly, truly, worth your observation, therefore I pray observe this Ditty; The Maids did complain, they came there in vain, and was not, was not that a pity. So oon as they came into the Fair, the Batchelors made them conjues low, And bid them a thousand welcomes there, this done, to a tipling-school they go: How pleasant was honest Kate and Sue? believing they should be richly-treated, But, Neighbours and Friends, as I am true, no Lasses ever was so cheated, Cheated, cheated, very farely cheated, as you may note by this new Ditty; They were left alone, to make their moan, and was not, was not that a pity? The innocent Lasses fair and gay, concluded the Men was kind and free, Because they pass'd the time away, a plenty of cakes and ale they see; For sider and mead they then did call, and whatever else the House afforded, But Susan was forc'd to pay for all, out of the mony she had hoarded, Hoarded, hoarded, mony she had hoarded; it made her sing a doleful Ditty, And so did the rest with grief opprest, and was not, was not that a pity? Young Katy she seemed something coy, because she would make them eager grow, As knowing thereby she might enjoy what beautiful Damsels long to know: On complements they did not stand, nor did they admire their charming features, For they had another game in hand, which was to pawn those pretty Creatures, Creatures, Creatures, loving, loving Creatures, which was so charming, fair and pretty; The Men sneak'd away, and nothing did pay, and was not, was not that a pity? Though't out of the door they enter'd first, and left them tipling there behind, Those innocent Maids did not mistrust, that Batchelors could be so unkind. Quoth Susan, I know their gone to buy the fairings which we did so require, And they will return I know, for why, they do our youthful charms admire; Therefore, therefore, stay a little longer, and I will sing a pleasant Ditty; But when they found they were catch'd in the pound, they sigh'd and weep'd the more's the pity. Now finding the Men return'd no more, and that the good People would not trust, They presently call'd to know the score, it chanc'd to be fifteen shilling just: Poor Kate had but five pence in her purse, but Sue had a crown besides a guinney; And since the ease had happen'd thus, poor Soul she paid it e'ry penny, Penny, penny, e'ry, e'ry penny, tho' with a sad and doleful Ditty Said she, For this I had not a kiss, and was not, was not that a pity? Printed for I. Bissel, in West-smithfield.
