15590 S93466 [ocm]71305143 183879
THE ENGLISH Courtier, and the Cūtrey-gentleman: A pleasaunt and learned Disputation, betweene them both: very profitable and ne∣cessarie to be read of all Nobilitie and Gentlemen. VVherein is discoursed, vvhat order of lyfe, best beseemeth a Gentleman, (aswell, for e∣ducation, as the course of his whole life) to make him a person fytte for the publique seruice of his Prince and Countrey. Imprinted at London, by Richard Iones: dwelling at the signe of the Rose and Crowne neere vnto Holborne Bridge, 1586.
To the right Honorable, Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, her Maiesties principall Secretary, and of her Highnesse priuy Counsell: Richarde Iones Printer, wissheth longe life, health, and increase of honour. RIght Honourable Sir, som∣times, a prety conceite well con∣uayed, contenteth the minde, no lesse then a graue & great booke. In euery written worke, two thinges bee specially required, Inuention, and Phrase: The one, is the substance or matter: the other, the forme or facion: but if they bee both good, they make the worke perfite, & win the worker commendacion. Yea, other∣whiles, a silly Subiet substantially hand∣led, is not onely passable, but also praise∣able. A litle flower well sauored is wor∣thy smelling: A trifling stone set hy a cun∣ning craftesman, deserueth to be worne: A poore Pamphlet perfitly handled, asketh the reading. J beseeche you then,
giue leaue, and let mee present your Ho∣nor with this litle Dialogue, written by a Gentlemā, rather for pastime, then setled studdy: and yet in my poore minde, both for wise conceyt and pleasant penninge, worthy to be read. The Author therof (as a thinge vnworthy) is neither content it should presume to your presence, nor passe among the wise. Notwithstanding, without his leaue, I make bolde to aduen∣ture the one and the other: And doo most humbly dedicate the same to your Honor, the rather because he hath loued you long, and honoured you much. J craue small praise for my Printing of it, and hee (be∣inge vsed to loose his labour) desireth no∣thinge. Your Honours alwayes (most humbly) to commaund. R. Iones.
THE AVCTHOR, to the Gentlemen Readers. ALbeit I well know, that euery Gentleman, wil gentlemanly iudge of all things: yet haue I thought it no restraynt, but happely some furtherance towardes their curteous conside∣ration, most humbly to pray pardon if ought in this present Pamphlet, bee found either in very reason, dis∣sentinge from wiser iudgementes, or els through di∣uersitie of humors, not fittinge with their fancies: For some I haue seene so passionate in opinion, as can not see or heare patiently any thinge that contenteth not their owne eye, or squareth not euen with the rule of their owne mindes. But, if it pleased them to consider how hardly mennes opinions bee brought to concur, they would (I am sure) spare them selues, and not with choller & offēce, so often trouble their own thoughts. Opinon and custome (as daily experience teacheth) do leade euery one, be hee neuer so foolish or barbarous, to beleeue his owne countrey condicions, and self con∣ceytes to bee best: and therin they that haue least rea∣son, do no lesse constantly tary, then those that vpon sound reason in deede, experience, and learninge, haue firmed their iudgementes. For, do wee not finde that the sauadge Nations, are as lothe to alter their soyle, as are wee that inhabite a most cyuill Countrey? Or do you not thinke, that many eyther through want of wil or lack of patiēce to learn, accompt men mad, that hold them selues at continuall study? And contrarywise, would any ciuill man bee pleased, to abandon his bee∣inge, to abide amonge the sauadge? or that would leaue the study of good letters, to take plesure in those
toyes, which ignorant men delight in? surely no: and no maruaile, sithe the wisest, yea the Philsophers them selues, haue euen to this day dissented in opinion. For some you se haue sought the contemplatiue life: others commended the actiue: and many preferred pleasure, as that which ought most to bee desired. Sith then, for so many reasons you finde difference in the opinions of men: and that no counsell, wit, or wil, can perswade them to one minde: my meaning is not, that though in this Dialogue accordinge to mine owne fancie, I preferre the Towne habitacion, yet therby to finde fault with any, that either because his reason so per∣swadeth, or his own minde so delighteth, wil driue out his dayes in the Countrey. It shall therfore please me, that euery man please him selfe, vsinge the liberty and will of his owne minde: and though it be farre diuerse from mine, yet I know not why his opinion should trouble mee, or mine offende him: so longe as the di∣rection of eyther, be still in our owne powers. VVhat harme was it to Achilles, though Socrates refusing al ho∣nors, put his whole felicity in vertue? And why should Socrates bee offended, though aboue all thinges, Achilles desired honour? VVhat maketh it matter, though Heraclitus, thought that nothing was cōtrary to other? Or what offence was it that Permaenides, frantickly af∣firmed, all worldly things to bee but one thing? And if Zeno perswaded him selfe that nothing mooued? All which opinions and errors, could nothinge disturbe the patience of the true Philosophers, who set their de∣light in contemplation, and loue of Th'almighty. Tot capita, tot sensus, the Prouerbe sayth: VVe see then, that the endes of mans delights bee diuerse, and for the most parte contrary: although the ende of euery mans
life, is one. The life of man may therfore be compared to Iron, which beeinge vsed, becommeth bright and shyning, yet at last worne to nothing: Or if it bee not vsed, but layde vp, doth neuerthelesse consume with rustines. Euen so, mans age well imployed, weareth with some glosse or brightnesse of Fame: or if it bee without action, and obscurely passed, yet doth it not continue euer: for death (certayne) is the end both of the one and the other. God graunt that euery man may lyue in the true feare of the Lorde, and the due obedience of his Prince, so shall hee eyther in Courte, Towne, or Countrey, most happely end his daies. FINIS.
The Argument and occasion of this Dialogue. IT happened (as ofte it doth) that diuerse Gentlemen béeinge conuited to dyne togeathers: Among many other thinges, they chaunced to fall in spéeche of the Countrey and Courtly lyues, reasoninge whyther it were better for the Gentlemen of Englande to make most abode in their Countrey houses, (as our English manner is,) or els ordinaryly to inhabite the Citties and chéefe Townes, as in some forraine Nations is the custome. These Gentlemen as they were diuersly disposed and vsed, so were their opinions of this mat∣ter likewise differinge: some commending the Coun∣trey dwelling, others preferring the Cittie habitati∣on. This matter a while spoken of by euery one, was at length by assente of the whole company disputed by two Gentlemen, th'one (for this time) I will call Vincent, th'other Vallentine, both men of more then cōmon capacity, & (haply) sumwhat learned. Vincent had béene brought vp in the Countrey: Vallentine his education and life was in Courts and Citties. Either of them with the best reasons they could, maintayned their opinions, as hereafter in this discourse you shal plainly perceaue.
Of cyuile and vncyuile life. The Speakers, Vincent and Ʋalentine. IT is a strange matter to se, how menne in this age, and in this Realme of England, begin to alter their manners & customes, not onely in garments, & ordinary beha∣uiour, (which be things of none importance:) But euen in their order of life, and conuersation. Vallentine. Sir, it is true, that some doo, but the most doo not: But wherin I pray you, do you note the cheefe chaunge, and in what sortes of men, and whether is this alteratiō, from worse to better, or from bet∣ter to worse? Vincent. This chaunge (wherof I meane) is like to the rest of worldly chaunges: that is, from the better to the worse: For as the Prouerb sayth: Seldome coms the better. Vallentine. That Prouerbe in deed is auncient, and for the most part true, beeing truly applied: yet because I am lothe to mistake your meaninge, I desire to know, whether in lamentinge of alteration, you in∣clude
the whole world, or some perticuler countrey: or whether you will haue mee to apply it to Eng∣land, and to some sortes of English men only: For with other Nations (I suppose) you haue practised litle. Vincent. In deede, I am a home bred bird, and therfore will not take vpon mee to discourse of forrayne customes, though I heare they bee bad enough: But as I tolde you at the first, I am sorye to see Englishmen, so apte to leaue their auncient good fashions, and fall into forrayne manners, in my poore minde, much worse, then our owne. And because our talke shall not bee ouer tedious, I will not at this time tell you of all faultes (wherof I wishe amendment:) But only of one matter, and that in one sort of men. Vallentine. You do very wisely to reduce matters into briefe, wherin you shall both ease your selfe, and helpe my memory; which is, (I confesse) but litle worth. Vincent. I know (Maister Vallentine) your memory is very good, & so is there in you many other commēdable partes, though you, for modesty, will not so say. For you Trauellers are full of respects: and in all your dooinges, your manner is to vse modesty. Vallentine. I thanke you Sir, for so sayinge, and more I thanke you if such bee in deed your opinion of mee. Vincent. Touching mine opinion, you shalbe assured, it is, and euer shalbe such, as I say: For I am (as
I tolde you) a plaine man, vtterly vnacquainted with disguising, and superfluous ceremony, yea in troth, they are thinges much diuers, from mine e∣ducation, and nature. Vallentine. I loue you a great deale the more, for in good faith, I am made of the selfe same mowlde. And though (desire to know) did carry mee in youth far from home, and that into Countries, both beyond the Seas, and Mountaynes also, yet haue not those ayres any whit, altered my loue from my na∣turall Countrey. Vincent. That so beeinge (as vpon your worde, I will now beleeue it is) I will trust the rather to your talke, and thinke that, what you doo answere to my demaundes, is in troth, that your selfe doth faithfully follow. Vallentine. I pray you (Maister Vincent) lay by these curte∣sies, and fal to the matter of your demaundes. For mee thinkes, (though you would be called a playne man) yet you vse more ceremony, then I, that haue spente some parte of my life in Countries, where those customes are most plentifull. Vincent. Well, then I will holde you no longer in these complaintes, (which wordes I learne of you tra∣uellers.) But fall into the matter it selfe. Vallentine. Indeed Sir, that is my desire, & sith it seemeth, that the subiect of your speech shalbe in comparing of our countrey customs, with those of forrain na∣cions,
I hope you will hold mee blameles, (though occasion beeinge offered) I happen to finde faulte with somewhat of our owne, and commend the customes of others: which I will doo the more boldly, because you tolde mee, you loued plainenes, and therfore bee content, our talke may bee free speech, and without respect. Vincent. On Gods name, so let vs proceede, and (as I promised) least our talke should extend too farre, I will neither aske your opinion of all customes, nor of all sortes of men: but onely desire to be resolued of one doubt, in one thing, which toucheth mee on∣ly, and others of my degree and condition. Vallentine. And I pray you Sir, what may that bee? Vincent. You know the vse and auncient custome of this Realme of England was, that all Noble men and Gentlemen, (not called to attendance in our Prin∣ces seruice) did continually inhabite the countryes, continuing there, from age to age, and from Aun∣cester, to auncester, a continuall house, and hospi∣tallitie, which got them great loue amonge their Neighbours, releeued many poore wretches, and wrought also diuerse other good effectes, as here∣after I will tell you. Vallentine. In deede Sir, I will not denie, that the Coun∣try ayre is holsome, to gaine the loue of neighbors is very good, and to releeue the poore is an acte of much charity: But to what end speake you this, for to your well liking of these matters, euery man wil assent.
Vincent. I wish to God, they would: but I see, that Gentlemen begin to take another course, & fallinge from the vse of their Auncestors, doo now eyther altogeather (or very much) leaue to dwell in their Country houses, inhabitinge Citties, and great Townes, which manner of liuing, I cannot allow, Though it bee (as I heare) vsed in forraine Coun∣tryes. And because you haue seene both fashions, my desire is (as a man of experience in both) you will faithfully informe mee, which of these orders of liuing you like best. Vallentine. Ah Sir, now at length you are come to the mat∣ter, which (as I conceaue) is nothinge els, but that you woulde know whither it were best that gentlemen, should inhabite (as they did aunciently) their owne houses in the Country, or the Citties, as in many forraine nacions the custome is. Vincent. In troth, that is the somme and whole effecte of my demaund, and nothinge els I will for this time desire to know your opinion of, vnlesse occa∣sion of our speech shall so require. Vallentine. For my opinion herein (thought it bee of small authority) such as it is I will tell you plainely, yet (as it seemeth by your former speech) it will discent with yours. For as you commend the continuall habitation of the country, so do I vtterly disalow therof, as a custome, neither good for the common welth, neither for the gentils that do vse it: which you shall perceaue playnly, if it please you to com∣pare
the commodities with the discommodities, of either: the good, with the bad, which is in either: the profit with the disprofit, which is in either: the quiet, and disquiet which is in either. And the se∣curitie, with the hazard that is in either: all which (without priuate Passion) well waied, will easely lead you to the troth: But first, because you affect the country life, I pray you commend it perticuler∣ly, the best you may, and giue mee leaue to remem∣ber you with the discommodities therof, least you growe ouer fatte, with feedinge vpon your owne affection. When it commeth to my lot to speake of my liking, you shall without offence, bee as bold with mee. Vincent. With all good will (Maister Vallentine,) But I pray you marke well what I say, and forget (duringe my discourse) the perticuler loue you bare to some Italian or Spanish Lady, during your abode, on that side: Least that priuate Passion doth make your likinge to their customes so delicate, as you loath our owne country quiet, and commoditie. Vallentine. Nay Sir, you shall not neede to doubt any such parcialitie, for it is long sithence I was there: and besides that, my bloud is now ouer colde to kindle any such fier. And therfore to our purpose. Vincent. Then I pray you vnderstand, that I remayne of the auncient minde of our English Gentlemen, who euer, euen to this day (or very lately) did thinke the country habitation best, as a life and e∣ducation most honest, most pleasant, and most pro∣fitable.
Vallentine. I like the diuision very wel: in any wise, proceed in that order. Vincent. I haue euer, and euer will accompt, that educati∣on, & life most honest, which is nourished in iustice, truth, and plaine dealinge, free from fraude, and dissimulatiō: things (as I thinke) litle vsed among vs plaine men of the Country: And first to speake of education of our Children, wee acquaint them not with any crafty company: we clad them simply to eschue pride: wee feede them grosely, to harden their bodies: and wee teache them Schoole lear∣ning, to know good from bad: other quallities in their childhood, wee commonly doo not giue them, as things which are either hurtful or superfluous: beeing growen to riper age, wee sende them to the Vniuersitie, where many become so learned, as they gaine by learning their owne liuing: or if not, yet such taste of learninge, as they are the better. Some also we bring vp in ye Innes of Court, where if they profite, wee suffer them to proceede: if not, speedely reuoke them from thence, least they ac∣quaint themselues to much, with the licentious customes of the Cittie: as with quarreling, dycing, dauncing, deceiuing, lustinge, brauing, & indetting. To teach them these, there wanteth not in euery streate instructors ynow. Wee therfore holde it best, not to hazard our children abroade from our houses, vnlesse it bee in these places of order, and there also suffer them not to continue, vnlesse wee see their disposition to learning. To serue in Court, or follow the war, wee accompt those liues rather
lewde, then laudable: these trades are commonly hard, and their hazard greater, then wee (beeinge borne to wealth, and worship) will put our Babes vnto: In conclusion, our care in educatiō of children is such, as wee study cheefly to make them honest and iust, wise and welthy, obedient and assured. Which commodities, others that haunt the Court the Cittie, the Warre, and the world: either they want, or with great hap, or hazard they haue thē. Thus much I thinke shall suffice, to enforme you of our education, I thinke you partly know it, els I would speake at more large: How do you allow therof tell mee playnely? And then I will speake of our lyues, and how honestly wee liue. For that was my promise. Vallentine. I allowe of your zeale to honesty in education, but if you mixe it with some other thinges, I will like it the better. That you study to bring vp your children in honesty, which is vertue, and cheefely iustice (for of that vertue men bee called good) I doo not onely allow you, but commend you: Yet if you remember what Tully telleth you, (for sure I am you haue bin a Scholler That men are not only borne to themselues: Then will you ad some other vertues and knowledges to these, you wish to bee in your children, for besides, that all men are not apt for one thinge, yet is it commendable, nay ra∣ther necessary, that there bee persons prepared for sundry actions, not so much to serue their owne turnes, as their Prince and Countrey: Respectes of more inportaunce, then the safety of any priuate Gentleman, either his person, his patrimony, or
his Parēts. For as you said the sum of your intent, was to frame your childrē to be honest, & iust: wise, & welthy: obedient and assured. Al which things I allow, as lawdable, beeing not misvnderstood. And first, touching honesty & iustice, I accompt them as one: for indeed, an honest man, is a iust man: & a iust man is honest: & that is hee that liueth iustly & ho∣nestly, in respect of loue to honesty & iustice: and not hee that is iust, either for feare, or for lacke of skil, to be worse: for vertue is a volūtary, & knowing good habite: Therfore if your Sonne be honest & iuste, either for feare of punishment, or for ignorance, be∣cause he knoweth not how to bee vniust, or false, I assent not vnto you, for then, he may be rather cal∣led a good, honest, iust foole, then an honest, or iust wise man: Touching the next, which are to be wise and welthy, to put these two into one, it may hap∣pen to proue that they concurre, though most com∣monly I haue seene few wise men welthy: not be∣cause welth shunneth wisdome: but rather, because wisdome seldome seeketh after welth. Yet in your sence (I suppose) it may stand well: for you accompt no man wise, but those that bee welthy: and I doo also assent vnto you, so that you are contente to meane sufficient wealth: but to seeke after priuate goods, omittinge all publique action, and priuate contemplation, I holde not that man wise, for hee shall do (as Marcus the Emperour sayd of Mar∣chants:) Labour and liue miserably, to die ritch: To the thirde of your endes, wherunto the education of your children tended, which is obedience with safety: surely, for the first there is no nation, no,
scantly the most barbarous, but wil commend obe∣dience, & therin rest you firme: but what you mean by safety I doo not so well know, but for ought I conceiue, it is the eschuing of perill & paynes, which beeing your intent (as it seemeth it is) I can by no meanes assent vnto you. For if you consider wel (as mens bodies be diuerse,) so are their mindes & in∣clinations diuerse: euery one is not disposed to one thing, nor to one actiō, & therfore whē you disallow of alsorts of learning & action, but of those that be for gayne and reward, I accompt your iudgement reproouable. I wish therfore cleanecōtrary to your minde, that in respect of the common wealth, & the seruice therof, (wherunto we are all bound, yea the best of vs all) that such younge Gentilmen as are not inclined to learning, should by their Parentes, bee not only suffered, and encouraged, but also to their powers enhabled, to trauaile countreyes, & haunt ye warres. In which trades of life although touchinge their persons, there bee greater perrill then in study at home: yet sith the common weale may not wante such men, and those knowledges not gotten without perrill. I iudge it a lesse euill to hazard mens bodies in them (though many perish) then vtterly to want them, and haue our children safe at home. Euery man by nature is condemned to die, & better it is to aduenture an honest death, then to continue an improfitable life: To answere the rest of your speech, that in warre, in Court, and Cittie, is great store of euill company: Thereto I say there is also many good: Therfore good coun∣saile of freends, & honest discretion of young men, may learne them to make choise: Besides that it
is good, to know euill, not to vse it, but to auoyd it, and for the most part, things are indefferent, and not perfit. Besides vertue, there is nothing in per∣fection good, nor besides vice, nothing in perfection euill. Therfore though your childe must needes know some euill, in learning good, yet is it better hee know it, with some hazard, then want his good for feare of that hazard. If no man would approch the fier, because it hath burned many a house, and many a heedlesse man, also, that haue fallen into it, then would many a one, freeze to death: & though the Sea, hath drowned many thousands, yet no wisdome would that sayling should bee forbidden, for (as erst I sayd) in euery thing excepting vertue, is commodity and discommodity, & when the good doth or may surpasse the bad, no man doth (or at the least ought) shun the aduenture, where good is the marke, and the end honest. Vincent. In good faith Sir, you haue spoken more, then euer I did heretofore consider: for in deede, when I bethinke mee of your discourse, I remēber how diuersely my poore children are in nature affected, some of thē are of thēselues very bookish, others for none entisement, or compulsion can be brought to learn, so as (I suppose) you say truly, yt if I durst hazard their persons, & suffer them to try their for∣tune abroad, they might attaine to sumwhat. And Fortune (as some Clerkes say) is very freendly to folke aduenturous. Vallentine. Well, I am glad, my speech hath drawen you to consideration, of any good thing, before either vn∣thought of, or forgottē. But I am sure you take my mening, as it is, to remēber you, & not to coūcel you.
Vincent. Sir, I thanke you, that you yeeld mee that ho∣nor, to say so: this proceedeth of your fauour. But I must confesse troth, that I neuer cast my minde so far from home. And I therby conceiue that a common wealth, hath occasion aswell to imploy men expert in warre, as others learned in lawes, though of these wee haue most vse. Vallentine. Yea Sir, therof assure your selfe, and in some Countryes where God hath suffered vnquietnes, there is more want of good Capitaynes, then lear∣ned Doctors: yea in such estate hath our Country beene, and may bee: for nothing is assured, but be∣sides Warriers, Princes haue occasion to imploy many other Gentlemen of experience. For I can accompt vnto you sundry honest quallities that are very cōmendable in men, and necessary for the state. Vincent. Fayne would I bee enformed of all. But first let mee intreat you, to tell what are, or ought to bee, the cheefe professions of a Gentleman? Vallentine. That can I doo, and in few wordes. Vincent. So much the better, for my memory shall the more easely beare them away, therfore without more request. I pray you proceede. Vallentine. The cheefe and onely professions, wherby a Gentleman should receaue aduancement, or com∣mendacion, are Armes, and Learninge. For in
these two onely should hee exercise him selfe. Vincent. Surely Sir, they seeme to bee noble quallities, but I thinke hard to excel in them. But is not Hus∣bandry, Tillage, Grasinge, Marchandize, buying and selling, with such other trades (as wee Coun∣try men vse) thinges meete for a Gentleman? Vallentine. In plaine speeche I tell you, that I thinke not one of them fit for a gentlemans exercise. Vincent. And why so? are they not commonly vsed of Gentlemen? and by them they doo receaue daily profit: the lawes doo allowe of them as thinges commendable. Also by them many poore yonger Bretheren without lande (as commonly they are all) doo by the Plough, maintayne him selfe, his wife and famyly. Vallentine. A poore maintenance, and a slow thrifte, God knoweth, and full euill it becommeth the person of a Gentleman to practise any of these trades. Vincent. Then I pray you tell mee how many wayes a man, without land, may gayne his lyuinge Gentle∣manlike. Vallentine. There are three wayes to doo it. Vincent. And which are they, I pray you informe mee? Vallentine. There is Arte, Industry, and Seruice.
Vincent. What you meane by euery of these, I pray you let mee know, for I am borne, I thanke God to some reuenues of mine owne, and therfore haue litle studied to attaine to any thinge, saue that my lotte hath brought mee vnto. Vallentine. The better is your fortune, that haue by successi∣on only, the whole fruite of all your auncestors tra∣uaile. Vincent. Euen so it is in deed, I thanke God & them for it: But I pray you answere to that I aske you. Vallentine. Such Artes as I wish a Gentleman sholud learne, must be those that commonly are called Ly∣berall Sciences. Which and how many there bee of them, you may easely know, yea and to what pur∣pose they serue. Vincent. But tell mee, are not the lawes a study very fit for a Gentleman? Vallentine. Yes surely, both the lawes Ciuill & Common are studies most excellent, & to speake breefely, all lear∣nings, that tend to action in the state either Ciuill, or Martiall. Vincent. Now you seeme to talke of great misteries, but wee gentlemen in the Country, vnlesse our sonnes proceed in the study of the cōmon lawes, Diuinitie, or Phisicke, doo holde them learned ynough if they can write and read English, and congrue Latine.
Vallentine. If your sonne wade no deeper in learning, better vntaught at all. And I am of this minde, yt these common Schooles (wherof in England are many) that receaue all sortes of children to bee taught, bee their Parents neuer so pore, and the Boyes neuer so vnapt, doo often times rather harme the good, because there they continue so long, as a good mi∣sterie or occupation might haue bin learned. For as I say, vnles the childe be apt for learning, and his freendes resolute in holdinge him to it, the thinge were better vnattempted. Vincent. Now (Maister Vallentine,) you seeme to speake straungly, as though VVrighting, Reading, and the Lattin tongue, were nothing worth. Vallentine. Sir, I do not so say, but to gaine a lyuing by thē without further learninge, I thinke it hard. And therfore poore men that put so many vnapte chyl∣dren to the Schole, do nothing els, but offer them losse of time: For do you not meete many beggers that can doo all these, and yet you see their estate is plaine beggery? Vincent. That is true in deede, but yet if they bee honest and personable, they are the fitter to become Ser∣uants to attend vpon a Noble or Worshipful man. Vallentine. I am glad you haue remembred mee of seruing∣men, for hereafter I will tel you more of my minde touching them, in the meane time, these quallities beeing of no necessity, will litle amend their enter∣tainement, and their certenty nothing.
Vincent. Well, I doo now conceaue, what learninge you thinke meete for a Gentleman, and that for poore children (vnlesse they proceede to some perfection in learning) they were better vntaught: & in troth to haue a good occupacion, I thinke is a sure trade to take vnto, then bare wrighting and reading. Vallentine. Touching Industry, I wish that young Gentle∣men (hauing no arte) should sundry wayes, yea, e∣euery wayes honest, try their fortune. Vincent. And how I pray you? for of my credite (if I had no reuenues of mine owne,) I could not tell, how to gaine a groat. Vallentine. Yet do not you see many yonger Bretheren, that euen in forraine Countryes, haue aspired to great pensions: others haue happened vpon good Mar∣riages, others for some notable, and egregious act, haue attained both profit and honour, whē others for very sloth or cowardise do liue at home, almost in beggery. Did not they better that did aduen∣ture them selues? Vincent. Yes indeede, but there are few, whom fortune so wel fauoureth, and in attempting these matters many doo miscarry. Vallentine. No doubt of that, els their reward ought not to bee so great, for things easy, without hazard, euery blockhead doth take in hand, and yet to incourage young men, aswell in Industry, as Arte, I pray you
consider how fewe of infinite numbers doo prooue learned in the Vniuersities: how few Prentices doo proue ritch Marchaunts: and how few Law Studients become Iudges: And then shall you finde the number of industrious men that thriue, is like to the rest. Vincent. If I were sure, my Sonne should attaine to that good hap you speake of, (and that some perhaps, haue aspired vnto.) Then could I bee content, hee should hazard him selfe: but I finde the daungers many, & the hope so litle, as I hold better to keepe him at home in the state of a poore yonger brother, then see him seeke a good, so desperate. Vallentine. The more vnwise you, and by so sayinge you dis∣couer the basenes of your minde, your small iudge∣ment and lesse experience: For if you had seene the Courtes of Princes, or the warres: you shal finde in euery of them, not only many young Gentlemen of your condition: But also many your betters, the Sonnes of Knightes, Barrons, Earles, Dukes, and Princes, & many of them, as ready to hazarde their liues, for their honour & Country, as the poorest or prowdest Souldier. Do you then take scorne that your Sonne should submit him selfe to that perrill, that these Princes doo aduenture? And if you consider how many, euen of base name & birth, through industry only, without arte, haue not only gayned them selues, goods and glory: but also therby haue giuen honour to all their Posterity, I suppose you would not onely aduenture your yon∣ger Sonne, but my young Maister, your heir also,
yea (rather then faile) your owne person. For had your first Auncestors beene no more industrious then you seeme, surely your name and house, had not had that worship and wealth it hath. These reasons may, mee thinkes moue you to hope well of industry: But to confirme you, I will resite the names of some few, whose industry hath not only gained them selues glory, but also their Countrey infinite good. How say you to Colombus, and Ves∣putius, whose industry discouered the west part of the world: from whēce the King of Spaine fetcheth yearely great Treasure? Also what do you thinke of Magelanus, that sayled about the world: yea to come nearer to your knowledge, do you not thinke that Maister Frobusher, by his industry, and late trauaile, shall profit his Country, and honour him selfe? Yes surely, and a number of others, who though they haue not perfourmed so notable mat∣ters, yet haue they wonne them selues reputatiō, and meane to liue, some more, and some lesse, accor∣ding to their vertue and fortune. Vincent. In good faith, you haue spoken very reasonably, I will no more bee so lothe to let my children goe seeke their aduenture. Now tell mee somewhat of seruice, for (as I remember) that was the third way to aduauncement. Vallentine. In troth, I so saide, and so I meane. Seruice, I say, hath aduaunced many, and daily doth, it can not much differ from industry, sauing that it hath somewhat a straighter rule: but desire of honor in the couragious, and necessity in the poore, doth
driue them to refuse none aduenture: Those yong Gentlemen therfore, yt finde them selues of minde capable, & of body disposed, I wish them to haunt the warre, wherin though the paines bee greate, and the perill much, yet it entertaineth the life, and in time yeeldeth honour: it is the common custome of Fraunce and other Countries, that young gentil∣men bee brought vp, as Pages in Court: so soone, as their Pagery is past, they become Souldiers in some Band or Garrisō, where (after knowledge and proofe) they become Officers: from Officers, Captaines of companies, and many of them go∣uernours of Townes, Coronels, and Chieftaynes. Is not this a better course for younge Gentlemen then tarry at home in their Fathers or Brothers house, and kepe a Sparhawke, or a kennell of baw∣ling Dogges, or that (which in mine opinion, is as bad:) Marry him selfe with some poore Mayden, and through charge of Children, become a very Farmer, or Ploughman, which thinges though they bee honest, and fit for some men, yet for a Gen∣tilman vtterly vnmeete. Vincent. I am halfe of your minde, but this Realme hath seldome warres, and few Garrisons, where wee should resort to learne, and lesse meanes to employ or entertaine such young men, as are apt & willing to serue. Vallentine. It is true, & yet are there more occasions to call thē to it, then they take, & more meane to entertayne thē, then (for ought I see) men of minde to descerne
them, and were our nation so desirous of honour, and their owne good, as some others are, there would neuer bee lesse, then two or three hundreth young Gentlemen wandring the world abroade, & seeking aduentures: yea, I suppose, wee English Gentlemen haue so heretofore vsed ye matter: how could els, Iohannes Acutus, an English man haue kept that stir in Italy that hee did: who (as Iouius, and other Cronacleirs say) led 5000. English vo∣luntary Souldiers, and during the contētions be∣tweene Guelphi and Gibellinj, did many seruices & exploits very memorably? Vincent. But I pray you, are there no otherwayes for Gentlemens preferment, then the exercise of war? Vallentine. Yes Sir, els God forbid: for I would haue no man (cheefely poore men) to accompt that the war is their occupation: But rather how to serue at oc∣casions, and the seruice done, quietly to retier them selues to their owne houses, Maisters, freends, or other industry, not dooing as I se many lusty yong Souldiers do, beg in the streats, when with a litle paines they could get them selues a way to liue. Vincent. But what shall the young Gentlemen souldiers doo, for (I thinke you know,) they haue no handy crafte to flie vnto? Vallentine. That I know well, neither would I wish them to meddle with any Mecanycall manner of liuinge, as a thing vtterly vnfit for Gentlemen. And ther∣fore I will say yt sith the number of those souldiers
is small, in respect of ye other multitude, they might easely bee (or the greater part of them) receaued in∣to Garrisons, and into the seruice of Noblemen, and others their good freendes, who knowinge them vertuous, would bee glad of their seruice, nay ra∣ther their company. Vincent. In deede the number of Gentlemen, that follow the war, is nothinge, in respect, of the multitude: and therfore either seruice, their owne industry, freends, or fortune may, (as you say continually) holde them in hart, and ability to liue. Vallentine. Doubt you not therof, specially, if they be honest∣ly and thriftely enclined: for some I haue seene so careles, as they neuer forecast what want may fol∣low. But finding them selues plentifully applied, do spend as much in one yeare, as fortune & frends haue gayned in many: therfore to prouide for them I meane not. Vincent. Yet one question more, touchinge seruice: Are there not other seruices besides the warre, fit for a Gentleman, wherby hee may bee maintained or happely aduaunced? Vallentine. Else the world were harde, though the warre ought to occupy the greatest number. For (if you forget not) I told you long since, that the profession of a Gentlemā might bee either Armes or Learning: wherof, if hee hath any taste, with some wisedome and experience, he may not only serue in the house and affaires of Noblemen, and Officers, but also
the Prince himself, yet if his learning be not in per∣fection, or excellent in some liberal science or lawes, I would wish hee added therunto Industry. In conclusion, what gentleman so euer hath in him ei∣ther by nature or nourture, any vertue, singularity, or industrious knowledge, cannot want place ey∣ther Martiall or Ciuill, either in his owne natiue Countrey, or els where. And though perhap you see many in Court euen by mere flattery, yea, some almost witlesse, win more wealth & worship, then many others, yet assure your selfe that vertue is the true way vnto them: & whē occasion of seruice doth happen, men of value & vertue bee those that shal stand their country in steede, and honor them selues. Vincent. Yet tell mee I pray you, which are the meanes, to enter into the course and order, to bee aduaun∣ced to some good, either Martiall or Ciuill, as you terme them? Vallentine. And that will I breefely tell you, let him that af∣fecteth the warre, apply him self to serue, or follow some Noble man, or expert Captain, that is either in continuall seruice Martially, or that is likely to bee vsed at occasion, for most commonly wee loue those, and desire their good, whose studies and in∣clinations bee like vnto our owne. And such as fynd thēselues disposed to lerning, or any ciuil func∣tion, let thē follow or serue those learned or wise persons, to whom the state hath geuen those auc∣thorities and trust. Vincent.
Truly you tell mee a way very likely, & reasonable, for at such time as the laste warre was in Fraunce, I meane at Newhauen, (where as you know who was the Generall,) I hard him commend the cou∣rage, and conducte, not onely of principall Cap∣taynes, and Gentlemen, but euen of priuate Soul∣diers: yea many yeares, sithens that time, you shal yet vpon small occasion heare the like at his hand, as though their dooings, and the mennes names were written in the middest of his memory. Vallentine. Well, now I perceaue you vnderstand me, and as this Noble man did and doth honor men of his professiō, so doubt you not, but likewise will others. And yet to acquite your tale, I remember, I haue heard him tell more then once, of one poore Soul∣dier, who in rescuing, or reuenginge an other En∣glish man, assayled by two Almaynes with their slaugh Swordes, slew them both with his owne hand, euen in his sight, which both wee, and euery man must say, was a part of a couragious Souldi∣our, and the General often speaking therof a signe, hee honored his desert, and desired his aduaunce∣ment. Vincent. But I pray you, is this the manner of other great men, to honour those that serue vnder them in their profession? I aske of you, because you liue in Courte, where are great personages, both in the knowledge of Armes and learning? Vallentine. Yea surely, though I cannot so perticulerly name
the matters: yet many Gentlemen there bee so studious and painefull, as both in Ciuill & Martiall affaires are very expert, and you shall heare great men that can iudge, much commend them, yea to the Prince, by whose bounty all sortes of vertuous men are aduaunced. Vincent. I begin to rest satisfied, touching education: and am perswaded, (and so will perswade with other Gentlemen my freends) that they shall aduenture their Sonnes, more then the olde custome was, sith either by their aduenture, they shall liue and become vertuous, or (as wee Englishmen call it) of good quallities, or else die honestly in seekinge to make them selues fit for the Princes seruice, and their owne reputation. Vallentine. I am very glad that my poore reasons haue ta∣ken good effect, but therin I wil challenge no more to my selfe, then I deserue: which is, that I haue put you in minde of that you either forgot, or els for want of leysure) neuer considered: For I ac∣knowledge you of much more wisdome and iudge∣ment then I am. Doth it please you to commaund mee any further seruice? Vincent. You will neuer leaue your Ceremonies (Maister Vallentine,) I know you are more wiser, and more expert then I am: but your naturall curtesy and modesty, doth moue you to yeeld more respect then is due vnto mee, I thanke you for it, and loth I am to seme tedious, els I entreat you to hold your promise: that is, to heare mee tell of our countrey
commodities & the content wherin we liue there: For though I now yeelde, that the education of Gentlemen is best abroad, yet mee thinkes their continuall habitation should bee best in the Coun∣try at home. Vallentine. I hope you will not euer dwell in that opinion: but I pray you begin to tell of your Countrey de∣lightes, and what is your manner of liuinge. I will with all my hart, both paciently heare you, and boldly (as you gaue leaue) tell you my minde, how I allow of your reasons. Vincent. I say then, that our Country habitacion is more godly, more honorable, more holesome, more quiet, more pleasant, and profitable, then it can be in any Cittie or Burrough. Vallentine. Surely Sir, you haue spoken of great respects, why you should loue the Country dwellinge, and though I will beleue that the thing is (as you say) yet sith wee are in dispute of the matter, you must giue mee leaue to demaund either reasons or de∣monstracions, why indeed it is so? Vincent. I will proceede, as orderly as I can, and make proofe (as I hope) of all my speeche, & first because I alleadged, that our Country liues, (I speake without comparison) was more godly, then the life of the Cittie: That opinion I conceaue, because I finde there, much loue & charity, which as I take it, are two speciall markes of godlines, and seldom found in Citties, where euery man almost, lyueth
to him selfe: For wheras Neighbours doo meete often without ceremony, chearing, and conuersing one with an other, without disdayne, or enuie, (as wee do in the Countrey,) there I iudge is loue, and good neighbourhood: Likewise where hospitali∣tie is liberally kept, and many Children and Ser∣uauntes daily fed, with all other commers: there (as I also thinke) is much charitie: in the Towne it seemeth the contrary, there is no meetinge of neighbours, without special conuitation, no saluta∣tion, without much respect, & ceremony, no number of Seruaunts, but those that for necessary vses are imployable. So as in breefe, there seemeth to bee litle loue amonge equals, and lesse liberali∣ty to inferiours: Wherupon I inferre, that in Cit∣ties and Townes, is lesse plenty of both these pro∣perties: (I meane loue and charity,) then is with vs in the Country. How say you (M. Vallentine,) haue I spoken well or no? Vallentine. You speake euer exceeding well, yet I pray you with patience, heare what may be sayd to the con∣trary. It seemeth that ceremonies of ciuility, doth make you doubt of loue among town inhabitants, and so consequently there wanteth some parte of that godly good will you finde, or imagine to be in the Country. Truely Sir, if you were aswell ac∣quainted in any Cittie, as you are in the Shier, where you abide: you should finde the same affec∣tion among men, that there are, some more & some lesse of acquaintance and freendship amongst these men, as they bee more or lesse a kinne, allied, or of
conformitie, or disformitie in disposition. For there are few men so vniuersally curteous or kinde, as make accompt of all men alike (which so beeinge) bringeth mee to beleeue, that when good freends are disposed to meete, it is better to bee eyther in∣uited, or occasioned, then (as they doo in the Coun∣trey) hand ouerhead resort to a gentlemans house, where (because the Maister doth not make choice of his guestes, sometimes very straungers do there meete, yea, other whiles meare enemyes, which (as you can conceaue) must needes marre all the myrth. And if any of these guestes doo happen to receaue lesse curtesy, or entertainment then the other, hee falleth forthwith into offence or ielousy agaynst the Maister of the house, and holde him more then halfe his foe. Which displeasure could not happen, if no man would resorte thither vn∣bidden: Besides that, (if you marke it well) when a knot of good and famylier freendes bee met, to make merry, and talke, (as true freendes often doo) merrilly, and liberally: if but one extraordi∣nary man (none of this troupe) doth hap to come in) you shall finde all the mirth marred, and their free speeche conuerted to respecte, yea, (shall I tell all) that gueste vnlooked for, maketh one to many: for the number of lodginges. And so the Maister of the house, is driuen eyther to forsake his owne bead, or discharge his vnbiden guest. Vincent. It is true that you say, that these vnacquainted guestes do occasion, alteration of cheare, and I my selfe in my poore house, haue diuerse times beene
so haunted with guests, as I was driuen out of mine owne bed, to lye at some Tennants house of mine, for a night or two: Notwithstanding, I toke it for no great trouble, so long as my freends found themselues content and welcome. Vallentine. But Sir, are you sure they were all your freendes? Vincent. Yea surely, I so thinke, though some of them I had neuer seene before that day. Vallentine. Doo you not thinke you haue as true freendes as any of these haunt feastes, that dwell far from you, or that do visite you at their occasions, or your owne conuitation? Vincent. Yes truly, and my trouble the lesse, if wee were lesse haunted, but the Country custome is, to bid euery man welcome, and the more resort he hath, the more is the Maister of the house honored, and the more authority a Gentleman hath in the shier, the more is the resort vnto him. Vallentine. Verely, I so thinke, for as his true freends do seeke him for loue and honour, so are there others that do it for flattery or feare: Thus you see how easely you may bee deceaued in the loue of your Neighboures, and that haunting your house, may bee for other cause or occasion, aswell as loue. Vincent. Sir, it may so bee right well, but yet you can say litle agaynst mee, touching our liberalitie and
charity, which wee vse in the Country, keepinge our gates open for all men, and feeding many tall fellowes to attend vpon vs: also relyuing all Beg∣gers, that aske at our gates, with money, meat, or bothe. Vallentine. I am loth to speak against these customes, because they are the cheefe commendacions of the Coun∣trey: and yet, sith I haue already my pardon and lycence to say what I lust, against you, let mee aske what sortes of men, doo enter commonly within your gates, which (as you say) are neuer shut? Vincent. There doo resort vnto vs of all sortes, I meane Noble men, Gentlemen, Yeomen, our Neighbors, & many others, that either haue occasion to come thither for busines, or passe that way for their own affaires or pleasures. Vallentine. These mennes presence in your houses, do rather honor you, thē shew that therby you be charitable. But what bee these tall fellowes of whom you speake? Vincent. They bee our seruingmen, that attend vpon our Table, and follow vs in the streetes, when wee bee at London, or any other great Towne, and fur∣nish our Halles at home. Vallentine. But I pray you, haue they no other quallities, wherin to serue you, or doo you vse them, for no o∣ther purpose, then attend on your Table, or follow you as shadowes.
Vincent. Surely no, neither is it the manner to offer them any labour or drudgery, for therof they would take great scorne, beeing cumly personages, & common∣ly the sonnes of some honest Yeomen, or Farmers of the Countrey. Vallentine. Then can I compare them to Monckes, and fat Friers, who vnder pretence of prayer, wanne them∣selues a lasie life, and liued vpon others laboure: So these men, beeing called men of seruice, do no∣thing lesse then serue: I doo not therfore accompte you charitable in feeding of such idle folke: for that is sayd to bee spent, or geuen charitably, which is bestowed on beggers, the blinde, and lame, and such like: but not on these sturdy fellowes, & need∣les seruauntes. Vincent. Doo you so say Sir? were it for the worship of a Gentleman, hauing good lande and reuenues to keepe no more seruaunts, then (as they doo in Cit∣ties) those that for their necessary vses they must needes imploy? If wee Gentlemen should so doo, how should wee furnish our Halles? how should wee bee ready for quarrellers? or how should our Wiues bee wayted on when they ride a broade, as commonly their custome is, cheefely in Sommer, the faire season and hunting time? Vallentine. In good sooth, you haue now sayd much, but no∣thing to purpose, for though it hath been a custome to keepe these needlesse men, yet the custome being not good, or not profitable, it ought to be banished.
Among the lubberly Monckes, and fat headed Friers, your Halles will best shew their good proportion, when they be not ouer ful: your quarrels would be perfourmed, with your owne persons, and your wiues (beeinge well vsed) should bee no common huntresse, nor gadders abroade, though I deeme not, such hath bin the vse that Ladies, and gentle∣women, (euen in their Husbandes absence) should ride a hawking, or huntinge. Vincent. If this custome of keeping great numbers of ser∣uingmen had not beene good, and commendable, how happeneth it, that neither lawes hath forbid∣den it, nor experience hath not disprooued it? Vallentine. I will tell you how (in mine opinion,) this com∣bersome and vnprofitable custome came, which in deede (as I thinke) at the first was very necessary, but now cleane contrary. Vincent. How can a thing bee good once, and after proue euill, cheefely a custome so long vsed? Vallentine. Yes surely Sir, and you see many lawes or sta∣tutes made with good consent, and vpon iust occa∣sion, which afterwardes become either so vnprofi∣table, or so seuere, as by like consent they be annul∣led, as you your self, (euen in your owne age) might haue marked: Likewise would customes which be∣come vnprofitable, or vnfit for ye cōmon welth be v∣sed. And touching our matter of many idle seruāts I thinke, yt at such time, as this Realm was deui∣ded into sundry principalities, & yt therby cōtinuall
quarrel and discord grew among the Princes, and their sundry subiectes of necessity the Noble men, and Gentlemen were forced to keepe the greatest number of Seruauntes they were able: Not for the purposes you alleadge, but rather (as a Gard) to defend them from the fury of their enemies: ei∣ther els this custome began in ye time of the great ciuill warres, which continued many yeares, and was (as you know) called the Barrons warre. In these times, it was not onely not folly, but rather great wisedome to haue numbers of seruauntes, and followers, though with charge, to attend vpon Gentlemen for their defence: but had they liued in continuall quiet, free from ciuill discention, I sup∣pose, they would not haue continued those Garri∣sons for their vayne glory, or their senceles ambiti∣on, (as I may call it.) Vincent. In good earnest, you speake reasonably. Vallentine. Yea Sir, I can bringe one other matter to your mind, wherof you may rather gather, yt this peace∣able Realme, hath been in times heretofore great∣ly trauelled, and the Nobillity in much perrill: for if you consider wel the sights, & manner of their most auncient houses, you shall finde they were all (for the most part) either Castelles or houses trenched, or Moted about: as buildinges, made rather for defence, then other respect, either of plesure or pro∣fite. Wherfore seeinge they did choose an habita∣tion for strength and defence, it is very like they al∣so accompanied them selues, as strongly as they were able. And I dare warrant you that in those
dayes, though they did (as wee do) entertaine ma∣ny seruaunts, yet was their consideration diuerse from ours. For as wee regarde cheefely the com∣lines of the person, so did they study to take them that were expert in the warre, and weapon of that age: as Pikes, Bowes, Swordes, and sheeldes (for shot, I gesse, they vsed not:) Also they made choice (as I likewise suppose) of men that were hardy and strong, because, (hauinge litle, or no vse of Artillary or small shot,) the cheefe seruice con∣sisted vpon force: both in defence of their Castels or houses, and also in the feelde fight. Vincent. All this while (I confesse) you reason very proba∣bly: but now (thankes to god, and good gouern∣ment) wee haue no neede, as they had, and yet haue we as good reuenues or more then the noble or Gentlemen of those ages, and enioy them more quietly: why should wee not then keepe them still, to attend vpon vs for our honour & worship? And they are not altogeather so vnquallified, or idle, as you are perswaded. Vallentine. Then I pray you, enforme mee further of their vertues or quallities, sith I haue plainely tolde you, for what cause the custome of Seruingmen began, and of what condicion they were. Vincent. Among our Yeomen, you shal finde some (yea very many) wel brought vp, and expert in sundry seem∣ly, and necessary knowledges, without which they cannot (as they doo) serue a noble man, or gentle∣man: and not to holde you in longer expectation
what they are. You shall know that our seruing∣men, besides that they al, (or the greatest number) can well and decently weare their garments, and cheefely their lyuery coates, their swordes & buck∣lers, they can also carue very cumly at your table, as to vnlase a Conny, to raise a Capon, trompe a Crane, and so likewise handle all other dishes, and meates that are set on the board before you: some of them also can wrestle, leape well, run & daunce. There are also of those, that can shoote in longe Bowes, crosse Bowes, or handgunne: Yea there wanteth not some that are both so wise, and of so good audacitie, as they can, and doo (for lacke of better company) entertaine their Maister with table talke, bee it is pleasure to speake either of Hawkes, or houndes, fishinge, or fowling, sowing or graffinge, ditchinge or hedginge, the dearth or cheapenes of grayne, or any such matters, wherof Gentlemen commonly speake in the Country: bee it either of pleasure or profit, these good fellowes know sumwhat in all. Vallentine. Verely syr, you haue told mee newes, I would faine know more of these men, and of their feates, I will no more say vertues, for that smels to much of beyond seas. Vincent. If you knew, what honour or worship these can doo, to a Noble man in his Countrey house, you would rather giue a good seruingman fortie pounds wages, then want his seruice some one day: I meane, eyther when you haue store of straungers (for so wee call our guestes,) or els
when you are from home: For in your absence, hee cannot onely see thinges in good order, but also entertayne them, first in the Hall, nexte in your Parlour, (or if you keepe that manner or estate) in your great Chamber, as a right good Gentleman, and some times a Lorde, may bee content (in their Maisters absence) to take all in good part: Yea to tell you all, some heires, (I speake playnely in this place) bee so simple, as their seruingmen, by their counsell, in prouidinge, foreseeinge, entertaininge and sparinge, doo maintayne theyr honours and worships. Vallentine. You speake well, for these sortes of seruauntes, I lust not yet a while to reply, I pray you say on. Are these all, that his folly, & foolish ambition doth entertaine? you must not tell what I say. Vincent. I am sure you speake merrily: but yet I will proceede, these sortes of men bee the most number: But besides them wee haue Subseruingmen, (as I may call them,) seldome in sight: As Bakers, Brewers, Chamberlaines, Wardrobers, Faulke∣ners, Hunters, Horsekeepers, Lackeies: and (for the most parte) a naturall Foole, or Iester to make vs sporte: Also a Cooke, with a Scullin or two, Launderers, Hynes, and Hogheards, with some other silly slaues, as I know not how to name them. Vallentine. I thought I had knowen all ye retinue, of a Noble mans, or Gent. house. But now I finde, I do not, for it semeth a whole Army or Camp: and yet, shal
I tell you truely what I thinke) this last number though it bee least, is the more necessary sorte of seruaunts, because these serue necessity, and the o∣ther superfluity, or (I may call it) ambition: But altogeather they make a world: For my parte, I had rather haue a litle with quiet, then a great deale with such confusion: for though money and prouision bee plentifull in the Countrey, yet spen∣ding, and eating, deuoureth all: and for ought I conceaue, there is no great charity in feedinge of many of these men, who eate much, and get litle. Vincent. I must confesse it true, that our charge is great, and some of them are also prowde, and euill natu∣red people, as were it not for their Parents sakes (who bee our good freendes, or Tennants) wee would many times discharge our houses of them: But partly for those respects, and partly for feare, beeing out of seruice, they should fall into offence of law, wee kepe them, though to our great charge and discontent: for well you know, it were great pittie to see a tall fellow to clyme a Gibbet. Vallentine. Euen so it were in deed: and yet, if you hap to haue in your ground a fayre great Tree, that yeelds you no fruit: but with the bowes therof, ouer droppeth an Aker of grasse, which therby (I meane for want of sunne shine) cannot prosper: were it not better to hew downe this tree, then for the onely beauty therof, suffer it to grow to your continuall losse and hinderance? Vincent. Yes mary would I, but to what purpose would
you apply this Parrable? Vallentine. I can compare a cumly vnquallified seruaunt to this Tree, for if hee can none other good, but shew forth his proper person, nor intendeth to bee more profitable, it maketh no great matter, what becommeth of him: cheefely, if hee bee vnhonest, and of euil condicion. Let not that therfore comber your conscience: but a gods name prefer your profit beefore the releefe or maintenaunce of such ydle folke. Vincent. In very deed syr, I haue heard of learned Clerks, that God and nature hath made nothing in vaine: wherupō I iudge, that men who can no good, the fault is rather their owne, then natures: yet doth it sumwhat stay in my stomack, to discharge a lusty fellow, though his conditions bee but skantly com∣mendable. And the reason is because hee becom∣meth a house well. Vallentine. If that bee all, that bindeth you to your charge, I will tell you how you shall better cheape furnish your house, then of these persons, of whom you haue no other vse, then to looke on them, because they are cumly. Vincent. As how, I pray you? for considering the smal seruice they doo, and yet are men healthy & sound, I suppose it is no great charity to keepe them. Vallentine. What I meane to tell you, is this: that you were best to cause al their pictures to be drawen in their
best array, and hange them vp in your Hall, and you shall finde them as seemely furniture, as the men them selues, and yet they will put you to no cost, eyther in meate, money, or cloth. Vincent. You speake merrily, but yet in good faith rea∣sonably and truely, for sith these men bee sound and stronge, and will notwithstanding bee ydle, I beleeue to keepe them, (cheefely with euill condici∣ons) is no great charitie, and hauinge no seruice at their handes, I cannot maintaine reasonably, that they are profitable. Vallentine. I am very glad, that you are perswaded to see, that many thinges vsed in the Country, & accomp∣ted godly, bee not euer as they seeme. Vincent. In deede, I yeelde vnto you, and had I consi∣dered so much a dozen yeares since, it would haue saued mee two thousande poundes of victuals, that these good fellowes haue deuoured: But tell mee touching my next allegation, honour and wor∣ship. Vallentine. To that I say, that your honor or worship, resteth not either in your Countrey aboade, or keeping of many seruaunts, but rather in your owne vertue. For though wise men for curtesy, & fooles through simplicitie, doo salute you with reuerence, yet must you not thinke your selfe the more honorable, vn∣lesse you be in deede vertuous: I meane wise, va∣lyaunt, iust, temperate, liberall, affable, modest, and in somme, indued with all sortes (or at the
least wise) with some vertuous morrall and com∣mendable condicious, wherby you may be known, and at occasions vsed, in the seruice of our Prince and Country, either Martially or Ciuilly: for those bee occupations of all nobility, in which word is in∣cluded all sortes of Gentlemen, aswell those that beare greatest Tytles, as they that haue lesse. Vincent. I finde it far otherwise then you say, for albeit a man bee (as few are) in possession of all these vertues, which (you say) doth onely make men honourable: yet if hee bee no Householder, nor keeper of seruaunts, you see that in his Countrey, neither the neighbours will loue him, nor ye people do him reuerence. Vallentine. I did not, nor will not speake agaynst house∣holdinge, nor yet haue I inuayed agaynst keping of honest and necessary seruauntes: but against the superfluitie in either: For I confesse that hos∣pitallity, bee it in Towne or Country, is good and godly, and also a testimony of liberality, which is a great vertue, and very commendable. But therwith bee content that I tell you, that though all good housekeepers bee the more honourable, yet euery one that can not, or doth not kepe house, or seruaunt, must therfore bee disdained or holden vile. Vincent. I know not what ye mean by disdain or vilety, but I am sure, be a man neuer so vertuous, vnles hee be a housekeper, no mā wil in ye country resort vnto
him, or if hee walke in the Cittie without seruants attending on him, no man wil put off his cap or do him reuerence: how can then such a man bee hono∣rable? Vallentine. Yes, yes syr, as much (or perhaps) a great deale more, then hee that spendes a thousand poundes a yeare in his house, or hath in the Towne twenty men to follow him. For though a vertuous man doth walke alone for lacke of abillity and ritches, yet (if hee bee knowen) hee shalbe honored: though (for want of seruaunts) hee seemeth not to euery one, that hee is honorable, because it is the vertue of minde, and not the guifts of fortune, that honor is due vnto. Vincent. Mee thinkes, you speake wel: and I must needs allow that a vertuous man (though hee bee poore) deserueth to bee respected, and honored: yet expe∣rience teacheth the contrary, that men of Title and wealth, are euer honored, and the poorer sorte (though full fraught with vertue) doo passe with∣out reputation: As for example, when we Gentle∣men of the Countrey doo reason, (as many times wee doo) of Noble men, Knightes, and all other degrees, comparinge some one to an other of the same callinge: we accompt him more or lesse hono∣rable or worshipfull, as hee is more or lesse landed or wealthy. Vallentine. I doo not vnderstand you, I pray you tell mee, as how you make your comparison.
Vincent. If there bee two Lordes in our Countrey, and ye one hath twenty hundreth pounds in reuenue, and the other but fifteene, wee say, hee that hath the more liuinge is the more honourable Lorde. And likewise, if two Knightes, the one hauinge a thousand pounde rent, the other not half so much, wee say they bee both men of worshippe, but not worshipfull alike, but the one more, the other lesse: And so from degree to degree, wee make our esti∣mation: Also you shall see it as a rule, taken and followed amonge Gentlemen, that hee that hath lesse lyuinge, giueth place to him that hath more: though for byrth and vertue, hee much better. The same guise their good wiues vse in the Countrey: for a ritch Lawyers wife, or the wife of a lustye younge Francklin, that is lately become a Gentle∣woman (Gra mercé, Monser le Harrault) will make no ceremony I warrant you to sit downe and take place before any poore Gentlewoman, bee shee ne∣uer so vertuous, wel borne or married to a Gentle∣man in deede, of a good race, vnlesse hee hap to haue either authority in the Countrey, or good plenty of lyuinge. Vallentine. I doo now vnderstand well, how the worlde walketh, and am sorry for it, sithe that which is without the man should more honour him, then that is within him. This estimacion I must (not∣withstanding that the multitude do allow it) vtter∣ly reiecte as false and vile. Vincent. And why? will you oppose your self to the opinion
of so many: I dare say, if you come into the country and aske of this matter, I warrant you they will say (without exception) the wealthier man, is the more honest man: and the greater landed Gentle∣man, the better man of worship. Vallentine. Then by that reason, my Lorde Mayors Horse, is a worthier beast, then Maister Recorders Moyle, because hee carrieth a ritcher burden: For that in your accompt, thinges without vs bee those that honour the person. But this folly and false iudge∣ment in honour, commeth of ignorance, and igno∣rance proceedeth from your manner of life in the Country, where in deede, you neuer attende to know what doth become you, but what may en∣ritch you, wherin you are far short of the Lawyer, and Ploughman, the one hauing a trade to ketch coyne, by his counsell and crafte, the other by his labour and lucke. You in the meane season (though in troth, attentiue enough to heare of profit:) yet mixting your thirfty desire with mirth and solace, as banking, and hunting, can neuer attaine to that wealth, which they do, and yet you will yeeld them honour. Certainly, if you had beene traded vp in the Court or Towne, you would cast an other ac∣compt of this matter, and bee not so barely minded as to way the worth of men, by the rente of their landes or the money in their purses. Vincent. I did not say, that this was my iudgement, but the opinion almost vniuersall, for if one man in the Countrey do hold your minde, I dare say you shal finde an hundreth to incounter him.
Vallentine. It may so bee (cheefely in this corrupt age,) but for my parte, though twise a hundreth men did en∣counter my iudgement, I care not, for I am sure there is not one wise man among two hundreth. Vincent. Well, I am content to yeelde rather to reason then the multitude, and beleeue with you, yt men are more or lesse honourable, as they are more or lesse vertuous, not measuring them (as the multy∣tude doth) as they are layed in Subsedy bookes. Vallentine. I thanke you syr, for dooing mee such fauour, as to concurre with mee in opinion. I pray you pro∣ceede in the rest of your countrey commendacions. Vincent. Then must I speake of the holsomnesse of our dwellinges, which without contradiction is much more, thē your aboad in Citties, Court, or townes where the ayre is commonly straught, & the con∣course of people great: which two thinges must needes breede contagion and sicknes, there wan∣teth also commodity for exercise, which is a thinge very necessary to maintaine health, we may at our willes walke, & ronne, hauke, and hunt, our feelds beeing spacious, and our game plentifull. All which thinges you want in Court & Cittie, or with great difficulty you haue them. Vallentine. Euery commodity beareth about it, some dis∣commodity: yet if I lust to reason, so needles a pro∣bleme, I could say, that as Courtes and Cities, by reason of the concourse of people become oft times
vnpleasauntly aired, yet the sight is of more im∣portance and worthier consideracion. For it may bee that a perticuler house in the country, (as com∣monly all olde buildinges were) bee as low, and vnholsomly placed, as any Cittie, for hereof was greater aduise in sytinge it. Also therin are great prouisions to preuent corruption and sicknes: the people also beeing therin, are more neate and ciuill then they bin in the countrey: For clenlynes is a speciall preseruatiue against infection, yea, if you did, or could know the whole number of people that did inhabit London, or any other cittie, com∣paringe them with as many of the Countrey, and marke how many died weekly of either, you should commonly see the thing would fall out indifferent, though at some one time died more Citizens, yet at some other you should finde, as great plagues and sicknesse, among the Masse of your countrey folke. And for your exercises (which I confesse are honest and good,) I will speake of them here∣after when you hap, (as you haue promised) to praise the pleasure of your countrey dwelling: Let it then suffise, that touchinge the good or euill ayre and holesomnes, or vnholesomnes of our diuerse dwellinges, I refer you to the sighte of the places, and leaue them to your wisedome without compa∣ringe. Wee liue here, till wee can no longer, and you till you die: some are very healthy, and some euer sickly: some haue much of the one, and some of the other. Euery man to his fortune. Vincent. Then syr, let that bee, as bee may, for I finde in euery ayre, some liue longe, & some lesse, though
few so longe as they would: but now let vs com∣mon of our quiet. Vallentine. With all good will, I am content to heare you, say what you lust, for it will please mee much, to know of your quiet life. Vincent. Vnderstand you (good Maister Vallentine) that our houses bee, (or at the leaste) the most auncient of them, sited in places remote, and far from any Cit∣tie, Burrough, (or almost) Village, wherby wee want those noysome noyses of cryinge and carria∣ges, which necessarily the Citizens must abide. Our gates bee not euery handwhile knocked, for either they are all day open, or that our Porters bee still present to let men in and out, wee are not much troubled with sendinge too and fro, for our prouisions: because euery Gentleman, if hee bee a man of any reasonable lands, and forecast, he hath about home, vpon his owne demeanes, all sorts of victuall for horse and man, and likewise fewel: So as in conclusion, I tell you hee needeth not to dis∣quiet himselfe, either in sence or wit, vnlesse it bee some one ambitious Gentleman amonge many, who (because he would seeme more venorable thē the rest) wilbe ritchly apparrelled, and fill his Sel∣ler with Wines of sundry sortes, which prouision in deed wee haue not without sending to London, or some great Cittie. Vallentine. I perceaue (as partly I did before) that your houses bee far from company, which in the respect you haue spoken, are the more quiet, and yet mee
thinkes, I would not want the comforte of neigh∣boured for the quiet you haue tolde vs, which ne∣uerthelesse may bee enough: And wheras you al∣leage that your prouisions at hande doth acquire you of trouble, which wee haue in the town, therin I iudge you deceaue your selfe. For albeit corne groweth on your owne demeane, and your wood likewise, also your cattell and all countrey foode: yet dare I warrant you before such time as the same prouisions be fit for your vse (I meane, your Lande manured, your corne reaped, your woods cut downe, & all thinges ready, and brought home as they must bee: your trouble and disquiet wilbe much more then ours, that sende twise a day from our house to the Market in the towne where wee dwell. Vincent. In deede I had forgotten, that wee haue much adoo in seed season, to set forth our Plowes, in har∣uest to reape our corne, and towards winter to lay in our fewell: But all these thinges yet wee haue without money, which you haue not. Vallentine. Without money? But syr by your fauour, not without cost, and other whiles wee haue them bet∣ter cheape then you, though they growe on your owne ground, as I will hereafter perswade when I shall answere you, touchinge the profite of the Countrey, which is one of your allegations, Vincent. Then do I longe much to heare, yet let mee tel you one touch more of our quiet, which is our auc∣thority, for a number of vs bee Iustices, some of
Quoram, and many of the Peace, some Shreeues some Surueyors, some Eschetors, some Feoda∣ries, and such like, others also, though in no office, yet beeinge discended of wealthy and worshipfull houses, are much respected, worshipped and feared of the people: But if the best of these remayned in Court (without office there) or in ye Citty or town, the meanest Marchaunt, or sylliest Shoemaker, woulde scantly respecte vs, and none at all feare vs. Vallentine. Nor wee them: and yet shall I speake plainely, I had rather bee worshipped or respected of one ciuil or wise man (such as liue in Courts or towns) then of one hundreth Countrey loutes, that either doo salute you for flattery, or honour you ignorant∣ly: And lothe would I bee, to finde you so grosse, as to thinke that among twise tenne of those plea∣beyall sortes, there bee two of iudgement enough to know what honour is due to one, more then to an other. Vincent. And why so syr? yes I warrant you that they vnderstand, what Noble man or Gentleman doo dwell neare them, and what honour is due to ey∣ther: Neyther are they so ignorant, or vnciuil, but if they hap to meet any such well apparrelled per∣son, in his worshipfull garmentes, or with a fayre cheyne about his necke, the countrey lowtes (as you terme them) can so much good manner, as to put off their hats, and if the Gentleman be braue in deede, they will also doo him other reuerence.
Vallentine. Not so, but I thinke verely they will often do reuerence to the Gentlemans cheyne, or his braue coate, which curtesie men of iudgement do not re∣gard, for they would be honoured for them selues and their vertue, and though no man doth commit Idolitry to their cheynes, or garmentes they force litle: which error I haue seen not only cōmon peo∣ple to commit, but (by your leaue,) many of your worshipfull inhabitantes, who by reason, you are continually abydinge in the Countrey, you know neither the persons of the Nobillity, nor yet the very Magistrates that gouerne. Wherby (when happely ye bee called before them,) you know nei∣ther what difference to make, either of their per∣sons or dignities. The like simplicity I haue seen in your Wiues: and yet in them more excuseable, (because they may not modestly without your leaues, see so much of the world:) who when they come to Court, do neither know the gentlewomen from the Ladyes, nor scantly the Queene her self. What Gentleman or Gentlewoman would not be ashamed of such ignoraunce, and wisheth not ra∣ther that he had spent twise two hundreth pounds then to shew him selfe to bee such a one as I haue tolde you. Vincent. In very deede, (Maister Vallentine,) it is meete for euery Gentleman to know, the person of his Prince: and likewise of the Magistrates, (or at the least, of the most of them) and surely such know∣ledge is not gotten without comminge to Court, or places where they resort: Notwithstanding if
all Gentlemen should follow the Court or dwel in London, how should the countrey bee gouerned? For without Iustices of Peace and officers there, the people would be out of order, and the Princes seruice must needs bee neglected. Vallentine. Although I take vpon mee to remember Gentle∣men, of their grosse ignorance and lacke of ciuility, yet is not my intent to traine them all their whole liues, out of their countrey, neyther would I wish them, (cheefely Officers, & ministers of the Prin∣ces in Iustice) to remaine alwaies: either in court or Cittie: But to resort thither at such age & times, as hee is either not imploied, or not needed, which if hee did (I am most assured) his seruice woulde prooue the more worth, and him self a great deale the more ciuill: If it pleaseth you to consider that if any important seruice bee cōmitted to the Iusti∣ces of any Shier, you shall see the same (or the cheefe trust therof) allotted to men knowen to the Prince or the Councell, and not to others. And if after the sayd seruice bee performed and any re∣port therof must bee made, if a man do come to do that office (beeing before knowen to the Prince or Magistrates, you shal finde hee shalbe heard with more respecte, and dispatched with more speede, then if any other vnknowen, or vnskilfull person had beene presented vnto them. Vincent. No doubt of that, but would you haue all Gentle∣men thus finely brought vp, and that there should no Iustices of Peace remayne in the Countrey, mee thinkes that were exceeding strange?
Vallentine. I did wish indeed, that all Gentlemen were wel brought vp, and resorters to Court or Cittie, yet I saide not that they should euer abandon the coun∣trey, cheefely those that are imploied there. Vincent. Then it seemeth that you would haue all the rest to bee Courtiers and Townes men, how should any of them then aspire to the offices of the Coun∣trey, when there they are not abidinge. Vallentine. My meaning is not to entice them all to Court, or to Cittie from their naturall shier: But that such (as would not doo them selues that great good) that at the least they would some times, & cheefely in their youth, abide in their cheefe towne or cittie of their countrey, where they may conuerse with a people more ciuill, then the poore villaines, and bee notwithstanding at hand to take office (if it be layed on them:) Also if they bee in office already, they dwell there fitly enough to exercise the same. But by this you haue saide, it seemeth you are, or faine would bee an Officer in your countrey. Vincent. Nay not so syr, but yet if it bee layed vpon mee, I must not refuse to serue my Prince. Vallentine. I warrant you syr, if you bee no better acquain∣ted in Court then you seeme, nor no better learned then I, you shall neuer bee troubled with office, vnlesse some freend of yours doo recommend you, for so obscure education as you speake, will slowly prefer you.
Vincent. I confesse our preferment is slow, and yours (bee it spoken with patience) is not ouer swift. For if you marke well it is much better to smell of the law, then of the Launce. Vallentine. By my fay syr, you haue hit mee home, for truely I wish that those sauours did yeeld thrift alike. But how happy are you, for whom fortune hath so well prouided, as you neede neither to taste the paines of the one, nor the perrill of the other. But Basta. Let vs returne to the matter, & tell mee how ye are perswaded of my spech touching your quiet. Vincent. Exceedingly well: And must acknowledge that in manuringe our owne groundes, wee offer our selues much disquiet and care, not becomminge a Gentleman. Also in consideration of our strangnes to the Court, wee are made the lesse meete for go∣uernment, & not to know the person of our Prince is a thinge that amazeth a Gentleman much. I yeelde therfore vnto your reasons, and the rather because you will neither binde vs continually to Court, nor London: But that wee may both visit our owne countrey houses, and yee make cheefe abode in our shier townes, as places to keepe vs in that ciuilitie, is behoouefull. Vallentine. You vnderstande mee right, and you shall by your dwellinge in those Townes, much enritche the people, that they thereby enhabled maye make their buyldinges the more beautifull and commodious, so that in one acte you woorke
two good effectes, which are to make your selues ciuill, and enritch the townes. Vincent. But how say you to our pleasures and pleasant exercises of the countrey? for that was the next I promised to praise. I trust you will allow of them, and commend your owne coldly, for I thinke they be colde enough in deede. Vallentine. Well syr, I perceaue you haue a colde conceit of of our Courtly pleasures, but what of that: tel vs yours I pray you. Vincent. Wee haue in troth so great store of them, as there is no time of the yeare, no houre of the day, nor no weather, but wee haue a pastime to entertaine vs with. Vallentine. As how? for Gods sake, say on. Vincent. In the spring time (and cheefely in Lent) wee fish the Carpe, the Pike, the Breame, the Roche, and the Yeele, as good meates in the eatinge, as good sportes in the ketching. In sommer we dare the Larke with Hobbies, and ketch them with day Nettes. In haruest when corne is downe, our Sparkaukes bee ready to kill the Partridge, the Quayle, and Rayle. In winter wee hauke the Heron, the Feasant, the Ducke, the Teale: And in breefe, all sortes of volary. The like pleasures wee can shew you vpon the ground, (for you must conceaue that all these fowles doo fly,) and bee it your will to hunt with your eye or eare, wee are
ready for you as if you please to see with the eye, wee course the Stagge, the Bucke, the Roa, the Doa, the Hare, the Foxe, and the Badger: Or if you had rather haue some Musicke to content your care, out goes our dogges, our houndes (I should haue saide) with them wee make a heauenly noise or cry, that would make a dead man reuiue, and run on foote to heare it. Vallentine. But by your leaue, if you wisht your owne good father, whose Heire you are, would rise from death to life, you had rather neuer heare hound, then trouble his rest. Vincent. Very well syr, you thinke I would bee lothe to trace my Fathers new steppes vpon his olde land, I speake like a hunter, and to tell you plainely, as I neuer desired his death: So were it no reason I should put him to paines, of receauing his arre∣rage of rents, which I haue spent these half dozen yeares past. Vallentine. Much good may it doo you, and let him rest, (God giue him rest:) But tell mee if all these plea∣sures, wherof you tolde, bee they vsed by day or night, in faire weather, or fowle? Vincent. In good sooth (Maister Vallentine) either you are wonderously pleasaunt, and disposed, or els very ignorant in Gentlemens quallities, that will aske me these vain questions: For euery man knoweth that the day time is fittest for all sportes, and like∣wise the faire weather.
Vallentine. Ah syr, I pray you pardon mee, for I confesse I am vnskilfull, yet vnlesse I bee much deceaued, I haue hard hounds barke by night, & haue seene foulers ketch Woodcockes in colde weather. Vincent. In deede it may bee, you haue hard sumtimes hounds yorne, (for so you ought to terme it) by night, and I suppose the winter weather and hard, is fittest for ketching of Woodcockes in deede. Vallentine. Well, I am glad, you know therby I haue hard, and seene sumwhat worthy a Gentleman: I pray you now tell vs your pastimes, destined for fowle weather, & how many be of them, besides ketching of Woodcockes. Vincent. I assure you many, and those diuerse (in which I will include our exercises also: but because you de∣maund of our fowle wether pastimes, I wil speake of them first. Vallentine. You are full of memory & order, I pray you say on. Vincent In fowle weather, we send for some honest neigh∣bours, if happely wee bee with our wiues alone at home (as seldome we are) and with them we play at Dice, and Cardes, sorting our selues accordinge to the number of Players, and their skill, some to Ticktacke, some Lurche, some to Irish game, or Dublets: Other sit close to the Cardes, at Post & Paire, at Ruffe, or Colchester Trumpe, at Mack or Maw: yea, there are some euer so fresh game∣sters,
as wil bare you cōpany at Nouem Quinque, at Faring, Trey trip, or one & thirty, for I warrant you, we haue right good fellowes in the countrey, sumtimes also (for shift of sports, you know is de∣lectable) we fall to slide thrifte, to Penny prick, & in winter nights, we vse certaine Christmas games very propper, & of much agilitie, wee want not also pleasant mad headed knaues, yt bee properly lear∣ned, and will reade in diuerse pleasant bookes, and good Authors: As Sir Guy of VVarwicke, ye foure Sonnes of Amon, the Ship of Fooles, the Budget of Demaundes, the Hundreth merry Tales, the Booke of Ryddles, and many other excellent writers, both witty and pleasaunt. These pretty and pithy mat∣ters, do some times recreate our mindes, cheefely after longe sittinge, and losse of money. In faire weather when we haue straungers, or holly daies (for els in the day time wee attend our thrift) wee exercise our selues in shooting at Buttes, Prickes, Roauers and Rownes: We cast the Bar or sledge, Leape or Run, if our ages and condicion bee fit for such exercise, els (beeing aged) wee chat at home, and talke of Turryn, and Torny, or some other no∣table war, wherin wee serued our Prince: Or if wee haue cōtinually dwelt at home, & bin Iustices of Peace, we accōpt what graue Iudges & gentle∣men we haue seene sit on our Bench, & with what eloquence we haue (when it was our turne) geuen the charge. Vallentine. Certainly syr, you haue told mee of many proper pleasures, and honest exercises: But with all let mee aske you what Neighboures these compani∣ons bee, of whom you haue tolde mee.
Vincent. They are our honest neighbours, Yeomen of the Countrey, and good honest fellowes, dwellers there about: as Grasiers, Butchers, Farmers, Drouers, Carpenters, Carriers, Taylors, & such like men, very honest and good companions. Vallentine. And so I thinke, but not for you beeing a Gentle∣man: For as their resort vnto your house shal giue them occasion to learne some point of ciuillity, and curtesie, so your conuersinge with them will make you taste of their bluntnes and rusticitie, which wil very euill become a man of your calling. Vincent. What would you then haue mee liue alone, and sollitary? That were worse then to bee dead. Vallentine. Nay, neither, for if you did, for the most liue in Court or Cittie among the better sorte, you should euer finde company there, fit for your estate and condicion: I meane Noble and Gentlemen, (with whom if you had acquaintance) you would litle de∣light in this rustical conuersation, and lesse reioyce at that mirth, which (now not knowinge better) doth (as it seemeth) please you much. Vincent. If these pastimes bee not fit for a Gentleman, what would you haue vs to make our selues mery with? Vallentine. That wil I tel you hereafter, when you demaund to know the pastimes and exercises of Court. In the meane time, tell on your owne tale, being now
come to the last commodity of the Countrey which is profit. Vincent. I thought it had beene needles for mee to haue saide any thinge therof, because I thinke you see ye matter in such experiēce, as it nedeth no dispute. Vallentine. What meane you by that? when there is nothing (as I tolde you long since,) perfitly good, nor per∣fitly euill, onely vertue and vice except. Vincent. All this while you flye aboue my pitch, I praye you speake plainely, doo you thinke the thrifte of Noble men and Gentlemen, haunting the Court, or inhabitinge the Citties, is comparable to the good husbandry and profit of the Country? Vallentine. Yea surely do I, and therfore conclude not in hast. Vincent. How can it so bee, when the most part, yea in effect, all Courtiers, and towne dwelling Gentle∣men bee beggers (or at the least poore in purse) and wee of the Countrey, bee either all, or the greater number, very wealthy, or ritche enough. Vallentine. All this may bee true, and yet neither the Court or Towne is cause of their pouerty, nor the Coun∣trey dwelling, the occasion of your ritches. Vincent. Well syr, sith experience will not perswade you, I will set downe some reasons to drawe you to mine opinion. And first call you to memory the continuall & excessiue charge which the Courtier,
or Cittie dweller is at, I mean in feeding him self, seruauntes, and famely: likewise how costly and almost princely hee apparrelleth him selfe, his wife, his children, and seruauntes, and all this charge goeth from the purse, for prouision hath hee none: neither doth hee sow any graine, reare any cattel, nor his wife and women seruaunts spin any cloth, & though they so did, none I suppose of you would weare it, such is your pride. On the other side, all the corne wee make our bread of, groweth on our demeane ground, the flesh wee eate, is all (or the most parte) of our owne breeding, our garmentes also, or much therof, made within our house. Our owne Mault and water maketh our drinke: So as in conclusion, I say that sith the necessities of mans life consisteth vpon these: I meane meate, drinke, and cloth. (All which cost vs nothinge, or very litle, and you very much) how can you in rea∣son conceaue, that wee should bee no ritcher then you, that haunt Courts, and inhabit Citties. Vallentine. What you alleage, or the most therof, I thinke is true, but your conclusion false: For albeit your pro∣uisions be great, yet your expences beeing greater, your thrifte is like to ours, who haue small prouisi∣on, and like charge. Vincent. How can your charge bee litle, when the cost of keepinge one man in Court, or Towne, wilbe as much, as to keepe three in the Countrey? Vallentine. And that I iudge is also true, but if my one man in the towne, will serue mee as well as your three
men in the Countrey serue you, though that one spendeth mee as much as your three, I care not: for my thrift is no whit the lesse, nor yours ye more, if of force (as in deede you must) keepe so many. For where there is (as you alleage) great Tillage, rearinge vp of Cattell, Spinninge, and Cardinge, with daily resorte, besides of straungers, (as is commonly to Gentlemen in the Countrey,) there must needes bee also many seruauntes, which con∣course of people, and busines breedeth occasion of continuall expence of victuall: So as in effect you keepe many that doo bring you home profite, and they with others, doo straight waies eate it vp, what are you then the better? but by thus much the worse then we, that you are combred with the vnlooked for resorte of freends and foes, and the daily feeding of many seruauntes. Vincent. Mee thinkes your speech hath good sence, yet because it is long, I do not perfitly conceaue it, as I desire, I pray you tell mee your reason breefely. Vallentine. Then must you imagine that you haue ten loads of Haye in your Stable, and ten horses which of force you must keepe. In my Stable I haue but one load, and one horse, now will I aske you whi∣ther your proportion bee larger for your cattell, or mine for mee? Vincent. They seeme all one, sauinge that hee that hath the greatest prouisiō, hath also the greater trouble. Vallentine. Then I am glad you vnderstande: For such is
the difference, betwixt the Countrey and towne dweller, the one hath much prouision, and many to spend it, the other hath litle, and few to consume it. So as I gesse, all comes to one reckoninge, saue that the greatest hauer, hath the lesse quiet. Vincent. But yet by your leaue (Maister Vallentine) you gay beseen Courtiers, albeit you want prouision, and haue litle, yet will you also spend much. And how then? Vallentine. Mary then I say, so many of vs (as indeede such is the honour of the most) bee plaine bancke∣routes, and beggers, as you call vs, but in whom is the fault? not in the Court nor yet in the towne. But in our owne selues, and our owne folly: But such as liue in Court or in towne orderly, & spende within their proportion, may bee equall with you in thrifte, and in quietnes far before you. Vincent. Yet haue you not fully answered mee, for sith be∣sides my yearly rentes, I haue three or foure hun∣dreth Acres of demeane landes, wherupon my prouision groweth, I accompt my house costeth me nothing, when you that haue none, but liue on the penny, must needes spend without measure. Vallentine. Why syr if you lust, let out your demeanes, were it worth no rente? Vincent. Yes that it were, for there is no Acre of it, but would yeeld mee yearely a crowne.
Vallentine. Then may you accompt, your prouision cost you yearly foure hundreth crownes. Vincent. By my fay, you say troth, for if I did not eate it, I perceaue I should haue it: But then how should my house bee kept, and my neighbours loue mee? Vallentine. A great deale better now for you, & other Gentle∣men disposing your selues, (as ful yll it becommeth you) to bee Ploughmen, you haue learned what euery soyle is worth, and so after that rate, set out your land, wherby the poore Husbandman or Far∣mer payeth so deare for your comming, and neigh∣borhood, as hee had rather you liued further off like a Gentleman, though for very flattery or feare when hee dineth at your Boarde, hee saith, hee is sory your worship should dwell away, when God wotteth, the poore man meaneth nothinge lesse: For I haue learned that those Tennauntes haue best peny worthes of their Farmes, whose Land∣lordes do least know the Lande, or dwell furthest from it. Wherfore you deceaue your selfe, to thinke that your continuall dwelling in the Country, doth ease the poore Ploughman, so long as you play the Ploughman your selfe, or let your lande at great rente: For shall you not finde a number of poore Husbandmen that almost starue for want of lande to mannure? wherof I iudge nothinge a greater cause, then that Gentlemen bee become Plough∣men, and are not contente to let the poore hier it, and liue of the rente, as their calling is, which co∣uetous, and clownishe honour they cloake vnder
pretence of hospitallitie. Vincent. But if I should not occupy my lande, how should I know what it were worth? for this I found by experience (calling home into my handes certayne coppy houldes, let out by mine Auncestors) that euery Acre was twise so much worth, as the rente I receiued for it. Vallentine. Loe, now in ernest you speake like a worshipfull Ploughman, not like a worthy Gentleman, for this experience, wherof you speake, were better vn∣knowen then vsed. Therfore some Doctors doo thinke it better not to know all thinges, then to know them: meaning (as I iudge) that euery man should not bee to deepe a searcher in an others pro∣fession or mistery, least led on with priuate profit he hindereth the common commoditie. Vincent By this reason (wherin I confesse is good sence) the Gentlemen of ye Country that occupieth much lande with his owne Plough, and feedeth many other, letting also his lande wel and roundly, were aswell spared, as present among his Tennauntes: Notwithstanding hee keepeth good hospitallitie. Vallentine. Yea certainly, for they giue the poore men their Tennants, a meales meat twise a weeke worth a groate, and force him to pay a shillinge more then hee was wonte, before his lorde became so skilfull a husband. Yea by your leaue also, if your poore Tennant presentes you with a couple of Capons, or a Pigge, it is many times welcome, all the meat hee eateth at you Table is not so much worth.
Vincent. I partly conceaue now the substance of al this dis∣course vpon profit, & finde in deede that comparing the number which wee keepe in the countrey, with those that you do in the Cittie, the cost of househol∣dinge commeth all to one accompt, and to confesse troth, I suppose there is more certenty in the pro∣portion of your charges then in ours. And (as I graunted before) not halfe the trouble. And sith I am led thus far from mine olde foolish minde and common loue to our countrey custome, to inhabite there, I will tell you of great and excessiue priuie charges, which wee be at in our houses, (I meane in our household stuffe, and cheefely linnen, for if a Gentleman haue in his house twenty beads, (as manye haue) and some a greater number, wee haue them full often occupied with straungers and their seruaunts, who for the most parte bee so care∣les, or slouenly, as they will make quicke speede to weare out not only our linnen, but also our hang∣inges, Curtaines, and Canopies of silke: So as within a litle time wee spoyle a great deale of good stuffe, and then forced to buy new. For as you see Gentlemen daily resorte vnto common Innes, so do they daily resort to Gentlemens houses, with man and horse, hauke and dog, till the poore Mai∣ster of the house hath al his linnen foule, al his pro∣uision eaten, & his household stuffe made vnsauery, & ofttimes torne and spoiled. But al this notwith∣standing I acknowledge to be true, yet it greeueth mee to dwel from my owne house where my neigh∣bors loue me, & my tēnants do feare me, yet would I faine do, as you aduise me were not the fashion, and the custome to the contrary.
Vallentine. By so saying, you renue an olde verse, that beeinge a Schoole boy, I oftentimes red: Video meliora, probo{que}, deteriora sequor. But I praye you let no∣thinge that is euil, vnfit or vnprofitable entice you to continue it, because the same hath beene an aun∣cient custome, for I dare warrant you, that Vice is as olde, as any vertue: and yet I hope you are not so simple, as for the age (against all reason) you will allow it for good. Vincent. In very deede, you discourse so well, as I must needes confesse my selfe driuen to the wall, with playne reason, yet while it comes to my minde, let mee aske you how your Wiues will bee brought to leaue their Countrey Gossippes, with whom they haue had longe loue and familiaritie. Also to dis∣charge their Dayeries (which is their priuate pro∣fite) will touch their stomackes neare, cheefely the thriftier sorte, and good huswiues? For some that loue not huswiuery would easely bee perswaded to the Towne, because they may lye longe a bed, and weare gay garments. Vallentine. Now haue you mooued a sober doubt, and well I wot not how to answere therunto, vnlesse I knew your wiues disposition, for I am very lothe to offend: Notwithstandinge because wee do com∣mon heare priuately, and not as they doo in Par∣liament iuditially. I wil tel you my opinion touch∣inge your wiues, I pray you heare what I say, but tell not them, what I sayde: (or if you doo) say not from whom you had it.
Vincent. With all my hart, for I learned longe agoe, (as I remember of olde Ouid the louer) Paruus tacere labor. Vallentine. Then doo I tell you flatly, that your wiues bee no lesse, but happely more from the order of ciuili∣tie, and the life of Gentlewomen then you are your selues, and therfore can I lightly beleeue, they wil not bee willingly brought to leaue their Countrey gossips, and gamesters, and more hardly to put a∣way their good miltch Cow: But your wisedome must euer rule their couetous folly: For if you con∣sider how vncumly a thing it is to see, (as I haue sometimes seene, and you I am sure often.) A Gentlewoman walkinge in the pastures, among her Cowes, and Calues, al to be dabled with dew and dyrte, and other whiles wandering in the hot sommer a longe mile, to finde out her hey makers, or corne reapers: So as beeing come thither, or at the least before shee bee returned home to her hus∣bands bord, or bed, what with myre in winter, and sweating in sommer, shee is become a morsell more meete for a Mowre, or a Mason: then a Gentle∣men, or a ciuill husbande. This I know is their vse: yea, I haue seene some of greater title then a Gentlewoman vse this manner of toyling: And if any other Gentlewoman bee more fine or delicate (as shee ought to bee indeede) shee is misliked a∣mong them, and called a cleane fingered girle, as though that were a great ignomy. But now syr, I dare promise that you hauinge yeelded to bee ci∣uill your selfe, will no more allow of this life in your
wiues: But remoue such manners from them, ei∣ther by reason or ouer rulinge, for yt sex is not euer reasonably. Vincent. For my parte, I wish my wife were not so payn∣full an huswife, and yet is that no euell propertie, but a thinge very profitable. And though good huswiues in deed, must neither shun the Sommer sweat, nor doubt to march in the Winter myer, yet I warrant you vpon the Hollyday, or when shee lust to goe into fine company, shee hath good gar∣ments, and can weare them well and Courtly. So can also our Gentlemen of the Countrey, for though wee walke at home plainely apparrelled: yet when wee come to the Assizes, London, or any other place of assembly, wee will put on Courtlike garments, (and though I say it) some of vs weare them with good grace. Vallentine. I beleeue you, euen like a Constable in Midsom∣mer watch. But this is no great matter. Vincent Well then wee do not differ much: Let vs ther∣fore come to conclusion, because I longe to heare how men be trained, and exercised in Courte and Cittie, for (as it seemed by your speeche) their man∣ner of liues, doo much resemble one thother. Vallentine. And so they doo in deed, I meane the Gentlemen, and not the Marchants and Mecanicall people, for their trade (as you can conceaue) is turned an o∣ther waies: But I praye you say on, for it seemed, you ment to resight in breefe the somme of all this speech, and how well we haue by consent resolued.
Vincent. That is my intent, so far as wit and memory will serue mee. But first let mee intreat you to tel sumwhat of Courte, and Towne dwellinge: then shall you heare my minde, and conclusion of all to∣geather. Vallentine. Verely (Maister Vincent,) I must (vnlesse I should wrong you) commend your memory a great deale, and many thankes must I also allow you, for your patience, in hearing my poore reason, and discourse, which (as it seemeth) is not in vaine, but hath taken the effecte I desired. Vincent. Yea surely syr, and therof reste you assured. I pray you now let vs forget the Countrey, and (as you promised,) say sumwhat of the Court & Cittie habitation. For I am a straunger to these places, though your hap bee to finde mee here at this pre∣sent in London. Vallentine. You might thinke mee of euil manner, and lesse curtisie, if I refused to performe your reasonable request, and the rather for the honour you haue done mee, in yeelding to my reasons. Vincent. Then without more ceremony I praye you begin, and feele no offence, though I through ignorance doo aske many questions, for mannes nature, (you wot well) is desirous to know, cheefely thinges commendable. Vallentine. Euen so it is. But touching my talke of the Court, and Towne habitatiō, although I haue at length
prooued, that in those places ought to be ye Gentle∣mens cheefe aboade, yet I thinke it not necessary to make any new comparison: But onely to touch some matters, how men do there liue, and in what ages and estates the Courtinge life doth become: For to take vpon mee to frame a Courtier, were presumption, I leaue that to the Earle Baldazar, whose Booke translated by Sir Thomas Hobby, I thinke you haue, or ought to haue reade. I wil not therfore cumber you with the educatiō of a gentle∣man, for that is already spoken of. For whither the same bee in Armes or learning, it is indifferent, for (as I tolde you) the state hath neede of both, and both do alike beseeme him vnderstande you, then that all Gentlemen inhabiting the Citties, & there from their Cradle brought vp, can not bee so hard to bee entred into a ciuill life, as they were, beeing brought vp in the Countrey till they bee sixteene or eyghteene yeares olde, before which time they are so deepely rooted in rusticitie, as they prooue like vnto the haggard haukes, which many times are so wilde and indisciplinable, as wil either neuer or with great labour bee reclaimed. The like I say of their liues, through rusticall company in childe∣hoode, doo get them selues as it were an habite in loughty lokes, clownish speech, and other vngentle manly Iestures, as it is a good while (yea many times neuer) that those rusticities bee leafte. But I will no more speake of children: onely this I say that young Gentlemen, (whose Parentes inhabit the Citie, and are desirous to haue their Sonnes well and vertuously brought vp) besides that, they shalbe free from these Countrey conditions, they
may, or then come to this age, bee perfitly learned in the Greeke and Lattin tongues, and other whiles in other volgare languages: also he may haue some good intrance in the sciences Mathematicall know∣ledges, very fitte for a Martiall man, and not vnfit for the Ciuill Officer: Whereof I infer that at this age, or shortly after hee is to bee iudged, wherun∣to hee is by nature and desire most inclined. Vincent. Wee will then for this time imagine (and for my part so wish) that all Noble and Gentlemen, did dwell in Citties, and Townes, and that therby their children should not be infected with the coun∣trey conditions, but were as apte for Courte, and Ciuilitie, as you would haue them: what would you then they should do, beeing come to eyghteene or twenty yeares? as you seeme to desire, beeinge well entred and learned in those studies, that be∣come a Gentleman. Vallentine. I would then (findinge the inclination of my sonne to learninge) continue and encourage him therin, and make him (I hope) a man fit for his countrey, or at the least for him selfe. Vincent. As how? I pray you proceede: For beeing now my selfe perswaded to dwell in the Cittie, & haue many younge children, I would directe them the best I could. Vallentine. I wish that your sonne, hauing passed the scholes, and spent some time in the vniuersitie, finding him disposed to learne the common lawes, you should
in any wise continue him, and (as I sayd before) holde him therto as a study both necessary for the state, and profitable for him selfe. Or if he rather affecteth the lawes Ciuill, or the science Mathema∣ticall, I would aduise you (if such bee your ability) to send him to study in the Vniuersities of forraine Countreyes, where hee may make double profit, I meane, learne the knowledge hee seeketh, and also the language of the place. Vincent. But I pray you, giue mee leaue to demaunde to what vse the knowledge of ye lawes ciuil do serue, for it is the law of the Realme, only (as I thinke) that bringeth in both honor, and profit. Vallentine. I deny not, but after our longe peace and quiet, (which God continue) the common lawes of this Realme, hath both aduaunced, and enritched ma∣ny, for (such is the nature of men) as they neuer cease one to molest the other, not beeinge by some forraine molestacion offended, they conuert their ambition, and couetous one agaynst the other. Wherupon they call one the other to tryall of law, in those contentions (which are many) the men of lawe, are hired and imployed, to their exceedinge profit and gayne. But touching the ciuill lawes, I say that is a most noble knowledge, beeinge the law almost vniuersall to all Christendome, & there∣fore such as attaine to the knowledge therof, shall not onely in this lande, & many other, hable them selues to get their owne liueload: But also be men most fit to counsell Princes, and all estates of go∣uernments both in causes Ciuill and Martiall: For
by them all differentes bee dissided: The learned Ciuilian therfore (besides his owne perticuler) is a man very fit, & imployable in all counsels of estate and Ambassages, as hee that is skilfull of the go∣uernment vniuersall. And if (as before I sayd) his learninge begotten in forraine Countreyes, he shall also bee helped with language and some ex∣perience. Vincent. Surely syr, this is more then I euer hard, for I supposed the onely profite and reputation of this learninge had been in the Arches and Spiritual Courtes, as wee call them. But now I finde that Ciuilians, can serue better purposes, and in euery christian countrey, make shifte to earne their owne liuinges. I pray you what shall we dispose of those young men, yt loue a Lawnce or a Sword better then either a Booke, or a long gowne? Vallentine. I thinke, I tolde you talking of the Countrey, that in my poore opinion there was no Gentilman (vnlesse hee were witlesse,) but might bee made fit for sumwhat. Such therfore, as were persons disposed of Body, after the age beforesayde, and not affected to the studdie of these lawes, I would notwithstanding holde them in loue of the Mathematicall Sciences, and preferre them into the seruice of Noble men, and Captaynes, eyther at home, or els in forraine Countryes, who haunting the warres, shal enstruct these young fellowes, in all orders and Martiall discipline, wherin helped with the knowledge of the sayde Science.
They shall in shorte spare, become not onely good and obediente Souldiers: But also skilfull com∣maunders, and perfite Captaines. Others also may with daily practise prooue excellent in the Art of Ridinge, and others in Saylinge or Nauigation: So as the Martiall exercises bee diuerse, all fitte for a Gentleman, & most expedient for the Princes seruice. Vincent. But these quallities bee (as I thinke) slow oc∣cupations to thriue by: notwithstanding they are full painefull and perilous, many men, yea (euery man at one time or other) haue neede of a Lawier: But a Captaine, a man of Armes, or a Souldiour (cheefly in time of peace) no man needeth. If ther∣fore a young Gentleman, beeinge of eyghteene or twenty yeares old, should during fiue, sixe, or seuen yeares nexte after, wholly endeuour him selfe in these disciplines and Martiall exercises, and doth become in them expert, or happely excellent, retur∣ned home into Englande, where all is peace, what vse were there of his vertue, or who would main∣tayne him? Vallentine. I must say those sortes of men seruiceable, bee not so well prouided for as the deserue, & I desire. Notwithstanding, sith the number of Gentlemen, who apply them selues that wayes bee not many: I iudge beeinge men in deede of vertue and value, our Prince, (for that shee is both liberall, and va∣lourous,) would willingly afforde them maynte∣naunce, besides that, there are diuerse Noble men and great Councellors, some very souldiers them
selues, and some louers, as well of armes as lear∣ning that would likewise put their handes to helpe so vertuous and industrious a youth. Vincent. And so do I suppose also, and doo heare it daily wished, that all sortes of men imployable in the state were prouided for: Notwithstanding, sith the vse of these is but seldome, I see no ordinaunce, or speciall prouision for them. And in deede, a man not needed, seemeth superfluous, and may be for∣gotten. Vallentine. You haue reasoned wisely, but not well, for if your Horse should no longer bee allowed Prouender, then during the time you ride him, I warrant you your iourney could not bee longe. Or if your ser∣uaunt should haue wages, but for howres wherin he laboureth, then should you pay him but for half the yeare, for euery night (as reason is) hee resteth. Vincent. You are (Maister Vallentine,) very nimbly witted, and therfore will I not replye, but in that which reason doth maintaine. And touching our matter, Let vs presuppose that some younge Gentleman hath in the prime of his youth disposed him selfe in∣dustriously in studdy, warres, and trauell, where hee caught that knowledge or experiēce, that doth recommende him to the Princes seruice: what is the order of the life there, and wherin shall he exer∣cise him selfe at the first comminge, or after some yeares of aboad there, and at what age may hee without offence, and in reason, retire him selfe.
Vallentine. You are very discrete and orderly in all your de∣maunds, I would wish you to aske of more skilfull Courtiers, for though I haue seene the Courtes of sundry forraine Princes, and serued longe our owne Soueraigne, yet dare I not accompt my self so perfite, as to enforme you in euery of these. Vincent. I haue saide, and so I must once more say, that you are ouer full of respectes, which humor you found beyond the Mountaynes: I pray you laye by this curiositie, and do (as you partly promised,) tell of the order of a Courtly life, and what exerci∣ses becommeth a Courtier in euery age, and begin at fiue and twenty yeares, or there about, for be∣fore that time, a young Gentleman may haue both studied in Schooles, seen the warre, and trauelled Countreyes: Which three thinges, or at the least one of thē, in any wise I wish a Gentleman should doo, to make him worthy of a Princes seruice. Vallentine. Such a man, beeinge retained to the Prince, his best meane to aduauncement (as I thinke) is to excell, (if possible hee may) in that he professeth, adding therunto dilligence, and fidelity in seruice. And if hee professeth (specially) armes, I would he aduentured him selfe, in euery honourable warre, till such time as hee hath gayned the true know∣ledge and reputation of a Souldier. And touch∣inge the exercises of such a one, duringe his aboad in Court, it shall well become his age and professi∣on, to handle all sorts of armes, both on horseback and foote, leape, daunce, runne, ride, (and if hee so
like) play at all sortes of games, so that hee accom∣panieth either his betters or equals, and that with such discretiō, as his loss be not at any time so great as to occasion his ruyn: It will also stand wel with his condition to entertaine Ladyes, and serue spe∣cially some one, whose vertue and priuate curtesie, doth at his hand best deserue. One other thinge also I wish hee vsed, I meane that at the least, one howre of euery day hee should read, either in some notable History, or excellent discourse: For that will much exercise the minde, & encrease the know∣ledge. Vincent. It is true, that as the strength of body vnused, will quickly decay, so wil also the wit and memory. But I pray you tell mee when these lusty exercises will become a Gentleman, I meane, whither they bee seemely all his life, or but only for some certaine yeares? Vallentine. In this question I am sure you aunswere your selfe, that they are seldome seemely, in a man of ripe age, and in olde yeares very rediculous. For if you should see an olde Gentleman, with a white or grisly beard, take vpon him to daunce, or turney for his Mistrisse fauour, I suppose you would not looke on him without laughter, nor shee with∣out disdaine: yea, (such is the force of cumlinesse) as euen in those that make profession of dauncing, vn∣lesse their yeares be fit for the vse therof, they doo rather instruct others, then vse it them selues. But armes becommeth a Gentleman in all ages: But yet diuersly, for old men must only in earnest vse it.
But young men both in earnest & sporte, are bound to that exercise. Vincent. Yet haue you not tolde mee how longe this lyfe wilbe seemely. Vallentine. I pray you presse mee no more with these de∣maunds, for I referred you to a booke yt can better enforme you. Yet sith you seeke my opinion, I say (as in a sorte I haue already sayd) that these exer∣cises of bodie, doo only become youth: And there∣fore that age (which I suppose by the Philosophers rule) endeth at thirty and fiue yeares doth onely grace a Gentleman in them. After that time, bee∣inge of capassitie, and experience, hee is rather to be imploied in serious seruices, then left at leysure, to entertayne Ladies, or daunce a Galliard. Vincent. But if it happeneth hee bee not vsed in any action meete for his age and skill: But either through want of occasion, freendes or fortune, let stand still in his first estate, without either aduauncement, or imployment, beeing no longer fit for loue and dal∣liance: How should hee grace him self in Court? Vallentine. Truly (as I take it) beeing come to the declyne of his age, and drawing neare to fortye yeares, hee may without offence retire him selfe, and resigne his ordinary attendance, resortinge some times to see his Soueraigne, as a cheefe comfort. For if you consider well, that place which requireth the person of a younge man, will misbecome the same body beeinge in yeares: also, while youth and lust
lasted, there was hope of good: which now decaied the man becommeth not only vnfit for the place he vsed: But also (not preferred) looseth the reputa∣tion, wherin his vertue and expectacion did holde him. Vincent. You speake like a man of experience and iudge∣ment, as one that knoweth what is beseeming in euery age, and estate. Notwithstandinge I see some vnaduaunced, & also vnemployed Courtiers, that dwell in their young places of seruice, euen to their last yeares. Vallentine. Euen so in troth it is, and the occasions thereof diuerse. Some there are of those men, very im∣ployable, yet therwith deepely infected with am∣bition, and therfore will neuer leaue the Courte, clearely forgetting, that Fortune is a woman, which sexe seldome preferreth folke of declyning age. Others hauinge happely committed some error, and therby incurred the princes offence, beeing pe∣nitent, and desirous to recouer fauour and reputa∣tion, doo notwithstanding they know them selues ouer aged for their profession, stil attend a plausible departure: which is not quickly obtayned, for (you wot well) Ira, and Irabundia, bee speedier passions, then are Beneuolentia and Gratia. Vincent. The thirde sorte, are the Children of Phao, who for want of wit, will imagine they bee euer young, neuer knowinge what becomes them, but still stay in Courte without countenaunce, not to aspire to any thinge, but to eate and drinke among Lords.
For them was the Florentyne Prouerbe deuised, which saith: Chi S'inuecchia in Corte in paglia more. Vincent. Sir, you needed not so far to haue fetched a Pro∣uerbe, to apply to this purpose, for wee haue one of our owne: But I thanke you for yours, you teach mee betwixt times, some beyond sea. Vallentine. Then (Maister Vincent,) sith you encounter mee with mockes, I will speake no more of Court, but as I haue oft tolde, wish you to peruse the booke of the Courtier. Vincent. Yet one word more of the Court, and then speake whereof you please. You seemed, to say that Lear∣ning & Armes, were the true professions of a gentle∣man, would you then that when hee commeth to age hee should abandon one of them? I meane Armes: or be so discurteous, as no longer to loue Ladyes. Vallentine. I meane nothing lesse: But that duringe life, a Gentleman should professe Armes, and at occasi∣ons, vse them (as I tolde you before) in age ernest∣ly, in youth, both in earnest & sporte. Also I would haue all Gentlemen, euen to their dying dayes, to honour Ladyes, although to serue them daily in Courte and dalliance, I holde olde men farre vn∣meete. Vincent I am satisfied, and because you haue so ofte ad∣dressed mee to the Earle Baldazar, I will speake no
more of Courte, but come home to the Cittie, which is or ought to bee our habitacion: Doth it please you to commaunde mee anye seruice there? Vallentine. No seruice good syr, but desire you will commaund mee, wherin I am able. Vincent. I know your abilitie to bee much more then I will imploye: But sithe you so freely offer your selfe, I praye you (but not commaund you) to tell what is your order of life in the Cittie, and which bee your exercises, both of body and minde. Vallentine. The manner of the most Gentlemen, and Noble men also, is to house them selues (if possible they may) in the Subburbes of the Cittie, because moste commonly the ayre there beeinge somewhat at large, the place is healthy, and through the dis∣taunce from the bodye of the Towne, the noyse not much: and so consequently quiet. Also for commoditie wee finde many lodginges, both spa∣cious and roomethy, with Gardaines, and Or∣chardes very delectable. So as with good go∣uernment, wee haue as litle cause to feare infecti∣on there, as in the verye Countrey: our water is excellente, and much better then you haue anye, our ground and feeldes most pleasaunte, our fier equall with yours. This much touch∣inge the site of our Towne dwellinge and the Ele∣ments.
Vincent. Then my desire is to know, how you be furnis∣shed of al sortes of prouision: as flesh and fish, beere and bread, wood and coale, hay and oates, with euery other thing needfull, either for your ordinary expences, or for feastinge your freendes at occasi∣ons. Vallentine. All these thinges wee haue with lesse labour then you of the Countrey, where the same doth grow: For either it is brought to our very Gates, and of∣fered vs, or els in the Market, hard at hand, wee may buy it. Vincent. But so dearely, as euery penny worth of prouisi∣on in the Countrey, is worth three of yours. Vallentine. That may hap so to bee, and yet (as I tolde you already) I may better afforde a penny for three Egges in the Cittie, then for nine in the Country. Vincent. And how can that bee, is not nine more then three, and will goe further? Vallentine. Yes truly, but sithe a penny in Egges wil serue the turne, for my few I keepe in the Cittie: And your penny though it bringeth you more plenty, yet see∣inge you haue so much people, as will deuoure it, commeth not the matter to one reckoninge? saue that the aduauntage is ours, that in rostinge our three Egges is not so great troubles as yours, in rosting of nine.
Vincent. Certainely (Maister Vallentine,) you are an excel∣lent Arithmetrition among egges: But I pray you tell mee how shal our children bee brought vp, and where shall wee haue Scoolemaisters to teache them? Vallentine. A great number of better then any Sir Iohn of the Countrey, who most commonly teacheth your children, that him selfe knoweth not, and yet either because you are lothe your Babes should be set far from your sleeues, or that there you may haue thē taught best cheape, you will in no wise seeke out a skilfull Tutor in deede. But when you shal inha∣bite the Cittie, you haue there choice of excellent Maisters, not only for the Grammer, and such boy studies, but also in all sortes of learning. Vincent. That is a very good thinge, and an excellent commodity. Now I desire you to instructe mee, what repare will bee to our houses, and how wee are to entertaine them, for I am ignoraunt in all, because I neuer dwelt in the Cittie. Vallentine. Of my former speeche, comparing the Country custome with ours, you might haue gathered, that vnoccasioned, or not contryued, no man will resort vnto your Town house, except he be your brother, your sonne, or some dere frend, whom you accompt as your selfe, els none without occasion, which happening, they that seke you are so respectiue, as neither at the howre of dinner or supper, they will looke you, if their busines doth not very much vrge
them. And if happely you do inuite any, of what condition soeuer hee bee, his seruauntes doo not charge you, no nor trouble you, for they retire, till such time as their Maister haue dined, of what de∣gree or title so euer is sayd Lorde or Maister bee. So as the greatest Lord shal no more pester your Hall, or disorder your prouision, then ye least gentle∣man, or meanest freend, (except it) bee that for one meale, you will to honour the great guest make your fare the better. Vincent. That is a great sauing to my purse, and sparing mee from trouble: In Country the custome is con∣trary, the charge of our Halles is more then our owne Table, and the trouble to serue the seruants exceeding. But when wee haue no company but by these happes, wee shalbe (I suppose) very soli∣tary. Vallentine. Euen so much as pleaseth your selfe, for when you lust to tarry alone, no man will presse you: if you wilbe accompanied, a small conuitation will traine freendes vnto you, and these men of more ciuilitie, wisedome, and worth, then your rude Countrey Gentlemen, or rusticall Neighboures. If you de∣light in graue men & sober, you shal easely acquaint your selfe with such. If you pleasure in myrth and pleasant companions, they are at hand. If you like of learned men, there are they found. If you wil hauke or hunt, there are Faukners & hunters enough. If you will ride, there are horsemen. And to bee shorte, you shall neuer lacke company fit for your honour, age, and desire.
Vincent. I am very glad of those newes, for wee Coun∣trey Gentlemen loue not to eate, nor dwell alone: But yet mee thinke I shall hazard my health: not∣withstandinge, if my body bee diseased (as it may bee, whersoeuer I dwell) wee may haue (I sup∣pose) plenty of Phisitions to cure vs. The wante of which men is cause that in the Countrey, many do I think daily perish, whose liues might by their skill bee preserued. Vallentine. Yea certainly syr, many in deede for want of good medecines doo no doubt miscarry: And euen in mine own experience I haue knowē a Gentleman or two, that were driuen to die, for want of a poore Surgion, or a Barbor to let them blood. Vincent. The more is the pitty. Now hauing hard what site I shall haue for my towne habitation, and like∣wise how I may be accompanied, I desire to know with what matters I shall entertaine my minde, and exercise my body. Vallentine. I haue tolde you often, and euer will tell you, that the cheefe and pricnipall studies, and delight of a Gentleman, must bee learninge and Armes: And therfore such as haue ciuilly brought vp, do seldom muse on other matters. For though they refuse not for company & conuersation to hauke & hunte, fish and fowle, Bowle or coyte, or any other honest pastime, yet is our most continuall exercise eyther studie or ridinge of great and seruiceable horses, with ye one we entertaine our mindes, with the o∣ther we exercise our bodies, & yt with great delight
Are not these occupations to much more purpose then either hauking or huntinge, or any other pas∣time which you Countrey Gentlemen do vse? Vincent. In respect of the common wealth, I suppose they are to better purpose, and yet are they costly: For the buyinge of many bookes, and hieringe of lear∣ned men to instruct you, is a thinge (as I take it) very chargeable. Likewise to maintaine two or three seruiceable horses, with good feedinge and keeping, will prooue exceeding costly. Vallentine. You say truely, and yet lay by your haukes, and your dogges with their keepers, and such charges as are incidente to those pastimes, then shall you finde that the practise of learninge and armes, is not more costly then these, and to dyceing and car∣dinge not comperable. You shall also consider, that for those Noble or Gentlemen that bee not bound to attendaunce to follow Court, but at their owne willes, may make prouision in the Cittie, and kepe their horses there, it is a matter of supportable ex∣pence. And many Gentlemen there are, that spend yearly so much hay and corne, vpon huntinge and haukinge Iades, as would maintayne halfe a do∣zen able horses to serue their Prince. Vincent. But would you haue euery Gentleman to kepe seruiceable horses, euen those yt liue to themselues, and receaue no pay of the Prince, either in war or Court? Vallentine. Yea surely syr, euery Gentleman of abillity ought
to doo it, for vnlesse hee be at all times well armed and horsed, I holde him vnworthy the name of a Gentleman, yea, though hee weareth the longe Roabe. Vincent. Then will you put our Gentlemen to double charges, I meane to keepe their haukinge nags, and their horses of seruice also. Vallentine. I will not wish them to that. For I desire onely to see them furnished like Gentlemen, not like Faulkners: if there were fewer haukes, and more horses, I suppose it were better for the state, and more worship for ye Gentlemen. Also (if you marke it well) it is (besides the necessity,) a better and more commendable sight, to see a Gentleman ride with three fayre horses, then fifteene of those vn∣cumly Curtalles. Vincent. In that I must also concurre with you in opinion. Vallentine. Yea, I am sure you will, and so wil euery other man in whō there is either iudgement or courage. And if you were in some Countries, where gentle∣men doo in deede liue a ciuill life: You should daily see them so wel mounted, as would greatly delight you. And so great is there the desire of knowledge in Chiualry, and the vse of armes, as in sundry Citties they haue by consente, erected a pay and pention, for men expert to teach them these know∣ledges: So as what with their instructions, and their owne exercise, many become cunninge, and some very excellent. The like prouisions they haue
deuised, for the knowledge of Philosophy, and the Mathematicall Sciences, entertaining men excellent in them, to read publikely, who for their paines do receaue good reward, euen by the only bounty and beneuolence of Noble and Gentlemen, studious of honour and vertue. Vincent. How commeth this currage and noble desire of knowledge into those people, more then vnto vs? Vallentine. I dare not take vpō mee to iudge, but (as I gesse) the want of knowledge what honour is, must bee the principall occasion of our want of desire to excel both in learninge and Armes: Yea, in my poore minde, because we dwel in remote place, one gentil∣man far from other, so as the better cannot inform the worse: there is no meane made to enstruct the ignorant, but euery one disposeth him selfe almost as a poore Ploughman, making profit and riches the markes of all his indeuor. Vincent. Then it seemeth, that the Cittie, the Court, and other places of assembly, (I meane of Nobility) doth occasion men to learne the customes of curte∣sy, and pointes of honour? Vallentine. No doubt therof, for euen experience doth prooue, that so it is, for if you happen into the company of two Gentlemen, (though in wit and capacity alike) the one brought vp in the Countrey, the other in Court or Cittie, you shall euen at the first sight per∣ceaue by their speeche, iesture, and behauiour, that their educations are diuerse.
Vincent. And that may so bee, yet the behauior of both good and gentlemanly enough. For you shall finde few Gentlemen of the Country, but they are sumwhat learned, and many of them brought vp in seruice, so longe as they can therby know what reuerence or countenance to vse towards all sortes of men. Vallentine. That is but your opinion, for I will compare their good manners, or rather their euill manners vnto the skill of an vnskilfull Taylor or shoemaker: who dwelling among the countrey people, doth exercise his occupation: and not beeinge there any better workeman, is holden an excellent artizan: when in deede hee is a plaine bungler, and a very ignorant dolte. Euen so to those that neuer saw any ciuile men: they that weare any good garmentes, are without other consideration, accompted braue Gentlemen, and folke of good nurture. Vincent. Then I perceaue that euery man that can make a coate is not a Taylor, nor euery one that hath the name of a Gentleman, and goeth well appar∣relled, ought bee so reputed: vnlesse the one bee skilfull in his crafte, and the other seemely in his garmentes. Vallentine. You take my meaning a right, and yet you must not thinke that these externall thinges, (I meane apparrell and iesture) bee the cheefest ornamentes for a Gentleman. For the inwarde vertues and perfections be in troth of most waight, and cheefly required.
Vincent. So haue I hard you already say, but few can at∣taine to perfection, and not many draw neare vnto it. Yet I thinke you shal finde in the Countrey the most part of those that beare the name of Gentle∣men, that they are of capacitie sufficient & hable to talke of their shire wherin they dwel, as of the fer∣tilytie or barenes therof: of hauking or huntinge, fishinge or fowlinge, and finally of all such matter as conserue either pleasure or profit, wherfore I finde no want in their wittes to bee supplied, vnles they happely lacke the Arte of Adulation, or the skil of ceremonious speech, which you trauellers haue brought from beyond the Seas. Vallentine. Sir you may bee bolde to tell mee of all faultes: For I can willingly confesse, that from far, many haue fetched full euill conditions. But therwith I pray you consider, that who so buyeth corne, must needes put some chaffe into his sackes: And so were yee better do then bring home no corne at all. Euen so hee that seeketh to know the best, must of force, happen vpon some euill: both which a wise man knoweth how to vse, ye one to bee stored, the other to bee cast away and detested. Vincent. Yet haue you not tolde mee your opinion, touching our Countrey wittes and experience, neither haue you sayde ought, how you allowe of those thinges wherin wee are able to speake. Vallentine. I say they are not euil, neither is it vngentleman∣like to haue skill in matters of profit or pleasure.
And yet if your capacities comprehend no greater matter, you may proue fat Franklins, or faukners for a prince, or perhaps hunts for my Lord Maior: but neuer become worthy the name of Gentlemen nor the estimation that therto belongeth. Vincent. In deede syr, I remember you tolde mee that armes and learning were the only occupations of a Gentleman, and these are not in troth any of thē. Notwithstandinge you must vnderstand that the most of vs haue gone to froole, and many haue seen some parte of the warres. Vallentine. Euery boy that hath been beaten for not lear∣ning his lesson, is not to be accompted learned, but hee that in deede hath learning, nor hee that a few dayes hath marched in armour ought be taken for a souldier: no more then those that for one nightes sleepe in Parnassus Hill, should bee reputed perfite Poets. Vincent. Truely it seemeth a thinge reasonable, that so noble knowledges are not gotten without long la∣bour and perseuerance. But I pray you tell mee what imperfection you finde in the conuersation of our Countrey Gentlemen: whom (to tel you truly) I wish either more lettered, or better learned in the Martiall discipline. Vallentine. Sith you so require mee, I will vse that (which you say is no property of a courtier) plainesse. And therfore I tell you, ye besides those quallities you alleaged, I finde nothing els in ye Countey gentle∣men:
& the same not accompanied with some taste of lerning or armes, I accompt as nothing worth. Touching their conuersation, you shall besides the rusticitie of their houses and garments, finde them full of lofty lookes, barbarous behauiour, and vndecent dooinges. As for ensample, some one will laugh when hee speaketh an other will cough before hee telles his tale: And some will gape or yawne when hee giueth the hearinge. So as in deede (vnlesse they be of better education, few doo know what coūtenance to make among ye equals, and among their betters vtterly to seeke. Also if they hap to dine at any table, either they are sullen∣ly silente, or els they fall into speeche of their owne Auncestors, their owne landes, their owne wiues or children, other subiect of talke yee shall seldome finde among these sortes of countrey men. Vincent. In good fayth syr, when I remember al mine ac∣quaintance, I confesse that some of them (cheefely in company) are to seke which way to loke: & much more how to entertaine. And this I speake not only of vs that dwell in the countrey, but by your leaue of many Courtiers. Vallentine. I am not so simple, (though simplest of many) but that I finde in Courte diuerse as vnworthy the name of Courtiers, as of you that deserue not the reputation of Gentlemen. But yet necessity and oc∣casion do draw vs to be of better manner, & cheefly in our dooings to vse more respect. And would you practise mine opinion, to liue sumtimes in country, & sumtimes in cittie, yee could not choose but know the thrift of the one, wherof ye boast, and also the ciuility of the other. Vincent.
All men are not apt for one thing & mens delights be diuerse: for as some affect the scholes & lerning, so others take pleasure in husbandry and tillage. Some haue minde to the warres, & loue to wan∣der in forraine Countryes: others are willinge to follow princes affaires, & some are best content to tarry at home & liue to the selues. How thē should al men be expert in learning & armes. Vallentine. I am glad you come so neare mee, for now wil I put ye in minde, yt long since I tolde you, which is, that euery gentleman vnlesse hee were witles will proue fit for some action, either Martiall or Ciuill, if he doth not, the fault in his owne, yt doth not offer himselfe to industry, or his foolish freends yt would not comfort him to it. And so in conclusiō, I impute ye fault to Nature, but rather to Nurture. Vincent. I had thought that nature had made euery man so affected as that he had been only meet, for that his freendes put him vnto, or that his Auncestors before him vsed and delighted. Vallentine. Touching that, I will tell you how Licurgus the Law maker of Lacedemon handled the matter, to teache the people there, what education besides nature could do in men. Hee caused two dogges of one lytter to be brought vp, the one he committed to a man that delighted in huntinge, and so vsed that whelpe: the other was fostered by a poore villain, willing in no wise that dogge to doo other then eate and feede fat. These two whelpes being growē to ripe age, Licurgus cōmaunded they should be brought forth in ye presence of many people, and with theē a Hare & a potful of poridge, which being
shewed to the dogges, and they both let loose, the one ran after the Hare, the other made hast to the porish pot. Wherby the Lacedomonians perceaued, that education & not nature, made in all creatures the difference of delightes, though some men are more and some lesse to goodnes enclined, yet euery man apt for somewhat, though many haue made them selues fit for nothing. Vincent. To say troth, I know many good wits, that first for not beeinge by freends admitted to learne, and after through an habit of sloth, do become both vn∣learned and very lowtes. Others both witty and curragious, yet vsed to home, and not hearing how vertuously some their equalles haue beene, are in time rather beastly then braue, rather effeminate then curragious. Vallentine. Well, now you see the minde doth much, and the endeuor therof, maketh men worthy or vnworthy the name of Gentlemen, of defaultes many accuse nature, wherof themselues are most giltie. Vincent. Concerning then (of that you haue spoken) how the ende of the Courtier is honour, & his exercises, Armes and learning. And that the country gentle∣men aspireth to ritches, exercised cheefly in grasing and Tulage. It must needes bee, that their man∣ners and customes are also diuerse. But as they bee in birth both equall, so ought they to haue lyke delights & customes, wherfore to vnite them it be∣houeth that the one sorte do confirme them selues to the other.
Vallentine. Then it is meete, that the worse do yeelde to the better, & the vnexpert, to those of best knowledge. Vincent. So were it both wisedome and reason. Vallentine. And which of those men (as you thinke) liueth most vertuously, and are fittest for the state? Vincent. Surely syr, since I considered, that we must not liue onely for our selues, and our perticuler profite, I am fully perswaded, that a gentleman vnskilfull in Armes and vtterly vnlearned, is seldome found fit for any publique function, or employment. And no man denieth but that man, who is able to go∣uerne, is a person more worthy and necessary then hee that is gouerned. For Aristotle a Father in Philosophy sayth: Regens est dimus recto. Vallentine. I am very glad to heare you so say, for that was all I laboured you to beleeue: yet before we put ful ende to our speech, let mee intreate you to tell that a good while since, your self offered, which is to re∣site in breefe, the sum of all our speech, wherby yee shal shew the excellency of your owne memory and also make these Gentlemen our hearers the better to carry away what hath beene sayd. Vincent. Vnderstand you then, that through your good reasons (for which I hartely thanke you) I am brought to know that the education of a Gentle∣man ought bee onely in Learning and Armes, and that no Gentleman, no nor no Noble man should
withdraw or holde backe his Sonne from the at∣tayning of these knowledges, which are the very true and only quallities or vertues of a gentleman as things not only beseeming such a person, but al∣so for the seruice of a Prince or State very neces∣sary. Secondly, you haue perswaded that in Court or Towne, the life of a Gentleman may bee no lesse godly and charitable, then in the Countrey: In which discourse you set downe what sortes of ser∣uauntes were superfluous, and which necessary, both for priuate vse, and the publike state. Wherin I also noted, that such younge men as were not borne to lande or lyuing, should eyther apply them selues to perfection in learninge or Marchandize, either else to husbandry, or some Mecanicall mistery or occupacion: And not to be seruingmen, without other knowledge, least through their Maisters want of will to kepe them, or their lacke of skill to earne their owne liueloades, they may be driuen to vnlawfull life or beggery. Thirdly, in consideration of your reasons I gea∣ther, that true honor consisteth not in the admira∣tion of common people, but in the vertue of him that therwith is indued. And that the reputation which a few wise men do giue vnto a Gentleman, is of more worth then that of the multitude, wher∣vpon is inferred, that the respect which is borne to any man by them of the Court and Cittie, (beeing the best and wisest sort) is more estimable then that which is borne by the common people. Fourthly, you seeme to allow more of many our Countrey sportes & exercises, then of our company
in vsinge them. Fifthly, that for health and holesome habitation the Citties, and some cheefe townes in England, are either better or not inferiour to the sites of the Noble and Gentlemens houses. Sixtly, I see that the Towne dwellinge doth much surpasse for quietnesse, & that the most parte of Gentlemens countrey houses be frequented as honourable hostries. And last, that the Court or Cittie habitatiō not abused, is no lesse profitable then yt of the country, & more free from trouble. Thus much of the country. Touching the Court and Cittie, you tolde that a Gentleman ought in the prime of his youth, en∣deuour him selfe to become sufficient for the seruice of his Prince. Which sufficiency is attained vnto through study, trauaile, and Martiall endeuour. In∣forminge breefely, at what age hee ought come to Court, what his exercises should bee there, and in what time and fortune it shal become him to retier him selfe from thence: For (as it seemeth,) an olde Courtier vnpreferred and vnimployed, looseth his reputacion, and may be compared to a Non profi∣tiens in Schoole. Concerning the rest, you referre mee to the Booke of the Courtier. Of the Cittie, you haue sayd sumwhat perticulerly of ye manner and syte of Gentlemens houses there and likewise, how they may with commodity and reasonable cost bee furnished of al sorte of victuals and other needfull prouision. Also that there be more skilfull Tutors to instruct your children, then wee possible can haue in the Country. You doo also discourse well of the manner of
householdinge and the resorte of freendes in the towne, which seemeth not to be combersome. Lastly, it appeareth your exercises bee cheefely in Letters and Armes, which bee both commen∣dable and very necessary. Thus much (as I thinke) is the somme or prin∣cipall partes of your speeche, which I confesse to bee very reasonable and good, and therfore con∣sent that a Gentleman so brought vp, is more ciuil then any Country man can bee: Likewise meetest for gouerment, and for his priuate vertue moste to bee regarded. Vallentine. Surely syr, you haue framed a proper Epilogue of our speech. And sithe I see that you both con∣ceaue aright what hath beene perswaded, and are also brought to beleeue what is true, I will presse you no further, but bidding you most hartely wel∣come to our towne habitation, as a place fittest for a Gentleman. I take my leaue. FINIS.
