C4363A [ocm]62369121 187847
THE CIVIL ARTICLES OF LIMERICK, Exactly Printed from the Letters Patent. Wherein they are Ratified and Exemplified by their MA∣JESTIES, under the Great Seal of ENGLAND.
THE Civil ARTICLES OF LIMERICK. GULIELMUS & Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran∣ciae & Hiberniae, Rex & Regina, Fidei Defensores, &c. Om∣nibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem: In∣speximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren. Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba. WILLIAM and Mary, by the Grace of God, &c. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting. Whereas certain Articles, bearing Date the third Day of October last past, Made and Agreed on between Our Justices of Our Kingdom of Ireland, and Our General of Our Forces there on the one Part; and several Officers there, Command∣ing within the City of Limerick in Our said Kingdom, on the other Part. Whereby Our said Justices and General did undertake that We should ratify those Articles, within the Space of eight Months, or sooner; and use their utmost Endeavours that the same should be Ratified and Con∣firmed in Parliament. The Tenour of which said Articles, is as fol∣lows, viz.
ARTICLES Agreed upon the third Day of October, One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety One. Between the Right Honourable Sir Charles Porter, Knight, and Thomas Conningsby, Esq Lords Justices of Ireland; and his Excellency the Baron De Ginckle, Lieutenant Ge∣neral, and Commander in Chief of the English Army; On the one Part. And the Right Honourable Patrick Earl of Lucan, Piercy Viscount Gallmoy, Colonel Nicholas Purcel, Colonel Nicholas Cusack, Sir Toby Butler, Colonel Garret Dillon, and Colonel John Brown; on the other Part: In the Behalf of the Irish Inhabitants in the City and Coun∣ty of Limerick, the Counties of Clare, Kerry, Cork, Sligo, and Mayo. In Consideration of the Surrender of the City of Limerick, and other A∣greements made between the said Lieutenant General Ginckle, the Go∣vernor of the City of Limerick, and the Generals of the Irish Army, bearing Date with these Presents, for the Surrender of the said City, and Submission of the said Army: It is agreed, That ART. I. THE Roman-Catholicks of this Kingdom shall enjoy such Privileges in the Exercise of their Religion, as are con∣sistent with the Laws of Ireland; or as they did enjoy in the Reign of
King Charles the IId. And their Majesties, as soon as their Affairs will permit them to summon a Parliament in this Kingdom, will endeavour to procure the said Roman-Catholicks such farther Security in that Par∣ticular, as may preserve them from any Disturbance upon the Account of their said Religion. ART. II. All the Inhabitants or Residents of Limerick, or any other Garrison now in the Possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms, under any Commission of King James, or those authorized by him, to grant the same in the several Counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork and Mayo, or any of them; and all the Commissioned Offi∣cers in their Majesties Quarters, that belong to the Irish Regiments, now in Being, that are treated with, and who are not Prisonners of War, or have taken Protection, and who shall return and submit to their Majesties Obedience; and their and every of their Heirs, shall hold, possess and en∣joy, all and every their Estates of Free-hold, and Inheritance; and all the Rights, Titles and Interests, Privileges and Immunities, which they, and every, or any of them held, enjoyed, or were rightfully and lawfully in∣titled to, in the Reign of King Charles II. or at any Time since, by the Laws and Statutes that were in Force in the said Reign of King Charles II. and shall be put in Possession, by Order of the Government, of such of them as are in the King's Hands, or the Hands of his Tenants, without being put to any Suit or Trouble therein; and all such Estates shall be freed and discharged from all Arrears of Crown-rents, Quit-rents, and other publick Charges, incurred and become due since Michaelmas 1688, to the Day of the Date hereof: And all Persons comprehended in this Ar∣ticle, shall have, hold, and enjoy all their Goods and Chattels, real and personal, to them, or any of them belonging, and remaining either in their own Hands, or the Hands of any Persons whatsoever, in Trust for, or for the Use of them, or any of them: And all and every the said Persons, of what Profession, Trade, or Calling soever they be, shall and may use, exercise and practise their several and respective Professions, Trades and Callings, as freely as they did use, exercise and enjoy the same in the Reign of King Charles II. Provided, that nothing in this Article contained, be construed to extend to, or restore any forfeiting Person now out of the Kingdom, except what are hereafter comprized: Provided also, That no Person whatsoever shall have or enjoy the Benefit of this Article, that shall neglect or refuse to take the Oath of Allegi∣ance,
made by Act of Parliament in England, in the First Year of the Reign of their present Majesties, when thereunto required. ART. III. All Merchants, or reputed Merchants of the City of Lime∣rick, or of any other Garrison now possessed by the Irish, or of any Town or Place in the Counties of Clare or Kerry, who are absent be∣yond the Seas, that have not bore Arms since their Majesties Declarati∣on in February 1688. shall have the Benefit of the second Article, in the same Manner, as if they were present; provided, such Merchants, and reputed Merchants, do repair into this Kingdom within the Space of eight Months after the Date hereof. ART. IV. The following Officers, viz. Colonel Simon Lutterel, Cap∣tain Rowland White, Maurice Eustace of Yermanstown, Chievers of May∣stown, commonly called Mount-Leinster, now belonging to the Regi∣ments in the aforesaid Garrisons and Quarters of the Irish Army, who were beyond the Seas, and sent thither upon Affairs of their respective Regiments, or the Army in general, shall have the Benefit and Advan∣tage of the second Article; provided they return hither within the Space of eight Months from the Date of these Presents, and submit to their Majesties Government, and take the above mentioned Oath. ART. V. That all and singular, the said Persons comprized in the second and third Articles, shall have a general Pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Premunires, Felonies, Trespasses, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever, by them, or any of them, committed since the beginning of the Reign of King James II. and if any of them are Attainted by Parliament, the Lords Justices, and General, will use their best Endeavours to get the same re∣pealed by Parliament, and the Outlawries to be reversed Gratis, all but Writing-Clerks Fees. ART. VI. And whereas these present Wars have drawn on great Vi∣olences on both Parts, and that if Leave were given to the bringing all Sorts of private Actions, the Animosities would probably continue, that have have been too long on Foot, and the publick Disturbances last: For the Quieting and Settling therefore of this Kingdom, and avoiding those Inconveniencies which would be the necessary Consequence of the
contrary, no Person or Persons whatsoever, comprized in the foregoing Articles, shall be sued, molested, or impleaded at the Suit of any Party or Parties whatsoever, for any Trespasses by them committed, or for any Arms, Horses, Money, Goods, Chattels, Merchandizes, or Provisions whatsoever, by them seized or taken, during the Time of the War. And no Person or Persons whatsoever, in the second or third Articles comprized, shall be sued, impleaded, or made accountable for the Rents or mean Rates of any Lands, Tenements, or Houses, by him or them received, or enjoyed in this Kingdom, since the Beginning of the present War, to the Day of the Date hereof, nor for any Waste or Trespass, by him or them committed in any such Lands, Tenements, or Houses: And it is also agreed, that this Article shall be mutual, and reciprocal, on both Sides. ART. VII. Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprized in the said second and third Article, shall have Liberty to ride with a Sword, and Case of Pistols, if they think fit; and keep a Gun in their Houses, for the Defence of the same, or for Fowling. ART. VIII. The Inhabitants and and Residents in the City of Lime∣rick, and other Garrisons, shall be permitted to remove their Goods, Chattels, and Provisions, out of the same, without being viewed and searched, or paying any Manner of Duties, and shall not be compelled to leave the Houses or Lodgings they now have, for the Space of six Weeks next ensuing the Date hereof. ART. IX. The Oath to be administred to such Roman-Catholicks as sub∣mit to their Majesties Government, shall be the Oath abovesaid, and no other. ART. X. No Person or Persons, who shall at any Time hereafter break these Articles, or any of them, shall thereby make, or cause any other Person or Persons, to forfeit or lose the Benefit of the same. ART. XI. The Lords JusticesThese Lords Justices were then Lords of the Regency in Ireland, as there was no Lord Lieutenant there. and General do promise to use their utmost Endeavours, that all the Persons comprehended in the above mentioned Articles, shall be protected and defended from all Arrests and Executions for Debt or Damage, for the Space of eight Months, next ensuing the Date hereof. ART. XII. The Lords Justices and General do undertake, that their
Majesties will ratify these Articles, within the Space of eight Months, or sooner, and use their utmost Endeavours, that the same shall be rati∣fied and confirmed in Parliament. ART. XIII. Lastly, And whereas Colonel John Brown stood indebted to several Protestants, by Judgments of Record; which appearing to the late Government, the Lord Tyrconnel, and Lord Lucan, took away the Effects the said John Brown had to answer the said Debts, and promised to clear the said John Brown of the said Debts; which Effects were ta∣ken for the publick Use of the Irish, and their Army: For freeing the said Lord Lucan of his said Engagement, passed on their publick Ac∣count, for Payment of the said Protestants, and for preventing the Ru∣ine of the said John Brown, and for Satisfaction of his Creditors, at the Instance of the Lord Lucan, and the rest of the Persons aforesaid, it is agreed, That the said Lords Justices, and the said Baron de Ginckle, shall intercede with the King and Parliament, to have the Estates secured to Roman-Catholicks, By Articles and Capitulation in this Kingdom, charged with, and equally liable to the Payment of so much of the said Debts, as the said Lord Lucan, upon stating Accompts with the said John Brown, shall certify under his Hand, that the Effects taken from the said Brown amount unto; which Accompt is to be stated, and the Ba∣lance certified by the Lord Lucan in one and twenty Days after the Date hereof: For the true Performance hereof, We have hereunto set our Hands, Present, Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle. AND Whereas the said City of Limerick hath been since, in Pursu∣ance of the said Articles, surrendered unto Us, Now know ye, that We having considered of the said Articles, are graciously pleased hereby to declare, that We do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as far as in Us lies, ratifie and confirm the same, and every Clause, Matter and Thing therein contained. And as to such Parts thereof, for which an Act of Parliament shall be found to be necessary, We shall recommend the same
to be made good by Parliament, and shall give Our Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills, that shall be passed by Our two Houses of Parliament to that Purpose. And whereas it appears unto Us, that it was agreed between the Parties to the said Articles, that after the Words, Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, or any of them, in the second of the said Articles, the Words following, viz. And all such as are under their Protection in the said Counties, should be inserted, and be Part of the said Articles: Which Words having been casually omitted by the Writer, the Omissi∣on was not discovered till after the said Articles were signed, but was ta∣ken Notice of before the second Town was surrendred: And that Our said Justices, and General, or one of them, did promise that the said Clause should be made good, it being within the Intention of the Capitulation, and inserted in the foul Draught thereof: Our further Will and Plea∣sure is, and We do hereby ratify and confirm the said omitted Words, viz. [And all such as are under their Protection in the said Counties] Hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, ordaining and declaring, that all and every Person and Persons therein concerned, shall and may have, receive, and enjoy the Benefit thereof, in such and the same Manner, as if the said Words had been inserted in their proper Place, in the said se∣cond Article; any Omission, Defect, or Mistake in the said second Arti∣cle, in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, that these Our Letters Patents shall he enrolled in Our Court of Chancery in Our said Kingdom of Ireland, within the Space of one Year next ensuing. In Witness, &c. Witness Our Seal at Westminster, the twenty fourth Day of February, Anno Regni Regis & Reginae Gulielmi & Mariae Quarto per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Pre∣missor. Predict. Ad Requisitionem Attornat. General. Domini Regis & Do∣minae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae. duximus exemplificand. per Presentes. In cujus Rei Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis, Anno{que} Regni eorum Quarto. BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos S. Keck In Cancel. Magistros Examinat. per nos Lacon Wm. Childe In Cancel. Magistros FINIS.
The Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance required by the second Article of this Treaty. I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, that I will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance to their Majesties King William and Queen Mary. So Help me God.
LES ARTICLES CIVILES DE LIMERICK, TIREZ DES Lettres Patentes. Par lesquelles ils sont Ratifiez & Prouvés par leurs MA∣JESTEZ sous le Grand Seau d'ANGLETERRE.
LES ARTICLES Civiles DE LIMERICK. GULIELMUS & Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran∣ciae, & Hiberniae, Rex & Regina, Fidei Defensores, &c. Om∣nibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem: In∣speximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren. Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi praeteriti in Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba. GUILLAUME & Marie par la grace de Dieu, &c. à tous ceux qui ces presentes verront, salût. Comme de certains Articles en date du troisi∣ême Octobre dernier, faits & conclûs par nos justiciers de nôtre Roy∣aume d'Irlande, & le General de nos armées dans le dit païs d'une part; & plusieurs officiers commandans dans la ville de Limerick dans nôtre dit Royaume de l'autre part: par lesquels Articles nos dits Justiciers & General se seroient engagez, à ce que nous ratifierions les dits Articles dans huit mois ou même plutôt, & qu'ils feroient tout leur possible pour les faire aussi ratifier & confirmer en Parlement. La teneur des dits Articles est il s'ensuit.
ARTICLES Faits & passez le troisiême Octobre 1691. Entre le Chevalier Charles Porter, le sieur Thomas Con∣ningsby Ecuyer seigneurs Justiciers d'Irlande, & son Excellence le Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General, & Commandeur en chef de l'armée Angloise d'une part. Et le seigneur Patrice Conte de Lucan, le sieur Piercy Vi∣conte de Galmoy, le sieurs Nicolas Purcel Colonel, Ni∣colas Cusack Colonel, le Chevalier Theobald Butler, le sieurs Garret Dillon Colonel, & Jean Brown Colonel, d'autre part. Et stipulés pour les habitans Irlandois de la ville & Com∣té de Lymerick, les Comtés de Clare, Kerry, Cork, Sligo, & Mayo. En consideration de la reddition de la ville de Limerick, & autres stipu∣lations passées entre le dit Lieutenant General Ginckle, le Gouver∣neur de la ville de Limerick, & les Generaux de l'armée Irlandoise, de la même date, que les presentes, à cause de la reddition de la dite ville & soumission de la dite armée, ou est convenue que, ART. I. LES Catholiques Romains de ce Royaume jouiront dans l'éxercise de leure religion de tous privileges non contraires aux Loix d'Irlande, ou comme ils en ont jouis sous le regne du Roy Charles
Second. Et leurs Majestez, aussi tôt que la situation de leurs affaires leur permettra de convoquer un Parlement en ce Royaume, tacheront de pro∣curer aux dits Catholiques Romains toutes les autres seuretez necessaires pour empêcher qu'ils ne soient aucunement inquietez ni molestez pour cause de Religion. ART. II. Tous les habitans & autres qui resident à Lymerick ou dans aucune autre des garnisons actuellement dans la possession des Irlandois & tous officiers & soldats portants armes par commission du Roy Jacques, ou de ceux par luy authorisez pour cet effet dans les Comtez de Lime∣rick, de Clare, Kerry, Corke, & Mayo, ou dans aucune Comté d'icelles, & tous les officiers en Commission qui se trouvent dans les quartiers de leures Majestez, & servent dans les regimens Irlandois qui sont actuelle∣ment en pied & avec lesquels se fait le present traitté, & ne sont pas pri∣sonniers de guerre, ou ont accepté sauvegarde ou protection, & qui vou∣dront revenir & se soumettre à l'obeissance de leures majestez, tous & chacun de leurs heritiers tiendront, possederont & joûiront de tous & cha∣cun de leurs terres biens en fond & autres biens & heritages, & de tous les droits, titres, interests, privileges, & immunitez ou franchises, dont eux ou aucun deux ont jouis ou avoit droit de jouir sous le regne de Charles Se∣cond, ou dans aucun autre tems du depuis selon les loix & ordonnances alors en force; & seront mis en possession par ordre du gouvernement, paisible∣ment & sans procés ni autres diligences, de telles parties de leurs biens qui se trouvent entre les mains du Roy ou de ses fermiers. Et tous les biens de cette nature seront libres & dechargez de tout arrerage de rentes royales & autres rentes ou impos publics establis & echûs depuis la sainte Michel de l'année 1688 jusqu'au jour de la datte du present traitté: Et tou∣tes les personnes comprises dans cet article, auront, tiendront & jouiront de tous leurs biens meubles & immubles à eux ou à aucun d'eux apppar∣tenans & restans, soit entre leurs propres mains ou les mains de ceux par eux employez par fidei commis & confiance, pour menager leurs interests. Et toutes & chacune des dites personnes de quelque profession, mêtier ou vacation qu'elles soient pourront suivre & exercer leurs dites professions ou mêtiers avec la même franchise & liberté qu'elles ont eu sous le Reg∣ne de Charles Second, pourveu que rien du contenu de cet article ne pu∣isse s'étendre ni estre expliqué pour retablir les personnes actuellement hors du Royaume dont les biens sont sujets a Confiscation, à l'exception neanmoins de ceux cy après compris. Pourveu aussi que personne ne pu∣isse participer des avantages portez par cet article qui negligera ou refu∣sera
de pretter lorsqu'il en sera requis le serment de fidelité porté par acte du parlement d'Angleterre la premiere année du Regne du Roy & de la Reine d'aujourd'huy. ART. III. Tous marchands ou reputez marchands de la ville de Ly∣merick, ou d'aucune autre garnison à cette heure dans la possession des Irlandois, ou d'aucune autre ville ou place dans les comtez de Clare & Kerry, qui sont absens au de la des mers, & qui n'ont point porté les ar∣mes contre leurs Majestez depuis la declaration de leurs Majestez pub∣lié au mois de Fevrier 1688. auront & participeront des avantages du second Article tout comme s'ils avoient été presens; pourveu que les marchands ou reputez marchands s'en reviennent au Royaume dans l'éspace de huit mois à comter de la date des presens. ART. IV. Les officiers, dont les noms s'ensuivent, sçavoir, le Col∣lonel Simon Luttrel, le Capitaine Roland White, les sieurs Maurice Eu∣stace de Manstown, Chievers de Maystowne communement appellé le Lord Montleinster servans actuellement dans les Regimens qui sont dans les susdites garnisons & quartiers de l'armée Irlandoise, qui ont été envoyez hors du pays pour les affaires de leurs Regimens respectives ou de l'armée Irlandoise en general, recevront & profiteront des avantages de l'article second pourveu qu'ils s'en reviennent au Royaume dans l'éspace de huit mois, & qu'ils se soumettent au gouvernement de leur Majestez & qu'ils prettent le serment cy dessus specifié. ART. V. Que toutes & chacune des dites personnes comprises dans le 2d & 3me Articles auront une amnestie ou pardon general de toutes sortes de convictions, proscriptions, condemnations par contumace pour crimes de leze Majesté, de tous crimes punissables de mort de toutes au∣tres transgressions des loix par eux ou aucun d'eux commis depuis le commencement du Regne du Roy Jacques II. Et que si aucun d'eux soit condemné par Arrêt du Parlement, les seigneurs de la Regence & le General tacheront de faire annuller cet Arret de condemnation en Par∣lement & de revoquer les proscriptions gratis, excepté ce qu'on doit payer aux clercs ecrivains. ART. VI. Et d'autant que les presentes Guerres ont attiré sur les deux parties opposées beaucoup de torts & de violences, & que s'il etoit permis aux particuliers d'intenter des procez sur les dites violences; les animosi∣tés, qui ont deja duré trop long tems, pourroient encore continuer au dommage du public: Pour donc retablir le repos & la paix de ce Roy∣aume, & pour obvier aux inconveniens qui seroient la consequence im∣manquable
de telles procedures, il est stipulé qu'aucun de ceux qui sont com∣pris dans les susdits articles ne sera poursuivi en justice, ou aucunement molesté à la requisition de qui que ce soit, pour aucunes transgressions des loix, pour aucun enlevement ou saisies d'armes, de chevaux, d'argent, de hardes, meubles ou marchandises, provisions par eux faites durant la guerre; ny ne sera aucun de ceux qui sont compris dans le second ou troisiême Article, assigné cité en droit, ni rendu responsable des rentes usufruits, & possessions d'aucunes terres, biens en fonds ou maisons par eux ou aucun d'eux receus ou saisis depuis le commencement de la pre∣sente Guerre jusques au jour de la datte des presens; ni d'aucun degats, de∣perissemens ou desordres par eux ou aucun d'eux commis: Il est aussi sti∣pulé que cet Article sera mutuel & reciproque aux deux parties. ART. VII. Tous Seigneurs ou gentilshommes compris dans les second & troisiême Articles cy dessus auront la liberté d'aller par tout avec l'épée & une paire de Pistolets, & d'avoir un fusil chez eux, soit pour la deffense de leur maison ou pour la chasse. ART. VIII. Il sera permi à tous les habitans & autres qui resident à Limerick ou dans les autres Garnisons d'emporter leurs biens, meubles, hardes & provisions sans être visitez ni fouillez, & sans payer aucuns droits, & ne seront tenus de quitter les maisons ou logis qu'ils occupent actuellement de six semaines, à compter de la datte du present Traitté. ART. IX. Le serment que l'on fera prêter aux Catholiques Romains, qui se soumettront au gouvernement de leures Majestéz Regnantes, sera celuy cy dessus specifié & point d'autre. ART. X. Si quelqu'un contrevient aux presens Articles ou à quel∣qu'un d'iceux, il n'excluera pas par la aucune autre personne des avan∣tages y portez. ART. XI. Les Lords JusticiersLes Lords Justiciers etoient alors seigneurs de la Regence en Irlande par ce qu'il 'y avoit pas de Viceroy. & le General promettent de faire tout leur possible pour que toutes les personnes comprises dans les Arti∣cles cy dessus soient protegées & mises à couvert contre tous arrests, pour∣suites, ou executions pour dettes ou dommages, durant huit mois après la datte des presens. ART. XII. Les Lords Justiciers & le General s'éngagent que leurs
Majestez ratifieront ces Presens Articles dans huit mois d'icy, ou même plutôt, & feront de leur mieux pour qu'ils soient aussi ratifiez & con∣firmez en Parlement. ART. XIII. Finalement, Comme le Colonel Jean Brown se trouva en∣detté à plusieurs protestans par jugemens enregistrez, & que le dernier gouvernement en fût informé, les Lords Tyrconnel & Lucan enleverent les effets que le dit Jean Brown avoit pour payer ses dites dettes, dont ils promirent de le faire decharger, & ces effets furent employez à l'usage & au service commun des Irlandois & de leure armée. Pour liberer donc le dit Lord Lucan de son dit engagement contracté pour leure cause com∣mune, comme aussi pour satisfaire les dits protestans & empêcher la ru∣ine du dit Jean Brown, & contenter ses creanciers, nous sommes conve∣nus à l'instance du dit Lord Lucan, & des autres personnes cy dessus mentionnées que les dits Lords Justiciers, & le dit Baron Ginckle, inter∣cederont auprès du Roy & du Parlement pour conserver par Articles & capitulation aux Catholiques Romains dans ce Royaume leur biens meu∣bles & immeubles, chargez & egalement affectez au payement des dites dettes, jusqu'à la concurrence de ce que valoient les dits effets enlevez au dit Jean Brown, suivant le certificat qu'en donnera par ecrit signé de luy le dit Lord Lucan après avoir compté avec le dit Jean Brown; le dit Compte sera dressé & la balance d'iceluy certifié par le dit Lord Lucan dans vingt & un jours de la date des presens. Pour l'accomplissement de tout ce que dessus nous avons signez, Presens, Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle. ET comme la dite ville de Limerick nous à êté livrée du dépuis sui∣vant les dits Articles, sçavoir faisons que Nous ayant consideré les dits Articles avons bien voulu declarer par ces presentes, que nous ratifi∣ons & confirmons, tant pour nous que pour nos heritiers & successeurs autant que de nos depends, les dits Articles & chaque clause & condi∣tion y portées. Et quant à ce qui en requiert un acte confirmatif du parlement nous en recommanderons l'accomplissement au dit parlement
& donnerons nôtre agréement & approbation à tous acte ou actes qui pas∣seront à ce sujet dans les deux chambres de nôtre parlement, & comme il nous appert qu'il a été convenu entre les parties stipulantes qu'après les mots Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Corke, Mayo, ou aucun d'iceux specifiéz au deuxieme article, les mots suivans sçavoir, & tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les dites comtés seront inserez & feront partie des dits Articles. Lesquels mots ayant êté omis casuellement par l'écrivain, l'omission n'en a été apperçue qu'après que les dits Articles furent signez, mais on s'en apperçeut avant qu'on eut livré la seconde ville; & comme nos dits Justiciers & General ou l'un d'eux ont promis que la dite clause auroit lieu ainsi qu'êtoit l'intention des parties stipulantes, & qu'elle étoit de même inserée dans le brouillon de la capitulation, nôtre plaisir, de plus, est, & par ces presentes nous ratifions & confirmons les dits mots omis, sçavoir, & tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les dites com∣tés, declarant & ordonnant par ces presentes tant pour nous que pour nos heritiers & successeurs que toutes les personnes comprises dans les dites clauses & conventions auront, recevront & jouiront des avantages d'icel∣les ainsi & de la même maniere qu'elles l'auroient fait, si les dits mots eussent été inserez dans leur propre place, au dit second Article; & ce non obstant toute omission defaut ou inadvertence à trouver dans le dit deuxiême Article à la charge, toujours ainsi que nôtre volonté & plaisir est que nos presentes lettres patentes soient enregistrées dans nôtre cour de Chancellerie de nôtre dit Royaume d'Irlande dans un an du jour & datte des presentes. En foy de quoy, &c. Nous signons à Westminster le vingt quatre Fevrier, Anno Regni Regis & Reginae Gulielmi & Mariae Quarto per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. predict. Ad requisitionem Attornat. General. Domini Regis & Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae duximus exemplificand. per Presentes. In cujus Rei Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Testibus no∣bis ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis, Anno{que} Regni eorum Quarto. BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos Examinat. per nos S. Keck In Cancel. Magistros. Examinat. per nos Lacon Wm. Childe In Cancel. Magistros. FIN.
Le serment de Fidelité ou Allegiance requis par le second Article de ce Traitté. Je A. B. promets avec sincerité & jure, que je fidelité & vraye Lige∣ance porteray à leures Majestez le Roy Guillaume & la Reine Marie. Qu'ainsi Dieu me soit en aide.
