R454 [ocm]64551647 184749
Reading Fight. To the Tune of Lylliburlero; OR, O Brother Teague, dost hear the Decree? 1 DOst hear, Brother Teague, how de Cause goes? In Reading they put Blood on our Nose: We dere did agree in de Dark to creep, And Massacre all in deir dead Sleep. Lero lero, Lero lero, Lylliburlero, Bullen-a-la. 2 But de sly Her'ticks watching all Night, Put us to stink for fear dey would Fight: We den did consult to lay new Snares, And de next Day to kill dem at Pray'rs. Lero lero, &c. 3 Five Hundred and more true Boys combin'd, To Murder dem all before dey Din'd: Each kept his Post with Hand on his Sword; Thus we all stood expecting de Word. Lero lero, &c. 4 But now by my Shoul, me quake to tell, Eighty wild Dutchmen, as fierce as Di-vell, All in a Trice so hedg'd us around, Dat at de first Blow dey make us give Ground. Lero lero, &c. 5 Never were Men with Fury so swell'd, With deir great Tooths deir Bridles dey held. In one Hand a Sword, in d'other a Gun; Thus Engag'd, we wisely did Run. Lero lero, &c. 6 Our Captains swore to us, Face about; But 'twas too late, our Courage was out: And dey were as quick to Fly as we, None durst look back on d' Enemy. Lero lero, &c. 7 Whilst dey rode up, we Gallop't away, We soon had enough of such Dutch Play: Dey hunted us round de Streets like Dogs, O Brother Teague, we wisht for our Bogs! Lero lero, &c.
8 We put d'Cross on our Faces all o're; But for all dat, we ran as before: We fled for Salvashon in de Church; But here by Chreest we were left in de Lurch. Lero lero, &c. 9 For d' Protestant Horses found us out, And put us all to a Second Rout: We thought of d'Advice a Priest once gave, Dat none but de Cath-lick Church can Save. Lero lero, &c. 10 Many Dear-Joys lay Wounded and Slain; Some Ran away, and ne're came again: And now by St. Patrick, what dost think? Have we not Reason enough to Stink? Lero lero, &c. 11 Now, are we not finely brought to Bed? Instead of Lords, we are Knockt on de Head: Dey promis'd us Houses, Farms, and Land, And told us, All was at our Command, Lero lero, &c. 12 When first we Arriv'd on d' English Shore; But now we shall ne're see Ireland more. O Padre Peters, dat Imp of de Pope, Now he has brought our Bodies to Rope. Lero lero, &c. 13 Dere is a thing one Leg and a Pair, Where many Teagues will say deir Last Pray'r: Dere will d' Hangman put Neck in de Noose, So wee Dear-Joys must dye in our Shoes. Lero lero, &c. 14 Ah! who in England would come to be Rich, To swing like a Dog, and rot in a Ditch? Let's fling down our Arms, and howl our A-bone, O Irish Lads, we are all undone. Lero lero, &c. 15 But what if we first with some Her-tick Blood, Wash out our Sins, and so become good? Then let's dye Martyrs for Cath-lick Cause, Since dat our Swords can't cut Penal Laws. Lero lero, Lero lero, Lylliburlero, Bullen-a-la. London, Printed in the Year 1689.
