C5597B [ocm]16998450 206267
A Full and Exact COLLECTION OF All the Considerable Addresses, Memorials, Petitions, Answers, Proclamations, De∣clarations, Letters and other Publick Papers, Relating to the Company of SCOTLAND Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES, since the passing of the Act of Parliament, by which the said Company was established in June 1695, till November 1700. Together with a short Preface (including the Act it self) as also a Table of the whole Contents. - Forsan & haee olim meminisse Juvabit. Virg. Grata superveniet, quae non perabitur hora. Hor. Printed in the Year 1700,
The Preface. THe Endeavours of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies in establish∣ing a Colony and Settlement in so important a place as that Isthmus, or narrow neck of Land (commonly called Darien) situated upon the hight of the World, between the spacious South and North Seas, and conse∣quently a fit Center for so extended and universal a Trade as seems to have been intended by the Act of Parliament establishing that Company, having not on∣ly been the Subject-Matter of a great deal of Discourse and Speculation, both Abroad and at Home, but also raised the Jealousy of some, and the Envy of others of the most considerable Courts in Europe; That, together with the continued course of Opposition which the Com∣pany met with, in all its Designs and Undertakings, gave occasion to the Writing of several very Ingenious Books concerning it. But these Books referring very of∣ten to several publick Papers contain'd in this Collection, it is humbly presum'd that of all that has been written upon that Subject, nothing can be more acceptable to the Publick, nor of more real use, in giving a juct View to indifferent Persons, of positive Matters of Fact, without any artificial Embellishments or Reflections thereupon, than the following Collection, taken as near as possible from the very Original Papers themselves.
It's true there was a small Collection of this kind Printed formerly, under the Title of Original Papers, &c. But the haste in which, it seems, that Collection was done, giving probably occasion to its being very im∣perfect in many respects, and it containing scarcely the Third Part of what this does, it was thought fit for the General Satisfaction of all contending Parties and others, to make this Collection with more deliberation, and as compleat as possible, to the end that there may be no occa∣sion for any further Additions to it, unless future events afford matter for a Second Volume: And that the Reader may likewise see how far the measures taken by the Company are warranted by the Act of Parliament by which it was established, an exact Copy of the Act of Parliament it self, is hereunto subjoyned.
ACT FOR A COMPANY Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES. June 26. 1695. OUR SOVERAIGN LORD Taking in∣to His consideration; That by an Act past in this present Parliament, Intitu∣led, Act for Encouraging of Forraign Trade; His Majesty for the Improve∣ment thereof, did with Advice & Con∣sent of the Estates of Parliament Statute and Declare, that Merchants more or fewer may Contract and enter into such Societies and Companies for car∣rying on of Trade, as to any Subject of Goods or Merchandise to whatsomever Kingdoms, Countries, or Parts of the World not being in War with His Majesty, where Trade is in use to be, or may be followed, and particularly beside the Kingdoms and Countries of Europe, to the East and West-Indies, the Streights & to Trade in the Mediterranean. or upon the Coast of Africa, or in the Northern Parts, or else where as above: Which Societies and Companies being contracted and entred into, upon the terms, and in the usual manner as such Companies are set up, and in use in other parts, consistent always with the Laws of this King∣dom: His Majesty with consent foresaid, did allow and Ap, prove, giving and granting to them, and each of them, all
Powers, Rights and Priviledges, as to their Persons, Rules and Orders that by the Laws are given to Companies allowed to be Erected for Manufactories; And His Majesty for their greater Encouragement, did promise to give to these Companies, and each of them, His Letters patent under the Great Seal, con∣firming to them the whole foresaid Powers and Priviledges, with what other Encouragement His Majesty should judge need∣full, as the foresaid Act of Parliament at more length bears. And His Majesty understanding that several Persons, as well Forreigners as Natives of this Kingdom, are willing to engage themselves with great Sums of Money in an American; African, and Indian Trade, to be exercised in and from this Kingdom, if Inabled and Incouraged thereunto by the Concessions, Powers and Priviledges needfull and usual in such Cases. Therefore and in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament; Doth hereby make and constitute John Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun Lord Justice Clerk, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Gif∣fen, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robert Chiesly present Provost of Edinburgh, John Swinton of that Ilk, George Clerk late Baillie of Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blackwood, and James Balfour Mer∣chants in Edinburgh, and John Corss Merchant in Glasgow. Willi∣am Paterson Esquire, James Foulis, David Nairn Esquire, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Chiesly; James Smith, Thomas Couts, Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohen D' Azevedo, and Walter Steuart Mer∣chants in London, with such others as shall joyn with them with∣in the space of twelve Months after the first of August next, and all others, whom the foresaid persons and these joyned with them, or major part of them being assembled, shall admit and joyn into their Joint-Stock and Trade, who shall all be Re∣pute, as if herein originally insert to be one Body Incorporate, and a free Incorporation, with perpetual Succession, by the Name of the CGMPANY of SCOTLAND Trading to Africa and the Indies: Providing always, Likeas, It is hereby in the first place provided, that of the Fond or Capital Stock that shall be agreed to be Ad∣vanced and Imployed by the foresaid Undertakers and their Co∣partners, The Half at least shall be Appointed and Allotted for Scots Men within this Kingdom, who shall enter and Subscribe to the said Company, before the first day of August, One Thou∣sand Six Hundred and Ninety Six Years: And if it shall happen, that Scots Men living within this Kingdom, shall not betwixt and the foresaid Term, subscribe for, and make up the equal half of the said Fond or Capital Stock; Then and in that case allennar∣ly
it shall be, and is hereby allowed to Scots Men residing a∣broad, or to Forreigners, to come in, Subscribe, and to be as∣sumed for the Superplus of the said half, and no otherways: Likeas, the Quota of every Mans part of the said Stock, where∣upon he shall be capable to enter into the said Company, whether he be Native or Forreigner, shall be for the least, one Hundred lib. sterl. And for the Highest or Greatest, Three Thousand lib. Sterl. and no more directly nor indirectly in any sort; With power to the said Company to have a common Seal, and to alter and Renew the same at their pleasure; with Advice always of the Ly∣on King at Arms, As also to plead and Sue, and be Sued, and to purchase, Acquire, Possess, and enjoy Lordships, Lands, Tene∣ments or other Estate Real or Personal, of whatsoever Nature or Quality, and to dispose upon and alienate the same, or any part thereof at their pleasure, and that by Transfers and Assignments made and entred in their Books and Records, without any other Formality of Law: Providing always, that such Shares as are first subscribed for, by Scots Men within this Kingdom shall not be alienable to any other than Scots Men living within this King∣dom; That the foresaid Transfers and Conveyances as to Lands and other real Estate (when made of these only and a part) be perfected according to the Laws of this Kingdom anent the Conveyance of Lands and Real-Rights, with power likeways to the foresaid Company, by Subscriptions or otherways, as they shall think fit to raise a Joynt-Stock or Capital Fond of such a Sum or Sums of Money, and under, & subject unto such Rules, Conditi∣ons and Qualifications, as by the foresaid Company, or major part of them when assembled shall be Limited and Appointed to begin, carry on and support their intended Trade of Navigation, and whatever may contribute to the Advancement thereof. And it is hereby Declared, that the said Joynt-Stock or Capital Fond, or any part thereof, or any Estate Real or Personal, Ships, Goods, or other Effects of & belonging to the said Company shal not be lyable unto any manner of Confiscation, Seisure, Forfaulture, At∣tachment, Arrest or Restraint, for and by Reason of any Embar∣go, breach of Peace, Letters of Mark or Reprisal, Declaration of War with any Forreign Prince, Potentate or State, or upon a∣ny other account or pretence whatsoever; But shall only be Transferable, Assignable, or Alienable in such way and manner, and in suc Parts and Portions, and under such Restrictions, Rules and Conditions, as the said Company shall by Writing in, and upon their Books, Records and Registers direct and appoint, and these Transfers and Assignments only, and no other shall con∣vey
the Right and Property, in and to the said Joynt-Stock, and Capital Fond and Effects thereof abovementioned, or any part of the samen, excepting always as is above excepted, and that the Creditors of any particular Member of the Company may by their real Diligence affect the share of the Profit falling and per∣taining to the Debitor, without having any further Right or Power of the Debitors Part and Interest in the Stock or Capital Fond, otherways than as above appointed, and with this ex∣press Provision, that whatever Charges the Company may be put to by the contending of any of their Members deceased, or of their Assigneys Creditors, or any other persons in their Rights, The Company shall have Retention of their Charges and Ezpenses in the first place. And the Books Records & Registers of the said Company, or Authentick Abstracts or Extracts out of the same, are hereby declared to be good and sufficient for Evidents in all Courts of Indicature, and else where, And His Majesty with Advice foresaid, further Statutes, and Declares, that the said John Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun; Lord Justice Clerk, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robert Chiesly present Provost of Edinburgh, John Swin∣ton of that Ilk, George Clerk late Baillie of Edinburgh, Mr, Ro∣bert Blackwood, and James Balfour Merchants in Edinburgh, and John Corss, Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson Esquire, James Foulis, David Nairn Esquire, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Cheisly, James Smith, Thomas Couts, Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohen D' Azevedo, and Walter Stuart Merchants in London, and o∣thers to be joyned with, or assumed by them in manner above∣mentioned, and their Successors, or major part of them assem∣bled in the said Company, shall and may in all time coming by Plurality of Votes, Agree Make, Constitute and Ordain all such other Rules Ordinances and Constitutions as may be needfull for the better Government and improvement of their Joynt-Stock, or Capital Fond in all Matters and things relating there∣unto; to which Rules, Ordinances, and Constitutions, all per∣sons belonging to the said Company, as well Directors as Mem∣bers thereof, Governours, or other Officers Civil or Military, or or others whatsoever shall be subject, and hereby concluded: As also to Administrate and take Oaths de fideli, and others re∣quisite to the Management of the foresaid Stock and Company. And the said Company is hereby impowered to Equipp, Fit, set Out, Fraught, and Navigat their own, or hired Ships in any manner as they shall think fit, and that for the space of ten years from the date hereof, notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred and sixty one years. Inti∣tituled.
Act for Encouraging Shipping & Navigation, wherewith His Majesty with Consent foresaid dispenses for the said time allena∣ly, in favours of the said Company, & that from any of the Ports or Places of this Kingdom, (or, fromany other parts or places in Amity, or not in Hostility with His Majesty) in Warlike or other manner, to any Islands Countreys, or places in Asia, Africa, or America; And there to Plant Colonies, build Cities, Towns or Forts, in or upon the places not Inhabited, or in or upon any o∣ther place, by consent of the Natives and Inhabitants thereof, and not possest by any European Sovereign, Potentate Prince or State. And to provide and furnish the foresaid Places, Cities; Towns, or Forts, with Magazins, Ordinances, Arms, Wea∣pons, Ammunition, and stores of War, and by Force of Arms to defend their Trade and Navigation, Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, and other their effects whatsoever; As also ro make Reprisals, and to seek and take Reparation of Dam∣mage done by Sea, or by Land, and to make and conclude Treaties of Peace and Commerce, with the Sovereigns, Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governours, or Proprietors of the foresaid Lands, Islands, Countreys, or Places, in ASIA, AFRICA or A∣MERICA. Providing always, Likeas, It is hereby specially pro∣vided, that all Ships imployed by them shall return to this King∣dom with their Effects, under the pain of Confiscation, For∣faulture and Seizure of the Ship and Goods, in case of breaking of Bulk before their return, excepting the case of Necessity, for preserving the Ship, Company, and Loadning allenarly. And His Majesty with Consent foresaid; doth further Statute and Ordain, that none of the Leidges of this Kingdom shall or may Trade or Navigat to any Lands, Islands, Countreys or places in ASIA, or AFRICA, in any time hereafter, or in A∣MERICA, for, and during the space of Thirty One Years, to be counted from the passing of this present Act, without Licence and Permission in writing from the said Company: Certifying all such as shall do in the contrair hereof, that they shall For∣fault and Amit the third part of the Ship or Ships, and of the Cargo or Cargoes therein imployed, or the value thereof, the one half to His Majesty as Escheat, and the other half to the use and benefite of the said Company: For the effectual Exe∣cution whereof, it shall be lawfull to the said Company, or any imployed by them, to seize the said Ships and Goods in any place of ASIA or AFRICA, or at Sea upon the Coasts of ASIA or AFRICA, upon the trangression foresaid, by force of Arms, and at their own hand, and that without the hazard of
incurring any Crime or Delinquencie whatsomever on account of the said Seizure, or any thing necessarly done in prosecution thereof; Excepting always, and without prejudice to any of the Subjects of this Kingdom to Trade and Navigat, during the said space to any part of America, where the Colonies, Planta∣tions, or Possessions of the said Company shall not be settled-And it is further hereby enacted, that the said Company shall have the free and absolute Right and Property, only relieving and holding of his Majesty and his Successors in Sovereignty, for the only acknowledgement of their Alledgiance, and paying yearly a Hogshead of Tobacco, in Name of Blench-dury, if re∣quired allenarly, in, and to all such Lands, Islands, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations that they shall come to Establish & Possess in manner forsaid; As also to all manner of Treasures, Wealth; Riches, Profits, Mines, Minerals, Fishings, with the whole product and benefite thereof, as well under as above the Ground, and as well in Rivers and Seas, as in the Lands thereto belonging, or from or by reason of the same in any sort, to∣gether with the Right of Government, and Admirality thereof; And that the said Company may by vertue hereof, grant and delegat such Rights, Properties, Powers, and Immunities, and permit and allow such sort of Trade, Commerce, and Navigation into their Plantations, Colonies, Cities, Towns, or Places of their Possession, as the said Company, from time to time, shall jugde fit and convenient, With power to them to impose and exact such Customs, and other Duties upon and from themselves, and others Trading with, and coming to the said Plantations, Cities, Towns, places and ports, and Harbours thereof, as the company shall think needful for the mantainance and other pub∣lick uses of the same. Holding always, and to hold the whole Premisses of His Majesty, and His Successors Kings of Scotland, as Sovereigns thereof, and paying only for the same their Ac∣knowledgement and Alledgiance with a Hogshead of Tobacco yearly, in name of Blench-duty if required for all other Duty, Service, Claim or demand whatsoever: with power and Li∣berty to the said Company to Treat for, and to procure and pur∣chase such Rights, Liberties, Priviledges Exemptions and other grants as may be convenient for supporting, promoting and en∣larging their trade and Navigation from any forreign Poten∣tate or Prince whatsoever in amity with His Majesty; for which the general Treaties of Peace and Commerce betwixt His Maje∣sty and such Potentates, Princes, or States shall serve suffici∣ent security, Warrand and Authority; and if contrair the said
Rights, Liberties, Priviledges, Exemptions, Grants or Agree∣ments, any of the Ships, Goods, Merchandise, persons or∣ther effects whatsoever, belonging to the said Company, shall be stopt, detained, embezled, or away taken, or in any sort prejudged or damnified, His Majesty promises to interpose his Authority to have Restitution, reparation and satisfaction made for the Dammage done, and that upon the publick Charge, which His Majesty shall cause depurse and lay out for that effect. And further it is hereby Statute, that all Ships, Vessels, Mer∣chandise, Goods and other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said Company, shall be free of all manner of Restraints, or Prohibitions, and of all Customs Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, or o∣ther Duties Imposed or to be imposed by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, for and during the space of twenty one years, ex∣cepting always the whole Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, that are not of the Growth of the Plantations of the said Company. And further it is Enacted, that the said Company by Commission under their common Seal, or otherwise as they shall appoint, may make, constitute all and every their Directors, Governours, and Commanders in Chief, and other Officers Civil or Militery by Sea, or by Land; as likewise that the said Company may Inlist, Inroll, Agree, and Retain all such persons Subjects of this King∣dom, or others whatsoever, as shall be willing and consent to enter in their Service or Pay, providing always that they Up lift or Levy none within this Kingdom to be Soldiers, without leave or Warrand first obtained from his Majesty, or the Lords of his Privy Council; over which Directors, Governours, Commanders in Chief, or other Officers Civil or Military, and others whatsoe∣ver in their Service and Pay, the Company shall have the Power Command and Disposition both by Sea and Land. And it is fur∣ther Statute, That no Officer Civil or Military, or other Person whatsoever within this Kingdom, shall Impress, Entertain, Stop or Detain any of the Members, Officers, Servants, or others whatsoever, of, or belonging to the said Company; And in Case the said Company, their Officers or Agents, shall find or understand any of their Members, Officers, Servants, or others a∣foresaid, to be Impressed, Stopped or Detained, they are here∣by Authorized and allowed to take hold of, and Release the foresaid person Impressed, or Stoped in any part of this King∣dom either by Land or Water; and all Magistrats and others, His Majesties Officers Civil and Military. and all others are here∣by required in their respective Stations, to be Aiding and Assist∣ing to the said Company under the pain of being lyable to all the
Loss, Dammage, and Dettiment of the said Company, by reason of the foresaid persons their neglect. And further that the said company, whole Members, Officers, Servants, or others be∣longing thereto, shall be free both in their Persons, Estates, and and Goods imployed in the said Stock and Trade from all man∣ner of Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, Excises, Quartering of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Levying of Soldiers, or other Impositions whatsoever, and that for and during the space of twenty one years. And lastly, All Persons Concerned or to be Concerned in this Company, are hereby Declared to be free Denizons of this Kingdom, and that they with all that shall Settle to Inhabite, or be Born in any of the foresaid Plantations, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, and other Places that shall be purehast and Possest by the said Company, shall be Repute, as Natives of this Kingdom, and have the Priviledges thereof. And gene∣rally without prejudice of the Specialities foresaid, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Gives and Grants to the said Company, all Power, Rights and Priviledges, as to their Persons, Rules, Or∣ders, Estates, Goods and Effects whatsoever, that by the Laws are given to Companies allowed to be Erected for Manufactories, or that are usually given in any other Civil Kingdom, or Com∣mon-Wealth, to any Company there Erected for trade and Commerce. And for the better Establishment and greater So∣lemnity of this Act and Gift in Favours of the said Company; His Majesty doth further Ordain Letters Patent to be expede hereupon containing the whole Premisses under the great Seal of this Kingdom, for doing whereof Per Saltum, Thir presents shall be sufficient warrand both to the Director and chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal, as use is  like cases. Extracted furth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT Cls. Regist.
THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament As∣sembled. Die Veneris, 13. Decembris, 1695. WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, ha∣ving taken into our Consi∣deration the State of the Trade of this Kingdom, Do find, That besides many o∣ther Disadvantages and Dif∣ficulties it now lies under, An Act of Parliament, that hath lately Received Your Majesty's Royal Assent in Your Kingdom of Scotland, for Erect∣ing a Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, is likely to bring many great Prejudices and Mis∣chiefs to all Your Majesty's Subjects, that are concerned in the Wealth or Trade of this Na∣tion; And therefore in all Duty to Your Maje∣sty, and the Care we ought to have of this King∣dom,
We do humbly Represent to Your Maje¦sty, that the said Act does provide, That all Ships Vessels, Merchandize, Goods, and other Effects what∣soever, belonging to that Company, shall be free from all manner of Restraints, or Prohibitions, and of all Customs, Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, or other Duties Imposed or to be Im∣posed by Act of Parliament, or otherways, for the space of One and Twenty Years: And further, That the said Company, Whole Members, Officers, Servants, or others belonging thereto, shall be free both in their Persons, E∣states and Goods Employed in the said Stock and Trade, from all manner of Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, Excises, Quar∣tring of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Levying of Sol∣diers, or other Impositions, during the space of One and Twenty Years. By reason of which great Advantages granted to the Scots East-India Company, and the Duties and Difficulties that lie upon that Trade in Eng∣land, a great part of the Stock and Shipping of this Nation will be carried thither; and by this Means Scotland be made a free Port for all East-India Commodities; and consequently those several Places in Europe, which were Supplyed from England, will be Furnished from thence, much Cheaper than can be done by the English: And therefore this Nation will lose the Benefit of Sup∣plying Foreign Parts with those Commodities, which hath always been a great Article in the Ballance of our Forreign Trade: Moreover, the said Commodities will unavoidably be brought by the Scots into England by Stealth, both by Sea and Land, to the vast Prejudice of the English Trade and Navigation, and to the great Detri∣ment of Your Majesty in Your Customs. And when once that Nation shall have settled them∣selves
in Plantations in America, our Commerce in Tobacco, Sugar, Cotton, Wool, Skins, Masts, &c. will be utterly lost, because the Priviledges of that Nation, granted to them by this Act, are such, That that Kingdom must be the Magazine for all those Commodities, and the English Plan∣tations, and the Traffick thereof lost to us, and Exportation of our own Manufactures Yearly Decreased. Besides these, and many other Obstructions that this Act will unavoidably bring to the Ge∣neral Trade of this Nation, Another Clause in the said Act, whereby your Majesty Promises to Interpose your Authority, to have Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made, for any Damage that may be done to any of the Ships, Goods, Merchandize, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said Compa∣ny, and that upon the Publick Charge, Does seem to Engage your Majesty to Employ the Shipping and Strength at Sea of this Nation, to Support this New Company, to the great Detriment, even of this Kingdom. All which great Prejudices, Inconveniencies, and Mischiefs arising by the said Act, We in all Duty and Faithfulness lay before Your Majesty. MATTH. JOHNSON. Cleric' Parliamentor. His Majesty's most Gracious Answer. I Have been ill served in Scotland, but I hope some Remedies may be found, to prevent the In∣conveniencies which may arise from this Act.
A MEMORIAL Given in to the Senate of the Ci∣ty of Hamburgh in French, faithfully Translated into English. To their Magnificences the Burgo-Ma∣sters, and to the Gentlemen-Councel∣lors of this City of Hamburgh, WE, the Subscribers, Ministers of His Maje∣sty, The King of Great Britain, have, u∣pon the Arrival of Commissioners from an Indian-Company in SCOTLAND, Represented, at two several Times, to your Magnificences and Lordships, from the King our Master, That His Majesty understanding, that the said Commissio∣ners Endeavoured to open to themselves a Com∣merce and Trade in these Parts, by making some Convention or Treaty with this City, had Com∣manded us most expresly, to Notify to your Mag∣nificences and Lordships, That if you enter into such Conventions with privat Men His Subjects, who have neither Credential Letters, nor are any other ways Authorized by His Majesty; That His Majesty would Regard such Proceedings, as an Affront to His Royal Authority; And that He would not fail to Resent it. Your Magnificences and Lordships had the Goodness to Answer us thereto by your Deputy, that you would no way enter into Commerce with the afore-mentioned Commissioners, nor Encourage them in any sort. Notwithstanding whereof, We the Subscribers do see with Displeasure, That, without any Regard to the Remonstrances made by us in the Name of His Majesty, the Inhabitants of this City forbear
not to make Conventions and Treaties with the said Commissioners, who dare even Erect a Publick-Office to receive Subscriptions, as appears by the annexed Print. And it is not very Credible, That Strangers could so openly Enterprize Matters of such Importance, without being Supported by this Government: Wherefore, We make our Just Complaints thereof to your Magnificences and Lordships; Beseeching you, in the Name of the King our Master, to remedy in time that which is begun, and to do it so Effectually, as to pre∣vent any Consequences it may have, capable to disturb the Friendship and good Correspondence, which we would Cultivat between England and the City of Hamburgh. We wait your Magnifi∣cences and Lordships Answer in Writing, to be transmitted to His Majesty our Master. And we are, Done at Ham∣burgh the 7th. of April 1697. Your Magnificences and Lordships most humble Servants, CRESSET His Britannick Majesties Envoy Extraordinary at the Courts of Lunenburgh, and his Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Pinen∣berg. The Knight RY∣CAUT Resident for His Majesty the King of Great-Britain in the City of Ham∣burgh. Which Memorial was immediatly transmitted by the Senate to the Commercii, (or Body of Merchants of that City) who happening to be then met in their own Hall, did, upon Perusal thereof, give the following Answer:
WE look upon it as a very strange thing, That the King of Britain should offer to hinder us, who are a Free People, to Trade with whom we please; But are amazed to think, That he would hinder us from Joyning with his own Subjects in Scotland, to whom he had lately given such large Priviledges, by so Solemn an Act of Parliament. Upon Notice of all which, the Company's De∣putees went immediatly to the Senate, and gave in a short Memorial in French, which, being faithfully Translated, is as followeth: Noble and Venerable Lords, WE the Subscribers, Deputees and Directors of the Indian and African Company of the Kingdom of Scotland, Understanding that the Gentlemen, His Majesty of Great Britain's Mini∣sters here, have presented a Memorial to your Lordships, in which they seem to quarrel the Powers which have been granted to us by His Majesty, and the Parliament of Scotland, to make Treaties of Commerce with any Foreign Poten∣tate, Prince or State, not in War with His Maje∣sty the King our Soveraign, for Enlarging the Trade, and for the better Establishment of our said Company; We pray your Lordships, That you would be pleased to Communicat the said Memorial to us, that we may take Measures accordingly. Hamburgh the 9th. day of April 1697. Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servants, Jo. Erskine., Jo. Haldan., Will. Paterson.
The Senate thereupon recommended the De∣putees above-nam'd to the Commercii, (in whose Hands the Memorial lay) who gave them a Co∣py thereof; Doubles of which were, by the said Deputees, dispatched to both the Secretaries of State for Scotland, and to the Court of Directors of the Company. And in the mean time, the Merchants, to assert their own Freedom and Pri∣viledges, Sign'd for considerable Sums in the Com∣pany's Books; But with a Condition to be void, if the Company did not procure some Declarati∣on from the King, that might render them secure from the Threatnings, and other Insinuations contain'd in the said Memorial. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies. May it please Your Majesty, WHereas, By the 32d. Act of the 4th. Session, and by the 8th. Act of the 5th. Session of Your Majesties current Parliament, as well as by Your Majesties Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, this Company is Established with such Ample Priviledges, as were thought most proper, for encouraging both Natives and For∣reigners, to Joyn in the Carrying on, Supporting and Advancement of our Trade; The most Con∣siderable of the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and whole Body of the Royal Burrows have, up∣on the Inducement and Publick Faith of Your Majesties said Acts of Parliament, and Letters Pa∣tent,
contributed as Adventurers, in raising a far more considerable Joynt-Stock, than any was e∣ver before rais'd in this Kingdom, for any Pub∣lick Undertaking or Project of Trade whatsoe∣ver, which makes it now of so much the more U∣niversal a Concern to the Nation. And for the better Enabling us to Accomplish the Ends of Your Majesties said Acts of Parlia∣ment, and Letters Patent, we have, in Pursuance thereunto, appointed certain Deputees of our own Number, to Transact and Negotiat our necessary Affairs beyond Sea. And at the same time, to Treat with such Forreigners of any Nation in Amity with Your Majesty, as might be inclin∣able to Joyn with us for the Purposes aforesaid. In the Prosecution of which Commission to our said Deputees, (Vested with full Power and Authority according to Law) we are not a little surpriz'd to find, to the great Hindrance and Ob∣struction of our Affairs, That Your Majesties En∣voy to the Courts of Lunenburgh, and Resident at Hamburgh, have, under Pretence of special War∣rant from Your Majesty, given in a Joint-Subscri∣bed Memorial to the Senate of Hamburgh, expresly Invading the Priviledges granted to our Compa∣ny, by your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament and Letsers Patent, as by the herewith trans∣mitted Copy may appear. By the which Memorial we sustain great and manifest Prejudices, fince both the Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburgh are thereby (contrary to the Law of Nations) ex∣presly threatned with your Majesty's high Dis∣pleasure, if they, or either of them, should coun∣tenance or joyn with us, in any Treaty of Trade
or Commerce whatsoever, which deprives us of the Assistance which we had reason to expect from se∣veral Inhabitants of that City. For Redress whereof, we do in all Duty and Humility Apply to your Majesty, not only for the Protection and Mantenance of our Priviled∣ges and Freedom of Trade; but also for Repara∣tion of Damnages, conform to your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent: And do further beg leave to Represent to your Ma∣jesty, That tho by the said Act of Parliament and Letters Patent, we conceive our selves legally and sufficiently Authorized to Treat even with any Sovereign, Potentate or Estate in Amity with your Majesty, for the Support and Advancement of our Trade; yet we by our said Deputees have only treated with particular and private Mer∣chants of the said City of Hamburgh, without ever making any the least Proposal to the Senate there∣of. And this we humbly conceiv to be the na∣tural Right and Priviledge of all Merchants what∣soever, even tho we had wanted the Sanction of so Solemn Laws. And without some speedy Re∣dress be had therein, not only this Company, but also all other individual Merchants of this King∣dom, must from hence forward conclude, That all our Rights and Freedom of Trade are and may be further, by our Neighbours, violently wrested out of our Hands. We therefore, to prevent the further evil Con∣sequences of the said Memorial to our Company in particular, do make our most Humble and Ear∣nest Request to your Majesty, that you would be Graciously pleased to grant us such Declara∣tion, as in your Royal Wisdom you shall think
fit, to render the Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburgh, and all others that are or may be concern'd, secure from the Threatings and other Suggestions contain'd in the said Me∣morial, as well as to render us secure under your Majesty's Protection, in the full prosecution of our Trade, and free enjoyment of our lawful Rights, Priviledges and Immunities, contain'd in your Majesty's Acts of Parliament and Let∣ters Patent above-mentioned. Signed at Edinburgh the Twenty Eight Day of June 1697, in Name, Presence, and by Order of the said Council-General, by May it please your Majesty, Your Majesties most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Servant, YESTER. P. Memorandum, That the Council-General of the Company, did at the same time come to a Re∣solution of Representing the Premisses likewise to His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, but were afterwards prevailed upon to supersede that Resolution, at the Secretaries of State's ear∣nest Desire (they being both then here) and upon their joint Engagement to procure a speedy An∣swer from his Majesty.
The King's Answer to the said Address. By the Right Honourable, John Earl of Tullibardin, &c. and Sir James Ogilvy Knight, Principal Secreta∣ries of State. My Lords and Gentlemen, WE are impowered by the King to signify unto you, That as soon as His Majesty shall Return to England, he will take into Consi∣deration what you have Represented unto him; And that in the mean time His Majesty will give Orders to his Envoy at the Courts of Lunenburgh, and his Resident at Hamburgh, not to make use of his Majesty's Name or Authority for obstructing your Company in the prosecution of your Trade with the Inhabitants of that City. Signed at Edbinurgh the second Day of August 1697. To the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies. Tullibardin. Ja: Ogilvy. A Letter from the Directors of the Company to the Right Honourable, the Earl of Tullibar∣din, &c. Principal Secretary of State. Edinburgh, 28. September, 1697. May it please your Lordship. IT is not unknown to your Lordship in what Humor the Council-General of our Compa∣ny, and most part of the Nation were in, with
relation to the Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, against our Company by the English Ministers there; Upon which ensued the said Council-Generals late Address, transmitted to His Majesty by your Lordship. And your Lord∣ship very well knows, that at your Request and Desire only, upon Promises of using your best Endeavours to procure a Speedy and Satisfactory Answer from His Majesty, the said Council-General was prevailed upon, to suspend repre∣senting that Matter further to the Government, till the 2d day of August last past; On which day your Lordship did signify His Majesty's An∣swer to the said Address; Upon Receipt where∣of, the said Council-General did resolve to Super∣sede any further proceeding therein, till His Ma∣jesty's arrival in England, as not in the least doubt∣ing but His Majesty would have in the mean time, pursuant to His said Answer, given Orders to his Resident at Hamburgh with relation to the subject Matter of the said Memorial: But we are extreamly surpriz'd to find by Letters of the 31 ultimo, from our Company's Agent in that City, That he had, according to our Order, been to wait on the English Resident there, and with all the Respect due to his Character, intimated to him the Contents the said Address and Answer: Upon which the said Resident declared, That he was Ready and Willing to obey his Masters Orders, but that as yet he had got none in that Matter. We can∣not imagine what should be the occasion of this new Dis-appointment, since we cannot suffer our selves to believe, but that His Majesty has, ac∣cording to His Letter to your Lordship, given Orders as aforesaid, which makes us admire the
more where the Neglect of that Matter doth now stand; Yet we must needs say, we are in some measure afraid to acquaint the said Council-Gene∣ral with it, lest they be more uneasie there∣upon than we could wish, till first we have your Lordships Answer. For which cause we the seve∣ral Subscribing Directors of the said Company (who are now in Town) have thought fit in as quiet a manner as possible to give your Lordship an Account thereof, to the end you may in your Wisdom and Prudence advise His Majesty with relation thereunto, and doubt not but your Lord∣ship will take such care herein, as may prevent our calling another Council-General with rela∣tion to the Premisses, which we are bound un∣avoidably to do, if we have not your Lordships timely Answer. We are May it please your Lordship, Your Lordships most Obedient and humble Servants. Ad: Cockburn. Fran: Montgomery. Arch: Mure. Geo: Clark: Rob: Blackwood. Ja: Balfour. William: Paterson. Mem: A Sign'd Duplicate hereof was likewise sent at the same time to the Right Honour able Sir James Ogilvy Knight, &c.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies. May it please your Majesty, BY a former Address of the 28th of June last, we have humbly represented to your Maje∣sty, how that your Majesty's Envoy to the Courts of Lunenburg, and Resident at Hamburgh, did un∣der Pretence of Special Warrant from Your Maje∣sty, give in a Memorial to the Senate of the said City of Hamburgh, contrary to the Law of Nati∣ons, and expresly invading the Priviledges con∣tained in the Acts of Parliament and Letters Pa∣tent, by which our Company is established: Co∣pies of which Address and Memorial we have, for Your Majesty's better Information, hereto annex∣ed. In answer to which, Your MAJESTY was then graciously pleased to signifie by Your Royal Letter, That upon Your MAJESTY's arrival in England, You would take the Contents of our said Address into Consideration: And that in the mean time, You would give Orders to Your said Ministers not to make use of Your Majesty's Name or Authority for ob∣structing our Company in the Prosecution of our Trade, with the Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburgh. In the full Assurance of which we rested secure, and took our Measures accordingly, till to our further Surprize and great Disappointment, we find, by repeated Advices from Hamburgh, That Your Majesty's said Resident continues still Con∣tumacious,
and is so far from giving due Obedience to Your Majesty's said Order, that u∣pon Application made to him for that Effect, with all the Respect due to his Character, he pre∣tended that he had never as yet got any such Order on our Behalf, which we thought fit in all. Duty and Humility, to lay before Your Majesty, renew∣ing withal our most humble and earnest Request, That Your Majesty would be now graciously pleased to take the Contents of this, and our said former Address into Consideration, and in Your Royal Wisdom order some speedy and Effectual Redress of our Grievances therein-mentioned, and a just Reparation of the manifest Damages, which our Company has already sustained, by reason of the said Memorial. And grant us a Declaration under Your Royal hand, to render the Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburg, and all others with whom we have oc∣casion to enter in Commerce, secure from the Threatnings and other false Suggestions, mention∣ed in the said Memorial, as well as to render us secure under Your Majesty's Protection in the free Enjoyment of our Lawful Rights and Priviledges contained in Your Majesty's Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent above-mentioned. Sign'd at Edinburgh, the 22d Day of Decemb. 1697, in Name, Presence, and by Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subjest and Servant, Fr. Scott. Fr.
To the Right Honourable, The Lord High Chancellor, and remanent Lords of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy-Council. The humble Representation of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies. May it please your Lordships, 'TIs not unknown to your Lordships how that in several successive Sessions of this Cur∣rent Parliament, His Majesty's Instructions to His respective High Commissioners, and their seve∣ral Speeches pursuant thereunto, have been full of repeated Assurance of His Majesty's good Inclinations for encouraging the Trade and Ma∣nufactures of this Nation. And whereas accord∣ingly, by the 32d. Act of the 4th. Session, and the 8th. Act of the 5th Session of the said Parlia∣ment, together with His Majesty's Letters Pa∣tent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, our Company is establish'd with such ample Priviledges and Immunities as were thought most proper for encouraging both Natives and Foreigners to joyn in the carrying on, supporting and advancement of our Trade. We have in pursuance and upon the publick Faith thereof, not only contributed at home a far more considerable Joint-Stock than was ever before raised in this Nation, for any pub∣lick Undertaking or Project of Trade whatsoever; but have also had all the promising Hopes and Prospect of Foreign Aid that our Hearts could wish, till, to our great Surprize, the English Mini∣sters
at Hamburgh have, under Pretence of Special Warrant from his Majesty, put a stop thereto, by giving in a Memorial to the Senate of that City, threatning both Senate and Inhabitants with the King's utmost Displeasure, if they should counte∣nance or joyn with us in any Treaty of Trade or Commerce: As by the annexed Copy there∣of may appear. Upon due Consideration whereof, we have, in all Duty and Humility, address'd His Majesty in June last for Redress thereof. In answer to which Address His Majesty was then graciously pleased to signifie by his Royal Let∣ter, That upon His return into England, He would take into Consideration the Contents of our said Address. And that in the mean time He would give Orders to His said Ministers at Hamburgh, not to make use of His Royal Name or Authorty for obstructing the Trade of our Company with the Inhabitants of that City. In the full Assurance of which we rested secure, and took our Measures accordingly, till to our further Surprize and unspeakable Prejudice, we found by repeated Advices from Hamburgh, that the said Resident continues still Contumaci∣ous, and is so far from giving due obedience to His Majesty's said Order, that upon Application made to him by our Agent in that City, with all the Respect due to his Character, he declared, That as yet he had got no such Order on our behalf Which, by a further Address we are now to lay: before His Majesty. But whereas we humbly conceive your Lord∣ships to be more immediatly, under His Maje∣sty, the Guardians of the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, we think it our Duty to repre∣sent
to your Lordships the Consequences of the said Memorial, both with relation to our Com∣pany in particular, and the Priviledges, Interest, Ho∣nour, Dignity and Reputation of the Nation in general. Your Lordships very well know of what Con∣cern the Success of this Company is to the whole Kingdom, and that scarce any particular Society or Corporation within the same can justly boast of so unanimous a Suffrage or Sanction, as the Acts of Parliament, by which this Company is established: So that if effectual measures be not taken for putting an early stop to such an open and violent Infringement of, and Encroachment upon the Priviledges of so solemn a Constitution, 'tis hard to guess how far it may in after Ages, be made use of as a Precedent for invading and over∣turning even the very Fundamental Rights, Natural Liberties, & indisputable Independency of this Kingdom; which, by the now open and frequent Practises of our unkind Neighbours, seem to be too shreudly pointed at. And should this Company (wherein the most considerable of the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and whole Body of the Royal Boroughs are concern'd) be so unhappy (which God forbid) as to have its Designs rendred unsuccessful, through the unac∣countable evil Treatments of our said Neighbours; most certain it is, that no Consideration whatever, can thereafter induce this Nation to join in any such other Publick, tho' never so advantageous Undertaking, as not doubting but to meet with the like or greater Discouragements from those who give such frequent and manifest Indications of their Designs, to wrest our Right and Freedom of Trade out of our Hands.
For which cause we humbly offer the Premisses to your Lordship's serious Consideration, not doubting but you will (in your profound Wisdom and Pru∣dence) take such effectual Measures for Redress thereof at present, and to prevent the like. En∣croachments for the future, as may be capable to remove those Apprehensions and Jealousies which the bare-faced and avowed Methods of the English do now suggest, not only to our Com∣pany in particular, but even to the whole Body of this Nation in general. Sign'd at Edinburgh, the 22d day of December 1697, in Name, Presence, and by Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please your Lordships, Your Lordships most Obedient, and most humble Servant, Fran. Scott, Pr. A Letter from the Council-General of the Company, to His Grace the Duke of Queens∣berry. Edinb. the 25th. of Decemb. 1697. May it please your Grace, THis is by Order of the Council-General of the Indian and African Company of Scot∣land, to acquaint your Grace, that by this Post, there is a Second Address from the said Council-General transmitted to the Secretaries of State, to be by them presented to His Majesty. And
the Subject Matter thereof being of so high a concern, not only to the Company, but also to the whole Nation; It is not doubted but that your Grace both as a Patriot and a Party Inte∣rested in the Company's Stock, will imploy your Interest to second the same, refering your Grace to the Bearer for particular Information of the whole Matter, and what has been already done therein. I am, May it please your Grace, Your Graces most Obedient, and most humble Servant, Fran: Scot, Pr. Mem: That Letters to this purpose, were at the same time written to such others of the Scots Nobili∣ty, and most considerable Gentry, as happen'd to be then at London. A Letter from both the Secretaries of State, in Answer to the Council-General of the Company's second Address to His Majesty. Kensingtoun, Jan. 17. 1698. SIR, VVE presented this Day to the King the Ad∣dress of the African Company: We could not have Opportunity to do it sooner, His Majesty being so much taken up at this time The King said, That he had already given Or∣ders to his Resident at Hamburg in that Matter,
conforme to his Lettter he wrote from Flanders in July last, which was communicated to the Company. We are, SIR, Your humble Servants, Tullibardin, Ja. Ogilvy.To Sir Fran: Scott of Thirlestane. To His Grace, His Majesty's High Com∣missioner, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament. The humble Petition of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies. Sheweth, THat whereas the Wisdom of the King, and this present Parliament, has thought fit by two several solemn Acts, and Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, to establish our COMPANY, with such Power, Priviledges, and Immunities, as were thought needful, to en∣courage any such New Undertaking in this Na∣tion, & particulary to raise a Joynt-Stock in such manner as we should think fit. And for that End, to enfranchise such Foreigners, as would become Partners with us, and to enter into Trea∣ties of Commerce with any in Amity with His Majesty for that effect, &c. Those of our Num∣ber who were then intrusted with the Manage∣ment thereof, did think it most Natural to make the first Offer of sharing our said Priviledges, with
our Country-Men and other Neighbours in England, as living under the same Monarchy. And they not only readily embraced the Offer, but in Nine Days time subscribed 300000 l. Sterl. as the one half of the Capital-Stock then pro∣posed, and Actually payed in the first fourth part thereof, part in Specie, part in Bank-Notes, and the rest in Notes payable upon demand. That both Houses of the Parliament of Eng∣land, taking Umbrage at those Proceedings, did not only joyntly Address His Majesty, for frustrat∣ing the ends of the said Acts, but the House of Com∣mons did also appoint a Committee to Examine what Methods were taken, for obtaining the said Acts of Parliament here for establishing our Com∣pany, who were the Subscribers thereto, and who were the Promoters and Advisers thereof; with Power to send for Persons, Papers, and Records: Pursuant to which, the said Com∣mittee gave Orders to Summon not only the En∣glish Subscribers, but even some Persons then Re∣siding in Scotland, as by the said Address, Votes of the House of Commons, and Copy of the said Summons may appear; By all which, together with some other Measures then taken, our Friends in England were, to our great Loss, Disappoint∣ment, and Retardment, forced to relinquish, &c. That notwithstanding of that Discouragement, not only most of the Nobility, Gentry, Mer∣chants, and the whole Body of the Royal Bor∣rows, have upon the Inducement, and Publick Faith of the said Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, Contributed as Adventurers, in raising a far more considerable Joynt-Stock, than any was ever before raised in this Kingdom for any Pub∣lick
Undertaking, or Project of Trade whatsoe∣ver, (which makes it now of so much the more Universal a Concern to the Nation) but we have also had all the Promising Hopes of Foreign Aid, that our Hearts could wish, especially at Ham∣burgh, where the Merchants of that City entred into Contract with our Deputees, to joyn at least 200000 l. Sterl: with us, till, to our gaeat Sur∣prize and Loss, the English Ministers there, did, under Pretence of Special warrant from His Ma∣jesty, put a Stop thereto, by giving in a Memorial to the Senate of that City, not only disowning the Authority of the said Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, but also Threatning both Senate and Inhabitants, with the King's outmost Dis∣pleasure, if they should Countenance, or Joyn with us in any Treaty of Trade, or Commerce, as by the annexed Copies thereof, in French and English, may appear, which Memorial we humbly pray, may for the better Information of Your Grace, and Right Honourable Estates, be also Read in Parliament. That after the said Memorial was by the Senate transmitted to the Commercij or Body of Merchants of that City, They to assert their own Freedom, did Advise and Prevail upon our De∣putees and Agent, who were there for the time, to open Books in the said Merchants Hall, where for some days they sign'd considerable Sums pursuant to their said Contract, tho' under Condition to be void, if we should not procure some Declara∣ration from the King, that might render them se∣cure from the Threatnings, and other insinuations contained in the said Memorial: And to our
great Disappointment, thus the Case stands in Suspense, between them and us to this Day. That as the reasonable (nay and unquestion∣able) Prospect which we had of a powerful As∣sistance from Hamburgh, and several other places (if not obstructed as aforesaid) induced us to propose a far greater Equipage at first, than other∣wise we would have done; So the rendering of these Measures abortive, has not only weakn'd our Stock, lessen'd our Credit, retarded our first Ex∣pedition, and disheartned many of our Partners at home, but even also shackled our Resolutions and Power from prosecuting at present several other Branches of Foreign and Domestick Trades and Improvements which we had in veiw, if we had not met with such Obstructions and Dis∣couragements from Time to Time. That tho' our Company is more immediatly and sensibly touched in many Respects by such Proceedings, than any other; Yet we humbly conceiving also, that the Honour and Independen∣cy of the Nation, as well as the Authority and Credit of the Parliament is struck at through our sides; We could not as Country-men, and in Duty to that Collective Power, which gave our Company first a Being, but inform His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament of the Premis∣ses, to the End, that the Great Council of the Na∣tion, now assembled (whom GOD Almighty Direct) may do therein as they in their profound Wisdom and Discretion, shall think fit. That as to what thereof concerns our Compa∣ny in Particular, we shall humbly beg leave to to Suggest further, That our Ships being now at
Sea, on their intended Voyage, the former Treat∣ment which our Company met with in England and else where, may give us too just grounds to sus∣pect, that if either through Multiplicity of pub∣lick Affairs, or otherways howsoever; Your Grace and Right Honourable Estates of Parliament, should neglect the taking present Notice of such Usage, the Enemies of our Company would be thereby encouraged, either directly or indirectly to pursue their former designs of Ruining (if possible) all our Measures. May it therefore please Your Grace, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament, to take the Premisses into your most serious Con∣sideration, to vindicat our Company's Reputa∣tion Abroad, by supporting the Credit of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, by which the same is Established, and wherein the Honour of the Nation is so much concerned, to take ef∣fectual Measures (as the said Act provides) for repairing the great Loss and Damages, which we have already sustained, through the un∣warantable Treatment above-mentioned, as well as for preventing the like for the future; & withal, to continue to us the Priviledges and Exemptions, mentioned in the said Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, for some longer time, in con∣sideration of the time already elapsed without Execution, and our Stock lying dead, without Improvement, by reason of the Obstructions aforesaid. Sign'd at Edinburgh the 22 day of July 1698. in Name and Presence of the said Council-General, by, Basil Hamitlton, I.P.C.G.
The Parliament's Address to His Majesty. WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Faithful Subjects, The Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses conveened in Parliament, humbly re∣present to your Majesty, That having consi∣dered a Representation made to us by the Coun∣cil-General of the Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, making mention of several Ob∣structions they have met with in the Prosecution of their Trade, particularly by a Memorial pre∣sented to the Senate of Hamburgh, by your Ma∣jesty's Residents in that City, tending to lessen the Credit of the Rights and Priviledges granted to the said Company, by an Act of this present Parliament. We therefore in all humble Duty lay before your Majesty the whole Nation's Concern in this Matter, and we do most earnestly entreat, and most assuredly expect, That your Majesty will in your Royal Wisdom, take such Measures as may effectually vindicat the undoubted Rights and Priviledges of the said Company, and support the Credit and Interest thereof. And as we are in Duty bound to return your Majesty most hearty Thanks, for the gracious Assurance your Majesty has been pleased to give us of all due Encouragement for promoting the Trade of this Kingdom; So we are thereby En∣courag'd at present, humbly to recommend to more special Marks of your Royal Favour, the Concern of the said Company, as that Branch of our Trade, in which we, and the Nation we represent, have a more peculiar Interest.
Subscribed at Edinburgh, the 5th of August 1698. in Name, Presence, and by Warrant of the Estates of Parliament. Seafield, I. P. D. P. To the King's Most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Court of Directors of the Company of Scot∣land, Trading to Africa and the Indies. Sheweth, THAT whereas the Estates of Parliament have by their Address of the 5th of August instant, been pleased to recommend the Concerns of the said Company to some Marks of your Royal Fa∣vour, for supporting the Credit and Interest thereof, which has already suffered in a great measure, by reason of the several Obstructions which they have met with in the prosecution of their Trade; particularly by a Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, by your Majesty's Ministers there. We are thereby encourag'd in all humility to lay before your Majesty, That as the said Memorial was given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, in a most solemn and pub∣lick manner; so your Petitioners humbly con∣ceive, that the Effects thereof cannot be taken a∣way, but by some Intimation made to the said Senate, that they may enter into Commerce with your Petitioners, as freely and securely in all re∣spects,
as they might have done before the giv∣ing in of the said Memorial. That in consideration of the Damages sustain'd by the Company as aforesaid, Your Majesty would be pleased for their Incouragement at present, as a Gracious Mark of your Royal Favour, to be∣stow upon them the two smallest of the Frigots, now lying useless in Bruntisland Harbour. That in regard of the time already lost, by reason of the Obstructions aforesaid, Your Ma∣jesty would be graciously pleas'd to continue the Priviledges granted by Act of Parliament to the said Company, of being Custom-free, for such longer time as your Majesty shall, in your Royal Wisdom, think fit. In respect of all which, may it please your Majesty to take the whole Premisses into your Royal Consideration, and give such Orders and Directions with relation there∣unto, as to your Majesty, in your Royal Wisdom, shall seem meet and expedient. Signed at Ediburgh the 16th day of August 1698. in Name, Presence, and by Warrant of the said Court of Directors, by, May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Servant, Geo. Clark. I. P. C. D.
Letters from Mr. Stevenson, the Company Agent at Hamburgh, to the Court of Di∣rectors of the Company. Hamburgh the 4th. of October, 1698. Much honoured Lords and Gentlemen; I Wrote to you on the 26th past, advising you of my going post to Hamburgh, in pursuance of your Orders, where I arriv'd the 2d instant. And the Day following I waited upon the English Resi∣dent, and in the Company's Name desired to know if he had yet received his Master's Pleasure, or∣dering him no more to oppose the Transactions of the Indian and African Company of Scotland in this City; which I pressing hard, answered by his Character and Honour, he never received any Orders from his Master that mentions the said Company, since his giving in the Memorial a∣gainst them: So I have no further to add, but that I am, My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most faithful Servant to power, Alexander Stevenson. This was under Cover which contained what followeth. Much honoured Lords and Gentlemen; BY this within-closed, you have a full Answer as to what may be expected here for ever.
Since my parture from this, I am informed that the English here did constantly assert that the Com∣pany would never be redressed, and the Delay of the same, after all your means, has made an Im∣pression upon the Minds of People, that it will never be, at least such as they might trust to. Hamburgh the 18th of October, 1698. Much honoured Lords and Gentlemen; I Wrote to you of the 4th current, wherein I ad∣vised you of Sir Paul Rycaut English Resident at Hamburgh's Answer given me anent your Affairs, to which refers: Mr. Cresset Envoy at the Courts of Lunenburgh, being returned from waiting upon his Majesty there; I thought it my Duty to wait up∣on him, and demanded in your Names to know if his Majesty had signified his Royal Pleasure, anent removing of the stop put to the Company's Affairs in this City, through the Memorial given in to the Senate against them: To which Answered he received no such Orders, and was of the Judg∣ment, If the Memorial were yet to be given in, it would be done. I shall not enlarge what farther past, but assure you he seems to insinuate, that his private Orders from the Government of England, was to act quite contrary to your Expectations. This is all from, To the Right Honourable the Court of Directors, &c. My Lords and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, Alex. Stevenson.
This was under Cover, which contained what followeth. Much honoured Lords and Gentlemen. BY the within-closed you have an account of what relates to your Affairs with respect to have the Merchants in this City concerned: I cannot offer to speak to the Commercij about the same, but those Merchants here that are Signers in the Books of Subscriptions, are as cordial as ever, were the Stop removed, they doubt not things here would take the desired effect. A Letter from the Court of Directors of the Com∣pany, to the Lord Seafield Secretary of State, upon receipt of Mr. Stevenson's Letters. Edinburgh, Novemb. 29. 1698. My Lord, THis is by order of the Council-General of the Indian and African Company of Scotland, to cover the inclosed Copies of two Letters lately re∣ceived from our Company's Agent at Hamburgh. Upon reading whereof yesterday at a meeting of the said Council-General, they were not a little surpriz'd at the Contents thereof, considering the many repeated Assurances given them formerly by Letters, word of Mouth, and even in Parliament, that the King had already given Orders to his Mi∣nisters at Hamburgh, with relation to the Memo∣rial given in to the Senate of that City against our Company. But after some reasoning there∣upon,
and considering how far your I ordships frank Undertaking, when last in Scotland, as well as the Station you are in, doth engage your best Endeavours to procure the Company Justice, and vindicate the Kingdom's Rights in this matter. They have ordered us, the Court of Directors, to transmit the said Copies to your Lordship, and ex∣pect your Lordships Answer to this and our late Pe∣tition to his Majesty, before they remonstrate any further with relation thereunto. This is in pre∣sence, and by Warrant of the said Court of Di∣rectors, from, To the Right Honourable the Viscount of Seafield, Se∣cretary of State for the Kingdom of Scotland. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, John Schaw, P. The Secretary's Answer. Whitehall, Decemb. 13. 1698. SIR, I Received a Letter from you as President of a Committee of the East-India Company, which relates to Accounts they have had from their Correspondent at Hamburgh. with the Copys of two Letters they have received: I shall take the first convenient Opportunity I can have to repre∣sent this Matter to the King, but I cannot as yet expect to have it; For his Majesty is very much im∣ployed in the Affairs of his Parliament here. This is all the Answer I can give at present, and which you may signify to those concerned: I am, To Sir John Schaw of Greenock, &c. SIR, Your most faithful and hum∣ble Servant. SEAFIELD.
A Letter from the Court of Directors, in Answe to the Secretary. Edinburgh, Jan. 13. 1699. My Lord, SIR John Schaw of Greenock, having some time ago signified to the Court of Directors of our Company, the Contents of a Letter, which he re∣ceived from your Lordship, bearing date at White∣hall, the 13th of December last intimating that your Lordship would take the first convenient opportu∣nity of representing to his Majesty the Company's Petition, with relation to the Parliament's Ad∣dress; as also the Contents of the Company's Let∣ter to your Lordship, bearing date the 24th of November last. But in respect we have not all this time heard any further from your Lordship concerning that Matter, this is by order of the said Court of Directors to put your Lordship in mind of the Premisses, not doubting but you have had before this time a convenient opportunity to represent the same to his Majesty; and in expecta∣tion of your Lordships speedy and satisfactory Answer, I remain, To the Right Honourable the Viscount of Seafield Secretary of State. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Archbald Mure. Pr.
The Secretary's Answer. Whitehall, Febr. 7 1699. SIR, I Have presented to his Majesty the Petition of the African Company; and I am commanded by him to let you know, That there being accounts that the Ships belonging to the Company are ar∣riv'd upon the Coast of America; And the parti∣cular Design not being communicated to his Maje∣sty, he therefore does delay to give any Answer un∣till he receive certain Information of their Settle∣ment. This you may signifiy to the Council or Directors of the Company, as being by his Maje∣sty's Command: I am To Sir Archibald Mure of Thornton, &c. SIR,  Your most humble Servant, Seafield. A Letter from the Council-General of the Com∣pany to his Majesty, giving an Account of their Colony's arrival and settlement at Da∣rien: &c. May it please you Majesty; WE your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects the Council-General of the Com∣pany of Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies, having by express received an Account from the Council of our Companys Colony in America, that they arriv'd safe at their intended Port within a League of Golden Island on the Coast of Darien;
and after having treated on board of our Ships with the Natives, who were always ownd to e the only Proprietors of that part of the Coast, our Men did, at the request, and with the consent of the said Natives, land on the 4th of November last, and take possession of an uninhabited Place, never before possessed by any European whatsoever; and that in pursuance of the said Treaty, the chief Men and Leaders of the said Natives have join'd with, and taken Commission from the said Council. We thought it our Duty at our very first Meeting to give your Majesty an account there∣of; and likewise that by Letters from our said Council bearing date at New Edinburgh in Caledonia (being the Name given to our present Settlement) the 28th day of December last, we are positively informed that the French have a Design upon all that Coast, or at least to make a Settlement some∣where thereabouts. And we humbly conceive, that the firm Settlement of our Colony in those Parts may be the means of preventing, or at least lessening the evil Consequences that may arise to your Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions every where, by the Settlement of any powerful foreign Neighbour in, upon, or near any part of that Coast. And as we are always bound thankfully to acknowledge your Majesty's Goodness for grant∣ing us these Priviledges mentioned in the Acts of Parliament, and your Majesty's Letters Patent by which our Company is established: So we do now in all humility confidently expect your Majesty's Royal Favour and Protection, as having in all the Steps of our Conduct through the whole Course of this Affair, strictly observed the Con∣ditions required by the said Acts of Parliament and
Letters Patent: And referring this together with the Contents of our last Petition to your Majesty's Royal Consideration, to give such Directions there∣in as to your Royal Wisdom shall seem meet and expedient This is in Name, Presence, and by War∣rant of the said Council-General: Signed by, Edinburgh, the 31st day of March 1699. May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most faithful, most dutiful, most humble, and most obedient, Subject and Servant, TWEEDDALE. A Letter from the Court of Directors to the Lord Carmichael Secretary of State, then in waiting. My Lord, THis being the first Opportunity that we have had to Address your Lordship, since your Advancement to that eminent Station and Place of Trust wherein you are; We must account it a Happiness that upon Receipt of the late welcome News from our Colony's Company in America, we can transmit an Account thereof to his Majesty by the hands of one so much devouted to the Honour and Interest of our Country and Company, as your Lordship has upon all Occasions shewn your self; and who being often Witness to our Company's Proceedings from time to time; can give a juster account thereof than any other that has no Inter∣est
in our Stock, nor has ever been amongst us. Inclosed you have our Council-General's seal'd Letter to his Majesty, which we doubt not your Lordships will carefully deliver, together with an exact Copy thereof for your Lordships better In∣formation, to which we refer, but shall for your further Information enlarge a little upon the se∣veral Heads therein mention'd: As to our place of Settlement it is so far from having ever been possess'd by any European whatsoever, that by all the Accounts that we could ever yet get, not only at this time from the Council of our Colony, but even by such Letters as we have seen and heard of from Curacao, and other American Islands, no European did before our Settlement so much as once set a foot upon that Plot of Ground wherein our Colony is now fix'd: And tho the same was altogether uninhabited, when our People came there, the chief Men and Leaders of the Natives of that part of the Coast nearest adjoining to Golden Island East-ward and Westward, have not only treated with the Council of our Colony be∣fore Landing, but have also in pursuance of that Treaty in a most kind and friendly manner ad∣mitted our said Colony into such Places of their Neighbourhood as are not yet possessed, and taken Commissions from the said Council in a very solemn manner, and joined with our People; And that in consideration of our Colony's admiting them and their followers to participate of the Liberties and Priviledges granted to our Company by his Majesty of Great Britain OUR SOVERAIGN LORD, with Advice and consent of his Parliament of Scotland, en∣treating to be protected accordingly: We repeat these Words, as being the express Words of the first
Commission which the said Council granted. As to the French Designs of setling thereabouts, it is a Point not to be doubted of: For in order there∣unto they have already been tampering with se∣veral of the Natives, some of whom they endea∣vour'd to have carried into France; and we have very good reason to believe that a further Pro∣gress had been made in that matter before now, were it not the daily Expectations which that Court had of the King of Spains Death, which we humbly conceive is a Matter worthy of his Maje∣sty's consideration, and of no small concern to the interest of his whole Dominions, tho this Na∣tion and our Company may seem to be more immediatly interested, at present. Your Lordship sees we have in the inclosed Let∣ter to the King made mention of our last Petition, and hope your Lordship will take a convenient Opportunity to back the same: For as your Lord∣ship knows, we have already suffered considerably by encroaching upon our Priviledges, so we ought to be very careful, as much as in us lies, not to admit of any dangerous Precedents. And re∣ally we must say, We were very much surpriz'd the other day, when we understood by Letters from the Council of our Colony, that Capt. Long Commander of the Rupert Prize, who carries his Majesty's Commission for finding out and fishing of Wrecks, should under the colour of that Com∣mission, wherever he went, traduce our Under∣taking and Colony to all sorts of People upon that Coast, whether Natives or others, declaring that our said Colony was no other than a pack of Rogues, Vagabounds, Robbers, and broken Offi∣cers, without any Commission, and that the King
would not own them; nay further, he himself came into our Harbour, where he was very courte∣ously and respectfully treated by all our People there; in recompence of which, he very ingrate∣fully made it his study all the while to seduce our Men, and did carry off one of our chief Car∣penters, which is a very considerable Loss in that part of the World, and in the Infancy of our Settlement, considering how necessary a Man he was, and the Difficulty of supplying his Place so quickly as they may have occasion for him. This kind of Usage is really so provocking, that we cannot suppose but that the King may be graci∣ously pleased to interpose his Royal Authority for preventing the like Usage in time to come, if his Majesty were duely informed thereof. So in the confidence of his Majesty's gracious Counte∣nance and Protection, and your Lordship's hear∣ty Endeavours to procure the same; this is by Order of the Council-General, and in Name, Presence, and by Warrant of the Court of Di∣rectors of our Company, Signed by, Edinburgh 1st day of April, 1699. To the right Honourable, the Lord Carmichael, Secretary of State. My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble Servant, J. Haldane. P. Memorandum, There was another Letter to the same purpose, written to the Viscount of Seafield, with an inclosed Copy of the said Letter to the King.
A Memorial given in to the King of Great Britain by the Ambassador Extraordinary of Spain; against the Scots Settlement at Darien. THe Subscriber, Ambassador Extraordinary from His Catholick Majesty, finds himself obliged, by express orders, to represent to your Majesty, that the King his Master having receiv∣yed Information from different places, and last of all from the Governour of Havana, of the In∣sult and attempt of some Scots Ships, equipt with Men and other things requisite, who design to settle themselves in His Majesty's Soveraign. De∣mains in America, and particularly the Province of Darien. His Majesty received those Advices with very much discontent, and looks upon the same as a token of small friendship, & as a rupture of the Alliance between the two Crowns (which His Majesty hath observed hitherto, and always observes very religiously, and from which so ma∣ny Advantages and Profites have resulted both to your Majesty and your Subjects); As a conse∣quence of which correspondence His Majesty did not expect such sudden insults and attempts by your Majesty's Subjects, and that too in a time of Peace, (without pretext or any cause) in the very heart of his Demains. All that the King desires, is, that this may be represented to your Majesty, and that your Maje∣sty may he acquainted, that he is very sensible of such Hostilities and unjust procedures, against which His Majesty will take such measures as he thinks convenient. Given at London the 13/ day of May 1699.
The Three following Memorials were pre∣sented to His Majesty in May 1699. by the Lord President of the Session, and Lord Advocat, on behalf of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, asserting the Legality of their Settlement in Darien. 1st. MEMORIAL. THe Establishment of the Company of Scot∣land, Trading to Africa and the Indies, was first prepared by an Act of Parliament 1693. In∣viting and Encouraging Persons in General, to enter into Societies, and Companies, for carry∣ing on a Trade to whatsoever Kingdoms, Coun∣trie or parts of the World, not being in War with His Majesty, and thereafter perfected by the Act of Parliament 1695, and a Charter thereon under the Great Seal, whereby the said Company was fully Settled with all the Powers, Priviledges, and Immunities in use to be granted in such cases, and particularly with Power to plant Colonies, and build Cities, Towns, and Forts in Asia, Africa, or America, upon Places not Inhabited, or upon any other Place, by Consent of the Natives, and Inhabitants thereof, and not possess'd by any European Prince or State. The Settling of this Company was so accept∣able to the whole Kingdom, abounding always with Men, and of late Years, very desirous to enlarge Trade and Commerce, That the Com∣pany's
Books being once opened, Subscriptions for a vast Sum were compleated long before the Day prefix'd by the Act of Parliament, and there were few Persons or Families of any Account within the Kingdom, who were not therein par∣ticularly concerned. But tho' the Subscriptions were soon compleat∣ed, and the Advances made, as readily as pro∣pos'd; yet the Directors and Managers, did proceed with great Deliberation, not being more Cautious to Conceal the Place where they were design'd for, than Careful to make such a Choice, as might be exactly in the Terms of their Act and Patent, To wit. Either not Inhabited, or freely Consented to, by the Natives, and not possess'd by any European Prince or State, and so lyable to no Exception. In pursuance of these Resolutions, The Com∣pany prepared Men, and Provisions, and set out their Ships, and in the Month of November 1698, arrived on the Noth-side of the Isthmus of Darien in America, they pitched upon a Place never be∣fore possess'd by the Spaniards; and after formal and distinct Treaties, obtained the Consent and Good-will of all the Neighbouring Natives and People. The Spaniards and French raise a Clamour a∣gainst the Settlement, as an Invasion of the Spanish Possessions and Dominions, in as much as the Place where the Company hath fixed, lyes as it were in the Middle and Bosom of the Spanish Countries, having Carthagena on the East, and Porto-Bello on the West, and Panama on the South, which is also alledged to be contrary to the
Treaties betwixt the King of Great Brittain and the King of Spain, whereby all these Countrie's are yeilded and conformed to the Spaniards If these parts of America had been wholly Void and Uninhabited, when the Spaniards made their first Discoveries, and Plantations there, the Question had certainly proceeded upon the head of Occupation, the only Ground acknowledg'd by all Lawyers to determine the Property of all Waste and Uninhabited Countries, where a formal Division hath not Interveened, as Grotius in particular, in his Second Book de jure Belli doth abundantly clear, and then the Spaniards must have further Subsumed, That as they found these Countries Waste, so they were the Occu∣piers and Possessors thereof; and in Special, that they were the first Occupiers and Possessors of the Isthmus of Darien, and the Place where the Company hath Settled, it being most certain, that Occupation gives no Right, save in so far as the Real and Actual Possession extends. But seing on the other hand, it is Nottour, and by all Acknowledg'd, That the Spaniards did not find these Parts Waste, and Uninhabited, this Argument must necessarily fall; and all that the Spaniards can now Plead, is either present Posses∣sion, which the Company's Patent owns to be a sufficient Right to any European Prince or State, or the above-mention'd Treaties, as exclusive of the King of Great Brittain's Subjects. For clearing then the Claim and Point of Pos∣session, The Company denies that ever the Spaniard had any Possession of the Place where they have Planted; and its obviously Incumbent
to the Spaniard, if they alledge Possession, to prove and instruct their Alledgance for the Com∣pany's Argument being Negative, viz. That the Spaniards did never Possess the Country where the Company hath Settled, it Undeniably proves it self, as all Lawiers affirm, unless the contrary, to wit, The Spaniards Possession, be evidently made out and proved, which is impossible; Nor do the Spaniards pretend to prove the same; But their Alledgance is, That in these large Coun∣tries of America, it were plainly Capricious to re∣quire the Actual Possession of every particular Place; But since they have the Uncontraverted Right and Possession of Carthagena, Porto-Bello, and Panama, which are the Extremities that in a manner environ the Isthmus of Darien, their Possession of these Places, must infer a Possession of the Interjacent Country in which the Com∣pany hath Settled, and consequently, that the Company hath Encroached upon, and Invaded their Right: And further, its said, That the Spaniards have actually possess'd Gold and Silver Mines in Darien, much nearer to the Company's Settlement than Carthgena, or these other Places, and have constantly been in use to Seize and make Prize of all Ships coming upon the Coast, be∣twixt Porto Bello and Carthagena, as Invaders of their Possessions, tho' these Ships did really pertain to Friends and Allies. To all which, It is answered, 1mo. That the above-mentioned Places belonging to the Spaniard, are very far distant from the Settlement of the Company, Carthagena above Fifty, and Porto-bello and Panama above Thirty Leagues, which Di∣stances are more then sufficient to render Coun∣tries
distinct, both as to Right and Possession. 2do. It's certain, that Carthagena, Porto-bello or Panama, cannot be understood to have unlimited Territories; if then their Territories be limited, it belongs to the makers of the Objection to show, that the Limits of these places do reach to, and comprehend the Place possess'd by the Company, which neither the Spaniards, nor any for them, will ever be able to prove, by the Law of Na∣tions, or any known Rule, or Custom in such Cases. It hath already been Notic'd, That tho' these Countries had been wholly Void, when the Spaniards begun to Plant there, they could only by their Possession have appropriat as far as they did possess, and that what was not possess'd, would have remain'd free, to be appropriated by the Occupation, and possession of any other People, a Rule Uncontraverted amongst all Na∣tions on the Face of the Earth. But the Case of America being, That before any Plantations were Settled there, by the Spani∣ards, the Natives were undoubtedly the Possessors and Proprietors. It follows necessarly, That Colonies coming to Settle among them, must derive Right from them, and that either by Con∣sent, Surrender, or Conquest, it being impos∣sible in the case of Countries inhabited, there can be any other Manner or Mean of Acquisition; But so it is, That the Spaniards acquiring after this manner, neither could, nor can pretend to have Right to more than did pertain to the Peo∣ple where they Settled, whether by Consent, Surrender or Conquest. Whence it necessarly follows, That since Darien was a distinct Country, and the Inhabitants
thereof a distinct People, from those Countries and Nations, where the Spaniards have hitherto Settled whether by Consent, Surrender, or Conquest; The Spaniards cannot pretend to extend their Right beyond that of their Predecessors, and the People & Country of Darien must still be as free from the Spaniards, as they were from their Predecessors; and consequently, that the Company coming to possess with the Dariens Consent, and by their Right, must be in the like Condition, and no∣ways lyable to either the Claim, or Complaint of the Spaniards, That the Country and Natives of Darien did never submit to, or were conquered by the Spaniards, must stand as a sure Position, unless the contrary be proven: But further, it is also certain, That the Dariens were never Repute to have any Dependency even on the great Em∣pires of Mexico and Peru, much less upon the lit∣tle places of Carthagena, Porto-bello, or Panama: Besides, The Dariens have been in frequent War with the Spaniards, since their first arrival into these Parts, and were never to this day Conquer∣ed: All which being attested by the English, and other Travellers, who have Written on this Subject; It appears to be beyond Controversy, That the Company having Settled with the Con∣sent of these Dariens, must have the same Right, with the same Priviledges and Freedom of Trade which the Dariens had, and that both are equally free from all the Spanish Pretensions, It is a known Case that an English Man one Sharp, having join'd with the Dariens against the Spaniards, invaded their Territories; he was ac∣cused by the Spaniards in England, as guilty of
Robbery and Piracy, but was acquitted, because he acted by Commission from one of the Darien Princes, which is an undeniable Evidence, that this Prince and his Countrey were judged to be independent on the Spaniards. The Spaniards may also have wrought Mines of Gold and Silver within the Isthmus; but no such possession can support their Complaint: The nearest possession of Mines that they can pretend was in Captain Diego's Country, on the Gulf of Darien, more than 15 Leagues distant from the Company's Settlement; Neither did the Spaniard get these Mines by Conquest, or Purchase, but by a plain stipulate Permission from Captain Diego, and his people, which changed not the Property; And upon Breach of Conditions, the Spaniards were quickly cast out, so that when the Company came to settle on the Isthmus, it was fully cleared of the Spaniards & all their pretences. Carthagena, Portobello and Panama, are adjacent to, and do in a manner environ the Isthmus of Darien; But that this Vicinity gives to the Spani∣ards no Claim of Right, is evident from many Instances; Tangier, Cheuta and Mamora, ly in the Bosom of the Empire of Moroceo, and yet belong to European Princes; The English and French have Neighbouring Settlements upon the River Gambo in Africk, and all along the Coast of Africk the English and other European Princes have their Set∣tlements intermixed and contiguous, where they Trade with all Freedom, without any mutual Impeachment. The English and French have both Plantations upon the Island of Newfoundland, and the Dutch in time of Peace settled upon Long Island, and the adjacent Countrey environed on all hands
by the English Plantations, and yet no War en∣sued, but the Dutch continued their possession till the Exchange was made for Suranam. The Spanish Fleets do necessarly pass betwixt the Cape of Florida belonging to the Spaniards, and the Bahama Islands, yet the English possess themselves of the said Islands, and have also se∣veral times settled at Port-Royal in the bottom of the Bay of Campiechy in the Gulf of Mexico, for cutting of Logwood, and have thence removed and settled again at their pleasure. The French have also endeavoured to settle in the Bay of Mex∣ico, and lately and more closely in the Samblas Islands on the Coast of Darien; They likewise settled a Colony in Petitguavis in Hispaniola, and in Guiana on the Continent, notwithstanding of the Vicinity of the Spaniards. The Dutch and Portuguese have their Respective Plantations on the Coast of Brasil, to which the Spaniards pretend Right as well as to the Isthmus of Darien, such as the Islands of Cura∣sao, and Bowane, near to Carthagena on the East, and Suranam and others upon the Continent, and yet never quarrelled. It is granted that the Spa∣niards in their excessive Jealousie, and upon the Pretext that by Treaties, none were to Trade in their Ports or Harbours, such as Carthagena, and Porto-bello without their Licence, have seized and made prize of the Ships that they have found upon the Coast betwixt the said Places; But first, they did this upon pretext of the said Treaties. Secondly, Injury and Violence make no Right. And thirdly, it is most certain when the Spaniards have been overcomeand beat off in such Attempts, and forced to suffer both Dutch and English to cut Logwood on that
Coast, yet the Spaniards did never complain of any Violation of Right, as knowing perfectly they had none, as may be seen in Dampier, Water, and other writers. The Spaniards at first endeavoured to amuse the World, with the Popes Gift of the West-Indies, and after the King of Spain's becoming King of Portugal, and in the Right of that Crown, claim∣ing the Benefit of the Popes Gift of the East-In∣dies, he assumed the Magnifick Title of Indiarum Rex: Yet he was never able to make good his Right, or exclude others by these empty Names; but in all Competitions the Pretentions of Spain, did either resolve in Occupation of what was void or surrendered, or conquest of what was possess'd by Natives; and that Title was never much regarded, either by Spain, Portugal, or any other Prince Popish or Protestant. The second Head which may be pleaded for the Spaniard, is, the Treaties that have been be∣twixt the Crowns of England and Spain. But 1mo. Granting that the Kingdom of Scotland will never disown any Treaty betwixt their King (whom GOD long preserve and prosper) may be concerned, where are these Treaties that exclude either the Scots or English, from possessing Darien? if not inhabited, or where Inhabited, with consent of the Inhabitants? If the Spaniard propone upon these Treaties, they must produce them. 2do. All to be found in the latter Treaties betwixt the said Crowns, such as the Treatie 1667, and the Treatie 1670, which may be understood to be the only Regulating Treaties in this Mat∣ter, is that in the former, The King of Spain o∣bliges himself not to molest the King of England,
or his Subjects in their Plantations in America, these particulars enumerated not by way of Ex∣ception, but because some of them had been con∣traverted. And that in the other Treaty 1670, It is agreed in the 7th. Article, That the King of Great Brittain, and His Heirs and Successors, shall have, hold, and possess, with full Right of Em∣pire, Property, and Possession, all Lands, Regions, Isles, Colonies, and Lordships, situated in the West-Indies, or any part of America, which his said Majesty, or his Subjects, did then hold or possess, So that no contraversie on any pretence, was thereafter to be moved on that Subject. And in the eight Article, That the Subjects of the said King should abstain from all Commerce and Na∣vigation, in the Ports and Places, having Forts, Castles, or Staples for Merchandise, possessed by either of them. To wit, That the Subjects of Great Brittain should not Trade, nor Sail to the Ports nor Places, which the King of Spain hath in the VVest-Indies, nor the Subjects of the King of Spain, Trade nor Sail to the Places, which the King of Great Brittain there possesses, without Licence given hincinde, in the Terms therein set down. By which it plainly appears, that all a∣greed to, was, and is, That the Kings and their Subjects respectively, should forbear Injuries, as likewise to Trade and Navigate without Licence in the Ports, Castles, and Staples, to either of them belonging, which can no ways exclude the King of Great Brittain and his Subjects from Trading, or making new Plantations in to such Places in America, as either are not inhabited, or where the King of Spain hath no Right. The Spaniard may positively pretend, that the Treaties provid∣ed
to the King of England, and his Subjects of cer∣tain particular Places, and generally what they then possess'd in the West Indies, may be construed an Exception, and import (as it were) an Ac∣knowledgement, that the rest of the West Indies did belong to the Crown of Spain. But, 1mo, The Places provided to the King of England and his Subjects are only enumerate for the greater Cauti∣on and Security, because some of them had been taken from the King of Spain, and thereupon con∣traverted. And, 2do, It is evident by the foresaid eight Articles, the Reserve of Trade is equally and mutually provided, and restricted to the King of Great Brittain and the King of Spain, their res∣pective Possessions; so that nothing can be eli∣cite from these Treaties, to give the King of Spain the Right to the whole West Indies, excepting the foresaid places possessed by the King of England, nor to ty up the King of Brittain and his Sub∣jects, from making new lawful Acquisitions in these Parts. But it is agreed to, That they should secure the one, the other in their respective Pos∣sessions; And thus these Treaties have been al∣ways understood, nor have they hindred the English to enlarge their Possessions inthe West Indies upon just Occasions, which certainly be∣longs as much, if not more to the Scots. 2d. MEMORIAL, By the same. THe Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, having by the other Me∣morial, endeavoured to clear the Justice of their Proceedings, as to their Settling a Plantation in the Isthmus of Darien in America, do further in all Humility Represent,
1mo, That there was never any Enterprize of a more National Concern, than the foresaid Plan∣tation is to the Kingdom of Scotland, the Erecting and Establishing of the said Company, was the Unanimous Desire and Satisfaction of the Nation, all Persons almost, and Families of any Conside∣ration, did readily subscribe for, and advance considerable Sums, for carrying on the Designs of the Company, much above what could have been expected. The Success the Company hath had, in overcoming Difficulties, and fixing upon a Place that appears so advantageous to Trade and Commerce, hath likewise raised the Expectation and Desire of its Continuance and Prosperity, to a far higher Degree than ever was known in any Business of this Nature: And, Lastly, it is most certain, That nothing could be more Grievous and Afflicting to the whole Nation, without Ex∣ception, than that this Undertaking, so far and so happily advanced, should meet with the least Discouragement, especially from such, whose Countenance and Assistance is so earnestly cra∣ved. 2do, It appears from the whole Circumstances of this Affair, That the English Nation can have no Prejudice, but rather Advantage by the fore∣said Undertaking: For, First, If it shall be profi∣table, the Profit evidently redounds to their Fel∣low Subjects and good Neighbours. Secondly, The English have free Access, to come in and par∣take of the Profit, when they please. Thirdly, The Product of the Place is probably like to con∣sist neither of Tobacco nor Suggars, the great Commodities of the English Plantations, but of such Goods and Commodities, as the English do not afford. Fourthly, It is true, That by the Act
of Parliament, and Patent of the Company, all Ships imployed by the Company, are to return to the Kingdom of Scotland with their Effects: But it is as true, That the said Act and Patent did bear the Liberty and Priviledge of a Free Port, and Mercat for all Strangers that shall be pleased to Trade with them, who are not under the fore∣said Obligation, but may come and go with their Return whether they please, which cannot but be of Advantage to the whole English Plantati∣ons, as to a Free Course of Trade. Fifthly, It is likeways granted, That by the foresaid Act of Parliament, the Ships, Goods and Effects what∣soever belonging to the said Company, are de∣clared free of all Customs and other Duties, for the space of 21 Years, but then four of the said Years are already run, and this small Encourage∣ment was needful to begin so great a Work, where∣of probably the Profit can little more than equal the Expenses for all that space; And besides, the Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, not of the Growth of the said Plantation, are excepted, and not discharged: And also it is evident, That if the Plantation prosper, the foresaid short Discharge of Customs, and other Duties, will be richly compensed by the great Increase of Trade, and consequently of His Majesties Customs, that may for thereafter be thence expected. And, Sixth∣ly, The Company and Plantation cannot reaso∣nably threaten any Diminution of His Majesties Customs in England; but on the contrary, this Plantation promising a new Trade, far different from the Trade of all the English Plantations, and offering to all, the Liberty of a Free Port, must rather increase the Trade of England, both to the King and Subjects Advantage.
As for the Objection, That the Company, by the Immunity they have from Customs and Du∣ties, may Import, and then as freely Export, and so undersell any other Nation, during that Im∣munity: Its Answered, That the Company in England have almost the same Priviledge, since, if they please to Export after their Return from the Plantations, they are allowed to do it freely with a full Draw-back, excepting only 3 or 4 per Cent. 3tio, It is with Submission Represented, That in all Appearance, if the Company of Scotland had not seized the foresaid Post in Darien, the French had certainly taken it: And now, that it is discovered to be so advantageous for Trade, it is not to be doubted, but that the French, who shew such Earnestness to have the Scots excluded, will certainly, if any such thing should happen, possess themselves of it, not only to the Hurt of the English Plantations, but to the far greater Prejudice, if not the Ruin of the Spaniards In∣terest in the Indies. And therefore, All things truly and justly con∣sidered, it is hoped, that not only the English will become more and more favourable to so good a Design, but that even the Spanish will the more easily acquiesce to Reason and Justice, that they see a more Powerful Competitor ready to catch hold of an Advantage, that cannot be so safe for them in the Hands of any other Nation, as in the Possession of the foresaid Company. 3d. MEMORIAL, By the same. THe Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, being endued with very ample Priviledges, hath settled a Colony at Dari∣en,
a Countrey very fit and proper for that pur∣pose, not only for the Richness of the Soil and Mines, but likeways by its Situation for Trade. The Spaniards have the most considerable Inte∣rest and Plantations in America, and are not wil∣ling, that any other Nation, or People should have share of the Advantages and Benefits they draw from thence, which is not Singular in the present Case, because they have ever withstood all Planters, either upon the Continent, or Ame∣rican Islands, by Acts of Violence and Hostility, as if every Settlement in America were an En∣croachment upon the Right of Spain. There is lately a Memorial offered in behalf of the King of Spain, to one of the Secretaries of State of the Kingdom of England, to the Effect following. My Lord Ambassador of Spain finding himself oblig'd, by express Order, to represent to His Majesty of Brittain what follows, Prays Mr. Ver∣non to represent to his said Majesty, That the King his Master, being informed from several parts, and last of all, by the Governour of Ha∣vana, of the Insult and Attempt of some Scots Ships, equipt with Men and Ammunition neces∣sary, who endeavours to post themselves in the Soverign Dominions of His Majesty in America, and particularly in the Province of Darien. His Majesty received this Information with Dissatisfaction, as a Mark of little Amity, and a Rupture of the Alliance which is betwixt the two Crowns, which His Majesty hath always observed very Religiously, and from which so much Advantage and Profit hath resulted, both to His Majesty and his Subjects, after which good Correspondence, His Majesty did not ex∣spect
such sudden Attempts & Insults from His Majestys Subjects, and that in time of Peace, without any Pretext or Cause, in the most in∣ward part of his Dominions. All that the King desires, That this be present∣ed to His Majesty of Brittain, and that His Ma∣jesty is very sensible of such Hostilities and Un∣just Procedures, against which, His Majesty will take such Measures as are convenient. London, May 3d. 1699. THe Charge is great, and if it can be made appear, that the King of Spain is Invaded, as is pretended, it is but Reason there should be just Reparation. It must be acknowledged, That it is a fair way of dealing, that the Spanish Rights and Pre∣tensions are thus asserted by Memorial, and an Opportunity afforded, and that the whole World may be satisfied, that His Sacred Majesty, the King of Great Brittain, hath granted no Patent to His Subjects in Scotland disagreeable to Treaties with Spain, and that the Scots Company have not exceeded the Limits of their Patent, to the preju∣dice of Spain. There may be many Reasons offered to satis∣fy Spain, and all other Nations of Europe, except the French, that if the Scots had not settled in that Isthmus, or if they were now to remove from it, the same would be possess'd by another People, more dangerous to the Interest of Spain, and in due time it may be made appear, that the Scots Settlement is for the Honour of the King, & the Interest of England, but the present design is only to satisfie the World, that the Patent granted by His Majesty, was agreeable to the Treaty with
Spain, and that the Scots Company have not ex∣ceeded the Terms of their Patent, and that they have Right to what they possess in the Isthmus of Darien, according to the Law of Nations, and that most part of the Nations in Europe have settled Plantations in the American Islands, or Continent, upon no other Foundation than the Scots. It is the Interest and Policy of all Governments, to improve the Natural Product of a Countrey, and to encourage Forreign Trade. The Experience of all Nations makes appear, That nothing contributes so effectually to these ends, as Forreign Plantations. Scotland is amongst the last of the Nations of Europe, in settling Forreign Plantations, tho' there be few that can propose more Advantage that way, because the Nation affords many Sub∣jects of Manufacture, and abounds in Men, which is the greatest Riches, as well as the Strength of a Nation; Yet for want of Forreign Plantations, many have been useless and burdensome to their Native Countrey, and have been constrained to serve Abroad in Forreign Wars, or into Plantati∣ons of other Countreys: And it is to be observed, that wherever they have planted, they have en∣creased and multiplied, as particularly in Ireland, but no part of the Benefit does accrue to their Native Countrey. The Nation has very long desired Forreign Settlements of their own, and did make some At∣tempts that way, which proved ineffectual for want of due Encouragement, but His Sacred Ma∣jesty, as Father of his Countrey, regarding the Welfare of it, did endue the same with suteable Encouragements by the 32d. Act, Par. 1693. and by the 8th. Act, Par. 1695. Yet both these Laws
were granted with a due regard to all former Planters; And did only allow them to plant Colonies, build Cities, Towns, and Forts in Asia, Africa, and America, upon Places not in∣habited, or in, or upon any other Place, by Consent of the Natives, or Inhabitants there∣of, and not possessed by any European Sove∣reign, Potentate, Prince or State. By these Acts of Parliament, and Patent con∣form, His Majesty did sufficiently provide, that the Possession of no European Prince should be in∣vaded or molested: And if Spain be injured, the Company must acknowledge, that the Injury flows from them, by exceeding the Limits of their Patent. It remains to be cleared in behalf of the Com∣pany, that they have strictly observed the Rules prescrib'd by the said Acts and Patent. The King of Spain's Title to America by the Pope's Bull, is rejected by the common Consent of all the Princes and States in Europe, who could not have settled there without Injury to Spain, if the Pope's Bull had been a sufficient Title; and neither Spain or Portugal hath relyed upon that Title, the one having planted in the East-Indies, and the other in the West, without regard to it: And this Title is sufficiently discussed by Grotius in his Mare Liberum, Cap. 3. and will never be in∣sisted on any where, and least of all in Brittain. America being inhabited by Natives, before Spain or any European People settled there, it is most certain, that the Right and Property did o∣riginally belong to these Natives, because the Earth was created for; and freely given by the Creator to the Children of Men, and the most Ancient and Uncontraverted Right of Property
of the Earth is by Occupation and Possession, which is an outward Act of the Body quasi positio pedis, and not an inward Act of the Mind, which cannot be known to others, beside many Mens wills might concur in wishing and liking the same thing, but their Bodies cannot concur in posses∣sing it, and an outward Act of Possession warns others to abstain. The Property that originally belonged to the Natives, could only be transferred from them to Spain by Conquest or Consent, and Spain can pre∣tend neither of these Titles to the Isthmus where the Scots have settled. It is alledg'd for Spain, That they do possess the Isthmus of Darien, in as far as they are undoubt∣ed Masters of the Bay of Panama, and the whole Coast of the Isthmus upon the South Sea: They have likewise Carthagena and Portobello on the North Sea, and they are Masters of the whole Countrey betwixt Carthagena and Portobello, and so must be reckoned Possessors of all, because Possession doth not require the particular Occupation of every part of a Countrey, but Occupation of one part is a sufficient Act to demonstrate the Will and In∣tention to possess the whole Pertinents: And the Spaniards having possess'd these two Extremes, the middle Space belongs to them, especially seing they have also settled in other Places betwixt these two, as their Conveniency did require, tho' they did afterwards quite these Possessions, as particularly they once possessed Nombre de Dios, and did also plant within the River Darien, and tho' they did quite these Possessions, they did not relinquish or repudiate their Right, but being better informed, they choosed more convenient Seats, but still reckoned themselves Proprietors of
the whole Isthmus, and divided the same in seve∣ral Jurisdictions. And the Natives upon that Isthmus were a mean inconsiderable People not to be regarded, who could not be thought to re∣tain any Right or Property in Opposition to the Power of Spain. They further add, That Spain hath been consi∣dered as undoubted Proprietors of the Bay of Mexico, and of that Isthmus, by other Nations in Christendom, and most particularly by the English, as is well known, and will clearly appear in two remarkable Instances. Several English Merchants having advanc'd their Stock, for settling a Plantation at Port-Royal in the Bottom of the Bay of Campechay, for cutting of Logwood, they desired the Countenance and Pro∣tection of the Government, for carrying on this profitable Trade: The Case was considered by the Council of England, and it was not found just, to allow the Protection of the Government, but were only left in a Permissive State, to manage their Trade upon their Peril. The Second Case, which comes closer to the present Question, was a Proposal by certain English Undertakers to settle in Darien, as the Scots have done, which being brought to the Council of Trade of England, and by them laid before the Lords Justices in His Majesties Absence, and trans∣mitted to the King himself; Upon a full Consi∣deration of the Case, that Project was thought to be an Encroachment upon Spain, and let fall. The King himself, and Council of England, be∣ing satisfied of the Right of Spain, in these par∣ticular Cases of English Undertakers, the same Judgment ought to follow, in relation to the Scots Company.
To all that is alledged, it's shortly and clearly Answered, That Spain hath neither Right by Treaties nor Possession to the Countrey now pos∣sess'd by the Scots: And, 1st. Tho' it be acknow∣ledg'd, that the Spaniards have more Strength, and larger Possessions on the South, than upon the North Sea, yet no Possession there can be exten∣ded to the North-side of the Isthmus, being pos∣sess'd by a People Independent, who never re∣ceived the Spaniards, or became subject to them: The Spaniards indeed have made great Settlements upon the South Sea, and in so far as they have possess'd, have restricted the Natives to narrower Bounds; but the Indians still continuing to possess what remains, Possession on the Coast, or the Mouths of Rivers on the South Sea, can never be extended to the North Coast: And the Spani∣ard can condescend upon no Ground in Law or Reason for such an Extension, nor can they make appear, that what the Scots possess is Part and Per∣tinent of their Plantation, especially considering that the Isthmus of Darien is naturally divided by a Ridge of high Hills running from East to West. Neither doth the possession of Carthagena and Porto-bello, give Right to the interveening Coun∣trey, which is above 80 Leagues or 240 English Miles, and these particular Forts, as well as the whole Spanish Plantations on the South Sea, be∣ing fixt without consent of the Natives, who con∣tinue their Possession in the interveening Coun∣trey, without any Subjection to, or acknowledg∣ment of the Spaniard: It lyes upon the Spaniards to condescend by what Rule the Limits of these Possessions can be so far extended. As to what is alledged, That the Spaniards have other Plantations nearer to the Scots Settle∣ment
from which they removed, but still retain Possession and Jurisdiction. It is Answered, Admitting the matter of Fact. as alledged, it comes to nothing; For still it is to be remembred, That the Spaniard will not pre∣tend to have planted with the consent of the Na∣tives: Nor, that the Darien Indians have ever ac∣knowledg'd Subjection; but they planted by Force and Violence: And therefore, whatever Forts they made in the Isthmus of Darien, the mo∣ment that these Plantations were left, the Right and Possession of the Natives did return. It is freely acknowledged, That Possession lawfully obtain'd by an outward Act of the Body, is retain'd by Acts of the Mind, if no other pos∣sess; but when Possession is taken by way of Fact, and not actually detained, the Right and Possession returns to the lawful Proprietor. 2. This alledged Possession of Nombre de Dios, and in the River of Darien, is only pretended to have been at their first Settlement in America, be∣fore they possess'd Carthagena and Porto-bello. 3. None of these pretended Settlements are within 20 Leagues of the Scots Colony; And tho Spain had yet Plantations there, the Limits could as little be extended to 20 Leagues beyond the actual Possession as to a Thousand: Nei∣ther can the Spaniards prove any Act of Jurisdicti∣on over the Darien Indians, whatever Title they may think fit to give to Governours or Vice-Roy's in America, the Scots do neither know, nor are oblig'd to notice the same: If Titles were e∣nough, the King of Spain assumes a Glorious Title of Indiarum Rex, but he has no more Jurisdiction over the Darien Indians, than in the Plantations of any other European Prince.
As to what is alledg'd upon the Opinions given by the King and Council of England, in relati∣on to His Majesty's English Subjects projecting Settlements in America, The Circumstances of the Projects, and the Motives of any Resolution taken in them, are wholly unknown to the Scots, and nothing can be founded on such Matters of Fact, unless the whole Circumstances were Au∣thentically instructed or acknowledg'd, but what∣ever was thought proper in these Cases, nothing can be inferred from thence to determine this. A Project is to be regulated either by Law or by Conveniency; And it's very ordinary and sute∣able, That his Majesty and the Government may discourage the Project of an Undertaking, if not Convenient, tho lawful: But when a Pro∣ject is Undertaken, Carried on, and a Settlement made in pursuance of express Acts of Parliament, and conform to a Patent, there's no more place to Deliberate what is fit, but what is Lawful. If the whole Circumstances were known, many Disparities might also appear, and from the bare relation of the Case of the intended Settlement in the Bay of Campechay a manifest Disparity is evident. The Bay of Campechay is in the Province of Nicaragua, in the Diocess of Chiapo, which Pro∣vince and Bishoprick, are part of the Ancient Empire of Mexico, which was conquered by Spain. By the Conquest of Mexico, the King of Spain as Conquerour, had Right of Sovereignty as far as the Dominions of Mexico did extend, and the Right and Possession of the Conquered People may reasonably be reckoned to become the Pos∣session of the Conquerour; And therefore a Settle∣ment in Nicaragua or Bay of Campechay might be
reckoned a down Right Encroachment upon Spain, which cannot be drawn in Consequence to a Settlement upon Darien, because the Spaniards can condescend upon no Title or Right beyond their actual Possession; for the Dariens were ne∣ver subdued, nor did they ever depend upon Mexico or Peru, or any Prince or People subdued by the Spanirds. And further, whatever be urged from these Cases, yet it can be made appear, That the Un∣dertaking to settle in Campechay was effectual, and the Cart is marked Port-Royal English-Colony; and 'tis known that the English cutt Logwood at Cape-Catach in Jucatan till the Charge of Carriage ren∣der'd it unprofitable, and thereafter Settled at Port-Royal for the same Effect, where there is plenty of Logwood appropriated to the English. It is also acknowledg'd, That the Darien-Indians are no powerful People, or able by themselves to resist the Impressions of Spain, but the point of Right and Property is the same in Rich and Poor, Strong and Weak, and they might lawfully transfer their Right, and assume the Scots or any other Nation to support or maintain the Right and Possession of that Isthmus, in as far as it was free from the Spanish Dominions. Yet the Dariens were not wholly neglected by the Spaniards as inconsiderable, for there have been frequent and almost constant Wars between them and Spain, in which the several Captains and Carriques have joyned together, and there is a fa∣mous Case of Barth: Sharp, who being accused in England as guilty of Piracy and Robbery commit∣ted upon the Indians, he defended himself as acting by Commission from Independent Native Indians then at War with Spain, and was acquitted.
The Right of the Scots Colony, as flowing from the Native Indians, is already sufficiently cleared, according to the most Ancient and Authentick Laws of Property, acknowledg'd by all Nations: And for a further Evidence and Demonstration of what has been asserted, and already sufficient-proven the Settlement of the English, French, Danes, Portugueses, and Dutch, will all be found to be Bottomed on the same Ground. The Spanish are the most Ancient Planters, and if Spain pretend to any Universal Title, either by Occupation of a part, or by the Popes Gift, or any other Right, he thereby excludes the Claim of all Posterior Planters, either in the Continent, or American Islands, which could not be thought to be separate and indifferent Domi∣nions: And if Spain recede from any Universal Title to the whole, it will not be possible to ex∣tend his Claim beyond his proper Possession, or the Possessions of these that are Subduced and Conquered by Spain: And if this be called in Question, it is expected, That some other Title will be condescended upon, that may clear the Limits and Extent of the Spanish Colonies, so as to make a Difference betwixt the Scots Settlement in Darien, and the Settlement of other Princes in the American Islands or Continent. The Empires of Mexico and Peru are known, and may be yielded to Spain, but the remainder of that vast Countrey was anciently possess'd by little Princes, or rather Captains or Heads of Fa∣milies or Cariques, who have no Dependance up∣on each other, nor upon any Prince or Potentate, but by Leagues and Agreement for mutual De∣fence. Thus it is known, That the Land of the Amazons was possess'd by the Natives; And it is
remarkable, That upon the Banks of Amazon, there are Fifty different Nations: So it is in Brasil, in Chili, Paragua, Florida, Carolina, Virginia, and generally over all the Continent, as well as in the Islands of America, and likewise in Asia and Africa: And therefore, European Princes have planted promiscuously, as they found Convenien∣cy, without Injury or Encroachment upon for∣mer Planters. The English possess the Continent from New-England to Carolina, without the Interposition of Colonies belonging to any European Prince, yet the Dutch, in time of Peace, set down upon Long-Island, and the Countrey now called New-York, betwixt New-England and Pensilvania, and conti∣nued to possess till the end of the War 1667: At which time, New-York was exchanged for Suranam. The Spanish Plate-Fleet do necessarly pass be∣twixt Cape-Florida and the Bahaman-Islands, yet the English possess these Islands, which the Spaniards did mightily resent, and used the English very bar∣barously upon it, yet Spain not being able to justi∣fy any unlawful Title, the English did maintain their Possession. Whatever be alledg'd, That the Government did not interpose for establishing a Logwood-Trade, yet it's certain, that the English did ap∣propriate the Logwood at Cape-Catch in Jucatan, till it was exhausted, and they afterwards settled at Port-Royal in the Bay of Campechay, for carrying on the same Trade, which was never question'd by the Spaniards, The French have several times endeavoured to settle in the River de Spiritu Sancto in the Bay of Mexico, and also the Samballo-Islands upon the Coast of Darien, and have actually settled a Colony in
Petit-Guavis in Hispaniola, the rest of that Island being possest by the Spaniards: The French have al∣so a Settlement in Guiana in the Terra-Firma, and several Forts upon the Coast of Caribana, and a∣bove twelve or thirteen American Islands. The Dutch have also the City of Coro in the North of Terra-Firma, and Suranam, and certain Forts upon the Coast of Guiana and Curasao, and seve∣ral American Islands. The Portuguese have the Coast of Brasil divided into many Captainships. The Interest of Spain was ever opposit to all these Settlements in Ame∣rica, and wherever they were strong enough, they attempted to expel the Planters, without regard to Peace or War, whereof the Scots did formerly feel the Effects, in their Plantation at Carolina hol∣den of the Crown of England, from whence they were expelled: These things were done by way of Fact, but it is the first time that ever Spain did openly pretend a Right beyond actual Possession, which was never sustained by any European Prince. And it is desired and expected, that there may be a further Condescendance of the Right and Title of Spain, to exclude other Planters by the Consent of the Natives, where Spain hath no actual Pos∣session, or Exercise of any Jurisdiction. It is further alledged for Spain, That all the Bu∣siness in America was settled by the Pacification 1670, betwixt the Kings of Brittain and Spain, which did confirm all the Plantations possess'd by English Colonies, and left the Remainder of Ame∣rica to Spain, and whatever happened before that General Treaty, could be no Rule thereafter, be∣cause there was almost perpetual War with Spain in America, which were never settled or composed till the Treaty 1670, which did presuppose and esta∣blish
the Right of Spain to all that was not posses∣sed by the King of Brittain's Subjects. As to the Instance of Sharp, it is not denyed that he was acquitted, and amongst others did propone that Defence, That he Acted by Commission from an Indian Prince; but that Defence was look'd up∣on as a Jest, and it was not for that Reason that he was acquitted. It is Answered, There was indeed a Treaty in the Year 1670, concerning America in particular, whereby it was provided, That the King of Brittain should have, hold and enjoy for ever, with full Right of Sovereignty, Dominion and Property, all those Lands, Regions, Islands, Colonies, and Places whatsoever situated in the West-Indics, or any part of America, which the said King and his Subjects did then hold and possess; From which Article the Spaniards would infer, that all the rest of America was lost by the King of Brittain, as a Right and Dominion of Spain, because that Spain ratifies the Possession ob∣tained by the King of Brittain, and there is not a mutual Ratification of the Possession of the King of Spain. This Article can bear no such Inference, for, 1. The King of Brittain and his Subjects did not then, nor do they now in the least question the Possessions of the King of Spain and his Subjects, but the King of Spain did very much question the Right of the King of Brittain to several of his Ame∣rican Plantations, not only upon the general Ground of an Universal Title to all the West-In∣dies, which no European Prince will bear, but like∣wise upon particular Claims, that the English had beat out the Spaniards, and enjoyed what had been once possess'd by them in several places: And the
former Treaties with Spain especialy that in the Year 1667, were only general, establshing a perpe∣tual Peace betwixt the Dominions and Terito∣ries of Brittain and these of Spain: But the Que∣stion remaining anent the Right and Dominion of these American Settlements to which the King of Spain did lay still a Claim, The Treaty 1670, did renounce his Claim to the Colonies in the En∣glish Possession, but did determine nothing as to those parts of America, which were never Pos∣sess'd by the Spaniard or Brittish, and if it had been intended, that the Right of Spain to all America that was not possess'd by some other European Prince should be asserted, and declared the same would not have been left to such remote conje∣ctures, but would have been specially express'd. 2. The whole Tenor of that Treaty does suf∣ficiently clear, that no such thing was intended as to presuppose, much less to assert the Right of Spain beyond actual possession. For by the Se∣cond Article of the Treaty, it is provided, That there be an Universal Peace in America, as in o∣ther parts of the World between the Kings of Great Brittain and Spain, and between the King∣doms, States, Plantations, Colonies, Forts, Cities, Islands and Dominions belonging to either of them; and between the People and Inhabitants under their respective Obedience. This Article in the Treaty relating to America, only doth clearly demonstrate, that both Kings were set upon an equal foot, and did Treat for themselves and the People and Inhabitants under their respective Obedience, and no further; so that all matters were left untouched that did con∣cern parts not Inhabited or possess'd by Natives, who were never under obedience to either Prince,
nor would the Treaty have been for Plantations, Colonies, Forts, &c. equally and mutually, if either King had pretended an universal Title or Right beyond Possession. 3. The Eight Article doth yet further clear, that the King of Spain had no Universal Claim, but according to his Possession, which Article provides, that the Subjects, Inhabitants and Ma∣riners of the Dominions of each Confederate, shall forbear to Sail to, or Trade in the Ports and Havens which are fortified with Castles, Maga∣zines or Ware-Houses, and in all other Places whatsoever, possess'd by the other Party in the West Indies. To wit, the Subjects of Brittain shall not Sail into, and Trade in the Havens and Places, which the Catholick King holds in the Indies, nor in like manner shall the Subjects of the King of Spain Sail into, &c. This Clause is plainly restrictive upon the King of Spain, That the Subjects of the King of Brittain shall not Trade into these places of the Indies which belong to Spain; for thereby it presupposes that Spain has no Universal Title, and its left free to the King of Brittains Subjects to Sail into, and Trade in all Ports and Havens which have no Fortifications, Castles, Magazines; or Ware-Houses Possess'd by the King of Spain, and con∣sequently it was lawful to have Sailed to, and Traded with the Darien Indians where the King of Spain had no Fortifications, Castles, Magazines or Ware-Houses, nor can clear any manner of Possession, and if they might Trade with the Indians it must be acknowledg'd they might Settle among them. It's also provided by the Tenth Article, that in case the Ships of either Party be forced
by stress of Weather, or otherwise into the Ri∣vers, Creeks, Bays or Ports belonging to the other in America, they shall be treated there with all Humanity and Kindness; Which Ar∣ticle states both Kings again upon an equal foot, and mentions the Right of both as restrictive to particular Rivers, Creeks, Bays, &c. in America as if neither Party claimed Universal Title over all. The 15th. Article of the said Treaty pro∣vides, that the same shall in nothing derogate from any preheminency, Right or Dominion of any Confederate in the American Seas, Chan∣nels or Waters, but that they have and retain the same in as full and ample manner as may of right belong unto them, providing al∣ways that the Liberty of Navigation ought in no manner to be disturbed. This Artiele relates to certain Preheminencies and Priviledges claim'd by Spain in the American Sea, which by the Treaty was not yeilded, but left in the same state as formerly; and if the King of Spain had pretended to an Universal Right o∣ver all America, in so far as is not possess'd by o∣ther European Princes, why was he more carefull to preserve his Claim of Sovereignty in the Seas, and forgot his Dominion upon the main Land? There can be no other reason for it, but because there was no such thing in prospect, as appears by the whole Tenor of the Treaty. Nothing hath been alledged in behalf of Spain to make any disparity betwixt all the Settle∣ments that have been made in America by the Sub∣jects of the King of Brittain or other Princes, ex∣cept the Treaty 1670: Which when duly consi∣dered, makes no disparity at all. For albeit the
Possession of the King of Brittains Subjects be there∣by confirmed; yet it will not be acknowledg'd by the King of Great Brittain, or any other Prince that the Settlements made by their Subjects were illegal or violent, untill confirmed by the King of Spain, and all Nations who have Planted there must sustain and justify the Scots Settlement, or acknowledge that the Settlement of their own Subjects were injurious to the Right of Spain. It is not, nor can be denyed, that the Dariens have been at frequent War with Spain, altho they pretend, that the Dariens were rather Rebels than Enemies. That is only for to beg the Question, for the Natives having the Ancient undoubted Right, it must be instructed, that they became Subjects before they could be Rebels. And tho' it be alledged, that what was done in Sharp's Case was reckoned a Jest, and that he was not acquitted upon that ground, as acting by Commission from the Dariens; yet the matter of Fact is certain and known, and was indeed re∣marked by all England, that Sharp join'd with the Dariens, did commit acts of Hostility and carried away great booty from the Spaniards, and was pursued for Restitution in England, and did pro∣pone a Defence. That he acted by Commission from an Independent People, and was acquitted by a competent Judicature in England. These matters of Fact being all acknowledged, it must be thought that a Decision in the way of Justice was no Jest, but according to the Law of the Nation. To Conclude and Sum up the whole Matter, The Scots did not move one foot, untill they ob∣tain'd two Acts of Parliament, and a Patent in their favours. These Acts (tho' very ample)
were framed with a just regard to former Plan∣ters, who by the express Tenor of the said Laws were not to be invaded or molested in their Pos∣session; even the just Right and Property of the Infidel Natives was considered, and the Under∣takers not allowed to dispossess them by Force and Violence, but to Plant with their consent: Upon the faith of these Laws, a greater Stock was advanced in Scotland than ever was raised by any other Nation, upon the first project of a Forreign Plantation; the Directors of the Com∣pany did very narrowly and exactly consider all the Treaties with Spain, and pitched upon a place, that the whole World considers to be of a great value for founding and raising a profitable Trade to the Honour of the King who (as the Father of the Countrey) did endue them with ample and just Priviledges, to the encrease of the Strength and Riches of the Isle of Brittain, which is all under the Government of one Monarch, of one Religion and Interest, and can have no dif∣ferent Friends or Enemies without endangering the whole. In one word, The Scots Company have acted deliberatly, for advantage to them∣selves, the Nation, and the Isle of Brittain; they have only used their own Right and have wronged no Nation or People, nor exceeded the Limits of their Patent in any circumstance. And if any will stand up for the Interest of Spain, and call in question the matters of Fact and principles of Law above asserted, which are generally known and need not to be confirmed by particular Citations. they may assuredly expect that what has been affirmed shall be made further clear and evident beyond contradiction, and whatever Obstacles
or Difficulties have, or may fall in, Ardua quae Pulchra, the undertaking was deliberate, just for the interest of the Nation, and with more regard to the Right of former Planters and Natives than any former Project of that Nature. Memorandum, That about this time, it was given out that the Spanish Embassador had presented a Second Memorial concerning the Scots Settlement at Darien; and that the French Embassador had likewise given in a Memorial to the Court of England concerning the French Ship which was cast away near Caledonia Harbour: But whether so or not, the Company could never procure a Copy of either. The Council of Caledonia's Address To the King's most Excellent Majesty. Most Gracions Sovereign; WE your Loyal and Obedient Subjects, the Council of your Colony of Caledonia, be∣ing settled pursuant to Powers and Im∣munities proceeding from your Royal Favour and Goodness; where, upon our arrival, the Natives on all hands in complyance with former Agree∣ments, received and entertained us with all pos∣sible demonstration of joy and satisfaction, there being no Possession, nor so much as pretended possession, for any Prince or State in Europe upon this whole Coast, extending it self considerably more than one hundred Leagues together. We found the Indians on all sides in open War with
the Spaniards, their nearest Neighbours: Against whom they besought our Assistance, which we could by no means comply with, by reason of the present Peace and good Understanding be∣tween your Majesty and the King of Spain. Yet notwithstanding this our just and peaceable deportment and inclination, and our certifying the same by Letters to the two neighbouring Go∣vernours of Panama and Carthagena; We have, to our no small surprize, received certain Informa∣tion, that several great and warlike Designs and Preparations are on foot, and carrying on by the Spaniards against this Colony; and that contrary to all Justice and Humanity, as well as the Trea∣ties of Peace between your Majesty and the Ca∣tholick King, they now unjustly detain, and re∣fuse to deliver up the Persons and Goods. that were saved of a Ship belonging to this Colony, called the Dolphin, which by misfortune of spring∣ing a Leak, was not long since oblg'd to run ashore and suffer Shipwreck near the City of Carthagena All which have been no small inducement for us to have improved the frequent opportunities we have had of taking Measures greatly disadvanta∣gious to the Crown of Spain: Yet in order to a∣void, as much as possible, any thing that might look like a publick Breach, untill the same were laid before your Majesty, and your Royal pleasure known therein: We have hitherto proceded no further, than the granting of Letters of Reprisals for the People and Effects unjustly detained from us. Great Sir, The Indies as well as Europe, do at this time implore your Protection: And as the effectual opening the Door of Commerce to
the trading World, and of more easy access to and correspondence with the ends of the Earth, hath been hitherto hidden and reserved by the Divine Hand, for one of the singular Glories of your Ma∣jesty's Reign. So it's with no small satisfaction to be any way concern'd in so hopeful an Accession to the Dominions and Greatness of your Majesty, and Wealth of your People; That we presume to lay ourselves, our Case, and this valuable Oppor∣tunity at your Royal Feet, most humbly beseech∣ing, that as it had its beginning, so it may con∣tinue to have its Being and Support from the hap∣py Influences of your peculiar Bounty and Grace. So with our earnest Prayers to Almighty God for the long and happy preservation of your Royal Person, and continuance of your Glorious, Reign, and most humble tender of our Lives and For∣tunes to your Majesty's Service and Disposition. We beg leave to Subscribe our selves, This Address was deliver∣ed to the Secretaries of State about the middle of September, together with a Memorial concerning the French Ship com∣manded by Cap. Duvi∣vier Thomas, which was Shipwrack'd near Caledonia, Harbour on the 24th of December 1698. Most Gracious Soveraign, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, Daniel Mackay, Robert Pennicuik. William Paterson, Colin Campbell, Samuel Vetch, Charles Forbes, Thomas Drummond.
By the Honourable Sir William Beeston Kt. His Majesty's Lieutenant Governour and Comman∣der in Chief, in, and over this his Island of Jamaica, and other the Territories depending thereon in America, and Vice-Admiral of the same. A PROCLAMATION. WHereas I have received Commands from his Majesty, by the Right Honourable James Vernon Esq one of his Majesty's Principal Secre∣taries of State, signifying to me, that his Majesty is unacquainted with the Intensions and Designs of the Scots settling at Darien: And that it is con∣trary to the Peace entred into with his Majesty's Allies; and therefore has commanded me, that no Assistance be given them. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, and by Command, strictly to command his Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, that they do not presume, on any pretence what∣soever, to hold any Correspondence with the said Scots, nor to give them any Assistance of Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, or any other Necessa∣ries whatsoever, either by themselves or any o∣ther for them; or by any of their Vessels, or of the English Nation, as they will answer the Con∣tempt of his Majesty's Command to the contrary, at their utmost peril. Given under my Hand and Seal of Arms this 8th. day of April 1699. And in the 11th. Year of our Soveraign Lord
William the Third of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, and of Jamaica Lord, Defender of the Faith, &c. WILLIAM BEESTON. Barbados. By his EXCELLENCY, A PROCLAMATION. WHereas his Majesty has been pleased to sig∣nify his pleasure to me by Mr. Secretary Vernon, that he hath been advertised, that several Ships of Force, fitted out of Scotland, were arri∣ved at the Island of St. Thomas with an Intention (as they declared) to settle themselves in some part of America: Their Design being unknown to his Majesty, and least the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty hath entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise preju∣dicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in the West-Indies. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Council, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects, in∣habiting within this Island that they forbear hold∣ing any Correspondence with, or giving any Assi∣stance to any of the said Persons: And that no Provisions, Arms, or other Necessaries whatso∣ever be carried to them, as they shall answer the same at their peril. Given under my Hand this 13th of April 1699, and in the Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. R. GRAY.
By his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governour in chief of his Majesty's Province of New-York, and Terri∣tories depending thereon in America, and Vice-Admiral of the same. A PROCLAMATION. WHEREAS his most excellent Majesty hath received Advice, That several Ships of Force fitted out of Scotland, were designed to settle themselves in some parts of America, and lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty hath entred into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in America, his Majesty has been pleased to signify his Royal pleasure to me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's Subjects, or others, inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, that they forbear holding any Cor∣respondence with, or giving any Assistance to any of the said Persons, while they are engaged in the aforesaid Enterprize; and that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries what∣soever, be carried from hence to them, nor be permitted to be carried, either in their own Ves∣sels, or any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. In pursuance of his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by and with the Ad∣vice of his Majesty's Council of this Province, to publish and declare his Majesty's Pleasure, and by
these presents do strictly charge and command all and every one of his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and Territories depending thereon in America, That they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any Assistance to such Person or Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, & are said to have settled in a certain place, which they have called Caledonia, That no Provision, Arms, Ammu∣nition, or other necessaries whatsoever, be car∣ried either in their own Vessels, or in any other Ship or Vessel for their use, from this Province, or any part thereof. And his Majesty's Collec∣tor and Receiver General, and all other Officers of his Majesty's Custom-House, are hereby re∣quired to take notice hereof accordingly. And I do further strictly charge, command, and forbid (by and with the consent of his Majesty's Council, as aforesaid (all his Majesty's said Sub∣jects, and others within this Province, that they neither by themselves, nor by any other Persons authorized by them, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure as aforesaid, hold any Corres∣pondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any Traffick or Commerce with such persons as are said to be settled in Caledonia aforesaid. And if any Person or Persons within this Province, by themselves, their Factors or Agents, shall contra∣ry to, and against the true intent and meaning of this his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure sig∣nified unto me, as aforesaid, hold any Corres∣pondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any Traffick or Commerce, in manner aforesaid, then all such Person or Persons so acting, as afore∣said, shall incurr such Pains, Penalties, and For∣feitures,
as by Law in such Cases are provided. And all his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province, are hereby required to take due notice hereof, and to observe his Majesty's said Royal Will and pleasure in all and every of the Premisses as they will answer the contrary at their peril. Given at Fort William Henry in New-York, the 15th day of May, 1699. and in the Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order, B. Cole. Cl. Concilii. Bellomont. God save the King. Printed by W. Bradford Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty in New-York. 1699. By his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellamont, Captain General, and Governour in chief of his Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts-Bay, New-York, &c. in America, and of the Territories thereon depending, and Vice-Admiral of the same. A PROCLAMATION. WHEREAS his most Excellent Majesty having received Advice, that several Ships of Force fitted out in Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas, with an Intention (as they
declared) to settle themselves in some parts of America: Lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty has entred into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in the West-Indies his Majesty has been pleased to signify his Royal Pleasure to me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's Subjects, or others inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, that they for∣bear holding any Correspondence with, or giv∣ing any Assistance to any of the said Persons, while they are engaged in the foresaid Enterprize; and that no Provision, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried to them from thence, nor be carried either in their own Vessels, or any other Ships or Vessels for their use. In observance therefore of his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province, to charge and command, and do hereby charge and command all and every of his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Pro∣vince and Territories thereon depending, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any Assistance to any Person or Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, and are said to have settled in a cer∣tain place in the West-Indies by 'em call'd Caledo∣nia, or to enter into any Traffick or Commerce with them, or any of them. And that no Provi∣sions. Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever be transported or carried unto them from this Province, or any part thereof, either in their own Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. Of which all his Majesty's Subjects,
and others within this Province, are hereby re∣quired to take due notice, and conform them∣selves accordingly, as they will answer their act∣ing hereunto under the outmost Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as are by Law in such cases pro∣vided. And the Officers of his Majesty's Cu∣stoms, and all other his Majesty's Officers, are hereby also required to take effectual care that his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure in all and every of the Premisses be duly observed and kept, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril, Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the third of June 1699, in the Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order of his Excellency, and Council, I. Addington Secr. BELLOMONT. God save the King. Boston, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to his Excellency the Governour and Council. A second Proclamation published in Barbadoes against the Scots Company and Colony. Barbadoes. By his EXCELLENCY. VVHEREAS his Majesty has been pleased to signify his pleasure to me by Mr. Se∣cretary Vernon, That he hath been Advised, that
several Ships of force are arrived at the Island of Cairat near Darien from Scotland, with an inten∣tion to settle themselves, their Design being un∣known to his Majesty; and least the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty hath en∣tred into with the Crown of Spain, or be other∣wise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Co∣lonies in the West Indies. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Coun∣cil, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within this Island, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving a∣ny Assistance to the said Persons; and that no Provision, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessa∣ries whatsoever be carried to them, as they shall answer the same at their peril. Given under my hand the 5th. day of Septem∣ber 1699. and in the Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. R. Gray. The Council General of the Indian and African Company's Petition to his Majesty. May it please your Majesty, WE your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, The Council-General of the Company of Scot∣land, Trading to Africa and the Indies, do in all humble duty beg leave to lay before your Maje∣sty the present Condition of our Affairs.
Your Majesty from an earnest desire of the flourishing of your Antient Kingdom, having been graciously pleased by the 32d. Act of the 4th. Session, & by the 8th. Act of the 5th. Session of this current Parliament, and your Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this King∣dom following thereupon, to authorize the set∣tling of Plantations and Colonies in Asia, Africa or America by the Natives of this Kingdom; and and such others as should joyn with them; as in the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent is more particularly express'd. We and our Constituents, your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects did, upon the faith and encourag∣ment of the said Acts, and Letters Patent, en∣ter into a Society, erect a Company of Trade, and with great Charge, and after many Difficul∣ties settled a Plantation on the North side of the Isthumus of Darien, a place precisely in the terms of the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent. And being sensible, That as our Company had its Birth from your Majesty's most Gracious Fa∣vour, so it could not subsist but by your Royal Protection; We did therfore in all humble man∣ner Petition your Majesty's High Commissioner and the Estates of Parliament assembled the 19th. of July 1698. Upon which the Estates of Parliament did with great unanimity Address your Majesty, That you would in your Royal Wisdom be pleased to take such measures as might effectually vindicate the undoubted Rights and Priviledges of the said Company, and support the Credit and Interest thereof.
That Session of Parliament ending before any Return could be had from your Majesty, Reports have been spred by the Enemies of our Settle∣ment, as if our Company had not your Majesty's Protection: And as an evidence thereof; That Proclamations have been issued out in your Ma∣jesty's Name by your Governours in all the Ame∣rican Plantations, not only to deprive our said Company and Colony of the friendly Assistance, that might have reasonably been expected from our Neighbour Nation, but also strictly forbiding all your Majesty's Subjects or others within these Plantations to enter into any Traffick or Com∣merce with the said Colony; & that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries what∣soever should be transported, or carried to them either in their own Vessels or any other Ship or Vessel for their use, and that under the utmost Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures mentioned in the said Proclamations. Which Proceedings we have but too much rea∣son to believe have been of fatal consequence to our Company and Colony, and consequently to the interest of all your Majesty's good Subjects in this Kingdom. And we being fully persuaded, that nothing could be so conducible for the sup∣port of our said Company and Colony in our pre∣sent Circumstances, as some special Testimonies and Evidences of your Royal Protection. We do therefore in all humility and earnest∣ness beg of your Majesty's fatherly care of our said Company in particular, and of the Nation in general, That your Majesty would be graci∣ously pleased to take off the force and effect of these Proclamations which have been so prejudi∣cial
to us, and to signify your Royal Pleasure to the Governours of these your Plantations, that we may be supply'd in the common and ordina∣ry way of Commerce. As also that your Maje∣sty may allow your Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November next, or as soon as possibly can be, that your Majesty may have the Advice and Assistance of the Great Council of this Nation in such a weighty and general Con∣cern, which we hope God will bless with an happy issue to his Glory, the Honour of your Ma∣jesty, the Credit of your Parliament, the Interest of the Nation, and the Good of our Company and Colony. Sign'd at Edinburgh the 19th. day of October 1699. in Name, presence, and by Order of the said Council General by, May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Ser∣vant, Belhaven, I. P. C. G. To which his Majesty was pleased to give the fol∣lowing Answer. WILLIAM R. RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well: Your Petition has been presented to us by our Secretaries, and we do very much re∣gret the Loss which that our Antient Kingdom
and the Company has lately sustained: We will u∣pon all Occasions protect and encourage the Trade of the Nation: And we will also take care, that the Subjects of that our Kingdom shall have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce with our English Plantations as ever they had formerly. Our current Parliament is adjourn'd to the 5th. day of March next, and we will order that the Parliament shall meet when we judge that the Good of the Nation does require it. And so we bid you heartily farewell. Given at our Court at Kensington the 2d. day of November 1699, and of our Reign the 11th. Year. By his Majesty's Com∣mand, Seafield. To our Right Trusty and well-beloved, The Council General of the Company of our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland Trading to A∣frica and the Indies. To the Right Honourable the Lord High Chancellor, and remanent Lords of his Ma∣jesty's most Honourable Privy Council. The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies. May it please your Lordships, WE think it needless to trouble your Lord∣ships with a repetition of the many Steps, Difficulties and Discouragements that we met
with all along both abroad and at home, since the beginning of this Undertaking, the most consi∣derable of them being already particularly known to your Lordships But maugre all those Diffi∣culties, we have with a great deal of Trouble and vast Expenses, settled a Plantation in one of the most valuable and impregnable Places in all A∣merica, situated on the North-side of the Istumus of Darien called by us Caledonia. As no Nation in Europe ever begun any such Settlement with so considerable a Strength of Men, Ships, and other Necessaries, as we did: So no instance can be given of any Settlement e∣ver heretofore made, that had so hopeful an As∣pect in so short a time as our Plantation aforesaid. But to our and the Nation's inestimable Loss, we have very surprizing Advices of our Peoples having deserted the said Settlement by reason of Proclamations issued forth in all his Majesty's Plan∣tations of America, strictly forbidding all his Ma∣jesty's Subjects to hold any manner of Correspon∣dence with our said Colony, and that no man∣ner of Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other necessaries whatsoever, should be transported or carried to them, either in their own Vessels or any other Ship or Vessel for their use; and that under the outmost Pains, Penalties, and For∣feitures mentioned in the said Proclamati∣ons. The certain notice whereof could not but have put them in a desperate Condition, especial∣ly none of our Advices having come to their hands, tho we wrote to them at several times, by the se∣veral ways of Jamaica, Barbados, Antegoa, New-England, &c. and sent them likewise an illimited
Credit for buying of Provisions, till our own Ships and Recruits should come up to them. We have taken such further measures, as seem'd most reasonable to us upon this unexpected Emergency, but have too good ground to fear, that not only what we have already done, but even all that we are able to do, must prove inef∣fectual, if the King and his Parliament of this Kingdom, do not give some encouraging Marks of their Favour and Protection to our said Compa∣ny and Colony: Wherefore we have in all hum∣ble Duty Petition'd his Majesty that he would be graciously pleased to take off the Force of the said Proclamations, and allow his said Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November next, or as soon as possibly may be, to give their Advice and Assistance in such a weighty and general con∣cern. Your Lordships may very well know the great Losses, both of Men and Treasure, that we have already suffered by the unaccountable Proceed∣ings of the Enemies of our Company and Colo∣ny: Nor can we tell when to expect an end to such Methods against us, unless his Majesty and the Great Council of the Nation fall upon proper and effctual Means for supporting so valuable an Undertaking. May it the refore please your Lordships, to take the whole Premisses into your most serious consideration, and do us all the good Offices with his Majesty that, in your profound Wisdom, you shall think most expedient for supporting our Com∣pany and Colony's Interest, and give him
an account of our present Circumstances, and how much the Honour and Interest of the Nation stands concern'd. Sign'd at Edinburgh the 20th. day of October 1699, in Name, Presence, and by Order of the said Council-General. By, May it please your Lordships, Your Lordships most humble Ser∣vant, Basil Hamilton, J. P. C. G. A Letter from the Company To the Right Honourable, The Viscount of Sea∣field, one of the Secretaries of State for the Kingdom of Scotland. My Lord, THis is by Order of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Af∣rica and the Indies, to acquaint your Lordship, That we have prevail'd upon Lord Basil Hamilton to be at the trouble of going up with an Address to His Majesty from our said Council-General on behalf of Captain Robert Pinkarton and Thirty more, who were wrongfully detain'd Prisoners at Carthagena since the beginning of February last, and (as we are inform'd) are most inhumanely treated.
We are daily importun'd by their Relations (who are very considerable) for their Relief; and it is of great concern to our Company, that something material be speedily done therein, not only for the sake of the said Prisoners, but also that others may thereby see, we do not a∣bandon the Interest of such as engage themselves in our Company's Service. Lord Basil Hamilton is fully instructed in all mat∣ters relating to the said Address, and other Affairs relating to our Company, of which he'll inform your Lordships. Wherefore we entreat that your Lordship will be pleas'd to introduce him to His Majesty, in presenting of the said Address; and to assist him in procuring a gracious return from his Majesty; in the considence whereof, I remain, Edinbr. 4th. Decr. 1699. My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Yester, I. P. C. G. Memorandum, Such another Letter was at the same time written to the Lord Carmichael, the other Secretary of State. The Company's Address to His Majesty. May it please your Majesty, WE your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, the Council-General of the Company of Scot∣land, Trading to Africa and the Indies, having for∣merly,
in most humble manner, represented to your Majesty, how that we have, with much Trou∣ble, great Expense, and after many unexpected Stops and Difficulties, settled a Plantation and Co∣lony on the North-side of the Isthmus of Darien, on the Continent of America, precisely in the Terms of your Majesty's Acts of Parliament and Letters Pa∣tent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom. We now, in all Duty and Humility, beg leave to represent further to your Majesty, That where∣as in the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Pa∣tent, there is a special Clause, by which your Ma∣jesty is graciously pleased to promise, That if contrary to the Rights and Priviledges therein∣mention'd, or contrary to the General Treaties of Peace and Commerce between your Majesty and any Potentate, Prince or State in Amity with your Majesty, the Ships, Goods, Mer∣chandize, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever, belonging to the said Company, should happen to be stopp'd, detain'd, embezell'd, or taken away, or in any sort prejudic'd or damnified, That your Majesty would interpose your Royal Authority, to have Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made for the dammage done; and that upon the publick Charge. And whereas likewise by the X and XI Articles of the Treaty concluded between the Crowns of Great-Britain and Spain, at Madrid the 8/18 day of July 1670. It is specially stipulated, That in case any of the Subjects of either the Confede∣rates with their Shipping be forc'd at any time, through stress of Weather, pursute of Pyrates, or Shipwrack to retreat and enter for shelter, and harbour into any of the Rivers, Creeks,
Bays, Havens, Roads and Ports belonging to the other in America, That the Persons so Ship∣wrack'd or forced a Shoar, shall in no sort be detain'd Prisoners, but that on the contrary; all friendly Assistance and Relief shall be admi∣nistred to their Distress, both for the Sustenance of their Persons and reparation of their Ships, and conveniency of their Vovage, and that Letters of safe Conduct shall be given them, for their free and quiet passage thence. Yet notwithstanding thereof, a Ship call'd the Dolphin, belonging to our Company, being sent from our said Colony to some of the Leeward Islands, with a Cargo for buying Provisions, and the said Ship in a few days time after her going to Sea and plying to windward, for the speedier passage, stricking unfortunately upon a Rock, sprung a Leak, and being forced to run a shoar, under the very Walls of Carthagena, to escape Ship∣wrack, not only the said Ship and Goods were violently seiz'd and dispos'd of as prize, but also the Men to the number of thirty and a Boy (whose Names are here subjoyned) were detain'd and made close Prisoners, contrary to the express Terms of the said Treaty. Upon notice whereof, the Council of the said Colony sent, in your Majesty's and said Compa∣ny's Name, a Messenger with a very civil Letter, to the Governor of Carthagena, to demand your said Subjects, who were wrongfully detain'd Pri∣soners, as aforesaid; and likewise Restitution of the said Ship and Goods, pursuant to the Treaty above-recited; and sent also Copies of the Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent above mention'd, in English, Latin, and Spanish, for the Governor's
Information: but instead of any compliance to those just and reasonable Demands, the Messen∣ger was threatned to be put in Chains, and not so much as allow'd to see any of the said Prisoners. And being lately assur'd, that (notwithstan∣ding of all endeavours hitherto us'd for their Libe∣ration) they are contrary to the Rules of Christi∣anity, Humanity, and the Law of Nations, still detain'd Prisoners under very severe Treatments, we think our selves in Duty and Conscience bound to lay their deplorable Case before your Majesty; and for that effect have commissioned Lord Basil Hamilton, one of our number, to present this our humble Address on their behalf to your Majesty, and to give your Majesty a further account of our Company's other Affairs, as he is particularly in∣structed therein; not doubting but that your Ma∣jesty will, in your Royal Wisdom, take speedy and effectual Measures for the redress of those Dammages, and the freedom of those distressed Prisoners, in the number of which there are some young Gentlemen of good Quality, and related to the best Families in this Kingdom. Signed at Edinburgh the 4th. Day of December, 1699; in Name, Presence, and by Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Servant, Yester, I. P. C. G.
The Chancellours Letter to the Directors of the Company. Holyrood-house, the 9th. of January 1700. Right Honourable, HIs Majesties Secretaries of State have acquain∣ted me, That the King will not allow my Lord Basil Hamilton access to him, Because he did not wait on his Majesty when he was formerly in London. And that he has never since given any publick Evidence of his Loyalty, nor has hitherto owned and acknowledged His Majesties Govern∣ment. But his Majesty will not refuse to hear what my Lord Basil's Instructions are; and has declared his willingness to be informed of what the Company desires. And if my Lord Basil will give in Writing to His Majesties Secretaries, what he had to represent, His Majesty will receive In∣formation from their hands of what is demanded, and will give his Answer to the Company; His Majesty doth not refuse to Receive the Petition, tho' he will not allow my Lord Basil to be the Pre∣senter of it. This from To the Right Honourable, The Court of Directors of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies. Right Honourable, Your very humble Servant, Marchmont Chancellour.
A Letter from the Directors of the Company, to each of the Secretaries for Scotland. My Lord, THE Council-General of our Company, having lately a very frequent Meeting thought fit to send up one of their own Number, with an Address to his Majesty, and with Instru∣ctions concerning the Contents of our Compa∣ny's former Petitions; they thought that none could be more Capable to Discharge that Trust, than Lord Basil Hamilton. as being throughly Versed in the course of the Company's Affairs, nor more acceptable to His Majesty, as having had no objection made against him when he was appoin∣ted; several Lords of His Majesties Privy Coun∣cil Being then present. And the Council-Gene∣ral having signified so much to your Lordship by a Letter, wherein they entreated, that you would be pleased to introduce him to the King, and give your Concurrence in procuring a Gracious Return to what he had in Commission, and which he was to Communicate to your Lordship. We are surpriz'd to find this day by a Letter from the Lord Chancellour; that the King will not allow Lord Basil Hamilton to have Access, because he did not wait upon his Majesty when he was for∣merly at London. But his Lordship being sent by, and having his Instructions from the Council-General, We the Court of Directors can say no∣thing to it, other than to entreat your Lordship that you'd use your Interest with his Majesty, to allow Lord Basil Hamilton, to have Access to His
Royal Person, lest the Refusal thereof be not on∣ly a great Discouragement to the Company and all its well-wishers, under its present Difficulties and repeated Misfortunes, but give also ground to the World to believe that his not being allowed Access to His Majesty, is upon the Ac∣count of his carrying an Address from this Com∣pany, which every Body knows stands in great need of, and has a just Right to His Majesties Royal Favour and Protection,, And which being the General Concern of the whole Nation, is con∣fidently expected & signified to your Lordship, by Order and in name of the Court of Directors by, Edinbur. the 9th. day of Janu∣ary, 1700. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Pat. Scot. I. P: C. D. A Letter from the Company, to my Lord Basil Hamilton. My Lord, WE have your Lordships Letter, of the 2d. Instant, by yesterdays Post; in relation to to the Contents of which, we send you here∣with the Copy of a Letter, which we have writ∣ten by this Nights Post, to both the Secretaries of State, and likewise the Copy of another Let∣ter, which we had this morning from the Lord Chancellour upon the same head.
As our Company cannot but have a just sense of your Lordships generous condescension, to the Council-Generals request, in undertaking a troublesome Journey to London, this time of the Year, to wait upon and Solicite his Majesty about our Company's Affairs, with no other view but frankly to serve the Interest of your Country, to the manifest neglect of your own, So we cannot but heartily regret that the carrying of the Com∣pany's Commission, should be the occasion of putting such a distinguishing Mark upon a Per∣son of your Lordships Quality and merit, as to be denied access to His Majesties Person, because you did not wait upon His Majesty when you were formerly at London. No body can be so blind as not to see through this. And whereas we never could hear, that your Lordship did e∣ver any thing unworthy of your. Quality, or in∣consistent with the duty of a Loyal and Peace∣able Subject. So we are still hopefull, that by your own prudent management, His Majesty may be undeceived of any mis-representation he might have had of you, & that he will yet conde∣scend to grant your Lordship access to his Royal Person, with the Company's said Address, and give you a Gracious Answer to the Contents thereof, and to the other particulars mention'd in your instructions; An account whereof would be very welcome News, in the midst of our mis∣fortunes, to the Company in general, and parti∣cularly
to the Court of Directors in whose Name, and by whose Order this is from, Edinburgh the 9th. day of January. 1700. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Pat. Scot. I. P. C. D His Majesties Letter to His Council of Scotland. William R. RIght Trusty and Right well beloved Cousin and Councellor, Right Trusty and Entire∣ly beloved Cousin and Councellour, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins and Councel∣lours, Right Trusty and well Beloved Councel∣lours, and Trusty and well Beloved Coun∣cellours, We greet you well, WHERE∣AS The Council-General of the Compa∣ny of that our Kingdom, Trading to A∣frica and the Indies, by their Letter to our Secre∣taries of the Fourth day of December last; did de∣sire, That they might give their concurrence to procure a Gracious Return from Us, to the Peti∣tion which they had sent with Lord Basil Hamil∣ton. And the said Lord Basil having com∣municated to Our Secretaries both the foresaid Petition and His Instructions; And they ha∣ving represented to us, what is desired in behalf
of the said Company, and we having refused the said Lord Basil Hamilton. Access, to present the the foresaid Petition to Us, for the Reasons We did Order our Secretaries to Comunicate to Our Chancellour; Yet We being willing to give an Answer to what the said Com∣pany does desire. You are therefore to call for some of the Council-General, and acquaint them that We are resolved in the terms of our Treaties, to demand from the King of Spain, that Captain  Pinkarton and these of his Crew, who are detained Prisoners at Carthagena be Re∣leased and set at Liberty. And you may also ac∣quaint them, that our Subjects of that our King∣dom shall be allowed the same Liberty of Trade that others enjoy with the English Plantations; And in general, you may signifie to them, Our Resolution to promote and advance the Trade of the Kingdom, And the three Friggots they de∣mand having been given by Parliament for guard∣ing the Trade of the Coasts; We are not resolved to dispose of them till we have the Advice of our Parliament. And so we bid you heartily Fare∣wel. Given at our Court at Kensingtoun, the Tenth day of January 1700, and of our Reign the Eleventh Year, By his Majesties Command Sic Sub. Seafield Directed thus, To Our Right Trusty and Right well Beloved Cousin and Councellor, Our Right Trusty and Entirely Beloved Cousin and Councellor, Our Right Trusty and well be∣loved Cousins and Councellours, Our Right Trusty and well Beloved Councellours, and to our Trusty and well Beloved Councellours, Pa∣trick Earl of Marchmont our Chancellor, and the rest of the Lords and others of our Privy. Coun∣cil,
of our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland. This is a true Copy taken from the principal and Sub∣scribed by, Gilb, Eilot Cls. Sti. Con. An other Letter from the Council General of the Company to my Lord Basil Hamilton. My Lord, YOur Lordships Letters to the Court of Dire∣ctors, having been by them Communicated to us, We cannot but acknowledge, that as you have at our request frankly undertaken a trouble∣some Journey and Task to serve the Interest of your Country and our Company; So we are ful∣ly satisfied, that you have acquitted your self with a great deal of Prudence and Discretion in the execution of that Charge, for which we ren∣der you most hearty Thanks: But finding by a Letter of the 10th. instant from His Majesty to the Lords of his Privy Council, and by a former from the Secretaries of State to the Lord Chan∣cellour (Copies of both which are herewith in∣closed) That his Majesty has determin'd not to to allow your Lordship access to present our Ad∣dress, nor to impart to His Majesty what other things we gave you in charge by your In∣structions: We are heartily Sorry that your Lord∣ships carrying of our Address, should bring you you under any such disagreeable circumstances with His Majesty: But the matter being so, we
cannot think it just to detain your Lordship any longer at London to the neglect of your own affairs at home, and do therefore hereby signify that your Lordship may use your own Freedom, to take Journey homeward as soon as you think fit, and as may sute best with your conveniency. This is in Name, presence and by order of the Council-General of our Company, from Edinburgh the 29th. of January 1700. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, John Home P. Upon the first notice that was given of a National Address or Petition to His Majesty for the fltting of the Parliament, the following Proclamation was emitted. PROCLAMATION Anent Petitioning. WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Brittain, France and Ire∣land, Defender of the Faith; To Macers of Our Privy Council Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute Greeting; Forasmuch, as We, by our Letter un∣der
our Royal hand, dated at Kensingtoun, the Twelfth of December instant, have signified to the Lords of Our Privy Council, That whereas we are informed, that notwithstanding of Our An∣swer to the late Petition of the Council-General of the Company of that our Kingdom, Trading to Africa and the Indies, which we think ought to have given intire Satisfaction to all our Good Subjects; Yet there is on foot a Design of Ad∣dressing Us of New, on the same heads, carryed on after such a manner, & with so little respect to our Government, gives us too just Grounds to ap∣prehend the Consequences, that We have ne∣ver hitherto denyed Our Subjects their Privi∣ledges, nor will We discourage the Liberty of Petitioning, when the same is done in an Orderly manner, but that we having fully declared our Mind, as to the Subject of the last Address, We cannot but take particular No∣tice of that unusual Method that is taken to pro∣cure Subscriptions to a new one, and that some Persons, who signalize themselves in carrying on the same, have given no Evidence of their Affe∣ction to Our Government. And make it their Indeavour to lodge the late misfortune of the Company, on Proclamations emitted in the West Indies, tho they cannot but be sensible, that the same did proceed from other Causes. And being convinced, that such Practises may tend to Alie∣nate from Us the Hearts of our good Subjects, & that it is necessary, for the Support of Our Go∣vernment, and preserving the publick Peace of the Nation, that they be discouraged and pre∣vented. We did therefore Recommend to the saids Lords of Our Privy Council, to signify and
and make known our Displeasure, and Dis-satis∣faction with such proceedings, and to take the most effectual Methods consistent with Law, for Discouraging the same, and for preventing these that are well inclined to Our Government from Joyning with them. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and Remanent Mercat Crosses of the whole head Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within this Kingdom, & thereat in our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance, and ordains Our Solicitor to transmitt Coppies to the Sheriffs, Stewarts and their Clerks for that ef∣fect and Ordanis these presents to be Printed. Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the Eighteenth day of December, and of Our Reign the Eleventh Tear, 1699. Ex deliheratione Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. God save the King. Here followes the first National Address or Petition mention'd in the foregoing Proclamation. May it please your Majesty, VVE the several Subscribing Nohlemen, Ba∣rons and Gentlemen of this Your Ma∣jesty's
Kingdom of SCOTLAND, being deep∣ly Affected with the present hard Circumstances of the Indian and African Company, both Abroad and at Home, as being of Universal Concern to the whole Nation. And your Majesty having been pleased, by your Royal Answer to the Coun∣cil-General of the said Company's late Petition, to signify, That your Majesty does very much Regret the Loss which this Kingdom and the Company has late-sustained; That upon all occasions Your Majesty will Protect and Encourage the Trade of the Nation; and that Your Majesty will order the Parliament to Meet when you judge that the Good of the Nation does re∣quire it. We are thereby Encouraged in most Dutiful and Humble manner, to represent to your Ma∣jesty, That as the Estates of Parliament, and this Nation, which they Represent, have a Peculiar Interest in the Concerns of the said Company, as is particularly manifested in their Unanimous Address of the 5th. of August 1698. to Your Ma∣jesty: So we humbly conceive nothing can be so Conducible to support the Interest and Credit of the said Company, under its present Misfortunes, as a Meeting of the said Estates in Parliament, and that the Good of the Nation can at no time re∣quire their Metting more than at present: As not doubting, but that under the Influences of Your Majesty's Favour and Protection, together with the Assistance which may be reasonably expected from your said Parliament, The said Company may be enabled to prosecute their Undertakings with greater Assurance, and better Success than hither to they could have done, under the many Stops and Difficulties which they met with from time to time.
We do therefore in all Humble Duty; most earnestly Entreat, and most assuredly Expect, that Your Majesty will, in Your Royal Wisdom, and Fatherly Care, for the Good of this Nation, be Graciously pleased, to order your said Parlia∣ment to Meet, as soon as possible, which We doubt not, will tend to the Honour of your Ma∣jest, and the General Good and Satisfaction of the Nation, and particularly of May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most humble Subjects and Servants. This Address was presented to His Majesty at Ken∣sington the 25th. day of March 1700. By the Right Honourable the Marques of Tweeddale, Sir John Home of Blakader Baronet, John Haldan of Gleneagles and Patrick Murray of Livingston Barons, Com∣missiners appointed for that end: Upon the presenting of this Address one of the abovenamed Commissioners signifyed to the King, that it was hoped His Majesty would be pleased to look upon it not only as a Petition for allow∣ing the Parliament to sit, but likewise as a Testi∣mony of the Nations concern for the interest of the Indian and African Company. To which His Majesty was Graciously pleased to Answer, That that would be best known in Parliament, and that the Parliament could not sitt before the 14th. of May then next ensuing, hut that it would sitt then: Or in Words to that effect.
To His Grace His Majesty's High Commis∣misioner, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament. The Humble Representation and Petition of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies. May it please your Grace, and Right Honourable Estates, IT is evident by the whole Strain of Three se∣veral Acts of Parliament, together with His Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, in favours of the said Company, That the Wisdom of the King and Right Honourable Estates did intend, that all such Advantages as might arise by the establishing of such a Company, should be of as universally a National Concern as possible; And in order there∣unto, were pleased to endow it with large Privi∣ledges and Immunities, suteable to the Circum∣stances of an Infant-Company, and the Great∣ness of its Designs: And lest that it should fail in the Execution, for want of a sufficient Stock to carry on such an Undertaking, all imaginable Parliamentary Encouragement was given to Per∣sons of all Ranks, Ages and Sexes, both within and without the Kingdom, whether Natives or Foreigners, to become Partners and Adventurers in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, as is sin∣gularly
manifest by the 42d. Act of the 5th Session of this current Parliament, especially calculated for that end only. Upon the publick Faith of having due Prote∣ction in the enjoyment of these unquestionable Priviledges and Immunities, as having received their Sanction from His Majesty. and the unani∣mous Suffrage of the great Council of the Nation as aforesaid, many Persons of all Ranks and De∣grees were thereby induced to become Adventu∣rers in the Joynt-Stock of our said Company, in in so much that in a very short time, a much more considerable Stock was subscrib'd for within this Kingdom, than was ever before so much as pro∣pos'd here upon any project whatsoever, since we were a Nation: Being thus entred into a Society, We and our Constituents have pursuant to the intentions of the Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent above∣mention'd, with much care and trouble, and a great Expense of Treasure, after having struggled with many unexpected Obstructions and Difficul∣ties setled a Plantation by the Name of Caledonia, in one of the most Healthful, Fruitfull, natural∣ly impregnable, and every way valuable Places in all America, as is universally acknowledged by all Per'ons of Experience in such Matters as well as by the General Consent of such as have been there: And as a manifest proof thereof tho our said Plantation be settled most strictly in the terms of the Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent a∣bovementioned, yet it has raised the Jealousy of some, and Envy of others, of the most knowing and considerable Trading Nations in Europe.
But to our and the Nations great Surprise, and inestimable Loss, while we were using all ordina∣ry means, and big with the hopes of riveting that Settlement upon a lasting Foundation, such was the further continued Chain of unexpected Ob∣structions and most unaccountable Mal-treat∣ments that we met with, by Proclamations of a very strange Nature, and otherwise, that the re∣peated Misfortunes following thereupon, put us under an indispensible Necessity of humbly peti∣tioning His Majesty for allowing the Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November last; in full confidence and Expectation of having the most natural and cordial Assistance from those who have first established our Company, and pro∣mised it Protection; especially since all our other Applications have hitherto proved ineffectual: But a meeting of the Estates of Parliament at that time not quadrating (it would seem) with His Majesty's other Affairs, a very considerable Body of the Nobility, Gentry and Burgesses of this Kingdom, thought fit, in a most dutiful and humble manner, by their late Address, to repre∣sent to His Majesty, how deeply they were af∣fected with the Nations concern in our Compa∣ny's repeated Misfortunes, and therefore hum∣bly Petitioned for the sitting of this Parliament as soon as conveniently might be. And the King having been most graciously pleased to order the Meeting of the Right Honourable Estates now in Parliament, We think our selves in all duty bound to give His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner and the Right Honourable the E∣states, a short and naked Narrative of the several Obstructions and Misfortunes that we have been
all along forc'd to grapple with, in the prosecuti∣on of our Company's Designs, to the end that the great Council of the Nation, having a perfect View and full Knowledge of these Difficulties which we now Labour under, may be the better able to judge how to apply a Remedy. The first attempt for strengthning our Compa∣ny's Interest and Stock was at London, where a Subscription of 300000 sterl. was procured in Nine days time, without so much as a publick Adver∣tisement, and many knowing Merchants were so far convinc'd of the many Advantages that might probably arise from such a Constitution, that they signified their willingness to be concer∣ned for Triple the Sum, if allowed: But not only did the Parliament of England by their Address to His Majesty of the 13th. of December 1695. and o∣therways, render that Subscription ineffectual, but the House of Commons did also appoint a Com∣mittee, to examine what Methods were taken for obtain∣ing the Act of Parliament, by which our said Company is established who were the Promoters and Advisers thereof; and did afterwards impeach the Nominees in the said Act of Parliament; notwithstanding the absolute Independency of this Kingdom. Yet after all this Discouragement, we went on with our Subscriptions at home, and made our next Effort for strengthning thereof beyond Sea, both in Holland and Hamburgh: In the first of which places many eminent Merchants declared their positive inclinations to be very considerably interested with us, and gave some signal Proofs thereof, till they were made to understand by Threatnings and other Insinuations, that a High∣er Power would make them at least very uneasy,
if they persisted any further in their Resolutions of being concerned with our Company, And at Hamburgh where we had the most pro∣mising Hopes of foreign Assistance, the Comercii or Merchant Company, entred into Contract with our Company's Deputees, to joyn at least 200000 l.Sterl. to our Company's Stock; but to our great Astonishment, His Majesty of Great Brittains Ministers there, did under pretence of spe∣cial Warrant from the King, put a full stop there∣to, by giving in A Memorial to the Burgo-Masters & Gentlemen-Councellors of that City wholly dis-owning the Authority of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent abovemention'd, & intimating that His Majesty would regard their entring into Treaties with our Com∣pany as an Affront to his Royal Authority, and that he would not fail to resent it, as having neither Credential Letters, nor being any otherways Authoriz'd by His Ma∣jrsty. Upon notice whereof, we did in all humble Duty Address His Majesty in June 1997, for Re∣dress of that open and bold Encroachment, upon not only our, but also the Nations Rights, in its most fundamental Constitution, by endea∣vouring to subvert the Independency of its Parlia∣mentary Laws, expresly contrary to the Law of Nations: All which His Majesty by his Royal Letter from Flanders in July 1697, Promised to take into Consideration, as soon as he would return into Eng∣land, and that in the mean time, His Majesty would give Orders to his Ministers at Hamburgh, not to ob∣struct our Company in the prosecution of its Trade with the Inhabitants of that City. In the full Confidence of His Majesty's Royal Promise, we thought our selves secure and took
our Measures accordingly, till to our further sur∣prize, we found by several Instances, that His Majesty's said Ministers were as wickedly bent a∣gainst us as ever, and still denying that they had got any such Orders from His Majesty: Where∣upon the Directors of our Company, did, by their Letter of the 28 of September 1697, expo∣stulate in the first place, with both the then Secre∣taries of State, about that further Dis-appoint∣ment, but having still no Redress therein, we did in most humble and dutiful Manner, by our second Address of the 22d. day of December 1697. lay the whole Matter again before His Majesty; And did likewise, at the same time, not only humbly Represent the Premisses to His Majesty's most Honourable Privy-Council, to∣gether with the train of ill Consequences that must necessarly attend such Treatment, if not pre∣vented by an early Redress; but wrote also sepa∣rately to both the Secretaries of State, and such other Noble Persons of the Government, as hap∣pen'd to be then at London, To use their Joint Interest, for procuring Justice, in a Matter of such Universal Concern to the Honour, Inte∣rest, and Independency of the whole Kingdom. All the Answer we obtain'd, was by a Letter of the 17th. of January 1698, from both the Secreta∣ries of State. That the King said, He had already gi∣ven Orders to His Resident at Hamburgh in that Mat∣ter, conform to his Royal Letter from Flanders, in July 1697, which was then communicated to the Company. By which Answer, together with what repeat∣ed Advices we had at the same time from Ham∣burgh, that the English Ministers there, had still positively disown'd their having got any such
Orders, we were put out of all Hopes of having any Redress, untill we should have an Opportu∣nity of laying the whole Matter before a Meet∣ing of the Estates of Parliament. But in the mean time we proceeded, with all the Strength we had (tho' extremely weak'ned by the Treatment above-narrated) to make the best Preparations we could (considering the Scarcity of these Years) for sitting out an Equipage of Ships, Men, Provisions, and other Necessaries, for settling a Plantation in America, in the Terms of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent a∣bove-mention'd: And its evident by the very Constitutions of the Colony, that they were cal∣culated more for the general Advantage of the Nation and Posterity, than for the particular and immediate Benefite of the Adventurers. And the Parliament happening to meet the ve∣ry next Day after our Ships had sail'd, we did by our Humble Petition of the 22d. of July 1698, Represent to his Grace, His Majesties then High Commissioner, and the Right Honourable Estates then assembled in Parliament, the Treatment which our Company met with at London & Ham∣hurgh as aforesaid, the great Prejudices which we had sustain'd thereby, and the many further In∣conveniencies and evil Consequences that must necessarly have followed thereupon, if, upon a∣ny Account whatsoever, the Parliament should happen to neglect the taking immediate Cogni∣zance of such Usage. And the Parliament having thereupon, by their Unanimous Address of the 5th. of August 1698, to His Majesty, thought fit to manifest their own and the whole Nations Concern in that Matter, earnest∣ly
entreating, and most assuredly expecting, That His Majesty would in His Royal Wisdom, take such Mea∣sures, as might effectually vindicate the Undoubted Rights and Priviledges of the said Company, and support the Credit and interest thereof; And the Parliament like∣wise, by the same Address, recommending the Con∣cerns of the said Company to some special Marks of His Majesties Royal Favour, as that Branch of the Trade of this Kingdom, in which they, and the Nation they re∣presented, had a more peculiar Interest; The Court of Directors of our Company were thereby encou∣rag'd to renew their Application to His Majesty, with relation to the Memorial given in by His Ministers to the Senate of Hamburgh, (the same being specially mention'd in the Parliaments Ad∣dress:) And in Consideration of the Dammages sustain'd by the Company, through Means of that Memorial, the Directors humbly Petition'd, That His Majesty would be pleased, for their Encouragement at that time, as a Gracious Mark of His Royal Favour, to bestow upon them the two smallest of the Frigots, then (and to this Hour) lying useless in Bruntisland Harbour. But our Company having no manner of An∣swer to either of these, and being assured by seve∣ral Letters from Hamburgh, That both the English Ministers there, had positively denyed their ha∣ving received any such Orders, as were long be∣fore promised, and declared to have been given, with Relation to that Memorial, the Court of Di∣rectors of our Company did, by their Letter of the 29th of November 1698, transmit Copies of the said Letters to the Viscount of Seafield, then sole Secretary of State, and entreated his Lord∣ship, to procure some speedy and effectual Answer
from His Majesty to the Contents of both that Letter. and their former Petition. The Secretary, by his Letter of the 13th. of De∣cember 1698, returned for Answet, That he would take the first convenient Opportunity he could have, to represent that Matter to the King, but that he could not expect to have it for some time, because His Majesty was then very much imployed in the Affairs of his English Parliament. We thereupon waited a full Month in expecta∣tion of some further Answer, but getting none, our Court of Directors did, by a Letter of the 13th of January 1699, put the Secretary again in mind of our said Petition of the preceeding August, and Letter of the 29th of November. The Secretary by his Letter of the 7th. of Fe∣bruary 1699, signified, That he had presented our Com∣pany's Petition to His Majesty, and was commanded to let us know, that there being Accounts, that the Ships belonging to the Company were arriv'd upon the Coast of America, and the particular Design not being commu∣nicated to His Majesty, He therefore delayed to give any Answer, until he should receive certain Information of their Settlement. Tho' we could not but be surpriz'd to find all our former Addresses and Petitions, about Mat∣ters of such weighty Concern, as are above nar∣rated, Answered, after so long delay, only with a seeming Charge, for not having communicated to His Majesty a thing that was never in the least demanded of us, by either the King, Parliament, Privy Council, or Ministers of State, we being limited to settle in the Terms of the Acts of Par∣liament, as we should be Answerable: Yet upon the very first Advice we had of our Colony's
Settlement in Caledonia, we by our Letters of the 31st. of March, and 1st. of April 1699, gave a ve∣ry full and dutiful Account thereof to His Maje∣sty, and to both the Secretaries of State, together with an Account of the French Designs thereabouts and of what Import our said Settlement (if duly protected) might prove to the Interest and Se∣curity of all His Majesties Dominions, and refer∣red the same, together with the Contents of our former Petitions, to His Majesties Royal Consi∣deration. About this time it was, That His Majesty was pleased to call the President of the Session, and the Advocat to Court, to the end (as we under∣stood) that they, jointly with both the Secreta∣ries of State, might in a Conference with seve∣ral of the English Ministers, satisfy His Majesty, as to the Legality of our Company's Settlement: Which (by all that ever we could learn) was then (and otherways since that time) made clear beyond all manner of Dispute. But while in the mean time, we were pawn∣ing even our own particular Credits, for sending the needful Supplies of Ships, Men, Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, and other Necessaries, for securing so valuable a Settlement to this Nation, we were astonished to have Advice. That by Or∣ders from England in January 1699, Proclamati∣ons had been emitted, in the Months of April and May, over all His Majesties Plantations and Territories in America, strictly Intercommuning our Colony, under very severe Penalties to be inflicted on the Contraveeners of these Procla∣mations, in regard His Majesty (as these Procla∣mations
narrate) was unacquainted with the Inten∣tions and Designs of the Scots settling at Darien. As we humbly considered these Proclamations to be such, as were never before published in those parts against any other People upon Earth, and of so Barbarous a Nature, as we thought, no Good Christians would put in Execution, even against Infidels; So finding ourselves unquestio∣nably warranted by all Laws Humane and Divine, we persisted in our Endeavours for mantaining that Settlement, as hoping, that, through means thereof, this Nation might in time, have an Opportunity of raising it self above the open Contempt, Reproach and Insults of its unkind Neighbours, and of propagating the Gospel a∣mongst the Ignorant good Natur'd Indians of those parts. But before our Recruits could possibly arrive at Caledonia, our Colony got certain Accounts of these Proclamations, and finding at the same time; the sad effects thereof, by being denied any the least help, either for Goods or Money, at Jamaica, from whence they had formerly Sup∣plies; and that in the Proclamation issued by Sir William Beston, Governour of that Island, he had positively declared. That by their Settlement in Darien, they had actually broken the Peace entred into with His Majesties Allies (which they believed he durst not veuture to have done without a sufficient Warrant) And finding themselves thereby to be of consequence declared Pirates, without any previous Summons or Hearing, contrary to the Customs and common Usage of all Nations, even in the case of real Piracy, and founding a Belief, at the same time, on the Treatment which they
knew our Company had formerly met with in Eu∣rope, without being Redress'd therein, that we were not in a Condition either to supply or protect them, they unhappily took the Alarm, under such a General Consternation, as devested them not only of all manner of patience to struggle with any Inconveniencies they lay under at the time, but also of all manner of prudence, in tak∣ing any reasonable Measures either for their own Security, or for our Company's interest. In the midst of which Consusion those of them who had any bad Designs (as we could not well suppose such a Number to be free of some) made use of these Proclamations as handies, by which to per∣petrate their own several ends, and easily per∣swaded all the rest to leave the Settlement: Which they unadvisedly did the 20th of June last; And by that means not only have the Ships, Men and Goods, which were there at that time, been ex∣posed to the Arbitrary will of those to whom the Execution of those Proclamations was given in Charge, but even all our subsequent Measures brought into inevitable disorder. Upon Information of all which, we did, by our humble Petition to His Majesty of the 19th. of October 1699, in all humility and earnestness, beg, That His Majesty would in His Fatherly care for the good of our Company in particular, and of the Na∣tion in General, be graciously pleased to give special Testimonies of his Majesty's Royal Protection to our Com∣pany at that Juncture, and particularly to take off the Force and effect of those Proclamations which have been so prejudicial to us, and to signify his Royal pleasure to the Governours of his Plantations in America, that our Colony might be supplied in the common and ordinary way
of Commerce, as those of other Nations are; And that in the mean time His Majesty would be graciously pleased to allow the Estates of Parliament to meet at the day ap∣pointed in November last, or as soon as conveniently may be, to the end that their Advice and Assistance might be had in such a weighty and General Concern. We likewise by our humble Address to His Ma∣jesty's most Honourable Privy Council of the 20th of October 1699. Represented what we thought in duty and prudence necessary, with relation to the Contents of our said Petition to his Majesty, Humbly referring the whole to their Lordships most seri∣ous consideration, and praying that they would be plea∣sed to do us all the good Offices with his Majesty that they'd think most expedient for supporting our Company and Colonys Interest; and to give him an account of our Company's hard Circumstances, and how much the Ho∣nour and Interest of the Nation stood concern'd therein. His Majesty was graciously pleased, by His Royal Letter to us of the 2d. of November 1699, to declare that He did very much regret the Loss which the Kingdom and the Company had lately su∣stain'd, That he would upon all occasions protect and en∣courage the Trade of the Nation. That he would take care that His Subjects of this Kingdom should have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce with his English Plantations that ever they had formerly, and that he would order the Parliament to meet, when he'd judge that the Good of the Nation would require it. But, in some short time thereafter, while we were solacing our selves with the hopes of hav∣ing his Majesty's protection, not only as a Com∣pany established by his Royal Authority, with the Advice and Consent of Parliament; but also as Subjects, making all the Preparations we could
to send the needful Supplies and Advices to those who were last sent for Repossessing the same Settlement: We were further astonished to have Advices, that, by second Orders from Eng∣land, another Fleece of Proclamations had been emitted, over all the English Plantations in Ameri∣ca, particularly on the 5th. of September last, in Barhados, &c. And that in complyance with the intent of these Proclamations, Our People that went along with the Rising-Sun, were in Novem∣ber last, positively denied Wood and Water at Monserat, a Priviledge never before denied to a∣ny other Nation: And by a Letter of the 29th of January last from the Commander of another of our Company's Ships, we are assured that they were positively denied Anchoring at St: Christophers by the Governour, Colonel Norton, who out of his own Mouth declared to the Com∣mander of our said Ship, That he did it by new Orders which he had received about a Month before; altho, at the same time, two Dutch Ships were then Watering there; which we have since confirmed to us by Letters from Mr. Daniel Mackay one of the Councellours of our Colony, dated at Port-Royal in Jamaica the 13th. of February last: By which Letters, he informs us likewise, That when he waited upon the Governour of that Island, concerning our Company's Ship the St. Andrew lying in that Harbour, The Governour declared to him, That tho the said Ship were fitted for going to Sea, he would not suffer her to go, without a special Order from England for that Effect. We likewise humbly beg leave to inform Your Grace, and Right Honourable Estates, that a∣mongst
our Company's many other Losses and Mis-fortunes, a Ship called the Dolphin loadned with a valuable Cargo, belonging to our Com∣pany, struck unfortunately on a Rock, by which she sprung a Leak, and being forc'd to run a shore under the Walls of Carthagena, to escape Ship∣wrack, the said Ship and Goods were by the Spaniards (His Majesty's Allies) violently seized and disposed of as Prize, and the Men also to the Number of 30 and a Boy, detain'd and made close Prisoners, not only contrary to the Law of Nations, (we being then in profound Peace with them) but also contrary to the express Terms of the 10. and 11. Articles of the Treaty conclu∣ded at Madrid the 2/18 Day of July 1670, between the Crowns of Great Brittain and Spain. By our Dutiful Address of the 4th. of December 1699, we humbly Petition'd His Majesty, That He would be graciously pleased to take those Proceedings of the Spaniards into His Royal Consideration, so as that speedy and effectual Measures might be taken for the Redress of those Dammages, and the freedom of these distressed Prisoners. In Answer to which, His Majesty was graci∣ously pleased, by his Royal Letter of the 10th. of January last, to signify, That He was resolved in the Terms of the Treaties to demand from the King of Spain, that these Prisoners should be set at Liberty. Yet some of the most considerable of these Prisoners being transported above half a Year ago to Old Spain, We have frequent Advices from them by Letters, dated in Cadiz-Prison, That they and all the Crew have been most Barbarously used, and that they themselves are still kept close Prisoners, under very severe Treatment; Copies
of which Letters we have some Months ago trans∣mitted to the Secretaries of State. By all which, it cannot but evidently appear to Your Grace and Right Honourable Estates, that tho' we have all along us'd our best Endea∣vours to wrestle through these almost unsurmount∣able Difficulties, and exerted even our outmost ef∣forts for retrieving our Losses, as much as possible by endeavouring to repossess and mantain so valu∣able a Settlement; And tho' we have certain Advices of its being Repossess'd by our People, and that we have taken all imaginable Measures for their present Supply: Yet we have too just ground to be fully perswaded, That unless the King and High Court of Parliament, do speedily Support, Protect, and Assist us, in the Prosecution of our Company's lawful Designs, that all our Past, Present, and Future Endeavours must, to the Nation's indelible Reproach and Dishonour, as well as to its and the Company's unspeakable and irreparable Loss, prove unavoidably abortive. May it therefore please Your Grace and Right Honourable Estates, to take the several Matters of Fact above-mentioned, into your most serious Consideration; To Vindicate, Support, and Protect us in the Enjoyment of our lawful Priviledges, both as a Company, and as Subjects of this free and independent Kingdom, to take such Measures, as You (in Your pro∣found Wisdom) may judge most Effectual, for repairing the many Dammages we have
already sustain'd, and for assisting us in the further Prosecution of our Company's lawful Designs; but more especially, for the maintenance of our just Right and Title to the Settlement of CALEDONIA. and the Enjoyment of such Advantages as (if duly Protected) may probably arise thereby. Sign'd at Edinburgh the 16th. Day of May 1700. In Name, Pre∣sence, and by Warrant of the said Council-General by, MARISCHALL. I. P. C. G, To His Grace His Majesty's High Commis∣sioner and the Right Honourable Estates of Parliament, The Humble Address and Petition of the Heretors of the Shire of Haddingtoun. THat whereas, after a long and Expensive War, we expected to have injoyed the bles∣sings of a happily concluded Peace, by the Re-establishing of our Forreign Trade, Encourage∣ment of Home-Manufactures, imploying of the
Poor, in the improvement of our Native product, and the lessening of our publick burdens: But instead thereof, to the unspeakable Loss & almost Ruin of the Nation, we find our Trade abroad sensibly decayed, and our Coin carried out, by the Importation of Commodities from places where ours are prohibited, our Woollen and other Manufactories at home, by the same means and the Remisness of Magistrates, in put∣ing the Laws in due Execution, receive not that Encouragement which the Interest of the Coun∣trey requires; whereby our Poor are neither mantain'd nor imploy'd, as they otherways might be, and more especially our Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, meets with so much opposition from abroad, and gets so little support at home, that after so great a Loss of Men and Expense of Treasure, their Sttlement in Ca∣ledonia may now too probably, a second time, fall under the same unlucky Circumstances as at first if not prevented. And yet after all these hardships that the Na∣tion groans under, numerous Forces are still kept on foot, which occasions now in time of Peace, heavy and unnecessary Taxes, while our much wealthier Neighbours are Disbanding theirs. All which Misfortunes and other Calamities, which have of late befallen us, we cannot but look upon as the Effects of the displeasure of Almighty GOD for the Immoralities that every where abound amongst all Ranks and Degrees of Men, to the Dishonour of GOD and our Ho∣ly Religion, the debauching the Spirits, and corrupting the manners of the People.
May it therefore please your Grace, and the Right Honourable Estates of Parlia∣ment, to take some effectual Course for curbing of Vice, and putting in Executi∣on the many laudable Laws for mantain∣ing and imploying the Poor, that they may be useful and not burdensome to the Kingdom; and for the Encouraging our Manufactories at home, and carrying on our Trade abroad with Advantage, to lay on such Impositions on the Branches of our Import, as may overballance our Ex∣port, and particularly that of France; and to assert the Indian and African Company's Right to the Colony of Caledonia, which has been & still unjustly is called in question, and to give such support to it as may Encourage the Adventurers to go on with an undertaking which, if vigorously pur∣sued, may tend so much in the future to the Wealth, Honour and interest of the Nation, and to relieve our Countrey of a great Number of Forces, every way so uneasy to the People, and in lieu thereof to fall upon such other Methods for secu∣rity of the Peace and support of the Go∣vernment, as may be more for the Interest of the Kingdom, and more consistent with the Liberty of the Subject. Memorandum, There were likewise at the same time, several other Addresses and Petitions, both from Shires & Burrows, presented & read in Par∣liament, needless to take up roome here as being much after the same strain with that of the Here∣tors
of the Shire of Haddingtoun, complaining of many general and particular Grievances, and more especially of those relating to the Indian and African Company, and its Colony of Caledonia; Praying for Redress thereof, and that the Parlia∣ment would be pleased to Vindicate and Assert its just Rights and Priviledges, &c. After read∣ing of all which, a Motion being made and press'd that the Parliament should make a Re∣solve in the following Words, viz. Resolved, That our Colony of Caledonia in Darien is a Legal and Rightful Settlement, in the Terms of the Act of Parliament 1695, and that the Parliament will mantain and sup∣port the same. His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner was pleased immediatly to Ad∣journ the Parliament for three days, and at their next Meeting, without so much as reading the Minutes of the former diet, Adjourn'd it further for full Twenty Days. Whereupon the Plurali∣ty of the Members of Parliament, then present, met that very evening, and sign'd the following Address. May it please your Majesty, WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Subscribing Noblemen, Ba∣rons, and Burgesses of this Your Antient King∣dom of SCOTLAND, Members of the same Parliament which happily Settled Your Ma∣jesty's Government over Us, and has ever since given continued Proofs of Zeal and Affection to Your Majesty's Service in the several Sessions thereof: Do humbly Represent to Your Maje∣sty, that having according to your Majesty's Roy∣al
Appointment, met together in Parliament, with full Resolution to have proceeded in the like good Intentions, for the Honour and Inte∣rest of your Majesty and People. It is to Our unspeakable Grief and Disap∣pointment, that not only there has been no Re∣turn given to the Unanimous Address of the last Session of Parliament, Expressing the whole Na∣tion's Concern in the INDIAN and AFRI∣CAN Company: But also after a Motion made in this Session of Parliament for a Resolve, That Our Colony of CALEDONIA in DA∣RIEN, is a Legal and Rightful Settlement, in the Terms of the Act of Parliament 1695. And that the Parliament would Mantain and Support the same. Members beginning to Reason thereupon, were interrupted by an Adjournment, which We Hum∣bly Conceive is not agreeable to the 40 Act of the 11th, Parliament of King James the 6. Where it is promitted, That nothing shall be done or Com∣manded, which might Directly or Indirestly Prejudge the Liberty of free Voting, and Reasoning of the Estates of Parliament, or any of them in all time coming. And thereafter, by a Subsequent Adjournment, from the Thirtieth day of May instant, to the Twentieth day of June next, the Parliament was not permitted to come to any Resolution, in the pressing Concerns of the Nation; which we cannot think consistent with that Article of Our Claim of Right. Whereby it is Declared. That for the Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthning, and Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be frequently called and allowed to
Sit, and the Freedom of Speech and Debate secured to the Members. We do therefore in all Humility and Ear∣nestness, Intreat, That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to allow your Par∣liament to Meet at the Day to which it is now Adjourned; and to sit as long as may be Necessary, for Redressing the Grievances of the Nation, Asserting its just Rights and Priviledges, as well at Home as Abroad, in its Colony of CALEDONIA, and for Enacting such Lawsas may be for the Advance∣ment and Security of Religion, the Ho∣nour of your Majesty, and the true Inte∣rest of this Nation. We are May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Dutiful, most Loyal and most Obedient Subjects and Servants. This Address was presented to His Majesty at Kensington the 11th. day of June 1700. By the Right Honourable the Lord Ross for the Subscri∣bing Noblemen, James Pringle of Torwoodlie and William Bennet younger of Grubbet for the Barons, and Patrick Murray of Dollory for the Burgesses, Commissioners appointed for that end: To whom His Majesty, upon hearing the same read, was graciously pleased to say, That He would consider of it. And, at a second Audience, the Lord Ross, in Name of the other Commissioners, Ad∣dressing the King thus.
May it please your Majesty, We are come here by Your Appointment to receive your Answer to the Address which we presented from the Loyal Members of your Parliament of Scotland. His Majesty was Graciously pleased to give the following Answer. Gentlemen, I Can give no Answer now to the Petition which you presented, but you shall know my intentions in Scotland. These Parliamentary Addressers finding that the Parliament was yet further Adjourned by Proclamation, and not knowing, it seems, how soon it might be allowed to Sit, They framed the draught of a Second National Address to be Sign'd by the several Shires and Burrows through∣out the Kingdom; but while the same was car∣ried on, His Majesty was graciously pleased to signify His mind in a Declaration, by way of Let∣ter, directed to His Grace James Duke of Queens∣berry His Majesties High Commissioner, and the Privy Council of Scotland: Which Letter was published after the manner of Proclamations; and is as followeth: William R. RIght Trusty and Intirely Beloved Cousin and Counsellor, Right Trusty and Right
well Beloved Cousin & Counsellor, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins and Counsellors, Right Trusty and well Beloved Counsellors, and Tru∣sty and well Beloved Counsellors, We Greet you well. We heartily wish that the last Meeting of Parliament had proceeded, so as that the Kingdom might have been made partakers of these Advan∣tages for which Our Commissioner was so fully Instructed: If it had been possible for Us to have agreed to the Resolve offered to Assert the Right of the African Company's Colony in America, tho that Method had appeared to Us more unneces∣sary, yet we had from the beginning readily done it, at the earnest Desire of Our Ministers, and for Our Peoples Satisfaction, all other Con∣siderations set apart. But now that Things are much changed, (wherein We are truly Sorry for the Nation's Loss) And We being most wil∣ling to grant what may be needfull for the Re∣lief and Ease of the Kingdom, and the Advance∣ment of its Welfare in all its Concerns; We have thought fit to Declare this Our good Mind to be made known to all Our loving Subjects. And for the Company's Concerns, We Assure you, that we will be so ready to concurr with Our Parlia∣ment in every thing that can be reasonably ex-expected of Us, for Aiding and Supporting their Interests, and Repairing their Losses, that Our good Subjects shall have just grounds to be sensi∣ble of our heartie Inclinations to advance the Wealth and Prosperity of that our Ancient King∣dom. And as for Captain Pinkerton and the o∣ther Prisoners in Spain, We have already, and We hope Effectually Interposed for their Libera∣tion. In the next place, As We did fully
struct our Commissioner, So we are still Resolv∣ed, to pass all such Laws as shall be offered for the better Establishing the true Protestant Reli∣gion and the Presbyterian Government of the Church which you at present Enjoy; For the more effectual preventing the growth of Popery justly feared, for the Repressing of Vice and Im∣morality, for the Preserving and Securing the Liberty of Mens Persons, for the Encouraging and Advancement of Trade and Manfactories, and generally to give Our Assent to such other Laws as shall be brought in for further clearing and securing Mens civil Rights and Properties, promoting the Administration of Justice, and set∣ling the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, de∣manding nothing on our part, save what shall be necessary to mantain that our antient King∣dom in so happy a Settlement against our & their Enemies. And this Declaration, We are confi∣dent will be satisfying to all good Men, who will certainly be carefull both of their own Pre∣servation, and of the Interest and Honour of the Government, and not to suffer themselves to be Misled, nor to give any Advantage to Enemies and ill designing Persons, ready to catch hold of every Opportunity, as their Practices do too manifestly witness. Our necessary Absence hath occasioned the late Adjournments, but as soon as God shall bring Us back, We are firmly Resolved Our Parliament shall Meet, where We do again Assure all Our good Subjects, nothing shall be Wanting on Our part, that may contribute to their Welfare and Happiness. And this Our Resolution and Decla∣ration, We Allow you to Publish for the Satif∣faction
of all concerned. So We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at Our Court at Loo, the 26th. day of July 1700. And of Our Reign the 12th year. By His Majesties Command RO. PRINGLE Here follows the last National Address former∣ly mention'd. May it please your Majesty, WE Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Bur∣gesses, and other Subscribers, your Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects of this your An∣tient Kingdom of Scotland, having formerly from an unfeigned Zeal to your Majesty's Service, and to the Good and Welfare of our Countrey Petition'd your Majesty for a Meeting of the Estates in Parliament, in order to Support, and Assist our Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, which the Parliament had, by their Un∣animous Address to your Majesty of the 5th. of August 1698, declared to be their own and the whole Nation's peculiar Concern; And your Majesty having been graciously pleased to allow the Parliament to Meet on the 21th. of May last, whereby all your good Subjects could not but con∣ceive suitable hopes of its happy issue, for the Honour and Interest of your Majesty and People, Do now beg leave to express our deep Con∣cern & Sorrow for the unexpected Adjournment thereof, without being permitted to do any thing
towards the wish'd for end of its Meeting; And do in all humble manner concurr with the duti∣full Address lately presented to your Majesty, from the Plurality of the Members of Parliament, Representing the Inconveniencies and prejudi∣ces arising to the pressing Concerns of the Na∣tion, from that Adjournment, and to the Rights and Liberties of Parliament, from the manner of it: And it is our Unexpressible Regret, that your Majesty does seem to have been pre∣vail'd upon by the Mis representations of evil Councellours to issue out Proclamations, further Adjourning the Parliament, from time to time, whilst not only did our said Company stand extremely in need of the Countenance Support and Protection promis'd to it by your Majesty in Parliament, and more especially upon the Misfortunes that have of late befallen it by the success of Enemies against its Colony of Cale∣donia, but whilst also even the Nation it self did, and still does, remain under the pressure of such Grievances as can only be Redress'd in Parlia∣ment. And to the end that your Majesty may have a just view thereof, we humbly beg leave to repre∣sent to your Majesty how indispensibly necessa∣ry it is, THAT the Protestant Religon be secu∣red against the growth of Popery, Immorality and Profaneness; THAT the Freedom and In∣dependency of this Antient Kingdom, and the Nation's Right and Title to Caledonia, as holding of your Majesty's Crown of Scotland, be Asserted and Supported; THAT the good inclinations of your Majesty and Successors Kings of Scotland be preserved from Foreign Influence, as well as
from the Mis-representations and Pernicious Counsels of Unnatural Countrey-Men; THAT the frequency and sitting of Parliaments be secu∣red and ascertain'd, pursuant to the Claim of Right; THAT dangerous Influences upon the freedom of Parliaments, either by Gratuities, Pensions, or Farms of any branch of the Revenue and the disposing of any part of the Revenue or annexed Property of the Crown, otherways than according to Law, for the necessary sup∣port of the Government, be prevented; THAT the publick-Credit be restored, and an enquiry made into the Application of the Funds laid on, and appropriated by Parliament, for support of the Government and payment of the Army; THAT the Security of the Nation, and Gover∣nment, be settled in a duly regulated National Force, in stead of a standing Army, so burden∣some to the Countrey, and dangerous to its Li∣berties; THAT the manner of applying the Secu∣rity, which we have by our Claim of Right, for the Personal freedom of the Subject, against long and Arbitrary Imprisonment, as well as against Pursutes upon old and obsolete Laws, be special∣ly declared; THAT the Trade of this Nation be Encouraged & Advanced, by duly regulating its Export and Import, by discharging prejudicial Branches thereof, by fixing the value of our cur-Money, by encouraging Manufactories, by im∣ploying the Poor, and more especially by Coun∣tenancing and Assisting our said Company, in the Prosecution of its lawful Undertakings; And THAT all such Articles of Grievances presented to your Majesty by the Estates of this Kingdom in the Year 1689 as have not yet been Redress'd, to∣gether
with such other Grievances as the Parlia∣ment shall, at the Meeting thereof, find the Na∣tion aggrieved with, be Redress'd in Parliament. And your Majesty having by your Royal Let∣ter, of the 24 of May 1689, been graciously plea∣sed to declare, and give full assurance to our Re∣presentatives in that meeting of the Estates, which settled the Crown and Royal Dignity of this Realm on your Majesty, That we should always find your Majesty ready to Protect us, and to Assist the Estates in making such Laws, as might secure our Re∣ligion, Liberties and Properties, and prevent or Redress whatsoever might be justly grievous to us; That your Majesty would never believe that the true interest of your People and the Crown could be opposite; and that your Majesty would always account it your greatest Prerogative to assent to such Laws as might promote Truth, Peace, and Wealth in Your Kingdom. We do therefore reckon it our duty, humbly to desire and assuredly expect, that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to satisfy the longing desires, and earnest Expectations of your People, by al∣lowing your Parliament to meet, as soon as possi∣ble; and when mett, to sit till they fully delibe∣rate upon, and come to solid Resolutions in the great and weighty Concerns of the Nation, and grant such Instructions to your Commissioner, as may impower him to pass such Acts, as the great Council of the Nation shall think most conducive to the true Honour of your Majesty and Govern∣ment, the welfare of this Realm, both as to its Religious and Civil Interest, and to the full quieting the Minds of all your Majesty's good People.
This Address was presented to His Majesty at Hampton-Court. the 16th. day of November 1700. By the Right Honourable the Lord Yester, Sir John Pringle of Stitchell, and Sir Peter Wedderburn of Gosford Baronets, Commissioners appointed for that end. And upon presenting thereof, the Lord Yester, in Name of the rest, Address'd the King thus, Sir, We are come here to present an Address to your Majesty Sign'd by a great Number of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects in Scotland, who have no other design in it, but your Ma∣jesty's true Honour, and the welfare of their Native Countrey; which we desire your Ma∣jesty would be pleased to hear read. His Majesty, after having heard the Address read, was Graciously pleased to give the following Answer. Gentlemen, I Can not take further notice of this Address, seing the Parliament is now met, and I have made a Declaration of my Mind for the good of my People, wherewith I hope all my faithfull Subjects will be satis∣fied. Here I must beg pardon, for having omitted the late Address of the House of Lords in Eng∣land, concerning the Endeavours of the Scots for having settled a Colony at Darien, and His Ma∣jesty's Answer thereunto; both which ought, ac∣cording
to order of time, to have been placed at Page 105 but rather than rob the Reader of having the benefit thereof, it was thought fit to insert them here, and they are as followeth, The Humble Address of the Lords, &c. presen∣ted to His Majesty the 12th. day of Februa∣ry 1700. VVE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, being ac∣cording to our duty solicitous for the preserva∣tion & Encrease of the Trade of this Kingdom, on which the Support of your Majesties Great∣ness and Honour so much depends, as well as the Security and Defence of your People, have been very apprehensive, that the steps lately made towards a Settlement of your Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland at Darien, may tend to the great prejudice of this Nation, and possibly to the disturbance of that Peace and good Correspondence with the Crown of Spain, which we conceive is very Advanta∣gious to us all: We have therefore taken the same into our serious consideration, as a matter of the greatest Importance, and proper to be laid before your Majesty, as the common Fa∣ther of both Countries. And as we are truly sensible of great Losses our Neighbour King∣dom hath sustained, both by Men and Treasure, in their Expeditions to that place, which we very heartily lament, so we should not en∣deavour by any Interposition of Ours, to de∣feat
the Hopes they may still entertain of reco∣vering these Losses by their further engaging in that design, but that we judge such a Pro∣secution on their parts must end not only in far greater Disappointments to themselves, but at the same time prove very inconvenient to the Trade, and quiet of this Kingdom. On this occasion we humbly presume to put your Majesty in mind of the Address of both Houses of Parliament, presented to your Majesty on the 17th. of December 1695. In the close of which Address your Majesty will see the Unanimous Sense of this Kingdom in re∣lation to any Settlement the SCOTS might make in the West-Indies, by vertue of an Act of Parliament past about that time in the King∣dom of Scotland, which was the occasion of the Address. And we humbly represent to your Majesty, that having received Information of some Or∣ders your Majesty had sent to the Governours of the Plantations on this Subject, the House did, on the 18th. of January last, come this Resolu∣tion, That your Majesty's pleasure signified to the Governours of the Plantations, in Relation to the Scots Settlement at DARIEN, was agreeable to the Address of both Houses of Parliament, presented to your Majesty on the 17th. of December 1695. And on the 18th. of this instant February, this House came to this further Resolution, That the Settlement of the Scots Colony at DARIEN is inconsistent with the good of the Plantation Trade of this Kingdom.
All which we humbly hope your Majesty will take into your Royal Consideration, and we are confident that your Majesty cannot be thought too partial to the Address of this House, if your Majesty shall in the first place consider the Advantage and Good of the Trade of this Kingdom, by the Preservation and Improve∣ment of which, both these Kingdoms, and all your other Dominions, must on all occasions principally be defended. It is remarkable that this Address was carried only by Four or Five Votes, and that the House of Commons absolutely refused to concur with it, and that about Sixteen Peers entred their Protests against it. His Majesties most Gracious Answer to the Ad∣dress was to this effect, Viz. HIS Majesty having received a very duti∣full Address from the House of Peers, in relation to the Endeavours lately used by some of His Majesties Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland towards making a Settlement at DA∣RIEN, in which they humbly represent to him their Opinion, That such a Settlement is inconsistent with the good of the Plantation-Trade of this Kingdom: Is pleased to let the House know, That he will always have a very great regard to their Opinion; And to assure them, that he will never be wanting, by all proper means, to promote the Advantage and Good of the Trade of England. At the same
time His Majesty is pleased to declare, that he cannot but have a great Concern and Ten∣derness for his Kingdom of Scotland, and a de∣sire to advance their Well-fare and Prosperity, & is very sensibly touched with the loss His Sub∣jects of that Kingdom have sustained by their late unhappy Expeditions, in order to a Settle∣ment at DARIEN. His Majesty does ap∣prehend that Difficulties may too often arise, with respect to the different Interest of Trade, between his two Kingdoms, unless some way be found out to unite them more nearly and compleatly: And therefore His Majesty takes this opportunity of putting the House of Peers in mind of what he recommended to his Par∣liament, soon after his Accession to the Throne, That they would consider of an Union be∣tween the two Kingdoms. His Majesty is of opinion, That nothing would more contri∣bute to the security and happiness of both Kingdoms; and is inclined to hope, that after they have lived near 100 years under the same Head, some happy Expediment may be found for making them one people, in case a Trea∣ty were set on Foot for that purpose; And therefore he does very earnestly recommend this Matter to the Consideration of the House. It is likeways remarkable that when the House of Lords fram'd and past a Bill of Union pur∣suant to His Majesty's said Answer, The House of Commons rejected the same from Motives which I shall not presume to mention, the same being already very well known to all those who know any thing of that Matter.
To His Grace, His Majesty's High Commissio∣ner, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament. The humble Representation and Petition of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies. May it please your Grace & Right Honourable Estates, WHEREAS, By our former Petition, of the 16th of May last, we laid a Representation of the then Cir∣cumstances of our Company's Affairs, before your Grace and Right Honourable Estates: Which be∣ing once read, and nothing done thereupon, we now humbly intreat, that the same, still lying in the Clerks Hands, may, at this time, be again read & considered in Parliament: And do further Represent, That, since that time, we have the Melancholly Assurance of what we then feared from the constant Course of our Discouragements, that the Governour of Carthagena, for the King of Spain, His Majesty's Ally, has, from the Unneigh∣bourly Instignation of those, from whom we ought more reasonably to have expected Assistance, been encouraged to make an Attempt for dispo∣ssessing our Colony of Caledonia; And in order thereunto, Blockaded them up by Sea, & attacked them by Land, in the time of profound peace, and that some of our said Colony being too easily frighten'd, by their Apprehensions of those evil Consequences that they thought must necessarly
have attended the many Discouragements, and want of Protection which we labour'd under all along, have unwarrantably taken upon them the Power to surrender our Company's said Settle∣ment to the Spaniards, to the unspeakable Loss and great Dishonour of the Nation, and that the West-India Proclamations, mention'd in our for∣mer Petition, being still as much in force and rigorously executed, as ever, against us, we could not all this time, nor cannot as yet, ex∣pect the Liberty even of carrying off our Ships, that are lying perishing at Port-Royal in Jamaica, and Amboy-Perth in East-Jersey without your Interposition on our Company's behalf, for pro∣curing to us Warrants from His Majesty, directed to the respective Governours of those Parts for that effect; especially since the Governour of Ja∣maica has, at several times, and to several Per∣sons, declared, That he will not part with our Company's Ship the Saint-Andrew, without a special warrant from England, and that all our Solicitations to the Secretaries of State for that end, have hitherto proved ineffectual. And we cannot but likewise Represent to your Grace and Right Honourable Estates, how that the want of due Protection to our Company all along, and the continued Tract of Encroach∣ments upon its Priviledges Abroad, without any Redress therein, has encouraged some Persons to break in upon the Priviledges of our Company even at Home. MAY it therefore Please Your Grace and Right Honourable Estates, to take the Contents of this, and our former Petiti∣on above-mention'd into your most seri∣ous
Consideration, to take such effectual Measures, as in your Profound Wisdom, you shall think fit, for Asserting and Vin∣dicating our Company's Rights, both a∣broad and at home, for enabling it to pro∣secute its lawful Undertakings, for procur∣ing Reparation from the Spaniards and others, for the Dammages sustained, and for preventing the like Encroachments for the future. Signed at Edinburgh the 28th day of Octo∣ber 1700, in Name, Presence, and by Warrant of the said Council-General, By JOHN SCHAW. I.P.C.G. FINIS. Non solum ferit uncis cornibus hostem, Verum etiam instanti laesa repugnat ovis. Prop.
THE CONTENTS. THe Act of Parliament establishing a Compa∣ny Trading to Africa and the Indies. the 26th. of June 1695. The Parliament of England's Address to His Majesty concerning the said Act the 13th. of December and presented the 17th. Ditto. 1695, p. 1. His Majesty's most gracious Answer to that Address. p, 3. A Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh by Sir Paul Rycaut Resident for his Majesty in that City, and Mr. Cresset His Majesty's Envoy extraordinary at the Courts of Lunenburgh, against the Company. the 7th. of April 1697. p. 4. The Answer. p. 6. A Memorial given in thereupon to the Senate of that City by the Company's Deputees the 9th. of April 1697. Ibid. What was done thereupon. p. 7. The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, to His Majesty upon that occasion. the 28th of June 1697. Ibid. His Majesty's Answer to that Address. the 2d. of August 1697. p. 11 A Letter of Expostulation from the Directors of the Company to the Secretaries of State. the 28th. of September 1697. Ibid.
The humble Address of the Council-General of the Company to His Majesty. the 22d. day of December 1697. p. 14. The humble Representation of the Council-General of the Company to His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council. the 22d. day of December 1697. p. 16. A Letter from the Council-General of the Company to His Grace the Duke of Queensberry. the 25th. day of December 1697. p. 19. A Letter from both the Secretaries of State, in Answer to the Council-General of the Company's Second Address to His Majesty. January the 17th. 1698. p. 20, The humble Petition of the Council-General of the Company to His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament. the 22th. of July 1698. p. 21. The Parliament of Scotland's Address to His Majesty in relation to the Hamburgh-Memorial and the other Contents of that Petition. The 28th. of August 1698. p. 26. The humble Petition of the Court of Directors of the Company to His Majesty, the 16th. day of August 1698, in pursuance of the Parliament's, Address. p. 27. A Letter from Mr. Stevenson the Company's Agent at Hamburgh to the Court of Directors of the Company the 4th. of October 1698, con∣cerning the Hamburgh-Memorial, &c. p. 29. A Letter from Ditto, the 18th. of October 1698. p. 30. A Letter from the Court of Directors of the Company to the Right Honourable the Viscount of
Seafield Secretary of State, the 29th. of Novem∣ber 1698, relative to the former Letters. p. 31. The Secretaries Answer, the 13th. of December 1698. p. 32. A Letter from the Court of Directors of the Company in Answer to the Secretary of State January 13th. 1699. p. 33. A Letter from the Secretary of State the 17th. of February 1699, in Answer to the Company's Petition of the 16th of the preceeding August. p. 34 A Letter from the Council-General of the Company to His Majesty, giving an Account of the Colony's Arrival and Settlement at Darien, and of the French Designs upon that Coast. the 31th. of March 1699. Ibid. A Letter from the Court of Directors to the Secretaries of State, the 1st. of April 1699, enlarging on the Contents of the preceeding Let∣ter to the King. p. 36. A Memorial presented to the King of Great Brittain by the Ambassadour Extraordinary of Spain against the Scots Settlement at Darien, the 3d. of May 1699. p. 40 The first Memorial presented to his Majesty, by the Lord President of the Session and Lord Advocat, on behalf of the Company, and as∣serting the legality of their Settlement in Darien the of May. 1699. p. 41. A Second Memorial by Ditto. p. 51 A Third Memorial by Ditto. p. 54. A Memorandum concerning the Spanish and French Ambassadours at the Court of England, in September 1699. p. 74.
The Council of Caledonia's Address to His Ma∣jesty, delivered to the Secretaries of State the of September 1699. Ibid. A Proclamation by the Governour of Jamai∣ca against the Company and Colony. the 8th. of April 1699. p. 77. A Proclamation by the Governour of Barba∣dos against Ditto. the 13th. of April 1699. p 78. A Proclamation by the Governour of New-York against Ditto the 15th. of May 1699. p. 79. A Proclamation by Ditto as Governour of New-England against Ditto. the 3d. of June 1699. p. 81. A Second Proclamation by the Governour of Barbados against Ditto the 5th. of September 1699. p. 83. The Council-General of the Company's Pe∣tition to His Majesty concerning those Proclama∣tions, &c. the 19th. of October 1699. p. 84 His Majesty's Answer. The 2d. of November 1699. p. 87, The humble Address of the Council-General of the Company to His Majesty's most Honou∣rable Privy Council, upon that occasion. The 20th. of October 1699. p. 88. A Letter from the Council-General of the Company to the Secretaries of State, concerning their humble Address to the King, with relation to Captain Pinkerton, &c. the 4th. of December 1699. p. 91. The humble Address of the Council-General of the Company to his Majesty concerning Captain Robert Pinkarton &c. The 4th. of December 1699. p. 92.
A Letter from my Lord Chancellor to the Di∣rectors of the Company the 4th. of January 1700. p. 96 A Letter from the Directors to each of the Se∣cretaries of State, the 9th. of January 1700. con∣cerning the Lord Chancellours said Letter. p. 97. A Letter from the Directors of the Company to Lord Basil Hamilton concerning the Premisses, the 9th. of January, 1700. p. 98. His Majesty's Answer to the Company's Ad∣dress by a Letter to His Privy Council of Scot∣land, the 10th. of January 1700. p. 100 Another Letter from the Council-General of the Company to Lord Basil Hamilton the 29th. of January 1700. p. 102 A Proclamation anent Petitioning. The 18th. of December 1699. p. 103. The humble Address of the English House of Lords against the Company's Settling a Colony at Darien presented to His Majesty, the 12th. of February 1700. p. 138. His Majesty's most gracious Answer to that Address. p. 140 The first National Address Petitioning that His Majesty would be graciously pleased to al∣low the Parliament of Scotland to meet, &c. presented to His Majesty, the 25th. of March 1700. p. 105 His Majesty's most Gracious Answer. p. 107. The humble Representation and Petition of the Company to His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honourable Estates of Parliament, the 16th. of May 1700. p. 108
The humble Address and Petition of the Here∣tors of the Shire of Haddingtoun presented and read in Parliament the 27th. of May 1700. p. 124 The heads of several Addresses from other Shires and Burghs, which were likewise read in Parliament at the same time. p. 126. An humble Address to His Majesty, from the Plurality of the Members of Parliament, then present, concerning the manner of Adjourning the Parliament, presented to His Majesty the 11th. of June 1700. p. 127. His Majesty's most Gracious Answer. His Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, by way of Letter, directed to His Grace the King's High Commissioner, and the Privy Council of Scotland. Given at Loo the 26th of July 1700, and published after the manner of Proclama∣tions. Ibid. The last National Address presented to His Majesty, the 16th. of November 1700. p. 133 His Majesty's most Gracious Answer. p. 137 The humble Representation and Petition of the Council-General of the Company to His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honourable Estates of Parliament. the 28th. of October 1700. p. 142. FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of the several Books and Pamphlets that have been hitherto Pub∣lished, concerning the Indian and African Com∣pany of Scotland, set down according to Or∣der of time, for the Information of the Curious. 1. A Letter from a Member of the Parliament of Scotland to his Friend at London, shew∣ing the reasonableness of that Act by which the Com∣pany is established. Printed 1695: 2. Some seasonable and modest Thoughts, &c. hum∣bly offered to R. H. a Member of the House of Com∣mons of England. 1696. 3. A Letter from a Gentleman in the Countrey to his Friend at Edinburgh. 1696. 4. A Letter from a Merchant in Amsterdam to his Friend at Hamburgh concerning the Designs of the Scot Indian Company, 1697. 5. Some Observations on it, in a Letter from Ham∣burgh by way of Answer to it. 1697. 6. A Letter from the Commission of the General As∣sembly of the Church of Scotland, to the Council and Colony of Caledonia. 1699. 7. A Defence of the Scots Settlement at Darien, &c. 1699. 8. A short and impartial view of the manner and occasion of the Scots Colony's coming away from Da∣rien. 1699. 9. A Defence of the Scots Abdicating Darien, &c. Written by Herostratus Junior, alias Harris. 1700. 10. A just and modest Vindication of the Scots de∣sign for the having established a Coloney at Darien, &c. with a Prefatory confutation of Harris. 11. An Enquiry into the Causes of the Miscarriage of the Scots Colony at Darien, containing a full An∣swer to Harris's Libel. 1700.
12. A short Vindication of the Defence of the Scots Abdicating Darien, &c. 1700. 13. Scotland's present Duty: Or a Call to the No∣bility, Gentry, Ministry, &c. 1700. 14. Scotland's Grievances with relation to Darien, &c. humbly offered to the consideration of the Parlia∣ment. 1700. 15. A full and exact Collection of all the considera∣ble Addresses, Memorials, Petitions, Answers, Pro∣clamations, Declarations, Letters and other publick Papers, relating to the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, since the passing of the Act of Parliament, by which it was established in June 1695, till November 1700 ☞ Nota, The 4th. 9th. and 12th. Pamphlets of this Catalogue are written against the Company, and all the rest for it, except the last, which consists of a Collection of several publick Papers of diffe∣rent kinds upon the same Subject, promiscuously gathered by an impartial hand. Contraria juxta se posita clarius elucescunt.
