L1633 [ocm]12426005 199742
A Letter to a Dissenter from his Friend at the HAGUE, Concerning the Penal Laws and the Test; shevving that the Popular Plea for Liberty of Con∣science is not concerned in that Question. SIR, I Suppose you are very busie about the Choice of Parliament-Men, and all hands are at work to Elect such Members as may com∣ply with the great Design to Repeal the Penal Laws, and the Test. The pretence I con∣fess is very plausible; for all Men are fond of Li∣berty of Conscience, vvho dissent from the Estab∣lished Religion; but you and I have liv'd long enough in the World to observe that the most pernicious Designs have been carried on, under the most plausible Pretences; and that is Reason enough to enquire vvhether there be no danger of it novv. I shall not say one vvord against Liberty of Conscience, nor for Penal Laws and Tests: Imagine the best things you possibly can of the one, and declame as much as you please against the other. For I do not see that either of them are concerned in the present Dispute; but only made use of to wheadle unthinking people, and to catch them with a very inviting Bait: and therefore before You engage too warmly in this Cause, I would offer some few things to your calm and deliberate Thoughts. The great Pretence is Liberty of Conscience; and if this were the true state of the Case, the Dispute would be more doubtful and perplexed: for that is an Argument a Man may talk of with∣out end, and it is not to be expected that Men who feel the want of Liberty, or taste the sweet∣ness of it, should be persuaded by any Argu∣ments to forgo it when it may be had. But now, if Liberty of Conscience may be had without the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws; if it be apparent to Men who will open their eyes, that the true spring of all this zeal for Repealing the Test and Penal Laws is not Liberty of Con∣science; if there be great danger that by consent∣ing to this Repeal, vve shall forfeit both the Li∣berty of our Consciences and our Civil Liberties into the Bargain; then I presume You will rea∣dily grant that Liberty of Conscience as good a thing as it is, is no Reason for such a Repeal. I. As for the first, it is a very plain case; For you enjoy Liberty of Conscience Now, and yet the Penal Laws and Test are not Repealed. What greater Liberty do you desire than you now have? What can the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test do for you which the Kings Declaration hath not done? You have his repeated Promises, his avow'd Principle that Conscience is not to be forc'd; and that no man ought to suffer meerly for his Religion; though the Penal Laws are not repeal∣ed, yet they are suspended; they are not executed either against Papists or Dissenters, and you have the security of the Kings Declaration for it. If you say, that the King can quickly recall his Declaration, and reinforce the Penal Laws, if he find you obstinate against Repealing them; I An∣swer first, It is very dishonorable to imagine such a thing of the King, after such a Declaration as this, vvhich he hath repeated the second time with all possible assurances of his Resolutions to stand to it: and that not as a meer Act of grace and favour, but as his own avowed Principle, that Conscience ought not to be forced. If you Re∣ply that the King may very Honourably recal this Liberty of Conscience, vvhen you will not have it, but resolve to keep these persecuting Laws; I answer, Not, if it be against the Principles of his own Conscience to Persecute. Meer favours may be withdrawn when they are slighted; bu no man will violate his own Conscience, to be re∣venged of such ingratitude. And yet this is not the case: You do not slight the grace and favor of his Declaration, but gladly accept the Liberty he gives; and all the World sees that You use it too: but instead of Repealing these Penal Laws, You chuse to rely upon his Royal Word and Di∣spensing Power; vvhich argues so great a Confi∣dence in him, and attributes such Authority to him, that it cannot possibly displease him. This is a plain sign, that you think your selves secure in his Reign; and can you think the King will persecute you in his own Reign, because you are contented to trust his Successors too? which would be a very odd kind of passion for Liberty of Conscience? To imagine the King should reinforce the Penal Laws upon your refusal to Repeal them, is to suspect that this great Zeal is not for Liberty of Conscience, but for the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test; that is, that Liberty of Conscience is granted for the sake of Repealing the Penal Laws and Tests, not the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests, desired for the sake of Liberty of Conscience; and then who knows what will become of Li∣berty of Conscience, when the Penal Laws and
Test are Repealed? If you suspect any such thing which never ought to be suspected of so just and indulgent a Prince, it is better to make the Expe∣riment before, than after such a Repeal. Suppose the King should withdraw his De∣claration upon Your refusal to comply. Who would put the Laws in Execution against you? They must either be Dissenters or Papists or the Church of England: I presume you do not fear that you should execute the Laws against Your selves; and as for Papists it vvere vvorth trying vvhether they vvho are so obnoxious to the Laws themselves, would put them in Exe∣cution against Dissenters, especially after all their Clamors against them: and as for the Church of England, vvhen they have been so reproached by Papist for Executing these Laws already, though more at the instance of the Court than from their own inclination, they vvill no longer be made the instruments of such executions, only to serve the turn of them that vvill reproach them: So that if the Declaration vvere recalled, You have a moral certainty that the Penal Lavvs cannot be Executed in this Kings reign, because there is no body to execute them. As for the Test, You cannot pretend that Li∣berty of Conscience is concern'd in the Repeal of that. You may go to Conventicles, and the Papists may go to Mass vvithout any disturbance though the Test be never repealed: and there∣fore the only design of repealing that must be to give a legal Qualification to Papists to possess all places of Honour, Profit and Trust in the Nation; that is, to put your Lives and Liberties into their hands; which I confess is a great Complement to a Roman Catholick Prince; but a Comple∣ment may sometimes be overstrained. And yet it is such a Complement as they need not. For vve see they are qualified by the Dispensing Power, vvithout the Repeal of the Test; which hath made me often wonder vvhy they are so zealous to have it repealed. Do they still question the Kings Dispensing Power? And desire some better security? Let them say so then, and give up that point, and then vve'll talk with them about re∣pealing the Test: but there is no need of repeal∣ing this Law, since the King it seems hath power to dispense vvith it in his reign; and they are very sanguine men, if they hope to have any oc∣casion for it in another! And if after all their boasts of a Dispensing Power, the Law still keeps them in avv, can it be the interest of Protestants to take off these restraints? Are they not insolent enough already, vvhile these threatning Lavvs hang over their heads? Or do vve hope that their modesty and good Nature vvill increase vvith their Povver? For my part I desire that all Men whom I fear may lie under a legal incapacity: for though their Force and Power may be the same, yet there is some difference, in point of Authority and Self-defence. II. There are many things which would make a wise man suspect that there is some farther De∣sign than Liberty of Conscience in all this zeal for repealing the Penal Laws and Test. For it would be very surprising to find a Roman Catholick Prince whose Conscience is directed by a Jesuit, to be really zealous for Liberty of Conscience; to see so many Popish pens imploy'd in pleading for Li∣berty of Conscience, and declaiming against San∣guinary Laws, vvhen all the world knows vvhat Opinion the Church of Rome has about Liberty of Conscience, what great friends the Jesuits are to it; how they abhor persecuting men for their Religion: vvitness the mild and gentle usage of the French Protestants by a King whose Consci∣ence is directed by a tender hearted Jesuit. And if a Princes zeal for his Religion be much greater than for Liberty of Conscience; it would make one suspect that his chief design is to serve his Religion by it; and this is no nevv invention, but as old as the days of the Apostate Julian, when the same method was taken to reinforce Paganism by Liberty of Conscience. This was the last effort of dying Paganism; may it be so of Popery too. We know there was no talk of Liberty of Con∣science, till the Nobility and Gentry of the Church of England refused to take off the Test: and then there vvas no other vvay left, but to buy off the Penal Laws and Test with Liberty of Conscience, which demonstrates that Liberty of Conscience is not the last End, but only a Means in order to some further End; and the Means is seldom va∣lued when the End is obtained. Men who can offer so much violence to their own Nature and the Principles of their Religion, as to grant Li∣berty of Conscience which of all things they hate, to procure a Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws; when that is done, can easily find some occasion to pretend a forfeiture of this Liberty, and to salve their Conscience and Honour together. Pe∣nal Laws to keep men from damning themselves will be thought more merciful than Liberty of Conscience; and the softness and tenderness of Na∣ture, must give place to a Bigotry in Religion; and then vve shall in vain wish for our old Penal Laws and Test again, when we feel the more ter∣rible smart of new ones. Though it be told us, that it hath always been his Majesties Persuasion that Conscience ought not
to be forced, I think that is no security; because though this has alvvays been his Principle, yet it hath not always operated. VVe know whose hand was most concern'd both in making and ex∣ecuting Penal Laws in the last Reign; and if our Dissenters suffer'd so much then, as they now com∣plain of, they know what they may suffer again, notwithstanding these Principles for Liberty of Conscience; for the same Principles obtain'd then, as do now. Upon the last withdrawing in∣to Scotland, notwithstanding those Principles the poor Scotch felt the severity of those Penal Laws vvith a witness; and methinks it is not safe tru∣sting to such Principles as so often act by way of Antiperistasis, and produce Effects quite contrary to their own Natures: and however the Church of Rome may indulge such Principles now they are convenient to serve a present turn, if the Scene ever alter, this private Conscience vvill be thought as great Heresie as a private Judgment; and whosoever now may ovvn it must then be guided by the publick Conscience of the Church, as well as by their Faith. There are so many surprising Circumstances in this whole matter, as cannot but amaze a think∣ing Man: that so fierce a Zeal should be now kindled for a Liberty of Conscience, that a Liberty of Judgment will not be allowed, but vvho ever will not concurr in this Opinion must undergo the high displeasure; vvhereas there can be no Liberty of Conscience without Liberty of Judg∣ment: And to be mortally angry with every man who is not of my Opinion, is no good Preface to granting every man a Liberty to think and act, as he pleases. If a Potentate should be so Zealous for Liberty of Conscience, as to change all his old Antipa∣thies and Friendships, to receive his profess'd E∣nemies and Rebels into his bosom, and cast off his tried and experienced Friends; that he should forget all injuries and all kindnesses together, this would be such an effect of a great passion for Liberty of Conscience as was never known be∣fore: and vvhen Causes do not work naturally, vve suspect some preternatural ingredients mixed with them. That a Zeal against the Test and Penal Laws, should be made a Test to the whole Nation; and that not vvithout severe Penalties too, viz. The forfeiture of our Princes favour, of all Places of Trust and Honour, and incapacity to serve in Parliaments if they can prevent it, or to be Mem∣bers of any little Corporation. That for the sake of Liberty of Conscience, the whole Clergy must be forced to Publish the De∣claration, though they declare it to be against their Consciences: That the Archbishop and six of his Suffragans must be sent to the Tovver, for Petitioning for their own Liberty of Conscience; and whither they must have gone next God knows, unless they had been rescu'd by an honest Iury: That all those vvho did not Read the Declaration are still threatned with Suspensions, and Deprivations: Archdeacons and Chancellors commanded to turn Informers, though almost all of them must inform against themselves for not reading, or not sending the Declaration: and all this while the Laws are on their side. It is like to be a very terrible Liberty of Conscience, when it is grown up into the Maturity and strength of a Law, which like another Hercules can strangle all Laws and Liberties in its Cradle. These things make me apt to suspect that the best way to preserve Liberty of Conscience is to keep the Test and Penal Laws. III. For Thirdly, If there be any reason to suspect any other design than Liberty of Conscience, as suppose to promote Popery, and by degrees to make it the Established Religion of the Nation, (which certainly is the Design, unless you can imagine, that Priests and Jesuits, and One who hath given up his Understanding and Consci∣ence to them, can ever be without this Design,) You will easily be convinced that there is infinite hazzard in repealing the Test and the Penal Laws. This sets Papists upon an equal level with Pro∣testants, and then the Favour of the Prince will set them above them: and when the whole power of the Nation, and the whole administration of Justice is in Popish hands, there vvill need no Pe∣nal Laws to persecute Protestants. If you say this is done in a great many instances now before such a Repeal; I answer, then You may certain∣ly guess what will be done when those incapaci∣tating Laws are repealed: And yet the Difference is very great; For while they are under such a legal Incapacity, the distrust of their power will make them more modest, which is the only thing that can plead their excuse hereafter; but when they have legal authority, they will shew their Nature without restraint. Men who have any thing to lose will act cautiously in prospect of an After-reckoning, or while these legal incapacities continue will be afraid to act; but when the Le∣gal Authority and Power is in their hands. Pro∣testant Subjects will quickly find what a Popish Liberty of Conscience means. While these Laws continue, some professed Protestants vvhose Consciences are governed by their Interest are afraid to declare; and by these
means Popery wants hands and numbers to do its work: But when these Laws are removed, hopes of preferment will prevail on some, and fear on others; and vvhen this frozen Adder begins to grovv vvarm, and recover its blood and spirits, it will find its sting too. This would certainly overthrovv the Constitu∣tion of the Church of England, vvhich is the most effectual vvay to let in Popery: For when all In∣capacities are removed, Papists are as vvell quali∣fied for Church-Preferments as Protestants, and it vvill be an easie matter to find pretences, to re∣move the best Men to make vvay for them. We have four Catholick Bishops (as they vain∣ly call themselves) already prepared to fill vacant Sees; and if such Men have the impudence to publish their Pastoral Letter, and make their pub∣lick Visitations while all the Lavvs against them are in force, judge vvhat they will do vvhen they are repealed. Thus our Parishes may be filled vvith Roman Priests, and they indeed are the fit∣test to serve under Roman Bishops. And if one Colledge be already seized into Popish hands, and the Protestant possessors turned out of their Free∣hold; vvhen those Lavvs are Repealed, we may quickly see more follow them; and judge whe∣ther this be not a fair and easie step to Popery. Nay, I have heard some good Lavvyers say, That vvhen the Penal Laws are repealed, Popery is the Established Religion of the Nation: That vvhen a repealing Law is repealed, the repealed Law revives: I am not so good a Lawyer as to judge of this, but I think it is vvorth your Con∣fidering. But who knows, vvhen all the Ecclesiastical Laws are Repealed, vvhat the Kings Supremacy and his Ecclesiastical Commission may do? There have been great and big vvords said of it of late; and I believe You had better keep your Penal Laws, than fall under the lash of a Popish Supre∣macy. I knovv there hath been a great talk of an Equivalent, but I vvould gladly know vvhat that Equivalent should be. Shall it incapacitate all Papists for any Office either in Church or State? That must not be, for fear of depriving the King of the natural right he has to the service of his Subjects; and then I am sure there can be no Equivalent for the repeal of the incapacitating Laws. But you say there shall be a New Charter for the Church of England, the Protestant Religi∣on and Liberty of Conscience. Now shall this be with a Penalty or without one? If with a penalty, then you do not repeal, but only exchange your Penal Laws; and if Penal Laws are not such Unchristian things, but they may be allowed, we cannot have better for the security of our Religi∣on than we have; and therefore vve had best keep these. Is there any other fault in our Penal Laws, (especially when they are not executed) but that they are too great a security to the Church of England, and the Protestant Inteest? And if this be a reason for Protestants at this time to re∣peal them, I have done. But if this new Estab∣lishment be without a penalty, what is it good for? When these Penal Lavvs are removed, Papists are qualified to sit in both Houses of Parliament: and vvho knows vvhether Closetting and Re∣forming of Corporations, and such other Arts may not quickly make a Popish Parliament? And then Good Night to Your New Establishment and Liberty of Conscience. These things I hope Sir, You will consider in your Choice of Members for Parliament; and not be cheated vvith the Popular cry of Liberty of Conscience, into the vilest and most despicable Slavery both of Soul and Body. I am SIR, Your very Cordial Friend, and faithful Monitor. Tot de Hague, gedruckt door Hans Verdraeght, 1688.
