M1076 C.20.f.10[4] R229004 99888088 193146
A Match at a Venture: OR, Time & Opportunity won the day. Being, A Discourse of wooing between Two Lovers. The Young-man Courted her with Complements most rare, And all his mind to her he boldly did declare; She still held off, and was so stiff inclin'd, And would not quickly let him know her mind: Until that Cupid with his Golden Dart Had made a wound, and pierc'd her tender heart: And then she yielded his true Love to be, They now are Married, and live most gallantly. Tune of, Jenny come tye my bonny Cravat. woodcut of gentleman woodcut of woman AS I in the Fields was walking along, I heard a young couple was talking anon, I do love thee most dearly, fair Maiden, said he, And thou shalt be my true love until I do dye; For Cupid has wounded my poor love sick heart, I must break my mind now before we depart. I will buy thée Scarfs, & I will buy thée Gloves, That is fitting for suitors to give to their loves, And jewels and bracelets that shall be most rare, If thou wilt but be my true love and my dear; I am thy true lover, thou'st be my own dear, I'le ne'r be false to thée thou needest not fear.
woodcut of man and woman Maid. KInd Young-man I thank you for your good will, Yet poor silly Maidens had need try their skill, You promise more in an hour then you do in 7 year, Its hard for to trust any Man I do swear; They be so false-hearted, and given to lye, They've caus'd many a Maiden to weep and to cry. Its not your cunning baits, nor your nimble tongue Such words as those has done many Maids wrong Therefore honest young-man you are not for me, A good Service is better than a Wife for to be: I take great delight for to live a Maids life, There's far greater trouble belongs to a Wife. Young-man. Swéet-heart now thou mak'st me to smile in conceit, Now hear me a word more I do thee intreat; If thou wilt but love me as I do love thee, And joyn now in wedlock my Wife for to be: There's never a woman in England I swear, Shall ha' more content then thou shalt have my dear. Tho' some be false-hearted, and often do swear, O do not blame all men for one my own dear: He is worse than a Iew that has a good wife, And loves her not as dear as he loves his own life: And let her want nothing that she doth require, But be loving and faithful unto her desire. Maid. Indeed honest Man, I tell you now true, There's many Men more I say besides you, That has said and sworn as much as you say, And have proved knaves to their wives the first day: That never takes care for one thing or other, Their wife and their children may starve altogether. It behoves all Maidens that live single lives, How they Marry with Men for to be their wives, Some will misuse them both sober and drunk, And use them no better then the whore their Punk, We see enough every day of those which are wed, How barely they go, and how hardly they'r fed. Man. Indeed pretty Maiden thy words are most true, But do not believe it shall be so with you: My state and my purse shall be at thy command, Say what shall be done, and thy word it shall stand; And grant but thy favour my wife for to be, Nothing shall be wanting that can pleasure thee. Maid. Why then honest young-Man you shall be my dear, I'le venture in Marriage without any fear; You shall be my Husband, I will be your wife, And live loving together all days of our life: The Young-Man rejoyced the same for to hear, when she had yielded to be both his wife & his Dear. Now in the conclusion, they appointed a day, And went to the Church & were marry'd straitway; VVith consent of their friends, & to end my Ditty, They live loving together in Londons fair City; And loving and gallantly they do agree, And a pattern to other true lovers may be. FINIS. Printed for I. Deacon, at the Rain-bow in Hol∣born, near St. Andrews Church.
