N509 R32161 [ocm]12346691 177315
A New and further DISCOVERY OF The Issle of PINES In A Letter from Cornelius Van Sloetton a Dutch-man (who first discovered the same in the Year, 1667.) to a Friend of his in London. With a Relation of his voyage to the East Indies. Wherein Is declared how he happened to come thither, the Scituation of the Country, the temperature of the Climate, the manners and conditions of the people that inhabit it; their Laws, Ordinances, and Ceremonies, their way of Marrying, Burying, &c. the Longitude and Latitude of the Island, the pleasantness and felicity there∣of, with other matters of concern. Licensed according to Order. LONDON Printed for Allen Bankes and Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce near Cripplegate Church. 1668.
A New and further discovery of the Isle of PINES, IN A Letter from Cornelius Van Sloetton, a Dutch-man, who first discovered the same in the Year, 1667. SIR, I Received your Letter of this second instant, wherein you desire me to give you a further account concern∣ing the Island of Pines, on which we were driven by distresse of Weather the last Summer, I also perused the Printed book thereof you sent me, the Copy of which was surreptiously taken out of my hands, else should I have given you a more fuller account upon what occasion we came thither, how we were entertained, with some o∣ther
circumstances of note wherein that relation is defective. To satisfie therefore your desires, I shall briefly yet fully give you a particular account thereof, desiring you to bear with my blunt phrases, as being more a Seaman then a Scholler. April the 26th 1667. We set sail from Amsterdam, in∣tending for the East-Indies; our ship had to name the place from whence we came, the Amsterdam, burthen 350 Tun. and having a fair gale of Wind, on the 27 of May following we had a fight of the high Peak of Tenariffe belonging to the Canaries, we would have touched at the Island Palma, but having endeavoured it twice, and finding the winds contra∣ry, we steered on our course by the Isles of Cape verd, or Insulae Capitis Viridis where at St. James we took in fresh water, with some few Goats, and Hens, wherewith that Island doth plentifully abound. June the 14 we had a sight of Magadascar or the Island of St. Lawrence, an Island of 4000 miles in compass, and scitu∣ate under the Southern Tropick; thither we steered our course, and trafficked with the inhabitants for Knives, Beads, Glasses and the like, having in exchange thereof Cloves and Silver. Departing from thence we were encountred with a violent storm, and the winds holding contrary, for the space of a fortnight, brought us back almost as far as the Isle Del Prin∣cipe; during which time many of our men fell sick, and some dyed, but at the end of that time it pleased God the wind favoured us again, and we steered on our course merrily, for the space of ten days: when on a sudden we were encounte∣red with such a violent storm as if all the four winds toge∣ther had conspired for our destruction, so that the stoutest spirit of us all quailed, expecting every hour to be devoured by that merciless element of water, sixteen dayes together
did this storm continue. though not with such violence as at the first, the weather being so dark all the while, and the Sea so rough, that we knew not in what place we were, at length all on a sudden the Wind ceased and the air cleared, the Clouds were all dispersed, and a very serene sky followed, for which we gave hearty thanks to the Almighty, it being beyond our expectation that we should have escaped the violence of that storm. At length one of our men mounting the Main-mast espy∣ed fire, an evident sign of some Countrey near adjoyning, which presently after we apparently discovered, and steer∣ing our course more nigher, we saw several persons pro∣misculously running about the shore, as it were wondring and admiring at what they saw: Being now near to the land we manned out our long Boat with ten persons, who ap∣proaching the shore asked them in our Dutch tongue, War Eylant is dit? to which they returned this Answer in English, That they knew not what we said. One of our Com∣pany named Jeremiah Hanzen who understood English very well, hearing their words discourse to them in their own language; so that in fine we were very kindly invited on shore, great numbers of them flocking about us, admiring at our Cloaths which we did wear, as we on the other side did to find in such a strange place, so many that could speak Eng∣lish and yet to go naked, Four of our men returning back in the long Boat to our ships company, could hardly make them believe the truth of what they had seen and heard, but when we had brought our ship into harbour, you would have blest your self to see how the naked Islanders flocked unto us, so wondring at our ship, as if it had been the greatest miracle of Nature in the whole world.
We were very courteously entertained by them, present∣ing us with such food as that Countrey afforded, which in∣deed was not to be despised; we eat of the Elesh both of Beasts, and Fowls, which they had cleanly drest, though with no great curiosity, as wanting materials, wherewithal to do it; and for bread we had the inside or Kernel of a great Nut as big as an Apple, which was very wholesome, and sound for the body, and tasted to the Pallat very delicious. Having refreshed our selves, they invited us to the Pallace of their Prince or chief Ruler, some two miles distant off from the place where we landed; which we found to be about the bigness of one of our ordinary village houses, it was supported with rough unhewn pieces of Timber, and cove∣red very artificially with boughs, so that it would keep out the greatest showers of Rain; the sides thereof were adorned with several sorts of Flowers, which the fragrant fields there do yield in great variety. The Prince himself (whose name was William Pine the Grandchild of George Pine that was first cast on shore in this Island) came to his Pallace door and saluted us very courteously, for though he had nothing of Majesty in him, yet had he a courteous noble and debo∣neyre spirit, wherewith your English Nation (especially those of the Gentry) are very much indued. Scarce had he done saluting us when his Lady or Wife, came likewise forth of their House or Pallace, attended on by two Maid-servants, she was a woman of an exquisite beauty, and had on her head as it were a Chaplet of Flow∣ers, which being intermixt with several variety of colours became her admirably. Her privities were hid with some pieces of old Garments, the Relicts of those Cloaths (I suppose) of them which first came hither, and yet being a∣dorned with Flowers those very rags seemed beautiful; and
indeed modesty so far prevaileth over all the Female Sex of that Island, that with grass and Flowers interwoven and made strong by the peelings of young Elms (which grow there in great plenty) they do plat together so many of them as serve to cover those parts which nature would have hidden. We carried him as a present some few Knives, of which we thought they had great need, an Ax or Hatchet to fell Wood, which was very acceptable unto him, the old one which was cast on shore at the first, and the only one that they ever had, being now so quite blunt and dulled, that it would not cut at all, some few other things we also gave him, which he very thankfully accepted, inviting us into his house or Pallace, and causing us to sit down with him, where we re∣freshed our selves again, with some more Countrey viands which were no other then such we tasted of before; Prince and peasant here faring alike, nor is there any difference be∣twixt their drink, being only fresh sweet water which the ri∣vers yeild them in great abundance. After some little pause, our Companion (who could speak English) by our request desired to know of him some∣thing concerning their original and how that people speak∣ing the language of such a remote Countrey, should come to inhabit there, having not as we could see any Ships or Boats amongst them the means to bring them thither, and which was more, altogether ignorant and meer strangers to ships, or shipping, the main thing conducible to that means, to which request of ours, the courteous Prince thus replyed. Friends (for so your actions declare you to be, and shall by ours find no less) know that we are inhabitants of this Island of no great standing, my Grandfather being the first that ever set foot on this shore, whose native Countrey was
a place called England, far distant from this our Land as he let us to understand; He came from that place upon the Waters, in a thing called a Ship, of which no question but you may have heard; several other persons were in his Company, not intending to have come hither (as he said) but to a place called India, when tempestuous weather brought him and his Company upon this Coast, where fal∣ling amongst the Rocks his Ship split all in pieces; the whole Company perishing in the Waters, saving only him and four women, which by means of a broken peice of that Ship, by divine assistance got on Land. What after passed (said he) during my Grandfathers life, I shall show you in a Relation thereof written by his own hand, which he delivered to my Father being his eldest Son, charging him to have a special care thereof, and assuring him that time would bring some people or other thither to whom he would have him to impart it, that the truth of our first planting here might not be quite lost, which his com∣mands my Father dutifully obeyed; but no one coming, he at his death delivered the same with the like charge to me, and you being the first people which (besides our selves) e∣ver set footing in this Island, I shall therefore in obedience to my Grandfathers and Fathers commands, vvillingly im∣part the same unto you. Then stepping into a kind of inner room, which as we con∣ceived was his lodging Chamber, he brought forth two sheets of paper fairly written in English, (being the same Relation which you had Printed with you at London) and very distinctly read the same over unto us, which we heark∣ned unto with great delight and admiration, freely proffering us a Copy of the same, which we afterward took and brought away along vvith us. Then proceeded he on in his discourse saying.
My Grandfather when he wrote this, was as you hear eighty years of age, there proceeding from his Loyns one thousand seven hundred eighty nine Children, which he had by them four women aforesaid My Fa∣ther was his eldest son, and was named Henry, begotten of his wife Mary Sparkes, whom he appointed chief Go∣vernor and Ruler over the rest; and having given him a charge not to exercise tyranny over them, see∣ing they were his fellow brethren by the Fathers side (of which there could be no doubt made of double dealing therein) exhorting him to use justice and sin∣cerity amongst them, and not to let Religion die with him, but to observe and keep those precepts which he had taught them, he quietly surrendred up his soul, & was buried with great lamentation of all his children. My father coming to rule, and the people growing more populous, made them to rang further in the dis∣covery of the Country, which they found answerable to their desires, full both of Fowls and Beasts, and those too not hurtful to mankinde, as if this Country on which we were by providence cast without arms or other weapons to defend our selves, or offend others, should by the same providence be so inhabited as not to have any need of such like weapons of destruction wherewith to preserve our lives. But as it is impossible, but that in multitudes disor∣ders will grow, the stronger seeking to oppress the weaker; no tye of Religion being strong enough to chain up the depraved nature of mankinde, even so amongst them mischiefs began to rise, & they soonfell from those good orders prescribed them by mygrand∣father. The source from whence those mischiefs
sprung, was at first I conceive the neglect of hearing the Bible read, which (according to my Grand-fathers prescription) was to be once a month at a general meeting, but now many of them wandring far up into the Country, they quite neglected the coming to it, with all other meanes of Christian instruction, where∣by the sence of sin being quite lost in them, they fell to whoredomes, incests, and adulteries; so that what my Grand-father was forced to do for necessity, they did for wantoness; nay not confining themselves with∣in the bound of any modesty, but brother and sister lay openly together; those who would not yeild to their lewd embraces, were by force ravished, yea many times endangered of their lives. To redress those e∣normities my father assembled all the Company near unto him, to whom he declared the wickedness of those their brethren; who all with one consent a∣greed that they should be severely punished; and so arming themselves with boughs, stones, and such like weapons, they marched against them, who having no∣tice of their coming, and fearing their deserved pu∣nishment, some of them fled into woods, others passed over a great River which runneth through the heart of our Country, hazarding drowning to escape punish∣ment; But the grandest offender of them all was taken, whose name was John Phill, the second son of the Negro-woman that came with my Grand-father into this I∣sland. He being proved guilty of divers ravishings and tyrannies committed by him, was adjudged guilty of death, and accordingly was thrown down from a high Rock into the Sea, where he perished in the waters. Execution being done upon him, the rest were par∣doned
for what was past, which being notified abroad, they returned from those desart and obscure places wherein they were hidden. Now as seed being cast into stinking dung produceth good and wholesome Corn for the sustentation of mans life, so bad manners produceth good and whole∣some Laws for the preservation of humane society. Soone after my father with the advice of some few o∣thers of his Counsel, ordained and set forth these Laws to be observed by them. 1. That whosoever should blaspheme or talk irre∣verently of the name of God should be put to death. 2. That who should be absent from the monthly as∣sembly to hear the Bible read, without sufficient cause shown to the contrary, should for the first default be kept without any victualls or drink, for the space of four days, and if he offend therein again, then to suf∣fer death. 3. That who should force or ravish any maid or wo∣man should be burnt to death, the party so ravished putting fire to the wood that should burn him. 4. Whosoever shall commit adultery, for the first crime the Male shall loose his privities, and the Wo∣man have her right eye bored out, if after that she was again taken in the act, she should die without mercy. 5. That who so injured his neighbour by laming of his limbs, or taking any thing away which he posses∣seth, shall suffer in the same kinde himself by loss of limb; and for defrauding his neighbour, to become servant to him whilest he had made him double satis∣faction. 6. That who should defame or speak evil of the Go∣vernor,
or refuse to come before him upon summons, should receive a punishment by whipping with rods, and afterwards be exploded from the society of all the rest of the inhabitants. Having set forth these Laws, he chose four several persons under him to see them put in Execution, whereof one was of the Englishes, the offspring of Sarah English; another of his own Tribe, the Sparkes; a third of the Trenors, and the fourth of the Phills; appointing them every year at a certaine time to appeare before him, and give an account of what they had done in prosecution of those Laws. The Country being thus settled, my father lived quiet and peaceable till he attained to the age of nin∣ty and four years, when dying, I succeeded in his place, in which I have continued peaceably and quietly till this very present time. He having ended his speech, we gave him very heart∣ly thanks for our information, assuring him we should not be wanting to him in any thing which lay in our powers, wherewith we could pleasure him in what he should desire; and thereupon profferd to depart, but before our going away, he would needs engage us to see him the next day, when was to be their great assembly or monthly Meeting for the celebration of their Religious Exercises. Accordingly the next day we came thither again, and were courteously entertained as before, In a short space there was gathered such a multitude of people together, as made us to admire; and first there was se∣veral Weddings celebrated, the manner whereof was thus. The Bridegroom and Bride appeared before him
who was their Priest or Reader of the Bible, together with the Parents of each party, or if any of their Pa∣rents were dead, then the next relation unto them, without whose consent as well as the parties to be married, the Priest will not joyn them together: but being satisfied in those particulars, after some short oraizons, & joyning of hands together, he pronounces them to be man and wife; and with exhortations to them to live lovingly towards each other, and quietly to their neighbours, he concludes with some prayers, and so dismisses them. The Weddings being finished, all the people took their places to hear the Word read, the new married persons having the honour to be next unto the Priest that day, after he had read three or four Chapters he fell to expounding the most difficult places therein, the people being very attentive all that while, this ex∣ercise continued for two or three hours, which being done, with some few prayers he concluded, but all the rest of that day was by the people kept very strictly, abstaining from all manner of playing or pastimes, with which on other days they use to pass their time away, as having need of nothing but victuals, and that they have in such plenty as almost provided to their hands. Their exercises of Religion being over, we returned again to our Ship, and the next day, taking with us two or three Fowling-pieces, leaving half our Company to guard the Ship, the rest of us resolved to go up higher into the Country for a furthery discovery; All the way as we passed the first morning, we saw abun∣dance of little Cabbins or Huts of these inhabitants, made under Trees, & fashioned up with boughs, grass,
and such like stuffe to defend them from sun and rain; as we went along they came out of them much won∣dring at our attire, & standing a loof from us as if they were afraid, but our companion that spake English, calling to them in their own tongue, and giving them good words, they drew nigher, some of them freely proffering to go along with us, which we willingly ac∣cepted; but having passed some few miles, one of our company espying a fat Buck come gazing on him, he discharged his peece, sending a brace of bullets into his belly, which brought him dead upon the ground; these poor naked unarmed people hearing the noise of the peece, & seeing the Buck lie tumbling in his gore, without speaking any words betooke them to their heels, running back again as fast as they could drive, nor could the perswasions of our Companion, assuring them they should have no hurt, prevail any thing at all with them, so that we were forced to pass along without their Company: all the way that we went we heard the delightful harmony of singing Birds; the ground very sertile in Trees, Grass, and such Flowers as grow by the production of nature, without the help of art; many and several sorts of Beasts we saw, who were not so much wilde as in other Countries; whe∣ther it were as having enough to satiate themselves without ravening upon others, or that they never be∣fore saw the sight of man, nor heard the report  murdering Guns, I leave it to others to deterne. Some Trees bearing wilde fruits we also saw, and of those some whereof we tasted, which were neither unwholesome nor distasteful to the pallat, and no question had but nature here the benefit of art added
unto it, it would equal, if not exceed many of our Europian Countries; the Valleys were every where intermixt with running streams, and no question but the Earth hath in it rich veins of Minerals, enough to satisfie the desires of the most covetous. It was very strange to us, to see that in such a fer∣tile Country which was as yet never inhabited, there should be notwithstanding such a free and clear pas∣sage to us, without the hinderance of Bushes, Thorns, and such like stuff, wherewith most Ilands of the like nature are pestred: the length of the Grass (which yet was very much intermixt with flowers) being the onely impediment that we found. Six days together did we thus travel, setting seve∣ral marks in our way as we went for our better re∣turn, not knowing whether we should have the be∣nefit of the Stars for our guidance in our going back, which we made use of in our passage: at last we came to the vast Ocean on the other side of the Island, and by our coasting it, conceive it to be of an oval forme, onely here and there shooting forth with some pro∣montories. I conceive it hath but few good Har∣bours belonging to it, the Rocks in most places make∣ing it inaccessible. The length of it may be about 200 and breadth 100 miles, the whole in circumference about 500. miles. It lieth about 76 degrees of Longitude, and 20 of Latitude, being scituate unde the third Climate, the longest day being about 13. hours and 45. minutes. The weather as in all Southern Countries, is far more hot than with us in Europe; but what is by the
Sun parched in the day, the night again refreshes with cool pearly dews. The air is found to be very healthful by the long lives of the present in∣habitants, few dying there till such time as they come to good years of maturity, many of them arri∣ving to the extremity of old age. And now speaking concerning the length of their lives, I think it will not be amiss in this place to speak something of their Burials, which they used to do thus: When the party was dead, they stuck his carkass all over with flowers, and after carried him to the place appointed for Burial, where setting him down, (the Priest having given some Godly exhor∣tations concerning the frailty of life) then do they take stones (a heap being provided there for that pur∣pose) and the nearest of the kin begins to lay the first stone upon him, afterwards the rest follows, never leaving till they have covered the body deep in stones, so that no Beast can possibly come to him, and this shift were they forced to make having no Spades or Shovels wherewith to dig them graves; which want of theirs we espying, bestowed a Pick-axe and two shovels upon them. Here might I add their way of Christening Chil∣dren, but that being little different from yours in England, and taught them by George Pines at first which they have since continued, I shall therefore forbeare to speak thereof.
after our return back from the discovery of the Countrey, the Wind not being fit for our purpose, and our men also willing thereto, we got all our cutting Instruments on Land, and fell to hewing down of Trees, with which, in a little, (ma∣ny hands making light work) we built up a Pallace for this William Pines the Lord of that Countrey; which, though much inferiour to the houses of your Gentry in England. Yet to them which never had seen better, it appeared a very Lordly Place. This deed of ours was beyond expression acceptable unto him, loading us with thanks for so great a benefit, of which he said he should never be able to make a requital. And now acquainting him, that upon the first opportunity we were resolved to leave the Island, as also how that we were near Neighbours to the Countrey of England, from whence his Ancestors came; he seemed upon the news to be much discontented that we would leave him, desiring, if it might stand with our commodity to continue still with him, but seeing he could not prevail, he invited us to dine with him the next day, which we promised to do, against which time he provided, very sumptuously (according to his estate) for us, and now was he attended after a more Royal manner then ever we saw him before, both for number of Servants, and multiplicity of Meat, on which we fed very heartily; but he having no other Beverage for us to drink, then water, we fetched from our Ship a Case of Brandy, presenting some of it to him to drink, but when he had tasted of it, he would by no means be perswaded to touch thereof again, preferring (as he said) his own Countrey Water before all such Liquors whatsoever. After we had Dined, we were invited out into the Fields to behold their Country Dauncing, which they did with
great agility of body; and though they had no other then only Vocal Musick (several of them singing all that while) yet did they trip it very neatly, giving sufficient satisfaction to all that beheld them. The next day we invited the Prince William Pines aboard out Ship, where was nothing wanting in what we could to entertain him, he had about a dozen of Servants to attend on him; he much admired at the Tacklings of our Ship, but when we came to discharge a piece or two of Ordnance, it struck him into a wonder and amazement to behold the strange effects of Powder; he was very sparing in his Diet, neither could he, or any of his followers be induced to drink any thing but Water: We there presented him with several things, as much as we could spare, which we thought would any wayes con∣duce to their benefit, all which he very gratefully received, assuring us of his real love and good will, whensoever we should come thither again. And now we intended the next day to take our leaves, the Wind standing fair, blowing with a gentle Gale South and by East, but as we were hoising of our Sails, and weighing An∣chor, we were suddenly Allarum'd with a noise from the shore, the Prince W. Pines imploring our assistance in an Insurrection which had happened amongst them, of which this was the cause. Henry Phil, the chief Ruler of the Tribe or Family of the Phills, being the Offspring of George Pines which he had by the Ngro-woman, this man had ravished the Wife of one of the principal of the Family of the Trvers, which act being made known, the Trevrs assembled themselves altogether to bring the oender unto Justice: But he knowing his crime to be so great, as extended to the loss of life; sought to defend that
by force, which he had as unlawfully committed, whereupon the whole Island was in a great hurly burly, they being too great Potent Factions, the bandying of which against each o∣ther, threatned a general ruin to the whole State. The Governour William Pines had interposed in the matter, but found his Authority too weak to repress such Disorders; for where the Hedge of Government is once broken down the most vile bear the greatest rule, whereupon he desir'd our as∣sistance, to which we readily condescended, and arming out twelve of us went on Shore, rather as to a surprize then sight, for what could nakedness do to encounter with Arms. Be∣ing conducted by him to the force of our Enemy, we first en∣tered into parley, seeking to gain them rather by fair means then force, but that not prevailing, we were necessitated to use violence, for this Henry Phill being of an undaunted resolu∣tion, and having armed his fellows with Clubs and Stones, they sent such a Peal amongst us, as made us at the first to give back, which encouraged them to follow us on with great violence, but we discharging off three or four Guns, when they saw some of themselves wounded, and heard the terrible reports which they gave, they ran away with greater speed then they came. The Band of the Trevors who were joyned with us, hotly pursued them, and having taken their Captain, returned with great triumph to their Governour, who sitting in Judgment upon him, he was adjudged to death, and thrown off a steep Rock into the Sea, the only way they have of punishing any by death. And now at last we took our solemn leaves of the Gover∣nour, and departed from thence, having been there in all the space of three weeks and two dayes, we took with us good store of the flesh of a Beast which they call there Reval, being
in tast different either from Beef or Swines-flesh, yet very de∣lightful to the Pallate, and exceeding nutrimental. We took also with us alive, divers Fowls which they call Mards, about the bigness of Pullet, and not different in taste, they are very swift of flight, and yet so fearless of danger, that they will stand still till such time as you catch them: We had also sent us in by the Governour about two bushels of eggs, which as I con∣jecture were the Mards eggs, very lussious in taste, and stren∣thening to the body. June 8. We had a sight of Cambaia, a part of the East Indies, but under the Government of the great Cham of Tartary; here our Vessel springing a leak, we vvere forced to put to shore, receiving much dammage in some of our Commodities; vve vvere forced to ply the Pump for eighteen hours together, vvhich, had that miscarried, vve had inevitably have perished; here vve stai'd five dayes mending our Ship, and drying some of our Goods, and then hoising Sail, in four days time more vve came to Calecute. This Calcute is the chief Mart Tovvn and Staple of all the Indian Traffique, it is very populous, and frequented by Mer∣chants of all Nations. Here vve unladed a great part of our Goods, and taking in others, vvhich caused us to stay there a full Moneth, during vvhich space, at leisure times I vvent abroad to take a survey of the City, vvhich I found to be large and po∣pulous, lying for three miles together upon the Sea-shore. Here is a great many of those persons vvhom thy call Brach∣mans, being their Priests or Teachers vvhom they much reve∣rence. It is a custome here for the King to give to some of those Brachmain the hanselling of his Nuptial Bed; for which cause, not the Kings, but the Kings sisters sons succeed in the Kingdom, as being more certainly known to be of the true Roy∣al blood: And these sisters of his choose what Gentleman they
please, on whom to bestow their Virginities; and if they prove not in a certain time to be with child, they betake themselves to these Brachman Stalions, who never fail of doing their work. The people are indifferently civil and ingenious, both men and women imitate a Majesty in their Train and Apparel, which they sweeten with Oyles and Perfumes: adorning themselves with Jewels and other Ornaments befitting each Rank and Quality of them. They have many odd Customs amongst them which they observe very strictly; as first, not knowing their Wives after they have born them two children: Secondly, not ac∣companying them, if after five years cohabition they can raise no issue by them, but taking others in their rooms: Thirdly, never being rewarded for any Military exploit, unless they bring with them an enemies Head in their Hand, but that which is strangest, and indeed most barbarous, is that when any of their friends falls sick, they will rather chuse to kill him, then that he should be withered by sickness. Thus you see there is little employment there for Doctors, when to be sick, is the next way for to be slain, or perhaps the people may be of the mind rather to kill themselves, then to let the Doctors do it. Having dispatched our business, and fraighted again our Ship, we left Calecute, and put forth to Sea, and coasted along se∣veral of the Islands belonging to India, at Camboia I met with our old friend Mr. David Prire, who was overjoyed to see me, to whom I related our Discovery of the Island of Pines, in the same manner as I have related it to you; he was then but newly recovered of a Feaver, the Air of that place not being agreeable to him; here we took in good store of Aloes, and some other Commodities, and victualled our Ship for our re∣turn home.
After four davs sailing, we met with two Portugal Ships which came from Lisbon, one whereof had in a storm lost its Top-mast, and was forced in part to be towed by the other. We had no bad weather in eleven dayes space, but then a sud∣den storm of Wind did us much harm in our Tacklings, and swept away one of our Sailors off from the Fore Castle. Novem∣ber the sixth had like to have been a fatal day unto us, our Ship striking twice upon a Rock, and at night was in danger of be∣ing fired by the negligence of a Boy, leaving a Candle care∣lesly in the Gun-room; the next day we were chased by a Pyrate of Argiere, but by the swiftness of our Sails we out ran him. December the first we came again to Madagascar, where we put in for a fresh recruit of Victuals and Water. During our abode here, there hapned a very great Earth∣quake, which tumbled down many Houses; The people of themselves are very Unhospitable and Treacherous, hardly to to be drawn to Traffique with any people; and now, this ca∣lamitie happening upon them, so enraged them against the Christians, imputing all such calamities to the cause of them, that they fell upon some Portugals and wounded them, and we seeing their mischrevous Actions, with all the speed we could put forth to Sea again, and sailed to the Island of St. Hellens. Here we stayed all Christmas Holy-dayes, which was very much celebrated by the Governour there under the King of Spain: Here we furnished our selves with all necessaries which we wanted; but upon our departure, our old acquaintance Mr. Petrus Ramazina, coming in a Skiff out of the Isse dol Prin∣cipe, or the Princes Island, retarded our going for the space of two dayes, for both my self and our Puer had Emergent bu∣siness with him, he being concerned in those Affairs of which I wrote to you in April last: Indeed we cannot but acknow∣ledge
his Courtesies unto us, of which you know he is never sparing. January the first, we again hoised Sail, having a fair and prosperous gail of Wind, we touched at the Canaries, but made no tarriance, desirous now to see our Native Countrey; but the Winds was very cross unto us for the space of a week, at last we were favoured with a gentle Gale, which brought us on merrily; though we were on a sudden stricken again into a dump; a Sailor from the main Mast discovering five Ships, which put us all in a great fear, we being Richly Laden, and not very well provided for Defence; but they bearing up to us, we found them to be Zealanders and our Friends; after many other passages concerning us not so much worthy of Note, we at last safely arrived at home, May 26. 1668. Thus Sir, have I given you a brief, but true Relation of our Voyage, Which I was the more willing to do, to prevent false Copies which might be spread of this nature: As for the Island of Pines it self, which caused me to Write this Relation, I suppose it is a thing so strange as will hardly be credited by some, although perhaps knowing persons, especially consider∣ing our last age being so full of Discoveries, that this Place should lie Dormant for so long a space of time; Others I know, such Nullifidians as will believe nothing but what they see, applying that Proverb unto us, That Travelers may lye by auth∣rity. But Sir, in writing to you, I question not but to give Credence, you knowing my disposition so hateful to divulge Falsities; I shall request you to impart this my Relation to Mr. W. W. and Mr. P. L. remembring me very kindly unto them, not forgetting my old acquaintance Mr. J. P. and Mr. J. B. no more at present, but only my best respects to you and your se∣cond self, I rest July 22. 1668. Yours in the best of friendship, Cornelius Van Sloetten.
POST-CRIPT. ONe thing concerning the Isle of Pines, I had almost quite forgot, we had with us an Irish man named Dermot Conelly who had formerly been in England, and had learned there to play on the Bagpipes, which he carried to Sea with him; yet so un-Englished he was, that he had quite forgotten your Lan∣guage, but still retained his Art of Bagpipe-playing, in which he took extraordinary delight; being one day on Land in the Isle of Pines, he played on them, but to see the admiration of those naked people concerning them, would have striken you into admiration; long time it was before we could perswade them that it was not a living creature, although they were permitted to touch and feel it, and yet are the people very in∣telligible, retaining a great part of the Ingenuity and Gallan∣try of the English Nation, though they have not that happy means to express themselves; In this respect we may account them fortunate, in that possessing little, they enjoy all things, as being contented with what they have, wanting those alure∣ments to mischief, which our European Countries are enriched with. I shall not dilate any further, no question but time will make this Island known better to the world; all that I shall ever say of it is, that it is a place enriched with Natures abundance, deficient in nothing conducible to the sustentation of mans life, which were it Manured by Agri-culture and Gardening, as o∣ther of our Europian Countries are, no question but it would equal, if not exceed many which now pass for praise worthy.
FINIS.
