O863A [ocm]27878903 205773
university of Oxford blazon ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS SAPIENTIAE ET FELICITATIS JAN. 9. 1651. By the Vicechancellour and Heads of Houses of the Ʋniversity of OXFORD. WHereas the Right Honourable the Councell of State hath beene informed by some Inhabitants of this City, concerning a distemper here growne to a very great height, manifesting it selfe in foule Riots and malicious actions a∣gainst persons of peaceable and sober deportment, and of godly conversation, at, and for their private meetings, for the Worship of God according to their consciences, directed by his Word; such as are, assaults, Robbings, beatings, cruell whippings, and desperate threatnings; to the so great terrour and af∣frighting of the said persons, and others like affected, that they dare not adventure themselves forth of their houses, after day light is down, for feare of their lives. And whereas the said Councell hath expressed a tender sense of such misdemeanours and injuries to the persons afore∣said, with a resolution for their protection, and have thereupon especially recommended it to the care of the Vicechancellour and Heads of Houses, as to make a through and particular enquiry after all the Contrivers, Actors and Abettors of the said miscarriages, so to take care to prevent the like violences for the future. These are therefore to warne and strictly require all Scho∣lars, and others under the jurisdiction of the Vniversity, that they forbeare all such misdemea∣nours and malicious actions against the persons aforesaid, as they will answer the contrary at their exceeding great perils, by undergoing the most severe punishment that (suitably to their demerits) can be inflicted by us, besides the securing of their persons, and the returning of their names to the Councell of State, that thereupon they may be lyable, further, to undergoe the displeasure of the said Councell. And all Scholars and persons under the Jurisdiction aforesaid, are hereby strictly re∣quired to forbeare the wearing or carrying about them of any manner of Armes or Weapons, offensive or defensive, according to the Statutes of the Vniversity in that behalfe. Tit. 13. §. 11. Signed in the name and by the consent of the Heads of Houses, by DAN: GREENWOOD Vice-can: Oxon. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1651.
