P720 C.20.f.9[100] C.20.f.9[101] R216081 99884629 192659
The Patient Hushand, and the Scoulding VVife, Shewing how he doth complain of hard fortune he had to marry such a cross grain'd Qan as she was and he wishes all young men to be advised to look before they lp. You Batchellors where ere you be This Counsel here now take of me Chue not a wife that  too pecise For fear she should puck ou your eyes. To the Tune of, Bonny bonny bird. a man a woman ALl you gallants in City or Town▪ come listen a while to my song To you ile relate with séeking a mats how that I my self a done wrong brave boys how that I my self a done wrong. When as I was single as some of you be I was beloved like other young men, I liv'd at my ease and I did what I pleass and the world it went well with me then brave boys and the world it went well with me then could kiss a young Msdan she'd never séem coy and sometimes she wuld kis me again, id perhaps at the last I cld not her a boy the world it went well with me then, &c. Thus bravely I liv'd without any contr and had lver good store lying by, I could sing & be merry drink White wine & sherry▪ then who but sweet William and I, &c. Yet I could not be conent but a wing i'd go to get me a Wife of my own, I get one at the lst but she rves a shrow and sets horns where there never was none brave boys and &c. I married in hast but at leaure repent I would be s fool'd by a if; She'l pout and se'l ler she'l frown and look sower then I dare not stir for my life bave boys then, &c.
WHn I went to Church I was led by two Mids and the Msick did play gallatly, My Wife she did dance and her and she skipt up and down like a fly, brave boys and the, &c. But e're we' béen married one moth to an nd to seh my Pockets she st ws be an, Sh took mē by he ear, and she nts oh the world it went ill with me then, &c. She turn'd me about and she gave me a rot such a on as I  had bfor, Her hands wer so quick my se she did lick and did bear me till I did roar, &c. The more I did pray yt hase storms they might cease the loner I think hey did ife, The mor I did pray that we migh live in peace the more mischief she stil did devise, &c. If that in an Ale-house I chanse for to pay then presently comes all my feas. I'a sure to have blos also bitter Oaths, If I be not wrung by the ears, &c. One day we'd about, and I held hr too't till with the Lade she broke all my ose, Nay worse then all this, m sl I beist, and in truth I befowl'd both my hose, &c. Surely the's no man that liveth on earth that hath such a cross wife as she, Which makes me to swear, young men haven care for the case it is alter'd with me, &c. Thrice hay i he that hath a good wife but far better's that young man Tht settel himself to live a sigle life then would I was unmarried again, &c. For these ais are so false a man can't them trust and so much they are given to lies, If a man he don't please them at every turn then they'r ready to pluck out his eyes, &c. They'l kick fling & throw, they'l fret & they'l own as i the was going mad you won'd swar And some Girls on their bellies more means will consume in one week than they'l get in a year, &c. The afore honest young men had néed to beware for my part my own ruine i'be brough, And of flattering Damsels to have a grea care▪ for wits never good till 'tis bought, &c. For why experience I plainly do find what troubles some men do uphr'd That hath a cross wife he's ne're sure of his life▪ to live quiet in bed nor at board, &c. I she hant her humour in every thing then his head with the Lade she'l get, And at night I suppose if he dont loss close then she▪l kick him out at the beds feet, &c. So Batchellors all now my leave Ile take this counsell is good for all honest young men If I was shut of this qean you know what I mean oh the world wou▪d go well with me than, brave boys oh the world wou'd go well with me then. Printed for W. Thackeray at the Golden Sugar-Loaf in Duck-Lane.
