P1270A 99828645 207826
THE Continued Cry OF THE OPPRESSED FOR JUSTICE, In TWO PARTS. The first being an account of some late Cruel Pro∣ceedings against divers of the People called QUAKERS: Which was Printed, and intended to be given to the King and both Houses of Parliament before the last Proro∣gation in the Year 1675. The second Part being an Additional Account of the Present and late Cruelty, Oppression and Spoil inflicted upon the Persons and Estates of many of the said PEOPLE. Printed in the Year, 1676.
THE Continued Cry OF THE OPPRESSED FOR JUSTICE, Being A farther Account of the late Unjust and Cruel Proceedings of Unreasonable Men against the Persons and Estates of many of the People call'd Quakers, only for their peace∣able Meetings to worship God. Presented to the Serious Consideration of the KING and both Houses of PARLIAMENT. With a Postscript of the Nature Difference and Limits of Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority, and the inconsistency of such Severities with both. Recommmended and submitted to the Perusal of Caesar's True Friends. By the Author of England's Present Interest, &c. Seek Judgment, Relieve the Oppressed, Judge the Fatherless, and Defend the Widdow, Isa. 1. 17. Printed in the Year 1675.
FOR THE KING AND Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT. FOrasmch as the Maintenance of Justice, and Preservation of the Peace of Civil So∣cieties have in all Ages been the great End of Government; and since it hath pleased Al∣mighty God to cast our Lot in a Kingdom, whose Constitution is more then ordinarily careful of the Liberty and Property of its free∣born Inhabitants: And because several Laws have been made upon Occasion of Dissent in Matters of Religion, to press an Uniformity
to the Religion now established, that in the Execution of them have generally interferred with those Laws that give and preserve English Freedoms, in that Hundreds of us have been Imprisoned, and our Goods frequently spoil∣ed, to the utter Ruine of many Families, with∣out any Legal Process or Tryal by Peers; and This not for refusing Conformity to the State, or denying Caesar his Due, or being chargea∣ble to Parishes, or useless to the Government but only because of our conscientious Dissent from the present Church: And since this seems to be an Alteration in the ancient English Government, by making an ECCLESIA∣STICAL CONFORMITY the Grand and Necessary Qualification in English Men to the Peaceable Enjoyment of ther NA∣TURAL and CIVIL INHERITAN∣CES: and forasmuch as this Course tends to a manifest Decay of Trade (the Political Life of this Island) Discouragement of Strangers, Depopulation of the Country, Impoverishing of many Thousand Ʋseful Inhabitants, as well as that such Severities about Matters of Conscience are Inconsistent
with the Doctrine and Example of Christ and his Followers in all Ages, and repugnant, no only to the very VVay of true Conviction but the Doctrine of ancient Protestants, whose Protestation at the Diet at Spira against Coer∣tion in Matters of Religion, was the Occasi∣on of their being called Protestants. And because many malicious and covetous Persons (under Pretence of doing God, the King & Country Service) have taken advantage by these Laws to vent their Passions, act their Revenge, and pursue their VVorldly Interest, beyond all Law and Humanity, as wofully appears by the anexed Particulars, ready to be proved. VVe therefore intreat; First, That it would please you to peruse the anexed Particulars for your better Information of the Nature of our Case and Allegations. Secondly, That you would be pleased, for the Removal and Prevention of the like Mis∣chiefs, to repeal or qualifie those Laws, where∣by the Persons and Estates of many Thousands of the peaceable People of this Kingdom are hourly exposed to Ruine in this VVorld, for
meer Conscience, about Things relating to the next VVorld, that being assured, the sweat of our Brows, and hard-gotten Bread for our Families shall not be made a Forfeit for our peaceable Consciences, we may be better en∣couraged, for the Time to come, to all virtuous and industrious Living under the present Go∣vernment, as hath hitherto been, through God's Grace, our daily Practice.
A few Instances out of many which might be given, of the great OPPRESSIONS and CRƲ∣ELTIES lately acted upon Innocent Per∣sons and Industrious Families, chiefly in Persu∣ance (as is pretended) of the late Act against Conventicles, for their meeting in peaceable Man∣ner to worship God: Read, Consider, and Redress. Leicester-Shire. FOR a Meeting at Long Claxton, or Clawson, four persons were sent to Prison, and so much Goods at divers Times ta∣ken from some of the said Meeting, that they had not a Cow left to give their young Children Milk, their very Bed-Clothes, wearing-Clothes and working-Tools escaped not the Violence or Avarice of their Persecutors; the total Sum amounts to a∣bove Two Hundred thirty six Pounds, nor did this satisfie our Persecutors for they cruelly dragg'd some Women in the Streets by the Necks, till they were neer stiffled, tearing the Clothes off their Heads and Backs. One Woman that gave Suck was so beaten and bruised on her Breast, that it festered and broke, with which she hath endured many Weeks Misery and Torture; Another Woman of seventy five Years of Age was violently thrown down upon the Ground by one W. Guy Constable; the Men were sorely beaten, drawn and dragged out of the Meet∣ing, some by the Heels, some by the Hair of the Head, and some so bruised, that they were not able to follow their Day-Labour; others they whipt on the Face till the Blood ran down;
there was one they furiously trod upon till Blood gusht out of his Mouth and Nose; To compleat the Mattter, the Informer took away from one of the Prisoners his Purse and Money, as if he had not been a quiet Neighbour, but a Prisoner of VVar: Nor was this accidental; but Designs no short Fit of Cruelty; upon an extraordinary Provocation; for at this bitter Rate have they treated them for several Moneths. Witnesses, Edward Hallam, William Marryott, John Wilford, William Smith, Richard Parker. Nottingham-Shire. UNder Pretence of prosecuting the late Act against Conventicles One Peniston Whaley a Justice, and one Colgrave a Bum-Bayly, and one Walker, both Informers have utterly ruin'd many poor Families in this County in their Estates, having taken or caus'd to be taken from several Persons about Seven Hundred Pounds, the Justice bidding the Officers take three or four Times the Value of the Fines, that they might sell good peny-worths, never returning, as we are informed, any one Record of Conviction into the Sessions, except forced by persons appealing: John Godrick and William Hudson of Little Greenly appealing to the Sessions, the Sessions ordered them their Money again; but the aforesaid Peniston Whaley still detains Sixty pounds in his Hands, contrary to the Orders of the Sessions, notwithstanding it has been divers Times demanded. T. Sampson by Warrant from G. Nevil, Justice, for two Meet∣ings had taken from him nineteen Head of Beasts and Goods to the Value of sixty Pounds and upwards, as was vallued by the Neighbours; so that they left him not a Cow to give his Chil∣dren Milk: That ever these Things should be done by such as count themselves Christians, and Followers of Christ Jesus, who suffered, but would have none to suffer for his Religion. Witnesses, Abraham Sampson, Francis Hawksmore, Robert Porter.
Norfolk. FOR several Meetings in and about Cockley Clay several Per∣sons have had Goods taken from them to the Value of fifty three Pounds, William Wat being Informer. John Patterson had Two Hundred Sheep taken from him worth Eighty Pounds. William Barber being informed against by John Gibbs a Priest of Glissing, for Meeting, had Cows, Carts, a Plough, Harrows and Hay taken from him to the Value of Fifty Pounds; the said William's House hath been rifled TEN Times, and he is now a Prisoner upon a Writ of Excommunicato capiendo. At Fa∣kenham several Persons have been fined, Wat the Informer, and his Wife being the only Witnesses against them, & Goods have been taken to a great Value; they left one Joseph Harrison not so much ☜ as a Bed to lye upon; but he, his Wife and Children were fain to lye on Straw. Cambridge. FOR a peaceable Meeting at the House of William Brasier Shoemaker in Cambridge, he was fined Twenty Pounds by John Hunt Mayor, and John Spencer Vice-Chancellor, upon the Information of Stephen Perry a Tinker: The Officers that came to distrein for this Twenty Pounds said, They had Warrants for Fifty Five Pounds more; They took his Leather, Lasts, and the Seat he workt on, wearing Clothes, and Sheets where he lay, though on Straw, having taken his Bed before, not leaving him any Thing to cover him withal; so that he was ☜ fain to lodge abroad, till he could get some old Things to cover him at Home. And there hath lately been taken from several Persons, for meeting in and about Cambridge, Goods and Cattel to the Va∣lue of Sixty Three Pounds and upwards. At Littleport, Ely, and other Places in the Isle of Ely, several
Persons were fin'd, & had their Goods taken for their peaceable Meetings, viz. Cloth, Stuff, Houshold-Goods and Cattel; from one Woman the very Bed she lay on; in all, to the Value of ☞ One Hundred Ninety five Pounds and upwards. Edward Partridge and his Favorite Thomas Richman, the old Informer, used great Violence to several; Edw. Partridge struck Samuel Cater twice, and being at Prayer, pulled him down by the Nose, beating Men and Women till he broak his staff: He also struck one Person, standing quietly at the Meet∣ing-house Door, and felled him, that the Standers by said, There is one knockt on the Head; yet he revived in a little Time, but within six Moneths after dyed, and to his dying Day complained ☞ of that Blow. Note, William March Justice, fined one Man (no Quaker) Five Pounds, for refusing to help to carry away the aforesaid Suf∣ferers Goods, which Five Pounds, the poor Man paid; but wanting but Two Pence thereof, the said Justice forced him to borrow it, to make up the sum; and shortly after the poor Man dying, on his Death-Bed he much rejoyced, That he had no Hand in taking away his Neighbour Adams his Goods. ☞ Witnesses, William Brasier, Samuel Cater, Oxford-Shire. FOR a Meeting at Alvskoet near Burford (Walter Powel Priest of the Town, being Informer, who before the Meet∣ing had spoak to the Justices, at their Peril to be at the Meeting) several Persons, were fined, and had Goods taken away to the Value of Forty Four Pounds and upwards.
Sommerset-Shire. THirty two Persons were fined for being at a Burial, for which they had taken from them in Cows, Corn and o∣ther Goods, to the Value of Eighty Two Pounds and upwards, by Warrant from Fra. Pawlet Justice, who when none else would ☜ buy the distreined Cattle, he sent Men to buy them for himself. One Margery Osmond, who was not at the Buryal, and yet was fined by F. Paulet, went to him to know the Names of them that had sworn against her, and desired Justice of him; he said, It was a Mistake; by which it did afterwards appear, he was willing to excuse the Informers; howbeit, he then read in a Book in the hearing of several Persons, in which Bayner and Withey were recorded Informers against the said Assembly at the Burial, and said withal, That she should prosecute them for Per∣jury at the next Sessions, and that the Record at the Sessions should be Evidence against them, or to that Effect; but he was not so good as his Word; for at the Sessions Witnesses were present to testifie, that she was not at the said Burial; but Fra. Pawlet (in Favour to these Informers) left Withey's Name out of the Record, and put in another's Name, who was not present, and also left out her Name; so there could be no Proceedings against ☜ the Informers for their Perjury, albeit he had issued out his War∣rant to levy the Fine imposed on her. The said Justice Pawlet for the same Burial fined several persons Twenty Four Pounds for an unknown Preacher, yet sent a Certificate to the Mayor of Bridgwater, to distrein Twenty Pounds on the Goods of John Anderton for preaching at the Burial that Day; so he would have Forty Four Pounds in all [Note, this is Twenty Four Pounds more then the Rigour of the Law allows of, admitting it ☜ had been a Conventicle.] for the Preacher known & one unknown when in Truth there was none spoak, but John Anderton that Christianly exhorted the People to consider their latter End: And when Mary Tyler, the Widdow of the deceased (who was fi∣ned ☜ Four Pounds for being at her Husband's Burial, and had
Goods taken for it) spoke mildly to him, to shew him his In∣justice, he told her, It did not become Women to go to their Hus∣bands Burials. ☞ And several Persons for being at Meetings at Glastenbury and Gregory Stoake in this County, have lately had Cattle, Corn and Goods taken from them, to the Value of One Hundred Forty Five Pounds and upwards, by Warrant from two Persons, called, Justice Waldron and Justice Cross. At this Day there remain Prisoners in this County for the Te∣stimony of Jesus, Twenty one Persons. And there hath dyed in Prion, Sufferers for good Conscience ☞ sake, in this County, since the Year 1660. Eighteen Persons. Witnesses, John Cuff, Henry Clothie, George Taylor. Berk-Shire. THomas Curtis, fined Three Pound Fifteen Shillings, had a Mare taken from him worth about Seven Pounds, by Warrant from Justice Craven; and though an Appeal was tendered (according to the Act) it was refused; and though the Officers voluntarily offered the Justice the Fine, yet he would not take it; but had the Mare valued at Four Pounds, and ☞ kept her. The 7th Day of the 8th Moneth, 1675. William Armourer and George Goswel, Mayor of Reading, came to the Meeting, and because the Women came not forth so soon as they would have them, W. Armourer pluckt out of his Pocket a sharp In∣strument, and prickt several of them in a Shameful Manner, ☞ till it fetcht Blood; and afterwards tendered the Oath of Allegi∣ance to seven of them, on purpose to ensnare them; and because for Conscience sake they could not swear at all, they were sent to Goal, where they now remain. And the Mayor Thrust some Women in a very Abusive Manner, perticularly an Antient Woman, without regard to Age or Sex.
Of which Cruelty, and much more, many in Reading are Witnesses. Cheshire. JUstice Daniel of Daresbury hath fined one Meeting near him several times over, and hath taken from T. Driggs and others the Value of One Hundred and Sixteen Pounds, Fifteen Shillings and Ten Pence, in Kine and Horses (which the Justice keeps to his Own Use and Work, as his own) also Corn, Brass, Pewter, Bedding, and such like Goods. William Hall of Congleton, Shoemaker, was fined Twen∣ty Pounds, by Will. Knight, Mayor, and two Justices, for having a Meeting at his House; for which his Mare was di∣strained, when his Wife was riding on her. And some time af∣ter, they seized on his Shoes in his Shop. And another time, in his Absence, with Mathooks brake open the Doors of his Dwel∣ling House, and took away Two Cart-Loads of Goods, where∣upon ☜ William tendered an Appeal, but the said Magistrates de∣nyed it: Sometime after, the Mare, of her own accord, came Home, in his Absence, his Wife let her in; now, notwith∣standing that upon their Crying the Mare, he went with two of his Neighbours, and acquainted the Chief Magistrate, that he had the Mare, and she was in the Field, without any Lock to hinder them from her, and if they had more Right to her then he, they might fetch her; otherwise, if they pleased, he would joyn Issue with them, to try whose the Mare was; which they refused, and committed him to the Goal, and Arraigned him for his Life, as a Fellon; but was acquitted by the Judge ☜ and Jury. Taken from several in and about Nantwich, by Warrant from Justice Manwaring, for Eighty Seven Pound in Fines, Goods to the Value of One Hundred and One Pounds, in Kine, Bacon, Bedding, Brass, Pewter, Corn, Cloth, Shoes and Cheese: And from one Man was taken, the very Beds they lay on to ☜
the Dunghil, which they also carryed away. Some of the Suf∣ferers appealing, the Jury acquitted them, but the Justices would not receive their Verdict; but at the next Sessions the Justices gave Judgment for the Informers; and not contented with this, they gave them TREBLE Cost. Note the Cheif Informer in these Sufferings, was one John Widdowbury of Hanklow, called an Esquire, who did it to be re∣venged on Thomas Braisey (one of the Meeting) for demanding Forty Pounds of him, which he owed unto Thomas Braisey upon Bond, which, that he might (as appears) defraud the said Thomas Braisey of, he hath since (by reviving an old Excom∣munication) sent him to Prison, and swears he will send his Wife after him from her four SMALL Children. Witnesses, Henry Fletcher, Jonathan Fletcher, Samuel Ellis. York-Shire. HAving in a former Narrative acquainted you, that Goods to the Value of Two Thousand Three Hundred Eighty one Pounds, Ten Shillings, by the late Act against Conventicles, have been taken from us, with some other of our heavy Pres∣sures and Sufferings in the County of York, for the Exercise of our Consciences towards God; and having yet obtained no Re∣dress, but rather an Increase of our Sufferings, One having since dyed in Prison at York, where Twenty Four yet remain Priso∣ners, and some Hundreds of Families like to be ruin'd by Pro∣secutions, both in Temporal and Ecclesiastical Courts, because for Conscience-sake we cannot conform to the Religion and Worship imposed on us, nor deny the Religion and Worship which we have been taught by the Spirit of God, according to the Holy Scriptures; and our constant adhering to the Religion and Worship in Spirit, which we believe God requires of us, ☞ can injure no Man; but the Denyal of it would greatly injure us, because every Man must give an Account to God for him∣self:
Oh why then should we by Law be exposed to Ruin and Destruction for the Exercise of our Consciences towards God, since by our Ruines none are like to be raised, unless it be a few Informers, Paritors and other inferior Officers in the said Courts; ☜ but the Dammage that may come to the King, and the whole Nation, by Discouraging, Persecuting or Ruining an industrious innocent People, is like to be very great: Therefore we de∣sire, that you would be pleased to put a Stop to the vexatious Proceedings of the said Informers and Courts, and confirm to us, your selves and Posterities the Liberty of our Consciences towards God, that we all may worship and serve him, as we believe he requires us; so shall we be accepted of him, and re∣ceive his Blessing, and Peace, and Tranquility in the whole Nation. Witnesses John Whitehead, John Hall. In divers other Counties in this Nation, there are many more Instances, both of great Havock and Spoil of Goods, impove∣rishing and ruining many innocent Families in their Trades and Livelihoods, which for Brevity sake, is at present here omitted.
A Postscript, Wherein The CIVIL and ECCLESIA∣STICAL AƲTHORITY is briefly considered in their Na∣tures, Difference and Extents, not Ʋnseasonably to the present Posture of Affairs. OUR Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ did long since distinguish the Things of Caesar from the Things of God in his plain and notable Answer unto that en∣snaring Question of the Jews, about paying Tribute to Caesar; Render (saith he) unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and to God the Things that are God's; that is, Divine Worship, and all Things relating to it belong unto God, Civil Obedience to Caesar: God can only be the Author of right Acts of Worship in the Mind, this is granted by all; therefore it is not in the Power of any Man or Men in the World, to sway or compel the Mind in Matters of Worship to God; where this is attempt∣ed, God's Prerogative is invaded, and Caesar (by which VVord I understand the Civil Government) hath all; for he doth not only take his own Things, but the Things appertaining to God also.
If any should ask me, What are the Things properly belonging to Caesar? I answer in Scripture-Language, To love Justice, do Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, right the Fatherless, be a Ter∣ror unto Evil-doers, and a Praise to them that do well; for this is the great End of Magistracy; but perhaps my Answer shall be reckoned too general and ambiguous, and a fresh Question started, Who are the Evil-doers, to whom the Civil Authority ought to be terrible? But this ought in my Judgment to be no Question with Men that understand the Nature of Civil Autho∣rity; for those are the Evil-Doers, that violate those Laws which are necessary to the Preservation of Civil Society, as Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, Traytors, Drunkards, Cheats, Vagabonds, and the like mischievous and dissolute Persons, Men void of Virtue, Truth and Sincerity, the Foundation of all good Government, and only firm Bond of human Society; whoever denies me this, must at the same Time say, that Virtue is less necessary to Government then Opinion, and that the most Vti∣ated Men, professing but Caesar's Religion, are the best Subjects to Caesar's Authority, consequently, that other Men, living ne∣ver so honestly and industriously, & having else as good a Claim to Civil Protection and Preferment, shall meerly for their Dis∣sent from that Religon (a Thing they can't help; for Faith is the Gift of God) be reputed the worst of Evil-doers, which is followed with exposing their Names to Obloquie, their Estates to Ruin, and their Persons to Goals, Exiles, and Abundance of other Cruelties: What is this, but to confound the Things of Caesar with the Things of God; Divine Worship with Civil Obedience; the Church with the State, and perplex human Societies with endless Debates about Religious Differences? nay, is not this to erect new Measures to try the Members of Worldly Societies by, and give an Accession to another Power, then that which is necessary to the Constitution of Civil Go∣vernment? But that which ought to deter wise Rulers from assuming and exercising such an Authority, is the Considera∣tion of the pernicious Consequences of doing so. For, First, It makes PROPERTY, which is the first
and most fixt Part of English Government, floating and uncertain; no Conformity to the Church, no Property in the State; and doubtless, the Insecurity of Property can be no Security to the Government. 2dly, It makes me owe more to the Church then to the State; for in this Case, the Anchor I ride by, is not my Obedience to Laws, relating to the Preservation of Civil Society, but Conformity to certain Things belonging to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church; so that though I may be an honest, industious English man, a great Lover of my Country, and an Admirer of the Government I live under, yet if I refuse to pro∣fess the Religion that either now is, or hereafter may be im∣posed, I must neither enjoy the Liberty of my Person, nor the quiet Possession of my Estate. 3dly, This not only alters the Government, by sacrificing Mens Properties for that which cannot be called a Sin against Pro∣perty, nor an Offence to the Nature of Civil Government, if a∣ny Transgression at all; but it narrows the Interest and Power of the Governours; for proportionably, what Number they cut off from their Protection, they cut off from themselves and the Government, not only rendering a great Body of People Ʋseless, but provoaking them to be Dangerous; to be sure it clogs the Civil Magistrate in his Administration of Government, making that necessary which is not at all necessary to him as Cae∣sar; It is a Sort of DƲƲ MVIRATESHIP in Power, by which the Civil Monarchy is broken; for as that was a Plurality of Men, so this is a Plurality of Powers; and to speak freely, the Civil Power is but Lackey, to run of all the unpleasant Errands the froward Zeal of the other sends it upon, and the best Preferment it receives for its Pains, is to be Infor∣mer, Goaler or Executioner to some of the best Livers, and therefore the best Subjects in the Kingdom: Oh what greater Injustice to Caesar! then to make his Government vary by such Modes of Religion, and him to hold his Obedience from his People, not by their Conformity to Him, but the Church.
4thly, This is so far from resembling the Universal Goodness of God, who dispenses his Light, Air, Showres, and comfor∣table Seasons to all (and whom Caesar ought alwayes to imitate) and remote from increasing the Trade, Populacy and Wealth of this Kingdom, that it evidently tends to the utter Ruin of Thousands of Traders, Artificers and Husband-men and their Families, thereby increasing the Charges, by increasing the poor of the Nation. 5thly, This must needs be a great Discouragement to Stran∣gers, from coming in, and setling themselves amongst us, when they have Reason to apprehend, that they, and their Children after them can be no longer secured in the Enjoyment of their Properties, then they shall be able to prevail with their Consci∣ences, to believe that the Religion which our Laws do now, or shall at any Time approve and impose, is undoubtedly true; and the Way of worshipping of God, which shall at any Time be by our Laws enjoyned, is, and shall be more agreeable to the Will of God then any other Way in which God is worship∣ped in the World. 6thly, The Religion we are commanded Conformity to, doth not make better Livers (that's a Demonstrative) nor better Artists; for it cannot be thought, that going to Church, hear∣ing Common-Prayer, or believing in the present Episcopacy, learns Men to build Ships or Houses, to make Clothes, Shoes, Di∣als or Watches, Buy, Sell, Trade or Commerce, better then any that are of another Perswasion; and since these Things are Ʋseful, if not Requisite in Civil Society, is not prohibiting, nay, ruining such Men, because they will not come to hear Common-Prayer, &c. distructive of Cvl Society; nor more obedient Sub∣jects. If any object, Dissenters have not alwayes been so; the Answer is ready, do not expose them, protect them in their Lives, Liberties and Estates; for in their present Posture they think they can call nothing their own, and that all the Comforts they have in this World are hourly lyable to Forfeiture, for their
Faith, Mope and Practice concerning the other World: Is not this to destroy Nature and Civil Government, when People are ruined in their Natural and Civil Capacity, not for Things relating to either, but what are of a Super natural Import. 7thly, This deprives them of Protection that protect the Go∣vernment; Dissenters have a great Share in the Trade, which is the Greatness of this Kingdom; and they make a large Pro∣portion of the Taxes that maintain the Government; and is it reasonable, or can it be Christian, when they pay Tribute to Caesar, to be preserved in an Ʋndisturbed Possession of the rest, and that the rest should be continually exposed for the peaceable Exercise of their Consciences to God? 8thly, Neither is this a Conformity to True and Solid Reli∣gion, such as is necessary to Eternal Salvation, wherein most Parties verbally agree, but for a Modification of Religion, some Peculiar Way of Worship and Discipline: All confess One God, One Christ, One Holy Ghost, and that it is indispensably requisite to live Soberly, Righteously and Godlikely in this present evil world; yet is one prosecuting the other for his Conscience, seizing Corn, driving away Cattel, breaking open Doors, taking away and spoiling of Goods; in some Places not leaving a Cow to give poor Orphans Milk, nor a Bed to lye on; in other Places Houses have been swept so clean, that a Stool hath not been left to sit on, nor so much as working Tools to labour for Bread. To say nothing of the Opprobrious Speeches, Bloody Blows and Tedious Imprisonments, even to Death it self, through Nastiness of Dun∣geons, that many Innocent People have suffered for their peace∣able Conscience only. 9thly, But this Way of proceeding for Maintenance of the National Religion, is of an ill Consequence upon this Account; Heaven is barr'd from all further Illuminations, let God send what Light he pleaseth, it must not be received by Caesar's Peo∣ple, without Caesar's Licence; and if it happen that Caesar be not presently convinced it is of God, at this Rate I must either
renounce my Convictions, and loose my Soul to please Caesar or profess and persevere in my Perswasion, and loose my Life, Liberty or Estate to please God; this hath frequently occurr'd, and may again; therefore I would entreat Caesar to consider the sad Consequence of Imposition, and remember, both that God did never ask Man Leave to Introduce Truth, or make fur∣ther Discoveries of his Mind to the World, and that it hath been a woful Snare to those Governments that have been drawn to employ their Power against his Work and People. 10thly, This Way of Proceedure endeavours to stiffle, or else to punish Sincerity; for Fear or Hopes, Frowns or Favour pre∣vail only with base Minds, Souls degenerated to the third and fourth Generation; every Spark of Integrity must be extin∣guisht, where Conscience is sacrificed to Worldly Safety and Pre∣ferment; so that this Net holds no Temporizers, Honest Men are all the Fish it catches; but one would think they should make but an ill Treat to such as reckon themselves generous Men, and what is more▪ Christians too; but that which renders the Matter more unjustifiable, is, the Temptation such Severity puts upon Men, not hardy enough to suffer for Conscience, yet strongly perswaded they have Truth on their Side, to desert their Prin∣ciples, and smother their Convictions, which in plain Terms is to make of sincere Men Hypocrites, whereas it is one great End of Government, by all laudable Means to preserve Sincerity; for without it there can be no Faith or Truth in Civil Society: nor is this all; for it's a Maxim worthy of Caesar's Notice, NEVER TO THINK TRUE TO CAESAR THAT IS FALSE TO HIS OWN CONSCIENCE; besides, raped Consciences treasure up Revenge, and such Persons are not likely to be longer Friends to Caesar, then he hath Preferments to allure them, or Power to deter them from being his most implacable Enemies. 11thly, There is not so ready a Way to theism, as this of extinguishing the Sense of Conscience for Worldly Ends; de∣stroy that Internal Rule of Faith, Worship and Practice towards
God, and the Reason of my Religion will be Civil Injunctions, and not Divine Convictions; consequently, I am to be of as many Religions as the Civil Authority shall impose, however untrue or contradictory; this Sacred Tye of Conscience thus broken, farewel to all Heavenly Obligations in the Soul, Scrip∣ture-Authority and ancient Protestant Principles; Christ may at this Rate become what the Jews would have had him, and his Apostles be reputed Turners of the World upside down, as their Enemies represented them, and the godly Martyrs of all Ages so many Self-Murderers; for they might justly be esteem∣ed Resisters of Worldly Authority, so far as that Authority concerns it self with the Imposition of Religion, because they refused the Conformity commanded, even to Death. And it may not be unworthy of Caesar's Consideration, if from these Proceedings People are tempted to infer, there is nothing in Religion but Worldly Aims and Ends, because so much Power is abus'd under the Name of Religion, to vex and destroy Men for being of another Religion, that he hazards the best Hold and Obligation he hath to Obedience, which is Conscience; for where they are taught to obey for Interest, Duty and Conviction are out of Doors: By all Means let Conscience be sacred, and Virtue and Integrity (the under dissenting Principles) cherisht; Charity is more powerful then Severity, Perswasion then Penal Laws. Lastly, To the Reproach of this Course with wise Men it hath never yet obtain'd the End desired; for instead of Compliance; the Difference is widened, the Sufferers are pitied by Spe∣ctators which only helps to increase the Number of Dissenters; for whoever is in the wrong, few think the Persecutor in the Right. This in all Ages having been the Issue of severe Prose∣cution of Dissenters for Matters of Religion; what a Cruel, Troublesom, Thankless, Successess Office is it for Caesar to be employed in; may he take better Measure of his Authority, and use his Power to the Encouragement of all the Virtuous and In∣dustcious, and Just Punishment of the Lazy and Vicious in all Perswasions; so shall the Kingdom Florish, and the Government Prosper.
For Ecclesiastical Authority, or in plainer English Church-Power, which makes up the other Part of this Postscript, it will be requisite to consult Holy Scripture, where we shall be informed of the Institution and Practice of it among the Ancient Christians; and by that Canon all People professing Christianity, pretend a Wil∣lingness to be concluded. CHurch-Power supposeth a Church first; It will not be im∣proper therefore to examine first, What a Scripture New-Testament-Church is; and next, what is the Scripture Power belonging to such a Church: A Scripture-Church is a Company or Society of People, believing, professing and practising according to the Doctrine and Example of Christ Jesus and his Apostles, and not according to the Scribes & Pharisees, that taught for Doctrine the Traditions of Men: They are such as are Meek in Heart, Lowly in Spirit, Mat. 11. 29 Chast in Life, 1 Pet. 3. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Virtuous in all Conversation, Phil. 4. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 15. full of Self-Denyal, Mat. 16. 24. Long Suffering and Pati∣ence, 2 Cor. 4. 6. not only for giving, Luk 6 37. but loving their very Enemies; Mat. 5 44. a People so effectually redeemed from the Impieties and Vanities of the World; Rev▪ 14. 4. he that thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. thought it no Disparage∣ment to be Head to, and account as his own Bo∣dy: Eph. 1. 22. Col. 1. 118. It was upon a Society thus qualified, that the Holy Ghost bestows these excellent Names,
Disciples and Friends of Christ; Joh. 19. 14, 15. Heirs and Co-heirs with Christ Rom▪ 8. 17. Christ's Brethren and Kindred Heb. 2. 11. A peculiar People Tit. 2. 14. The purchased of his most precious Blood Acts 20. 28. the Re∣deemed from the Earth Rev. 14. 3. A Royal Priest∣hood, an Holy Nation; 1 Pet. 2. 9. The Church of the First Born; Heb. 12. 23. Christ's Body, Col. 1. 24. and the Lamb's Bride Rev. 21. 9. which answers but Christ's own Cha∣racter of himsell, Religion and Kingdom, which is the most apt Distinction that ever can be gi∣ven of the Nature of his Church and her Autho∣rity, viz Joh. 18. 36. MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD. which well connects with Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things Mat. 22. 2. that are God's, It was Answer to a very suspitious Question; for it was fa∣miliarly bruited, that he was a King, and came to possess his Kingdom, and was by some called the Luke 13. 2. King of the Jews. The Jews being then subjected to the Roman Empire, it con∣cerned Pilate, Caesar's Deputy to understand his pretentions, which upon better information he found to center in this, My Kingdome is not of this World, else would my Sub∣jects fight for me: As if he had said, these Reports Joh. 18. 36. are a meer perversion of my Peaceable and Self-denying Inten∣tions, an Infamy invented by malicious Scribes and Pharisees that they might the better prevaile with Caesar to sacrifice me to their hatred and revenge: I am Caesar's Friend, I seek none of his Kingdom from him, nor will I sow Sedition, plot or conspire his Ruin; no, let all Men render unto Caesar the Things that are Cae∣sar's; that's my Doctrine; for I am come to erect a Kingdom of another Nature then that of this World, to wit, a Spiritual Kingdom to be set up in the Heart: And Con∣science is my Throne, upon that will I sit, and Luke 17. 21. rule the Children of Men in Righteousness; and who ever lives soberly, righteously and godlily in this World, Tit. 2. 12.
shall be my good and loving Subjects, and they will certainly make no ill ones for Caesar, since such Virtue is the end of Govern∣ment, and renders his Charge both more easie & safe then before. Had I any other Design then this, would I suffer my Self to be reproached, traduced and persecuted by a conquered people? were it not more my Nature to suffer then revenge, would not their many provocations have drawn from me some Instance of another Nature then the Forbearance and Forgiveness I teach? Certainly were I animated by another principle then the perfe∣ction of Meekness and Divine Sweetness, I should not have for∣biden Peter fighting, saying, put up thy Sword, or endoctrinated my Followers to bear Mat. 26. 52. Wrongs, but revenge all Affronts, and by Plots and other Stra∣tagems have attempted Ruin to my Enemies, and the Acquest of worldly Empire; and no doubt but they would have fought for me: Nay I am not only patiently (and with Pitty to Ene∣mies) sensible of their barbarous Carriage towards me for my Good Will to them (for their Eternal Happiness I only seek) but I foresee what they further intend against me, they de∣sign to crucifie me, and to do it, will rather free a Murderer then save their Saviour, they will perform that Cruelty with all the Agravation and Contempt Mat. 27. 20. they can, deriding me themselves, and expo∣sing me to the Derision of others, for they will Ver. 27. &c. mock my Divine Kingship with a Crown of Thorns, and in my Agonies of Soul and Body Ver. 29. for a Cordial, give me Gall and Vineger to drink; but notwithstanding all this, to satisfie the World that my ver. 48. Religion is above Wrath and Revenge, I can for∣give them; and to secure Caesar and his People Luke 23. 34. Mat. 26. 53. from all Fears of Imposition, whatever Authority I have, and how many Legions of Angels soever, I might com∣mand both to my Deliverance, and the Enforcement of my Mes∣sage upon Mankind; I resolve to promote neither with worldly Power; for it is not of the Nature of my Religion and Kingdom: and as I neither assume nor practise any such thing my Self, that am the great Author, Promoter and Example of this Holy Way; so have I not only never taught my Disciples to live or act other∣wise
or given them a Power I refuse to use my Self; but expresly forbad them, and warn'd them in my Instructions of exercising any the least Revenge, Imposition or Coertion towards any: This is evident in my Sermon preached upon the Mount, where I freely, publickly and with much Plainness, not only prohibited Revenge, but injoyned Love to Enemies making it to be a great Token of true Discipleship to suffer Mat. 5. 44. 45, 46, 47. Wrongs, and conquer Cruelty by Patience and Forgiveness, which is certainly a great Way off Imposition or Compulsion upon other Men. And when I was strongly bent for Jerusalem, and sent Messengers before to prepare some En∣tertainment for me and my Company in a Village, belonging to the Samaritans, and it seems the Luke 9. 53, 54, 55, 56. People refused, because they apprehended I was going to Jerusalem; this provoakt some of my Disciples, par∣ticularly James and John to that Degree, that they asked me, if I were willing that they should command Fire from Heaven to destroy those Samaritans, as Elias in another Case had done; I turned about, and rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what Manner of Spirit ye are of; for I am not come into the World to destroy Mens Lives, but by my peaceable Doctrine and Exam∣ple to save them. At another Time one of my Disciples, relating to me some Passages of their Travails, told me of a cer∣tain Man they saw that cast out Devils in my Luke 9. 49, 50. Name, and because he was not of their Company, nor followed them, said he, we forbad him; as if they had thereby served and pleased me; but I presently testified my Dislike of the Igno∣rance and Narrowness of their Zeal, and to inform them better told them, they should not have forbid him; for he that is not against us is for us; my Drift is not Opinion, but Piety; they that cast out Devils, convert Sinners, and turn Men to Righte∣ousness, are not against me, nor the Nature and Religion of my Kingdom, and therefore ought to be cherisht rather then forbid. That I might sufficiently declare and inculcate my Mind in this Matter, I did at an other Time, and upon a different Occasion, preach against all Coertion and Persecution for Matters of Faith and Practice towards God, in my Parable of the Sower, as my
Words manifest, which were these; The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Man which sowed good Seed in his Field; but while Men slept, his Enemy came, and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went his Way; but when the Blade sprung up, and brought forth Fruit, there appeared the Tares also; so the Servants of the House-houlder came and said, didst thou not sow good Seed in they Field? from whence then hath it Tares? he answered, an Eneny hath done this; the Mat. 13. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 Servants said unto him, wilt thou then that we go and gather them up? but he said NAY, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with them, let both grow together till the Harvest, and in the Time of Harvest I will say to the Reapers, gather ye together first the Tares, and bind them in Bundles to burn them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn. And that I might not leave so necessary a Truth mis▪appre∣hended of my dear Followers, or liable to any Mis-constructions, my Disciples, when together, desiring an Explanation, I inter∣preted my Words thus; He that soweth the good Seed is the Son of Man; the Field is the World; the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; but the Tares are the Children of the Ver. 36, 37, 38, 39. Wicked One; the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil; the Harvest is the End of the World; and the Reapers are the Angels. This Patience, this Long-Suffering and great Forbearance belong to my Kingdom and the Subjects of it, my Doctrine speaks it, and my Example confirms it, and this can have no possible Agreement with Imposition and Persecution for Con∣science: And that I might sufficiently deter my Followers from any such Thing, as I profess my self to be their Lord and Ma∣ster, so have I commanded them to love one another in a more especial Manner; but if instead thereof Joh. 15. 12. any grow proud, high minded, and beat or abuse their Fellow Servants in my religious Family, when I come to take account of my Houshold, he shall be cut asunder, and appointed his Por∣tion among the Unbelievers; behold the Recompence I appoint to Imposing Lordly Persons, such as count others Infidels, and to make them such Believers as themselves, will exercise Violence
towards them, and if they prevail not, will call for Fire from Heaven to devour them, and if Heaven refuse them, will fall a beating and killing, and think (it may be they do God good Service) but their Lot shall be with Unbelievers forever: Nay, I have so effectually provided against all Mastery, that I expresly charged them, not to be many Masters; for one was their Ma∣ster; I told them, that the greatest amongst them was to be Ser∣vant to the rest, not to impose upon the rest; nay, that to be great in my Kingdom, they must become as gentle and harm∣less as little Children, and such cannot force and punish in Mat∣ters of Religion, In fine, I strictly commanded them, to love one another, as I have loved them, who am ready to lay down my Life for the Ungodly, instead of taking away Godly Mens Lives for Opinions; and this is the great Maxim of my holy Religion, He that would be my Disciple, must not crucifie other Men, but take up his Cross, and follow me, who am meek and lowly, and such so enduring shall find Eternal Rest to their Souls, this is the Power I use, and this is the Power I give. How much this agrees with the Language, Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ, I shall leave them to consider, that read and believe Scripture; but some affected to present Church▪ Power, and desiring their Ruine that conform not to her Worship and Discipline, will object, That Christ did give his Church Power to bind and loose, and bid any Person agrieved tell the Church. I grant it; but what Binding was that? with outward Chains and Fetters, in nasty Holes and Dungeous? nothing less: Or was it, that his Church had that true Discerning in her, and Power with him, that what she bound, that is condemned, or loosed, that is remitted, should stand so in God's Sight and Christ's Account. But tell the Church; and what then? observe Christ's Ex∣tent in the Punishment of the Offender; If the Offender will neither receive private Admonition, nor hear the Church, then (sayes Christ) let him be to thee as an Heathen, &c. Here's no Fines, Whips, Stocks, Pillories, Goals, and the like In∣struments
of Cruelty, to punish the Heretick; for the Purport of his Words seems to be no more then this; If any Member of the Church refuse thy private Exhortation and the Church's Admonition, look upon such a Person to be no more of you; let him take his Course, thou hast done well, and the Church is clear of him. Well, but say the Church-Fighters of our Age, Did not St. Paul wish them cut off that troubled the Church in his Time? Yes: But with what Sword think you? Such as Christ bid Peter put up, or the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God? Give him leave to explain his own Words; For the WEA∣PONS of our Warfare are NOT CARNAL, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalteth it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing every Thought into Obedience to Christ. What think you of this? Here are Warfares, Weapons, Oppositions and Conformity, and not only no external Force about Matters of Religion us'd or countenanced, but the most express and pathetical Exclusion and Rejection of any such Thing that could be given. Now observe what Sort of Church-Government he recom∣mends to his beloved Timothy; Avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, and striving about the Law, for they are unprofitable and vain: A Man that is an Heretick, after the first and second Admonition, reject, knowing that he that is such is subverted and sinneth, being CONDEM∣NED OF HIMSELF, or self-condemned. It's very remarkable; first, That this great Apostle, in∣stead of exhorting Timothy to stand upon Niceties, and sacrifice Mens Natural Comforts and Enjoymnets for Opinions of Re∣ligion, injoyns him to shun Disputes about them, leaving Peo∣ple to their own Thoughts and Aprehensions in those Matters, which excellently well coheres with another Passage of his; Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if in any Thing ye be otherwise mind∣ed, Phil. 3. 15.
God shall REVEAL even this unto you; he did not say, you shall be FINED, PILLAGED, EXCOMMUNICATED and FLUNG into Prison, if ye be not of our Mind. 2dly, That, in the Apostles Definition, an Heretick is a self∣condemned Person, one conscious to himself of Error, and Ob∣stinacy in it; but that are not conscientious Dissenters; for many Ten Thousands in this Nation act as they believe, and dissent from the National Religion, purely upon a Principle of Conscience to Almighty God; and with Men of any Tenderness or common Sense, their continual great Sufferings in Person and Estate, and their Patience under them, are a Demonstration, or there can be none in the World: Nor can their Persecutors disprove them, unless they could search Hearts, and that is a little too far for a Fallible Spirit to reach, and an Infallible One they deny: So that the Apostle makes not the Heretick to lye upon the Side of mis-believing, or not coming up to his Degree of Faith & Knowledge, but upon the Side of Wilfully, Turbulently, Obstinately and Self-condemnedly maintaining inconsisting Things with the Faith, Peace and Prosperity of the Church. Granting us then not to be obstinate and self-condemned Dissenters (and you cannot reasonably refuse it us) how do you prove us Erroneous in the other Part? All Parties plead Scripture, and that for the most opposite Principles; Homousians and Arrians, Calvinists and Arminians, Papists, Jansenists and Protestants; The Scripture, you see, cannot determine the Sense of it self; it must have an Interpreter; he must either be Fallible or Infallible; If the first, we are worse then before; for Men are apt to be more confident, and yet are still upon as uncertain Grounds; If the last, this must either be an ex∣ternal or an Internal Judge: If an External, you know where you are without pointing; for there stands nothing between you and Popery in that principle; If an Internal Judge, either it is our selves, or the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us; Not our selves; for then the Rule is the Thing ruled, which cannot be; and if it be the Spirit of Christ Jesus (and the Apostle tells us, That unless we have the Spirit we are none of Christ's) then is the
Neck of Imposition broken, and what hast thou to do to judge me? let me stand or fall to my own Master; And upon this Foot went Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Beza abroad; And Cranmer, Ridly, Hooper, Jewel, Bradford, Philpot, &c. at home, and as good Men, and constant Martyrs in Ages before them. But suppose Conscientious Dissenters as ill Men as the Apostle describes an Heretick to be; what is the Punish∣ment? 3dly, A Man that is an Heretick, after the first and second Admonition reject, that is, deny his Communion, declare he is none of you, condemn his Proceedings by a publick Censure among your selves; what more can be strain'd by the fiercest Prosecutors of Men for Religion out of these Words. But was this the Evangelical Rule and Practice? Yes, that it was; Oh then whence comes Imposition Force Cruelty, Spoil of Goods, Imprisonments, Knockings, Beatings, Bruisings, Stockins, Whippings, and Spilling of Blood for Religion? What Church is that, whose Officers are so far from cloathing the naked, as to strip the clothed, from feeding the hungry, that they take their Bread from them, and those poor Widdows and helpless Orphans too; and so remote from visiting the sick and imprisoned, that they drag away their Bed from under them, and cast People into Prison for Conscience sake; Nay they haled away an Honest Man from a Meeting to Goal at Reading, (but the other Day) not permitting him to TAKE LEAVE of his poor Wife, newly delivered, and in a DYING Condition, though she also desired it, and liv'd but just by the Meeting-House where they took him. In fine, what are they that for no other Cause pass such dreadful Excommunications, as render the Excommunicants little better then outlawed Persons, subjecting their Civil and Natural Rights to their Pride, Passion, Interest or Revenge, unless they will purchase their Enjoyment at the dear Rate of loosing their own Souls? For what else can be the Consequence
of conforming to that I do not believe? Is not this to destroy sincere Men, and make and save Hypocrites. Oh, that such as are concern'd would soberly consider, if any Thing is so Scandalous to True Religion as FORCE; who can think that evidence Good that is extorted? And what a Church is that, which is made up of such Proselites, or that employes such Means to make them? O where is that Christian Meekness, Patience and Forbearance? How many have been ruined, that were never exhorted, and ex∣comunicated before they were once admonished? This is not to serve God, but Worldly Interest: its quite contra∣ry to Christ's Counsel and Doctrine: He came to save, and not to destroy Nature to magnifie his Grace. You pretend to hate J. Calvin's unconditional Reprobation, yet practise it; If you say no, Conformity is your Condition: I answer, that its as unreasonable to require an impossibillity, as cruel to damn Men for not doing it; For as you say, his Doctrine makes God to command them to repent, that cannot repent, and yet damn them if they repent not; So you injoyn Men to re∣linquish their present Faith and Worship, and conform to yours, which is not in their Power to do, yet damn them in a temporal Respect if they refuse it; For you make such an unavoidable Dissent, punishable with the Destruction of Mens Liberties and Estates: You had better leave off va∣luing your selves upon the Mercy and Well-Natur'dness of that Tenet of the universal Love of God to Mankind, till you love more then your selves, and abominate the Church of England's being, such an Elect to the Civil Government as utterly reprobates the rest, as you pretend to detest the like Injustice in J Calvin's Notion of Election and Reprobation. And the Truth of it is, this helps on Atheism as much as any Enormity in the Land, when Witty Men, not willing to take Pains to examine after the Truth and Excellency of Religion, behold Men that call themselves Christ's Ministers, and the Apostles Successors and Followers, to affect and seek Government, and yet twice deny it, when they go to receive it, that some others grow Lordly, live Voluptuously, and watch
after the biggest Preferments; not being excited by most Service for God, but Earthly Power and Wealth for themselves, and at the same Time persecuting Men of more Self-Denyal, for Matters of Opinion about Faith and Worship towards God; so that No Conformity to this Church, No Protection from the State. Which among Protestants is so much the more un∣reasonable, because they by these Courses implicitely own and assume the highest Infallibility and Perfection, and yet deny any such Thing; For it supposes that nothing is Truer, no∣thing Perfecter, or else they both persecute Men to em∣brace a Fallible and Imperfect Religion, and with cruel Penal∣ties provide against any Thing more True or Infallible; the greatest Injury to the World that can be; for it is a plain En∣deavour to frustrate all those excellent Prophesies and gracious Promises God has given, and the holy Scriptures declare of the latter Dayes. To conclude, I shall desire Men of this Unnatural, Unreasonable and Unchristian Spirit to consider: 1. What Church was that which John saw, riding upon the Powers of the Earth, employing their Authority to force CON∣FESSION, TRIBUTE and SUBJECTION to her? 2. What that Church was which dyed her self in the BLOOD of them that believed not in her, against whom the poor Souls under the Altar (whose Bodies had been beheaded by her) cryed to God? 3. What Church it was that would suffer none to Buy, Sell or Traffick without having her Mark (CONFORMITY to her) in their Forehead or right Hand, that is, either those that heartily and openly confest her, or those that basely complyed for Fear? 4. What Church is that which Trades in the Souls of Men? Read Revelations. Chap. 13. 18. & 20. 5. Whether this Church reigns not, wherever Mens,
LIBERTIES and PROPERTIES, with all the Comforts of this Life are exposed and sacrificed for Mat∣ters of FAITH and WORSHIP to Almighty God. Weigh these Things, you great Church-Men of the Age, in the Fear of that God who made Heaven and Earth, and think not to make thus cheap of the Lives, Liberties and Estates of Free-born English People, and Harmless Chris∣tians for their peaceable Conscience, without being accounta∣ble to that Great Lord in the Terrible Day of his Judgment, that draws on upon the World: No Plea you have shall be able to justifie these things, or fence off the heavy Stroak of that Just Judge, unless you repent: 'Tis not Succession in Name, but Nature, that makes the true Christian Minister and Bishop: And where the Divine Life and Holy Qua∣lifications of Christ and his Apostles are wanting, there can be no Succession, but what is as proper to the false Church as the true, the Counterfeit as the Christian: Be not deceived, God will not be mocked, such as you Sow, such shall you Reap. Remember Christ's Words; Blessed are the Poor in Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the Pure in Heart; for they shall see God. Blessed are the Meek; for they shall in her it the Earth. Blessed are the MERCIFƲL; for they shall obtain Mercy. Therefore Reform, and let your Moderation be known unto all Men, for the Lord is at hand: Even so come Lord Jesus. ERRATA Pag. 18. Line 33. for Injustice read Injury. p. 20. l. 11. dele and. p. 20. 31. read Heaven is hereby barr'd, as much as in Men lyes, from. p. 22. l. 22. for the read though. p. 25. l. 15. read revenged. p. 28. l. 25. read Chains.
THE SECOND PART OF THE Continued Cry OF THE OPPRESSED FOR JUSTICE. BEING An Additional Account of the Present and Late Cruelty, Oppression & Spoil inflicted upon the Persons and Estates of many of the Peaceable People called Quakers, in divers Counties, Cities and Towns in this Nation of England and Wales (chiefly upon the late Act made against Coventicles) for the Peaceable Exercise of their Tender Consciences towards God in Matters of Worship and Religion. This is thank-worthy, if a Man for Conscience towards God endure Grief, suffering wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2. 19. We shall not find any Occasion against this Daniel, except we find it a∣gainst him concarning the Law of his God, Dan. 6. 5. Galio said unto the Jews, If it were a Matter of Wrong or Wicked Lewdness, O ye Jews, Reason would that I should bear with you, Acts 18. 14. Printed in the Year, 1676.
VVHereas great Suffering and Oppression is still continued and inflicted upon many of the People call'd Quakers in divers Coun∣ties and Places in this Nation, upon the late Act against Conventicles, for meeting together to worship God according to their Consciences and Perswasions; & many industrous Families much Ruined, the Fatherless and Widows greatly oppressed, and Trading in many places much impared and decayed, and the Cry of the Poor (who have been imployed by industrous Tradesmen) very great, many wanting Bread because of the great Discouragement occasioned by the great Spoil and Havock that's made upon their Goods, and Fruits of the Labours of industrous Fami∣lies, only for the Exercise of their tender Consciences towards God, as the following Narrative will more par∣ticularly evince; which Sufferings and Oppressions have been occasioned chiefly under Pretence of the said Act, and continued in divers Counties by the means of some Turbulent Malicious Priests, who themselves have turned Informers, and encouraged others to seek out and haunt the peaceable Meetings of the People aforesaid, and to inform the Magistrates against them; the Men thus encouraged and employed being some idle, dissolute and extravagant Persons, not willing to take Pains in the Creation for a Livelihood, as other Men do, have ta∣ken upon them and been encouraged in this Unchrist an as well as Inhumane Course of informing against peaceable Subjects for their Own Ends and Advantages, wandring from place to place to find out such peaceable Meetings,
wherein if there be either Preaching, Praying or Wait∣ing on God in Silence, they trouble the Magistrates, in∣stigating such as are willing to gratifie them; and those Priests who have either themselves turned or encouraged Informers, in order to suppress the said Meetings, and make a Prey upon the said Peoples Estates & Livelihoods, ruining and destroying these peaceable Protestant-Sub∣jects in their Rights and Properties, under pretence of Doing the King Service; which Oppression and Grie∣vance hath long continued in this Nation, and the Cry thereof becomes louder and louder from many Distressed Families, since that divers Accounts and Applications have been given and made, and yet no Redress: Our Complaint still remains, not only of Unchristian but Inhu∣mane Usage herein; & that God who knows our Hearts and Conscientiousness towards him, and our Innocency towards the King and Government, he knows our Cause and hears our Cry, and according to his Promise we expect, that for the Oppression of the Poor and the Sighing of the Needy he will arise, &c. however, We, the People who are the present Sufferers, do look upon our selves ob∣lieged in Conscience, to spread before you this brief Ac∣count following, which is but as a short Appendix in compa∣rison of the Account that might be given of the great and many Sufferings that have been and still are continued upon the said Act in divers places of this Nation (besides tbe great number that were Imprisoned till Death, and others Banished from their Distressed Families into for∣reign Plantations upon the Act for Banishment) as also upon the Bishops Writs, De Excommunicato Capi∣endo, &c. many have been, for some years, and still are kept in Prisons and destructive Goals in this Nation in di∣vers
Counties, where several are Sick, and some have late∣ly laid down their Lives for not paying Small Tythes, Easter-Reckonings and to the Repairation of the Steeple-Houses. And upon the Statutes made against Recusants, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, some Hundreds of the afore∣said People are returned up into the Exchequer, and Writs of Enquiry have been sent down to the Sheriffs, and Juries impannelled to enquire into their Estates, who have made Returns thereof into the Exchequer, from whence Writs are issued and sent down to the Sheriffs in many Counties, to make seizure of Two Thirds of their Estates, and the Sheriffs Bailiffs being Unreasona∣ble have (in some places) taken a great deal more then what was pretended to be the King's Right: It is too great a Work to give a particular Account of all that are like to suffer on this Account, the Sheriffs in several Counties having Writs of Seizure in their Hands, and threaten to put them in Execution; Only two Instances in one Coun∣ty, for brevity sake you are desired to take notice of, as followeth. The 23d day of the 11th moneth, 1676. the Sheriff of Cambridge-shire sent his Bailiff John Burgani to de∣mand of Richard Webb of West-wickham in the same County 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. being Two Thirds of the yearly va∣lue of his Estate, as it was returned by a Jury impannel∣ed to make Enquiry into the Estates of Popish Recu∣sants; but Richard Webb being innocent, could not an∣swer the Bailiff's Demand, whereupon the Bailiff and his Assistants took from him four Horses, as they were go∣ing to plow, worth 18 l. and one of the Bailiffs Men cryed, We must have 20 l. worth of Goods, for we
must sell Good Penny-worths: so they took Two Cows more, valued at 8 l. 10 s. in all to the value of 26 l. 10 s. for 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. demanded. John Prime of Willbrom-parvo, had taken from him upon the 2d day of the 9th moneth, for 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. demanded by John Curby Bailiff, for Two Thirds of 20 l. a year of his Estate, four Cows and one Horse, worth 18 l. And the Bailiffs have Warrants in their hands to make seizure of many more in this County. We therefore entreat your Patience, who are in Power, to peruse the following Account, and take it into your se∣rious Considerations, to afford the Sufferers some effectu∣al and speedy Relief, by stopping these Oppressions, Un∣christian and Inhumane Proceedings for the future, that we and our Families, who are the Sufferers herein speci∣fied, may not be utterly destroyed, but enjoy our Liberties and Rights in the peaceable Exercise of our tender Con∣sciences, wherein we are accountable to God, and desire alwayes to approve our selves in all good Conscience and Innocency under the Government.
SUFFERERS in and about the Town of Lewes, in the County of SƲSSEX, only for their Peace∣able Meetings, & Exercise of their Consciences in the Worship of God; Chiefly carryed on Against them by VVilliam Snat, Priest, and Surrogat to the Court called, Court Christian; and James Clark, Register to the same Court. UPon the 5th day of the 8th Moneth, 1675. Wil∣liam Snat priest, accompanied with two other Priests, and one Robert Smith a Taylor, went to a peaceable Meeting of the aforesaid People, the said William Snat and Robert Smith being the Informers, they took the Names of several that assembled, and went to Henry Shully called a Justice, and swore against several persons for being at the said Meeting at the house of Thomas Mosely, which was utterly false, for it was not T. Mosely's house, and also against a Preacher▪ his Name unknown, for which Thomas Mosely was fined 20 l. and the Preacher 20 l. which Fine for the Preacher the Justice laid upon Nicholas Beard of Rottenden 10 l. and for himself 5 s. and 3 l. more upon Thomas Mose∣ly, and upon Mary Akehurst Widdow 7 l. 5 s. and upon
Ambrose Galloway for his Wife being there 5 s. and upon E∣lizabeth Shuter 5 s. and upon some other Persons five shillings apiece. Upon the 10th day of the 8th moneth, 1675. James Clark seeing he could make such Profit to himself by being an In∣former, he took up the Trade, with his Brother William Snat the Priest, who went to a Meeting of the aforesaid People, and brought with them Ferdinando Bryant and John Delves Constables of Lewes, who took several Persons Names, and went to Richard Bridger Justice, where the said James Clark, William Snat and Walter Jones gave Information of a Meet∣ing in the House of Mary Galloway (mark it was in the same House which Priest Snat swore but five dayes before to be the House of Thomas Mosely, and now swear it to be the House of Mary Galloway, although there was no alteration concer∣ning the said House) for which Tho. Mosely was fined 9 l. 15 s. and Ambrose Galloway fined 9 l. 10 s. and for himself and Wife 15 s. and Mary Akehurst 25 s. and Samuel Baker 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and Steven Eager 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and several other Persons for being at the said Meeting were sined 5 s. apiece, which said fines J. Clark Informer levied himself, that he might the better feather his Nest, for 10 l. 5 s. demanded of Amb. Galloway of Lewes he took Goods to the value of 14 l. 15 s. and from Thomas Mosely for 9 l. 15 s. demanded he took Goods to the value of 12 l. 6 s. 8 d. the 20 l. for the House imposed for the first Meeting being not then levied; and from Mary Akehurst, a Widdow, that hath Five Children, for two fines, being both 8 l. 10 s. took Goods to the value of 16 l 18 s. 10 d. and from Elizabeth Shuter Widdow he took two Looking-glasse for 5 s. demanded; from Samuel Baker, a Blacksmith at Newhaven, for 6 l. 18 s. 4 d. fine, was taken half a Tun of Iron which cost 7 l. odd money. Upon the 17th day of the 8th Moneth, 1675. some of the aforesaid People being met together at the same House as aforesaid, in their usual manner in Lewes, came James Clark, William Snat and William Purser Informers, with the afore∣said Constables, and a Lieutenant, and an Ensigne; and two
Sarjeants belonging to the Militia, and also a great number of rude People of the baser sort, who with great Violence dragg'd them out of the Meeting-house, abusing many, drawing them in the Streets, kicking, bruising and beating many, and from some there was Blood drawn, and chiefly by the Hands of James Clark aforesaid, whose Beast▪like behaviour caused many of the Spectators to cry Shame of him; this being done, the aforesaid Informers went to Nisal Rivers Justice, & gave Information against several that were there assembled; and the said Justice imposed by his Warrant these Fines fol∣lowing; upon John Songhurst for preaching 20 l. upon the House 20 l. to be levied as followeth; upon Ambrose Galloway for the House 4 l. and for himself and other Per∣sons 2 l. 5 s. all being 6 l. 5 s. for the which James Clark took Goods from the said Ambrose to the value of 18 l. 7 s. it being chiefly Linnen Cloth, never measuring any, the said Ambrose not being at home when he thus rifled his Shop, but afterwards got leave from the Man of the House where the Goods were lodged, to measure so much as he shewed him, the value of which is above expressed, never returning any thing again. Thomas Mosely being fined 2 l. which James Clark demanded, with 3 l. more for a former Fine, the whole being 5 l. he took Goods to the value of 12 l. 5 s. John Ellis being fined 4 l. the said Clark took Goods to the value of 7 l. 8 s. Thomas Bud, a poor Shepherd, being fined 25 s. the aforesaid Clark forced into his House, he being not at home, and took away nine pieces of Pewter, ten Cheeses, a Pottage-pot, a Skillat, a Frying-pan, a Bucket, with some other things, his Bed very hardly escaping, he wanting the Tick to carry away the Pillage in, but espying a Sack, took that, and the Bed escaped his hands From Tho. Robason, a Felt∣maker, being fined 20 s. the said Clark took eight Hats. Mary Akehurst fined 10 s. Clark took Goods to the value of 18 s. Maskall Picknal being fined 5 s. [mark] the said Clark with∣out any Officer with him (that he might the better cover his Cruelty) took four Roles of Linnen Cloth, without measu∣ring any, and refused to let them see it measured. Steven
Manard and his Brother Nicholas Manard were fined 5 s. a∣piece, for the which was Goods taken to the value of 24 s. Henry Geats for a fine of 5 s. had taken from him a great Brass Kettle. Richard and John Scrase fined 50 s. apiece; Edward Paine 20 s. Samuel Web 20 s. Thomas Banks 20 s. these last Fines being not yet levied, and also several other Persons being fined, of which we can give no Account, be∣cause Clark doth refuse to let us have a Copy of the War∣rant. Upon the 24th day of the aforesaid 8th moneth, some of the aforesaid People being peaceably met together, came Ja. Clark, Will. Snat and William Purser Informers, accom∣panyed with the Constables and about twelve Soldiers in Arms with their Officer as aforesaid belonging to the Militia, without any Regard to their Sabbath-Day, they drew Friends out of the Meeting-house, abusing many with Blows and cruel Pun∣ches, and set a Guard at the House door to keep them out; then the aforesaid Clark demanded of Mary Galloway a fine of 5 s. for the which he took seventeen new Deal Formes, that cost near 3 l. which Forms were not the Goods of Mary Gal∣loway, and loaded away some of the Soldiers with these Forms, to carry them along the Town whither he did direct; and when many of the People and Constables were gone, the said Clark commanded one of the Soldiers to break open the Door of the House, that he might use his Will, there being none but two Maids in the House: thus did they continue for the space of four Weeks with Guards of Soldiers, to keep out the Meeting from their own House, in the Street, in the Winter Season: Also the said Clark did upon one of the First Dayes afore▪mentioned, demand another Fine of 5 s. of Ma∣ry Galloway, for the which he took a new Settle and five Deal Boards, worth 20 s. which were not the Goods of Mary Galloway. Upon Information given on Oath by Thomas Levet Priest, Mial Harmer Smith, and George Shepherd, Taylor Infor∣mers, on the 5th day of the 7th Moneth, 1676 to Sackvil Graves, called Justice; that several Persons whom these In∣formers
named, were at a Meeting at the House of William Yokehurst in the Parish of Westfurle near Lewes in Sussex, upon the 23th day of the Moneth called July, for which the said Justice fined Clement Picknell for preaching at the said Meet∣ing 40 l. and William Yokehurst for suffering the Meet∣ing in his House 20 l. and he fined thirty one Persons, as be∣ing present hearers, some 10 s. and some 5 s. apiece; and to be levied as followeth, by reason of the poverty of some, has expressed in the Warrant, upon Ambrose Galloway 10 l. 10 s. and upon Mary Akehurst 10 l. upon John Ellis 10 l. upon Thomas Weekes 9 l. 10 s. and on John Abrook 9 l. 10 s. and on John Longly 8 l. 10 s. and upon William Yokehurst 50 s. and upon Maskall Picknell 5 l. and on Samuel Baker 45 s. and upon Richard Hudson 5 s. and for the poverty of Ten other Persons 5 s. apiece all to be levied upon Richard Hud∣son, the whole fine being 2 l. 15 s. for which fine the Con∣stable and some other Officers took from Richard Hudson a Cow and Calfe worth 4 l. 5 s. Richard Hudson knowing that the aforesaid Informers had Sworn falsly, and several per∣sons that were laid upon him were not there, brought his appeal and prosecuted it at the Sessions, where, and before the Court, it did appear that these Informers had Sworn falsly, four per∣sons in the number of Ten, for the which Richard Hudson had 20 s. returned him back again by the Sheriff for the four persons they had sworn falsly against, One of the four they swore to be pre∣sent at the Meeting, was dead six Years before. The aforesaid Appeal being tried before seven Justices of the Peace in open Court, yet never a one did give any Reproof to these false Informers for these their false Oaths. For a Meeting at Lewes the 12th day of the 7th moneth, 76. several of the aforesaid People were fined by William Spence Justice, upon the Information of Walter Jones and William Purser Informers, for two Preachers 40 l. and for several Persons as Hearers, 5 s. apiece, to be levied as followeth, Upon Ambrose Galloway 10 l. 5 s. upon John Ellis 10 l. 5 s. upon Thomas Mosely 10 l. 5 s. and upon Henry Scrase 10 l. 5 s. and upon some other Persons 5 s. apiece. So that the total of the Fines that have been imposed upon
the aforesaid People for their peaceable Meetings in the Wor∣ship of God, from the 5th day of the 8th moneth, 1675. to the 12th day of the 7th moneth, 1676. doth amout to 252 l. 15 s. besides the Unreasonable Havock the aforesaid Clark hath made upon Goods as before related. The 29th of the 9th Moneth, 1676. Edward Howel of Willington Constable, accompanied with Richard Whiting, Sa∣muel Munger, John Bet and Robert Garet of Westfurll, did take a Mare worth 8 l., out of the Stable of Maskal Picknel of Willington for a Fine of 5 l. 15 s. imposed on the said Maskal for being at a Meeting at Westfurl, the 23d of the 5th Moneth 1676. by Sackvill Graves called Justice; 20 s. of the said Fine being imposed on him for two others, to wit, Thomas Banks and Sibble Pain of Bishopston, although the said Sibble Pain was not at the Meeting. Upon the 26th Day of the 10th Moneth 1676. George Ty and Thomas Turle Constables of the Town of Lewes, and James Clark Overseer for the poor, and Edward Strudwick Steeple-house Warden, came with a Warrant given forth by William Spence Justice, upon an Information of George Jones and William Purser Informers, that Ambrose Galloway was at a Meeting or Conventicle in Lewes, where were two Preach∣ers, their Names unknown therefore the said Justice did impose upon Ambrose Galloway for the Preacher, 10 and for himself, 5 s. Upon the Day aforesaid, the Officers aforesaid came into the Shop that had been the Shop of Ambrose Galloway, but then in the Tenure and Occupation of Ambrose Galloway the Son of Ambrose Galloway, who was not at the Meeting, as charged; for the which Fine the Officers broke open the Coun∣ter and a Press in the Shop of the said Ambrose, and took away Mens Coats and Breeches, and Childrens Coats, and other Goods to the Value of 20 l. 5 s. 11 d. the said Ambrose be∣ing by Trade a Salesman. The Witnesses Names that saw Thomas Mosely's first Parcel of Goods distrained, which was done the 28th of the 8th Moneth, 75. are, George Shelton and Thomas Wallter.
The Names of those which saw the second Parcel distrain∣ed from Thomas Mosely, which was done the 1st of the 2d moneth, 76. are, Mary Ford, Benjamin Mosely and Mary Galloway. About the 9th Moneth, 75. Ambrose Galloway of Lewes was cited to the Bishope Court, held in Lewes, to appear three days after citation; Amb. Galloway did appear accordingly at the Time and Place, and there was no Court held that day; some time after this Court decreed Excommunication against the said Ambrose, never sending him any other, whereby he might certainly know when there was a Court kept, that he might make his just Defence, but forth-with denounceth him Excommunicated, and about the 26th day of the 9th moneth, 76. the aforesaid Bishop sendeth forth a Capiendo to carry the said Ambrose Galloway to Prison for a Contempt. SUFFERINGS in and about the City of HEREFORD. ON the 20th of the 6th moneth, 1676. the People of God being met together at their Meeting-house, being in the Subburbs of the City of Hereford to worship the God of Heaven according to their usual manner, in Spirit and in Truth, one John Rea (as they heard) went and informed Henry Cal∣dicott, then Mayor of the City, of the Meeting, who with several other Officers came unto the Meeting and after some words warned them, not to meet any more, and said, if they did, let it be at their Peril, and so went away. Upon the 27th of the same moneth, they being in like manner peaceably Assembled together again, there came unto
them many Boyes out of the City in a Riotous manner, throw∣ing Stones and Dirt into the Meeting. On the 3d of the 7th Moneth next after, being also the first day of the Week, they were peaceably met again to wor∣ship God, then came Boyes, and Girles, and Young People to a great number, in the same Riotous manner, and throng'd in and about the Meeting. and became so abusive unto them beyond all Humanity, so as to fling their Hats at their Faces, using all the filthy deriding words towards them they could invent to utter, and with their Staves some of them would strike off many of their Hats off their Heads, of both Men and Women, and sometimes striking some upon their Heads with their Staves, and sometimes justling against them, and throwing Stones amongst them, and brake some of the Glass∣windows, and turned in Dogs into the Meeting, oftentimes bidding them speak by the spirit, and then making a Noise with Hooping and Hollowing; and some of them fastened Burs to some of the Men's Hair; and as they sought to force a Pig into the Meeting amongst them, it happening to be a Pig of John Rea's, who on that day two Weeks before was said to inform the Mayor of the Meeting, and he seeking to drive his own Pig from them, one of the unruly Young Men broke his Head with a Stone, which was the new-elected Mayor's Son, as 'twas said. On the next first Day being the 10th of the 7th Moneth, the aforesaid People were again assembled together in their usual religious Manner, and in a short Space the Street before the House, became filled with People, young & old; & many young Men and Boyes came in upon them, riotously as before, and threw their Hats at and amongst them, and fired Squibs, and threw amongst them, and then throwing Stones against the Glass Windows, stroke a Woman, as she was sate within the Room, on the side of her Head with a Stone: But seeing them so outragious, and desperately cruel, some of the Meeting went to the Mayor to signifie their Doings unto him, who be∣came somewhat displeased at the Matter, and also they went to
Abraham Seward an Attorney at Law, the New Elected May∣or, whose Son was one of the Leaders of the turbulent Com∣pany in their Actings, to acquaint him of his Son, who seemed to be ignorant of his Son's Doings, yet somewhat threatned the Persons that went to him, with the Execution of the Law upon them; & because some of the Lads belonged to the Free-School in Hereford, one of the Meeting went to the chief Master of the School about them, who presently came and took No∣tice of as many as he could find; for many of them dispersed at his coming, they having by that time beaten the Glass-Win∣dows to pieces with Stones and Staves; but it was said by some, he was forbidden to correct them, and that the Colledge-Priests should set them on, and say, they would bear them out in what they did; and some of the unruly Boyes were Quire∣sters. On the 14th Day of the 7th Moneth they were peaceably met together again to serve the living God, and assoon as they departed many rude Boyes came running to find them there, and some of them said, if they had met with them, they would have done their work for them, and fell again upon the glass∣windows breaking them. On the 16th Day following two Friends went to Robert Si∣monds and Thomas Simonds, Justices for the City, to let them know of the several riotous Assemblies, and the Abuses done upon them, who not at all regarded their Complaint, but the said Robert Simonds did endeavour to force some Confession of a Meeting from one of them, and then protested, if he had con∣fessed, he would immediately have fined him; then the Friend asked him, what if it should please God to suffer another Re∣ligion to be set up with Authority in this Nation, would he not think it an unreasonable thing to be forced from, or punish∣ed for his Religion he now professeth? He answering said, he should not, but would be subject to the Government; and after said to some others, as we were credibly informed, that if the Friend had but confessed a Meeting, he would presently have arrested his Horses he had then in the Town; and also said, the Quakers were well helpt up to come with Complaints to them.
On the 17th Day after, it being the first Day of the Week, the aforesaid People were peaceably assembled again to wor∣ship God, after some time the rude Company of Boyes & young People came unto them in the former riotous manner; many of them having Sticks and Staves in their Hands, and they threw their Hats, and Dirt, and Stones amongst them, and Squibs, and burned some of their Clothes; and when Friends departed, the Door of the House being locked, they passing away, saw the Master of the School coming hastily again to seek after his Schollars, which many of them perceiving, hid themselves from him, and he said unto Friends, that it was not fitting that Boyes should be suffered to abuse them as they did, yet soon after the rude Company became more unruly then before; for they totally brake down the Glass-Windows that remained, and as many of the Pillars thereof as they could, with some of the Walls of the House, and entered in and broke the Benches and Seats they found therein; and brake open an inner Door with other things they could meet with; and some Boyes fol∣lowed after some Friends of the Countrey with hooping and hollowing, and throwing of Stones after them, about a quarter of a Mile; and it was commonly said, that the Master of the School going about to correct some of his Schollars for their A∣buses towards Friends, they made such a Resistance against him, as violently to throw him over a Bench, and giving him threat∣ning Words, they being so emboldned in ill Practices; and when several sober People of the City, that saw or heard of the Doings of the rude Company, crying out against them, they would threaten them; and one man, because he reproved them, was forced to take up Stones in his Hands to defend himself from them The 18th Day of the 7th Moneth, 1676 there being a Meet∣ing in Hereford of the aforesaid People, to enquire into the Ne∣cessities of the poor, the Widows and Fatherless Children, that they that are able to work may be imployed, and assisted to get their own livelihood, but if unable, then to be relieved, and the Fatherless and Helpless Children to be set out Apprentices, which is acceptable Service to God, and great Benefit to the
whole Nation, against which work there is no Law, nor ought to be; for it is the Command of God, To do good unto all, but e∣specially to the Houshold of Faith. And in Obedience to God and his Truth they came together to do this especial Good to the Houshold of Faith, and being peaceably met together in their shattered Meeting House, and after some time was spent in the Service of Truth, there came a great Company of rude tumultuous Boyes, many of them in a Riotous Manner with Staves, Sticks and long Splints of Wood in their Hands, and surrounding the House, and one of them sounding a Horn, there came a great Company of Peo∣ple of several Sorts; then the Boyes began to throw their Hats, Dirt and Stones into the Meeting, and hurt some; and utter∣ing abominable, filthy, reviling Words and deriding Speeches against the Spirit of God, and his Worship; one of them came within the Door, and breaking Wind backward said, The Spi∣rit moved him, and so the brutish rude Company fell to laugh∣ing, and shoting, and throwing of Stones through the broken Walls and Windows into the House; and some threw in Ex∣crements upon Friend Clothes, and then got upon the House and untiled part of the House, and seeing a Friend coming into the House, they tumbled down some of the Stones upon his Head, and so continued breaking the House for some time, and broke down the Pale with the young Vines about the House. And a Friend in the Meeting seeing their Wickedness, was constrained to bear his Testimony against them, exhorting Friends to Patience, and the tumultuous rude Company to Moderation (who like the Sodomites about just Lot's House, encompassed them about in their cruel Emnity) lest the Lord bring some sweeping Judgement upon them and the City. Then soon after came some of the Magistrates of the City, namely Edward King and Robert Simonds Justices, with Abra∣ham Seward the Elected Mayor for the Year to come, an At∣torney at Law, whose Coming was not at all to appease and scatter the Riot and Rage of the People, but to execute their own and the Priests Envy and Cruelty against Friends, which first appeared in the Boyes and rude Multitude, and then ma∣nifested
it self in their Proceedings; The said Edward King Justice, first entring the House, said in a vain, light, scoffing Spirit, What be ye? Quakers, or Shakers, or Candlestick-ma∣kers? And then asked, who was the Speaker? some of the Boyes said, such a one; then Abraham Seward with the two Justices urged him to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and did the like to the rest of the men, taking their Names, with the Names of the Women, and then calling for the Constables and other Officers to take the Men to Prison, being eight in Number, and threatned to fine the Women with him that the Boyes said, spake, and for the House also; then they took away the eight Men to the Town-Hall or Market House, and in their Passage along with the Magistrates, Abraham Se∣ward the Elected Mayor said, They should never meet there, and had often spake it before, and words to that Purpose in a pre∣sumptuous Spirit. And a Friend going with him said, We are a People gathered by the Power of the Lord, and therefore the Power of Man can∣not scatter us: Then he replyed, and said, I will break your Meetings. So then they came to the Town hall, and there they tendred the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to them, who answer∣ing, said, We are Christians, therefore cannot break the Com∣mand of Christ to swear at all; but to render just and lawful Allegiance to the King, do not deny nor refuse. Notwith∣standing this their Answer, they made a Mittimus, and sent them to prison. About the next day after they were imprisoned, one Walter Rogers a Prebend walking by the Meeting house, and obser∣ving how it was broken and torn with the Rude Company, said to some as he passed, That they were Very Good Boyes, and had done their Works Better then he thought they had. On the 24th of the 7th moneth, being the first day of the Week, Friends were assembled again to wait upon God, many Rude Boyes came unto them, and threw their Hats at them, one of them pulling a Woman by her Chin, and poch∣ing Friends with their Staves through the Windows; and when
Friends departed, many of the Boyes followed some of them a pretty way, throwing Stones after them, using many Taunting and Deriding VVords against God's Holy Spirit and Worship. The Names of such men who were present at the Meeting at Hereford, and were Eye-VVitnesses of the Riotous Doings of the Rude Multitude, and the Proceedings of the Magistrates against the Meeting, the 18th Day of the 7th Moneth, 1676. who are now Prisoners in Bysters-Gate in Hereford, are as fol∣loweth: of Amely. Roger Prichard, Henry Price, William Oven, of Leominster. Morgan Watkins, Charles Barnet, Constantine Young of Hereford. James Exton, Robert Woodliffe▪ The Names of some more of the Men Friends belonging to Hereford, who were also Eye-witnes∣ses of the Riotous Doings and several Proceedings done against Friends at the several Meetings before∣mentioned, are as followeth: John Barber, John Carver, James Eckley, Nathaniel Powles.
The 1st of the 8th Moneth, 1676. the aforesaid People were peaceably met to worship the God of their Lives, ma∣ny Rude Boyes and Young People came about them, and ma∣ny of them fell to throwing of Stones through the Windows they had broke before; and one of them stroke a Woman Friend on her Head with a Stone; and some of them through a Window did cast their Urin upon the peoples Heads; and as a Man sate some what igh to a Window, one of the Boyes reached through, and took his Hat off his Head, and put Excrements therein, and threw it in again amongst them; and some of them, in their vain deriding manner, with bawling Words, would Act preaching, and oftentimes used Shout∣ing. The 22th of the said Moneth, being again assembled peace∣ably together to worship God, being also the first day of the VVeek, soon after came Serjeants, Constables and other Of∣ficers of the City, and forced Friends along with them to come before Abraham Seward Mayor of the City, who kept them at a certain place till the Mayor came from his Worship, and after a while caused them to be discharged. The 29th of the same Moneth they were again met toge∣ther in their peaceable usual manner, then came many of the Officers and Constables of the City, and forced them out of the House, and kept them out, taking two Men along with them, namely, Iames Exeon and Iohn Carver, and brought them before the Mayor, Edward King, Robert Simonds and Thomas Payner, Justices; the Mayor called to John Jones and Christopher Jones two of his Serjeants, and Thomas Lugon a Constable, to inform of the Meeting, when, after they had sworn them, one of the Friends spake unto them, To take good heed, and not to forswear themselves, as some of the Officers did aforetime, in accusing Persons to be present at a Meeting, when they were not; yet presently after they informed against one Mary Carver for being at the Meeting; and as they were set∣ting her Name in the Warrant or Conviction, one of the Men seeing their Wilfulness therein, told them, That Mary Carver was not then there: Therefore it is to be seen, whose
Hearts are bent to Cruelty, how little regard they have to their Oaths. Then one of the two Friends asked the Infor∣mers, Whrein they had right Knowledge, that it was a Meet∣ing exercising Religion? To which they gave no Answer; but the Mayor said, It was no matter for that; will you swear to the contrary? and withal they tendred them the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and because they could not with good Consci∣ence) swear at all, they committed them to Prison till the next Assize; and told them, They should heve but Straw to lie on; and commanded the Goaler, To put them apart, one from the other. The 12th of the 9th Moneth following, being also the first day of the Week, the shattered Meeting-house being then somewhat repaired, and an Inhabitant dwelling therein, Friends were there met again to wait upon the Lord, there came ma∣ny Boyes and Young Men again, and beset the House, and threw Stones against it, and they were forbidden by the Inha∣bitant thereof, who told them, It was his Dwelling-house, yet they violently brake open a Window, being made very fast, with Boards well nailed, and there came the Mayor's Officers, and one of them encouraged the rude Company to Untyle the House, and one—Holley a Servant to John Hipps a chief Constable in the City, said, That the Mayor's Officers, the Ser∣jeants, told the Rude Company, That they should knock out the Quakers Brains if they would not depart. And the Officers came, and forced Friends out of the House, and in the Even∣ing many Rude Boyes came again, and told the said Inhabi∣tant, They would pull down the House upon his Head, using ma∣ny Abusive Words against them, and stroke a Girle with a Stone. Some of those that were Eye-Witnesses to the afore-men∣tioned Proceedings: John Barber, James Exton, John Carver, Elizabeth Barber, Elizabeth Exton, Mary Carver, Diana Thomas.
On the 3d of the 10th moneth, 1676. the aforesaid Peo∣ple were assembled together to worship the Lord in their usual peaceable manner, at the City of Hereford, then came the Mayor's Officers, and turned them out of the House, and brought one Iohn Barber before Abraham Seward Mayor, Henry Caldeot and Thomas Payner Justices, who tendred to him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and because he could not in good Conscience swear at all, committed him to Prison till the next Assizes. And on the 7th day following, the said Iohn Barber had taken from him Goods worth 25 s. for 16 s. demanded for not going to the Steeple-house, and then also the said Iohn Barber, had Goods seized worth 26 l. for a fine of 10 l. demanded, and imposed upon him for the House where the Meeting was, by Warrant under the Hands of Robert Simonds and Edward King Justices. And on the 10th of the 11th moneth following, then was taken from the said Iohn Barber, dwelling in the Parish of Ni∣cholas, Goods worth 14 s. for the demand of 12 s. for not going to the Steeple-house. And then also was taken from Iohn Carver of the City and Parish aforesaid Goods worth 7 s. for 4 s. demanded for the same Cause. Edward Price, Wardens. Thomas Gwillim, Wardens. Giles Cockes, Overseers. Evan Thomas, Overseers. Thomas Gough, Petty-Constable. Iohn Hipps, Chief-Constable. Richard Phillpots, Assistant. Iames Exton, Iohn Carver and Iohn Barber do remain Prisoners in Hereford-City Prison, upon refusing to take the Oath, being committed until the next Assizes. Iohn Haines and Iames Robbins, both of Boddenham, are continued Prisoners by the Writ Excommunicato Capiendo,
for Contempt of the Bishops Court (as is said) being com∣mitted to the County Goal the 23d of the seventh Moneth, 1676. On the 20th of the 11th moneth, 1676. the aforesaid Peo∣ple were then met again, in their usual manner, to worship the Lord, then came the Mayor's Officers and forced them away, not suffering them to abide in the open Street there∣about; and one of the Officers, a Serjeant, called Iohn Iones, said unto them, They would Fire the House where they met, and broyle them therein. Dansey Gwillim and Henry ulia, with others can witness the same; these Witnesses are no Quakers. Thomas Holt of Wickton in the Parish of Leominster com∣mitted to Prison the 18th day of the 7th moneth, 1674. and still remains a Prisoner for small Tythes and Easter-Reckon∣ings to the value of Eight Groats demanded. Nathaniel Smith of Leominster committed to Prison the 11th day of the 11th moneth, 1676. from the Quarter-Sessi∣ons, because for Conscience sake he could not Swear. SUFFERERS in the County of Leicester. THe 10th day of the 1st Moneth, 1673. Samuel Harper of Haborough was arrested wfth a Bishops Writ, for not going to the Steeple house, and there still remaineth a Prisoner at the Suit of Matthew Bent Priest. Thomas Dsh of Hincly Labouring-man, taken to Prison by a Bishop's Writ, at the Suit of Geoge Naylor Priest of the same, for refusing to pay small Tythes; Anthony Wells and
Leonard Gasway Bailiffs, took him to Prison from his aged Wife the 24th of the 11th Moneth, 1674. where he still re∣maineth. The 26th of the 7th Moneth, 1674. John Marriot Joyner, and William Parker Carpenter of Long-claxton, alias Clanson, were taken by a Warrant from Thomas Stavley and Thomas Beamont, called Justices, directed to Thomas Faux Consta∣ble, and brought before them to give in sufficient Sureties to answer the Suit of John Reay Vicar of the same Town, they refusing were sent to Prison by a Statute made the 27th of Henry the 8th: The Priest demands of John Marriot 5 s. 6 d. per Annum, and of William Parker 3 s. they both remaining Prisoners from their Wives and small Children. The last day of the 12th moneth, 1674. Thomas Followes of Whetstone committed to Prison by the said Thomas Stavley and Thomas Beamont, upon the same Statute, for refusing to become bound to answer the Suit of Thomas Robeson Priest, in a Cause of Tythes, his Demand about five shillings and six pence per annum; and yet remaineth a Prisoner from his Wife and Family. The 18th of the 1st moneth, 1676. George Power of Swa∣nington in the Parish of Whitweek, was taken by Samuel Ster∣key of Ashbydelazouch at the Suit of John Brintnal Priest, in a Case of small Tythes, part of which was demanded by a former Priest more then one half, and since he was Prisoner this John Brintnall hath taken a Lamb out of his Fold, and he still remaineth a Prisoner. The 2d Moneth, 1676. William Tuninges of Syleby Shep∣herd, was subpoened into the Exchequer by Richard San∣ders Impropriator, and for not appearing was cast into Pri∣son for small Tythes, to the value of 3 s. 4 d. and there con∣tinues. The 1st of the 5th Moneth, 1676. Samuel Brown of Leice∣ster Apothecary, was taken by a Bishop's Writ for not coming to the Steeple-House, by Anthony Wells and Leonard Gasway of Leicester Bailiffs, about the Tenth Hour at Night in his Bed, and still remains a Prisoner.
The 13th of the 8th moneth, 1676. John Johnson of Northkilworth Shepherd, taken by a Bishop's Writ for not coming to the Steeple-house by Leonard Gasway and Antho∣ny Wells of Leicester Bailiffs, and Iohn Iackson of Humberston Bailiff, where he remaineth a Prisoner, being the chief Guide of his Mother's Business, she be being aged about Eighty. The 24th of the 8th Moneth, 1676. John Wilsford late of Nether-Broughton, Jersey-Comber, taken by a Bishop's Writ for not going to the Steeple-House, by Leonard Gasway and Anthony Wells of Leicester, John Iackson of Humberstone, and Henry Bunnes of Melton Mowbray an old Informer, and the rest Bailiffs, took him out of a peaceable Meeting in Long-Clan∣son; the before-said Henry Bunnes broke the Meeting House Windows, tore a Woman Friend's Hood, stroke an old Wo∣man-Friend on the Breast, hurled Ale in John Wilsford's Face; he still remaineth a Prisoner from his Wife and small Children, near 40. Miles in Leicester County Goal, their Livelihood chiefly depending upon his Hand-Labour. The 28th of the 11th Moneth, 1676. Daniel Fox of Thru∣sington was taken by a Bishop's Writ for not coming to the Stee∣ple-House by Leonard Gasway of Leicester, and Iohn Iackson of Humberstone, and there continues. The 19th of the 4th Moneth, 1676. Sufferers for meeting to worship God. The 22d of the 1st Moneth, 1675. Taken from Iohn Swann of Little-Peatling for being at a peaceable Meeting at William Well's of Knighton, upon the 20th of the 4th Moneth, 1675. by a Warrant from Thomas Beamont called Justice, was fined 50 s. for which Fine he had a Cow taken from him to the Va∣lue of near 4 l. by Iohn Marriot Constable, and Francis Pearce Informer; the Constable confessed that he sold the Cow for 3 l. but nothing was returned again. For the same Meeting Michael Woodcock and Iohn Warden had each of them a Cow taken from them, for 50 s. Fine a∣piece.
The 5th of the 1st Moneth, 1675. taken from William Wells of Knighton, by a Warrant from Thomas Beamont called Justice, Charles Gibbins of Kimcoat, and Francis Pearce of Armsby In∣formers, for having a peaceable Meeting at his House, upon the 20th of the 4th Moneth, 1675. Seven Milch and Incalved Beasts, to the Value of near 30 l. Ioseph Pipin and Richard Ing Church▪Wardens, and VVilliam VVard Overseer of the poor, the Fine 20 l. Samuel Brown of Leicester Apothecary, being at a peacea∣ble Meeting at William Well's of Knighton, Charles Gibins of Walthm Kimcoate, Corporal to the Militia, and Francis Percy of Armsby, Militia-Soldier, informed Justice Beamont so called, of Stouten-Grange near Leicester, of the same, whose Readiness to assist them in their Ungodly Designs was publickly manifest, insomuch that he granted out Warrants against several for that Meeting, directing one to Iohn Brown Constable of the Bishop Fee, against Samuel Brown, to distrain of his Goods to the Value of 5 l. 5 s. 5 l. for the Poverty of the Preacher, the rest for his own Offence, as they call it; the aforesaid Con∣stable wanting Opportunity to make Distress, was much threat∣ned by the Justice to be distrained of for neglect of his Office, receiving another Warrant to distrain for 6 l. 5 s. for the same Meeting Now the Constable of Gilmorton having distrained of Friends there by a Warrant from the said Justice for the same Meeting, and the Constable, Informer and other Officers ex∣pending part of the Money which the Warrant expressed, he laid 20 s. more upon the said Samuel Brown (there he broke that Law, because he levied more upon Samuel Brown, being no Poverty could be supposed) and the Justice to some said, That he acted for Fear of the Penalty of 100 l. calling the Suf∣ferers Rebbels, and said, They deserved to be punished as such. Notwithstanding their and his personal Resolve to distrain, he appearing and receiving Intelligence of Disappointment, one Day he called out in great Rage to the aoresaid S. B. saying, Brown, you have a Conventicle in your House; the Reply was, no Persons save our own be at this time in my House, the Justice still rageously saying, He would break open his Doors to
see; then actively riding in his own Person from Officer to Officer to get them together to fulfil his wicked desire, at that Juncture of time Elizabeth Carr and Edeth Brown went to him to inform him that there was no Meeting at that time, and further exhorted him to fear God, and desist from assisting the Informers in these destructive Designs, further declaring unto him, that if he did not, God's Hand of Justice would soon o∣vertake him, and reward him according to his Deeds; to which he replied, Do you curse me? and stood up trembling and said. Get you out of the Room, you disquiet my Spirit; so they left him, and he coming down with the Informer and other Officers, the People on Heaps being gathered together to see what he would do, finding the Woman of the House standing at the Door with her little Babe, laid Hand upon her, plucking her away in an Uncivil Manner, commanding the Informers to go to the Smiths to borrow Hammers to break open the doors, they being deny'd, still commanded them to threaten the Smiths to lend them upon pain of Impirsonment, they still denyed, saying, They should not lend them to do their honest Neighbour a∣ny harm; so the Informer was forced to make use of a great Stone to break open the Doors, the Justice entring first said, They have caried away their Goods; Reply was made, No, the Informers have twice taken them away before; Have you been so long Rebbels? said the Justice, you shall suffer for it; so he asking who such a Person was, the Reply being, That he was well acquainted with that Person's Husband formerly, when they together were Officers in Oliver's Army, at which Charge, his Coat appearing so manifestly turned, he retreated his Ground and left it in charge, that they should take enough of the Goods away, and to be further revenged on the said Samuel Brown, tendered him the Oath of Allegiance, to which he re∣plied, That active Obedience in this Case being first due to the King of Kings, who said, swear not, and passive Obedience to the Ordinance of Man for Conscience Sake; but through the Interest of one of the Officers freely extending to the Justice on the behalf of Samuel Brown, was prevalent to divert his mali∣cious Design, as the Justice himself confessed. The Officers
returning an Account of what they had taken away, he com∣manded them saying, We have spent several Dayes about this, and we had need have more to bear our Charges, the Constable engaged that what Money was wanting, more then the Goods would amount to, he would make up. Note, Charles Gibbins the first and chief Informer in this County, was found dead off his Horse, going from Lutterworth Market, soon after his Information about this Meeting; and the said Justice was in a few weeks after this his wicked Act, by Death cut off. The Goods taken away was Bedding, to the Value of about 8 l. To the Truth of these things, there are ma∣ny People Witnesses. Sufferers for Tythes in Long-Clanson, in the Vale of Belvire, in the County of Leicester. The 3d. Week of the 5th Moneth, 1676. Iohn Reay Vicar or Priest went to the Lands of William Hanly, and took to the value of the 5th Part of his Barley, besides 13. Wheat-Sheaves; Iohn Moor, Henry Hobb and Robert Wright let this Part to the Vicar, Witnesses Iohn Iackson, Richard Hanley. The 21st of the 5th Moneth, 1676. Taken from Edward Hallam about thirty Wheat-Sheaves, by Thomas Marriot, Thomas Hicling and George Manchester. Taken from Iohn Dubleday, by the same three men, to the Value of one Quarter of Wheat and Rye. The 24th of the 5th Moneth, 1676. Taken again from Iohn Dubleday, by the said men, Four Load of Barley. Taken from Edward Hallam, by the said men, and upon the aforesaid Day, Three Loads of Barley. The 26th of the 5th Moneth, 1676. taken again from Ed∣ward Hallam, by George Manchester the Elder, Two more Loads of Barley. The 2d of the 6th Moneth, 1676. taken again from Edward Hallam, by George Manchester the Elder, Thomas Marriot, John Manchester, and others, Three Loads of Beans and Pease.
Taken from John Dubbleday the same day, by Tho. Hicling and the others aforesaid, Three Loads of Pease and Beans. The 30th of the 6th Moneth, 1676. Taken from Valen∣tine Gregory by the Priest his Wife and her Son, and his Man, and the Clark of the Town, who came into his Orchard, and did get up into the Trees, and broke the Boughs, and did the Trees much Hurt, and carryed away Pears and Apples about Four Strykes. William Willowes, a poor Man, was cast into Prison the 12th of the 1st moneth, 1667. from Five of his Children, by Edward Ward Priest, for small Tythes, and there remain∣ed a Prisoner Four Years and upwards; and then, by the said Priest, and Robert Johnson, and William Webster, had taken from him the 11th day of the 7th moneth, 1676. one brass Pan worth 10 s. and four Sheep worth 1 l. 12 s. Sufferers in Derby-shire in the Year 1675. THomas Holland in the Parish of Heanor, for having a Meeting at his House the 3d day of the 8th Moneth, 1675. was fined by John Lowe, called Justice, 5 l. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 8 l. by Roger Cheetam Constable, and other Officers. Informers. George Hawley Thomas Needam William Markeall of Ilson, for being at the above-said Mee∣ting, was fined by the same Justice 5 l. 5 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 9 l. 10 s. by John Gregory of the same Town, Constable. Iohn Hanks fined for being at the said Meeting 5 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of seven shillings and six pence.
Richard Malby fined for being at the said Meeting, 5 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 6 s. 8 d. by Philip Swern of Shiply Constable. Samuel Roe fined 5 s. for his Wife's being at the said Meet∣ing, and had Goods taken from him to the value of Eight Shillings. Iohn Lynam and Edward Searson fined either of them 5 l. 5 s. for being at the said Meeting, and Iohn Lynam fined 5 s. more for his Wife, though she was not at the Meeting, and had Goods taken from them to the value of 0 l. by Iohn Rowland Constable, and other Officer belonging to the Parish of Pentridge. William Wooly and his Wife fined for being at the said Mee∣ting 10 s. and had Goods taken from them to the value of 1 l. 2 s. Thomas Vallens fined 5 s. for being at the said Meeting, and had his Wages deteined by one of the Officers, he then working for him. Daniel Bettridge fined 5 s. for his Wife being at the said Meeting, and had Goods taken from him to the value of 8 s. All this was done by Warrants from Iohn Lowe, called Justice. Informers. By George Hawley Thomas Needam Witnessed by Iohn Wagstaff, William Day, Luke Hanks. Joseph Wats of Wadshelf, in the Parish of Brampton and County of Derby, who could not for Conscience sake pay Richard Mathyman Priest of Brampton that which he called his Dues, as Tythe-Wool and Lamb, and Easter Reckon∣ings, which in the whole did amount unto but about Two Shillings and Six Pence, was served with a Suppoene to appear
at London; and after some time was arrested by Joseph Par∣ker and William Kirk of Chesterfield Bailiffs, who would ac∣cept of no Bail, but he must either pay what the Priest de∣manded or go to Prison, and because he had not Freedom to pay, they took him to Prison to Chesterfield, the 9th day of the 7th month, 1675. the Priest gave order to the Goaler, That he should not have Liberty to work; he was there kept Priso∣ner above Twenty Two Weeks. Witnessed by Robert Haslam, Cornelius Arnold, Henry Harvey. An Accompt of the Sufferings of the People of God within the County of Derby in the Year 1676. Thomas Farnsworth within the Parish of Heanor in the said County, for being at a Meeting at John Lynam's, was fined 5 s. for himself, and 3 l. 15 s. for fifteen unknown Persons, and had Goods taken from him to the value of 6 l. by Robert Towe Officer, by a Warrant from John oe called Justice, Iohn Bradley and Iohn Bruckshew Informers. Iohn Wagstaff within the parish of Pentridge, in the said County, for the same Meeting was fined five shillings for him∣self, and 15 s. for the poverty of three Persons, by warrant from the said Justice, and had Goods taken from him to the value of 1 l. 4 s. by Iohn Roland Constable, and other Offi∣cers, Iohn Bradly and Iohn Bruckshew informers. Iohn Lynam for the same Meeting was fined 10 s. for his Wife, and Edward Searson 5 s. for his Wife, and had Goods taken from them to the value of 1 l. 15 s. by the same Officers, by Warrant from the said Justice, and also the same Informers. Thomas Valens fined for the same Meeting 10 s. for him∣self and Wife, and had Goods taken from him to the value of 19 s. 6 d. by the same Officers, Justice and Informers. Samuel Roe for Friends coming to his House to accompany him to bury his Wife, was fined 20 l. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 30 l. by Iohn Willott Constable of
Ilson, and other Officers, by a warrant from Iohn Loe, called Justice, Iohn Wilson Priest of Ilson and Iohn Wagg Collier In∣formers. Iohn Lynam, for being at the same Burial, was fined 5 l. 10 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 6 l. 10 s. by Iohn Roland and other Officers of the parish of Pentridge, by Warrant from the said Justice, Iohn Wilson Priest of Ilson and Iohn Wagg Collier Informers. Iohn Blunston of Little-Hallam in the parish of Ilson, for being at the said Burial, was fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the poverty of the Preacher, and had four Cows taken from him to the value of 14 l. by Iohn Wllot Constable, and other Officers of the said parish, by Warrant from Iohn Loe, called Justice, Iohn Wilson Priest and Iohn Wagg Collier In∣formers. Iohn Hanks and Ann his Wife for being at the same Burial, were fined by the said Justice 20 s. for their second pretended Offences, whereas his Wife was never convicted before, and was distrained of by the abovesaid Officers, and the same In∣formers Instruments. Robert Towe and Iohn Willott can witness the abovesaid Sufferings. Hugh Mastin and George Ellis, both of Baslow in the parish of Bakewll in this County, now Prisoners in the Count-Goal at Drby, where they have been kept close Prisners since the 29th day of the last second moneth called April, by an Ex∣communicato Capiendo out of the Bishp's Court of ichfild, and as pretended, for not appearing at that Court, although they were never cited thereto. Persons fined for being at a Peaceable Meeting at Tupton the 15th day of the last 12th Moneth, as followeth. Iohn Fletcher of Tupton fined 20 l for the Meeting house, & had his Goods seized upon for the said Fine, although the aid Iohn was not at that Merting, nor interested in the House more
then another Friend; for the Land was sold by Iohn several years since. Nicholas Swift of Brampton was fined for being at the said Meeting 5 s. and for an unknown Preacher or Teacher, as the words were, fined 5 l. and had Goods taken from him to that value, and 10 s. more the Officers took for distraining, by Ralph Renshaw, William Debb, and other Officers. Thomas Brocksop of Little-Normanton, for being at the said Meeting, was fined 5 s. and 5 l. more for an unknown Preacher or Teacher, and had a Bullock taken from him and sold by William Allwood and Richard Cooper, but whether for so much Money or no he knows not, but believes the whole fine was paid by the Officers. Susanna Frith of Chesterfield fined 5 l. 5 s. for the said Meeting, but the Officers coming, and finding her Door put to, returned and made no Distress. Iohn Clay fined for the said Meeting 5 l. 5 s. but he being a single man, and boarding with his Brother, and having no per∣sonal Estate that was apparent, the Officers could make no Distress. Rihard Clayton, for being at the said Meeting, was fined 5 s. but being a Servant to one that is called Sr. Henry Hum∣lock, the Officers could make no Distress. This was done by Warrants from Thomas Gladwin called Justice, Iohn Coope Thirdborough and Robert Mosely Informers, but were constrained to be so by the said Justice. William Allwood and Ralph Renshaw can witness these things. Several Warrants more are forth against several Friends, for being at a peaceable Meeting at Tupton the 29th of the last 7th Moneth, but not all of them being as yet executed, there is no Account given of them at present.
Stafford-shire. IN the 10th Moneth, 1675. Thomas Hinks, Thomas Wall and John Dible of Woolverhamton, were brought Prisoners to Staffood Goal upon a Writ Excommunicato Capiendo; T. Hinks and T. Wall continued Prisoners about three moneths, and Iohn Dible remained Prisoner about six moneths. 1676. William Riding of Lyn was taken Prisoner by Ben∣jamin Lant Apparritor, about the 5th moneth, upon the above said Writ, and remained Prisoner Twenty One Weeks. Michael Nickens, a poor Man, was taken upon the above∣said Writ, and remains still Prisoner. William Morgin was taken Prisoner about the 11th of the 6th moneth, and still remains in prison upon the abovesaid Writ. Thomas Hamrsly was taken Prisoner by Humphry Sutton, at Litchfield Apparritor, about the sixteenth of the seventh moneth, and st remaineth a Prisoner upon the abovesaid Writ. In the 7th moneth William Alcock of Fordwelly, near Leek, had taken from him one great Kettle, a goeat Pot, a little Kettle, and two Pewter Dishes, to the value of fifty shillings, at the Suit of George oods Priest of Leek, for the value of six shillings, which he demanded of him for Easter-Reckon∣ings, by Thomas Hamersly Bailiff, and his men.
Prisoners upon the Account of Truth in the County of Somerset at Ivel∣chester the 26th Day of the 11th Moneth, 1676. JOhn Sage of Chewten, Aged about Eighty Years, hath been Prisoner since the 8th moneth, 1666. upon an Exegi fac. for not paying Tythes to the Suit of Ann Kingsmell Widow, Impropriator; the value of Tythes worth about 9 or 10 s. William Liddon of Wythell, upon an Exegifac. imprison∣ed the 11th moneth, 1670. for not paying Tythes at the suit of Iohn Hillacre Farmer of Tythes. Arthur Ieffrey of South-Brent, imprisoned in the 9th mo∣neth, 1670▪ upon a Kings-Bench Writ, to the Suit of Will. Plumley, Thomas Brigham and Willoughby Leyne Spinster, for not paying Tythes to the value of about 16 s. 8 d. Marmaduke Coate of Haucbridge, imprisoned in the 6th moneth 1670 upon an Attachment out of the Exchequer, upon Contempt, as charged, to the Suit of Robert Bambury Impro∣priator, for not paying Tythes. Gregory Ceely of North-Curry, aged about 69 years, impriso∣ned in the 2d mon. 1673. in Execution for not paying Tythes to the Suit of Robert Hill Farmer of Tythes, wherein he char∣geth above Nineteen Times the value, and besides, hath ta∣ken his Goods in part, and yearly takes away his Corn also, contrary to Law. Note, At one Assizes Hill's Witnesses prove the Tythes to be worth 3 l. at another Assizes the same witnesses swear the same Tythes to be worth Twelve Pound Fifteen Shillings, for which the Execution is One Hundred Forty Four Pound,
which is above Eleven Times more then proved, the single va∣lue for three years being 7 l. 10 s. Iames Paple of Stawell, imprisoned the 28th of the first moneth, 1674, in Execution for not paying Tythes to the suit of William Bull an Impropriator, who is since Dead. Iohn Denny of Weston▪Loylad, a poor Husbandman La∣bourer, imprisoned in the 10th moneth, 1674. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying small Tythes to William owel Impropriator, the value of Tythes being about 9 d. for three Years. Ieremy Powel of Michael-Creech, imprisoned in the 11th moneth, 1674. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying Tythes and Offerings to John Gale Priest of Creech, to the value of about 4 d. Thomas Browning of Lymington, imprisoned the 24th of the 1st moneth, 1674. upon an Attachment out of the Exche∣quer, for not appearing to the suit of Matthew Brayn Priest of Lymington, for small Tythes, the value being about 25 s. for five years, and the Ptiest took away his Corn by force. William Ford of Curry-Mallett, imprisoned the second moneth, 1675. by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying Tythes to the Suit of Thomas Beal, Priest of Cur∣ry-Mallett fot Tythe Apples. Walter Hodges of Kingsbury, imprisoned on the 3d of the 1st moneth, 1675. upon an attachment out of the Chancry, for not paying Tythes to the Suit of William rd Impro∣priator. Iohn Wride, Robert Tutton, Iohn Brice and Robert S of Burnham, imprisoned the 2d moneth, 1675 by a Mmus from several Justices of the Peace, for Contempt, as alledg∣ed, for not appearing at the Bishop's Court at Wlis, pon a Citation to the Suit of Rober Collier Priest of Crd who lives there, and yet demands the Tythes of Ba also, being about Twenty Miles distant; it is for small Tythes. Note, That this was done upon a Citation only for not appearing, without any other Proceedings, Decrees or Sentence; and the
words are conjunctively for Contempt of Proceedings, Sentences and Decrees; see the Statute. Iohn Parsons of Middlezoy, imprisoned in 1675. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, to the suit of William Pow∣el Impropriator, in a Case of with-holding Tythes, upon which he was removed to London, & remanded to the Cost and Charge of the Sheriff▪ by the promotion of one Hartrye; the said Impropriator's Agent, who is since cast into Prison him∣self by his Master for his Unjust Dealing. Iohn Chapple of Worle imprisoned in the 11th Moneth, 1675. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, to the Suit of Sa∣muel Willan Priest of Weston and Kewstock, for not paying Tythes to the value of about 14 Groats after the Priest's rate. Edward Silcocks of eston super Mare, a poor Man and a La∣bourer, brought to Goal in the 2d moneth, 1675. upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for ome small Tythes of Fish, &c. which came to about 10 s. for five years, to the Suit of the said Priest Willan, who is an Envious, Persecuting Proud-spirited Man. Note, This was for not answering upon Oath to the Priest's Ar∣ticles in the Bishop's Court at Wells, Which to impose is con∣trary to the Statute 13 Car. 2d 12. Robert Wlls of Chsselborrough, imprisoned the 25th of the first moneth, 1676. upon an Attachment out of the Exche∣quer for not paying Tythes to old Priest aulr, who is Dead. Tomas Powell of Greniton, imprisoned in the fifth moneth, 1676 upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not an∣swering upon Oath to the Articles of William Powll Impropri∣ator, in a Cae of Tythes, the value at utmost for six years stints of Meadow six shillings nine pence, & for nine Cocks of Barley worth about three Note, also con∣trary to the Sta∣tute 13 Car. 2. 12. shillings four pence, though the Schdule mentioned in the Libel which begins, In Di nomine amen, chargeth 12 Acres of Wheat, 15 Acres of Barley, & 100 Acres of Meadow Elianor Powel Wife of the said Tho Powel, by the name
of Elianor Watts (the Suit being begun before they were married) imprisoned the 15th of the 6th moneth, 1676. up∣on an Execution out of the Kings Bench to the Suit of Priest Collier, for not paying Tythes, though He by Violence took them away, and got bad Fellows to swear for him at the As∣sizes; one of his Witnesses called Philip Samm, swore in the Priest's presence in the Court, That the VVheat was worth 15 l. an Acre, to make up the matter. VVilliam Goodridge and Samuel Sayer of Banwell imprison∣ed the fifth day of the 7th moneth, 1676. by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying Tythes to the Suit of Ia∣cob Crosman priest. Edmund Chapple of VVorle rendred himself Prisoner the 20th of the 11th moneth, 1676. upon the Statute 5 Eliz. 23. within six dayes after Proclamation, or else had incurred the penalty of 10 l. he being formerly Excommunicated for not answering upon Oath to priest VVillan's Artcles and Libel in the Bishop's Court at VVells, and the Sheriff having return∣ed that he was not to be found upon the Writ de Excommuni∣cato Capiendo, though he did not abscond but followed his Oc∣casions. And this also in the ground was for not answering upon Oath, the Tender whereof is contrary to the Statute 13 Car. 2d 12. Iohn Anderdon of Bridgewater, imprisoned upon the False Swearing of wicked Informers, and hath been Prisoner since the 3d of the 6th moneth, 1675. and for refusing to swear was left upon Kalender as Premunired by Judge Rainsford at the Assizes at Taunton, the 21th day of the 1st moneth, 1675 the wicked Accusation of the Informers coming to nothing, the chiefest of them having stood in the Pillory for Wilful Perjury. Note, No lury past upon him, nor Sentence given in Court ac∣cording to Law, though the Prisoner had pleaded as to matter of Fact for refusing to take the Oath.
Sufferers in Cheshire. SAmuel Rayle meeting with Ieffery Shackerly Governour of the Castle of Chester, and not putting off his Hat, he the said Governour threatned him, and soon after sent a War∣rant to fetch him before the Monethly Meeting, and there tendred him the Oath of Allegiance (that infallible Snare) and because for Conscience Sake he could not swear, committed him prisoner to the Castle, where he hath remained since the 28th Day of the 8th Moneth, 1676. Ioan Edge Widdow, aged sixty Years, for not paying Tythe-Hay and Easter-Dues, was sued in the Bishop's Court, and committed to prison, where she hath remained since the 15th Day of the 10th Moneth, 1676. Sufferers for the Truth's Sake in Suf∣folk, he 9th of the 11th Mo. 1676. VVIlliam Seaman of Melton was cast into Prison up∣on the 28th of the 2d Moneth, 1668. at the suit of Priest Beesten of the same Town, for not paying Tythes, upon which suit he still continues a Prisonerin the said Melton-Goal. Robert Britwel of Ʋfferd, because for Conscience Sake he could not pay Tythes, was cast into Melton-Goal, upon the 14th Day of the 7th Moneth, 1670. at the suit of Richard Lufkin Priest of the same Town, where he still continues up∣on the Account afore-said. Iohn Downam was cast into Bury-Prison, upon the 28th of the 3d Moneth, 74. by a Significavit, at the suit of Iohn Gar∣rad Priest of Assn, where he still continues.
Edward Higns by the same Writ, for not paying to the Steeple-House Rate (the sum of 5 s.) was committed to Bury Goal the 7th day of the 6th Moneth, 1675. at the VVardens suit of Gregory Parish, in Sudbury. William Sarce, by a Significavit, for not marrying accor∣ding to the National way, and yet he was married before he came amongst the People called Quakers, committed the 2th Day of the 6th Moneth, 1675 to Bury Prison, at the suit of the Priest or Parishoner of Wortham. William Fackner and Iohn Manning of Aldeborough, were taken Prisoners the 28th of the 11th Moneth, 1675. upon a Significavit, for not going to hear Common Prayer (so called) and commited to the County Goal in Ipswich, being 18 miles from their own Habitations having Wive and Children Note their Emnity; for Aldeborough is a Corporation▪Town, and a Goal in it, yet notwithstanding Ipswich being 18 miles, as above said, they were sent thither, where they remained Prisoners this 6th Day of the 11th Moneth, 1676. Iohn Burch of Snape, upon the same Account, and in the same Goal, was committed Prisoner the 3d Day of the 12th moneth, 1675. being 14 miles from his own Habitation, from his Wie & Children, notwithstanding Bliborrough Goal belongs to that Town, and is not above five or six miles from him, and doth also remain Prisoner in Ipswich Goal afore-said this 6th Day of the 11th Moneth, 1676. George Glamdfield of Chelmondiston, was taken Prisoner the 17th Day of the 4th Moneth, 1675. upon a Significavit for Tythes, at the suit of Daniel Smart of Chelmondiston, a Priest, and was Prisoner there the 3d Day of the 11th Moneth 1676. upon the same Account. Iohn Beardmore Priest of Arrington, took from George Deen, in the 4th and 6th Moneths 76 at several times, viz. One Pig, and by Estemation, as followeth, two Bushels and an half of Wheat, two Bushels and an half of Rye, one Bushel and an half of Oats, seven Bushels and an half of Barley, one Bushel of Apples, and ten pounds of Hops, all valued at 1 l. 18 s. 4 d. witness Iohn Franks, George Fenner and others.
Iohn Britewel took from Nathaniel Keeble of Tunstal, in the 4th and 6th Moneth, 1676. at several times, viz. Certain Clover valued at 8 s. Rye judged by the Reapers to be seven Combs of it, Barley judged to be five Combs of it; witness Ioshua Poynts, Robert Scotsmer and others. Edmund Stubs Priest took from the said Nathaniel Kee∣ble, at several times in the fifth and sixth Moneths, 1676. viz. VVheat judged to be eight Combs of it, Pease judged to be six Bushels; moreover he took for one Years Tythes of about 9 l. per annum, eleven Cows and Heifers, and one Bull, which Cattle were valued to be worth 40 l. witness Ioshua Poynts, Thomas Keeble and others. This Account was sent up, but there is a Report, as if some of Nathaniel Keeble's Wife's Kindred, who are no Quakers, had compounded for the Cattle, and that he hath them again. The said E. Stubs Priest took from Robert Davie, of Tunstal afore-said, on the 8th Day of Note, 2 or 3 of these Cows taken from R. D were returned again. the 6th Mo. 76. for one Years Tythes of 21 l. per an. 6 Cows & one Bull, & 7 Calves, but the Calves got away from the Bailiffs, which said Cows and Bull were valued to be worth 22 l. witness Nathaniel Keeble and others. Mary Pollard of Branson widow, an aged woman, was committed to Melton prison, the nineth of the eighth Moneth, 1676. at the suit of William Ribands of Creeingham, being one that hired an Impropriation of Tythes, and she remains a pri∣soner there upon the same Account, the sixth Day of the ele∣venth Moneth, 1676. The same William Ribands in the ele∣venth Moneth, 1672. took from the said Mary Pollard, without proceeding against her in due Course of Law, two Cows, which were valued to be worth 7 l. The sixth Day of the 5th Moneth, 1676. George Pippen Priest of Ringshal, by a Warrant out of the County-Court hol∣den at Ipswich, caused to be taken away from William Green∣wood dwelling in Briset, two Cows, which were reasonably va∣lued at 8 l. for two Years Tythes, at 20 s. per annum; and the Bailiffs were Ambrose Pulford and George Pooley of Need∣ham;
and the Cows were prised, one at 50 s. and the other at 55 s. by William Rosse and Richard Scotchmer bought by Thomas Love of Nedeham-Market. On the 25th Day of the 9th Moneth, 1676. there was ta∣ken from William Greenwood of Briset, within seven miles of Ipswich, two Cows for Tythes, which they pretended was 3 l. the Cows were prized at 5 l. they being reasonably worth 7 l. this was done by Warrant out of the County Court holden at Ipswich, upon the Account of Christopher Sherman Impro∣priator of the said Town of Briset; the Bailiffs Names are John Coal, Richard Francis. Samuel Parmiter of Otten-Belchamp in the County of Essex, was arrested for Tythes at the suit of Oliver Rayment Impro∣priator, of Water-Belcham, and was sent to prison at Chelms∣ford in the County of Essex, the 7th Day of the 9th Moneth, 1676. Sufferers in Nottingham-shire. FOr being at a Peaceable Meeting at Hucknall, the 16th day of the 2d Moneth, 1676. Francis Clay was fined 5 s. and ten Pound for the pretended Poverty of a Preacher. And William Clay was fined 10 s. for himself and his Wife, for which he had Goods taken from him worth 2 l. which the Of∣ficers sold for 10 s. Robert Thoroton, the Justice, so called, bidding them, Sell the Goods for what they could get, if they could get for Ten Pounds worth but Thirty Shillings; and be∣cause the Officers could not sell the Goods so soon as he would have had them, he fined them 5 l. a man, and distrained their Goods. Richard Bateman was fined for the same Meeting 5 s. and 10 l. for the pretended Poverty of the Preacher; and the said Richard being but a poor man, they took most of the
Goods in his House, to the value of 2 l. and sold them for 3 s. 6 d. Elizabeth Clay and Anthony Tomlinson fined 5 s. apiece. Christopher Brandreth fined 5 s. and 1 l. 5 s. for the pre∣tended Poverty of five others, for which they took a Mare from him to the value of 4 l. which they sold for 30 s. Thomas Cockram fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pre∣tended Poverty of the House, for which he had two Oxen ta∣ken from him worth 10 l. 10 s. George Cockram for the same fined 5 s. had taken from him Goods worth 11 s. John Bullivent the Elder fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pretended Poverty of the House, for which he had a Mare and Goods taken from him worth 3 l. the said John Bullivent being a very poor Man and not keeping House, but dwelling in his Shop, being a Nailor, the aforesaid Justice bid the Of∣ficers take all he had, his Coat off his Back, and his Hat if it were on his Head, and his Hammer he workt with. John Bullivent the Younger fined 5 s. for the same. The aforesaid Goods were distrained by Warrant from Rob. Thoroton called Justice, John Smith of Remson and Tho. Sharp of Newark Informers; the said John Smith was very Rude in his Carriage in the Meeting, using Threatning Words to the persons assembled, saying to one, with his Faucheon drawn in his Hand, That he would thrust it down his Throat; and to ano∣ther, He would cleave him down, and run it into his Buttock. At another Meeting the 23d day of the 2d Moneth, 1676. at the House of Robert Grace in Suton in Ashfield, these seve∣ral Persons following were taken by the aforesaid John Smith and Thomas Sharp Informers, and had before Arthur Stannup called Justice, who fined them as followeth; Robert Grace, for having the Meeting at his House fined 4 l. for which Samuel Brittain took away part of his Houshold Goods. William Clay fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pre∣tended poverty of the Owner of the House.
Thomas Cockram fined 10 s. for himself, and 5 s. for his Wife, and had two young Beasts taken from him worth 3 l. which the Officers sold for 1 l. 8 s. Elizabeth Clay fined 10 s. for her self, and 10 s. for her Daughter Mary Leadbeater fined 10 s. for her self, and 10 s. for her Son. VVilliam Maulson (M. L's Son aforesaid) was fined 5 s. for himself, and 1 l. for the Poverty of two others, for which two last fines the Officers took away a Cow & Houshold Goods to the value of 5 l. 4 s. which they sold for 2 l. 10 s. Officers Names are Francis Scarclff Constable, Tho. Ʋrdidge Third∣borrough. The 28th day of the 3d Moneth, 1676. the aforesaid peo∣ple were by the Officers kept out of their Meeting at Sutton in the Street, where the aforesaid Informers finding them, took several with them to a Justice's House, but it being late at Night the Justice appointed them and the Officers to come the next Day, the Officers came, but the Informers went to Robert Thoroton another Justice, who they thought might be readier to do their Work, who fined these persons following, and gran∣ted Warrants to make Distress on their Goods. Robert Grace, Anthony Tomlinson, Joseph Roberts, fined 10 s. apiece, the Distresses made by Samuel Brittain Consta∣ble and other Officers. George Cockram fined 10 s. for himself, and 1 l. for the Poverty of two others, and had a Cow taken from him worth l. 5 s. 4 d. John Fullwood fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the Po∣verty of a Woman pretended to be the preacher, although some of the Officers present all the Meeting time, did testifie to the Justice, before whom the Sufferers were first brought, that they did hear no words tending to either Preaching or Tea∣ching; yet this Thoroton, upon the Informers False Swearing, did grant a Warrant to make Distress upon two Persons Goods for 20 l. for the Preacher that day: and the aforesaid John Fullwood had Eleven Quarters of Mault taken from him worth 10 l. 9 s.
And William Day for the pretended Preacher was fined 10 l. and had his Goods distrained. George Hopkinson had Goods taken from him worth Twelve Shillings. Robert Marriot fined 5 s. for himself, and 3 l. for the po∣verty of six others, and had a Mare taken from him. Edward Richardson of Kilverton, for being at a peaceable Meeting at Rowland Dabey's House was fined 10 l. and they took away his Working-Tools, his Coals, Hay and Corn, Beds and Bedding, and other Houshold Goods, and his Chil∣drens Cloaths, to the value of 16 l. being almost all the poor man had, (he being a Black-smith by trade) to the undoing of his Wife & Children as much as lay in the Hands of wicked Men; but great are the Mercies of the Lord. Distrained by Warrant from Robert Thoroton of Carcouson, Tho. Girton Constable, Christopher Dent of Bingham, and Robert Wycam Informers. William Maultly of Orston for the same had 7. Strike of Barley taken from him worth about 17s. by Warrant from Ro∣bert Thoroton called Justice, Christopher Dent, and Robert Wy∣cam Informers, taken by VVilliam Dawson Constable, and Hugh Lamb Officer. Robert Bullivant of Over-Broughton, was fined 10 s. and they took away his Houshold Goods by Warrant, from Ju∣stice Hows of Langer, John Hickling Constable, Iohn Dably and VVilliam Pilkinton Officers, Iohn Camsells of Everton was fined 5 s. and had Goods taken from him worth about 10 s. Iohn Smith of Everton for the same was fined 5 s. and they took from him a pair of Boots worth above 8 s. distrained by Warrant from Justice Sands of Screwby, Iohn Bily, Thomas Reans, Robert Flower, and Robert Mew Officers, the Infor∣mers not known. Iohn Ouldam of Calverton for being at a peaceable Meeting at the House of Robert Bradshaw of Oxen wa fined 5 l. and they took away his Working Tools and a pair of Boots worth a∣bout 3 l. 9 s. and seized upon the rest of his Working Gear
(he being by Trade a weaver) since taken away; distrained by Warrant from Robert Thoroton, William Hernsly Con∣stable, Henry Marshall, and William Martin, and Tho. Hut∣chinson Officers. William Wilson of Girton for having a Meeting at his House peaceably to wait upon God, was fined 5 l. and they took away from him two Cows that were none of his own, but lent him by his Friends to give his Children milk, when his Goods were taken before upon the same account and they sold the Cows which were worth about 6 l. Thomas Crane of North-Scarle for going to the same, had Houshold-goods taken from him, by Iohn Cheeswright Con∣stable, to the value of about 5 l. for a fine of 55 s. Stephen Swinsco and his Wife of South-Collingham, for go∣ing to the same Meeting was fined 5 l. 10 s. and he being a La∣bouring man, and not having to answer the fine, the Con∣stable took Goods from him worth about 2 l. 16 s. And the Constable was fined 5 l. for not taking a Cow that this poor Man had, which the Persecutors heard of, though she was gone out of the Lordship three dayes before the Constable came to distraine or had his Warrant; so he was forced to give the Informers 20 s. to agree with them. Another poor Woman in the same Town having almost all she had taken from her formerly upon this account, she ha∣ving since got some Bedding, and other Necessaries, they have now stript her of All, and she forced to go seek lodging in the Town; and her Land owner having a Bedsted which was left in the House as an Earlcome, durst not let it stand, though willing of himself, their Threats were so Cruel, being with∣out Pitty or Mercy. Robert Carnell of North-Collingham for going to the same Meeting, was fined 10 l. and they took from him almost all his Houshold-goods, he being several times before distrained upon for the same thing; And although formerly one that had Plenty of such things, yet now is ingaged to a Neighbour for a Bed to lye on.
Tho. Fox for going to the same Meeting was fined 5 l. 5s. and they took from his Brother Thomas Leevesly as many Spokes and hewen Fellows as were worth about 6 l. 6 s. 8 d. which said Spokes and Fellows were made over unto the said Thomas Leevesly by Bill of Sale for some sum of Money the said Tho∣mas had paid for his Brother, and was made appear so to be before the Justice; yet the said Justice refusing to do Right put the Constable to distraine. Matthew Hartly, a very poor man, for going to the same Meeting was fined 15 s. and being gone forth of the Town to get his livelyhood, spinning Woollfor 2 d. th day, the Officers broke open his Door, and took most of what he had there, be∣ing very little. John Trusswell for going to the same Meeting was fined 5 l. 5 s. and they took away his Houshold-goods, not leaving Bed∣ing to cover them, but as it is lent them by others; and some of the Family lodge in the Town for want of Bedding; This being a man also that has had Plenty of these things for his own Family, and also hath helped to relieve others before this Act came forth, since which he hath often suffered much; and thus the Scripture is fulfilled, They that depart from Iniquity are made a Prey. All these Warrants granted by Robert Thoroton of Carcou∣son, John Smith of Remston, and Robert Wycam of Orston In∣formers. The names of the Sufferers, and the Towns where they live are as follow, of Gerton, Richard Carter Constable, Roger Baradale Warden, Tho. Wilson Overseer; these three were fined 5 l. apiece for turning back two Cows when owned, and forced to take them again, and sell them. North-Collingham, Richard Longmate Constable, John Roades, Robert Trawly Wardens, William Hall, Richard Godsave Overseers. South-Collingham, John Tinsley Constable, fined 5 l. for not taking a ow that was gone three dayes before the Warrant came to his Hand, Iohn Crane Overfeer, Robert Millnes, Bartholomew Perkins Wardens. North-Scarle, Iohn Cheeswrite deputie-Constable, Iarvis Partridge Warden.
Ralph Bateman and Iohn Bateman of Fransfield, for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 20 l. and had Sheep taken from them worth 33 l. by Warrant from Penistone Whaley, Robert Brown Constable, Edward Baington, Iohn Gunthorp Wardens, Richard Bean Third-borough, Thomas Hickbone Overseer, Christopher Dent of Bingham, and John Warin of Westhorp In formers. William Watson of Fransfield, for being at the same Meeting was fined 20 l and had Goods and Cattel taken to the value of 30 l and had Houshold-goods, with Corn upon the Ground not ripe worth 30 l. more, yet sold all together by the aforesaid Officers. Andrew Hodson for his Wife and Daughter being at the same Meeting, had two Swine taken from them, cost 1 l. 10 s. Mary Handly of Edenly for being at the same Meeting was strained of, and the Officers thinking they had not taken e∣nough, she being from Home, they brake down the VVall and shot the Lock, and took most of her Goods to the value of 1 l. 18 s and left Goods not worth 3 s. John Horner and John Dallimor VVardens, Charles Ward Third-borough, by VVarrant from Penistone Whaley. John Wood, for being at the same Meeting had Goods ta∣ken to the value of 10 s. Stephen Moor, for being at the same Meeting, had a Table taken worth about 13 s. 4 d. by the same Officers. Edward Wood of Ekrin Wheelwright, for being at a peace∣able Meeting at his own House, was fined 20 l. and had six Cows and rwo Heifers taken from him to the value of 19 l. 14 s. 6 d. when sold they wanted 6 l. to make up the Fine and Charges, and a Neighbour (called William Hurt) laid down 6 l. and took away Wheel-Timber for the same; di∣strained by John Holmes Constable, Richard Tomson senior, Richard Peck sen. William Moore sen. William Johnson jun. and Thomas Peck Officers of Ekrin, Christopher Dent and Robert Wycam Informers, by Warrant from Robert Thoroton. John Cam of Kirsal in the parish of Kneesal, for being at
the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and for the Poverty of the Preacher, as they pretended, 10 l. and had two Cows, one Hose and a Mare taken from him to the value of 10 l. 5 s. by John Key Constable of Kneesal, and John Wright of Kneesal Warden. Thomas Estwood for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and had one great Bible, one Warming-pan, one Pewter-Dish taken from him by the same Officers. Richard Hind of Welley sen. for being at the same Meeting was fined for himself and the pretended Poverty of Nineteen Persons more 5 l. and had taken from him two Cows, one Yearling-Calf, worth about Six Round Ten Shillings, Cuth∣bert Walker Constable, Samuel Tongue and James Byllyate Overseers. Richard Birkit of Knapthorp for the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and for the Poverty of the Preacher aforesaid 10 l. which 10 l. 5 s. was paid by his Brother Peter Birkit into the Sessions at Newark. Roger Noble of Kersal for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and had Pewter and Brass taken to the value of 12 s. by John Key Constable, and John Wright Warden. Elizabeth Johnson for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and it was paid by her Husband George Johnson. Robert Bradshaw of Oxen for having a peaceable Meeting at his House was fined 20 l. and had taken from him two Mares, four Beasts to the Value of 20 l. William Aulcock Constable, Robert Bush and Robert Stox Overseers, Tho. Farnell, Gabriel Martin Wardens, Christopher Dent and Robert Wycam Infor∣mers, by Warrant from Robert Thoroton. For a Meeting at Knapthorp, in the Parish of Conton, in the said County, the 11th of the 4th Moneth, 1676. by Warrant from Robert Thoroton senior (by Christopher Dent of Bingham, and Robert Wycam of Oston in the County aforesaid Infor∣mers) directed to the Constables, Church-Wardens and Over∣seers for the Poor of Knapthorp, Kirsal, Kneesal and Kirton,
and to every or any of them; the Tenour whereof was on this wise, Whereas I am credibly informed, that there will be a Meeting at some of your said Towns, or within your respe∣ctive Liberties, or thereabouts, on Pretence of Religion, o∣therwise then by Law is established, these are therefore in his Majesty's Mame to will and require you, and every or any of you to bring the said Persons so assembled before me, or some other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County▪ to be dealt withal according to Law; thereof fail not, &c. Given under my Hand and Seal, the 13th of April, 28 Car. 3. Anno Dommini 1676. Robert Tho∣roton. So there being a peaceable Meeting in Silence by the High-way-side (being kept out of their ordinary Meeting-house) was taken by Richard Taylor Constable, and Richard Greaves and Rowland Wilson Church-wardens of Conton, and had be∣fore William Cartwright of Osington, and were fined as follow∣eth, and Warrants granted to distrain, Iohn Cam of Kirsal for himself, his Wife and his Brother Iohn Hall 15 s. and the Money was paid by his Wife's Father William Hall of Maple∣beck, who took away Goods from Iohn Cam to satisfie for the same. Iohn Machon of Kneesal for himself & his VVife fined 10 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of about 10 s. by Thomas Hay Constable of Kneesal, and Samuel Lee Over-seer. Ioseph Humphrey of Kneesal fined 5 s. and they took from his Father Richard Humphrey three Pewter-dishes worth about 7 s. by the aforesaid Tho. Hay and Samuel Lee. William Kent of Kirton fined 5 s. and had 5 s. taken by John Prestwood Constable, and Francis Roberts and Iohn Wood∣cock Officers of Kirton. Roger Noble of Kirsal fined 5 s. which was paid by his Mother in Law Mary Wright of Kirsal. Richard Hind of Wellow jun. fined 5 s. and a Brass-Pan, and a Pewter Flagon worth about 6 s. 6 d. was taken from his Father Richard Hind, by Cuthbert Walker Constable, and
Iohn Challerton and William Whitlam Wardens, and Iohn Bullivant and Edward Gilbert Overseers. Iames Hnd of Wellow fined 5 s. had a Bed-hilling and a Blanket taken to the value of about 10 s. 6 d. by the same Officers. For a Meeting at Kirsal in the Parish of Kneesal, in the said County of Nottingham the 18th of the 4th Moneth, 1676. which Meeting was peaceable, and in Silence, by the High∣way-side on the Common, being kept out of their ordinary Meeting▪House, the Informers came and took what Names they pleaed, and they were fined as followeth, by Warrants from Robert Thoroton, Christopher Dent and Robert Wycam being Informers. Edward Wood of Ekrin in the County aforesaid Wheel∣wright fined 10 s. for himself and his Wife, and 10 l. for the poverty of the Place (which particularly belonged to none ex∣cept the Queen, to whom they pay Common▪Fine) which 10 l. 10 s. was paid into the Quarter Sessions at Newark the 12th of the 5th Mo. 1676. by the Officers of Ekrin, who took his Tim∣ber, and almost all his Houshold goods to the value of the same; the Officers that distrained were Iohn Hollin Constable, Rich. Townsend senior, Wiliam Moor senior, Thomas Peck and Tho. Machen Thirdboroughs, Martin Cam Overseer, and William Moor junior and Thomas Salmon Wardens. Thomas Oakland of Knapthorp in the Parish of Conton fined 10 s. for himself and his Wife, and 10 l. for the Poverty of the Place aforesaid, and had almost all his Goods taken and sold for 5 l. by Richard Taylor of Conton Constable, Richard Greaves and Rowland Wilson Wardens. Iohn Cam of Kirsal in the Parish of Kneesal Wheelwright, fined 20 s. for himself and his Wife, and 40 s. for the Poverty of Michael Embly, Isabel Roberts, Esther Scrimshaw, Roger Noble and Ionathan Humphry, and 3 l. was paid by VVillam Hall of Maplebek his Wife's Faher, who took away Goods for the same, and seized of that little he had left. Iohn Kent of Norlayhs in the Parish of Rufard Husband∣man for being at a peaceable Meeting at Kneesal the 25th of the 4th Mo. 76. was find 10 l. 10 s. and had eight g
Beasts taken from him to the value of 17 l. by Iohn Gray Con∣stable of Rufard. Iames Hind of VVellow Tailor for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s. and had the Bed-clothes taken from off their Beds, insomuch as the Boy about four Years old, the 2d of the 11th Mon. 75. said, Now I must be fain to lie in my Clothes; for we have nothing left to hap us) to the value of about 1 l. 13 s. by Cuthbert Walker of VVellow Constable, Iohn-Chal∣lerton, VVilliam VVhittham VVardens, and Edward Gilbert Overseer. Richard Hind junior of VVellow for being at the same Mee∣ting was fined 10 s. and they took from his Father Richard Hind a Swine worth about 18 s. by the aforesaid Officers. Edward Wood of Ekrin was fined 10 l. 10 s. for the same account as they pretended, though he was not there at that time, John Warin of Westhorp in the parish of Suthwell and one Johnson of Bingham Informers, who came to the Town and informed the Constable Thomas Hay of the Meeting, and went their way, and the Constable was fined 5 l. and a Warrant granted out to distrain by Robert Thoroton for the same, although he had set watch▪men to keep Friends out of the House where the Meeting was to have been, and himself came into the yard where Friends were peaceable together, and the Meeting was dispersed soon after; so he went to the Justice with the Officers that had the Warrant to distrain of him that he might take in the Warrant, and another Townsman William Trulove with him, and they gave in the Names or consented to the Names of Friends that the Justice read to them. The Fines above-men∣tioned and the Goods distrained was by Warrant from Robert Thoroton of Carcouson, a Copy of one of the Warrants follows. To the Constables, Church-Wardens and Overseers for the Poor of Wellow, and every or any of them. Forasmuch as James Hind and Rich. Hind of the said Town are lawfully convicted before me, for having been present at a Conventicle or Unlawful Assembly, on pre∣tence of Religion, otherwise then by Law is established,
in Kneesal, on Sunday, the 25th of June last past; these are therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you to levy of each of the Offenders 10 s. apiece, being formerly con∣victed, by Distress and Sale of Goods; which Sams you are to deliver to me, to be distributed according to Law; hereof fail not, as you wil answer the contrary at your Peril. Given under my Hand and Seal the 27th day of July, 28 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1676. Robert Thoroton. The 9th of the 5th Mo. 1676. the aforesaid People being met together to wait upon the Lord at Mansfield, they being kept without the Gates to the Street-ward, which some call Lords-waste, others the King's high-way, and there came three In∣formers to the Meeting, viz. John Smith of Remson, Edward Simson of Lenton, the third not known by us, and they hear∣ing no Declaration when they came, they sent for the Consta∣ble and took the Names of them they knew, and those they knew not they drew out of the Assembly, and put them to the Constable to have them before a Justice, and one Woman when she was put to the Constable did speak some Words to one of the Informers, which he said he would make preaching, so having sent some to one called Justice Stanhope of Linby, they went to Robert Thoroton of Carcouson (a fit Instrument for their purpose) who granted Warrants, and fined them as followeth, George Hopkins of Mansfield for being at the said Meeting was fined 5 s. for his own Offence, and 10 l. for the poverty of the Preacher or Teacher, as they pretended, which was but the Woman that spoke to one of the Informers, as a∣foresaid, for which Fines the Officers took 7 Quarter & 7 Strike of Mault, he being a Maultster, and they came into his House, and looked into all his Rooms and said, they would have all his Houshold Goods, they would not leave him a Spoon. Robert Moor for his Wife being at the said Meeting was fined 10 s. for which the Officers took two pair of Shoes, and one Pair of Boots, the said Robert being a Shoemaker. John Fulwood Maultster for being at the said Meeting was
fined 10 s. for his own Offence, and 50 s. for the Poverty of Iohn Bullevant sen▪ and Iohn Bullevant jun. Mary Leadbeater, Thomas Leadbeater and VVilliam Malson, these five lived at Scegby; the Officers Names Iames Hardy and Francis VVatson Constables, Thomas Clark and Iohn Pumtree Thirdboroughs. George Cockram of Scegby for his VVife being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s. for which the Officers took an Heifer worth 1 l. and they sold her, as George did hear, for 18 s. not offering to return any overplus again to him; The Officers Names were Francis Searcliph Constable, and Thomas Ʋrdidge Thirdborough. Robert Grace of Sutton for him self and Wife being at the same Meeting was fined 20 s. Elizabeth Brandrith for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s. John Blackburn, Samuel Whitworth, Elizabeth Whitworth and Elixabeth Fello for being at the same Meeting were fined every and each of them 5 s. Margaret Whitworth for being at the same Meeting was fi∣ned 5 s. for her own Offence, and 40 s. for the Poverty of Richard Bateman, Joseph▪ Roberts, Sarah Clay and Francis Clay. Richard Cooper of Mansfield-woodhouse for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. for his own Offence, and 10 l. for the Poverty of the Place where the Meeting was kept, it being without the Gates to the Street-ward, as is before mentioned. Thomas Scoaley of Warsop for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 l. for the Poverty of the Place aforesaid. Here followeth a Copy of one of the Warrants. Nott. To the Constables, Church-Wardens, and Overseers for the Poor, and Thirdboroughs of Sutton in Ashfield and Hurknal, and every or any of them. Forasmuch as Robert Grace and his Wife, Eliz. Bran∣drith, Jo. Blackburn, Sam. VVhitworth, Eliz. VVhit∣worth, Eliz. Fello and Sarah Clay, Richard Bateman, Joseph Roberts, Fran. Clay & Margret VVhitworth
of your said Towns, are lawfully convicted before me for having been present at a Conventicle or Unlawful Assem∣bly, on pretence of Religion, otherwise then by Law is esta∣blished, in Mansfield, on Sunday the 9th of this instant July; these are therefore in his Majesty's Name to re∣quire you to levy of the said Rob. Grace for his own Of∣fence and his said Wife's Offence the sum of 1 l. being formerly convicted; and the said Eliz. Brandrith the sum of 10 s. for her own Offence, being formerly con∣victed; & the said John Blackburn, Sam. Whitworth, Eliz. Whitworth and Eliz. Fello, of every or each of them the sum of 5 s. apiece; and of the said Margret Whitworth the sum of 5 s. for her own Offence, & the sum of 2 l. by reason of the poverty of Rich. Bateman, Joseph Roberts, Sarah Clay & Francis Clay formerly convict∣ed, by Distresses and Sale of Goods; which said sums you are to deliver to me, to be distributed according to Law; hereof fail not, as ye will answer the contrary at your Perils. Given under my Hand and Seal the 25th day of July, 28 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1676. Robert Thoroton. William Day of Newmenleas Milner near Eastwood being at a Meeting at Sutton in Ashfield, the 28th of the 3d Moneth, 76. was fined 5 s. for his own Offence, and 10 l. for the poverty of a Preacher or Teacher, there being no preaching or teaching, as the Informers pretended, as the Officers which kept us out of the Meeting-house did testifie before Arthur Stanhope Ju∣stice in Mansfieldwoodhouse, and several others affirmed the same, nevertheless the Informers went to Robert Thoroton and he granted a Warrant against the said William Day, and they took away from his a Mare and a Heiser, besides Pewter and Brass, and Beddding to the value of 14 l. 10 s. 4 d. Iohn Smith of Remson, Thomas Sharp of Newark, Ioseph Wilkinson of
Nottingham Informers; Thomas Gristed Constable, Robert Howet and Henry Winfield Wardens, Ellis England Thrid∣borough; and the said William Day went to Robert Thoroton called Justice to let him know that he was wrongfully fined, and told him that there was neither preaching nor teaching, and if he would give him leave he could produce several that would testifie to the Truth of it, and the said Iohn Smith In∣former standing by said▪ Did not widow Leadbeater go on with a Narration of words? And William Day answered, that what words she spoke was in answer to him, and the Justice said, If it was but one word, it was enough. Witnesses to the Truth of this, Bartholomew Mastin, Luke Hanke, Thomas Mee and Ioseph Potter. Edward Wood of Ekrin, in the County of Nottingham Wheelwright, for Contempt of the Ecclesiastical-Court at York (as is pretended, to answer George Higgins in a certain Cause of Tythes) was attached by a Warrant from Peniston Whaley and Robert Thoroton Justices, dated the 2d of March, 5. and by Cerificate from Henry Watkinson Official▪principal of the afore-said Court; and 37 s. was paid by Richard Thomson junior of Ekrin, for about 12 s. in the principal demanded. Michael Embly of Ekrin had two Lands of Pease (worth a∣bout 13 s. being all he had) taken by George Higgins of Ekrin Impropriator, for the pretended Tythe of an Acre of Barley, whereof four Cocks & half he pretended due to him for Tythe. Thomas Farnsworth of Scaftworth for being at a peaceable Meeting had taken from him five Cows worth about 14 l. Robert. Spauld for the same had five Cows taken from him worth about 13 l. Robert Nicholson for the same had one Heifer, worth about 1 l. 3 s. 4 d. taken from him. Zacharias Bower for the same had one Cow taken from him worth about 2 l. 10 s. Witness Iohn Camsal, Thomas Denton, Iohn Birks, Iohn Glover. The Officers Names that distrained, William Chapman Constable of Eaverton, Edward Chapman and Iohn Batts Wardens, Iohn Rayner and Francis VVilliamson Overseers, George Gantley Constable and Warden for Scaftworth.
Iohn Seaton of Blythe for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 20 l. and had four Oxen and one Horse taken from him worth 22 l. George Greaves for the same Meeting was fined 10 l. 5 s. and had four Cows taken from him worth 13 l. Iohn Wilson for the same was fined 3 l. and had a Mare ta∣ken from him worth 4 l. 10 s. Gervase Crease for the same was fined 10 s. and had four∣teen pound of pewter taken from him worth 14 s. Distrain∣ed by Warrant from Robert Thoroton. The Officers Names are, Robert Williamson and Richard Malken Constables, Ger∣vase Pye and Richard Emerson Wardens, Henry Noedin Over∣seer, Iohn Brown and Thomas Moresin Thirdboroughs, Wit∣ness Thomas Farnsworth, Ioseph Hudson, Iohn Couson. Iohn Torr of Scrooby for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 5 s. for his own Offence, and 10 l. for the poverty of a certain Blind Man unknown, for one Meeting, and 1 l. fine for another Meeting, both Warrants amounting to 11 l. 5 s. and they took from him 4 Oxen worth about 14 l. 10 s. and ano∣ther Warrant from Justice Sands for the sum of 10 s. and 1 l. which the Officers run in Charges about felling the Oxen, which they had taken away by Virtue of the other two Warrants, more then they sold the Oxen for, as is pretended; so they took an Heifer from him worth about 2 l. 10 s. William Kirkby of Geatforth, for being at a peaceable Mee∣ting, had taken from him seven Beasts worth about 12 l. 10 s. By Warrant from Robert Thoroton. Adam Hutchinson and Charles Tollet Constables, William Brfit and George Norman Wardens. Witness Iohn Raganal, Peter Ancliph. Note, There was formerly taken on this Account, from several Innocent Persons in this County, Goods and Cattle to the va∣lue of 695 l. and upwards; and two Persons great Sufferers formerly, appealing to the Sessions, they ordered them their Money again, but this great persecuting Justice, Peniston Whaley, fraudulently detains 60 l. in his Hands, contrary to the Orders of Sessions.
John Seaton of Blythe, for having peaceable Meeings at his House to worship the Lord, was fined 20 l. and 10 s. for himself, and 35 s. for his Wife's being at four Meetings, and 5 s. for his Servant, in all fined 62 l. 10 s. and had his Goods distrained, viz. All his Houshold Goods, Horses, Mares, Kine and Swine, his Carts and other wooden ware, with old Wood, Stone and Brick, to the Value of 100 l. and upwards. The Officers Names that distrained, Robert Williamson, Rich∣ard Malkin, Constables; Richard Emerson, Gervase Pye, Wardens; Henry Nodin, Overseer for the Poor. George Greaves of Blythe Shoemaker, for meeting peaceably at the House of John Seaton, was fined for himself 40 s. and for the Poverty of several other Persons, and four unknown, 4 l. 10 s. and they distrained of his Goods, as Bedding, Pew∣ter, Shoes and Boots, by the above said Officers, to the Va∣lue of 11 l. and upwards. George Greaves for being at a peaceable Meeting at John Seaton's, was fined 10 s. and 3 l. by Reason of the Poverty of six other Persons, and 10 l. by Reason of the Poverty of the Owner of the Place; and they took in Hay, Corn, Barley, Mault, one Mare, two Swine and a Calf, and Houshold goods to the Value of 25 l. and upwards. The Officers Names that distrained, Richard Boulton and Robert Billyet, Constables; Gorvase Pye and Richard Emerson Watdens; John Malkin and Michael Judson, Thirdboroughs; Henry Nodin, Overseer of the poor. Gervase Cressie of Blythe▪ being one of the Overseers of the poor, for Neglect of his Office, because he did not assist them in breaking up the Meetings of the said People, was fined 5 l. for which Fine Christopher Snowdin High Constable, took from him two Cows, and other Houshold Goods, and one Bundle of Candle weke, in all to the Value of about 9 l. 4 s. Henry Ʋpton of Harworth for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 20 s. for himself and his Wife, and 6 l. 10 s. by Reason of the Poverty of thirteen other Persons named in the Warrant, and had two Oxen and three Cows taken from him, worth about 14 l.
William Kirkby for being at a peaceable Meeting in the high∣way, the said People being kept out of their meeting house, was fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. by Reason of the Pover∣ty of the owner of the Place. For which Fine the Officers took from him six Beasts and five Horses and Mares, with the rest of his Goods in the House, to the value of 25 l. and upwards and sold in the presence of Richard Champiom, John Ridginal, John Wilson; Officers, John Champion, Edward Tomlinson, Constables. Joseph Hudson of Mattersey for being at a peaceable Meet∣ing, was fined for himself 10 s. and 6 l. 5 s. by Reason of the po∣verty of twenty five unknown Persons (then and there present, as the Warrant specified) and the Officers distrained for the said Fine, 5 Cows, 10 Swine, some Pewter and Bras, 2 Beds with Furniture, and other Houshold Stuff, and a parcel of Corn, and a parcel of Hay to the value of 12 l. 10 s. by Thomas Bar∣ker Constable; William Morley and Henry Iessop Wardens. witness William Broundley, George Goodyear; All the afore-said Goods and Cattle were distrained by Warrants granted by Robert Thoroton. Thomas Farnsworth being impannelled upon a Jury at a Court-Leet, and because he could not swear, was fined 3 s. 4 d and had a pewter Dish taken from him worth about 4 s. 6 d. Iohn Birks for the like had a Flaggon taken from him worth about 5 s. 4 d. Zacharias Bower for the like had two pewter Dishes taken from him, worth about 6 s. These taken by Robert Graves the Bishop's Bailiff. Iohn Birks of Scaftworth for being at a peaceable Meeting with several other Friends, though kept out of the Meeting-House, and driven into the Street, was fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. by Reason of the poverty of the Owner of the place, (though it was in the Street or High way) and he had taken from him five Cows, worth about 14 l. 5 s. Zacharias Bower for the same was fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the poverty of the owner of the Place, and had
taken from him five Cows, worth about 15 l. by Warrant from Justice Sands. The Officers Names, William Chapman Con∣stable; Edward Chapman, Iohn Bates Wardens; Iohn Raynes and Francis Williamson Overseers for the poor. Witnesses, Robert Spanold, Robert Nickelson, Edward Ieptson. Thomas Denton for being at the same Meeting fined 10 s. and had Goods taken from him to the value of about 17 s. Thomas Farnsworth of Scaftworth, for being at peaceable Meetings was fined 10 s. for himself, and 3 l. for the poverty of 12 unknown Persons; and by another Warrant 10 s. for him∣self, and 10 l. by Reason of the Poverty of the Owner of the Place, by Warrants from Peniston Whaley, and his Goods were distrained and sold; first, three Horses, one Mare, two Cows, four Calves, one parcel of Rye and a parcel of Barley, two parcels of Hay, his Carts, Ploughs and Horse-Harness, and o∣ther things in the Yard, at 28 l. 6 s. 4 d. Also within the house four Beds and several Houshold Goods at 12 l. 4 s. 8 d. Iohn Birks of the same, for 20 s. Fine, had a Fillie taken from him, worth about 1 l. 15 s. Zachariah Bower of the same for the same Cause was fined 13 l and had taken from him seven Horses and Mares, five Calves, three Carts, two Ploughs and one Harrow, with Horse-Harness, Hay and Corn, and Wood at 20 l. 8 s. 4 d. Goods in the House, as four Beds, Pewter and Brass, and several o∣ther Goods worth about 16 l. 4 s. 2 d. by two Warrants from Peniston VVhaley. The Officers Names, William Chap∣man Constable; Iohn Raines, Francis Williamson Overseers; Iohn Bates, Edward Chapman Wardens; and George Gantley Constable of Scaftworth, all of Everton. Witnesses Robert Nickelson, Edward Ieptson, Robert Spanold. Henry Ʋpton of Harworth, for being at a peaceable Meeting at Blythe, was fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pover∣ty of the Preacher (as they pretended) and the Officers made Distress, & sold all his Goods & Chattels which he had left, for the raising of the said sums, by Warrant from Robert Thoroton. The Officers Names, John Ellis Constable; Thomas Rowood and Robert Sissans Wardens; Robert Fetherly and John Ellis
Overseers: VVitnessed by Bartholomew White senior, George Wagstaff, Charles Hopkinson. John Birks fined 20 s. for being at two peaceable Meetings, and had a Mare taken from him, worth about 40 s. Thomas Denton for a Fine of 5 s. had taken from him two Calves, worth about 40 s. by VVarrant from P. Whaley; witness Thomas Saintpall, Dorothy Gledge. Edward Hickson of Tickhil for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined for himself, and the Poverty of two others 30 s. and had taken from him an Heifer, worth about 3 l. 5 s. John Lambert of Tickhil for being at a Meeting was fined for himself and the poverty of five more persons, 3 l. and they took from him an Heifer worth about 3 l. 10 s. by Warrant from Ralph Knight. The Officers Names that distrained, James Houson, Samuel Scorar Constables; John Bradford, Richard Hole Overseers; William Lee Church Warden; witness John Bradford, John Hickeon, Elizabeth Ties, Iohn Fairfoot. Gervase Lambard for being at peaceable Meetings at Blythe was fined 40 s. by Warrants from Peniston Whaley, and they distrained his Goods, viz. Some Pewter, Brass, his Beds and Bedding, with some Leather and his Working Tools, with all other Goods in the House, with his Hay, to the Value of a∣bout 8 l. Iohn Camsal fined 30 s. for being at peaceable Meetings, and had taken from him some Corn in the Barn, with two Beds and Bedding, with other Goods to the value of about 10 l. The Officers Names, William Chapman and George Gantley Constables; Edward Chapman and Iohn Baytes Wardens; Iohn Raines and Francis VVilliamson Overseers of the poor. Witnesses, I seph Camsel, Thomas Saintpal, George Flecher. The 22 d of the 10th Moneth, 1676. an Account of Goods then taken from VVilliam Emley of Mansfield in the County of Nottingham Mercer, for a Fine of 10 l. 5 s. for being at a Meeting the 17th Day of the same, at Hucknal-Hoofot, in the parish of Sutton in Ashfield, and thereof convicted the 19th of the same, by Iohn Smith, one Sharp and Obadiah Anthony Informers, before Robert Thoroton of Carcouson, in the Coun∣ty
afore-said, Justice, viz. 10 l. for the poverty of the Preacher, and 5 s. for him elf, and by Warrant from the said Robert Thoro∣ton directed to Thomas Innocent and Francis VVatson Consta∣bles; Richard Burbidge Apothecary, John Garner Mercer, Ralph Croshey Dyer, Thomas Wheat Butcher, Overseers of the poor; George Cook Malt-maker, and John Clay Tanner, Church-Wardens; John Plumtry and Thomas Clerk Thirdboroughs, all of Mansfield in the County aforesaid; he had Shop Goods taken from him to the value of 23 l. and upwards. George Hopkinson for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s. which he was distrained, by Thomas Innocent Con∣stable, Iohn Plumtry and Thomas Clerk Thirdboroughs, as followeth, one Coverlet worth 10 s. one pewter Candlestick worth 1 s. one Chair worth 4 s. A Relation of a Notorious Piece of Deceit, acted by the Persecu∣tors of these poor afflcted People called Quakers in this County. Upon the 26th Day of the 9th Mo. 76. some of the said Peo∣ple being peaceably assembled together, in the parish of Blythe and waiting in Stilness and Silence upon the Lord, there came in amongst them one Edward Butterworth, who sate down a while amongst them, till the Informers came in, viz. Iohn Smith, Obadiah Anthony and Thomas Sharpe; then Edward Butterworth stood up and said, Blessed be the Peace-makers, with some other words that were not understood, by Reason Tohmas Sharpe one of the Informers pulled him forth, the Con∣stable meeting them near the Door, asked why they pulled him out? the Informer said, If another speak I will pull him out al∣so, so the Officers had this pretended Preacher before Justice Sands, who upon Examination said, He lived at Broughton with∣in eight Miles of Lincoln; but there being some Suspition that he was a Cheat, ordered the Officers to secure him, and to bring him before him again next Day; where before the said Justice Sands and Sr. Ralph Knight, being again examined
he still said, he lived at Broughton, and Thomas Sharp, one of the Informers being asked upon his Oath, whether he knew the said Butterworth, did affirm, He never saw him before in all his Life; but a Certificate was produced before the Justices to prove they both lived in Newark, a Copy of which is as follows. This may certifie whom it may concern, that we whose Names are under-written do testifie, that Edward Butterworth and Thomas Sharpe of our Town of Newark, are very well acquaint∣ed, and very near Neighbours, living together in our Town, and both in a Street, most of our Town well know it. John Milnes. Thomas Merryweather. After Examination the Justices seeing their Deceit, com∣mitted Butterworth to Nottingham Goal, except he found Sureties to appear at Redford Sessions, and as the Constable was conducting this pretended Quaker to the Goal, Smith and Anthony two of the Informers being with him, he rode away from the Constable; but about three Dayes after he went to Justice Sands, and Obadiah Anthony and Thomas Sharpe two of the Informers with him, who were bound for his Appear∣ance at Redford Sessions. A short Relation of the Proceedings of the Justices of the Peace, at Nottingham Quarter-Sessions, the Eighth Day of the Ele∣venth Moneth, 1676. Where many of the People of God, in Scorn called Quakers, came to appeal for Justice from the Illegal Proceedings of the Cruel Informers, who acted by Virtue of several Warrants granted forth by Robert Thoroton Justice of the Peace; there being about 20 Appeals which were promised to be tried at this Sessions, and but three of them put in, the manner of their Trials was as followeth, as near as can be remembred. Upon the 8th day of the 11th Mo as afore-said, the Court be∣ing
sate the Council for the Informers spoke to the Justices and the rest of the Court, that it would be a Dishonour to the King, and to his Honourable Justices of Peace, that the Appeals should be tried; for if they were, it was as much as if the Iustices had not done according to Law, and if it should be brought in for the Appellant, it would be a Dishonour to them, or Words to that Effect. The Council for the Appellant, It is not any Dishonour to the King, or his Justices, but whether the Informers acted according to Law or no, that is the Question; and if any look upon them∣selves to be grieved contrary to Law, they may be tried by a Iu∣ry of twelve men, which the Law doth allow; and further, he desired the Tryals might be in the Informers Name, and not in the Name of the King, but it would not be granted. So when the Justices had ordered the Appeals should go on to Tryal, a Jury was impannelled and sworn, and the Warrant of Robert Thoroton's Conviction of the Meeting at Blythe such a Day, betwixt the King of the one Part, and Iohn Sayton and the other Appellants on the other part, by which Warrant the said Iohn Sayton was fined 20 l. for suffering a Conventicle at his House (as they said) in the Parish of Blythe. So the Wit∣nesses were called and sworn. Witness, I was there on that Day, and there were several People met, but were all silent, and no Words spoken amongst them but did not see Iohn Sayton there. Council for the Appellant, Now in the first place, forasmuch as there was neither Preaching, Praying nor Reading, as their own witness doth testifie, therefore it was no Conventicle. 2dly, Being they cannot prove he was there, therefore how can it be judged, that he did either wittingly or willingly consent to that Meeting, if they could make it a Conventicle, with much more to that purpose. Informers Council, Now as to the first, although there was neither Preaching, praying nor Reading, yet it was evident enough that they met under a pretence of a Religious Exercise, & seeing there was more then five, & not of Iohn Sayton's Fami∣ly, therefore it must needs be a Conventicle. And as to the 2d,
seeing they cannot prove he was there, we must leave it to the Consciences of the Jury, whether he did willingly consent to that Meeting, or no. So when the Council had spoke on both sides, Peniston Wha∣ley one of the Justices, who sate in the Chair, as Judge of the Court, stood up and spoke to the Jury to this Effect, and said, Although there was no visible Exercise that can be proved, yet the Quakers say, they worship God in Spirit and Truth, and we know their Manner is, to sit sighing and groaning, and such like dumb Actions; and did very much labour to insense the Jury (not like an Impartial Judge) and told them, They must find it for the King; and so the Jury went forth in Order to bring in a Verdict. So another Jury was impannelled, in Order to a second Try∣al of Iohn Sayton's, he being sined 20 l. more for a Meeting in the parish of Blythe as aforesaid; so the Witnesses being sworn, their proceedings were much like the former, only one passage is to be taken Notice of, concerning one Thomas Sharp an In∣former, who not long before did forswear himself before a Ju∣stice of Peace in the County, and Evidence being ready in the Court upon his Oath to testifie the same, in Order to invalidate hi Evidence, was called to know what he could say concerning Sharp, but the informers Council would not suffer him to speak to that Matter, but instead thereof, asked the Witness several ensnaring Questions, and Sharpe's Testimony was taken. Counsellor Leake being for the Appellant, asked the said Thomas Sharpe, VVhether he was to have part of the Fine by the Oath he had taken? and he said, Nay: He was then asked, VVhat he did at Blythe that day, and what was his Business? and he answered, To look after Meetings. So this we leave to sober People, to judge whether he was concerned or nay, he being one of the Informers. Note also, That Iohn Sayton was above Sixty Miles from home the same day that he was fined 20 l. as was made appear in open Court by substantial Evidence. So the Jury went forth, and the first Jury immediately came in with a Verdict.
Then they were asked, If they were all agreed? Jury, And they said, Yes. Court, VVho shall speak for you? Jury, Our Fore-man. Court, Do you find it for the King or for the Appellant? Jury, For the Appellant. Upon this Verdict coming in, Penistone VVhaley, one of the Justices (the rest of them being pretty moderate) bid them Go forth again; but one of the Jury-men stood up & said, They were agreed, and they had considered it very well; where∣upon he fell into a great Rage, and flung off the Bench, and said, You deserve all to be Hanged, and said, they were as ill as Highway-men, and Cursed them, and further said, as if He hoped the King would take away Iuries, for this way will not do. Then Lawyer Athrop, the Appellant's Atturney, answered and said to the Court, You know how Iudges have been reproved for threatning Iuries, and striving to force them contrary to their Consciences, or words to this purpose. So the second Jury came in, and was asked, If they were agreed? They said, Yes. Court, Do you find it for the King or the Appellant? Jury, For the Appellant. Which Verdict was to the great Satisfaction of most peo∣ple, who had heard or known of the Informers Cruelty and Ungodly Proceedings. Upon the nineth day, being the next Morning, the Court sate, again, and proceeded in order to a Tryal of VVilliam Hudson's of Little-Greenley, near Redford, for which he stood convicted by Robert Thoroton, and fined 20 l. and VVilliam Hudson was called, and did appear, and was bidden to come up to the Bar, but as he was coming up, one pulled off his Hat, and Penistone VVhaley seeing that, bid give the man his Hat again, so VVilliam put it upon his Head, and for so doing P. VVhaley fined him 5 l. and committed him to Prison, and said, VVe need no Iury for that.
Note, That these two former Juries were impannelled by the Sheriff according to Law, being all substantial Men, with∣out Exception when they were sworn, and only intended to try the Causes depending; but the judicious Care of the Jury men not suting the Humour of some of the Justices in bringing in their Verdicts the day before, must now all be tur∣ned off, and to work they go to impannel a new Jury to an∣swer their Ends; and one Billige was called and placed the Fore-man, which is or hath been Bailiff to P. VVhaley, and one Howett that is his Clark, and others whom they pleased. So the Jury being sworn, and the Witnesses also, which were two Informers, viz. Thomas Sharpe and Obadiah Anthony, and another poor man, which did say, VVe saw many people met together about sixteen, but they were silent, without speak∣ing any words; but they could not say, they saw William Hud∣son there. Thomas Sharpe was asked, If he knew William Hudson? and he said, Yea, and that is he, pointing at one, of which several took notice of him, VVilliam Hudson being then in Prison [A Notorious Forsworn Informer.] The Appellant's Council seeing their Illegal Proceedings in impannelling another Jury, whom they pleased, and would not admit of any Exception, nor have regard to Law, would plead no more, but did forthwith rise up, and said, If this be your Law, I have done, or words to that purpose. But the Informers Council made use of his Silence and De∣parture to their own unjust Ends, & wronged him, saying to the Jury, You are upon the Matter of Fact, and you see the Case is so clear that their Council hath nothing to say; therefore you need not stand long about it, but bring it in for the King. So the Jury went out, but notwithstanding their illegal choice of them, in hopes of a speedy and free Verdict to an∣swer their Ends, yet it proved far otherwise, as will be mani∣fest in the sequel. For after they had waited a long while, and the Jury came not in, they sent a Bailiff to know if they were agreed? then he returned and said, They are not agreed, and they think they shall not agree.
So when they had waited very long, and had done their o∣ther Business, they sent again to them, That if they would have Information in matter of Law, they would inform them: So the Bailiff brought them into the Court, and Penistone Whaley said, Are you agreed? and Billidge the Foreman said, We are Eight that would bring it in for the King, and there are Four that will not agree thereto. Penistone Whaley, Why, what Four are these that will not agree? One of them stood up and said, In the first place, I am not satisfied that William Hudson did wittingly and willingly consent to the Meeting at his House; and 2dly, there being neither preaching nor pray∣ing, nor any visible Exercise of Religion, it cannot be a Con∣venticle. The Informers Atturney said, That as concerning it being a Conventicle, the Quakers themselves did grant, and several of them that wtre at that Meeting had paid their Fine. Note, This was false; for none that were at that Meeting had paid any Fines; but by virtue of Robert Thoroton's War∣rant the Officers and Informers had taken their Goods, and because they did not put in their Appeals, this is called a Confession of the Fact. And so they went out again, but could not agree, and about Eight by the Clock at Night one of the four being weak, and ill of a Cold, and wanting Refreshment, something condi∣scended, partly through the Threats of Penistone Whaley, threatning them, who said, If they could not agree, there they were likely to stay until they dy'd, and as one dyed they would chuse another, until they were all Dead. So at last they delivered in a Private Verdict against the Ap∣pellant, after the Court was adjourned, which te Justices Note, Most of the Justices at Nottingham Sessions carry∣ed things moderately, except P. Whaley; but at Newark Robert Thoroton and Peni∣stone Whaley, and the rest that sate on the Bench, were bent against the Innocent, as with one accord. receiving, charged the Jury to appear the next day at Newark; Sessions in open
Court: So the next day the Jury appearing at Newark, some of them being dissatisfied with what was done, desired to know of the Justices, If it was not lawful to go out again, that they might consider better of it, in regard they had agreed to a pri∣vate Verdict, because they were threatned to be kept without Meat Half a Year, and beleving the other part of the Jury would have more Liberty? But the Justices told them, It was not lawful to do it, but was a Cheat to the King, and a Dissembling with God Almighty. But the Appealant's Atturney desiring to prove the Lawfulness of it, was threatned to be Bound to his Good Behaviour if he spoke any thing before the Verdict was delivered in open Court. So at last they were forced again to condiscend, and the Verdict was given in against the Appealant, although it was contrary to their Consciences, being Forced thereunto, as some of them declared in open Court, and to this day some of them remain dissatisfied. So the Court being now sate at Newark, and a Jury im∣pannelled in order for another Tryal of William Hudson, he being the Appealant, the Goaler gave William Hudson leave to be there. The Jury being now impannelled, Pen. Whaley gave his Judgment, and said, Although that there were no words proved as Preaching, it must be found for the King, if you believe they were met to worship God; for (said he) some worship one way, and some another, and the Quakers Worship is dumb Worship. And Robert Thoroton (another of the Justices) said, The Quakers Worship is with Sighs and Groans which cannot be ut∣tered. Whereupon one of the Jury-men desired to be satisfied, for said he, It may be they met not to worship God, but were sate Sighing and Mourning for their Abominations. Robert Thoroton replyed, That's the Quakers Worship, the Wickedest Thing in the World. But said the Man, I would gladly do Equity.
Robert Thoroton replyed, YOƲ HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH How shall the Oppressed come to have Justice done them, when the Court they appeal to told the Jury, THEY HAVE NO∣THING TO DO WITH EQUITY! EQƲITY. So they went out, and some of the Jury being not satisfied concerning the Meeting, being it was in Silence, did think to have found it for the Appealant, as they have confessed; but presently they procured one Obadiah Anthony, an Infor∣mer, who told them, That there was Preaching, and they were kneeled down upon their Knees: So then they concluded against the Appealant. This one of the Jury-men confessed; and the said Obadiah Anthony was seen with the Jury by John Sayton and Samuel Ellz of Newark, and Francis Hawoth, and many others, and one of the Bailiffs standing by with a Candle. So when the Jury brought it against the Appealant, then they gave William Hudson his Liberty. So complaint being made to the Court, That the Informer was allowed to be amongst the Jury, which made Thirteen; their Answer was, Charge the Bailiff to look better to the next. Also, when John Sayton's Appeal was tryed at Newark, the Foreman of the Jury, William Arnall by name of Car∣couson (Robert Thorton's Neighbour) did much Rail in the Court against the People called Quakers; and one heard him say, I will serve the Quakers turn this time; we will be troubled with them no more. Several that were called upon the Jury they excepted a∣gainst, and shewed no Cause why, and would have none but such as were ready to answer their Cruel Ends. So the Appealants seeing their illegal Proceedings, and that wrong Judgment proceeded from them that sate in the place of Justice, notwithstanding all that was said or spoken, and al∣though they cryed for Justice, they could not be heard; and if the Appealants Atturney (having no man else to plead for them) did speak any thing contrary to their Wills, either by
excepting against any of the Jury (which the Law allows, if Cause be shewed) or any other thing that they did not af∣fect, although lawful, he was threatned to the good behaviour, or some other Opprobious Terms; so that now having got their Desire upon the Innocent, they went on without Con∣trole; and the Jury being levened by them, what Appeals were afterwards tryed, were brought in against the Appeal∣ants, who having now no other to appeal unto, but Almigh∣ty God, did wholely commit themselves, with what they have, into his Hands, being fully satisfied it is for his Name's sake they now suffer; and whosoever so looseth either House or Lands, or any other thing, shall in this Life re∣ceive a Reward, and in the World to come Life Everlast∣ing. Justice Whaley said at Newark Sessions to the Jury, That if they did believe that the Quakers did meet to MAKE MAR∣RIAGES or TURN PAN-GAKES, they might find it for the Appealant; but if to WORSHIP GOD, they might find it for the King. Prisoners in the County of York, as followeth. JOshua Smith excommunicated for not taking the Oath of a Warden, pronounced by Henry Watkinson Chancellor and a Capiendo sued out by Thomas Holms Procter, commit∣ted the 13th day of the 9th Moneth, 1673. where he still re∣mains in the Castle of York. Christopher Stockton committed to the Castle of York, by William Rayley Knight, and Francis Driffield, both Justices of the Peace, in the North-Riding of York shire; their Warrant grounded upon a Statute of Henry the 8th, bearing date, the third of the nineth Moneth, 74. and by Certificate from the Judge of the Consistory-Court at York, Henry Watkinson cer∣tifying
his Excommunication, and this done at the suit of Thomas Flather Priest of Lestingham, for Substraction of Tythes. Nicholas Raw committed to prison by him called Lord St. Johns and others, by a Significavit of his being excommunica∣ted, at the suit of Tobias West Priest of Grunton, their War∣rant bearing date the 7th of the 9th Moneth, 74. Christopher Walkinton of Hutham committed to Prison upon 2 Capias for nonpayment of Steeple-house Tax, and other Contempts of the Church so called, the 8th of the 11th Moneth, 74. Robert Squire Proctor. Ioseph Trevis of the parish of Owthorne arrested by William Marshal Apparitor, with a Capias sued out by Robert Squire Procter, and committed the 20th of the 11th Moneth, 1674. where he yet remains. Peter Simpson of the parish of Hampsthwaite sued in the spi∣ritual Court, so called, at York by Samuel Sugde Priest of the said Parish, decreed excommunicate by Henry Watkinson Judge of the Court, and a Capias sued out by Thomas Holms Procter, attached by George Haxby of Hampsthwaite Appa∣ritor, and committed the 1st day of the 12th Moneth, 74. William Hudson sued in the spiritual Court, so called, for nonpayment of Steeple-house Tax, by Richard Bolton Warden, and at his own Charge, attached by Christopher Morley Ap∣paritor by a Capias, and committed the 8th day of the 11th Moneth, 73. where he still remains at the City Goal. Matthew VVildman of Celside, in the parish of Horton in Craven, and County of York Husbandman sued in the same Court by Thomas VVilson of Becrofthat, in the parish afore∣said Impropriator, for Substraction of Tythe, and for his Con∣tumacy in not appearing to Citation, was decreed excommu∣nicate by H. VV. Chancellor, and a Writ sued out by Thomas Holms Procter, and attached by Robert Banks of Giglesweek Yeoman and Appariter, and committed the 12th of the 3d Moneth, 75. where he yet remains. Thomas Appleton of Huttonrudsby Yeoman presented in the Bishop's Court for not going to the Steeple-house to hear
Divine-Service, so called, and not receiving the Sacrament, and for his Contumacy in not appearing to the Citation, was decreed excommunicate by Henry VVatkinson Judge of the Consistory-Court, and a Capias sued forth by Francis Parker Procter in that called the Spiritual-Court, and attached by William Stockdel Appariter, and committed to the Castle of York the 7th day of the 5th Moneth, 75. where he still is a Prisoner. Gervase Key of the parish of Kirkburton was sued in the afore∣said Court by Iosph Brigs Priest of Kirkburton afore-said, in a Cause of Substraction of Tythes, and because he could not give in his Answer to his Libel upon Oath, was by the Judge pro∣nounced contumacious, and certified to Iohn Armitage and Iohn Key Knights, and Francis White, all Justices, by War∣rant committed him the 8th of the 5th Moneth, 75. Edward Goor of Thornton, near Pocklington Husbandman was presented in the afore said Court, and for not appearing to Citation was excommunicated, and by a Capias attached and committed (though old and infirm) the 15th day of the 5th Moneth, 1675. Richard Carr of Scamston, near New-Malton Husband∣man was presented in the afore-said Court for not receiving the Sacrament, and going to hear Divine-Service, so called, for which he was cited, and not appearing, pronoūced contuma∣cious, and decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Arthur Thornton Register to the Bishop, by which he was at∣tached, and committed to prison the 21th day of the 6th Mon. 75. Edward Evans of Nunmoncton near York Yeoman was pre∣sented in the Bishop of Chester's Court, by the Wardens, and ci∣ted to appear at Richmond before Thomas Cradock Official, and for not appearing decreed excommunicate, and a Writ sued forth by Thomas Lee Procter, and attached by Iames Hagu and William Syres senior Bailiffs, by Warrant dated the 9th of he 5th Moneth, 75. and committed the 28th day of the 6th Mon. 75. Honora Skipwith of Skipwith Widow presented in the Bi∣shop's
Court at York for not receiving the Sacrament and going to hear Divine Service, so called, was thereupon decreed ex∣communicate, and a Capias sued forth by Arthur Thornton the Bishop's Register, and attached by William Saire and ano∣ther, Bailiffs, and committed to prison the 23d of the 7th Mo. 75. John Leightfoot of the parish of Skipwith Husbandman pre∣sented upon the same Account, and decreed excommunicate and a Capias sued out by the afore-said Thornton, and taken by the same Persons, and committed the 23d of the 7th Moneth, 75. Iohn Green of Leversedge Yeoman in the parish of Birstal, presented in the Bishop's Court at that time called Easter, in the Year 1674. by Thomas Taylor, Robert Walker, Matthew Smith, Iohn Mau and Isaac Brook for not going to the Stee∣ple house and receiving the Sacrament, so called, and there∣upon cited, and appearing to the Citation was decreed excom∣municate, and a Writ sued forth by Arthur Thornton, and at∣tached by Christopher Morley and William Stockdale, and com∣mitted to York Castle the 26th day of the 8th Moneth, 1675. and dyed in prison. Thomas Mitton of the Chapelrie of Ripandin, in the parish of Ealand Husbandman, was presented in the Court afore-said by Samuel White, Richard Royd, Iosiah Siddel, Iohn Bothomley and Ioseph Hoyle, for not going to the Steeple▪house and re∣ceiving Bread and Wine, and thereupon cited, and not appear∣ing to the Citation was excommuicate, and a Writ sued forth by Arthur Thornton; he was committed to prison the 26th of the 8th Mon. 1675. William Keddy of Hutham Husbandman, presented in the afore-said Court for not going to the Steeple▪house & receiving the Sacrament, so called, was excommunicated by Henry Watkinson Judge, and a Capias sued forth by Robert Squire Procter, and committed to prison the 3d of the 11th Moneth, 75. Christopher Wharlton presented in the Bishop's Court at York and for not appearing to Citation decreed excommunicate, and
a Capias sued out by Robert Squir, Procter the 3d of the 11th Moneth, 75. William Blssom of Patrington Cooper presented in the afore∣said Court and for not appearing to Citation decreed excom∣municate by Henry Watkinson Judge of the Court, and a Ca∣pias sued out by Robert Squire Procter, and committed the 5th day of the 11th Moneth, 75. Thomas Billany presented in the Bishop's Court afore-said, and for his not appearing to Citation, decreed excommunicate by the Judge afore said, and a Capias sued out by Robert Squire Procter, committed the 5th day of the 11th Mon. 75. Richard Hancock presented in the afore said Court, and not appearing to Citation decreed excommunicate by the Judge of the afore-said Court, and a Capias sued out by the aforesaid Procter, and committed the 5th day of the 11th Moneth, 75. Samuel Wright of Nedlington Gras-man in the parish of Holden, sued in the Bishop of Chester's Court by Lanc. Clark and John Hewson parish Clarks of Holden, for their Sallery, which at the first was voluntary; their Demand was 4d. and not appearing to the Citation was decreed excommunicate by Ioseph Cradock Knight Official principal of that Court, and a Ca∣pias sued forth, and committed the 9th Day of the 10th Mo. 75. Samuel Pool of Knottingley Yeoman sued by one John Bing∣ley, on the Behalf of the King and himself, for a Debt of 40 l. which the said Bingley saith, he owes to the King and himself; and by a Writ attached and committed to Pontefract Goal the 18th day of the 11th Moneth, 1675. where he yet remains. Thomas Parkin of Eloughton Husbandman presented in the Bishop's Court at York, and for not appearing to Citation de∣creed excommunicate, and a Capias sued forth by Thomas Holms Procter; committed the 7th of the 12th Moneth, 75. Mary Brockbanck of Farndale near Kirkby-More-Side in the County of York Widow, aged near fourscore, was sued by Thomas Hardwick Priest of Kirkby-more-side for Substraction of Tythes, and attached by an Exchequer Writ, and commit∣ted, to York-Castle the 29th of the 8th Moneth, 14. where she yet is
Henry Iarret presented for Non payment of Steeple-house Tax, and not appearing to Citation decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Robert Squire Procter, and commit∣ted the 28th Day of the 12th Moneth, 75. Francis Lund, Thomas Salkel, & Thomas Wilkinson, all of Dent in the County of York, but of the Diocess of Chester were sued in the Court at Richmond, by Leonard Burton Priest of Sedbergh for Easter-Reckonings, which according to their Costom is but 1 d. 1 ob. per head, and for their not appear∣ing to citation, were by the aforesaid Cradock Official decreed contumacious, and a Capias sued out by Iohn Newton Procter, and attached by Robert Banks Appariter, and committed the 8th Day of the 2d Moneth, 1676. where they yet remain. William Redshaw committed to the Castle of York by Hen∣ry Goodrick Justice of Peace, at the Request of Henry Watkin∣son Judge of the Spiritual Court, for his pretended contumacy to the Decrees of the said Court, as saith the Mittimus, com∣mitted the 15th day of the 5th Moneth, 76. Isabel Milner Widow presented for her Non-conformity, and for her not appearing to citation, decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Thomas Holms Procter, attached by William Stockdel Appariter, and committed the 10th day of the 10th Moneth, 76. Joseph Denton Batchellor, near Leeds, presented for his Non-conformity, and for his not appearing to Citation de∣creed Excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Tho. Holms Procter, attached by Will. Stockdel Apparitor, committed the 17th of the 11th moneth, 1676. David Nutbrown of Holden Linnen-Weaver, presented in the Bishop of Chester's Court, and a Capias sued out by Th. Lee Procter, and attached by William Marshal Apparitor, committed the 18th day of the 11th moneth, 76. John Lukis of Easingwod-house Carpenter, presented in the Bishop's Court for his Non conformity, and for not appearing to Citation was decreed Excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Arthur Thornton the Bishop's Register, and committed the 21th of the 10th moneth, 75. All these still continue Prisoners in the County of York.
Dyed in York Castle since the 4th Moneth, 1675. John Brockbank, Son to the before-named Mary Brock∣bank, and as Servant to his Mother, yet sued with her, and cast into Prison; he Dyed the 8th of the 8th Moneth, 75. Richard Long sued for Tythes; Dyed the 25th of the 3d moneth, 76. William Brockbank Dyed about the middle of the 8th mon. 1675. John Green for Non-conformity Dyed the 11th of the 5th Moneth, 76. William Doughty presented by an Informer, one Anthony Atkinson a Butcher in Thorn, sued out a Capias, and another Writ for 20 l. a Moneth, both at the Informers Suit; he Dy∣ed the 5th of the 10th Moneth, 76. Devon-shire. RObert Welch of Ʋsculum sued for the Non-payment of Tythes to James Holloway Impropriator of the same Parish, and in the 11th moneth last was by him cast into Prison by a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo. Note, And in the Year 1674. this Holloway sued Robert Welch for Tythes, and though he was kept close Prisoner for the same, yet that did not satisfie this Presecutor's Cruelty, but he caused as many Pease to be taken out of Robert's Field as were worth 2 l. and not long after removed him to London by a Habeas Corpus, and at the Assizes following got an Exe∣cution out against him, and took away from the said R. Welch six Oxen, three Cows and one Horse, worth 42 l. the value of Tythes claimed being but 7 l. and still detains him in Pri∣son besides.
Note, They returned two of the Oxen again, so that what they kept was computed to be worth 34 l. On the 10th of the 9th Moneth, 1676. for a Fine of 7 l. 15 s. to be levyed on James Taylor, for being at a Silent Mee∣ting in Burliscombe, there was taken of Tenants Goods on his Ground twenty Sheep and two Cows, worth 16 l. by Warrant from Justice Waldrond, Justice Bere and Justice Sainthill, Edward Hurley and Nicholas Dowdney Constables, Robert Cross and Nich. Colman Church-wardens, John Sealey and Tristram Dune Overseers, Henry Rew a Constable and Jo. May Informers; which Goods were fold for about 8 l. 10 s. to one Capron of Sampford-peverel. Also, by the same Officers there was taken from Clement Colman, for being at the same Meeting, the value of Ten Shillings. Also, from Gawen Taylor, for being at the same Silent Mee∣ting, the value of 10 s. By the Officers of Burliscomb, by Warrant from the same Justices, there is taken from George Russel, for being at the same Silent Meeting, Houshold Goods to the value of 30 s. And many other Warrants are out from the aforesaid Justices, to distrain the Goods of many other Persons, for being at the aforesaid Silent Meeting. Also. their Meeting-House was by Consent of the said Ju∣stices seized upon, and kept from them by Force. Prisoners at Exon in Thomas's Parish. James Taylor, the same time they came for his Goods for being at the Silent Meeting, as aforesaid, he was taken up on a Common Process, at the Suit of Justice Bluet and Richard Peacock on the Account of Tythes, & sent to the Sheriffs Ward, where he is now a Prisoner. Joan Pollixphen of Kingsbridge, who hath been a Prisoner three Years the 15th of the 11th Moneth last past. for the value,
as is supposed, of about 4 or 5 s. in Tythes, by Samuel Nor∣cott a Priest, she being first served with a Subpoena by one Christopher Batten a Bailiff, yet she not near him, but was in another County, and for not appearance came forth a Process against her, and took her up, and cast her into the Sheriffs Ward, where she yet remaineth. Elizabeth Phillips by the same Priest was sent to the same Prison on the Account of Tythes, where she hath been a Pri∣soner three Years, and now the last Week, at the turning of the Ward she was freed. William Wilcott and Thomas Burgin Dyed in the Sheriffs Ward this year, both sent in on the Bishop's Account, for not going to the Steeple-house. Sufferers in Bedford-shire, 1676. JOhn Barton of the Parish of Studham in the County of Hartford Taylor, being rated to a Church levy, as they call it, 2 s. 2 d. it being demanded by Nathaniel Fisher War∣den of the Parish, and for refusing to pay the said Nath. Fisher did sue out a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, and did him∣self with a Travailer which he imployed, Arrest the said John Barton in Hartford-shire, and haled him by Force into Bed∣ford-shire; Bridget Hall, Mary Impie and Ann Barton being Eye-witnesses of the same; and carryed him to Bedford Goal, where he hath remained prisoner one Year and fifteen Weeks, notwithstanding he hath a Wife and Six Children. Henry Newman of Seawell, in the Parish of Hauton-Regis in the County of Bedford, Husbandman, being rated to a Church-Levy, as they call it, 13 d. or thereabouts, and for refusing to pay it the Wardens returned his Name to William Foster Commisary, & was Arrested with a Writ of Excommu∣nication, and the 7th day of the 4th moneth, 1676. by Edw.
Groom an Apparritor, and was carried to Bedford Goal, where he hath remained a Prisoner ever since. Thomas Ballard of Elstow, in the County of Bedford, Hus∣bandman, being Arrested by Robert Hawkins Bailiff, at the Suit of Thomas Hilersdon of Elstow, in the said County, for not paying Tythes, was had to Prison, where he hath been a Prisoner seventeen Weeks. Sufferers in Cambridge-shire. TAken from Iohn Prime of Willbrom quond. upon the Ac∣count of Tythes, the 18th day of the 8th moneth, 1675. by Thomas Whithand Priest of the same Town, Wheat, Rye and Barley to the value of 18 l. 7 s. 4 d. Taken from Philip Taylor of Cottenham, by Warrant from Thomas Buck Magistrate of Westwick, for being at a Meeting at the House of Robert Mittins at Swansey, the 2d day of the 2d moneth; and for being at another Meeting at Oakington, at the House of Matthew Beezley, the 14th day of the 3d Moneth, by Warrant from the above-said Thomas Buck, for a Fine of 5 l. 10 s. Three Cows, to the value of 10 l 10 s. the Informers were Stephen Perry of Cambridge and Thomas Gilby of Blunsom in Huntington-shire; the Constables Will. Meadle, Thomas Smith and Stephen Fluston: These Goods above-mentioned were distrained upon the 29th of the 7th Moneth, 1676. Taken from Matthew Beezley of Oakington for a Meeting at his House upon the 2d day of the 2d moneth, 1676. by Warrant from Thomas Buck of Westwick Magistrate, for a fine of 9 l. three Cows and one Horse to the value of 11 l. 10 s. the Goods were strained upon the 24th of the 5th mon. by William Crosbee and Stephen Linton Constables, Stephen Perry Informer of Camb. Thomas Gilby of Blunsom in Hun∣tington-shire.
Upon the 20th day of the 1st Moneth, 1676. George Tay∣lor of Chesterton was carryed to Prison to Cambridge Castle by Christopher Wilson Bailiff, by a Writ de Excommunicato Ca∣piendo, sued out by William Linnet Priest of the same Town, and remains Prisoner to this day for Tythes. Upon the 13th Day of the 11th Moneth, 1676. Iohn Wash Tayler of Castle-Camp, was carryed to Prison by Iohn Bargin Bailiff, upon an Attachment by Priest Holles of the same Town, where he remains a Prisoner to this day for Tythes. Upon the 19th of the 5th Moneth, 1676. John Prime of Willbrome quond. was carryed to Prison by Iohn Curbey Bailiff, by an attachment at the suit of Thomas Whithand of the same Town, Priest, where he remains a Prisoner to this day for Tythes. Upon the 2d day of the 6th moneth, 1676. Gabriel Wal∣ker of Swofham Bulback, was carryed to Prison by Abraham Akerson Bailiff, by a Capias Capiendo, at the suit of Iohn Sow∣ersby, Priest of the same Town, for Tythes. Robert Rull of Rampton, a Prisoner for small Tythes.
Sufferers in Norfolk the 22d Day of the 10th Moneth, 1676. VVIlliam Barber of Gissing in the County of Norfolk, Prisoner upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of Iohn Gibbs Priest of Gissing, who was arrested the 17th day of the 7th moneth, 1674. for a small matter of Tythes, who remains a close Prisoner. Iohn Norris and Henry Peed of Northwalsham, Prisoners upon a Writ of Common-pleas, at the suit of him called Esquire Beacher Impropriator, were committed to the Castle of Norwich the 15th day of the 3d moneth, called May, 1675. for Tythes. Also, they had a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo laid upon them the 19th day of the 4th moneth, called Iune, 1675. at the suit of Thomas Clendon Curate, in the Name of Henry Gooch Vicar of Northwalsham, for small Tythes and Offerings, where they now remain Prisoners. Iohn Hart and Matthew Bacon of Northwalsham, Prisoners upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, arrested the 24th day of the 5th moneth, called Iuly, 1675. at the suit of Tho. mas Clendon Curate in the Name of Henry Gooch Vicar of Northwalsham, for small Tythes and Offerings, and are there kept Prisoners. Francis Gardiner of Tivitshall in the County of Norfolk, a Prisoner by an Attachment out of the Exchequer, was arrest∣ed the 24th day of the 6th moneth, called August, 1675. at the suit of Christopher Burrel Priest of Tivitshall, for Tythes, and brought to the Castle of Norwich, where he now remains a Prisoner. Bartholomew Howling of Shipdam in the County of Nor∣folk, committed to the Castle of Norwich upon an Assize-Process in the 6th Moneth, called August, 1676. and three
dayes after he was in custody there was brought in upon him a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, where he now remains. Nich. Phillips hath been a Prisoner about Nine Years for Tythes, at the suit of Edward Barnard Priest of Diss, and also a Sessions▪Process. Matthew King, William King and Stephen Wicks, are Pri∣soners for Tythes, and have so continued Fourteen or Fifteen Years, or more. Francis Dix of Great-Ellingham in the County of Nor∣folk, was arrested about the 11th moneth, 1669. by a Com∣mon pleas Writ for Tythes, at the suit of Henry Harman Far∣mer to the Impropriator, who lives at London, and brought to the Castle at Norwich, who notwithstanding his Imprison∣ment, was sued to an Out▪lawry by the said Harman, and be∣ing stopt, he brought a Tryal down to Thetford Assizes in the year 1676. and had trebble Damages given him, which was 28 l. 16 s. for which there was taken from him by the Bailiffs of the Hundred, Cattel and Goods to the value of 40 l. Mary Satterthwait of Pullam▪Market in the County of Norfolk, Widdow, was sent to Norwich Castle the 20th day of the 3d moneth, 1676. at the Suit of Doctor Starkey (so called) Priest of the same Town, upon a Writ of Excommu∣nicato Capiendo, who is since released. Thomas Mathewman of East▪Deerham in Norfolk, was arrested the 28th day of the 5th moneth, 1676. for Tythes, at the suit of Richard King the Impropriator, and brought to the Castle at Norwich a Prisoner, in which Imprisonment he was brought to his Death the 7th of the 9th moneth follow∣ing, whose Wife through tending of him and watching with him, it being a Noisom Place and Cold Season, shortly fell Sick, and Dyed the 17th of the 10th moneth following, whose Blood cryes against the said Rich. King Impropriator. Taken from Samuel Pyke of Hingham in the County of Norfolk, in the Year 76. for Tythe for the said Year, by the Servants of Robert Sippins Priest there, of Winter Corn and Summer Corn to the value of 3 l. 10 s.
Sufferers in Norwich. On the first of the moneth called March last, John Shapen jun. for being at a peaceable Meeting to wait upon God, in Norwich, the 27th of the 12th moneth last, had taken from him, by one Beak and Iohn Stone Constables, by a Warrant from Iohn Manser then Mayor, John Tennyson and Charles Tennyson Informers, 5 pair of Shoes called Flyers and a Cake of Tallow. Ditto John Fedman, for being at the same Meeting, had ta∣ken from him, by William Poole Constable, goods worth 8s. 6d. Iohn Dilerance, for the same Cause, had Goods taken worth 10 s. for a Fine of 5 s. by Edward Trull Constable, VVilliam Chessen Overseer, and Tho. Leman Church warden. Ditto, Anthony Alexander, for being at the same Meeting, was fined for himself, and the third part of 20 l. for the House, and had as many Splightings or Hides taken out of his Fats as were worth 8 l. 17 s. Note, Erasmus Cooper entring Anthony's House, in a suddain surprizing manner, said to the Man's Wife, who was big with Child, He came to seize all she had for the King. She said, That was hard, to seize all for 7 l. fine. He replyed, He would not leave her a Bed to lie on. And he went to the Shp Door, and finding it lockt, he fetcht a Pickax, and broke it open, and he and the rest of his Companions were so Cruel and Ʋn∣neighbourly, that it caused Tears to trickle down the Cheeks of some of the Neighbours, who beheld them; the Names of his Assistants are Nic. Becket Constable, Rob. Clark Warden. Edward Cullier Overseer, Edw. Makins and Richard Pye. In the 3d moneth last, the same Officers, accompanyed with two others (viz.) Isaac Wolfill and Nath. Ponder Overseers, went into the Yard of the said Anth. Alexander privately by the Crick side in a Boat with a Warrant from J. Manser Mayor and Francis Bacon Steward, for the third part of 20 l. being a Fine imposed on him for the Cause aforesaid, for which they
took 7 dozen of Calf-Skins worth 8 l. 8 s. and commanded his Man to assist them to pull the Ware out of the Fats, which he re∣fusing to do, they gave him abusive words; Anthony said, It was unreasonable to require the Man to assist in taking his Master's Goods from him; Rob. Clark answered, They were their Goods. Robert Hutchison, on the 4th of the 5th moneth last, for being at a Meeting, had Houshold-Goods taken away to the value of about 7 s. by Warrant from Tho. Checkering Mayor, by Rich. Lusbrook and Iohn Allen Constables, and Iohn Freeman War∣den, and Christopher Hastead Overseer. Samuel Duncon, in the 5th moneth last, had taken from him for meeting to worship God, Houshold goods and Wares to the value of 42 l. 19 s. 5 d. by Warrants signed by Francis Bacon and Iohn Manser Mayor; and John Crow and Gamaliel Sugden Wardens, Tho. Southgate jun. Edw. Mayhew Over∣seers, VVilliam Poole pretended Constable, Charles Tennyson Informer, Tho. Giddens Carter, Tho. Woods, John Brown and Robert Phebee Helpers, together with the Hang man. Note, The aforesaid Officers took Possession of Samuel Duncon's House, and there kept Night and Day, from 7th day in the af∣ternoon till 2d day in the afternoon, loading away his Goods, as if they had been their own, & breaking up Locks at their Plea∣sure, keeping Samuel's Wife, who was big with Child, as a Pri∣soner in her own House the first Night, not suffering her to speak with any so much as at the Door, nor any to come to her till some of the Magistrates being spoken to to abate it (for' Shame and Cry of the People) ordered it. And the Reader may take notice of the Insolency and Vile∣ness of one of the aforesaid Informers, who boastingly said, He would make the Mayor wait upon him as often as he would at his Pleasure: Oh a sad Age! that such ungodly, vile, idle, pro∣phane Men should be encouraged thus to vaunt themselves a∣gainst, or rather over the Magistrates of this Nation, whose Sword in Justice ought to be a Terror unto them, they being Evil-doers in the Sight of the just God, who hates Oppression, and in the Sight of just Men; and its to be lamented, that un∣der
Officers are forced to proceed in making Havock of their peaceable Neighbours Goods against their Consciences, to sa∣tisfie those greedy Informers; as witness the aforesaid Pool Con∣stable, when he went with the Informer to the Meeting in Nor∣wich the 16th of the 5th month, & hearing the Truth declar'd, he cryed with Tears in his Eyes, VVhat shall I do? I know the Pow∣er of God is among you; and told the Informer, That if there were a Curse hung over any people upon Earth, it was over the Infor∣mers; and said to S. D. afterwards, That he confest he had sinned against his Conscience in doing what he did. And Note further, That since the taking of the said Samuel Duncon's Goods, John Tennyson, one of the said Informers is laid up in Prison upon an Execution for Debt; and he hath confest, He never prosper'd since he took in hand that Work; and said, He knew not what to do; and said, If he were at Liberty, he would never meddle more. So people may see how badly his Ill-gotten Goods prosper with him. Note, John Crow would not suffer an Account to be taken of the Goods he & the rest of them took away of Sam. Duncon's, but when a Man was taking an Account, he scatched it from him, and put it in his Pocket; and the said Crow finding Sam. Duncon's Shop set open the Second Day in the Morning, shut it up again himself; thus acting like Plunderers in Time of VVar, which is a Shame to Magistrates, that they should suf∣fer such things in Times of Peace. Since the other Account, Nich. Becket Constable, Rob. Clark and Robert Sellers Wardens, Nathanael Ponder Overseer, by Warrant from Tho Chickering Mayor (for a Fine of 10 l. im∣posed upon Anthony Alexander for the Meeting house) did with the Help of Andrew Cooper and William Drayton, carry away from the said Anthony 15 Splitings, worth 9 l. 15 s. four Horse-Hides 1 l. 10 s. and 11 couple of Wombs worth 14 s. 8 d. in all to the value of 11 l. 19 s. 8 d.
Sufferers in Westmoreland. DOrothy Middleton of Lupton, within the Parish of Kirby∣lonsdale and County of VVestmoreland, an ancient Wi∣dow of the Age of Sixty four Years, was sued in the Bishop's Court of Chester, by Henry Hoyle Priest of Kirbylonsdale afore¦said, for Easter Reckonings demanded by him to the value of 3 s. by the year for three years; and upon a Writ of Excommu∣nicato Capiendo, was for the same arrested▪ and carryed to Prison at Appleby in the said County, the 24th day of the 12th moneth, called February, in the year 1675. and hath there remained Prisoners ever since, which is about eleven Moneths. Thomas Moor of Newbiging, in the afore-said Parish of Kirbylonsdale, was also sued in the same Bishop's Court, by the same Henry Hoyle Priest aforesaid, for Easter Reckonings, demanded by him to the value of 1 s. 6 d. and upon an Ex∣communicato Capiendo Writ was for the same arrested, and carried to Prison to Appleby aforesaid, upon the 29th day of the 12th moneth, called February, in the year 1675. and hath remained Prisoner there ever since, which is about eleven Moneths. Note, Although the afore-said Henry Hoyle Priest is about four Moneths since Dead, yet nevertheless the aforesaid Doro∣thy Middleton and Thomas Moor are upon the same Suit and by the same Writ yet detained Prisoners in the Goal of Apple∣by afore-said. Thomas Gamm of Camsgil, within the Parish of Burton and County aforesaid, was sued in the Bishop's Court of Chester by John Ormrod Priest of Burton, for Easter Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues (so called) by him demanded to the value of about 6 s. by the year for two years, & upon an Excommuni∣cato
Capiendo Writ was arrested, and carryed to Prison at Ken∣dal in the said County the 27th day of the 11th moneth in the year 1674. where he remained about three moneths; and be∣ing but about Four Miles from his own House, his Wife and Children, and Friends had the conveniency often to visit him; but therewith this Priest Ormrod was so Vexed and Troubled, being filled with Envy and Cruelty, that he prevailed with the under Sheriff, one Allan Prickatt, to remove him to the Common Goal at Appleby, being about Sixteen Miles from his own House, where he hath remained Prisoner these Two Years. Sufferers in the County of Berks, the 27th of the 11th Moneth, 1676. RObert Pain of Sunning, and John Pain of the same, arrested for Tythe at the suit of Samuel Christopher Priest of Sunning above-said, and carryed to Reading Goal the 13th of the 4th moneth, 1674. where they remain still Prisoners. William Dobson of Brightwell arrested for Tythe at the suit of Ralph VVhistler, and carryed to Reading Goal the begin∣ning of the seventh Moneth, 1675. and remains still a Pri∣soner. Thomas Davie, George Ball, Richard Nash, Thomas Pret∣ty, Thomas Draper, William Ward, John VVyron, all of New-VVindsore, arrested by VValter Coudry under Goaler the 13th day of the 11th moneth, 1675. by a Writ of Excom∣municato Capiendo, for not going to the Steeple house, and not paying to the Repair of it, and not receiving the Sacra∣ment, being rated as followeth, viz. Thomas Davie, 3 s. George Ball, 2 s. 3 d. Richard, Nash 4 d. Thomas Pretty, 3 d. Thomas Draper, 2 s. 7 d. VVilliam VVard, 4 d.
Iohn VVyron, 3 s. 4 d. all carryed to Reading Goal, and re∣main still Prisoners. Taken from Samuel Burgis of Brimton, for 4 l. 18 s. 4 d. demanded for Tythe by Thomas VVorral Priest, a Mare worth Ten Pounds, the 26th day of the 3d moneth, 1676. by Richard Smith Bailiff. Sufferers in Lanca-shire. UPon the 14th of the 11th Moneth, 1675. Iohn Backhouse, Robert Hubbersty and Francis Fleeming, all of them of Yelland, within the County of Lancaster Husbandmen; and VVilliam Waithman and James Waithman both of Lyndeth within the said County Husbandmen, and all five within the parish of Warton, were served with a Writ out of the Exche∣quer, at the suit of Hugh Phillips of London Farmer of the Tythes of the Rectory of Warton afore▪said, under the Dea∣con of Worcester) by Gawen Hewtson, Samuel Fisher, Robert Watson and Hugh Read Bailiffs, who required their Bond for Appearance, but they being not free to give Bond, were re∣turned to the Common Goal at Lancaster, where they remain Prisoners yet; Witnesses to the Truth of this are, John Smith, John Hubbersty, Edward Rawlinson and William Huginson. Roger Hairsnep of Aughton Husbandman was sued in the Bishop of Chester's Court for Tythe, by Alexander Bagerly Priest of Aughton, and for not appearing according to the Or∣der of the Court, was apprehended upon Contempt, by Or∣der from John Eutwistle of Ormskirk and William Holme of Kersley Justices, and carried to Lancaster Goal the 17th day of the 7th Moneth, 1675. where he remains Prisoner this 10th of the 11th Mon. 1676. Upon the 15th day of the 7th Mon. Roger Haydock of Coppel within the parish of Standish Husbandman, was sued by Ralph Briddock Bishop of Chichester for Tythes, and by Warrant
from Roger Bradshaw called Justice, and Nicholas Penington Mayor of Wiggan, committed to the Common Goal at Lan∣caster, where he remains Prisoner, the said Bishop having writ to the Goaler, as also to the Judge of the Assizes, called Francis North, who strictly Charged the Goaler, he should not let the said Roger Haddock, nor any of the Quakers have Liberty, so that not only the said Roger Haddock, but several other Brethren were debarred of Liberty through the Instigati∣on of the Bishop. Upon the 6th Day of the 3d Mon. 1675. Hskin Fell of Coppel was at the suit of Ralph Briddock Bishop of Chichester, for Easter Reckonings, upon his Denyal to take an Oath cal∣led Juramentum Militia, apprehended by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of Roger Bradshaw called Justice, and Nicholas Penington Mayor of Wiggan, and committed to the Common Goal at Lancaster, where he remains Prisoner. Upon the 13th of the 9th Mon. 1676. Robert Walker of Boulk Woolen Weaver was apprehended and imprisoned at the suit of Edward Garthforth Priest of Lancaster, by a Signi∣ficavit from the Court of Richmond, for small Tythes, where he now remains a Prisoner, for his Testimony against that Priest∣hood that takes Tythes. Sufferers for Meeting to worship God. Upon the 14th day of the last 12th Moneth Thomas Tomlin∣son of Crossmore had taken from him for a Fine of 5 s. for him∣self being at Freckleton, and 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. for the pretended Poverty of another, Three Beasts worth 11 l. 10 s. by Ma▪ Kerkham Constable of Freckleton, George Nickson Warden, and some other Officers, who after they had drove the Beasts about 2 Miles, sold them one to the other for 8 l. 10 s. This was by Warrant from Edward Riggby of Preston, called a Ju∣stice, a great Persecutor, who threatned, He would root out the Quakers out of the Hundred wherein he dwelt, and said, All the Laws as yet made against the Quakers were too short, he would have a Law that they should be tied and dragged, either at a horse
or cart tayl, and that he would be one of the first that would move for it in Parliament. Henry Tomlinson of Crossmore White-Smith, by the same VVarrant, for being at the same Meeting, had distrained from him Goods worth above 5 l. 10 s. by the same Officers, the Priest of Kirkham being Informer. Iohn Townson of Racliffe, by VVarrant from the afore▪said Edward Riggby and another Justice, had two Cows taken from him worth 5 l. 10 s. for being at the same Meeting, by Iohn Bernard Constable of Racliffe, Henry Carter Overseer of the poor, Thomas Hankinson and others, Officers. Alexander Salsbury of Leagram, the 19th Day of the 9th Moneth 1676. for being at a peaceable Meeting of the Lord's people at Thomas Garner's, Alexander Powel, called a Justice, granted a VVarrant to make Distress of his Goods for a Fine of 20 l. being informed against by Adam Knowel and Iohn Burton Informers, and that he was teaching or preaching at the said Meeting. whereupon the Officers, viz. Nicholas Wal∣bank Constable, and Hugh Dobson Overseer of the poor, took from him. Four Oxen worth 17 l. 10 s. and another time the same Officers took from him Seven Beasts worth 21 l. 10 s. And the 20th of the 10th Moneth the same Officers took from the said Alexander Salsbury Four Cows worth 21 l. VVitnes∣ses hereof, William VValbanck, Richard Birlow, Iames Ham∣ber. Charles Lee of Clitheroe Labourer, had taken from him (for a Meeting at his House the 1st Day of the 8th Moneth, 76.) Four Horses, with Load-Saddles, Collars, Wanties and Over∣laies, worth 14 l. One Cow and a Calf, worth 5 l. 6 s. 8d. One Yearling Heifer and Three Calves, worth 7 l. 5 s. The Constables Names that took them were Iohn Dugdale and Ed∣mund Rogerson, Edmund Robinson Apothecary Church-war∣den, Iohn Page Husbandman Overseer of the poor.
An Account of such as are Imprison∣ed for the Truth's sake in Hunting∣ton-Goal the 6th of the 12 Mo. 1676. THomas Ashton of Brampton in the County of Hunting∣ton, was attached the first of the 2d Moneth, 1675. for the Non-payment of Tythe [that grand Oppression] at the suit of William Swepson Impropriator, and was had to Huntington Goal, where he still remains Prisoner. It is sup∣posed the value of what he is charged with by the said Impro∣priator is about 50 s. or 3 l. for Lamb and Wool some years past. VVilliam Newberry of the said Town of Brampton, in the County of Huntington, was attached at the suit of the said William Swepson Impropriator, and was had to Prison about the 27th Day of the 7th Moneth, 1675. where he still remains Prisoner for the value of 4 s. 4 d. per ann. for some years past. Note, Both of them above-mentioned were imprisoned for Con∣tempt, for not answering the Bill exhibited against them; and their Corn and Hay have been forcibly taken away in this the time of their Imprisonment. Robert Spalton of Chatterice in the Isle of Ely, was arre∣sted at the suit of William Strong (Priest of the said Town of Chatterice) about the 1 st of the 2d Moneth, 1675. for small Tythes, and being arrested in the County of Huntington was had to Huntington Goal, where he remains Prisoner to this day. Iohn Beadles (within the Liberty of Ramsey and County of Huntington) was arrested the 20th day of the 7th moneth, 76.
at the suit of Silvester Titus (commonly called Colonel Titus) Lord of the Mannor of Ramsey and Impropriator (for Tythe supposed not to be above 25 s. according to the usual Rate) and was had to Huntington Goal, where he remains a Prisoner to this day. George Clapham of Brampton, in the said County of Hunting∣ton, was had to Prison upon a Bishop's Writ for not appearing at the Court, & non payment of Tythes, by Ol. Pocklington Priest. Nathaniel Nicholl of Wooley in the said County of Hunting∣ton, was carried to Prison the same time for Contempt of the Court, in not appearing (by the same Writ) and for not going to the Steeple-house, they were both had to Huntington Goal the 7th of the 12th moneth, 76. where they continue. And there are several other Bishop's Writs out against seve∣ral more in this County, but not as yet executed, &c. At a Meeting of the People of the Lord, at the House of Amy Peacock of Erith, in the County of Huntington, upon the 23d of the 2d Moneth, called April, 1676. a Person be∣ing there that was moved by God's Eternal Power to preach the Everlasting Gospel, with wholsome Exhortations to the Fear of the Lord, there came into the same Meeting these Informers, viz. Stephen Perry of Cambridge, Thomas Gilbie of Bluntsham, and John Potto of Somersham, who having been a long Sea∣son in an Ale-house, came into the said Meeting like mad-men threatning and pulling People, not regarding either Age or Sex to the Hurt of some Women there present, and being deman∣ded of a Friend (Jasper Robins by Name) what Authority they had for their so doing? They replied, They had a Commission from the King to break up the Meeting. The aforesaid Jasper speaking to the Constables, that came with the Informers, to keep the Peace, and if any of them had a Warrant from any Justice, Friends would obey; and the said Informers pretended they had one, but it appeared they had not, but came in their own Wills, in that violent drunken Spirit: So they going a∣way in a Rage, especially against the aforesaid Iasper, because he desired the Constables to set them in the Stocks for their drunken Behaviour; and some Weeks after went to one Iohn
Tryce of Godmanchester (a Justice) and made a Complaint that the aforesaid Iasper had spoke certain Evil Words against the King (Yet) invented only in their own Evil Hearts, and then also informed of the said Meeting, so that the said Iasper Robins and others were fined, and he the said Iasper bound to answer their Complaint at the next Quarter▪Sessions; and he knowing his own Innocency therein, and that the Constables and others were present when they pretended he spake these Words, of∣fered his Traverse to the Court, which upon the third Quarter-Sessions was obtained, and the Matter being heard, their Wic∣kedness was manifested, and the Jury gave in their Verdict, that the said Iasper was not Guilty. Tobias Hardmeat of Fenstanton for the same Meeting for himself, and the pretended poverty of the Preacher, was fined 10 l. Thomas Parnel of Ripton-Regis for the same Meeting, for himself and the pretended poverty of the Preacher, was fined 10 l. Benjamin Thornley of Erith for the same Meeting was fined 5 s. Goods taken away worth 5 s. Edward Christenwheat of the same, fined 5 s. Goods taken worth 5 s. Thomas Cook of the same, fined 5 s. Good taken worth 5 s. Richard Basse of Erith for the same fined 5 s. Goods taken worth 4 s. The Officers that distrained were Thomas Bull, Richard Ferilis Constables, Thomas Skeiles Overseer. William Prior of Somersham (being a young man, and newly come out of his Apprentiship, and very poor as to the outward, insomuch that he had very little but his wearing Clothes) was fined for the said Meeting 5 s. for which William Wingrave, Edward Ratford Constables, Iohn Goule senior, Stephen Dar∣wood Vardens, Thomas Smith and VVilliam Bonnum Overseers Officers of the said Town manifested their Cruelty in taking away his Clothes, and leaving him nothing of his mean Appa∣rel, but one Hose, he being in Bed, insomuch as he was neces∣sitated to borrow Clothes to cover his Nakedness till he had wrought for more: His Clothes taken were valued at 10 s.
William Bavin of Bluntsham for the same Meeting fined 5 s three Swine taken from him to the value of 34 s. At a Meeting at Erith the 3d of the 10th Moneth, called December, 76. Friends were kept out of their Meeting house by the Constables and Officers of the said Town, and by men they had appointed for that work that Day; and Friends stan∣ding in the Street, about the middle of the Meeting came Stephen Perrey of Cambridge, and Thomas Gilbie of Bluntsham, two of the aforesaid Informers, who although they stand guilty of Perjury in the Sight of God and Good Men, yet upon Infor∣mation upon Oath to Nicholas Iohnson a Justice (so called) that there was a Meeting in the Gate-House of Amy Peacock of Erith aforesaid, though in Truth no Persons were in the Gate-House, but their own Family, yet the said Nicholas Iohnson being one by whom they are (and have been) encouraged, is∣sued out his Warrants upon the Oaths of these insufficient Witnesses, viz. these two Informers. Whereby one Thomas Cooke of Erith that had but one Cow left him, had her taken away, by Warrant from the abovesaid Nicholas Iohnson: And the said Thomas Cook knowing the said Witness had sworn falsly against him, went with an Appeal to the said Justice Iohnson his Place of Residence at Somersham in the said County of Huntington, but he having sold his Habitation is sometimes a Sojourner at Cambridge, sometimes at a publick House at Somersham aforesaid, so no Appeal could be had, and the said Thomas Cook making his Appeal to the Bench at the next Quarter Sessions, his Paper of Appeal was taken, but no Answer was given to it, but he lyeth under the said Suffering without Redress. Samuel Nottingham of Ramsey for the said meeting, for him∣self was fined 10 s. & for the pretended Poverty of Amy Peacock Owner of the Gate. House, wherein they falsly swore the Mee∣ting was, was fined 4 l. 10 s. For which Fines, by Warrant from the said Nicholas Iohnson, Lawrence Farmer alias Beard, Henry Adray Constable, Wil∣liam Booth and Iohn Evans VVardens, Robert Burrowes, Wil∣liam Hanes and James Sharp Overseers of the poor for the said
Town of Ramsey, for the Fines of 5 l. took away Four Cows, worth 10 l. or more, notwithstanding he told them that it was a false thing by which he was prosecuted, or to that Purpose, and further, that he was kept out of Amy Peacock's Gate-House expressed in their Warrant, by Constables and Officers, and that the Informers were forsworn, and the Street was the Place in which the Meeting was kept that Day; and on the 19th of the 10th Mon 76. being the next Day after they had distrained, he went with one of the Constables to the said Nich. Johnson, where he was at an Alehouse in Somersham upon that Occasion, and one of the Informers (viz. Thomas Gilbie) with him, waiting for their Prey; and the said Samuel told the said Justice how foully and falsly they had proceeded against him, and that the Informers were forsworn, and the Informer being then present could hardly deny the Truth of what he said; but the said Nicholas being forward and ready in the Execution of that Work, the said Samuel telling him, he was by a Rail in Erith Town Street, betwixt which and the Gate House a∣bove mention'd there is a broad passage for people to go along, then said the said Nicholas Johnson, being (as is said before) willing to keep up the Informer for Unjust Gainto them both I (said he) dare swear you were in the Gate-House: & it is probable the said Nicholas was Seven or Eight Miles distant at that time, and therefore very unable to swear any such thing. And upon the Testimony of the aforesaid false Witnesses ma∣ny other Warrants are issued forth from the said Nicholas John∣son, for levying Fines for the said Meeting, and the Constables and Officers pressed upon by him to make Service thereof, but they at present forbear, as being sensible of the false Witness given in by those wicked Informers abovesaid. Sufferers in Surrey. AMbrose Rigg was committed to Prison from the Sessi∣ons at Croyden by Stephen Harvy, the Judge there,
the eleventh day of the eleventh moneth; 1676. be∣cause for Conscience sake he could not pay 11 s. 6 d. for Fees. William Bowman; Henry Franklin, Joan Stringer Widow and Rebecca Almond, were taken from their Dwellings by Iohn Fisher John Blatt and John Hatcher were brought to Sessions by Richard Bonnick Bailiff. Bailiff, and committed to Prison, and from thence carryed to the Sessions held at Croyden the day and year a∣bove said, because for Conscience sake they could not pay 3 s. apiece, imposed upon them there by Stephen Harvy Judge, for three first dayes Absence from the Steeple-house, and were committed close Prisoners in the Mshalses, where they remain to this day. Richard Stubbs committed the same time for the same thing, who remains a close Prisoner to this day. Thomas Seaman Was committed to Prison upon a Writ of Capias about the middle of the 6th moneth, 1676. being presented by the Wardens of the Parish of Sheer, because he could not go to hear Thomas Duncomb Priest there, where he still remains to this day. Thomas Woods and John Woods were committed to Prison upon a Writ of Capias about the middle of the 7th moneth, in the year afore-said, being presented by John Chandler and John Tuersly Wardens of the Parish of Wittly in Surrey, be∣cause for Conscience sake they could not pay to the Repair of the Steeple house. Stephen Smith and Richard Baker were committed to Pri∣son at the Suit of Gabriel Offley Priest of VVorplesdon, be∣cause they could not pay him Tythes, about the 20th of the 9th Moneth, 1676. All these were committed to the Marshalses Prison in the Burrough of Southwark, where they remain this day, being the 25th of the 11th moneth, 1676.
Lincoln County. UPon the 24th day of the 1 st moneth, 1675. Allice Bunby Widow of Potier-Hanworth, for suffering a Meeting of the people of God called Quakers, was (by a Warrant under the Hand of Christopher Nevill of Harmston, in the County aforesaid (called Knight) fined 20 l. and had four Oxen, one Horse and one Mare taken from her, with Yoaks and Teams, as they were going to plow, and (she be∣ing but a Friendly Woman) was forced to pay the 20 l. The Names of the Constables were Thomas Hutchinson and Will. Almond, Thomas Breston and Thomas Sumpter called Church-Wardens, John Makender and Will. Almond Informers, who informed the Justices, that they heard a Young man speak Lord and hrist, or such like words. Edward Bunbed, for the same Meeting, had a Mare taken from him (by the Constables, Church-Wardens and Over∣seers of the Poor of Hanworth aforesaid) worth 5 l. sold at 4 l. and returned back again 30 s. for a 4 l. Fine. Niholas Johnson of Hanworth aforesaid, had for a 4 l. fine four Cows taken from him worth 9 l. and were sold for 4 l. and had 30 s. returned; both these were taken by the same Officers that took the Widow Bunby's Cattle. Lincoln City. Abraham Morrice of the City of Lincoln, Mercer, being at the said Meeting, had a Fine imposed upon him by the said Justice of 10 l. for the Speaker unknown, and 5 s. for him∣self, which the said Christopher Nevill certified to Joseph Ld∣ington then Mayor of Lincoln, who forthwith issued his War∣rant to Benjamin Harinson Constable, VVilliam Hodghkinson Church-Warden, and Robert Coppy Collector, who upon the first day of the second moneth, 1676. came into Abraham
Morrice's Shop, and took as many pieces of Stuff as cost him 19 l 7 s. 8 d. upon which the said Abraham entred his Ap∣peal, which was tryed at Sleford Sessions the 4th day of the said Moneth, but no Justice could be had; for some of the Te∣nants and the Constables of Auber and Harmston were put upon the Jury, which two Towns at times Chr. Nevil doth dwell in, who put one John Coddington (who many years had been his Hired Servant, and now his Tenant) the Fore man of the Jury; there was but one Informer at the Sessions, which Ne∣vill perceiving did not answer his Defire, came off the Bench, and took his Oath, The Information which he there shewed upon the Bench was true; upon which the Jury gave it against the Appellant; But since that time, the said Iohn Coddington Fore∣man coming from Newark, fell from his Horse, and Dyed in a day or two after. Witness Nicholas Mitchel and William Morrice. Prisoners in Lincoln Goal. James Dixon of Crowle imprisoned by a Writ de Excommu∣nicatio Capiendo, bearing date the 13th Day of the Moneth, called Iuly, 1674. for not appearing at the Bishop's Court at Lincoln. Thomas Everat alias Everard and Robert Berryer of Crowl, both imprisoned for the same cause by the same Writ, bearing the same date. William Edlington of Crosland imprisoned for the same Cause, the 3d of the Moneth called April, 1674. Katherine Cliffe imprisoned by an Attachment out of the Court of Exchequer, baring date the 21th day of the moneth called February, 1675. Iohn Baldock of Wainfleet imprisoned by a Writ of Excom. Capiend. for not paying to the Repair of the Steeple-house, the 20th day of December, 1675. Henry Wilson committed to Prison for Non-payment of Tythes to Perrigry Moor Priest, by a Warrant dated the 21th of the moneth called March, 167. Thomas Wresle imprisoned upon an Attachment out of the
Exchequer for Non-payment of Tythes, the Attachment dated the 3d of the 6th Moneth, called August, 1674. Robert Reeder imprisoned for Non▪payment of Tythes at the suit of Robert Bernard, the Warrant dated the 15th day of the 2d moneth, called April, 1674. Thomas Brown imprisoned by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying Tythes, the Attachment dated the 29th of the 3d moneth, called May, 1676. Sufferers in Cumberland, the 5th of the 12th Moneth, 1676. THomas Bewly of Halcliff Hall, of the Age of Seventy Eight Years and upwards, imprisoned by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for Non-appearance at the suit of Ar∣thur Savage of Caldbeck Priest, for Tythe▪Wool, Lamb, White-Book, and some Prescription; for his Ground payeth no Tythe in kind: The said Thomas sustained Seven Years and Four Moneths Imprisonment, at the suit of the said Priest, for the same pretended Tythe above-mentioned; and when the said Thomas was at Liberty, the said Priest sued him for the Prescription-Money, as he alledgeth, 3 l. and caused the Bai∣liff (Robert Priestman) to distrain his Feather-bed, that he and his Wife lay on, with all Clothes thereunto belonging, and a Cupboard, worth 5 l. and when the Bailiff could not get these things sold, he sued the Bailiff, and forced him to pay the Money and Costs. The said Thomas was committed to prison this second time the 21th of the 9th moneth, 1674. and hath continued more then Two Years, having had no Real nor Personal Estate in his Hand this Five Years. George Bewly, eldest Son of the said Thomas Bewly, by ver∣tue of an Attachment and Proclamation out of the Court of
Exchequer, at the suit of the said Priest for Tythes, Wool, Lamb, White Book, Presciption-Money, only for the Te∣nement, late his said Father's, not being Tythe in kind of Corn nor Hay, he hath been prisoner Two Years, and yet re∣mains. John Striket of Branthwhait, VVilliam Scot of Greenrigg and Isabel Peacock of Whelpoe Widow, having Six Fatherless Chridren, all Prisoners by Attachments out of the Exchequer for Non-payment of Tythes of Wool, Lamb, White-book and Prescription; for none of them are liable to pay Tythe-Corn or Hay; and were committed to Goal the 23d of the 9th Moneth, 1676. and yet remain. Thomas Bewly the younger Son of Thomas Bewly aforesaid, (Alice Nicholson of Wodhall, having Six Fatherless Children her Husband being kept in Prison by the said Priest for Non∣payment of Tythe till he Dyed in Goal) by an Attachment out of the Exchequer, for not putting their Answer in upon Oath, being sued for Non-payment of Tythes of Wool, Lamb, White Book and Prescription, the said Priest taking the Tythe Corn upon their Ground yearly, were committed to Goal the 20th of the 11th Moneth, 1676. and yet re∣main. Grace Stalker of Whalpey in Caldbook by an Attachment out of Chancery, at the suit of Iohn Munkhouse of the same Town and Parish, was apprehended the 30th of the 3d moneth, 1676. for not putting in her Answer in the said Court upon Oath, was committed to Goal the day and year above-said and yet remains. Sufferers in Cumberland in the year 1676. for Meeting to∣gether to worship God. Iohn Howes of New-Town for having a Meeting at his House the 22th Day of the 1 st Moneth, was fined 20 l. and and had three Steers and two Cows taken from him worth 16 l. distrained by Richard Graham Constable, and others.
Thomas Stordy of Moorehouse fined 9 l. 5 s. for being at the said Meeting, for which they took from him two Oxen and one Cow worth 10 l. 10 s. distrained by Robert Watson of Thurstonfield, Robert Hodgson of Dikesfield and Iohn Hutton of Brough Constables. Robert Huntington of Bowstedhill fined 7 l. for the Speaker and 10 s. for himself and his VVife being present at the said Meeting, for which he had three Heifers taken from him worth 6 l. 10 s. Christopher Whtlock for being at the same Meeting, had taken from him a Cow worth 40 s. by the Constables of Orton Parish Iohn Iveson of Iarriston fined for being at the same Meeting 7 l. 5 s. and had a Mare and 2 Cows taken from him worth 8 l. All the aforesaid Distresses were by VVarrant from William Musgrave of Carlsle, called a Justice. Christopher Taylor of Hetherside, for having a Meeting at his House was fined 20 l. by the said William Musgrave, and the 22th day of the 3d moneth, 1676. Gilbert Atkinson In∣former, Alexander Porter, George Story, Richard Hethring∣ton and VValter Key took from the said Christopher five Beasts worth 14 l. Iohn Iackson of Angerton for himself and his Brother being at a Meeting fined 2 l, for which the same Officers, by the same Justice's VVarrant, took one Mare from him worth 1 l. 6 s. Sufferers for Meeting at Pardsay-Cragg and at Cleater in the the year 1676. by VVarrant from Richard Patrickson of Calder-Abbey, called a Iustice, George Richardson of St. Bees and others Informers. Iohn Steel of Graythwait had two Cows taken from him worth six pounds (the 31th of the 3d moneth, 1676.) by Richard Allason of Bramby and Iohn Fletcher of Hill in Blin∣bshett Constables.
Luke Steele the same day had taken from him for the same Cause one Kettle worth 12 s. The 11th day of the 5th moneth, 1676. Richard Allason Constable and George Richardson Informer took from Iohn Steel aforesaid, two more Cows worth 8 l. Iames Bragg and the said Geo. Richardson Informer took from Iohn Nlson of Hightrees one Cow worth 3 l. 10 s. for meeting. The same day and year, the same persons, for the same Cause, took from Iohn Dickenson of Hightrees one Cow worth 3 l. 10 s. John Jackson of Felldyke for the same Cause the same time had taken from him two Kettles worth 14 s. Michael Williamson of Gillgaran had taken from him by William Peile and Joseph Dixon Constables of Distington for the same Cause, one Cow worth 1 l. 10 s. William Carter of Crossfield, the 13th of the 5th moneth, 1676. for the same Cause, had taken from him one Mare worth 1 l. 5 s. Middlesex. RIchard Ashfield and Abraham Bonefield, both of Staines, are Prisoners in Newgate upon a Writ of Excommuni∣cato Capiendo for not paying a Parish Rate.
Sufferers in Hamp-shire. NIcholas Ede of Froyle, sued by Richard Farrer Priest of the said place for petty Tythes in the Exchequer, and car∣ryed to Winchester Goal the 19th day of the 11th moneth, 1674. where he yet remains a Prisoner. Iohn Bishop of Gatcomb in the Isle of Weight, arrested at the suit of Iohn Woodnutt Priest, because for Conscience sake he could not pay him Tythes, he was committed to the Ser∣jeants Ward in Newport the seventeenth day of the seventh moneth, 1675. where he still remains a Prisoner, kept in very close. Worcester-shire. ALice Booker of Wickamford imprisoned in the County-Goal by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of William White and Richard Clark Wardens, for not paying to the Repair of the Steeple-house, 1676. Newcastle. THe 26th and 27th of the 11th moneth, 1676. the War∣dens and Officers of Gateside, by Warrant from Sr. Francis Anderson, so called, Justice of the Peace in the Coun∣ty of Durham, made Distress of the Goods of Richard Stock∣ton, and took away to the value of Six Pounds Ten Shillings,
for being at a Meeting in Gateside the 27th of the 11th moneth aforesaid. By Warrant from the same Justice the same Officers took away from Christopher Bickers Goods to the value of 13 l. the Warrant was grounded upon the Act made in the year 1670. Wilt-shire. VVIlliam Moxham cited to the Bishop's Court at Sarum for not paying small Tythes and Offerings to Priest Gunn, who, when he appeared, because he did not put off his Hat, they called him Coxcomb, and told him, He was Be∣witched, and bid him come again next Court-day; and when he came again, because for Conscience sake he could not Swear to his Answer to their Libel, they proceeded to Excom∣munication, and thereupon he is since committed to the County Goal in Fisherton, where he still remains a Prisoner, this 15th day of the 12th moneth, 1676. Oxford-shire. A Relation of the Ʋnchristian-like Dealing of Justice Gregory of Cooksome with his Poor Neighbour & Tenant Rich. Holliman of the same Place, Miller. THe said Richard Holliman and his Wife being lately con∣vinced of the Truth, Robert Crpps the Priest and the Justice their Landlord were greatly in Rage against them, and the Priest meeting with them accidentally in a Neighbour's
House, after some words past, told them, He would provide▪ a Task for them, The poor Woman said, I pray thee let it not be Pharaoh's Task But shortly after Ju. Gregory sent his Warrant for R. Hollman to come before him, and when he came, the Justice was very VVrathful against him that he was turned a Quaker, and said, It was the Confoundedst Religion of all, and threatned to turn him out of his Mill, and askt him; Whether he was at Church last Sunday He reply'd, No: Then the Justice said, He must pay 1 s. and soon after sent the Officers with a Warrant to distrain, who took away a Pewter-Platter worth 3 s. and so proceeded several times, till he took away Goods to the value of 24 s. a small sum in value, yet it was more then the poor Man was worth if his Debts were all paid, he having a Wife and Six Children, most of them small: And this Cruel Justice was not satisfied to cause this poor Man's Goods to be so taken away, but He Turned him out of the Mill, which he and his Friends had lived in many years; and this was done near the Winter, a hard time for a Man to be put to shift with such a Family, when he knew not what course to take to subsist, nor hardly where to put their Heads for shelter, and for no other Cause but for being a Quaker.
North-Wales. The late Severe and Illegal Proceedings against the People called Quakers, for Conscience sake, in MERIONIDD-SHIRE. CAdwallader Thomas, Rowland Ellis, Lewys Robert, Hugh Robert, Evan Rees, Edward Rees, Griffith John, Gainor David, Elizabeth Williams; these Nine being taken Prison∣ers upon an Indictment for not resorting to their Parish Chur∣ches, so called, were all at the Assizes held for the said Coun∣ty in the Town of Bala, upon the 11th day of the 6th moneth last past, brought to the Bar to answer their Indictments, Ke∣mick Eyton and Thomas Wallott Judges, and upon their refu∣sal of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, then tendred unto them (and as we conceive unjustifiable, the Prisoners being but private Persons, and the Jdges declaring no special Commission, they had to Warrant and Authorize the same) The said Judges delivered in open Court, That in case the Pri∣soners would refuse the Oaths the second time, they should be pro∣ceeded against as Traytors, the Men to be HANGED and QƲARTERED, and the Women to be BƲRNED. And upon the 1st day of the 7th moneth, their Circuit then re∣turning, they offered to them the Oaths again▪ and uon their not taking of the same in Form, though they solemnly ac∣knowledged Allgiance to the King as supream Magastrate, were remanded to close Imprisonment, and were strictly kept as Fellons or Traytors, though without Rule of Court or Commitment upon them for Eleven Weeks time from the Ses∣sions, and in the last great Frost were kept from the Benefit of a Fire-place or Fire, which the Goaler had granted them, had not one Maurice Jones, who is the Priest of the Parish of
Dolgelle (where the County-Prison is) and generally known to be a very sottish Parson, threatned to Complain of him to the Judges. Edward Rees, one of the Prisoners, being above Sixty Years of Age, and as was generally concluded, being not of Strength to bear so great a Cold, patiently resigned up his Life to the Hands of our Righteous Judge, Dying about the height of the Frost, the 17th day of the 10th moneth, commonly called December. One of the Women, being a Wife, and big with Child, was very Weak and Sick lately, and the rest not likely to be otherwise, if the Prisoners be so continued, un∣less some speedy Course be taken for their Relief. Further Sufferings. Griffith Robert and Hugh Rees were by the vexatious Prose∣cution of the before-named Priest, Maurice Jones of Dolgelle imprisoned upon a Writ de Excom. Capiend. the 30th day of the 3d mon. 1676. where they continue Prisoners; the last of them for not paying a Mortuary, where he was no further concerned then by his Tenderness and Compassion, in super∣vising and taking Care of the Orphans of the deceased Pa∣rent. Robert Richard, a poor Labourer, of the Parish of Bettus in the said County, upon the Instigation of Owen Edwards, the Priest of the Place, and Complaint, was committed lately to the County Goal for twelve dayes Absence from the Steeple∣house, by William Salisbury, one of the Justices of the Peace for the said County. The same Priest vexatiously troubled the Master of the said Labourer a little while before.
Mountgomery-shire. An Account of the Sufferings of the People called Qua∣kers, upon the late Act against Conventicles, by the Prosecution of one David Maurice of Pen-y-bont, who was principal Informer and sole Justice of the Peace therein concerned, his Clerk and Servants the Drivers. UPon the 7th day of the 1 st moneth, in the latter-end of the year 1674. the said David Maurice of Pen-y-bont in Denbigh shire, but in the Commission of Peace for this County, came with some 14 or 15 Persons, most if not all of them armed, to a House called Cloddiau Cochion, within the Corporation of Pool, which hath proper Justices of its own, where a small Number of our Friends were peaceably met with the Doors open and all silent, he requiring us to depart, Thomas Lloyd requested of the before named Justice a quarter of an Hours time before our being dispersed, which he readi∣ly granting, and with his Followers sate amongst us, the be∣fore-mentioned Thomas Lloyd ttered a few Words, by Way of defining the true Religion, and what the true Worship was, all which the said David Maurice approved of, as sound, and according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, yet not∣withstanding he fined him the said Thomas Lloyd in 30 l. for preaching, though he was no Magistrate of the Corporation, (neither certified he the Conviction at the next Quarter-Sessions of the Peace, for the Borough, according to the Statute, where the supposed Offence was committed, bt at the Quarter-Ses∣sions for the County, to whom the Cognizance did not pro∣perly belong) and upon this Conviction caused to be driven, up∣on the 16th of the 4th Moneth, 1675. from the said Thomas
Lloyd 4 Cows and a Mare, all worth about 16 l. by two of his Servants, one of them being his Clark, and a third his Te∣nant, and no Officer of the Corporation, nor of the Parish, nor of that Allotment of the Hundred in place with them; which Drivers were lurking near the Ground some two Hours before day, and drive the Cattle before Sun-rise, and were brought out of the County into his own Demense, one of the Cows he returned till required. The same day about the dawning thereof, the said Drivers, by a Varrant from the beforenamed David Maurice of Pen-y▪bont brake rudely through Neighbours Fields, to the Ground of Thomas Lewys of Cloddiau Cochion, within the said Borough of Pool, with no Officer, neither of the Corporation, Parish, nor of that Division of the Hundred, and drive from him six Cows, two Oxen, and two Heifers; alledging for his Offence, that the before mentioned Thomas Lewys suffered a Meeting to be at his House, that very Day the before-named David Mau∣rice was there himself, who not only allowed of the Time, but approved what was spoken there; though the Right of the House and the Use thereof lay properly in the Mother, who was a Widow; and this Meeting chanced to be in her Quarenteni, viz. Her forty Dayes. And further, the said David Maurice took by his Clerk, without a Warrant, two Horses, one of them being Charles Lloyd's, and the other Thomas Lewys's, though they were at that time out of the County, where the supposed Offence was committed. Charles Lloyd of Dolobran had Ten young Beasts taken from him the 18th of the 3d Mon. 1675. by John Jones of Keel O∣vereer of the poor of the Parish of Myvod, John Morgans Pet∣ty Constable, William Samuel Servant to the Church-Warden upon a Warrant from the said David Maurice, the only In∣former, & busie Justice upon this Mercenary Act, in our Bor∣ders, for preaching at Cloddiau Cochion, within the Liberties of Pool, the 14th day of the 1st moneth last past, though the said Charles Lloyd was not at the Place that day, nor of many dayes before or after at a Meeting, as many can testifie.
David Jones of Branyarth for being a Hearer at the two a∣foresaid Meetings at Cloddiau Cochion, and though distrained of a Brass-Pan for his proper Fines, had four Cows and two Oxen drive from him by a Warrant from the said David Maurice of Pen-y-bont, for the pretended Inability of others convicted; the two Oxen and one of the Cows were since returned. Thomas Hamond of the Parish of Mountgomery was commit∣ted to the County▪Goal about seven Moneths ago, by a War∣rant from Matthew Morgans and one—Stedman two Justi∣ces of the Peace for the County of Mountgomery, upon the Sta∣tute of the 27th Hen. 8. c. 20. in a suit of Tythes, in the Bishop's Court of Hereford, upon the Prosecution of Edward Herbert Baron of Cherbury and Roger Jones Priest of the Parishes of Berine and Mountgomery, which Prisoner notwithstanding several Applications to them and their Agents made, without any Redress, deceased the 28th Day of the last 11th Moneth, called January, leaving his Widow and four Daughters desti∣tute of a Tender Husband, and a Careful Father, by this hard Usage; the was denyed Liberty of once visiting his Family since his Confinement. The sum upon which he was molested, was inconsiderable. Prisoners in Shrop-shire. OWen Roberts of Sallop Baker, and Ann his Wife, and Thomas Oliver of Condov Black-Smith committed to prison the 11th day of the moneth called January, 1675. by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not appearing at the Bishop's Court.
Note, There have Dyed Priso∣ners, ☞ in several Goals in England and VVales, since the King came into England, who suffered for Good Conscience sake, above Two Hundred Persons of the a∣foresaid People, by reason of their Close Confinement. And they cryed with a loud Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, dost not thou Judge and Avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Revelat. 6. 10. THE END.
