10613 S114643 99849868 15040
❧: Examples howe mortall synne maketh the synners inobedyentes to haue many paynes and doloures within the fyre of Hell. And fyrst Example of a Fa∣ther of an housholde the whiche sawe two pon∣des and the tourmen∣tes of Hell.
The Examplayre vpon the paynes of Hell. MEN fynde by wry∣tynge this that whiche folo∣weth how ye discyple reciteth in the Boke of his promptuarye & sayth yt the father of a hous∣holde yelded his soule to god / & al his houshol¦de watched hym and kept his body by nyght by the dyuyne mercy he reuyued & yode vnto the churche to yelde thankes vnto god. And all that he had he gaue to the churche and to the poores. Afterwarde he yode vnto an her¦mytage and by a water made his dwellynge and entred within the sayde water and lette his clothes to be ysye and frosen nere to his flesshe. And after that he entred into a bay∣ne ryght hote and susteyned suche payne tyll vnto the deth. And whan he was repreued to endure suche payne he sayde. Yf ye had seene that that I haue seene ye sholde do with me that I doo / or more greater thynge. And he recounted terryble thynges of the paynes of hell in sayenge that whan his soule departed fro his body an Aungell led hym into a va∣ley
of infinyte greatnes. In the whiche there were two pondes / the one was ful of worme and of flambes of fyre eygrelye brynnynge and hote. And the other ponde was frosen / & there was terrible coldnes of snow & of halfe And these two pondes were ful of oules terryble tourmented / the whiche whan they myghte nomore sustayne the greate cruelte of the fyre they passed in to the colde. And they that myght not sustayne the coldenes passed in to ye hote. &c. Afterwarde the Aūgel fed hym by darkenes ryght thycke and there sawe lytell flambe and lytell hepes and as∣semblementes of fyre the which proceded frō the furneys of hell & mounted as hye as spar∣kles of fyre & men of fyre thorowe them pro∣ceded / & there felte stynke intollerable / and there harde wepynges / waylynges / and how∣lynges in comporables and sawe the deuyls ryght terrybles that helde hookes of fyre the whiche coueyted to catche thee Father of the housholde to cast hym in the furneys / but the Aungell defende that they shulde not touche hym. For the Iudge had cōmaunded that he shulde returne in to his body for to do penaū¦ce. And there he dyd suche penaunce that it
passed mannes reason. After he dyed ioyous∣lye. &c. To the purpose of this example that speketh of the fyry ponde saynt Iohn̄ sayth. Qui non est inuentus in libro vite scriptus missus est in flagnum ignis ardentis & sul∣phuris He the whiche is not founde wryten in the Boke of lyfe whan he is deed is sent in to a ponde of fyre brynnynge & of sulpre. This pōe here wherof speketh saynt Iohn̄ is not of colde water or boylynge wherin the syn̄ers be songed / drowned / or boyled as false mo∣ney makers / but it is by symylytude as a pō¦de or a cawdron of fyre & of sulphre molton brynnynge and boylynge wherin the damp∣ned be sent there to be plonged smored / brent and boyled the which is the seconde deth that commeth after the deth corporall wherof spe∣keth saynt Gregory in his moralles. Fit mi∣seris mors sine morte / finis sine fine / defectus sine defectu. &c. ¶Example of a Father and his Sonne the whiche were seene in hell in tourment of fyre brynnynge boylynge as doth the peason in a pot on the fyre. Quere .lxxiii. Also saynte Iohan sayeth in the appocalyps that the ho∣mycides / fornycatours / enuenymours / ydo∣latres
/ and all lyrs shall be sent in to a pon¦de brynnynge of fyre and sulphre the whiche is the secōe deth. Vn̄. appoca. xxi. Pars illo¦rum erit in stagno ardenti igne & sulphure quod est mors scunda. Vnto the purpose of the secone ponde the whiche was frosen and that the dampned passed frō the ponde of the fire in to yt of the cold. It is writē Iob. xxiiii Ad calorem nimium transiet ab aquis niuiū And from the great cruelte of colde and of tormentes that the dampned haue god saieth in the gospelles that they shall wepe & gryn¦de theyr teeth of greate payne that they shall endure. Vn̄ Math. viii.xxiiii. Ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium. ¶Another Example howe a ryche man was put in a Chayre of ☞Fyre.☜ THE disciple recyteth howe a deuou∣te man sawe by vicyon a ryche man lede in to hell that had be moche ho∣noured in this worlde and exceded in worldly glory / in glotony / lecherye / in songes / and in dyue resolaces. And the prynce of the deuyl∣les
rose vp from his chayre / came before hym and made hym to sytte in a chayre all of fyre and sayde vnto hym Syt thou here for the honour that thou hast had ī the worlde. And was constrayned to drynke of lycoure ryght bytter / stynkynge and foule. And they saide to hym that it was for that he had drōken in the world the drynks full of swetenesses and two deuylles were there with trompettes the which blewe in his eares that the slambes of fyre yode out by ye eyes / nosethrylles / mouth and eares. And it was sayde vnto hym that it was for the bayne and songes that he had harde in the worlde And they put serpentes about his necke and vnto his armes / & sayde vnto hym that it was for ye embracemētes of womē yt he had had in liuinge lecherously. &c. ¶Another Example of a woman that sawe the paynes of her husbande and of other dampned. THe discyple recyteth ī his sermōs thie the whiche foloweth the whi∣che is also wryten in other Bokes and sayeth that a Knyght ryghte
puyssaunt was abandoned in torneymentes the whiche lyued miserably / and myscheuous¦ly dyed. His wyfe the whiche abode wydowe was ryght deuoute and holy. The whiche re∣compted vnto her brother Albert mayster of the ordre of the prechours that after the deth of her sayde husbande she was rauysshed in spyryte and sawe by the soule of her said hus¦bande great multitude of deuylles assēbled. And the one of them the which appered to be mayster cōmaunded vnto his companyons and felawes that they shulde put a payre of hosen on his fete of the whiche the pryckes o∣therwyse called dartes perced hym from the plante of the fete tyll vnto the brayne. After¦warde he made hym to be clothed in a hau∣bergyon wherof the prickynges perced al his bodye on all partes before and behynde. Af∣terwarde he made to putte on his heed a hel∣me of the whiche the pryckes in discendynge perced hym tyll vnto the plante of the fo∣te. Afterwarde he made to put vpon his shol¦der a shelde otherwyse called a marke or tokē the whiche was so heuy that all his membres were frusshed. After that the Prynce of the deuyle had made al these thinges to be done
to the sayde cursed soule he sayde agayne vn¦to the saide deuylles. The custom of this mā was that after his tornementes that he vsed baynes / & after his baines that he was layde in his bed and by hym a tendre mayden the whiche he enbraced and with her medled / ap∣propre hym semblable thynges. And with∣out taryenge the sayde soule was moche tor∣mented bayned in a bayne of fyre / and after¦warde layde in a bed of fyre brynnynge and fast by hym a tode of the greatnes of the bed the whiche was so horryble & had so terryble eyen that of the enbracynge and of the tou∣chynge & of the yssynge that the sayde tode made and of the horryble lokes he was more brente and tourmented than he ne had be be¦fore of the sayde armoures / of the bayne / and of the bed. Alas what paynes haue those the whiche in suche wyse ben tormented. That blyssed won an that sawe by the dyspensacy∣on of God the thynges beforesayde vnto the Soule of her sayde Husbande was so moche tourmented that meruayle it was all thee dayes of her fyfe of the recordacyon of the vysyon before rehersed of her Husban∣de.
¶Another Example howe a suaunt sawe his mayster the whiche was ledde in to paynes. MEn fynde by wrytyng this the whi∣che foloweth howe the dyscyple re∣cyteth in his promptuary and saith that there was a noble man oppressour and persecutoure of poore people and loued thee worlde. The which as he rested hym ī his bed his seruaūt the which lay before his chambre was rauysshed by vycion before thee thro∣ne of god. And there sawe his sayde mayster that was accused of all the thynges that hee had done / and for them sentence of dampna¦cyon was gyuen and was ledde of deuylle before Lucyfer with great daunsynge. Vnto whom Lucyfer sayd Approche vnto me my∣ne owne faythfull seruaūte that I may kysse hym. And whan he was before hym Lucyfer sayde peas be not with the in eternyte. Agay¦ne Lucyfer sayde. He hadde of custome to bathe hym / lbe hym to the vayne. Than was he bayned of a bayne infernall and mo¦che tormented with the nailes of the deuyls /
and some leest fyre vpon hym. After he was layde in a bedde infernall. And Lucyfer cō∣maūded that after the vaine men shulde giue hym to drynke ī the chalyce of the yre of god. And he was constrayned to drynke of fyre & sulphre molton to gyders. And as he cryed it suffysed Lucyfer sayde. He had of custom to here symphonyes. So there arose vp. ii. sym∣phonyatours the whiche were two deuylles with Instrumētes full of fyre the which blew agaynste hym in suche maner that from his eyen and his mouth & fro his nose the flam∣bes of fyre yode oute. After Lucyfer made hym to be brought and sayde to hym. Thou hast songe of songes singe me one & he saide. What shall I synge / but that cursed bee the day that I was borne. And Lucyfer sayde vnto hym Syng a better songe. And he an¦swered. What shal I synge / but cursed be the father that begate me. And Lucyfer sayd vn¦to hym / synge yet a better. And the accursed sayde / but that cursed be that god the whiche hath suffred that I was borne vpō the earth vnto this purpose sayeth the psalmyst. Non mortui landabūt te dn̄e: ne{que} oēs qui descen∣dunt in infernum. And Lucyfer sayde / here
in the songe that I wolde haue / lede hym vn¦to the place that he hathe deserued. And he was caste in to a pytte of fyre. Than the de∣uylles made so great daūsynge that it semed that all shulde fall. And at the sayde daūsyn¦ge the seruaunt of the sayd man awoke. The whiche ranne vnto the chambre of his sayde mayster and founde hym deed. Than he tol∣de the sayde vysyon. &c. ¶Another Example of a scoler of Pa∣rys the whiche appered vnto his mayster after his death in great tormentes. IT is wryten in ye legende of the deed that one of ye maysters of Parys na∣med Scilo prayed ryght greatly his scoter that yf he dyed that he wolde appere vnto hym after his death for to denounce vn¦to hym of his estate yf it pleased vnto God. And one tyme after he appered / the whiche was clothed with a cloke of parchemente all wryten without forth of sophyms / and within enflombed with fyre / and the sayde mayster demaunded hym what he was. He answered
I am he the whiche hath promysed to come agayne vnto the & he was axed of his estate he saide. This cloke weyeth more on me than a great towre / the whiche is gyuen me to be∣re for the vaynglorye that I toke in the ar∣gumentes / of sophystrye / that is to saye ful∣lacyons. And the slambe of fyre the whiche brynneth me is gyuen for the furtes delycy∣ousses that I wore. And as the saide mayster sayde that suche payne was lyghte to bere. The deade bodye sayde vnto hym that he shulde stretche oute his hande and that he shulde fle the lightnes of his payne. And whan he hadde stretched oute his hande the sayde deade bodye lette fall a droppe of his swete the whiche perced the sayde hande mo∣re sooner than shulde do an arowe / and say∣de vnto hym. I  all suche. And the sayde mayster felte so horryble tourmente that he was so ferde that hee ffte the worlde and en¦tred in to relygyon. In lyke wyse atelleth the chaunter of parye. &c. ¶Another Example of the Soule dampned that wept the tyme that he had loste.
IT is wryten in the booke of dre¦de that as a holy man was in o∣raison he herd by the wyl of god a voyce horryble wepyng. He de¦maunded who it was that in su∣che wyse wepte. Answere was made the whi∣che sayde. I am a soule dampned. And he de¦maunded wherfore wepest thou so bytterly. He answered and sayde that one of the thyn∣ges wherfore he and all the dampned sorowe moost for is that that they haue lofte and cō¦sumed the tyme of grace vnprofytablye in synnynge / wherein an houre by repentaūce they myght haue gotten grace & escaped the tormentes wherin they be and shallbe eter∣nally. By this example these synners shulde vnderstande yt it is the most great good dede that may be in them as to be in the estate of grace well confessed / & repentaunce of theyr synnes. Also by that that this soule wept in hell is vnto the purpose of that that the Euā¦gylles saye that the dampned wepe in Hell. Vnde. Mathei. viii. Et luce. xiiii. Ibi erit fle¦tus et stridor dentium. Vnto this purpose tongdalus the whiche sawe the tormentes of hell & afterwarde was brought agayne tolde
that he sawe in hell a torment of an yzye pon¦de where the soules the whiche therin were tormented cryed so horryble that they were herde vnto heuen. And after where the sayd tongdalus spake of the pytte of hell he herde great cryes & howlynges of soules and thon¦dre so horryble that no man ne myghte thyn¦ke no tongue declare the horryble crye and the noyse thee whiche was in thee sayde tormente. &c. ¶Another Example of two men the whiche were in paynes whan S. Taurayn areysed them. IT is wryten in the legende of saynt Taurayn that tydyn∣ges weare browghte vnto a ryght honorable man that his Sone and his Squyer were deed. And for to abredge the matter saynte Taurayne areysed the sayde sone. The which yode incontynent on knees before saynte Taurayne and requyred hym to be baptyzed. And after yt he was baptyzed
sayde vnto his Father. Halas Father thou knowest what myserable lyfe we lede & what paynes those susteyne the whiche ben sembla¦bles vnto vs. And what glorye is vnto those the which loue & serue vnto ye god the which is to be honoured of man. Certaynly I haue sene hym to be in the company of Aungelles and to praye vnto god for vs And whan the sayde sone areysed had spoken these wordes & many other vnto his Father he yode on kne∣es before saynt Taurayn and caused hym to baptyze hym. And also his wyfe mother of the said reysed. And for to be short in that day so many of great lordes as of lytell peo∣ple a thousande & two hondred persones were baptyzed. And afterwarde at the request of the sayde sone areysed S. Taurayn areysed also afterwarde the Squyer the whiche wyt¦nessed that he was in great paynes whan a messenger came to tell hym of the souerayne mayster that he were brought agayne & takē vnto saynt Taurayn. And this sayde squy∣er areysed sayde vnto the sayde sone. He the whiche hath brought me agayne hether com¦maundeth the that thou dyspose the to retur¦ne vnto hym. And in contynente a Feuer
toke hym / and after the cōmaundement dyed ¶Another Example of iii. deade men arey∣sed the whiche recompteth of the paynes of purgatorye and of hell / and howe they were in Iudgemente before God. IT is wryten in the Epystell of the holye Bysshoppe named sitillus that by the merytes of saynt Ihe∣rome yt which appered vnto saynt Eusebe thre deade bodyes were a∣reysed for to take away a great erroure the which reygned in that tyme amonge the gre∣kes that it came in the latyns of the heretikes that sayde that the yll persones ne shulde ha∣ue of tormentes in hell tyll vnto the daye of Iudgement that the body & the soule shuld be remyt togythers. The thre deed bodyes yt were areysed lyued. xx. dayes / the which we∣re demaunded why they wepte so sore. And ye one of them sayde vnto hym that asked it. Yf thou knew the paines the which before yester¦daye I endured thou shuldest haue euermore cause to wepe. And he was requyred to tell
what paynes he had endured & suffred with∣in ell. He sayde that the dampned and those in  haue so great paynes that yf a pson suld endure in this worlde al the paines / tormnts / and afflyctions that a man may tyne / that n shulde be but con¦solacion to endure all that / in regarde of the seest payne of purgatorye / or of hell. Also he sayde. Yf any lyuynge had felte the experyen¦ce of the dolour the whiche is in hell or in pur¦gatorye / that he shulde loue better to endure tyll vnto the ende of the worlde wihout any remedy togythers all the paynes and tormen¦tes that all the men and women hath endu∣red one after another syth Adam vnto now / than to be tormented one day in the leest pay¦ne that is in hell or in purgatorye. And ther∣fore yf ye axe me what the cause is wherfore I wepe. It is for that that I knowledge me to haue synned agaynst god / & that iustely he punysseth the syn̄ers wherfore I wepe to haue deserued suche punycyon. Afterwarde he was axd wherin dyffereth the paynes & tormentes of purgatorye / & those of hell. He answered that they ne dyffre as vnto thee qualyte and quantyte of paynes they ben of
one selfe greatnes / but they dyffre in as mo¦che as ye paynes of hell haue none ende. And also the dampned shall haue augmentacion of tormentes in Iudgemente whan they shal there be tormented in body and soule. And the paynes of purgatory shall haue an ende. For whan the penaunce is accomplysshed / those of purgatorye ben delyuered Also he was asked yf those the whiche ben in purga∣torye and in hell haue egall tormentes or dy∣uers. He answered that the one haue more gre¦at tormentes and dyuers than the other after the quantyte and greatnes of syn̄es that they haue cōmytted. And also the dampned albeit that they ben in a place of paynes / yet feel they more great tormentes the one than the other / after the quātyte / & qualites of sin̄es yt they haue cōmitted. For in the persone where there is more of matter of synne / & more strō∣gely the fyre hym taketh and brynneth more cruelly. Also he was demaunded howe he ba∣re the dede whan the soule yssued oute from ye body. He answered / whan myne houre of deth came in place where I was he founde so ma¦ny of deuylles that a manne myghte / nōbre them for the great multytude the which were
so horrybles to beholde yt a man ne can thyn¦ke more great paine than it is. Any man had leuer caste hym selfe more sooner in a fyre flā¦bynge and brynnynge than to beholde them with the eye / the which deuyls came vnto me and brought agayne vnto my mynde all the cursed operacyons that I had done agayne god esmouynge that I ne had more of espe∣raunce of the dyuyne mercy the whiche I ha∣ue greatly offended. And certes knowe ye that yf the mercy of god ne had ayded me I ne myght haue resysted vnto them. For whā my spyryte was destytute of all force lytell & lytell I me cōsented vnto theyr wordes / and saynt Iherome arryued more clere than the sonne with great multytude of Aungels the whiche came vnto myne ayde. And the sayd saynt Iherome blamed them / & they depar∣ted with great howlynges and clamours. &c. For to abrydge this matter the saide are ysed sayde that his soule was borne before god in Iudgement in lyke wise as a man may shyt the eye / but how ne of whom he ne knew. Mo∣reouer he sayd al the syn̄es that he had done / spoken / and thought in all his lyfe appered clerely vnto the Iudge and before all in lyke¦wyse
as they had ben present / so that there ne abode the moost lytell thought but that it ap¦pered so it had be thought. Also he sayd that he was replenysshed with so great feare that meruayl it was. And that great multytude of deuylles were there present the whiche wyt¦nesse the ylles that we haue done in declaryn¦ge the place / the maner and the tyme and the ylles that men spoke agaynst vs / we ne may agayne say thē in no maner. For the Iudge knoweth and seeth all. Also the Iustes and presentes it sene and knowe. Alas what shal I saye / we ne abyde more than the sentence to be brought forth agayne vs. For all the presentes ye vnto the Iudge that we ben¦dygne of tormentes. And almooste no good dede appered wherin we had esperaūce to ha∣ue the mercy of god. And whā he ne resysted more as to brynge forth the sentence the whi∣che is iustely gyuen agayne the sinners that blyssed saynt Iherome was present. Also we¦re present saynt Iohan baptyste / saynt Pe∣ter / and great multitude of Aungels the whi¦che requyred of the Iudge yt our sētence were yet dyffered a lytell of tyme for the reuerē∣ce and deuocyon that we had made vnto the
sayde saynt Iherome. And for to dystroy the erroure the which reygned in the worlde. And he was accorded vnto ye said saynt Iherome that that he requyred. The whiche ledde vs with hym. And shewed vs ye glory of the blys¦sed soules and the paynes of hell and of pur∣gatorye / to thende that we myght wytnes cer¦tayne that thing that we haue sene. The whi¦che thynges be not here writen for bycause of shortnes. And wolde that we were put within the paynes of purgatorye to thende that we shulde proue ye experyence of the paynes the whiche there ben in the whiche we were put. For to abrydge the sayde saynt Iherome vs cōmaūded that we shulde come agayne in to our bodyes. And yt we shulde wytnes that / yt we had sene / & vs promysed yt on the .xx. day yf we dyd dygne penaūce of ye sin̄es yt we had cōmytted yt we shuld dye agayne with saynte Eusebe ye whiche shulde dye on the sayde day and we shuld haue glory. And so our soules were incontynent within theyr bodyes. &c. ¶Another Example howe a deuyll sayde that the soule of the Erle Guyllaume was in horryhle payne.
IT is wryten in Dialogo Ce¦sarii this the whiche foloweth howe the discyple recyteth in his Boke and sayeth that as a knyght was at the death in his bedde al alene the deuyll appered vnto hym vysyly in forme and sm¦blaunce of a sheepe the which had the hornes of a gote. And when he se hym there in suche wyse he had fere and hym demaunded what art thou and what sekest tou. He answered I am a deuyll the whiche am come for to fet¦che the soule. Vnto whom the sayde Knyght sayde / depart thou frome cursed thefe / I ha∣ue cōmaunded it vnto Ihesu Chryst that I haue receyued in the sacrament. And the de∣uyll sayde. Varled yf thou wylte do me ho∣mage I shall yelde vnto the helth and I shal enryche the aboue all thy parentes. And the knyght hym demaunded where ben thy tre∣sours. He answered treasours infynyte ben hyd nere vnto the court. And the said knight asked hym / tell me where is the soule of the Erle Guyllaume that whiche is lately deed. He answered. It is in hel in so great fyre that yf the moste great mountayne were there it
shulde be consumed in lesse of tyme than to close the eye. And that payne there is but a bayne of myle in the regarde of the daye of Iudgement where he shal receyue the pay¦ne. And he asked hym of another man. And he answered he hath be .xxxi. yeres ī paines but a Monke and Mynche hath delyuered hym by good dedes. And agayne he demaun¦ded the deuyl. From whens camest thou whā thou came to me. He answered. I and my fe∣lowes were at the death of an abbesse away¦tynge her soule. And the knyght him demaū¦ded. Howe many ben ye. He answered that the moste great forest of the worlde hath not so many of leues as we were. And the knight demaūded him. What haue ye done. He answe¦red / Alas nothyng she was a good religyous & saint Michel came thither yt which bete vs & departed ī lykewyse as departeth the poudre before the wynde / and he was axed yf he we∣re at the death of suche an abbot. He answe∣red that there is not so moch of grauell in the see as there was yf deuyls / but we ne dyd no¦thynge / for the vyllaynes Monkes the whi∣che there were & groned as hogg{is} ne wold let vs to approche. And the sayde knyght saide.
Howe dare ye go vnto the deth of so holy a man. And the deuyll sayde I was at the deth of the sone of god / and set me on the arme of the Crosse / wherfore dare I not than go vn∣to the death of suche a man. &c. ¶Another Example howe a relygyous wolde more sooner enter into a fyre than to beholde the Deuyll. THe disciple recyteth in his prōp¦tuarye and sayth that one ty∣me a relygyous came vnto the deth the whiche cryed horrybly cursed be the houre that euer I was relygyous / and after helde his peas. And within a lytell whyle afterwar¦de he began to laughe with a Ioyous face & sayde. Naye. But blessed be the tyme that I entred into the ordre. And blyssed be the glo∣ryous Mother of Iesu Chryst that I loue and agayne helde his peas. The freres yt whi¦che were by him and herde these wordes wept and prayed for him. Two houres after he say¦de vnto a frere the which was by him / call my
brethren. For god hath exalted theyr praiers And he sayde vnto them whan tey were en∣tred. My bretren ye were trouble of ye fyrste wore I sde vnto you / but the cause of the worde was for that that the deuyls horryble appered vnto me / the whiche wolde rauysshe my soule. And for the drede I was rauysshed out of my selfe and cursed the houre that I entred in to relygyon I tell you that yf a great fyre were here melled with brymstone / and that I had to chose to put me within it or els to beholde agayne the deuylles in the forme that I haue sene them / I shalbe chose more sooner to put me in the fre than to be∣holde them / afterward the Quene of heuen and of mercye came the whiche chased away the deuylles. And whan I se her I concey∣ued esperaunce / and for the greate Ioye that I hadde I haue laughed and blyssed the houre that I entred in to relygyon and the vyrgyn Mary whan he had spoken these wordes he dyed debonayrely. &c. ¶Another Example howe the vysyon of the Deuyll is horryble.
IT is wryten in some Boks this the whiche foloweth that the dyscyple recyteth in his promptary and saieth that the abbot of saynt agathe ca¦me vnto coleyne with one of his Monkes and a conuerse with a woman demonyacle. And whan the abbot asked the deuyll of some thynges he ne wole answere. The abbot sayde afterwarde. I coniure the by hym that I haue trayted in the Masse yt thou answere me. And incontynent the De∣uyll answered vnto those thynges that men demaunded hym. After the abbot coniu∣red him that he shuld go forth of the woman. The deuyll answered. And whether shall I go. The abbot sayde / I haue opened my mouth to thende that thou there entre. The deuyll sayde I ne maye there entre / for this daye the ryght hault god there entred. Than the abbot sayde. epe vpon my two fyngers my thombe and the nexte it. The deuyll an∣swered I wyll not for thou haste this daye traycted the ryght hault with them. And he sayde vnto hym that he shulde go forth. The deuyll sayde the ryght haulte ne wyll it not /
I shallbe yet two yeres in her / and than she shal be delyuered. And so was it done. Than the Monke & the conuerse prayed the abbot that he wolde shewe hym selfe vnto them in forme naturall. And he fyrst refused it aftr∣warde he wolde it and sayde vnto the deuyll. I cōmaūde the in the vertue of Iesu Chryst that thou appere vpō vs in thy natural kyn¦de. And the deuyll sayde. And wyll ye not departe yf ye se me not / and the abbot sayde naye. Than the deuyll shewed hym selfe so horryble within the body of the woman that it was meruayll to se / his eyes sparkeled as a furnayse embrased in fyre smokynge. Whā the sayd Monke and conuerse sawe that they fell vnto the yearth as deade for feare / the abbot hadde also fallen yf he had not com∣maunded the deuyll to take his fyrste forme. The whiche thynges he dyd and the deuyll sayde. Thou neuer commaunded me so fo∣lysshe a thyng / knowe thou for certayne that yf thou haddest not receyued this daye the dyuyne thynges / none of you ne hadde repor¦ted vnto any man that that I haue shewed / wenest thou that a man maye se me and ly∣ue / naye. In the ende the Monke and the con¦uerse
were reuyued by colde water. &c. ¶Another Example howe a man con∣sydred yf after a hondreth thou∣sande yeres the dampned shulde be delyuered from hell. THe disciple reciteth in his prōp¦tuarye & sayeth that as a man moche seculer and delycatyue thoughte one tyme vnto hym sese yf after a hōdred thousan∣de yeres the soules of the damp¦ned shulde be delyuered from paynes. And his thoughte answered hym that naye. And after a hondred thousande yres naye. And yf after as many of yeres as there are of drop¦pes of water in the see / nay. And in thynkyn¦ge such tynges he was moch troubled. And as he was freful he began to vnderstande & to apperceyue yt the loues of ye worlde accur∣sed and in darenes the whiche ronne in pay¦nes eternalls for a lytell of tyme that they lyue in this worlde in ioyes transytoryes in the wyll of the flesshe. A man shulde here vn∣derstande
that whan the synners dye impeny¦tentes / obstynate / and abyde in theyr syn̄s an them bere with them with takynge away the gyfte of the sayde synnes by contrycyon and penaunce ne without askynge any gra∣ce ne mercy of as moch as whan they lyue in this worlde and that they haue the tyme and and the place that to do. And for as moch as the soule is eternall and immortall the whi∣che shall be sent in to the fyre of hell there for to abyde / and that she sall haue with her e∣uermore synne the whiche is the matter of the fyre that it shal brenne. I lyke wyse ye soule shall euermore suffre payne & euermore shall brenne with the sayde fyre the whiche neuer shall haue mercy nor grace. &c. ¶Another Example that is enioyned vn∣to a persone to be in a good bedde withoute departynge. IT is wryten in the promptuarye of the dyscyple yt the Bysshop of Mar∣seyll sayde vnto hym selfe. Whan I was a louer of the worlde / and had gyuen me vnto worldely vanytyes I began to thynke
one time of the eternyte of the pines of hell. And I sayde in my herte. Yf thou were esta∣bled to lye the euermore in a bedde softe and delycatyue in suche maner that thou shuldest not departe for any occasyon so euer it shuld be / with grat payne shuldes tou susteyne that. How mayest thou than lye & brenne in suche payne eternal / in tollerable in hell yf it fall that thou be thyther sent. By this occa¦syon I lefte all and made me Monke. &c. ¶Another Example howe a yonge man made hym relygyous for to thynke yf his fayre membres shuld be the pasture and the matter of the fyre of hell. IT is writen in some Bokes this the whiche foloweth howe the dys¦cyple recyteth in his promptua∣rye and sayeth that one tyme as mayster Iordayn perswaded a yonge man noble fayre of membres that he shulde entre in the ordre of preachers / he foun¦de hym that he was not prompte that to do. And he sayde vnto hym in the ende of the
words. I praye the that thou do it inconty∣n nt for the loue of god  beholde thy han∣des & the other fayre membres / what domage sall that e yf so fare membres shall be the pasture of the fyre eternall. And he dyd it. For this thynge he entred in to the ordre and so contempned hymslfe for the loue of God. ¶Rapina. ¶Another Example of the punycyon of a knyght the which toke away the Cowe of a woman wydowe. SOme Maysters hathe wryten this the whiche foloweth howe the dyscyple recyteth in his Bo¦ke of sermons and sayeth that one tyme a knyght toke awaye the Cowe of a woman wydowe / and as she wept and prayed hym to restore it for to nou¦rysshe her chyldren. The knyghte answered. Yf I toke her not another after me shulde co∣me the whiche shulde take her. After her deth by the suffraunce of god the sayde knyghte was sene that fyrst many great deuyls hede∣ous
and blacke him tormented ryght cruelly and horrybly / and specyally one amongest all the other ceased not to beate hym and to tormente hym without beynge wery / or with∣oute leuynge hym. Than the sayde knyghte hym demaunded wherfore tormentest thou the more than all the other deuylles the whi∣che ben here. He answered / yf I tormented yt not another shulde the tormente as thou say∣dest to the good woman of h r Cowe yt thou tokest awaye / yf thou tokest her not another shulde take her. &c By this Example it s to vnderstande that the sayd knyght ws ryght dygne of payne and punycyon. For he dyd vnto the good woman that that he ne wole a man shulde do hm agayne the cōmaunde∣mente of god the whiche is loue thy neygh∣boure as thy selfe / ne do vnto another no mo¦re than thou woldest a man shulde do the. Vnde Leuetici. xix. & Ma. xxii. Eiliges pro¦ximum tuum secut teipsum. Et Thoi. iiii. Quod ab alio tibi odie fieri / vide ne tuliqn̄ alteri facias. Et ysido. Quod nō vis pti nō facis quod nōvis tibi fieri alteri nū{quod} īfras. Nō īteras alu mala ne patiaris simia. The saide knyght had no wyll that a man shulde
take away his cowe as he dyd vnto the sayde wydowe. And for that was he punysshed. &c. ¶Another Example of a rauyssher in pay∣ne the whiche toke the gote of a woman wydowe / and dyd of great oppressyons vnto his subiectes. THe dyscyple recyteth in his promp¦tuarye and sayeth that a relygy∣ous of the ordre of cysternenis la¦boured vnto the deth / he sawe. S. Benet the whiche came vnto the seperacyon of his soule / the which shewed vn¦to hym many houses of the saued and of the tormentes of the dampned. And amonges ye other he sawe a great prynce borne brynnyn¦ge and resydent in a chayre of fyre. And be∣fore hym there was of fayre women the whi∣che put theyr faces of fyre in his mouth / and he brynned tyll vnto the nombryll / and he was bette horrybly. This sayde man had be a puyssaunt prynces lecherous. After ye sayd lecherous he sawe another that the deuylles dyd fle / And afterwarde they cast and spryn¦cled
of salte vpon hym. And vpō a gyrdyron of fyre brent him and rosted. This sayd man had be a lorde cruell the which made of great oppressyons vnto his subiectes / and made of demaundes iniuste vnto the poores. After∣warde the sayde relygyous sawe another the whiche rode a horse of fyre and had a token of fyre the which otherwyse men call a bokelet / and bare a gote of fyre. And after ye taile of ye gote he bare an habyte of amōste. This sayd man was a rauyssher the whiche toke the go∣te of a woman wydowe. And whan he was sycke he receyued the habyte of a monke / not by charyte ne by wyll to abyde in the ordre yf he myght be hole. But by the admonycy∣on of his frendes / & for that he drewe the ha∣byte of a monke after hym. Afterwarde the sayde relygyous sawe many other people the which susteyned many other paynes after the symylytude of the maners that they had syn¦ned in this worlde. It is that wherof the sage speke. Sapiē. xi. Perq̄ peccat homo: {per} hec & torquentur. By the thynge that a man syn∣neth by that shall he be tormented to thende that he haue euermore remours in his con∣scyence that yll yt he endureth is gyuen vnto
hym for his proper synnes. Vnde Ysaye vlti¦mo: it Marci. ix. Vermis eorum. s. morsus cō∣scienti non moritur & ignis nō extinguitur. ¶Another Example howe a Myller was borne to se the tormentes of hell and after was brought agayne in to his bodye. MEn fynde by wrytynge this the whiche foloweth howe the discy¦ple recyteth in his promptuary and sayeth that as a man prea∣ched of the crosse a carle vseret bought agayne a vowe for money that he had made vnto ye sepulcre of Iherusalē. And yode vnto the dyspensatour fraudelently / and gaue vnto hym for his sayde vowe an hondred shyllynges as he myght well gyue xlviii. li. without dysherytynge his chyldren And as this sayde carle sat at the tauerne he sayde vnto the other the whiche had made of vowes. Ye fooles shal passe the see in peryll of your lyues and shall dyspende your sub∣staunce / I haue boughte my vowe for fyue pounde / saued my lyfe and dwell sure in my
house. And also I shall haue semblable re∣warde as you. And in a nyght as he was in his bedde with his wyfe he herde in his mylle mouynge tempeste In lykewyse as ye wheles gryndynge. And he sayde vnto his sone go se who is in the mylle. He yode and retourned anone with great feare. Of whō the mayster demaunded. what hast thou sene. He answe∣red I had so great feare at thee doore of the mylle / yt I muste nedely come agayne. And he sayde yf the deuyll were there yet shulde I go to se what it is. Thā he cast his vestymēt vpon his sholders and yode vnto the mylle / he was all naked but of the sayde vestyment He opened the dore & loked within / and sawe two horses ryghte blacke / and a blacke man by them and saide vnto the carle host the lepe vpon this horse the whiche is broughte vnto the. That carle had fere ond the blackeman sayde vnto hym / what taryest thou / caste a∣waye the vestyment and come / there was on the vestyment a crosse. He was dyspeyred al the voyce and callynge of the deuyll kest al¦waye his vestyment and lepte vpon the horse And the blacke man lepte vpon the other hor¦se / and they were led incontynente in dyuer
places of paynes. In the which the accursed sawe his father and his mother. And many other yt he had knowē. And he sawe a knyght named Helye of the castell Horst the whiche was mounted vpon a cowes backe towardes the hornes The whiche Cowe ranne on the one syde and on the other and tormented hor¦rybly the sayde knyght in strykynge hym with her hornes on the backe. And the catle hym demaunded wherfore he susteyned suche payne / and he answered. I haue rauysshed this Cowe and taken away from a woman wydowe without mercy. And therfore she me tormenteth without mercy. Afterwarde there was shewed vnto the sayde carle a sege of fy∣re and it was sayde vnto hym. Thou shalte returne euen nowe in to thy house. And after thre dayes thou shalt come agayne in to this place here / and thou shalte take thy rewarde in this syege. After these wordes here the de∣uyll broughte hym agayne in to his myllt. And he founde his wife and his housholde as halfe deed / vnto whom he tolde that / that he had sene. And howe it hapened. The Preest was called for to chere hym and to counsayll hym to confesse hym / and to haue contrycy∣on.
And he answered wha profyte me these wordes here I ne maye repente me. For I se that in vayne I shulde confesse me. And I knowe that of necessyte it is to accomplysshe in me that the whiche is dysposed and the ac¦cursed dyed so without receyuynge the sacra∣mentes of the churche. &c. ¶Another Example that a knyght dyed / and after wos brought agayne into his body / the whiche recompted of a brydge ryght strayte vpon a water by the whiche hym behoueth to passe. IT is wryten in the Dyalogue of saynt Gregory that a knight dyed & within a lytel after came agayne into his body the which tolde that he had sene a brydge vnder the whiche brydge ranne a water styn¦kynge and darke. And on ye other syde of the brydge there was medowes smellynge swete and adourned with all floures. And in those medowes were assembled of people clothed in
whyte the whiche were fulfylled of swetenes and odours of the sayde floures. And at the sayde brydge there was such probacyon that whan any of the vniuste there passed he fel in to the blacke water stynkynge / and the iuste passed tyll vnto ye place delectable. And the sayde knyght sawe there without the brydge a man named peter boūde with great weight of yron. And he demaunded wherfore he suf∣fred suche payne. Answere was gyuen that whan men gaue hym anye for to do venge∣aunce he desyred it more to do by cruelte than by obedyence. Also the sayde knyght sayde that he sawe a pylgrym the which passed vpō the brydge all ouer of also great auctoryte as he had lyued in the worlde clenely. And he sawe another named steuen the whiche as he passed the sayde brydge his fote stode in such wyse that he than fell of the sayde brydge in lyke as halfe. And thā some mē ryght blacke lyfte them vp from the sayde water the which drewe hym downewarde by the thyes. And some men ryght fayre clothed in whyte toke hym by the armes and they drewe hym vp∣warde / & as this stryfe was the sayde knyght was put agayne in to his bodye. And he ne
knewe which of them shulde vanquysshe / but saynte Gregorye sayeth that it is to vnder∣stande that ye ylles yt he had done stroue agay¦ne the almesdedes. And by the other the whi∣che drewe hym downewarde appered that he had not parfytely resysted vnto the syn̄es of the flesshe. This Example ought to drawe all persones to lyue clenely / purely / & holyly to thende yt they may passe ye saide brydge vn¦to ye place delectable without fallynge in to the torment beforesaide. And ye synners shuld also correct thē of yll & to do penaūce / or they shall fall of the sayde brydge in to the sayde water / wherin they shall be punysshed. ¶Another Exāple of the vysyon of Tong∣dalus the whiche suffred many paynes in purgatory and sawe of the tormen∣tes of helle and after was brought agayne in to his body. IN the yeres of our Lord a thousand xlix. There was a mā named Tōg¦dalus in a Cytie of the lande of Ir∣lande. This sayde Tongdalus was noble
of lynage / a fayre man yong of age / curleys of all goodnes and of great honour. He was great and ryght appert of the arte of chyual¦rye Also he was well spekynge / and good in dysportyng / & of as moch more as he trusted in his beautye and his force of as moche the lesse was it vnto hym of the helth of his soule And yf any man sayde any thynge to hym for the helth of his soule he was greued with hym / he despyted the holy church / he ne dayg¦ned to beholde the poores in theyr indygence / Moreouer he gaue that that was in his pa∣layes for to haue ye prayse of the worlde and many he had of frendes and of companyons And it came one daye that he satte at table with one of his companyons for to eat. And incontynent that he had taken of the meat he dyed of death sodayne and the body fell vn∣to the earthe / In lyke wyse as it neuer had had soule. The seruauntes ranne vnto hym / the meate was taken awaye / wepynges / and lamētacyons were made / men range the bel∣les. The people was moche ameruayled of the deth the whiche had taken this noble man so sodaynely. He dyed the wednesdaye about the houre of noone. And from that houre tyll
vnto the saterdaye at noone he abode so the body withoute buryenge for that that in the lefts partye he had a lytell of hete. And on the saterdaye at noone the soule came agay∣ne vnto the body. And so by the space of an houre he behelde those the which were by him / vnto whom he made a token that he shuld ha∣ue the body of god. And after that he had re∣ceyued it he began to prayse god & to yelde vnto hym graces and sayd. Syr all puyssaūt more great is thy mercy than all my synnes. And afterwarde sayde this worde the whiche is wryten in ye Psalter. That is to saye. How many trybulacyons and ylles hast thou she¦wed vnto me / and I beynge conuerted thou hast quyckened me. And hast brought me a∣gayne from the depnesse of the earth. And incontynent that he had spoken those wordes he departed / and gaue vnto the poores ye that he had / and promysed aboue all thynges to loue the lyfe that he had before ledde / and all that he had sene and suffred he recompted it vnto vs and sayde. whan my soule yssued out of my body she knewe and sawe the syn¦nes that she had done. And so began she to doubte. But she knewe not what it was that
she shulde do. And she wolde rentre within my body / but she myght not. But she ne durst go out / for she dredde her synnes of al partes / and she ne had truste in no thynge but vnto the great mercy of god. And so began to we∣pe and to tremble / and she knewe not what she shulde do / and anone after / she sawe come vnto her so great nombre and multytude of deuylles that all the house stretes and place of the Cytie were full the whiche enuyrōned her on all partes / the whiche deuylles sayde. Synge we vnto this soule the songe of deth / that we vnto her shulde synge / for she is the doughter of ye deth pardurable and the vyan∣de of ye fyre extynguyble enemy of the lyght and frende of darkenesses. And afterwarde and agayne her they gryn̄ed & wheted theyr teeth & sayd vnto her. Vnhappy soule here is the people yt thou haste chosen with whō thou shalt entre in to hell in parburaylyte. Thou haste ben a nouryce of sclaundre / a louer o dyscorde that we loue. wherfore art thou not proude / wherfore ne knowest thou not thy le∣cherye / where is thy vanyte and vayne glad∣nes / where ben thy laughynges ryghte vntē∣pred / where is thy face wherin thou trustedest
so moche. wherfore ne shyttest thou not the eye / wherfore ne tryppest thou with thy fote. wherfore ne thynkest thou the great malyce that thou were wonte to do in vanytyes and syn̄es. And as these foresayde deuylles sayde these wordes I loked towarde the heauen and sawe a ferre of a lyght dyscended in lyke wy∣se as it had ben a sterre ryght clere and shy∣nynge. In the whiche I had esperaunce that there was some ayde that god sente vnto me. And as it approched vnto me I apperceyued well that it was the Aungell of god the whi∣che had kepte me in this worlde. And whan he approched vnto me he also greted me swe∣tely and sayde. God the salue Tongdalus. ¶And whan I sawe so fayre a yonge man the which greted me so swetely by my proper name by great Ioye I answered. Alas my Lorde ye doloures of hel hath beset me about. And the panges of death hath occupyed me / as it is wryten. Dolores inferni cicumdede∣runt me: preoccupauerunt me la quci mortis. And the Aūgel aunswered. Thou callest me nowe lorde I haue be euermore with toe / but iudge thou not yt I were dygne of such great honoure The soule answered. Syr I neuer
se the before. And the Aungell sayde. From the houre that thou were borne I haue euer∣more be with the in all places where thou we∣re. And thou ne woldest neuer beleue my coū∣sayll. Than the Aungell lyfte vp his handes amonges the deuyls & shewed vnto hym one the which dyd vnto hym worse than the other and sayde vnto hym that is he the which coū∣sayled the which thou beleued & dyd his wyl / but be thou sure that thou shalt haue the mer¦cy of god / and thou shalt suffre a lytell or tor¦mentes that thou haste deserued. Come thou after me & that ye I shal shewe yt so kepe thou it & put thou it in thy memory / for thou shalt returne agayne within thy body. Whan the soule had herde this she was moche ferefull & she approched vnto the Aungell whan the deuylles herde this worde they were madde. For they sawe that they ne had of puyssaū e to do yll vnto the soule and blasphemed god in sayenge that he was not ryghtfull / for he yelded not vnto euery man after his de And of the great woodnes wherof they were full they beteche other. And they departed from thene sory and heuy as inraged Than the Aūgell sayde vnto the sayd soule. Come
after me. A syr thou goest before / these deuyl¦les shall take me behynde and shall lede me in to hell. The Aungell answered. Haue thou no fere for we haue more great ayde thā they ne haue. Sideus pro nobis quis contra nos. Yf god be for vs there is none that may noye vs. It is wryten by the prohete Dauid. Ca∣dent a latere tuo mille et decem millia a dex∣teris tuis: ad te autem non appropinquabit. Verūtamen oculis tuis considerabis et retri∣butionē peccatorū videbis. That is to saye a thousande shall fall on the lefte syde / and ten thousande on thy ryght syde. Certaynely they shal not approche vnto the. Albeit thou shalt consydre by thyne eyes and thou shalle se the retrybucyon of thy synnes. And whan he had sayde these wordes they yode forth. ¶Of the valey. WHan they were gone longely togy∣thers by so geeat darkenesse yt they had no lyghte / but that the whiche praceded of the Aungell / they came in to a valey moche horryble / the whiche was ryght depe and full of bryn̄ynge coles. And about
that  there was a couerynge of yron brē¦nynge of thyckenes syxt fadome the whiche was more hote than that whiche brent vnder¦neth. From thens yssued so great stenche the whiche greued more the soule than all yt that he had before suffced. Aboue the sayde coue∣rynge dyscended many chetyues soules the whiche there were fryed as a man fryeth ba∣con in the panne. And afterwarde they were strayned thorowe the couerynge as waxe & fell & dyscended in to the welle of the sayd va¦ley / vpon the brynnynge coles where they we¦re tormented of a newe torment / thus sayd ye Aūgell. This payne suffreth those the which haue kylled fathers or mothers / or other peo∣ple by delyberacyon or dede. And after this torment they shal beled into more great / but thou ne shalt suffre this sayde torment albeit that thou haste well deserued it. ¶Of the beest horryble. AFter they entred in to a way moch hor¦ryble croked & harde. And whan they had longe gone in darkenes / the soule sawe a ferre a beest moche horryble and fere∣full
of the greatnes incredyble / more great than all the mountaynes that he had before sene. She had the eyen as great fyres brēnyn¦ge / and had the mouthe so greate that it se∣med vnto hym that there myght well entre. x.M. men of armes / there yssued out of his mouth fyre inextynguyble / & stynke incom∣parable. Great multytude of soules entred by the mouthe in to the wombe of the sayde beest the whiche soules cryed horrybly of tor∣mentes that they were in▪ And before ye sayde beest there was great multytude of deuylles the which bette & tormented the sayde soules and after put thē within the sayde beest. And whan the soule had longe beholden the sayde beest she was moche ferefull and sayde to the Aūgel. Syr wherfore approche we vnto this torment. The Aungell answered. we maye not go by other waye / for none escapeth this tormēt but those ye god hath chosē to be in his company. This beest that thou seest is called Acherons the whiche tourmenteth all the a∣uarycyous. Of this beest it is wryten. Absor¦bebit fluuium et nō mirabitur / et habet fidu∣tiam {quod} influat Iordanis in os eius. That is to say. He shall swalowe a streme or water
and it shall be no meruayle / and also haue af¦fyunce that the wter of Iordan ronneth yet throughe her month. And whan they had spoken this they came before the sayde beest, and the Aungell departed and lefte the soule amonge the deuylles. And incontynente the deuylles besette her about and there tormen∣ted her with great tourmentes as woode dog∣ges. And afterwarde they fedde her with thē in to the wombe of thesayde beest. Therin she suffred many bytynges of dogges / of beres / of lyons / of serpentes / & of other beestes that she had neuer sene ne knowen before / & there had of great tormentes of deuylles / brennyn¦ge of fyre / sharpenes of sulphre / & darkenes / woundes to plundge / to crye / and great ha∣boundaunce of dysease and of trybulacyon. There was the sayde soule accused of her syn¦nes that she had cōmytted. And for the great heauynes wherof she was full she strake her seffe on the chekes tare them with the nayles of her owne handes / & wende there to be dāp¦ned pardurably / & anone she founde her selfe out of the sayde beest / but she wyst not howe she came out and she was layde ferre of mo∣che feble. Afterwarde within a whyle of time
she opened her eyen and sawe her Aungell by her. Than had she great Ioye albeit that she was moche tormented & began to gyue pray¦synges vnto our lorde of his mercy. And the Aungell touched her and comforted her. &c. ¶Of the ouen with the flambes. ¶Afterwarde they yode another waye / and whan they were gone longely by darkenes / they sawe an house moche hyghe the whiche was rounde as an ouen. In the sayde house there was wel a thousande wyndowes / from the whiche yssued fyre / stronge / sharpe / & mo∣che hote. whan the soule sawe the sayd house she had great fere and sayde vnto the Aun∣gell. A syr we approche to the gates of deth. Alas caytyfe who shall delyuer me fro this torment. The Aungell answered. From the fyre ye whiche yssueth out by these wyndowes thou shalte be delyuered / but in to the house it behoueth to entre. whan they were appro∣ched they sawe within the sayde house in the middes of the fyre great multitude of deuyls the which helde axes / knyues / hachettes / and othee Instrumentes of yron sharpe for to tor¦mente the soules that were there of the whi∣che soules there was great multytude. Than
sayde the soule vnto ye Aungell. Syr I pray the yf it please the that thou delyuer me fro this torment / and in all the other where thou shalt sede me I graunte me to be there tor∣mented. And the Aungell sayde. This tor∣ment is greater than all those that thou hast sene / but yet shalt thou se greater. Nowe en∣tre here for the deuylles tary for the as dog∣ges enraged. Than the soule began to quake and to tremble of the great fere that she had and prayed the Aungell moche that he wol∣de make hym to passe the sayde torment / but it vayled him nothyng. And whan ye deuyls herde that she was graūted vnto them for to torment they toke her with theyr Instrumen¦tes and tormented her sharpely. The mayster of this house had to name Physternus. His house was full of fyre brennynge in the whi∣che soules strayned theyr teeth and wayled for the great doloure that they suffred. And there were men and women / not all onely of people of the worlde / but also of relygyon. There was this soule tourmented the whiche sayde that she had well deserued that that she had suffred. But whan it pleased god she foū∣de her selfe out of the sayde torment and she
wyst not in what maner. Than she aduysed her Aungell by her to whom she sayde. A syr where is the worde that the prophete Dauid speketh. Mīa dn̄i plena est terra. That is to saye. The earth is full of the mercy of God. Than the Aungell answered and sayde. By those wordes many soules be deceyued. God is ryghtwyse thoughe that he be full of mer∣cy / & many synnes he vengeth & punyssheth / and also he pardoneth. Yf god pardoned all ye synnes wherfore shulde the men be iust. And yf a man ne dredde the tormentes / wherfore shulde he drede to do synne & his wyll. And what shulde it nede that these synners shulde repent them and confesse them of theyr syn∣nes yf they ne dredde god. God by his great mercy spareth the synners in theyr lyfe and taryeth them for that they shulde do penaūce But yf they ben obstynate in theyr synnes and wyll not reuerte / he them punysshed for theyr synnes after theyr deth. And God som∣time taketh away ye gooddes tēporalles from the Iust for to punysshe thē tēporally of so∣me outrages yt they haue done / & also to then¦de yt they enpryde thē not. But he kepeth vn∣to them ye gooddes pardurables of his glory.
¶Of the cruell Beest and of the ysye ponde. ¶After the Aungell led the soule in to ano∣ther place wherin they sawe a beest moche meruaylous the whiche had two fete and .ii. wynges and the necke ryght longe. And his nebbe and his nayles were as yron / and from his sayde nebbe yssued a flambe of fyre by ryght great sharpenes & force. And the sayde beest was vpon a ponde full of stronge yse / the whiche beest deuoured the soules within his wombe in suche maner that they became as vnto nothynge by the tormētes that they suffred. Afterwarde he put them out of his wombe within ye yse of the sayde ponde. And there were they tormented of newe torment. And all the soules the whiche in to the ponde dyscended were in throwes in lykewyse as women with chylde. And not a lonely the women / but also the men as the women. And within theyr belyes they felte the sharpe by∣tynges that the serpentes made of the whiche they were engryped. And there were the cay∣tyues soules tourmented. And whan the ty∣me came & approched that they shulde chylde they cryed so horrybly that they fylled hell of
noyse and of hon synges. Than they chylded serpentes as wel the men as the women. And the sayde serpentes yssued not onely by the mēbres wherby the women chylde naturally. But also by the armes / the feete / and all the other mēbres yssued oute the horryble beestes the whiche had heade of fyre brynnynge mo¦che sharpe / wherwith they tormented ryghte cruelly ye sayde soules frō whens they yssued. And the sayde beestes had horryble tayles & nedles and aboute theyr tailes made as they were crochettes and hookes made as yf they were crochettes. And whan they yssued from the sayde caytyues soules yf they myght not drawe theyr tayles after them for the hookes they returned theyr nebbes & smote ye soules and gnawed then vnto the synewes & bones and of the great payne & tormente that they suffred they keste so great and horyble cryes that they were herde vnto heauen. Moreouer the sayde soules were replenysshed of dyuers maners of beestes on theyr membres the whi∣che did them eate and gnawe vnto the bones. And they had tonges y• which fastened with∣in the sayde soules tyl vnto the lightes. This payne sustayne the false Monkes / chanons /
the false Nonnes / and these other benefyced of holy churche the whiche haue not wel kept theyr bodyes frō euyll doyng / ne theyr mou∣thes from euyll saynge and spekynge. Also those the whiche hath vsed Lecherye susteyne this payne and torment. And for that that thou arte cuspable it behoueth the to susteine this sayde tormente. whan the deuylles herde this worde they toke the sayde soule and ga∣ue it to the sayde beest to tourment and to de¦uoure. And whan she was in torment as the other soules and that she was engryped with serpentes as the other / and whan the tyme ca¦me that she shulde chylde the Aungell came to her and touched her / and she was inconty∣nent hole / and sayde vnto her / come after me. ¶Of the valey of smythes. ¶Afterwarde they yode in to another way moche horryble & dyseasefull full of so great darkenes that they had no lyght but of the clerenes of the Aungell. And it semed yt they descended from a ryght hyghe mountayne in to a great and depe valey. And them ore yt they yode the lesse had the soule of esperaunce for to returne vnto lyfe. Than the soule sayd vnto the Aungell. Syr whyther gowe. The
Aungell answered. This waye ledeth vnto death And the soule sayd. what is that than that the scrypture sayth ata est via que du¦cit ad mortem / et multi sunt qui intrant per eam. That is to say that the way the whiche is large ledeth vnto death: and many there ben the whiche entre & go by that way. The Aungell sayde. Of this speketh not ye scryp∣ture / but of ye cursed way of the worlde wher∣by mē cōmen in to this way. And whan they were descended into the sayde valey moch de¦pe they sawe there of forges. Than the Aun∣gell sayd vnto the soule. The mayster of this valey is called Vulcane the which by his en¦gyn and falsenes hath casten many soules in to paynes and tormētes. Than sayde the sou¦le vnto the Aūgell. Syr shall I suffre this tor¦ment. The Aungell answered / ye / thou shalte suffre this torment. And whan the deuylles her¦de that worde they beset the soule about and to¦ke it with theyr Instrumentes of yron yt they helde / and sayde vnto the holy Aungell none harme / and keste it in to a chymney full of fy¦re brynnynge. And began to blowe the fyre of theyr furneys in lykewyse as men blowe whan the yron is in the furneys. And so they tormē∣ted
the soules the whiche were there tyll that they came to nothynge. And whan they wre so brente and tourmented they toke te sayde soules with theyr Instrumentes of yron .xx. an hondred or two hondred and layde them on a hpe vpō an anuelde of yron and the deuylles the whiche were in other for¦ges sayde. Cast vnto vs these caytyues sou∣ls we shall yet torment them agayne. Than the duls kest them vnto them agayne the whiche were in ye other forges. And after that they had ben there strongly payned and tour∣mented they kest them vyolently vnto those of the fyrste forges. And before yt they came to the groūde they were taken agayne and so they kest them frō one vnto an other and tor¦mented tyll vnto that / that the skynnes / the flesshe / and the bones came as vnto nothyn∣ge. Of this matter is wryten. Prouerbiorū. ix. Parata sunt derisoribus supplicia / et mal¦lei percutientes stultorum corporibus. After that the caytyues soules were so tormēted a it is sayde they desyred ye deth but they might not dye. Vnto this purpose it is wryten. Apo¦calipsis. ix. In diebus illis querent homines mortem et non inuenient eam / et desiderabūt
mori et more fugiet ab eis. And whan ye say∣de soule had suffred longely these tormentes the Aungell came vnto her and toke her and had her out of the fyre where she was / & sayde vnto her. Howe felest thou thy selfe nowe. Remembre the that for as moch as thou hast done thy wyl & ye delyte of thy body thou hast suffred so great tormētes. But the soule had not so moche force yt she myght answere one worde for the great torment that she had suf∣fred. Than the Aungel sayde vnto the soule. Illud psalmi. Dominus mortificat et viuifi∣cat deducit ad inferos et reducit. Comforte¦the / for our lorde quyckeneth & mortyfyeth / ledeth in to helles & bryngeth agayne. And albeit that the tormentes that thou hast sene ben moche great yet shalt thou se moche mo∣re greater from the whiche thou shalte be de∣lyuered by the mercy of god. And know thou that all those soules that thou hast sene here abydeth the Iudgement of God. But those the whiche thou shalte se from hensforth ben all redy Iudged. Gowe nowe forwarde for thou art not yet comen vnto the paynes of hell. And the Aungell touched her and he∣led as he had ben accustomed for to do. &c.
¶Of the pytte of Hell. ¶After that they entred in to a waye / and whan they were a lytell gone forwarde in spe¦kynge one vnto the other there came to the soule sodayne horrour and colde intollerable and stynke and darkenes more thycker than those before / trybulacyon and anguysshe so great that it semed vnto the soule that all the foundementes of the earth trembled vnder her fete & sayde vnto the Aungell. Syr wher¦fore is it that I ne may holde me on my fete as I haue accustomed to do. And whan she had sayde this she ne myght remene from the place for the great feare that she had / and incontynent the Aungell departed in suche maner that she myght no more se hym / and forthwith she began to dyspayre. For she foū¦de that the whiche is wryten. Ecclesiastes. ix. Nec opus / nec ratio / nec sapientia / nec scien∣tia erunt apud inferos que tu {per}peras. That is to say that in hell there ne is operacion / ne reason / ne wysdom / ne cōnynge wherby man may ayde hym. The caytyne soule was in ly¦kewyse / for she myght not helpe herselfe / the whiche herde terryble cryes and howlynges of soules / and thondre so horryble yt no man
may thynke it ne tonge declare the horryble crye end the noyse that there was. Vnto this purpose God speaketh in the Gospell. Illud Mathe. xxii. & .xxiii. Ibi erit fletus & frdor¦dentium. Than the soule loked about her for to knowe yf she myght se ye way wherby they were comen / and she sawe a great square dyt∣che in lykewyse as a cysterne. And from that dytche yssued out a pyller of flambe and of smoke togythers moche horryble & stynkyn∣ge. And the pyller of fyrs was so hyghe that it stretched vnto the heauens. And in the fā∣be there was great multytude of soules and of deuylles togythers the whiche mounted with the sayde flambe in hyghe in lyke wyse as lytell flambes. And of tormentes the whi¦che they suffred they came as vnto nothynge & after yt they fell agayne in to the dyche tyl vnto ye botom. Vnto ye purpose of this saieth the Psalmyste. Tu vero reduces me in pute∣um interitus. And whan the soule had behol¦den this she wolde haue drawen her a backe / but she ne myght lyfte her fete frō the groūde. And whan she had assayed many tymes to re¦moue her and that she myght not she was mo¦che ferefull / and of the great woodnes that
she had she tare and rent her chekes with her owne handes and nayses & cryed. Alas cay∣tyue wherfore may not I dye. And the deuyl¦les the which mounted with the sayde flambe herde the sayd soule in such wyse crye so they beset her about with theyr Instrumentes of yron wherwith they tormēted the soules and sayde in this wyse. Caytyue soule worthy of payne and torment from whens art thou co∣men hyther / thou ne hast yet nothynge felte ne suffred / thou shalt endure nowe that that thou art worthy by the sinnes that thou hast cōmytted. From the whiche torment thou ne mayest neuer departe ne within it dye / but e∣uermore thou shalt lyue and brenne in tormēt without lyght / comfort ne helpe. And from nowe forth thou ne mayst haue mercy. For thou art comen vnto the gates of death / and thou shalt be borne streyght in to the tormen∣tes of hell. He that hath brought the hyther hath deceyued the / nowe let hym delyuer the from our handes yf he can / for thou shalt se hym no more. And they sayde the one vnto the other. wherfore tary we so longe that we ne gyue this soule vnto Lucyfer for to de∣uoure it / and so they thretened it of death per∣durable.
And these deuylles abouesayde we∣re blacke as coles with horrible lobes & theyr eyen were as the lāpes brēnynge. And theyr teeth as whyte as the snowe / and they had tayles lyke as scorpyons / and theyr clawes of yron and great large wynges. And whan they had sayd these wordes the holy Aungell appered vnto the sayd soule and sayd to her. Enioy ye doughter of lyght for thou shalt ha¦ue mercy and not Iudgement. Thou shalt se of great tormentes and paynes / but thou shalt suffre none Come thā after me & I shal shewe vnto the / the ryght cursed enyemye of humayne lygnage. Those the whiche ben the¦re haue no lyght / & they shall not se the / but thou shalt se them well and theyr tormentes. ¶Of the Prynces of darkenes and of theyr cursed felowes the whiche ben in paynes. ¶After these thynges spoken and sene the soule approched vnto hym & sawe the prynce of darkenes in the botom of hell / & what and howe great tormentes she sawe there the en∣tendement ne may comprehende it / and man ne may expresse it ne declare. That is to say yf he had an hondred heades / and that euery heade had an hōdred tonges / yet they myght
not recompte the paynes of hell. There was one the ryght worst deuyll yt which was more greater than all the beastes that he had sene before. The which was blacke as Rauen, He had the forme of the body of a man from the feete vnto the heed except that he had well a thousande handes. And he had atayle well an .C. cubytes long / and .x. of greatnes. And he had nayles of yron great & longe as well on the feete as on the handes longer & greter than the speres of knyghtes. His nebbe was moche longe and great. His tayle was ryght longe and sharpe all full of pryckles sharpe poynted for to greue and torment the mysera¦ble soules. And that moost horryble deuyll laye vpon a gred yron of yron / vnder the whi¦che there was great habundaunce of brēnyn∣ge coles. Also there was great multytude of deuyls the whiche blewe and kyndled ye fyre. About the enemy there were so many deuyl and of cursed and myserable soules that no man myght beleue that of all the worlde frō the begynnynge myght be yssued & brought forth so many soules. And the deuyll was bounde by euery Ioynture of all his mēbres with great chaynes of yron and of copre brē∣nynge.
And of great torment and vehement woodnes wherof he was full he turned hym fom the one syde vnto the other / and stret∣che out his handes in the multytude of the sayde soules and toke them and strayned thē in lykewyse no men maye do a clustre of gra∣pes in theyr handes for to make the wyne co∣me forth. And in such maner he strayned thē that he eyther brake theyr heedes / or theyr fe∣te / or handes / or some other membres. After∣warde he syghed and blewe and dysperpeled the sayde soules in to many of the tormentes of the fyre of hell. And incontynent that pyt or well wherof we haue before spoken keste stynke and horryble flambe. And whan that cruel beest drewe agayne vnto hym his breth all the sayde soules that he had shed with flā∣bes and sulphre fel and entred in his mouth / the whiche he deuoured. And whan some sou∣les escaped hym by aduenture betwene his handes he smote them wth his tayle. And ye deuyll the whiche in suche wyse tormented the soules horrybly was tormented aboue all o∣ther. Than the Aungell sayde vnto ye soule. This deuyll that thou seest here is calld Lu∣cyfer the whiche is the fyrst creature that god
made the whiche was in the delyces of Para∣dyse before that he descended from heauen / and yf he were not bounde he wolde do many euylles & parturbacyons. And they the whi∣che thou seest the which be with hym there are a partye of the Aungelles of darkenes. And the other partye ben men and women the whi¦che ben descended from Adam the which ben all redy Iudged the whiche abyde many the which haue renyed Iesu Chryst / or doth ye ope¦racyons of them the whiche renye hym. Here be the yll Prelates and Prynces of whom it is wryten. sapientie .vi. Potentes potēter tor¦menta patientur / fortioribus autem fortior instat cruciatio. That is to saye yt those that be myghty in dygnyte and in power shall suf¦fre tormentes with great puyssaūce. That is where as they haue mysche nouslye vsed the puyssaunce that god hath gyuen vnto them. All the other tormentes that thou haste sene albeit that they be ryght great yet are they nothynge to compte in regarde of this here. And the soule sayde. Certessyr thou sayest true / for I am more greued and tormented to se alonely the torment and to fele the stynke the whiche is there than all the tormētes that
I haue suffred hyther to wherfore I praye¦the yf it please the yt thou take me from hen. Also I se many of my felowes yt I loued mo¦che & helde theyr company moche dere where as I haue nowe great horrour for to se them. And certaynly I vnderstande & knowe yt yf the great grace & mercy of god w re not my succoure yt I haue deserued for my synnes to be punyssed and tormented eternally as they ben. And the Aungell sayde vnto hym. O my blyssed come and conuerte the in thy rest / for god hath done well vnto the / thou shalte not suffre these tourmentes here. And thou shalt se them no more yf thou forget not the thynges that thou hast sene / and yf thou de∣serue them not agayne. The soule of the say∣de Tongdalus sawe many other tourmen∣tes / and of the Ioyes of the saued the whiche hath be lefte by cause of shortnes for they ben moche longe to recounte and wryte. ¶By the scryptures and Examples beforesayde it doth appere that the synners in obedyentes vnto god shulde correcke them and amende whyles that they lyue in this worlde yf that they wyll escape and eschewe the inestyma∣ble tourmentes of hell and gette the Realme
and the glory eternall. Vnto the whiche glo∣rye we maye go / cum illo qui est benedictus in infinita secula seculorum. Amen. ¶Thus endeth the Examplayre vpon the paynes of hell. ¶Iesus. ¶Hereafter foloweth an Ex∣ample that the name of Iesus doth many goodnesses. And howe it de¦lyuered a man fro many perylles and tour∣mentes. IT is wryten in many Boo∣kes that as seynt Patrycke preached in Irlande he praied God deuoutly that he wolde shewe hym some token by the whiche the wycked euyllmen myght haue feare and also repent them. And sodaynly a ryght great hole or pytte appered and it was reueled vnto hym that the place of purgatory was there. In the whiche pla∣ce yf any wolde descende he shulde haue none
other payne. Many the which herde this thyn¦ge therin entred the whiche came neuer agay¦ne. And a man named Nycolas the whiche had cōmytted many synnes there descended to thende that he myght repente hym of his synnes. And he founde fyrste an oratory and whyte Monkes the whiche sayde vnto hym. Be thou stedfast and constaunt. For it beho∣ueth the to sustayne many tēptacions. And he them demaunded what remedy he myght haue agaynst the sayde temptacions. They answered whan thou flest thy selfe tourmē∣ted with paynes crye hastely. O Iesu Chri∣ste adiuua me. That is to saye. O Ihesu Chryst helpe me. And whan that he was de∣parted from them the deuylles ranne soday∣nely vpon hym in lykewyse as wylde beestes famysshed. And as they dyd in this wyse vn¦to hym he recorded hym of his counsayle and sayde. O Iesu Christe adiuua me. And in∣contynente he ne wyste where the beestes be∣came. He yode furthermore & founde a tyght great fyre in to the whiche the deuylles kest hym. And incontynente that he had sayde. Iesu Christe adiuua me / forthwith the fyre was put out and quenched. He walked yet
further and sawe a well ryght depe from the whiche yssued smoke and great clamoure of soules the which were tourmented. And whā the deuyls had casten hym within it he cryed. Iesu Christe adiuua me. That is to say. Ie∣su Chryste helpe me / and forthwith he was delyuered. At the last he sawe a brydge that was ryght narowe and strayte. And there he had great terrours / the whiche brydge hym be¦houeth to passe / but he myght not. And he sette one of his fete vpon the brydge and say∣de. Iesu Christe adiuua me. And so he saide at euery steppe tyll yt he had passed the brydge on the other syde. And whā that he was past he came vnto a fayre medowe wherin grewe many fayre and delectable floures / of the whi¦che floures and medowe proceded good odou¦res and smelles. And afterwarde he came a∣gayne vnto lyfe and .xxx. dayes passed he came vnto Paradyse by the Inuocacion of our blessed sauyoure and redemptoure Iesu Chryst. ¶Vnto the Example of the aboue∣sayde man the whiche was delyuered from al tourmentes and paynes incontynente that he had called the helpe of Iesus. In lykewy∣ thou man and woman call deuoutly the
name of the blessed Lambe Iesus in all ad∣uersytyce / fortunes / tourmētes / losses / temp∣tacions / sickenesses / necessityes / anguysshes / perylles / infyrmytyes / and thynges doubta∣bles / & well shall come vnto the. This name Iesus is interprete sauyour. Iesus interpre∣tatur saluator. For by the meryte of his pas∣syon he saued all the worlde. He brake hell / saued and delyuered afthe good persones the whiche were in the lymbe of ye holy fathers & opened Paradyse vnto all good chrystyane. Also Isus is the kynge of kynges / the Iud¦ge of Iudges / and of all great and lytell. It is he that gyueth Ioye & beatytude eternall vnto the good / & that punyssheth and damp∣neth the euyll / Iesus is holy and debonayre vnto the good / & also he is terryble and cruel vnto the euyl. And therfore sayeth the psal∣myst. Sanctum & terribile nomen eius initi∣um sapientie timor domini. Also the name of Iesus is in excellence aboue all other. Vn̄ Paul. ad Phyl. Docatū est nomē eius super omne nomen. Also the name of Iesus is lo∣ued & dred aboue all names / & in namynge hym all creatures resonables shulde bowe the knee / be it in Paradyse in this worlde / or in
hell. Vn̄. Paul. ad Phi. In nomine Iesu om̄e genu flectatur celestium / terrestrium / et infer¦norum. The men and women of this worlde cal hym in theyr besynesses and necessytyes / and the deuylls of hell dred hym. For to be shorte the name of Iesus ought to be loued / honoured / called dred / and redoupted / for it is replenysshed with bountye / beautye / and ho¦lynes infynyte and in enarrable. That is the whiche passeth all entendementes. &c. ¶Finis ¶Imprynted by me Robert Wyer: dwellynge at the Sygne of seynt Iohn̄ Euangelyste in seynt Martyns Parysshe, besyde Charynge Crosse. ¶Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum.
ROBERT WYER·
