10812 99850251 15440
A LETTER VVRITTEN BY A FRENCH GENT: of the King of BOHEMIA his Army: Concerning the Emperour FERDINAND his Embassage into FRANCE. Translated out of the French Coppie. Printed at Flushing. 1620.
A LETTER WRITTEN BY A FRENCH GENTLEMAN, OF THE KING OF BOHEMIA HIS ARMY, Concerning the Emperour FERDI∣NAND, his Embassage into FRANCE. NOT to meddle with (what euery man knowes) the insatiate Ambition of the House of AVSTRIA, in both the braunches thereof, which all Christendome shortly will not bee enough to content, as ha∣uing long since prepared the way to that Fift Monarchy, which certaine Religious Persons Confidents of Spaine affirme to bee as neces∣sary for the preseruation and increase of the Catholicke Religion, as is the Popes Spirituall Monarchy. Nor to speake of the Cruelties which the Princes of this House haue giuen way to, in the Indyes, in the Low-Countries, and in all places where they haue extended their Dominions; nor the Designes or Attempts they haue had (open or secret) against England, Ireland, Venice, or France it selfe, wherein they haue nourished partialities and indeauoured to suppresse the Lawes Salique. For as for Ger∣many, Bohemia, and Hungarie, (Electiue Estates) who is ignorant that to perpetuate them to
themselues, they haue sought to make them Hereditary and Patrimonies to their Familie? Not to mention also the scornefull fashion of the two last Emperours, who would neuer send to France to performe office of Congratu∣lation or Condoling, when it is well knowne that in their Courtes, were publicke reioycings for the Murthers committed vpon the Persons of our two last Henryes, of famous and immor∣tall memory, refusing to acknowledge the last for a King or a Catholicke, till long time after his absolution, when they saw him Victorious, Tryumphant, and Absolute in his Gouern∣ment; And yet when that Great and good Prince, was pleased to vse his Credit and Me∣diation, for according the difference betweene certaine great Princes of the Empire (friends and allyes of this Crowne,) one of the Empe∣rour Rodulphs principall Officers, spared not to say, that the King of France might meddle with the affayres of his owne Kingdome, and let o∣thers rest: When at that time there was on foote a question, touching a certaine litigious Territory, which the saide Emperour preten∣ded to bee deuolued to him, and lay, other∣wise, very fitt for him and one of his Brothers. Not I say to mention or repeate what hath fal∣len so often vnder the Pennes and discourses of men, and whereof no man almost is ignorant:
I will onely succinctly answer to the Fiue prin∣cipall reasons, framed to induce the King to assist the Emperour Ferdinand, now stript of the Kingdomes of Bohemia, and Hungarie. 1. The first is Religion, the ordinary pretext of such as vndertake to inuade others, or to draw from them ayde and supplyes. It is true that the hard measure offerd the Protestants of Bo∣hemia, by the Officers of the Emperour, (as is apparent by the frequent Complaintes and re∣monstrances presented by the saide Protestants to his Imperiall Maiesty, and of late by the A∣pologie and declaration Published in diuers Languages) gaue the first hint and occasion to the last Combustion, and brought foorth the fruites and changes that wee now beholde. But this is not the first time that the Bohemi∣ans haue in generall complained of the force offered their Priuiledges, and Liberties; and of the breach of the fundamentall Lawes of their Estate, (which is in very deede Electiue) and that the Imperiall branch of Austria, hath endeauoured to make it Hereditary, as well as the Empire; to the preiudice of the Imperiall Liberties and Constitutions, and particularly to that of the Golden Bull, which expresly for∣bids the perpetuating of the Succession in one
and the same Family. In a worde then, it is a busines of State and not of Religion: Besides that, the Bohemians make it appeare (and they thinke with sufficient proofe) that Ferdinand was Elected King of Bohemia by the surprise of three or foure Officers of that Kingdome, Pen∣tioners and Partisans of Spaine, without calling thereto the assistance of the three incorporate Prouinces, Silesia, Morauia, and Lusatia, which haue euer had, and ought to haue, their free voyces and assents. Againe it is most true, that at such time as the Estates of the saide King∣dome, expelled the Iesuites (whome they char∣ged as the Authors of that mischiefe) they tooke into their protection, all other orders of Church-men, who euen to this houre haue not receiued any interruption in their Ecclesiasti∣call Functions, or in the free inioying of their reuenues and Benefices. Besides that, King Frederick at his entrance, tooke a solemne oath for their maintenance, and protection, and sig∣nified as much to the King in his Letters, Da∣ted at Amberg the Twentieth of October last. And questionlesse if hee should proceed other∣wise, he should bee ill aduised, in regard that a good and great part of that Estate consists of Catholickes. It is then a meere Columny to say that it is a busines of Religion, and that the Designe of the Protestantes is to suppresse the
Catholickes. The falshood also of this asser∣tion is prooued by the Suffrages, that a Prince Catholique had in his Election to Bohemia, and in like number as had another Prince of the Lu∣theran profession: each of them hauing had sixe Voyces: And since all this is matter of Fact, the proofe or disproofe thereof is most easie. 2. The Second reason alledged, is Alliance: because the Emperour Ferdinand, is by the Mo∣ther side Vnckle to our Queene, whose Hus∣band they say is tyed in respect of so straight a Bond to assist him: But the most straight Bond is of a King to his Subiectes, as of a Father to his Children; and the safety of an Estate sur∣passeth all other considerations. The transcen∣dent Greatnes of this House hath cost France deare enough in our dayes, without seeking farther proofe of this in other Histories then in that of the last League; vnlesse we will now ap∣prooue, what was almost two thousand yeares since saide of our Nation, That wee assoone forget an Iniury, as a Benefit. This also is a point of Consideration, that the King in ma∣king himselfe a party for the House of Austria, diuideth his Subiects that are of different Re∣ligion, before the woundes of the State bee
throughly closed; offendeth his Oldest and su∣rest Friends and Allies; and bringeth his King∣domes into the danger of a Warre abroad, and of trouble at home. For if hee imploy his for∣ces against the Palatinat for the diuersion de∣maunded; what other effects may hee expect? Since the Palatinat during the absence of King Fredericke, is vnder the Protection of the E∣states of the vnited Prouinces, and of the Prin∣ces of the Vnion. Againe, the King (shall as in a brauery) empty his Treasure for a busines farre from vs; and which concerneth not di∣rectly nor indirectly, his Estate or Person; be∣ing (as I haue saide) a matter neither of Reli∣gion nor Conscience. In yeelding also Sup∣plyes to one party before hee heare the other, his Maiesty tacitly Condemneth one, and is Guilty of that which all the Lawes of the world and hee himselfe forbids, in ordinary Suites and differences, betweene party and par∣ty; it being likely that before many dayes bee past, the saide King Fredericke, his Friends and Allyes, will giue his Maiesty an account of what hath passed in this busines, and acquaint him with the cause and motiues of so great a change and enterprise. 3. The third inducement is the assistance and
Protection that Kings owe one another; espe∣cially such as are in distresse: But let the Em∣perour be pleased to remember how hee and his Predecessors, haue euermore neglected France; expresly forbidden the Princes of the Empire, Friends and Allyes of this Crowne, to assist our Kinges of later times, in their necessi∣ties; much lesse that they haue euer supplyed them with men or money: Let him remember also the refusall, hee lately made the Duke of Neuers, of the Kings mediation, fauour, and au∣thority, for setling the Affayres of Bohemia, when they were yet in Good tearmes; I meane during the Life of the Emperour Mathtas, and many monthes before this new Election. But if the King will fauour one of the partyes (as by reason of State and for diuersion it hath beene at other times in practice) there may be shewed to his Maiestie, halfe a hundred Letters of the deceased King, and of some of the Kings his pre∣decessors, contayning thankes for the good & notable seruices performed by the house of the Prince Palatine and his Allyes, to their Persons and Crownes in their occasions of need. The instructions giuen to such as haue bene within these thirtie or fortie yeares, sent into Germany confirme this: Besides, the straight alliance that King Henry the great (a most wise Prince) settled betweene him and the body of the Vnion in
Germany, a small time before his death; appro∣ued since by the King now Raigning, and by the Queene his Mother then Regent, when the Duke of Deux Ponts came into this Kingdom to condole the last Kings murthering. In like sort the Contracts & Obligations vpon proofe in the Chamber of Accounts for many summes of money, lent and paid before hand, by the said house of the Prince Palatine, his neere kind∣red and Allyes, (of a part whereof France is yet a debtor.) These (I say) are proofes sufficient of what I haue saide, and oblige his Maiestie to lend his assistance rather to this then to the o∣ther party. 4. The fourth induction, is the dangerous ex∣ample of Reuoltes (for with such tearmes doe they qualifie this change, to make it the more odyous, without distinguishing between King∣domes Electiue and Hereditary; Especially since between Electiue Kingdomes, there is dif∣ference of Condition as all the world knowes. And it is to bee noted, that at the Sacring and Coronation of the Kinges of Bohemia, the King first sweares to obserue the Lawes and Priuiled∣ges of the Countrey, and then the people take the Oath of fidelitie. And at that ioyfull en∣try (as it is tearmed) of Antwerp, which is the
solemnity of Creating and receiuing a newe Duke of Brabant, it is deliuered in expresse tearmes that hee declares himselfe fallen from his Right and Dignity, if hee make not good the Articles that hee hath promised and sworne to the people. So did the deceased Duke of Anion, last Duke of Brabant promise and pro∣nounce in the yeare, 1583. For betweene the proceedings of the Low Countryes, and of Bohe∣mia, there is a great resemblance. The enacti∣ons and Cruelties of the Duke of Alua, were in∣differently exercised vpon the Protestants and Catholickes, The Count of Egmont (whose head hee stroke off) was no Hugonet: no more then was the most part of so many thousand o∣ther of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, whom hee brag'd, at his departure thence, that he had made an end of by the hand of the Hangman. And it is most true, that the inhumane and bar∣barous courses taken by the Count of Bucquoy, for these fifteene or sixteene Monthes, in the Warre against the Bohemians, thinking with Fire and Sword to bring them to obedience (which is wisdome against the hayre) serued but to hasten the reiection of Ferdinand, and the Election of Fredericke: Not to mention the obstinate denyall, made to admit or heare the Deputies of the Estates of that Kingdome, and of the Prouinces incorporate vnto it, at the
last assembly at Franckfort, when the saide Fer∣dinand was aduaunced to the Crowne Imperi∣all: And of this kinde of wisdome, was also the Refusall made lately by the same Empe∣rour Ferdinand to his Subiectes, of the lower Austria, and Stiria, who made offer to serue him with their Liues and goods, in withstan∣ding the Inuasions of the Bohemians, conditio∣nally that hee would Confirme their Priuiled∣ges, and graunt them free vse of their Religion: It is hee himselfe, that in the like case saide once, That he had rather bee a Prince without Subiects, then to haue any, of a contrary Reli∣gion to his owne. This humour of his ex∣pressed in that Language, made such an Im∣pression and apprehension of him in his peo∣ple, (though hee be held otherwise a Good and a wise Prince) as it was not the least reason of the Alteration wee now see. Happy are those Princes, that hauing neede of Counsell, are able to make choyce of Wise and Faith∣full Councellours, such as haue no other ayme but their Maisters aduauntage, without re∣gard to their owne particuler interest. There haue beene in this House, Great and Famous Princes for Valour and Vertue, but these of later time haue beene ill Serued and ill adui∣sed. Witnes their Losses in the Low Coun∣tryes, and now, and to come; if they againe
take not the way they haue left, of sweetnes and gentlenes. 5. The Fift and last, principall reason is, That the Turke will infallibly, lay holde on the oc∣casion of these Combustions, to serue his turne, and to aduaunce his Conquests, to the hurt of Christendome; which is not vnlikely? And if hee doe it not, it is either the fault of his little wisdome, or of his weaknesse; which yet may bee auoyded by leauing this new King in quiet Possession, now that he is Elected, and that without Suite or labouring of his owne, nay without his owne Knowledge, and beeing forcedly as it were carryed on, by the Coun∣sell of his Friends, to the Acceptance of this Crowne, which hath beene since set on his Head; accompanyed with all the Formes and Solemnities due and Correspondent to the fundamentall and most auncient Lawes of Bo∣hemia; a Kingdome Free and Priuiledged if e∣uer any: Whereas, on the Contrary, if hee bee molested; and dispossessed; Hee will be, by the law of Nature, and of Reason, inforced to inuite his Friendes and Allyes to ayde him; As the Princes of Germany; the Kings of Den∣marke, and Sweden; the Hans Townes, and the
Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, with whom hee and some other Princes of the Vnion, are Confederate for their common Defence. Not to speake of England, and the Vnited Prouin∣ces, whence hee cannot but receiue Powerfull succours. Not to speake also of certaine Prin∣ces, and Estates Catholicke, which holde good Correspondence with him: Nor of the Prince of Transiluania, who offreth him his best meanes and Forces. In the meane time, it is a false affirmation that the said King entertayneth Intelligence or commerce with the Turke, hauing Friends so many and so mighty in Christendome, with∣out being driuen to seeke them else where with so great danger. But if the Prince of Transil∣uania Fortifie himselfe on that side, (as hee hath heretofore done) for his better setling in his Principallity, at such time as the House of Austria sought to crosse him, as it had donne before, the vnfortunate Gabriel Battori: and disturbe him in his Possession, it is beside the purpose and concerneth not Bohemia; nor is in any sort applyable to this new King. But who knoweth not, howe the greater part of Hungary, and of other Principalities of that part of Christendome, are in conclusion fallen into the handes of the Common Enemy of Christendome?
In a worde, this Busines is the true Touch∣stone whereby to distinguish betweene good and ill Counsells, and to discerne the true French from the Spaniard, or fauourers of the Spanish Party. {inverted ⁂} FINIS.
