11366 S119413 99854620 20047
A IOVRNALL OF THE VOYAGE of the young Prince Fredericke Henry, Prince of Bohemia: Taken in the sixt yeare of his age, from Prague in Bohemia, to Luerden in Friesland, to the Court of Count Ernestus Cassimerus van Nassaw Gouernor of Friesland. With his seuerall Gifts and Entertainments: and the description of diuers of the chiefe Cities. Being accompanyed in his passage by these of the Germane Nobilitie, and others, viz. Count Attemberg. Count Henry van Nassaw. Count Stulsberg. Baron Scoske, a Bohemian Lord. Mr. Iohn Ashburnham Esquire, an Englishman, and Gouernor to the Prince. Mr. Fredericke Porvel a German, the Princes Tutor. With diuers other Gentlemen of Qualitie, Seruants and other Attendants. Printed at London for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1623.
A IOVRNALL OF the Voyage of the young Prince Frede∣ricke Henry, Prince of Bohemia, &c. ON the 12. day of September Anno 1620. the Court remoued from Prague to Brandis or Prandis, (being three miles distant) on the riuer Elb, neere where the riuer Gitzera fals into the Elb: where the Prince the next day following, taking his leaue of the King and Queen his father and mother, and being royally attended, set forwards towards Barlene, the chiefe residence of the Marquesse Elector of Brandenburg his vncle. Although the passages were too full of souldiers for him to goe the neerest way: for which cause, and for the better commodity of lodging, shaping his course from Prage full North; on the thirteenth of September hee set out from Brandis: which Towne being no great State, is in the same longi∣tude and latitude with Prage, that is, 29. and 46. and some odde minutes, and vpon the great and faire riuer of Elbe or Albis, which the Bohemians call Labe; which we passing, came the same day to Wieswasser, which signifies in English White wa∣ter, the Bohemians call it Biela: an ancient City it is, and though it be situated in the Kingdome of
Bohemia, yet is this with diuers others vnder a par∣ticular gouernment of some of the ancient Nobili∣ty of that Country: this City is fiue miles from Brandis, eight from Prage. Hereabouts are also (almost) continuall great waldts or woods, which marching from the banks almost of the riuer Elbe, East and West, tend euen to the borders of the vpper Lusatia, which is one of the incorporated Prouinces belonging to the Kingdome of Bohemia: At this Wiswasser the Prince was met by the Inhabitants, and brought into the Castle, and there by the Burgraues appointment (himselfe being through sicknesse vnable to come to waite vpon the Prince) hee was for that night entertained by the Citizens with very good ob∣seruance. The next morning being the 14. of September, the Citizens brought him on his way with an able Conuoy of 150. horse and foot, till hee past out of Bohemia into Leutznatz or Lusatia; where at his first entrance the townsmen of Gabel met him, the chiefe of which company in the name of the towns∣men made a complementall Oration, intimating their faithfull loues, and his most hearty welcome vnto them. The Oration being ended, hee was conducted by them towards Gabel. Within halfe a miles riding he was met by a troope of horse, be∣ing about 150. which were sent from the Marquesse of Iegerensdorf. Here the Conuoy of Wiswasser re∣turned backe, and this troope brought him to the towne of Gabel, here the Prince dined. This Gabel is one of the first good townes on the bor∣ders
of Lusatia towards Bohemia; it stands neere vnto the riuer of Niesse one of the chiefe Floods of Lusatia, which rises not farre from hence. From hence departing after dinner, about a mile off from the Towne, he was met by a second troupe of horse, sent also from the said Marquesse of Iegerensdorf, by which troupes his Highnesse was conuoyed to the City of Zittaw or Sittaw, standing vpon the riuer of Niesse. At the entrance whereof, he was receiued by two other troopes of horse, and three companies of foot, besides the Citizens themselues standing all in their Armes on each side, with musicke of Trumpets on the Cathedrall Church, and Haultboyes on the tower of the Statehouse, which sounded vntill the Prince was entred into his lodging. Before which, by commandement of the towne, was placed a strong Guard of both horse and foot, besides two compa∣nies of foot placed within the gates in the Court, for defence of his person. And at each gate of the City for that night was set an extraordinary strong Court of Guard both of horse and foot, the times being then dangerous, because the Duke of Saxo∣ny was then in Armes, and held his Leaguer be∣fore the City of Baultzen, within foure miles to the North-West of that place, vpon the riuer of Spre; and we were now vpon the borders of Meis∣sen, which is one of the Duke of Saxonies Coun∣tries, and confines vpon Lusatia, by a long tract of ground. And thus farre euen from Prage in Bo∣hemia vnto Zittaw in Lusatia, our Court was full North.
But the next day being the 15. of September, departing from thence, we tooke vp vpon the right hand more towards the East, setting forward to∣wards Gorlitz, which also stands vpon the riuer of Niess aforesaid, which riuer rising in the Country of Miessen (I take it) east-ward of Gabel, passeth by Zittaw, Gorlitz, and so north-ward through both the Lusatiaes, till it fals into the Oder, which parts Lusatia from Silesia. On the way towards this Gor∣litz, (the Princes horses being almost wearied) he was met by certaine Coaches and diuers troopes of horse, sent from the Marquesse of Iegerensdorf, who in that time of warre had his chiefe residence in that City. This guard tooke vp both sides of the way for a mile and a halfe together: and within halfe a mile off the City, the Marquesse himselfe in person met the Prince, accompanied with 4000 horse and foote. And within a quarter of a mile off the City, he was receiued by the Citizens, ran∣ging themselues in armour on both sides the way, their order extending euen to the very entrance of the Marquesse his Palace. For the Princes better contentment, the souldiers were all commanded to march by in Battaglia and warlike order, with Drummes, Fifes, and Ensignes displayed. After all which the Prince was by the Marquesse and all his Councell most royally feasted. He was lodged in the Palace in a most faire chamber, richly fur∣nished, and cut with antique works of great art and beauty. At this good entertainment we stayed two nights and two dayes. This Gorlitz is the chiefe towne of the vpper
Lusatia, and a fayre and a strong one it is, as being naturally defended, partly by his mountainous si∣tuation, and by the nearnesse of the Riuer of Neiss, ouer which it hath a commodious & well couered wooden Bridge. The Church of S. Peters is a very fayre peece, as is also the Tower of the State-house. On the third day after being the 1. of Septem∣ber, the Marquesse with all his traine and troopes, brought his Highnes halfe a mile out of Towne, and there solemnly taking his leaue, parted with him, commanding his Troopes to goe on with the Prince, and to convoy him to a garison-Town of his called Lauben, which is to the East-ward of Gorlitz, and something out of the way. At our ap∣proach within two miles of the town, we might be∣hold the Souldiers both Horse and Foot drawne forth in two diuisions, the Horse in one, and the Foot in the other, and both ranged in battell-aray. The reason of this demeanour, was a iealousie of some treachery which they conceiued to be inten∣ded against their Garison, for that the night before the Princes Quarter-master being sent before, to giue them intelligence of his Highnes comming, they supposed him to haue bin a spy, and clapt him vp close prisoner, lading him with irons. These troops and companies of Garison Souldiers being afarre off discouered, bred also the same iealousie of them in vs, as our approach did of vs in them, ei∣ther part hauing a misprision of the others inten∣tions. Whereupon it was resolued to send a Trum∣pet before, with certaine Gentlemen, to giue and
take satisfaction on eyther side. Whereupon they being better satisfied, and all mistrust being quite taken away, the chiefe Burgers of the Towne ad∣uanced forwards, and comming to the Prince, they kist his Highnes hand: And after some solemne Speech of entertainment, with their excuse allea∣ged, for their late behauiour, imputing the same to the danger of the time, and their vnexpected and sodaine notice of his arriuall, the Prince mounted on horse-backe, & rode cleare through their troops towards the Towne: and hauing past them, the horse and foot discharged three vollies of shot for his welcome: & comming to the gates of the town he was receiued by a guard of towne-dwellers, and by them conueyed to his place of rest, where for that day he dined, where also the Marquesse of Ie∣gerensdorfs Conuoy of horse left vs, and returned to Gorlitz. This towne of Lauben is situated vpon the banks of the Riuer Queis, which also runnes into the O∣der, and is neare vnto the borders of Silesia, and vn∣to a necke of land which thrusts out from Bohemia also, which being very narrow at Gabel, we touch∣ed vpon Miessen the Duke of Saxonies Country. This Lauben is in the frontiers (as it were) both of Bohemia on the South-side, and Silesia on the East, it selfe being the vtmost towne of the vpper Lusatia, which makes the Garison to stand more warily vpon their guard. After dinner he was conducted out of the same Towne by a troope of horse of the towne garison, which waited vpon his Highnes, till hee came to
the Citie of Limberge in Silesia, which town stands vpon the Riuer of Bober, and not farre from the ri∣uer Queis aforesaid. But before he came neare the Citie, the Prince was met by a troope of horse from thence, in the middest of whom he was con∣ueiged to his lodging in the towne, which was one of the chiefe Burgers houses, where they placed a strong guard at the doore, for the safety of his per∣son. This was vpon a Saturday at night. That day (his Highnes comming thither being knowne abroad in the country) all the young No∣bility and Gentry thereabouts came in to see the Prince, and to wait vpon his Highnes at table at Supper-time, so that all the Princes seruants were for that time dismissed from their attendance vpon him. The next day being Sunday, and Septemb. 19. the Prince mounted on horse-backe, the Nobilitie go∣ing before him on foot, and their children on each side, with the troops of horse and Foot attending. In which stately and solemne manner his Highnes rode to Church, and heard a Sermon. Whence be∣ing returned, he dined with the Nobility. After dinner the same day, he was by them and their troops conducted to the Citie of Somponsel, where he was most nobly entertayned of the Ci∣tizens. So soon as the Prince was discouered by the Watch vpon their Towers, they sounded their Trumpets, and beat vp their great kettle-Drums, continuing so vntill he came to the gates. Where as soone as he was entred, the Towns-men making a guard of themselues, gaue the Prince a lusty volley
of shot for his welcome. Then with the sound of Corners and Haultboyes he was entertained to his lodging. At the entrance whereof the Towns-men gaue him another volley of shot, and placing a strong court of guard for that night before his lod∣ging, departed. The 20. of Sept. the Nobilitie tooke their leaue of the Prince, and the Towns-men waited vpon him with a conuoy to a place called Crozan, or Crossen, where his Highnes dined. After dinner the same Conuoy brought him through till hee came to a citie called Friestadt, which is not farre from the borders of Poland, and lyes to the North the riuer Oder, running between this part of Silesia and Poland, through the Duchy of Crossen, which is finally parted from hence by a ledge of woody mountaines, tending north-west and by north by a long tract to the East-ward Here the troopes of Somponsel left him, and returned homewards, the Souldiers both horse and foote of Friestadt receiuing him into their rankes in warlike order. All which by reason it was late and darke, was done by the Citizens by torch-light: by whom hee was gallantly conducted to his lodging, where he rested for that night. This being the last towne we lay at in Silesia, the next day being the 21. of September, the Prince being conuoyed by some horse of the towne, wee entred into the Brandenburgher marck, that is, the marches or borders of the land of Brandenburg, through which we passed on to the City of Franck∣ford vpon Oder, so called, to distinguish it from
the other Franckford which is neere to the Palati∣nate, where the great Mart is twice a yeare kept; which is also called Franckford vpon Maine, be∣cause that that stands vpon the riuer of Maine, as this doth vpon the riuer of Oder. This last towne being vnder the gouernment of the Marquesse E∣lector of Brandenburg, the chiefe Citizens at the Princes arriuall (according to their wonted man∣ner to noble strangers) presented their loues in huge flaggons of wine (which growes here) and banquetting stuffe, to the Prince; their flaggons being so much the greater, in regard of their loues to the Duchesse of Brandenburg their Princesse, who is Aunt to the Prince. This being moreouer the generall courtesie of the great Cities of Ger∣many, to present their loues to all Princes their friends, and Ambassadors of Princes, with an Ora∣tion, the Burgers bring each of them a great bottle of wine, which hangs by a ringle vpon his arme; and if hee hath any businesse or Embassie to their State, they send him also Oates and Fish. This Franckford is esteemed the third towne of worth in the Country, and being vpon the very North west angle of Silesia, and about some 14. yeares before our being there (viz. Anno 1606.) was made an Vniuersity by Ioachim Marquesse of Brandenburg: the Oder runnes vpon the East side, the other parts are fenced in by the mountaines. From hence vpon the 22 of September wee set forwards towards Ruttersdorp, but the way being waste ground, and without habitation, wee were faine to haue our prouision carried along with vs,
and dined that day at a Boers house. The same night his Highnesse came to the village of Rutters∣dorp, where he lodged in the Castle, both which belong vnto the Marquesse of Brandenburg. At this place (the Marquesse himselfe being then in Prussia or Pruce land) the Prince was faine for that night to content himselfe with such enter∣tainment as the place could afford. But the Mar∣chionesse being certified of the Prince her Ne∣phewes being there, sent post all night, with plate and other prouision; which made so good speed, that by the morning there was store of furniture, and by break-fast time very good variety of proui∣sion of all sorts; which was a strange change, and a sudden alteration, ouer night to be serued in ves∣sels of Tin, and in the morning to haue a Cupbord of Plate. And thus by the Duchesse noble care, the Princes supper was well mended, by a full and sufficient break-fast. This Marchionesse of Brandenburg is named Elizabetha Charlotta, daughter to Fredericke the fourth Prince Elector Palatine; and sister to the pre∣lent King of Bohemia, the Princes father. After which the 23: of September hee set on towards Berlin, the Court of the Marquesse, and ordinary place of his residence. The Duchesse hearing of his aproach, by a Post which the Prince dispatcht to her aforehand, to giue her Highnesse notice of his being so nigh; the Duchesse sent forth her brother Prince Lodowicke, Duke of Simmern, and vncle to the Prince, together with a young Polish Duke (whose father had beene banished
out of Poland) and Count Philip van Solmes, who all with a faire traine came to meet the Prince, of whom, after most ioyfull and mutuall salutations, he was brought into the Palace, where his High∣nesse with the rest of his followers were most nobly welcomed, and royally feasted. This gallant young Prince, vncle to our Prince Fredericke, is stiled Lodowicke Philip, Count Pala∣tine, &c. was borne Nouem. 22. 1602. had the two Dukedomes of Simmern, Lautern, with the Coun∣try of Sponheim assigned him for his portion, by his fathers Testament; which was confirmed vnto him by the Emperour Rodulphus the second: he going vp with his brother into Bohemia, had all his coun∣try & goods taken from him by Spinola in the Pala∣tinate: hee went from Prage to Berlin before Prince Fredericke, where they now meeting, went into the Low-Countries together. Here we abode ten dayes, hauing as great va∣riety of entertainment, as that time of mourning would permit. For the old Marquesse Elector be∣ing lately deceased, and the houshold and whole Court all in mourning, and the day of the Funerall drawing neere, was not a time of mirth or mask∣ing. In our stay here, this one thing was excee∣ding well worth the seeing and remembring, which was this; The time of the Funerall growing, the vault in the great Church was opened, where Marquesses Electors of Brandenburg still vse to be enterred. The Prince and all we of his traine were brought in to see the place; going downe into which, there was an obiect of State Antiquity and
much reuerence, namely, the bodies of 16 Princes embaulmed in Coffins of Tin, and laid by three and three on the top of each other, with their swords and spurs hanging by them: which also be∣sides the worth of the present sight, showes also the antiquity of the succession since the choice of that place of buriall. The Funerall was appointed to be fiue dayes after the Princes departure, which was now at hand. After ten dayes stay therefore, on the 3. of Octo∣ber the Prince tooke his leaue of the Marchionesse Electoresse his Aunt, and of the rest of the Court, and departed out of Berlin; and being accompa∣nied with Prince Lodowick his Vncle, and Count Philip van Solmes, who from hence iournied with him all the way, and neuer left him till he came into Holland; they arriued the first night at an old City and a strong Castle called Spandaw, for now from Berlin we turned about again on the left hand and full West: the riuer of Spre vpon which Berlin is situated, being betwixt that City and this Spandaw. Here the Prince lodged all night, his prouisions and entertainments being all made at the charges of the Marchionesse Electoresse. This Spandaw stands neere the conscience of the two riuers Ha∣vel and Spre. The next day being the 4. of October, the Prin∣ces dined at a place called Sando, and the same night they lodged at a Dorpe called Bernese; which because they be places of no great account, I there∣fore passe them ouer without any more descripti∣on of them.
The 5. of October the Princes dyned at the Citty of Ratenaw, which stands by the Riuer of Hauell, be∣yond this Citty, and to the North or Northwest loses himselfe and his name in the greater Elue or Albis. Af∣ter dinner they set forwards againe, and came that night to the Castle of Tungermund on the Riuer Elue. The place is something old, but what it is, is in the Marquesse of Brandenburgs Dominions. The next day being the 6. of October, the Princes passed through the Forest of Neslingham, where they also hunted; and that night they lay at the Marquesses Lodge in the Forrest: and thus farre the Marchionesse sent her plate, furniture, and seruants to attend the Princes, and feasted them hitherto at her own charges. Which from hence being the boundary of the Marquisate on that side, returned home againe towards Berline. And all this while we held our course full West from Berline. By the West∣side of this Forest runs the Riuer Ohre, which we passed. The next day being the 7. of October, they entred in∣to Brunswick Land, and dyning at a Towne called Caluer, they came the same night to a Colledge of Lutherans cal∣led Miriando: where the Rector would not open his gates to receiue the Princes, vntil he heard his Princes the Duke of Brunswicks pleasure, who was at the same time 7. miles off from that place. Here we stayed 2. houres and aboue, in a terrible storme of rayne and winde, vntill a Post which the Princesse had dispatched the night before vnto the Duke, was returned. Vpon whose arryuall with Let∣ters from the Duke, the Princesse were receiued with all fitting respects, and the best entertainement that the place could afford. The Rector and the Society excused them∣selues
by reason of the times, which were dangerous, and full of suspition, and the persons of the Princes vnknown to any of them, and the Colledge it selfe being a place of importance. A tedious night this was and a could, and some were wet with the rayne, and othersome scapt bet∣ter. But that which gaue vs some comfort, was; that a∣bout midnight there came another Post from the Duke, who requested the Princes to stay there all the next day also, for that the Duke had not made his prouision for their entertainement at his Court in such a short warning. And in the meane his Highnes sent in his own furniture for the Princes table, and commanded such prouision to be brought in, as the Country there abouts could afford, so that we had there the next day by dinner time, all things fitting for entertainement. The next day being the 9. of October, the Princes left the Colledge, and set on towards Wolfenbuttell, the chiefe place of residence of the Duke of Brunswick, & where the Court then was. But a little before we came to the Citty, the Duke of Brunswick himselfe, with the L. Chancellor of the Duchy, diuers of the priuy Councell, with many Nobles and Gentlemen, came forth of the Towne, with many faire Companies of horse, to entertain the 2. Prin∣ces, & so went along together with them into the Town. Within which were diuers Companies of Souldiers with full Armies vnder their seuerall Ensignes with Colours flying, with Trumpets sounding, Fifes playing, & Drums beating in warlike manner, very gallant to behold, which stood along vntill wee came to the Castle. The Hault∣boyes and Cornets playing in the meane time from of the top of a Tower, and a peale of Ordinance being shot
off at their entrance into the Castle. The Princes were led into very stately, rich, and fayer Roomes in the Castle, and euery where in the house there Princely plenty and variety of all things necessary. The Princes hauing reposed themselues a while, were by the Duke brought into the Dutchesse Chamber, who being allied to them both, receiued them with all Ioy and contentment. Supper time being come, the Princes were againe brought into a wondrous faier roome, where the Tables were couered and great state vsed according to the Ger∣man fashion of entertainement, which is full and sump∣tuous. In this supping place, there was a roome wherein there was a very large and rich Cupboard of plate; at one end of which stood the musick of Instruments and voices, and at the other end stood the Officers of the Cel∣ler and Buttery, to fill wine and beer to the table. For here is beere in this Country which is rare in other places of Germany, though scarce good any where. Yet here at this Wolfenbuttell, is a huge vast Tunne, larger then that of Hei∣dleberg, but this is filled with Brunswick beer, as that other with Rhenish wine. There were also 6. other tables, where the 2. Princes seruants did eate, the Dukes own Gentle∣men bearing them company, which time and the whole three daies that we staied here at this Royal entertainment was spent with great mirth, iollity and extraordinary show of magnificence, bounty, and courtesie; al which ex∣cellent well became a kinsman and a Prince. The present Duke of Brunswicks name is, Fredericus Vl∣ricus, he was born the 5. of April 1591. he married Anna So∣phia daughter of Iohn Sigismund, Marquesse Elector of Bran∣denburg then lately dead in Nouēber 1619, & sister to Geor∣gius
Wilhelmus the present Prince: she was borne March 17. 1598. the Dukes alliance with the Prince comes in by the mothers side: for Anne Queen of England was daughter to Frederick the 2. King of Denmark; as was also Eliza∣beth her elder sister, the mother of this present Duke. The Dutchesses alliance with the Prince comes in by the house of Brandenburg, of which she is descended. The Duke of Brunswick hath as yet no children; his onely bro∣ther and heire apparent is our valorous noble Champion Christian D. of Brunswick, and Bishop of Halberstadt: he hath or had also 5. sisters. Leauing therefore this Citty the 14. of October in the morning, the same day they came to a place called Stanberge, where the Princes dyned at the Dukes char∣ges. The same night they lodged at a place called Collen∣berge, which stands vpon the West side of the Riuer of Glein. The 15. day the 2. Princes dyned at Hamelen which is by the Riuer of Wester, and on the East side. After dinner they went to Dalmel, where they lodged. And thus farre the Princes was feasted and furnished whith Plate and other prouision Royall, at the sole cost and charges of his Highnesse the Duke of Brunswick, who is elder brother to Duke Christian of Brunswick, Bishop of Halberstadt the fa∣mous young Warriour; and this Town is vpon the Con∣fines of the Duchy of Brunswick, which is bounded on the West by the Country of Westphalia, from which the Weser parts it. Here the Dukes Seruants and Officers re∣turned from the Princes backe againe to Wolfenbuttell. This Duchy of Brunswick was sometimes accounted to Saxony, and got a particular and distinct name from Bru∣no,
who being son to Ludolphus Duke of Saxony, laid the foundations of Citty in this Duchy, which of him is cal∣led Brunswick; the Dutchy of Luneburg hath also been possessed by the Dukes of Brunswick, continuing so vntill the yeere of Christ 1430. in which the Country was di∣uided between William the victorious, who had the title of Brunswicke, and his vncle Bernard, who had the title of Luneburg: in whose posterity both these Dukedomes still remaine, the Dukes of both being both of one family, Brunswick being of the direct line, the elder house, and the greater Dukedome. The chiefe City both of Brunswick and of all Saxony, is the Towne of Brunswick, which giues name to the whole Duchy, although the Court be most commonly kept at Wolfenbuttell, which with the whole Duchy we hauing left behind vs, entred next into Cleueland. The 16. of October setting out somewhat late, we ar∣ryued the same night at a Citty called Belfield, where within a mile of the Towne, they were receiued by cer∣taine troopes of horse, and so conueyed to the Citty. En∣tring the Gates, they were welcomed with a peale of Or∣dinance; and so by the Townesmen in Armour, they were brought into the Castle of Spanberg, where the Gouer∣nour and Captaine entertained them with their forces marshalled in warlike order. Here the Princes were fea∣sted 4. dayes. In the meane space it was consulted vpon for the Prin∣ces safety; that seeing they were now to passe by diuers Garrisons of the Enemies: that it were best to dispatch a Post before hand to the Prince of Orange, to certify his Excellency of the Princesses neerenes, which was also
done. Both the Armies of the States and the Spaniards being then about Wesel. Here it was also agreed vpon to send Prince Lodowick with some others another way into Holland; that so the Country-people might be satisfied with his presence in stead of the Princes; which tooke effect accordingly; and did not onely giue the peo∣ple good content through whom he passed, who came flocking into the high waies to see him; but also diuerted their expectations, from any thought of his passage any other way: by meanes whereof, his Highnes the Prince of Bohemia passed in his way with the more safety and secrecy. From Spanburg Castle we came next to the Castle of Arden, which is vnder the Graue of Benthem; and so by Glandorpe to Mareling, where we lodged all night. From whence forward the Towns being neer & so well known, I forbeare to make any further description of them, but onely name them as we passe through them. From thence we went to Russenbeck; from thence to Embsbourne; from thence to North-horne; from thence to Hardenberg, where we lodged. From thence we went to Realte; from thence to Deuenter in Holland, where we met with the Princes againe. The next day we set forwards towards Swoll, which is a strong Town of Garrison; where we staied two nights and one day. And here the Count Ernest van Cassimere (who comming in Post from the Prince of Oranges Leaguer at Wesel, had before met with the Princes) receiued the Prince into his charge, and safe protection. And here Prince Lodo∣wick departed from his Highnes, & went directly towards the Hage: And Prince Frederick kept on towards Freez∣land.
The next day at dinner being the 25. of October, wee came to a Citty of Garrison called Steenwick, where his Highnesse was met by the Burgers in Armes, & receiued into the Town with a volley of shot, and comming to the Castle they discharged a peale of Ordinance for his welcome: and all marched by in warlike manner in the Princes view. From thence after dinner they came to Wolfingow, where they rested all that night. The next day, they dined at Hernenfen, and came the same night to Luerden in Freezland, the place whether at his first setting out of Prage, it was his intention to goe. Here the chiefest of the Town met the Prince on Horse∣back. At the entrance thereof, the Ordinance of the Cit∣ty were discharged to welcome him: and the Burgers within the Town in Armes, ranking themselues on each side; conueied his Highnes to the Castle being the Court of Count Ernestus van Cassimerus; at that instant time, be∣ing receiued in succession of Count William of Nassaw his brother lately deceased, for Gouernour of Friezland. The Prince being come to the Court, and brought to an exceeding faire Chamber, beheld all the Townsmen marching by in their Armes: & then being brought to the Chamber of the Countesse, he was there most Nobly en∣tertained by them both, with all ioy and solemnity. And thus it pleased the Almighty God to leade this sweet young Princes first one way, and then againe another way, now through friends Countries, and now through foes, as from Heidleberg in the Palatinate, to Prage in Bohemia at first; so now againe from Prage to Luerden: which is almost round about the middle part
of Germany. A Iourney by Land which would haue tired the little Iüls. Which two, as they may hitherto be com∣pared together for their high birth, (both being borne of gods, and both descended from Venus) and their early tra∣uels, and in the losse of their natiue Countries; so it may please God also to conclude them alike in this too: that it may be said hereafter, how that they were both; The Fathers of a race of Emperours. That so the Townes he past, may for their honours say, Nere, Prince, King, Emperor, Frederick Henry lay. FINIS.
