11746 99844290 9087
¶ The ofspring of the house of Ottoman∣no, and officers pertai∣ning to the greate Turkes Court. Whereunto is added Bartholo∣meus Georgieuiz Epitome, of the customes Rytes, Ceremonies, and Religion of the Turkes: with the miserable affliction of those Chrstians, whiche liue vnder their captiuitie and bondage. In the ende also is adioyned the maner hovv Mustapha, eldest sonne of Soltan Soliman, twelfth Emperour of the Turkes, was murthered by his father, in the yere of our Lorde 1553. all Engli∣shed by Hugh Goughe. (∴) Imprinted at London in Fletestreate, neare vnto saint Dun∣stones church by Thomas Marshe.
❀ To the right worshippeful knight, Sir Thomas Gressam. Hugh Goughe vvisheth all godly honour, with Nestors yeres, and Galens healthe. BEyng not manye Monethes sence, by some fortunate chaūce (right vvorshippeful) in the hearing of cer∣taine graue communi∣catiō, debated by mē, both discrete, learned, and not altogether vnvvorshippefull: it vvas at that present my luckye happe to heare of suche vvell disposed persons as of late daies, and before our time, had bene be∣nefactours to Englād their natiue coūtrey. Amonge the vvhiche, some of a Zealous minde, had bestovved their sage coūcel and politike deuises, for defence of the same, o∣ther of a fauorable affection, geuen their labour, to the hauinge in readines of suche
necessary instrumentes, as bothe in time of peace, might cease our doutfull mindes, frō carefulnes therof, and in the perilous sea∣sons of vvarre, defende vs from our daylye imminent aduersaries: the reste, beinge not many in number, hadde either, of a godlye and voluntarie vvil, vvholy (vvich chaun∣ced more seldome) applied their riches, or many ioyning together, laid out their trea∣sures, to the erectinge of suche noble buil∣dinges, as might be for a publike commodi∣tye vnto the inhabitantes of this vvorthy Ile of Britaine. All vvhose deedes for an euerlasting memoriall of them, and of ther vvell spent daies, haue most vvorthely de∣serued to be engrauen in tables of brasse. But fevve, yea alas to fevve, haue florished, in vvhom all these commendable qualities haue▪reygned, as both to be beneficiall to their countrye, by sage councell, procuring of safegarde for protection of the same, and bestovving of their substance, to the buil∣ding of such famous and magnificent vvor¦kes,
as might serue for common vtilitie vn∣to all men. And by the discretion of those men,, that be learned and vvise, if euer anye subiecte hath enioyed thē, they attribute it vnto yow. For what is he, vvhiche is igno∣rāt of the policies, and trauels, that your vvorshippe haue vsed and susteined, for to gette safegard, and requisite furniture to the realm. Besydes the infinite riches geuē to the buildinge of that princely vvoorke, com∣monly called the Burse, vvhich already de∣clareth, and in Lōdon is openly to be sēne. vvhat commodity generaly, it vvill bringe to the Citisens therof. These noble exploi∣es (as in dede they ar not a litle by all men praised) can not, but be highely commen∣ded. To vvhat end shuld I reherse, or make mention of the great diuersity, which men accōpt to be betwene it and the huge towre of Babilō, or outragious buildings in Egipt named Pyramides: or of the exceding diffe∣rence, wherby it excelleth the intricate La∣berinthes,
and monstruous pillers, erected in diuers partes of the world: csidering that it is vnknovven vnto fevve, that these vvere either builded for a vaine ostentation, or fri∣uolous memorial, vvith out any profitable vse, or of enuye, because the founderers of the same, vvoulde not leaue ouer muche store of worldly treasures vnto their succes∣sours. I neade not also to make rehearsal of your curtesy, gētilnes, frendship, and libera∣litie tovvardes al men, yea and (vvhich de∣seruethe no small commendation) tovvar∣des the vnknovven, and strangers, as diuers other, and I also of late dayes, haue suffici∣ently proued. In consideration vvherof, lest I might seeme, eyther vnmindfull of suche benefites, as vndeseruidlye, I haue receiued at your frendly handes, or be thought vn∣thankefull, by not endeuoring, (according to my pore habilities) partly to recompens your fauorable gentilnes declared tovvarde me: I counted it good to present your vvor¦shyppe, vvith some suche treatice, as both
myght declare me mindfull of your so vn∣speakeable benefites, and vvype cleane a∣vvaye from you, the opinion of detestable ingratitude, vvhiche othervvise your vvor∣shippe might most iustely haue conceyued of me. And in so muche as vvithin these thre hundred yeares, to the great domage, and vtter decay almost of Christes infalli∣ble religion, the great Turkes povver, and Empire hath spredde it selfe so farre, that at this instant, ar subiecte to his cruell tyran∣nye, aboue foure and thirtye moste famous nations vvhiche in times paste haue bene christened, yea and vvithin these fourescore yeares, as one Hiltenius by prophesyinge hathe foretolde vs, he shall haue dominion both in Italie and Germanie: ponderinge vvith my selfe this pitifull estate, and la∣mentable ruyne of Christianitye, I imagi∣ned that it did not so become me, as by dvv∣tie I vvas bounde, in gratifying your vvor∣shippe, to reveale and make manifeste vnto my countrey men, the nature, disposition,
customes, rites, and faithe of those circunsi∣sed Infidelles, vvith the horrible rackinge, painefull tormenting, and vnnaturall abu∣sing, of our faithefull brethren the innocent Christians, most miserably oppressed vvith the heauye youke of their vnmeasurable taxes, tributes, and continuall bondage: that they by considering of the daungers, hanginge vniuersally ouer our heades, may learne hence fourth to amende their sinfull liues, and cal incessantlye vnto god for soc∣cour against that mortall aduersarye, bothe to the vndoubted veritie of Christes holye gospell, to our countrye, liues and soules. VVerefore accordinge to my simple skill and knovvleage I haue trāslated into our vulgar speche, this little booke, that herein, the vnaquainted vvith the latine toungue, may learne reade and see the sūme of their belefe, the vnstable, vveake, and folish foun¦dations of their fained religion, vvhich in token of my bounden dvvtie, I offer & de∣dicate vnto your vvorshippe: desiring most
humblye that you vvill accept it in good parte, and so accept it, as to vouchesafe to protecte and defende the same, vvith the title of your vvorthy name. This if you do, and receiue it so fauorablely, as other thin∣ges of late dayes you haue done, you shall encorage me, hereafter for so frendlye ta∣kinge of these rude lines, to attempte and geue the onsette, both vpon bookes of grea∣ter volume, and matters of more vveight and substance. In the meanne tyme I vvill not cease daily to call vppon God, that he of his infinite goodnes, vvill en¦crease this louing affection tovvardes your countrye, endvvynge you vvith perfecte healthe, vvith all godlye honour, and after thys vvaueringe lyfe, to aduaunce youre worship aboue the skyes, ther to remaine in perpetual blissednes, vvorld vvithout end. Your vvorsnippes most bounden Hugh Goughe.
☞ Bartholomeus Georgieuiz the author wishethe vnto the godly and Christian reader perfecte felicitie THe ciuill discention, deadly discorde and contentious warres of our Princes, most christiā reader, haue procured me thys, that (beinge spoiled of all my goodes, bound with cheines, ledde to be solde as a beast, throughe townes, villages, stretes, and the moste daungerous and slippery places of Thrace and the les∣ser Asia), seuen times I haue ben sold vnto most peineful and manifolde kin∣des of husbandry: and there constrai∣ned vnder the turkish rustical whippe and sharpe ordinances, in hungar and
thirst, in colde and nakednes, lying a brode out of house, to kepe horses, and fede flockes of sheepe and eardes, to learne the arte of warrefare, and ex∣ercise tylling of ground, From whence taking flight, and lyuinge by the mast of Okes, by wilde herbes, and ther bit∣ter rootes sprinkeled with a litle salte, and wandring in desertes, beholdinge the north pole as my guide, I haue bene enuironed with moste rauenous wilde beastes, I haue moreouer, on plankes of timber, bound together with a corde, endeuored to passe ouer the sea Hel∣lesponte: but beinge taken at length, brought back againe vnto my master, bound hand and foote, cast prostrat on the earthe, and greuosly beaten with roddes, I was after cast of vnto the vn¦mercifull regraters of mankinde, and
slaughterous boutchers to be solde: so that tossed with the fluddes of aduer∣sitie by the space of thirtene yeares, I haue bene forced to suffer and susteine manye miseries, afflictions, calamities and persecutions, throughe ye loue that I bare vnto oure holye and catholyke faith, But when I could not escape by that more nere way, which is throughe Thrace suche tirannye, greuous bon∣dage, and cruell affliction of the Infi∣delles, flying by an other way, whyche is to wit, towardes the pole Antartike, throught the most daungerous places, and desartes of Caramania and Siria. Throughe soudrie perilles on the lande And daungers straung bi seas and sande. At length I came into the holy lande, vnto the Fryars of Saincte Frances, by Ierusalem, dwelling in the mounte
Sion. From whence after the course of ne yere, raised (by goddes prouidence) s it were from the dead, taken out of the mouth and iawes of that rauenous and insatiable dragon, and deliuered from his rackinges and tormentes, I came vnto my brethren the christians as an vndouted messanger of their pu∣nishementes, that they may do worthy penance for ther errors and offences, lest thei com into that place of tormēts and affliction: that they may vnder∣stande also in what hatred thei ought to be, whiche hinder from that moste holy and longe desired expedition the christian sworde, in time to come, to be the reuenger of our miseries, foreshe∣wed so many yeres sence, as well by the propheticall mouthe of trewe beleuers as infidelles, and predestinated to de∣stroye
and vterly subuert that kinge¦dome of Sathan, when therfore after my pergerinatiō throuh the holi land and visitinge of certayne places in the wste partes, I had briefly noted the tragidyes of theyr crueltye, and cer∣tayne other thynges whych by remay∣ninge in the court and warrefare of of the Turkish emperour, I had lear∣ned, eyther by daily conuersation long vse, and experience, or suche as I had hearde the learned and wiser sorte of the same, to rearde and rexearse, or (in time past mencioned and readen) vnderstode to be questioned by their sagest coūcellours, and committed thē to memory: all, in fewe wordes and fai∣thefully written, at sondry places and diuers times, by peece meale, I had pu∣blished, after with publishing, when by
certayne learned and well disposed men, I had found them made commō, dispersed into diuers languages, and perceyued that they woulde be profita∣ble, expediente, and after a sorte ne∣cessarie vnto the readers, I gathe∣red the whole into this one bondell, and nowe brought & reduced it vn∣to a more compendious order. I of∣fer them, moste gentile and Christian reder, of thee to be redden. Thou ther¦fore by the example of oure sauiour Christ (which preferred the litle gifte offred by a poore widoishe woman, be∣fore the riche presentes of so many Princes) vouchesafe to take and accepte in good parte this sim∣ple gifte of a poore af∣flicted Pilgrime. ❀
❀ The Originall beginning of the Turkishe Empyre and Lineall Race of theyr Empe∣rours, vvyth the trade and Ordi∣naunces of theyr warres THat the Turkes are lineally descended frō the Barbarous Na∣tion of the Scithians, not onely all the aun∣cyente Hystoryogra∣phers do witnesse, but also ther maners, face, countenāces, pryde, rashenes, won∣derfull audacity, & finallye al their trade and order in fightyng doth it moste eui∣dently declarē. They sixe hundred yeres sence, entring into the lesser Asia, which now hath to name Natholia, committed ther infinite spoilinges, and robberies, vntill by litle and litle they had brought subiect to their empire inheritances, ca∣stels, and cyties, and oppressed the inha∣bitantes
of Asia the lesser, whiche hadde not bene accustomed to fightinge, and warres. Neyther at that time had the Turkes any certaine Prince or Kynge, but, rouing abrode by flockes, ouerrane, brought vnder their subiectiō, and cruel∣lye raygned ouer the noble countreye of al the lesser Asia. But afterwarde when thre hundred thousande footmen and an hundred thousand horsmen of the Chri∣stians had assembled and gathered toge∣ther vnto the moste renowmed Duke Gottfridus Bilioneus, and passed ouer the Sea to possesse and inhabite the holye lande, where was the sepulcher of our redemer Iesus Christe: the Turkes also flocking together, created one Soliman ther Captaine, & so made warre agaynst the Christians. But after a cruell and blouddye battell, they were by the sayde Christians vanquished and put to flight. From this time foreward we reade not that the Turkes had any Prince, vntill
the yeare after Christes incarnation a thousand and thre hundred, about which season at lenght Ottomannus began to wexe famous, and being of great powr and strenght, was created first Em∣perour of the Turkes, from whom al the rest, as the table ensewing shall plainely declare, con∣sequently tooke ther beginninge.
A brefe rehersall of al the Emperours of Turkeye Otthomannus, OTthomannus firste Emperour of the Turkes, whiche was of the turkishe nation as it wer the grandfather, & from whom all the other Princes of Turkey do take their name, was fortunate, victo∣rious, and a very cruell tyrant. He raig∣ned eight and twentye yeares, and dyed in the yeare of our Lorde, a thousande, thre hundred, twenty and eight. Oreanus, OReanes secōd Emperour of the Tur∣kes, was subtil & wittye, he inuented sondrye sortes of instrumentes and En∣ginnes of warre, and gouerned the Em∣pire two & twentie yeares. Amurathes, AMurathes the sonne of Oreanes and
third Emperour of the Turkes, beynge a young man, was disceiful, circumspect and vigilant. In the yeare of Christe a thousande thre hundred thre score and thre he possessed by force of armes Adria¦nopolis, and raygned thre and twentye yeares. Baiazetus, BAiazetus the first of that name & forth Emperour of ye Turkes, was victori∣ous, but a famous and cruell tyrant. He brought in subiection to his Empire al∣most all Grece, and was at lenghte van∣quished by the most mighty Tamberlane. Cyriskelebes, CYriskelebes the sōne of Baiazetus, and fifte Emperour of the Turkes, came vnto the Empire beynge a very younge man. He fought a battel with Sigismun∣dus Emperour of Rome, whiche at that present was king of Hungarye, ouercam
and put him to flight in the felde called Salumbetus. He dyed beinge yet of you∣thely yeares, & rained about sixe yeares. Moises, MOises was sixt Emperour of ye Tur¦kes. After yt he had slaine Oreanes his brothers sōne, he obteined ye turkish Empire, but not lōg gouerned the same. For he was also murthered by Maho∣metus brother vnto Oreanes slaine of him before, which after the death of Moises brought vnder his subiection the Em∣pire of Turkey. Mahometus, MAhometus the first of that name, & seuenth Emperour of Turks was notable throughe his cruelty. He weake∣ned in many battells the strenght of the Walachians, & oppressed them. He raig∣ned fouretene yeares, and dyed in the yeare from Christes incarnation a thou∣sande foure hundred and nintene.
Amurathes, AMurathes the seconde of this name, & eight Emperour of the Turkes was full of guile and cruel. He first inuented, and established the order of Ianitzaries, of whome it shalbe spoken hereafter. He raigned yeares thirty one, and died in the yeare of christian health, a thousand four hundred and fiftye. Mahometus. MAhometus of that name the second, ninth Emperour of ye Turkes, was bolde, of great audacitye stubborne, and rash. He toke Constantinople in the yere from Christes incarnation, a thousande four hundred fifty and thre, the nine and twenty day of may, and was Emperour thirty and two yeares. Baiazetus. BAiazetus called the second of that na∣me, tenth Emperour of ye Turkes, by
force of warre subdewed all Moldauia, and brought it in subiection to his Em∣pire. Besides that he fought many, gret, and perilous battels, at the whiche he was present in his owne person among his souldiers. He raigned thirty and one yeares. Selimus, SElimus eleuenth Emperour of ye Tur∣kes was marueilous cruel. He poiso∣ned his Father, and by that meanes ob∣teined the turkishe Empire, in the yeare of our Lorde God a thousande fiue hun∣dred and twelue. Afterwarde when he had subdewed the great Sultan, he sacked the most populons citye Alkairum, and raigned but eight yeares, at what tyme he was iustly punished for his crueltye. Solymannus, SOlymannus the sonne of Selimus and twelueth Emperour of the Turkes, whiche reigned in our time, but now is
saide to be dead, was for our sinnes and offences fortunate and victorious. By him wer subdewed ye Grecian city Alba, with Rhodes. And after that he had van∣quished kyng Ludouicus, he adioyned al∣so to his Empire, Buda, Strigonium, Alba Regalis, and many other cityes of Hun∣garye. He also in the yeare of our Lorde a thousand fiuehundred twentye and nyne beseged Vienna, wher from by helpe of the sone of God, whom he hathe as his enemye, he was driuen away.
In what maner the Turkes do vse to make vvarres. AFter that the Turkes had vanquished the strenght & powre of the Macedonians, thei kept and imitated ther traininge vp of souldiers, warrelike discipline, and maner in go∣uerning, althoughe in euery particuler point they agre not. Wherfore ther har∣neis being coates of maile, they ar accu∣stomed to fight with spere, shilde, and swordes croked in the backe lyke our woode kniues, and often times proue conquerours. It is most certain that the Ianitzaries do nothing at all differ from the most picked souldiers of Macedonia, by whose martiall prowes Alexander the great, vanquished the inhabitantes of the Easterne partes, and brought thē in subiection to his Empire. They bring vp, exercise, and instructe them euen frō
their infancye in fighting and the war∣res. Not one amonge them doth knowe either his parentes, or knisefolke. They ar (to saye the truth) the children of chri∣stians, rauished and taken awaye at son∣drye robberies, and spoiling conquestes, whiche beyng brought into the orcharde of the turkishe Prince, they practise and traine vp in warrelike feates and exer∣cises, wherby in time to come, they may be haue and defend thē selues more mā∣fully in the forefront of their battelles. If any of them chaunce to dye, or to bée slaine in the felde, eyther at the assaute of any citie strong castell, or other migh∣tye places of defence, incontinent they ordaine and substitute in ther places, cer¦taine of those so exactly exercised and in∣structed yong menne, and by that mea∣nes fil vp the member. By reason wher of the bande of Ianitzaries, whiche is is it were the fortresse and harte of all the powre and strength of the Turkes, doth
alwaies confinew vndeminished. They haue not equal stipendes, but euery one hath a pension: according to his propre manlines and puisant dedes atchiued. And this is the onelye cause why they proue so desperate prompt and ready to attempt all kynde of valiant actes and aduentures, as of late yeares wée haue of them bene taught and certifyed, not withe out oure greate grefe, domage, and discommodytie. For euen sithens the time of Amurathes the second, which first constituted the Ianitzaries, and dis∣posed them in this order, we neuer reade that they loste the vniuersall and hole strenght of any generall armye, but by experience haue rather knowen them, to be the victours and conquerours. The Turkes do mainteine & kepe with suche iustice and seueritie the discipline of war, the lawes and customes in bat∣tell, that in this behalfe they maye seme farre to passe ye Gretiās & Romains. Ther
neuer chaunceth amonge them, eyther diuisions, mutual slaughters, seditions, or treason. For they ar fourthe with be∣headed, being but for a trifeling offence conuicted. The turkish souldiers in ma∣ny respectes do surmount the warriours of other nations. First of all they readi∣ly obeye, with out grudging or disdaine, their Prince & Captaines, which is not obserued among vs. Secōdly al thoughe they be enforced with moste vrgent ne∣cessitie, yet they neuer take flight, but rather assaile and fight more desperatly. For they fully beleue that by celestiall prouidēce it is determined at what time, and after what sorte euerye mane shall ende his lyfe and dye, and therfore they thinke that no misfortune may chaunce vnto them before the prefixed houre. Finally in as muche as they ar endura∣ble & most patiēt, a lōg space of time they can susteine thē selues with out bred or wine, with only water and rice.
❀ The Officers perteinning to the greate Turkes Courte and vvarres, vvith the disposition of the same, and diuersities of his souldiers. Visier Bassae, VIsier Bassae are Councellours to the turkishe Emperour: For with these he accustometh to deliberate & consulte of all his busines and affaires. They ar in number foure, and are chosen by the Emperour him selfe, of the multitude of those, whiche haue forsaken Christ, and of Christians ar bée come Turkes, yea ther haue bene founde to proue of them more worse then the Turkes thē selues Their authorytye and powre is of great estimation, and they are of marueilous riches and substance. Lesker Kadie LEsker Kadie are ye chefe Judges, whi∣che determine, & discide, be they neuer
so many, all contentions, and controuer∣sies of warre. The one hath his seat in in Romania, the other in Natolia. Theire office is to declare the lawe, sit in iud∣gement, and the causes of as manye as ar brought before them, to decyde accor∣dyng to the lawes of Mahomet. Unto these do apeale and resort all the other inferiour Judges named also Kadie, and in their powre it lyeth to geue iudge∣ment of any controuersie, be it neuer of so great weight. Beglerbeg, BEglerbeg he hath the soueraintye of al other Captaines, & is chefe Prince of warrefare, or one that supplieth ye chefe Princes rome. Ther ar two Beglerbegs, and they haue the dominion ouer them that ar named Szantsakbegler. The one hath his abode in Natōlia at Cutheia a ci∣tye of Galatia, the other in Romania in a citie of the Ruscians, whiche of them is
called Sophia. Tepthedar Tepthedar in their lāguage doth signi∣fy a boke, in the which reckoninges and accoūptes ar writen. Wherof they haue their name Tepthedar. They ar ye Que∣stours, or Treasourers. The one in Ra∣mania, the other in Natolia do receyue an accounte of the yearly profites, and reuenewes, throughe out the whole tur∣kishe Empire, and of all rentes and ex∣penses. They ar of great authoritye an estimation in the courtes of Princes. Iereys, Iereys is Prince of the battels fought vpon the sea, and warres about the sea coastes, whiche alwaies is choseu out of the nomber of them wyche are named Szantsakbegler, or Liuetenantes whyche gouerne Calliopolis. He hath the charge of thre hundred shippes, all whiche are gouerned by sailes.
Moderie, Moderis are menne learned in the constitutions, decres, and ordinaunces of Mahomet, wise, and of meruelous ex∣perience, and therfore they are all gene∣rallye called by this name. Muthi, Muthi are lawiers, of the whiche one is elected to be as principall Doctor of the lawe, whose apointmente or deci∣ding it is not lawefull for any manne to retracte or call againe. If any obscure & darke places are founde in the lawes, these are consulted concernynge the in∣terpretation therof. Iaziti. Iaziti are diuers scribes in the courtes of turkishe Princes, howbeit they vse sondrye languages and letters. For in Turkeye they speake and writte withe their propre spech and letters. In Grece
and Italye with the tounge and letters of the Grecians. But in Pannonia and Moldauia are accustomed in writing the language and letters of the Rascians. The Turkes do call all the scribes by one name Iaziti. Spahioglani. Spahi in their ong betokeneth noble, and Oglan doth signifye a younge man or sonne, wherof they haue to name Spa∣hioglani, and they are the principall bor∣semene in the turkishe armye, brought vp in the Emperours Orchard, and are called his sonnes. Out of ye band of these are chosen such as they call Szantsakbe∣gler, after that his Legates or Embassa∣dours. The ful number of thē is a thou∣sande▪ beinge apparaled with gorgeous and riche ornamentes, they ride by the Emperours right syde. Euery one of thē hath seuē or eight souldiers vnder him. Soluphthari
Soluphthari, these are hrought vp toge∣ther with the Spahioglans, and are equi∣valent vnto them in powre and dignity. Their number also is a thousand, being cladde in moste fine and sumptuous ro∣bes thei go by the Emperours lefte side. Capiti. Capi in the turkishe language dothe signifie a Gate, of the which their name deriued is Capici. They are the kepers or porters of the Princes Gates, whiche are maruelously estemed, and aduaun∣ced to highe dignities. They are elected out of the bande of Ianitzaries. The num∣ber of them is fourhundred. Vlufagi. Vlufagi are a thousande horsemene so called, chosen from the troupe of Ianit∣zaries, or pycked souldiers of the Bassaens, whiche haue made manifest by some fa∣mous or notable acte their fidelytye and manlye prowes. They kepe the thirde
ranke after the Emperour of Turkye. Caripiti. Caripiti, these also are horsemene, in number a thousande. And euen as their horses are quicke and swifte, so are they also endewed with wonderfull audacity and swiftenes. Thei vse and arme them selues with bow, arrowes, shilde, ere, and croked swordes, and haue stipen∣des verye large. Solakhi. Solakhi, are the principall and best a∣pointed souldiers. These also are chosen frome the bande of Ianitzaries, whyche ar marueilous skilful in shewing with arrowes, and are practised and accusto∣med, aboue all the rest, in shewtinge thē of most streight vnto ye prefixed marke. Their number is seuen hundred, whose offyce is to enuiron and safegarde the Emperour with their arrowes nocked. Ianitzaraga.
Ianitzaraga. By this name is called the Chefteine of the Ianitzaries, which hath vnder him Peticapteines, of whom cer∣teine haue the gouernmēte ouer a thou∣sande, other of fiue hundred. Ther are besydes these Centurions, and captai∣nes ouer tenne. Vnder whose dominion do the rest of the Ianitzaries lead a moste quiet lyfe. Ianitzari, Ianitzari are footmen in nūber twelue thousande, most valiant, of marueilous practise, & stronge souldiers, vnto whose fidelity the turkishe Emperour is wont thefelye to credite and committe hym selfe. They vse long Gunnes, out of the whyche they showte fourthe pellettes with great swiftnes, & strike the marke or thinge whervnto they send the same. Beslie, Beslie, are also souldiers most famous and exercised, whiche haue declared no∣table
actes of their strenght. Euery one of them receiueth the stipendes of fiue souldiers, and are almost in nūber four∣hundred. Mutapharak Mutapharak, are the sonnes of greate Princes, ministers or seruantes of the Emperour, they enioye aboundant ly∣bertye, and susteine no trauels, sauinge that they stande before the turkish Em∣perour, obserue, waite vpon, and accum∣panye him. Czausi. Czausi, these do cary clubbes in their handes, they order and dispose the hoste. They goe also before the Prince in the armye, and make him waye, as hereaf∣ter it shalbe declared againe. Ther are of them thrée hundred. Whose help and aide, the turkishe Emperour is also accu∣stomed to vse in Ambassadges. Gimlie,
Gimlie. These souldiers are formes∣sangers, which haue horses most swifte, and when necessitye requireth, can ryde and dispatche a great space of grounde in one night. They are couered with coates of maile, and fight with shild spe∣es and croked swordes. Alcantzi, Alcantzi be horsemen of the lowest estate or degre, they are cruell wasters and spoilers, whiche, in as much as they goe to warre, onely for their priuate cō∣modities sake (for no spoiles or booty is wonte to be exacted at their hādes) they waste and consume euerye thinge with fyre and sworde. The multitude of them is great, for they excead the number of thirty thousande. Mekther Mekther, are ministers of the turkishe Prince, whiche are ordeined to purge, make cleane, and decke vp the houses of
the Emperour of Turkeye. These haue the charge of al the hanginges of tapes∣trye and arras. They kepe the tentes of the turkishe Emperour, when he goeth vnto any warre. Asappi, Asappi are footemene verye skilefull in showetinge of arrowes, sent from the cities of Turkeye, the help the turkishe Emperour in time of warre Euery one of them, for the stipende of one moneth, dothe receiue thrée turkyshe peace of goulde.
❀ The Turkishe rites and ceremonies. The forme of the turkishe temple, of the resort therunto, and order in praiinges. THey haue temples of a competēt largenes, and sumptuous, cal∣led in their language Meschit, in the which I saue at all no ima∣ges or pictures, sauinge these woordes writen in the Arabian tounge: La Illah Illellah. Mehemmet, Iresul, Allab, Taure Bir Pegambir Hath: which is as much to saye as, their is no god but one, and Me∣hemmet his prophet, one receatour, and the rest of his Prophets equall. Or these Fila Galib Illelah, whiche thuse maye be englished, their is none so stronge as God. After that their is to be sene a gret multitude of Lāpes burning with oyle, all the temple whitlimed, the pauement
couered with mattes, and bewtisyed frō aboue with hangings of tapistre worke. Not farre from the temple, their is a toure or turret of exceading height, whi∣che their prest ascēdinge before the time of prayer repeatethe these wordes thri∣se, with a loude voyce, his eares stopped with his fingers: Allah Hechber whych doth signifye, their is one trewe God. Whose voyce beyng hearde, bothe the noble and baser sorte of mene resort vn∣to the church, they are so geuen, and ad∣dicted vnto deuotion. Then the forena∣med preste comming downe doth praye with them, and so is he bounde to doe fiue times within the space of a daye and night, by his office. But as manye as come vnto the prayer Church, ought first to washe their handes, féete, and pryuy partes: after ye thrise they sprincle water vpon their beades, rehearsinge these wordes: Elhemdu Lillahi, wiche is, glorie be to my God. Laste of all their
shoes put of, called Patsmagh, and lefte before the dore of the temple, they enter in: some with bare feet, other hauinge cleane showes named Mesth, with the which they tread not one the bare earth. The turkishe women neuer kepe cum∣panye, and sitte with the menne, but a part in a place altogether separete from their sighte and hearinge: and they sel∣dome frequente the temple, but at the time Bairam of Easter, and nowe and then on the Frydaies, which in their lā∣guage is named Gsumaagun, they praye from the nynthe houre of the night vnto the twelueth of the same, which is myd∣denighte: and in the time of their praier, they marueilouslye beate and torment their bodyes with continuall mouynge and exclamations, in suche wise that of∣ten times destitute of strenght and re∣membrance, they fal flatte one the earth and if any of them from that time fore∣ward shal féele her selfe to be with child,
she affirme the to haue cōceyued by ver∣tue of the holye ghoste. And when they are deliuered, the children borne of them are called Nefes Oglu, wich is Soules, or children of the holye ghoste. So was it declared vnto me by theyr waitinge maides: for I neuer sawe it, neither is it permitted that any man shoulde be pre∣sent at that spectacle. But at the prayers of the men I haue bene oftē times with my maister, whose maner and custome is suche. While their prayer endureth, they put not of their bonettes (wyche in their toūg are named Tsalma) but touch them with the toppes of their fingers, as thoughe they were about to lifte thē vp, they knele on their knées and kysse often the earthe. A heinous déed among theim it is accounted that a Christian should be permitted to their prayers: for they beleue (as it is reported among thē) their churches to be defiled by suche vn∣cleanely persons. For the Christians ac∣custome
not those often frequented was∣hinges, acordinge to their custome. Ther the preste goeth vp vnto the pul∣itte, and preachethe about the space of wo howers: his Sermon being finished wo boyes supply ye roome, with singing pronounce their praiers. Which also en∣ed, the preste beginneth with all the people in a lowe voyce to singe (shakyng his head from one syde to an other) no other but these wordes, La Illah Illelah, whose meaning is, ther is but one god, and so the space almost of halfe an houre he shaketh him selfe, and soundethe the prayers with his voyce. But ch kynde of prayers and ceremonies, as singinge and Sermons are not vsed euerye daye, sauynge in the time of Lente, and on a festiuall daye, as Thursdaye, from the ninthe houre of the night vnto the twel∣ueth. And of some Frydaye is most reli∣giously obserued.
Of the Turkes Lent, vvhen They kepe it and hovve their Easter is obserued. ALent they haue also, in their propre language called Orutz, wherin eue∣rye yeare they fast the space of one Mo∣nethe and a weke, but not alwayes one, and the same, for if this yeare they faste Januarye, the next folowing they ab∣steyne in Februarye, goinge in order, so that in the course of twelue yeares, thei faste a yeare, and the twelue wekes are offredde vnto God in stéede of a Tenth. In the time of their fasting, they tast all the daye of no kynde of meate, no not so muche as of bredde or water. But after the sight of a starre, it is lawfull for thē the féede on all sortes of meates, excep∣ting stranguled, and the flesh of Swine. Stranguled meate of thē is called Mur∣dar, whiche doth signifie a deade, or vn∣cleane carcas, and the swine Domutes. The Lent finished they celebreate the
feast of Easter, in their mother speache ned Bairam, with marueilous solem∣ytie, by the space of thre dayes, anoyn∣nge the nayles of their handes & féete ith a certaine oyntment by thē named hna, whiche causethe their nayles to lister: they steigne with the same oynt∣ente also, the tayles and féete of their ouses: thys colour sticketh very faste, nd cane not easely be wéeped or was∣ed awaye: wherfore excepte new nay∣s encrease out of the rootes, they all∣ayes apeare glistringe, but from the andes with often and continewal was∣hyng it maye he weipte out. The wo∣men not only infecte their nailes, but al∣so their handes and féete with the same Oyntemente. ❀ The maner of the turkisne circum∣cision, after vvhat sort it is done, and of their names. THey vse Circuncision called in theyr propre spech Tsuneth, not on ye eighte
daye, accordynge to the custome of th Jewes, but after the childes birth whe he is in the age of seuen or eyghte yea∣res, then skilefull in speaking their lan∣guage: and that ceremonye is obserued amonge them at that time, for the wor∣des of confessyon, whiche are required before the circumcision (the Thumbe of his hande called Larmath, lifted vp) and they are those to witte, that before we haue mentioned to bée written in their temples. And the childe is not brought vnto the chuch, but circumcised at home in his parentes house, At this solemnity haue I ben often present, which is done after this maner. First of all their frin∣des are called together to a bankete, for whom of dayntye dishes, ther are suffi∣cient prepared, of all kyndes of fleshe, suche as they may lawfully féede on, and here and ther, (as among the richer sort) is slaine an Oxe, in the which (flean, & his boweles taken out), they encloase a
sheepe, in the shepe a henne, and in the henne an egge, all whiche holye toge∣ther are rosted in honour of that daye. After that at the time of their banketing and feast, the childe is brought fourth to bée circumcised, then the Phisition or Surgion seruinge for that purpose, ope∣neth the mitte of his yarde, and taketh the skinne folded in a crampe wire, sōne after whereby to rydde the childe from feare, he sayeth that ye circuncision shal∣be deferred vntill the nexte daye, and so departeth, not longe betwine, fayninge as thoughe some thynge were omitted or forgotten, whiche necesarye apper∣taineth to the accōplishinge of that acte, vpō a sodaine he cutteth of peace of that skinne, whiche couereth the heade of the childes yarde, putting vpon the wound a litle salte and softe silke thense fourth he shalbe called Musulman, which is cir∣cumcised, and they haue no names geuē them on the daye of circumcision, but at
their very birthe, when firste they are brought into light and this worlde, whi∣che are these, and firste of kynges as Su∣leiman, interpreted Solomon Sultan Ste∣lim, whiche is a Prince of peace Murath Begh, a desyred ruler: Mustapha & suche like. Of captaines as Pirin, Haradon, Hader, Ebrahim. And the names of lordes of the meaner condition are Spahalar, Sauslar, Eminler, Behram, Memmi Mehē∣met, Alli, Ahmat, Tcielebi, Paiazith, Chatsun, Hutscref. Vnto all the reste, Mutsa, Ionutz, Sthender, Perhat, Ferro. Their captiues and bondemene, for the greater parte are called Seremeth, which name signifyeth a bolde and spedye ser∣uante. From that time forewarde the feast continewing by the space of three dayes, the circumcised childe is brought with a moste solemne triumphe vnto a Bathe. And in retourning home, he is leade by the guestes and banketters, which offer giftes vnto him before pro∣uided:
some silke garmentes, some siluer cuppes, other mony or horses. The wo∣mē also present him with shirtes, napt∣kinnes, and other suche like. Euerye of the feasters geueth acording to his plea∣sure, habilytye, or riches. The women are not at all circumcised, but confessing only the fornamed wordes, are counted Mulsuman But if any amonge the chri∣stians of his voluntarye will, graunting him selfe to bée a Mehemmetiste, dothe suffer circumcision whiche not seldome chaūceth by reason of the most greuous yoke and burthen of tribute, he is caried throughe all the streates & highe wayes of the cytye, with great honour and ioye of all the people, playing vpon timbrel∣les: vnto him also are geuen certain gif∣tes, after that he is made frée frō paying any tribute, in their mother tounge cal∣led Haracs. And throughe gredines of this lucre and aduantage, manye of the Grecians, whiche they call Vlumlar, and
Albanians, that are named Arnautla haue bene circumcised. If anye manne forced by vyolence, as one whiche hath stroken a Mulsuman, misused him with reproche, or blasphemed Mehemmet wiche I sawe chaunce vnto a certaine Bishoppe of the Grecian religion) be circumcised, ther is no thing geuen vn∣to him, albeit he shalbe discharged from paying any tribute, as the reste Mulsul∣manlar, whiche is of the circumcised are. ¶ Of the turkishe Prestes by vvhome they are elected, and hovv thei liue. THe prestes, which in their speche are called Talismanlar▪ do very litle or no thinge at all differ from the laye people, neither from the chefe ministers of their ceremonies (which amonge vs are. Bis∣shoppes) and no depe learnynge is to be required in them, it is sufficiente if they are of abilytye too reade the Alkaron and Mussaphus. But they that canne inter∣prete them accordynge to the texte, are
counted profundely learned: because thei were not deliuered by Mehemmet in the vulgare turkishe toung, but in the Ara∣bian language, for they counte it a hei∣nous matter if beynge interpreted they should be writen in their mother speche. These prestes are elected by the people, but receyue a stipende for their labour of the kinge: they haue wiues and their apparell is lyke vnto seculer menne. If the stipende be not sufficiente for them to lyue, throughe the multitude of their children, they vse some handye crafte, and handle some suche occupation, as maye be thought worthye a frée manne, they become schole masters and writte bookes, I saue verely no printers among them, but they dresse their paper verye finelye. The rest doo vse other meanes for aduantage and games, as the occu∣patiōs of Showemakers, Tailers, and suche lyke.
¶ The festes of the turkishe Munkes and maner of ther liuinge. THer are not wantinge amonge them Munkes called Deruislar, of diuers sortes verely, but chefely of thrée orders. The first order is of those, which hauing no one thinge propre, goo as it were na∣ked, sauing their pryuye partes are co∣uered with shepes skinnes, and likwise in the time of extreme coldnes, they vse the same skinnes to couer their backes: but their sydes, handes, féete, and head, they couer at all with no garmente. Re∣questing almes as wel of the christians as Turkes, they desyre it Alahisi, which dothe signifye for gooddes sake. These Munkes deuourynge the herbe called Masath, are driuen into a madnes, in so muche that they wounde them selues, and draw a launce from one side of their breast ouerth wart vnto the other, after, that alongest their armes, without she∣winge fourthe any token of grefe: and
remoue not the kindlede drye stickes of trées layed vpon their head, breast, and hands, vntil they be resolued in to asses. I sawe an other secte whiche forebidden carnal copulation with women, goe, the fore parte of their yarde, or the secrete parte it selfe perced throughe, and ther∣in encloased an iron ringe of the weight of thrée poundes to obserue chastitye. The third order seldome goeth abroad, but doth remaine day and nyght in tem∣ples, hauing litle cabines in the corners of those churches, with out showes, gar∣mentes, and bare headed, hauinge no∣thyng about them, exceptyng one shirte. fastinge the space of manye dayes, and prayinge, that God woulde reueale vn∣to them the estate of thynges to come, withe whom the turkishe, beyng about, and entendynge to stirre or make warre accustometh to consulte.
¶ Of the marueillous reūerence vvhich the Turkes exhibite vnto the tradi∣tions of Mehemmet. THe Turkes attribute such reuerence vnto the traditions & decrées of Ma∣homet, yt not only god they blaspheme note (which chaunceth often among vs) yea if they but finde, a scroll, in what fa∣cion soeuer it be writen, lyinge on the earth, taking it vp, and often times kis∣sed, they encloase the same, throuste into some chenke of the wal: for it is counted a synne, that the letters, wherwithe the name of God, and lawes of Mahomet are writen, shoulde be trode vnder their féete. And therefore no manne dare to sell an Alkaron, or anye other of their writinges vnto a christian, or mane of some other faith and religion, lest being neglected and cast awaye, they should be troden vnder their féete, or touched with vncleane handes, if otherwise they are be headed. Wherefore in this respecte,
they can not verely but be preferred and estemed before vs. ❀ Of the Scholes for bothe kindes, and in vvhat artes they instructe their youthe. THey haue places apointed to trade in good letters their youthes of bothe kindes, called in their toung Ochumach∣girleri, and teachers for the same whiche are named Hogsialar, howbeit separatly they are instructed, as the male children by men, and young girles by women, in Astronomye, Philosophye, and the arte of Poetrye. Durynge the time of their learnyng, speaking in a shrl voyce, they moue their bodyes from one syde to the other. They haue no skill in artifyciall Musicke, but faine certaine vearses by prescribed rules, whiche are in this ma∣ner. Euerye vearse ought too compre∣hende a leuen syllables. Wherefore it pleased me for an example to subscribe these fewe.
❧ Vearses called of them Bethler. Birechen bes on eiledum derdumi Iarà dandam istemiscem iardumi Terch eiledum Zachmanumi gardumi Ne ileim ieniemezum glunglumi They ar amorous vearses, of a goddesse called in their language Assih, whyche is goddesse of loue, whose interpretation worde by worde is suche: Birechen, bes on, eiledum, derdumi: Of on, fifty, I haue mad, in my tribulatiō Iara dadam, istemiscem, iardumi: Of my creatour, I haue required, succour Terch eiledum, Zachmanumi, gardumi: I haue neglected, of my countrey, the vi∣sitation. Ne, ileim, ieniemezum, glunglumi. What, shall I do? I can not subdew, my minde. ☞ Hovve they contracte matrimo∣nye, of their dovvries, and occasion of deuorse.
THer matrimonye called in their toūg Eulenmech, is done in this maner. They ioyne to gether in mariage with out any betrowething made, they take their wiues without dowrye, and for the most parte are constrained to bye them, contrarye to that aunciente custome, which in time past was vsed among the Romaines, wher the sonne in law was wounte to be bought, and not the sōnes wife. The spouse hath no comelye dec∣kynge or furniture about her body, whi∣che the bridegrome is not compelled to raūsome and by of his wyues parentes. Leude and vnsemelye behauiour or ba∣raines causeth a diuorse betwine them. Their Judge hathe certificate, and de∣cydeth suche matters. Mariage is also permitted vnto them withe their bonde seruantes, but the children borne are counted in seruitude and boundage. ❀ Of their Pilgrimmes, and to vvhat places they goe in Pilgrimage.
PIlgrimes in their language called Hagfilar, do visite the places by them counted sacred and holye, whiche are Mecha, Medinus, (as our men Jerusalē) wher they affirme that Machomet dyed, but no lesse throughe hope of gaine, then for religion or deuotions sake. Ther after the sght of a Shoe called Tsaroth, which gilted only, hangeth downe from the roofe or vaulte of the temple, and cer∣taine moste subtile nettes, named Chu∣mas, bought, they departe with greate aduantage into their countrye. And in their retourne, some for deuotions sake dothe carye water throughe the strea∣tes, and offer the same srelye vnto the thyrsty, suche as they méete, other at∣tende their propre busines. And if anye, by what meanes so euer it be, happe to dye in the iorney, allthoughe they come not to Metha, yet are they accounted a∣monge the nomber of Pilgrimes.
❀ The foolishe fayle vvriten by Ma∣homet in his Alkaron, and of the beast named El Barahil MAchomet write the in this Alkaron of two Angelles called Aroth and Maroth, whome he affirmethe to haue ene sente by God into the earthe, that hey shoulde minister iustice and equitie nto menne, and were commaunded too rinke no wyne, neyther adioyne them selues in cōpanye with women, or shew nto any body the waye whiche leadeth to the place of perpetual blissednes, whi∣he transgressynge the commandement of God, becam drūke, deceiued by a wo∣man, defyled them selues, and declared nto her the waye whyche to heauen bringeth, whome whē God sawe com∣minge towardes heauen: he asked the Angelles standyng by him, who it was that endewed with suche a shape, would come into heauen. When the Angelles hadde affirmed that it was throughe the
folie of Aroth & Maroth, God commaun∣ded that the woman shoulde bée turned inta a Starre, but bidde them caste the Angelles cheyned together into a bur∣ninge pitte foreuer ther to bée tormen∣ted. He maketh mention likewyse of a beast named El barahil capable of the speache of manne, whyche beaste caried Machomet into heauen, wher he confes∣sed to haue sene great Angelles, hauing many heades, and those heades to haue diuers and manifolde tōges. These tru∣lye ar rather toyes to mocke Apes with∣al, and vnworthy to be spoken by suche a prophet as they counte Machomet to be. But peraduenture well tipled with wine, he thought to haue dreamed in his dreames of such miracles, or rather pro∣digious folishenes. Therfore in as much as he was not ashamed to declare suche trifles, by mouth, but also to write them in his Alkaron, he ought deseruedly not to be called a Prophet, but a false decey∣uer, and malicious seducer frō the truth.
☞ Of the miracles vvrought at Mecha by Machomet, and of suche as they report him ther dailie to doe. I Doute, and am vncertaine whether they ought to be called miracles, or miraculous trifles, those I meane which are writen in their boke named Mehem∣medinum▪ For they stedefastlye affirme and throughely perswade them selues, that, when Mecha shoulde bée builded, God throughe the prayers of Machomet gaue commaundement vnto the Hilles, that euery one should bringe stones, for the erectynge and building vp of Mecha: and when all the hilles had brought the tenth of his stones, wherby Mecha was builded and finished, a certaine hill na∣med Araphatdagh beyng more slacke, by reason of his comming frō farre coastes, then ye rest, whē he saw Mecha through∣lye builded, and perceiued that they nea∣ded not hys stones, began bytterlye too wepe. Whom whē Machomet had sene
murning, and vnderstode the cause of his lamentation, sayde, lette not thy co∣rage fainte the, and bée not sorowefull, but laye downe ther (apointinge to the place with his finger) thy tenthe: & who∣soeuer shall not praye vpon that stone, his pilgremage shalbe vnprofitable and vnthankefull. Then Machomet stroke the stone with his foote, & brought water ther from, not good to be dronken of, and called it by name Abzemzemsui, which is water of purification, wherof al their Pilgrimes are accustomed to cary home with them in vesselles: and when one chaunceth to die, the clothes wherin the dead carcas shalbe wrapped are sprin∣cled with that water, in remissyon of all his sinnes and offences. They saye also that no man can come vnto Mecha, but his comminge is fore∣knowen by Machomet, which afterward to the kepers (& they are all Eunuches) by hym is reuealed: but if that Hagij,
whiche signifyeth Pilgrime, bée a thefe, a wicked persone, christian, or manne of oher suche like religion, the forenamed kepars doe prohibite him entrance into Mecha. But in deed his dead corps, as some affirme, lyethe not ther, but the shape of an image printed by the person of Machomet in a wall of the temple, whome they kysse, and so retourne vnto their habitation. Those Infideles haue suche vaine lyes perswaded vnto thē by Machomet, and a gret number mo to be laughed at, which here I am ashamed to alleage. Howbeit I would that the gen∣tyle reader, shoulde enquere of some Turke, whether suche thinges are so in déede, and then he shall bollye affirms that the Author hath spoken mere vere∣tye and truthe. ❀ Of their almes houses, and vvhat meate is geuen vnto the pore. THey haue hospitalles or almes hou∣ses, called Imareth, builded by the tes∣tamentes
of their kinges, in whyche places meate or foode is geuen vnto the poore and Pilgrimmes, but diuersly at sondrye places. Ther are whyche geue Rice named Pirrincts Tsocbà, with flesh: at an other place, Bolghdaias, whyche is made of wheat, in steade of potage, they adde bread also of a reasonable quanti∣tye: the drincke whyche they distribute is water. But place is graunted vnto none ther to remaine alnyght, or slepe, for ther is a publike Charuatsaure, wher frelye they are receiued to hospitalytye, howbeit ther be assigned vnto them no beddes, but they slepe vnder the coue∣ring of a house eyther in heye or strawe. ❀ The maner of their sacryfice, for vvhat cause they do it, and hovv the beastes offred are vsed and distri∣buted. THey offer beastes in sacrifice, but for the moste parte before vowed, called Chorban as well in the turkyshe as ara∣biane
language: In the time of anye di∣sease or perill, they promise (euery mane acording to his habilitie) in certaine pla∣ces to sacrifice eyther a Shepe or Oxe: after that the vowed offringe is not bur∣ned, like vnto a beast killed and layed on the aulter, as the custome was amōg the Jewes, but after that the beast is slaine, the skinne, head, féete, and fourthe parte of the flesh are geuen vnto the prest, an other part to poore people, and the thirde vnto their neigheboures. The killers of the sacrifice doe make readye the other fragmentes for thē selues and their com∣paynons to féede one. Neyther are they bound to performe the vow, if they haue not bene deliuered from the possessed di∣sease or peril. For all thinges with them are done condytionallye I will geue if thou wilte graunt. The lyke woorshyp∣pinge of God is obserued amonge the Gretians, Armenians, and other realmes in Asia imitating yet ye christian religiō.
¶ VVhat is assigned to be done by the Testamentes of the Turkes, as vvell of menne as vvomen. IF any of the circumcised dying enten∣deth to make a testament, suche lega∣cies for the most part are apointed, (their neigheboures and frendes called toge∣ther) eyther to fetche springes of water, and bringe them before some Hospitall, temple, or drye place, that is frequented be menne Haritsi, moued with a godlye zeale, & Gsianitsi, for their soules health. Other bequethe their goodes to make captiues and bound menne frée. But the women (as thys kynde aboue all other is moste superstitious) geue monye vnto souldyers, for to kill a certaine number of christians. They make account, that by so doynge, it will greatlye profite the health of their soules. The kynges a∣point temples and hospitalles to be buil¦ded, and other of the nobility when their lotte is to dye.
¶ Their ceremonies about the dead, and maner of interrement. IF a circuncised manne dyeth amonge them, the men take care to make ready the dead corps: if any of the female kind, the women. They washe cleane the co∣arse, and wrappe in fresh and néet lyuen, after that the same is caried vnto some place without the cytye, for it is a hey∣nous crime to burye in the temples. The taper bearers & monkes with light goe before, the prestes folowe after, syn∣gynge by all the waye, vntill they come vnto the place of interrement. But if the disceased person were poore and nedye, money gathered together is accustomed to be geuen vnto the religious people for their labour and trauell. ¶ The building of ther sepulture called Tulbe, and of the sacrifices done to the dead. VPon the kynges sepulcher is builded a temple, for their kinges are buryed
in Cities: the tumbe of riche and poore mene, is about the height of an auter, so that beastes can not leape vpon, and de∣file the same. They often resort thither in wepinge and murnynge: and certaine infernall sacrifices layde on the monu∣mente, as bread, fleshe, chéese, Egges, milke, and the banket continewinge by the space of nyne dayes, accordynge to the Ethnicke custome, it is al deuoured, for the disceased soules sake, eyther by Pismares and the birdes of heauen, or poore people. For they affirme that it is lyke acceptable vnto God, that almes shoulde be offred to the brute beastes ha∣uinge néede therof, as vnto menne, sins that it is geuen for ye loue of God. I haue senne many, whiche geuing the valewe in monye of one litle birde before kepte incloased, haue cast of the same to flye a∣waye: other to throwe bread into the ri∣uer for fishes, through the loue of God: addinge that they for suche mercifulnes
towardes the neadye, shoulde receiue an abundante rewarde at goddes handes. ¶ Of the Turkishe vvarrefare: and first of the king, and a part of his officers. THey haue all one kynge, and in their lāguage he that now raigneth, of thē is called Huncher Othmanlardan Sahitsul¦tan Suleiman, which by interpretation is, Salomon is emperour & Prince of Tur∣keye, of the Othomans descended, whiche now hathe his first begotten sone of the age of thrée and twenty yeares, or their about named Mustapha, in crueltye and tyrannye, passyng his predicessors, often lying in waite for his father, if he might by any meanes kille or cause him to bée slaine, throughe gredie affection, and de∣sire to beare rule. But in what sorte, he was murthered by his Father it shalbe declared in the ende of this booke. The kynge hath vnder him two chefe goue∣nours, or liuetenantes, ouer Europe and Asia, named Tsangiach Begler, vnto the
whiche are subiecte inferiour presiden∣tes called Timargilar, whose hestes doe certaine ordinarye souldyers obeye, but if they be founde lingringe and slacke, when they be called for expedition vnto war, are punished with hāging. Bassalar, whiche they interpret heades, are manye in number, they for councell do alwayes accompanye the kinge. Sulihtarlar also, whyche are the garde of hys bodye, are wont continewally to folowe immediat∣lye after his backe, together with hys Capugtsibegler chamberlaines, Iazitgtsi∣begler chauncellours, Eminler exactours of tribute, whyche is to witte, of children and money, Spahalar lyght harneysed horsemen, a great route, Vlachlaris pos∣tes▪ or pursiuantes, with other such like alwayes folowing the courte. ¶ The estate of the Turkes peeres or nobilitie, and of the possessione. NOt one of the nobles, doth possesse anye prouince or cytye by ryght
title of inheritāce, which after his death, he maye leaue vnto his children, heires or successours, with out consente of the kynge. But if a Prince or gouernour co∣ueteth to haue certaine possessions, it is graunted vnto him vpon this condition. They enter in bargaine concernyng the Prince and reuenewes of those possessi∣ons. The Turke doth know, how many souldiers may yearely be mainteined by the profits of that prouince, then ye Liue∣tenante is bounde to haue allwayes in readines for him, that band of souldiers, at all callinges, otherwise he léeseth his head: and no thing may excuse him from going vnto warre, but onely sicknes. And if at anye time, it shall please the Turke to depriue him of that benefyte, it is in his frée will and choyse: But if he be not depriued, it is his propre possessiō vntill death. After whose interremente, if the heyres of the disceased, will ob∣serue and kéepe the same couenant, they
are permitted to enioye it, if not, it is as∣signed vnto others. If some time any of these péeres or noble doth talke with the kyng, he fasteneth his eyes on ye ground, not daring to beholde hys countenance. ¶ Of the Bassans, vvhom vve may cal councellours, chancellours or rather Secretaries. ALl the Bassans, for the greater part are made nuches (as it was decla∣red vnto me, when I was bonde manne of a certain ruler in Constantinople and are in greater estimatiō with the Turke then all the rest of his nobles, excepting the Sangiackes, and almost as manye as are aduaunced vnto that dignitie, are the rauished children of christians. Not one among them, albeit he hathe a daughter of the Turke to wyfe (as one Chrustā a Bassan had) is indowed eyther with cas∣tell cytye are towne, which he may cha∣lenge by inheritance: but if he be aduaū∣ced vnto any honorable authoritie, he en∣ioyethe
the same vntill his deathe, or as longe as it shall please the Turke. ☞ The obediēce vvhich the Turkes are cōstrained to attribute vnto their king and of his messaengers or poastes. NOt one, eyther of the Jenitsaries, or nobles, hath leaue, or maye bée permitted to walke in the cytye, armed, or girded withe a sworde: excepte it bée, whē the Turke goeth out of his palaic, eyther to pray, or hūte. The gouernours and officers of the cytie do beare in their handes coogelles, whiche if they fynde any brawlyng, or doinge iniurye, and of∣fence one to an other, they punishe them with the aforenamed coogelles. And not one speakinge to an officer, dare to looke him in the face, but fallynge flatte to the earthe, and kissyng his féete, he spekethe vnto him his eyes fastened on the groūd. And when the kynge sendeth Poastes with letters vnto the gouernours of any hys Prouinces, whose horses, as sonne
as they are weried with iourneyng, or tyred with swifte, and contine wall galo∣pinge, the poast is licensed, to take from them their horses, what soeuer they bée whiche méete him in the waye, but if in traueling he méeteth with none, then he turneth towardes the cytyes or townes, Cadiam, whyche is to saye, the iudge he goeth vnto, whiche, excepte he prouide him an horse, is hanged before the gate of his oune house, and for this cause, hor∣ses are nowrished by fewe, but for the greater part Asses. And when that mes∣sanger, or poast shall come to those, vnto whome he was sent, the kynges letters receyued with greate humilytie, kyssed, and his comaundementes with all spede possible executed, he is sent awaie. Then is no Prince whych dare gaine say him, no one Prouince or cytye (as it often chaunceth amonge vs) that rebellethe, and finallye not one whyche dothe not feare hym.
☞ By vvhat meanes the Turkes powre is alvvaies found, and hovve it maye be deminished. THe turkishe Emperour equallye di∣stributeth all his prouinces, vnto the péeres of his realme, but on this condi∣tion, that continuallye, as well in the time of peace, as warre, a bande of soul∣dyers may be mainteyned by the yearely profites of that prouince: his powre is not at al deminished, the souldyers being slaine, excepte he léese also the prouince. As for an example, if the Emperour of Turkeye hath now fowre hundred ban∣des of souldyers, of the whyche a hun∣dred is susteined by the reuenewes of Hungarye, then if Hungarye shoulde be loste, he léeseth also the hundred bandes of souldiers: but if he forgoe no prouince, and léese all the souldyers mainteyned therby, he léeseth nothyng: because that to succede in their places, (yea if he wold desire a greater number,) they may ease∣lye
be founde: like as amonge vs eccle∣siasticall liuinges, and other vacant offi∣ces, may quicklye finde a possessor. ❧ The state of the Chazilarious. THe souldiers called Chazilar, are stronge, and marueilouslye practised in warrelike affaires, whyche at the first bickering, do breake their speares vpon the aduersaries, vsyng no kinde of wea∣pons, sauyng shéelde, speare and gleues, accordynge to oure countrymen, with a helmet, and coate of maile: but their spe∣res beyng broken, they manfullye fyght with drawen gleaues, defendynge them selues with sheildes, alwais endeuoring to mischefe the handes or heades of their enemyes, and lyinge in wayte with all their force to destroye them. It is coun∣ted among them no prayse, but an igno∣minyes, to stryke the enemye or horse with the point of their swoorde. These men put all their lyfe and safegarde vn∣der moderation of the goddesse Fortune,
called in their mother speche Hassup, or Ctsutara, of whom the most common pro∣uerbe amonge them all is this, Iazilan Gelur Bassina, whyche in the Englyshe tounge after this maner maye bée inter∣preted, Iazilan, the writynge, Bassina, on the heade. Gelur, shall take effecte: their meanyng is that, what so euer the God∣desse Fortune, at the daye of Natiuitye, hathe writen on euerye mans heade, to auoyde it, it is impossible althoughe he lurketh in an in vincible castell. Their worthy déedes and exploites are writen by Historiographers in vearse, and re∣hersed by all sortes of men, that the reste wt such lyke boldnes (encoraged through desyre of honour and prayse) may valiūt∣lye, and with out feare assaile their ene∣mies. But for euery noble victorie atchi∣ued by them, their stipendes are doubled, and therfore al the fornamed horse men, ought to folowe & accompanie the kyng, furnished with these kynds of weapens,
that is to witte, Jauelinges or speares, gleaues, dartes, and iron clubbes, some haue tergates, other haue none, and they alwayes receiue wages, as well on the time of peace as warre. ❀ Hovv manie orders ther be of the turkishe footemene. THe first order of footemene, is of the Solachlaries, which are archers, they vse bowes, arrowes, gleaues, and differ by their heade garment from the Ienit∣zaries. The second order is of the Ienit∣zaries, they also haue wepons lyke vnto the Solachlaries, howbeit, for bowe and arowes they vse hargabusheares & po∣leaxes. All these gathered from amonge the christians, leadynge their liues their vnder tribute, taken awaye by force, cir∣cumcised, and brought vp in a certayne place called Tsarai, doe fight moste cora∣giously against the christians, and haue stipendes litle enoughe to liue by: that is to saye, some fowre, fiue, or sixe peces of
monye called Ahtse, of the whiche thrée score do make vp a Crowne: and these vpon paine of lyfe may not ryde, excepte they be sicke. Ther are many also found to be made Ienitsaries of the Turkishe children. The third order of footemene is of the Azaplares, of whome, the warre being ended, ye wages also do cease, and they are all the children of Turkes. They vse a longe speare, gleaue, & haue red heade coueringes, or of some other colour, made of cloth, with fowre angles, corner wise, called Tachia, and differ frō the Ianitsaries, and Solachtaries, by their garmentes, and armour: in the time of battell they throust throughe the horses of their enemyes. Ther is besides these an other order of footemene, from walla∣chia, of the Grecian religion, named Voinichlar, whych haue no other stipend of the Turke, then that they are frée frō payinge any tribute and Tenthes. The men of this order are bound, at their pro∣precostes
and charges, to féede the idle horses of the Turkish kinge, to take iare of them, and brynge them fourthe in the time of warre. ¶ Of the great Turkes tentes, and paui∣lions of his nobles, and souldiers, with the order of their iorneyinge in the time of vvarre. WHen the Emperour of Turkie, for∣saking Constantinople, setteth fore∣warde vnto anye warre, he taketh with him two tentes, called Satorlar, that one this day, may be pitched at the next place of taryinge, when the daye folowing, he purposeth to be receyued. The greatnes of his tabernacle is suche, that vnto the beholders a farre of, it maye be thought a cytye: next therevnto doe the Princes pitche their pauilions, and encompasse round the kynges tabernacle: after these the horsemen, wherof euery one singu∣lerly, or thrée enioye a tente. The foote∣men also haue vnto them peculier taber∣nacles,
for it is decréed by ordinance of warre, that no mane shall lye abrode out of house, or couering. Certaine laborers do make way for the Armie to passe, pla∣cing heapes of stones, or piles of woode, on euery syde, as tokens of the waye, in somuch that in the darke, they can scarse straye out of the waye. They begine to sette forewarde about middenight, and continew marching vntill noone tide of the next daye. In the time of their ior∣neyinge, the kinge is caried, sittinge in the middeste, betwne two Bassans tal∣kynge with him, before whom do iorney certaine souldiers of the enitsarye or∣der, on horses, caryinge burning torches, and this is done in a very obscure and darke night. Then the Tsanlar, whyche are captaines or disposers of ye Army, ha∣uinge iron clubbes, sharpened and kye on euery syde, do driue men awaye from the kinges sighte, by the distance of sto∣nes caste, or shootynge of an arowe,
where Sulihtarlar, the multitude of the garde doth goe, amonge whom are the wagons or chariottes laden with loue boyes, seruyng for the Turkes vse and his péeres. Then the forenamed captai∣nes or disposers of the armye, iorney ey∣ther before them, or come after, with in∣finite bandes of horsemen, footemen, and souldiers of diuers orders, some ha∣uing wages, other for gaine, and lukces sake: men only, for they bringe no womē with them. ❀ The driuing of their beastes, order in the campe, in vvhat sort they lodge, and vvith vvhat foode they lyue. AFter these succedeth a multitude of Camelles, Mules, and horse (sumeti∣mes they bring Elephantes with thē al∣so, called in their language Phil) carying victalles, tentes, with other suche thin∣ges necessary for the Campe. And when the Turkes tabernacle is pitched, euery thing is their setled, and placed in order,
as it were in a cytie: ther are places for Shoemakers, Bakers and Butchers: some séeke and prouide for all sortes of fleshe, but if freshe meate can not be got∣ten, then they drawe fourthe suche foode as is caried by their beastes, that is to witte, bredde twise baken, fleshe dried in the smoke, named Pastarmar, chese, and milke congealed to curdes. They ar most pacient of hunger, thirst, and colde. Very seldome they herboure, or lodge in cities, but in the feldes vnder tentes, not farre from heye cockes and riuers, hauinge a greater regarde vnto their beastes, then of them selues, contēted with a light and base meat, as congealed milke tempered with water, and bread put therin, eyther newe, or twise baken, both maisters and seruantes. Ther is suche sylence obser∣ued amonge them in the nyght season, that they neglecte their captiues flyinge awaye, for feare leste if a noyse, or cla∣mour shoulde be stirred, they should suf∣fer
the punishment ordeined for ye breche of Sylence: but at what time they goe to reste, and when they ryse from their bed∣des, to walke abrode, they crye all with a loude voice these wordes, repeatynge them thrise Allah, Allah, Allah, whyche doth signifie. O god, O god, O god. ☞ VVhat seuere iustice is exercised in the time of vvarre. SUche seueritie is vsed to the breakers of decrées, and ther ordinances in war that no souldier dare to take any thynge vniustelye, if otherwise he should be pu∣nished with out compassion: For ther ar elected among them, certaine ordinarye kepers, or defendours of such necessaries, as ar brought in the wayes, towards the campe, by children of eight or tenne yea∣res olde, which bring to be solde, bredde, egges, frute, corne, with other such like. The forenamed officers ar also bound to defende the Orchardes of frutes, sytuate by the wayes sydes, in so much that they
them selues dare not to take one apple, or other such lyke thing, with out licence of the possessed, for if it happen otherwise they also shalbe punished by léesing ther heades. When I was in an armye of the Turke, at an expeditiō or voiage against the Persians, I saue a Espahye together with his horse and seruant beheaded, be∣cause his horse breakyng louse, had en∣tredan other mans fielde. ❀ Of the triumphe to be celebrated for the Turkes victorie, vvher he is all∣vvayes resident, and vvherefore he maketh vvarre so often againste the christians. WHen it is signifyed, or relation made of the Turkes victorye, the cytyes breke fourth into all kinde of ioyefulnes. By night about the first kindeling of the candell, they begin this triūphant mirth, torches, linkes, and tapers of waxe, are euery wher displayed, the house & wayes whereby the turkyshe emperour muste
passe are adorned with tapestry workes clothe of Arras, and hanginges of silke. But the most solemne pompe is done at Constantinople, wher he is alwayes re∣sident, if no warres be stirringe betwene him and other countries. Howbeit by the lawes, he hym selfe is bounde, after euery thrée yeares, to take a voiage into the christian realmes, eyther for ampli∣fyinge or defence of his kyngedome and dominion. Of their hunting. THer is no nation, vnder the sunne, that so muche deliteth in hunting as the Turkes. For in pursuing wilde bea∣stes, thei runne throughe on ther horses, daungerous, sharpe, and rockye places, takyng diuers kyndes of beastes, and if the dead beast hath bene choked by dog∣ges, neyther they them selues do féede v∣pon the fleshe therof, neyther the chri∣stians inhabiting those costes. But if by chaunce they kill a boare, him they geue
vnto the christians of those partes, for the circumcised are forebidden to eate of Swines fleshe. ¶ Of husbandrie, and craftes men, vnto whom the tenthes do perteine, of the bath, and ceremonies about the same. THe Husbandemen doe til the feildes by their seruantes, and paie the tenth therof vnto their Emperour. The labo∣rours susteine them selues with handye craftes, but they whiche lyue sluggish∣lye, and in idelnes, do pine awaye withe hunger. Merchandise is practised also very diligently amonge them. They tra∣uell into Asia the lesse, whiche nowe is called Natolia, Arabia and Egipte, they discloase them selues, euen amonge the Venetians. In euery of their cytyes ther are Bathes, in the whiche accordynge to their accustomed vse, they washe them selues twyse or thryse. If they voyde vrine, their priuey member is washed, if they vnlode the burthen of nature, their
fundament is made cleane with water: the lyke is done by the women, both kin∣des are waited vpon, as the men by ther seruantes, and the women by their wai∣tinge maydes, caryinge after them ves∣selles full of water. And when they goe fourth to washe, the women do anointe them selues, with a certaine kynde of Oyntement, whyche after the space of halfe an houre, doth cause the heares to fall of, the men them selues doe shaue ther priuye partes, and in no wyse they suffer the heares to growe, but ridde thē selues therof, as wel the men as the wo∣men, in euery moneth twise or thrise: but chefly when they frequent the temples, otherwyse (as defillers of the sacred and holy place) thei should be consumed with fire. Ther are amonge them also diuers sortes of craftes men as bowchers, shoe∣makers, tailers, goldsmithes, siluersmi∣thes, and of al other kinds of metall, lik∣wise printers, and masons, but not of so
subtile and excellent wittes, as certaine ther ar amonge vs. ¶ The iustice and equitie vsed amonge Citizens. ALl the christians, and lykewyse the Turkes, haue one iudge chosen frō among the circumcised, whiche is bound to minister the law, and iustice equallye vnto all estates of men. If any man cō∣mitte murther, he shall suffer deathe for the same. If he steale, or take any thinge by force, he shalbe therfore hanged. As it chaunced vnto a certaine Janitsary, that had dronken vp the milke of a woman, carying it to be solde in the market, not payinge the price therof, whiche, accused before the iudge, whē he had denined the facte, being hanged vp by the héeles, and bounde harde about the middle with a corde, incontinent he vomitted vp the milke, and fourthe with by iudgemente condemned to hanging. This happened, I beyng present, at Damascus, when I
iorneyed from Armenia towardes Jeru∣salem. If any temple commit adultrye, the man is caste into prison, and after certaine monethes redemed for monye, but the adulterous womanne is caryed throughe the streates and highe wayes, on an Asse, scourged with whippes na∣ked, and hauyng the intralles of an Oxe hāged about her necke, is stoned to death ☞ The tilling of their grounde, of the graine, Vines, and other frutes, vvhiche grovve in those countries. AS well the Christians, as circunci∣sed Turkes, do till the feldes, main∣teine pastures, and plante vines, hauing corne or graine like vnto this of our coū∣trye, as wheat, Millet or Hirse, barlye, Oates, fine wheat, beanes, and al kindes of pulse: forthermore Rice in great plen∣tye, flaxe, and silke cotten, more then in our countries. Both the sortes of menne aforenamed haue also in possessyon vi∣neardes, vsinge diuersly the frutes ther∣of.
The Christians make wine, but the Turkes a kinde of honye called in their language Pecmez, thei vse, and order cer∣taine reasons in suche sorte, that as well to the eye, as in taste, they all wayes seme freshe and new, and are by them named Vzum Turssi. They haue frutes ther in gret abundance. At their propre seasons, the Orchardes, gardens, and feldes, are replenished, and laden with Pompones, Melons and cucumbers. Ther are nut∣tes, apples, peares, pome granates, al∣moundes, chest nuttes, figges, cheries, plummes, and other of lyke sorte, for a small price to be bought, but not in eue∣rye nation. For ther are places, as heare and ther in Cappadocia and Armenia the lesse, where (throughe extreme cold) not one of these ar to be had, or may be gottē. ¶ The state of their Shepardes, vvhat heardes of beastes they fede, and of the tribute vvhich is required of the Christians.
THer are Shepardes among the Tur∣kes called Sobaenlar, which leade ther liues contineweally in desartes, & chang places for freshe pasture almoste euerye moneth, hauyng at all no houses or pos∣sessyons, exceptyng tentes, and droues of beastes. They féede Camelles, Mules, Horses, Oren, Shepe, Goates, and make chéese, butter, and shere Shéepe, wherof they make a kinde of garment, or clokes called Ghepenech, and tapestrie workin∣ges, which ar solde, to bye corne for foode vnto their familie. The fornamed She∣pardes generally, do yearly pay vnto the turkish Emperour, tyethes, of ye encrease of al their beastes. The Christians also, liuinge vnder tribute, ar constrained to paie tēthes, which in quantitie is to wit, of euerye male beaste, one crowne, and whiche is moste cruell, they take awaye from them by force all their sonnes ha∣uinge no wiues, makyng searche ther∣fore in ther houses, euery fifte yeare.
❀ The forme of building ther houses. THeir is no great magnificence be∣stowed vpon ther houses, the greater art of them builded of bricke worke, and her bricke is made after two sortes, ey∣ther they are baked in a kéele, or dryed by heat of the Sunne. The rowses of ther houses ioyne together wedgewise, as do the buildinges of our countrye, and this is obserued throughe out al Europe, but in Natolia the coueringes or roufes, are plain, in fashion of a flowre, without any ridge: cundites they haue, and water pipes, that sende downe the rayne water vnto them, whiche is conueied throughe rouled pipes. ❧ The fashion of ther garmentes, vvherof they are made, and in vvhat sorte. THeir aparaill made of the substance of wooll, flare, and silke, is riche and magnificent enoughe, the garment cal∣led Chauton, they vse gardeo, plaites, and
hangyng downe euen vnto ye shoe hēme our bréeches they abhorre, obiectinge thē opprobriously vnto vs, as thynges to be ashamed at. Their shertes named Gum∣lech, and Naptkins ar dyed with a violet colour, ther head is builded vp with an heape of cloth, in maner of a turret, and gathered together at the toppe, not much vnlike the fashion of a stéeple, and suche a couering for their head is called in ther tonge Tulbent, or Salma. The wiues of riche men goe with their faces couered, and neuer open their countenaunces vn∣to any other sauing their husbandes, nei∣ther at any time frequent the market, or common assemblies. The shoes named Babucs, or Csisme, as well of the women as men, haue thicke sooles, that they may vse them the longer space. ¶ Of their meates, and foode. THey vse bread most holesome, called Echmech, both white, & browne, euen as the men of our countries doe, but thei
scater or mingle with the dooghe a cer∣taine kinde of séede named Sussam, after that it is baked, which geuethe a delec∣table switnes vnto the eaters, that bread is not vsed amonge the Christians, sa∣uinge at certaine places, here and their in Spaigne, as in the kingdome of Gra∣nata, and about Ciuill. In their foode is bestowed great conninge, and diuers sortes of sauces, their ordinarye meat is so muche thickened with rice▪ that the partes therof maye be drawen a sonder with their handes. Marueilous is the ab∣stinence amonge them from fishe. They eate all sortes of fleshe, exceptynge of Swine. Their are amonge them no ta∣uerns, or publike Innes, to entertaine strangers, as with vs, howebeit in the stretes are sold diuers kindes of meate, requisite for sustenance, with other thin∣ges necessarye to liue by. ¶ The diuersities of their drinke.
THrée sortes of drynke they haue: the firste is made of Suger, of them na∣med Secher, or honye alayed with water, this drinke hathe to name Tserbeth. The seconde is of reasons (the kerneles firste drawen forth) boyled in water, after that is added water of Roses, with a quanti∣tye of pure honye, that drynke hath his denomination Hossaph, and is sold eue∣ry wher in Turkye, it is swete, and cau∣seth the bealy to swell. The thirde is of that kinde of hony named Pechmes, whi∣che is made of newe wine sodden, vntill the third parte be boyled awaye, this drinke in taste, and to the sight represen∣teth the lykenes of honye, it is alayed with water, and geuen to be dronken of their seruantes. ¶ The maner of the turkishe tables, and hovv they sit at meate. WHen the time of refreshyng is cōme, they put vnder them mattes, called Hactser, after that they spred, abrode ta∣pestrye
clothes, or Cuishens. Some, sitte downe vpon the bare ground. Their ta∣ble hauing to name Tsophra is made of leather, it is sprede abrode and drawen together in forme of a purse. They sitte not downe acordynge to our custome, or after the maner of the auncient fathers, as leanyng to their Elbowes, but their legges lyinge one ouer the other, crosse∣wise, muche like vnto Tailers, Grace or thanke geuinge vnto God is said, before they tast of any meate. They eate spede∣lye and with great silence, in which space their wiues are kept in som secret place The menne seruantes, after the age of twelue yeares, ar not permitted to en∣ter the house wher women be: but yoūge boyes, within the age of twelue yeares, comming in, and goinge fourth, do bring them thinges necessarie, whyche separa∣ted farre of, haue their habitation in an other house. The bounde women haue not so muche lybertye, as to step with∣out
the dores, except it be with the Tur¦kes wiues when they enter the bathes to washe, or goe some other where, with out the cytye, as into Orchardes, vinear∣des, and Gardens, for recreations sake (whiche often times they are wount to doe) but labour harde, continewally lur∣kynge in ther houses, neyther are they permitted to talke, or be conuersant with the men seruantes, as in his propre place, whiche is in the treatise next folowing, of the afflictions of cap∣tiues, the readers easely shall vn∣derstande.
❀ The salutation of the Turkes, Persians, and Arabians, is suche. Sellam aliech Tsultanum, Peace be vnto the O Prince. Sellam aliech Baba. Peace be vnto the O Father. Sellam aliech Ana, Peace be vnto the O Mother. And so the reste in order yow maye salute accor∣ding to the worthines of their persons. Ther aunswere. Rahmatullah Sellam alechmi, Our mercifull God geue peace to yow also, Rahmatullah aliech, tseudigum, Our mercifull God geue vnto yow, my frende, Berechyat. his blessyng. ¶ A Dialogue conteininge questions, and aunsvveres of a Turke vvith a christian, and firste the Turke in this maner speaketh vnto the Chri∣stian. Handa gidertsan bre Giaur? Whether goest thou O Christian? The Christian. Tsultanū giderum stambola. O Prince I goe towardes Constantinople,
The Turke. Ne issum Vac bu meinleketten? What busines hast thou in these countries? The Christian. Ederum bezrgenlik Affendi I excercise marchaundise maister. Or Maslahatom var anadolda. My busines is into Asia. The Turke. Ne habar scizum gilerden? What newes is ther spoken of in your partes? The Christian. Hits neste bilmelom tsaa dimege. I knowe not what newes you desire to vnder∣stande, that I might declare it vnto you. The Turke. Gioldassum varmi tsenumle? Haue you anye companion? The Christian. Ioch, ilanuz gheldum. No, but alone I came. The Turke. Gelutmisun benumle? Dothe it please you to come with me? The Christian. Irachmider tsenum iataghom? Is your lodgeynge farre of?
The Turke. Iachender, guestereim tsaa bundan, It is hard by, I will shew it you from hence. The Christian. Gel ghusteriuere, tseuertson Allaha. Come and shewe, if you loue God. The Turke. Kalch iochari tur honda. Lifte thy selfe vp, stande here. The Christian. I knowe not in what parte it is. Bilmezum hanghi darastan der. The Turke. Tsag eline bacha ghun doghtusine. At the right hand looke towardes the east. The Christian. Bir buch eun atsarhibi, gurunur, ōmider? One hyghe house as it were a Castell apeareth, is that it? The Turke. Gersksou oder iaken deghilmi? It is euen hit, it is the same, is it not hard by? The farevvell. The Christian. Tsamarlodach tseni Alaha. I committe you vnto God.
Ben gitmezom oraa. I will not goe that waye. The Turke. Bre neden korkartson? nitie gelmetson? Oh whom do you feare? why come you not? The Christian. Benūiolum deghelder oraa. My iorneye is not that waye. The Turke. Vargeth tsagloga, eier ghelmeson. Depart with good Luke, if you will not come. The Christian. Gegsien hair altson. A prosperous nyght chaunse vnto you. The Turke. Aghbate hair oltson. And vnto you a more happy night. Ben kurtoldom tsoch succor Allaha. I am deliuered, highe praise be vnto God. These fewe wordes of the turkyshe lāguage, I haue here added for the, most gentill reader, not of necessitie, but for delectations sake: that thou maist vnder∣stand, how grosse and barbarous they be▪ The euer liuing God graunt, that they
may haue more néede of our speche, then we of thers. Farevvell. The lamentable affliction, as vvell of the captiue Christiās, as of them vvhich liue vnder the most greuous youke of Tribute. ❀ In vvhat sort the Christians, taken in warre by the Turkes are handeled. THe turkishe Emperour entending to take any voige, against the Christiās, amonge other hys honorable marchan∣tes a grat number or rablement, of vn∣naturall Regraters of manne kynd, and slaughterous bouchers, sitting on Ca∣meles, doth allwayes accumpanye him: these for hope of bondemen, doe bringe with thē cheines of a merueilous lēght, in the whiche maye fiftye, or thrée score easely be bound on a rowe. So many as
the enemies sworde hathe not muthered and cōsumed, they by of the spoilers and botye sekers, whiche is permitted vnto them, on this condition, that they pay the tenth of their captiues vnto the Empe∣rour, the reste it is lawfull for them to kéepe, eyther for their propre vse, or to be solde: and amonge them ther is no mer∣chandise so frutefull, profitable, or more vsed and accustomed, as in time paste it was among the Romanes which called gods merchādise, bought with no faute, and in the whiche no conuincement by lawe ought to be feared. ¶ In vvhat maner the Emperour orde∣reth, and diposeth his captiues. THe aged sorte, and youthe of bothe kindes, which befel and happened vn∣to him vnder the name of tēthes, he this disposeth, that the wel stroken in yeares, may be sold to applye husbandrye, how∣beit they ar very seldome taken, for it is arare thinge, that they should be spared,
whome age of many yeares hath made scarse saleable. The young men, and vir∣gins, they kéepe inclosed in a certaine place named in their lāguage Sarai, that ther they maye be instructed in profita∣ble artes and sciences, wherby in time to come, they may vse them the more com∣modiously, but firste it is attempted, that, the christian faith and religion being de∣nied, they may be circuncised. And nowe hauyng receiued the first instructions of their ceremonies and the proportion and lineamentes of their bodyes, diligentlye marked by Phisiognomye, they ar acor∣ding to euery ones disposition & toward∣nes, apointed, either to learne the lawes of their country, or, (if a greater force of body, apeareth in them, then sharpnes of witte,) vnto warrefare: and they haue geuen for their daily pention, two or thre Ahcse peces of mony, that they call As∣pres, thrée score of the whiche do make a crowne: they thinke it to be sufficient for
their foode, and aparaill, vntill they be a∣ble to fight in a battell. In this maner, they are instructed in the rudimentes of warrefare. Firste for the tendernes of their strenght, they haue a weke bowe assigned vnto them, but in continuance of time, the force of their bodye, and skil∣fulnes in showtinge beinge encreased, a tougher and more strong bowe is assig∣ned, thus it still augmenteth vntill they ar fit for the warre. A most seuere mai∣ster, at night wil be present among them, to examine, and haue an accounte of ther daily exercise, and as often as they haue rred from the marke, so manye tymes shall they be beaten with roddes. These are ascribed to the order of Solacrarors, whiche are Archers. Certaine other ar brought vp, for that they may be elected amonge the Ienitsaries: these also haue their ouersears, which constraine them to a daily kynde of combating, their con∣tendyng is with clubbes. But the reste
(Oh enuious acte) in whome a greate grace of bewtie apeareth, ar so mangled, that no manlines is to be sene in all ther bodyes, with no small daunger of léesing their liues: but if they escape, yet from thence fourth saftye and sauegard maye they not obtaine, vntill they are made pertakers of their vnnatural lust and le∣cherye, or, their comly bewtye wearynge away, ar made Eunuches, to serue ma∣trones, and dames, eyther appointed to kéepe horses and Mules, or assigned to be drudges in their kitchens. ¶ Hovv they deale vvith virgins, and other vvomen. SVche as are endewed with excellent bewtye, they chuse to be Concubines, the meaner sorte are geuen to ryche Da∣mes and matrones, for wayting mades, to vse them about their necessarye busi∣nes, amonge the whiche, certaine ar such vncleanlye offices, that with honestye they may not be named: for the maydes
ar compelled to folow them, with a ves∣sell of water, when they goe fourth to lay downe the burthen of nature, and purge their inferiour partes. The reste are streightlye kept to labors fitte for wo∣men, as imbrotheringe, and weuing. It is lawful for none of them all, eyther to persiste in the Christian religion, or cō∣ceiue anye hope of fredome, as longe as they liue. ☞ In vvhat sort, the other Turkes doe Vse their captiues. HEre before wée haue shewed, what the turkishe Emperour accustometh to doe, and nowe shalbe declared, what is done by these priuate persons. When any new captiues by them ar receiued, first they endeuour by all kinde of thret∣ninges, faire promises, and flatteringes, that the late obtained bondmen, maye be circuncised: whych when it is done, he is handled sume what more gentellye, but all hope of returning into his country is
cleane cutte of: for burning is ordeined s a punishement vnto the flyers away, Those whiche ar counted most constant, and lesse fugitiue, ar taken by their ma∣ters, to serue them as pages in the ar∣mye, and then at lenght fréedom is pur∣chased, whē, being vnprofitable through his age, he is rather reiected by his ma∣ster, then dimised, or when his maister being in daunger of death at the warres, doth bequeth him fredome. They ar suf∣fred to marrie, but their children ar dispo¦sed accordynge to the arbitrement, and pleasure of their maister, whiche thinge causeth the wyser sorte to abhorre ma∣trimonye. But suche as refuse circum∣cision, ar moste cruelly tormented: what miseries haue I ther susteyned by the space of thirten yeres? Verely I am not able to expresse in any wordes, what ca∣lamity and grefe is in that kynde of life. ¶ After vvhat maner, they vvhich ar vn∣skilefull of manual sciences, ar vsed.
MOst miserable is the estate of them which haue not learned the manual craftes, for they onely amonge them are had in honour & regarde, wherfore when the learned sort, prestes, and noble men, whyche haue leade all their lyfe in idel∣nes, come into their handes, they ar coū∣ted in a more greuous case then of al the rest. For the regrater neuer entendeth to bestow any cost on them, as scarse salea∣ble: they trauell bare legged, with vnco∣uered heades, and often times naked in the greatest part of their body: for their first garmentes worne out, ther shalbe no newe apparell bestowed vpon them, they ar lead and drawen throughe cold, snowe, rockes, stones, summer and win∣ter, and haue no prefixed ende of miserye vntil they dye, or chaunce vpon some fo∣lyshe maister, whiche byeth such vnpro∣fitable merchandise, this is their pitifull estate, and dolefull misfortune. Finallye not one among them is so happy of what
age, condition, science or bewtye so euer he be of, that, falling sicke by reason of iorneyinge, the regrater will leaue hym at some place to be loked vnto. Firste he forceth him to go with stripes, if that can not preuaile, he is placed on a beast, vpō the which if he cane not sitte vpright, he is bounde to the beast, his fore part, and face lokinge to the grounde, lyke vnto a fardell or packe: and beyng about to dye, first spoyled of his garmentes, they caste him into the next diche, or pitte, there to be deuoured by dogges, and vultours. ❀ Hovv the nevv taken captiues are handeled in iorneyinge, NOt only in the iorney, they bynde ther captiues in perpetual cheines but also adde manacles to their handes: the distance of a passe is betwine euerye of them, lest one should tread vnder féete the other: whiche they doe for this occa∣tion, because they would not bestoned, of the bondemen, to deathe. For in as much
as euery Regrater leadeth with hym a great multitude, so that often times they haue fiue hundred men lincked in Iron, they feare the force of so great a number if they should haue their handes at liber∣tye, and frée to caste with all. But when the night is come, they late their féet al∣so with giues, and laye them vp right to al domages of the aire. The state of wo∣men is more gentill, they whiche are of competent strenght, go on their féete, the weker sorte ar caried vpon beastes, but suche as are so féeble, that they cane not abide the rockyng of the beast are placed to be borne in panniars lyke Géese. The nyght is vnto them more sadde and so∣rowfull, for eyther they are inclosed in mightie senced places, or enforced to suf∣fer the beastly lust, and vncleane lecherie of those mankynd regraters. And a most lamentable howlynge and wepynge is heard throughe the darke of youthelye wightes of both kindes susteining vio∣lence,
neyther maye the age of sixe or se∣uen yeares defende the miserable wret∣ches from suche filthines, the malitious nation is so fearce and feruent, bothe a∣gainst and beside all course of nature in libidinous lecherye. ☞ After vvhat fashion the captiue Christians are lead, and brought fourthe to be solde. WHen the daye begynneth too were bright, they are brought fourthe into the market to be solde, lyke drones or flockes of shepe and Goates. The mer∣chantes assemble together, the price is sette: if the captiue liketh them, his gar∣mētes taken of, he is shewed openly be∣fore the eyes of his mayster to come, all his membres are vewed, they ar felte, and euery part searched, whether anye hurt or domage hauing bene taken, lieth in the limmes and ioyntes. If he likethe them not, againe he is retorned vnto the regrater, so many times that to suffer, as
any man entending to by shall come and drawe neare: if he contenteth their min∣des, and they agre vpon a price, he is lea∣den awaye to moste painefull bondage, eyther to bée made a ploughe manne or sheparde, that in the weane time I may omitte more laborous trauels. For there are amonge them vnspeakeable exam∣ples of miserye, I haue sene menne ve∣rye often coupled together in a youke to drawe the ploughe. The bonde women, are moste streitly kept to perpetuall la∣bours, separate from the sight of menne, and they are not permitted so muche as to talke with their felowe seruantes. If any man hath bene taken by them, with his wife and children, the noble and rich men will bye him very gladdely, and he is made ouersear of their farmes, eyther to take the charge of tillinge their lande, dressyng of their vineyards, or maintai∣nyng pastures. The children of these are in bondage. If they perseuer and conti∣newe
in the christian faithe, a certaine time of bondage is assigned vnto them, whiche beynge passed, they enioye their auncient fredome: howbeit their childrē, except they be redemed, remaine in ser∣uitude, according to the pleasure of their maister, eyther to abyde in the same pla∣ces, or som other wher to be transferred: there is no lande geuen by inheritance, for the which they serue a certaine space of time. If after their obtained libertye, they long to retorne into their countrye, letters patentes are deliuered vnto them for safe conducte. But vnto such as haue abiured and foresworne our religion, neyther is ther any determinate time of bondage, neyther lawe to be chalenged cōcerning retorne into their natiue lāde, all hope of Fredome onely dependeth at their maisters frée will and pleasure, and albeit that fredome be obtained, yet paye they tyethes, as the rest of the Turkes doe, but are frée from other burthens,
were with the Christians ar oppressede. ❀ The state of those captaines vvhich they make Shepardes. PEinefull is the lyfe of husbandmen, yet more greuous it is with thē which are bought to take the charge of She∣pardes, they must leade their liues in de∣sertes, and remaine continually both day and night abrode in the open ayre: only their maister with his wife, dwelleth in the tente, and besides the painefull tra∣uell in defendyng and kepyng their stoc∣kes, they ar cōstrained at leasurable hou∣res to make garmentes, & tapestrye wor∣kinges. Euerye moneth they change pa∣stures, conueying them selues from one hill to an other. They which are of a na∣ture more gentil and tractable, ar wnte to gene a small stipend vnto their ser∣uantes, suche as we reade to haue bene measured amonge the Romaines, and that is counted their propre goodes, whi∣che is kept for assistance in the waye, yf
after obtained Fredome they purpose to retorne into their countrye, or vnto other thynges necessarye for maintenance of their lyfe. But this chaunceth not euery wher, for it is a miserable enticement in to bondage, wherby they restreine them from their intente of departure. But vn∣to them whiche haue denyed Christe: be∣cause they ar sure that they will not take flight, no suche fauour is shewen. ¶ The flight of bonde menne out of Europe. FLight is more easye for them to take whiche passe their dayes in Europe, then vnto suche as are sold ouer into the regions beyond the seas: for by them no daungerous places ar to be passed but ri∣uers, whiche easely they maye swimme throughe, the greatest perill is in goinge ouer the sea Hellesponte. These whiche purpose to flie awaye, are wont to ende∣uour it in the time of harueste, for that the more commodiously they maye hide
them selues in the corne, and haue suste∣nance therof, they continewe their flight in the night season, and lurke in the daye time, either in wooddes, marishes or a∣mong the corne, and had rather to be de∣uoured by wolues and other beastes, thē backe to be drawen againe to their olde maisters. ❧ Of their flight out of Asia the Lesser. THey whiche seke meanes to flye out of Asia, doe take their iorneye towar∣des the sea Hellespont, betwine Callpo∣lis, and ye turrettes sumtime called Seston and Abidon but nowe in these our days Bagas Asar, whych maye be interpreted, a castell of the streightes of the sea, wher the sea is most narrowe. Thei cary with them an Axe and cordes, both to cutte downe trées, and binde them together, therof to make them boates for passage ouer the sea, bearinge no other thynge with them, sauing salte: by nyght they
enter the boate. If the windes and good fortune be fauorable, they rowe ouer in thrée or foure houres, if otherwyse, ey∣ther they perish in the waters, or are dri∣uen backe agayne to the sea bankes of Asia▪ Hauinge escaped the seas, they ap∣proche the hilles, and fixinge allwayes their eyes vppon the Pole, and Bootes, they directe their iorneye into the northe part: In the time of hūger they sustaine them selues with Acornes, and herbes sprinckeled with salte. If a companye resorte & assēble together to take flight, they inuade by nyght the Shepardes, whiche beyng slaine, they carye awaye with them what meate and foode soeuer ther they finde, howebeit often times they perish them selues, receiuing death of the Shepardes, or taken by them, and deliuered to their old masters, ar brought again vnder their accustomed thraldome and bondage. But a greater nomber the daungers destroye, thenne doe escape in
safty, for either they ar drowned by ship∣wracke, deuoured with ye téethe of wilde beastes, slaine by their enemies sworde, or finally famished for defecte of nowri∣shemēt, when by flyinge thei haue wan∣dered a longe space. ¶ Of the punishement ordained for fugitiues. MAnifolde ar the punishemēts apoin∣ted for flyars awaye: some hanged vp by the héeles ar most greuously scour∣ged, but of such as haue committed mur∣ther, the féete ar launced with kniues in∣to manye furrowes, and so miserablely mangled they sprinkle them with salte, throughe the bodyes of other is thruste a great forke, that hath an iron toppe, which a longe space both daye and night they beare and susteine. ¶ The fauorable affection of Grecians and Armenians tovvardes fugitiues. PUnishement by death and forfaiture of all their goodes is ordained for thē,
ye fauer or further the flight of fugitiues. Notwythstandyng the Armenians and Gretians doe not cease daily to hide the Christian captiues in their houses, and bringe them diffigured with their appa∣rell vnto the shippes of the Venetians, or other Christians, and geue prouision re∣quisite for their iourneye, with all other thinges necessarye, neyther by them are ther omitted any tokens of godlye loue, For they affirme to haue receyued lyke fauour at our handes, at what time they come to Rome and Compostella. ❀ Of the inchauntementes Vsed by the Turkes against Fugitiues. THey haue a certain kind of inchaunt∣mente, wherby they bringe thē backe mager their teth. The name of the ser∣uant writen in a scroll of paper is han∣ged vp in his lodging or cabinne, after that they coniure his heade with horri∣ble wordes and incantatiōs: which dōne by poore of the deuil it commeth to passe,
that the seruaunte flyinge shal thinke to chaunce, in his iorneye, amonge Lions or Dragons, either the sea and fluddes to breake oute againste him, or all th∣ges to seme blacke by reason of darke∣nes, and driuen backe with this terrible sightes, he retorneth vnto his maister. ¶ Hovve the memorie of Christ by litle and litle vvereth to obliuion in the Prouinces sumetime of Christian religion. THere are certaine yet remayninge aliue, whyche haue in remembrance the conqueringe of Constantinople, and the kyngdones of Gretia, Albania, VVa∣lachia, and Seruia, whiche the Turkes do nowe call Bosnam, reduced and brought into Prouinces, they verelye sticke most firmelye vnto Christe, but the younger sorte can not remember it, and in short space it will come to passe, that the obli∣uion of Christianitye shall replenishe all those countries: The like will happen in
Croatia, Ilungarie, & Sclauonie, which are ate additions and augmentinges of the Turkishe empire. ☞ In vvhat sort the conquerour aafe any victorie behaue them selues, and hovve by them are vsed the Spi∣rituatie. WHen the Turke hath subdued any prouince, al the goodes therunto ap∣pertayning as wel moueable as not mo∣ueable, are graunted and geuen for a boo∣tye. He noteth out by the grounde all the nobility, but chieflye the princes issue. And in that at this presēt is fauoured by them the sonne of kynge Ihon, they do it not to none other ende, then if Hungarie should be taken frō them, they may place him therin, newe mischiefes to attempt, but whē of Hungarie they shal haue sure and safe possession, no doubt but they wil ridde hym out of this life. For the Tur∣kes to obtaine a kingdome do fauor nei∣ther their owne bloud nor kinsfolke, no
not their propre brethren. If they mur∣ther not the spirituall men, at least wise▪ spoiled of al their riches and promotiōs▪ thei cast them of to be laughed at, and to get their liuinge by begging. They take oute of the Churches all the belles, or∣ganes, and other musical instrumentes, yea the temples them selues profaned & defiled, they cōsecrate to their Mahomet: the naked and base chapelles are lette stande for the Christians, wher they say their seruice not openlye, but with great silence, and couertly: whiche when they are fallen to the grounde by meanes of earthequakes, consumed with fyrye fla∣mes, or rotten throughe longstanding, it is not lawfull for them to réedifye with∣out the paiment of a greatsome of mo∣ny. Sermons and preaching of the Gos∣pel is plainelye forbidden, neyther is it lawfull for thē to assēble vnto any Chri∣stian cōmon wealth, beare wepōs about with them, be cladde with like apparrail
vnto the Turkes, daunce, or sette fourth pleasant sightes of a ioyefull lyfe▪ If any iniurie be done towardes the, or Christ, by opprobrious wordes, thou must holde thy peace, and pacientlye suffer it. But contraryewyse, if thou speake anye vn∣worthye or disdainefull thynge of their religion, thou shalt be enforced to circū∣ision, if then also thou mutter againste Mahomet, fire and burnyng shall consu∣me the to asshes. And if a horseman of ye Christians passe by a Musulman, whi∣che is one entrede in the turkish religion it is necessaryly required that he descend from his horse, and worshippe the other sitting, with a lowly countenance, and bēding his body, which except it be done, he is beaten downe from his horse with clubbes. ¶ The estate of prestes and munkes li∣uinges vnder tribute of the Turkes. PKestes and mūkes with the Turkes are of all other in vileste estate,
they ar reputed as cōmitters of sacrilege & accursed both by god & man, neither do they receiue any stipēds of ye church. Upō Festiuall they haue caste vnto theym  y certaine women, a small quantitye of bredde, no thinge is distributed amonge them vppon otherdayes. They lyue by purueyinge of wodde: for the custome is that they he we downe trees in the wod∣des, wherwith their asses beynge laden, they wander wyth that marchaundyse through out al the streates, proclayming wodde to be solde. ¶ Of the vnmerciful tributes exacted at the Christians handes. THe Christians do pay the fourthe of all their increase, and this fourthe is not only gathered of the profites of their landes, fieldes and flockes, but also the manual artificers do geue the fourthe of all their gaines. Ther is besides this an ther burthen of payment, by the which
so many as ar in one familie, do exhibite euery one a duccate. If their parentes be not able to discarge it, they are constrai∣ned to sell their children into bondage. Some other linked in cheines do wan∣der doore by dore to begge money for dis∣chargement therof, but if neyther then they ar of abilitie to paye, they are con∣demned to perpetuall imprisonement. And nowe when they haue performed all dewies, yet is it alwayes lawful for the Turke to haue the frée election of the best of his sonnes, whiche, circumci∣sed, and conueied awaye out of his par∣rentes sight, is trained vp for the war∣res, neyther shall he euer retorne againe to his parentes, and first because a childe will quicklye commit Christ to obliuiō, soone after also his parentes and alyes, so that if they should be conuersant with him, he can not discerne, or iudge one of his kinsefolke. No manne is able to ex∣presse  wordes, with what bitter tea∣res,
sorowefull sighes, and pitifull sob∣binges that violente separation is done. The Father séethe his sonne, whom he hathe instructed and brought vp in the true worshippinge of Christe, to be dra∣wen by force vnto the warrefare of Sa∣than, that he maye fight against Christe: the soone is rauished from his parentes perpetually to liue amonge straungers and Aliantes, vtterly to forsake that whi¦che by bloud is dearely beloued, grateful throughe aquaintāce, and frendly by fa∣miliarity: from thense foreward to come amonge the number of them, whom the Grecians are wont to call Apatoras and Ametoras. And albeit that this greatlye degenerate frō the trew Christian faith, yet a great number of them do cary vn∣der their armepittes, as a most sure pre∣seruatiue against euill happes, the Gos∣pell of saint Ihon, (whiche is to witte. In the beginning. &c.) throughely written vnto the ende, bothe in the Grecian and
Arabian language, whiche intentinelye and with feruent desire expect and lōge for the Christians sworde (of whom the turkishe prophet dothe speake, as it shal∣be declared in ye treatice next folowing) to reuenge and deliuer the Christians from their vnspeakeable afflictions and painefull persecutions. Whiche in that it hathe not vntill this daye made haste, and ben lifted vp against them, who soe∣uer they be that ar the hinderers therof, and to what purpose they do it, it forceth not, but they seme trewlye to haue de∣serued moste vnworthely of the Chri∣stian religion. For nowe (Oh soroweful mischaunce, our brother George of Vara∣dinum being disceased) how quickely ha∣ue we lost the gouernement of the Te∣mesuans? let hence fourthe Hungarie la∣ment, and Transyluania be sorowefull, Pollonia also ought to bée circumpecte, with Lutē Russia, Prussia, Moschouie, Da∣cia, Denmerke, Gutlad, Norvvaie, and Sue∣uelande
Lotte the lyke be sayde of Au∣striche, Morauie, Siletia, Boeme, Saxonie, Germanie. England, Scotteland. Spaigne, and France. Let Rome, Venice with all Italie loke no better to spede. God graunt that these thinges maye attaine vnto a more happye end then I suppose they will. A salutinge dialogue in the Sclauone tounge. Bogh pomozi gospodaru God helpe you my patrone. The Aunswere. Dobro dossao priiateliu. In good time you come my frende. The Question. Ieli ouay praui put u kaliplie? Is not this the streyght waye into Callipolis. The Aunswere. Ni brate, Zabludiossi daleko. No brother, you haue erred greatlye,
The Question. Od Zemlie koiessi kazuimi. Of what Countrie ar you? tell me. The Aunswere. Od Vlaske Zemliessam, od benetak▪ Of the Italiās region I am, from venice. The Question. Vkasi mi praui puth takoti boga. Shewe me the streight waye, for goddes sake, The Aunswere. Hodi ssamnon, neboisse nistar Come with me, neyther feare you▪ any thynge. The Question. Ieda koie glasse imas, Kazuimi. If any newes you haue, declare it vnto me. The Aunswere. Ne takomi vice dafnam prouidablih ti. No by my faith If I knew any I would shewe it you. The Farewell, and geuinge of thankes. Ostai Zbogom brate, onie grad Staye in goddes name brother, that is ye citye.
K amogres whether you goe. The Aunswere. Poi Zbogon, i bogh te zdrano nosio. Depart in goddes name, & god the in safty keepe. Hallu ti imam i dobrati nots bila. Thankes vnto you I geue, and a haypy nyght haue you. ❀ The Lordes praier in the Sclauone toungue. Nass otsse ki yessi na nebessi. Our Father whiche arte in heauen. Ssuhtisse tuoie ime. Kralyeusstuo Holowed be thy name. They kyngdome. pridi, tuoia olia budi na zemlij kako come, they will be done in earthe as it is na nebu. Dai naga danass nassega in heauen. Geue vnto vs this daye our ssagdaniga kruha, iodpusciainā nasse dughe daillye bredde, and forgeue vs oure debtes. kako mi odpuscianao nassiiw dusuikon, i as we doe forgeue our depters. and nepeliai nats u napast, da izbaui leade not vs into temptation, but deliuer nate od nepriazni, Amen. vs from euill. Amen.
The Salutation of the Angell. ZDrano Mario puna milosti, gospidin Haile Marie full of grace, the Lorde is stobum, blasena ti meusenami, with the, blessed art thou amonge women, i blasen tsad tuoye vtrobe and blessed is the frute of thy wombe Iesus Kristus, Amen. Jesus Christe, Amen. ❀ The Author vnto the Christian reader. I Thought it good, most fauorable rea∣der, heare to recite certaine woordes of Scaluone speche, yt thou mightest knowe by howe muche the Sclauone tonge, diffe∣reth from the Persian language, whiche is vsed by the Turkes. Ʋnderstand ther∣fore that it is lawfull for all men, skile∣full in that tounge, safelye to passe into Croatia Dalmatia, Russia VValachia, Ser∣uia, Boeme, & Poole althoughe throughe distance of the prouinces, they differ not alitle in certaine wordes, and pronuncia¦tion,
as the Italians frō the Spaigniar: des, and Germans from the Flemmin∣ges. Farther let not this be vnknowen to the, that the Russians and inhabitan∣tes of Seruia do vse one lāguage in their deuine seruice. For they haue foure and thirty letters, not muche vnlike those of the Grecians▪ And likewise the Croatians, but their letters differ verye muche from the other in forme▪ howbeit in number and pronunciation thei ar like. And ther∣fore it is impossible for vs, with English letters to vtter the trew pronunciation of their words. The Turkes conuersant in their kings courte, and confines of Scla¦ony do vse the same language. Farevvell.
❧ The horrible acte, and wicked offence of Soltan Solimam Emperour of the Turkes, in murthe∣ringe his eldest sonne Musta∣pha, the yeare of our Lorde. 1553. I Haue thought it a thinge con∣uenient, and necessarye for me purposing to make manifest by writing vnto the world so mis∣chenous a déede, for the more full and perfecte demonstration therof, a litle to retire, and firste of all brefelye to tuche the originall cause, & beginning of that vnnaturall acte. It is therfore to be vn∣derstanded, ye Soliman had begotten thys Mustapha on a certaine bondewoman, vnto whom euen from his childehoode he assygned the prouince of Amasia. Whether, after the contine wance of cer∣taine monethes, he iorneyed, his mother him accūpanying, at what time, through his florishinge in youthelye yeares and
vertue, he was thoughte, in ye opinion, & iudgement of al men, by some heauenly prouidence, to be geuen and sente vnto their countrye. This younge man being departed with his mother, the kynge in processe of tyme what rauyshed aboue measure with the be wtie of an other his cōcubines named Rosa: by whom he had foure menne children, and one woman. The finite had to name Machomet, and vnto him was geuen the prouince of Ca∣ramania. The seconde Baiasith, whyche helde the country of Magnesia. The third Selimus, vnto whome Machomet beynge dead, was assigned the prouince of Cara∣mania. The fourth was sirnamed Iangir of the bunches, wher with he was both deformed before, & behinde in his backe, notwithstāding of a sharpe prudent and politike will. But the virgine was ma∣ried to one Rustanus a paschan. He after the slaughter of Hybrachimus obteined the dignitye of a Visier, whiche we may
cal one of the chiefe councellers. But a∣busing that office with ye auerice in him naturally engraffed, he eyther renewed or cleane changed all the customes and orders, deminished the yearly stipendes of the souldiers, whiche they call Janis∣charies, enhaunsed the reuenews of the Captaines (paide by them vnto the Em∣perour) whiche are named Sangiackes, encreased subidies and tributes vppon the prouinces, and no lesse added a mea∣sure to the inordinate expenses of ye kin∣ges house, applyinge his office to none other ende, then that he might heape vp for him selfe infinite treasures, by his co∣lored and diceitfull pillage, by the whi∣che meanes, beinge estemed as a diligēt and profitable seruitour, he easely allu∣red the kings fauour vnto him selfe: litle regardynge in the meane time, that he was enuied and hated of all other men. Duryng whiche space, Rosa, of whome we haue mencioned before, perceyuinge
her selfe to be fauored and beloued of the kynge aboue the rest of his concubines, vnder a colour of religion minded to de∣clare vnto ye Muchti, that in déed she was stirred of a godly desire and affectiō, and throughely purposed to build a temple, and erecte an hospitall, to receiue pilgri∣mes in the honour of the highe God, and his prophet Machomet, yet that shée had determined, not to attempte it with out his councell and aduise. wherfore she de∣maunded of him whether suche workes wolde be acceptable vnto God, and anye thinge auaile for the health of her soule▪ To whiche demaundes the Muchti aun∣swered, that the déedes woulde be vnto god moste gratefull, and althoughe not muche profitable for the safegarde of her soule, yet that they woulde bée a greate urtherance vnto the kings soule, vnder whose dominion, & at whose commaun∣dement were all her goodes, riches, and also (for shée was a bondewoman) her
lyfe. With this aunswere, the woman semed, euery day one more thē an other, to be sadde, sorowfull, and disquieted in her minde, and so much that in the space of many daies she coulde not bée comfor∣ted. Of whiche anguishe & pēsiuenes, the kinge beyng certifyed, begane to solace her most curteouselye, affirminge that hée in shoorte space woulde finde a re∣medye, whereby at lenght shée shoulde enioy the long wished end of her desire, Wherfore incontinēt he made her frée, and thervpon confirmed his déed by such writinges (as amonge them it was ac∣customed to bée done) that from thence fourth she shoulde neuer be bounde vnto him againe. After obteining of this desi∣red and louing fauour, Rosa with a great quantitie of treasure, departed to finishe the woorke before mencioned. Duringe which time the kyng (as aboue it is spe∣cified) baited, and as it were drowned, passinge all moderation, in an vnbride∣led
desyre and lust of Rosa, commaunded by a messanger that she should come vn∣to him. But the craftye and desceitfull woman, from whome no guile was hid∣den, subtillye willed the messanger, that he shoulde admonished his Lorde of ho∣nestye, and obseruinge the lawes: and that shée acknowleged her selfe no len∣ger to be bonde, but a fre woman, albeit in the meane season not to denye, hys kingely maiestye, at his arbiterment to haue the apointing and disposition both of her life and death: but concerning car∣nall copulation, that of all other thinges it coulde not be done, with out the com∣mittinge of a moste greuous sinne and offence. And least perhappes he myght thinke it to be a fable forged, and fained by her, that she was contented, and wold repose her selfe in all thinges to the iud∣gement of the Muchti. This repulse so stirred vp the inflamed hart of the kyng, that, all delaye set aparte, he commaun∣ded
the Muchti to be sent for vnto hym, and geuing him frée leaue to aunswere, asked, whether with out breakynge and violation of the lawes, he might carnal∣lye ioyne with a bonde woman by hym made frée? wherunto the Muchti aune¦swered, that it was not lawfull, except he had first contracted lawful matrimo∣ny with her. But this difficultie so aug∣mented the kinges affectiō, that blinded beyounde all measure with sensuall ap∣petite, he consented in wedlocke too the frée woman. Wherfore the mariage ro∣bes, and other necessary prouision made ready, acordyng to their custome, he sente her fiue thousand Soltane ducates, vn∣der the name of a gift for their mariage, not with out the great admiration of all men, especially because it was contrary to the vsage and custome of the house of Ottomanno. For, to auoyde equalitie in the Empire, they neuer marye anye ho∣nest and lawfull wiues, but in their pla∣ces,
to satiffye their pleasures, and libi∣dinous lustes (whervnto in moste vile & and filthy maner, they are subiecte, as boue all other nations) they haue raui∣shed virgines frome all partes of the worlde, bewtifull and in fauour the most excellent, whom princesse like, and hono∣rablelye, they nourishe in the kinges pa∣laice (whiche of thē is called Sarai) bring them vp to serue for al vses and commo∣dities, and instructe them in honest, and ciuill maners, with whome the kynges by course, as their pleasure shalbe, are wount to accompanyé. But if by chaūce any amonge them beyng begotten with childe of the king, shall afterward bring foorth and be deliuered, then she aboue all the reste is reuerenced and honored, and for a great dignitie and reputation, is therfore called Soltana. Those women after the birth of their childrē ar maried to great Lordes, paschans, and Sangia∣ches. But to retorne vnto our purpose of to
this bonde woman latelye made frée so highelye aduaunced by the benefite of Fortune, yt she myght well be thought the chefest of all the women of Asia, and accompanyed with suche successe of feli∣citie, wherby she might satisfie all her ambitious endeuours and desires: this only thinge remained, that meanes and occasion might be founde, wherby Soli∣man beynge dead, the succession of the Empire, myght be translated vnto her only posteritie which purpose, the gen∣tilmāly to wardnes of Mustapha so much hindered, a younge mane of a noble co∣rage, and passynge witte, no lesse excel∣ling in his coragious hart, thē in strenght by reason of ye multitude of his souldiers, whiche also throughe his magnanimity and fortitude was in wounderfull esti∣mation with the souldyers, and for hys graue wisdome and vpright iustice, mar∣ueilously fauored of the people. All whi∣che commendable qualities in him, the
crafty woman well considering, and pri∣uely with Rustanus consultinge of that matter, for she knewe (as by the instinct of reason it is most probable) that Rusta∣nus woulde rather desire his kinseman, and brother of his wife, to be aduaunced and setled in the Empire, then Mustapha with whom she knewe for a certaintye, that he was in most mortall hatred, and chefely because ther had fallen betwyne them great variance and strife. For from the beginning, whiles he went aboute to deminishe the pentions of others (as before we haue partly touched) he ende∣uored also, but in vaine, to detract a part of the stipend and reuenewes of Musta∣pha: wherby she sone coniectured, that so noble and stout a hart, if he shoulde bée aduaunced vnto the estate of the Em∣pire, woulde not easelye burye in obli∣uion, so vnderserued an iniurye, in so muche ye Mustapha raigning, he thought by meanes of his forepassed lyfe, that not
onely, he shoulde fall in danger of his of∣fice and dignitie, but also of his heade. All whiche lykelihodes to chaunce the malicious woman pondering in her pe∣stilent minde, endeuored to kindle in the kynges thought no small suspitions of Mustapha, which were that he inflamed with desire to beare rule, hauinge his cō∣fidence in the fauour and beneuolence of all menne towardes him, and swellynge throughe the great armye of souldiers (of the whiche he hathe great plentye and abundance) lefte no other thinge to bée looked for at hys handes, then that shortlye he woulde affecte the Empire, and craftelye lye in waite to murther his Father. And whereby the better to con∣ceale and clooke this matter, shée fitelye prouided all thinges to be attempted by Rustanus, whiche continually hadde the charge of weightie affaires about ye king neither were ther anye craftye meanes priuy vnto him, whiche he applied not
for the destruction and accusemēt of the young men. For vnto as many as were sente for administration and gouerment of the prouince of Siria, he priuely tolde, as thoughe Mustapha was had in suspi∣cien by his father, geuinge in charge to euery of them that they shoulde haue a diligent eye vnto the estate of Mustapha, and with out faile to certifie him by wri∣tinge of all suche matters as they bothe sawe & heard concerning his behauiour: craftely affirming, that the more odyous thinges, were writen by them of Musta∣pha, so muche the more they shoulde be in fauour and accepted of the kyng. Frō that day forewarde Rustanus beynge of∣ten certifyed by them, of the princelye excellency, wisdome, fortitude, magna∣nimitye, beneuolence, and liberalytye of Mustapha towardes all men, wherewith he hadde marueilouslye purchased vnto him the fauour of the multitude, and no lesse of the moste feruent desire, with the
whiche all menne, for the most parte, se∣med to bée kindled, about election of him vnto the Empire: all thys notwithstan∣ding, he not onely first dared to sowe the séede of so mischeuous a conspiracie, but also those letters deliuered vnto the vn∣gratious woman, he lefte the reste to bée prosecuted by her pestiferous head. But Rosa seyng good opportunitie offred, for accomplyshinge of her detestable intent, thought neuer to leane of corrupting the kynges minde with effeminate allure∣mentes, and Flatteringes (as she knew the wayes, few lyke vnto her) so that, if at any tyme mention shoulde be made of Mustapha, she woulde take a fitte occa∣tion of the time to oppen the letters. And in déede shée was not deceiued of her expectation, for a conueniente season beyng awaited, she admonished the king not with out teares (as vnto women in fained matters they are at no time wan∣tinge) of the perill and daunger where∣vnto
he was subiecte, rehearsing among other obiections, howe Selimus the kin∣ges parent, had before at one time, by suche lyke meanes depriued his Father bothe of his kingdome and lyfe: where∣fore she earnestlye entreated him by ex∣ample of other to take diligent care for him selfe. But these argumentes of su∣spicion, at the firste sight, semed not in euery behalfe so probable vnto the king, whereby it came to passe, that by those assayes, the cursed woman litle profited. Whyche perceiuynge in her enuiouse harte, after tracte of certaine monethes, she directed her malitious thoughtes vn▪to other disceites, sekynge opportunitye by all mannes possible, to distroye the younge manne wyth poison. Neyther were ther wantinge bloudsheders, and most detestable menne, prompt and rea∣dy to accomplishe vilanouslye all hey∣nous actes, least by celestiall prouidenc shée might haue applyed her selfe to s
horrible a dede. wherfore he first touched not the venimed robes, sent vnto him, by this woman, vnder the name of hys Fa∣ther, vntill an other hadde bene clad with the same: by whiche prouident wis∣dome, he preuented the vndeserned mis∣chefes of his vnnaturall stepmother, and openlye, in the sight of all menne made manifeste the poison. Howbeit the adul∣terous harlot yet ceased not to imagine againste him freshe and newe wiles, for she wēt about (beyng boldened throughe the amourous drynkes, with the whiche by the héelpe of a bewtifull woman, a Juishe enchauntrisse, shée hadde so allu∣red the kinges minde, that euerye daye riche presentes, and the successe of di∣uers requestes, wer vnto her daily, more and more promised by the kynge) to get her selfe suche beneuolence and familia∣rytie, as neuer any béefore hadde obtei∣ned in the princely palaice of Ottomāno: for shée desired, that by course her chil∣dren
might he conuersant in the royall houses of their Father, whyche was be∣cause by their continewall presence, and daily faire flatteringes, thei might more and more entice vnto them his Father∣lye loue, and if throughe some fortunat chaunce, Mustapha shoulde also come, shée might gette a more conuenient oc∣cation to oppresse him: if not, to expecte the time to kill hym by messangers. But Mustapha in déede not comminge (for the kynges sonnes haue not accu∣stomed, their father not wittinge of hit, to depart out of the prouinces assigned vnto them, and repaire to Constantino∣ple, except their father beyng dead, they come accompanied with a great number of souldiers, to take possession of the Em¦pire) she hadde soone in redines an other mischefe. For the request whyche was desired, beynge obteyned, shée brought to passe, that not onlye in the cytye, but in the prouinces also her children fo∣lowed
the kynge their Father yea Gi∣angis difformed with bunches accom∣pained his father remaining in the cāpe. But the forged inuention of this wicked steppe mother standynge in doubte the space of certaine yeares, fortune at lēght minding to fauer those cursed iutentes of the woman, brought suspicious letters from the Paschan (for euery of the kings sonnes is wount to haue with hym one Paschan, whiche is suche a one, as occu∣pieth the rome of him, that geueth aun∣swere vnto the people concernynge the lawe, and ministreth councell about warrelyke affaires, with a teacher by whom he is trained vp in good letters, and princelye behauiour) whyche was constituted ouersear of the regiment of Mustapha, and gouernynge of the pro∣uince of Amasia: in the whych was con∣teined, a mariage to be in handeling be∣twine Mustapha and a daughter of the kynge of Persia, and that he therfore re∣ferred
the matter vnto the sacred gate, because that if anye misfortune shoulde chaunce therof, he might be counted frée from al suspition. These letters brought vnto Rustanus, he thought that at lenght he shoulde bringe the long hoped ruine, and destruction of Mustapha to a desired ende. And makynge no longer delaye, with spede he declared al the whole mat¦ter to Rosa, and soone after bothe con∣ueyinge them selues into the palaice, they reuealed the state therof before the kinge. In the whyche cause, whereby to drowne the kynges minde, yet stagge∣ringe, and full of doubtes, in their ambi∣guouse suspicious, they applied all their wilye disceites, sayinge: that Mustapha, as an ambitions person, to bée kindled, and sette on fire, with a furious rage of the minde, contrarye to all heauenly and humaine lawes, throughe desire of ob∣teinynge soo noble an Empire: to con∣spire also against his fathers death: and
wherby a greater confidence myght bée geuen to their crafty imaginations, they put the kinge in remembrance of the a∣liance contracted by Mustapha with the persians, most auncient and deadly ene∣mies to the of springe of Ottomanno, and therefore he ought narowely to sée vnto hym selfe, lest, to persian strenght ioyned to the Sangiaches and Ianischaries, whose fauoux Mustapha longe sence had wonne by his liberalitie, in short space, he shoulde bereue his father both of lyfe and kingedome with these and such like accusations, they brought the troubled minde of the olde manne to suche passe, that he fullye purposed to prouide for safegarde of his owne estate, by death of his sonne, after this maner. In the yeare of our lorde God a thousande fiue hun∣dred fiftye and twoe, he caused with all diligence and celerytie, throughe out, for the moste parte, all his prouinces, to bée proclaimed, the Persians, departed out
of their coastes, to haue inuaded Siria wt a great Oste of armed men, ouerthrowē cityes, lead awaye the people captiue, and, no mane resistyng them, spoiled all the countrye with fire and swoorde, whi∣che so bolde an enterprisse, and desperat acte to repell, that he was constrained, to sende thither Rustanus with an, army. Certaine bandes of souldiers therefore beynge gathered together, he priuelye committed thē to Rustanus, that as secret¦lye as it might be, and without all tu∣multe, he shoulde laye handes or Mu∣stapha, and bringe him bounde vnto Con¦stantinople, but if he coulde not commo∣diouslye bringe it to passe, that then by one meanes or other, he shoulde cause him to be murthered. This vnnaturall and beastelye commaundement of a fa∣ther being receiued, Rustanus guarded wt a mightye Oste of souldiers, marchethe towarde Ciria. Whither, when he was come, Mustapha certified of his ariual,
all lingrirg set a part, iorneyed towar∣des Siria, accompained with seuen thou∣sand of the most valiant and best apoin∣ted souldiers throughe out all Turkeye. Wherof Rustanus hauing intelligence, and seyng that he could not, according to his intēt, accomplish the wicked cōmaū∣dement, of his most cruell & vnkinde fa∣ther, with out longer tarying begane to flye, and, retiring made hast with his ar∣my to Constantinople again, & with such spede, that he dared not to sée the duste, raysed in the aire by the horsemene of Mustapha, muche léesse too abyde hys commynge. Beynge retorned therfore wythe hys companye of souldiers, he perswaded all menne, to haue founde the prouince quiet and in safegarde. But at lenght opened vnto the kynge in secret the cause of hys retorne: addynge that he had senne by moste manifest signes and coniectures, the mindes of all the whole armye, to be meruellouslye enclined to
the fauour of Mustapha and yt he thought it not good, in so daungerous a busines to attempt the matter by open warre: for whiche cause he referred the decydynge therof vnto the wisdome of hys maiestye This relation encreased newe and no small suspicion in hys vncurteouse and bloudshedynge father, and in no pointe degenerating from the engraffed cruel∣tye of his auncestours, from whiche too deliuer him selfe, in his wicked thought he throughely determined, wherefore in the yeare next folowyng, he commaun∣ded a mightye oste to be gathered to ge∣ther, signifying that the Persians hadde inuaded Siria with a more huger armye then before: and that he forced for a pu∣blike safegard, hadde determined thither to leade the Oste in his propre person, and resiste the intētes of their enemies. The souldiers therfore gathered to ge∣ther all most at a beckning, and necessa∣rye prouision generally ordeined for the
warre, commaundement beynge geuen to sette forwarde, after fewe dayes the bloud suckyng father dothe folowe hys armye. Whiche when he was ariued in Siria, fourthe with charged Mustapha, to repaire vnto him at Alepes (for ther he had pitched his tētes. But in the meane space Solimam was not so able to con∣ceale, by outwarde aparance, (althoughe diligent regarde was applied thervnto) the detestable and deadlye hatred, which in his harte he had conceiued towardes his sonne, but that it came to the euident perseuerance of the Paschans, and other men of greater dignitye about him. Throughe the whych one Acmat a pas∣cha secretly warned Mustapha by a mes∣senger, that he shoulde haue a more ca∣refull regarde vnto his lyfe and saflye. And in deede Mustapha thought it not vnworthy to be marueled at, ye hys Fa∣ther with out any probable reason, shold thither resort with so great an armye of
souldiers, howbeit trustynge to his in∣nocencye extremely vexed with anguish and perturbation of minde, he fully pur∣posed to satiffye and obeye, (althoughe with no small perill of his lyfe) hys fa∣thers cōmaundementes. For he thought it to be more honest and laudable, by o∣beyinge his father to incurre death, then by liuynge to fall into the crime of diso∣bedience. But weyinge, in this so great sorowe and heauines, many cogitations in his minde, at lenght constantlye and with out tremblinge, he demaunded of his teacher, whome (as before wée haue mencioned) he had alwayes with hym, in his courte, whether on empire of the whole worlde, or a blissed lyfe, were ra∣ther to be wished for by a man? vnto whō the doctor frely aunswered, that ye Em∣pire of this worlde, vnto a man through∣lye considerynge it, doth brynge no feli∣citye, but vnder a vaine and colored a∣pearence of the trewe goodnes, for then
that, their is nothynge more vnstable, and lesse assured: in as muche as it is wont to brynge with it selfe, méere so∣rowe, perplexitye of minde, tribulation, suspicions, manslaughter, feare▪ vngod∣lines, vniuste dealinges, ruine, captiui∣tye, spoilinge, with diuers other kindes of mischefe, neuer too bée wished by such a one, as is desirons to attayne vnto the trewe blissednes, by the whyche dout∣les a happye lyfe shoulde bée loste and not wonne, but vnto whome bée geuen, depelye to weye and consider the vnsta∣bilitye and shortnes of this our fragile estate, whyche the common sorte este∣meth to be the trewe felicite, and striue againste the vanityes of this worlde, and imbrace honestye, that no doubte for them, ther was a place assygned and prepared in heauen by the highe God, wher they shoulde geue the fruition of perpetuall ioye, and a blessed lyfe. With thys aunswere of the Doctor, the young
mans minde beynge marueilously trou∣bled, as it were after a sorte, by a presa∣gement of hys deathe, it is throughelye purposed, he sayde, and abidyng no long communication, incontinent directed his iorneye towardes hys bloude thirstynge Father, and not farre from hym, pit∣ched his tentes in the plaine felde. But this soo hastye commynge of Mustapha, kynled a greater suspicion in hys wic∣ked Father, and in the meane time Ru∣stanus ceased not, in that behalfe to aug∣ment and encrease thys suspicion with hys moste leude lyes, and dissemblynge deuises, for geuynge a sygne, he encora∣ged the Janischaries, and other the che∣fest souldiers of the armye, to goe fourth and mete Mustapha. And farther prolon∣ging sette a syde, euerye one moste spe∣deye executed hys commandementes, prouided and furnished hym selfe for the iorneye. After that the moste disceitfull villaine shewinge fourthe (as he knewe
exceadyngelye to faine) a disdainefulnes in hys countenance, conueyed streyght waye hym selfe into the kynges tente, moste impudentlye affirming, that all the principall souldiers, for the moste parte, were departed of their owne ac∣corde, and without any biddinge, to re∣ceyue and méete Mustapha. Whyche beynge heard, the kynge, throughe vex∣ations of hys minde, beganne too were pale, and goynge out of hys tente, soone perswaded him selfe, that the woordes were trewe whyche had bene spoken by Rustanus. And there wanted not vnto Mustapha prodigious visions of his vn∣fortunate chaunce to com. For the thirde daye béefore he shoulde make ready him selfe for the iourneye, slepyng about the twye light of the daye, he semed to haue seene Machomet appareled with gliste∣ringe robes, takyng him by the hande, to bringe him vnto a certaine place moste delectable, granished with exquisite and
gorgiouse palaices, and enuironed with a most pleasant garden, whiche pointing to euerye thynge with his finger, spake to hym in this maner: sayinge, here per∣petually do rest as many as in the world, haue leaden a godlye and vpryght lyfe, with suche as haue bene mainteiners of the lawes and rightuousnes, and equitie and reprouers of synne and vices. After that turnyng his face on the other syde, to haue beholden two brode and moste swifte riuers, whereof the one to séethe with water more blacke then any pitche, and great number to bée drowned ther∣in, the reste to appeare aboue the water, cryinge for mercye with a most horrible voice: and in this place, he sayd, are tor∣mēted such as malitiously haue wrought iniquitie, remaininge vnder the waue∣ringenes of hys fickle life. And the grea∣test parte of them he affirmed to be Em∣perours, kynge, princes, and other suche great potentates of the worlde. Whiche
being finished, Mustapha broken out of his slepe & vision, commaunded the Do∣ctor to be sent for, & opened vnto him the whole course of his dreame. But he mu∣sing ther vpō a long space, (for the super∣sticious Machometists do attribute very much vnto ye doting to yes of dreames) replenished with sorow & pensifenes, in the & aunswered, that the vision was to be feared, as one whych foreshwed vnto hym great perill of hys lyfe. Wherfore he councelled hym to haue especiall re∣garde of his healthe and dignitye. But Mustapha, as he was endewed withe magnanimitye and fortitude, hauynge no respecte to hys awneswere, stowlye replied, sayinge, shal I suffer my selfe to bee made a fearde, and vanquished, with friuolous and childishe feare? whi rather doe I not make hast with a constant and vnwauering corage, to go towardes my Father, and so much the bolder, because I knowe moste certainelye, that I haue
alwayes so duelye reuerenced (as it bée∣commed me) his maiestye, that hée vn∣willinge thervnto, I neuer turned mine eyes towardes his roiall seate, muche lesse my féete, but least of all mynded to affecte the Empire: except the especiall fauour of the highe God, had called hym awaye vnto a better lyfe, and not then also withoue the frée and publike ele∣ction of the whole Oste, that at length, with out all slaughter, bludsheding, and crueltye, I might raigne after a godlye sorte iustelye, and kéepe inuiolated the Frendeshippe of my brethren. For I haue purposed with my selfe, and ra∣ther chosen, sins that my Fathers will and pleasure dothe so require, by dwe o∣bedience to ende my lyfe, then raignyng manye yeares, to be reputed of all men, but chiefely by mine aduersaries, as a rebell. This communication finished, Mustapha apparaleth hym selfe in whit robes, putteth certaine letters in his bo∣some,
whyche the Turkes mindinge to goe any where, ar wont alwayes to ca∣rye with them, (for in supersticious ce∣remonies they dote verye muche,) and so sette forwarde towardes his Fathers campe, and (as we haue sayde (pitched Pauilyons: this at length accompained with certaine of hys trustye frendes, he directed hys iorneye to the tente of hys wicked Father, mindinge with great re∣uerence (as the customes amonge them required) to kysse his parentes handes. But when he came to the first entrance therof, remembryng him selfe to be gir∣ded with a dagger, he entred not in be∣fore he hadde layed downe the same, be∣cause he woulde not be séene to come ar∣med in his fathers presence, and to re∣moue far from him all suspicion. Being entred the iuner partes of the tnte, he was receiued ioyfullye enoughe & with suche reuerence as ought to bée requi∣red, by the Evnuches of his Father.
But seing but one seate prepared wher∣in he alone should sitte▪ replenished with care, he stede still a good space musinge with him selfe, and at lenght demaun∣ded where the Kynge was. When the standers by hadde aunswered, that he shoulde incontinent behold him, he sawe frome the other syde seuen dumbe men to come towardes him, (whom the Em∣perour of Turkye is accostomed to haue about him, as partakers of his secretes, and redye wickedlye to accomplishe all kyndes of murther, and heynous actes) wherwith beyng stroken with feare and terror, beholde my deathe, he sayde, and risynge, contented to flye awaye, but in vaine, for apprehended by the Evnuches and kepers, he was drawen by force vn∣to the appointed place of hys vnhappye chaunce, and with out anye longer de∣laye, the dumbe men quickly bounde the stringe of a bowe aboute his necke, the miserable younge man struggeling, and
humbly desiringe that he might bée per∣mitted to speake but two onely woordes vnto his father, whiche beastlye and vn∣naturall manquellour, that, from an o∣ther side of the tente behelde that lamē∣table sight, rebuked them with a thun∣drynge crewell voice, saying: what not yet at lenght, will you execute my com∣maundementes? and kil this traiter whi∣che by the space of tenne yeares hath not suffred me to take one quiet nights rest? whose so sharpe, fearce, and imperious wordes beyng hearde, the Evnuches by helpe of the dumbe men, threwe the mi∣serable wretche to the grounde, and the stringe bounde about his necke, drawen from eyther his sides, they strangled the most vnhappye sone, by commaundemēt of his vnkynde Father. This horrible & pitifull murther in such sorte dispatched, sone after by assignemēt of the king, was taken the Paschan of the prouince of A masia, and beheaded in the kynges pre∣sence,
whyche accomplyshed, he sent for the bunched Giangir, ignorant of suche happes as were befallen, and iestinge as thoughe he hadde done a thinge worthy prayse and commendation, he bidde hym to go and receiue his brother Mustapha. Then Giangir with a ioyfull and merye hart made haste, thinkyng to haue mette wyth his brother. But when he came vnto the place, and vnhappye strangled brother, and beheld him yinge one the earthe, it is impossible to bée declared, with what griping gryfes he was pric∣ked at the harte. And scarse was he yet come thyther, whē hys malitious father, sente after hym messangers, whyche in his name, shoulde offer vnto him all the treasure of Mustapha, his horses, tentes, seruantes, robes, ornamentes, and besi∣des that the prouince of Amasia. But Giangir replenished with extreme sorow and pensifenes, for the pitifull deathe of hys dearest beloued brother, powrynge
out plentye of teares, spake in thys ma∣ner: Out vppon the, O defestable and wicked dogge: Otraiter, I wil not name the Father, thou thy selfe nowe enioye the treasures, horses, ornamentes, & pro∣uince of Mustapha. Coulde ther any such thinge take place, in that fearce vngodly and mischeuous minde of thyne, as too murther so noble, warlyke, and sonne of suche a towardes, whose lyke the house of Ottomanno hadde neuer vntill thys daye, neyther shall in time to come, and that withe out all respecte of humany∣tye or ryght of bloudde? I will beware therfore, least heereafter, thou triumphe in lyke maner, bragge soo vnshamefast∣lye ouer me poore bunched miser. Ha∣uinge in this sorte tragicallye lamented, and takyng in hande his dagger, wher∣with hée was girded, he thruste it throu∣ghe his inwarde boweles, and so sodain∣lye gaue vp the ghouste. Whiche déede whē it cam vnto the Emperours hering,
a hard matter it was to speake, what ve∣xations griped him at the hart. Howbeit so great anguishe and sorowe ouercame not his couetous minde, for incontinent he commaunded all the riche treasures of Mustapha to be brought into hys ten∣tes. But the souldiers thinkynge that all his substance was graunted and ge∣uen for a praye, made earnest spede with prompt and readye mindes to performe the kynges hostes. Durynge which time the souldiers of Mustapha remaining in the campe, ignorante of that whyche had befallen to their Lorde and gouernour, seynge so great a bande of souldiers, to come rushe on, with out al order of war, wherby to repell & driue of their tumul∣tuous insolence, came armed agaynste them, and soo manfullye brake theyr force, not with out slaughter of a great number on their syde. As soone as ye ru∣mor of this tragedye was brought vnto the kyngs souldiers, perceiuing the hur∣lye
burlye more and more to kyndle and encrease, determined to helpe their com∣panions: and so at lenght proclamation made vnto armour, a blouddye cumbate was fought on bothe sydes, in so muche that in short space wer slaine aboue two thousande men, and manye other woun∣ded: and the tragedye had gone farther, if one Achmat a Paschan, a manne moste graue, and for his vertuous exploites, of no small reputation amonge the soul∣diers, had driuē backe the Janischaries, and apeased their rage, turnynge hym selfe also towardes the souldiers of Mu∣stapha, and mitigated with gentill wor∣des and exhortations their stirred min∣des, saynge: what will you nowe deare brethren and louyng frendes, degenera∣ting frō that wisdom throughe the whi∣che, in so many ages you haue bene prai∣sed and highelye commended, go against and withstande the commaundementes of the great Soltan our Emperour? I
can not (as God shoulde loue me) mar∣uell enoughe, what hath soo inflamed your harts, whom I hethervnto haue a∣lowed as mostvaliant & renowmed soul∣diers, as in this ciuill conflicte, to strt∣che fourth these wepons againste your owne fellowes, whiche with suche pro∣sperours successe, and good fortune, you haue vsed vpon the enemies of the house of Ottomanna, and to represent suche a spectakle vnto your aduersaries, yt they, by whose ryght hande they lament them selues, vanquished, shoulde now reioyse for their mutual destruction and slaugh∣ter. Therfore my sonnes haue diligent regarde, for your magnanimities sake, lest by this your rashe insolency, you lese that wisdome and fortitude, wherby vn∣to this daye aboue all other men you ha∣ue bene extolled, and reserue these wée∣pons, which to much you haue exercised agaynst your owne selues, for your ene∣mies, when a better occatien, and more
prayse woorthy shalbe ministred. With this and suche lyke sainges, Achmat the Paschan aswaged the kyndled corages of the souldiers, so that they suffred all thinges peaceablely to bée caried out of the tentes of Mustapha vnto the kynge. But when the death of Mustapha came to the Janischaries & eares of the whole Hoste, a freshe sedition began amonge them. Euerye one cried vnto armour a∣gayne, and makyng a terrible noyse, by reason of their teares and wepinges, as they were this in a ragyng and furious minde, came violentlye rushynge withe great tumulte and drawen swordes, into the kinges tente. But this renewed con∣spiracye, brougt suche tremblynge into the kynges minde, that destitute of all councell, he woulde haue taken flight, with no small daunger of his head. How beit beynge helde by his seruantes, and takynge occation of necessyty, he purpo∣sed to attempt the thyng, whiche in saf∣tye,
he neuer thought to haue done, and entringe out of the doores, spake in thys sort (but with a pale countenance) vnto the soudiers: what rumor, noyse, rufling, and insolencye is this, wherwith so ras∣shelye you haue disquieted my minde? What doe this furious, inflamed, and irefull visages signifie? Wil you not cal to remēbrance that I am he which hathe the powre to rule & gouerne you? Haue you determined to blotte your warrlyke prowes, and the martiall feates of your auncestours, by shedynge the bloudde of your kynge and Emperour? Vnto the kynge speaking in this maner, stoutlye aunswered the souldiers: that they in dede confessed him to be the same, whom manye yeares sence they hadde elected, but in that they hadde by their coragious mankynes conquered him so large an Empire, and defended the same, for thys occation to be done, because he shoulde raygne vprightlye, minister iustice, and
not without regarde to laye hys handes one euery iuste person, and wickedlye too embrwe him selfe in the bloud of Inno∣centes. And that in defence of an vpright quarell, they were come armed, and pro∣uoked to reuenge the deathe of giltles Mustapha, neyther the kyng to haue any resonable cause, whereby to bée stirred with displeasure against them. Their de¦sire therfore was, that, wherby to purge them selues openly of the crime of trai∣ters, of the whiche they were falsely ac∣cused by ye aduersaries of Mustapha, the accuser should come fourthe in the mid∣dest, & that they woulde not laye downe their armour, beefore he had personallye apeared in iudgemente, and beginne his accusation, as the lawe required, vppon paine of lyke punishement. Duringe the time that these thinges should he donne, the horrour of that heynou acte, prouo∣ked them all to wepyng, in so much that the kynge semed to repent hym of that
cruell, detestable, and beastlye killing of his sōue. Then the kinge promised vnto the souldiers, with gentill woordes, the successe of their demaundes, and ende∣uored, as muche as he coulde, to pacifye their inflamed minds. But in the mean time the souldiers, lest the kynge should craftelye haue escaped, and disapointed them of his promises, and the expectatiō of suche thinges as they had requested, remained all of sette purpose, with dili∣gent care to kepe the watche and warde, After that the kyng cleane depriued Ru∣stanus of all his dignities, toke from him the kynges ringe, wherof he hadde bene keper, and deliuered it to Achmat the paschan. But Rustanus brokē with feare and trembling, seynge hym selfe scarse voyde of daunger in hys owne tentes, fludde priuely vnto the pauilious of Ach∣mat the paschan, and consulted with him what were best to be done in soo doutfull and perilous a busines, whiche aunswe∣red,
that therin he should vse the aduise of the kynge, and obeye what so euer by him should be commaunded. These wor¦des greatly contented the mynde of Ru∣stanus, and makyng no long delay, asked councell of the kyng concernyng all hys minde, by messangers, his trusty and fa∣miliar frendes. But aunswere being ge∣uen, that, al lingring set a part, he should absent him selfe, most spedely from the kinges sight and pauilions: he replied, that it coulde not conueniently be done, with out money & pauilions, vnto whom the king againe aunswered, that neither time, place, or longer delay to take com∣modious opportunitie, by anye meanes shoulde be graunted▪ Then Rustanus at length, with out longer taryinge, giltye enoughe vnto him selfe, of his misce∣uous committed dedes, accōpained with eight of his most faithfull frendes direc∣ted his iorney towardes Constantinople, and with spedy pace (as feare is accusto∣med
to minister wynges) in the ende came thyther, and there with Rosa, and manye other confederates vnto that con∣spiracye, expecteth the euente of his for∣tune, not with out great iepardye of le∣singe his head. The rumor went that Soliman also, giltye vnto him selfe of so outragious a murther, was pricked with a supersticious repentance, to goe vnto Mecha, and takyng his iorney, beyng cō∣pelled by the Persian powre, from thése to spede him selfe vnto Ierusalem, ther to offer sacrifice (called in ye language Cor∣ban) for his disceased son. And this much (once to make an ende) came to my re∣membrance, to declare, or rather geue admonishement of Mustapha, yt he was, for his warrelyke prowes, and prompt minde to shedde christian bloud, so fauo∣red of all menne, that they maye thynke neuer anye to haue sprongen out of the linage of Ottomanno, whyche woulde haue promised so muche concerning en∣largemēt
of their empire, so that among them of dispared maters is rysen thys prouerbe Gietti Soltan Mustapha, wher∣by they would signifie, that of their first purposed intent their labour to be lost, or in vaine. We oughht therfore to reioyce one with eche other, for the deathe of so fearce, cruell and deadly an enemye, and thinke, that it came not to passe with out the prouidence of God, whyche in that behalfe was minded to prouide for our saftye and sauegarde. Finallye, lette vs once at length, take diligent care for our selues, that we maye absteine from ciuil warres and dissentions, thynkynge, that we ought to goe againste (euery manne addynge his helpinge hande) this com∣mon enemy, not only of our natiue coun∣trye and liues, but also vnto our soules. Whyche if we doe, it shall not bée harde to driue from vs this mortall aduersarye vnto the name of christianitie, if other∣wyse, it wilbe daungerous, leaste, (wee
beyng occupied about hatefull conspira∣cies amonge our selues) endeuour to in∣uade, wast, and spoile with his tyrannye that part of Europe that yet remaine the vnto vs vnperished, whyche the almigh∣tye and omnipotent God forbidde, and reduce ds vnto concorde and vnitie for his sonne IESVS Christes sake our Sauiour and redemer AMEN. ❧ Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, nere to S. Dunstons Churche by Thomas Marshe▪ ❀
