12766.7 99839517 3945
¶ The chroni∣cle of Ihon Hardyng in metre, frō the first begynnyng of Englāde, vnto yt reigne of Edwarde ye fourth where he made an end of his chronicle. And from yt tyme is added with a cōtinuacion of the storie in prose to this our tyme, now first emprinted, gathered one of diuerse and soundrie autours of moste certain knowelage & substanciall credit, yt either in latin or els in our mother toungue haue writen of ye affaires of Eng∣lande. ❧ LONDINI. ❧ In officina Richardi Graftoni Mense Ianuarii. 1543. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum. RG printer's or publisher's device
¶ The dedicacion of this present woorke, vnto the right honora∣ble lorde Thomas duke of Norffolke, by thenprynter, Richard Grafton. LOrde Thomas of Norffolke duke moste gracious Of noble auncestrie and blood descended A captain right woorthie and auenturous And frō Scotlād euen newely retended Wher Englandes querele ye haue reuenged In the behalf of our noble kyng Henry I wyshe you all health, honour, and victorie ¶ And because it hath pleased almightie God In the right title and quercle of Englande To vse your stocke as an iron rod Wherewith to scourge the falsehood of Scotland In whom is no truthe ne holde of any bande Ihon Hardynges chronicle, as me thought was Moste mete to bee dedicated, to your grace ¶ For Hardyng a true herted Englysheman An esquier valiaunt hardie and bolde And not vnlearned, as the time was than Serched out of chronicles, bothe late an olde All that euer by thesame hath bee told How frō the begynnyng, Scotlāde dooeth reigne Vnder kynges of Englande, as their soueram
¶ And Hardynges owne self, hath the partie bee That from Scotlande, oft tymes hath brought Their seales of homage and fealtee Vnto the kyng of Englande, as he ought Vnto whom the Scottes then sued and sought Yeldyng to liue in humble subieccion Of Englandes gouernaunce and proteccion ¶ But that people of their propre nature Hath euen from the first, been so vntowarde So vnstedfast, inconstaunte and vnsure That nothyng maie possibly bee more frowarde So haue thei continued from thens foorthwarde Neuer gladde to bee in quiet and rest But to defeccion, aye readie and prest ¶ Wherefore Thon Hardyng, to his lorde & mai∣ster Whom in his tyme he serued without blame Edwarde, first duke of Yorke, and after Kyng of this realme, the fourthe of that name In this chronicle affermeth of thesame That thei will rebell, till by prouision The kyng of Englād shall haue made theim both ¶ And in deede Englād, hath oft been cōstreigned one The Scottes slackenesse in dooyng their homage To pricke forewarde, whē thei would haue refrei∣ned With yt sharpe spurre of marciall forceage And to abate their wantonnesse of courage With the iron rodde, of due correccion As oft as thei attempted defeccion ¶ For ye Scottes will aye bee bostyng & crakyng
Euer sekyng causes of rebellion Spoyles, booties, and preades euer takyng Euer sowyng quereles of dissension To burne and steale is all their intencion And yet as people, whom God dooeth hate & curse Thei alwaies begynne, and euer haue the woorse ¶ Englande hitherto hath neuer lacked power As oft as nede wer, the Scottes to compell Their duetie to dooe, and menne of honour Englande hath had, as stories dooe tell Whiche whensoeuer the Scottes did rebell Wer hable at all tymes, theim to subdue And their obedience, to England renue ¶ Emōges ye whiche noumbre, your noble father In the twelfth yere of Henry the seuenths reigne By aunciente recorde, as I can gather Beeyng of suche credence as cannot feigne Yode into Scotlande their pryde to restrein With sēbleable power (as bookes dooen auowe) And like commission as your grace had now ¶ That season he did so valiauntely The Scottes vanquishyng and puttyng to flight That thei ranne awaye moste shamefully Not hable of hym tabide the sight Nor hable to sustein, the brunt of his might Soondrie castelles, he raced down to the grounde Whiche to the honour of Englande did redound ¶ Kyng Iamy also, makyng greate braggue and vaūte Hauyng his armie not a myle of that daie
Your father as a captain valyaunt Made in a moment, for feare to runne awaye The Scottish kyng, sēding foorth heraldes tway Chalenged your father, wt many a proude woorde Battayle to wage, and trye it by the sworde. ¶ And choose thou sir Earle, {quod} kyng Iamy then Whether we shall fight, armie against armie Orelles I and thou, trye it manne for manne For sparyng bloodshed, of either compaignie That if it chaunce me, to haue the victorie Nought shall I demaunde, for Englandes losse & thine Sauig Barwike toune, for euer to bee mine ¶ Then to the heraldes, saied this noble knight Shewe to your kyng, that in this place purposely Battayle for to wage, my tentes haue I pight I am not come to flee, but to fyght sharpely As where he standeth, he maye see with his eye And fyrst where he would, bloodshed saued to bee Therof am I no lesse desirous then he. ¶ Secundarily, where it is his likyng That I a poore Earle, and of meane estate Maye combattre, with hym beyng a kyng That our two fightes, may ceasse all debate He dooeth me honour, after suche highe rate That I must nedes graūt, my selfe bound in this case Humble thankes to rēdre to his grace ¶ Now as for the towne of Barwike, it is knowē (Which your lorde requireth in case I bee slaine) Is the kyng my souereins, and not mine owne
So that graunte therof, in me dodeth not remain But thys maie ye bear worde to your lord again My person and lyfe, aduenture I shall More precyous to me, then the round worlde all. ¶ When kyng Iamy, by his heraldes twoo Spedefullye returnyng, had due knowlage Muche otherwyse, then he loked for thoo Of the Earles stout aunswer and message Fled out of hand, and would no battayle wage So that your father, retourned home victour With coumfort, laude, praise, ioye and honour ¶ The same your father, in the fyfth yere Of our moost noble kyng Henry the eyght When hys grace and his armie at Turney were And the same kyng Iamy, of Scotland streyght Agaynst England, his banner dyspleyght Vanquished the Scottes, & wt your helpyng hād Slew there king Iamy, and brought him to Eng¦land ¶ Agayne in the .xv. yere of the same reygne Your selfe in proper personne, full courageous Set forth against ye Scottes, without dysdeygne Lyke a captayne valyaunt and venturous Wher ye brēt Iedworth, a toune right populous Wyth diuers victories, that your grace then had Whiche made all Englande, to reioyse & be glad ¶ The yere folowyng also, as bookes testify The Scottes came, with an houge power Of .lx. thousande men vnder the Duke of Albany Besiegyng Warke castel, thynkyng it to deuour
But heryng that your grace, dyd approch yt houe The Scottes trembled, and so dyd theyr Duke And cowardly fled, to their shame and rebuke. ¶ Sembleably, by thys your last viage Nowe thys last October and Nouember Made into Scotlande, to their great damage It dooeth as me semeth, ryght well appere That when pleaseth our king to send you thether Your house in hys ryght, is appoynted by God To bee to the Scottes, a sharpe scourge and rod Wherfore thys chronycle of Ihon Hardyng I haue thought good, to dedycate to your grace Because the same in euery maner of thyng Doothe best set out the nature of that place With distaunce of tounes, and euery myles space Besechyng your grace to take in good parte Myne honest labours and beneuolent harte
The preface into the Chronycle of Iohn Hardyng. EMonges all wryters, that haue put in vre Their penne and style, thyn∣ges to endite None haue behynd theim, left so greate treasure Ne to their posteritee, haue dooen suche delite As thei whiche haue taken peines to write Chronycles and actes, of eche nacion And haue of thesame, made true relacion. ¶ By Chronycles we knowe, thynges auncient The succession of tymes, and menne The state of policies, with their regiment Howe long eche partie hath ruled, and when And what were all their procedynges then. Chronicles make reporte of matiers dooen And passed many thousand yeres gooen ¶ By Chronycles we knowe, in eche countree What men haue been, of prowesse marciall What persones chiefly in actiuitee When and betwene whom, warres haue befall Either ciuile or els externall Howe thesame haue been, conueighed & wrought Or els appeaced, and to quiete brought ¶ Chronicles dooe recorde and testifye.
Euen from the worldes first beginninges And dooe kepe in continuall memorie The course and processe, of all maner thinges The liues and maners, of princes and kynges Aswell Gentiles as Iudaicall Aswell Iuste and godly, as tyrannicall ¶ What persones to their prince and countree Haue been louing true and obedient And at all times of necessitee Haue serued thesame, with good entent And constauntly therin, haue their liues spent In Chronicles are regestred feithfully To their immortall honoure and glorye ¶ Contrarye wise, who to their souerains Or to their countrees, haue been wicked traitours Or by collusion and crafty traines Haue rebelled against their gouernours Or the same to helpe, haue been slacke proctours Are sembleably sette out by name To their endelesse infamy, reproche, and shame. ¶ These thinges, and others a thousande mo Wherby realmes, haue decaied or growen Chaunged in processe, and altered to and fro Fruitefull and expedient to bee knowen Are in Chronicles, so plainly shewen That thinges antique, to vs bee as apparent As yf at their doinges, we had been present. ¶ Wherfore Goddes worde and holy scripture Whiche abandoneth all maner vanitee
Yet of Chronicles admitteth the lecture As a thing of greate fruite and vtilitee And as a lanterne, to the posteritee For example, what they ought to knowe What waies to refuse, and what to folowe. ¶ The bible bookes, of Iudges and kynges Althoughe moste full, of high diuine misterie And farre surmounting all Ethnike dooynges Yet yf they bee read, and take literally Hath the fourme and course of a plain historie What kynges serued God, and who trangressed Whiche thereby prospered, or wer oppressed ¶ The bookes of the kynges euery where Yf thinges seme touched ouer briefly To a larger storye, dooeth vs referre Whiche were Chronicles of eche manne truely Sette out at length, to our memorie Albeit those Chronicles (as it is euident) Are loste, and dooe not remain at this present ¶ The bookes inscribed, Paralipomena A perfecte membre, and piece of the bible Is a summarye, of the kynges of Iuda And therfore in Hebrue, it hath the title And appellacion, of a Chronicle The Machabees also, by my deming Is a plaine historye, of holy writing ¶ Whiche bookes, if they had neuer been set out It had been a greate maime to our knowlage A lamentable lacke, with outen doubte
A greate cause of blindnesse to our age And to our faith, inestimable damage. But the spirite of God, the authour was That those examples, might bee our glasse. ¶ Chronicles therfore, of true reporte Whether of Christian realmes or no Are matier of pleasaunce, fruite, and comforte And for a thousande causes and mo Diligently to bee attended vnto Yea, and all maner writers of the same Worthie laude, thanke, honoure & immortal fame ¶ Neither is any one to bee reiected That in this behalfe, hath dooen his endeuoure For though some bee, such as might bee corrected Yet those that haue, therein bestowed laboure Haue minded to profyte vs to their power Neither any is so full, but somwhere dooeth faile Nor any so bare, but dooeth somthing auaile. ¶ And what an exceding benefite trowe ye Is it for eche manne, to haue cognicion Of all actes, bothe of his owne countree And also of euery forein nacion As yf he had liued, when eche thing was dooen And to view the actes of antiquitee As though he did nowe, presentlye theim see ¶ Chroniclers therfore, I can highly cōmende And emonge others, this authour Ihon Harding Who with all his power, to this point did contēd To the vttermost extent of his learning
That Englishe men might haue vnderstanding Of all affaires, touching theirowne countree Euen to his dayes, from olde antiquites ¶ And though his cōning, were not so muche As some others, nor his intelligence Yet his good minde, entent, and zele was suche That in hym lacked, no pointe of diligence After suche bookes, as he thought of credence Feithfully to describe, suche thinges in rime As happened to Englande, from tyme to tyme ¶ But in thinges dooen, before his owne dayes He foloweth his authours, at auenture Without choice or difference of the true wayes Nor well assured, who were corrupte or pure Nor whether they were certaine orelles vnsure Whether fabulous, or menne of veritee Whether vaine, or of good authoritee. ¶ But what soeuer, in his owne time was dooen That he reporteth with all fidelitee Right so as eche thing, ended or begonne Withoute any spotte of insynceritee Or dissimulation of the veritee He founde all meanes, the veray trueth to know And what he knewe certainly, that did he shewe. ¶ From the beginning of Henry ye fourth kyng Of this realme of Englande, after the conquest Euen to Edwarde the fourthes reigning Whiche was thre score yeres and one at the leste He leaueth nothing vnwriten at the largest
That was or semed to bee of importaunce Touchyng peace and warre, wyth Scotlande or Fraunce ¶ Vnto the Scottes, he coulde neuer bee frende Because he sawe theim towardes England False from the begynnyng, to the last ende Neuer standyng to anye league ne bande Homage, fealtee, ne wryting of theyr hande Neuer so readie to make rebellyon As when thei promised moost subiection ¶ That if Ihon Hardyng, bee a trew man And in this behalfe inspyred with prophecie Thei wyll neuer bee, but as thei were than Falle to England, suttle, and craftie Entendyng myschiefe, when thei shewe contrary Spoylers and robbers, that amende wyll neuer Tyll our kyng shall haue made theim Englyshe for euer ¶ Neither is there anye, that euer wrote Which in maters of Scotland could better skill Nor which their falshoode and vntrueth to note Had more affection or better wyll Or better knew water, woodde, toune, vale & hyll Or was more feruente the Scottes to persue Who to England he knew, woulde neuer be true ¶ Neyther anye Chronicler that euer was Eyther dooth or can, more largly declare Euen from Brutus, howe it came to passe That kynges of Englande the soueraines are And ouer Scotlande oughte rule to beare Hymselfe is wytnes, of their subiection
And homage, vnder Englandes protection ¶ In other thinges, the tymes were suche That though this werke haue some spice of blind¦nesse Yet is the authour, not to be blamed much For Popyshe errour, that season doubtlesse Did all the worlde ouer go and oppresse Therfore such thinges, we must in good part take And pardon that faulte, for the tymes sake ¶ Yet haue we thought best, the autour to set out Euen in suche fourme, as hymselfe dyd endite It wer an vnquod thyng, yf we should go about To alter and chaunge, that olde men haue wryte Secondly to vs, it maye bee greate delyte The blindnesse of those tymes to consider From whiche hathe pleased God vs to delyuer ¶ Fynally the darkenesse of those dayes to see To the honoure of our kyng dooeth redound To whom by goddes helpe geuen it hath bee All Popyshe trumperye for to confounde Which thyng, al trew English hertes hath boūd Incessauntly to praye, for kyng Henrye ye eyghte Whose godly wisedome, hath made all streyghte And for asmuch as Hardyng, his boke doth ende With Edward the fourth, whose seruaūt he was And to whome also, this booke he dyd commende Consideryng also, the tyme and space Beyng .lx. yeres and more, I coulde not let passe So many goodly statutes and decrees Battayles, and stories, not good to lese.
Wherfore I annexed theim by continuacion Begynning wyth Edwarde the fourth of yt name Then Edward the fyfth, kyng by generation Whom Richard the third, to his immortal shame Cruelly murdered, the story sayeth the same But plaged he was, to hys greate greuaunce With a shamefull death, as Goddes vengeaunce Then Henry the .vii. nexte doothe ensue Father vnto our moost dred soueraigne lorde And of Henry the. viii, some thyng that is true I haue here set forth, as wryters dooe accorde Not in metre, but obseruyng worde, for worde Myne authours, that wrote it all in prose Reportyng the truth, without fraude or glose ¶ Now right gentle reader, thy parte shalbe My good wyll and zele, my payne and labour To entreprete and take in good parte and gre Geuing to the same, suche good wordes of fauour As may enforce me with all myne endeuour The settyng forth of mo werkes to take in hande To thy solace, and honour of Englande
¶ The Proheme of Iohn Hardynge into this his chronycle. THe moste substance of power and of myght, Through age distilled, into debilitee Of me yt am this time an aged wight And greate faute, haue of habilitee This labour now shuld haue wthold fro me But that my witte would haue some diligence My ghoost to kepe from synne and insolence. ¶ This werke is great, and lōge to bryng to fyne So doeth it euer fro tyme to tyme encrease And long hath dooen, afore Christ dyd enclyne, In Marie mother and mayden without lease To chronicle, so men haue theim put in prease Some in meetre, and some also in prose Some in Latyn, full wysely dyd it close. ¶ And some in Frenche, they made for intellecte Of men that could no Latyn vnderstande More sufficiently endited and protecte By ferre then I can it nowe take in hande And some in lynes two, theyr ryme ay bande But though my witte be not so curious As theirs by ferre to make it glorious. ¶ Yet wyll I vse, the symple witte I haue To your pleasaunce and consolacion Moste noble lorde and prince, so God me saue That in chronycles hath delectacion Though it be farre aboue myne estimacion Into balade I wyll it nowe translate
Ryght in this forme with all myne estymate. My lorde of Yorke vnto your sapience. I wyll remember a notabilyte Of your elders rule and regymence That had this lande of olde prioryte Which ruled were after their dignitee In vertue digne by roiall gouernaunce And in vyce rulyd and misgouernaunce. By whiche knowledge your discrete sapience All vyce euermore destroye maye and reproue By vertuous and blessedfull dilygence And vertue loue, that maye not ought greue Howe ye shall rule your subiectes while ye lyue In lawe and peace and all tranquyllite Whiche been the floures of all regalyte. ¶ Edward the thyrde that was king of this land By ryght title, and very iuste discent And kyng of Fraunce as I can vnderstande By his mother quene Isabell the gent Sister and heyre of Charles by hole entent For Charles dyed without any chylde The ryght discent vnto his mother mylde Why shulde yt French forbarre you of your right Numeri .xxvii. Sith God of heauen in libro numeri Gaue to Moises this lawe that nowe is lyght In the chapiter seuen and twenty By these wordes the doughter ryghtfully Of Salphaat aske the fathers heritage Sal∣phaat Geue them in possessyon amonge the cosynage.
¶ This kyng Edward reignyng in his dayes In mercyall actes, tryumphe and victorie Aboue all princes famed was alwayes Fyue sonnes had, the worlde out to crye Ther wer no mo suche of one patry monye Edwarde the prince and eldest sonne of age Who gat Richarde, that had the heritage. ¶ Leonell next borne, after in Antwerpe In Brabant lande, that wedded vnto his wyfe The erles doughter of Vlster as men do karpe And begatte on her Philip his doughter ryue And also his heire, whome he loued as his lyue Whome erle Emonde of Marche the Mortimer Wedded to his wyfe and begatte the erle Roger. Edwarde the thyrd had fyue sonnes. Edwarde prince. Leonell. Iohn duke of Lancastre. Edmounde duke of Yorke. Thomas of Woodstocke duke of Gloucester. ¶ That erle was after of Marche & of Vlster With wylde Irishe that slayne wer in Irelande Who had a sonne, erle Emonde Mortymer That dyed without yssue I vnderstande To whom dame Anne, his syster, vnto his land Was veraye heyre, whō the erle of Cābridge wed And gatte of her your selfe as I haue red ¶ Why should ye not then be her veraye heyre Of all her lande and eke of all her right Sith Iesu Christe of Iude lande so feire
By veray meane of his mother Mary bryght To be kyng, claymed tytle and right And so dyd name hym selfe kyng of Iewes So by your mother, the right to you acrewes. ¶ After Lyonell that was duke of Clarence And of Vlster the erle was, by his wyfe And of Italie, for his greate excellence Kyng should haue been, without any stryfe Of all Europe, without comparatyfe The royall lande, and to his espousaile The dukes doughter of Melayn without faile. ¶ Iohn borne in Gaunt, of Flaūders chief cytee ke orn in Gaūt. The thyrde soonne was, of good kyng Edwarde That wedded dame Blaunch, ful of feminytee Duke Henryes doughter and heire afterwarde Of Lancastre, by lawe of kynde and forwarde  y• . Who gat and bare the fourth kyng Henry That kyng Rycharde deposed wrongfully. ¶ Who gatte Henry the fyfth lyke conqueroure  y• . Of Normandy, and mykill parte of Fraunce That excelled bothe kyng and Emperoure In marcyall actes, by his gouernaunce Who gatte Henry the sixte at Gods pleasaunce  yt Of suche symplenesse and disposicion As menne maye se by his discrecion. For when Henry the fourth first was crouned ny a wyseman, sayd then full commenly third heyre shuld not ioyse but be vncrouned And deposed of all regalitee
To this reason they dyd there wittes applye, Of euill gotten good, the third should not enioyse Of longe agone, it hath bene a commen voyse. ¶ Howe the maker of this booke saieth his auyse in briefe for the duke of Yorke. ¶ O my lorde of Yorke, God hath prouyde In this for you, as men sayen commenly So that no slouth you from his grace deuyde But take it as he hath it sent manly And rule well nowe ye haue the remedye But neretheles, let euery man haue the right Both frende and foo, it may encrease your might. ¶ Treate well Percy of marchys lyne discended To helpe your right with might and fortifye By tender meanes to holde hym well contented Remembryng hym, by wyttie polycye Howe by processe of tyme and destenye Your right might all bene his, as nowe is yours Through gods might, make thē your successours ¶ Edmoūde was then the .iiij. sonne, at Langlay Edmoūd duke of yorke. Borne, as knowen was well in the lande A noble prince after, as men might say At battayle of Orray, yt fought sore with his hāde And Iohn of Gaunt his brother, I vnderstande That fought ful sore, for Ihō of Mountfortright Agayne Charles of Bloys a manly knight. ¶ This Edmoūde was after duke of Yorke creat And had a sonne that Edward had to name Whom kyng Richarde made to be denominate In all his writtes exaltyng his fame
Kyng of Portyngale, his father yet at hame Lyuyng in age I trawe of .lxxx. yere A fayre person, as a man might se any where. ¶ Thomas Woodstoke, the .v. sonne was in dede Duke of Gloucester, that tyme made and create Thomas of wood stoke du∣ke of glo¦ucester. By kyng Richarde murdered whom for his mede Kyng Henry quyt with death preordinate By Goddes dome and sentence approbate Who sleeth, so shall he be slayne by his sentence Well more murder whiche asketh ay vengeaunce Mat. vii. ¶ Who laye afore Paris, amoneth daye With hoste royall without any batell Of all enemyes moste dred he was alwaye And Scottes moste hym bred without any fayle For as they trowed by theyr owne rehersaile Of prophecyes he shulde theyr lande conquere And make the kyng to Englande homegere. ¶ Nowe haue I made vnto your owne knowlege Edward prince of Wa the eldest sonne of kynge Edward the .iii. A remembraunce of Edwardes sonnes fyue Your exampler to geue you a corage So noble princes, I trowe were none alyue After my wytte as I can discryue The eldest sonne, whose lyfe I haue lefte oute Who yt in Fraunce & all landes was moste doute ¶ Of the ryghte and tytles that my Lorde of Yorke hath to Fraunce and Spayne with Portingale & other landes by yonde the sea, Ierusalem and other landes. ¶ At batell of Poytiers tooke kynge Iohn With greate honoure triumphe and vyctory
By merciall actes, and verteous life aloone And in Spayne, as made is memorie The kyng Petro, by knightly victorie To his kyngdome, he did restore again By his brother putte out, with muche pain ¶ The appoinctement bytwixt duke Iohn & duke Emund who should bee kyng of Castle and Lyon, and what the maker of this booke sawe and red at Londō, to syr Robert Vmfrewill then lorde Vmfrewill. ¶ This kyng Petro to giue hym to his mede Had nothyng els but doughters twoo full faire Whiche he betooke, to that prince in deede For his wages, for cause thei where his heire With whome he did, to Englande so repaire And Constaunce wedde, vnto his brother. Iohn Emund his brother, the younger had anone ¶ Dame Isabell, the younger hight by name Bytwene these brethren, was appoinctment The first heire male, whiche of the sisters came, The kyng should been, and haue the regiment To you my lorde of Yorke, this dooeth appent Duke of Yorke. For your vncle Edwarde, was first heire male To whome your father, was heire with out faile ¶ So kyng of Spayne, and also of Portyngall Ye should nowe bee, by lyne of bloodde discent By couenaunt also and appoinctement whole As I haue seen of it the mununent Vnder seale wryten, in all entent Whiche your vncle, to my lorde Vmfrewill At London shewed, whiche I red that while
¶ For Spayne & Portyngale beare the renoume And commen name as I haue herde expressed Both to the realmes of Castyll and Lyon. And so the kynge of Spayne hath aye adressed His royall style in wrytyng well impressed Kyng of Castill and also of Lyon, Accompted both so for his region. ¶ Nowe be ye knowe, of your title to Englande The ty∣tle of the kinges of Englāde to Scot∣land and Ireland. By consequens to Wales and Scotlande For they perteyne, as ye maye vnderstande Of auncient tyme, to the crowne of Englande By papall bull, ye haue the right to Irelande, Gascowe, Paitowe and Normandye Pountyf, Bebuile, Saunxie and Sauntignye. ¶ And all the lande beyonde the charente Of Dangolesme, Dangolismoys & Luyre zyne Of Caoure; Caourenō, Pyridor & Pirygūt coūtre Of Rodis, Ronegeauis, Dagō, Dagenoyse yt fine Tharbe, Wigor & Gaure shoulde to you enclyne, With all the fraunchyses and all souerayntie As hath the kyng of Fraunce in his degre. ¶ Nō. that I Ihon Hardyng maker of this booke, delyuered to kyng Henry the syxte the copie of the treatie of this land as kyng Edward the thyrd treated and had them after the battayll of Poytours. ¶ Calys & Marke, Colne, Hāmys, Oye & Wale, Sandegate & Guysons, with all the whole coūtre With all the landes and townes betwene thē all With all fraunchyses and royall souerayntie
All those of right be yours in propertie What by treate and what by veraye right As kyng Edwarde them had of mykyll might. ¶ To Ierusalem, I saye ye haue great right For erle Geffraye, that hight Plantagenet Of Aungeoy erle, a prince of passyng might The eldest sonne to Fouke, and first begette Kyng of Ierusalem by his wife dewly sette Whose sonne Geffray foresaide gatte on his wyfe Henry the seconde that knowen was full ryfe. ¶ Yet haue ye more fro Bawdewyn Paraliticus Kyng afterward, to thesame kyng Henry The croune sente and his banner precious As veraye heyre of whole auncestrie Descent of bloode by tytle lynyally From Godfray Boleyn and Robert Curthose Godfray Boleyn. Robert cur those. That kynges were therof and chose. ¶ He sente hym also the Sepulture keyes Resygnyng wholy vnto hym all his ryght For to defende the lande from Sarizenes For he was sicke and had therto no might And all the lande, destroyed was to sight By the Soudyan to great lamentacion Of Goddes people, and all Christen nacion. ¶ He sente hym also the keyes of Dauids towre With Heraclye, that of Ierusalem Was Patriarke and greatest of honour And with templers, which brought hym into this realme Besekyng hym yt he would thē susteine
Full humbly askyng supportacion For the cytiee and christen consolacion. ¶ All these titles, the chronicles can recorde If they be seen by good deliberacion Many of theim to these full well accorde As I haue seen with greate delectacion By clerkes wrytten for our informacion As in olde feldes, cornes freshe and grene grewe So of olde bookes cōmeth our cunnyng newe Out of old bookes cō∣meth newe knowledge ¶ Of this I wyll nowe cease and forth procede To my mater, wher fyrst I beganne To chronicles of this lande for worthihed To remembre in balade as I can To that entent to please both God and man And eke to please good femynitie The dukes wyfe na∣med Cece∣ly Of my lady your wife dame Cecely. ¶ That in Latyn hath litell intellect To vnderstande the great nobilytie Of this like lande of whiche she is electe Tyme commyng like to haue the souerayntie Vnder your rule as shulde feminitee Whiche if it maye please her ladyshippe My hert will reioyse of her inward gladshippe. ¶ For well I wote your great intelligence That in latyn hath good inspeccion Will pleased bee of your hie sapieuce My lady that is vnder your proteccion Your heyre also maye rede at theyr eleccion Whiche if it may please your nobilitee
Of my laboure I would reioysed bee. ¶ Also for your heyres and for your successours In tyme commyng to haue a clere knowledge How of this realme the noble gouernours Haue kept with helpe of Baronage In victorye, tryumphe and surplusage Sith Brute it wanne in his prioritee It hath been kept in worthy dignitee ¶ But howe this ysle enbrased with this sea Vnedefied was knowne first and founde That Albion was named of propertee Of dame Albione that first therein had ground And after long, how Brute therof was crowned That of his owne name called it Brytayne And buylded it, wher all before was playne. ¶ The ende of the Proheme.
Here begynneth the Chronycle of Iohn Hardynge. The firste Chapter. ¶ Of the .xxx. susters that first inhabited this lande & named it Albion, that nowe is Englande Wales & Scotland. THe whyle that Troye was reignyng in his might In Greece there was a kynge right excellente That Dioclesiā, some booke sayeth he hight Kyng Dio¦clesyā and Albyne his wyfe. And of Surray that had the regimente, Dame Albyne hight his wife, a lady gente Who doughters had .xxx. wedded to there degree To kynges all of greate nobilitee. ¶ Whiche fell in pryde, and hye elacion Thynkyng to be in no subieccion Of husbandes more, ne dominacion But only by a fell conieccion Toke hole purpose and full affeccion To kyll there lordes slepyng sodaynly Soueraynes to be, and lyue all seuerally. The .ij. Chapter. ¶ Note that wemen desyre of al thynges soueraynte, & to my conceypt more in this land then in any other, for they haue it of the nature of the saied susters. THe youngest suster, the mater all discured To her husbande, and to her father gent For whiche she was of al that dede assured But they were putte in exile by iudgement
So rightfull were the princes of there entente They iudged them to be put in the see In shyppe topasse echeone fro there countree. ¶ As fortune would, to make there auenture Which by processe, with streames to and fro This chro¦nicle is not true. And tempestes greate, and sore disauenture Of sickenes great and mykell other wo And moste of all, they knewe not whether to go Tyll at laste they came vnto this ysle That then was waste, as chronicles do compile. ¶ But I dare saye, this chronicle is not trewe, For in that ylke tyme, in Surraye was no kyng Ne afterwarde, to tyme that Saul grewe Ne no kyng was in Surray euer lyuyng Saul was the fyrste kyng in the thyrde age. That had that name, for Saule was ye first kyng Of Surray realme, at the ende of the thyrde age In Samuels tyme, the prophete wyse and sage. The .iij. Chapter. ¶ Note that Hughe de Genesis a Romayne historiographier declareth in his chronicle all the kyngdomes of the worlde, and all the names of suche kynges as ruled in theim, from Noes floude vnto the byrthe of Christ. In whiche chronicle the foresayed Hughe writeth, that Danays kyng of yt Gre∣kes had .l. doughters and that Egistus his brother kyng of Egypte had as many sonnes that maryed together, which doughters kylled theyr owne husbandes, and for that cause were banyshed, and saylyng on the sea were dryuen vnto a certain ysle, which, Albina beyng the eldest suster of theim named accordyng to her name Albiō, and Brute after that called it accordyng to his name Brytayne. NE afore Brute, was in no realme yt name, No kyng on liue, that hight ne called so But of Arginos the kyng of full hye fame
Had doughters fifty, whose name was Danao The kyng of Egipte, his brother Egisto Had soonnes also fifty together wedde In chronicles of olde as I haue redde ¶ Whiche doughters, slew their husbandes ech∣one Long before Brute was of his mother bore So fynde I by these women alone And by these soonnes thus slain before The chronicle trewe, in their persones more Then in the doughters of Dioclesian Were in no lande that tyme so hight kyng none ¶ So in the yere of Aioth Iudge of Israell These ladies here landed full weery and sore Seuenty and twoo as Hugh dooeth tell Whiche was I saie an hundred yere afore That Brute came into this lande and more By fyue yeres trulye, and well accompted Of yeres ode so muche more amounted ¶ Also in Surray there was no kyng before Kyng Alexaunder dedde and expired For Seleucius was the first kyng thore By all chronicles that I haue enquired That chronicle should not bee desired Seyng that it is not trew ne autenticke By no chronicle vnto the trewth oughte like ¶ I dare well saie he sawe neuer Hugh Genesis This se∣ that our chroni¦cle is false in the bee∣gynnyng, Ne he redde neuer the chronicles of Surry Of Israell Iude ne of Egipciis Of Argiuos, of Athenes, ne Thessaly
Of Macedon, Cesile, ne of Assery, Of Lacedemon, of Lyde, ne yet of Latyn, Of Affrique, of Asis, ne yet of Babelyn, ¶ Of Perce, ne Meede, Italye, ne Albany, Of kyng Alexaunder, ne of his successors That afore tyme reigned dyuersly In dyuerse realmes, citees castelles and toures Of Romany, ne of state of emperours For had he seene all these and their stories Of Dioclesian, he would make no memories, The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe these ladies had this Isle in the yere of Aioth .lxxii. in the third age of the world, and she called it Albion of hir name, and toke feauty & seruice of theim all, as souerayne ladie of this Isle, that nowe is Englande, Scotlande and Walis, as Hugh Genesis wryteth in his Dyaloge. THese ladies so ay dwellyng in this Isle The yeres of Aioth seuenty & two no lees Dame Albyne was as mēne can compile The eldest sister, and thought she would encrees Hir self aboue theim all apon the dees Sittyng, she tooke feauty, then of theim all Trewe to hir to bee, for aught that might bee fall ¶ And then she gaue this Isle a propre name Of Albion, out of hir name as chief And called it so, frome thens forward the same She ordained then bowes to their relief Arowes & boltes and bowstrynges made in brief To slee the Dere, the Bull, and also the Bore The Beer, and byrdes, that were therin before,
¶ With pitfalles great & trappes thei did begile The beastes and byrdes to theyr sustenaunce They gatte eche daye with nettes and other wile The fyshe in stagnes and waters sufficiaunce Eche daye they made wyttye cheuesaunce To helpe them selfe at their necessitee For hungre, that they shulde not perished bee. The .v. Chapter. ¶ Howe spyrites gatte Giauntes vpō the ladies, which gatte other Giaūtes within this lāde. Before Brute came were xii. M. Giauntes, what in this lāde that nowe is Englāde and the north that nowe is Scotland, and the west yt nowe is Wales, as the Scotte Marian saieth in his dialoge. THese ladies with meate & drynke replete And of nature reuigured corporally And all there care forgette and vnder fete Had great desyre to play them womanly As wemen yet wyll do full louyngly For to fulfyll the werke of womanhed And bryng forth frute, the lande to rule and lede. ¶ So wer they tempted with inwarde meditaciō And vayne glorye within their hertes implyed To haue comforth of mennes consolacion And knewe nothyng, howe of them to prouyde But inwardly theim they glorifyed So hote that spyrites in mannes forme Laye by theim their desyres to performe ¶ So duryng forth in suche lust and delyte With nature of theim selfe and feminacion The spyrites gatte children, yt were Gyaūtes tyte Of them through their owne ymaginacion
By feruent hete, moued with temptacion Thus gatte they then great Giaūtes ful of might Within shorte tyme that were longe and wight. The .vi. Chapter. ¶ How the fathers laye by theyr doughters, the brethren by theyr systers, the sonnes by theyr mothers and euery kynde with other, as Hugh Genesis reporteth in his chronicles. THe fathers then by theyr doughters laye Mother ne syster agayne it not replyed Of chylder fell sonnes and doughters ay They gatte eche daye and strongly multiplied Of theim this ysle then was so fortifyed So stronge then was this generacion None durst it noye for theyr malignacion. ¶ Amonge theim fell so great vnkyndnesse Accordynge ryght well to there lyfe inordinate That echoue of theim dyd other oppresse That none of theim was lefte on lyue of ye estate Of .xij. thousande within a lytell date Whose pryde fell afore the incarnacion Twelue hundreth yere, by veraye computacion. ¶ But Bartholomew de proprietatibus rerum Sayth howe this ysle of Albion had name Of the see bankes full whyte all or sum That circuyte the ysle as shyppes came Fro ferrome sene, as thei through the see fame Sailed by & by for rypes and roches whyte To shipmen were greate gladnesse and delyte. ¶ But Maryan saieth the chronicler to sewe
That dame Albion was the first that named it so Both two myght be together clere and trewe That shippes so saylinge to and fro And at her coming they called it so both two And so both waies maye be right sure & trewe From whiche there wyll no chronycler it renewe ¶ Of this nowe wyll I sease and saye no more To time come efte ye Brute hath wonne this lande Brutus And slayne them all in batell foughten sore But nowe of Brutus ye shall well vnderstande Howe that he did in Greece and tooke on hande And of what bloude he cam by clere discente And howe in Greece he had greate regiment. ¶ And howe he gate this ysle by his prowesse And called it by name the ysle of Britayne And of his name for theyr worthynesse He called his men Britaynes ay furth certayne That Troyans were afore not to layne To whiche I praye the holy Trinyte That is one God in personnes thre. ¶ Of helpe and spede to bryng this boke to ende The o∣acyon of the au¦thoure for yt ma¦kyng of this booke. For symple is my wytte of all scyence Of rethoryke as yet neuer I kende And symple am of all intellygence Yet wyll I not so hurte my conscyence On olde goddes to muse or on to call That false were euer and euer so wyll be fall. ¶ Of Saturnus ne yet of Marcury The na¦mes of false god¦des. Of Iubiter of Mars ne yet of Venus
Of Pallas ne of Mynerue ne Megary Ne of Phebus Ceres ne of Geneus Of Cupyde ne yet of Thisophonus Dyan Bacchus ne of Cerbery All these I wyll refuse nowe and defye ¶ And to ye god in heauen I praye in magestie My wytte to enforce with might and sapience With langage suche as may ought pleasaunt be To your pleasaunce and noble excellence For I am bare and naked of eloquence By insuffycience and all symplicyte To ende this booke as were necessyte. The .vii. Chapiter. ¶ How Brute conquered Albyon & called it Britayne of his The ar∣mis of Brute owne name, yt now is England Walis and Scotland, and the armes of Brute in whiche he was clade fyrste when he entred this ysle after Genesis the Italyane Chronycler were of Gowlys .ii. Lions crowne of golde Rampant and combattaunt. AS chronycles telleth & make notificacyō Brutus who so them wel shal know & vnderstand Of what kynne blode and generacyon Brutus firste came that conquered all this lande It to remember I haue nowe take on hande Through all olde stories by philosyphers cōpiled In balade thus it shall be made and fyled ¶ As out of olde feldes newe corne groweth eche yere Of olde bokes by clerkes newe approued Olde knyghtes actes wt mynstrelles tonge stere The newe corage of yonge knightes to be moued
Wherfore me thinketh old thinges shuld be loued Dute of oldbokes cōmeth new wise¦dome. Sith olde bokes maketh young wittes wise Disposed well with vertues exercyse. ¶ At olde Adam therfore I wyll begyn Who was I fynde, the first olde creatur Adam. Conueyng downe lynyally in kyn As discent in byrth and in gendur Next vnto Brute, as mencion maketh scriptur I shall reporte, as God wyll please to lede My symple ghoost with language it to fede. ¶ For well I wote, without his supportacion For to reporte his veraye genealogie Howe he by discent in all generacion From Adam downe to Troyane Auncetrye Gotten and borne certeyne in Italye Full herde it is, although I woulde full fayne The ge∣neaion of ute So symple be my spyrites and my brayne. ¶ Of Adam whiche was the fyrst creature . Came Seth forsothe and Seth gat Enos than And Enos gatte afterwarde full sure A sonne that hight and called was Canayn . Who gatte Melaliel, as scripture tell can Who gatte Iareth of whom Enoke came That Matusaly gatte of mykill fame. ¶ Matusale gatte Lameke, who Noe gatte And Noe Iaphet, who gatte Cichym than h. . th. m. . . That Cipre gatte after whom Cipres hatte Cipre gatte Crete, that the ysle of Crete began A famouse and a ryght notable man
And Crete gatte a sonne hight Cely Cely. Saturne Who gatte Saturne a wyse man and a wittye ¶ Of whome came then Iubiter of Frigy Whiche is Turky wherin Troyes citee Iubiter. In honoure stode and in great victorye And Iubiter gate Dardanus no lee That of Frigy in greate felicitee Darda∣nus. So reygned kyng greatly magnifyed And as a God amonge theim glorifyed. ¶ Of whom came so his sonne Eritonus Who gatte a sonne that firste Troye edifyed Erioto∣nus. Troilus Ilis. Ilyon. Hercules Lama∣done. That Troilus hight of whome came kyng Ilis That Ilyon made a palays of great pryde Whiche for passyng other was both long & wyde Where Hercules slough kynge Lamadone And led awaye the royalles of the towne. ¶ Lamedone gatte the kyng Priamus Pria∣mus. Who made agayn his palays Ilion And Troies citee also more glorious Then they were before their subuercion And royall without peruercion In ioye and myrth they stode many a yere Achilles was Pri¦amus bro¦ther. And Achilles with hym his brother dere. The .viij. Chapiter. ¶ A shorte lamentaciō of the maker, for kyng Lamedone lose his life and his estate that might haue stande in peace and suertie, for a litle succour of Iasone in his voiage. O Lamedon of Troye, that bare the crowne What fortune droue the, to dooe Iasone vnkyndnesse
Where he to paye, was so readye and bowne For his vitayle that came in by distresse Of tempest greate standing in heuinesse Hym for to dryue oute of the regyon And not refreshe hym at his requisicyon. Lamedō shewed to Iason vnkind∣nesse. Whiche was the cause after of thy heuynesse When he the slough and destroyed all thy cytee And caste downe all thy myght and great nobles With lytell thing that sauyd might haue bee O good lorde? why shoulde thy royal dignytee To straungers shewe that cruell vnkyndnesse That to thy lande purposed no distresse. Hector, Troilus Dephe∣bus He∣lenus, & Parys, came of Prya∣mus. Of Priamus came Hector and Troylus Dephebus Helenus and Parys Of royall bloude and dukes full glorious Of excellence and greatest of empryse Whiche were all slayne by fortunes excercyse All the sege of Troye knyghtly in the defence In mercyall actes as princes of excellence ¶ The palays greate and the noble cytee Greekes By Grekes seeged, longe and many a yere Was wonne at laste and wast as men yet see This kyng & quene both two were slayne in feere Where Anchises and Eneas his sonne dere Anchy∣ses, Ene¦as, Asca¦neus. And Ascaneus the sonne of Eneas Escapyd awaye and on the sea dyd passe. The .ix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Eneas exyled oute of Troye came to Cecyle and to Affrike to the cytee of Carthage, and fro thence to Italye, & there was made kynge of Tuskayne and of Latene.
ANd in Cicile they after did aryue Where Anchises dyed and was dispent. Eneas and his sonne to the sea gan dryue With shippes .xii. to Italy had they mente Eneas. But wynde theim droue, again there entent Into Affrique, where for Eneas sake They welcome wer and worthely vptake. ¶ Fro thence after he tooke the sea agayn And landed then in Italia In Tibre mouth with trauayll & with payne Where the towne and porte is of hostia Where by the God he bidden was to ga To helpe the kyng Euandre in his right Euādre. For after hym the God that land hym hight. ¶ To whom he went as hym was prophecied And welcome was into Italie Of kyng Euandre greatest magnified For his wisedome fame and cheualrye For his worshippe and for his auncetrye He gaue hym than greate lordshippe and riches And gold enough right of his worthynes ¶ Kyng Euandre made warre on kyng Latene Latene. Turnus In whose defence Turnus kyng of Tuskayn Came, with greate hoste of Tuskalayns so fyne Agayn Euandre, wher Turnus then was slayn Eneas did that dede and that derayn With mighty strokes courage and cheualrous He wanne the felde in batell fortunous. Betwene Euandre so and the kyng Latene
The peace he made, reste and concordaunce And kyng Latens his doughter yt hight Labyne Wedded to his wyfe, by veray good accordaunce Betwene theim forth was no more discordaunce And Eneas kyng was made of Tuskayne Of whiche the kynge Euandre was full fayne. ¶ Sone after then dyed the kyng Latene Whose realme Eneas had also in peace In which he made a castell fayre and fyne Labynyon it hyght wythout leace His wyues name to worshyppe and encreace Of whome he gatte a soonne, and dyed afore. That he was brought into this worlde and bore. ¶ This worthy prince, kyng Eneas mortally Ended his lyfe that was of hye prowesse Where so God wyll to reigne eternally Within the house of fame, where as I gesse er knightes fell of noble worthynesse That more desyred in armes to haue a fame hen be the best in dede, and beare no name The .x. Chapiter. ¶ Of the house of fame where knightes be rewarded after the merites in armes by Mars the God of armes, some trans∣late wich kyrcheues of pleasaunce & some with rynges and onches, their sepulture in the felde of pitee by heuen gates yt haue be veraye louers of theyr louers ladyes and neuer panyneles but aye graceles. BUt than hys soonne Siluius Postumus Newe borne so young and tendre of age Kyng of this lande was made Astanius His brother dere that ruled his heritage And peaceably kepte out of all seruage.
Twenty wynter and eyght full mannely, And gatte a soonne that called was Syluy. ¶ Whiche Siluius gatte and generate Siluius ye father of Brutus. His soonne Brutus on Crensa labius nece All priuelie by hym de virginate And sore besought by his subtilitees And sumwhat of hir womanly petees That tendred hym of god femynete As womanhod would of all humilitee ¶ Soo after sone, the fate of death would soo That passe away muste nede Ascanius He gaue his brother Siluius posthumus tho His heritage and riches plentuous But Brutus waxed echedaye full beauteous The praise of Brute. And in mannehod well more in all vertue Was none hym like in no place that mēne knewe ¶ Of .xv. yere when he was commen to age At huntyng as he shotte at a dere He sleugh his father vnto his greate damage Howe Bru¦tus slewe his father, And at his birth as saieth the chronicler His mother dyed as wrytten is full clere Anone after as he was of hir bore For whiche .ii. causes his herte was wonder sore ¶ Seyng Iuly this fals fortunite The soroes greate in hym so multiplied That there for shame of his fortunite In no wyse would he no lenger dwell ne byde But into Grece his sorowes for to hide He went anone where exiles wer of troye
Whose sorowes great he leched all with ioye. ¶ Sir Helenus was Priamus sonne of Troye And Anchises an olde worthy knight Helenus. Priamus. Anchises. And .vi. M. that of hym had great ioye Of gentilmen of Troye exiled forth right That hym besought with instaūce day and night To helpe theim out of their great heped sorowe In whiche they lay oppressed euen and morowe. ¶ For whiche he wrote his letter in that tide To kyng Pandras that kyng was of that lande Pandras. Requiryng hym to let hym passe and ride Frely, where so they would withouten bande For whiche the kyng with power tooke on hande To siege Brutus within his castell fayre To whom Troyans strongly gan repayre. ¶ To Brutus so, to helpe theim at there might Brutus. Anacletus Who then anone sent forth Anacletus. His prysoner, whom he had taken ryght Vnto the hoste, to tell theim how Antigonus Laye in the wood stollen awaye fro Brutus on{us}. Who went to theim, that next the wood then laye And bad theim come and rescowe hym or daye. ¶ Whiche warde so brake & to ye wood can ryde Brutus with that with all his hole power There brake in and would no longer abyde But slough the Grekes and tooke the kyng infer But than as saith the veray chronicler No lenger wolde he there abyde ne dwell But furthermore as chroniclers doeth tell,
¶ With kyng Pandras, he made his appoincte∣ment Pandras. Hym to deliuer, on this condicion To wedde his doughter, by will and assent Dame Innogen and shippis of his region With vitaile and riches, to wynne lande & towne, For there he woulde, no longer make soiourne But with Troyans, to their lande attourne ¶ All this promysses and whole apoinctement Fulfilled and spede, Brute with his wife So sailed furth thorowe the Grekish oryent The pil∣lers yt Her∣cules made of brasse. To marytayne, and twoo pillers ganne he driue That Hercules also with busy liue To tyme he came to an olde citee No creature therin, that tyme coulde see ¶ But a goddas, menne called Diane Diane the Goddes, That coulde declare, and expounde destynie To whome Brute anone went vp alone And laye afore hir, there full deuoutely With candell brennyng, and with ceremonie Besekyng hir, of succour and grace Where that he might, hir worship in sum place ¶ With his Troyanes, therin for to abyde And inherite, to whome then saied Dyane By yonde all Gualle, an Isle full long and wide Enclosed whole, within the occiane With Giauntes kepte his destyned, the alaan And thy Troyanes, to haue and enhabite Therin to dwell, for euermore and enheret ¶ So sailyng furth, by Columnes of Hercules
Whiche been of brafse, by Hercules their sette For when he came into the sea no lees Of Spayne, wher that his meny Troianes mette Of their lynage as it was to their dette Thei came with hym echeone by one accorde Corneus their capitain was and lorde Corneus capitain of yt Troyās. The .xi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Brute came frome Grece into Albion, and named it Britaine and howe he arryued at Totnesse in Deuinshire HE sailed so fourth by the sea Aquitaine. Where yt he arriued yt nowe is Guyā lāde And sleugh the buckes of whiche thei wer full faine, The bere & the bore and hartes all that thei fande With out licence or yet any warand Wherfore Guffor kyng of the lande full fell With Troyanes faught, but Goryne their bare ye bell Goryne, ¶ Brute tooke shippe and arriued in Albion Where Diane saied, should been his habitacion And when he came the coastes of it vpon He was full glad and made greate exultacion Reioysed highly of his fortunacion In armes of Troye couered and well araid Of whiche Troyanes wer full well apaid He bare of goulis twoo liones of golde The ar∣mes of e Countre Rampant with golde onely crouned Whiche kynges of Troie inbataill bare ful bolde To whiche frō Troye was distroyed & confoūded Their children slain, the next heire was he founde And in tho armes this Isle he did conquere
As Marian saieth the veray chronicler Maryan chronicler. ¶ At Totnesse so this Brutus did arriue Corneus also and all their coumpaignie Corneus The giauntes also he sleugh doune beeliue Through all the lande in battaile mannely And left no moo but Gogmagog onely In all this Isle, so had he theim destroyed Gogma∣gog, Whom in prisone he kepte and anoyed The .xii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Corneus wrastilled with Gogmagog the giaunt of the Isle, and sleugh hym. BVt for he would knowe all his resistens What he might dooe more then Corneus He made theim bothe dooe their sufficiēce In all wrastleyng whiche was moost rigorous And to defende or sawte moost curious On the sea banke, afore Brutus thei mette Where by accorde the daye and place was sette ¶ This Gogmagog so thrafte Corneus That rybbes three were broken in his side Corneus then of might full laborous Thought he would sone reuenge that tide With that he stode and sette his leggues wyde And gatte hym vp betwene his armes faste And ouer the roche into the sea hym caste ¶ Whiche place hight yet Gogmagoges sawte By cause he leped their frome Corneus All if it wer nothyng in his defaute
But by the might of Coryn, full vigorous Coryn. Who was alway in bataill fortunous For whiche Brutus had hym in greate deynie And gaue hym aye worship and dignite ¶ This Brutus, thus was kyng in regalite And after his name, he called this Isle Briteyn, This Isle Briteyne. And all his menne, by that same egalite He called Briteynes, as chroniclers all saine Of whiche thei all were full glad and faine To Corneus he gaue to his availe The duchie whole, and lande of Cornwayle. Corneus. The .xiij. Chapiter. ¶ Howe he buylded the citee of Troynouaunt, that nowe is called London. London. SO was the name, of this ilke Albyon All sette on side, in kalandes of achaunge And putte awaye with greate confusion And Briteyn hight, so furth by newe eschaunge . After Brutus, that slewe these Giauntes straūge And wanne this Isle, by his magnyficence In whiche he dwelled long tyme in excellence ¶ The citee greate, of Troynouaunt so faire He buylded then on Thamis for his delite Vnto the north, for his dwellyng & for his moost. Whiche is to saie in our lāguage perfect, Newe Troye, in bookes as I canne nowe endicte repeier And nouell Troye, in frenche incomperable Of Breteyne, a citee moost profytable ¶ This Briteyne is in length eyght .C. myle
Fro Monsehole, that is in Cornewayle right The lēgth and bredth of ye Isle of Bryteyne. Vnto the northend of Catenes, to compile And also in bredeth, frome sainct Dauid yt hight To Yarmoth, that in Norffolke, is by sight Twoo hundred myle, accoumpted well and clene As autours saie, this Isle dooeth whole contein The .xiiij. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Brute sette his lawes & peace of Troye in this Isle without whiche a kyng is no better then his subiecte or his leege manne. IN which through out, his peace & lawe he set Whiche been ye floures of all regalite With out whiche, but if thei twoo bee met There maie no prince holde prncipalite Ne endure long in worthy dignite For if those twoo, bee nought vp holden than What is a kyng, more worth then his liege māne ¶ This kyng Brute, kepte well this Isle in peace And sette his lawes of Troye, with ordre, rites, And consuetudes, that might the lande encreace Suche as in Troye, he knew was most profittes Vnto the folke and the common profettes He made theim wryten, for long rememory To rule the Isle, by theim perpetually ¶ His menne he did rewarde full royally With landes and rentes, yt with hym suffred pain And Troynouaunt, he made full specially An Archflaume, his sea Cathedrall certain A temple therof, Apolyne to opteyne By Troyane lawe, of all suche dignite
As archbyshop hath nowe in his degree. The .xv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Brute departed Britaine in thre partes to his thre sonnes, the two yonger to holde of the elder, so that Wa∣les and Scotlande shulde do homage to Englande by hys ordynaunce by the lawe of Troye. THis kyng Brutus this ysle deuided in. iii Howe Bru¦tus deuided this ysle. A lytell afore out of this ysle he dyed, To his thre sonnes yt were full faire to se After his dayes to ioyse he signifyed And when he had the Isle all tripertyed He called the chyefe Logres after Locryne Thre son∣nes of Brute. That doth extende fro Monsehole to Hūber fine. ¶ Fro Humbar north vnto the Northwest sea Locryne  Albanacte. Of all Britaine which he called Albanye For Albanacte the kyng therof to be His second sonne, that was both good and manly To holde it of Locryne perpetually And of his heyres by homage and feaute As to chiefe lorde longeth the suffraintie. ¶ And fro the water of Waage right in yt southe And Strigell castell to Seuerne all by and by And so to Dee at Chester as it is full couth Ryght in the North cambre he called for thy For Cambre shulde it haue all plenerly And on Locryne it should euer be homage And of his heyres euermore in herytage. The .xvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe by lawe Troyane the souerayntie belongeth to the eldest brother or syster.
AS after the lawes of Troye y• soueraintie And all resorte of ryght doth apertayne To the eldest brother in propertie The eldest syster ryghte, so by ryght shulde bene Souerayne lady and ouer them all quene By equytie of that ylke lawe and ryghte In place where it is holden lawe perfyghte. ¶ This kyng Brutus made people faste to tylle The lande aboute in places both farre and nere Brutus ordered ye people to sowe corne. And sowe with sede and get theim corne full wele To lyue vpon and haue the sustynaunce clere. And so in feldes both farre and nere. By his wysdome and his sapience He sette the lande in all suffycience. And as the fate of death doth assygne That nedes he muste his ghoost awaye relees To his goddes Dyane he dyd resygne His corps to be buryed withouten lees In the temple of Apolyne, to encreace His soule amonge the goddes euerychone After his merytes trononized highe in trone. Fro beginnyng of the worlde to Brutus Into this isle entred fyrste at Totnesse Foure thousande yere .lxxx. and .iiii. were thus As the chronycles therof beareth witnesse And after the incarnacion to expresse A thousande hole, a hundreth and fyftene And of Hely Iudge in Iuly was eyghtene. In the thyrde age he came into this ysle
And in the yere as it is afore expressed But howe longe yt he reygned or shorte whyle Walter of Oxforde hath confessed Foure and twenty yere, as he hath inpressed And other sayne he reigned thre and fourty yere But Marian saith thre score he reygned here ¶ Whiche is moste lyke to be verifyed By all his workes and greate operacions Whiche in shorte tyme myght not been edifyed Ne performed with shorte occupacyons But in longe tyme by good consyderacyons Rather it is lyke he reigned thre score yere, By his greate workes and beginninges yt appere The .xvii. Chapiter. ¶ Kyng Locryne the souerayne lorde of all Britayne had Lo¦gres to his parte, to whom his .ii. brethren dyd homage for Albyne and for Cambyr. THis eldest sōne was king yt hight Locrine Of all Britayne hauing ye souerante Hauing Logres as Brute dyd determine To whome Cambre and Albanacte the free Obeying both vnto his royalte There homage made as to yt lorde souerayne And Emperoure of that lande of Britayne. Locryne ¶ There homage made and to Cambre went Albanactus then rode to Albyne And reigned so by lyfe in one assente Eche one other to helpe and fortifye And thus in peace holding their regalite
But as they satte so beste in peace and reste Kyng Humbar arose in Albyne full preste The .xviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Humbar slewe Albanactus, wherfore Locryne and Cambre gathered a great power and disconfyted king Humbar, & ceased Albany by excheter vnto Lores againe for defaute of an heyre. IN the ryuer that called is Humbar nowe Where Albanact{us} anon did wt hym fyght And in batel stroke Humbar on the browe And felde hym were he neuer so wight But Humbar arose agayne wt all his myght * The death of Albanact And in that stoure was Albanacte slayne Kyng Humbar had the felde wt mikyll payne. ¶ King Locryne then & Cambre elles his brother With hoostes great vpon king Humbar faughte That of Humbarlande was king wt many other In Albany that mikyll sorowe wrought And with hym met where he before had fought The ry∣uer of Humbar wherof it tooke yt name. Where sore for fyght he fledde to the ryuer And there was drowned in that water clere. ¶ A greate parte of his hooste was drowned also As they dyd flee in that water clere And many slayne that myght no further go And many other taken for prysonere Locryne the felde had, and his brother dere And to the shyppes where they had all rychesse Theyr men to helpe that suffred there distresse
¶ All Albayne into his hande he seased And helde hole to Logres ioyned then agayne As it was firste and that lande well pleased Of the resorte the people were full fayne But in the shyppes a lytell from Almayne He fande the kynges daughter of Germanye Dame Estrylde that was full womanly. ¶ Whome for his wyfe he helde at his plesaunce For whiche the duke Corneus was wroth But frendes then by noble gouernaunce The playne trouth to saye in soth Made hym to wed, all yf it were full loth The doughter so of Duke Corneus With all frendeshyppe they were accorded thus ¶ Dame Gwendolyne ye hight by proper name Of whome he gate a sonne yt hight Maddan And in the meane whyle in preuy wyse at hame He helde Estrylde as his loue and leman Therof his wyfe vnwetyng, or any other man And of her gate a doughter full femynyne That Sabren hyght as chronycles do deuyne. ¶ In this meane tyme Corneus so dyed To whome the quene Gwendolyne was heire Whome kyng Locryne forsoke and replyed And Estrylde weddid agayne yt was full fayre How Lo¦yn was e in betrayle by hys wye Gwen∣dolyne. But Gwendolyn to Cornewayle dyd repayre With her power, and faught wt kyng Locrine Where he was slayne and had none other fyne. ¶ She drowned Estrelde and her doughter dere
In a ryuer whiche that tyme had no name But fro thens forth for Sabryn farre and nere That ryuer that was plentuous of name The ry∣uer of Se¦uerne, wherofit tooke the name. Was called then Seuerne yt hath greate fame Thus Seuerne firste had name in propertee Of that lady that drowned was in specyaltee The .xix. Chapiter. ¶ Gwendolena. quene of Britaine had Logres and Albayne Guendo¦lena. in peace and reste .xv. yere. GWendolyne so after fro kyng Locryne Had reigned hole .x. yere and was slayne The quene was of all Logres lādes so fine And of all Albaine also through out incertayne Crowned quene and so reigned with mayne And seruyce tooke of Cambre for his lande Who gouerned well her tyme, I vnderstande ¶ Fyftene yere and then her sonne she crowned That Maddan hyght & into Cornewaile went And then she dyed with sycknesse sore confounded And to her goddes her wofull herte she sent And thus this quene in her beste entente To set amonge the goddesse euerychone Euer to complayne her wedowhed alone The .xx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Maddan kynge of Britayne reygned after Gwen∣dolena his mother, and reygned .xi. yeres. MAddan her sōne was king of Britain then Hauyng Logres and also Albany That fourty yere there reygned as a man
Kepyng the lande in peace from tyrannye Maddā kyng of Britain that is Englād & Scot∣lande. In whose tyme was none in his monarchye Durste ought vary or any thing displease So was he dred, and set the realme in ease. Throughe all Britayne durste none another dys∣plese So wel the lawe and peace he dyd conserue That euery man was gladde other to please So dred they hym they durst no thing ouer terue Againe his lawe, nor peace but theim conserue So was he dred through his great sapience Both in, and oute by all intellygence. ¶ He dyed so, and to his father yede His sonnes two Maulyne and eke Memprise A daye then sette whiche of theim shoulde precede To the croune but then by couetyse Howe ye one  to be kynge. And that ylke daye the yonger Memprise Slewe his brother Maulyne elder of age To that entent to haue the herytage. Memprise thus kyng destroied, his men all oute Their landes their goddes or elles their liues cer¦tayne Mēpryse kyng of Britaine He tooke from theim all his lande aboute Fulfylled all with pryde and great disdayne His comonnes all with taxes did distrayne So tirauntely, he lefte theim nought to spende By consequent, thrifteles he was at ende. His wyfe he dyd refuse and foule forsake Vsynge the synne of horribilyte The wret∣ched end of Mem¦pryse. With beastes ofte in stede right of his make Whiche by all ryght and equytee
Vengeaunce asked by fell bestialitee And so hym fell, as to the wood he wente A route of wolffes hym slough and all to rent. The .xxi. Chapiter. ¶ Ebranke kyng of Britayne had Logres and Albany. Also he had .xx. wyues .xx. sonnes and .xxx. doughters, he made Yorke, Bamburgh, Edenburgh, Dumbritayne and Al∣clude, Also he made an archeflaume at Yorke & his temple that nowe is an archebishoppe. EBranke his sōne thē crowned was anone Who shippes great made on ye sea to sayle Ebranke reygned▪ lx. yeres. Withhelde his knightes wt hym so forthe to gone Vpon warre he went without fayle Then into Gaule with a full manly tayle Wher that he had riches innumerable To holde estate royall incomparable. ¶ XX. wyues he had as chronicles saith And .xx. sonnes of his owne generacion And doughters fayre .xxx. that wer not laith Whiche doughters so for theyr releuacion Into Italie with great supportacion There to be wedded in Troyan bloodde & maried For ladies theyr with Troyans wer alyed. ¶ In Albany he made and edifyed The castell of Alclude whiche Dumbritayne The Ca¦stell of Dūbry∣tayne in Scotlād. And some autours by chronycle hath applied And some sayen on the pight wall certayne
And the west ende it stode that nowe is playne And some menne sayen it is Yorke cytee Thus stande menne nowe in ambyguytee ¶ But sooth it is, he made this Dunbrytayne A castell stronge that standeth in Albany Vpon a roche of stone, hard to optayne About the whiche the sea floweth dayly And refloweth again nocturnally Twyse in his course and to the sea again In the whiche no horsse maye dunge certain. ¶ He made also the mayden castell stronge That men now calleth the castell of Edenburgh The ca∣stel of E¦diburgh. That on a roche standeth full hye out of throng On mounte Agwet wher mē may see out through Full many a towne, castell and boroughe In the shire aboute, it is so hye in heigth Who wyll it scale he shall not fynde it light. ¶ He made also vpon mounte Dolorous A castell strong that this daye Bamburgh hight The ca∣stell of Bam∣burgh. That on a roche is sette full hye and noyous Full hard to gette, by any mannes might The castell is so stronge and so well dight If menne therin haue stufe sufficient Or it be wonne many one muste bee shent. ¶ His sonnes all he sent to Germanye To wynne thesame lande by labour and conquest Vnder the rule of their brother Analye Duke Assarake that was the eldest A worthy knight proued with best
All Germanye they gatte at theyr entent And lordes wer made their as there father ment. ¶ Sixty yere whole he stoode and bare ye crowne Reignyng fully in all prosperytee No enemyes durst again hym vp ne downe Warre, ne do in no wyse again his royaltee He made a temple in * Ebranke citee That is yorke. Of Dyane, where an archeflame he sette To rule temples as that tyme was his dette. The .xxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe after the death of Ebranke reygned Brutus greneshilde. BRutus Greneshilde then by his name full ryght. Both good & trewe, and easy of all porte His people all that came into his syght With all his might euermore he recomforte Of all there sorowe that they to hym reporte And why he hight Greneshilde to his surname Brutus greneshilde reigned. xii yeres. Because he bare on grene ay wher he became. ¶ Xii. yere he stoode reignyng full well in peace And dyed so and by his father buryed In Ebranke afore Dyane no lees With Britons hole thyther accompanyed With all honours that might bee multiplyed In any wyse with all seruyse funerall As longed to the fate of death ouer all. The .xxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Leyle kyng of Brytayn had Logres & Brytayne, he made at Carlele a temple flamyne and a flaume to rule it.
THē Leyle his sōne was kyng of Britain so Leyle kyng of Britain reygned .xxv. yeres. That Carleele made that tyme in Albany That now Carleile is called by frend & to Whiche in Englyshe is to say fynally The cytie of Leyle, for in brytayn tongue playnly Cair is to saye a citee in theyr language The cytee of Carleile by whō it was buyl∣ded. As yet in Wales is there commen vsage. ¶ This ilke kyng Leyle made then in that citee A temple greate, called a temple flaumyne In whiche he sette a flaume in propertee To gouerne it by their lawes dyuyne Of Iupiter, Saturne and Appolyne That then wer of all suche in dignitee After theyr lawes, as nowe our byshoppes bee. ¶ When he had reigned hole .xx. yere and fyue In youth full well, and kepte lawe and peace But in his age his people beganne to stryue Failyng his lawes, cyties wold not warre cease Cyuill warres greately beganne to encreace And he dyed then settyng no remedy Buried at Carleyle in his citee royally. The .xxiiij. Chapiter. ¶ Rudhudebras kyng of Brytayne had Logres and Albany he made Caunterbury, Wynchester and Shaftesbury, and three temples and three flaumes of theim. RVdhudebras his sonne was kyng anone Rudhude∣bras kynge reygned xxxix. ye∣res. Cair kent he made, yt now is Caūterbury Cair went also & buylded of lyme & stone That Wynchester is nowe, a towne full mery
Caire Paladoure, that nowe is Shaftesbury Where an Engel spake syttyng on the wall Whyle it was in workyng ouer ¶ In whiche citees, he made then temples three And flaumes also as nowe these bishoppes been To kepe the rites after their moralytee Of there goddes, as in there bookes was seen Of their fals lawes as thei dyd meen When he had reigned by thyrtye yere and nyne The dulful death made hym to earth enclyne The .xxv. Chapiter. ¶ Bladud kynge of Britayne had Logres and Albany. He made an vniuersitee and a study at Stamforde & a flaume and his temple at Bathe his citee, whiche vniuersitee dured to the commyng of saynt Augustyne, and the byshoppe of Roome enterdited it for heresyes that fell emong the Sa∣xones and the Britons together mixte. BLadud his sōne, sone after hym did succede Bladud rei¦gned .xx. yeres. And reigned after then full .xx. yere Cair Bladud so that now is Bath I rede He made anone ye hote bathes there infere When at Athenes he had studied clere He brought with hym .iiii. philosophiers wise Schole to holde in Brytayne and exercyse. ¶ Stāforde he made yt Sāforde hight this daye In whiche he made an vniuersitee Stāforde. His philosophiers as Merlyn doth saye Had scolers fele of greate habilitee Studyng euer alwaye in vnitee In all the seuen liberall science
For to purchace wysedome and sapience ¶ In cair blam he made a temple right And sette a flamyne theirin to gouerne And afterward a* Fetherham he dight A manne decked in fethers, To flye with wynges as he could beest descerne Aboue the aire nothyng hym to werne He flyed on high to the temple Apolyne And ther brake his necke for al his great doctrine The .xxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Kyng Leyr of Brytaine gaue away with his doughter all his lande and had it all again, and dyed kyng possessid. HIs soōne was kyng high sette in royaltee Leyr kyng, Of all Brytaynes by name yt hight kyng Leyr Who Laiceter made after hym called to bee Cair Leyr his citee that buylded was full faire He had doughters three to been his heire The first of theim was called Gonorelle The next Ragan and the youngest Cordelle ¶ Emonges theim, as Leyr satte on a daye He asked theim, howe muche thei hym loued Gonorell saied more then my self ay And Ragan saied more then was after prouid For ioye of whiche, the kyng was greately moued I loue you more then all this worlde so fayre He graūted theim twoo, of thre partes to bee heire ¶ Cordell the yoūgest, then saied full soberly Father as muche as ye been in value So muche I loue you, and shall sikirly
At all my might and all my herte full trewe With that he greuid at hir and chaunged hewe Senne thou me loues, lesse then thy sisters twain The leest porcion shalt thou haue of Bryteine ¶ With that Maglayn duke of Albaine Gonorell weddid, and had the lande all out Euin of Walis, and of Cornwayle ther by That duke was of those twoo landes stoute Ragan weddid, to whiche twoo dukes no doubte Kyng Leyr gaue rule and gouernaunce Of all Bryteine, for age and none puissaunce The .xxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Leyr made a temple, and a Flamyne to rule at all Laiceter. A Temple that in his citee of Kaireleir A Flamyne also, as he a bishop were In name of Ianus the folke into repere And then he wente, Gonorell to requier Of the greate loue, that she aught hym so dere That of hir promyse she failed vnkyndly Wherfore he wente, vnto Ragan in hye ¶ She failed also for all hir greate promyse And to Cordell that weddid was into Fraunce Long after that he wente in greate distres To helpe to wynne hym his inheritaunce She succurred hym, anon with all plesaunce Bothe with gold & syluer of right greate quātitee To gette his lande again in all suertee ¶ Aganippe hir lorde, was kyng of Fraunce
That graunt hym menne, and goud sufficient And sent his wife with hym, with greate puisaūce With all aray, that to hir wer apent His heire to been, by their bothes assent For he was olde, and might not well trauell In his persone, the warres to preuaile ¶ Kyng Leyr thus wāne his lande, wt all might again And riegned well there after full thre yere, And died so, buried at Kairleir menne sayn In Ianus temple, in whiche tyme for age clere The kyng of Fraunce, Aganype infere Dyed, wherfore Cordell his ayre was soo To rule Brytaine alone with outen moo The .xxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Cordell quene of Fraunce and doughter of kyng Leyr, reigned after the death of hir father. COrdell quene of Fraūce, and doughter to Cordell quene of Fraunce kyng Leyr, Quene of Englāde after hir fathers daye Fiue yeres reigned, as for hir fathers heyre, And gouerned well the realme, all menne to paye His sister soonne, then Morgan of Albanie And Condage also of Cambre and Cornewaile In battaill greate, hir tooke and putte in baill ¶ For sorow then, she sleugh hir selfe for tene And buried was, by side hir father right In Ianus tēple, whiche kyng Leyr made I went At Kairleyr, so that nowe Laicester hight Thus died this quene, that was of muche might
Hir soule went to Ianus, whome she serued And to Mynerue, whose loue she had deserued The .xxix. Chapiter. ¶ Morgan kyng of Albanie, that clanyd all Briteyne, but this Isle of Britayne was departed, for this kyng had but Albany. MOrgan yt eldest soōne of Dame Gonorell, Morgan. Clamed Brytein, as for his heritage Warred sone of Condage as I spell That kyng was of Cambre, in younge age Duke of Cornewaile also for his homage But this kyng Morgan was kyng of Albany Soonne and heire of the eldest soonne varelie ¶ Cōdage was kyng of Cābre, yt Walis is nowe And duke of Cornewaile his patrimonye, Cōdage is that which we nowe call Walis Claymed Logres as soonne and heire to Regawe The myddill sister for his mothers proprete As she that aught to haue hir partourye At Glomorgane, with Morgan did he meete In bataill sleugh hym, there casten vnder fete The .xxx. Chapiter. ¶ Condage kyng of Logres Cambre, and duke of Corne∣waile, gatte all Bryteine againe, and made a temple wt a Flamyne at Bangor, COndage was kyng of all greate Britaine Condage reigned xxxiii. yeres. And in his hande, he seased all Albanie For his eschete, that ought to hym againe Resorte of right, and returne verelye He made a Flamyne, a temple also in hye, Of Mars at Perch, yt nowe his. s. Iohns towne
In Albany that now is Scotlande region ¶ He made another temple of Mynerue In Cambre, which now is named bangour The thyrde he made in Cornwayle for to serue Of Mercury, in place where he was bore For his people to serue the goddes there Wherby he reygned .xxx. yere and three In rest and peace and all tranquilitee. ¶ Ryueall his sonne that was pacificall Crowned was than easye of gouernaile Ryueall reygned vxii. yeres. In whose tyme the greate tempest dyd befall That dayes thre the flyes did hym assayle Enuenoned foule vnto the death no faile And rayned bloodde the same .iii. dayes also Greate people dyed, the lande to mykell woo. ¶ Gurgustyus his sonne so reygned then Gurgusti∣us reygned xv. yeres. In mykill ioye and worldly celynesse Kepyng his landes from enemyes as a manne But drunken he was echedaye expresse Vnaccordynge to a prince of worthynesse Out of drunkennesse succedeth euery vice Whiche all men shuld eschewe if thei wer wise. ¶ Scicilius his sonne then did succede In whose tyme echeman did other oppresse The lawe and peace was exiled so in dede Scicilius reygned xiiii. yeres. That ciuill warres and slaughter of men expresse Was, in euery parte of the lande without redresse And murderers foule through all his lande dayly Without redres or any other remedy.
¶ Iago succeded, and kyng was of this lande Kyng Iago reigned x. yere. As eiuill as was the kyng of Scicilus The same vices, as I vnderstand Orels wourse, and more malicious Wherfore our lorde, toke vengeaūce of hym thus He smote theim bothe, in suche aletargie That sone thei dyed, for marrid with frenesie ¶ Kymar his soonne had then the diademe Kyng Ki¦mar reig¦ned .xx. & viii. yere. And kyng then was, with all kyndes of royalte Kepyng his lande, as well did so hym seme In lawe and peace, with greate felicite The common weale and their vtilite He did prefer euer in vniuersall Whiche to a prince is a vertu principall ¶ First if he kepe not lawe nor peace certein His people will nothyng dred ne doubt Than stande he moost in parell to bee slaine Orels putte doune right by his vnderlout No better is he bee he neuer so stout Then is his subiect, or another wight That with rebell, vnlawfull kill hym might ¶ Gorbonyan that was his soonne and heire Gorbo∣niā reig∣ned .xi. yere. Was kyng, who had that tyme but soonnes twoo The eldre hight Ferrex that was full faire The younger hight Porrex whiche discordid so That either of theim was alwaye others foo For that the father sent Ferrex into Fraunce To kyng Syward, that was of greate puisaunce ¶ But after long, when he had reigned .xi. yeres
Dyed awaye frome all royalte Leuyng his lande by his good rule inclere In sufficiente and all prosperite Ferrex heryng of his mortalite With power strong came to this lande againe And with Porrex faught sore wher he was slaine, ¶ For sorow of whiche ther mother yt Iudō hight To Ferrex came with hir maydens all in ire Slepyng in bed slew hym vpon the night And smote hym all on peces sette a fyre Loo this cruell mother sett on fyre With suche rancor that she could not ceas Whiche for passyng ire was mercyles The .xxxi. Chapiter. ¶ Clotane, Pynner, Ruddan & Stater reigned with barōs warres .xl. yere, howe this Isle of Brytaine was departed in foure parties & stood departed .xl. yere in barōs warres. CLotane that then was duke of Cornwaile Clotane with his feldes rei¦gned. x. yeres. Next heire then was by all succession But Pinner thē had Logres ī gouernaile And kyng ther of was by wrong ingression Ruddan had Cambre in his possession And Stater was then kyng of Albany Thus was this Isle then lede by tirannye ¶ Thus Brytain was to foure kynges deuided Echeon of theim warryng on other The barons also on warre were so prouided That all the people to wast father and mother Thei spared none, all wer thei sister or brother And eche citee on other bothe towne and tour
And eche tyranne was a conquerour ¶ And lordes faine subiectes then to been, The poore menne that afore yt warre wer desolate Of all honour and worship that was seen Through their manhode with people congregate Lordeship conquered and roose to high astate Laddes and boyes, the ladeis tho did wedde Their kynne afore, nether lande ne hous hadde ¶ Fourty wynter thus duryng barons warre This Isle so stoode in sorowe and in strife In faute of might, the weaker had the wer And suffered wrong that was then their life For who that might, aught gette wt spere or knife He helde it furth, as for his heritage And waxid a lorde that a fore was a page ¶ Defaute of peace & lawe, sette theim on hight To ouer runne lordes, and bee victorious As worthy was for of their wrongfull might The lordes were cause that thei were rygurous That would not so their wronges malicious At first with stande and punishe trespassoures But suffer theim endure in their erroures The .xxx. Chapiter. ¶ The conseipt of the maker of this booke touchyng barrons warres, in defaute of peace and lawe. DEfaut of lawe, was cause of this mischief Wronges susteined by mastry & by might And peace laied downe that should haue been the chief,
Through whiche debates folowed all vnright Wherfore vnto a prince, accordeth right The peace and lawe euen with equite Within his realme, to saue his dignite ¶ What is a kyng without lawe and peace Within his realme sufficiently conserued The porest of his, maye so encrease By iniury and force, of menne preserued Till he his kyng, so wt strēgth haue ouerthrowed And sette hym self in royall maieste As tratour Cade made suche an iuoperte ¶ O ye my lorde of Yorke and veraie heire Of Englande, so this matter well impresse Deipe in your breste, lette it synke softe and feire And suche defautes, sette you aye to represse At the begynnyng, lette your high noblenes The trespassoures to chastes, and to restreine And lette theim not, lawe, ne peace, disobeine ¶ O ye lordes, that been in high estate Kepe well the lawe, with peace and gouernaunce Lest your hurtes you hurte, and depreciate Whiche been as able with wrongfull ordynaunce To reigne as ye, and haue also greate puisaunce For lawe and iustices, in lordes vnpreserued Causeth many of theim to bee ouerthrowed The .xxxi. Chapiter. ¶ Dunwallo Moluncyus kyng of Cornewayle conquerid Logers, Lambry, and Albanie as right heire of Brytayne he gaue fraunchises to the temple, plough, merkettes, feyres and hie wayes, so that none should disturbe by lawe nor by
wrong, he made sixe temples in Logers Cambre & Albanie and also many Flāynes to rule theim of estate as bishop∣pes nowe dooen. KYng Clotein died, yt reigned in Cornewaile Wherfore his soōne Dūwallo Molūcius Dūwallo reigned .xl. yeres. Was kyng of all his realme without faile A mannly prince in armes full cuorageous Assembled his hoost, and came full vigorous Of kyng Pynner in Logres intrusour And sleugh hym ther as wrongfull gouernour ¶ Kyng Ruddan and kyng Stater Of Albanie with hoostes strong and wyght Gaue hym battaill with mighty power Where Ruddan & Stater wer slain downe right, With all their hoostes and their greate might And Dunwallo had the victory With muche ioye and manhod mightely ¶ Dunwallo so called Moluncius At Troynouaunt with royall diademe Of gold crouned moost riche and precious Dūwal∣lo was ye first king of Bry∣teine that was cro∣ned with golde. Vpon his hede as did hym well besene The first he was as chronicles expreme That in this Isle of Brytein had croune of golde For all afore, copre and gilt was to beholde ¶ He graunted pardon vnto all trespasoures Of whiche thei were full glad and ioyus Amendyng all their faultes and errours With all their hertes full beneuolous He eked then by his witte full curious With his lawe called lawe Moluntyne
Chargyng all menne to theim fully to enclyne ¶ He graunted vnto the temples euery one And to the plough and all commen wayes To markettes & faires wher mēne should gonne Fraunchesies so greate and liberties alwais That all menne beeyng in theim night or dayes Should not betaken ne troubled in any wyse Neither by lawe nor by no maistries ¶ Sixe temples he made in Cābre & Logres als And in the lande also of Albany Of Flamynes as fele, to serue their goddes fals A temple also in troynouaunt sothely This tē¦ple was. s Poules churche in Lōdon Of peace and concorde he made verely In whiche when there fell any discorde Emong his lordes, there were thei made accorde ¶ When he had stond so kyng by fourty yere He dyed awaye, and buryed was full fayre In his temple then of concord full clere At troynouaunt with greate repeir To whome Belyn was eldest soonne and heire And Brenny next was borne of younger age Wherfore Belyn had all the whole heritage The .xxxi. Chapiter. ¶ Belyne kyng of Brytain who gaue to Brenny his brother, Albany that made hym homage for it, and sone after made hym greate warre and was false to hym and after frendes againe in other landes, but not in Englande ne in Scotlande.
BElyn was kyng and sat in royall trone Crowned with all maner of royaltee Bolyn. To Brenny his brother he gaue the lande anone Of Albany, for whiche homage & feautee He made forthwith as to the souerayntee His man became and kyng of Albany Confirmed was and made full honorably. ¶ But after sone, his men hym sette to warre Vpon Belyn, that fought in batayll sore But Brenny fled and his men discomfite wer For then he went vnto Norwaye therfore And in that he dwelled thore Wher he wedded the kynges doughter fayre That taken wer by sea homewarde in repayre. ¶ By the kyng of Denmarke, yt Cuthelake hight Who by tempest into Logres wer driue And brought vnto Belyn mykell of might Wher he bande hym, as chronycles doth briefe Denmark to holde, of Belyn to haue leife Home with his wyfe to passe so anone Whom Belyn graunted home agayn so to gone ¶ Brenne anone great hoste of Belyne brought Wher in the forest that tyme of Colatre In batayll strong, kyng Brenny all forfought Discomfite, fled in Burgoyn for feare To duke Segwyn, to whom he gan hym beare So manfully and wisely in all thyng That he hym wedded vnto his doughter ying. Sone afterwarde this duke Segwyn dyed
So Brenny than was duke by his wyfe That to his brother alwaye full sore anoyed Came with great hoste to fight with hym ful ryfe Conwen their mother by her prerogatyfe Betwyxte theim treated & made there wel accorde On her blissyng nomore for to discorde. ¶ With wordes peteous, and mothers naturesse Shewyng her pappes and wōbe wt great beautie Lo here the wombe that bare you with syckenesse As womanhode would and femynitee Lo here the pappes, as was necessitee That fed you ofte in your tendre age For my loue nowe let be all this outrage. The .xxxij. Chapter. ¶ These. i. brethren wanne all Fraunce & all Italie to Rome and besieged Rome, gatte it and wer Emperours of it. SO made she theim at one and well accorde And made theim kisse & coūcelled theim to gone To their lādes lest thei after discord Whiche thei did with hostes greate anone With manly men of armes full greate wonne All Fraunce, thei wanne Sauoye and Lunberdy Tuskayne also and all great Italye. ¶ Thei sieged Rome, wherfore their coūcellours Galbo and Porcenna came it to rescue With hostes greate, wher then these Emperours Slewe syr Galbo and Porcenna the trewe And Rome thei wanne that alway was vntrewe Italye throughout obeyed theyr dominacion
Without more stryfe or altercacion. ¶ Kynge Belyne there no lenger would abyde But lefte Brenny alone with all that lande▪ And home he came with mykill ioye and pride And Albyon he seased in his owne hand And so kyng and lorde of all Brytayn lande A citee fayre he made that Kaire vske hight Whiche mē nowe callē Carlyō by name ful right. The .xxxiii. Chapter. ¶ He made the hye wayes through out Britayn, and he foun¦ded three archeflamynes, at London one for Logres, ano∣ther at Yorke for Albany that nowe is Scotlande for that tyme fro Humbre north that was that tyme Scotlande, & the thyrde at Laklion in Wales, for all Wales. IN Brytayn then he made frō Cornwel sea Of lyme and stone through all Brytayn That men might ryde and go in al suertee Vnto the sea by northe Catenes certayne Whiche vnto all men was brode and playne Another he made in bredth fro saint Dauid towne Vnto the sea flowynge at Southamptone. ¶ Thre archeflamynes he made through al Bry∣tayn As archebyshoppes now in our lawes been There temples all to gouerne and domayne At Troynouaunt on Logres to ouer seen Her fals goddes to serue and to queme At Ebranke another for Albany And at Karleō for Cambre on soueraynly. ¶ A towne he made ful hie that hight Belyn gate
At Troynouaunt his citee moste royall Thyrtene flamynes of bishoppes high estate And temples as many, in citees all So that there were in his tyme ouer all With other so afore edificate Xxviii. flamynes in temples ordynate. ¶ And at his death, he bad his corps to be brent Into powder all in a barell of golde To put, and sete vpon his toure to represent His body hole, who that seen it wolde His triumphes all, that enemyes might beholde Well wrought about, in ymagerie and scripture Full royally wrought for to refigure. ¶ He reigned had then one and forty yere When he thus died and to his God had sent His woofull ghoost out of his corps full clere Emong the goddes, euermore to bee present For whiche his people of wepyng coulde not stent There sorowes great in teares bitter thei did stepe Whiche in streames rāne & fro their eyē did wepe. The .xxxiiii. Chapiter. GVrgwyn his sōne was crowned after him Of Britayn bare then the diademe Who made his lawe, vpon lyfe & lymme Gurgwyn reigned xxx. yeres. His peace also he kepte, as he did deme As his iudges coulde it full well exprime Into Denmarke he went for his truage Whiche kyng Cuthelake graunt him in heritage
¶ He slewe yt kyng, and Danes great multitude His seruise had, and made the lande to enclyne To his lord shyppe and to his altitude There truage paye, forthwarde nomore declyne And as he came by sea then homewarde fyne He founde shippes thyrty full of myghty men Accordyng well as many fayre women ¶ At whose request, of his speciall grace He gaue to theim the land, that nowe is Irelande Wher they did wone & make their dwellyng place There gouernaunte, so then I vnderstande Was Partheleyn to holde it then hym bande Of kyng Gurgwyn and all his lynage Perpetually by feautee and homage. ¶ Neuerthelesse some chronicles reporte That Irelamall their capitayn had to name Howe Ire∣lande was hold of this kyng & his heires. By whome it was so bigged and supporte That out of Spayn wer exiled and thither came And some sayth that Hiberus of great fame There duke was than and there gouernour That of Spayne afore had been the floure ¶ This king Gurgwyn his surname was Batr{us} Came home agayn after the voyage sore All forbeten, so was he corageus That from his corps his ghoste departed thore Reigned that had .xxx. yere afore In Carlion after his high degre Was buried so with full greate royaltee. The .xxxv. Chapiter.
¶ Howe Guytelyn kyng of Britayne wedded Marcian to wife, that Mercian lawes made by her great wisedome. GVytelyn his sonne gan reigne as heyre Guytelyn reygned .x. yere. Of all Brytayn aboute, vnto the sea Who wedded was to Marcyan full fayre That was so wyse in her femynitee That lawes made of her syngularytee That called wer the lawes Marcyane In Britayne tongue of her owne witte alane. ¶ This Guytelyn was good of his estate Full iuste he was in all his iudgement Wise and manly of porte erly and late Right meke and good euer in his entente Although of state he was right excellent, With eche poore man that came to his presence Through whiche he waxed of moste hie sapience. ¶ When he had reigned ful peacebly .x. yere He lefte the realme to his sonne and heire And to his wife to be his counceller For his sonne then was .vii. yere olde full fayre Whom at her death she sent for all repayre Of Barons all their she delyuered hym To kepe, in payne of losse life and lymme. ¶ Sicilius his sonne reygned .xxiiii. yere Sicilius reygned .xxiiii. yeres And crowned was and dyed in iuuentude That gouerned wel the realme full well and clere At Karlyon buryed after consuetude As kynges afore in all simylitude With all repayre of all his Baronage
As well accorded vnto his hye parage ¶ Rymar his sonne the barons dyd crowne With honoure suche as fell to his degree * Rymar kynge. Who twenty yere and one so bare the crowne And kepte lawe and all tranquilytee And peteous was euer as a king shulde be In ryghtwesnesse accordyng with his lawe Hauyng pytee and mercy where hym sawe ¶ Danius kyng his brother dyd succede * Danius kynge. Duryng .x. yere in warre and greate payne Withouten reste he was alwaye in dede The lawe vnkepte, was cause there of certayne As myne authour it lyste nothyng to layne I wyll it nowe wryte and in this boke expresse That men may knowe his foly and lewdenesse The .xxxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Moruile kyng of Britaine was slayne by his owne immoderate Ire, withoute knowledge of eny man with a fysshe bestyall of the sea. MOruyle his sonne a baste goten and bore Moruyle reygned .xvii. yere. On Tangusta his specyall paramour Was crowned then after faught full sore with the kyng of Morians as a conqueroure Where he hym kylled and had the felde yt houre And lefte no man on lyue and brente theim all His Ire exceded his wytte and gouernall ¶ Sone after then came fro the yrishe sea
A bestyous fyshe, a monstre sume dyd it call Wherof afrayde was all the comontye For it deuoured the folke both great and smalle Wherfore the kyng his yre myght not apall Ne cesse, afore he foughten with it had All sodaynly alone as a man ryght mad ¶ Where both were dead or any man it knewe His yre full fell was and vntemperate His discrecyon out of his brayne flewe But he coulde not by reason ordynate Proroge his wyll ne yre inordynate By other meanes with people multytude It to haue slayne by wytte and fortytude. ¶ He reigned had that tyme but seuentene yere When he thus dyed and fondly dyd expire Vnsemingly of any prynce to heare That he with suche a monstre shoulde desyre To fyghte alone so preuely of yre But sonnes he had full fayre then fyue Of manly men also substantyfe. ¶ Gorbonian his eldest sonne of fyue Gorbony reygned .x. yere. Was after kyng and helde the maieste Ryghtwesse and trewe to euery creature In peace his realme and all tranquillyte And to his people he helde all equyte Tyllers of lande with golde he dyd comforte And soudiours all, with goodes he dyd supporte ¶ Arthegall his brother signed with Diadene Arthegall The kyng was then with all solempnytee
By natyfe byrth nexte brother as men deme Who good men hated of his iniquyte Oppressyng them by greate subtylyte And all fals folke with ryches dyd auaunce His Barons all deposed hym for that chaunce The .xxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe this kyng was crowned in defaute of his elder bro∣ther, and after of pure pytee crowned his brother agayne. CLydoure then the thirde brother generate * Eledoure kyng reyg∣ned v. yeres Was kyne create by all successyon And bare the crowne with all royal estate By lordes wyll and there concessyon That ruled well withoute oppressyon When he had reigned so fully fyue yere Arthegall he founde that was his brother dere ¶ As he was gone on huntyng for his disporte In the forest and woode of collatre That sought had frendes and found had no comforte But heuy was and of full simple chere Whome Eledoure toke in his armes clere And brought hym to his cytee of Alclude That then was of great myght and fortytude. ¶ In Albany then was it the greatest citee tho Besyde the woode that tyme of collatre Where his Barons and many other moo At his biddyng were come and presente there Whome syngulerly he made them for to swere Vnto Arthegall his brother to be trewe * Arthegall reygned. . yere. So purposed he, to crowne hym all newe.
¶ And then anon in haste so forth they rode To Ebranke and helde then his parlyament Where of good loue and tender brotherhod The crowne he set with very trewe entente On Arthegalles hede & thought it was wel spent By hole decree and iudgement of his mouth And made hym kyng agayne by north and south ¶ Arthegall kyng crowned so all newe agayne Full well his lordes after dyd loue all perlees Forsoke all vyces and tooke to vertue playne And set his lande and people in all kyne and ease Reigning .x. yere, he fell in greate disease In maladye of dyuerse great syckenesse Dead and buried at Carleyle as Igesse. The .xxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Eledoure was yt seconde tyme crowned king of Bri¦tayne for his good rule. THe Briteines all crowned Eledoure That reygned after .xiii. yere in dignytee Eledoure reigned xiii yere So well theim payde to haue hym gouer∣noure For his goodnesse and his benignyte And for he was so full of all pytee That in all thynge mercy he dyd preserue Well better euer then men coulde it deserue. ¶ Iugen with force and eke syr Peredoure Iugen and Peredour reigned. vii yere toge∣ther. His brethren two on hym rose traytorously Deposed hym oute of his hye honoure And prisoned hym full sore and wrongfullye All in the towre of Troynouaunt for thy And parted the realme betwixte theim two Together reignyng .vii. yere and no mo
¶ Paredour then had all the lande full clere Para∣dour rei∣gned by hym self iiii. yeres And crouned was, reignyng after worthely His lawe and peace, kepyng full well foure yere And dyed then, and to his goddes full hye He passed so, and buryed full royally After their rites and their olde vsage With greate honour by all the baronage. The .xxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Eledour kyng of Brytein thrise crouned, for his good rule and good condicions. ELedour was kyng all newe made againe Eledour reigned. .x. yeres. Thrise crouned yt kepte his olde cōdicion Of whome the lordes & cōmons wer full faine And sory for his wrongfull deposicion He reigned so fro losse and all perdicion Reignyng after full peacebly tenne yere Buried full faire, at Alclude his citee clere, ¶ Gorbonian that was Gorbonian his soonne Gorbo∣niā kyng of Bry∣taine. The croune after his vncle in all thynges That ruled well fro tyme that he begonne Full well beloued with olde and also with young He reigned tenne yere of Brytein kyng And dyed then with worship whole enterred As to suche a prince of right should bee required ¶ Morgan yt was the soonne of kyng Arthegall, Morgan reigned .xiiii. yere Was crowned then and held the royalte Full fourten yere he ruled the realme ouer all The lawe and peace with all tranquillite He kepte full well in all prosperite For whiche he was full greately magnified
In all his realme with people landefyed ¶ Emnan his brother so was crouned kyng Emnan kyng rei¦gned .vii. yere. Seuen yere reigned in all kynd ofe tiranny For whiche he was deposed as an vnderlyng When he had reigned seuen yere fully That to god and manne was euer contrarie Till all his lordes and commons euerione Whiche wer full glad awaye that he was gonne, ¶ Iuall the soonne of kyng Ingen did reigne Kyng Iuall rei¦gned .xx. yere. Louyng alwaye to kepe all rightwesnese Hatyng all vices, and of good menne was faine All vicious menne, he helde in sore distres Helpyng poore menne fallyng in feblenes When he had reigned full well by twenty yere He dyed awaye as saieth the chronicler ¶ Rymo the soonne that of kyng Paradour Kyng Rymo reigned xvi. yere. Crouned was then, louyng all gentilnes All vertue euer he louid and all honour And in his tyme was plenty and larges Of his people full well belouid I gese And dyed so in all felicite on hye Sixten yere whole reigned when he ganne dye ¶ Gerennes then the soonne of Eledour Kyng Gerēnes reigned, xx. yere. To reigne beganne and ruled well this daye And sone the deathe hym toke and dyd deuour If I the treuth of hym shall saye That twenty yere he reigned all menne to paye The lawe and peace full well aye conserued Of his commons the loue aye deserued, Kyng Catellus
Catellus his soonne then ganne succede reigned, x. yere. Kepyng the lawe and peace as he had hight Oppressours all, that poore menne did ouer lede He hanged euer on trees full hie to sight That ensample of theim euery manne take might Tenne yere reigned full of felicite And dyed so vnder his vnsure deite ¶ Coile his soonue after hym succede Kyng Coile rei¦gned, xx yere. And crouned was, reignyng so twenty yere In lawe and peace as to his worthihede Accordyng was for lawe and peace cōserued clere As euery manne maye se bothe farre and nere The floures been of royall dignyte In whiche he reigned twenty yere ere he did dye ¶ Porrex his soonne was crouned in his astate Kyng Porrex, Esye of porte to speake with euery wight Their comonnyng to hym was delicate Who reson spake he fauoured as was right Who viceous spake or did in his sight He chasticed theim after the cause required Reignyng fiue yere, of no lande had he fered ¶ Cheryn his soonne norished in dronkennes Kyng Cheryn. Customably, to whiche folowed all kynde of vyce It exiled witte out of his brayn doubteles And reason after that, made hym full vnwyse He was of all his gouernaunce so nyce And reigned so in Brytein but one yere When he dyed laied, was on the bere ¶ His soonne Fulgen reigned but one yere Fulgen,
Eldred his brother and Androge hight the thirde Kynges after hym echeone were synguler Fulgēce, Eldred & Androge A yere reignyng whose good rules are hid For why, vnto no manne was it kyde Thei dyed sone, for long that might not dure In suche drōkennes, full weake was their nature ¶ Vryan the soonne of kyng Androge Vryan. Three yere reigned, that was full lecherous A mayden young, wher he did ride or goo He had euery daye, he was so vicyous But yet he was gentill and bounteous All if he had maydens in suche charte Wedowes and wifes, he had in greate plentie ¶ Elynde was kyng, & fiue yere bare the croune, Elynde. Full well ruled the realme in all kynd of thyng In Astronomye, full redy aye and bowne Dedancius also reigned fiue yere full young Dedan∣cius. Who the realme ruled in all maner thyng Full peseably frome that Elynde was dedde, Bothe twoo dyed in their floreshed youthede Deto. Gurgū∣cius. Merian Bledudo Cappe. Owen & Sicilius all these reigned eche of theim .ii. yeres. Bledud. Gabred. cantor. ¶ Detonus then was kyng reignyng twoo yere, Gurguncius so twoo yere bare also the croune And Meryan twoo yere by wrytyng clere Bledudo then full ready bowne Twoo yere also bare the croune Cappe and Owen and then Sicilyus Eche after other by twoo yere reigned thus ¶ Bledud Gabred reigned, expert in song And in all musike instrumentes
Farre passyng was all other and had been long Suche was his cunnyng and his sentementes That for a god in all folkes ententes In myrth and ioye and maner of melodye Archi∣uall. Eldoll. Redon Redrike, Samuel Pirry. Penisell & Capre. eche of these reig¦ned two yeres. Thei honoured hym tenne yere onely ¶ Archiuall, then his brother reigned so And Eldoll after his soonne, succeded anone And Redon then his soonne, came nexte hym thoo Redrike his soonne, when his father was gonne Croune and septer receiued, hath anone Samuell, Pirre, Peneysell and Capre Seuerally echeone reigned twoo yere The .xl. Chapiter. ¶ Elynguellus kyng of Brytein had greate will to here all mēne whē thei came to hym, whiche is a vertue. For greate cunnyng maketh a manne wyse and to knowe muche, and for mischefes to fynde remedies, as my lorde Vmfrewill commended neuer a manne, that putteth a mischief and canne fynde no remedie therfore. ELynguellus whiche was Capre his sōne Bothe wyse and sadde, and in his realme helde right, He herd all menne what counsaill that thei conne For oftymes a symple manne to sight More wysedome hath in his insight And better reason canne in his braynes fynde Then canne a lorde, though he maye beres bynde, ¶ Who in his lande did wrong or any vnright, He prisoned hym in sore and greate distresse He gaue his menne yt souldyours were full wight Lyuelode to liue vpon, frome all destres
Sicke folke and poore caste into feblenesse He visited aye, and reigned had seuen yere When that he dyed and left his realme full clere ¶ Hely his soonne, in all thyng good and wise Howe Hely the soonne of Elyng∣wellus made the Isle of Hely. Succeded then, the Isle of Hely made His palais gaye that might right well suffice He buylded ther that was bothe long and brade Wherin he dwelled muche, and moost abaide The lawe and peace he kepte and conserued Which himvpheld that he was neuer ouer terued ¶ Three soonnes he gatte, Lud and Cassibalain Kyng He¦ly reig∣ned .xl. yere. The third was called that tyme sir Nemynus When he had reigned sixty yere in certaine The death cruell to menne that is aye noyeous In his commyng that is alwaye douteous Hym sleugh a waye, who was at Hely buryed Afore his god that ther was edified The .xli. Chapiter. ¶ Lud kyng of Brytain buylded frome London stone to Lud gate & called that parte Luds toune, & after by processe, was called London by turnyng of tongues. HIs soonne and heire was Lud of muche Kyng Lud reig¦ned .xl. yere. might Thē crouned by all the baronage His citees all eke his heritage, castelles wight He did repeire that were his heritage And where was worthy his seruesse and homage To hym was doone, in landes al aboute Was none withstode so was he dred and doubte With walles faire, and towres freshe about
His citee great of Troynouaunt full fayre Full well he made and batelled throughout And palays fayre, for royalles to appeare Amendyng other defectyfe and vnfayre From London stone to his * palays royall This pa¦lays is nowe the bishop of Londōs palays be¦side Pou¦les. That nowe Ludgate is knowen ouer all. ¶ Betwene Londonstone & Ludgate forth right That called was then for his name Ludstone He made men buyld, that London so then hight His Palays fayre then made he there anone With toures high, bothe of lyme and stone Besyde Ludgate, and his temple nere thereby His God to serue and hym to glorifye. ¶ When he had reigned by fourty yere all out He died so, and in his temple fayre Entoumbed was, with stories all about Androgeus was then his sonne and heyre Passyng of sight and Iuly fayre Tenancius his yonger sonne of age Which wer to young to rule the heritage. ¶ Cassibalayn there vncle then was kyng And founde his neuewes full honestly and well Cassiba¦layn rei∣gned .xxxiii. yere. And nourtred theim while thei wer chylder ying And at there age when they could reason fele He theim auaunced right worshipfully and well Androge he made and created duke of Kent Of Troynouaunt also by whole entent. The .xlii. Chapiter.
¶ How Iulius Caesar came to Britayn, that nowe is Eng∣lande, and arryued in Thamis, and fled to Fraunce for newe succour. HE made also then Tenancius Duke of Cornwail yt time of mikel might In whiche tyme so came Caesar Iulius Into the lande of Fraunce that nowe so hight And on a daye walkyng vp and downe full right On the sea syde, wher he this lande did see Desyryng sore of it the souerayntee. ¶ His nauye greate with many soudyoures To sayle anone into this Britayn made In Thamis aroue, wher he had ful sharpe shores And countred was with Brytons that abade With Cassibalayn the kyng of Brytons brade Wher after battayll smytten and forfought Iulius fled and then preuayled nought. ¶ To Fraunce agayn and there he did soiorne The Frenche wer fayn of his discomfiture And trowed to make hym so fro theim retorne But the Britons full besely did there cure In this batell as came them of nature The dukes of kent and eke of Cornewayle And Nemynus theyr Eme did moste preuayle. ¶ Crudan the kyng that tyme of Albany Gnechet the kyng also of Venedose That northwales nowe is called specially And kyng Bretayle that was full vertuous A manne in armes passyngly curious Of Denycye, southwales that nowe hight
He asked helpe of Fraunce that fayled hym right. ¶ Then sent he to all landes there about To poore menne all, he gaue full great ryches And exyled men of warre that wer full stoute He gaue liuelode and felons all douteles He delyuered quyte, fre of all distres All outlawed menne, he graunted full perdon The bondemen also of euery region. The .xliii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe, whan Iulius Caesar failed power, he gatte newe power by wily polycy, to haue his purpose, and came again to Brytayn and fled the seconde tyme. IN whiche meane tyme, whē he was redy so With his nauy came to brytayn again Into Thamis where Cassibalayn tho Great pyles of tree and yron sette hym again His shippes to peryshe and so he did certain Throughe whiche, greate parte of hys nauy was drowned And some other in batayl wer cōfoūded ¶ Then fled he eft with shippes that he had Into the lande of Fraunce wher he was ere Hym purposyng to Rome, full wo by stad Of his rebuke with sorowe and with care, But then the kyng full glad of his euell fare A feaste royall at Troynouaunt he made Where great discorde, with his neuewes he had The .xliiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Iulius Caesar came agayne to Britayne the thyrde tyme & accorded with the kyng and had truage of hym.
PVrposed fully on theim to bee auenged For whiche thei sent anone to Iulius And prayed to come his right yt he had chalē¦ged To clayme it hole thei wrote hym right thus Thei should hym helpe with people plenteous Through whose councell, ful gladly then he came At Douer arryued with mykeil ioye and game. ¶ Where then the kyng Cassybalayn he met And fought full sore, where that Androgeus Out of a woode on Cassibalayn set And to a mounte hym droaue, where that Iulius And he hym sieged again full coragious He fought full sore with all manly defence All nyght afore, by myghty resistence. ¶ But some for drede of famyshement He treated with the duke Androgeus To paye his tribute to Roome in good entent And to amende all thynges greuous With all his might and hertes beneuolence Androgeus to all this did assente And made Iulius to this fully consent. ¶ This truage was .iii. M. i. well payde Eche yere to Rome of siluer good and fyne These princes thus accorded wer and daied In peace and reste and Iulius went fro heyne To warre vpon Pompey, yt nought wold enclyne To Romys Senate after that Iulius Hym had conquered by warre full fortuous. ¶ With whome then went the duke Androgeus
And in Britayne no lenger wolde abyde He lefte his brother duke Tennancius In Britayne with Cassybalyn that tyde And so to Rome with Iulius dyd ryde But Neminus brother of Cassybalayne Full manly fought on Iulius tymes tweyne. ¶ With strokes sore, ayther on other bette But at the laste this prynce syr Iulius Crosea mors, his swerde in shelde sette Of the manly worthy sir Neminus Whiche of manly force and myght vigorous The swearde he brought away oute of the felde As Iulius it set faste in his shelde. ¶ Through which stroke, sir Neminus then died And buried was at the north gate certayne Of London then, where nowe is Scotlande edifi¦ed London cytee royall of all Britayne Thus this worthy knyght in his graue befayne Crosea mors, his swearde layde by his syde Whiche he brought from Iulius that tyde. ¶ After whiche accorded this kyng Cassybalayn Reigned fully in Britayne then .vii. yere Payeng trybute to Rome alwaye certayne Rulyng his lande in lawe and peace full clere And reygned had in all, full thyrtye yere And foure aboue vnto his god so yede Buryed at Ebranke wt all knyghtly worthihede. The .xlv. Chapiter.
TEmancius his neuewe then full faire Teman¦cius reyg∣ned .xvii. yere. Kyng Luds sonne yt duke was of Corne∣wayle With Diademe was crowned as ryght heire Of all Britayne had the gouernalle Who kepte the lande in his tyme by good gouer∣nalle Full .xvii. yere to his god then wente Buryed full fayre as to suche a prynce appente. ¶ Kymbalyne so was his sonne and heyre Noryshed at Rome instructe with cheualre That knyght was made with honour great & fay¦er Kymbe∣lyne. By Octauyan reigning then enterly Emperour then of Romes great monerchy In whose tyme was both peace and all concorde Through all yt worlde, and borne was christ oure lorde This Kinbelyne reigned fully .x. yere And ruled this lande in lawe and peace full well And dyed then as sayth the chronycler That ilke same yere that christe was borne wt zele Of his mother a mayden fayre and wele For christen folke by grace then to redeme From payne of hell to blysse as clerkes deme ¶ From tyme yt worlde firste was begoonne and made Vnto the tyme of Christes natiuytee Accompted ere through christendom full brade Fyue. M. yere .ix. score and .xix. bee Or goddes sonne cam man for to bee As Crosius the discyple of Austyne In this writyng so as he coulde determyne. ¶ Guyder his sonne and heyre full corageous Guyder
That crowned was and kyng of excellence reigned. xi iiii. yere. The trybute which the Romayns had of vs Denied then and made greate resystens With great trouble and manly violence Vnto the tyme that he had reygned clere In Bretayne by .iiii. and fourty yere. ¶ In whiche yere then the Emperour Claudius At Caire peers that nowe porchestre hight Arryued a lande with people full corageous He closed the gates afore with mykyll myght And the cytee assauted both daye and nyght The cytezens to famyshe and conquer His name in armes and honour to proffer. ¶ But king Guider fought there wt themperour And slewe men on euery syde aboute Rescowyd the towne as very protectour And made hym to fle, were he neuer so stoute But one Hamon rode faste into the route Hauyng on him the Britains sygne of warre Who in the prees slewe the kyng Guyder. The .xlvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Aruiragus kynge of Britayne reygned .xliiii. yere. And howe in his tyme Cladeus Emperour had truage of this lande, and maryed his doughter to the kynge. ARuiragus yt sawe his brother slayne His brothers armis vpon hym self he cast Aruiragus reigned .xl.iiii. yere. And king was then of all ye great Britain Vpon Hamon pursued tyll at the laste He droue hym into the hauen full faste And drowned him there, after hight Hamō towne
That men nowe call shorte speche Southhāpton To winchester kyng Aruiragus rode Whether Claudi{us} came wt Romans ful of pryde Where Aruiragus with Britayns him abode But as they should haue fought in that tyde By both theyr councelles they were drawē on side Claudius doughter to wed they were accorde And truage to paye eche yere withoute discorde. Then Claudius sente for dame Gennyse His doughter fayre full womanly to see She came in haste as then it myght suffyse To come oute frome so farre lande and countre And in a mede with floures of greate beaute Wedded they were, where Claudius then made A cytee fayre Cayre glowe to name it had ¶ Of his name it was so denominate  Wher of Gloucester was so na∣med. Nowe Gloucester standynge on seuerne syde The maryage after Christe was incarnate Was in the yere fourtye and syxe that tyde So in Britayne two yere he dyd abyde Orcades ysles in the meane tyme he conquered In whiche he enfeffid the kyng & hym preferred. ¶ And home to Rome he passed so agayne But after agayne, the kyng truage denyed And none wolde paye, wherefore Vaspasyan Hyther was sent with Romains fortifyed At Ruteporte that nowe Sandwiche is notifyed The kyng hym met and put hym frome the lande To Totenesse went and notwithstandyng fande.
¶ So went he forth to Exceter his waye Caire Penelgorte then hight and it assaide Where then the kyng hym met the seuentene day With hoste full stronge, but then the king preuay¦led But Gennyse the quene greatly auayled By her trety made them full well accorde That with Rome he dyd no more discorde. The .xlvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Ioseph Aramathie came vnto Britayne with Vas∣pasyan, and chrystened a parte of this lande. VAspasyan wintered then in Britayne At the prayer of quene Gennyse And had truage then fully payde agayne To Vaspasyan, as before was the gyse With whome Ioseph full holy and full wyse Of Aramathie with his felowes fourtene Into this lande then came and gaue contene. ¶ For whome so then Vaspasyan praid the kyng The quene also to hym to be good lorde Vaspasian And good ladie, which they graunted in all thing Declaring then, and fully dyd recorde This worthy Vaspasyan by his owne worde Howe he hym tooke oute of Cayphas prysone Preserued by god and not by mannes reasone. ¶ For fourty yere and two he in prisone laye Fro Christes death to tyme that he hym fande Withoute meate or drynke by any maner waye
But only was conforted by goddes sonde And howe he hym brought oute of Ierusalē lond All this he tolde, the king and eke the quene And prayde theim his supporters to been. ¶ After the wynter nexte in somer tyed Vaspasyan to Rome then went agayne Ioseph abode and fully landifyed The lawe of Christe, to whiche he was full fayne And the kyng gaue the sothe to sayne Twelue hydes of lande ye then Mewtryn hight Whiche Glastenbury is nowe named full right In bretayne then this Ioseph dyd conuerte Brytons ay howe to knowe the incarnacyon Afore that Paynyms and also peruerte He taught them of his conuersacyon Of his passyon and his resurreccyon With other thinges as the chronycler saith That apperteygneth to Christes fayth ¶ Agrestes reygned by .iiii. and syxty yere When he was dead & in caire glawe was buryed Agrestes. In a temple entoumbed fayre and clere Of his goddes that there were deifyed Aboute whyche tyme so oure ladye Mary dyed Or elles assumpte in body and soule on lyue Vnto the blysse after her ioyes fyue. ¶ But Vaspasyan with his hoste full royall And Ioseph also came into Britayne The yere of Chryste was then accompte in all Seuenty and syxe the sooth for to sayne
Whē Vaspasiā to Roome retourned home again The kyng enduyd Ioseph in meutryne The .xlviij. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Ioseph conuerted this kyng Aruiragus & gaue hym a shelde of yt armes that wee call sainct George his armes whiche armes he bare euer after, & thus became that armes to bee yt kynges armes of this lāde, lōg afore sainct George was gotten or borne, and as Maryan the profounde chro∣nicler saieth, he bare of siluer in token of clennes, a crosse of goules significacion of the bloodde that Christe bleedde on ye crosse, and for it muste nedes of reason by called a crosse. IOseph conuerted this kyng Aruigarus By his prechyng to knowe ye lawe deuine And baptized hym as writē hath Nenin{us} The chronicler in Bretain tongue full fyne And to Christe lawe, made hym enclyne And gaue hym then a shelde of siluer white A crosse endlong and ouer twhart full perfect ¶ These armes were vsed through all Brytain For a cōmon signe eche māne to knowe his naciō Frome enemies whiche nowe we call certain Sainct Georges armes by Nenyus enformaciō And thus this armes, by Iosephes creacion Full long afore sainct George was generate Were worshipt heir of mykell elder date The .xlix. Chapiter. ¶ Marius the kyng of Brytain reigned sixty yere and three, howe the peightes inhabited firste in Albany yt is Sotclāde nowe in these dayes, in Catenes & thei wer the North peigh¦tes, and a parte of theim inhabited sone after bytwyxt the Scottes sea and tweid that were called South peightes.
MAryus his soonne was then intronizate And sette on high in trone of maiestie With croune of golde full royally coro∣nate As worthy was vnto his royalte Who nourished was at Rome in his inuente With his mothers kynne the beest of the empire With Claudius also, that was his oune graūdsir ¶ In whose tyme a peight hight Rodrike With power greate by sea came fro Sythy As proude and bryme as lyon marmerike Arreued so vp in Albanye Distroiyng whole the lande all sodainly With whome yt kyng thē faught in greate battell And sleugh hym with oute any faile ¶ Wher then in signe of his high victorye He sette there vp a stone in remembraunce Of his triumph, of his aduersatie Titled on it, his fame for to auaunce Howe the peightes, there brought to vttraunce Wher the redde crosse is nowe in Westmerlande In Stanys more, as I canne vnderstande ¶ Then to ye peightes left a liue, he gaue catenese To dwell vpon and haue in heritage Whiche weddid wher, with Irish as I gesse Of whiche after Scottes came on that linage For Scottes bee to saie their langage A collecciō of many into one Of whiche the Scottes were called so anone The .l. Chapiter.
¶ Howe Scottes came of Scota kyng Pharois doughter yt came after many daye into Albanye so yt of peightes Irish & of Pharois people collect togethers wer Scottes named For at the tauerne or at a gatheryng of people or of mony is called a scotte and so came first ye name of Scottes which Scottes inhabited theim by twixt catnes & ye Scottishe sea. BVt Mewynus the Bryton chronicler, Saieth in his chronicles orther wise That Gadelus and Scota in the yere Of Christe seuenty and fiue, by assise At stone inhabitte as might suffise And of hir name that countre there aboute Scotlande she called that tyme with outen doubt ¶ This Scota was, as Mewyn saieth the sage Howe Galway had fyrst the name of kyng Gadelus Doughter and bastarde of kyng Pharao yt daye Whome Gadele wedded, and in his olde age Vnto a lande he went, where he inhabited ay Whiche yet of his name is calle Gadelway And with the peightes he came into Albanie The yere of Christ aforsaid openlye ¶ And at hir death she left a precious stone In Albany, on whiche Moses did preache And buryed there she was by hir self alone Whiche stone was holy, as some menne then did teache And did miracles, so was yt cōmon speache In honour it was had, bothe of greate and small And holden for a relique moost speciall ¶ This stone was called the regall of Scotlāde The re∣gall of scotlande On whiche yt Scottish kynges wer brechelesse set At their coronomente as I canne vnderstande
For holynes of it so did thei of debte All their kynges vpon this stone was sette Vnto the tyme kyng Edward with long shankes Brought it awaye again the Scottes vnthākes, ¶ At Westmonestery it offered to sainct Edward Where it is kepte and conserued To tyme that kynges of Englande afterward The sub¦ieccion of Scotlād. Should coroned bee, vnder their fete obserued To this entent kept and reserued In remembraunce of kynges of Scottes alway Subiectes should bee, to kynges of Englāde ay ¶ Also afore the fifte kyng Henryes daye Their siluer coigne was as it ought to bee The kynges face loked on side all waye To his soueraigne lorde of Englande as I see Whiche to been hetherwarde of egalite Vnto their lorde thei haue of newe presumed To looke euen furth, whiche would nowe bee con¦sumed ¶ Kyng Maryus kepte yt realme in lawe & peace Full of riches and of prosperyte And dyed so at Sarum buryed dowteles When he had reigned sixty yere and three His tribute payed, full well to Roome citee Of Christes faith sumwhat he was enformid But muche more he neded to haue been reformid ¶ Coylus his soonne was kyng then crouned so Coylus, reigned xiii. yere. Who mutryed was at Roome in greate vertue Held well his lawes egall to frende and foo And in his dooynges full iuste he was and trewe,
His life alwaye and rule in vertue grewe That full great name of hym was notifyed And in all landes of honoure multiplied. ¶ The lordes, gentiles, yemen, and commontee He cherished well, and in no wise oppressed And to theim gaue, wher was necessitee And tribute payde to Rome vndistressed And at his death with sickenesse impressed He buried was at Norwhiche then full clere When he reigned had fully .xiii. yere. ¶ Somewhat in fayth of Christ, he was instruct But not fully, as was necessitee Like as he was in Rome with hym inducte So helde he forth in all stabilitee And as he harde in all symylitee Howe Ioseph had his graundser enformed With benyng herte and wil, he hym confyrmed. The .li. Chapter. ¶ Lucius kyng of Britayn reigned .liiii. yere, and was the se∣conde Christened kyng of Britayn by Faggan & Dubyan that baptized all this lande, and for the same cause bare the same armes after he was baptized. Also he made of .iiii. archeflamynes in Britayn three archebyshoppes at Lon∣don, Yorke and Carlion. AFter kyng Coile, his sonne then Lucius Lucyus kyng. So crowned was with royall diademe In all vertue folowed his father Coilus To compare hym in all that myght beseme He put his will after as his witte could deme
In so farre forth, that of Christentee He contynued so a Christen man to bee. ¶ And in the yere of Christes incarnacion An .C. foure score and tenne Eleuthery the first, at supplicacion Of Lucyus, sente hym twoo holy menne That called wer Faggan and Duuyen That baptized hym, & all his realme throughoute With hertes glad and laboure deuoute. ¶ Thei taught yt folke, ye lawe of Christ eche daye And halowed all the temples in Christes name All mawmentes and Idols caste awaye Through all Britayn, of al false goddes thesame The temples flamynes, the Idols for to shame They halowed eke and made bishoppes sees Twenty and .viii. at dyuers great citees. ¶ Of .iii. archeflamynes, thei made archbishopri∣kes One at London, Troynouaunt that hight For all Logres with lawes full autentikes To rule the churche & christentee in right Another at Carlyon a towne of might For all Cambre, at Ebranke the thirde From Trent north, for Albany is kyde. ¶ All these workes Eugeny then confirmed The kyng then gaue to Faggan and Duuyen The ysle of Analoon and by cherter affirmed That was called otherwyse Mewtryen Also frely as Ioseph and his holy men Had it afore, then forth for theyr dispence
Wherof thei wer glad, and thought it sufficience. ¶ But whē this kyng had reygned in cotēplaciō Fyftie and .iiii. yere in all prosperitee He departed to God, desyryng his saluacion In heauen to dwell, with all felycytee Where the Aungelles synge incessauntely Glory, honoure and euerlastyng prayse Be to the lambe of God, nowe and alwayes. ¶ At Cairglowe buried, after his dignitee For whom all men made great lamentacion Who bare before the baptyme of propertee His Auncestres armes, and after with consolaciō He bare the armes, by his baptizacion Whiche Ioseph gaue vnto Aruigarus As the Briton saith, that hight Mewynus. ¶ For cause he had none heire to kepe the lande Through all Britayn the barons gan discorde Vnto the tyme that Romayns toke on hande To chese a prince by there stedfaste accorde But .iiii. yere wer gone or then they could accorde In whiche tyme then Seuer the senatour Hether came to be theyr gouernoure. The .lii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe that ther was Britons warre .iiii. yere after the death of Lucius. SEuerus thus the worthy senatour Seuerus kyng. Descēded downe, right heire to Androge{us} The eldest soonne of Lud that with the Emperoure
Out of Britayn that went with Iulius Whiche Senatoure afore sayd Seuerus To Britayn came and was intromizate And with a crowne of golde was coronate. ¶ He brought with hym frō Rome two legion With whom great part of Britons helde ful sore And other parte of the northren Britons With Fulgen stode was kyng of Scotlande bore Gathered great people euer more and more With whom yt Pightes & fugitiues .viii. esenable Destroyed the lande by warre full violable The .liij. Chapter. ¶ Howe Seuer made a dike with a wall on it, of turues and soddes to kepe the Pightes and the Scottes from the Bri∣tons, ouertwharte the land frō the east sea vnto yt west sea. BVt kyng Seuer hym droue wt batayl sore Farre north vnto the Scottishe sea wher thei abode & dwelled forth euermore Betwene the Scottishe sea and twede no lee But some bookes sayen to Tyne in certayn And so is like, for Seuer there did make A dike, and wall for the Scottes & Pightes sake. ¶ From Tymnouth to Alclud his fayre citee With turues & soddes & wer theim to againstand Where the water myght not the Enemytee Kepe of warre from his trewe Britayn lande By fyfty myles accompted I vnderstande To the weste sea, that was of greate Brytayn This wal wt dikes, pightes & Scottes did refrein
¶ But kyng Fulgē of Pightes & Scottes again With hoste full great, sieged Ebranke citee Whiche Seuer rescowed, and was slayn And Fulgen also for beten there did dye Receaued his guerdon for his tyrannye At Ebranke the kyng Seuer was buried With victorie and honours glorified. ¶ Getan his sonne, a Romayne generate Getā king of Britain chosen by yt Romayns. The Romaynes then, hastely did crowne And Britons bloodde together congregate By hole assente, and playne eleccion Bassyan chase without collucion For borne he was of the feminytee Of Britayn bloodde and consanguitee. ¶ This Bassian with Getan then did fight In great batayll wher Getan so was slayn To Bassian so discended all the right Bassian reygned vii. yere. Of whiche the Brytons all were full fayn Within .iiii. wekes was all this done full playn But Bassian then his brother buried And Romayns all on hepes mortifyed. Bassian then was crouned kyng of Brytayn Full well he helde the realme .vii. yere in peace To tyme Caranse confedered hym agayn With Scottes & Pightes vpō hym gon encrease All fugitiues, outlawes to hym, came prease For long he had a robber been by the sea And richer was, then any kyng myght bee. By his manhode set all on roberye
Of lowe bloodde came, rysen by insolence To soudyours he gaue wages full greatly For to betraye the kyng by diligence He to the kyng so made by violence Whiche promyse kepte, he slewe the kyng anon In place wher as thei wer with hym alone. The .liiii. Chapiter. ¶ Carense kyng of Britayne reigned .iiii. yere by treason, borne of lowe bloodde and rose vp of robery by the sea. THrough treason of Carense Scottes & the Pightes Caranse reigned liii. yeres. Assented so by fals cōfederaciō Through his giftes & his subtyll slightes Betwene theim wrought in councell priuatly This false Carense so gatte the monarchie Of all Britayn within the sea aboute Foure yere he reigned, of porte that was ful stoute ¶ The Barons were so with gold englaymed By this Carense and by his language swete Semyng like truth in maner as he proclaymed As nothyng is more redy for to mete Then coueteous and falshode as men lete So wer they all with his giftes enfecte The kynge was slayne and he was electe. ¶ But whē to Rome was knowne yt false disceyt Of this Caranse and his wronge intrucion The Senate sent a letter by theyr conceyte Hym to distroye by dewe execucion Who for his faute gaue hym absolucion
In batell stronge slewe hym and had the felde And Scottes all and pyeghtes yt with hym helde The .lv. Chapiter. ¶ The wordes of the maker of this booke vnto my Lorde of yorke touchynge gouernaunce of this lande, by example of this kyng Caranse through robbery refen of poore bloude to royall estate. O Worthy lorde and duke of Yorke yt been Consyder well this case full lamentable The righwes kig wel gouerned as it was sene Thus murdred was, of him yt was vnhable And set hym selfe in trone moste honourable Of all Britayne, yet came he vp of nought And of lowe bloude, and it were wysely sought. ¶ Good lorde when ye be set well vnder crowne With treytours and misruled ryatours Dispence right so, with all suche absolucyon And lette hym seke no other correctours But maynteyne theim, your lawes gouernours And ouer all thyng, be ye the chefe Iustyce To kepe the peace, that no false you suppryse The .lvi. Chapiter. ALlecto then crowned and made kyng * Allectus kyng reyg∣ned .iii. yere Of all Britayne reigning fully yeres thre And well he ruled in all maner werkyng By power of the Romans greate postee That brought with him from Rome legions thre But Britayns then dyd set a parlyament And chase a kyng by theyr hole assent
¶ Asclipiade that was duke of Cornewayle Who with Brytons to troynouaunt came Whylest Romans were by theyr hole gouernalle At sacrifyce of their goddes faynte and lame Agaynste whome Alecto of greate fame Full mightly then faught tyll he was slayne But Gallus drewe all Romans in agayne. And kepte the wallys for whiche Asclepiadote The seege aboute the cytee strongly layde In which meane while Britōs brake in, god wote And slewe Gallus and Romains sore affrayde All out of araye and sore dismayde Besyde a broke that walbroke men nowe call That Galbroke then was called there ouer all Of Gallus name that slayne was in that place And some sayne of walshemen afterwarde Walbroke it called for a sodaine case That then byfell vpon a daye full harde Of the Brytons that with theim so miscaryed Ouer that ylke brooke full sore & harde distressed By Cornyshmen slayne downe ther, & oppressed The .lvii. Chapiter. ¶ Asclepiadote kynge of Britayne reygned .x. yere, in whose tyme was great persecucyon in Britayne, sayncte Albons slayne and many thousandes slayne for Chrystes sake. ASclepiadote was crowned king agayne In royall wyse with all solempnyte Asclepia∣dote reyg∣ned .x. yere. The lawes well he helde and put in great payne Ouer trespassours, for their peruersite
Theuys and robbers on galowis hanged to be But in his tyme the Emperoure Dioclesyan Into Britayne then sente Maximian. ¶ This Maximian to surname Hercelyus A tyraunte false that christente anoyed Through all Britayne of werke malycious The christoned folke felly and sore destroyed And thus the people with hym foule accloyed Religyous men the prestes and clerkes all Wemen with chylde and bedred folkes all ¶ Chyldrē soukyng vpon the mothers pappis The mothers also withouten any pytee And chyldren all in theyr mothers lappys The crepyls eke and all the christentee He kylled and slewe with full great cruelte The churches brent all bokes or ornamentes Bellys, relyquys that to the churche appendes The .lviii. Chapter. ¶ This persecucion was in yt yere of Christes birth a C. lxxx and .iiii. yere, and the .x. yere of kyng Asclepiadote. HE slew that time & martyred saint Albone And with him also Iulus and Araon And Amphimabal yt wolde not dye alone But offered hym to dye with him anone For Christes loue as faste as he myght gone For thousandes sele were martered in those daies Whose soules be nowe in blysse and shal alwaies ¶ Asclepiadote reygned fully but .x. yere.
Who for great feare suffred all this payne And durste nothyng agayne this tyraunt steare But him withdrewe to hyde hym was full fayne This persecucyon as some chronyclers sayne The .x. yere was of Asclepiadote For whiche duke Coyle agayne him rose ful hote ¶ The duke Caire colun that hight Coylus Whiche cytee nowe this daye Colchester hight Then crowned was that slewe Asclepiadotus For cause he came not fourth wt all his might The tyraunt fell to agaynstande as he hight Wherfore Britayns were all full gladde & fayne Of kynge Coylus yt succured all theyr payne. The .lix. Chapiter. ¶ Kyng Coyle of Briteyne reygned .xi. yere, that was father to saynte Elyne. HE ruled the realme in lawe and peace ful wel Kyng Coy¦lus reyg∣ned .xi. yere That for his wyt and vertuosyte Able he was as chronycles coulde fele To haue ruled all the emperalyte For ryghtwesnesse, manhode, and moralytee A doughter had he and none other heire Elyne that hyght farre passyng good and fayre. ¶ That afterwarde she was and is canonyzed In shryne at Rome that is saynt Elyne Her father Coyle set her to be excercysed In philosophye and other scyence clene In whiche she coulde her selfe ryght wel demeane That she was able by wytte and sapience
The realme to rule and haue therof the regence The .lx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Constancius Senatoure and Emperour of Rome wedded saynt Elyne, and by her was kyng of this lande. THe Romans sēt to Britayne Constancius That Spayne had put in hole subieccyon Vnto Rome, as chronicles haue writē thus Who landed here withoute reieccyon To whome kyng Coyle by good direccyon His message sente, offeryng hym his truage And he to stande king, and holde his herytage. ¶ Of whiche, Constance was glad of his entente And here abode at prayer of the kynge His doughter wed by their whole assente Elyne his heyre yt was both good and yonge Of hye wysdome and womanly conning And there with all the fairest that men knewe More Angelyke then womannyshe of hewe ¶ Within fyue wekes after her father dyed Buryed at Care Colune his owne cytee Greatly cōmended, well famed and laudifyed, Both on this syde and beyonde the sea Eleuen yere reigned in greate dignyte And ouer all thyng alway comon publyke Of his realme wrought not many kīges him lyke The .lxi. Chapiter. COnstance was kīg crowned wt Diademe Constaūce kyng reyg∣ned. xv yere And Elin quene through al great britain On whom he gate a sonne yt had bapteme
That Constantyne called was then in certayne But kyng Constaūce of Rome was hye cheftaine By the senate fyrste made the Emperoure And after kyng of Britayne and gouernoure. Whiles he laboured for Romes publyke profete With his felowe that hyght Galerius That Emperoure of Rome by greate delyte Whiche of maxence of porte malicyous Werryd full sore with werke full cheualrous And all the weste this constaunce had and hylde Galerius had the Este there into bylde. ¶ And after when this Constaunce of Britayne Was crowned kyng the comon wele preferryd Of all his realme not lettyng for disdayne He wrought it aye and no tyme it differed As chronycles of hym sayde and referred And when he had reygned hole .xv. yere At Ebranke was he buryed full clere. The .lxii. Chapiter. ¶ Constantyne kyng of Britayne sonne of Constaunce and of saynte Elyn, by. xxxiiii, yere, was fyrst kynge of Bry∣tayne, and afterwarde Emperoure of Rome. HIs sonne ful yonge Constantyne his heire Then crowned was by all the baronage Constan∣tyne reyg∣ned .xxxiiii. yere. Who lykely was, semely and ryght feire Of .xv. yeres, so in his tender age Great manhode had to rule his heritage Of greate wysdome was and of sapience By discrecyon had he intellygence.
¶ He had also a lambishe pacience To here all pleyntes mekely with sobernes A lyons chere in felde with good regence Discrecion good, to chastysh wickednes The welfare of his realme with busines Preserued euer and kepte in regyment And wher nede was, he made suppowelment ¶ The Senatours of Roome by letters well en∣dite Praied hym to come to Roome as emperour For to destroye Maxence and disherit Of Christen folke the cruell turmeutour Of Christen faieth, the cursed confoundour For of his birth thei saied it sette hym so Maxence to stroye that was his fathers fo ¶ For whiche he went to Roome wt greate power Of Britons strong, wt flemynges and Barbayns Henauldes, Gelders, Burgomans & Frenche full clere Duchemēne, Lūbardes also many Almains The yere of Christ three .C. and ten wt Romains Mette with Maxence and with Dioclesian And their feloe that hight Maximian ¶ Sumwhat afraid of their multitude Constantyne then he held vp to heuen And sawe a crosse in whiche was enclude This reason good in hoc vinco. full euine His ferdnes so anone then did hym leuen In signe of whiche, a crosse of goules he bare In his baner white, & with hym faught he there ¶ He had the felde and putte theim to the flight
Wherfore euer after he bare twoo armes clere In all likenes to euery mannes sight As Englishemenne in this lande bare theim here Sainct Georges armes nowe called wtoutē wer Thus hath the kyng of englande, to theim right Throughe eldres goottē, by god his verey might ¶ The senate whole, hym mette and magnified His high tryumphe, and mighty victorye With laude and honour fully glorified As vsage was, that tyme of Romanye At certain gates sette vp for memory And crouned hym in imperiall trone That so manly had quit theim of their foone The .lxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Thanswere of Constantyne whā he was a leper & should haue been heled with the bloodde of innocentes, and howe he sent his mother sainct Elyn to seke the holy crosse. And howe he gaue his palis and dignite emperiall of Roome to Siluester. And howe he went to Besaūce and builded it all newe, & called it Constantyne & destroyed all the Aryanes heresies and dyed there at sainct Nychomede whose daye is halowed with the Grekes in the twenty and one daye of Maye. BVt howe that he a leaper after grewe And by his leches, vtterly infourmed Many innocentes whiche ther were borne newe For his health should slain beē & disformed By theim into heale again returned In whose bloodde bathed, he should haue been His leprous swames, to haue weshed of clene
¶ But howe their death of emperiall pitee He then released, rather to haue his pain Then to recouer by tyranne crueltee His health and life so to gette again For whō these innocentes, should haue been slain And howe he was, by Siluester made clene With holy water that yet in Roome is seen Sorcerie ¶ Nor howe he sente his mother sainct Elin To seke the holy crosse, whiche she hym brought Ne howe she brought the clerkes with hir again Of Iewes lawe, it to approue for nought With Christen clerkes, by reason well out sought Ne when our lawe by Siluester for trewe Was best approued, that other lawe vntrewe ¶ Howe then he gaue his awne palais royall Constā∣tine first graūted to the. b. of Rom yt prima∣cye. With Roome all whole, and all the dignite Through out Romany, with sea emperiall To Siluester that had the papall sea He gaue it to hym all quite and free And to his successours perpetually Ne howe he distroyed the aryans heresy ¶ Nor howe he went frome Roome to Besaunce And of his name, then called it Constantyne Nowe menne it call, by all rememoraunce Constantyne noble, wher to dwell he did enclyne There his lawes to kepe and to determyne And there he sette his throne emperiall And for his domes, his sea iudiciall ¶ Nor howe he dyed, after that Nichomeyd
In cathologe emong the sainctes noumbred Of Maye the twenty and one daye in dede Vnder shryne buryed and subumbred Emong all Christē kynges worthy to bee remem∣bred Whose daye & feast ye Grekes haue eche yere Solemply, as for a sainct full clere ¶ And when he dyed, reigned had and imperate In Brytain, Roome, and also at Constantyne By thirty and foure yere ende, and determinate And in the yere of Christ as menne did determine When this worthy emperour, his life should fyne Three hundred was and fourty also full euen So when his soule was rauished into heuen ¶ And these lōgyng not to Brytons gouernaūce But vnto Roome and the empire Whiche me nede not with my stile auaunce For Marian hath the Rooman chronicler All the whole substaunce and the mater So well it maye with rethorike termes fayred Whiche by my simplenes I would not wer appai¦red ¶ But after his daye came one Octauius Octauius Duke of Westesax that crouned was for kyng That sleugh the werdeins of constatynus Whiche that he sette for Brytain gouernyng In his absence to keipe it in all thyng For whiche the senate Traherne to Brytain sent Sainct Elyns vncle that into Brytain wente ¶ With legyons three at Portesmouth did lande And to Wynchester then rode furth right
Where Octauius came, hym to withstande And with hym faught and putte hym to flight Went to Portesmouth again full right Wher then he shipped full faste to Albanye Wher on stanemore thei faught again on hye ¶ Wher Traherne wāne the felde with victorie, Kyng Tra∣herne. And into Logres came crouned with dignite And well did rule then all his monarchie All menne hym loued for his sanguynite In his tyme in greate nobilite He kepte it well frome all tyranny Foure yere complete in all thyng worthily ¶ In whiche tyme, so then the said Octauius Procured his death by whiche then was he slain By a traytour full false and odyus So was he kyng of Brytain then again And sone then after, he fell in age vnbain A doughter he had, that was bothe good & faire Whō sume counsailed, bycause she was his here ¶ To Conan Meryadoke anone for to marye And other counsailed vnto Maximian Kyng Traherne his soonne a prince of Romanye To Constantyne next heire he was alaane Whiche maryage was fulfilled and tane Maximian hir wed, then Octauius By fourten yere then reigned and dyed thus ¶ Maximian after hym ganne succed And crouned was maugre of all his fone For ire of whiche Conan departed in deede
And warred sore on Logres so anone Maximi¦an reig∣ned in all xxx .iiii. yere. Wherfore the kyng, full faste with hoost gan gon And countred hym with bataile fell and strong The kyng preuayled, that other so did emong ¶ Till on a daye, their frēdes made theim accorde The kyng ruled the lande, full well in peace Fiue yere fully, without any discorde In whiche tyme, he gatte full greate riches Thought in hym self, ouer the sea to passe Hauyng no will, in Bryton long to abide But into Fraunce, he was so sette in pryde ¶ With hoost full greate he landed in Armorike A duchy that was longyng vnto Fraunce The lesse Brytain, nowe of Gaule kyngrike And conquered it by marciall gouernaunce To Conan then, it gaue hym to auaunce To holde of hym, and called it lesse Brytain And stuffed it then with Brytons, soth to sain ¶ And furth he went & wan the realme of Fraūce And so by processe, Almaigny hym obeyed So did a greate parte of Italy, by accordaunce He putte to flight Gracyan, that hym desobeyed And Valentynyan, with hym conueighed And sleugh by battaile, Fulgen mightely And Emperour was made of Romany ¶ Conan the kyng, then of litle Brytayn To Dyanote the duke of Cornewaile sent For Vrsula his doughter, letters plain His wife to bee, in verey good enteut
With her also of maydens, that wer gente The .xi. M. vyr∣gins. Xi. thousande, in his land to bee wed For Frenchewemen, they would haue none to bed ¶ This Dianote, custos was of a Britayn His doughters wt those virgyns then forth sente In Thamis shipped, and cast in Almayne By tempest greate, there shippes all to rente Many of theim wer dead, and many shente In sykenes, frayde in stormes, and sore tempest That ful fayn thē there, wold haue had there rest. ¶ Gwames was then kyng of Houndelande And Malga kyng of Pightes, paynymes hatous In whose landes they arryued, I vnderstande Vnto theim then, they wer full odyous Passyng yrefull, and full malicious And for they would not, be deuirgynate They slewe theim all, through crueltee and hate. ¶ Whiche now beē saynts, & marters euerychone In nonnes mynster, conserued in Coleyn That noumbred been, both with frend and foone Xi. thousand virgins, of greate Britayn Maximian the emperoure of Romayn When he had reigned .xxxiiii. yere By Gracyās frendes was buried, & layd on bere. The .lxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Gracian kyng of Britayne, in whose tyme kyng Malga & Gwaymes distroyed all Britayne GRacian, when Maximian was slayne To Britayn sent then, by the Senatours Gracian kyng. In whose time kīg Malga & kīg Gwayme
This lande ouer road, standyng in all honoures That mortall fooes, and cruell tormentours To Christen fayth wer and malicious All mercylesse and passyng rigorous. ¶ Whiche kynges two, roote of all crueltee Full false paynemes replete of felony The churches brent, and slewe the commontee Wyues nor childre, ne yet the clargye Ne religious ne yet the prelacye Thei spared not, but mercylesse theim kylled Of wickednes so foule, thei wer fulfylled. ¶ But Gracian that crowned was and kyng In domys false, and in his iudgementes Fell dispiteous great tallages takyng Both of the lordes there landes and rentes And of gentilles agayn all there ententes So did he also of all the commontee For whiche thei sle we hym without pitee ¶ Gwames and also Malga the kynges two Destroyng Britayn without any reste The Senate sent a legion of knightes tho Into this lande, of eche region the beste Chosen out of all the worthieste The whiche putte Gwames and Malga to flight That shipped home vnto there lande full right. The .lxv. Chapiter. ¶ The Senate of Rome sente a legion of knyghtes into Bri¦tayn, who made the Britons to make a walle of lyme and stone from the easte sea vnto the weste sea and called it the peight wall.
THis legion and Britons hole assembled That made a wall well wrought of lyme and stone Where Seuer made of turues & soddes sembled With castelles strong and towres for the nones At eche myles ende to agaynstande all the foonyse From sea to sea as yet it is well seen In dyuers places, where it was wonte to been. ¶ This legion home returned then agayn For Britayn then suffred great disease The Scottes & Pightes ther did theim ful great payn Syxe yere then next, of whiche to haue some ease To kyng Aldrye there sorowes to apease Of esser Britayn, then sent theim Constantyne To be there head and also there medecyne. ¶ This Constantyn kyng Aldries brothers wife Was crowned then with royall diademe Constā∣tyne rei∣gned .x. yere. At Caircester as Brytons could deuyse That with his hoste royall as did hym seme Gwayme and Malga, as chronicles do exprieme The Scottes and Peightes he vēged & ouercam That Brytayne wrought afore full mykel shame. ¶ Thre sonnes he had full fayre by his wife Constance then was the eldest sonne of all That was not wise, wherfore then in his life He made hym monke, he was so bestiall To gette the life aboue celestiall His secounde sonne that hight Aurelius His surname was called Ambrosius.
¶ The youngest sonne hight Vterpendragon These two were wyse, but young they wer of age To there vncle sent, to be at his direction Nurture to learne, and all maner language By whiche after they maye haue knowelage With discrecion and all good ordinaunce To rule and haue the realme by gouernaunce ¶ When Constantyne had reigned well .x. yere Vpon a daye, as he in his garden went A Peight that was in his house, hym full nere Hym slewe anone, by treason and consent Of Vortiger, that euer in his entent Conspyred had, to haue the regaltee Of greate Britayn, the kyng so to bee. The .lxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Constaunce kyng of Britayne reigned but one yere, that was monke first and after made kyng, and was not wyse but an ideote, whome Vortiger crowned to that entent to make hymselfe kyng by false cōtryuyng, seyng the kyng full symple to rule the lande. COnstaunce his sonne ye mōke was in Cair∣gwente Constaūce kyng. Vortiger duke of westsex, was that daye In haste crowned, by barons hole assente Knowyng he shulde, be but a foole alwaye The realme to saue, and kepe out of disraye He waged Peightes, on hundreth to serue yt kyng Alwaye vpon his body abydyng ¶ He made the kyng, full certenly beleue Thei shuld espie emong the enemytee
By their frendes, yt no Peightes shuld hym greue Ne Scottes of theyr greate peruersitee But thei of it, afore in certayntee Shuld let hym witte, there malice to vnderstande Such subtyll meane, to fage the kyng he fande. ¶ And vnder that, a while he payed theyr wage Full well with chere, full good & all pleasaunce Vnto a daye he sayd, to theyr knowlage The kyng nomore would haue theyr attendaunce But wer he kyng, he shuld theim well auaunce Whiche thyng, and euer came to preefe About his {per}sone, they shuld be cherished as cheefe ¶ There wages also, full well shuld be payde For whiche behest, anone they slewe the kyng And brought his head to hym full foule arayde Of which he made hym wroth, in all semyng But to London, by his subtyll wrytynge He gaue charge, the Peightes all to kyll And none escape, nether for good ne yll. ¶ This Vortiger, protectour was that yere And in his handes, the kynges castels all He had, and sawe he might the crowne full clere Haue at his wyll, so dred the lordes temperall And prelates hie, that were spirituall His heuynesse and indignacion That they assented to his coronacion. ¶ Whē Cōstaūce thus, yt kyng had been one yere And could nothyng, of rule ne gouernaunce The commons sawe, he was an ideote clere
Theyr voyces all gaue, with all theyr obeisaunce To Vortiger with theyr hole attendaunce As comons would euer yet of olde and newe Eche yere their kyng to chaunge and renewe. The .lxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Vortiger kynge of Britayne reigned .xviii. yere through his falshed and treason cōspired with Peightes, to slea his kyng. And howe Engist and Horsus paiens landed in Kent and were beloued with Vortiger, and howe wed∣nisdaye and frydaye had name, and what goddes and god∣disses they honoured. Howe and when Engist and Horsus lāded in Kēte, & made Thoncastre & horne castre in the coū¦tre of Lyncolne, & howe Engist sent for his doughter & ma∣ried her to kyng Vortiger, and brought in with her greate multitude of paiens, that accombred all the realme both of warre & of Christen fayth, wherfore the Britons crowned the kynges sonne. THis Vortiger thē crowned kyng of might Vortiger kynge of Britayn reygned .xviii. yeres The Peightes and Scottes for he there kyng so kylled They sclaundred hym, that mikell good he hight Vnto Peightes, the kyng haue slayn and spilled By suche treason his will they so fulfilled And after by his preuy ordinaunce He made thesame be slayne, for thesame chaunce ¶ For whiche they aroose on hym to been auēged With ful great hoste destroyed both corn & towne And brent his lande, and felly reuenged In whiche tyme came into this region Engist and Horsus dukes of great renoune By sort sent out all voyde of Saxonye With menne of warre also of Germanye.
¶ In shyppes thre arryued so then in Kent When Vortyger at Caunterbury laye Whiche he withhelde anon, and farre him sent To warre on the Scottes and Pyeghtes aye That brent his lande and noyed day by daye Peynemis they were and trowyd of Mercury And on Venus theyr goddes of Payanie. ¶ That Mercurie woden, in their language Was called so by his propre name For whome they honoured of olde and age The fourth daye in euery weke at hame * Wednys∣daye, wher∣of it was named. And so of Mercury geuing it a name And of wodē called it wednisdaye Of olde custome as they haue vsed alwaye ¶ And Venus also, was theyr hygh goddesse For whome alwaye they halowed the sixte daye Of euery weke in prayer and holynesse Who in theyr tonge friday was called alwaye For whose honoure, that named was frydaye The Sonne the Moone, Iubiter and Saturne And Mars the God of armes, they dyd adorne ¶ The yere after of Christes incarnacyon Foure hundreth full fourty and syxe also Was when Engyst into this regyon Firste came, and hauen wt thre shippes and no mo As saynte Bede sayeth in gestis anglorum so with scottes & Pieghtes they faught ful mightely And droue theim oute and had the victorye. ¶ This Engist had then none habitacyon
Desyringe so a castell in to dwell Hym and his men, to kepe frome all aduersacyon Of Scottes & peyghtes yt enemyes were then fell As all olde Chronyclers canne you tell Asked as much ground, as a bulleis skyn thonge Myght cyrcuyte fully of brede and longe ¶ Whiche the king him graunted then anone He made a thonge then of a bullys skyn So small and longe, that rounde about dyd gone A stony grounde to set his castell in And thus by subtelte and his sleyghty gyn Where then he made Thongcastre as men tolde In Lyndesey, that nowe is Castre of the wolde. ¶ Engyst then sent for his doughter Rowan That came anone, with shyppes eyghtene Well stuffed of men, for they were of Britayne Agayne the Scottes and Peightes to opteyne Whome Vortiger then, thought ful longe to sene She proferred him a drynke and sayde wassayle As he was learned, he sayde to her drynke hayle ¶ Which wordes fyrst came vp so into this land With that he set his herte her for to loue That he her wed by all kyndes of lawfull bonde As then the church could best hym learne & moue And thus the Saxons by Vortiger set aboue For whiche his sonnes, and all the Baronage Hym hated sore, ryght for his maryage ¶ Of Paynimes bloodde, for to their ydolatrye Greate people were then, turned and peruerte
And greate also in Pilagien heresye Were accombred, and hole to it aduerte Wherfore his sonne, the people to conuerte For Lupus sent, and his felowe Germayne Christen fayth to preache, in all Britayne. Which bishoppes. ii, the folke conuert did againe By processe so, and home agayne then went This Engyst then, to please the kyng full fayne For his sonne Occa, to Germany sent For Ebissa and Cherdryk by consent Of Vortiger, that .iii. C. shyppes brought Of men of warre, the best that might be sought. Of whiche his sonne, that then hight Vortimer Of his fyrste wyfe, and also the barons all Of suche multytude of people, affrayed were And to the kyng, as then it did befall Compleyned had, without helpe in generall Wherfore anone, together they dyd consent This Vortymer to crowne by hole assent. The .lxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Vortymer the sonne of kynge Vortyger, kynge of Brytayne to withstande the power of Engyste, and of Saxons was twyes crowned. Howe this Engyst vnder treaty slewe all the Baronage of Brytons on yt playne of Salysburye. THen Vortimer they crowned anon ryght With royalte, that might to it appende Vortymer kynge of Britayne. That was ful wise ap pued, lyke a knight In all courage, that to knighthode did extende
For to assayle or elles for to defende Who with myscreauntes faught sore vpon De∣went So did he elles at all place where he went ¶ At Abirforth he fought with theim also The better ay he had where as he yede But Catigerne his brother was kylled tho And horne also was slayne by greate manhode And thus Vortimer victorius where so he yede An other tyme vpon the north sea bankes He faught with them, in batayle their vnthankes ¶ They fled vnto the ysle then of Tenecte Where he theim syeged fearfully and assayled And slewe theym doune on hepes ay as they met That theyr power almoste then was fayled All forefoughten and full sore batayled Besought the kyng they myght haue his lycence To Germany to make their reuertence. ¶ So wente they home, with lytell folke alyfe That in his tyme, they came no more agayne But cytees all, and churches amended full ry fe The christentee to mainteyne was full fayn But then anone the subtell quene Rowayne Made hym to be poysoned, of whiche he dyed With her venymes thus was he mortifyed. ¶ In a pyller of brasse he layde on hyght At the gate where Saxons, had landed afore He bad his men for also farre as he myght Hym se, he truste they wolde not nerre come thore But neuerthelesse, they letted not therfore
But buryed hym at Troynouaunt cite As he them bade, with all solempnite ¶ Kyng Vortiger was crouned then again For Engest sent and bade hym come anone For Vortimer his soonne was deade and slain Who wt three hūdred shippis full of mēne echone In Brytain landed, and to the kyng ganne gone Of whome he was full glad and well reioysed And of his folke that were of greate power noised ¶ But Brytons all, and also the baronage To fight with hym, arose by whole consent For whiche he sent to theim by message That to the realme, none eiuill he ment But for to helpe the lande in his entent And if thei were of his hoost, displeased As thei could best deuise, thei should been eased ¶ And bad theim set a daye wher thei might mete By their auise his power home to sende Or all to hold, for their common quiet Fro their enemies, the realme for to defende All his defaute by their auise tamende The Brytons thought his profer reasonable And to the realme also full profitable ¶ Thei sent hym woorde to mete the first daye of Maye With foure hundred so on euery side Vpon the plain of Sarum in meeke araye The craft & pollicye of Engist That Caire Cradok was called so that tyde Byside Awmesbury full fair edefied Again whiche daye, this Engist bad his menne
Within their hoses a long knif to haue then ¶ And when he saied Nemyth, your sexes then Eche manne then slee, a Bryton with his knife For so I shall, vs marshall as I can A fore a Bryton, a Saxon sette full rife So shall wee reue theim sonest of their life And sette vs ay in rest and moost quiete At a daye lymete, together when wee mete ¶ A daye assigned, as was his ordinaunce The watche woorde saied, eche panyme a Bryton slewe Foure .C. lordes, of Christes holy creaunce Betrayed were, by Engist so vntrewe The death of whome, many a Bryton did rewe Whose corps all, were buryed at Awmisbury Whiche after that daye, was made a Nonnorye ¶ With the hoost of panymes came full fast And toke the kyng, held hym at Troynouaunt For marred sore and greately was agast What so thei asked, anone he did theim graunt The citees all and castels sufficiaunt To lette hym passe awaye without troublaunce Whiche Engist graunted, because of aliaunce The .lxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Engist caused Logres to bee called then En∣gestlande, of whiche the commons putte gest awaye in their common speache, and call it England for shortenes of speache.
ENgist with his hoost had all thorient The South & North, in all ye greate Bri∣tain In his kepyng, except thoccident Englāde wherof it was so named. Whiche Brytons held of warre and muche pain By olde chronicles, as I haue herd saine And then anone, he called it Engestes lande Whiche after was shorted, and called England ¶ Through the cōmons, yt thought it long to say And muche lighter, in tongue to saie Englande Then with their mouth, ouer long to name it aye By long producyng, to call it Engistislande And thus came first in, as I vnderstande As I conceiue, thus came first Englandes name For short speach, corrupt per sincopene ¶ But Engist then, gaue all the lande about To Saxons all, and kyng was so of Kent But Vortiger in Cambre sought through out To buylde vpon, a castell to his entent To holde hym in, fro the panymes violent Whiche in Cambre, the castell of Genoren He made full strong, in the lande of Hergigyen ¶ Vpon the ryuer of Ewey, on Cloarte hill But of dragons and of the water vnder That Merlyn saied, that castell did so spill Ne of his birth that many menne on wounder Of that werke, bothe aboue and vnder That no father had, ne of his prophecye I cannot wryte of suche affirmably ¶ Notwithstandyng, that philophiers wise
Affirme well, that sprites suche there been Bitwene the moone and therth called Incubice That haue gotten chyldren of wemen vnseene As in stories diuerse I haue so seen Howe the philosophier, wise Magancius Affirmeth it also, and Apuleyus The .lxx. Chapiter. ¶ Aurelius Ambrose kyng of Brytain the seconde soonne of Constantyne, AVrelius Ambrose brother of Constaunce Into Britain with strong & greate power And segid then Vortiger by ordinaunce In his castell of Genoren full clere Whiche with wild fire he brent, and hym in feere And crouned was by all the baronage To reioyse Britain that was his heritage ¶ He sought Engist that panyme was full grym With hoostes thei faught, but Aurele had yt better The Saxons fled, before that were full brime For in their quarel, it might bee no better Duke Eldoll toke Engist and did hym fetter In Kent as he hym mette awaye fleyng At Conanburgh hym brought to the kyng ¶ Where he was heded with swerd, and decollate And Occa then and his soonne Ebissa His cousins dere at Yorke came, in ful late And with hym Saxons full many one moo Wher then the kyng, hym segid with muche woo But Occa then, and al his compaignie Came to the kyng to whome he gaue mercye
¶ The kyng then made a worthy sepulture With yt stone hengles, by Merlins whole aduise For all the lordes Brytons hye nature That there were slain in false and cruell wise By false Engest and his feloes vnwise In remembraunce of his forcasten treason Without cause, or any els encheson ¶ But Pascencius the soonne of Vortiger With hoost of Irish, Cambre he destroyed With whome the kyng faught with his power And droue hym out, to Irelande sore anoyed Of his people many slain and foule acloyed But Eopa then clad in monkes clothyng With his poysonis, then poysoned had the kyng ¶ But then the kyng of Irelande and Pascence In Cambre brent, the kyng full sicke then laye He sent Vterpendragon for defence With hoost royall and mighty greate araye He faught wt hym, for whiche thei fled that daye With shame and hurt to Irelande home again Vterpendragon the felde so had full plain ¶ Then Vter sawe a starrye beame full bright And asked Merlyn, what that it might meane He said it is Stella Cometa righte It sygnifieth the kyng his death to been That nowe is gonne to the blisse I ween The dragon also, thy self dooeth signifye With beames twoo extendyng seuerally ¶ The beame southward, to Fraūce yt dooeth ex∣tende
Thy soonne that thou shalt haue dooeth signifie That shall conquere, all Fraunce vnto thend Almaignie also and all Germanie And so to Roome, throughout al Romanie Aboue all princes, in his tyme moost fained Through Christente moost dred and best named ¶ That other beame to Irelande extendyng Thy doughters eke dooeth also signifie Their children also, that of theim shalbe comynge The realme to haue with all the regalie Thus Merlyn to hym dooeth specifie So went he furth anone to Cairgwente Where he had woorde of his brothers enterremēt ¶ Within the Giaūtes carole that so then hight The stone hengles, that nowe so named been Where prelates & dukes, erles & lordes of might His sepulture to worship there were seen Thus this worthy kyng, was buryed by dene That reigned had, that tyme but thirten yere When he was dedde and laied so on beere The .lxxi. Chapiter. ¶ Vter Pendragō kyng of Brytain and of his armes that he bare. HIs brother Vter, at Cairgwēt was croūd Vter Pendra¦gō kyng of Bry∣tain. In trone royall thē fully was admit Twoo dragons made of gold royall that stound That one offred of his deuout wit In the mynster there as he had promit That other before hym, euer in battaile bare Of gold in goulis, wher so he gan to fare
¶ Tharmes also of Troye, that Brutus bare Tharmes also, of good kyng Lucius Whiche after baptyme, his armes alwaye ware The same armes that kyng Constantynus At his batayll against Maxencius So bare alwaye, yt saynt George armes we call Whiche Englyshemen nowe worshippe ouer all. ¶ And for he bare, the dragon so in warre The people all, hym called then Pendragor. For his surname, in landes nere and farre Whiche is to saye, in Britayn region In theyr language, the head of the dragon And in the north, as he a castell made Pendragon hight, wher he his dwellyng had. ¶ But Occa sonne then, of that false Engist And Oysa also, the sonne of Occa with That northlande brent, of which when Vter wyst He faught with theim, there saued theim no grith Nor none of the people, that came theim with He tooke Occa and Oysa, in batayll Beside Dane hill, wher they did hym assayle. ¶ The Saxones also he slewe, yt with hym came And had the felde, with all the victorie For ioye of whiche, he made great ioye and game Proclaymed his feast, of Pasche solemply To holde at London, wher then he made his crye That euery lorde, his wife with hym shuld bryng For worshippe of that feast, and of the kyng. The .lxxii. Chapiter.
¶ Howe the kyng was an amoured of the duke of Gorloys wyfe, and how he gatte on her kyng Arthure. EMonges other, Gorloys duke of Corne∣wayle His wife did bring Igrene fayre of figure Whose beautee their, all others made to faile So well and hole auised was nature Her womanhede exceded euery creature That though nature, her beautee woulde haue a∣mēde Hir cōnyng might therto in no wise extēde. ¶ Of whiche beautee, and of her goodlyhede The kyng with loue, so greatly was oppressed It chaunged all his corage and manhede In kalendes of eschaunge, he was so impressed For whiche the duke with hir then home adressed Perceauynge well, the kynges fykelnesse Was set for loue, on her womanlynesse ¶ In Tyntagell his castel strong, he her set Hymselfe then laye, in castell Dymyoke Wher then the kyng hym sieged her to get But Merlyne then, from it hym did reuoke And by his councell subtelly dyd prouoke Knowyng his loue; he had to dame Igrene By coniurisons made in haste full yerne. ¶ He made the kyng, vnto duke Gorloys like Hymselfe like to Brethel in all semblaunce That then was the dukes preuy myke And Vlfyn lyke, by all kyns gouernaunce Vnto Iordan in all maner conysaunce That moste knewe of the dukes preuytee
By whiche he brought to Igrene all three. ¶ Thus laye the kyng hir by, euer whē he would She trustyng then, that he had been hir lorde But euer his siege he made sadly to been holde His people assautyng the castell by one accorde But Gerloys men, then pleynly did recorde Theyr lorde was slayn and Vter had the felde Of which she merueyled, & then fast hym behelde. ¶ There gatte he then, on hir a sonne full fayre And fro hir went, vnto his hooste agayn The duke was slayne, with all his moste repayre Of whiche the kyng, glad is not to layne To Tyntagell with all his hoste full fayne He came anone, and had it at his wyll He comforted hir, and bad her holde it styll ¶ But then betwene theim two he did discure The priuetee in all, as it was wrought And sette his daye to wed hir and to cure Of heuynes, that she was then in brought Her lordes death so muche was in hir thought For hir so slayne, hir wyfehode also defouled Afore that tyme, that euer was kept vnfouled. ¶ And at the daye, he wedded hir and cround And she ferforth with childe was then begonne To comforte her, he sette the table rounde At Wynchester, of worthiest knightes alone Approued best in knighthode of their foone Whiche table rounde Ioseph of Arimathie For brether made of the seynt Grall onely.
¶ In whiche he made, the seege pereleous Where none shulde sytte, without great mischiefe But one that shuld be moste religious Of knightes all, & of the rounde table chiefe The saynt Graal, that shuld recouer and acheue By aduenture of his fortunitee And at his death, a virgyne shulde bee. ¶ But at hir tyme, the quene had borne a soonne That Arthure hight, and was of statur fayre More large of lymme, and wysest vnder sunne Of his age then, to bee his fathers heyre Of all his lymmes, right comly, stronge & fayre But Occa then and Oysa, that afore Stale home, were come & warred in Britayn sore. ¶ The kyng sent forth, syr Loth of Lowthian A worthy prince, hardy and bounteous His doughter had wedded, yt hight thē dame Anne A manly manne, and right cheualrous The first knight, that was electe right fortunous Of the table round, that ofte with theim did fight That ofte preuayled, and sometyme put to flight. ¶ For whiche the kyng, ordeyned a horse litter To beare hym so then, vnto the verolame Wher Occa laye, and Oysa also in feer That saynt Albones, nowe hight of noble fame Bet downe the walles, but to hym forth they came Wher in battayll, Occa and Oysa were slayne The felde he had, and therof was full fayne. ¶ There was a well, whiche his enemyes espied
That he vsed the water ofte to alaye His drynkes, all his sores to be medifyed Whiche they venomyd, with poyson on a daye Of whiche he dyed, and went to blisse for aye In the carole, besyde his brother dere As to suche a prynce, it dyd ryght well affere. ¶ He reygned had then. ix, and thyrtye yere And in the yere of Chrystes natiuyte Fyue hundreth and syxtene, then was full clere The realme he lefte, in good felicyte Arthure his sonne, to haue the royalte To reygne and rule the realme, yt then was able That of his age, was none so cōmendable. The .lxxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Arthure kyng of Britayne, reygned .xxvi. yere. Howe the kynge bare syxe banners in his warre, and howe he renew∣ed and increased the table rounde, and helde vp royally the rule of it, and howe he conquered Irelande and Denmarks with all the ysles of theim. ARthure his sōne vp growen, then peerlesse Throughout yt world approued of his age Of wyt and strength, beawte and largesse Kynge Ar∣thure. Of persone hye, aboue his Baronage And other all, of Brytons vasselage By his shoulders, exceded in longitude. Of all membres, full fayre in latytude, ¶ At Circestre then of .xv. yere of age When Dubryk archbishoppe of Carilyon
With all estates within his herytage Assembled there Duke, earle, lorde, and baron And commentye of all the regyon Vpon his hedde did sett the dyademe In royall wyse, as wele hym dyd beseme. ¶ The yere of Christes byrth .v. C. and syxtene Was whan he was crowned all with golde Where than he made, a vowe for to sustene. The chrysten fayth, the churche also to vpholde The peace and lawes, mawgre who so other wold The Saxons also, to warre and destroye That of longe tyme, had done vs greate anoy ¶ King Arthure sought yt Saxons in Scotland His chiefe baner of goules was to see An ymage of our Lady of golde enthronde Crowned of golde, as freshe as it myght be His other banner was of the Trynite Of golde and goulis of saynt george was yt third The .iiii. was Brutus armes knowen and kyd ¶ The fyfte baner of goulis .iii. crownes of gold The syxte of Goulis, a dragon of golde fyne With hoost full great, of Britons yt were holde On Douglas water the Saxons he did vntwine Colgrim yt was their capitayne fled fro thyne To Yorke anon, and it with people helde His men then slayne, the kyng had so the felde▪ ¶ Cheldrik & Baldoffe, two dukes of Germanie With hostes great, then landed in Britayne To Colgrym came, and brent that lande in hye
But to Arthure kyng Howell came full fayne With hoost great, his systers sonne certayne Of lesse Britayne, that with his vncle went Against Colgrym to fyght in his entent. ¶ Cador the duke, that tyme of Cornewayle The kynges brother of his mothers syde Came to the kyng, with people yt might auayle So dyd all other, of all Britayne full wyde With their enemies then met of mikell pryde And vaynqueshed theim at Lyncolne then seging For whiche they fled full faste yt, syege leauing ¶ To Calidon wood nere vnto the sea Where the kynges two, theim seged sore about That for famishment & fought, they swore to be The kynges men and their lande throughoute For to voide their people, of all the land out & out Colgrym, Baldolffe, and also duke Cheldryk That chieftayns were wt dughty duke Cordrik ¶ And leyde hym hostage, all this to spede And when they were vpon the sea agayne They landed eft at Totnesse so in dede And seged Bathe where Arthure was full faine Their hostages honged in their syght ful plaine And with them fought Colgrym & Baldof slewe To Cordryk gaue westsex to be his man trewe. ¶ Duke Cador then folowed vpon the chace And slewe Cheldryk, and his of Saxonie And to the kyng agayne came for this case That kyng beseged was in Albanye
Wherfore they went, with hoste full manly To Alclud, where Scottes & peightes laye about Theim discomfyted, and hym delyuered oute. The Scottes & peightes, he droue into oute ysles Of Scotland then, & there became his men To lyue in peace, that euer were full of wyles. But Gwillomare, the kyng of Irelande then Ouer kyng Arthure, full harde warre beganne With hoste full greate, of Iryshe and Saxonye In Scotlande brent, and also in Albanye. ¶ But then yt kyng hym met, & with hym faught Discomfyted hym, and put hym to the flygt Vnto Irelande, with batayle sore vnsaught Of Scotlande, then of Lowthyan by ryght The kyng was then, that loth of Lowthian hight The fyrste knyghte, was so of the table rounde To Arthure true, & also his lyegeman founde ¶ His syster Anne, vnto his wyfe had wed On whome he gate the curteous knyght Gawen In Dunbar castell, his lyfe there he ledde And Aguzell was kyng, that tyme certayne Of Albanye, and Vryan, of Murref playne The kyng was then, to kyng Arthure full trewe His lyegeman aye, and chaunged not of newe. ¶ The kyng Arthure, then wedded to his wyfe Gwaynore faiereste of any creature That tyme accompted, for passyng birth natyse So Iuly fayre, she was of her fygure More aungelyk, then womannyshe of nature
In so ferfurth, mē thought them selues wel eased Her to beholde, so well al folke she pleased. ¶ The table rounde, of knightes honourable That tyme were voyde, by great defycience For many were, through actes marcyable Dispended then, by warres violence Wherfore the kyng, then of his sapience The worthyest of euery realme aboute In the table rounde, then sent without doute. ¶ The thre kynges foresayde of Scotlande Two kynges also of Walys, full chyualrous Howell the kyng of lesse Briteyne lande And duke Cador, of Cornewayle corageous And worthy Gawen, gentyll and amarous And other fel, theyr rule was wronges to oppresse with their bodyes, where lawe myght not redresse The fayth, yt church, Maydens, & widowes clene Chyldren also, that were in tender age The cōmon profyte, euer more to sustene Agayne enchauntmentes, his body for to wage Agayne whiche crafte, of the deuelles rage Theim to destroye, and all kinde of sorcerye Of whiche were many, that tyme in Brytaynye. ¶ On whitsonday, alwaye euery yere They shoulde eche one at the feaste be wt the king In anye place, where euer so that he were But yf he were in prysone, or harde lettyng By dede of armes, death, or elles sycke lyeng In whiche cases, one of the table rounde
Shulde seke hym all yt yere, tyll here were found. ¶ Also their rule was eche one should tell His owne actes of warrys auenture Afore the kyng at meate howe hym byfell In his trauayle or of his misauenture The Secretorye, should put it in scrypture For none auaunt, it should not then betake But for his rule to holde, ye king then dyd it make ¶ Also to steare & moue, yonge knightes corage To seche armes and warrys of worthynesse And of dyuerse landes, to learne the language That elles wolde lyue at home in ydylnesse For honoure & ease, abideth not together doutlesse Also it moueth these poore & yonge knighthode To be auaunced, by theyr ladies lyuelode. ¶ For doute it not, Ladies ne gentylwemen No cowardes loue, in maner that is abusyon And shamefull also repreuable amonges men His cowardyse doth him greate confusyon A man to withdrawe him, by feynt collusyon For better is, with honour for to dye Then with lyfe, ay ashamed for to be ¶ The somer nexte, Arthure went to Ireland With batayle sore forfoughten yt conquered And of the kyng had homage of that lande To holde of hym, so was he of hym feared And also gate as chronycles haue vs lered Denmarke, Friselande, Gotelande, & Norway Iselande, Greneland, Thisle of Man & Orkynay
¶ He conquered these, to hold of hym euermore He made kyng Loth that was of Lowthian Of Norway kyng, wher he had fought full sore And Lowthyan he made his soonne Gawayne The kyng to hold of hym by homage then For Norway was his veray heritage Discent of bloodde of kyng Sechelynes lynage ¶ Kyng Arthure then, through Christētie moost famed And conquerour aboue all kynges royall Was thē moost doubted of māhode & best named But kynges and princes of Septentrionall His to present moost high emperiall Eche daye came newe, that then more like it semid An heuenly life, then erthely as menne demid ¶ He held his houshold, and the rounde table Some time at Edenburgh, some tyme at Striue line Of kynges renomed, and moost honourable At Carleile sumwhile, at Alclud his citee fyne Emōg all his knightes and ladies full femenine At Bamburgh also and Ebrank citee At London at Wynchester, with greate royalte ¶ At Carlion, Cardif, and Aualyne In Cornwaile also Douer and Cairelegion And in Scotlande at Perthe and Dunbrytain At Dunbar, Dumfrise and sainct Iohns towne All of worthy knightes, moo then a legion At Donydoure also in Murith region And in many other places, bothe citee and towne ¶ But euer as next, the valey is the hill
After long rest commeth sharpe labour Kyng Arthure then had so firmely sette his will To conquer Fraunce as his progenitour Maximian did, with full greate honour Wherfore he sent, to all his homagers That to hym came with all their powers The .lxxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Arthure conquered Fraunce, and sleugh kyng Frolle of fraūce, and wan many lādes thither∣ward, and when he had wone Fraunce and ruled it nyne yere, he came to Carlion and he and the quene were crouned there again with greate solempnite & dewe seruice dooen by his homagers. ANd into Fraunce anone so furth he went And in Paris Frolle yt was gouernour Bysegid then, who vnto Arthure sent Profered hym bataile, with full greate honour With hande for hande, for right of themperour To fight with hym, to iudgen all the right Whiche to fulfill, Arthure graunted and hight ¶ At a daye assigned, thei twoo together mette Within an Isle without Paris citee Wher either other, with wepons sore then bette But kyng Arthure, by greate humanyte That daye hauyng, of hym the souereingte Sleugh Froll yt daye, with Caleburne his swerd For whiche all Fraunce, of hym were sore aferd ¶ Paris thei yeld, and all the realme of Fraunce The royals all, to kyng Arthure obeyed
Seruice did hym, and all whole obeisaunce As to their kyng, and hym nomore disobeyed He sent Howell, with hoost and hym conueighed To Guyan then, who made Guytard obeye To kyng Arthure, with all that euer he maye ¶ Nauerne and Spain, Portyngale, Aragon Prouince, Sauoye, and Langdok with also Flaundres, Braban, Henauld and Burgoyn Orliaunce, Poytiers and Lectoo Cateloigue eke Almaignie and many mo Holande, Selande, and Gelders within fere His menne became, as prince without pere ¶ At Paris then he feasted all thastates By fourty dayes, were he and also the quene Were crouned then and had the lande subiectes In all honour and ryalte as was seen He feasted all the commonalte full clene The prelates whole and the vniuersite And ladies all, with their feminite ¶ Nine yere, he helde his throne riall in Fraunce And open hous, greately magnified Through all the world, of welthe and suffisaunce Was neuer prince, so highly gloryfied The rounde table, with princes multipled That auentures then sought cotidianly With greate honour, as made is memory ¶ And when he had, so ruled Fraunce neni yere To Brytain went, he home then again At Cairlion his citee faire and clere
At witsondaye to se, his knightes faine He sette his feast royall, the sooth to sayne By fourty dayes, for all that there woulde been Moost for his knightes, that he desired to seen ¶ At whiche feast he, and the quene also Crouned were, with royall diademe By Dubrice, that tharchibishop was tho At Carlion as the churche did deme With all rialtie as well did beseme Tharchebishopes of London and Ebrank Came to that feast, and had full muche thanke ¶ At the Enoyntyng of this moost noble kyng Tharchebishop of London the right arme Tharchbishop of Yorke by all writyng The left held vp, without any harme While the people to see that sight, did swarme This was their charge and verey dewe seruise Of anonxcion tyme, to dooe and excersise ¶ Kyng Agurell that was of Albanye The kyng Posses of Southwalis that hight And of Northwalis Ewayn the kyng manly And duke Cader of Cornwaile by right Afore the kyng bare foure sweordes full bright Whiche was seruice of greate antiquite For their landes dewe, to his souerente ¶ Afore yt quene Gwaynour, the queenes came Of Southwalis, Northwalis and Albanye And the duches of Cornwaile, of greate fame Right well bee seen of chere benyngly
Eche of theim bare on her hande on hie A turteldoue, that was of coloure white To please the queene, so was her moste delite. ¶ Syr Kay was then the duke of Aungeoy At Parys made by Arthur and create His stewarde was that had with mekell ioye A thousande knightes, to serue early and late Ententyfly not feynt, wery ne mate Duryng the feast, clothed all in Ermyn For best araye, that he could best ymagyn. ¶ Sir Bedwer then at that feast was Boteler A thousande knightes with hym consociate The feast to serue, of wynes good and clere Clad all in graye, of pelury preordinate That was full riche, accordyng to there estate Thetis goddesse of waters ther had no might For Bacchus god of wynes, shed his power right ¶ Thousādes many, of lordes & knightes hono∣rable Eche daye duryng the feast imperiall Afore the kyng and quene incomperable To masse and meate, went in especiall A thousande ladies of estate temporall Besyde thousandes that were of lesse degree Wyues and wydowes with other virginitee. The .lxxv. Chapiter. ¶ A good cause to make knightes worthy and coragious, and ladies and gentilwomen to lyue in great clennes.
THer was no knight, accompted of honoure But if he wer, in warre approued thrise Nor with ladies, beloued as paramoure Whiche caused knightes, armes to exercyse To be vertuous, and clene of life and wise It comforte also ladies, and theyr femynitee To lyue the more, in perfite chastitee. ¶ And when this feast royall was dissolued The kyng rewarded so highly, eche estate And in his mynde, ymagened and inuolued Howe sone and when, at tyme preordinate They might agayn bee consociate And commaunded theim, at the nexte Pentecost There for to bee with him, both least and moste. ¶ Dubricyus, then archebyshop of Cairlyon Mekely ceased, and hole forsoke his cure Purposyng so of good religion An heremytes lyfe, thence forwarde to endure In whose steade, Dauid of life full pure Was set to rule the churches dignitee To Gods pleasaunce with all libertee. ¶ To Mangauero, the sea Pontificall Of Chichester he gaue withouten lette Of Wynchester with the cōmoditees all To Duuyan he gaue, and hym in sette To God and the churche, as fell of dewe dette Thysse of alclud also Pontificall To Eledoure, he graunted, as might befall. ¶ As then befell, the feast of Whytsondaye
That all his knightes, of the table rounde To his presence, were commen in good araye And euery knight, his auenture that stounde Had tolde the kyng, as his order was founde Whiche aduentures, the kyng made all be writtē In his register, euer to be knowen and weten. The .lxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Galaad came to kyng Arthure and atheued yt seege pereleous in the roūd table, & howe the saynt Graal apered at supper in yt hal, wherfore he made a vowe, neuer to abide two nightes in one place, to tyme he knewe what it was, and that he might se it agayne. GAlaad that tyme, was .xv. yere of age The goodlyest afore, that men had seen Whō Laūcelot gat in very clene spousage On Pelles doughter, yt kyng full longe had been Of Venedose, that northwales is nowe, men wene Clene armed, came at meate & obeyed the kyng The quene also, and estates there syttyng. ¶ And sate hym downe, in the siege pereleous Of the table rounde, where none durst sitte afore But Ioseph, that was full religious That made it so, ere Galaad was bore And kyng Arthure, that satte therin therfore And neuer moo, that it had ought presumed But they were brent therin, shamed & consumed. ¶ Whiche Ioseph sayd, afore that tyme ful long In Mewyns booke, the Britayn chronicler As writen is, the Britons iestes emong
That Galaad the knight and virgyne clere Shuld it acheue and auentures in all fere Of the seyntgraale and of the great Briteyn And afterwarde a virgyne, dye certeyne ¶ But the knightes all then of the round table Conceyued well and fully then beleued He was thesame persone incomperable Of whō Merlyn sayd euer shuld been wel cheued Moste fortunate of all knightes that then lyued For whiche they all anone to hym attende In all thynges that to knighthode appende. ¶ At supper as he sate agayn at euen In thesame seege with full knightly constaunce That proued well, whiche made theim al beleuen That by his rule and noble gouernaunce To all knightes he shuld do great pleasaunce In speciall to all of that order Ful greate worshyp and all knightly honoure ¶ So sodenly, doores and wyndowes al clapped With hydeous noyce, farre passyng meruelous Opened and sperred, al by theim selfs fast rapped For whiche thei trust of some cause meruelous As with that noyse the saynt Graall precious Flowe thryse about, within the hall full ofte Flytteryng ful fast, aboue theim high on lofte. ¶ And as it came sodenly vnknowen Right so it went awaye withouten lees The knightes all that tyme that had it sawen Amerueled were, of it doutelesse
Wherfore they all with wepens gan to presse To see and wete, what thyng it myght bee But whether it went, they could nomore it see.. The .lxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Galaad and the knightes of the rounde table made theyr auowes to seke the saynt Graal, some tyll thei found it, and some for a yere. BVt on yt morowe, Galaad & other knightes Afore the kyng by one assent compered Where Galaad made his auowes & high∣tes Neuer to lye, but he were presoned In one place in no maner of grounde Two nightes together, no where tyll he it see Besought the kyng his knight that he might bee. ¶ The kyng hym made a knight of ye table roūd And armes wolde haue geue hī, but he wold none Afore that he gatte theim in a stronge grounde By auenture, or els vpon his foone And tooke his leaue to passe so forth anone The knightes all, then of the rounde table Graunt hym seruice a yere, then perdurable. The .lxxviii. Chapiter. ¶ The lamentacion of kyng Arthure for his knightes vpon theyr departyng from hym, & of the rule whiche Galaad made emōg the knightes in the quee of the saynt Graal, and howe at Aelon he found a shilde of thesame armes, a speare & a swcorde that Ioseph lefte there for hym, which armes, Aruiragus, Lucyus and Constantyne bare of siluer a crosse of Goules.
FOr whiche the kyng wt heuy & dulful chere Thus sayd: O God what shall I do or say That my knightes al, which I had ī quere Thus sodenly fro me, that passe awaye They my blisse, my hertes hele eche daye My landes helpe, custodyes of my crowne And membres of my corps, to kepe my region. ¶ O God, yt deth wold brest myne hert on twayne Who shall maynteyne, my crowne & my ryghtes I trowe nomore, to see you eft agayne Thus hole together, and so goodly knightes Would God, I might make myne auowe & high∣tes To passe with you, in what land so ye go And take my parte with you, both in well and wo. ¶ This Galaad then, rode forth, with his route At euery waye, he made a knight for to departe To tyme they were, all seuerally gone oute And none with hym, so had echone theyr parte And yf any met, another at any arcte His rule was so, he shuld his felowe tell His auentures, what so that hym befell. ¶ And also sone, as theyr waye laye on sūdrywise They shulde departe, and mete nomore agayn But aduenture, it made of exercyse Of diuers stretes, that together layne Of this mater, is nomore to seyne. But when he had, his felowes all conueyed He tooke his waye, full like a knight arayed. ¶ Of auenture he came to Auelon
Where that he found a shylde, that was ful white A crosse therin of Gowlys, by it one A speare also, a sweard of great delyte The whiche with hym, he bare awaye full tyte He gyrde hym with the swerde, anon full ryght The shylde he hunge, vpon his shoulder lyght. ¶ The spere he toke on hande, ful lyke a knyght But there he founde in bokes clerely wryten Howe Ioseph loste that shylde, therin forth ryght When he there dyed, as then it was well weten And also in scrypture, lefte there wryten That no man should it beare, without mischeue But one that should, y• doughteous siege acheue. ¶ That same was wryten, ryght there of y• swerd Whiche Vacyan lefte there, when he dyed And of the speare, he was nothyng a ferde All, yf the same parell of it was notifyed Lyke as to fore of it was specifyed But when that he had, laboured so foure yere He founde in walys, the Saintgraal full clere. ¶ Then rode he forth, vnto the holy lande Through god and holy inspiracyon To god he gaue his seruyce, and hym bonde To chastyte, and greate contemplacyon And kyng was made, by hole coronacyon Of Garras then, and duke of Orboryk Of whome the people, full well dyd theym lyke. ¶ Syr Boers with hym went, and syr Percyuall And other moo of the table rounde.
Whome knyghtes he made of the seynt Graall Whiche order so he ordeyned then, and founde At Sarras, that to Egypt lande doth bounde To lyue chaste, and maynteyne christentye Lyke as Ioseph dyd of Armathye. ¶ But longe after vpon the whitsondaye Sir Boers and Percyuall came to the kyng With knyghtes all, that lyuyng were that day At Carlyon, but Percyuall dyd bryng Vnto that courte full dolorous tidyng Syr Galaad his herte closed all with golde Vnto the kyng full openly and tolde. ¶ Howe Galaad had acheued the auenture In kyng Pellis householde with great honoure That called was yt saint Graall by scrypture And Kyng was made, by his worthy laboure As he that was of knyghthode a worthy floure Of Sarras so and duke of Orboryk Besyde Egypte, where there was none hym lyke Where thenne he made .xii. knightes of the order Of saynt Graall in full signifycacyon Of the table, whiche Ioseph was the founder The saynt Graall what it is. At Aualon, as Mewyn made relacyon. In token of the table refyguracyon Of the brotherhede of Christes souper & maundie Afore his death of hyghest dignytee. ¶ And howe Galaad then at his deth you prayed His herte to bury, besyde kyng Eualake And duke Saraphe, in golde thus arayed
Where they be buryed, besyde Ioseph their make And thus muche he prayed you to do, for his sake In the chapell of our Lady, Chrystes mother At Glastenbury, with dyuers sayntes other ¶ This kyng Arthure with Princes & barons al And all knyghtes of the rounde table To Glastenbury then rode as myght befall And there enterred the hert of Galaad honorable With all seruyce for the death accordable And ouer it he hanged his shylde that he bare The whiche afore, saint George armes were. ¶ And when this feaste, was come vnto an ende The kyng Arthure also and quene Gwaynour To all estates, greate gyftes gaue and sende As they were wonte eche yere afore For his great honoure encreased more and more Of hyghe knyghthode, houshold and all largesse Aboue all princes moste famous he was doutlesse ¶ These were knightes then of the table rounde Morued the Earle that tyme of Gloucestre Of shrewisbury, therle Heralde that stounde Therle Mawren also of Worcestre Therle Ingence that was of Leycestre Arthegall therle of Warwyke full corageous Therle Curson of Chestre full bounteons ¶ Kymar then Earle of Caunterbury When the Earle of Bathe, and Ionathall Thearle of Dorcestre, Gallus erle of Salisbury The earle Gurgen, of Herforde knowen ouer all
Beuyse, Earle of Oxenforde, that men dyd call Gwerande earle, that was of Excestre And Paradoure, the earle of wynchester Cador the duke, that then was of Cornewayle The kynges brother was, on the syster syde Dame Igrene was their mother, without fayle Gwytelene earle of Carlele, was that tyde Waldeue the duke, cōmended and landifyed Of Northumberlande, a lorde of greate power Fro Humbar north, to Twede then was full clere ¶ Kynge Aguzell, that was of Albany Kyng Vriayn, of Murref, with Ewayne His sonue, that was corageous and manly And the noble and curteous knyght Gawayne That kyng was then, of all fayre Lowthyan And syster sonne, vnto the kyng Arthure Mordred his brother, was of the same ordoure. ¶ Loth of Lowthian, that kyng was of Norway Of Lowthyan, that kyng afore had been Father to Gawayne, and murdred was that days Kyng Vryan of South walys I wene The kyng Pellis, of Northwalis full clene The kyng Howell also of lytell Britayne Boers and Hester, Degionaunt and Ewayn. ¶ Syr Percyuall Launcelot, Delake and kaye Sir Colingraunt Bedewer, and syr Degarye Geryn of Charters, ye douzepers of Fraunce gaye The kynges of man, Orkeney, Irelande all thre Of Iselande, Gotlande, and dukes of dignyte
Of Portyngale, Nauerne, and Cateloyne Of Spayne the kinges, & the duke of Burgoyne ¶ Syr Lyonell Gryffith, Kynkar Olenius Donalde Macoyle, Cynmarke, & Gorbonian Kymbalyn Rydran, Eualake, and Carthelius Crade, and Cradok, Dunwallon, and Morgan Gadwaloure, Eneas, and Ternuan And many mo, yt were full longe to wryte Whiche with my style, I canne not nowe endyte. The .lxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the embassado of the Emperoure Lucius was recey∣ued solemplye, and presented the Emperours letters vnto kynge Arthure, and also of the tenoure of the same letters, the whiche Lucius sent to hym. BVt whyles the kyng sate in his trone royal His prynces all, and knyghtes of dignite Aboute him there thambassade imperyall Were fayre brought vnto his royall dignite That Prynces were of authoryte Of moste rype age, and reuerende chere With Olliffe Braunchies, in their landes clere ¶ Otokyn of message, and legacye A stately pase, vnto his hye presence Where they offered, of Lucius Heberye The letters then, on knees with reuerence Of whiche this, the wordes and comprehence As foloweth nowe, when they were reed and sene As chronyclers wryten, thus do contene.
¶ Lucius of Rome, the Emperoure Procurator for all the hole senate Of the Publyke profyte, chiefe gouernoure By hole Senate made and denominate To Arthure kyng of Britayne procreate Sendeth gretyng, lyke as thou haste deserued Nowe in Fraunce, which was to vs preserued. ¶ Amerueled much, of wronges that yu hast done Within our lande of Fraunce by great rygour Without ryght, that better had bene vndone But yf thy wytte amende, thy foule erroure That syth of Fraunce, then were the gouernour No trybute payde, but as thyne owne conquest Haste holde it aye, vnder thyne areste. ¶ And for thou haste no wyll, it to amende And were so prowde, to do so cruell a dede Kyng Froyle to sle, to vs that dyd apende. And mekell more, for cause thou takest no hede Of the gate imperyall, that we lede To whiche all landes obey, and paye truage Saue thou alone, gaynstandest of thyne outrage ¶ Wherfore we byd strayghtly and cōmaunde That from August nowe, nexte within a yere Thou come to Rome, and pay that we demaunde The truage, which thou haste of thy power Of Britayne longe withholde, so in feare And thy defautes, amende thou did in Fraunce By sentence of the Senates ordynaunce. ¶ And elles, we shall approche to thy countre
And what so thy foly hath vs be refte With sweordes, wee shall it make restored bee Till our senate, as first it was infefte The liuelode, that thy father so the lefte Thou art els like for thine intrusion To lose and be brought into confusion ¶ Wrytten at Roome in the consistorye By whole auise, of all the wise senate At Pasche last past, to byde in memorie Their regestred and determinate Lest thy youthed, our letters and the date Would couer, with feyned forgetfulnesse Trustyng in vs, the same defaute I gesse ¶ With that the kyng, went to the Giaūtes toure With princes all that were of his counsaile By their aduise, to wryte to the themperour For his honour, and for his gouernall Of whiche so wise, would not for gette ne faill So well were made to Lucius and endite Whiche saied right thus, as in my stile I wryte The .lxxx. Chapiter. ¶ The letter that kyng Arthure sent again to Lucius themperour of Roome. ARthure kyng of all the greate Brytain And Emperour of Rome, by title of right Whiche deforced by Lucius Romain Pretendyng hym for Emperour of might Vnto the same Lucius, for thyne vnright Vsurper of the sea emperiall Sendeth gretyng, as enemie moost mortall
¶ To the senate of Roome it is well knowen Howe Iulyus Ceaser with iniurye The truage had, Brytain was brought so lowe By helpe of erle Androgeus, and his traytorye That brought hym in, by his false policye Without right or title of discent Or any right, that to the senate appent ¶ And what so he had, then by iniurye Leefull to vs, nowe is it to withstande For what euer thyng, is take vniustly Maye neuer be had, as I can vnderstande By any other, to hold it with strong hand Frome hym that had it, well and rightfully By none other maye bee had lawfully ¶ By whiche reason, the wrong we shall defende And hold our realme so, in our first astate Of seruage free, as it to Brute apende Who held it free, afore that Roome bare date Whose right to vs, is nowe determinate And by suche right, as thou dooest nowe pretende We maye clayme Roome, & to thempire ascende ¶ For kyng Belyn, that was our auncetour And Brenny also, the kyng of Albanye All Roomain did wyn, by conquest there Of Roome thei had, and all greate Italie And sleugh themperour, by their great maistrie And crouned were in the sea empiriall Wher no prince was, that tyme to theim egall ¶ But yet we haue, a better title of right
To thempire whiche nowe we will pretende For Constantyne, sainct Elyn soonne of right By right of bloodde, of Constaūce downe discēde Emperour was, that Roome did well defende Again Maxence, and his feloes tweyn Whiche there made, muche Christē people to dien ¶ Maximian kyng of greate Brytain By whole decre, and will of the senate Was emperour of Roome, and ruled almaigne Whose rightes we haue, and al their whole astate And heire of bloodde, borne and generate Wherfore we clayme, the throne empirial Frome hens furth, by lawe Iudicial ¶ As to the daye, whiche thou hast vs sette To paye to Roome, the tribute and truage We shall bee their, to chalenge of dewe debte Truage of Roome, with all their rerage And to enioyse and hold our heritage Of Roome citee, to kepe the souereigne sea With all that longeth to themperalite ¶ And if thou wilt me sonner haue or seeke Bryng Romanye with the, wher so thou will With me I shall bryng, Brytain eke And whiche of vs, that daye maye other kyll Bere Roome with hym, and Brytain also their till Wryten at our citee of Cairlion By whole aduise of all our region The .lxxxi. Chapiter ¶ He gaue to thambassatours royall giftes, and sent his
letters with his ambassatis to passe to Roome with theim in cōpaignie & he with his hoost folowed sone after theim. THe kyng then gaue vnto yt hie ambassate Full riche giftes & golde enough to spend And bad theim giue their lordes in whole senate His letters so, whiche he then to hym send And bad theim saie, that soner then he wend He should hym se, before the daye assigned In trust of whiche, theim with his seale assigned ¶ This noble kyng Arthure, his princes prayed And barons all, and knightes honorable To passe with hym, at wagis to bee payed With their power, and their retenue able For to directe, his right full resonable Marciall actes, thempire to obtein To whome thei all consented, whole and clene ¶ And with the kyng, thei passed forth anone Into Brytain, wher Howell then was kyng Wher then he hard, y• countre make greate mone For a Gyaunt, horrible in all thyng That rauished had, by his cruell werkyng Kyng Howell sister, Elein without pere Bytwene his armes, was slain and layed on bere ¶ For whiche yt kyng, to mount Michell thē wēt With that Gyaunt, that faught a bataile sore With Caliborne his sweord, or that he stint He sleugh hym there, to death for euermore And charged Kay, for his victorie thore To smyte his hedde of, then for memorye
In worship of his worthy victorye ¶ In whiche mount, kyng Howell hir tōbe made A chapell faire, theron edefied Sith that tyme hether, vpon that place abade Wher that Gyaunt, and she were homycied But all his hoost, and people hym magnified And all the landes about, wholy enioyed Of that Gyauntes death, so felly anoyed ¶ The kynges all, of Portyngale and Spain Of Nauerne also, and eke of Catheloyne Vnto hym came, and dukes of Almaigne The dukes of Sauoy, and of Burgoyne Douze peres of Fraunce, and the duke of Lorain The kynges also, of Denmarke and Irelande Of Norwey, Iselande and of Gotelande ¶ Through Fraūce, Burgoyn, Sauoye & Lum¦bardie Into Italy, and so through all Tuskayn Fro Tuskayn, then so into Romany To Awbe ryuer, kyng Arthure came so than And loged on that water as manne Wher with Lucius, he faught, in battaile strong Either other proued, with strokes sore emong ¶ But kyng Arthure, and the princes all His knightes also there, of the round table So manfully theim bare, that daye ouer all That neuer their better were seen, nor more able So were Romaynes, that daye full cōmendable Ne none might dooe better in any wise So worthely thei faught without feyntise
¶ And at the last the Brytons bare the bell And had the felde, and all the victorye Wher Arthure sleugh, as chronicles dooeth tell Themperour Lucius Hibery And toke his feloe contributorye But Lucyus hedde, to Roome for his truage He sent his corps also, for their arerage The .lxxxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the senate and the citee of Roome, mette hym in seuen processions, and crouned hym and there win¦tred hym by all the whole winter. THe senate sent vnto the kyng Arthure And prayed hym, thempire to admit Whiche became hym, & semed hym of na∣ture As Constantyne did in the honour sitte And al truage forthward, thei would remitte Of greate Brytain, neuer to aske it more But make it free, as it was euer before ¶ To whiche prayer, kyng Arthure did consent And came to Roome, in royall high astate Wher the citee, by good and whole assent Full richely hym mette, and the senate With greatest laude, that might been estimate And euery gate, his triumphe and his glorie Full curyously was wrought, in greate storie ¶ The seuen orders in procession Full solemplye, at Peters churche hym mette The wifes whole by good discrecion The wydowes after full deuoutly sette
In order came then, nexte as was there dette The virgyns then, of pure virgynitee And then thynnocentes of tender iuuentee ¶ Thorders all of good religion The preastes, and clerkes seculer The byshop and cardinalles in vnyon With the sacrement, and lightes clere And Belles ryngyng, therewith in fere Euery order with laude and reuerence Reioysed greatly of his magnificence. ¶ At the Capytole, in the sea imperiall They crowned hym, with crownes thre of golde As Emperoure, moste principall And conquerour, that daye moste worthy holde Wher then he fested, the citee manyfolde Of Rome the byshop, and all his cardinals The senatours, with other estates als. The .lxxxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe that tydynges came to the kynge at Roome, that Mordred had wedded his wyfe, and vsurped the crowne of Englande, for the whiche he came home agayne, and gaue Mordred batayll at Douer, where Arthure pre∣uayled, and after again at Wynchester, wher the round table began and fell for euer. ALl that wynter, at Rome he did soiourne In palays of Mayns palacium The somer cā, yt home he might retourne At whiche somer, so when it was come Tydynges came to Arthure, hole and some
That duke Mordred, was kyng of all Britayn And wedded Gwaynour, to his wyfe certayn ¶ For whiche at Rome, he made his ordenaunce To rule that lande, and all the hole Empire And home in hast, with full great purueyaunce To Britayne came, to venge hym on that sire That trayterously, agayn hym did conspire To rauyshe his wife, by stronge and mighty hāde And also for vsurpyng the crowne of his lande. ¶ At porte Rupyn, whiche nowe Douer hight He landed then, where duke Mordred hym met And fought full sore, by all a daye to night Wher syr Gawen & Anguzell, were sore bet And slayne both two, so sore they were ouer set But Arthure had the felde, and Mordred fled To Wynchester that night, full fast hym sped. ¶ The kyng folowed fast, vpon the chace And there he fought agayn, with hym full sore Where many princes and lordes in that case Were slayn on bothe sydes, for euermore Of the round table, that longe had been afore Many worthy knightes, there were spended For Arthures loue, that might not been amended. ¶ The rounde table, at Wynchester beganne And there it ended, and there it hangeth yet For there were slayn, at this ylke battayl than The knightes all, that euer did at it sitte Of Britayne borne, saue Launcelot yode quyte And with the kyng, folowed on the chase
When Mordred fled to Cornwayle, for. yt case. The .lxxxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ The battayll of Camblayn, where Arthure preuayled and sewe Mordred, and Arthure had his deathes wounde, and howe Arthure died and was buried in the Blacke chapel of Glastenbury. WHer on the water, yt called was Camblayne Mordred abode, wt mightie hoste & stronge With Arthur fought, yt day of hie disdayne Full oft alone, euer as they met amonge But Arthure slewe Mordred, with his knyfe long That Calibourne was called, of suche vertue That whomsoeuer he smote therwith he slewe. ¶ But this Mordred, gaue Arthure deaths woūd For whiche he yode, his woundes to medifie Into thysle of Aualon, that stound And gaue Britayne, that was full solitarie To Constantyne, duke Cader sonne on hye His neuewe was, for Cader was his brother As well was knowen, they had but one mother. ¶ Kyng Arthure then, in Aualon so died Wher he was buried, in a chapell fayre Whiche nowe is made, and fully edified The death of kyng Ar¦thure. The mynster churche, this daye of great repayre Of Glastenbury, where nowe he hath his leyre But then it was called the blacke chapell Of our Lady, as chronycles can tell. ¶ Wher Geryn erle of Charters then abode
Besyde his toumbe, for whole deuocion Whether Launcelot delake, came as he rode Vpon the chace, with trompette and clarion And Geryn tolde hym, ther all vp and downe Howe Arthure was, there layde in sepulture For whiche with hym to byde, he hight full sure ¶ And so they abode, together in contemplacion And preastes were, aboute his toumbe alwaye In prayers greate, and holy meditacion With heare, the fleshe repressyng night and daye Three dayes eche weke, at breade and water aye They fasted & lyued in great sorowe and penaūce To soules helth and Goddes hye pleasaunce. ¶ But whē the quene Gwaynour had perceyued Howe Mordred was fled awaye then thryse Frō Yorke then yode, lest she were deceyued On fote by night, with a mayden full wise To Carlion to lyue, in Goddes seruice In the mynster of saynt Iuly, with Nonnes In prayers whole, and greate deuocions. ¶ This kyng Arthure, to whō none was cōdigne Through all the world, so was he then perelesse His life and soule, to God he dyd resigne The yere of Christ, as chronicles expresse Fyue hudreth and two, in sothefastnesse And fourtye also, accompted hole and clere At his endyng, without any were. The .lxxxv. Chapiter.
¶ The commendacion of Arthure, after the conceipte of the maker of this booke in fewe woordes, and also the compleynte and lamentacion of the sayde maker for the death of Arthure REigned he had then, sixe and twenty yere Moste redoubted in erth & moste famous The worthiest, and wysest without pere The hardyest man, and moste coragious In actes marciall, moste victorious In hym was neuer, a drope of cowardise Nor in his herte a poynte of couetyse. ¶ There was neuer prince, of giftes more liberal Of landes geuyng, ne of meate so plenteous Agayn his fooen, was moste imperiall And with his owne subiectes moste bounteous As a Lyon in felde, was moste douteous In house a lambe, of mercy euer replete And in iudgement euer eguall was and discrete. ¶ O good lorde God, suche treason & vnrightes Why suffred thy deuyne omnipotente That of theim had precience and forsightes That myght haue lette, that cursed violence Of Mordredes pryde, and all his insolence That noble kyng forpassyng conqueroure So to destroye, by treason and erroure. ¶ Fortune false, executryse of weerdes That euermore, so with thy subtilitee To all debates, thou strongly so enherdes That where men euer, would lyue in charitee Thou doest perturbe, with mutabilitee
Why stretchest thou so thy whele vpon Mordred Agayne his eme, to do so cruel dede ¶ Wherthrough that high, & noble conqueroure Without cause, shuld algates peryshed bee With so many kynges, and princes of honour In all the worlde, might none there better bee O fals Fallas, of Mordredes propertee Howe might yu so, in Gwynoure haue such might That she the death caused of so many knightes ¶ O false beautie, of Gwaynour predestinate What vnhappe made the, false to thy lorde So good a prince, and so fortunate Was neuer yet seen, as all men can recorde The whiche betwene you made so greate discorde That he and all his princes, wer there slayne Thy chaungeable hert, to venge he was so fayne ¶ But O Mordred tofore, so good a knight In greate manhode, proudly aye approued In whom thyne eme, the noblest prince of might Put all his trust, so greately he the loued What vnhappe, thy manly ghost hath moued Vnto so foule, and cruell hardynesse So many to be slayn, through thyn vnhappynes ¶ The highnesse of thyne honoure, had a fall When thou began, to do that iniurie That great falshode, thy prowesse did appall As soone as in the entred periurie By consequens, treason and traitourie Thy lorde and eme, and also thy kyng souerayn
So to betraye thy felowes eke certayne. The .lxxxvi. Chapter. ¶ Constantyne, kynge of Britayne, sonne of duke Cador of Cornewayle reygned foure yere. COnstantine his brother sōne was crowned Duke Cador, sōne of Cornwaile boūteous Afore had been, one of the table rounde In Arthures tyme, a knight was ful auenturous In trone royall was set, full precyous With Diademe on his hed sygnifyed At Troynouaunt, where no wight it replyed. ¶ Who then anone, with Saxons sore did fight And also with Mordred sonnes two Their capitaynes were, & put theim to the flyght That one fled to wynchester, and hyd hym so That other to London, with mykyll woo Where Constātyne theim bothe in churches slew At the autres, where they were hyd in mewe. ¶ This constantyne set all his lande in peace And reygned well foure yere, in greate noblesse And dyed then, buryed at Caroll no lesse Besyde Vterpendragon full expresse Arthures father, of greate worthynesse Whiche called is the stone, Hengles certayne Besyde Salysbury vpon the playne. ¶ Aurelius Conan, his cosyn fayre * Aurelius Conan, kīg of Bri∣tayne, reyg¦ned thre yere. The sea royall then helde, and ganne succede To hym, as nexte then of bloude and heyre
His vncle, and his sonnes two in dede In prysone slewe, to crowne hym selfe I rede That should haue been, kynges of all Britayne Afore hym so, yf they had not be slayne. ¶ He maynteyned aye ciuyle warre and debate Bytwene Cytees, Castelles, and countees Through al his realme, wt mysruled mē associate Whiche was greatly agaynst his royaltees And but thre yere, he reygned in dignitees As God so wolde, of his hye ordynaunce For wronge lawes, maketh shorte gouernaunce. ¶ Then Vortyper, succeded after hym Crowned was then, with all the royalte * Vortiper king of Bri¦tayne reyg¦ned. vii yere Agaynste whome, the Saxons stronge & grym Made full greate warre, destroyed the comente But in batayle, by greate humanyte He them ouercame, and set his lande in peace Vnto the tyme, that death made him decease. ¶ Seuen yere he reigned, and his people pleased And tender was he, of his comynalte Aboue all thyng, he sawe that they were eased The publyke cause, afore the syngulerte Preserued also, as it of ryght should be For cōmons fyrst, for prynces supportacion Were set, and nought been waste by dominacion ¶ Malgo nexte hym, to the crowne attayned Feyrest of other, that euer was in his daye Malgo kīg of Britayn reygned .xxii. yere. All tyranny, fully he restreyned And conquered holy, thryse of Orkenay
Irelonde, Denmarke, Iselonde, and eke Norway And Gotlande also, obeyed his royalte He was so wyse, full of fortunyte. Within his realme, was none so large ne strong Ne none that was, in feacte of warre so wise With swerde or axe, to fyght in the thronge Nor with his speare, that had suche exercyse For to assayle hys fooes, and them suppryse And defence also, he had great keenyng As any prynce euer had, or any kyng. ¶ But one defaute he had, of greate offence Of Sodome synne, he wolde it not amende He haunted it euer, withoute any defence Whiche greued god, and brought hym to an end Two and twenty yere, as dyd appende His lande he helde, in peace and vnyte Without suppryse of any enmytee. ¶ Carreys was then crowned kyng anone That loued well in all cytees debate * Carreys, kīg of Bri∣tayne, reyg¦ned thre yere. Betwene townes and citees euery chone And in suche wyse, maynteyned early and late Imagened of his wyll preordinate So muche in warre, that cytees and countrees Full comen were, of his malicyousnesse. ¶ For which Britons, made hym full mykel war And Saxons also, vnto kyng Gurmound sent Of affrycans, that then in Irelande were Who with his fleete to perfourme his entent To Britayne came, by all theyr hole assent But Saxons then, and he were full accorde
And Britons also, that had ciuyle discorde The .lxxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Gurmounde kynge of Affrycans, conquered Bry∣tayne, and departed it in seuen kyngdomes, to Saxons,  Englyshe, and went to wynne moo landes, & made Gur∣monde Chester. GƲrmoūde, yt then was mighty cōquerour King of Affricās, most dred in euery lond with helpe of Britōs & theyr great socour And of Englishe & Saxons had made thē bonde That dwelled that tyme in Northumberlande And other places in Britayne, vnder truage Rose with hym whole, agayne yt kynges outrage ¶ And fought with him, and put hym to yt flight To Circestre went, and strongly helde the towne But kyng Gurmound, yt towne then seeged right And gate it so, with myght & greate renowne Wherfore he fled to wales, for his proteccyon what came of him, myne authour nought exp̄ssed But with the death, I trowe he was oppressed ¶ But Gurmound then, Britaine hole destroied Bothe churche and towne, & eke the christen faith For he a Paynym was, and sore anoyded The chrystentye, as Gyldas wrote and seyth Through Logres yt whole was lost, wt paynī ley∣eth The prelates, all curates, and religyous With reliques all fledde awaye, full dolorous. ¶ And hid them then in hilles, woodes and caues
Tharchbishops, the one of London then And Tadyok of Yorke, that fled fro Knauis With sainctes bones, to wildernes fast ranne And hid hym there, and Gurmond sore did banne With crosse and bell, & with greate candill light Cursyng Thei cursed hym, as ferre as the churches might ¶ This kyng Gurmōd gaue all Northūberland Frome Trent North, yt then hight Berun & deyre Northfolke, Southfolke and Cābrydge shire at hāde Whiche Estāgle, Bede calleth in his storie And all fro Trent to Themis, for memorye Mers he called, all to English gaue That dwelled ther, for euer to reioyse and haue ¶ He gaue all these, to Englishe menne in deede Whiche came out of a lande, hight angulo In Germany that was, and with woodes I rede Replenished of wild bestes, buck and doo Sith that tyme hether, hathe been and yet is so Wherfore thei were, of it called Englishemenne All Logres & Northumberlande, Anglande then ¶ He gaue Sussex then to the Saxons Essex, Midelsed, with Surry whole and Kent But then Hamshire, Barkeshire, toures & townes And Shropshire whole, & Gloucester as thē apēt All these were called, Westsex as Bede ment Thus dalt he the lande, to theim therin dwellyng Whiche long afore, paied truage to the kyng ¶ Thē went he home, through Fraūce & it distroi∣ed And many other landes and regions
But Brytons then, to yt West parties sore anoyed Droue theim of Logres, with all religions To liue in peace, for dred of rebelions For after Carreis was fled, thei had no kyng To tyme Cadwan, was made by their chosyng ¶ So stode thei then, kyngles by twenty yere Howe yt Britons were kyn glesse xx. yere. Fro the yere of Christ, fiue hundred and four score And therto three, as clerly dooeth apere Ʋnto the yere after that Christ was bore Sixe hundreth and three, without any more When Cadwan was of Brytons, kyng elect And crouned was, to rule theim and protect ¶ O kyng Carreis, vnhappiest creature A lamen tacion of yt maker of this booke to yt lordes. That in Brytain reigned euer afore What infortune made the flee from thy cure What caused the to maintene so euermore Eyuile discord within thy realme so sore That might haue reigned, ouer many a lande Through whiche, thyne owne is lost I vnderstād ¶ Thou vnderstandest full litill theuangilye That euery realme, within it selfe deuide Shall desolate bee made, as clerkes tell Mat▪ xii. And euery hous on other, shall fall and slyde Thy wycked will, that nowe is knowen wyde That suffred so debate, bytwyne lorde and lorde Bytwyne citees and landes, cyuyle discord ¶ The cause was of thy disheriteson And of thy realmes desolacion That with lawe and peaceble constitucion
Might haue been saued, with greate consolacion And the churche preserued, in greate prosperacion The Christen faith, in thy lande distroyed That with the peace, shuld haue be kept vnnoyed ¶ O woful Carreis, thyne heires & thy Brytons Their children all, the widdowes and their wifes The commonalte in citees and in townes The churche also may bāne, full sore those striues By thy supporte, that rest so many their liues Wher lawe and peace, if thou had well conserued All had been saued, with thanke of god deserued ¶ Defaute of lawe, was cause of this mischiefes Wronges sustened, by maistry and by might And peace layed downe, that should haue been the chief For whiche debate folowed and vnright Wherfore vnto a prince accordeth right To kepe the peace, with al tranquillite Within his realme, to saue his royalte ¶ What is a kyng, without lawe and peace Within his realme sufficiently conserued The poorest of his realme, maye so encrease By iniury and force, to bee preferred Till he his kyng, with strength haue ouerterued And sette hym self in royall maieste If that he bee, in suche a ieopardie ¶ O ye lordes and princes of high astate The coū¦cel of the maker to duke Ri∣chard of Yorke. Kepe well the lawe and peace in gouernaunce Lest your subiectes defoule you and depreciate Whiche been as able, with wrongfull gouernaūce
To reigne as ye, and haue as greate puysaunce If peace and lawe been voyed, and vnytee The floures are lost, of all your souerentee ¶ O worthy prince, O duke of Yorke I meane Discendid downe of highest bloodde royall Se to suche ryotes, that none sustene And specially, that alyens none at all Inhabite not with power, greate ne small That maye this lande, ought trouble or ouer ride For twies it was so wonne, with muche pride ¶ Through Vortiger, by Engist and Horsus Whome he receiued, whiche after hym distroyed And with his helpe full false and noyous The worthy bloodde of Brytain, sore anoyed At the Caroll murdred, and all accloyed And nowe again, when Carreis was exiled The kyng Gurmōd, & the Saxons hym beguiled ¶ For Saxons, Peightes, and Englishemenne Reigned then through all the Logres lande Deuided in seuen realmes fully then Westser Sussex, and Kente I vnderstande Estser and Mers, Estangle, & Northumberlande That droue Brytons, into the West countre To Walis and Cornwaile, fro towne and citee The .lxxxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Ethelbert kyng of Saxons. Hils Ethelberte was reignyng kyng of Kēt W Sainct Austin sēt by Gregory of R. bisshop Landed in Tenet, with clerkes of his assēt
And many monkes, to teache the faith I hope That clothed were, echeone vnder ablacke cope Whiche in procession, with crosse and belles came The latinies syngyng in Iesus his name ¶ In the yere of Christ his incarnacion Fiue hundreth foure score and sixtene Kyng Ethelbert, had in his dominacion All Kent throughout, with greate ioy as was seen Were baptized then, in holy water clene To whome Gregory sent Mellito and Iusto With other clerkes, and doctours many mo ¶ Gregory hym made, archebishop of Caūterbu∣ry Of all Englande, hiest then primate And had the paule with hyest legacye By Gregorye, sent to hym and ordinate Fro London then, thus was that tyme translate To Caunterbury, the sea Metropolitan And London sette, as for his suffrigan. ¶ Saynt Augustyne then, wt helpe of Ethelbert Saynt Augustyns made, & Christes churche also That Christes churche hight, as it was aduerte And sacred so by hym, and halowed tho For the chiefe sea, Metropolitan so Of all Englande, by Gregory ordinate And saynt Augustyne, of all Englande primate. ¶ Then Augustyne made Peter a clerke deuoute Of saynt Augustynes thabbot religious And made Mellito, as Bede clerly hath note Of London then byshoppe full vertuous
A clarke that was then beneuolus Who then conuerted, of Essex the kyng Sebert And all his lande, baptized with holy herte ¶ Kyng Ethelbert, sainct Poules edefied And kyng Sebert Westminster founded Mellito theim both halowed and edefied Austyn then, made clerke full wel grounded Iust o that hight, of Rochester full well bounded The bishop then to preache, and helpe Austyn And to baptise the folke by his doctrine ¶ Saint Austyn set ful nere to Walis his seant That prelates all, bishops and doctours wise Of Brytons bloodde, thither might well atteine To make all rest and loue in humble wise Through all yt churche and lande, by good auice To whiche sean came, tharchbishop of Brytain And bishops fiue, with doctours wise certain ¶ In whiche Austyn syttyng as president Archbishop and also the high primate Required and prayed, with all his whole entent As he that was of England high prelate By Gregory sacred and ordinate Of fraterne loue and due obedience To helpe hym furth, with all their diligence ¶ To conuerte and to teache the Saxons all The Englishe also, in Christen feith and trewe And baptize theim, through Brytain ouer all The pasche to kepe, as Roome did then full dewe To whiche Brytons aunswered, yt they not knewe
That he had suche estate, in all Britayn For they had three archebyshops to obeyn. ¶ Of Cairlyon, London and Yorke citee By byshops of Rome graūted to vs & ordinate Full long afore ye had suche dignitee Wherfore we will obeye, no newe primate And specially none Englyshe newe prelate For Englyshemen, and Saxons haue vs noyed And haue our lande, and all our kyn destroyed ¶ And Pasche we wyll holde forth as we afore And holy fathers, vnto this daye haue vsed We wyll not chaunge, for youre doctrine ne lore There shall no newe, emong vs been abused As saynt Iohn did, we haue it not refused That on Christes bozome, saw his great priuetees So will we vse, and none other solempnitees. ¶ S. Austyne saied, sith ye nowe thus forsake The seed of God, to sowe by your doctryne The Christen fayth, for to encrease and make By ryghtfull dome of God, ye muste enclyne Vnder theyr handes, that fro the fayth declyne The cruel death to suffer, for hie vengeaunce Sith ye refuse Christes wyll and ordinaunce ¶ This tyme, eche kyng warred on others lande Of seuen kynges, of Saxones nacion And of Englyshe with Peightes I vnderstand And Britons also, did great aduersacion But Ethelfryde of Englyshe gouernacion Of Northumberlande kyng, and Panyme cruell
Fought with Aydan, the kyng of Scottes fell. The .lxxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kynge Ethelfryde of Northumberlande had ser∣uyce of Aydan kyng of Scottes, the yere of Christ .vi. hundreth and three, after saynt Bede. AT Degfastan, wher Ethelfryde preuayled And sette Aydan, in his subiection To Bedes dayes, ye Scottes nomore assay∣led Homage of the Scottes. Englande, but aye obeyed his ediccion And was his man, without contradiccion And held of hym, his lande as was accorde By many yeres, thens forth nomore discorde. ¶ This battayl was, of Christes incarnacion Syxe hundreth yere & three, as sayth saynt Bede And of his reygne, by Bedes computacion The eleuenth yere it was then, as I rede That twenty yere and .iiii. reygned there in dede In all his tyme, to whom the Peightes obeyed And Iryshe also, and nomore hym disobeyed. ¶ In that same yere, of Christes incarnacion The Britons all, did sette theyr parliamente At Cairlion, by good informacion Cairlegeocestre hight, as some men ment That Westchester is become of entente Where they did chose, Cadwan vnto there kyng Theim to defende, fro theyr fooes warryng. The .xc. Chapiter.
¶ Cadwan kynge of Britayne, that firste was prince of Northwales. This Cadwan was crowned in the yere of Christ syxe hundreth and thre, and after Bede by. xiii yere reigned ouer the Britons, in the west parties of all Wales and Cornwayll. THis kyng Cadwan, at wynchester crownd Was made ye kyng, of Britayne & Brytōs Agayn whom kyng Ethelfrede, yt stound Warred full sore, all the regions Where Brytons were, so did he all religions Who westchester sieged, with violence Wher Brochewall therle, made greate defence. ¶ But there he slewe, Brochewall in batayll And gatte the towne of westchester, in that tyde Where .xii. C. monkes, without fayle A murder of Mōkes. He slewe downe, right a lytle there besyde That came to praye for peace, without pride Fro Banger there, in hole procession That marters wer there, by his oppression. ¶ Whō kyng Cadwan, wt mighty hoste & strōge Met in felde, full ready for to fight But both theyr frendes treated, so theim emong That good accorde betwene thē, was made righte Duryng theyr lyues, well kepte as they hight With all frendshippe, great loue and vnytee That both theyr realmes, stoode in great dignitee ¶ But Ethelfrides wyfe, with chylde farre gone Violently exiled and repudiate And wedded another, full wrongfully anone Wherfore she went, to recouer his estate
To kyng Cadwan, full sycke and desolate Whom he receyued, with noble reuerence And sory was, for her wofull offence. ¶ But thē his wife, as great was gone wt childe For whiche he kept hir in house to abyde To tyme he might, hym haue reconsyled Her to receyue, and set the other on syde But in the meane tyme, they might no lēger abide Both queenes delyuered, wer of sonnes two That one Edwyn, that other hight Cadwallo. ¶ The chylder two, together noryshed were In tender age, to tyme that they were men At whiche tyme, there rose full cruell warre Betwene Redwald, kyng of Estangle then And Ethelfride, that fought as folke did kenne Wher Ethelfryde on Idell, was downe slayne And Redwald the feld, ther had with payn. ¶ Kyng Cadwan then, out of this worlde so died Thesame yere, so dyd Austyne also And Laurens made fully, and glorifyed Archebyshop of Caunterbury tho And Ethelbert of Kent, to heauen dyd go Thus chaunged they theyr habitacion Some to payne, and some to saluacion. ¶ Cadwall then, the sonne of kyng Cadwan Cadwall lxi. yeres. reigned After his father had reigned .xiii. yere Was crowned at Westchester as a man Of Britons all, as clerely dyd appeare The yere of Christ .vi. C. and .xvi. cleare
That reygned well, full syxtye yere and one Aboue all kynges, as souerayne of echeone. ¶ But kyng Edwyn then, of Northumberlande The sonne and heyre, vnto kyng Ethelfryde Was crowned kyng at Yorke, I vnderstande For whiche, the kyng Cadwall hym defyed And made hym warre, with Britons fortifyed And sente hym worde, no crowne for to were And elles he should vnder it, his hed of shere Which Edwyn then accompted, at ryght nought But kepte estate full royall, and condigne with crowne of gold, at yorke ful freshly wrought Elfrydes sonnes, of his wronge wyfe vndigne Goten and borne, he felly dyd repugne Hym dyd exyle, in Scotlande dyd abyde For his mother was exyled, by Ethelfryde. ¶ And Ethelfryde hym gate, on his wrong wyfe And had exyled, his owne wyfe truely wed Edwyns mother, as knowen was full ryfe Full great wt chylde, with hym, as Bede hath red Then made he welles, in dyuerse countrees spred By the hye wayes, in cuppes of copper clene For trauelyng folke, faste chayned as it was sene ¶ And euery daye, he rode withouten reste With trompettes lowde, afore him where he rode That euery wyght, myght suerly in hym truste That he wolde then, of his ryghtwyshode Do euery man ryght, without more abode All complayntes here, & as lawe wolde reforme
So all his lyfe to rule, he did confirme. ¶ He sente vnto Ethilbalde, kyng of kent His syster for to haue, and wed her to wyfe Dame Ethelburge, that was full fayre and gent But Ethelbalde, then sent hym worde by lyfe It was not good, but lykely to make stryfe That a christē woman, to a Paynim shuld be wed And elles he sayde, his message had be sped. ¶ Edwyne then sent his message so agayne He wolde well, she kepte her owne creaunce And bade hym sende, with her a chapelayne And clerkes wyse, without any varyaunce To kepe her in her fayth, and in all suraunce And yf her fayth be better then is myne When it is knowen, I wyll therto enclyne. ¶ Kyng Ethelbald, her sent with Paulyne That sacred was byshop of Yorke that tyme By Iusto archbyshop, that was full fyne Of Caunterbury to kepe her true Bapteme And her beleue, that none her fethers lyme With heresye, to foule his owne creaunce Thus wedded he her, at Yorke in all suraunce. ¶ The yere of our Lorde .vi. hundreth & .xx. tho And fyue therto, as Bede hath clerely writen And in the yere .vi. hundreth and twenty so And syxe therto, kyng Edwyn as is weten To westsex went, where batayle sore was smyten Betwene hym, and byshop Quychelyne King Kinigils sonne, of westsex then so fyne.
¶ Where then he slewe, this manly Quichelyne For cause he had, compassyd his death afore By pryuey wyse, as he coulde ymagyne He put the lande then vnder trybute sore And Kynygell, the kyng of westsex thore Became his man, and helde of hym his lande At his byddyng to ryde with hym, and stande. The .xci. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Cadwall fled, and was dryuen from his realme by kynge Edwyn, and helde it in subieccion, and was bapty∣zed by saynt Pawlyn archbyshop of Yorke. KYng Cadwallo then, of all Brytons The yere of Chryste .vi. C. and eyghtene By wronge councell, on Edwyns regions Great warres made, but Edwyn then full kene Faught with hym there, full sore as it was sene And to the flyght hym droue, out of the felde All Britayne lande he conquered so, and helde ¶ Cadwallo fled, vnto lytell Britayne And dwelled there, in heuynesse and in payne By dyuers yeres, and durste not come agayne The subie¦cion of the Scottes. For power none he myght, not yet obteyne The Britaynes durste hym not obeyne For kyng Edwyn, had hole dominacyon Of theim and Saxons, & of the Scottyshe naciō ¶ And in the yere of Chryste .vi. C .xx. and .vi. Edwyns doughter that named was Eufled At Yorke was borne, to whome men dyd complex Maydens twelue, to take the chrystenhede
That lordes doughters wer, of great worthihed Whiche saynt Paulyn archbyshop dyd baptyse In Yorke mynster, in full holy wyse. ¶ And in the yere of Chryste .vi. C .xx. & seuen The chrysten lawe, disputed amonge his lordes Was founde beste, to wynne the blysse of heuen Wherfore Edwyn, by good and hole concordes Both of his comons, and also of his lordes With all his realme, baptime toke as goddes mē Of saint Paulin, that archbishop was then ¶ In that same yere, byshoppe Honorius To Paulyn sent, the palle of dignyte The kyng Edwin, and this ylke Paulins Yorke mynster made newe, of greate beaute And comons all, full well so baptized he In Northumberlande, in Swale, Owse, & Trent And other ryuers in countrees, where he went. ¶ By thyrty dayes, and sixe labored he thus And then he came, to Lyncolne with Edwyn Where he conuerted Blecca, as Bede sayth to vs The Mayre, and all the cōmons by his doctryne And Lyndsey hole, vnto the fayth deuyne And made the mynstre of Lincolne, at his costage Of kyng Edwyn, and also the colage. ¶ And in the yere .vi. hundreth and thyrty moo Iusto dyed, to whome Honoure dyd succede Of Caunterbury, archbishop made was tho Whome saint Paulin, as wryten hath sent Bede Dyd sacre then at Lyncolne, so in dede
In the mynster that he and Edwyn founde The kynges colage, named that ylke stounde. ¶ And in the yere .vi. hundreth thyrty and two Kynge Edwyne, by holy doctryne, Of saynt Felyx, an holye preste that was tho And preachyng of the holy archbyshop Paulyn Of Chrystes worde, and verteous discyplyne Conuerted Edordwolde, of Estangle the kyng And all the realme, where Felyx was dwellyng ¶ At Dōmok then, was Felyx fyrste byshop Of Estangle, and taught the chrysten fayth That is full hye, in heauen I hope But then the kyng Edwyn, as Bede sayth Had made the people stable in the chrysten layth To Yorke went home, with hym also Paulyn To rule the lande, after the lawe deuyne. The .xcii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Cadwall and Penda slewe kyng Edwyn, and reig∣ned ouer Brytons agayne. BVt in the yere .vi. hundreth thyrty & thre Kyng Cadwall, of Britaine that had been With king Penda, of Merces great coū∣tre Assembled stronge, with hostes fell and kene And Northumberlande brent, as then was sene And slewe both wyfe, and chylde olde and yinge Prestes and clerkes, they spared there no thyng. The churches all, they brente and foule destroied Whome Edwyn met, with power that he might
At Hatfelde towne, in herte full sore anoyed All redy so, in batayle for to fyght within yorkeshyre, where Edwin was slaine right And all his realme, was wasted and subuerte By kyng Penda, that a Paynym was peruerte. ¶ The same yere then, for cause of warre & stryfe Saint Paulyn went to Kent there to dwell With Ethelburge, that was kyng Edwyns wyfe That welcome were, as Bede surely doth tell At Rochester, as that tyme befell Saint Paulyn was, vnto the sea translate And byshop therof, then denominate. ¶ Kyng Cadwall reygned full hole agayne In Britayne lande, as prynce without pere Aboue Englyshe, as lorde souerayne Ouer Saxons, Scottes, & peightes, clere Subiecctō of Scottes And Englyshe also, as clere did appere And Eufryde then, and Osdryk paynimes fell Northumberlande then helde, as Bede doth tell ¶ Whome Cadwall and Penda, felly slewe From tyme they two, had reygned but a yere Oswolde theyr cosyn, as knowen was full trewe That in Scotlande noryshed was full clere To Englande came, with mighty greate power And gate his ryght, and all his herytage With helpe and socoure, of his Baronage The .xciii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Oswolde kynge of Englande reygned ouer Bry∣tons, Scottes, and Peightes, Iryshe, and ouer all Logres and Cambre.
THis kyng Oswolde, in Englāde gan suc∣cede Oswold. The yere of Christ, vi .c. was thē clere Thirty and fiue, replete of all manhed And afterwarde, full clerely did apere As to suche a prince, of nature should affere That Yorke minster, repaired then all newe Of lyme and stone as Christen prince and trewe ¶ Who for ayde then, into Scotlande sent An holy monke he was and religious And bishop sacred, after Christes entent In Christes doctrine, he was full laborous Whome for teachyng and preachyng vertuous He made hym bishop of all Northumberlande Whose sea was chief then, at the holy Isse lande ¶ In that same yere, Oswold to Westsex rode For Christ his loue, at prayer of sainct Biryne Wher thei the kyng Kynygill, of paynymhode Baptized, and made a Christen manne full fyne And sette Westsex vnder tribute syne For to bee payed to hym and his heires Perpetually by yere, at certeine feires ¶ Sainct Biryne bishop, thei made furth right Of all Westsex, at Dorchester was his sea Frome Oxenforde, but litill waye to sight Kyng Oswold wedded Beblam his wife to bee Kyng Kynygilles doughter, full faire to see And on hir he gatte, a soonne hight Cidilwold In Deyre reigned, vnder his father Oswold ¶ And in the yere sixe hundrith thyrty and sixe
Kyng Penda sleugh Ordewold of Estanglande In bataile strong, and mighty gan to vexe That wastid sore about hym euery lande As tyraunt fell, wher he the Christen fonde He sleugh theim downe, and cruelly ouer ran Sparyng nother wife, childe, ne manne ¶ The kyng Oswold, so mighty was in deede That ouer Scottes, Peightes, and Brytaines Irish, Westsex, and English I rede And ouer Logres and all the Saxons None so mighty aboue all regions As Flores and Bede hath wrytten thus Whose wrytynges are full vertuous ¶ As he at meate, did sitte vpon a daye At Bamburgh, a palmer came to his gate Asked some good, for Christ his loue alwaye To whome he sent his dishe of syluer plate For cause he had not els for his astate The poore manne to refresh and comforte Sainct Bede of hym, thus clerely dooeth reporte ¶ An holy manne, within his hermitage Desired sore in his meditacion If any better, of any maner age Wer in the lande of any nacion To whome was said by reuelacion That kyng Oswold, more holy was of life Notwithstandyng, he had weddid a wife The .xciiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe an hermite proued sainct Oswold his wife at
his desire by biddyng of sainct Oswold WHerfore he came, vnto the kyng Oswold And prayed hym, he might knowe his life And of his reuelacion then hym told Wherfore he toke to hym, his ryng by life And bade hym saye, the quene that was his wife To dooe with hym, on nightes twoo or three As she was wonte, at home to dooe with me ¶ This token had he, he satte with hir at meate His meate & drynke, when he would haue the best But water and brede, he might none other gette And then at night, she leide hym for to rest Right with hir self, so well hir self she trest And when he was, ought sette to dooe amisse In water he was cast, his fleshe to keele and lisse ¶ But when the daye came, he was full fain And of the quene, full soone he toke his leue Vnto the kyng, he went anone again And prayed hym fast, he might passe home at eue For of his life, he would no more preue Whiche more holy, was one daye and night Then all his life, he euer been might ¶ But Cadwall the kyng of Brytons sent The kyng Penda, to warre on kyng Oswold Whome Oswold mette, with greate assemblemēd In battaile strong, at Heuenfeld as God would Wher people fled, with people manyfold To kyng Cadwall, who with Penda anone Assembled an hoost, on Oswold for to gon
¶ Oswold thei mette, on Marfeld that tyde Wher he was slain the yere of Christ was than Sixe hundred whole, and fourty and twoo beside His hedde and armes, as Bede the holy manne In his chronicle hath write, who so rede it can Vpon a tre was hong many a daye That rotted not, nor in this world neuer maye ¶ Oswy then in all Northumberlande The croune had, and all the royalte Oswy kyng of Northū∣berlande With Cadwallo he hight, allwaye to stande As souereigne lorde of Bryton, then was he And ouer all other, had then the mageste But this Oswy made Humwald for to kyll The kyng Oswyn, that feloe was hym tyll ¶ For cause he rose, on hym with multitude And nought for thy, when thei together mette All his people of full greate fortitude He withdrewe then, and with Humwald sette In pryue wise, without any lette But false Humwald, priuely hym slewe On whome he trusted, and trowed had bee trewe ¶ Quene Eufled that was kyng Oswys wife Kyng Edwyn his doughter full of goodnesse For Oswyns soule, a minster in hir life Made at Tynmouth, and for Oswy causeles That hym so bee slain, and killed helpeles For she was kyn to Oswy and Oswyn As Bede in chronicle dooeth determyn ¶ This Oswyn nowe is canonized in shryne
Saynt Oswyn called, at Tynmouth gloriously But kyng Oswy, to Cadwall did enclyne And Oswalde his hed, and arme had leue to burye Whiche he betoke to quene Bebla in hye Who closed theim in siluer, fayre and clene And theim betooke, to saynt Aydan I wene. ¶ This kyng Cadwall, his feast at Londō made To hym all kynges, as souerayne lorde obeyed Kynge Cadwal Saue kyng Oswy, at home that tyme abade For whiche he trowed, that he hym disobeyed Wherfore he sent to Penda, and hym prayed To warre on Oswy, without delaye And make hym, to his souerayne lorde obey. ¶ In which meane tyme, this Penda slewe Anne Of Estangle, that long had ben kyng A Christen prince, and a full manly manne And so came on kyng Oswy fast rydyng Wher on the felde, they met sore fyghtynge Whom Oswy slewe, and .xxx. dukes also That with hym came, and .xxx. M. moo. The .xcv. Chapiter. ¶ In the yere of oure lorde God .vi. hundreth and. v. Pen∣da slewe the kyng of Escangles, and the yere of our Lord God .vi. hundreth and .vi. Oswyne slewe Penda kynge of Marchelande, and the foresayde kynge Oswyne con∣discended to holde and kepe his Easter accordyng to the vse of Roome and Caunterburye, the yere of oure Lorde vi. hūdreth and .lxiii. whiche before was celebrated accor∣dyng to the Iudeicall custome.
THose battayls two, after thincarnacion Syxe hundreth yere, fyfty wer & also fyue In the yere after, by computacion, That kyng Oswy, made Penda kyng belyue Of Marces lande, and to conuerte his lyue By teachyng of Dwyma, made byshop thare And all his lande, by vertue of his lare. ¶ Kyng Oswy made houses .xii. of religion Sixe in Deyry, and sixe in Berū to bee With his doughter Elflede for deuocion Whom he auowed, in clene virginitee To sacre so, and lyue in chastitee For his triumphe, and for his victorie Of kyng Penda, and his panymerye. ¶ The kyng Oswy, of Christes incarnacion The yere .vi. C .lx. and also three Had all the clerkes, of his dominacion With many other clerkes, of farre countree For to dispute the Pasche, when it should bee The whiche afore, was held diuersly One vse at Yorke, another at Caunterbury ¶ But this seynt Oswy, then helde it at Whitby Where then saynt Hilde, in all deuinitee Was hole instructe, amonge all the clergie Where Wilfride, with Egilbert and she Concluded all the clerkes of the countree And fro thens forth, thei helde it in certeyne As Caunterbury vsed, and did obeyne ¶ This kyng Oswyn, then died in the yere
Sixe hundreth hole, sixti and also ten At Whytby then, wher Hild was abbas clere At Streyneshalgh, named was so then Emonge the couente, of this holy woman And in Hildes schole .vi. byshops wer enfourmed In holy wryte, as she theim had confourmed. ¶ These were the names of the byshoppes right Bosa, Oskford, Etla and also Tatfryde Iohn of Beuerley the fyfte, that then so hight The sixte then, was the holy man Wilfryde All in the lawe of Christ enfourmed that tyde With this virgyne clene, of royall discent Of kyng Edwyn and Oswalde bloode full gent. ¶ Whiche virgyne clene, died so in the yere Of Christ .vi. C. and foure score also About whiche tyme, saynt Awdry y• virgyne clere At Hely died, emonge hir floures tho Of holy virgyns, and wydowes also Whiche she had gathered, & kept in cloyster clene Whyle she there was thabbasse, as was sene. ¶ Who wyfe was twyse, in westsex first espoused The secounde tyme, vnto the kyng Egfryde Of Northūberlande, her maydenhed euer housed I dar well saye, it was neuer set asyde There might no man, hir herte frō Christe deuide So hole it was sette vnto chastitee Inuiolate she kepte her virginitee. ¶ For good ne gold nor any great rychesse With her housebandes to been deuirginate
Hetherto might neuer eschaunge her sekirnesse So sad it was, it was neuer violate But euer clene, as in her fyrst estate By her housbādes, for ought they could her hight But virgyne died, through grace of God almight ¶ Thus Awdry then, frō Egfride was deuorced For cause, she would not lese hir maydenhede To tyme hir soule, wer lowsed and vncursed In hely abode, where then she made in dede An house of Nunnes, as writtē hath saynt Bede To serue the God, aboue celestiall In prayers good, and matens nocturnall. ¶ Wylfride from Yorke, exiled and expelled The kyng of Sussex, and all his lande Conuerte all hole, and mawmetrye downe felled Wher, so three yere afore, I vnderstande Suche vengeaunce reigned, in that kynges land That ther grewe no grasse, nor no maner of corne The people died, for hunger all for lorne. ¶ And that same daye, when they were conuerte The grasse and corne, that welked were afore By three yere passed, waxed grene and gan reuert Through prayer of Wylfryde, yt prayed therfore For whiche the kyng, made hym bishoppe thore That fyue yere hole, there so occupyed The byshopyes cure, and Christes fayth edefied. ¶ And in the yere .vi. hundreth .lxxx. and fyue Kyng Egfride rode with hoste into Scotlande And warred on pightes & Scottes wt mekel striue
Whō then they sewe, as Bede could vnderstande With many worthy knightes, of Northūberland At Nettansmore, in an hye mynstre buryed A worthy place, in Scotlande edified. ¶ Eche kyng of seuen, on other warred sore But kyng Cadwas, that then was souerayn lorde Accorded theim, as myster was ay where By his good rule, he made euer good accorde Wher any strife or warre was, and discorde And all the realines, in Britayn hole baptized And bishoppes in theim sette, and autorised. ¶ Kyng Ethelride of Mors, and quene Ostride His wyfe, doughter of Oswy Berdnaye Buried Oswalde, with myracles glorified Where many yere, full styll there after he laye Vnto the tyme the suster, as bookes saye Of kyng Edward thelder, hym translate To Gloucester abbey, to his estate. ¶ Cadwallo kyng of Britons, in the yere Of Christe goddes sonne .vi. C. sixty and sixtene So died awaye, who reigned had full clere Full sixty yere and one, as well was sene That souerayne lorde, of all Britayn had been After the decease, of the good kyng Edwyn And made all seuen kynges, to hym enclyne. ¶ He made his ymage, of laton full clene In whiche he put his body balsomate Vpon an horse of laton, fayre to sene With a sweorde in hande, crowned like his estate
Full hye sette vp, to sight on Ludgate His battayles all, and his greate victorie Aboute hym wrought, was made for memorye The .xcvi. Chapiter. ¶ Cadwalader kyng of Brytayn, and lorde of all .vii. kynges in Britayne. CAdwaladrus, after hym gan succede Cadwala∣der kyng. Both young and fayre, in florishyng iuuēt That Cadwalader was called as I rede Who of Britayn, had all the souerayntee Of Englyshe and Saxons, in eche countree Of Pyghtes, Iryshe & Scottes his vnder regēce Subierciō of yt Scot∣tes. As souerayne lorde, and moste of excellence. ¶ Kentwyne the kyng, of westsexe then died The yere of Christ sixe hundreth .lxxx. and sixe The mekill warre, had made and fortifyed Vpon Britons, and felly did hym wexe So combrous he was and cruell gan to wexe Whose realme the kyng Cadwalader conquered And Sussex also, and slewe y• kynge wt his swerde ¶ In whiche yere then, Gatta by shop died Whose sea was then, at Hexham vpon tyne That byshop was, of Yorke notified For Wilfryde was, hold out with mekyll pyne And exiled from his benefice that tyme From Yorke that tyme, by the kynge Alfride Of Northumberland, whose cure Gatta occupied ¶ After whose decease then Iohn of Beuerlay
Was made byshop of Yorke, and had the sea Then the Cathedrall at Hexham so alwaye For wylfryde was in Sussex farre countre But then certayne Alfryde of cruelte Cōmaunded Iohn, to vexe and noye wylfryde But tender loue, they helde on eyther syde The .xcvii. Chapiter. ¶ How Cadwalader fel in greate impotencye, that he might not gouerne the lande, wherfore in defaute of lawe & peace fell Barons warre and ciuyle discorde in all the realmes. THe kyng Cadwaladre beyng impotent So euery daye, & helde no gouernaunce Nether lawe ne peace wtin his regiment Wherfore Britons, dred none ordynaunce But eche one toke on other great vengeaunce Fro that time forth, eche countre on other warred And euery cytee agaynste other marred. ¶ Thus in defauee of lawe and peace conserued Cōmon profyte, was wasted and deuoured Percyall profyte, was sped and obserued And Venus also, was cōmonly honoured For lechery and aduoutry, was moste adoured Amonge them was cōmon, as the carte waye Ryot, robbery, oppressyon, nyght and daye Of which came then, manslaughter, & homicide And cyuyle stryfe, with sore contencyons Through Britons land, euery where, on eche side With batayles greate, and fell discencions
As Bede wryteth amonge his mencyons They dred nother the kyng, ne god almyght Wherfore he sent vengeaunce on them full ryght That through the warre, ye tylth was all destroied * A greate plage. Churches all, and husbandrye vnoccupyed That with hunger, the people were sore anoyed That people great, in stretes and feldes dyed And muche folke, as Bede hath specifyed The fayth of Chryste, for hunger then forsoke And drowned thē selues, so sore ye payne thē toke. ¶ Their catell dyed, for faute of fode eche daye Without meate, or any sustenaunce In townes and feldes, and the cōmon waye Through which their enfecte, was wt that chaūce That multitude of folke, in greate substaunce On hepys laye, full lyke vnto mountaynes That horryble was of sight, aboue the playns. Vnburyed hole, withoute Sacrament By pestylence also, many one dyed Some woode, some raynage went And some were in lytargie implyed An other some, with batayle mortifyed With murther also, amonge themselues dispent Full many were, that none an other lament. Through which defautes, not amēded nor correct The bishoppes fled, the prestees & clerkes anoyed To Walys went, there to be protecte In cauys hyd, accombred and accloyed Full heuely deseased, and full greatly anoyed
With saynctes bones, and relyques many one Morning full sore, and makyng there their mone ¶ Then fel a yere of pardone, and of grace At Rome, where the kyng Cadwaladrus All desolate, and sory for that case In pylgrymage thyther, purposed thus With herte deuoute, and wyll beneuelous With his Brytons together consociate Of worthy bloude so borne and generate. ¶ To haue pardone, and playne remissyon Of theyr trespasse, synnes, and neglygence That they put nought, reddour ne punissyon By lawe, payne, and discrete prouidence On trespassours, that dyd violence Through which their land, & they were so mische∣ued That wt law kept, might wel haue bene acheued To Rome they came, of whom ye bishop was glad Sergio that hyght, who them graunt remissyon Of all their synnes, with herte and wyll glad Saue onely then, of their omissyon And neglygence, of hole punissyon That they put nought vpon the trespassoures Of cōmon people, that were destroyours Whiche was not in his power to relese Without amendes made, and restitucyon To common weale, and theyr due eucrease As they were hurte, in faute of due punissyon He charged them, for theyr playne remissyon The cōmonte to supporte and amende
Of as te good, as they were so offende. In ye meane whyle, whyls they at Rome so were The Saxons hole, and Englyshe consociate Toke all theyr lande, liuelod, and other gere To Saxon they sente ambassyate To Angulo, to be assocyate With many mo of theyr countree men For Britons all, at Rome were bidyng then ¶ And bad them come in haste, and tary nought For theyr owne helpe, and for their waryson The whiche they dyd, and hither fast they sought The Brytons lande, they toke in possessyon And kepte it forth, with many a garyson For Brytons came no more therto agayne For king Cadwallader, thē dyed at Rome certain His Brytous also dyed homewarde by the waye In dyuerse places, and some went to Britayne Other some to Fraunce, there to abyde for aye And some also to Normandy, and to Spayne That to theyr owne, they came no more agayne But Saxons hole, and Englyshe it occupyed Euer more after, and strongly edifyed. ¶ Some chroniclers saye, he had by visyon No more to come into Britayne the more But to the bishop of Rome with great contricion Confesse hym, and take his penaunce thore And absolucyon for his synnes sore And howe ye bishop of Rome buryed him royally And on his tombe, set his Epitaphye
¶ In laten letters, in marble stone well graue Declared hole his conuersacyon Forsakyng all the worlde, heuen to haue And howe ye byshop of Rome, by his confyrmaciō Called hym Peter, whome Bede by relacyon Calleth a saynt in blysse, hole disposed Fro whiche he may in no wyse be deposed. ¶ This Cadwalader of Britons was ye kyng That reygned full, as souereygne lorde .xii. yere And in the yere .vi. hundreth and nynte beyng And dyed so, as sayeth the chronyclere That of westsex, then had be kyng two yere Of whome walshemen holden opinyon Of Englande yet to haue the reuercyon ¶ When yt his bones be brought fro rome again Amonge them all, haue suche a prophecye And Englande then, efte synce called Britayne Thus stande they yet, in suche fonde matesye In truste of whiche vayne fantasye They haue full ofte, Englande sore anoyed And yet they wyll proue, yf it maye be destroyed. The .xcviii. Chapiter. ¶ The lamentacyon of the maker of this booke, and his coun¦sayle to my Lorde of Yorke, for good rule in the realme of Englande. O Gracyous lorde, O very heyre in ryght Of great Britayne, enclosed with a sea O very heyre of Logres, ye now England hyght Of wales also, of scotland, which all thre
Britayne so hyght, of olde antiquyte O very heyre of Portyngale and Spayne Whiche castell is, and Lyons soth to sayne. ¶ O very heyre, of Fraunce and Normandye Of Guyan, Peytowe, Bayen, Man, & Angeoy Membrys of Fraunce, of olde warre openly O very heyre of Ierusalem, and Surry All this meane, I by you that should enioye Ye or your heyres, my lorde of Yorke certayne That wrongefully haue bene holde out to seyne ¶ But O good lorde, take hede of this mischieue Howe Cadwaladore, not kepyng lawe ne peace Sufferyng debates, and cōmon warrys acheue And fully reygne, and put hym nought in preace By lawe nor myght, to make it for to cease For whiche there fell so great diuisyon That he was put vnto deheryteson. ¶ Not he alone, but all his nacyon Deuolued were, and from theyr ryght expelled Full fayne to flee, with greate lamentacyon From greate Britayne, in which they had excelled In which their aūcetour, afore lōg time had dwel¦led And knew their foes mortal, shuld it occupy For euermore without remedye. ¶ Which is the payne, most fell aboue all payne A man to haue bene in hye felycite And to fall downe, by infortune agayne In myserye and fell aduersyte Howe maye a man haue a thyng more contraye Mat .xii.
Then to haue been well, and after woo begone Incomperable to it, bee paynes echone. ¶ Wherfore good lord, the peace euermore main¦teine And ryottes all, chastyce by prouisyon And lawe vpholde ryghtfully, and sustene And ouer all thyng, se there bee no deuisyon But reste and peace, without discencyon For where a realme, or a cytee is deuyded It maye not stand, as late was verified ¶ In Fraunce as fell, full greate diuision Through whiche, yt first Henry kyng of Englāde Ouer rode their lande, by greate prouision And conquered theim, thei might not hym wt stāde All their citees, were yeld into his hande For cause of their cruell descencion Emong theim sustened by contencion ¶ Roome, Carthage, and many other citees And many realmes, as clerkes haue specified Haue been subuert, and also many countrees By diuision, emong theim fortified Wher vnite and loue, had been edified Might theim haue saued in all prosperite Frome all hurt, and all aduersite ¶ Whexfore good lord, thynke on this lessō nowe And teache it to my lorde of Marche your heire While he is young, it maye bee for his prowe To thynke on it, whē that the wether waxeth faire And his people, vnto hym dooeth repaire And litill hath, theim to releue and pease
Then maye it hap, with it his people case ¶ For what sauour a newe shell is taken with When it is olde, it tasteth of the same Or what kynd of ympe, in gardein or in frith Ymped is in stocke, fro whence it came It sauourith euer, and it nothyng to blame For of his rote, frome whiche he dooth out spryng He must euer tast, and sauour in eatyng ¶ While he is young, in wisedome hym endowe Whiche is full hard to gette, without labour Whiche labour maye not bee, with ease nowe For of labour came kyng and emperour Let hym not bee idill, that shall bee your successor For honour and ease, together maye not been Wherfore writh nowe the wand, while it is grene ¶ Endowe hym nowe, with noble sapience By whiche he maye the wolf, werre frome the gate For wisedome is more worth in all defence Then any gold, or riches congregate For who wanteth witte, is alwaye desolate Of all good rule and manly gouernaunce And euer enfect, by his contrariaunce ¶ Endowe hym also in humilitee And wrath deferre, by humble pacience Through whiche he shall, increace in dignitee And catch alway, full greate intelligence Of all good rule and noble regymence And to conclude, wrath will euer sette a side All maner of thyng, whiche wisedome would pro∣uide ¶ Behold Bochas, what prices haue through pride
Be cast downe frome all their dignitee Wher sapience and meekenes had bee guyde Full suerly might haue saued bee And haue stand alwaye in might & greate suertee If in their hartes, meekenes had bee ground And wisedome also, thei had not be confound ¶ Nowe foloweth of the Englyshe kynges and Saxones. The .xcix. Chapiter. THis Cadwalader, nowe laide in sepulture That some tyme was yt kyng of great Bry¦tain And of Westsex also ther wt full sure To whome succedid Iuore his soonne certain Reignyng ouer Brytons that did remain In Wales then, without any socour But onely he became their gouernour ¶ With whome Iue, his cousin was at nede That warred sore the Englishe and Saxonye Many winters, and nought preuayled in deede Sauyng thei reigned, vpon the Vasselry That wer out castes, of all Brytany But Ingils and Iue his brother dere In westsex reigned, which Cōrede his sonnes were ¶ Whom Englishe then, and all the Saxonye Theim chose and made, to bee their protectours Again Iuor and his cousin Iuy That were that tyme, the Brytons gouernours To Wales fled, for helpe and greate socours But Ingils and Iue of Englishe bloodde discent Then kept Englande, full well by one assent
¶ A yere all whole, and then this Ingils dyed And Iue was kyng, of Westsex fully cround That reigned then, full greately magnified Eyght and thyrty wynter, full well and sounde With his brother, and what alloen that stoūde In whose tyme, Theodore then dyed Of Cauntorbury archebishop signified ¶ Whiche Ingile & Iue, did call this lande En∣glande After Inglis, as thei had harde afore After Engest, it called was Engestes lande By corrupt speach, Englande it hight therfore And afterwarde, so that name it hath euer bore As Gurmound also, afore it had so named Whiche sith yt tyme, hath been ful hougely famed ¶ Kyng Iue and Ingils, in Westsex first began The yere sixe hundred foure score, & therto nyne So did Iuo and Iue in Wales then Ouer the Walshe, that were of Brytons line In muche trouble and woo as fill that tyme Kyng Alfride in all Northumberlande Wittred and Welbard, in Kent I vnderstande ¶ In Englande yet, were kynges seuen Vnder kyng Iue, that twenty battailes smote Vpon Iuor and Iue, accompted euen But in the yere, as Bede hath saied and wryte That euery manne his debte, to kynd paye mote Kyng Iue dyed at Roome, then was the yere Seuen hundred and seuen and twenty clere ¶ And at his death, he gaue to Roome eche yere
The Roome pence through Westsex all about Roome pence, Perpetually to bee well payed and clere For vnto Roome he went without doubt And with theim, lordes and gentils a greate route In pilgrymage, for Eld and impotence When he might not the lande well defence The .C. Chapiter. ¶ Etheldred kyng of Westsex protector of Englande that reigned thyrty yere. ETheldred in Westsex, to hym gan succede And kyng was then, and held the royalte Ethel¦dred. Protector was of Englāde their in deede And helde his tyme, euer furth the souereingtee In heritage and perpetualitee That thyrten yere reigned in good astate Whiche cherished peace, and chastised all debate ¶ Wher any wrath was, growyng in his lande Emong prelates or lordes temporall In citees or in cuntrees wher he fande Accordid theim, in euery place ouer all And in his tyme the kynges inspeciall Vnder his rule and sure proteccion He kept in peace, by lawfull direccion ¶ Who dyed so, of Christ his incarnacion The yere sixe hundreth & fourty accompted tho Entombed at Bathe, with sore lamentacion Of all Englande, as well of frende as foo Which Bathe citee, some tyme was called soo Achamany, in Brytain language By Achaman that had it in heritage
¶ In his tyme was Oswyk in Northumberlād And dyed then, to whome Colwolphe did succed Edbertpren in Kent I vnderstand And Ethelbald in Mers was thē I rede In Essex also, was then reignyng Selrede And Ethelrede in Estangle that daye All these wer kynges, and vnder hym alwaye ¶ So fro that tyme furth, & fro the Scottish sea To Sulwath loud, and to the water of Tyne The Peightes had and kept without lee Wher kyng Edwin, their kyng was by right line Rulyng that lande in peace and lawe full fine That chaunged then mayden castell name To Edenbrough a towne of greate fame The .C .j. Chapiter. ¶ Cuthred kyng of Westsex protectonr of England and reigned sixtene yere, CVthred was kyng, crouned of al Westser Kyng Cuthred. And protectour of all Englāde that daye His kynges vnder hym, yt then wer full sixe Did hym homage anone withouten delaye Saue Ethelbald of Mers, that saied hym naye For whiche he warred on hym then full sore That bothe their landes, troubled were therfore ¶ Full oft thei mette, & faught with great power Some that one, some tyme that other had Victorie in felde, with strokes bought full dere But when that kyng Ethelbald was moste glad This kyng Cuthred, that was nothyng a drad At Berford with hym mette in strong battaill
And slewe hym then, as Bede maketh rehersall ¶ Which Ethelbald in Mers, one & fourtye yere Had reigned hole, and diuerse abbeys founded In Mers lande, at Crouland one full clere Of Monkes blacke, within the fennes groūded To whiche Turketyll his chaunceler founded Gaue sixe maniers, to theyr foundacion And abbot there was made by installacion ¶ This Battayl was, of Christes natiuitee Seuen hundreth and fyue and fyftye yere Wher Ethelbalde of Mers, the kyng did dye To whom Borrede, there was the kyng full clere But this Cuthrede of Westsex layed on here Was in the yere of Christes birth to weten Seuen hundreth hole, and syxe and fyfty written. ¶ To whome Segbert, in all regalites His cousyn next of bloode by all recorde Segbert. kyng. Was kyng crowned, and had the dignitee But full he was, of malice and discorde That with his kynges, could no tyme wel accorde Wherfore they would, no lenger of hym holde But droaue hym out, of all his lande full bolde ¶ For lawe ne peace, he did not well conserue But chaunged lawe, euer after his deuise From good to euell, eche other to ouerterue To spoyle and robbe, his commons to supprise Thus in the lande, he made full great partyes Wherfore the kynges, and lordes did hym expell That but one yere, he dyd in it excell.
¶ And afterwarde exiled, as he hym hyd Within a wood, a swynherd made his ende Then with his staffe, he slewe hym so betyd For all his hye estate, thus was he spend A prouerbe is of olde, was wysemen kend That wronge lawes, make euer shorte lordes Whiche wysemen yet remembre, and recordes. The .C .ii. Chapiter. ¶ Kynulphe kyng of Westsex protectoure of Englande, the whiche reigned .xxvi. yere. KYnulphe succeded & had the gouernaunce Kynulph kyng. Of Westsex then, with all to it appente Protectour was by all thordinaunce Of kynges all, and the lordes assent As his elders afore had regimente The yere of Christ .vii. hundreth fyfty and seuen As Bede hath written, and accompted full euen. ¶ Of all the kynges, and lordes of Englande He tooke feautee and royall hole homage As souerayn lorde, honoured in all the lande And mightly mayntened his heritage His kynges all, and all his baronage The peace and lawe, he kepte by diligence Was none that would displease his excellence. ¶ He reigned hole, in all kyndes suffisaunce Sixe and twentye yere fully accoumpted In greate honoure and myghty great puysaunce Was none hym like, nor none hym surmounted
But death alone, to his corps amounted Dryuyng his soule, out fro the worldly nest To heauens blisse, eternally there to rest. ¶ At wynchester he was full fayre buryed The yere .vii. hundreth foure score and also thre Emong the people, highly magnifyed As to suche a prince, longeth of royaltee Right well beloued, of his lordes and cōmontee In whose tyme Offa of Mers kyng Vnto the B. of Roome, sent his letters prayeng. ¶ To depriue Lambert of Cauntorbury Of primacy, and also of the palle Whiche the byshop Adrian, anone hastely Graunted hym then, by bulles written papall Lambert depriuyng, of his sea primall By whiche Aldulphe, byshop then of Lychfelde Hye primate was, and thestate there helde. ¶ The pall he had, and all the dignitee Lambert depryued, without any delay Of primacie, and of all souerayntee Of all the churche of Englande hole that day From Humber south, to Aldulphe did obeye And Lychfeld then for metropolitan sea Was set aboue, and had the dignitee. ¶ But Egfryde then, the sonne of Offa kyng Of Mers, the pall and all the primacie Did well restore, to Christes hye pleasyng To Award then byshop of Caunterburye Wher it abode, euer after worthyly
Vnto this daye, with all the dignitee As of olde right, it should haue souerayntee ¶ This tyme Kynot, of Pyghtes was the kyng Fro forth to Carleile, and from the Scottishe sea To Tyne that tyme his lordshyp was & dwellyng The whiche he helde, by homage and feautee Of the kyng then of Northumberlande in fee And was his man also, in warre and peace As his elders had doen, without leace. ¶ In whose dayes, tharchbyshop Egbert Of Yorke, brother was as I can vnderstande To the kyng of Northumberlande Edbert The primacye and pall, brought to Yorkes lande By the B. of Rome graunted, without gaynstand Whiche from the death, of the good kyng Edwyn Had ceased long, from the tyme of saynt Paulyn ¶ About this tyme, as well is expressed Vnguste the kyng of Pyghtes, rode in Englande On warre, wher then he was full sore distressed By the manly kyng of Northumberlande Where he auoiwed, yf he came to his lande A churche to make of full great dignitee In worship of saynt Andrewe should it bee ¶ And at his home commyng one Regalo Fro Constantyne by reuelacion Brought certayn bones of saynt Andrewe tho Ignoraūce in those da¦yes. To kyng Vngust, where by his relacion He founded then, a mynster of his fundacion Of saynt Andrewe, wher his bones shryned been
As there in dede I was, and haue it seen. The .C .iii. Chapiter. ¶ Brightryke kyng of Westsex protectour of Englande rei∣gned .xvi. yere, that began to reigne in the yere of our Lorde vii. hundreth .iiii. score and three, and died in the yere .vii. C. foure score and nynetene. BRightrike cousyn, yt was nexte of bloode To kyng Kenulphe, by hole intelligence Of Westsex, was kyng full wise & good And protectour of Englande in regence Whiche gouerned right well, with great sapience The yere of Christ .vii. hundreth .iiii. score & three When that he tooke on hym the dignitee ¶ He wedded Edburge kyng Offa his doughter fayre Of Mers, for loue & peace & good accorde Betwene theyr landes, with all theyr hole repayre The kyng Albert, also of good accorde Only of purpose, to make concorde Of Eastlande came, to Offa for peace Betwene theyr lande, the warres for to ceasse ¶ And his doughter to wed, vnto his wyfe For more suertee of loue, and good accorde Whom quene Eburge, of Mers because of strife Afore had be, betwene hym and hir lorde And for she would not vnto the mariage accorde Made hym to bee slayn, in full priue wise Within his bed, afore that he myght ryse. ¶ For whiche Offa, greatly was agreued
And buried hym, at Harforde his citee And Offa then and Humbert, as is breued Bishop of Lychefelde, wher then was his see Whiche kyng and byshop, with great royaltee Translate that tyme, saynt Albone in shryne Of siluer gylt, with stones fayre and fyne. ¶ Whiche Offa died, the yere of Christ full clere Seuen hundreth .iiii. score and thereto seuentene When he had reigned so, ix. and thyrty yere At Offa aye buried, that tyme as well is sene With all honoure, as to suche a kyng beseme To whom Egfride his sonne, then gan succede And after hym, Kynuphe reigned in dede. ¶ Whiche Offa gaue through Mers, the Rome peny Vnto the churche of Rome, full longe afore Tharchebyshoprych from Cauntorburye Vnto Lychefeld, translated for euermore By his will, euer to abyde thore So stode it then, for certeyn all his lyue As Flores sayth, and doeth it so subscriue. ¶ This Azdulphe, kyng of Northumberlande Slew Wade his duke, that again hym was rebel Besyde Mulgreue, where as men vnderstande His graue is yet men saye, vpon the fell For his falshed and treason, as bookes tell Betwene Gysburgh and Whitby, sothe to saye Where for treason, he was layd in the hie waye. ¶ In his fourth yere, wt duke Kylrike he fought And droaue hym to his shippes then agayn
In Humbar, so that he had not to his fraught But fewe persones, were lefte alyue vnslayne And in his yere eleuen, with mykell payne With Danes he fought, againe yorkeshyre right where many thousādes he slewe, yt were ful wight ¶ And on a daye, as he from huntyng came All hote chased, his men bottelles founde In his chaumber, in which was wyne of name Menne called yt tyme, Vernage of straunge land Whiche wine was poysoned, as I vnderstande Of whiche he dranke, and poysoned was anon Vnto the death, and might no ferther gone. ¶ He dyed the yere .vii. C .lxxx. and nyntene At Tewkisbury, buryed in sepulture Of whose death, Edburge that was quene Was blamed then, for that mysauenture For she dyd make that drynke, men sayde ful sure Certayne persones by venym to haue slayne That loued her nought, and was her euer agayn But what for feare, and what for speche she fled With great rychesse, of passyng great measure In Fraunce vnto the kyng, full fast she sped But of her rule, thence forth I set no cure It was so lewde to reporte in scrypture I wyll not breake my brayne, it to reporte For wemens wele, the which I wolde comforte The .C .iiii. Chapiter. ¶ Egbert kyng of Westsex, protectour of England that reig¦ned .xxxv. yere, & dyed in the yere of Chryste, viii. hundreth
thyrtye and thre, as after shall appere. EGberte, cosyn to the sayde Segberte Kyng of Westsex, was royally accepte Kyng Eg∣berte. with all honour, yt the lordes could aduert And eche man glad, no creature excepte So graciously fortune, then had hym kepte That all people ioyed, his coronacyon For cause he was, of Britons generacyon. ¶ For downe he was, from Asserake discent Kyng Ebrank, sonne of consanguinytee Syth Cadwalader dyed, and was dispent Was none ryght heyre, of Brytons bloud but he As Chronycles tell, lyke as a man maye se For systers sonne, he was to kyng Sygbert Of Westsex hole, as Flores coulde aduerte. ¶ Also men sayde, he came of Ingils bloude And very heyre he was, to hym and Iue For whiche Englysh & Saxons, with him stode And helde with hym, as for theyr bloude natyfe Protectour was he made, there so belyue Of all Englande and Wales, hole conquered And Cornewayle asso, as it is chronicled. ¶ Then toke he, of all kynges leege homage Excepte Bernulphe, yt kyng of Mers was tho Woulde do hym none then, for his herytage Wherfore he brent his lande, & did him mikyl wo And so they gathred great hoost, on both sides tho Where Bernulphe, then at Glenden hym met In Mers lande, trowyng hym to ouerset.
¶ But kyng Egberte had then the victory And slewe Bernulphe, for all his boste and pryde To Ludican, he gaue that lande in hye To holde of hym, as other dyd on euery syde Through all Englande, yt was both longe & wide Then droue he kyng Balrede, out from all Kent And all his realme destroyed sore and brent ¶ But Ludican was false, by foule treason Whome kyng Egbert then slewe in batayle sore For his falshode, and his rebellyon And to Wylaffe, he gaue that lande ryght thore Was Bernulphs sonne, to haue for euermore To holde of hym, of ryght and herytage By seruyce dewe, of feaute and homage. ¶ Then in his tyme, the Danes sore destroyed The ysles of shepey, and Tenet also And to the sea, they went agayne vnanoyed And after sone, in Northumberlande tho They dyd aryue, and wrought full mekell woo With whome Egbert, there faught wt smal meny That oute of the felde, they made hym to flye. ¶ Kyng Egbert drewe south, then into the lande And helde the felde, to tyme his sonnes two Athylwolfe and Ethylbert, I vnderstande With hoste full greate, came ridyng to hym tho Where then he bare, the crosse of golde ay so In his lefte hande, and in his ryght a swerd With which he made, his fooes therwith al aferd ¶ For there he had the felde and victorye
And slewe Dardan, a knyght full chyualrus The kynges sonne, of Denmarke sekerly And all his hose, that was full malicyous By vertue of the crosse, patyfe precyous For whiche alwaye after, in hys banner Of azuer whole, the crosse of golde he bear ¶ Whiche armes so full, after this daye Kyng Kinigyll of Westsex, had them bore Fro his bapteme, thenne afterwarde alwaye And all the kynges after, so dyd euermore Of Westsex, so in mynde of Christes lore His crosse, his death, and his holy passyon Whiche Iewes him wrought, without compassiō When kyng Egbert had fyue and thyrty yere Reygned in lande, and felt full great syckenesse Of whiche he dyed, of Chrystes birth full clere The yere so then .viii. C. was expresse Foure and thyrty, nother more ne lesse At Wynchester, then royally buryed As Flores sayeth, and well hath notifyed. The .C .v. Chapiter. ¶ Athelwolfe kynge of Westsex, reygned .xix. yere, & dyed the yere .viii. hundreth .liii. after Chrystes byrth, AThelwolfe was king crowned at his citee  Tythes firste graū¦ted to the clergy in Englande. Of Westchester, in all royall estate To whome the kinges, & lordes made feau¦te And homage leege as was preordynate That reygned after .xix. yere fortunate And graunted the churche, tythes of corne & haye
Of bestiall also, through Westsex for aye ¶ In the yere eyght hundred thirty and eyght The Danes arriued with shippis fourscore & thre Wher Athelstane his sonne did with theim feight And duke Wolfward, by greate fortunitee Theim toke and sleugh with all felicitee But Athelstane, in that battaile was slaine Of his warres, that was the capitain ¶ And in the yere eyght hūdred thirty and nyne The kyng faught sore wt Danes at Mersyngton Wher erle Harbart was slain a prince full fyne But Danes all were take and slain their a doune Without mercy, cracked vpon the croune The kyng came home, with honour and victorye As Flores saieth, right in his memorye ¶ And in the yere eyght hundred fourty and one The Danes watched thest sea cost throughout With diuers hostes, for which yt king made great mone All helples thē, the Danes yt were so stout In many places, with many dyuerse rout All harmles went, without hurt or pain By dyuers tyme, that yere home again ¶ In the yere eyght hundred foure and fourtye At Carham then, the kyng full sore did fight With Danes fell, and had the victorye And at Alnewik he faught, again furth right With Danes also, wher kyng Redwolf yt hight Of Northumberlāde, and erle Alffride was slain And full greate parte, of their hoost certain
¶ Kyng Athilwolf came to the South contree Wher Danes then in battaile with hym faught In Somersetshire, wher he made many dye And gate the feld, and sleugh all that he caught Wher great people yt daye the death hath raught Tharchbishop with his full wise clergie Bysyde Sandwiche, of Danes had victorye ¶ And in the yere eyght hundred fifty and one The Danishe hoost, in Thamis did arriue Kent, and Southray, Sussex, and Hāshire anone Distroyed sore and throughe yt South gan dryue Wher muche folke thei sleugh, bothe māne & wife Whiche host ye kyng, wt battaile slewe doune sore That home again retourned thei no more ¶ And in the yere eyght hundred fifty and three The kyng Edmond of Estangle began To reigne after Albert of greate beautee That holy was, as his legend tell can But Athilwolf the kyng buryed then The kyng of Mers, that had his doughter wed All Wales wan, theim thought thei had well sped ¶ This Athilwolf to Roome toke his waye In pilgremage with hym, his soonne Alurede Cardinall was of Wynchester that daye Wher then he had, the bishoprike, in deede A perfecte clerke, he was as saieth sainct Bede A philosophier wise, and well approued And by the bishop of Rome, cōmēdid well, & loued ¶ And there thei were abydyng ful twoo yere
And home thei came, vnto the kyng of Fraunce And his doughter Indith ther weddid clere By assent of hym, and all his hole puysaunce And so with worship, and noble gouernaunce Fro thens he came, sone into England With hir and with his soonne as I vnderstand ¶ And in the yere eyght hundred fifty and three The death his soule, gan frome his body dryue Vnto the blisse eternall, there to bee In heuen aboue, wher is euerlastyng life To Peter and Pole he graunted infenitife The Roome pence then of all Englande As Flores saieth, as I can vnderstande ¶ He was then buryed, at Winchester in royall wise As to suche a prince, of reason should affere And with his wife, as did full well suffice Foure soonnes he had, worthy without pere Sir Athilwold, Ethelbert, Elfride the dere And Alrude the youngest of echone Afore theim all, one bast had Athelston ¶ Athelbold was kyng after hym and heire And protector, with all the prerogatif His stepdame wed, menne saied it was not faire The churche him gan punishe and chastiue For cause he wed, hir so vnto his wife Again the lawe and christen conciense Vnaccordant, with his magnificence ¶ That reigned whole, twoo yere and no more In greate sikenes and pain inmorderate
Greately vexed, and punisshed was right sore Menne saied it was, for sinne inordinate With his stepdame, that was so consociate But then he had, as God would repentaunce For his trespas and misgouernaunce ¶ Afore he dyed, he did full sore repent And for his synne, stode to correccion Of holy churche, for his amendement Submitted whole, without obieccion And for to liue, in clene perfeccion Departed were by lawe and deuorced Afore his soule was passed and vncorced The .C .vi. Chapiter. ¶ Ethelbert kyng of Westsex protector of Englande that reigned fiue yere. SIr Ethelbert his brother gan succede Kyng Ethel bert. In whose dayes, the Danes destroied sore The east parties of England then in deed And home againe, they went harmeles therfore Destroyed the people, and the lande right sore But sone ther after, kyng Ethelbert them mette And sleugh theim downe, in bataile sore and bet ¶ An other hoost, then newe spoyled all Kent And by treaty, wyntred within the Isle Of Tenet, then by Kentishe mennes assent But at last, thei with a subtell wyle Despoyled all Kent, and falsely did beguyle And to their shipis went without delaye Into Denmarke, with muche riche araye
¶ This Ethelbert reigned whole fiue yere And dyed the yere of verey Christ his date Eyght hundred whole and therto sixty clere As Flores saieth, and hath it approbate But with sykenesse he was so alterate He dyed then, and at Shirborne buryed With greate worship and honour laudified The .C .vii. Chapiter. ¶ Elfride kyng of Westsex protector of Englande reigned sixe yere, and dyed in the yere of Christ eyght hundred lxvi. ELfride was kyng, after his brother then Kyng Elfride. That reigned so, with all the dignitee In Westsex whole, and mightely began Protector was as was necessitee For Danes then of greate iniquite His lande foule brent, wasted and destroyed That all Englande, was combred and anoyed ¶ In the east cost of Englande specially In Estangle, wher Edmond then was kyng Ther did greate hurte full cruelly In Northumberlande full felly warryng The people destroiyng, and the lande brennyng Wher Danes then, sleugh the kyng of that lande Byside Yorke, so as Flores dooeth vnderstande ¶ Also thei sleugh, in Northfolke all about The people doune, and in Suffolke also The kyng Edmond thei sleugh without doubt Of Estangland, with arowes sharpe tho Was shot to death, with muche other woo
That is a sainct honored this daye in blisse At Edmondes bury canonyzed I wisse ¶ Hungar and Vbba sleugh hyw full cruelly And brent abbeis throut all England that tyme By North and South, and prestes full cursedly All holy folke fled out of that realme Thei sleugh all people that had take bapteme At Colyngham sainct Ebbe, that was abbesse Their nonnes putte from theim in sore distresse ¶ For dred of the tyrauntes twoo, full cruell And their people cursed and full of malice That rauished nōnes, euer wher their herd tell In hir chaptre, ordeined again their enemies Should not deffoule, their clene virginitees She cut hir nose of, and hir ouer lippe To make hir lothe that she might from hym slipe ¶ And counseled all hir susters to dooe the same To make their fooes to hoge so with the sight And so thei did, afore thenimies came Echon their nose and ouer lipe full right Cut of anone whiche was an hogly sight For whiche tho fooes thabbey and nonnes brent For thei theim self disfigured had shent ¶ Frō Twede to Thamys, abbais then thei brēt And churches hole and people sleugh right doune Wiues maydens widdowes and nonnes shent Through all the lande and the est region People sleyng in euery borough and towne The women euer thei diuiciate
In euery place and fouly defflorate ¶ And in the yere .viii. hundreth fyftie and sixe He died so, and from this worlde expired Whom all his tyme, the Danes full sore did vexe Agayn hym euer, full sore they had conspired Theyr hertes in malice, alwaye sore affcerd Sometyme the worse they had, sometyme yt better As Flores sayth, and written hath in letter The .C .viii. Chapiter. ¶ Alurede kyng of Westsex protectour of Englande reigned xxi. yere and died the yere .viii. C .xcv. ALurede, kyng was of this region Alurede kyng. That brother was to this noble Elfryde A perfect clerke, proued in opynyon As clerkes could discerne, and proued In knighthode also approued and notified So plenerly, that no man knewe his peer So good a knight, he was and singuler. ¶ In battayles many, in his fathers dayes And also in his brethren tyme all thre He fought full ofte, and bare hym wel alwayes That for his dedes and singularitee He was commended amonge thenemytee Within the lande and out, as well was knowe His fame among the people hye was blowe. ¶ Whyles he was kyng, he had aduersitee With Danes oft, that on hym did ryue Destroyed his lande, with great iniquitee
The whiche full oft, with might he did out driue And slewe thousandes, that lost theyr lyue Through the warres, begon of theyr outrage That meruayll was to sene, of one lynage. ¶ And in the yere. viii, hundreth sixty and eyght The Danes came to Yorke, and toke the towne Hunger and Vbba, with many a wyle sleight Wasted the lande about, both vp and downe And so came forth to Mars, with hostes boune And to Westsex, whom then the kyng Alurede Discomfited there, with the hoste that he did lede. ¶ The Danyshe hoste, to Redyng came agayn Another hoste at London, was with pride Of Danes also, that wrought hym mekyll payne But whyles these hoostes, were parted and deuide With his power, Alurede gan to ryde And at Anglefeld he fought, in Barkeshyre right Where victorie he had, maugre of theyr might ¶ At Redyng in Barkeshire, then he mette An hoste full greate, where he had then agayn The victorye, and his fooes downe bette At Basyng also, he slewe theim downe certeyne At Asshenden, he droue theim out all pleyne And gotte the felde, with all the victories As Flores sayeth right in his memories ¶ And in the yere .viii. C. syxty and fourtene The Danishe hoste, rode Lyndsey & Mars coūtre And home agayn, as then was well sene In Northumberlande, with greate prosperitee
The Danes rode, doyng great aduersitee Where the bishoppe then of holye Isselande And all his monkes were, full fast fleand ¶ With s. Cuthberts bones, bare about .vii. yere Supersti∣cion. Nowe here, nowe there, in dyuers places aboute For dread of Danes, and enemyes that there were In Northumberlande dwellyng, yt tyme ful stout But then the kyng, the sea sayled throughout▪ And shyppes gatte, with much great ryches For to defende his lande, fro greate distresse. ¶ In Westsex then, with fooes agayn he met Wher they fro hym, to Exeter that night Fled full faste, where Alurede theim ouer sette And slewe theim downe, in batayll and in fyght And then in Mers, anone he fought forth ryght With Danes tho, and also with Norwayes That wasted had all Mers, in many wayes. ¶ Then fought he also, at Chipnā in Wilshire And Hunger and Vbba and duke Haldene Tyrauntes cruell, hote as any fyre The Christen folke did brenne, wast and slene With cruell tourmentes, did theim care and tene Where Alurede had the victorie And slewe that daye, all the Danyshyre The .C .ix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kynge Alurede fled, to Ethelyngay in Hidils, for dreade of Danes, and serued an oxherde of the countree.
GVtron the kinge of Denmarke yt was tho In Westser werred ful sore, & brent y• lond Wyth whych the kyng so marryd was wt wo He wyst not well whether to ryde or stond. But to Ethelyngay anone he tooke on honde To ryde, where then he hyd hym in a place For drede of Danes, suche was hys hap & grace. ¶ In Denwolfes house, thoxerd of the towne So was he then, in poore and symple araye Wher Denwolf, cladde hym in hys owne gowne And tender was to hym there alwaye But hys wyfe made hym to laboure aye Wyth bakynge and wyth bruynge wonder sore In water beryng, she made hym worke euer more Where then hys lordes & knyghtes in good araye Came to hym then, wyth hooste and greate powre Where than the kynge vpon Gutron that daye In batayle stronge, wyth corage freshe and clere Foughte sore, and tooke Gutron prysonere And thyrtye dukes wyth hym in companye. Vnchrysten were, they all of panymrye ¶ And had the felde wyth all the vyctorye. And of Danes manye thousande slewe He baptyzed than as made is memorye Thys kynge Gutron, that after was full trewe And named was Athylstan all newe. To whome the kynge, gaue than all Estenglande As Edmonde had, to holde of hym that lande. ¶ And all hys dukes were also there baptyzed,
And chrysten menne, bycame for goddes loue The yere of Chryste .viii. C. thenne compeysed Seuente and .viii. as Flores doth approue The kyng was then, agayne at his aboue Remembred hym of Denwolfe, that hym hyd And sent for hym to Ethelingay, he dyd. ¶ His wyfe was deed, & somwhat was he letred At his desyre, the kyng set hym to lerne To tyme that he was wyse, and mekell betred In holy wryt that he coulde well discerne And then the kyng made hym byshop as yerne Of Winchester, when Dunbert there so dyed That byshop was afore hym sacrafyed. ¶ In the yere .viii. C. and foure score The Danes in Thamis, & wintred at Foulham The kyng came in somer after thore And slewe them all, that they went neuer hame The deed, the quycke, the maymed, and the lam All buryed wer, where the batayle was smyten As Flores sayeth, and clerly hath it wryten. ¶ At Rochester the Danes were efte on londe With whom the kyng, there faught, & many slew Many drowned, and lyeng on the sonde As they vnto theyr shyppes, agaynwarde flewe He droue them there, vnto a warmly stowe After theyr laboure, to haue recreacyon Vpon the sondes, to make theyr habitacyon. The .C .x. Chapiter. ¶ How Marine bishop of Rome, graūted to kyng Alurede to
found an vniuersytee and study for clerkes, which he made at Dxenforde, where the clerkes be sworne, they shall not rede for theyr fourme at Stamforde. ANd in the yere .viii. C .lxxx. and tweyne Marine bishop of Rome, graūted to kīg A lurede To foūd & make a study thē again And an vniuersyte for clerkes in to rede The whiche he made, at Oxenforde in dede To that entent, that clerkes by sapyence Agayne heretykes, should make resystence. And chrysten fayth mayntayne, by theyr doctryne The kyng also, to comforte and counsayle By theyr teachyng, and wytty disciplyne As Phylosophers of olde, dyd great auayle To kynges, prynces, and cytees, gouernayle Gaue all theyr wyt, in studye and dilygence Agayne mischeues, to fynde and make defence ¶ And in the yere .viii. C .lxxx. and eyght All his ryches, in fyue partes he ganne deuyde One parte to men of warre, to kepe his ryght An other parte, to lande tyllers in that tyde The husbandry to mayntayne and to guide The thyrde parte, all churches wasted to restore The .iiii. vnto the studye for theyr lore And to the Iudges, and men of lawe well lerned The fyfte parte, full wysely he dispende To holde the lawe in peace truly gouerned Disposed thus, he was the realme tamende This was a kyng, full greatly to commende
That thus could kepe his lande from all vexaciō And not to hurte, his cōmons by taxacyon. ¶ For truste it well, as god is nowe in heuen Who hurte the poore people, and the cōmontee By taxes sore, and theyr goodes fro them reuen For any cause, but necessytee The dysmes to paye, compell of royaltee Though they speake fast & mumble wt the mouth They pray full euyl with hert, both north & south The yere of Chryste .viii. C. lxxx and thyrtene The duke Hastyne of Danes, euer vntrewe Destroyed the lande, with hostes proude & kene By Easte and Weste, that all the lande did rewe Whome the kyng in batayle, felly slewe After diuerse batayles, amonge them smyten In sondry places, there as it was well weten ¶ In euery shyre, the kyng made capitaynes To kepe the lande, with folke of theyr countree And shippes many, & galaies longe wt Chieftaīs And Balyngers, with bargys in the sea With whiche he gate ryches, greate quantyte And at a flud, was called Vthermare He slewe an hoste of Danes, with batayle sare The .C .xi. Chapiter. ¶ How duke Rollo a panyme, gate Normandye, of whome all the dukes of Normandye, be lynally discended. ANd in the yere .viii. C .lxxx. and senentene The duke Rollo, of Denmarke nacyon A Painim stout, with mighty hoste & kene
In Englande brent without any delacyon Whome Alurede by good supportacyon Droue then agayne: vnto his nauy ryght And of his men, a thousande he slewe in fyght ¶ Whiche Rollo then, landed in Normandye Of whome all dukes, of that prouynce discent And wan that lande, with swerde full manfully And duke there was made, of hole entent By processe after, and by the kynges assent Of Fraunce, whose doughter he wed vnto his wyfe And christen man became so all his lyfe. ¶ At charters fyrste, he seged so the towne Superset, cyonsnesse with dāp∣nable ydo∣latrye. Where they wtin, our ladyes smocke then shewed For theyr banner, and theyr saluacyon For feare of whiche, full sore in herte he rewed All sodaynly, and vnto Roan remoued Where then his wyfe, dame Gylle was dede and buried Without chylde betwene them notifyed. ¶ But then he wedded Pepam, the syster fayre Of duke Robert, of Normandye and Roone On whome he gate William his sonne & heyre That after hym was duke therof anone When yeres many were passed and ouergone But nowe at this to ceasse, I wyll enclyne Tyll afterwarde, I shall tell forth theyr lyne ¶ Kyng Alurede, the lawes of Troye and Brute Lawes Moluntynes, and Marcians congregate With Danyshe lawes, that were well constytute And Grekyshe also, well made and approbate
In englyshe tongue, he dyd then all translate Whiche yet be called, the lawes of Alurede At Westmynster, remembred it in dede ¶ And in the yere .viii. C .lxxx. and eyghtene Then Alurede, this noble kyng so dyed When he had reygned .xxix. yere clene And with the Danes, in batayls multiplyed He faught often, as Colman notifyed In his chronycle, and in his cathologe Entytled well, as in his dyaloge ¶ That fyftye batayls, and syx he smote Somtyme the worse, and somtyme had the better Somtyme the felde, he had at his note Sometyme he fled awaye, as sayth the letter Lyke as fortune, his cause lefte vnfeter But neuerthelesse, as ofte when so they came He contred them, and kepte the lande fro shame. The .C .xii. Chapiter. ¶ Edwarde the fyrste kyng of Englande reygned, xxiiii. yere and dyed the yere of Chryste .ix. C. and, xix. EDwarde his sōne, so crowned was anone Of Westsex, then by all the parlyament Protectour was made, againe the fone Whiche warred sore, in Englande by assent The yere .viii. C .lxxx. and fyftene spent Earle Athylwolde he exyled, into Fraunce For he a nonne had rauyshed, to his vsaunce. ¶ But after that, this same earle Athylwolde
With Danyshe hoste, Mers and Estanglande Destroyed sore both, kyng Edwarde full bolde Slewe Ethalwode, and his hoost I vnderstande Discomfet hole, and droue them out of lande And made all kynges of Englande, his subiectes For so he thought, it was his very dettes ¶ He sommoned then at London, his parliamēt Where he deposed, the kynges euerychone Of all Englande, and made them by assent Dukes and earles, thence forwarde so anon In euery kyngdome, then he ordayned one. And in some thre, he made by ordynaunce And all kyngdomes, foringed by gouernaunce ¶ And he to be the kyng, of all englande Proclaymed hole, to voyde all varyaunce Discorde and warre, that many yeres had stande Whyles seuen kynges, had the gouernaunce Ther might no lawe, ne peace haue perseueraūce Wherfore he toke, of euery Duke homage Of Earles also, and of the Baronage. ¶ Scotland and Wales, he warred sore in dede Homage of the Scottes Tyll they became his men, and made homage For souerayne Lorde of Britayne, as I rede The kynges then dyd for theyr herytage For all theyr men, and for their vasselage To ryde with hym, where that euer he gooe In warre and peace, agayne frende and fooe. ¶ Duke Ethelrede of Mers, and also his wyfe Elfled that hyght Westchester, then repayred
That wasted was, by Danes warre and strife Whiche Roomaynes first builded, had and feired In tyme when, thei to this lande repeired Of Roomayne werke, whiles thei here occupied That citee first, full freshly edified ¶ Thē faught the kyng, wt Danes at Wodefeld sore In Mers & also at Herford wt greate pain Wher victorye he had, of theim euermore Again he faught with Danes soth to sain At Towcester, and laid theim on the plain In Yorkeshire also, he slewe the Danes downe And voided theim all out of his region The .C .xiii. Chapiter. ¶ This kyng made an vnion of all the realmes, and called it Englande, and after it failed neuer of that name. THis noble kyng thus made an vnion Of seuē realmes, yt stode three hūdred yere Sixe and thyrty also in greate deuision And warres many, as Colman saieth full clere Fro Gurmond had driuen out Carreis here Whiche was the yere fiue .C .iiii. score & thirtene Vnto the yere of Christ nine hundred & nientene ¶ These erles all, and dukes then held the lawe As shryues nowe in shires dooen and maintene That the commons ouerlaied, full sore with awe And sore oppressed their states to sustene Wherfore he voided theim out of office clene And shryues made through all his region Whiche haue not forgete extorcion
¶ This noble kyng, Edward thelder hight When he had reigned full twenty & foure yere Buryed he was at Winchester full right As in Flores, full clerely dooeth apere Who in his tyme surely had no peere Of wysedome nor manhode as was seen The lawe and peace that could so well sustene The .C .xiiij. Chapiter. ¶ Athelstane kyng of England reigned fiftene yere and dyed in the yere of Christ nine hundred thirty & fiue. How Con∣stantyne kyng of Scottes warred again Athelstane but he recouered his homage by myracle of sainct Iohn of Beuer¦ley as sheweth here afterward. SIr Athilstane his eldest soonne of age In wisedome euer full sadly & well auised At Kyngstō was crouned & toke homage Of all the lordes right as he had deuised Agaynste whome all Wales as thei suffised Then he warred, but he made theim obeye And made homage, his meune to bee for aye ¶ In wohse tyme so, y• yere of Christ nine hūdred And thyrty more and fiue full accompted Robert Rollo his soule and corps asondred His corps to the earth, his soule amounted Whiche in knighthod, his Danes surmounted That reigned had then duke of Normandy By thirty yere accompted full clerly ¶ To whom succedid his soōne Wyllyā lōgspee That after hym was duke of Normandy
But then the kyng of Scottes by cruelte Rebellyō of the Scottes. Hight Constantyne, hym warred cruelly For whiche, kyng Athilstane mightily Stroyed all Scotland till his people dyed For cold and hunger dyed and mortified ¶ But he was so comforted euen by miracle That he faught a none, wt this kyng Constātyne And had the feld and his habitacle Theim droue through all the lād wt muche payne To tyme he was, full fain to enclyne To Athilstane, for to make his homage Homage of the Scottes. For all Scotland that was his heritage ¶ Anlaaf the kyng of Denmark, full of pride Cousyn to kyng Constantyne of Scotland With shippis many arriued on Humberside At Burnesburgh and claymed of England For to haue of the kyng as I vnderstand The truage, whiche his eldres had afore And with hym brought Colbrōd to fight therfore ¶ And Athilstane at the daye assigned Made hym redy the battaill to haue smitten Again Colbrond, armed with hart benyngned But then sir Guy of Warwike as was weten Guy of War¦wicke. In palmer wyse as Colman hath it wryten The battaill toke on hym for Englandis right With Colbrond in armes for to fight ¶ Wher then he sleugh, this Danyshe champion By whiche battaill, the truage was relesed By couenaunt made and composicion
Betwene the kynges afore and warres cesed Thus kyng Anlaaf, home to Denmarke presid Without more warre or conturbacion And sir Guy went to his contemplacion ¶ Kyng Athelston then, fraunchesid Beuerley In the worship of God and sainct Iohn Wher in his life, is written for euer and aye The miracle of his stroke so in the stone That neuer manne might dooe but Athilston Through grace of God and his direccion Through prayer of sainct Iohn and affeccion ¶ This noble kyng was euer more iust & trewe To God his faith, and to churches deuocion To poore menne grace, on subiectes euer did rewe To preestes and age reuerence in feld and towne In dome sadnes, trouth and discrecion And in the yere nene hundred thyrty and fiue When he had reigned sixtene yere with life ¶ His brother Edmōd for kyng thē was crouned Kyng Emōd reigned i. yere. Of Englande whole by concent of all estate To whome Dothowe kyng of Scotlāde yt stoūde And Howell of Walis the kyng then create As was afore vsed and determinate Homage of the scot¦tes. Feaute to hym made and leege homage For Wales and Scotlande yt was their heritage ¶ He sette sainct Dunstan then at Glastenbury Vnder thabbot of monkes and religion That abbot was with hym at Canturbury This kyng Edmond was slain by a felone
Whiche of malice, and his false treason That forfet had, and dampned was to dye For his forfet, and for his felonye. ¶ At Cauntorbury, as y• kyng hym saw on a daye For yre on hym, he ranne and sore hym wounde For whiche he stroke, the kyng for aye So they dyed both two, ther in that stounde Eche of theim, of his mortall wounde Whiche to a prince, accorded in no wyse To put hym selfe in drede, wher lawe may chastice ¶ He reigned but .vi. yere then all out And died the yere .ix. hundreth fourtye and one At Glastenbury buried without doute For whome the people, made then ful great mone For lawe and peace, he kept to euerychone And his commons, neuer his tyme supprissed And oppressours of hym alwaye were chastised ¶ His brother Edrede, after hym had the crowne Edrede kynge of Englāde At London then, and tooke royall feautee Of all estates, within his region Excepte Scotlande, that through theyr vnlewtee Rebelliō, of ye Scot¦tes. Crowned Gilryke, a Dane of great beautee Of royall bloodde borne and generate And for theyr kyng, hym fully had create. ¶ Kyng Edrede went to Scotland we his power And all the lande, wasted sore and brent Wherfore the Scottes, by hole consent for feer Put downe Gilryke, from all the regyment And droaue hym to Denmarke or they stent
And to Edrede came all the Baronage Homage of ye Scot¦tes. And to hym made feautee and homage ¶ And in the yere .ix. hundreth fourty and nyne He died, buried at Wynchester his cytee When that he had, his soule made to enclyne Out of his corps, to passe awaye and flee Where God of heauen, would that it should bee But .viii. yere full, he reigned and no more When death hym toke, with sikenes great & sore. ¶ Edwyn his brother, resceyued then the crowne Edwyn kynge. Folyshe and proude, and of his will maligne And in his wytte, was full lytle reason Whom his barons, for cause he was vndigne Made hym his crowne, for to resigne Deposed hym then, out fro his regiment At the parliament, by theyr commen assent. ¶ Whom saynt Dunstane, for aduoutre blamed But it amende, he would in no kyn wyse Of whiche he was, full openly defamed Through all the realme, he was the more vnwise For whiche the lordes, and commons all did ryse And droaue hym out, awaye wher no man knewe Thus synnes olde, make shames come full newe. ¶ He reigned had, but .iiii. yere and no more When he was depriued of his estate Without thanke of God or man therfore And well worse, was of all men moste behate Of his reygne hauyng no lenger date Who dyed the yere .ix. hundreth fyfty and thre
Foringed hole from all his magestee The .C .xv. Chapiter. ¶ Edgare kyng of Englande, reigned .xviii. yere & died in yt yere of Christ .ix. hundreth three score and eleuen. HIs brother Edgare by a commē assente Edgare. Was chosen kyng, as chronicles recorde With diademe crowned, at his parliamēt And homage toke royall of euery lorde So mercyfull and full of misericorde Was he, that saynt Dunstan reconciled Whome kyng Edwyn, wrongfully had exiled. ¶ Whom archebyshop of Cauntorbury he made With all estate and primates dignitee Of Monkes and nonnes, mynsters fayre & glad Fourtye founded of religioustee Within his realme, of his owne royaltee Endewed theim all in lande and tenemente Sufficiently with all establyshemente ¶ He wedded Elfbede yt dukes doughter Ozmere On whom he gate a sonne, both good and fayre That after was saynt Edwarde the marter Who was his eldest sonne and his heyre A lykely prince towarde, both comly and fayre Elflede died, he wedded Elfrith to wyfe That doughter was to duke Orgare be life ¶ On whom he gate Ethelbert so anone The kynges of Wales, he had in subieccion
The Scottes kynge Kynowth withouten moon Homage of yt Scot¦tes. Made hym homage, without obieccion Thus all were vnder his proteccion And rode with hym, alwaye in warre and peace In all his tyme, withouten leas. ¶ So trewe he was, and in his dome wyse That for no mede, nor fauoure wold he false The trewe leuers, his lawe did not despyse He socoured euer, and felons hanged hy the halse Conspiratours, murtherers and traytours als The cōmon weale, aboue all thyng preferred Which euery prince, shuld se wer wel obserued ¶ He taxed not his commons, ne supprysed Ne holy churche, nor yet the clergie But lyued on his owne, as it was assised Vpon his rentes, and landes morallye His officers hym ruled, full no tably In euery shire he went in priuetee To spie and knowe, who hurtes the commontee. ¶ He was a kyng, full worthy and condigne That let not, for his ease nor his laboure To searche and see defautes, that were maligne And theim correcte, he was a gouernoure God set neuer kyng, to be a ryotoure Thoffice of a king To trippe on tapettes, and lyue in ydelnesse But for to rule, with all kyndes of busynesse ¶ He died the yere .ix. hundreth sixty and eleuen When he had reygned full eyghtene yere Buried he was, at Glastenbury to neuen
His corps to the earth, his soule to heauen clere When he had been dead, foure and twenty yere Byshop Oswald, of that same diocise By counsell of thabbot, that was wyse ¶ Abbot Edwarde of that place that hight Who layde hym in a toumbe, made of newe For it was shorte, he brake his legges wight Of whiche the bloodde, as rede and freshe of hewe As euer it was sprent out, all hote and newe Into his eyen, by whiche he lost his sight Men sayd it was, for he had so hym dight ¶ Edwarde his sonne, that eldest was and heire Saynt Dunstan then, as made is mencion Edwarde marter kynge of Englande. Tharchbyshop of Cauntorbury fayre So crowned hym, kyng of this region Whom dame Alfrith of false presumpcion His stepmother, to crowne syr Ethelrede At Cornisgate, so cut his throte in dede ¶ As he with her did drynke, of good entent And buryed was, at Warham then anone But afterwarde the B. of Rome, to England sent To take hym vp, and laye hym hye anone In a toumbe made of siluer gold and stone As a marter, then hym canonized At Shaftesbury, where he is autorized. ¶ And dyed in the yere of Christ .ix. hūdreth clere Sixty also accoumpted and fyftene That reigned had in Englande, but .iiii. yere His soule to blysse, went then as is well sene
Where nowe he muste, euer dwell and been In ioye eterne, emonge the sayntes of heauen And there with Christ goddes sonne beleuen The .C .xvi. Chapiter. ¶ Kyng Ethelrede, kyng of Englande reigned .xxxviii. yere and dyed in the yere of Christ, a thousande and thirtene THen Ethilrede, withouten tariyng At Kyng stone tho, by all the baronage Crowned was, fayre & royally as kyng Ethilrede kyng. His brother was, and heyre of heritage But saynt Dunstan then, by his trewe language Prophecied and sayd, withouten leas In all his tyme, he should not reigne in peace. ¶ For to this realme he sayd he had no right But by murther and cruell homycede Of your brother, that for you was dight Whiche murther euer asketh vengaūce on euery syde Wherfore he said, serue God what so betyde And then it is the fayrest chastisement To be put out, fro that same regyment. ¶ Saynt Dunstan died, and went to heauen The kyng rode forth, to London his citee And as he rode, he sawe a cloude full euen A wonder∣full token. As rede as bloodde, as all the people did see Whiche Englande hole ouerspred in quantitee Fro whiche the bloodde, reyned vpon the ground That men trouwed to haue ben peryshed yt stound
The next yere after, the Danes at Southhāpton Arryued, and brent the countre there aboute Also they spoyled, and sore brente the towne And so they dyd all Cornewayle throughout And Deuenshire also, and somerset no doubte With Dorsetshire, and Wylshyre, & Barkeshrye brent And to London came, or euer yt they stent The suburbes there, they spoyled sore and brent Two dukes then, of Denmarke and Norwaye Northfolke, Southfolke, & Essex, or they stent Brent and spoyled, and so forth helde the waye To London then, where theyr felowes laye So assembled they, and passed into Kente Where that countre, they spoyled sore and brent ¶ The lande of kent to them graunted truage To lyue in peace, and home agayne they went But in Northfolke an other hoste their passage Made then, and so to Lyncolne or they stent All Lyncolneshyre throughout, then they brent And Yorkeshyre also, and home they went againe With pylage great, of which they were full faine ¶ The king might get, no helpe wt them to fight For which he treated, wt king Anlaaf of Norway And wt king Swaan, of Denmarke for his right That destroyed had the lande, in fell araye And truage hight, them furthwarde to paye For they had no power, amongest thē to prayse And was full fayne, the warres for to cease But yet kyng Swayne, wold nothīg rest for this
He came agayne, and crowned was for kyng Greate tallage, of all this lande a mysse He toke alwaye, and specyally all other thyng Saynt Edmūdes landes, he hurt by great taskīg And tallage, which of it that he raysed Vnegally, he pondred then and peysed. For whiche warrys, quene Emme to Normandy To her brother, duke Rycharde the thyrde With her sonnes, Alurede and Edwarde her by And Edmunde Ironesyde, then it so betyde All these the toke, and in a shyppe she dyd And with kyng Ethelrede by the sea led pryuely For helpe to haue gotte his lande there by ¶ In whiche tyme, whyls he in Normandye Was soournyng, kyng Swayn full lowde then cryed And sayde vnto his men, & fast gan crye I am but deed, saint Edmunde hath me spyed And with a speare, hath me here mortifyed Wo worth yt day, I noied S. Edmundes ground For with his speare, my hert he hath sore wounde ¶ He dyed ryght so, without confessyon And whyther he went, I ne wote ne whare But well I wote, in good and true professyon Saynt Edmonde king dyed, and made his fare To blysse eterne, withoute any care But then the Barons, and lordes of Englande Sent worde to Ethylrede, with hym for to stande And wrote to him, how yt kyng Swayn was deed And bade hym come, to his lande agayne
And so he dyd, by councell and theyr rede He exyled all the Danes, with greate disoayne And slewe them downe in batayle, wt great payne For whiche therle Edryk, sent to kyng Knowte To Englande to come, with hoost great and stout ¶ This ylke kyng knowte, yt sonne was to kyng Swain To England cam wt host & great power Whome Ethylrede then met, and faught agayne In batayle stronge, & droue him home full clere With whome Edryk, then fled as dyd apere Into Denmarke, as a false traytoure vntrewe Purposyng so to come agayne all newe But kyng Ethelred in the meane tyme, then dyed The yere of Chryste, a thousande and thyrtene And reygned had, as Colman notifyed Thyrtie and eyght, in warre and intene Euer ne we and newe vexed as was sene His owne lande fled, for drede of en myte Without socoure, fro it he was fayne to flee. ¶ Thus was he chastysed, for his mothers gylt Accordyng well, to holy trewe scrypture For cause that she, his brother had slain & spylt And lyke the wordes of saynt Dunstane, full sure That sayde it was, a punishyng full pure Oute of the realme, to be dryuen and expelled In whiche by syn, he had so hye excelled. The .C .xvii. Chapiter.
EDmond Ironeside gotē & generate Of his first wife, a dukes doughter of En¦glād Edmonde Ironesyde reigned kīg of Englād thre yere. After Ethelrede his father was {pro}rogate Vnto the crowne, of all this royall lande Men called hym so, as I can vnderstande Where euer he rode, armed was he ay Oppressours all, to chastyce in his waye. ¶ Knowt of Denmarke, assayled ofte this lande So in this tyme, that euer he armed went To vse the feate of armes, I vnderstande As to knyghthode, full well it dyd appent Thus Colman sayth, and Flores that he ment But syxe batayles, agayne kyng Knowt he smote With victorye, as Flores hath it note. ¶ But then to voyde, the greate effusyon Of chrysten bloude, they two together accorde To fyght them selfe, for full conclusyon Within an yke of Seuerne, by concorde Withouten warre, or any more discorde And who so then, myghte get the victorye Reioyse the realme, and all the monarchye ¶ And at theyr daye, and place so assygned They armed, met with strokes knyghly set With speare and swerd, eyther other so repugned With axe and dagger, eyther on other bette Eyther of them tryste, the ouerhande to gette But at laste kyng Knowt, to hym alayde These wordes there, and thus to hym he sayde. ¶ Wolde god Edmonde, thou were so couetouse
As I am nowe, and as myne herte now wolde And in this case, as glad and desyrous We shulde not longe, this batayle thus holde And to our men, great gladnesse manifolde Yf thou the halfe, of Denmarke had with me And I the halfe of Englande, had with the. With whiche they both the wepons fro thē caste And eyther other, in armes gan them embrace That both theyr hostes, amarueled were ful faste What it dyd meane to ceasse, in so lytell space But when they knewe, betwne them the case They kneled all, and Chryste they laudifyed With herte deuoute, ye eche of them so victoryed. ¶ Their realmes both, they parted then in two By hole accorde, betwene them so concorded And loued euer, as brethren after so As chronycles, haue well hole recorded Fro that tyme forth, no more then they discorded This ysle where they faught, hyght Clyues Of cōmon langage, as then it dyd them please ¶ But Edryk of Lyncolne, euer vntrewe Reconsyled home, by Edmonde was agayne By subtyll meane, this good king Edmond slewe In pryde wyse without wounde or mayne But in what fourme, I can not wryte nor sayne When he had reygned, yt tyme fully .iii. yere Buryed he was, but where no man durste spere ¶ But in the yere of Chryste, a thousande so He dyed awaye accompte, and syxtene
Vnknowen to his people, and Lordes tho For whom they made great dole, as thē was seen But neuerthelesse, it myght no better bene This false Edryk, so falsely it couered That openly it was, not then discouered. The .C .xviii. Chapiter. * Knowt kynge of Englande and of Dē¦marke. KYng Knowt, reigned in Englād thē anon And wedded had quene Eme of England Ethelrede wife, which gate him loue anon In Englande, of all the estates of the londe Of cōmons also, that were both fre and bonde On her he gate a sonne, that harde Knowt hight On his fyrste wyfe, had Swayne & Herold ryght ¶ He sent Edmonde and Edwarde, yt sonnes two Of Edmōd Ironeside, to Swithen to kīg Knowt To slee or lowse, to kepe in pouerte so That they should neuer haue power in nor oute To claime England, neyther with hoost ne route Whome he sent forth, then into Hungry To the emperoure, with letters worthely ¶ Besechyng hym, to noryshe them and saue Declaryng hym, whose sonnes that they were The whiche he dyd, full worthy and gaue Vnto Edmonde, his owne doughter dere Whiche Edmonde then dyed, and she in fere Without chylde, wherfore Agas his coosyn Doughter of Herry, he gaue to Edwarde fyne ¶ Of whiche Edwarde, called Edwarde thexyl Came Edgare, then called Edgar Athelyng
But Knowt it let, hym self then crounyng That to London to hold his Christmas With his houshold, went then with greate solas ¶ Wher erle Edrik, to kyng Knowt hym cōfessed That he had slain, kyng Edmond Ironeside His owne leege lorde with cruell death impressed To gette his loue, and with hym dwell and bide For vnlikely it was to goo or ride Twoo kynges together in Englande He saied was not accordyng in the land ¶ The kyng his woordes well herd and cōceiued And howe he asked a reward for his mede There made hym tell, howe he his lorde disceiued Afore the lordes, as he had dooen in deed The whiche boldely he did without dreed Hauyng no shame, to aske a greate reward For whiche the kyng & lordes gaue whole award ¶ To hang hym on the toure duryng his liue To he were dedde, that all folke might hym se And his treson there, openly to shriue And after that, to hang there till he dye For whom then was emong the commons truily A greate biworde, as many one yt woundre & rōne As did on therle Edryke of Strettoun ¶ The kyng went to Norway and it conquered And droue the kyng Of out of that land And held it so by conquest of his swerd Full worthily he gouerned euery land To peace and lawe, he kept theim as he faund
And in his domes, was rightwyse and stable And to the poore alway merciable ¶ Kyng Malcom of Scotland, thē did homage To hym and furth became, for euer his manne Homage of yt Scot¦tes, So did the kynges of Wales of hye parage And all the North West Occian For their kyngdonies, and for their landes than And in his tyme moste he was redoubted Of all princes and in all londes loaued ¶ To Roome he rode, in royall goodly wyse And there was with the bishop greately commed As Christen prince, by papall whole aduise The cardynalles foure, whiche the bishop had sed At Malburgate, foure mile fro Roome extende With greate meyne hym mette, & greate honour As if he had been of Roome themperour ¶ At his commyng again into England He gaue Norway vnto his soonne sir Swayne And to Herold his soonne as I vnderstand England he gaue, of whiche he was full fain And to Harknowt, Denmarke he gaue certain And so dyed in Christen whole creaunce At Shaftisbury buryed by his ordynaunce ¶ The yere of Christ a thousand so was than And thirty foure also truly written When he had reigned, fro the tyme that he began Eightene yere whole, as well it was wrytten With the darte of death, whē that he was smitten In whose dayes the land was inquiet
Full of riches and of welfare whole replete The .C .xviij. Chapiter. ¶ Herold kyng of England the soonne of kyng Knowt reig∣ned fiue yere, and dyed in the yere a thousand and .xxxix. HErolde his soonne; was crouned then in deede Herold, By Loofrike yt duke of Leiscestre By Londoners, in Flores as I reede By Danyshyr also, as saieth the letter That strong werre then, and of power greater Then other lordes of Englishe nacion At London made was this coronacion ¶ Alurede the soonne, of kyng Ethelrede With fifty sailes, landed at Southampton Wher kynge Herold with hoste hym met in deede Redy to fight with hym for the croune But certain lordes of Englondes region Betwene theim treated, that Alurede went again To Normandy, to duke Robert full plain ¶ But afterward, as Alurede so rode Fro his mother vnto the kyng Herold The duke Goodwyn on Gyldismore hym bode With people greate, of nombre manyfold And slewe his menne downe there as he would And led hym furth to Ely and hym slewe As traitour false, that euer had bee vntrewe ¶ Some chronicle saieth, he putte out bothe his eyen Fro whiche he dyed sone for pain and woo Some other sayin, he slette his wombe full keen
The lengest gut to a stacke he nayled tho Led hym about the stack ther with muche wo Till all came out that was his wombe within Thus sleugh thei hym, with sobteltie and gyn ¶ His mother quene Eme, Edward then sent To Normandy to duke Wyllyam anone That hir cousyn was, to kepe he were not shent By kyng Herold, of his cruelty alone Warnyng hym of the treasō yt Herold had dooen For whiche cause Herold hir exild Out of England, and Edward also hir child ¶ To Flaundres she fled, then full sore amoued To erle Badwyn hir cousyn nie of bloodde Declaryng to hym, howe Herold had distroyed Hir soonne Alurede that heyre of England stood And exiled hir, without socour or good And Edward also hir soonne, heire of England His brother children also, awaye in vncouth land ¶ Wherfore therle, to kyng Hardknowt then wrote All hir compleynt and of his socour prayed And he should help, with all his might God wote It were amendid of that she was affrayed He came anone, in warre full well aryed Into Flaundres, his mother for to please Hir for to socour, and sette hir hert in ease ¶ In whiche meane while, the kyng Herold dyed At Westminster, and buried was full feire After he had reigned, as it is notified Fiue yere reigned without any heire
Of his body gotten, after hym to repeire England to gouerne, wherfore the lordes by assēt To kyng Hardknowte then into Flaundres sente ¶ To bee their kyng, sith Herold was a gone To please hym with, and his mother to comfort Who came to England furth with anone And crouned was with all the whole disport That lordes conde, as Flores dooeth report Thus kyng Hardknowt was kyng of Englande than Who worthily yt tyme to reigne tho began ¶ This kyng began his brothers death to venge Kyng Hard knowt▪ On erle Gowyn, that erle was then of Kent That peased was, for he should not reuenge With riche giftes, whiche that he on hym spent With meekenesse lowe, & swore that he was sent To dooe that thyng, on pein of high treson By kyng Herold, charged without reason ¶ Through good and giftes, & mighty hie riches And of his kyn, that meekely hym obeyed And by acquaintaūce, that thei made then expresse Vpon the holy euangelis sworne vndelayed The kyng graūted hym his grace & was well pay¦ed To make hym of his coūsell, & of gouernaūce Without more wrath or any discordaunce ¶ He maried then his sister Gunylde to Henry Themperour, that falsly was accused Of synne and cryme vsed in auoutry With a young manne the whiche hir excused After the lawe of the land that was there vsed
By battaill of his hand that then their flewe His accusour approuyng hym vntrewe ¶ For the whiche she would, nomore come in his bed But lyued sole euer after, so hir life For good ne gold for aught that he hir beed For loue ne threte, for betyng ne for strife With hym dwellyng, forthwarde as his wife In all thynges els, euer at his gouernaunce Bothe daye and night in womanly pleasaunce ¶ Kyng Hardknowt then, his doughter maryed Vnto a duke of the Danishrie At Lambirgh dyed at his feast magnified Emong his lordes and all his prelacie And putte hym whole in God his high mercye And charged theim, his brother Edward to croūe To reioyse the land of Englandes region ¶ This was the yere of Christ then inscriued A thousand whole fourty also and one When that he had reigned, as was subscribed The twoo yere whole, whē he was thus wyse gone For whom was made that tyme full muche mone At Wynchester, byside his father buryed With lordes all, thither full well accompaignied The .C .xix. Chapiter. ¶ Kyng Edwarde the confessour kyng of Eng∣lād reigned twenty and foure yeres, yt began the yere of Christ a thousand fourty and one and dyed the yere a thousand sixty and fiue.
EDward his brother, sōne of kīg Ethelrede King Ed¦warde yt  cōfessou was crowned then, kyng of Englande The yere of Christ, a M. then in dede Fourtye & one, as Flores could vnderstande To whom the kyng Swayn, of Denmarke lande The tribute whiche he had, fully relesed And warres all betwene theim ceassed. ¶ To sende hym then, the hole Englyshe nauy Agayn Magnus, that kynge was of Norwaye That helde it so, by wrong and tirannie Whiche Edwarde sente anone in great araye With lordes, knightes and squiers freshe & gaye With archers many, by whiche he gate his lande Of Norwaye hole, and seazed it in his hande. ¶ Erle Eustace of Boleyn, that had wed Edwardes suster, on his mother syde To Edwarde came, at Douer sore bested Where then his men, a burges slewe that tyde Wherfore therle Goodwyn, set full of pryde Therle Good∣wyn. Asked the kyng, to haue delyueraunce Of therls men, to byde his ordynaunce. ¶ Notwithstandyng, yt Burges slewe his knight For that same cause, wherfore he it denyed But made peace then, as he therle had hight Of Boleyne, so his brother in lawe alied For whiche therle Goodwyn sore replied And warred sore, vpon the kyng eche daye With his sonnes fyue, in full great araye ¶ Not cōsideryng, yt kyng his doughter had wed
And his treason perdoned had and hyd Of his brothers death, when yt he murthered had Whom then the kyng, Somond cōmaunde & bid Vpon his legeaunce, whatsoeuer betid For to aunswer in his courte, and amende Defautes all, betwene theim might be kende. ¶ At whose summons, he would not then apeare But warred sore, both he and his sonnes fyue For whiche the kyng, theim exiled out all clere But after they landed and did aryue At Sandwiche, so the kyng theim met belyue Where lordes then, theim treated and accorded And afterwarde nomore they discorded. The .C .xx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Sywarde duke of Northumberlande, slewe in bat∣tayle Maclom kyng of Scotlande, and crowned Malclo∣me kyng at Scome, accordyng to saynt Edwarde the con∣fessoures commaundement whiche Malclome did homage to saynt Edwarde, as apeareth by his letters patent. DVke Siwarde then, was of Northūberlād In batayle slewe kyng Maclom so in dede Of Scotlande then, yt false was of his bād Whiche to the kyng he made, who taketh hede Wherfore the kyng, in Marian as I reade By his letters charged, duke Siward take on hād To croune Malcolin yt was of Comberland ¶ The whyche he dyd full myghtely anon At Skone abbey, wher kynges were all crouned Vpon his hed he set the crowne anone
And toke homage of hym, vpon the grounde Homage of yt Scottes. In Edwardes name, as he of right was bounde For that ylke realme, and as his elders dyd Suche fortune then, to Englande was betid. ¶ The kyng Gryffyn of Wales, then was slayn That Herford shire spoyled had and brent His hed set vp, at Gloucester full playne For his vntruthe, and falshed, that he ment And sone therafter, his brothers hed was sent Vnto the kyng for his rebellion So wer they both foringed for treason ¶ And as kyng Edward, in his palayce of pride Duke Goodwyne, then sittyng at his table Sawe the butler on his one fote slyde And lyke to fall, that other fote full stable As he was seruyng the kyng at his table Then held hym vp, that he fell not to grounde Kyng Edward sayd, to Gudwyn in that stounde ¶ As his one fote, ye se helpe that other Full well and trewe, I fynde it dayly nowe Had ye ne bene, thus had helpe me my brother Therle then to the kyng on side gan bowe And sayd, if I wer cause, I praye God nowe This breade passe not my throte, but dead I bee And straungled here anone, that ye maye see. ¶ At his prayer anone, with that he died For with that breade, straungled was he yt stound It might not passe his throte, as men espied Wherfore the kyng then, bad drawe out yt hounde
Vnder the boorde, as he that false was founde On whome God shewed an hasty iudgement Approued well, by good experiment. ¶ Wher Herolde had, therle Algare exiled Fro Leycestre, where erle he was so then The kyng Eward, agayn hym reconsiled And perdoned hym, and toke hym for his man Of Couentre, as Flores tell it can The lord he was, and there thabbey founde And buried there is, with his wyfe that stound ¶ This Algare was, the sonne of erle Leofryke Whiche Leofrike was, the duke Lofwynes sonne That erles had been there, none afore theim like But duke Siwarde, as he did wonne Syckenesse hym tooke, and sore vpon hym ronne In whiche he dyd, hym arme in all degree And had his axe in hand, full lyke to dye. ¶ He sayd vnto the lordes, then hym about Thus semeth well, in armes a knight to dye And not in bed to lye, loure and loute Tyll death hym kyll, with paynes cruelly As would God, here were my moste enemye That I myght dye vpon hym, nowe in right In armes thus arayed like a knight. ¶ With that he died, for paynes that he felt Vpon his fete standynge in that arays And shoke his axe, while yt his hert gan swelt And to the ground he fell in that afraye Who buried was, at saynt Marie abbeye
At Yorke citee, with worshyp and honoure As likely was, for suche a gouernoure. ¶ The kyng Edward, the duke of Northūberlād To Tosty gaue the sonne of duke Goodwyn Vnder the name of erle, as Flores doth vnderstād After whiche tyme, all haue been erles syne With landes and rentes, both fayre and fyne Whiche estate suffice, for princes ben both two In euery lande accompted, where they go. ¶ He disherited erle Waldyue, his owne sonne Who erle was then, create of Huntyngdon Of Northampton also, as chronicles tell can A worthy prince, of all this region That rule a realme coulde, well then by reason Another prince, was Loafrike that daye Erle of Leycestre and Couentry no naye ¶ Whiche Loefrike had a wyfe, yt Godiue hight That naked, throughout all Couentree The tolles sore, and seruage agayn right To redeme hole of her femynitee She in her heare, hangyng beneth her knee Vpon a daye, rode so through all the towne To bye it free, by her redempcion. ¶ For otherwise, therle would not it free But yf that she, rode naked through all the towne Vpon the daye, that all men might her see Trustyng she would not for no waryson Haue doen it so, by suche redempcion But thus by witte, she kept her selfe vnshamed
And freed the towne, worthy was he blamed ¶ Kyng Edwarde sente then into Hungary For his cousyn, the sonne of Emond Ironesyde Themperoure sent hym, Edwarde gladly His brother sonne, and folke with hym to ryde His sonne Edwarde Athelyng by his syde Margarete and eke Christine his doughter dere Whiche kyng Edward, receyued with good chere ¶ He maried Margarete, mighty wt great riches To kyng Malcolyne, of Scotland was that daye That on her gatte, fiue sonnes of great noblinesse Edwarde, Dunkan, Edgare, Alixander the gaye And Dauid also that kynges were all no naye Eche after other, of Scotlande throughout Whose mother is now S. Margrete wtout doute ¶ At Dumfermlyn shryned and canonized On whom Malcolyne a doughter gate also Kyng Henryes wife, the first full wel auised Quene Mawd yt hight, yt well loued Englāde tho These crosses fayre and roiall as menne goo Through all Englande, she made at hic expense And dyuerse good orders throwe his prouidence ¶ Another sustre, this same saint Margarete had That Christine hight, kyng Edwarde thē {pro}fessed In religion to lyue, she was full glad To holy lyfe, disposed and adressed An holy woman of lyfe, and of god blessed Who at hir death hir soule then vncouered And to our lorde, full mekely so it offred.
¶ In his forest, as he pursued a dere In Essex, a palmer with hym met Askyng hym good, whome gladly he dyd here He claue his ryng, and in sonder it bette The halfe of whiche, he gaue without lette To the Palmer, that went awaye anone That other good to geue hym, there had he none ¶ But after that, full longe and many a daye Two pylgrames came, vnto that noble kynge And sayde, saint Iohn thappostell in pore araye Vs prayed, and bad straytly aboue all thyng Ignorance and super∣sticyon. To you present, and take this halfe golde rynge Whiche ye gaue hym of almesse and charyte And bade vs say, that ryght sone ye should him se ¶ Whiche ryng he set together there anone And that ylke place he called, ay after hauerynge And that same place, where they it braste alone He called ay after that tyme, Claueryng In Essex be bothe fayre standynge Where that he made two churches of saint Iohn Theuangelyst, and halowed were anon ¶ Sone after that, he dyed and went to blysse But fyrste he made duke Herold protectoure Of his cousyne, to gouerne and to wysse Edgar Athelyng, full yonge a gouernoure Whome he ordeyned to be his successoure As very heyre to Edmonde Ironesyde But thus Herolde, then set all that asyde When he had be kyng .xxiiii. yere
He dyed the yere, a thousande syxtye and fyue * Herolde kynge of Englande duke Good wins sōne. At Westminster canonyzed is full clere All newe he made, the churche there in his lyue All were he not ryght heyre, as men in stryue A confessoure he is, full hye in heuen With God to dwell, euermore and beleuen. Herolde by strength, then crowned was for kynge Forsworne that was, vpon the euangelystes For to crowne Edgar Athelynge And hym protecte, and defende in all wyse Vnto his age, that none the realme suppryse This was his othe, of whiche he was forswore All yf he made Edgar an Earle therfore. ¶ The earle Tosty, then of Northumberlande That brother was, vnto the kyng Herolde By kyng exyled, out of the lande To Englande came, with kyng Herold full bold Of Norwaye then, in Chronycle as is tolde But kyng Herolde of Englande, with them met At Staūford brydge, to death they both wer bet. ¶ Besyde yorke, was this batayl ful sore smyten Where kyng Herolde of Englande, had the felde And slewe Herolde Harngrey, as was wryten Kyng of Norwaye, and earle Tosty vnder shelde That neuer after, myght armes welde And thousandes fell, of Danes and Norwayes He kylled there that daye, as Flores sayes. A yere he reygned, whom Willyam Conquerou. That duke was then, of all fayre Normandye
Hym slewe in batayle, for his ymagyned erroure Agayne hym, that he dyd so cruelly And not wolde mende, ne yet satisfye The duke Willyan, so the felde then conquered With strokes sore, for whiche the lande was ferd This kyng Herolde at Waltam, whiche he found Of foure score chanons, full fayer was buryed At the hye aulter, & as a kyng was crownde All yf he were intrusor notifyed And in batayl slayne, and victoryed Of gentylnesse, the Conquerour bad so All yf he were afore his mortall fo
¶ Willyam Conque∣rour, kyng of Englande, and Duke of Nor mandye, beganne to reygne, the yere of Chryste, a thousande .lxvi. and reygned .xxiiii. yere, and dy∣ed, the yere, a thousande .lxxxx. and the sayde Conqueroure founded the Abbaye of Batayle, for the soules of the people slaine there, the fourenene daye of Octo¦ber, in the yere of Chryste a thou∣sande, thre score and syxe. The .C .xxi. Chapiter. THe .xiiii. daye of October accompted The duke Wyllyam yt was of Nor∣mandye Duke Wil¦lyā of Nor∣mandye. At London was crowned, and an∣noynted In trone royall, to hauethe Monarchye By his conquest, and his victorye Withoute tytle of ryght to hym discente But onely of his tryumphall entente ¶ The yere of Chryste, was when Alurede hym crowned Tharchbyshop of Yorke, & hye primate A thousande hole .lxvi. well founde Quene Mawde his wyfe, to hym assocyate He crowned also, that tyme in her estate The abbay of batayle, that then he bounded And for the soules there slayne, he founded. ¶ He called it so then for a memorye Of his batayle, by whiche Englande he gate
In token of his myghty victorye That Englande there he had, so well ouerset To praye for the soules slayne, as was his det Whiche abbaye is in Sussex, in that stede Where the batayle was, and the people dede. ¶ The South part of England then he rode And dalt it largely vnto his menne The North again hym rebelled then abode With help of Danes, in that countre were then And Scottes also, that false wer, when and whē But kyng Wyllyam, that worthy conquerour Discomfite theim, with long and sore labour ¶ To Normandy he went, then right anone And with hym had Edgar called Athelyng Edwyn and Morkar afore that were his fooen For cause they should not, then make more risyng In his absence, while he were ther abidyng But at his home commyng with hym again He brough theim all, of whiche the folke were fain ¶ Gospatrik that then was erle of Cumberland That not again stode king Malcolin in his werre When he distroyed therldome and his land But hym withdrewe out of waye full ferre Wherfore the kyng, as saieth the chronicler Hym disherited, and gaue to Rauf Mesthyne His erldo, meto whom menne did enclyne The .C .xxii. Chapiter. ¶ Homage of Scotlande dooen to kynge Willyam conque∣rour, at Birmithi in Scotland, and also howe the kyng of
Fraunce scorned the kyng Wyllyam & he quit it hym after THen rode the kyng into Scotlād anone And brent the land vnto Abirnythy Where kynge Malcolyne submitted hym with great mone And homage leege hym did full humbly Homage of the Scottes. And amended there all his iniury Then went he furth, to Duram wher he offred And to the churche, he gaue great good vncoffred ¶ He thē his lawe and peace alwaye proclaymed Officers made in euery shire about And so held on, to London vnreclaymed Wher his iustice he sett yt land throughout The kyng of Fraunce, thus scorned hym out of doubt That kyng Wyllyam in Gesine had lyen long And tyme hym wer been kyrked, with good songe ¶ When he this hard, to Fraunce he went anone There to bee kirked, he offrid his candill bright A thousand townes he brent, as he did gone At theim he prayed, the kyng of Fraunce to light His candill then, if that he goodly might Whiche at his kirkehale and puryficacion To Mars he thought, yt tyme to make his oblaciō ¶ Edwyn therle proclamed of Leicester After decesse of Algary his father dere And erle Morcare his brother that after Dyed bothe twoo, Lucy their suster clere Of Leicester then, and Lyncolne bothe in fere The coūtesse was, whome kyng William maried To Iue Tailboys erle of Angeou magnified
¶ To kyng Wylliam then came full glad again At Wynchester he held his parliament Wher he then slewe, for wrath and greate disdain The duke Waldiue, that no harme to hym ment But onely for he counselled and consent To erle Edgar, to gette his heritage Of England whole, and made to hym homage ¶ Who duke was then of Northumberland And erle create was, also of Huntyngton By chronicles olde as menne can vnderstand Entitled whole, as of all Northampton Beheded was at Wynchester towne Whose hedde together, grewe to the necke again Buried at Crowland, for sainct the soth to sain ¶ The kyng then made, as I vnderstand The bishop then, of Duresme that Walter hight Erle proclamed of Northumberland Whom at Catteshede, yt countre slewe doune right The kyng then made, a lord that Awbryke hight Erle of yt countre, yt durst not Scottes withstande Wherfore he gaue, Robert Mowbray that lande ¶ And made hym erle of Northumberland The kyng then sent vnto euery shire Iustices to sitte, throughout all the land Of all lordshipis, and knightes fees enquere What temporales he had, to knowe he had desire And what perteined vnto his royall croune And what the churche had of deuocion ¶ Vnto his soonne, eldest then generate
All Normandy he gaue in heritage And England whole, to Wyllyam nominate His second soonne gaue with all thauauntage And to Henry his third soonne young of age Therldome gaue then of Gloucester sea With the honour of slede, for euer in certente ¶ He dyed the yere a thousand four score and ten And of his reigne twenty yere and four tho At Cane buried, in thabbey that hight then Sainct Stephēs abbey, by Cane that stādeth so His doughter Ade, afore had maried tho Vnto therle Stephē of Bloyes, a prince of might Of warres wyse, and a full manly knight The .C .xxiij. Chapiter. ¶ Wyllyam Rufus kyng of England reigned thirtene yere, and began to reigne in the yere of our lorde a thousand four score and ten, & dyed yt yere a thousand one hundred & three. HIs soōne Wylliam Rufus as he deuised Kyng Wlliam Rufus Was crouned then wt great solempnitee But after soone, duke Robert was auised To clayme England by his priorite And Normandy also, as for his proprete As he that was his eldest soone and heire With hoste full greate, in England game repeire ¶ And made greate warre vpon his brother so Three yere all out, betwene theim so continued Till at last thei bothe, betwene theim twoo Did condiscende, as well to theim perteined With whole herte and will, nothyng feined
The iudgement of kyng Philip of Fraunce To vndergo and bide his ordinaunce ¶ In whiche meane while, his brother erle Hēry The castels all belongyng to the croune As high constable of England properly Then seazed had in his possession As his office by good dereccion Asked of right and of good consuetude To kepe theim sure to the crounes excelsitude ¶ The kyng Philip, by his auised parliament Gaue iudgement, betwene the brethren twoo As kyng Wyllyam their father full ment All Normandy, Robert should haue euer moo And Wyllyam England, & frendes should bee so And liue in peace, without any clayme And either other releace, and whole disclayme ¶ Therle Henry of England then constable Deliuered all the castels and citees right To kyng Wyllyam his brother enheritable As he was bound, and fully so had hight Duke Robert then, his brother a worthy knight To England came, to sport hym with his brother At whiche tyme, either was glad of other The .C .xxiiij. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Malcolyn of Scotland warred in Eng¦land for his wifes right, pretendyng yt she was right heire of England, and afterward he did homage to kyng wyllyam Rufus for the realme of Scotland.
His Malcolin of Scotlād greatly claimed T To haue England then by his wifes right Margarete suster of Edgar, heire {pro}clamed Of England whole, that expelled was by might Of kyng Wyllyam conquerour by vnright So for his right, the Northland he destroyed And home he went again, nothyng annoyed ¶ But then the kyng and his brethren twoo To Scotland rode and wasted sore the land Till Malcolyne came, and did his homage Homage of the Scottes. By letter wrytten and sealed I vnderstand Whiche Hardyng gaue, in to kyng Henryes hād Without reward or any recompence Of mayne labour, his costagis and expence ¶ The duke Robert went home to Normandy And kyng Malcolyne & his soonne, then Edward Warred again Northumberland in hie But erle Robert that kepyng had and ward Of Northūberland, wt hym then faught full hard Byside Alnwike at Malcolyne well were slain There Malcolyne and Edward his soōne certain ¶ Whē quene Margret, so of yt tidynges knewe She eate neuer meate, for sorowe dyed anone At Dunfermelyn, buryed as then was dewe But nowe she is there shryned in fleshe and bone Workyng miracles, as sayeth many one Entombed faire, and in the firetree translate Of whiche abbey nowe is she aduocate ¶ The Scottes then made, Dunwalde so their kyng
Malcolynes brother, that to it had no right But Dunkā, sonne of Malcolyne that knowyng With helpe of kyng Wyllyam, and royall might Of Scotlande, so droaue hym awaye to flight And crouned was, as chronicles vnderstande Homage of yt Scot¦tes. And homage made to wyllyam for his lande ¶ Sone after, kyng Dunkan of Scotland slayn By treason was, and Dunwall restitute Vnto the croune of Scotlande then agayne Whome Edgare then, by succoure and refute Of kyng Wyllyam droue out, all destitute Of any helpe, and crouned was in Scotlande To kyng Willyam did homage for his lande Homage of yt Scot¦tes. ¶ Of whose homage, Iohn Hardyng gaue yt let∣ter Full clerely made, written well and sealed The whiche also, with other letters better That by reason maye not be repeled The whiche, yf he would haue enbeseled The kyng Iames vnto his waryson A M. marke, hym hight of his discrecion. ¶ And in his tyme, Roes that Richarde hight The kyng of Wales, in battayl strong was slayn Besyde the castell of Brekenham, then full right Fro whiche tyme forthe, theyr kynges seazed full playn And princes called they were, soth to sayn The kyng with hoste, on Robert Monbraye rode Who with the kyng, faught of his traytourhode. ¶ And discomfite, helde Bamburgh castell then And the kyng enduryng, full .vii. yere
Consentyng with the lordes, that so began For to depose the kyng, of his croune clere And duke Robert his brother, with great power To croune and make, the kyng of all Englande With Normandy to ioyse, I vnderstande. ¶ The kynge exiled Anselme of Cauntorbury Tharchebyshop, that withstode his wronges Doen to the churche, and to the prelacie To the commons also, that theim belonges Seuētene tounes, wt also many churches amōges And abbeys foure, he wasted and confounde The newe forest in Hamshire for to founde ¶ He buylded the Newcastell vpon Tyne The Scottes to gaynstande, and to defende And dwell therin, the people to enclyne The towne to builde, and walle as did append He gaue theim ground, & golde ful great to spend To buylde it well, and wall it all aboute And fraunchised theim, to paye a free rent out ¶ The rentes & frutes, to tharchbishop {per}teinyng And to the byshoppes of Wynchester & Sarum And also .ix. abbeys lyuelod conteynyng In his handes leazed, and held all and some But for his workes & buylynges held eche crome With whiche he made then, westmynster hall And the castel, of Newecastell withall. ¶ That stādeth on Tyne, therin to dwel in warre Agayne the Scottes, the countree to defende Whiche as men sayd, was to hym mekill deer
And more pleasyng, then otherwyse dispende And muche people for it, did hym cōmende For cause he dyd the commen wealthe sustene Of marchers vnnumerable to mayntene. The .C .xxv. Chapiter. ¶ This kyng Willyam Rufus taxed so sore the commons, yt they'might not mayntene tilthe, for whiche fell great derth and great myschiefe and moren of catel for defaute of food, for whiche the commons wer glad of his death. GReat tallage of England, then was raysed In so ferforth, that tilthe of land was leyd Of which sued mischiefe, nothyng praysed For faute of food, morayn of bestiall frayed And death of people, for hunger sore arayed A kyng woteth not what harmeth housbandrye Housbande to pill, and taxe outragiously. ¶ To Godis dome, haue no consyderacion Howe that this kyng, on huntyng as he stoode Vnder a tree, and as writynges maketh mencion Walter Tyrel at his game in that wood Shotyng at a dere, of whiche he drewe no bloode But stroke the kyng, vnto the dethes wounde That there anone he died, vpon the ground ¶ At Wynchester then, buried anone The date was then, of his reygne .xiii. yere For whome the folke, no sorowe made nor moone He hurte theim so, with taxe and tallage here Of Christ a thousande an .C. and three yere clere Whose death the folke, in no wise did complayn Were they all therof, bothe glad and fayn.
The .C .xxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Henry the first kyng of Englande and duke of Normandy reigned .xxxvi. yere, and died in the yere of Christe a thou∣sande .C. and .xxxix. HEnry his brother, yt first was of that name was crouned thē, wt al yt honour might be Kyng Hen¦ry the first He recōsiled saynt Anselne that cam hame Who crouned Maude his wyfe full fayre & free That doughter was, full of benignitee To kyng Malcolyne, & saint Margarete yt quene Of Scotlande, whiche afore that tyme had been. ¶ On whom he gate Willyam, Richard & Mold Whose goodnesse, is yet spoken of full wide If she were fayre, hir vertuous manyfolde Exceaded farre and vices she set aside Debates all, that engendred were of pride She staunched hole, with all beneuolence And visited sycke and poore with diligence. ¶ The presoners also & wemen eke with childe And in gesene lyuyng ay where aboute Clothes and meate, and beddyng newe vnfiled Wyne also and ale, she gaue without doubte Where she sawe nede, in countrees al throughout These crosses all, that yet bee moste royall In the hye wayes, with gold she made theim all ¶ Kyng Edgare thē, hir brother was of Scotlād That to kynge Henry then made homage The byshop of Duresme, then toke on hande Homaeg of yt Scottes.
The duke Robert, to gone in message To make hym clayme Englande his herytage The whiche he dyd, anon withoute delaye As they accorded vpon a certayne daye. ¶ But Anselne, byshop of Caunturbury And also quene Maude, then made them well ac∣corde The kyng to paye, thre. M. marke yerely To duke Robert, withoute more discorde And counsayled then the kyng, as was recorde To loue the lordes, that made the discencyon Betwyxte his brother, and hym by conuencyon ¶ The kyng Henry, warred Robert Estenuyle The eldest sonne of Roger Mountgomery And his brother, that was so called that whyle And create Earle of Shrewysbury Who his castell of Arundell helde for thy And Shrewysbury also, and the cytee With other mo castels, in his countre ¶ Whiche to the kyng, he yelde by conuencyon He and his brother, to passe to Normandye With all theyr men, without discencyon To theyr father, Roger Mountgomerye That earle was there, of Bolesmo manly The kyng went then, to Caue and to Baxhous Helde them with force, and herte full couetous Whiche towres Robert the duke of Normandy Asked of hym, to haue delyueraunce And his money, of thre thousand marke yerely Whiche he ought hym, by the hole concordaunce
Whiche he agayne sayde, and stode at variaunce Wherfore they fell on warre, and toke the felde With hostes greate, full sore faught vnder shelde ¶ At Tenarthbray, that is in Normandye Where Nigell then, of Albany that hyght Toke duke Robert, in batayll manfully And brought him bound, vnto the kyng wt might For which yt kyng anone there made him knight And gaue hym landes, that were forfet afore By Robert Stutuyle, in Englande for euermore ¶ He gate also a castell, besyeged longe Whiche he scalyd, with noble polycie And to the kyng it gaue, though it were wronge For whiche, the kyng gaue hym anon in hye The landes, all that forfet were only By Robert Monbray, earle of Northumberland In his brothers tyme, as I vnderstande. ¶ The same Nygell, that hyght Albanye A sonne had then, whome the kyng Henry Roger Monbray, dyd call euer after ay Thus Albany was chaunged morally Vnto Monbray, for the lyuelod onely Whiche Monbray had afore of herytage These Monbrayes nowe, rose fyrst of hye corage ¶ This kynge Henry then seazed Normandye And made his sonne Willyam duke of yt lande And home came to Englande then in hye And in the yere of Chryste, to vnderstande A thousande hole, an .C. and ten on hande
His doughter Maude, he maryed to Henry That Emperour was then of Romanye. He put his brother duke Robert in straite warde And many other, that were of his cognisaunce Where he released couenauntes and forwarde Afore wryten of his enherytaunce That betwene them, myght make any dystaunce And founde hym euer, in all royall estate By good auyse, and councell ordynate ¶ Whiche duke ordred was so, for he forsoke The realme, of al the lande of Ierusalem When he was chose therto, and nought it toke For couetyse, to haue this Englyshe realme For he forsoke that fortune, as men dyd deme Agayne goddes wyll, and his hye ordynaunce For chosen he was, by all chrysten creaunce. ¶ For at wynnynge of Ierusalem Where prynces many, kynges and dukes were He was the worthyest of any realme And bare hym beste, in knyghtly dede of warre At all assautes, moste knyghtly dyd hym beare The honoure all, and fame he had euermore And chosen was there, to be kynge therfore, ¶ Men saide, yt God gaue hym suche punyshmēt His brother, to put hym in greate myserye Vnto his death, agayne his owne entente For he forsake Chrystes owne monarchye In whiche he was borne, & for man lyste to dye The chrysten fayth, to mayntayne and encrease
For couetyse his brother, to discreace. ¶ The yere of Chryste, a thousande was ful cle And an hundreth also, and therwithall eyghtene When good quene Maude was deed, & laide on be At Westminster buryed, as well was sene For heuynesse of whiche, the kyng I wene To Normandy, then went vnto his sonne The duke William, & there with hym dyd wonn ¶ The third yere after, to England came agay The duke his sonne, Willyam of Normandye His brother Rycharde also, the sothe to sayne And earle Rycharde, of Chester in company With many other lordes, in shyppes them bye Vpon the sea were dreynt in greate distresse Of the whiche the kyng, had then great heuinesse ¶ Which duke Williā had wed y• doughter then Of Fowke Tailboys, Earle of Angeou had bene With whome a .C .lx. knyghtes with many men And ladyes many, were drowned as was sene And then the kyng wed Hadelyse the quene The duke Godfrey daughter, yt was of Loreyne Of his mournyng, to comforte him agayne. ¶ And in the yere, a thousande fully accompte And an .C. twenty, and also fyue Themperour Henry, the death surmounte And passed to God fro Maude that was his wife Who to her father, king Henry came belyfe Abode with hym in Englande, then▪ two yere Maude Empryce, was called then full clere
¶ And in the yere of Chrystes incarnacyon A thousande was, an .C. twenty and seuen When kyng Henry, in greate prosperacyon His doughter Maude, thempryce to neuen The earle Geffrey Plantagenet euen Earle of Angeou, the sone of Fowke Tailboys So maryed had of fame, that had the voyce. ¶ On whome he gate a sonne, yt Henry hyght By surname called Henry fitz Empryce Then dyed his eme Alexaunder forth ryghte * Homage of yt Scot∣tes. The kyng of Scottes, a prīce of great enterpryce That homage dyd for Scotlande, as suffyce So dyed, then to whome Dauyd succede His brother was, saint Margarete sonne in dede. ¶ That to kyng Henry, made his homage And then to Maude, the foresayde Empryce * Homage of yt Scot∣tes By hole assent, of all his Baronage By letter wryten and sealed, as maye suffyce which Iohn Hardīg, in Scotland brought of p̄ce with many mo, for foure .C. marke and fyftye At biddīg & cōmaundement of the wt king Henry ¶ Cadwalan, prynce of Wales at Wadeyet In batayle faught, where kyng Henry him slewe And greate people of Wales, that there forset Were slayne that daye, to hym yt were vntrewe Of whiche batayl, Wales maye alway rewe The yere a thousande, an .C. and thyrtye And there tyll two, as made is memorye. ¶ Then went the kyng to Normandye agayne
And there abode, and kepte all Normandy To tyme he dyed, of whome that lande was fayne But Englande then of it, was full heuy When he had reygned so full worthy He dyed in the syxe and thyrtye yere At Boys Leon, of his reygne then full clere. ¶ Of Chrystes date, was then a thousande yere An hundreth also, and. ix, and thyrtye moo Buryed at Redynge, as well it doth appere In the abbaye, whiche there he founded so Of monkes blake, where euer they ryde or goo That pray for hym, & for quene Maude his wyfe Who eyther other loued withouten stryfe The .C .xxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Stephan of Bloys, kynge of Englande reygned .xix. yere, & beganne the yere of Chryst, a thousande .C. and. xxxix, and dyed in the yere a thousande .C .lviii. STephā of Blois, his sister sōne was croūd A manly mā, was thē of great power Kyng Ste¦phan. And king was made of England yt stound Withoute stryfe, or any maner warre To Normandy he went, and seazed all there and gaue it to his sonne, syr Eustace And made hym duke therof, with great solace ¶ Thus Eustace, then duke of Normandy To Parys went, to kyng lewys of Fraunce His homage made for his lande so in hye And put oute then, with greate contraryaunce The offycers, that dyd to Maude pleasaunce
And wed the suster of kyng Lewes to wife For supowaill of it without strife ¶ The kyng Stephā to Englād thē home came And tidynges had, howe kyng Dauid had distroi¦ed The North parties, & dooen full muche harme Wherfore he brent Edenburgh then and noyed And the countree aboute, he sore accloyed For wiche Dauid his soonne to Henry then sent To bee his manne, thens furth at his entent ¶ To whome kyng Stephan therldō of Hūtyng¦ton Then gaue, and erle therof hym so create Who then for it, by verey due reason His homage did as it was ordinate Homage of the Scottes. Whiche Hēry dyed, and neuer had kynges estate For whiche the Scottes, seyn thei owe no seruice To Englishe kynges, but onely of this wise ¶ Kyng Stephan then bet the castell doune In England, so that stode hym to defence His menne thei gaue to their enheritesoun And all foon, for cause of their offence He disherite with might violence Diuers erles and lordes he disherite And many other of his frendes enherite ¶ The yere of Christ a thousand was then gone An hundred thirty and eight also Kyng Stephan brake all his othes a none That he had made vnto the barons tho For whiche thei rose full sore again hym so And warred hym felly on euery side
And he on them also with mikyl pryde. ¶ The yere a thousande, an .C. thyrty and nyne Maude Empryce, in England claymed her right With earle Robert, of Gloucestre her brother fine And earle Randolf of Chester, with all his might Syr Bygot earle of Northfolke then hyght Awbrey Ver then earle of Oxenforde And Willyam Bawne, yt then was earle of Her∣forde ¶ Willyam Legroos, earle of Almarle tho Robert Louell, & Willyam lorde Percy Kyng Dauyd her eine, and many other mo Of earls and barons, that were full hardy The castell then Lyncolne gate on hye The cytee helde of Lyncolne with also With hoste full greate, lyggyng with them so ¶ Where then the kyng, y• castell seged longe Tyll he it had, by treaty and conuencyon And bode therin, with power greate and stronge Tyll Maude and he, as made is mencyon With stronge batayles, and great discencyon Besyde Lyncolne, where then she had the felde And Stephā taken, & hurt sore through his sheld To Brystowe then, earle Roberte Clare hym led And in the towre, there kepte in stronge pryson The Empryce Mawde, with power that she had To Wynchester then, she rode segyng the towne Where the quene Maude, as made is mencyon Kyng Stephā his wyfe it rescowed wt batayl sore And toke the earle Clare his eme thore
The .C .xxviij. Chapiter. ¶ Thenterchaunge of kyng Stephan and of tht duke Robert Clare duke of Glocester. FOr which cause thē, to haue hir eme again Themperesse and quene Maude accordid To enterchaunge, yt kyng so then full fain For erle Robert without more, concordid This enterchaunge, thus made and recordid The kyng hir sued vnto Oxenford Fro whens she went, by night to Walyngford ¶ Vpon the frost, in the wynter season In her smocke alone, with hir vncle dere That none hir knewe, of theim without the towne So like hir smocke and the snowe was in feer The kyng knewe not in what place that she wer For Oxenford he gate, and Awbray slewe Of Oxenford, that was an erle full trewe ¶ The kyng Stephan, a castell then began At Wilton, where kyng Dauid with power And erle Robert, of Glocester that was then Hym droue awaye, out of that place full clere And bet it downe, to the ground full nere To Walyngford, the kyng with power went Themperesse to sech was his entent ¶ Hir partie then, droue hym then awaye With greate slaughter of menne and occsion And euery lorde on other, made greate affraye And spoyled other through al this region
By greate impression and cruell sore raunson The kyng treated with erle Randolf full trewe But false then was his treaty, as menne knewe ¶ For when he came vnto his presence Anone he putte hym in sore prisone To tyme he had by his magnificence The castell of Lyncolne vnto his croune And putte hym then to fyne and greate raunsom So variaunt he was alwaye of hight Fro euē to morowe, that no man trust hym might The fiftene yere of the same kyng Stephen Therle Geffrey of Angeou decessid A noble prince as all menne did beleuen Henry his soonne, of persone well encressed Of childishe wit also full relesed And of age he was then fiftene yere To Scotland came, kyng Dauid to require ¶ Of his socour, and of his supportacion England to gette, that was his heritage Who made hym then, full greate consolacion And with hym came without fee or wage With full assent of all his baronage Vnder baners, kyng Dauid made hym knight Vpon the felde, again kyng Stephen to fight ¶ But suche treaty was made and good accorde That kyng Stephen, to Henry shoulde retourne As very heire, without more discorde At his decesse, to Henry whole retourne The croune of England, without more soiourne
Who died then, after in his .xix. yere At Feuersham buried, he was full clere. ¶ Of Christes date, was then a thousande yere And an hundreth fyftye and eyght also His wyfe and he, there buried both in feer The whiche he found, whyles he was lyuyng so And reigned here, in muche trouble and wo And had this realme, without any ryght For themprise Maude, that fayre lady bright The .C .xxix. Chapiter. ¶ Henry fitz Emprice kyng of Englande and erle of An∣geou, duke of Normandye and Guyen, by .xxxvi. yere and beganne to reygne the yere of oure Lorde a thou∣sande a hundreth .lviii. and dyed the yere a thousande an hundreth and .xciiii. HEnry therle of Angeou was tho kyng Hē∣rye the seconde. In this meane tyme, had bē in Normādy And set his rule therin, for frende or foo And crouned was at London worthely With all the lordes of his hye monarchie And made hym then, theyr feautee and homage The prince of Wales also for his heritage. ¶ He wedded then a lady, fayre and bright Dame Alianor, the dukes doughter of Guyen And heyre therof, and lady by all right Possession had with all, the profytes then And welbeloued was she with her men Deuorced fro the kyng Lewes of Fraunce.
That hyr had wed to wyfe, of his puysaunce. ¶ And on her gatte two doughters, fayre & gente But for sibrede and consanguinitee They were departed, by papall iudgement On whome kyng Henry, by Christes decree Gatte sonnes foure, of great humanitee Henry, Richarde, Geffrey, and Iohn also Elianor and Ihone, his doughters two. The .C .xxx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Malcolyne the seconde kyng of Scottes made ho∣mage for Scotlande & for therldome of huntyngdon. IN this meane whyle, kyng Dauid then so dyed To whō Malcolyn, Hēryes sōne was heire Whiche Henry was erle notified Of Huntyngdon, without any dispayre Of that erldome, bothe good and fayre And sonne was, to this noble kyng Dauy That wedded had, erle Waldens doughter onely. ¶ To enioye therldome, by her enheritaunce That gat on her, this Malcolyne that was kyng Of Scotlande nowe, of mighty hye puysaunce That homage made, for his enherityng Homage of yt Scot¦tes. Vnto Henry, that then was of Englande kyng For all Scotlande, and also for Huntyngdon Whiche seruices both, were due vnto the croune. The .C .xxxi. Chapiter.
¶ This kyng Henrye exiled Thomas becket byshop of Cauntorburye. HE maried then, his sonne the young Henry To the doughter of the kyng of Fraunce He exiled then, Thomas of Cauntorbury Out of Englande, and many of his aliaunce For cause of his rebellious gouernaunce And as he came fro Rome, by Fraunce awaye With language fel, he prayed the kyng that daye ¶ The poyntes to mende, and so to Englād went For which the kyng, was with hym sore displeased That then he sayd, had I had men that ment Myne honeste, I were not thus diseased With suche a clerke, thus greued and vneased Therfore three knightes, Raynold le Fitz Vrsy Raynold fitz Vrsy Hughe Maruile Robert Tracy. Hughe Moruyle hym slewe with Robert Tracy. ¶ But kyng Malcolyne died, that was full true Of his homage, at Westchester ensealed To kyng Henry dooen, so as it was due For it should not be gaynsayd ne counselled Homage of yt Scot¦tes. Nor afterwarde of Scottes be repeled To whiche Malcolyne, Willyā his sonne & heyre Was crouned kyng of Scotlande then full fayre. The .C .xxxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kynge Wyllyam of Scotlande wente in to Normandye, with kyng Henry of Englande the seconde, as his liegeman.
THis kyng Wyllyam then rode with hoste full stronge Subiec∣cion of yt Scottes. The Northrē lād he brent & sore distroyed By east and west, of both Merches of Englande The lorde Vesty, with it was anoyed The lorde Vnfreuyle with syckenesse so accloyed With power great at Alnwike with hym faught Wher he was takē, in batayll sore and caught ¶ Whō to the kyng, to Londō then thei brought Vnto kyng Henry, with great honoure Then had the kyng, tydynges he liked nought His sonne Henry, by kyng Lewys socoure Besieged Roan, with hoste great and rygoure For when the kyng, to Normandy then went The kyng Wyllyam, with hym his labour spent. ¶ And Dauid also, his brother with al his might That erle was then, create of Huntyngdon, And Robert ferers erle of Leycester so hight And Roger clare, with theim of great renoume Of Gloucester, that erle was in possession With other lordes, and the siege sone remeued And his cytee of Roan, full well rescued. ¶ The siege and saute, perdoned and forgeuen At the prayer of kyng Lewys of Fraunce Within fewe yeres, in peace and rest to liuen He crowned his sonne without distaunce Kyng of Englande, and gaue hym gouernaunce And at the feast of his coronacion. He sewed afore hym, for his consolacion, The .C .xxxiii. Chapiter.
¶ This yonger Henry reigned but .iiii. yeres, and died before his father, wherfore he is not accompted as kynge because his father outlyued hym and reigned after his death. ANd to hī said, sōne thinke I do you honour A kynge to serue you thus, nowe at youre meate He aunswered hym full vnthankefully that houre And sayd, it was no reproue ne forfete An erls sonne to serue the kynges sonne at meate For whiche the father Henry, to Irelande went Tyll young Henry the kyng was dead and spent Then came Henry, and had the gouernement The father and kyng, was then admytte agayn And reigned then, and had the regiment And but .iiii. yere his sonne reygned soth to sayen Wherfore he is among kynges certeyne Not accoumpted, by no chronicler For his father was kynge afore and after clere. The .C .xxxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Wyllyam of Scotlande made his homage to kyng Henry the seconde. THe kyng Wyllyam, at his daye assigned To Yorke came, to do there his homage Homage of yt Scottes. That made it then, & nothyng it repugned But for his due dette, then for his heritage Of Scotlande whole, by veraye due knowlage Of his barons, and by his euydence Agayne it founde he then, no trewe defense. ¶ The kynge Henry then, cōquered all Irelande
By papall dome, there of his royaltee The profytes and reuenues of the lande The dominacion, and the souerayntee For errour whiche agayn the spiritualtee They helde full longe, & would not been correcte Of heresyes, with which they were infecte. ¶ He founded then, the priory of Newstede Within Shirwod, and Waltham founded newe Afore were secular without hede Whiche regular he made, in order due And other two houses of order trewe He founded there, for his soule to praye Where was holy seruyce kepte euery daye. ¶ Geffreye his sonne, the thyrde gotten and bore That duke of Britayne was hole create By his wyues right, to enioye for euermore Whiche was a prince, of royall great estate At Parys dyed, that Arthure create To sonne and heyre, and Isabell the fayre His doughter was, without any dispayre ¶ In the yere of Christ, a thousande clere An hundreth and sixty also and one Baudewyn the thyrde, died taken priesoner By the Sarysens, that were his mortall foone Of his body, that yssue then had none To whome his brother Almarike did succede To Ierusalem, and there was kyng in dede ¶ By treason of therle Triples then The Christen hoste, that had foule betrayed
When Bawdewyn was so taken, through yt false man That great people of Christē had thē reised And on the felde, nothyng to be praysed To the Sarysyns went, with all his power And discomfyt the chrysten hoost full clere. The .C .xxxv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Geffrey Plantagenet, otherwyse called Plantage∣neth Earle of Angeou, elder brother of Bawdewyne and Almaryk, shoulde haue ben king of Ierusalem afore, and so by consequens thys kynge Henrye shoulde haue be kynge of it. BVt yf ryght, had lynally procede Geffray Plantagenet, Earle of Angeou The elder brother of Bawdwyn so in dede And of Almaryk, with mykell blysse and ioye Whiche Geffray, so Earle of Angeou Shulde haue be kyng afore of all that realme Both of Surry, and also Ierusalem ¶ When duke Robert, Ierusalem forsoke For couetyse to haue, and ioyse Englande Godfray Boleyne, the realme of Surry toke And of Ierusalem eke, I vnderstande And erowned was, to be kynge of that lande That duke had bene afore, of all Loueyne A noble prynce, and a worthy Chyefteyne ¶ A thousande was, an hundreth sixty & syxtene Withoute yssue, of his body cōmynge Dyed, to whome his brother as was sene Bawdwin succeded, and of that realme was king
That ruled the lande, as was full well semyng Full worthy accompted, amonge all estates That chrysten fayth susteyned, without debates To whom his sonne, king Bawdewin did succede The seconde was, that had so borne that name A noble Prynce, of all marcyall dede And in that lande, greate honoure had and fame Whiche on his wyfe, gate without blame A doughter then had vnto his heyre That lande to haue enheryte, and repayre. Whom then earle Fowke of Angeou, wed to wife And kyng was of that lande then by her ryght On whome he gate thre sonnes in his lyfe Worthy knyghtes, and men of greate myght The eldest Geffray Plantagenet hyght That gate this same Henry fytz Empryse Kyng of Englande, of noble and hye enterpryse. The .ii. sonne, of Fowke, was Bawdewin yt thirde Dyed prysoner, as it is expressed afore Without yssue of his body betyd The third sonne then, of Fowke & laste was bore Hyght Almaryk, whiche two were kynges thore Where erle Geffrey their elder brother had ryght That suffred them, to ioye that lande by myght ¶ Which Almaryk dyed kyng so of that realme After whome then reygned, his sonne Bawdwyn That fourth was of that name of Yerlam That impotent was, without medecyn To mayntayne warre, he myght no more enclyne
Who called was Bawdewyn Paraliticus For with the palsye, stryken was he full hydeous The .C .xxxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe that kyng Henry the seconde was very heyre of Ieru¦salem, and by consequens, Rycharde of Yorke shoulde be the same. Wherfore he sent to kynge Henry his crowne His banner also, of his armes full fayre Of Ierusalem, that were of great renowne As to hym that was then the very heyre Of earle Geffray eldest sonne full fayre Was to kyng Fowke, and to his wyfe the quene Doughter and heyre, to Baudewin the .ii. clene. ¶ This fourth Bawdewyn called Paraliticus This message sent, the yere of Christe a thousand An hundreth ful, foure score and thre, ryght thus When Henry was requyred, to haue that lande Whiche he proroged, and sent agayne his sounde He shulde be there, yf that the kyng of Fraunce And he myght well accorde of gouernaunce ¶ He went so forth anon to Normandye With hoost full great, with kyng Philyp to treat Of that voyage and warre, accorded on hye But then the death, hym felly ganne reherte Wherfore anon, he satte vp in his seate And to his sonne Rycharde, greate sōme he gaue Thether to go, that holy lande to saue. ¶ And then he dyed, at Pount Euerard buryed
The sorowe of herte, and great contricyon A prynce chrysten, fully notifyed Withouten pere in all comparyson Of worthy knygthode, and manly renowne A thousande yere, an. C, lxxx. and fourtene And of his reygne, was syxe & thirty clene The .C .xxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Richard king of England, duke of Normādy, & earle of Angeou, reygned .x. yere, and beganne the yere of Chryst a. M. an .C .lxxxxiiii. & dyed the yere. M .CC. and .iiii. RYchard his sōne, to kīg thē was crowned Kyng Ry∣charde the fyrst, called Cure de L¦. By Bawdewyn archbyshop & primate Of Cauntorbury, & of England yt stound That ruled the churche, then by lawe ordynate His brother Geffray, of baste so procreate Archbyshop was of Yorke, then newe electe The Northren churche, vnder him to be protecte. ¶ The lorde Lueye, that Godfray Lucye hight Afore hym bare a royall pyllyon And Iohn Marshal, his spores of gold ful bright Willyam Maundeuile, his mighty hye crowne That earle was then of Almarle vp and downe Of his wyues ryght, & willyam Marshal bolde Earle of Strigeyll, the scepter bare of golde. ¶ Willyam Patryk, that was then Longspee That Earle was, then create of Salysbury A staffe of golde, for constable then was he Of Englande hole, to haue the regeny By ryght of his offyce of constablery
For yf the lande were voyde, & none heire knowe To kepe the realme, by his offyce hym owe. ¶ This ylke Willyam, was earle also create Of Gloucestre, by whiche that offyce grewe To hym of ryght, for he was generate Of Roberte Clare earle of Gloucestre trewe Foure Barons bare, by theyr seruyce full dewe Aboue his hed, then in processyon A cloth of golde, by good direccyon. ¶ Earle Dauyd then, that tyme of Huntyngdon Brother, of the kyng Willyam of Scotlande And Iohn the earle of Morten of renowne Kyng Rychardes brother, as I vnderstone Ryght worthy lordes, that tyme of this lande And Robert Ferrers, earle of Leycester tho Thre swordes bare, afore the kyng there so Syxe Earls then, and Barons of estate A cheker bare, with Iueles full royall And clothes ryche, that were well ordynaté For that ylke feste, and state imperyall Fro South, vnto the Septentrionall Where then, none suche accompted of rychesse As there were then, as wryten is expresse The .C .xxxviii. Chapiter. ¶ How kyng William of Scotland, made homage for Scot¦lande, and then after his coronacyon at Westmynster, he went to Fraunce, and so to Ierusalem, by the assent of the Kynge Phylippe.
THe bishop of Duresme on his right hande The bishop also of Bathe on his left syde Homage o the Scottes The kīg of Scottes Willyā for Scotlād Made hym homage and feaute leege that tyde Kyng Rychard then, to Fraūce with muche pride Anone so yode tharchebishop Bawdewyne With hym then went, worthy clerkes and fyne ¶ Sir Rauf Fulgence erle of Perche then also Robert Ferrers erle of Lecester then With erles fell and barons many moo Of all this land, went many a worthy then Of England and Scotland many a manne Of Ireland Wales, Guyan and Normandy Then with hym went, in that voyage on hie ¶ The kyng Philip, shippid his hoste at Iene The kyng Rychard tooke the sea at Marsile With all his hoste, without other meene Within short tyme, arriued vp in Cisile Wher he full faire, receiued was that while By kyng Tancred soonne of Wyllyam Whiche Wyllyā wed his suster, Iohan by name ¶ The kyng Rychard, twoo Isles ther cōquered Byside Cisile, to his suster theim gaue To hir lyuyng, and bade hir not bee fered For he should se hir dower, she should haue Longyng to the right that she should craue And at Meschyne, kyng Rychard then did make A Bastell strong, the Sarsyns for to wake ¶ And sailed furth, to Cipres then hy sea
Wher his mother hym mete with dame Barnage The kyng his doughter of Nauerne faire & free Whom ther he wed, in lawfull mariage At Lymosyn in his pilgremage A citee great full of all habundaunce Whiche by assaute, he gate of his puysaunce ¶ The kyng Rychard rode then to Nichosie And gate the citee, with force and might The citee also of Cheryn mightely Wher his doughter and heire, he toke full right To Buffenet and Baffe that were full wight To Dendamour and Candor his citees He went anone with greate felicitees ¶ He gate theim all, & all the realme throughout And toke the kyng Isaak and hym slewe And wed his doughter, vnto the kyng full stout Of Ierusalem, whose wife was dedde then newe That Sibill hight, yt doughter was mēne knewe Of Almarike, kyng of Ierusalem The brother of Geffrey, of Angeou hir eme ¶ This kyng Rychard, yt realme of Cipris wāne To whome the lordes, echeone did their homage And anone by sea, with many a manne To Acres wher in that ilke voyage He toke a ship of high and greate auantage Of ablementes for warre, and ordinaunce The whiche he had, with hym in gouernaunce ¶ But fiftene Sarsyns there he dreyncte And twoo hundred he kept, that ship to gnie
To Acres then, wher kyng Philip full feyn Had sieged long without remedie But kyng Rychard, of Acres toke in hie The stronger syde, and gaue it greate affraies Late and erly, bothe by nightes and dayes ¶ He gate it sone, with his greate ordinaunce And on the walles his baners full hie he sette The kynges armes, he sette vp also of Fraunce And kyng Guyes armes of, Ierusalem well bette The duke of Oistrich Lympold without lette Set vp his armes after aboue theim all Whiche kyng Rychard, did cast doūe ouer yt wall ¶ With wages greate, and riches manifold He ryched his mēne, & rode throughoute all Sur∣ry The citees all and castelles that he would He gate with force, and came again in hie To castell Pilgrym, whiche kyng Philip pleinly Beseged had full long, and went his waye Whiche Rychard beseged in greate araye ¶ To the whiche there was, no waye but one full straite On a cawsey with dikes depe and wyde Strongly walled, with towres on to wayte With many drawe bridges, wher none might go ne ryde Strongly cheined, wt barris on eche side Whiche castell then he gate in dayes ten With battaill sore, wher he sleugh many menne ¶ The cheynes of yrone, he stroke vp wt his axe Bothe at Acres and at castell Pilgrym And brent theim all, as thei had been of waxe
Cheynes & barres, with muche might that tyme The Sarasyns also, he slewe with muche gryme The kyng Philip fell sicke and home would gone To Fraunce anone, and toke his menne echeone ¶ Vnto the duke of Burgoyn theim to lede To bide for hym, vpon the warres there And home so went to Fraunce without drede Wher then he made greate warre and muche dere In Normandy and Guyan, fouly hym bere Against his othe, and his greate assuraūce At their passage, by couenaunt and concordaunce The .C .xxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Rychard sold the realme of Cipres to Statyn once, & an other tyme to the kyng Guy Lezinaunt to resorte to hym & to his heires, in de faute of issue of theim. HE sold Cipresse to kyng Statyn of might An other tyme to Guy Lizenaūt full bold For great riches, the resort again of right And for greate sommes of innumerable of gold His prisoners he raunsomed, sore and sold But with his hoste, full well he distribute All that he gate, vnto their greate refute ¶ Ioppen he gate and it repaired newe He and the duke of Burgoyn full sore sought On the Soudan and felly did pursue To castell Assure, fro whens he fled vnfought But kyng Rychard, that of no perill rought Was hurt right ther, with dartes venemous
Fiue woundes sore, mortall and perelous ¶ The droue hym then, into Ierusalem And layed a sege, about the citee rounde And kyng Rychard hard, howe fro Egipt realme Came strong vitail, and ryches in that stounde With full greate hoste, the Christen to confounde By night he came, and there theim discomfete With worship greate, and farpassyng profite ¶ Gase he buylded full faire, and Ascaloyn To the templers, to whome afore thei longid He deliuered, and made hym redy boun For to assayle the citee, and haue fongid With might of menne, & laddirs full well hongid Engynes and gonnes, greate stones for to cast Whiche to haue wonne, thei were full like at last ¶ The Soudan out by night, then stale awaye And Christen menne, the citee gate anone And kyng Rychard, with all the hoste his waye Toke to the Flum of Cedar on his foon He folowed fast, with hoste as he might goon With the Soudan faught, & putte hym fro yt feld And mightely fro hym, he rest his sheeld The .C .xl. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the Soudā toke a trewce wt kyng Rychard, after he had putte hym to flight & wonne his citee and castels in Surry. Kyng Rychard gaue Ierusalem and yt realme of Surry, to his susters soonne Henry erle of Campa∣nya, with the heire Sibill to his wife, and homeward∣was takē prisoner in Oistrich, but in his gift of Surrry
Ierusalem, he reserued the resort to hym & to his heires THe Soudā toke a trewce wt kyng Richard For thre yere whole to bye all marchandise And sell and passe saufly thitherward To the sepulcre, in all maner wyse With entercomen, as then it did suffice And home he went, for cause his brother Iohn Then purposed had, for to bee crouned anon ¶ He sent his mother, and wife to Cisile And of Acres he made then capitain The baron bold, sir Rychard Vmfreuile Ierusalem to Henry erle of Champein With all Surry to haue and to demain And made hym kyng therof without delay For his susters soonne, he was without nay ¶ For the marquis Wyllyam Mountferrate That kyng therof was, by his wife enherite Was slain in Tire, his citee by debate All sodeinly for cause of greate dispite Vetulo de Mount, his brothers death to quite His bretherne twoo to Tire, with power hath sent That slewe hym there, by Vetulo his assent ¶ Whose wife he gaue, to Henry his cousyn For she was heire of Ierusalem He made kepers, in euery place full fyne And homeward came, then by the sea stream Hoostyng by diuerse countres and realme To Romany Tuskan and Lumberdy In to Oistrich, and there was take in hye
¶ Thēperour led home, thē to Mēske he brought In strong ward brought, to tyme that his finaūce Was fully payed, emong his commons & sought Of holy churche, vnto ful greate greuaunce The marchaūtes also, thē made great cheuisaūce Of all the shryues, was take full greate riches Through all England, to raūsom wt, his highnes ¶ And home he came, & Iohn his brother chasti∣sed And his fautours, emprisoned all full sore To Normandy then went, and there supprised The kyng Philip, and werred hym euer thore That stroyed his land of Normandy afore Against his othe, and his hie assuraunce Whilest he labored vpon the miscreaunce ¶ He then appeled the kyng Philip to fight Thei twoo alone, hand for hand in feld That he was false of his promise and hight Whiche kyng Philip graunted, but not it held But cowardly, with royall hoste hym beld Vpon hym came, all sodeinly to fight Within three dayes then, for their brothers right ¶ Beside Gysours thei faught with hostes sore Wher kyng Rychard had the victorie Kyng Philip fled fro his baner thore With muche shame, reproffe and vilanie Kyng Rychard segid a castell then in hie That Caluce hight, not ferre fro Lymosyne Wher hurt he was, full sore and dyed fyne ¶ An arblaster with a quarell hym smot
As he about the castell went to spie But then he made therto a saute full hote On euery syde, about full cruelly And gatte the place so then full myghtely And slewe theim all, without any grace Agayn hym so that holden had, that strong place. ¶ He shroue hym then, vnto abbots three With great sobbyng, and hye contricion And wepyng teares, that pitee was to see Mekely askyng penaunce and absolucion That it might please God, at his peticion To forgeue his offences tyll domysday So afterwarde in blysse, he might been ay. ¶ He quethed his corps, then to bee buried Al Fount Euerard, there at his fathers feete To whom he graunted, and made it notifyed Traytour he was, and false of his behete His herte inuyncyble, to Roan he sent full mete For their greate truth & stedfast great constaunce His bowelles lose to Poytou, for deceyuaunce ¶ Whose soule, from the body dyd departe And into heauen went, where is eternall ioye Because from synne, he did conuerte Longyng for that blessed daye To see Christ, that for his synne dyd paye That crucyfied was vpon the roode Redemyng his synne, by the shedyng of his blode. ¶ And of his reigne, he died the .x. yere And in the yere of Christes incarnacion
A thousande hole, two hundreth and .iiii. clere As written is, by clere computacion Who in his life had hole dominacion In Normandy, Guyen, Cypers and Surry Whose honoure shone, aboue all other clerely The .C .xli. Chapiter. ¶ Iohn kyng of Englande, duke of Normandy and Guyan  erle of Angeou, began to reygne the yere. M .CC. and .iiii. and reigned .xvii. yere and died the yere. M .CC .xxi. HIs brother Iohn, was kyng then of En∣glande Ihōkyng of Eng∣lande. And crouned was, at westminster ful faire By all estates and lordes of his lande And sone therafter deuorced, full vnfayre From his wife wedded, that there afore was heyre Vnto therle of Gloucestre full wyse That sonnes had, that tyme of great enterprise ¶ For cause of whiche, and of consanguinitye Deuorce was made, and toke another wyfe Dame Isabell, therles doughter fayre and free Of Englande, and his heyre knowen ryfe Whiche after made hym ful great warre & stryfe For she was wyfe, of Hugh Brune of Toreyn The Viscount then, toke fro hym a virgyne. ¶ Wherfore Hugh Brune, nomore of hym wolde hold But warred hym, on euery side aboute Tyll he hym toke, with other many folde And slewe theim all, were thei neuer so stoute In his first yere, a taxe he tooke full out
Of eche plough land thre shyllynges fully payed For whiche the people bitterly for hym prayed The .C .lxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Wyllyam of Scotlande did homage leege to kyng Iohn at Lyncolne, the duke Arthure of Britayne & all the lordes of Irelande did the same IN his first yere, kyng Wylliā of Scotlād Made hys homage, in Lyncolne his citee And Arthure duke of Britayne, I vnder∣stande Sone after, made hys homage & feautee At London then, with great humilitee The prince of Wales, there made his homage For Wales then, that was his heritage. ¶ The great a Neele, and Makmurre also And al the lordes, and kynges of Irelande Therles also of Vlster, did right so Of Ormond and Desmond, for there lande And all estates there, as I vnderstande Wer sworne to hym, and to hym did homage For theyr lyuelodes, and theyr heritage ¶ The kyng Philip confedered with Arthure To rebell sore, agayne his eme kyng Iohn And graunte hym men, & power stronge and sure To gette Guyan Poytou and Angeou anon Wherfore kyng Iohn to Normandy gan gone And there he tooke Arthure duke of Britayn In castell Mirable dyed, in mykell payne ¶ Dame Isabell the suster also of Arthure.
In the castell of Bristowe, was then holde And died there in pryson, then full sure As kyng Iohn hir vncle, so it wolde A lady of greate beautee, she was hold Beshet in pryson, in paynes strong So endeth her life, for sorowe liued not long ¶ Thus slewe he both, Athure and Isabell The chyldren of his brother, duke Geffrey To ioye the croune of Englande, as men tell Wherfore moste parte, of all his landes that daye Beyonde the sea, forsoke hym then for ay Retournyng to the kyng of Fraunce in hye To holde of hym and his perpetually ¶ Bishop Hubert of Cauntorbury tho died Wherfore kyng Iohn, vnto the couent sente To chose his clarke, whiche they refused & denied Wherfore the kyng, was wroth in his entente For they disobeyed the lettre, whiche he sent For they had chosen mayster Stephan Langton The pite∣ous & lamē table storye of king Ihō who by the Roomyshe byshop and his adherē∣tes was most sham fully & vy∣lanously a∣bused, as by this hy∣story doeth appeare. An worthy clarke, of all disposicion. ¶ Whom kyng Iohn, then wold not admytte For Romayn bull, ne for the prelates prayer But prisoned some, and some to death commytte Some he exiled and theyr eyen clere And all personnes and prelates in fere He then put out and seazed theyr benefice Through all the lande, as his mortall enemyes The Romyshe byshoppe curssed hym openly And all the realme fully did enterdite
That sacramentes none, therin should occupie And to the kyng of Fraunce, without respite He wrote his letters so full fayre endite To take Englande hole in gouernaunce For kyng Iohn his great misgouernaunce. ¶ Many erles also, and many great barons Vnto the kyng of Fraunce, wrote openly To sende his sonne Lewes, the rebellions To helpe, to whome they promysed sikerly To croune hym kyng of England worthely If that kyng Iohn, would not his trespasse amēd Vnto the churche, in whiche he had offend. ¶ Wherfore yt kyng of Fraūce, to England sente His sonne Lewes, with hoste and power strong With whom many lordes susteyned his entent And other some, maynteyned kyng Iohn in wrōg Thus stode this lande, Englande & Wales longe Hole enterdite, frō all holy sacramentes That none was done, without priuelegementes ¶ Lewes the sonne, of kyng Philip of Fraunce Had castelles, fees, and citees many one At his good rule, and full wyse gouernaunce In Englande then, well mo, then had kyng Iohn Tyll on a daye, to lordes he made his moone By whose coūcel, vnto yt Romishe bishop he wrote His letters meke, as best he could theim note ¶ Besekyng hym of mercy, and of grace Of forgeuenesse and absolucion His defautes all to mend, and his trespasse
And vndirguage all his punysion For to release thenterdiccion For whiche the Romishe bishop as he yt letters see Wepte fore, hauyng full greate pitee ¶ Thenterdiccion fully he releassed And to the kyng of Fraunce, anone sent To ceasse the warre, the peace to be encreassed Betwene hym, and kyng Iohn bayssent To whiche he would, put so all his entent To Lewes then, he sent thesame message And of Englande, to haue his hole costage ¶ And for Lewes, with Lordes of Englande Obeyde not the byshops commaundement He sent Gwalo his legate I vnderstande To cursse Lewes, and all of his assent Then died kyng Iohn, in Christen hole entent At Croxton abbey, and buried was full fayre At Worcester, with lordes and great repayre ¶ Some bookes sayen, he poysoned was to dead Of plummes so syttyng at his meate In thabbey of Cistews at Swynsheade With whiche a monke, there hym did rehete Wenyng of God greate thanke to gette At Newerke died, at Worcester sepultured In chronicles, as is playnly scriptured. ¶ He gate a sōne, that Hēry of Wynchester hight And other after, and Richarde was his name That erle was of Cornwayle, of great might A Worthy knight, and of right noble fame
These sonnes on his wyfe, that noble dame And gate Isabell, the wyfe of Frederyk Emperoure of Rome, a lorde full poletyk. ¶ In his tymes were these earles in Englande Geffry Maundeuile, earle of Essex than Syr Quincy, as I can vnderstande Earle of Winchester, that was a manly man And the earle of Cornewayle that was than Roger of Clare, then earle of Gloucester That in Englande was, none his better. ¶ Roger Bygot, earle of Northfolke then That Marshall was, that tyme of Englande Henry Bowne, then earle of Herforde, as I can Conceyue was then, Constable of the lande Aryght worthy knyght, of his hande And Dauyd, then was of Huntyngdon Willyam Marshall, earle of Penbroke full boon ¶ Randolfe of Chester, the earle of good estate Robert Veer of Oxenforde full wyse Willyam Groos, of Almaryk generate Willyam Lōgspee, earle then, of great enterpryse In actes marcyall, a man knyghtly and wyse Of Salysbury, a mighty lorde that daye Through all Englande, knowen of greate araye. ¶ Willyam, the earle of Arundell that hyght Awbeny by his surname, full well then knowe At Wimondham, in Northfolke buryed ryght Father was of Philyp, full yonge vnknowe That full curteous was, both to hye and lowe
That after hym was earle of Arundell As chronycles wryten, can clerely tell ¶ This kyng Iohn dyed in hole creaunce The yere of Chryste, a. M, was then knawe Two hundreth .xxi. by remembraunce In chronycles, as I haue red and sawe And full cumbreous, bothe to hye and lawe At Worcester, buryed in good araye As a prynce royall of reason, ought that daye. The .C .xliii. Chapiter. ¶ Henry the thyrde, kynge of Englande, duke of Normandye and Guyen, and Earle of Angeou, that beganne to reygne the yere of Chryste, a thousande .CC. xxi, and dyed in the yere, a thousande .CC .lxxiii. and of his reygne the .lvi. yere ¶ In his tyme was a batayl at Lincolne, where Earle Rau∣dolfe of Chester discomfyted Lewys, yt sonne of kyng Phi¦lyppe of Fraunce. HEnry his sonne, then was of .ix. yere age Kyng Hen¦ry yt thirde At Gloucester, crowned with the dyademe By the Legate Gwalo, & the Baronage Stephan of Langton, helpyng as did well seme Archbyshop then, as the byshop coulde deme The same yere then, the kyng wt Lewys faught Besyde Lincolne, where Lewys was nere caught ¶ Foure .C. knyghtes, of Lewis there was slaine Therle of Perche, was slayne on Lewis syde And many fled, with Lewys soth agayne Therle Randolf, of Chester knowen wyde The felde there gate, yt daye with mikell pryde
And Lewys then, all his ryght relesed And home he went, with mony well appesed. ¶ In the seconde yere, he wedded Alyanor Therls doughter of Prouynce, good and fayre Whose elder syster, kyng Lewys wed afore This earle was then, famed amonge repayre The noblest prynce, without any dispeyre That tyme alyue, through all chrystente Of all honoure, and greate nobilyte And Iohn, the sonne of Dauyd of Huntingdon That of Huntyngdon, & Chester earle had bene Without chylde dyed, his erldome to the crowne Then sezed were, to tyme yt it was sene Howe his systers myght them departe betwene The parliament graunted, yt wardes to the kyng That helde of hym, by knyghtes seruyce doyng ¶ To make statutes, at Oxenforde & ordynaūce By whiche, there shulde none alyence enheryte And put the kyngvnder the gouernaunce Of certayne lordes, wysest & moste parfyte Whiche after made amonge them great dispyte And batayles stronge, & greate contrariaunce Through all the lande, by longe continuaunce The .C .xliiii. Chapiter. ¶ Of the byrthe of Edwarde his eldest sonne, and heyre was in the .xxix. yere of his father, and in the yere of Chryste a thousande .CC .xxxix. Howe Symonde Mountforte Earle of Leycester was create.
HIs eldest sonne, and heyre yt Edward hyghe At Westmynster, of Chrystes incarnacyon The yere a thousand .CC .ix. and .xxx. ryght Whome the legate Otho by informacyon Baptyzed in funt, saynt Edmondes confirmacy To hym then made, as the churche deuysed In his baptime holy, then autoryzed. ¶ Symond ye sōne, of earle Symond Moūtfort Came oute of Fraunce, for ferdnesse of yt quene To kyng Henry, whome he gaue great comforte He gaue hym then, his man for ay to bene Of Leycester, the earldome fayre and clene With the Stewarde of Englande, in herytage Whiche is an offyce, of greate priuelage. ¶ And wed his doughter, dame Elyanore To Willyam Marshall, earle of Penbroke After whose deathe, she auowed chastyte for euer∣more But he her maryed, and her betoke For all her vowe, as sayeth the booke To Earle Symond Mountfort to be his wyfe Notwithstandyng, yt she vowed chastyte her lyfe. ¶ Tho dyed Lewelyn, the prynce of Wales then Betwene his sonnes Gryffyth, and Dauid grewe Greate discencyon and stryfe ay, when and when And dame Beatryce, the kynges doughter trewe To earle Symonde, of Britayne wedded newe The yere of Chryste, a thousand was accompted Two hundreth moo, fourty and one amounted The .C .xlv. Chapiter.
¶ The  of  of Lancaster and of Leicester, long after in the yere of his father one and thirty, and in the yere of Christ M. iiC xli. THe same yere then, Edmond his soōne was At Lācastre yt yere of Christ thē writē A thousand whole, twoo. C, and fourty mo bore And one therto, in Flores as is wryten And in the yere next after then ouersetten The kyng his doughter, Margaret then maryed. To Alexaunder kyng of Scotland notified ¶ At Yorke citee, wher he then did homage Homage of the Scottes. For Scotland whole, and Isles apperteinyng Then dyed hemperour full sage Wherfore the lordes of Almaignie variyng Some chose Rychard kyng, Henryes brother be∣yng And some yt kyng of Castile would haue algate But erle Rychard of Menske had all the state ¶ Then rose discorde, betwene the kyng Henry Battaile of Lewes And certain lordes of mighty greate power Symond Mountfort, vpon hym toke boldly To bee cheftein, to hold the feld full clere At Lewis faught, of christ then was the yere A thousand twoo, hundred and sixty accompted And foure also, so muche more amounted ¶ This erle Symond, had then the kyng Henry And his brother, Rychard themperour In his kepyng and ward, wer hold strongly But prince Edward, was sette in Herford toure And erle Henry of Herford that was floure
Themperours soonne, at Herford with hym laye A myle about, disported theim euery aye ¶ Fro whens at last, with horse thei brake awa And to Wigmour castell thei came in hie The bat¦taill of Euesh. To sir Roger Mortymer wher he laye That theim receiued, then full gladly And so thei assembled with greate hoste manfully And held the feld, the lordes fast to theim drewe And at Euesham, thei stroke a battaill newe ¶ In the yere of Christ, a thousand was tho Twoo hundred mo, sirty also and fiue When prince Edward faught with his foo Symond Moūtfort, and raught hym fro his liue The feld discomfited, there anone as bliue With help of erle Gilbert, then called Clare And other lordes with hym that were thare ¶ He slewe many, and some awaye exiled And some he held in prisone and distres He toke out then his father, as is compiled His eme Rychard, holden in greate dures And all his frendes, of his hie worthynes He socoured euer, and with his gold supported And wher it want, with his woord theim cōforted The .C .xlvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Robert Ferrers erle of Darby was dishe rite and many other of their compaignie.
RObert Ferrers, that erle was of Darby Disherite then, for his insurreccion With many other at Chesterfeld in hie Faught with Edward, of their presumpcion And fled awaye, with greate confusion Vnto the Isle of Axholme, and fro thens Vnto Lyncolne, and spoyled the citezens ¶ Fro thens to Ely thei went anone Wher prince Edward, thisle proudely assailed Thei fled fro it soone, to Yorkeshire gan gone In freres clothis, that were full long tailed Robbyng their fooes, when thei of good failed And other some to Kilyngworth then fled To Henry Hastynges, who then the castell had ¶ Wher then yt kyng, great siege laied all about But nought auailed, so strongly thei defende And for ther was, in euery shire throughout So greate robbery, and nothyng amende The kyng was fain, for lordes then to send By whose aduise, he ordeined for that case That all disherite and exiled, should haue grace ¶ All disherite, should buye their landes again To paye for theim gold, as thei might accorde With theowners, so that no man should payen More then the land were worth, by greate recorde In seuen yere whole, and if thei might concorde For lesse money, so it exceade a yere The value of the yerly rent full clere ¶ Robet Ferrers erle of Derby then
The soonnes also, of erle Symond exclude That perpetuall iudgement fully then Neuer to redeme their landes, but been exclude So that theowners, be not with theim delude Vnto a daye, that fifty thousand pound Be paide of nobles whole and round ¶ Edmond the soonne, of the same kyng Henry Was weddid first vnto dame Auelyn Erle Willyam his doughter, of Almarle womāly None issue had, neither male ne feminine Then was he wed to Blaunche yt quene full fyne Of Nauerne, and so of Lancaster create With Leicestre also therle denominate The .C .xlvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Edward theldest soōne & heire of kyng Henry the third, and his brother erle Edmond of Lancaster and of Leicestre went to Ierusalē with greate power whiche twoo princes were coūted the semeliest of all the hoste of Christendome. HIs brother Edward, and he associate To Ierusalem, their voiage thē auowed Two semely princes, together adioynate In all the world, was none theim like alowed So large & faire thei were, eche manne he bowed Edward aboue his menne, was largely seen By his shulders more hie and made full clene ¶ Edmond next hym, the comeliest prince aliue Not croke backed, ne in no wyse disfugured As some menne wrote, the right lyne to depryue
Through great falsehed, made it to bee scriptured For cause it should alwaye bee refigured And mencioned well, his yssue to preuaile Vnto the croune, by suche a gouernaile ¶ But prince Edward and he held fourth their waye To Ierusalem, so did themperour Rychard his eme, and Henry his soonne full gay To Cisile came by sea, through many a shoure Edward with hym, then had his wife that houre Elianour doughter of the kyng of Aragon A princesse faire at his eleccion ¶ The kyng Lewes also then thither went And in his waye dyed and expired Sainct Lewes nowe is named by all assent Of holy churche, as it is well enquired Approued trewe as reason well required But Edward prince, and Edmōd abode two yere With werres greate, and mighty strong power ¶ For nacions all, vnto prince Edward drewe And to Edmond his brother, for their semelines And greate māhode, whiche in theim yt thei knewe Sir Charles, yt brother of king Lewes doubteles Kyng of Cisile of noble worthynes By the Soudan was chasid without beld Whome prince Edward socoured, & had the feld ¶ And with the Soudan faught in bataill sore Discomfit hym, and putte hym to the flight Wher Edward then was hurt and woūded thore Of woundes fiue, that mortall werre to sight
His brother Edmond also wounded in that fight But as Edward in his bedde, sicke then laye A Sarasyne came, to hym vpon a daye ¶ To leche his hurtes, with salues many one But false he was, for with a knife full sore He strake hym foule, as thei were then alone But yet that prince, the knife fro hym gate thore And slewe hym then, with it for euermore At Acres laye he then, with woundes fele With medicyns, to lech and to hele ¶ The lech so false, was by the Soudan sent Hym to haue slain, in any maner wyse For cause he had, discomfite hym and shent And when he was all whole, that he might ryse Message he had, fro all the lordes wyse Of England then, of his father dedde That praied hym home to come, & been their hede ¶ Kyng Henry had then made, the minster faire Of Westminster, as it is nowe at this daye The remnaunt he left vnto his heire To edifie and make in like araye Or els a some of money for to paye The whiche he graunted to the edificacion At his death, then bequeth and assignacion ¶ Edward then, toke a trewce for tenne yere With the Soudan, and to Cisile saylid And landed at Rome, wher thē he had good chere Bothe of the bishop and cardinalles not failed That sore had mourned, and greately bewailed
That curssed sore, syr Guy Mountforte eche daye For the slaughter of Henry his cousyn gaye. ¶ The sonne that was of Richarde themperoure Erle of Cornwayle, whome at Veterbe he slewe Right in the churche, for olde wrath and rancoure In Englande dooen, his fathers death to renewe At masse knelyng horrybly hym all to hewe Fro Acres as he came, as goddes knight Without cause of reason or of right ¶ But price Edward & Edmoūd his brother dere To Sauoye cā, where iustes wer made & tourna∣mēt And ther desired thei, & their knightes in fere With the duke of Sauoye, and his there presente To iuste, and proue eche other in good entente Theyr knightes younge, to learne as dyd suffice In marcyall fete, knighthode to exercyse ¶ Wher he foriust, the duke full manly His brother also, the dukes neuewe And bare hym downe, both horse and man egerly And euery knight, with other euer iusted newe Daye by daye, whyles echeone other knewe By .xiiii. dayes enduryng and conteyned With feast solempne, by the duke susteyned. ¶ An hundreth ladyes, of worthy good estate Were set on hye, aboue within a tente By the duke of Sauoye, well ordinate To geue the gree, and thanke by iudgement Whiche then awarde, playnely by hole assent To prince Edwarde, & erle Edmound his brother
That had foriust the duke and many other. ¶ The duke hym gaue, gyftes of great honoure And to his brother, gyftes of hye pleasaunce And to his knightes, giftes of great valoure And conueyed hym, into the lande of Fraunce Where of the kyng with worthy gouernaunce Receaued he was, as prince full excellente And homage made to hym, in good entente. ¶ For his landes, lyeng beyonde the sea The whiche was true, as chronicles witnesse And home he came, with great felicitee Of whose cōmyng, the people had great gladnesse Hym to receaue, in all kynde of worthynesse And of his brother Edmound also in feer They were full glad, at all theyr hole power ¶ But kyng Henry was gone to God afore The yere of Christ, a thousande hole accompted Two hundreth hole, syxty and thirtene more On saynt Edmondes daye, when he amounted This worlde leuyng, full of trouble accompted Vnto the blysse of heauen, for euer to reste Emong good soules, where Christe so liked best. The .C .xlviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Edwarde of Englande, the first after the con∣queste, called Edwarde with the longe shankes, beganne to reigne on the morowe after saynt Edmondes daye yt kyng in the yere a. M .CC. and .lxxiii. & died the yere. M .CCC. and .vii. the eyght daye of Iulye, and the .xxxiiii. yere of his reygne.
EDwarde his sonne & heire, first generate Kyng Ed∣warde the fyrst after yt conquest. With all honour by all the baronage Crouned was, in all royall estate And of thestates, receyued hole homage Kyng Alexander for his heritage The ho∣mage of yt kynge of Scotlande to kyng Ed¦warde. Of Scotlande hole, and ysles apperteynyng His homage did, right then vnto the kyng. ¶ The duke also of Britayne made homage For Britayn hole, and there became his man Whiche princes two, had wed in mariage His susters two, Margarete and Beatrice then Margarete to Scotland, & Beatrice to Britayne Both two maried, and wed in hye estate By their father full wysely ordinate ¶ A marchaunt toke the wife of prince Lewlyn Erle Symonds doughter, of Leycester yt had ben And to the kyng hir brought full femenyn Wherfore the prince, by heste as then was seen To be his man, and homage did full clere And led his wyfe to Wales in good entent By the kynges grace, and by hole assent ¶ The kyng then, did great right and iustice Vpon clippers and peirers of the coyne And newe money made, that then might suffice Of syluer plate, made out of Boloyne The grote, half grote, all in newe coyne He coyned fast, peny, halfpeny, and ferthyng For porayll to bye with, theyr leuyng. ¶ That same tyme he made a newe statute
That no man should graunt lande ne tenement A restraint of lādes to be geuen to the clergye. To the churche, ne geue nor constitute No maner grounde, nor no maner rente Without licence, of the lorde and his assent Of whome it is holden, aboue in chiefe And els yt church, this realme had put in mischiefe ¶ The prince Lewlyn, and of Dauid his brother Made warre vpon the kyng in greate araye The Marche brent and many harmes other In Englande did, wherfore the kyng his waye To Wales held, in all the haste he maye The lorde Mortimer, toke then the prince Lewlyn And to the kyng hym brought, for to enclyne ¶ The kyng hym headed, and to the toure it sent The Walshemen made, Dauid his brother then Prince of Wales, by theyr commen assent Wherfore the kyng, to warre on theim began And of the Walshemen, slewe full many a man And had Dauid vnto his presence brought Hanged and drawen, as then he had it sought. ¶ Then seazed he Wales, for euer into his hande And ordeyned, that no prince therin should be But he or els his heyre I vnderstande And that no man, of Wales hole countre One night shulde lye, in castell nor cytee But voyde out fro sunne to sunne, thē euery night Thus kept he Wales, his tyme by royall might. The .C .xlix. Chapiter.
¶ Howe Gladowys Dewy, the doughter of Dauyd, prynce of Wales, was wedded to syr Raufe Mortymer, of whom came the Earles of Marche. GWenlyan, yt doughter was of Lewlyne Without chylde dyed, a vyrgyne aye In a onnery, of the order of Gylbertyne And Gladowys Dewy, Dauyds doughter gaye Yonge, freshe and lusty, as the rose in Maye To Raufe was wed, that was lorde Mortymer Of whome yt earles of Marche, become full clere ¶ Then went the kyng, and quene to Gascyne And Gwyan, to set that lande in pees And so forth then, he went to Aragon To sporte them with theyr father there no lees To Gwyan then, agayne for his encrees He came anone, and set in peace that lande And so came agayne to Englande. The .C .l. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng dyd atteynt his Iustices, and sette enquery of peace breakers, ryouters, oppressours, extorcyoners, and of the vsurye of Iewes. HIs Iustyces all, by lawe he dyd attaynt For wrong domes, & false iudgement For couetyse, yt false were then & faynt To helpe the poore cōmons, to theyr entent He set Iustyces in heyre by all assent That called was, that tyme Troilebaston For to enquere, of all extorcyon
¶ Of Ryouters, fyghters, and baratours Of market beters, that raysed greate debates Of peace breakers, and all the susteynours That were with theim of preuy assocyates Of oppressours, of all the pore estates And all that were then founde culpable Emprysoned were, or by theyr pursse excusable ¶ Of Iewes within this lande, yt was abidyng Great plaintes were made, of Okoure and vsury Howe they dyd waste, the folke by suche winning And preuy bondes, made without measure In payne of double, or elles forfeture The king thē voided, for whiche yt church a disme Hym graunted, so dyd the cōmons a quindecyme. ¶ Rys Ap Madoke, a warre in Wales gan take Agayne the kyng, that great warres had sustened And prynce hym called, of Wales without make Who then at Yorke, by lawe full wel mainteyned On galous hye, as to hym well apperteyned Was drawen and hanged, his hed vpon ye towre was set anon, as rebell and traytoure. The .C .li. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Edmonde Earle of Lancaster, and of Leycester, kept Gwyan, and wed quene Blaunche of Nauerne the kynges syster of Fraunce, and therfore he bare the labell in his ar∣mes for dyfference fro the kynges of Englonde euer after. KYng Edward sent, his brother thē ful dere To kepe Guyā, and wt him strōg chiualry Who gouerned there, yt land without pere
To hye honoure, as made is memorye In Fraunce sore dred, amonge the aduersarye And other landes, lyeng there all aboute Aboue all men, he was there moste bedoute For euer he put them, to the worse in felde In armes ay, he had the victorye And in Parys, at Iustes vnder shelde Far passyng was, and dyd ay notably That for his manhode, and famous chyualrye In so ferforth, that all landes hym commende For his manhode, whiche so in hym they kende. ¶ He wed dame Blaunche, of Nauerne yt was quene King Philip sister, yt was ful good & faire Of whome he gate, Thomas of Lācaster I wene And Henry his brother, yt afterwarde was heire And earles both, they were without dispayre Of Lancaster, and also of Leycestre As Flores hath expressed well, by lettre. ¶ For whiche weddyng, and noble alyance He and his heyres, bare for a difference Englande armes, with labell hole of Fraunce By whiche all men, maye haue intellygence That Edmonde was yonger in existence Then kyng Edward, though some say yt cōtrary And from the truth, yet haue they wyll to vary The .C .lii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the fyue portes, toke the nauy of Fraunce on the se in batell.
THe kyng of Fraūce, a nauy great then sē Vpon Englande, to warre in great aray Which yt .v. portes toke on the sea & shent And people greate, there slewe & dreynt yt daye Theyr shyppes all, by batayl and affraye Were take, and brought then into Englande With capitaynes many, and lordes of yt lande ¶ Kyng Philyp then, at Parys in parlyament Somonde Edwarde, afore hym to appere Surmittyng hym, of robbery felonoment Vpon his flete, so done by tymes sere For faute of aunswere, foreiuged hym there Destroyed his land, in eche place where he might But kyng Edwarde, then went to Fraunce ryght ¶ And gate agayne, his landes euerychone And sought ay where, vpon the kyng of Fraūce But he fled euer, and batayle wolde geue none Sone after, so Philyp by ordynaunce A trewce toke, by good ordynaunce For all his landes beyonde the sea To set in peace, with all tranquilyte The .C .liii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Morgan and Madoke his brother, were sette in the towre for rebellyon in Wales made by comforte of kynge Phylip of Fraunce. IN Wales, Morgan made war & great di∣staunce And Madoke also, his brother ful vntrew For whiche the kyng, wt all his ordenaūce To Wales went, & faught with them all newe
At straytes great, whiche tho traytours knewe Yet were they take, and put in sore pryson Within the towre, for theyr rebellyon. ¶ The kyng Philyp had sent then golde to wa On England then, with sir Thomas Turbiruile Who was espyed, by sotell meanes afferre And heded was anon, for all his guyle His wyt not holpe hym then, ne yet his wyle He dyed with shame, repreef and vilany Engendred all of mede and surquedrye. The .C .liiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Earle Edmonde was Leuetenaunt of Guyan, and warred vpon the kyng of Fraunce, and defyed hym by let∣ter, for he brake the promyse made to Edwarde his brother kynge of Englande. SIr Edmōd erle of Lancaster thē ful trewe Leuetenaūt then of Guian, all throughout On whom yt king Philip, then rode al new And brake the trewce, wt hostes great and stout Wherfore he went to hym without doubte To se howe that, it myght be well defende He bade hym thus, set to his knee and amende. ¶ Wherfore in ire, he gaue hym vp homage The whiche he ought for his lande that he helde And aunswered hym agayne, of great corage From hens forwarde, I shall you holde the felde And at my power, eche daye vnder shelde Proue howe ye do vnto my lorde greate wronge The whiche I shall amende, or it be longe.
And so departed, withoute more langage And into Guyan came, with all his myght And to his brother wrote, & made hym knowlage And bade hym come wt power for to fyght With spere and bowe, for other writ of ryght Maye not be got, within the courte of Fraunce For to recouer, his hye enherytaunce. ¶ Eche day thēce forth, wt bāners hole displeyed He helde the felde, and kyng Philyp warred And leters sent hym defyals and vmbrayde Of hys suraunce, and othe that he had erred And castelles gate, fll many & not differred Kyng Edward sent, his brother then suppowaile The Frenche partye, to warre and assayle. The .C .lv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe syr Roger Mortymer was made Earle of Marche at Kyllyngworthe, and set the rounde table of a thousande knyghtes, and as many ladyes. ANd in the yere, a. M. was full then Two hundreth also syxty and nyntene When syr Roger Mortymer so began At Kelyngworth, the rounde table as was sene Of a thousande knyghtes, for disciplyne Of yonge men after he coulde deuyse Of turnementes, and iustes to exercyse. ¶ A thousande ladyes, excellynge in beaute He had there also, in tentes hye aboue The iustes, that they myght well & clerely se Who iusted best, there for theyr lady loue
For whose beautie, it should the knyghtes moue In armes so etchone other to reuie To geate a fame in playe of chiualrie ¶ This Mortimer, was then lord Mortimer But in these iustes, he held great feastes eche daye By fourty dayes conteined whole and clere At whiche one part of ladyes faire and gaye Gaue hym the price of fame, of all that playe Wherfore the kyng, to encrese his estate Proclamed hym erle of Marche there create The .C .lvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Edmond erle of Lancaster and of Leicester faught at Bayon with the power of Fraunce and was slain there & sir Wyllyam Valence erle of Pē broke was dedde ther and many other lordes, in the yere a thousand twoo hundred four score & sixtene. BVt erle Edmond the kynges brother dere With twenty & sixe baners, proud & stout The fifth daye of Iune, was accompted clere Of Christ his date a thousand yere all out Four score and sixtene with out doubt At Bayon faught, with the Frēchemenne certain Wher he in yt feld yt daye, like a knight was slaine ¶ Sir Williā Valence, erle of Pēbroke was thē Sir Iohn Rychmond and many other baron Sir Iohn saynct Iohn, right a full manly māne Thenglishe hoste felly, ther was bore doune By a busshement, laied by colucion That brake on theim, sore fighting in the feld Out of a wode, in whiche that daye were beld
The .C .lvii. Chapiter. WHen Iohn of Gaunt, yt sone of king Edwarde Howe a chronicle was fey∣gned to make Ed¦mond the elder bro∣ther. For cause his brother yt duke was of Clarēce None yssue male had then, that menne of herd But female by all intelligence When kyng Rychard in his greate excellence None yssue had, he would haue been his heire Apparaunt then, by act in perlyament feire ¶ The whiche Thomas Wodstok, duke of Glou¦cester And all nobles of England ther present Proclaymed then, by wrytyng and by letter Howe that therle of Marche, then in perlyament Vnto the kyng, was then heire apparaunt Wher duke Iohn in diuers places made Feined chronicles, that shewed were full brade ¶ Howe this Edmond thelder soonne of kyng Henry Broke backed and bowbacked bore Was vnabled to haue the monarche And Edward so the younger kyng therfore Shuche chronicles then, he feined full sore And putte in place, of diuers religion To make his soonne, right heire of this region ¶ But when kyng Henry, this chronicle shewed It was defect, and clerely sette at nought And vnderfoote cast doune and eke stroyed The contrarie by chronicles truly wrought Was proued trewe, and then his title he sought By resignement and renunciacion By depoisale and playne coronacion ¶ It is not true, that croke backed he hight For valyaunt he was, in all his doynges
And personable with all, to euery mannes sight Although false chronicles, haue other saiynges Kyng Alexander of Scotland, then dyed That wedded had, the kynges suster Margarete And Alexander his sonne, beyng in thesame stede Who with Margatete his wife, on ye sea perished. The .C .lviii. Chapiter. ¶ How Florēce erle of Holād & his persuers boūd hym to vide the iudgement of the kyng Edward, if he should be kyng of Scotlād. FLorence therle of Holand & his compeers That claimed then, the croune of Scotlād After the death of Margaret as pursuers Came to kyng Edward, then of England Requeryng hym in God his name all weldand As he that was, of Scotland souereigne lord To trye the right, and sette theim in accorde ¶ For whiche he sette, at Norham a parliament After Easter then next folowyng In the kirke of Norham, to that entent That all Scottes, and other that were pursuyng Might ther appere, their titles claymyng At whiche parliament, the pursuantes theim bond At his decree and iudgement to stond ¶ By one letter, with all their seales ensealed Whiche doublid was, thei gaue vnto the kyng The other part, for it should not be repeled Thei kept with theim selfes, alwaye abydyng Which lettre, Iohn Hardyng maker of this boke This was to Henry the fyfth. To kyng Hēry delyuered, yt gaue hym in recōpēce The manoure of Gedyngtō, we all yt appurtenēce. ¶ For whiche manoure, then the cardinall
Of Wynchester vnto the quene disposid In hir dower and fro hym toke it all When that the kyng, by death was deposid Hym recompence, he promised and composid But nought he had, but might yt prīce haue lyued He durst full eiuill, his excellence haue greued ¶ An other letter, duble in like wyse The saied heires deliuered to the kyng That other part as shuld of right suffice Semblably with theim, was remainyng By whiche thei bound, theim self by their sealyng Hym to delyuer, the kyng his castels all To kepe, to tyme his iudgement were byfall ¶ Of whiche iudgement without possession Of castell strong throughout ther all the lande He might not well dooen execucion Wherfore the heires to hym, so their theim bound Whiche letter also, Iohn Hardyng toke on hand And did deliuer, so then at Boys Vincent For the saied reward, together by one entent The .C .lix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Edward made sir Iohn Balyoll kyng of Scotland. AND in the yere of Christ his incarnacion A thousād whole two hūdred & four scoure And therto three by verye computacion At the feast of sainct Michael set afore The kyng Edward to Scotland came therfore Wher twenty then, chosen were of England And other twenty persones, also of Scotland
¶ By whose aduyse, all other rightes excl ude The kyng iudged, to Iohn Bailyol the croune That was discent, as clearely was conclude Of theldest doughter, of Dauid of Huntyngdon As chronicles make, therof good mencion Margarete wedded to Aleyne of Galawaye Whose doughter was kyng Iohns mother yt day ¶ That Dernegull hight, and was Iohn Bai∣liols wyfe. Whose sonne & heire, kyng Iohn was thē cround That Bailioll hight, that knowen was full ryfe In yt mynster of Skone, within Scotland groūd Syttyng vpon the regall stone full sound As all the kynges, there vsed had afore On saynt Andrewes daye, with all ioye therfore ¶ At Christmas nexte after, the same kyng Iohn To Newcastell, to kyng Edwarde came His homage made, and feautee leege anone Homage of ye Scot¦tes. Of his free wyll, without any blame And with greate ioye, agayn retourned hame But then yt Scottes, chose theim .xii. lords by assēt To rule the kynge Iohn, by their entent. The .C .lx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Iohn of Scotlande, made confederacye with Fraunce agayn Englande. WHiche made him then, to make confederacy With kyng Philip of Fraunce and aliaūce Perpetually to be contributorie
Ether with other, by strong & great assuraunce Englande to warre, with al theyr hole puyssaunce The kyng Edwarde, seynge this hye falshede To Barwike came, with hoste and great māhede ¶ At the nonnes of Barwyke, then he laye And layde a siege, about on euery syde At after Easter, but flemynges then that daye The Leden hall, there helde full strong that tyde Which wt wylde fyre, was brent & might not byde That same night, then syr Wyllym Duglas yald Barwyke castell, to kyng Edwarde and salde. The .C .lxi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Iohn of Scotlande surrendred his homage to kyng Edwarde, and disclaymed to holde of hym. IN this same tyme .vii. erles of Scotlande Sieged Carleile, and so to Hexham brent And home again, harmeles out of Englād They went anone, and none harmes hent Worse to haue dooen, was there entent But then kyng Iohn, surrendred vp his homage To kyng Edwarde, for hym and his linage ¶ By letters whiche the kyng, Edward then sent To abbeys great, in Englande of recorde To be remembred, of his false entente Renoūcyng kyng Edwarde, for his souerayn lord The seuen erles, at Dunbarre by concorde Then sieged it, fro whiche earle Patrike went And graunted to holde of hym, at his entent.
The .C .lxii. Chapiter. ¶ Of the battayle of Dunbarre, where that kyng Edwarde preuayled. WHiche castell so, then the kyng rescowed And droaue therles, there out of the felde And much people vnto the deth ther bowed Without helpe, there slayne vnder shelde To Ronkesburgh, the kyng Edward so held That sone was yelde, to hym without stryfe Their good saufe also, and theyr lyfe. ¶ So he forth to Edenburgh went anone That yelden was, on thesame condicion Then was Stryuelyn voyde and lefte alone Without defence, or any garyson That Edwarde toke, in his possession Whiche kyng Edwarde, toke into his power And saued the people, both farre and nere. ¶ Then came therle of Vlster with great power Of Iryshemen, and so to saynt Iohns towne The kyng thē went, wt host through Fyfe ful cher And brent yt shire, throughout both vpō & downe Submys¦sion of ye Scottish kyng & al his lords vnto kīg Edward the first. When then kyng Iohn, by good direccion To Edwarde sent, and prayed hym then of peace And to his grace, submytte hym or he would cease ¶ Thē kyng Edwarde toke his submyssion At Brighyn then, vpon the water of Taye And gaue hym there, his realme without condiciō Of Scotlande so, to hym and his for ay The lordes all, made hym homage that daye The .x. daye was of Iuly, and in the yere
Of kyng Iohn then the .iiii. was counpted clere ¶ And therupon, he sent hym to the toure Of London then, with certeyne rebelles moo Kyng Iohn he kept, in worshyp and honoure Like his estate, where he would ride or god Ten myle about, for his disport there so Then kyng Edwarde, on the mountaynes went That monthes there bee called in theyr entent ¶ And as he came homewarde, by Skone awaye The regall there, of Scotlande then he brought And sent it forth, to Westmynster for ay To be there in a cheire clenely wrought For a masse preaste to sytte in, when he ought Whiche there was standyng, besyde the shryne In a cheire, of olde tyme made full fyne ¶ Thē made the kyng, Iohn Wareyn his regēt That erle was then, of Sussex and Surray And treasorer he made, at his entent ugh Cressyngham, and Wyllyam Ormesby The chiefe iustice, through Scotlande generally His chaunceler at Skone, and tresorer Abydyng wer, to rule the land full clere. ¶ Thē went kyng Iohn, to Flaūders for socoure Of the dukes of Geldre and Brabant And also of the noble Emperoure That hym had hight, great helpe & socoure then But none he had, and home agayn he want For in yt meane tyme, whyle he in Flaūders abode Wyllyam Valoys, all Scotlande ouer rode
¶ He slewe the iudge, and the chaunceler Thofficers also, and the chaumberleyn The Capitaynes and the treasorer And gatte the lande, fro Englyshmen agayn And slewe theim all, with cruell death and payn Wherfore the kyng, vpon the Maudeleyn day At Fowkirke fought, with Scottes in great aray ¶ Where Scottes fled, and fourty. M. slayn And into Fiffes he went, and brent it clene And Andrewstoune, he wasted then full playn And Blakmanshire & Menteth as men mene And on the ford of Trippour, with hoste I ween To Bothbile, Glascowe, and to the towne of Are And so to Lanarke, Longhmaban & Anand thare ¶ Whiche all he had, euer wher he came And then he wed kyng Philippes suster Marga∣rete A fayre lady, and full of noble fame Hir sonne and heire, Edwarde Carnauan hete A mayden wed, kyng Philippes doughter swete Whom his father, then prince of Wales create Duke of Cornewayle, & erle of Chester nominate ¶ Then went the kyng to Scotlande agayn And wan the lande, and had there all obeysaunce Sauyng Wales, that would not hym obeyn But fled hym euer, for drede of mischaunce He ordeyned then by statute ordinaunce That none should bee, the prince of Wales more Excepte of the kyng, his eldest sonne first bore The .C .lxiii. Chapiter.
¶ How the byshop of Rome, at the suggestion of the Scottes wrote to kyng Edwarde vnder this fourme. ANd in the yere, a thousande .CCC. & one Bishop Boniface, at yt Scottes suggestiō To kyng Edward, by lettre wrote anone Chargyng hym, then vpon his beneson For to delyuer the Scottes out of pryson Whiche in Englande, he had holden with wrong And his officers, call home yt there had be long. ¶ Alledged all, howe Scotlande hole was holde Of Peters churche of Rome, & nought of hym But by great wrong, and oppression bolde He theim ouerled, with warres sore and brym And theim compelled, in payn of lyfe and lymme To become his men, & the realme of hym to holde By homage leege, whether they wold or nolde ¶ And bad hym also, afore hym then appere At the courte of Rome, his right there for to shewe And yf it myght beknowe, his right were clere Without delay, by iudgement iuste and trewe He shulde it haue by execucion due By sensours of theyr churche and hole sentence For to obeye his hie magnificence. The .C .lxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Edwarde wrote agayn an aunswer of his lettre.
THē kyng Edward, wrote vnto hym agayn An aunswere, by his letters meke and due All his tytles and duties full playne Nought in fourme, neuer in effecte to sue Nor in his courte, no iudgement to pursue Remembryng well, his fatherhede Nowe Brutus had Albian, and dyd it possede ¶ In Hely tyme, whiche to his sonnes he deuyde Vnto his sonne Locryne, fyrste propogate He gaue Logres, that hath this tyde To Albanacte, the seconde procreate He gaue Albanye, Scotlande nowe denomynate And to Cambre, his yongest sonne he gaue Cambre, that nowe is Wales, to ioye and haue ¶ To kyng Locrine, of Logres and to his heires The soueraynte, and homage ay reserued Of Albanacte and Cambre, and all theyrs Perpetually Troyan lawe obserued By which lawes, Bryton hath bene conserued Sith hitherwarde, without interrupcyon Afore the tyme, that Rome had prescrypcion. ¶ Afore the tyme also, that Chryste was bore By many yeres, the kynges of Logres had Scotlande by eschete, for faute of heyres thore And remeued kynges, yt were there knowen bad And other kynges there made, with hertes glad Whiche yt land couth, there gouerne mikel better And seruyce dyd to Logres, ofte by letter. ¶ Also, the same Iohn Baylioll I made
Kyng of Scotlande as lawe and reason wolde Who made homage, to me with hert full glad And afterwarde, was false manyfolde He stroyed my lande, wt hostes stoute and bolde Wherfore I made hym warre, tyll he were fayne To my presence to come, and hym obeyne ¶ Where then for trespasse, and rebellyon He surrendred to me, and to my heyres The realme of Scotlande, & also the crowne The lordes of all Scotlande, for them & theyrs Made me homage, for theyr proper landes By theyr letter wryten, and theyr bandes ¶ Wherfore then, hauyng therof possessyon The pryde of my subiectes, and insolence Howe the Scottyshe kynge & all the lordes of Scotlād made ho∣mage vnto dyng Ed∣warde. Where I dyd fynde, theyr false rebellyon As ryght and lawe, wolde be my regence I chastysed ay, at myne intellygence Wherfore, please it to youre fatherhede Myne aunciente rightes, to haue cōmend in dede The .C .lxv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the lordes wrote to the byshop of Rome for the same cause. THe date was of this letter, a. M. yere Thre hundreth also & one, the. viii daye of Mayr And of his reygne .xxix. clere With that the lordes in Englande were yt daye By theyr letter, and the byshop dyd praye The kynges ryght, not to put in questyon Of eldest tyme, longyng to his crowne.
¶ For in theyr letter, the bishop they did remēber They wolde not suffer his disherityson His crowne so foule to hurte, and dismembre His royalty to put in questyon For desyre of his rebels false suggestyon The whiche ryghtes, for death or lyfe mayntaine They wer so bound, they could none other meane ¶ So seased the byshop, and the mater lette And kyng Edwarde then, in to Scotlande went Through all Catnesse, destroyed it in greate hete The monthes hye, & oute ysles strayte he shent Tyll they obeyed all, hole his regiment And wyntred then, at Dunfermlin abbey Where saint Margarete, is worshpped euer & ay The .C .lxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Of the batayle of Argyle, where Vmfreuyle tooke Wyl∣lyam Waleys, and Iohn Waleys. ANd then therle of Angos Robert Vmfre∣uile That regēt was, of Scotlād cōstitute Toke william Wales, then at Argyle His brother Iohn also without resute With rebelles mo, that were all destytute By batell sore, there smyten full cruelly Where Vmfreuile then had the victorye ¶ And to London them brought, to iudgement Where they were drawē, & hanged on galowe tre And quartred then, their quarters home were sēt At certayne townes, hanged vp there to be Theyr traytourhede, and falshede for to se
Theyr heddes also, full hye vpon the towre At London brydge, were set to great terroure The .C .lxvii. Chapiter. ¶ How Peirs of Gauerstone, erle of Cornwaile was exyled ANd in the yere a thousand .iii. C. and fyue He exyled out Peyrs Gauerston of Corne∣wayle That Earle was then, for treason knowen ryue And in the yere after, without any fayle Earle Robert Bruis, of Carrike ganne assayle Earle Iohn Comen of Bongham, at Dunfryse And slewe hym there, in feueryere whē it did fryse ¶ Bycause he wolde not, to hym there assent To be crowned then, kynge of Scotlande And forthe he fled, to se who wolde consent And many one drewe to hym in that lande Became his men, and made syker bonde To whome Walter Wareyne, the yonger sonne Of therle of Surrey, yt then dyd wonne ¶ With the lorde Vesty, that had his syster wed That fro her went, vnto this Robert Bruys Eyther of other were fayne, for they were fled Out of Englande, their liuyng had such Guris For their ryotous lyuyng, and male auentures Thus went they aboute, harkening euery where Who were foes, and who their frendes were. ¶ All Scotland through, this Robert wēt about On fote to spye, who wolde with hym holde And who wolde not, he warred them all oute
And kylled them downe, in places manifolde And muche harme dyd, in chronycle as is tolde And with hym was, alwaye Walter Wareyne That wt hym went, through mountaynes woode and playne ¶ On nightes they lay, in woodes & in moūtaine At morowe, on theyr foes came downe and kyll On day they were thousādes, at euen but twayne There knews no moo at euē, where they drewe tyl So were they euer at nyght of lodgyng wyll For drede of guyle and of greate traytourye They lodged them on nyghtes full priuely ¶ But on the feaste of the Annuncyacion Of our lady, saynt Mary the virgyne Robert Bruys, with greate supportacyon Was crowned at Skone, as he coulde ymagyne To whom great folke, with good wyl did enclyne Full glad of his welfare, & his coronacyon With greate hoste came, to Perch wt prosperacion The .C .lxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe syr Robert Vmfreuile, Earle of Angeou, and syr Ay¦mer Valence Earle of Pēbroke discomfyted kyng Robert Bruys, besyde saynte Iohns towne, and put hym vnto the flyghte. ON the morowe, sir Robert erle Vmfreuile Of Angeous then, yt regent was by north The Scottes sea, and Aymer Valence yt while Erle of Pēbroke, by south ye water of Forth Wardayne was, of Scotlande forsoth That daye faught, with kyng Robert Bruis
Beside Iohnstoune, where he fled wtout rescowes ¶ Vnto the Kentir, & many Scottes there slaine Where then they toke, the wyfe of kyng Robert And his brother Nygell, the sothe to sayne And the earle of Athels, myght not a sterte And sent them to the kyng, wt full glad hert Whome the kyng kepte, after theyr estate At London, well together consoyate ¶ Henry Percy, toke the brethren two Of kyng Robert Alexaunder, & Thomas yt hight To the Iustes them sent, yt hanged were tho His other brother, at London hanged ryght Kyng Roberte then, sieged the Percy full wyght But Vmfreuyle, hym anon rescowed. And the syege, from hym anone remoued ¶ Kyng Robert Bruys, faught wt Aimer Valēce Earle of Penbroke, and put hym to the flyght At Methfen so, and slewe with violence All Englyshemen, in batell there downe ryght Therle of Gloucester, Gylbert Clare yt hight Thre dayes after, he syeged hym in Are But kyng Edward therle, then rescowed thare ¶ The king Edwarde wt hoost hym sought full sore But ay he fled, into woodes & strayte forest And slewe his men at straytes & daungers thore And at marreys and mires was ay full prest. Englyshmen to kyll without any rest In the mountaynes & cragges, he slewe ay where And in the nyght, his foes he frayde full sere
The king Edward wt hornes, & hoūdes him soght With mēne on fote, through marris mosse & myre Through wodes also, & moūtēs wher thei fought And euer yt kyng Edward, hight men greate hyre Hym for to take, and by might conquere But thei might hym not gette, by force ne by train He satte by the fyre, when thei in the rain ¶ The kyng Edward for anger, fell in accesse And homeward came, full sycke and sore annoyed And bade his soonne, he should for no distresse No trewce take wt Scottes, that sore hym noyed But werre theim aye, to tyme thei were distroyed For he saied thus, yu shalt neuer fynd theim trewe But whiles thei bee, in thy subieccion dewe ¶ At Burgh vpon the sande he died anone The de∣athe of Edward the first. And to London, caried then daye by daye At Westminster buried, with muche mone With quene garete, he had thē soōnes tway Thomas Broton erle of Northfolke gay And marshall of England, the other of Kent Edmond Wodstok, was erle in all entent ¶ This noble kyng died in Iuly the third daye And toward heauen he then tooke his waye The yere of Christ a thousand south to saie Three hundred whole, and seuen by calculacion And of his ne and coronacion Fiue and thirty, not fully whole complete When he so went, vnto the blisse so swete The .C .lxix. Chapiter.
¶ Edward the second kyng of England began to reigne the yere a thousand three hundred and seuen, the eyght daye of Iuly and was deposed the yere a thousand thre hundred twenty and sixe, and of his reigne nyntene yere. EDward his soōne, prince of Wales & lord Kyng Edward the second At Carnaruan, of his mother bore Was croūed kīg, by good & whole cōcord Of all the lordes that were assembled thore At Westminster, as was his father afore And at the feast of thassumpcion Of our lady, he sent for Peers Gauerston ¶ Whom then he made therle of Cornwaile Again the will, of all the baronage Whom his father exiled, for misgouernaile The third yere after, for his misused outrage The lordes rose, of ire and greate courage And heddid hym as for an hie traytour That wasted had, and spent the kyng his tresour ¶ And in yt mean while, kyng Robert Bruys had ge All Scotland nere, wherfore yt kyng Edward The bat¦taille of Bānokes¦burne. To Scotland went, at Bannokesburne thei me And faught full sore, till slain was the vaward And discomfited was the midelward And to the rereward kyng Edward hym drewe For greate socour, wher he had battayl newe ¶ Whiche kild was doune, sauf fewe that led the kyng To Dunbarre then fleand with hym away Ther was therle of Gloucester slain fleyng The lord Clifford, and all the lordes that daye
Therle of Herford to Bothuile fled his waye Therle Edmond of Arundell, and erle of Valence Therles of Warwike & Oxenford take at defence ¶ This battaill was the yere of Christ smitten A thousand whole three hundred and fiftene On midsomer daye, and of his reigne thē written The seuenth yere, by chronicle as is seen Then was Vmfrey erle of Herford frethed clene And enterchaungid for kyng Robertes wife That holden was in England then full ryfe, The .C .lxx. Chapiter. ¶ Of the relesse that kyng Edward made to Robert Bruys at Dūbarre whiche relesse Iohn Hardyng deliuered in to the tresorye, in the dayes of kyng Henry the fifth at Boys Vincent in Fraunce with other, for whiche he gaue hym Godyngton that the quene hathe nowe. PAtrike Dūbarre erle of Marche that daye To kyng Edward was leege mā lōg afore To his father, and trewe had been alwaye Sent kyng Edward to Barwik, but therfore He toke of hym a relesse for euermore Of his seruice, that due was to the croune Anentes kyng Bruys to execute his treason ¶ Whiche relesse the maker of this booke Iohn Hardyng brought with other euidence And to the kyng Henry the fifth it toke With other mo, afore at Boys Vincent Perteignyng to England royall regiment And nought he hath vnto his sustenaunce
As oft a fore here, in his remembraunce The .C .lxxi. Chapiter: ¶ Howe kyng Robert Bruis toke all the lordes of Eng¦land, and sleugh many at Stryuelin bridge & distroi¦ed the Marches and bete doune castelles therin. KYng Robert Bruys, toke Robert Vmfre∣uile Erle of Angeos Henry then lord Percy Therle of Marche and also yt lord Neuile Acton and Scropen and also the lord Lucy At Stryuelyn bridge, fightyng mightely In the vaward of the forsaid battaill Taken prisoners, and raunsomed for auaill ¶ Thē kyng Robert, yt Marchis whole distroied The castelles wanne and bet theim to the ground And all Scotland afore that he had noyed Obeyed to hym and were his lieges bounde And maintened well, thē furth all Scotlād groūd The bishoprike of Duresme all throughout Northumberland, he brent with hoste full stout ¶ Two cardinales yt B. of Rome to Scotlād sent To treate a trewce, a twene the kynges twoo And for to stall Lewes Beamount present Bishop of Duresme, that then was sacred so Whose brother was Henry, lord Beaumont tho Licensed and graunted, by the kyng of Fraunce To bee liege menne, to Edwardes whole plesaūce ¶ But sir Gilbert Midelton theim mette And sir Walter Selby, misruled knightes
A litell fro Duresme their waye forsett Gilbert Mideltō robbed yt cardinal¦les. And robbed theim openly, on the lightes And to Midford castell, led theim fourth rightes And held theim ther, in mighty and strong hold To tyme thei had, their iwels and their gold ¶ Whiche knightes twoo, robbed the lād about That castell held, by force and rebellion A quarter of a yere, with rebelles stout But thei were take within that garison And to the kyng sent, by that enchesone That hanged were▪ as traytours all should been On galowes hie, that all might theim seen ¶ Then after soone, sir Gosselyn Deynuile His brother Robert, with twoo hundred in habite As thei were friers, went about in exile Robbyng the land, in full greate dispite The bishopes places, of Duresme in circuite Thei spoiled clene, leuyng nothyng in theim But walles bare, whiche thei would not claime The .C .lxxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the lordes of England with powre royall durnot ryde into Scotlande passyng fourtene mile, England was so at vnder that tyme. THerle Edmond then of Arundell Wardein of the Marches, then constitute Therle Robert of Angeos Vmfreuile Of his landes hauyng no refute Therle Dauid of Athell destitute Of his erldome, the lord Percy full hardy The lord Neuell, the lord Beaumont manly
¶ With all the power of the North contree Distroyed then Scotland and brent Vpon the March vnto Lyntell Lee Whome sir Walter Wareyn, by whole assent Of Iames Douglas, pursued as thei went With great power, alwaye at their side That thei were fain, again to England ride ¶ But sir Walter Wareyn and Douglas With their power, brent all Northumberland Tyndale became Scottes, and false then was And rode with theim, & brent through all the land To Alerton, and so rode home to Scotland Through the West March, & brent it all through out And home thei went, without any doubt ¶ The castell then of Berwyke and the towne Kyng Robert gatte, after strong & greate defence By treaty with peace, Spaldyng and treason The Wendesoaye before Easters reuerence Wher that traitour, without long suspence Betrayed the towne, and into Scotland went By Scottes slain, as to a traytour appent The .C .lxxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Edward laied siege to Barwyke and for sooke the siege and went South, for Robert Bruys had destroyed mikell of Yorkshire, & discomfited yt ar¦chebishop of Yorke & his clergy, at Milton on swale THe kyng Edward began to siege Berwyk like And wonne it had, but false tales it let And tidinges newe, yt nought the kyng did
For Robert Bruys, the kyng of Scotlande mette With the bishop of Yorke, and hym ouersette Wherfore he loste the siege, and went awaye But Bruys had stroyed England in fell araye ¶ To Borough brydge, by east and west he brent And home agayne, with many a prysoner Without harme or lette of his entent With mykell good, but in Myton medowe nere To Swale water, laye then with great power Walter Wareyn among the hay kockes bushed Vpon the byshop sodenly with Scottes yssued ¶ And .xv. hundreth Englyshe there he slewe And home he went, with kyng Edward full glad With prysoners many, mo then men knewe The byshop fled fro the felde full woo bestad With his clerkes, that then were full mad For whiche therle Thomas, of Lancastre there And kyng Edward, depatted halfe in werre. The .C .lxxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe at the nexte parliamente after, Thomas of Lanca∣ster and Leycester erle and certayne lordes, exiled the twoo Spencers out of the land, but then yt Spencers made great persecucion with the kyng agayn the lordes, and slewe the erle of Lancaster and the other lordes. AT ye parliamēt thē at westminster next hold Erle Thomas, yt then was called ful trewe Therle Vmfrey of Herford, that was bold Therle of Marche, full manly as men knewe The Monbrey also Percy and Clyfford drewe
All armed came, and two Spencers exiled Out fro Englande, neuer to be reconsyled. ¶ But sone, the Spencers came to yt kyng again Syr Hugh the lorde, and syr Hugh his sonne And put therle of Marche, in great disdayn Roger his sonne, that with hym did wonne Appeched hym then of hye treason Agaynst the kyng, wherfore the kyng hym sent Into the toure, tabyde the parliament. ¶ Then went the kyng, and Spencers both two With hostes full great, to Burton vpon Trent Where the lordes laye, and sparled theim then so That north they went, then wayes by one assente To rayse mo men, they trust in theyr entent The Spencers two, fully for to destroye Who all the realme, full cruelly did noye. ¶ At Borinbrig, syr Andrewe Hertlaw met With erle Vmfrey of Herford, and hym slewe And toke the erle Thomas, without let And to the kyng, that then to Pountfret drewe Where then were sette, vpon hym iudges newe Therle Edmound of Arondell for iustice And syr Robert Mapilthorpe, his enemyes. ¶ There he was headed, anone vpon the hyll And buryed was there in a chapell fayre, Henry his brother, stode at the kynges wyll Whom the kyng graunted to bee his heyre That wedded then Alyce, without despayre The doughter and heyre, of therle Henry Lacy
Of Lyncolne, so graunted by the kynges mercy. ¶ Wyllyā fitz Wareyn, & many another knight In diuers shyres, some hanged and some head That hold with hym, or with his compeers right Syr Bartholomewe Badelismore, without rede Drawen and hanged, and put to foul dead Roger Clyfford and Iohn Monbraye barons Headed then were, for theyr rebellions. ¶ Therle of Marche, syr Roger Mortymer His sonne Roger, foriuged were for treason And by the kyng, of death pardoned were And put were then, in perpetuall pryson Into the towre, for that same encheson Fro that tyme forth, the Spencers other excede The quene was, but an hand mayden in dede ¶ To tyme the kyng, to her brother hir sent And also his sonne Edwarde to dooen homage For Guyen, so to haue at his entente And for they dwelled, so long in that viage The kyng theim had suspecte, of theyr message By councell of the Spencers, theim exiled As in chronicle pleynly is compiled. ¶ The kyng then made, and playnly did create Andrewe Hertlawe, erle then of Carlele Whiche tyme, the kyng Robert full fortunate Rode all the east Marche, full proudly and well The byshopryke and Yorkeshire euery dele Andrewe Hertlawe, erle of Carlele absent To Lancastre hym drewe in false entente.
¶ The kyng Robert, was passed home agayn With prayes greate, and many prysoners Fro Humber north, the people downe were slayn Of whiche the kyng, and all his councelers Blamed therle Andrewe, and his compeers For he had men enough, with hym arayed The Scottes all, that might haue slayn & frayed. ¶ He hight the kyng, haue brought to hym great powers Into yorkshyre & held nothing his hight Therfore the kyng, by counsell of the Spencers Gaue charge to take hym, either by daye or night Or kyl hym downe, wher they mete wt hym might To all shryues, was sent this commaundement Fro Trent northwarde by writtes & maundemēt. The .C .lxxv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe syr Roger Mortymer the younger wente oute of the toure of London & went into Fraunce to the quene of Englande and to the prince Edwarde hir soonne, and also howe the lorde Lucye tooke syr Andrewe Hert∣lawe erle of carlele, and headed hym at Carlele for treason. THen r Roger, the yongest Mortimer Made his kepers dronke, and went away Out of the toure by night & other in feer And into Fraunce, anone he toke his waye Vnto the quene Isabell, in poore araye And bode with her, at hyr gouernaunce All tyme that she was soiournyng in Fraunce ¶ And then Antony Lucye lorde of Cokirmouth
Syr Robert Lowther, with other many in feere At Carlele toune, as knowe was full couth Toke syr Andrewe Hertlawe, with mekill stee They put on hym, he toke royall power In truce takyng, with therle of Murrey Withouten power, in trayterous araye. ¶ In wrongyng of the kynges hye estate And of his right, full great derogacion And howe he toke greate golde immoderate Of kyng Edwarde, through cauelacion To bryng hym power for his supportaciō Agayn the kyng Robert, that then destroyed His lande full foule, and had hym self anoyed. ¶ And howe he had the people hole withdrawe With hym Westwarde, by false confederacie Betwene hym and therle of Marrowe Couened fully before cast traytorie Wherfore they drewe hym first all openly And hanged after, and to London sent Vnto the kynge his head, for great present. The .C .lxxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the quene Isabell treated mariage, of one of the doughters of therle of Henaulde for hir sonne Edwarde to haue to wife, by thauice of her brother kyng Charles & came to Englande with great power, and toke yt kyng and slewe his counsell for treason. THere by aduise, and good consyderacion Of the kyng of Fraunce, her brother dere Quene Isabell accorded for supportacion
Hir sonne should wed, one of the doughters clere Of therle of Henauld, that fyue then were Through whose succour, she & hir sonne Edward Toke then the sea, to Englande warde ¶ Erle Edmond of Kent, then with her came Kyng Edwardes brother, & syr Aymer valence Erle of Penbroke, whiche came with hir fro hame And Mortymer the yonger, in hir presence Henauldes and Frenche, with great sufficience Of people stronge, at Orwell with her lande Where lordes many, her mette I vnderstande ¶ To London then, she & hir sonne tho wrote The councellours and traitours for to take That ruled had, in mykell mysryote The kyng Edwarde, her lorde & also hir make And in prieson, to kepe theim for hir sake Wherfore they voyded, out of the citee then The quenes enemyes, echone ay when & when. ¶ The kyng then, fled into the west countree She and the prince, full sore hym then pursued And at Bristowe, she headed, as men might see Syr Hugh Spenser the father that was renewed And syr Hugh his sonne, that was transumed In hye estate, and erle had be create Of Wynchester, wher he stode all mate. ¶ Syr Hugh Spēser, his sonne at Herforde take Was headed then, and vnto London sente So was Edmond, there headed for hyr sake That was erle of Arondel there present
His hed smote of, for treason so was shent Theyr hedes set vp, in dyuerse sere place In recompence, of all theyr great trespasse ¶ And at London, they heded the Chaunceler With dyuers other, whiche they founde vntrewe So dyd they also, the kynges tresourer And there set they a parlyament all newe But fyrste they put the kyng, as all men knewe In Killyngworth, there to be holde in warde To tyme they se, howe lordes wolde awarde. ¶ At which parlyamēt .iii. bishoppes & erles thre Thre Barons also, & thre Banarettes electe To Kyllyngworth, to ryde wt the cominalte All homage leege, by parliament hole directe To surrender vp, without any reiecte The which they dyd, for his mysgouernaunce With heuy chere and mournyng countenaunce ¶ The kyng full sad, with wordes well auysed Thanked them all, knowynge his hye trespasse And that he was, of rule not well prouysed To the pleasure of God, whiles he had space Ne cōmon wele to kepe in-euery case Ne to his wyfe, had bene a trewe husbande But falsly had her exyled oute of lande ¶ Mekely he prayed, the lordes at parlyament His sonne to admytte vnto the regyon Syth he vnable was to the regyment And foule had ruled, the lande withoute reason He them besought, for gylte of his caryon
His sonne were not refused, ne chastyzed But set in rule, by councell well aduyzed. ¶ These lordes twelue, with heuy countenaunce Reported vnto the quene, and lordes all The sorowfull chere, and wordes wt repentaunce Of kyng Edwarde, as then it was befall His prayer meke, and his desyre fynall Of whiche the lordes, in yt same parlyament Reioysed were, of his noble agrement The .C .lxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Edwarde the thyrde, kynge of Englande and of Fraunce, beganne to reygne, the yere a thousand thre hundreth twen¦tye and syxe, and dyed the yere, a thousande thre hundreth thre score and seuentene, and of his reygne one and fyftye yere. EDward his sonne, yt prince of wales was Edward ye thyrde. In tender age, that time of .xiii. yere Was crowned on saint Brice day & begā than The yere of Christ was then accompted clere A thousande hole, thre .C. and syxe and .xx. were Whose father then had reygned .xix. yere oute And in his twenty yere, withouten doute. ¶ From the third daye of Iuly by computacyon Of the yere, vnto sayncte Brycez daye So muche in his twenty, by relacyon He reygned had, & then put downe for aye From Kyllingworth, to the castell of Berkeley By nyght he was caryed, and translate From wyfe and chylde, forsake and repudyate
Where he was slayne, with an hote brenning spyt Through his towayle, vp to his herte within In September, his bowelles brent for hete That deed he was, without noyse or dyn On saynt Mathewes daye, so they dyd hym bre The fyrste yere was it then accompted, & wonne Of kyng Edward the third, that was his sonne ¶ At Gloucester entombed fayre, and buryed Where some say, god shewed for him great grace Sith that tyme, with miracles laudifyed Ofte tymes, in dyuerse many case As is wryten there, in that same place For whiche kyng Richard, called the seconde To translate hym was purposed hole and sounde ¶ Sir Iames Douglas, in Englād wt an hoste Destroyed the lande, wherfore the kyng Edward With Frenche henauldes, & Englysh for yt moste In myghty hoste & great then came northward The seconde yere of his reygne, to regarde Whome in Stanhope parke, he besieged then That compted were of Scottes, ten. M. menn ¶ By .xv. dayes, that syege there endured He helde them in, they myght not passe oute But through a mosse, yt all men trowed was sured So depe of myre, and brode it was aboute No siege was layde, for there they had no doute By which yt Scottes, cast them what so betyde To escape awaye, in the nyghtes tyde But Iames Douglas, their flekes fell dyd make
Whiche ouer the mosse, echeone at others ende He layde anon, with fagottes fell ouer the lake There gate awaye, and passage to pretende On whiche by nyght, they led their horse vnkend And home they went, to Scotlande harmelesse Wherof the kyng was heuy there doutlesse ¶ When they were ouer yt quaking mosse & mire They drewe the flekes ay after as they went That Englyshe should not them sue ne conquere This was a poynt of warre, full sapyent But on our syde, there was by consequent But lytell wytte, that lefte the myre vnwatched And by good watch, yt Scottes myght haue be ca¦ched ¶ And in the yere, a thousande ompted clere Quene Isabell, her doughter maryed Dame Iane of ye towre, to Dauid Bruis her pere Kyng Robertes sonne, and heyre hole notifyed At Berwyk towne, the seconde daye signifyed Of Iuill, and of kyng Edwarde then was thre By cause of whiche, the kynge in pryuite. The .C .lxxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Of the relesse that kynge Edwarde made in his tender age to kynge Robert of his seruyce of Scotlande, whiche Iohn Hardinge delyuered to kyng Edwarde the .iiii. at Leycester with a patent, by which ye earle of Dunbar bound him and his heyres, to holde his landes of yt kinges of Englande. BY councel of his mother, & the Mortymer were Relesed there the hole soueraynte And seruyce dewe, that to the crowne then
t Berwike then without autorite Or any parlyament in especialte In tender age, and youthes intelligence In his third yere, so of his hie regence ¶ He sent th then, to Henauld for a wife A bishop other lordes temporall Wher in chaumbre preuy and secretife At discouerit dischenely also in all As semyng was to estate virginall Emong theim selfes, our lordes for hie prudence Of the bishop asked counsaill and sentence ¶ Whiche doughter of fiue, should bee the quene Who counsailled thus, with sad auisement Wee will haue hir, with good hippis I mene For she will bere good soonnes, at myne entent To whiche thei all accorded by one assent And chase Philip, that was full feminine As the bishop moost wise did determyne ¶ But then emōg theim selfes, thei laugh fast ay The lordes then saied, the bishop couth Full mekill skyll, of a woman alwaye That so couth chese, a lady that was vncouth And for yt mery woordes, that came of his mouth Thei trowed he had, right great experience Of womanes rule, and hir conuenience ¶ Kyng Robert Bruys, smitten in lepry dyed To whom his soonne Dauid, then did succede And crouned was, for kyng and notified His wife also, was crouned quene in deede
Kyng Edwardes suster, she was then as I rede Sir Roger then that was lord Mortimer With Isabell the quene was holden dere ¶ Through hardinesse of whiche he wasted clene The kyng his tresour as was notified For whiche Henry erle of Lancastre for tene Rose with greate hoste, as then was fortified To haue withstand, and clerely haue replied The wantonnes of Roger Mortymer That was that tyme the quenes playfeer ¶ But treated he was, to sitte in rest and peace Notwithstandyng, at the coronacion Of kyng Edward, chose he was without lees His custode then for good informacion Of the kyng his persone, and preseruacion But quene Isabell, and the Mortimer Would not suffre, ne while that so it were ¶ Edmond Wodstok, that then was erle of Kent By kyng Edward, of Carnaruan create Whose brother he was, by quene Isabelles entēt And Mortimer his mighty and greate estate Arested was and stode repudiate At Winchester foriudged in parliament And hedid there again the common assent ¶ A brother he had, hight Thomas of Brothertō Erle of Northfolk, and marshall of England That of his death made none execucion For lordes all, the greatest of the land Full sory were, but nought thei tooke on hand
Fro noone till euen without the castell gate He stoode condempned as a repudiate ¶ Whome then at euen, a boye of the marshalse Stroke of his hedde, for whome the lordes than And commons all, displeased were inwardly At Notyngham sone after thei began Wher Mortimer, therle of Marche then Arested were, and his soonne sir Roger And to the toure of London sent thei were ¶ On sainct Andrewes daye thei wer drawe and hong At London, so by dome of the parlyament At Westminster holden by processe long Sir Simond Bedford, was of their assent Drawe and hanged, therfore thei went And fro the quene his mother he resumed His landes all, for she had so consumed ¶ His treasour foule, and all his greate riches He putte hir to hir dower, and nomore To liue vpon, at the frere minours doubtles Wher she had not been brought before And there she dyed, and buryed is therfore At London nowe, full feire and reuerently Wher she had dwelt long, full honourably ¶ Edward Baylioll, to claim Scotland thē went And with hym went, sir Gilbert Vmfreuile Claimyng to bee erle, by his whole entent Of Angeous then, as chroniclers compile Sir Henry Beaumont also went that while His heritage to gette and to conquere
Therledome of Boughan, should bee his clere ¶ Henry Percy, with Edward Bailioll went Galoway to claime, as for his heritage By shippe thei went, all whole by one assent At Rauensporne and landed with greate corage At Kincorne wel in Fyfe by all knowlage Dauid Strabolgy erle of Athellis by right With theim thē went, for his landes ther to fight ¶ Thei were accōpted twoo. M. fightyng menne And fiue hundred byside the mariners At their landyng, their shipis thei brent right then And bored some, and sanke at good leysers Thei thought theim self, of good & strong powers Thei toke none hede, of shippis home again But landeway ride, for all the Scottes dain ¶ Thei toke none hede, nor yet consideracion Of thousandes many, ne of greate multitude As lordes dooe nowe of commons congregacion But putte their cause to god his hie excelsitude And in their owne handes solicitude At Kincorne, then faught with therle of Fyffe Discomfit hym and fled awaye with life ¶ His menne were slain, vpon the feld echeone Thē Robert Bruys, ye bastard soōne their Guyde The lord Seton, with power came anone And newe battaill theim gaue, with mekell pryde That noumbred were, ten thousand on their side Whiche slain were all, for thei would take none Saufe the chiefteynes, that fled awaye alone
¶ The kyng Edward Baylioll with his power To Dunfermelyne abbey, then furth so went Wher in Glasinore, yt Scottes then sembled were Fourty thousand, full proud in their intent And all were slain, without suppowelment Therle of Marre and therle of Murray Therle of Carryk, and Menth dyed that daye ¶ And after soone, at Deplyng More mette Sir Neel Bruys, with ten thousand in feer That slain were there, and to therth doune beet The Englishe had the feld that daye full clere Their ordinaunce was, to take no prisoner Wherfore thei slewe the Scottes without mercie Lest newe bataill came on theim in hie ¶ At these battailles, afore that been wrytten Sixty thosaund Scottes, slain and mortefied Were more with prees, as afterward was weten Then wt mānes hand, thei were so feel multiplied Echeone on other, of pride so reuied Without rule of marcill gouernaunce Thei smored were, by their contrariaunce ¶ And but twoo knightes, & thirty & thre squiers Whiche ther were dedde of the Englishe power In foure battailles faught, wt axe swerd & speris At Diplyng Moore, fro tyme the soōne rose clere To three after noon, as saieth the chronicler Within seuē dayes thei smote these .iiii. battailies As chronicles make full clere rehersailes ¶ Thē wēt thei furth, vnto sainct Iohns towne
That was replete, and full of all vitaile And kept the toune with manly direccion Archebald Douglas and erle Patrik no faile Of Dunbarre then, the toune began tassaile With thirty thousand, but there thei were well bet With cast of stones, and greate defence ouerset ¶ The citees then, and tounes to the sea side At their costage, to Scotland sent a flete To helpe our lordes, and get theim good that tide And with the shippis, of Scotland for to mete And so thei did, and sore theim all to bete And brought theim home, and some with wildfyre brēt In Taye water and some thei sanke & shent ¶ Wherfore the Scottes, the siege then forsooke Thenglish lordes, at Skone the kyng did croune Edward Baliol the soonne was, who will looke To Iohn Baliol kyng of that region Whome then afore, Henry Beaumount brought Frome Baliol, wher he was lord in Fraunce As his aunceters had been of remembraunce ¶ This kyng Edward Baliol his fooes sought And at Rokisburgh, faught▪ wt therle of Murrey Discomfited theim, in battaill sore ther fought And to Duresme sent hym fro thens awaye Ther to bee kept in siker strong araye Then sir Archbald Douglas and erle Patrike Then of Dunbar, their kyng thought to bee swi ¶ Thei toke with hym a trewce to Candylmasse From, October, in trust of whiche he sent
Thenglishe lordes, to England home expresse Trustyng he had been sure in his entente All was falshede, that the two erles ment For they vphelde Dauid, in tendre age Kyng Robartes sonne, to whom they did homage ¶ Syr Iames Douglas & erle Patrike Dūbare With all theyr helpe, at the Candilmasse On Edwarde roase the Bailiol, or he were ware And slewe all that they found doutlesse That fayn he was, to Englande to flee helpelesse At Marche after, he entred then Scotlande With thesame lordes, then of the north lande ¶ On both sydes they rode, and fast destroyed And to Berwike Edwarde Bailol came And sieged it, and felly was annoyed To whiche Edwarde of Englonde, wt great fame Came with his hoost, and laye there at thesame The Douglas then, and Dunbare with power Northumberlande all through brent full clere. The .C .lxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Of the battayle of Halidon hill, and howe Edwarde Bay∣liol did homage leege, to kyng Edwarde of Englande. TO Halydon hill, they came wt their prayes Barwike castell and towne so to rescue Wher to oure hoste, ful oft they made fra∣yes Both day & euen, and morowes or day dewe But then the kyng of Englande to hym drewe The kyng also of Scotland with his might Full sore that daye in batayll did they fight.
¶ Where Edwardes two, had al the victorye The royaltes of all Scotlande, there wer slayn Thyrty thousande, with theim liggand by Of men of armes, and archers dead certayn Then in the yere, next after soth to sayn At newcastell, Edwarde kyng of Scotlande His homage did, to the kyng of Englande. Homage of yt Scot¦tes. ¶ For whiche, yt cōmons of Scotlād on hym rose And slewe his men, that he into Englande came And gatte an hoste, and rode vpon his fooes Through Anand, through Kylay & Conyngham, Carrike and Glascowe, slewe al yt he foūd at hame The kyng Edwarde of England with power Through Lowthian, so did to Stryuelyn clere. ¶ And both met there, with great gladnesse And home they came, destroiyng all the waye Another yere in Iule, for to redresse Scotlande agayn, with hostes they gan a fraye At saynt Iohns towne they met in great araye And ther they made, therle of Athelis regent Whome the commons felly slewe and shent. ¶ Kyng Edwarde sent after in another yere In Maye Henry Lancastre, a noble knight To Scotlande, with an hoste of good power And afterwarde he came with mekill might To saynt Iohns towne, & on the monthes right Through Murrey to Elgyne, Giluernes & Rosse Throughout mounteynes woddes myre & mosse. ¶ Kyng Edwarde, then came home into Englāde
And proclaymed his sonne, Edwarde nominate The prince of Wales, thens forth I vnderstande Henry Lancastre, the younger he create Erle of Derby, to beare the hole estate Wyllyam Mountague, erle of Salisbury Of Northampton, Wyllyam Bowne full manly. ¶ Of Gloucester he made, Hugh of Awdely Of Suffolke then, he made Robert Hufforth Of Huntyngdon, Wyllyam Clinton gay Whiche erles, the kyng toke with hym forth With many a worthy knyght, bothe of south and north And with the quene, so vnto Andwarpe And there abode, by all the wynter sharpe. ¶ With great people, and worthy chyualrye Agayn the kyng of Fraunce, to clayme his right And wrote his title, vnto yt Romishe bishop on hie The duke of Barre, and other lordes of might The quenes frendes, then socoure had hym hight Where then the quene, of hyr sonne Lionell Delyuered was, as chronicles do tell ¶ He cherished then Flaundres, that they forsoke Theyr naturall lorde, and swore feautee To hym and his, theyr power they betoke To byde and dwell, vnder his souerayntee Because they sawe in hym suche humanitee He chaunged his armes, in banners and penons And in his seale, quartred of both regions. ¶ And in the yere, then of his reygne thyrtene His armes chaunged, and called kyng of Fraūce
He rode in Fraunce on warre, as then was seen A thousande tounes he brent, by his puysaunce The kyng of Fraunce, without variaunce Sent hym worde, that he wold with hym fight But at the poynt, he did not as he hight ¶ For at that tyme, in sonder they were a myle He fled awaye, kyng Edward held the felde Two dayes after he sued and Vmfreuile Of hym had sight, and then he founde his sheld By whiche he knewe, his couenaunt he not held Wherfore the kyng, to Brabant went agayn The dukes three of Barre Earle and Brabayn ¶ The parliamēt thē, at Westmynster was hold Wher they graūted hym, the .ix. lābe flees & shaue Of the commons, but the churche nomore wold Hym graunt, but one dysme of theim to haue For which he graūted generall perdone and gaue The .ix. lambe slees & shaue, graunt was two yere To helpe the kyng, his right to conquere The .C .lxxx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde smote the battayle on the sea at Sluse besyde Brydges, & howe the kyng firste rode into Fraunce, and quartred his armes with the armes of Fraunce, and sent to kyng Philip, to trye the ryght be∣twene theim two. ANd in his yere next after, then fourtene At Sluse yt kīg faught, wt the Frēch nauy Fro noone to eue & to the morowe, as was seen Where all wer drouned & slayn myghtely
And kyng Edward, to Fraunce went hastely With hoste full great, destroied the lande & brent The cytee of Turnais, besieged and shente ¶ Then wrote he to the kyng Philip of Fraunce Not namyng hym kyng of that lande But to Philip of Valoys, for greuaunce Willyng alone, they two to take on hande To fyght for the cause, and for to stande Who hath the better, for euer to holde Fraunce Withoute warre, or any more dystaunce ¶ Or elles, they two eyther wt an .C. knyghtes And yf these wayes, please hym not to excepte Come with his hoste, & all his strongest wyghtes To the cytee of Tournay, none excepte At a certayne daye, iustly to be kepte And who the felde maye get, brooke well Fraunce Withoute more stryfe, or any varyaunce ¶ The kyng then wrote vnto kyng Edwarde a∣gayne That he wolde not for the letters fight Whiche touche not kyng Philyp in certayne But Philyp Valoys, as sheweth well to syght To whiche he wolde set, neyther daye ne highte But when he thought it were for his honoure He shulde hym chase awaye without socoure ¶ Out of his land, which wrongfully he sheweth Agayne his fayth, feautye made and homage To his auncesters by letter, as it sheweth Vnder his seale, of hole and good knowlage For Guyan, and his other herytage
And fro Turnace into Brabane agayne The kyng Edwarde, in wynter dyd remayne ¶ To byde the byshoppes rule and disposicyon Of good accorde, for then two cardynalles To take a trewce, by good prouisyon Duryng two yere, betwene them generals And all theyr frendes, that were princypalles Then came the kyng to Edwarde into Englande His offycers newe made, I vnderstande. ¶ To the trewce then taken at Maltrete The dukes two, of Burgoyne and Burbone In the kynges soule of Fraunce, swore and hete Truly to kepe, for frendes or for foone And duke Henry of Lancaster, sad as stone Willyam Bowne Earle of Northhampton And Willyam Mountague, full hye of renoune ¶ Earle of Salisbury, in kyng Edwardes soule there In lyke maner, were sworne and biheste The .xix. daye, then of Ianyuere The yere of Christ, a. M. then was seste Thre hundreth and two, and fourty at leest When these trues were taken so, and sealed For afterwarde, they shulde not be repeled The .C .lxxxi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Henry duke of Lancaster went to Guyan, in yt yere of Christe, a thousande thre hundreth .xlv. And of the ba∣tayle of Cressy, in the yere of Christe, a thousand, thre hun∣deeth fourtye and syxe.
ANd then Henry duke of Lancaster create Went to Guyen, with many bolde baron Where then he gate, the cytees of estate And castelles fele, & many a walled towne And made the lande Englyshe, both vp & doune And to the kyng Edwarde obeied, as they ought And great worshyp and ryches there he caught ¶ And in the yere a thousande and .CCC. gone Syxe and fourtye, kyng Edwarde at Cressy Met with Philyp, of Valoyes there anone That kyng of Fraunce was by intrusery At whiche batayle, Edwarde had the victorye And with honoure and myght, there gate yt felde And Philyp fled, and caste there doune his shelde ¶ And his eldest sonne, with hym went awaye With an hundreth banners, in her company The kynges of Beme, were slayne that daye And of Maliogres, there full manfully The dukes of Alaunson, also theim by And of Loreyn slayne were, in batayle And earles fyue, without any fayle ¶ Of Flaunders, Bloys Harcourt & Melayne Of gentyls and other, without any Essayne And of Guntpre, were there in batayle slayne Fyue score thousande, the twenty daye certayne And syxe also of Auguste, accompted playne The kyng Edwarde had all the victorye The kyng Philyp, had all the vilanye. ¶ The king Dauid theu, of Scotland wt power
To Duresme brent, where on saynt Lukes daye The archbyshop, with his clergye clere And syr Gylbert Vnifreuyle, in good araye The Lorde Percy the Neuyle, then laye With all the north, a lytell frome Duresme Wher then they faught, & on yt king Dauid came ¶ And take he was, yt yere of Christe was then A thousande, full thre hundreth fourty and syxe Full sore wounded, full lyke he was a man And also of his lordes, mo then fyue or syxe Brought to London priuely, through Essex For lordes shulde not hym take wt greate power From Iohn of Coupland, yt was his taker clere ¶ And in ye towre of London, then kept in warde To tyme the king were come home out of Fraūce That then in Fraunce, mo castelles to regarde And townes walled, goten by his hye puissaunce Then had the kyng Philip in gouernaunce And lyke was then, all Fraūce to haue conquerde With his alies, he made that lande afferde The .C .lxxxii. Chapiter. ¶ Of the greate pestylence, in the yere of Chryste a thousand thre hundreth fortye and nyne, and the yere nexte after, the kynge wente vnto Fraunce, and the prynce of Wales vnto Guyan. ANd in the yere of Christ clerly accompted A thousande hole, thre .C. fourty & nyne The pestilence was in England amoūted That kyng Edward newe warre ganne ymagine
The nexte yere after, agayne Fraunce fyne Thether he went, & prince Edward then went With greate power to Guien, as Regent. ¶ The kyng then put his sonnes yonge of age In Fraunce then forth, in mighty gouernaunce Syr Lyonell, Earle of Vlster in wage Regent of Fraunce, hym made by ordynaunce Syr Iohn of Gaunt, to haue hole attendaunce Of all the hoste, as hye and greate constable To whiche he was accompte, yt tyme full able. ¶ Sir Edmonde Langeley, full of gentylnesse Sir Thomas Woodstok full of corage To their banners, them put for worthynesse To haue rule in that worthy viage Whiche prynces fyue, approued in yonge age There was no king christen, had such sonnes fiue Of lyklynesse, and persones that tyme on lyue ¶ So hye and large, they were of all stature The leste of them, was of persone able To haue foughten with any creature Singler batayle in actes marcyable The byshops wit, me thinketh was cōmendable So wel coulde chese the princesse yt them bare For by practyse he knewe it, or by lare The .C .lxxxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kynge of Fraunce was taken prysoner at the ba∣tayle of Poyters, the yere of Christe, a thousande, thre hun¦dreth fyftye and syxe.
IN the yere of Christe, a M accōpted right Thre hundreth and syxe, and fyfty mo The prince Edward, at Poytexs sore dyd fyght The .xix. day of September, was tho Where kyng Iohn of Fraunce, his sonne also He toke and had the felde, with victorye His eldst sonne then, fledde fro hym cowardly ¶ The kyng Dauyd died, and lette his hostage For his raunsome lygge ay forth in Englande The yere, a thousande .CCC. by knowlage Eyght and fyftye, as I can vnderstande And payde not yet, ne quyt not out his bonde Ne his hostage, he wolde not so displease To delyuer, ne putte theim fro their ease ¶ The quene Isabell, & the quene of Scotlande Her doughter was, and kyng Dauyds wyfe Sone after dyed, and buryed I vnderstande At the graye Freres, in lande knewen full ryfe The whiche yt quene Isabell founded in their lyfe Full fayre entombed, & wrought full rychely Where the two Quenes reste full honorably The .C .lxxxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Of the seconde pestylence and the greate wynde and earth∣quake, the yere a thousande. CCC, lxi. ANd in the yere of Christ, a. M. wryten Thre hundreth also syxtye and one The .ii. pestylence, reigned as was weten Duke Henry dyed, for whome was mekyll mone Dame Blaunche his doughter, full faire of fleshe and bone
His heire was then, whom Iohn of Gaūt did wed The duchy by hir had, men saied he had well sped ¶ In that same yere was, on sainct Maurys day The greate winde and earth quake meruelous That greately gan the people all affraye So dredfull was it then and perelous Specially the wind was so boistous The stone walles, steples houses and trees Were blow doune in diuerse ferre coūtrees ¶ And in the yere a thousand three hundred also Sixty and foure, kyng Iohn of Fraunce dyed Kyng Iohn of Fraūce In London then, in Sauoy had been sicke The dukes palice of Lancastre edified Full royally as it is notified His boweles buryed, at Poules with royaltee His corps in Fraunce, with all solempnitee ¶ In that same yere, sir Iohn Moūtfort of newe Duke of Brytain was by heritage As heire male, his title was act trewe At Orrers faught, again the Frenche linage Sir Charles de Bloys, that clauned by mariage The duchy whole, of Brytain by the might Of his wise, wher he was slain by might ¶ Duke Iohn of Gaunt, was at that battaile Sir Edmond also of Langley his brother dere Sir Iohn Chaundos treated without faill All daye, and faught at eue through his aūswere Whiche treaty is yet, oft remembred here For Chaūdos trewce, that treted all daye to night
And made bothe parties at eue together fight ¶ At whiche battaill, duke Iohn of Gaūt in dede And his brother Edmond, then faught full sore Were neuer twoo better knightes, thē thei in dede That better faught vpon a feld afore It was but grace, that thei escaped thore Thei putte theim selfes so ferfurth ay in prces That wounded wer thei bothe, full sore no lees The .C .lxxxv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe prince Edward of Wales wedded dame Iohā doughter of Edmond Wodstoke erle of Kent, he of yt third degree and she of the second. THese brethrē twoo wt their Englishe power Set Iohn Moūtfort ī his whole ducherie With great honour & manhode all in fere Erle Iohn of Kent dedde was afore sothely Erle Edmōdes soōne, to whom dame Iohā truly His sister was heire, whome therle Mountague Of Salisbury had wed of maiden newe ¶ And hir forsoke, after repudiate Whom his styward sir Thomas Holand wed And gate on hir, Thomas erle of Kent late And Iohn Holand hir other soonne she hed Thomas their father, dyed of sickenes bested The prince hir vowid vnto a knight of his She saied she would none, but hym self I wis ¶ For hir beaute, all onely he hir tooke And wed hir so, and to Guyan went
The yere was then a thousand who so loke Three hundred also, sixty and fiue extent Rychard his soonne, whiles he was there regent In Burdaur borne was thē with great gladnes Supposyng then, of hym greate worthynes ¶ The kyng Peter of Castell and Lyon A battaill in Spain To Burdeaux came, & ther prince Edward beheld To gette again his worthy region Fro whiche his brother bastard wt full strong be∣eld Had putte hym out, & thought it for to weeld For whiche the prince with all his hole power Rode into Spain to helpe hym to conquer ¶ Wher thē he faught, against the bastard strōg The third daye of Aprill accompted then In battaill sore ferfoughten ther full long In whiche were slain full many a Spanish māne The basterd fled, the prince the feld there wan And sette the kyng Peter in his region In peace and rest without rebellion The .C .lxxxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the lordes of Italy sent ambassiate to kyng Ed¦ward for sir Leonell of Andwarp, to make hym kyng of Italy, who was create erle of Vister by his wife, doughter & heire to Rychard erle of Vister of whom he gate dame Philip, wedded to Edmond Mortimer erle of Marche, whiche erle of Marche gate Roger erle of Marche and my lady Percy. THe duke of Milayn yt hight sir Bernabo The lord Mātowe & the marques Ferrar The lord of Mountpollestrme then also
The lordes of Iene, of Pyse that then were The lordes of Venis, and Florence there To kyng Edward, sent ambassiate By commen assent, of papall senate ¶ For Lionell his soonne, with theim to send The duke his doughter of Melayn, for to wed Promisyng hym then, hym so to recommend That of Itale the rule sholde all be led By hym and his frendes, of Italye bred And in short tyme, to ioye and bere the croune Of all Italye the royal region ¶ His wife was dedde, and at Clare was buried And none heire he had, but his doughter faire Philp that hight, as chronicles specified Whom quene Philip Christened for his heire Tharchbishop of Yorke, for his compeire Hir godmother also, of Warwyk the countesse A lady was of all greate worthynes ¶ The kyng his soonne, sir Leonell create Duke of Clarence, and to Melayn hym sent With chiualrie of fame, well ordinate And squyers freshe, galaunt and sufficient With officers and yomen, as appent And with hym went, that greate ambassiate At his costage, to Melayn consociate The .C .lxxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe sir Leonell when his wife Elionor was dedde was create duke of Clarence, and weddid the dukes doughter of Melayn in Lumbardy, and dyed ther &
had no childe with her, and some saye he is buried there and some saye, his boones were brought home and bu∣ried at Clare in Essex, but in trouth of Clare he had his name, and honoure of duke of Clarence, for Clare is called Clarencia in Latyne, and also Clarence in Frenche. THis duke royall, of Clarence excellent At Melayne, wedded was thē in royal wise With that lady fayre and beneuolent Full royally, as to suche a prince shuld suffice And all the rule he had, by councell wyse Fro mount Godard, vnto the citee of Florence And well beloued was, for his sapience. ¶ In citees all, he helde well vnitees Greate iustes ay, and ioyus tournementes Of lordes & knightes, he made great assemblees Through all the lande, by his wyse regimentes They purposed hole, by theyr commen assentes To croune hym kyng, of all great Italie Within halfe a yere, for his good gouernaly ¶ In all the world, was then no prince hym like Of hie stature, and of all semelynesse Aboue all men, within his hole kyngrike By the shulders, he might be seen doutlesse As a mayde in halle of gentilnesse And in all other places, sonne to rethorike And in the felde, a Lyon marmorike ¶ In whiche meane tyme, his iustes & his excesse His great riot, and wynes delicacie His ghoste exiled, out of his corps doutlesse
Afore the daye set of his regence For whom was made great mone, through Italie Some sayen he is buried at Melayn And other some saye, at Clare certayn. ¶ But chyldren had he noone, but Philip heire By Elizabeth his first wyfe, whiche the kyng Edwarde maryed, to Emond Mortymer Therle of Marche, that was his warde fulying Who gate on hir, Roger their derelyng And Elizabeth wed to Henry Percy Sonne and heyre, vnto therle Henry ¶ Of Northumberland, which two both father & sonne Wer knightly men, in warres ay occupied Beyonde the sea great worshyp had they wonne In many a realme, full greatly magnified For marcyall actes by theim multiplied The whiche were long here to reporte For in theyr tyme, they were of noble porte. ¶ But of the prince Edwarde, yet wold I saye Howe he fro Spayne departe then in dede The kyng Peter toke hym, his doughters tweyn Thelder hight dame Constaunce as I rede To duke Iohn wedded, his lyfe with her to lede The yonger hight dame Isabell by name The duke Edmōd of Yorke wedded of great fame ¶ And in the yere, a thousande fully written Thre hundreth eke sixty, and also fouretene The prince Edwarde died, as well was weten At Kenyngton, which was his palice clene
And buryed was, at Cauntorbury as I wene Betooke hym hole to goddes disposicion After his mercy to suffre his punycion. ¶ And in the yere of Christes incarnacion A thousande hole, and three hundreth signified The prince pereles, by all informacion Sixty and seuentene clerely notified Great syckenesse, so had hym victoried And droue hym out, from all his region That neuer prince might haue dooē by persecuciō ¶ In Iune the .xxii. daye expresse Was, when he died, & from this world expired That was the floure of earthly worthynes That to the height of knighthode had aspired His owne hande pereles, as was enquired At Westmynster buried in royall wyse As to suche a prince, of reason ought suffice. ¶ Who was the first of Englyshe nacion That euer had right, vnto the croune of Fraunce By succession of bloode and generacion Of his mother without variaunce The whiche me thynketh, should be of moste sub∣staūce For Christ was kyng by his mother of Iudee Whiche sykerer side is ay, as thynketh me. ¶ And of his pedegre vnto the croune of Fraūce With his bloode, wherof he is discent Within this booke, without any varyaunce Mencion is made, only to this entente That reders by all good auysemente
The title of his right and heritage May well conceyue, and haue therof knowlage. The .C .lxxxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Richarde the seconde kyng of Englande and of Fraunce, began to reigne the yere a thousand thre hundreth & .lxxvii. and was deposed by parliamente, in the yere a. M .CCC .cxix. and the .xxii. yere of his reygne. RIchard his heyre, yt sōne of prīce Edward Kyng Ri¦chard the seconde. Crowned was then, with all solempnitee By all the lordes and barons hole award Obeying hole vnto his maiestee Who that tyme, was in tendre iuuensee Of eleuen yere, fully accompted of age When he had so his croune and heritage. ¶ And kyng was called, of Englāde, & of Fraūce In Iune the .xxii. daye full clene Of Christes death, without variaunce A thousande was, thre hundreth sixty to neuen And .xvii. yere therwith to beleuen When the two realmes, fell to hym by discente As nexte heyre, to kyng Edwarde thexellent ¶ And in the yere, a thousande thre hundreth mo Sixty adioynt, and therwith all nynetene The thyrde pestilence reigned in Englande so So sore, that moste parte of the people clene Dyed awaye, as through the realme was sene And of his reignes of Eglande and of Fraunce The thyrde yere was, by very remembraunce.
¶ And of his reigne, in Iune then the .v. yere And of our Lorde, a thousande then accompted Thre hundreth, eke .iiii. score and one full clere The commons rose, an hūdreth thousād amoūted Insurrec Of Kent and Essex, whiche that tyme surmounted The kynges power, and all the hie estates For whiche the lordes fled then as exulates. ¶ And lefte the kyng, alone then in the toure With tharchbyshop of Cauntorbury there so And the priour, to been his gouernoure Of Clerken well, whiche the commons heded tho And brought the kyng forth, with theim to go They asked hym, all bondmen to bee free And taxe none, euer after payed to bee. ¶ They asked eke, Iake Strawe, & Wat Tiler To bee made dukes, of Essex and Kente To rule the kyng thens forth, in peace and warre For they bee wyse, of royall regiment Thus tolde they the kyng all theyr entent The whiche he graunte, in all thyng by and by For he durste no poynt, then theim denye. ¶ Afore Iake Strawe, yt kyng thē stode hodlesse Of which Walworth, the Mayre of Londō trewe Areasoned hym then, of his greate lewdenesse With a dagger, in Smythfelde then hym slewe The citezens, with hym then strongly drewe And slewe theim downe, and put theim to flight And brought the kyng, into the citee right. ¶ The cōmons brent the Sauoye, a place fayre
For eiuill wyll they had vnto duke Iohn Wherfore he fled northwarde in great dispayre Into Scotlande, for socoure had he none In Englande then, to whō he durste make moone And there abode, tyll commons all were ceased In England hole, and all the lande well peased ¶ The .xx. daye of Maye nexte folowyng And one therwith, as calculers it knowe The date of Christ a thousande then beynge Thre hundreth also foure score & two on rowe Thearth quake was, whiche that tyme I sawe That castelles, walles, toures and steples fyll Houses and trees and cragges fro the hyll ¶ And in the yere afore, kyng Richarde wed Quene Anne, vpon saynt Agnes day that floure That doughter was, as I haue sene and red Vnto the kyng of Beeme and Emperoure And suster also, vnto his successoure Themperour of Rome, that Segemond hight Who to kyng Henry in Englāde came full right. The .C .lxxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Richard wente into Scotlande, in the yere a thousande three hundreth and .lxxxvi. and in his reygne the .x. yere, and howe he create two dukes of Yorke and of Gloucestre. ANd in the yere of Christ, a thousande so Thre hūdreth also, foure score & .vi. ther tyl And of his reigne, the .x. yere and mo The kyng Richard, with hoste went at his wyl
In to Scotlande, his corage to fulfyll To Edinburgh, and brent the lande also Without lettyng there of any foo ¶ At London so then at his parlyament He made therle of Cambrydge his vncle dere The duke of Yorke, to be incontynent And so he was proclaymed there full clere That Edmonde hyght, of Langley of good chere Glad and mery, and of his owne ay lyued Without wronge, as chronicles haue breued When all the lordes, to councell and parlyament Went, he wolde to hunte and also to hawekyng All gentyll disporte, as to a lorde appent He vsed aye, and to the pore supportyng Where euer he was, in any place bidyng Without suppryse, or any extorcyon Of the porayle, or any oppressyon. ¶ He made also the earle of Bokyngham Thomas Wodstoke, that same daye and create His other vncle duke of Gloucester by name Proclaymed hole, and so denominate With his brother to be consociate The foxe tayle he bare ay on his spere Where he so rode in peace, or elles in warre. ¶ The kyng then made yt duke of yorke by name Maister of the mewhouse, & his haukes fayre Of his venery, and mayster of his game In what countree he dyd repeyre Which was to hym, without any dispeyre Well more comforte and great gladnesse
Then bene a lorde, of worldly greate rychesse ¶ His vncle Thomas, ye duke then of Gloucester And wed the doughter, then of therle of Herforth By whiche he had, by writyng & by letter The Constablery of Englande, then ay forth Both by South, Est, West, and North By herytage, of his wyues lande and ryght Of auncyent tyme, by kynges graunt & hyght ¶ And in the yere of kyng Richarde elleuen The duke Thomas that was of Gloucester * The ba∣tail of Rot¦ote bridge Henry the earle of Derby dyd beleuen With hym by worde, and also by his letter The earle Marshall did, so then for the better Therle Beanchampe, of Warwyk by his name Of Arundell the earle, dyd the same. ¶ These lordes fyue together, boldely sworne Agayne Robert Veer, then duke of Irelande The kinges pleasure, & one of age both like borne Whom he loued moste, as they could vnderstand With batayl stronge, at Rotcot bryge toke on hād To fyght with hym, where then he fled awaye Ouer Thamis, without retourne for ay. The .C .xc. Chapiter. ¶ Of the great parlyament, where the fyue lordes foriuged yt duke of Irelande, and his compeers AT Lenton nexte accompted in the yere At London then, ye king set his parliamēt At westminster to hold it there moste clere
Where these fyue lordes came armed, by one assēt Appealed the duke of Irelande, of greate entent The archbyshop of Yorke, that hyght Neuyle And Michell poole, earle of Suffolke that whyle ¶ Sir Nichol Brēbyr of London yt was Mayre Tresilyan also, and syr Symonde Bourley Whiche they exyled, & some they honge vnfeyre Some they heded that tyme, that was full gaye Holt and Belknap, exyled were awaye In to Irelande, for hye contryued treasone Agayne the kyng, and his royall crowne. ¶ The earle Douglas, & the earle of March also * The ba∣tayl of Ot¦turborne Northumberlande, by west the newe castell Vnto Morpath norwarde, dyd mikyll wo At Otturborne, as chronycles dyd tell Henry Percy, with small hoste on hym fell And slewe Douglas, & many put to the flyght And gate the felde vpon his enemyes ryght ¶ He sent the lorde, syr Thomas Vmfreuyle His brother Robert, & also sir Thomas Grey And sir Mawe Redmayn, beyond yt Scottes that whyle To holde them in, yt they fled not awaye Wherfore the Scottes releued agayne alway Through which, Henry was take there anone To Dūbar led, for whom was made great mone ¶ The felde was his, all yf yt he were take The Vmfreuyle Grey, Ogle and Redmayne Helde the felde hole, yt myght so for his sake And knewe nothyng whetherwarde he was gayn
The Earle of Marche, with preuy men alane Full priuely to Dunbarre, with hym rode And kepte hym there, for he was greatly ferde. ¶ The Douglas all yt many were that daye Laboured full sore, with wyles and great wyt Hym to haue slayne, for euer and ay For Douglas death, so sore they rewed it This batail was on saynt Oswoldes daye cōmyt The .xii. yere of the kyng, and of Christes date Thirtene .C. foure score, and eyght socyate The .C .xci. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the quene Anne dyed, and howe kyng Rychard went fyrste to Irelande with his hooste. ANd in the yere, a thousand .iii. C. and mo Foure score & fourtene, quene Anne died The .xviii. yere, was of the kyng then so And buryed was, as well is notifyed Of all vertue, she was well laudefyed To womanhede, that myght in ought appende At Westminster, she is full well commende ¶ At Michelmasse nexte after folowyng In that same yere, the kyng to Irelande went With greate power, & hoste therin warrynge Vpon Makmur, with all his hole entente And on the greate Aneell, by one ascent Of his lordes, where Makmurre & greate Aneel To him obeyed, and made hym homage leel. ¶ The earle of Marche, syr Roger Mortymer
The kynge made then Leuetenaūt of Irelande That yonge was then, and home he came yt yere And great hoshoulde helde, as I can vnderstand Far passyng kynges, of any other lande For whiche, the voyce on hym rose and name Through christendom, he bare then furth yt fame ¶ And in the yere a thousande, as was then Thre hundreth eke foure score, & also syxtene Of his reygne, the .xviii. yere was then At Alhalowmasse kyng Rychard as was sene At Calys wed, dame Isabell the quene Kīg Charles doughter, yt then was kīg of Fraūce At Christmasse crowned by gouernaunce ¶ And in Smithfelde great, iustes & tornement Of all realmes and dyuers nacyon Of Englyshe, Iryshe and Walshe present Of Scottes also, were at the coronacyon And iusted there with greate cōmendacy on By .xiiii. dayes iusted who so wolde Henry of Derby, bare hym then full bolde Henry Percy, and Raufe his brother gaye Robert Morley, and syr Iohn Grene Cornewell Heer Nichol Hauberke, and eke syr Mawburney Walter Bytterley, syr Thomas Blankeueile Syr Hugh Spencer, and Iamco saunz fayle Heer Hans, heer Iohn, & the lorde fitz Walter Blaket Dynmoke, and also the lorde Spencer. ¶ Vmfreuyle, and his brother Roberte Vmfrey Stafforde, and syr Rychard Arundell
These .xx. helde the felde within full sinert Agayne all other, that wolde with Iustes mell Of what nacyon he were, that man can tell Of in any lande, the knyghtes iusted thare And squyers also without, yt well them bare The .C .xcii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng arest the duke of Gloucester, the Earles of Warwyk, and Aroundell, and foreiuged them for treason, and made fyue Dukes, a Marquis, and foure Earles, and watched daye and nyghte with Cheshyre men, for drede of insurreccyon. THe yere of Christe, a. M. was so then Thre .C. eke foure score & also seuentene At mydsomer, the kyng with many a man At Plashe toke Thomas, of Wodstoke full kene Of Gloucester, the duke that was full clene That smyten was, in fell and great syknesse And in the towre hym put in great distresse ¶ Whome sone he sente, to Calyce secretely And murthered hym, in the prynces inne By hole aduice, of his councell priuely And in eche shyre, of which he did greate synne His confessyon of treason, more and mynne Of .ix. poyntes fayned, he then proclaymed To staunche the folke, yt for hym cryed & claymed. ¶ He then arest Thomas, earle of Warwyke And Earle Rycharde, of Arundell no lees The lorde Cobham full trewe, and also manlyke Foringed them, by strength of men and prees The earle of Warwyk, his name for to distresse
Vnto thise of Man in sore prison Of Arundell therle hedded for treson ¶ The lord Cobham in to prisone perpetuall In the towre to abide for euer more At Mighelmasse next so then did bifall The kyng then held his greate parlyament thore At Westminster, wher the kyng mustred sore At the Blakeheth, an hundred thousand menne To make the commons, for to dred hym then ¶ At whiche parlyamēt, he made therle of Derby Duke of Herford, therle of Rutland also Of Almarle duke, therle of Kent duke of Surry Therle of Huntyngton, duke of Excester tho Therle Marshall he made and no mo Duke of Northfolke, thus were there dukes fiue Of newe create, and none was substantiue ¶ He made therle of Somerset marques Of Dorset then, sir Iohn Beaufort that hight Of poore liuelode that was that tyme doubtles Foure erles next he made, in mantiles full right With swerdes girt, the lord Spencer on hight That create was then erle of Gloucester Thomas Percy also erle of Worcester ¶ The lord Neuell then erle of Westmerland Wyllyam Scrope erle of Wiltshire create That Chamberleyn was then, I vnderstand And tresourer of England ordinate These foure erles were thus consociate Then all these dukes, and erles with many mo
Of lordes young he had aye with hym ¶ Bishopes thirtyne, he held then furth eche daye Barons many, and many a worthy knight To greate nombre, and squiers freshe and gaye And officers, well mo then nedid right In eche office, by tenfold mo to sight Then were afore, for then he had eche daye Twoo hundred menne, of Cheshire wher he laye ¶ To watche hym aye, wher so euer he laye He dred hym aye, so of insurreccion Of the commons and of the people aye He trusted none of all his region But Chesshire menne for his proteccion Wher euer he rode, with arowes and bowes bent Thei were with hym, aye redy at his entent The .C .xciii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe in the tyme of kyng Rychard reigned ouer pas¦syng pryde, aduoutree, and lechery as well in menne of the spiritualtie as in other of his hous. TRuly I herd Robert Ireleffe saye Clerke of the grenecloth, yt to the houshold Came euery daye, for moost partie alwaye Ten thousand folke, by his messis tould That folowed the hous, aye as thei would And in the kechin three hundred seruitours And in eche office many occupiours ¶ And ladies faire with their gentilwomen Chamberers also and lauenders Three hundred of theim were occupied then
Ther was greate pride emong thrfficers And of all menne farpassyng their compeers Of riche araye, and muche more costious Then was before, or sith, and more precious ¶ Yemenne and gromes, in cloth of silke arayed Sattyn and damaske, in dublettes and gounes In cloth of grene, and scarlet for vnpayed Cut werke was greate, both in court and tounes Bothe in mēnes hoddis, and also in their gounes Broudur and furres, & goldsmith werke aye newe In many awise, eche daye thei did renewe ¶ In his chapell, were bishoppes then of Beame Some of Ireland, and some also of Fraunce Some of England, and clerkes of many a realme That litill connyng had or conisaunce In musike honorably, God his seruice to auaunce In the chapell, or in holy scripture On mater of Goddis to refigure ¶ Lewed menne, thei were in clerkes clothyng Disguysed faire, in fourme of clerkes wise Their peryshyns full litill enfourmyng In lawe deuine, orels in God his seruise But right practyfe thei were in couetyse Eche yere to make full greate colleccion At home, in stede of soules correccion ¶ Greate lechery and fornicacion Was in that house, and also greate aduoutree Of paramoures was greate consolacion Of eche degre, well more of prelacie
Then of the temporall, or of the chiualrie Greate taxe ay the kyng tooke through all the lād For whiche commons hym hated bothe free & bōd The .C .xciiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the duke of Herford and the duke of North∣folke wer exiled out of England. ANd in the yere. M. and thre hundred clere Foure score and therwithall eightene And of his reigne the twenty & twoo yere The duke Henry of Herford as was seen At Couentree, in barres armed clene Again the duke of Northforke, for treson Whiche bothe, the kyng exiled fro his region ¶ The duke Henry, exiled was for ten yere The other was also for terme of life That died duke, at Venys leide on bere But duke Henry exiled was beliue Like as the chronicle can openly discriue For ten yere whole, for to abide in Fraunce And to auoyde the realme without variaunce ¶ Vpon the pain of decollacion And hiyng sone before sainct Edwardes daye In Octobre called the translacion Vpon whiche daye, he shipid fourth his waye At Calice londed, and so rode on alwaye Vnto Paris, wher he was faire recepte With lordes many, and worshipfully was mette ¶ In lenton next, duke Iohn his father dyed
Of Lancaster, of weakenes and of age Entombed faire, at sainct Poules buryed His heire in fraunce should haue his heritage In Maye then next, the kyng with baronage To Ireland went, with hoste and greate power The wild Irishe to wynne, and to conquere ¶ For then Roger therle of Marche was slain With wild Irishe, in bushment for hym laye His soonnes then, full young were bothe twein In ward were take, vnto the kyng that daye And then the kyng made full fell araye In euery shire, blanke charters to bee sealid Blancke chartres. For cause his actes should not bee repeiled In the yere of Christ a. M. was then clere Kyng Ri¦chard his voiage in to Irelāo Three .C. also foure score and eke ninetene And of his reigne the twoo & twenty yere Begynnyng at Midsomer, then as I meane Whiche afterward turned hym to mikell tene He was then landed, in Ireland with his hoste Of chiualrie and power with the moste The .C .xcv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe duke Henry of Herford and of Leicestre landed in Holdernesse in the same yere, and Thomas Arundell archebishop of Cantorbury that before was exiled, and howe duke Henry swore to therle of Northūberland and to sir Henry Percy wardeyns of the Marches and to therle of Westmerland and to other lordes of yt North.
AT whiche tyme so yt duke Henry toke land At Reuēsporn i Yorkeshire as was knowe Tharchbishop Thomas I vnderstand Of Cauntorbury Arondell that was lowe Bothe of ryches and gold as menne sawe For the kyng had hym out of the land exiled Fro Cauntorbury, neuer more to bee reconsiled ¶ In Holdernesse, he landed with fourty menne Wher the lordes of Lyncolneshire hym mette Bothe Wyloughby Roos, and Darcy then And Beaumoūt also, wt Penouns proudly bette By ordinaunce of Henry Percy sette Erle of Northumberland, and sir Henry His soonne, wardeyns of the Marche seuerally ¶ To Dancaster he rode full manfully Wher bothe the wardeyns of the Marche mette Then with the duke, with hostes great & chiualry Therle also of Westmerland was sette With his power, as then it was his debt For he had wed the dukes suster dere A full good lady without any were ¶ Ther swore the duke vpon the sacrament To claime no more, but his mothers heritage His fathers landes, and his wifes in good entent And to laye downe, bothe taxe and tallage Whiles he might liue, but of the baronage And all the states somouned in parlyament Thought it nedefull and therto whole assent ¶ He swore also, the kyng in gouernaunce
To be put by good and hole prouision And Chesshyre men, for theyr misgouernaunce To voyde out of his house of eiuill condicion And officers of good disposicion To rule his house, like his estate royall Thus was his othe there made in speciall. ¶ Then rode they forth to Bristowe, were thē lay Scrop and Busshe, and also syr Henry Grene And headed theim, but Baget fled away And then the kyng, at Flynt as was sene Great monstres made, of people that was kene Whiche toke his wage, and came to duke Henry And rode ay forth, with hym full redely ¶ In this meane whyle, therle of Northūberlāde Treated with the kyng, that tyme in Conwaye To mete with duke Henry, then in Englande And brought hym then, to hym in meke araye With litell speche to Chester then the waye They rode anone and put hym there in warde And so to London, from thens came southwarde. The .C .xcvi. Chapiter ¶ Howe duke Henry of Lancaster was made kyng, by resi∣gnacion, renunciacion and deposayle and election of the parliamente and crouned at Westmynster on saynte Ed∣wardes daye in Octobre. ANd set hym in the toure, where he resigned His right, his realme, & his royall croune To duke Hēry, which no mā thē repugned And there he made a playn renunciacion
Of all his righte, for whiche by prouision The parliament then, for his misgouernaunce Deposed hym so then, by greate ordinaunce. ¶ Then went they to a free election Seyng the youth then of the Mortimer That erle of the Marche, by trewe direccion Was then, and heire of England then moste ner To kyng Richarde, as well then did appere Consydred also the might of duke Henry They chose hym kyng, there durst none it deny. ¶ Therle of Northumberlande, then had sent His power home, by councell of duke Henry So did his sonne Henry, that truly ment Supposyng well the duke wolde not vary From his othe, ne in no wyse contrary And he and his, kepte all theyr power Tyll he was crouned kyng, as it did appere. ¶ Therles two, then of Northumberlande Of Worcester, and syr Henry Percy And thee also of Westmerlande Councelled hym then, fro his oth not to varye And though at eue he did to theim applie On the morowe, by a pryue counsayl He would be crouned kyng without fayle. The .C .xcvii. Chapiter. ¶ Henry the fourth kyng of Englande and of Fraunce, was electe by yt hole parliament, the morowe after Michelmasse daye, the yere of our Lorde, a thousande thre hundreth foure score and nynetene, and reigned .xiiii. yere, & died at West∣mynster
the .xix. daye of Marche in the yere of Christe a thousande foure hundreth and .xiii. and of his owne reygne the .xiiii. yere. THis duke Henry, by great loue of the land Kyng Hen¦ry yt fourth Of many lordes, and of the commontee Tharchebyshop Arondell toke on hande To croune hym then, in royall maiestee On saynt Edwardes day, with great solempnitee But kyng he was the morowe after Mighelmesse His reygne begynnyng that day without distresse ¶ Therle of Warwike, and therle of Arondell That exiled were, and the Lorde Cobham eke With all theyr frendes, yt kyng Richard did expell The dukes frendes of Gloucester, nought to seke Whiche then began for to encrease and eke Through all the realme, with kyng Henry to stād To croune hym kyng, that tyme of all Englande. ¶ An hundreth thousande cryed all at ones At Westmynster, to croune hym for kyng So hated they kyng Rychard, for the nones For his mysrule, and wrong gouernyng For taxes and for blanke charters sealyng For murder of duke Thomas of Woodstoke That loued was well, more then all the floke ¶ The great parliament, then he made rehersed The dukes of Almarle, Excestre and Surry He depryued and the iudgement reuersed That then was made, & gaue full wylfully Agayne Woodstoke and Warwyke for enuie Arondell and the lorde Cobham full trewe
Whiche was reuersed and reuoked newe. ¶ The duke of Almarle, was then erle Rutlande The duke of Surry, erle of kent was agayn And eke the duke of Excester I vnderstande Of Hungtyngdon therle was to be fayn The marques eke of Dorset was full bayn Of Somerset erle agayn to bene He chastised theim, no feller as was sene ¶ Therle of Gloucester, was lord Spencer Then set agayn, to his first estate The kyng then made his eldest sonne full clere The prince of Wales, in parliament hole create Duke of Cornewayle and erle denominate Of Chester also, that then was yong of age But yet he was that tyme of hye courage The .C .xcviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng gaue the Constablerie and the Marshalsee to therles of Northumberlande and Westmerlande wyth certayn landes, and how syr Robert Vmfreuile was made knight of the Garter & capitayn of Rokesburgh, & faught on fote on Fulhoplewe and wan the feld with victorie and was made lorde Vmfreuile. AT this tyme yt kyng graūted by parliamēt The Constablery certayn of Englande In heritage so at his coronoment To therle then of Northumberlande Also of Man thifle I vnderstande To holde of hym and of his heyres alwaye By seruyce royall, as wrytten was that daye
¶ And to therle of Westmerlande also The Marshalsee of Englande then he gaue All Richemond fee, that was in Englande tho By patent also, for terme of life to haue The lordes all he pleased, so God me saue With office ay, orels with lande or rent With liberall herte, as to a prince appent. ¶ And whyles that parliament so did endure The Scottes rode by North, and sore had stroyed In Cokedale then, where Vmfreuyle had cure That with theim faught, & had theim sore anoyed At Fulhaplowe, on fote he theim acloyed For there he toke syr Richard Rotherforde His sonnes fyue, full fell of dede and worde. ¶ Syr Wyllyam Stiwarde, also he toke The lorde of Gordowne, he put to flight And Willibarde, the felde there then forsoke And prisoners brought home, well mo at night Then he had men with hym the felde to fight For whiche the kyng, hym had ay after in cherte Consyderyng well his knightly aperte. The .C .xcix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng Henry remeued kyng Richard from place to place, by night in preuey wise, in whiche tyme theries of Kent, Salisbury and Huntyngdon, the lorde Spencer and syr Raulfe Lomley were headed. THe kyng thē sent, kyng Richard to Ledis There to be kepte surely in preuitee Fro thēs after, to Pykeryng wēt he nedes
And to Knauesburgh, after led was he But to Pountfrete last, where he did die Bothe therles, of Kent and Salisbury Therle of Huntyngdon, and Spēcers sothelye. ¶ And syr Raulfe Lomley with mo in company After Christmasse, thought to haue slayn the kyng They were distured, and fled awaye in hye But they were slayn at Circester fleyng By the commons, with theim there fyghtyng Therles of Kent and of Salysbury And syr Raulfe Lomley in theyr companye. ¶ The lorde Spencer, take was vpon the sea At Bristowe was headed and decollate Therle also of Huntyngdon did flee And brought vnto the countesse of estate Of Herforde then, who had hym forth algate To Plasshe, where she made men hym hede Without counsayll of any lorde or rede. ¶ Syr Thomas shelly, set full hye in pride And Mawbleyn with Ferebye drawe and honge Syr Barnard Brockeys, was heded theim beside The byshop also of Carleile theim among In Westmynster, his life there to prolonge Perpetually by iudgement was commytte Among his brethren in order for to sytte. The .CC. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Richard was brought deade frō Pountfret to Powles, and after buried at Langley, for menne shoulde haue no remembraunce of hym. And howe syr
Robert Vmfreuyle faught with yt Scottes at Redeswere and had the felde and the victorye. IN march next after, kig Rychard thē was dede Fro Poumfret brought with great solempnyte Men sayde forhungered he was & lapped in lede At Poules his masse was done and diryge In hers royall, semely to royalte The kyng & lordes, clothes of golde there offerde Some .viii. some .ix. vpon his hers were proferde. ¶ At Westminster then dyd they so the same When truste he shuld there haue buryed bene In that mynster lyke to a prynce of name In his owne tombe, together with the quene Anne, that afore his fyrste wyfe had bene But then the kyng, hym faste to Langley sent There in the freres to be buryed secretement ¶ On Michelmasse day, next after his coronaciō Sir Robert then my mayster Vmfreuyle At Redeswyres, withoute excusacyon With Richarde Rotherforde fought that whyle And toke the stewarde, as I can compyle And Iames Douglas, with the lorde Seton And prisoners many, for to geue raunson ¶ Two hundreth men, vpon yt felde were slayne Thre hundreth fled, some hole, some maymed sore That dyed at home, with sorowe and wt payne Some died homeward, ye home they came nomore Where so he fought vnto his men right thore A mery worde he wòlde saye or they met
To glad theyr hartes, enemyes to ouerset. ¶ The .ii. yere of his reygne, then he went The kyn∣ges voiage into Scot¦lande. In haruest tyme, so into Scotlande And Edenburgh, with the countre brente In whiche tyme the Scottes brent our lande All Bamburgh shyre in Northumberlande For both wardeyns, with the kyng were gone No wardeyne there, but husbandes by their owne The .CC .i. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Owen of Glendoure rose in Wales againe the king and made warre on the lorde Gray Ruthin, and toke the lorde Graye and syr Edmonde Mortymer. THe king came home, and to London went At Michelmasse, wher thē he had message That Owen Glendoure, then felly blent In Englande sore, and did full great damage For cause the lorde Graye helde his herytage And to the kyng of it, full sore had playned No remedye gate, so was he then demeaned ¶ The lorde Gray Ruthin did hym great wrong Destroyed his lande, and he did hym the same So both Marches, destroyed were full longe But Owen wanne him selfe, eche day great name Of vasselrie, of gentyls and of fame That he them did, for whiche to him they drewe And became his men, & to him were full trewe ¶ So on a daye, the lorde Graye, and he met With great power vpon eyther syde
Where then they faught in batayle sore bet And toke hym then his prysoner that tyde And there the felde, he had with mikyll pryde Greate people toke and slewe, & home he went The lorde Graye he raunsomed at his entent ¶ Syr Edmonde then Mortimer warred sore Vpon Owen, and dyd hym mekyll tene But at laste, Owen laye hym before Where in batell they faught, as well was sene Where Owen toke him prisoner, as then ful kene With mekell folke, on eyther syde slayne And set Edmonde in prysone, and great payne ¶ He wrote vnto the kyng, for great socoure For he had made with Owen his fynaunce To whom yt kyng wolde graunt then no fauoure Ne nought he wolde thē make him cheuesaunce For to comforte his foes disobeysaunce Wherfore he laye, in feters and sore prysone For none payment of his greate raunsone The .CC .iii. Chapiter. ¶ The Earle of Northumberlande, & his sonne Henry Per∣cy stroke the batayle of Hamildon with the Scottes, & toke syxe Earles, and discomfyte .xl. thousande Scottes. IN the .iii. yere Therle of Fyffe & Murrey Of Athell and Angos, & Douglas also And of Menteth, wt barons fell yt daye The nomber was .xl. thousande and mo Had brent the lande, by south Northward tho To Homildon, where on holy rode daye
The earle them met in good & stronge araye ¶ His sonne also, Henry Percy was there George of Dunbar, was in theyr company And with the Scottes yt daye fought full sere Discomfyted them, and had the victorye Six earles taken and .xl. thousande playnly Some fled, some died, some maimed there for euer That to Scotlande, agayne came they neuer ¶ The kyng Henry, thryce to wales went In the haye tyme, and haruest dyuers yere The kyn∣ges voya∣ges into Wales. In euery tyme were mystes and tempestes sent Of wethers foule, that he had neuer power Glendour to noye, but euer his caryage clere Owen had at certayne straites and passage And to our hoste dyd full greate damage ¶ The king had neuer, but tempest foule & raine As longe as he was ay in Wales grounde Rockes & mystes, windes & stormes euer certaine All men trowed, yt witches it made that stounde The cōmens all, then of all Englande grounde Warred his gate, to Wales euery yere For haye and corne were loste both two in fere Whiche made greate derth, & of catell morayne And euen ay in hylles and in mountaynes Kepte him ful strong, yt king ay wrought in vaine The king might not, but euer more held yt pleines And waste his owne lord shippes, & his demaines And full great parte Owen had and occupyed By processe so in Wales, and victoryed
¶ Therle Henry, then of Northumberland Brought to the kyng, his owne prisoner Therle of Fyffe, was then I vnderstand Heire vnto the duke of Albany clere Regent that was of Scotland without pere But sir Henry his soonne, then would not bryng His prisoners in no wise to the kyng ¶ But the kyng he prayed for Mortimer That raunsomed might he been wt his frendes so He saied hym nay, for he was taken prisoner By his consent and treson to his foo Whom he would not comfort for to ouergoo The prince his landes, ne his owne to destroye For ay he had greate trust, yt he should hym noye ¶ The kyng hym blamed, for he toke not Owen When he came to hym on his assuraunce And he aunswered then to the kyng again He might not so kepe his affiaunce To shame hym self with suche a variaunce The kyng blamed hym for his prisoner Therle Douglas, for cause he was not there ¶ And saied he should hym fette, but he hym sēde Sir Henry sawe no grace for Mortimer His wifes brother, he went awaye vnkende To Berwyk so, and after came no nere Afore thei mette, at Shrowesbury in fere Wher then thei faught, for cause of his entent He purposed had, Mortimer his coronoment ¶ The lordes all of England had hym hight
And Owayn also on seuerne hym to mete Except therle of Stafford young to fight By their letters, vnder their seales mete But in the poinct, thei brake all their behete And he was slain, and all the cause conselid Why he the feld tooke and the kyng appelid The .CC .iii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe for therle of Marche his right, sir Henry Per¦cy and sir Thomas Percy his vncle erle of Worce∣ster, faught with the kyng and were slain at the bat∣taill of Shrewesbury wher all ye lordes deceiued them the yere of Christ a thousand foure hundred and thre and of his reigne the fourth yere, that were bounde to theim by their seales except therle of Stafford, whiche letters I sawe in the castell of Werkeworth when I was constable of it vnder my lord sir Robert Vmfre¦ uile who had that castell of kyng Henry his gift by forfeture of therle of Northumberland. ON Madleyn euen was on the Saterdaye After long trete, the prince began to fight The yere of Christ a thousād was no nay Foure hundred also and three, therto full right When the battaill was streken of mikell might And of the kyng then was the fourth yere Of his reigne, accompted well and clere ¶ His vncle dere, was with hym there dedde His father came not out of Northumberland But failed hym foule, without witte or rede But to the kyng he came I vnderstand Holy submittyng hym vnto his royall hand
Whom then he putte to hold in sore prisone With twoo menne of his owne in Bagyngton ¶ His castelles, all his mēne held then full strōg To tyme the kyng had, graunt hym plener grace But the lordes, in counsaill then emong Hight hym to help, the sixte yere at the Pasche But none durst come that tyme, so fell the case But bishop Scrop and therle marshall The lord Bardolfe, then of our lordes all The .CC .iiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe in yt yere of his reigne & in yt yere of Christ a thousand foure hundred and fyue, master Rychard Scorpe archebishop of Yorke, Thomas Mombray rle marshall sir Iohn Lamplewe and sir Wyllyam Plompton were hedded byside Yorke. IN lenton after he came home to his land By perliamēt, whole deliuered and acquit And twoo yere after, in peace I vnderstād With kyng Henry, full peasebly did sitte Then in the yere as menne remembre it Of his reigne the sixte, the bishop Scorp went Therle marshall with hym of one entent ¶ To Yorkes More, and ther assembled power Of their owne, and their frendes also Of therles menne of Northumberland that were To the nombre of twenty thousand tho Afore the daye, assigned that was so By therle then of Northumberland That there Cheften with theim should haue stād
¶ With other lordes that were to theim assent But the bishop and therle marshall Wher slain afore the daye of assignement Betwene theim made afore in speciall Hedded were then, nere Yorke as then did fall Sir Iohn Lamplewe and sir Wyllyam Plomtō With the bishop were hedded there for treson The .CC .v. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the lord Hastynges, the lord Fauconbridge and sir Iohn Coluile of ye Dale and his make, and sir Iohn Ruthyn were hedded at Duresme by ye kyng for ther∣les of Northumberland & then he gate therles castelles and stroke of seuen heddes at Berwyke. THe lord Hastynges at Duresme was then take The lord Faucōbrige together in cōpany Sir Iohn Coluile of ye Dale & his make Sir Iohn Ruthyn that knightes were full māly To therle of Northumberland openly Were hedded there all foure vpon a daye And to Werkworth remeuid in greate araye ¶ Wher the castell with in a weke was yolde Vnto the kyng, after assautes fell and sore The casteleyns to passe free wher thei would With horse and harnes, without chalenge more Then to Alnwike, the kyng remeued thore Wher the capitains vnto the kyng then sent Wyn Berwyke ones, he should haue his entent ¶ So went he then to Berwyke without delaye With assaut and shotte, of gonnis strong yt were
He had it then, and ther hedded on a daye The barons sonne of Graistoke taken there Sir Henry Bowton and Blenkensop therfore And Prendirgest ran on the sea also And Tuwile with other squiers twoo ¶ To Alnwike then, the kyng laied siege again Without assaute, by whole conuencion Henry Percy of Athel, with hert fain And Wyllyam Clifford, without discencion The castell yeld at the kynges entencion With horse and harnes, without enpechement Or forfeture or els impediment ¶ Prodhow Langley and also Cokirmouth Alnham Newsted, deliuered were anone Thei remoued then furth in to the south Therle of Northumberland was then gone Afore Northward, to Scotland with great mone The lord Bardolf with hym thither went And there abode, with their suppowelment ¶ The sommer next, by sea to Wales thei went Vnto Glendour, and after then to Brytain And so by sea, to Flaunders or they stent The other sommer, to Scotland came again By thest sea, and ther thei did remain To the winter then, of snowe full depe That thei were slain, for whom yt folke sore wepe ¶ The nynth yere was then of the kyng Henry In Feueryer afore the fastyngange Of Christ his date a thousand certainly
Foure hundred and eight, counted emong At Bramham more with speres sharp and long In Yorkshire, so the Rokeby with theim mette Shrief of the shire, with power that he gette The .C. C .vi. Chapiter ¶ Howe the kyng his soonne of Scotlād & heire Iames was taken on the sea and brought vnto the kyng and then dyed Owayn and the kyng of Scotland. THe same yere also, yt prince thē of Scotlād Vpon the sea sailyng, then in to Fraunce Was taken & brought to yt kyng of Eng∣lād Eleuen yere old was he then, by remembraūce Whom the kyng then putte in gouernaunce For like a prince, as to a kyng appent In all honour as was conuenient ¶ The tenth yere then of the kyng his date The kyng of Scotland, and Owayn of Glendor His soonne also, the world forsoke then algate And dyed awaye, of theim then was no more The prince of Scotland then was kyng therfore And Wales all became the kyng his menne In rest and peace without rebellion then ¶ In that same yere Gilbert Vmfreuile Lord was then of Riddisdale in keyme That passid not seuentene yere that while And ward was to the kyng that tyme But seuentene yere of age was that tyme At Arrays then faught full worthely
Wth George Turnuile, in lyestes syngulerly ¶ With axe and sworde, and dagger vpon foote Twenty strokes with euery wepen smyten Vndeparted without any mote And on the morowe, there they syten Twenty coursses, with speres together hitten A quarter bare vnarmed and vnarayed Saue there serkes slewe with speres vnasayed. The .CC .vii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Robert Vmfreuile went into Scotlande and lay in the Scottishe sea .xiiii. dayes, and euery daye faught with yt Scottes, somedaye on the northsyde, and some daye on the southsyde, and gatte .xiiii. greate shippes, & brent there Ga∣liot with ordinaunce and sore battayll in the Scottishe sea afore Edynburghe and at the Blakenesse. THe yere eleuenth, of this same kyng Henry Syr Robert Vmfreuile toke the see With .x. sayles, to kepe it notably When trewce was taken in specialtee Betwene Scotlande and vs in cetentee To the Scottishe sea, both by sea and lande And to Monshole on our syde I vnderstande ¶ In the Scottishe sea, with his shippes he laye Where .xiiii. shippes he toke with his manhede And faught full sore, at full sea euery daye Sometyme vpon the northside so in dede And some tyme on the southsyde out of drede With the duke of Albany and of Fyffe And his proude scottes, yt faught then full ryffe.
¶ With therle of Douglas, and theim of Lothiā And brought his fiers, brennyng vpon the sea In botes and cogges ordened by theim than With other botes, with mē of armes in propertee And archers good, well pauȳshed in specialitee That brent theyr shippes and theyr galiot A shyppe of auantage was then God wote ¶ When he had ben, there .xiiii. dayes to thende With his prises, he came to Englande Full of cloth, wollen & lynnen, that land to amend Pytche and tarre, both for fre and bonde For to amende the shepes of our lande Floure and mele of whete and rye he solde The market he so amended manyfolde ¶ And wood he had, and other marchaundise Woll and hide, and yron great quantitee Woll skynnes, cloth of golde and spyceries Iewelles in chestes and stones of precioustee And other marchauntes in specioustee And prisoners also, and mykell flaxe Wynes swete, and mykell poleyn waxe. The .CC .viii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe syr Robert Vmfreuile brent Pebles on there market daye, and made his men to mete their clothe with speres & bowes, and after the Scottes called hym Robyne Mend∣market, and his neuewe brente Iedworth and Teuidale sone after. AT Pebles long, afore that tyme .iiii. yere He brent the toune, vpon their market daye And met theyr cloth, wt speres & bowes sere
By his biddyng without any naye Wherfore the Scottes from thence forthward ay Called hym, Robyn mendmarket in certayn For his measures were so large and playn. Robyn mēdmar∣ket. ¶ His neuewe Gilbert, and he the .xi. yere Of kyng Henry, vpon the water of Calme than And also on Roule and Iedworth forest clere Forrayed full sore, with many a manly man His banner first, there was displayed then When he was clerely but .xiiii. yere nomore When his vncle had battled hym so sore. The .CC .ix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the prince Henry of Wales sent power to the duke of Burgoyn to helpe hym, the two Vmfreuiles, syr Iohn Graye with other, where Vmfreuile with the Englyshe men helde the felde for he would not kyll the prysoners, as the duke of Burgoyn had ordeyned THe prince Henry, to duke Philip then sent That of Burgoyn was so both syr & lorde Syr Gilbert Vmfreuile, & his vncle vera∣mēt His cousyn also syr Ihō Gray, as mē recorde With many other worthy, with speare & sweorde Willyam Porter agayn the duke of Orleaunce And his armynakes with men of great defence ¶ At Sncle then, again ye duke of Orleaūce And the duke of Burbon by all a daye Thenglyshe faught with great sufficience And wanne the brydge, with battayll bet awaye Tharmynakes, with many sore affraye
Where Vmfreuile proclaymed was erle of Kyme Cheiften was of all Englyshe that tyme. ¶ At Durdan also, and at Etham agayn They faught all newe, where then they had yt feld And prisoners many they did opteyne The which the duke of Burgoyn wold haue weld Because to hym they were so vnbelde Theim to haue slayn he cōmaunded then, eche ca∣pitayn His prisoners to kyll then in certeyn ¶ To whiche Gilbert Vmfreuile erle of Kyme Aunswered for all his felowes and there men They shuld all die together at a tyme Or theyr prisoners, so shulde be slayn then And with that toke the felde as folke did ken With all theyr men, and all theyr prisoners To die with theim, as worship it requyers ¶ He said they wer not come thyther as bouchers To kyll the folke in market or in feire Ne theim to sell, but as armes requiers Theim to gouerne without any dispeyre As prysoners owe home agayn repeire For fyne paying, as lawe of armes wyll And not on stockes nor in market theim to sell ¶ With whō syr Iohn Graye, as his cousyn dere And all Englyshe with many other of Fraunce With their prysoners full familier Batayled in felde, with full strong ordinaunce More like to fight, then to make obeysaunce And helde therle of kyme for theyr cheiftayn
To lyue and dye vnder his baner certayne ¶ The duke Philyppe, full of sapyence Sawe his manhode, and his knightly courage Lothe was to lese his noble aduenture By treaty, and by other tender message Of prisoners, graunt them to do auauntage And hym withhelde with all his feloship As Earle of Kyme, proclaymed of great worshyp. ¶ Then after sone, oure Englishemen anone Came home agayne, wt great and hye rewarde Whome then the duke, by letter cōmende alone In writyng specifyed, with herte inwarde Vnto the prynce, that sent them to hymwarde And thanked them greatly of his seruyce In his warres shewed agayne his enemies ¶ The king discharged yt prince fro his coūsayle And set my lorde syr Thomas in his stede Chief of counsayle, for the kynges more auayle For whiche the prynce of wrath and wilfull hede Agayne hym made debate and frowardhede With whom the kyng toke parte, & helde the felde To tyme the prince, vnto the king him yelde ¶ The king then made his sōne duke of Clarēce My lorde Thomas, and sent hym into Fraūce To helpe the duke Lewys of Orlyaunce Agayne the duke of Burgoyne at instaunce Of my lorde Thomas, againe yt prince suraunce Whiche was the cause also of theyr heuynesse So to refuse duke Philyppes loue causelles
¶ But then the duke of Clarence with power Came to the duke Lowes of Orlyaunce Kīg Charles brother, who made hym noble chere And hym receyued, with full hye reuerence They two warryed, with mighty suffycience Vpon the duke of Burgoyne, and hym outrayed That he went into Burgoyne, all formayed ¶ Then rode the duke of Clarence into Guien Through Fraunce, with hoste then full royall And kepte that lande, wt helpe of duke Lewis thē In whiche meane while, kyng Henry gan fall In great syknesse, that his strength did pall With contryte herte, and humble yelden chere He sayde, O lorde, thy me I requyre. The .CC .x. Chapiter. ¶ The wordes that the Kynge sayde at hys deathe of hyghe complaynt, but nought of repentaūce of vsurpement of the realme, ne of the restorement of ryght heyres to the crowne O Lorde he sayde, O God omnipotent Nowe se I well, thy godhede loueth me That suffred neuer my foes to haue theyr entent Of myne persone in myne aduersrte Ne in myne sycknesse, ne in myne infyrmyte But ay haste kepte it fro theyr maleuolence And chastysed me, by thy beneuolence ¶ Lorde I thanke the, with all my herte With all my soule, and my spirytes clere This wormes mete, this caryon full vnquerte
That some tyme thought in worlde it had no pere This face so foule, that leprous doth apere That here afore, I haue had suche a pryde To purtraye ofte, in many place full wyde. ¶ Of which ryght, nowe yt porest of this lande Except only, of theyr benignyte Wolde loth to looke vpon, I vnderstande Of whiche good lorde, that thou so visyte me A thousande tymes the lorde in trinyte With all my herte, I thanke the and cōmende Into thyne handes, my soule withouten ende. ¶ And dyed so in fayth, and hole creaunce At Cauntorbury buryed, with greate reuerence As a kyng shulde be, wt all kynde of circumstaūce According vnto his hye magnifycence Besyde the prynce Edward, with great expence Of Christ was then, a. M. yere full oute Four hundreth eke, and thirtene oute of doubte. ¶ O very God, what torment had this kyng The con∣ceyte of the maker. To remember in bryef, and shorte entent Some in his sherte, put ofte tyme venemyng And some in meate and drinke great poysonment Some in his hose, by great ymagenement Some in bedstraw, yrōs sharpe groūd wel & whet Enuenemed sore, to slee him, if he had on them set ¶ Some made for hym, diuers enchauntmentes To waste hym oute, and vtterly destroye And some gaue hym batayle, full felonoment In felde within his realme, hym for to noye
And on them selfes, the hurte and all the anoye Ay fell at ende that honged were and heded As traytours ought to bene in euery stede ¶ This kyng dyed, of his reygne in the yere Fourtene accompted, of Marche yt .xix. daye The sondaye was then by Kalendre Of whome the realme, great ioye at first had ay But afterwarde they loued not his araye At his begynnyng, full hye he was cōmende With cōmons then, & also lytell at the ende. The .CC .xi. Chapiter. ¶ Henry the fyfth, kyng of Englande and of Fraunce, began to reygne the twenty daye of Marche yt was saynte Cuth∣bertes daye, and was crowned the ninth daye of Apryl, the yere of Christe, a thousande foure hundreth twenty & two, after he had reigned .ix. yere and an halfe. And in the houre that he was crowned and anointed he was chaunged from all vyces vnto vertuous lyfe, and lycensed the folke to offer vnto Richarde Scrop, and buryed kyng Rychard at West mynster, and graunted to Henry Percy his landes. HEnry his sōne, yt prynce of wales was thā On saynt Cuthbertes day in Marche fo∣lowynge Kyng was so, as I remember canne On passyon sondaye, after was this kyng Anoynted and crowned, without taryeng The ninth daye, it was of Apryll so With stormes fell, and haylestones greate also ¶ In his fyrste yere, the lorde Cobham heretike
Confedered with lollers insapient Lorde Co¦ham. Agayne the churche arose, and was full lyke It to haue destroyed by theyr entendment Had not the kyng then made suppowelment And put hym fro the felde, by good direccyon That sembled were, by greate insurreccyon. ¶ Then fled the lorde Cobham herrorious To Wales, so with lollers many one Musyng in his opinyon venemous Howe that he myght destroye the churche anone But God that syt in heuen aboue alone Knowyng his herte, naked of all good entent Let hym betake, to haue his iudgement ¶ And put he was to prisone in the towre Of whiche he dyd escape awaye by nyght And take was agayne within an houre And after sone dampned, by lawe and ryght For heresye, by the clergy in syght And brent he was to ashes deed and pale Through cursed lyfe, thus came he in greate bale ¶ The houre he was crowned and anoynt He chaunged was, of all his olde condicyon Full vertuous he was, fro poynt to poynt Grounded all newe, in good opinyon For passyngly without comparyson Then set vpon all ryght and conscyence A newe man made, by all good regimence ¶ He gaue leue then of good deuocyon All men to offer to byshop Scrop expresse
Without lettynge, or any questyon He graunted also, of his hye worthynesse To laye the kyng Rycharde, and Anne doutlesse His wyfe that was, at Westmynster buryed As kyng Richard hym selfe had sygnifyed ¶ And fro the freres of Langley where he laye He caryed hym to Westmynster anone And buryed hym of royall greate araye With the quene Anne, in tombe of marbel stone Full royally arayed, as royals by them sone And to Henry Percy, he graūted his landes clere That to the duke of Bedforde, then geuen were ¶ My lorde of Clarence, fro Guyā home agayne Came to the kyng, with ioye & greate pleasaunce The second yere, of whome the kyng was fayne At Leycester then, as made is remembraunce In his parlyament, without varyaunce His brother Iohn, duke of Bedforde create His brother vinfrey, duke of Gloucester of estate ¶ Thomas Beauford, yt was earle of Dorcet He made duke then, of Excester that whyle He gaue in charge, that tyme withouten let Vnto syr Robert there Vinfreuyle By his wysdome, and manhode that whyle To treate with the Scottes, to get Henry Percy Layde in hostage, by his grauntsirez foly. The .CC .xii. Chapiter.
¶ Howe sir Robert Vmfreuile faught at Geteryng the third yere with the Scottes, that had but seuen score speres and three hundreth howes, on Madlyn day and discomfited of theim .iiii. M. menne & made chase twelfe mile on theim in to their owne land, and went with the kyng to Harflite to the siege with whom I went thether. THen was it warre betwene vs & Scotland That sir Robert Vmfreuile might it spede But at Geteryng wt Scottes hād for hād He faught on fote, on Maudelyn daye in deede Wher eightene score Scottes were take I rede Three score sain, a thousand putte to flight With four .C. mēne, discōfited theim fourth right ¶ Twelfe mile thē, he made on theim great chase In to their land, and home he came again To his castell of Rokesburgh in that case Whiche he had then in kepyng soth to sain Of his greate labour, in harte beyng full fain With prisoners, many one hurte full sore Hym self and his, that then had wounded thore ¶ At Lammasse next, the kyng then as he laye At Southampton, therle of Cambridge toke The lord Scorp also, and eke sir Thomas Graye And hedded theim, the cause was who so looke Emong theim selfes, for thei this counsaill toke And purposed therle of Marche to croune Kyng of England, by their prouision The .CC .xiii. Chapiter.
¶ Howe the kyng wēt in to Normādy and steged Hare∣flete and gate it with greate peyn and losse of menne But who maye cas of rennyng hoūdis and many racches but he must lese some of theim. THE kyng held furth by sea to Normandy With all his hoste, at Kydcans landed thē And laied a siege to Hareflete myghtely On euery side, by land and water wanne With bulwerkes stoute, and bastell he began In whiche he putte therle of Huntyngton Therle of Kent also of greate renoune ¶ Whiche erles twoo, wt other to theim assigned Cornwaile and Gray, Steward also and Porter Full greate assautes, made eche daye & repugned Whiles at last, thei bette the towne toures their And what the kyng, with fagottes that there were And his connyng werching vnder the wall With his gūnes castyng, thei made yt toure to fall ¶ And their bulwerke brent with shot of wildfyre At whiche place then, therles twoo vp sette Their baners bothe, without any hyre The kyng therwith, his gonnes the walles bette The duke did so, of Clarence without lette On the ferreside, wher as he then laye Therle Mountague, did well ther alwaye ¶ The lord Gawcort that thē was their capitain Of Harelete tho with other of the toune Offred then the toune to the kyng full fain And he with other, to stand at the kynges direcciō Then made he there, his vncle of greate renoune
Capitain of it duke of Excester than And homeward went, through Fraunce like a mā The .CC .xiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng came homewarde through Normādy and Picardie, and sote the battaill of Agyncor wher I was with my maister. AN hundred mile to Calais had he then At Agyncourt, so homeward in his waye The nobles there, of Fraūce afore him wē Proudly battailled, wt an hūdred thousād in araie He sawe he must nedes with theim make afraye He sette on theim, and with theim faught full sore With nyne thousand, no more with hym thore ¶ The feld he had, and held it all that night But then came woorde, of hoste and enemies For whiche thei slewe all prisoners doune right Sauf dukes and erles, in fell and cruell wise And then the prees of enimies did supprise Their owne people, yt mo were dede through pres Then our menne might haue slain, yt tyme no lese ¶ On our side, was the duke of Yorke ther slain Therle also of Suffolke worshipfully And knightes twoo, with other then soth to sain And at the siege, therle of Suffolke sothely The father dyed of the flixe contynually But mikell folke, at that siege yet dyed Of frute and flixe, and colde were mortified ¶ On yt Frēch partie, yt dukes of Barre & Lorein
And of Alaunson, in battaill ther were dedde And take were of Christeans in certain The duke Lewes of Orliaunce their hedde The duke of Burbone in that stede Therle of Vendom and Arthure also of Brytain And sir Bursigalo marshall of Fraunce certain ¶ And therle of Ewe was taken ther also Fyue barons also that were at their baner And fiftene hundred knightes and squyers mo Were sain that daye in full knightely maner With woundes, so as then did apere As werres would vpon Chrispyn daye And Chrispynian that sainctes in blisse been aye The .CC .xv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe themperour and the duke of Holand came to the kyng, the Coūte palatine the duke of Melayn the marquys Farrar, the lorde Mantowe and the mar¦ques Mount Ferrete the lorde Moūt Palestrine came with themperour the same tyme, and the duke Bauers and Embeir and the prince of Orenge also AND in the yere of Christ a thousand clere Foure hundred also & therwithall fiftene When this battaill was smiten as dooth apere In the third yere of his reigne as was seen To Caleice so he came, and home bee dene With themperour of Roome sir Sigemond Vnto hym came then, in to England ground ¶ With a thousand mēne yt were full clene araied
The duke of Melayn, the counte Palatyne The marques Ferrer, yt lord Mantowe wel apay∣ed The coūte Carmeler, the counte Palestryne With many lordes of the water of the Ryne And of the Garter was made the secondarye And in it stalled, for he would not varye ¶ The duke of Holand, then by sea came With .lx. shippes, in Thamis that did aryue And to the kyng, he went vnto lambe To Themperoure after he went belyue As chronycles then did discryue Then was he made knight of the Garter At his desyre, as sayth the chronicler. The .CC .xvi. Chapiter. ¶ Of the battayle of Sayne, & of the carykes there taken in the sea afore the mouth of Sayne. THe kyng sent then, yt duke vnto the sea Of Bedforde, yt with four hūdreth sayles To vitayl Harelete, wt therle of Marche no lee Therle Marshall, without any fayles With therles armed in plate and mayles Of Orenforde, Warrewike and Huntyngdon Of Salisbury, Deuonshire, & many a baron. ¶ Of Arondell also, these erles all Were in that flote, vnto the noumbre of men Twenty thousande Herouldes did theim call On our Lady daye thassumpcion then All these lordes with many worthy men
The fyfth yere of the kynge was then expresse Whē there enemies theim met at Sayn doutelesse ¶ They faught ful sore, afore the water of Sayn With carrikes many, well stuffed and arayed And many other shippes great of Hispayne Barges Balyngers and galeys vnfrayed Whiche proudly came vpō our shippes vnprayed And by theuen there sayles aualed were set Theyr enemyes slayn in battayll, and sore bet ¶ And many dryent, were that daye in the sea That as our flete rode there then alwaye Vnto the feast, nexte of his natiuitee The bodies flete amonge our shippes echeday Full piteous was, and to see theim ay That thousādes were .xx. as they then tolde That taken were, in that same batayll bolde. ¶ In which meane while, whiles our ships there laye It was so calme, without any wynde We might not sayle, ne fro thens passe awaye Wherfore theyr galeys, eche day there gā vs fynd With ores many, about vs dyd they wynde With wildfyre oft assayled vs daye and night To brēe our shippes in that they could or might ¶ The flete came home, than at our Lady day Frō Sayn, whiche tyme yt kyng then had cōueied Themperoure then to Caleys on his waye And home agayn was come right well apayed Of the welfare of that worthy flete assayed So well in armes, vnto his hie pleasaunce
Vpon his foes, & kepte theim selfe by gouernaūce. The .CC .xvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng wēt into Fraūce, in the .v. yere of his reigne the seconde time, and landed at Towke in Constantyne in Normandy. THe king thē in his .v. yere wēt into Fraūce And landed at Towke and gatte the ca∣stell than And so came with all his ordinaunce And layde his siege aboute, with many a man Whiche by processe, at the last he wan Whiche to Vmfreuile, that thē was erle of Kyme He gaue to kepe, for great manhode that tyme ¶ Bayons, Falace, Cees, and Argenton Doumfront, Mortyne and Iuory also Musterdeuilers, Euerons and Alaunson Caldebeke and Depe, Arkes, Vnycort tho With other townes and castels many mo Gurnaye, Newcastell, Gysours, Estoutuile Roan, Louers and also Vmfreuile ¶ Pountlarge, Pountoyes & also Pount Dorsō, Maunte, Vire Balom and also Aueraunce Castell Galiard, with many other toune Bolham in Perche, saynt Ioilian in Maunce Merteyn in Perche, Chirbroke and eke Cōstaūce Vernell in Perche, Seintlowe and Alauayle Vernon on Sayn, without any battayle ¶ All Normandy he gate, within two yere And after then, he trauayled in Fraunce
For mariage and conuencion clere Betwene kyng Charles and hym at instaunce Of duke Philip of Burgoyn, of aliaunce In whiche tyme, so they were by appoyntment Accorded well, and clerely condiscent. ¶ That then he wed, his doughter Katheryne And proclaymed was, then of Fraunce regent And heritour of Fraunce, by ryght lyne Of his owne right, fro kyng Edwardes discent And Normendy and Guyan as appent Remayn should to hym, and to his heyres Kynges of Englande euermore, and to theyrs. ¶ Then layde he siege to Melon anone right Aboue Paris. v. legges vpon Sayn Whiche by processe and laboure of his might And full sore siege, full long with passyng payne He had at laste, of whiche he was full fayn And toke it, to Vmfreuile erle of Kyme To haue for euer, ay forwardes fro that tyme ¶ Sauncer in Burgoyn then gate he mightely And Motreux also, where the duke was buried Of Burgoyn then, whom he toke vp in hie And at Dugyon, as it is notified Hym buried so, in Burgoyn vndenyed With high honour and great solempnitee As to suche a prince, of reason ought to bee ¶ And Motreux toke he then to syr Iohn Gray That then was made erle of Tanōiruile A manly knight in armes proued aye
And lorde Powes was, by his wyfe that whyle And emes sonne, vnto therle Vmfreuile Two better knightes I trowe, there were not thā Of theyr estate, sith tyme that they began. ¶ At siege of Meloyn, and of all other citees After folowyng, the kyng of Scotland lay The prince of Orenge withouten lees The duke Embarre his sonne and heire alway That suster sonne then was, full freshe and gay To kyng Henry at Meloyn, full well arayed The kyng of Fraūce, with banner hole displayed ¶ The siege helde, fro Midsomer to Christmasse When kyng Henry at his palayce royall Of Turnels fayre, besyde the bastell pereles Of Saynt Antonye helde his hole imperiall Where then he feasted, these kynges & princes all Where then therles of Suffolke and of Kyme With ten men helde the iustes by all that tyme ¶ But whyles the kyng Henry was so in Fraūce The duke Robert, that was of Albany Layd about Barwike of great puissaunce Sixty thousande of Scottes cruelly Assayled the towne echedaye by and by The capitayn was syr Robert Vmfreuyle A knight of the garter, had ben long whyle. The .CC .xviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the duke of Albany besieged Barwske, and therle Douglas Rokesburgh in heruste, in the seuenth yere of
the kyng, and howe Henry Percy erle of Northumberland rescowed Barwike and Roliesburgh, with .vii. score. M. mē, for trust it true, there is no lorde in Englande, that may de fende you agayn Scotlande so well as he, for they haue the hertes of the people by North and euer haue had, and doute it not, the North parte bee your trewe legemen. THey shot their gonnes, and with their lad∣ders scaled But nought auailed, thei wer so wel of bet When they our hoste sawe, anone they vnscaled That stale awaye by night without let For feare our hoste, vpon theim shulde set At Baremore then, with .vii. score thousande men For which the Scottes, fled fro yt duke home then ¶ Vpon the night, and let hym there alone With his owne men and no mo of weike power Yet rode he to Norham nere theim anone And brent the towne, our hoste and he then wer But two myle of, and durst not come no nere Wherfore he rode, home then into Scotlande Our hoste more sone retourned to England ¶ Then syr Robert Vmfreuile, with the garyson Of Barwike, with his countremen Folowed after the Scottes, with his penoun On the hynder ryders, and many of theim then He toke homewarde, and slewe squyers ten Within Scotlande, besyde Cherneside towne And to Berwike came with his garyson. ¶ Therle Douglas, then hight syr Archebalde Whiche his one eye had lost at Hamyldon That semed hym well, ay after manyfolde
At Shrowysbury, for his correccyon He loste one of his stones, for his raunson His syege then lefte at Rokesburgh where he laye And with the duke of Albany rode awaye ¶ The Earles two, of Douglas and Dunbarre For trewce sent, to Roberte Vmfreuyle Wardeine of the este marche, full wyse and warre He wolde none take with them, then for no while Syth they the trewce had broken, and did fyle He shuld them holde the warre, to they were faine To seke peace then, at the kyng agayne. ¶ The kyng was then, in Fraunce hole regent And Parys had, and all the lande aboute Troies in Champaine, & Mews in Bry had hent With all citees, townes and castelles stoute In all that lande and countree there throughout Of Mewis he made sir Iohn Graye capitayne That was lorde Powes, by his wyfe certayne ¶ That tyme syr Raufe Crōwel was gouernour Of kyng Charles, and Isabell the quene By kyng Henry ordeyned theyr protectoure Who kept them at Boys vincent, as was sene In royall wyse, as to them dyd parteigne The kyng busy, that tyme in his conqueste For to set rule in Fraunce, coulde haue no reste ¶ In this meane whyle, sir Robert Vinfreuyle Wardeine of the March, thought then full great shame The king in Fraūce, doing so well yt while He made the warre on Scottes to haue a name
Two yere complete he wrought thē mekell shame Thest Marche hole of Scotlande then he brent And market townes echeone, or that he stente ¶ Howyk Selkirke Ied worth, & all Dunbarre Laudre also, with all Laudre dale The forestes also, fro Berwyk that were farre Of Eteryke Ied worth, and eke all Teuidale And all the villages in them, both great & small And none helpe had, but of his countre men Of the bishopryke, & of Northumberlande then ¶ In this mean time, yt Scottes had great paine Wherfore therls of Douglas and Dunbarre To London came, and toke a trewce full fayne As Vmfreuyle them hight afore the warre That to the kyng they shulde it seke of farre Of whiche he kept his hoste then full two yere For with his warre, he waste the marche full clere The .CC .xix. Chapiter. Howe the Kynge and the Quene came into Englaude, in the eyght yere of his reigne. THe .viii. yere of his reygne, at Cādelmasse The kinge came home, and brought with hym the quene That he had wed at Troys, in Chāpein doutlesse Afore the lordes of Fraunce, as then was wel sene The duke of Clarence, as men well it mene He made regent of Fraunce in his absence To occupye ryght, as his owne presence ¶ The earle of Salisbury, the Mountague
He made gouernoure then of Normandaye Therle of Kyme, a knyght of his full trewe Marshall of Fraunce, he made full openly The lordes all, he ordeyned there to lye Hym to comforte, and to bene attendaunt To hym, in all that myght hym be pleasaunt ¶ This prynce of princes, in England thē abode To somer after, eche daye in busynesse To ordeyne for his passage, and his rode To Fraūce agayne, in which tyme then doutlesse I sawe two knightes afore hym then expresse That none might them accorde, or treate to peace Ne iustyce none, of fyghting might them cease ¶ The lordes then greatly counsayled the kyng To make them fynde suretye to kepe the peace The kyng answered anon without tarying I shalbe youre borowe nowe or I cease For of this thyng, I may not longe you prease But what case fall that slaine is one of you That other shall dye, to god I make a vowe ¶ They heryng this, anon they were accorde By frendes that treated, yt time betwene them two And after that, they were no more at discorde This was a Iustice of peace, that coulde do so His offyce kepte, without borowes moo For when he dyed, Iustyce of peace bode none But baratours, theyr office kepte anone. ¶ And at the Easter, then in his xv. yere The duke of Clarence, thenemies had espyed
At Bangy then for whiche his menne in fere He sembled, and thyther faste he hyed On Easter euen, he wolde not bene replyed With whome were then therle of Huntyngdon And Somerset the earle, his wyues sonne The .CC .xx. Chapiter. Howe on Easter euen, the duke of Clarence smote yt batell of Bawgy, in the yere of Christe, a thousand .iiii. hundreth & twenty, and in the nynth yere of kyng Henry for that yere the feaste of the Annuncyacyon of oure Lady fell on Ester twysdaye, and the date chaunged after that batayle in the Easter weke. ANd nere at Bawge came Gylberte Vm∣freuyle Marshal of Fraunce, wt .v. horse & no mo And of good wyt, counsayled hym that whyle To kepe the churche and goddes seruyce tho And after the feaste, to seke vpon his foo And he aunswered hym, yf thou be aferd Go home thy waye, and kepe the churche yerde ¶ For thou haste bene with the kyng to longe To make me lese my worshyp and my name Thou haste ay gote the worshyp euer amonge And I haue none, thus wolde thou lose my fame With suche wordes chidyng he dyd hym blame To whome he sayde, yf that thou be afrayde And kepe the churche, as thou me nowe hast saide ¶ With yt he saide, my lorde ye haue no menne With the enemyes, thus hastely to fyght Youre men wot not of this, ne howe ne whenne
To semble to you of power, ne of myght For trewly nowe my cousen Graye nowe right And I haue here but ten men and no mo But yet ye shall neuer saye we leaue you so ¶ So rode they furth, ay chidyng by the waye Tyll they to Bawgy, ouer the bridge were gone Where the enemyes were batayled in araye Where then they light, & faught with them anon The duke was slayne yt day there wt his foone With hym were slayne, then therle Vmfreuyle And syr Iohn Graye the Earle of Tankeruyle The lorde Roos, and syr Iohn Lumley With many other were with hym slayne yt daye Whose names I can not wryte nor saye The Earles two, of Huntingdon no naye Of Somerset also, were taken there I saye For prysoners, and put to greate raunson And laye full longe in Fraunce then in pryson ¶ Thenglishe power came, when all was done And rescowed then, the deed men where they laye And brought yt lordes home, fro thens thē ful sone That were there vpon the felde that daye And buryed them in Englande, in good araye Echeone in his owne abbaye or colage Afore founded within his herytage ¶ At Cauntorbury, the duke was of Clarence Besyde his father kynge Henry buryed With suche honoure, costage and expence As the duches his wyfe coulde haue signifyed
Whiche neded not to bene modifyed She was so well, within her selfe auysed Of greate sadnesse, and womanhede preuised. The .CC .xxi. Chapiter. Howe the quene wente agayne to Fraunce, & lefte the quene in Englande with chylde, and wanne dyuerse cytees tow∣nes and castelles in somer, in the nyngth yere of his reigne THe kyng then let ye quene in Englande byde In somer then, the. ix yere of his date And into Fraunce, agayne he went yt tyde With heuy harte, to Parys went algate The castell of Perfount, soone he gate A royall place of all that men haue sene The greate cytee of Compyne also I wene. ¶ The cytees also of Cassons Bray and Crayle Of Owsare also, with many cytees moo And to Parys agayne without fayle In his castell of Lowre abidynge tho Tidynges then came, to him full glad and mo That of a prynce delyuered was the quene Of whiche all men reioysed as was sene Saynt Dionis then, and castell Boys Vynccent Corbell Pount Melanke, and full great parte of Fraunce Burgoyne Artoys, and Pycardy to hym sent To bene his men, without contraryaunce And eche cytee, to hym sworne in substaunce Walled townes and castelles euerychone As hye regent of Fraunce by hym one
¶ Then rode he furth to Bawgy and Orleaunce Wynnyng the tounes, and citees in his waye And castelles all, that were of greate defence Crepy, Lawnesse, and Milly with greate affraye Nongentle Roy, he gatte with greate araye Pount Caranton, with many other obeyed To his highnesse, and were his menne conueghed ¶ The duke of Brytain, then was his manne For fee belaste, without rebellion The counte sainct Paule, his manne was then The duke of Burgoyn, without suspicion With many other, his menne without collucion Were sworne thē whole, ye coūtrees in y• same wise Castelles and tounes, eke as he couth deuise ¶ In August so of his reigne the tenth yere He toke sickenes, and laye at Boy Vincent In pain strong, as then it did appere Full like to passe, wherfore in his entent The duke of Bedford, he made he regent Of Fraunce, and of his other landes all Beyond the sea as chief in generall ¶ And of his soonne Henry, he made custode Thomas Beauford, his vncle dere and trewe Duke of Excester, full of all worthy hode To tyme his soonne, to perfecte age grewe He to kepe hym, chaungyng for no n With helpe of his other eme, then fu The bishop of Wynchester of good a ¶ Therle then of Salisbury manly
That Mountague then hight by surname He sette to kepe, then all Normandie Vnder the regent, as knight of full greate fame With other lordes, full sage and worthy of name Therle of Oxenford, and of Suffolke also Of his counsaill to been with many mo The .CC .xxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng dyed the last daye of August the yere of Christ a thousand foure hundred two and twenty and of his reigne the tenth yere, for all his rightwis∣nes and iustice that he did, he had no consciēce of vsur¦pement of the croune. THe last daye of August then full clere Of Christ his date, a thousand signified Foure hundred and twoo and twenty yere When that this prince of princes so dyed At Boys Vincent, with death then victoried That neuer prince in earth might thē haue dooen But he alone that ruleth sonne and moonne ¶ With whose bones, the quene came to Englād The kyng of Scottes Iames with hir also The duke of Excester, as I can vnderstand Therle of Marche, Edmond Mortimer tho Rychard Beauchampe, then erle of Warwike so Humfrey then erle of Stafford, young of age And erle Edmond, of Morten wise and sage ¶ O good lord God, that art omnipotent Why streched not thy power and thy might
To kepe this prince, that sette was and consent With themperour, to conuert Surrey right And with Christen inhabite, it had hight Why fauoured so thyne high omnipotence Miscreaunce more, then his beneuolence ¶ Aboue all thyng, he keped the lawe and peace Through all England, that none insurreccion Ne no riotes were then withouten lese Nor neighbour werre, in faute of correccion But peasebly vnder his proteccion Compleyntes all, of wronges in generall Refourmed were, well vnder his yerd egall The .CC .xxiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe through we and peace, conserued was the encreaso of his conquest, and els had he been of no po∣wer to haue conquered in out landes. WHen he in Fraunce, was dayly cōuersaunt His shadowe so obumbred all England That peace and lawe kept continuaunt In his absence throughout all this land And els as I can seyne and vnderstand His power had been lite, to conquere Fraunce Nor other realmes, that well were lesse perchaūce ¶ The peace at home, and lawe so well conserued Were croppe and rote of all his hie conquest Through whiche ye loue, of God he well deserued And of his people, by North, South, Est & West Who might haue slain y• prince, or downe him kest That stode so sure, in rightfull gouernaunce For common weale, to God his hie plesaunce
The .CC .xxiiii. Capiter. ¶ Henry the sixte kyng of England and of Fraunce that fled in to Scotland without cause, on Palme∣sondaye the thirty and nyne yere of his reigne, and of Christ a thousand foure hundred three score and one, began to reigne the yere of Christ a thousand foure hundred twenty and twoo. HEnry his soōne, thē not .iii. quarters olde King Hē¦ry yt sixte That borne was at. s Nicholas daie afore At Windesore, so as yt realme thē would Vnto the croune, succede as he was bore All England hole, by might of lordes thore The duke of Gloucester then disired To haue the kepyng of the kyng enspired ¶ The bishop of Wynchester it withstode With all the lordes there, hole of his assent Then would he haue been, as for yt next of bloode Leuetenaunt then of England and regent The bishop aye, withstode all his entent That chaūceler was, by yt fifth kyng Henry made And so furth stode, and in thoffice bade ¶ For cause he was so noyous with to dele And office would he haue and gouernaunce Wherfore thei made hym, for the common wele Protectour of the realme by ordinaunce The duke of Glou∣cester pro¦tectour of Englād. To kepe the land, fro mischief and varyaunce The kyng of Fraunce, for sorowe then dyed The quene his wife also, as was notified ¶ The lord Cromwell, lost therof nothyng For he had bothe theim in his gouernaunce
And home then came, when buryed was the kyng Charles of Fraunce, with worthy ordenaunce Quene Isabell also with purueaunce Accordaunt well to their royall estate With costages greate, as was preordinate ¶ The first daye of the moneth of Septembre He gan to reigne, then was a thousand yere Foure hundred as I can remember Twenty and twoo accompted then full clere As I finde write in the chronicler But not crouned for tendernes of age Nor yet anoynte, for dred of youthes outrage ¶ The duke of Bedford, stode so furth ay regent The duke of Bed∣fordregēt of fraūce. The duke of Gloucester, here was so protectour The bishop of Wynchester by perlyament Was chaunceller and hiest gouernour Of the kyng his persone and his greate socour His godfather and his fatheres eme And supportour was, moost of all this realme ¶ The regēt then, of Fraunce wed Anne his wife The duke his suster of Burgoyn, good and faire The duke of Brytain, hir suster knowen rife Had wed afore without any dispeire Whiche was lady of greate repeire▪ Whiche dukes twoo were sworne and aliede With the regent to stand strongly fortified The .CC .xxv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the regent wt lordes of Englād smote the vattaill of Vernoyle in Perche, in ye third yere of kyng Henry yt .vi.
¶ Therle of Boughan and therle Douglas Therle of Wigton with power of Scotland And lordes of Fraunce, to gether assembled was Wher the regent with lordes of England At Vernoyle in Perche, as I can vnderstand Faught wt theim sore, & slewe the Scottes cruelly And bade theim thynke emong on Bawgy ¶ The regent had the felde and victorie With greate honour and laude full comfortable Therles were ther, with hym of Salisbury Of Suffolke also, that were full honorable The lord Wiloughby, full fortunable The lord Scales of greate and hie corage With many other of the baronage ¶ Therle of Ewe, and his brother manly Faught in that feld, and gate aworthy name And many mo, did tho full doughtely I dare well saie, was none therfore to blame All other also, whiche that were worthy of fame I would haue wrytē, if I had knowen their mede But to heraldes, I will commit their deede ¶ Thei sleugh therles, of Boughan & Douglas And of Wigton, of Scotland that wer there The lord of Enermeth, of Scotland then was With greate people, that dedde then there were Our Englishmenne, full manly theim bere The regent was there, that daye a lion And faught in armes, like any champion The .CC .xxvi. Chapiter.
¶ Howe Mountague erle of Salisbury layde siege to Orle aunce and was slayne there. THerle of Salisbury, then Mountague With great power, layd siege to Orliaūce Wher slayn he was, for whō men sore gan rewe So manly was his knightly diligence He laboured euer in marciall excellence Vnto the tyme as would thende of fate With a quarell was slayne infortunate ¶ And buried was, in Englande that yere With greate worshippe and hie solempnitee Richard Neuell had wed, his doughter clere And erle was made, that tyme by her in fee The regent then, of great nobilitee By counsell of the duke then of Burgoyn Kepte Fraunce full well, without any essoyn ¶ Then died his wife, and wed then sone agayn The countee seynt Paules, sister of Fraunce That leegeman was to kyng Henry certayne To the regent sworne, as by full greate assuraūce With true seruice, and all trewe aliaunce He kepte bothe Fraunce, and eke all Normandy In peace and rest, full well and worthely ¶ Therle Richarde of Warwike, kepte the kyng By all this tyme, sith the duke was dead Of Excester, that first hym had in kepyng Therle Richard, in mykell worthyhead Enfourmed hym, but of his symplehead He coulde litle, within his brest conceyue The good from eiuill, he could vneth perceyue.
The .CC .xxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the kyng was enoynted and crouned in England in the yere of Christe a thousande .CCCC. and .xxix. and of his reigne the .viii. yere. And afterwarde he was crouned in Fraunce, the yere a thousand .CCCC. and .xxxi. and of his reigne the .x. yere, in whose presence the regent ceased of his office, for whiche he was wroth with the cardinall is vncle for asmuche as the kynge was there presente, therfore there shulde bee no regente. THe kyng then in his .viii. yere in Englande At Westmynster vpō saynt Leonardes daye The sondaye then, as I can vnderstande And of Christ was then, a thousande full I saye Foure hundreth and .xx. and .ix. no naye He crouned was, with all solempnitee By whole assent of lordes and commontee. ¶ Then of his reigne, accompte the .x. yere To Fraunce he went, wher then at saynt Denys His fathers eme, the cardinall full clere Hym crouned fayre, with bishoppes there full wise The regent was there, with suche seruice As was due of reason, and to hym appent The duke of Burgoyne, also obedient. ¶ The duke also, was there of Britayne The counte saynt Paule, and the duke Embarre Therle of Foys, with other lordes of Guyan The prouoste of Parys, with other great repaire Of lordes, knightes, and many ladyes fayre The gouernours of all the great citees And prelates fele and Barons for there fees.
The .CC .xxviii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the lorde Cromwell was chamberleyne in Fraunce at his coronacion, and discharged at his commyng home in to Englande, and the duke of Bedforde regent of Fraunce died, and then yt duke of Burgoyne was made regent a yere and then therle of Warwike was made regent a yere & died at Roan in the castell. THe lorde Cromwel was his chamberlayn Who was so wise, he was of great record His homagers, as to hym did perteyne In Fraunce that tyme, by good and trewe accorde For his fees, as they and he concorde Of Christes date, was then a thousande yere Foure hundreth also and one and thyrty clere, ¶ The regēt died, for whō was made great mone Then bothe councels of Englande and of Fraūce Chose the duke of Burgoyn then anone To regent of that lande, for great affiaunce That kepte it well a yere in all assuraunce But sone thereafter, with the dolphyn accorde And was his man, as then was well recorde ¶ Therle Richard of Warwike then conceyued Of the symplesse and great innocense Of kyng Henry, as he it well perceyued Desired to be discharged of his diligence About the kyng, and by his sapience Was sent to Fraunce and so was regent And kepte it well in all establishement. ¶ Tyll that he dyed, out of this worlde awaye
For whom great mone was made and lamentaciō For his wisedome, and for his manhode ay For his norture and communicacion He stode in grace of hie commendacion Emonge all folke vnto the daye he died Regent of Fraunce, full greately laudified. The .CC .xxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the duke of Burgoyn besieged Calys and set vp his bastell there, and howe the duke of Gloucester rescowed it. THe duke of Burgoyn, then to Calis came And set a bastell then afore the toune The which therle of Morteyn, by his name Edmond Beaufort, as made is mencion With soudyours it gatte and bet it downe The duke wēt home, and left the siege with shame When he our flete sawe, saylyng on thesame ¶ The protectour with his flete, at Calys then Did lande, and rode into Flaunders a litle waye And litle did, to counte a manly man But that the siege, for hym then fled awaye The duke distracte, sore sycke was many a daye For sorowe and shame, he helde hym out of sight Many a yere, he went not out to fight. The .CC .xxx. Chapiter. ¶ Howe kyng Iames of Scotlande besieged syr Raulfe Gray in Renkesburgh, and howe Henry Percy erle of Northum∣berlande rescowed it with seuen score thousande men.
IN yt same tyme also, of Scotlād kīg Iames To Rēkesburgh cā, & layd his siege about Syr Raulfe Graye, thē kept it frō all sha∣mes Agayn his sautes, yt then were full stoute Therle then of Northumberlande throughout Raysed vp the lande, and when he came it nere The kyng trumped vp and went awaye full clere ¶ Who sawe euer afore, two hostes royall So easely without stroke discomfite Of diuers landes, and neither had a fall And on no parte, smote no stroke perfite The cōce of yt maker touchynge kīg Iames. But for the shadowes, that were imperfite Of our hostes so fled and sawe nothynge But vmbres two, of our hoste then commynge ¶ But thus I deme, tho princes wer forswore The kyng of Scottes, the duke of Burgoyn eke That they not durst on no grounde abide therfore Their vntruthes, made there hertes feynt & seeke Truste neuer their manhode after worth a leeke That vncompelled forsworne or wilfully Shall neuer after haue honour ne victorie ¶ Take hede ye lordes, of these great princes two What came of theim, in shorte tyme after this The kyng murthered, at home in Scotlande tho The duke was wod, and frantike for his misse Thus vengeaunce fell vpon theim bothe I wysse Alas a prince shulde haue suche cowardise To be vntrewe or false in any wise ¶ Sith he nede nought, so strecheth ay his power
To kepe his trouthe, and make his o thesame To kepe to hym with strength of sworde full clere Or els destroye his land, and all his fame And put hym so to foule and open shame For periury occupied, and lawe vnpreserued Caused many a man, for to bee ouerterued. The .CC .xxxi. Chapiter. ¶ Howe therle of Stafforde was .ii. yere regent of Normandy and howe therle of Huntyngdon was other two yere, and howe Richard duke of Yorke was regent of Normandy. vii yere with holden, and afterwarde was made liuetenaunte of Irelande. BVt after then therle of Stafforde went With power strong, to kepe all Normādy Two yere with holde, wt all lordes assent Whiche well he keped, and full honorably With litle losse, of places fewe sodenly By enemyes won, that might not longe ben holde And home he came, when spended was his golde ¶ Then went therle thyther of Huntyngdon That kept that lad, with sad and trewe seruice With great power, truely vnto the croune For all the foes, and eke the kynges enemyes And fewe places loste, ne had no great supprise And home he came agayn, at two yeres ende When his wages were gone and all hole spende And after hym the duke of Yorke full ying Thether was sent, with great power royall
And regent was, of all that longed to the kyng And kepte full well Normandye in especyall But Fraunce was gone, afore ingenerall And home he came, at seuen yere ende agayne With mekell loue of the lande certayne ¶ The duke of Yorke, sent was then to Irelande Leuetenaunt then he was there many a daye And greate thanke there, and loue of all the land He had amonge the Iryshe alwaye And all the Iryshe, beganne him to obey He ruled that lande full well and worthely As dyd afore, his noble auncetrye The .CC .xxxii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Edmonde Duke of Somerset, was made keper of Normandy. THe kyng then made yt marquis of Dorset Edmōd Beauford, at ye cardinals request Without delay, then duke of Somerset And sent hym fourth anon withoute reste To Normandye, to kepe it for his beste But in his tyme Fastolfe and Kyriell Discomfyte were, in batayle sore and fell ¶ Where .vii. M. Englyshe were ouerthrowe Wherfore the Frenche, assembled newe eche daye And gate the lande ay, by and by on rowe For whiche the duke wrote his letters ay Vnto the kyng and his councell alwaye For more power, & elles he myght not byde To kepe the lande, ye French were of suche pryde
¶ He coulde none get, this land was thē so pylde Through war of Fraūce, they wolde not hī releue So was the lande wt Frenchmen wonne & welde With siege eche daye, and sautes fell and breue The Frenche nought reste yt tyme a daye to eue We loste more then, certayne within two yere Then kyng Henry gate in seuen clere ¶ Then was the kyng come vnto mannes age Wherfore the lordes, wolde no protector Wherfore the duke loste his great auauntage And was no more then after defensour But then he fell in a greate errour Moued by his wyfe Elianor Cobham To truste her so, men thought he was to blame ¶ He waxed then straunge, eche day vnto yt kyng For cause she was foriudged for sossery For enchaunmentees, yt she was in workyng Agayne the churche, and the kyng cursedly By helpe of one mayster Roger Donly And into Wales he went of frowardnesse And to the kyng had greate heuynesse ¶ Wherfore ye lordes then of the kinges coūsaile Made the kyng to set his hye parlyament At Burye then, whether he came without fayle Where in parlesey he dyed incontynent For heuynesse, and losse of regyment And ofte afore, he was in that sykenesse In poynt of death, and stode in sore destresse ¶ When of the kyng was .vii. and twenty yere
Then he so dyed in full and h creaunce As a christen prince of royall bloude full clere Contryte in herte with full greate repentaunce With mouth confessed, to Goddes hye pleasaunce Vnto the earth, that is all fleshe his neste His body went, his soule to heauens reste ¶ And of the kyng, the .xxix. yere In Maye▪ the duke of Suffolke toke the sea On pilgramage to passe, as dyd apere With Brigauntes then with compassed enmyte Hym slewe and heded with full great cruelte Agayne assuraunce of the kynges proteccyon That worthy were the death for insurreccyon ¶ That same yere then at the hye parlyament Was made a playne, and a hole resumpcyon Of all the landes by sad and hole aduysement Whiche the kyng had geuen of his affeccyon To any wyght by patent, or conccssyon Then taxe ceased, and dymes eke also In all Englande then raysed were no mo. The .CC .xxxiii. Chapiter. ¶ The duke of yorke, was made protectour and chyef of coun¦cell, the thyrty yere of kyng Henry the sixte, and the Earle of Salisbury was chaunceller of Englande. THe duke of Yorke then made was protec∣tour And gouerned wel but .ii. yere not endured Discharged he was, wt passing great mur mour Of cōmons hole, amonge them thē ensured To helpe hym so, with power auentured
For he was set, the comon wele to auayle By his laboure, and his hole counsayle. ¶ But ay the better, that he to God was set The more were other, by worde and dede The contrarye to laboure, and to let His good purpose, to pursue and to spede So that he had no hap for to procede For sotell menne hym let ay at the ende The cōmon wele to mayntene and amende. ¶ The Earle Richard also of Salisbury So was disposed, in all thynges to the same Whiche was the cause of theyr death fynally For whiche of ryght, ne muste folowe blame Their lyues well kepte, had bene without shame For tho princes two, died in their kynges right For the publike wele, of eche Englishe wight ¶ The .xxx. yere this was then of the kyng When they the kyng, then had in gouernaunce And ruled hym well, in all maner thyng And made good rule, and noble ordynaunce Auoyding all misrule, and misusaunce For worshyp of the kyng, and of his realme Without doubte, or any other probleme. The .CC .xxxiiii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the Earle of Northumberlande, the duke of Somer∣set and the lorde Clyfforde were slayne at saynte Albones the thyrty and .iiii. yere of his reigne, where yt duke of yorke the Earle of Salisbury, and the earle of Warwike toke the
kyng,  kept hym in good rule, the twenty & two days of Maye, that was then the Thursdaye next of Pen tecot the yere of Christ a thousand foure hūdred & lv. THei were put by from all their good entent And straūge were hold, after many a daye To the thirty yere and thre by hole consent At sainct Albones, then vpon the thursdaye Accompted then next afore Witsondaye Thei slewe the duke Edmond, then of Somerset For cause he had the realmes wele so lette ¶ Therle then of Northumberland was there Of sodein chaunce, drawen furth with the kyng And slain vnknowne, by any manne ther were The lord Clifford ouer busie in werkyng At the barres theim mette sore fightyng Was slain that daye vpon his owne assaut As eche manne saied, it was his owne defaute ¶ Therle of Wiltshire with fiue hundred menne Fled fro the kyng full fast that tyme a waye The duke of Buckyngham, was hurte there then The kyng thei tooke, and saued in good araye To Wistminster with hym thei tooke the waye And ruled hym well, in all prerogatife As kyng of right, without any strife The .CC .xxxv. Chapiter. ¶ Howe yt lord Audely faught with therle of Salisbury at Bloreheth at Mighelmas terme, in the thirty and eight yere of his reigne.
¶ Yet were these lordes, voyde fro yt kyng again The duke of Yorke, and therle of Salisbury Therle also of Warwike, nought to layn Without cause, I can not remembre why But at Bloreheth, the lord Audely in hie With therle of Salisbury faught full sore Therle preuailed, and Audely slain was thore ¶ The thirty yere and eight of the kyng And so he went to Ludlowe on his waye The duke of Yorke, in Wales had shippyng To Ireland then he went, full well awaye Therles of March, and Salisbury that daye And of Warwike, as God it had purueighed To Calais went, their waye no thyng denied The .CC .xxxvi. Chapiter. ¶ Of the battaill of Northampton, wher the Earle of March, & therle of Warwike preuailed & led the king to Westminster & kept hym there, the yere of his rei∣gne right and thirty, and the yere of Christ a thousād foure hundred nyne and fiftie, and slewe the duke of Bokyngham, therle of Shrowisbury tresorer of En∣gland, the lord Beaumont, sir Thomas Percy, lord Egremond, and led the kyng with theim to London and gouerned hym full well and worthely, the tenth daye of Iuly. AT Couentree, the king in his parlyament Proclaimed theim all thre for rebellours But afterward, all three of one assent At Northampton came, as worthy warriours In somer after, to been the kyng his socours
Wher then the duke of Buckyngham, theim met With power greate, and trust haue theim ouerset ¶ Therle of Shrewesbury was with hym thore The lord Baumount, with hym was also The lord Egremount, full stout in feate of warre Whiche foure were slain, with mikell people mo Beside Northampton, on the Thursdaye tho The third daye of the moneth of Iuly And in the reigne of the kyng, eight and thirty ¶ Thei saued the kyng, & kept hym sauf & sound With greate honour, therle of Marche Edward Therle also of Warwike, in that stound And with hym rode, so furth to London ward Full worshipfully, thei kept hym thens forward In all state royall as did append And as his menne vnto hym did attend The .CC .xxxvii. Chapiter. ¶ Howe the battaill of Wakefeld wher the North par∣tie preuailed, was the fifth daye of Christmasse, and of the kyng his reigne the nyne and thirty. THen in the winter, afore the Christemas The duke of Yorke, therle of Salisbury Therle of Rutland, with theim I gesse With power greate, for their aduersarie To saue theim selfes, as then was necessarie At their owne weld at Yool, so then had been The robberies there, to haue staunchid clene ¶ Wher thē yt lordes, of ye North were assembled
And faught with theim at Wakefeld thē full sore And slewe theim downe, whiles thei were dissēbled And gate the feld that daye vpon theim thore And Southward came thei, then therfore To sainct Albones vpon the fastyngange eue Wher then thei slewe, the lorde Bonuile I leue The .CC .xxxviii. Chapiter, ¶ Howe therle of Northumberland, the lord Neuell and the North partie, faught at sainct Albones yt seuētene daye of Feueryere, and slewe the lord Bonuile  six Thomas Kiryell and many other, the thirty and nyne yere of the kyng, and the yere of Christ a thou∣sand foure hundred & sixty, and led the king to Yorke. AND sir Thomas Kyriell also of Kent With mekell folke, that pitee was to se And spoyled fast, ay homeward as thei wēt Without rule, into their countree Thei sette theim nought, on rule and equitee Ne to kepe lawe nor peace, in nokynd wyse Howe might thei dure long, in suche a guyse ¶ But then the kyng, alone left on the feld Came to the quene, and went to Yorke his waye With the North partie, that thē so with hym held The duke of Excester with hym went a waye The duke of Somerset, it is no naye Therle also then of Deuenshire And sir Iames Drmond erle of Wiltshire ¶ The lord Moleyns, the lord Roos also The chief Iudge, and sir Rychard Tunstall The lord Ryuers, the lord Scales his soonne also
The lord Welles, and Wiloughby with all Sir Wyllyam Tailboys, so did befall And many other, went to the North partie For to maintein then the sixte kyng Henry The .CC .xxxix. Chapiter. ¶ Howe Edward duke of Yorke and erle of Marche toke on hym yt roiall charge for the wele of the realme the fourth daye of Marche, the yere of Christ a thou∣sand foure hundred and sixty, folowed kyng Henry that refused tho the rule of the land and gaue vp Ber¦wike to the Scottes, and fled in to Scotlād and gaue battaill to the North partie at Feribrig on Palme∣sondaye, wher kyng Edward the fourth preuailed, the yere of Christ a thousand foure hūdred sixty and one whiche was then the twenty and nyne daye of Mar∣che, foure dayes after our lady daye that tyme. THe duke Edward, of March thē ye .iiii. day Of Yorke full young, therle of Marche was then, By counsaill of the lordes, by south menne saye Bothe spirituall and temporall, as mēne saie then Vpon hym toke, estate royall and began To reigne as kyng, and with hym reised the land With lordes fele, by south I vnderstand ¶ At Towton feld, he faught on Palmesondaye Wher then therle Henry of Northumberland The lord Neuell, the lord Clifford that daye The lord Dacres were dedde I vnderstand The kyng Henry, then out of the land To Berwike toune, yt stounte in Scotland groūd With certain lordes, and with the quene yt stound
¶ And gaue the toune and castell to the Scottes By whole assent of his simple counsaill Whiche might well bee accompted then for sottes As foules that were then, of no gouernaill In to Scotland, with foule misgouernaill The quene Margarete, and the dukes both twoo Of Excester, and Somerset fled also ¶ The lord Roos, and eke the lord Moleyns And the chief Iudge, that called was Forscue And Tailboys also, with other eiuill capitains That after shall, full sore repent and rewe If thei also well as I, nowe Scotland knewe Thei would not so, haue hasted thitherward From the presence and grace, of kyng Edward ¶ Kyng Edward thus had then the victorie With his lordes and menne that were full trewe That halpe hym so, and were contributorie To wyn his right, whiche then the people knewe To Yorke he went, and found it not vntrewe To Duresme also, and to the Newcastell That to hym were, as trewe as any stele ¶ At Yorke was hedded, that time and decollate Therle that then was of Deuenshire And at the Newcastell, so destinate Hedded then was therle of Wiltshire The kyng then sette, the land at his desire Saue castelles fewe, wt force that then were hold By North and West, with rebell manyfold ¶ And South he went, for his disporte and plae
At Leycestre helde he then his great counsayl In the moneth that then was called Maye And ordeyned there for good gouernayl Of al his realme, that enemies nought it assayle Then in wynter, Margarete that had bene quene Fro Fraunce so came by shippe, as then was sene ¶ Into Scotlande, with .iiii. thousande Frēchmē Of soudyours, for whiche the kynge anone With hoste royall, to Durisme came he then And sent therle of Warwike agayn his fooen Therle of Kent also, with good menne many one They layde a siege, to the castell of Bamburgh And to the castell also of Dunstanburgh ¶ Syr Raulfe Percy, and the duke of Somerset Delyuered theim to the kyng by poyntment By whiche the kyng, without any let Gaue the kepyng of theim incontynent Vnto syr Raulfe Percy of good entent And Alnewike castell was kepte many a daye To rescouse came, and fet theim thens a waye ¶ Whiche stode in stale, not ferre from the castell But .viii. thousande, to whom the castelleyns Came anone out, as men were there to tell With horse & harnes, & home rode through yt play¦nes Into Scotlande, as good & wise chieftayns I can well thynke, it was a manly dede To noye theyr foes, and helpe theimselfes at nede ¶ My lorde Vmfreuile, whom that I dyd serue Sayd to me, it was the best thyng might befall
Any chiefteyne to greue his fo and ouerterue And kepe hymselfe harmelesse therwithall He that maye hurte his fo without fall And passe away, to his socoure harmelesse He is a foole to abyde any distresse. ¶ But when that they, wer gone so home agayn And theyr frendes with theim, from thens awaye Two hundreth men of commons, came full fayne Out of Alnewike castell, in symple araye Our men bet theim in agayn, there alwaye Tyll they were glad, to yelde theim & haue grace The whiche they had, without longer space The quenes power, yt she so brought fro Fraunce Was so litle, the wardeyns naught it dread They hight the kyng, for all hir ordinaunce To kepe the lande, for any helpe she had How may she ought of great power besped Whē Charles doughter of Fraūce void of dower Despoyled was, of Fraunce fayled all power ¶ Quene Isabel that was kyng Rychardes wife Kyng Ri¦chardes wife sent home a∣gain into raunce Deposed was, by kyng Henry of Derby Of her wels, as it is knowen full ryfe And home was sent, without remedye What auayled hir kynne and progenye Of nought els, but great vexacion That Frenchemen made to theyr owne damp∣nacion. The .CC .xl. Chapiter.
¶ The mocion & conceypte of the maker of this booke touchynge kynge Henrye the syxte, his wife and his sonne, to be gotten home and putte in gouernaunce with all that fled with hym, cōsyderyng their trouth that forsoke their lyuelodes and welfare for his sake, and fro they so gotten home, that after they will be as trewe to you, and els to geue sore iudgement vpon theim. O Gracious lord kyng Edward fourth accompte Consydre howe kynge Henrye was admytte Vnto the croune of Englande, that did amounte Not for desert, nor yet for any witte Or might of hym selfe, in otherwyse yet But onely for the castigacion Of kyng Richardes wicked peruersacion ¶ Of whiche the realme then yrked euerychone And full glad were, of his deposicion And glad to croune kyng Henry so anone With all theyr hertes, and whole affeccion For hatred more of kyng Richardes defection Then for the loue of kyng Henry that daye So chaunged then the people on hym aye. ¶ Yet kept he aye therle of Marche full ying In erles estate, as he that was his warde And brought hym vp, in all maner thyng As his estate asked and coulde awarde And cheryshed hym, in norture to regarde
As his owne sonnes, duryng all his lyfe To make hym loue hym, without any stryfe ¶ Thus by wisedome his sonne Henry right so Hym cherished by good and wise counsayl Whiche he assigned vnto hym tho Of good rule, that would not let hym faile For cause he should agayn hym not preuayle And into Fraunce, in his hole estate Had hym with his brother associate ¶ All this he did, of full good policie To wynne his loue, and kept hym in direccion From entisement of all eiuill and folie To his pleasaunce, without all suspection This was greate witte and circumspeccion To rule hym thus, his heighnes to obaye Without stryfe, to sitte in peace his daye ¶ O gracious lorde, nowe of your sapience Consydre well this sixtye yere and three Your kyn and ye by all intelligence Haue been deuorced of all the royaltee To nowe that God of his specialitee Hath graūted you grace, your rightes to recouer And your enemyes all to rule at ouer. ¶ Considre well the benigne innocence Of kyng Henry that nowe is in Scotlande By Goddes dome of small intelligence For your preuayle, as men can vnderstande Gette hym nowe home, agayn into Englande
With all the meanes, ye maye of sapyence His wyfe and sonne, with all your dilygence. ¶ For truste it well, yf they maye passe to Fraūce Or power get to theim in any wyse Eche yere they wyl you trouble, and do greuaūce By Scottes assent, and theyr exercyse To brag and boste, as they wolde on you ryse To make your people and cōmons for to yrke Iackes and salades ay newe and newe to wirke ¶ For truste it well, as God is nowe in heuen The Scottes wyll ay do you the harme they may And so they haue full ofte, with odde and euen Afore that Christe was borne so of a maye As yet they do at theyr power euery daye Wherfor good lord, brīg home these persons thre With all theyr men, & geue them grace all fre ¶ And loue them better, for theyr great lewte That they forsoke theyr landes and herytage And fled with hym, in aduersyte To byde in payne sorowe and seruage Good herte shulde rewe, well more theyr trewe co∣rage Then them yt wold haue gone, and durste nought Consyder howe thei shewed, as they thought ¶ Yf ye might get them all for any good To be your men, and haue theyr herytage And youre enemies, that agaynst you stode Ye shulde make trewe men to your auauntage To passe with you, in warres and hostage As trewe as they haue bene to kyng Henry
And mekell trewce for your ryght auncetry ¶ For yf ye myght theim get nowe euery chone Youre warres were done, thē might you syt in rest Without trouble of any lande alone For all youre lande throughout, thē might ye trest Yf it were hole that ye nede not mistryst No prynce christen, myght do you any dere But in his lande, ye myght make him were. ¶ Graunt Henry grace, wt all his owne liuelode The duchye hole of Lancaster, that is his ryght Not as it is, but of worthyhede Fyrste duke Henry, had the noble knight At his laste daye, that was of mikyll might His wyfe and sonne, get home by ordynaunce And geue them councell, for theyr gouernaunce ¶ Suche as you truste, wyll rule them worthely To youre plesaunce, in all tranquillyte In peace and reste, with all good polyce For better were, to haue them in suretye Than lette theim bene, with your aduersyte With Scottes or French, yt wold se your destresse And helpe to it with all theyr busynesse ¶ And yf ye maye by no meane nor treate Get them home, ordeine then faste youre flete On the easte sea, into Scotlande in hye At Edenburgh, so maye it with you mete With all vitayle and ordynaunce full mete And set vpon the castell, they bene in Escape they maye not, but ye shall them wyn.
¶ For I haue sene theyr castelles stronge echone That strongest bene, and worste to get and wyn Amonge them all, for certayne is there none That may bene holde out longe, when ye begyn Saue Dunbretayne, the sea aboute doth ryn Eche daye and nyght, twyce withouten doubte The caste of Dunbre¦tayne. Whiche may be wonne, by famyshyng aboute ¶ With shippes by sea, & siege vpon the lande Ye maye not fayle, to haue it at the laste All other wyll bene yelde into youre hande So that ye haue by workemen well fore caste Youre ordynaunce and gonnes for to caste With abylementes of warre, suche as ye nede No castell elles maye withstande in dede ¶ Therfore in what castell·that they bene in The tyme to beginne warre in Scotlande Go to the same withoute impedyment Not in wynter, but in somer ye begyn When Iuyll moneth, or Auguste is present That forage may begot, as doth appent Of corne and grasse, for horses sustenaunce And fayre wether to mennes hye pleasaunce. ¶ O righteous prince, bring home ye scatred men To theyr pasture forsaken and forlore For of your breste, shulde greate foyson ren To nedy men, of grace and helpe euermore Consyder howe God hath you set therfore And ouer the flocke, to seke the scatered shepe And laye them in your folde surely to slepe ¶ Consider nowe, most gracious soueraine lorde
Howe longe nowe that your noble auncetrye In welth and helth, hath reigned of hye recorde That kepte lawe and peace continually And thynke they bene of all your monarchye The fayrest floures and highest of enterpryce And sonest maye youre foreyne foes supprice ¶ Consider also in this symple tretyse Howe kynges kepte neyther lawe ne peace Went sone awaye, in many dyuerse wyse Without thanke of God at theyr decese And nought were dred wtin, ne without doutlesse But in defaute of peace, and lawe conserued Destroyed were, right as they had deserued. ¶ Consyder also, moste erthly souerayne lorde Of French nor Scottes ye get neuer to your pay Any treaty or trewce, or good concorde But yf it be vnder your banner aye Whiche maye neuer be, by reason any waye But yf youre realme stande well in vnyte Conserued well, in peace and equyte ¶ Your marchis kepte, & also your sea full clere To Fraūce or Spaine, ye may ride for your right To Portyngale & Scotlande wt your banner Whils your rerewarde in Englād stādeth wyght Vnder your banner, your enemies well you hight A better treaty, within a lytell date Then in foure yere, to your ambassate ¶ Remembred bene, vnto youre excellence The tytles all, that longe to youre regiment
Of Scotlande hole, with all my dilygence That third parte, is of Britayne by extent And owe to bene, at your cōmaundement And membre of your royall monarchye As Chroniclers haue made therof memorye ¶ Englande and Wales, as to their soueraygne To you obey, whiche shuld thinke shame of ryght To se Scotlande thus proudly disobeyne Agayne them two, that bene of greate myght It is a shame to euery mannes syght Sith Iohn Baylioll, his ryght of it resygned To kyng Edward, why is it thus repugned ¶ Within thre yere, theyr greate rebellyon Ye myght represse, and vtterly restrayne And kepe them euer in youre possessyon For to obey youre might, make them full fayne As kyng Edward dyd wt hunger and with payne Them conquered hole, to his subieccyon To byde euermore vnder his proteccyon ¶ Wherfore good lorde, nowe girde you wt your swerde And set vpon the frowarde heretykes That erren fro the two partes of the herde And strayen oute, as they were litargykes Whiche haue forget their lorde as cronnatykes Hauyng no shame of theyr peruersyte Nor chaunge hewe for theyr falsyte. ¶ And truste it well, as God is nowe in heuen Ye shall neuer fynde the Scottes vnto you trewe Where they maye with youre enemies ay beleuen
They wyll to you then, alwaye be vnttewe Yet through your manhede, it maye them rewe For lenger then ye haue them in subieccyon Truste neuer truth, in them ne perfeccyon The .CC .xli. Chapiter. ¶ The kynges tytle to all his landes, briefely reported, with a mocyon to vnion Scotlande and Englande. TO England haue ye right, as ye maye se By Brutus chronycle Sarōs & Normās To Wales yt same, & Scotlād also perde Who that the gifte and right well vnderstandes Of Iohn Bayloll, howe he into the handes Of kyng Edwarde, it gaue and resygned Why shulde it nowe be voyde and repygned ¶ To Fraunce youre title, is writen well & know For saynte Lowis, to you by hole discente And Normandye all hole, bothe hye and lowe Fro Willyam Conqueroure, by hole entent Guyen and Poytowe, withall to them appent For Elianour the mother of kyng Iohn Doughter and heyre, to duke Willyam anon ¶ To Angeou also, by Geffrey Plantagenet Father of Henry le fytz Empryce That of Angeou was Earle withouten let And of Mayne also, a prynce of greate empryce To Irelande also, by kyng Henry le fytz Of Maude, doughter of fyrste kyng Henry That conquered it, for theyr greate heresye
¶ To Casteil and to Lion also ye been Thenhe ritour also and verie heire By right of bloodde discended clere and clene Of Portyngale, wher Lusshborne is full faire Fro kyng Petro without any dispeir For tho twoo, bee the verie regions That named bee Castile and Legions ¶ Your graunsirez mother duchesse Isabell Full lady like faire and femenine To kyng Petro as I haue heard tell Was verie heire of theim, by rightfull lyne To whom ye been heire as menne determyne By small hackeneys, greate coursers men chastice As Arthure did by Scottes, wanne all fraunchese ¶ Though scripture saieth, of North all eiuill is shewed Me thynketh I can, auaūte it as properly That thei bee as manly learned and lewed As any folke and as muche pain maye dry Better menne of warre are not vnder the skye And of lyuyng, Dauid saieth in his boke Of Scotland well, who so that will it loke ¶ If Scotlād were youres, to Wales & Englād Who hath power, to make you resistence In any wise, in any vncouth land Your rereward then scant in all sufficience To kepe England surely in your absence Make theim Albion, and passe furth wher ye list To other landes ye nede none other trist The .CC .xlii.
¶ Thexcusacion of the maker, touchyng defautes of this booke and of the simplenes of it. OF all maters I haue saied myne entent So as I couth espie, & in all wise enquere Whiche if it maye, your highnes well cō∣tent My hearte reioyseth, to comfort your desire And of your grace, euermore I you require For to consider, my losse and my mayme in fere For Englandes right, as well as I couth spere ¶ Besechyng ay vnto your royaltee If ought bee saied in this simple treatise Displeasyng to your hie nobilitee For to resume it, in a better wise Hauyng my witte excused, that neuer was wise And thinke I would haue mēt vnto your plesaūce To whiche I lacke nothyng, but suffisaunce ¶ Please it also vnto your royaltee The quene maye haue a vereie intellecte Of your eldres of greate antiquitee And of England, of whiche she is electe Soueraigne lady, full worthily protecte Vnder your rule and noble gouernaunce Whiche God ay kepe without variaunce ¶ The whiche should please her good femenite To reade vpon, for her comfort and disporte To se and knowe, the greate nobilite Of your eldres regalie and porte Whiche maye her glad alwaye and recomforte And if it maye please her souereingtie
Of my labour I would reioysed bee ¶ For women haue femenine condicion To know all thynges longyng to their housband His high worship and his disposicion His hertes counsaill also to vnderstonde As at weddyng, to her he made his bounde And moste of all his hertes priuetie And thestate of his good auncetrie ¶ O souereigne lorde yt quene hath all fufficiēce As touchyng you, but of your auncetrie In this treatise of all their excellence The quene maie se the worthy regence Of this your realme and noble monarchie Whiche hath been kept in greate nobilitee By your eldres of greate antiquitee ¶ This booke I call after my name Hardyng Sith God lent me that disposicion To enforme hym that laboured the wrytyng By plain language of small prouision Through Godes grace and his supposicion All destitute of language and science And desolate of rethoryke eloquence ¶ Moste cause was why I drew this ilke treatise To make your father haue had {per}fecte knowlage And you also of Scotlande in all wise That percell was of your eldest heritage And of all landes moste nere your auauntage To haue it whole, no more to bee dismembred Whiche might bee gote, as it is afore remembred
¶ I had it leuer then Fraunce and Normandy And all your rightes that are beyonde the sea For ye maye kepe it euermore full sikirly Within your self and drede none enmytee And other landes, without gold, menne and fee Ye maye not long reioyse, as hath been tolde For lightter bee thei for to wynne, then holde ¶ Your auncestres haue had beyonde the see Diuers landes, and lost theim all again Sore gotten sone lost, what auaileth suche roialte But labour and cost, greate losse of menne & pain For ay before, with treason or with train And want of gold, was lost within a yere That we had gote in tenne, as dooeth appere ¶ How the maker of this booke reporteth the distaunce and miles of the tounes in Scotland and ye waye how to conueigh an armie aswell by lande as water into the chefest partes therof. NOWE to expresse, vnto your noble grace The verie waye, bothe by sea & land With the distaunce of tounes, and euery myles space Through the chefest parte of all Scotland To conueigh an armie, that ye maye take in hand Herafter shall folowe, in as good ordre as I maye
The true discripcion, and distaunce of the waye ¶ From Berwike to Dōbarre, twenty miles it is And twelfe miles forward vnto Haddyngtoune Frō Bar¦wyke to Dōbarre .xx. Had∣dingtosie xii. Edē∣burgh xii Lythko xii. Ster¦lyng .xii. Frō E∣dēburgh to Leith. i to Blak∣nesse .ix. to Ster∣ling. xiiii And twelfe miles frō thēse to Edenburgh I wisse To Lithko twelfe, and so Northwest to Bowne Twelfe miles it is, vnto Sterlyng toune Besouth Foorth, that ryuer principall Of right faire waye, and plentifull atall. ¶ Wher yt your nauy at Leith may rest saufly With all your vitayles, a mile from Edenburgh And after at the blaknesse, whiles as ye ly At Sterlyng toune, whiche is the kynges burgh And wynne that shire, all whole out through So shall your nauy at your necessitee Bee at your hand still, your army to supplie ¶ From Sterlyng then ouer the riuer of Foorth Frō Ster¦lyng to ye doune of of Mon∣teth .iiii. Passe alongest the brydge to Camskinelle And if it bee broken toward the North Vnto the foorde of Tirps vnder the fell Thē spede you Westward, thre miles as mēne tell Wher ye maye passe to the downe of Menteth Whiche passeth from yt Foorth thre miles vnneth ¶ Then frō the downe, a waie ye haue right faire Frō Ster¦lynge to Falklād .xxx. Through out Monteth, & eke Clakmannam shire And so through Fiffe, to Falke land to repaire Thirty long miles, without mosse or myre For so it is compted, with horse and carte to hyre From Sterlyng Eastward, & the highe oyghylles Whiche some mēne call mōtaignes, & some felles
¶ From falkland thā to Disert towne, south east Twelfe myles it is, of fayre ready waye And from Falkland to saynte Andrewes, east But other .xii. myles, wythouten anye uaye Wher the byshoppes see is, and castell as thei say And at Kyngorne, and Disert may ye meete You for to vytayle, al youre Englysh fleete. ¶ Than ride northwest, from s. Andrewes towne Alongest the south syde, of the water of Taye Vp to the burgh of saynte Ihons towne Right north from Fyfe, a countree freshe and gay And from saynt Androws .xxiiii. myles they say A pleasant grounde and fruitfull countrey Of corne and cattel, with prosperitie. ¶ Which countrey of Fyfe along the scottish sea And from saynt Androws, to the oyghles they say Is .xliiii. my les longe of good countrey And somtyme in bredth .vi. myles of fayre way But from Logh leuen eastward, without uay Of ryght good way, briefly to conclude Xii. myles conteyne it dothe in latitude. At Ennerkethen and saynt Margarete I hope Your nauy maye receaue vytayle in that countre A longest the water of Foorth, as I can grope Wyth hulke, and barge, of no smal quantite You to supporte, in your necessytee So that ye maye not, in those countryes fayle To haue for your armye, redye vytayle. ¶ Thē to s. Ihons towne, vpon the water of Tap
Within Steathren, that standeth fayre & stronge Dytched about, syxtene foote depe I saye And .xx. foote on breadthe ouerwhart to fonge Yt is northest .xx. myles full longe And nere to Scone abbay, within myles thre Wher alwayes thei crowne their kinges maieste Whyche water of Tay, is so nauygable From the east sea, to saynt Ihons toune For all suche shippes, as bee able Fortie tunne of wyne, to cary vp and doune For vitallyng, and keping of the toune Vnto the whych, so floweth the water of Taye That all the dytches it fylleth nighte and daye At the whych toune, passe ouer the brygde ye shall With al your armye, hostyng through that land Wher in Angus, that countree pryncypall The Kerfe of gowry doth lye I vnderstand A plentifull countree, I you warrande Of corne and catell, and all commoditees You to supporte, in your necessytees Betwyxt the mounthes and the water of Tay Whych some do cal mountaynes in our lāguage Passe eastwarde, with your army daye by daye Frome place to place with small cariage For your nauy shall you mete in that viage At Portincragge, shorte waye from Dunde With bitailes to refreshe your whole armye Beside the stuffe and vitaile of that lande Which ye shall fynde, in the countre as ye go And market made alwayes to your hande
Of all theyr vytayles, althoughe they bee your fo Now from s. Ihons towne, the soothe to say is so Xviii. myles it is, to the towne of Dundye The pryncypall bugh, by northe the Scoty she see ¶ Than ryde northeast all alongest the see Ryght from Dumber to Arbroith as I mene Than to Monrosse, and to Baruye And so through the Meernes to Cowy as I wene Then .xii. myles of moore passe to Aberdyne Betwyxt Dee and Donea goodly cytee A marchaunt towne and vniuersytee ¶ Of the whych waye .xxx. myles there is Of good corne lande, and .xx. large extenre Full of catell and other goodes I wysse As to Moore lande, and heth dothe wele appente From Brichan cytee to the orient Where doothe stande vpon the see A goodly porte and hauen for your nauye ¶ Where that the same, may easely you mete To vitayle your armye, whersoeuer ye go Ouer all the mountaynes, drye mosses and wete Wher the wild Scottes do dwel than passe vnto That is in Mare and Garioth also In Athill, Rosse, Sutherland and Chatnesse Mureffe, Lenox, and out ysles I gesse. ¶ And when ye haue that lande hole conquered Returne agayne vnto Striuelyne And from thence to Glasco homewarde Twenty and foure myles to s. Mongos shrine
Wher wt your offeryng ye shall frō thence decline And passe on forthwarde to Dumbertayne A castell stronge and harde for to obteine ❧ In whiche castell s. Patryke was borne That afterwarde in Irelande dyd wynne Aboute the whyche floweth euen and morne The westerne seas without noyse or dynne When forth of the same the streames dooe rynne Twyse in .xxiiii. houres, without any fayle That no man may that stronge castell assayle. ¶ Vpon a rocke so hye, the same dothe stande That yf the walles were beaten to the roche Yet were it full harde to clymbe with foot or hand And so to wynne, yf any to them approche So strong it is to get without reproche That without honger, and cruell famyshemente Yt cannot bee taken to my iudgemente ¶ Than from Glasgo to the towne of Ayre Are twentie myles and foure wele accompted A good countree for your armye euery where And plenteous also, by many one recounted For there I was, and at the same I mounted Towarde Lamarke towne .xxiiii. myles Homeward trudging, for feare of Scottish giles ¶ From the towne of Ayre in kyle, to Galloway Through Carryct passe vnto Nithysdayle Where Dumfryse is a pretye towne alwaye And plentifull also of all good vytayle For all your army, wythout any fayle
So that kepyng this iourney, by my instruccion That realme ye shall bring in subieccion. ¶ Then from Domfrise to Carlill, ye shall ride xxiiii. miles of veray redy waye So maye ye wynne the lande on euery syde Within a yere, withouten more delaye For castelles there is none, yt withstande you may Nor abide your seage, against your ordinaunce So simple, and weake, is their purueiaunce. ¶ And yf ye like good Lorde, at home to abide With litell cost, your Wardens ye may sende Charging theim all, with hostes for to ride In proper persone, through wynter to thende With morow forraies, they may them sore offend And burne Iedburgh, Hawike Melrose, & Lāder Codinghm̄, Donglasse, & the toune of Dombarre ¶ Then send an hoste of footemen in At Lammesse next, through all Lawde: ayle And Lāmermore woddes, and mossis ouer rynne And eke therwith the Stowe of Weddale Melrose lande, Etryke forrest, and Tyuydale Lyddisdale, Ewysdale, and the Ryngwod selde To the Creke Crosse, that ryden is full selde ¶ The wardens then of bothe the marches twoo To bee their stayle, and eke their castelles strong Then to reskewe from enemies wher euer thei go With fleyng stayles, to folowe theim ay emong Les nor then foes theim suppresse and fong And euery night to releue to the hoste
And lodge together all vpon a coast ¶ And also than at the next Myghelmesse The west warden to Domfryse ryde he maye Four and twentie myles from Carelyl as I gesse And than passe forthwarde, through galowaye To Carricke after, into good araye And then from thence, to the towne of Ayre In Kile that countree, plentifull, and fayre ¶ Nexte than from Ayre, vnto Glasgew go A goodly cytee and vniuersitee Where plentifull is the countree also Replenished well with all, commoditee There maye the warden of the east marche bee And mete the other twayne as I wene Within tenne dayes, or at the moost fyftene ¶ The thyrde army from Barwyke passe it shall Through Dumbarre, Edenburgh, and Lythk And then to Sterlyng, with their power al And nexte from that vnto Glasgo Standyng vpon Clyde, and where also Of corne and cattell is aboundaunce Youre armye to vittayle at al suffysaunce ¶ Thus these thre armies at Glasgew shal mete Well arayed in theyr armour clene Which hōward frō thēce, thei shal returne cōplete Four and twentie myles to Lamarke so shene To Pebles on Twede, is syxtene myles I wene To Soltray as muche, thā twētie miles wt spede From thence returne, they shal to Wark on twede
Within a moneth, this lande maye bee destroyed All a south forth if wardens wyll assent So that our enemies shal bee sore annoied And wasted bee, and eke for euer shent If Wardens thus woorke, after mine intent They maye well quenche, the cruell enmitee This daye by south all the Scottishe see. ¶ Now of this matter, I haue sayed mine intent Like as I could espye and diligently inquire Whiche if it maye your highnesse well content It is the thing that I hartely desire And of your grace no more I dooe require But that your grace, will take in good parte Not only my peines, but also my true harte.
EX FRVCTIBVS EORVM COGNOSCETIS EOS printer's or publisher's device ❧: LONDINI.: ❧ In officina Richardi Graftoni. 1543.
¶ A continua∣cion of the chronicle of England, begynnyng wher Iohn Hardyng left, yt is to saie, frome the begyn¦nyng of Edward the fourth vnto this present thirty & foure yere, of our moost redoubted souerei∣gne lorde kyng Hēry ye eight, gathered oute of the moost credi∣ble and autētique wryters. RG printer's or publisher's device
To the reader. FOrasmuche moost benyng rea∣der, as this former autour Ihō Hardyng, wrote no ferther then to kyng Edward the fourth: in whose dayes it should apere yt he departed out of this world: & also consideryng the length of y• tyme sence, and the manifolde goodly historyes, battailles, decres and statutes with the discēt and lyne of the kynges of England sence that tyme, I thought it not onely my dutie to labour yt know∣ledge of thesame historyes to thētent to adioyne & annexe thesame herunto, but also it should bee a greate offence in me to suffre you to bee depriued of so many fruitefull & necessarie thynges. Wher∣fore I haue here to the vttermost of my poore wit gathered and set foorth vnto you thesaid histories not in metre, like as Iohn Hardyng hath dooen before, partely because I would therby declare a dyfference betwene the former wrytyng of Iohn Hardyng and this my addicion, but specially, that these excellent storyes should nether in sence ner woordes bee defaced of the eloquence and greate grace that the autoures of thesame haue all readie geuen theim, and therfore haue I wrytten theim vnto you in prose and at length, yt whiche thynges howe muche ye more that thei shall delyte and please you, so muche the more glad shall I bee of my peynes taken.
¶ Edward the fourth. AFTER TAHT EDVVARD had vāquished & put to flight Henry the sixte, beyng then ve∣rie ioious and proude (partely thorowe yt victorie that he had gotten and partely for that the commons began to cleaue vn to hym and to take his parte, and lykewise did the states of the realme) then de∣parted he with all conuenyent spede to London, and ther assemblyng his counsaill together, was shortely after proclaimed kyng at Westminster yt nyne and twēty daye of Iune and was called Ed∣ward the fourth of that name after Wyllyam the conquerour, and this was in the yere of Christ his incarnacion a thousand foure hundred three score and one. And the self same yere kyng Edward held The first yere. his parliamēt again, in the whiche, first the realme was sette in good ordre, and all thynges wholy re∣dressed, whiche was very good & expedient for the commen weale, for yt it had not been looked to all y• tyme that ciuile battaill did continue. And also thorowe his decree & will, all ye statutes that kyng Hēry yt sixt had made, was vtterly abrogated & of no vertue or strength, finally his twoo brethren yt wer younger then he, George was made duke of Clarence, and Rychard duke of Gloucestre, and Iohn the brother of Rychard Erle of Warwike, was made marques Montacute, and Henry Bur¦chire
the brother of Thomas bishop of Cauntur∣bury erle of Essex, and Wyllyam Faucounbridge erle of Kent, & this Henry Burchire beeyng a no∣ble manne & moost puissaunte in feactes of warre had gyuen hym to mariage the suster of Rychard duke of Yorke, called Elizabeth. And for this cause chiefely, that the said Rychard might haue his assi¦staūce and helpe of hym in all maner of aduersitie that should chaūce, either by battaill or other wise and that he did, after that kyng Edward the soonne of the same Rychard had made hym erle of Esser, tothend yt bothe the father & the soōne might at all tymes bee a sure fortresse and defēce for hym And he had begotten of this Elizabeth in laufull mariage foure menne children, yt is to saie, Wyl∣lyam, Thomas, Iohn, and Henry, and one dough¦ter called Isabell, the whiche liued but a shorte space, the whiche soonnes vsed greate diligence in bryngyng matters to passe, & in weightie affaires and busynes very laborious, in aduentures and ieoperdies manly and bold, and in forseyng thyn∣ges very circumspect, but specially Wyllyam the eldest had all these qualities. This Wylliam ma∣ried Anne a mayden discēdyng of high parentage and of moost pure virginitie, the doughter of Ia∣mes Lussheburne erle of sainct Paule, by whome he had Henry nowe erle of Essex, also Cicile and Isabell doughters, the whiche Isabell died before she was ripe to mariage, and yt other was maried to Walter Ferryse. But to come to that I spake in the begynnyng. When all thynges chaunsed thus luckely to Edward, and that all was as he would haue it,
Henry the duke of Somerset fearyng that kyng Howe Hē¦ry yt duke of Somer¦sette lefte kyng Hē∣ry the .vi. and fled to kyng Edward and after repented & fled aga∣ine to Hē¦ry the .vi. Henry should goo to wracke, and take the woorse, fled to kyng Edward, of whome he was after the moost gentle sorte intertayned, but sone after it re∣pented hym of his deede, for in the meane season kyng Henry had gotte a greate power of Scotish menne, & vnwittyng to Edward gat Duresme, the whiche thyng after hearde, the duke of Somerset fled priuely to hym, with a greate compaigne of yt kyng his frēdes folowyng after, and so many for desire of lucre and vaūtage did turne to hym, that Henry was thought to haue as greate an armie as his enemie had. The whiche armie he made menne thynke to bee the greater for yt he did spoile and destroye townes and feldes where soeuer he came, & so by long burnyng and wastyng he came to a village called Exham, where as he buckeled The dis∣comfitur of Henry the sixt. with Iohn marques Montacute whome he mette there, and there fightyng very sharpely, as often tymes it had chaunsed before, was putte to flight, losyng the greatest noūbre of his hoost, & he hym¦self with a fewe ino, went in all the hast to Scot∣land, and the residue fled, some one waye and some an other to saue their liues. Ther was taken there prisoners, Henry duke of Somerset, Robert duke of Hungerforde, and Thomas Rosse, the whiche duke of Somerset was putte to death by and by The duke of Somer¦set taken & beheded for that he had chaunged his mynde so sone and went to ye other partie, the other were had to Newe castell, and ther beyng for a season were putte to death in like maner, wherby other should haue no trust of any victorie, when their capitaines were dedde & gone. Albeit kyng Edward nowe might
thynke all thynges to be wel, and him selfe strong enough agaynst the power of hys enemy for that he had gotte suche a vyctorye, yet dyd he wyth all dylygence prouyde that Margarete kynge Hen∣rye the .vi. hys wife, shulde at no hande be let into Englande for feare of wynnynge mennes hartes to her. Wherefore, he made bulwarkes & sure for tresses on euerye parte and coastes of hys realme that there myghte be no landynge, and dyd wryte to all theim of the southe partes, that they shulde in nowyse take in anye woman, or helpe anye, for yf anye so dyd, he shulde be taken as an enemye & an hyghe traytoure to the crowne, as they were a¦gaynste whome he dyd fyghte. And of that parte that is nygh to the Scotish bancke, he layed watches, that none shoulde goo oute of the realme to kynge Henrye. But kynge The ta∣kynge of Hēry the xyxte▪ Henrye hym selfe was neuer in anye greate feare whatsoeuer chaunced, in so muche that he came in to England in a dysguysed apparel, and then be∣inge knowen and taken of certayne spyes sone af¦ter he had come in, was caried to London to king Edwarde, and there layde in holde. After whose attachynge and imprysonmente, the realme was set in more quyetnes. Wherfore, Edwarde nowe beynge oute of all feare and daunger of hys ene∣myes, dyd wholy set hym selfe the foure yeres af∣ter ensuynge to the reformatyon and redressynge of hys publyke weale, and to the recompensynge of hys souldyers for their paynes: did deuyde and geue the landes of theim that were wyth kynge Henrye to hys owne, and so wyth geuynge large and ample rewardes, dyd get the fauoure of all
hys people as well the laye as the nobles, and v∣synge suche vrbanyte and clemencye to all kinde of men, that he had throughlye wonne the hartes of all men: the whyche gentylnes and fryndely fa¦myliaritee he dyd euer after vse. Also as for the lawes of the realme he dyd alter and mend some, and some he made newe, besydes that he coyned monye as wel golde as syluer, the whyche at this The coy¦nynge of royalles & nobles. daye is currante. The whyche golde was royals, and nobles, and the syluer, was grotes, so that in hys tyme thys kinde of coyne came vp. And after that hys realme was in thys state he made a proclamation, that yf anye manne beyng a traytoure or rebellyon hertofore to hys grace, & wyllyng to submyt hym selfe wholy to hym shuld haue his pardon, and other that wolde not, shuld die, and suffer according to the lawes. The which kyndnes and natyue loue dyd cause hym to haue the good wyl and herte of his commons, so much that it is euydent, he was al the dayes of hys lyfe a conqueroure, through the helpe and ayde of thē in so much, that hys enemyes were euer shameful¦ly put to wrack, as it shalbe shewed more playnly hereafter. And also not contented wyth the frend∣shyppe of hys owne countree menne, dyd wynne and procure the loue of foren and straunge pryn∣ces, and made theim to bee of kynred wyth hym, whereby that they myghte, (yf nede shoulde so re∣quyre) ayde and socour him, or at the least, not bee iniurious or noysome to hym. So that he maried hys syster lady Margarete, to Charles the sonne of Phylyppe duke of Burgoyne, throughe which maryage he had greate helpe at the insurrection
that chaunsed in thys his natiue countree, and af¦ter that sente Rycharde the erle of Warwyke em∣bassadoure into Fraunce, the whyche shoulde de∣syre for hym to wyfe, a mayden called Bona, the syster of Carlotta the quene of Fraunce, and the doughter of Lewes duke of Sauoye, whyche after dyd marye Iohn Galeot duke of Mylayne, the whyche busynes dyd cause cyuile battayle to bee. For in the meane tyme that the earle wente in to Fraunce, and had spoken wyth Lewes the kynge, wyth whom the ladie Bona was, and way¦ted vpon the quene her syster, Edwarde chaun∣gynge hys mynde, maryed ladye Elyzabeth the doughter of Rycharde the earle of Ryuers, which was maryed before to syr Iohn Gray knyght, by whome she had two chyldren, Thomas and Ry∣charde, of the whyche maryage, for the humylytie or basenes of stocke that the lady was of, he wold no prynce or kynges to haue knowne of it, no not so muche as her owne father Rycharde the earle, for the whyche cause, when it was blased abrode, euerye man dyd meruayle greatelye, kynges and prynces were dyspleased and grudged at it, and sayde playnelye, that it was not for hys honoure so to dooe, and beganne to reproue the foresayde maryage shamefullye, and for that he was led ra¦ther by blynde Cupyde, than by anye reason, they dyd incessaūtlye reproue the same. And ether thys was the cause of the sedycion whyche afterwarde dyd ryse betwyxte kynge Edwarde and the earle of Warwycke, or els the pryuie enuye and malice whiche was in both theyr hertes nowe brastynge out, wherby, an occasiō or quarel might be picked
For Edward after that he had got his kyngdome (as it was openly knowne) by the erle of Warwy¦kes meane and helpe, begonne to suspect hym for that he was in such authoritee, so that he woulde haue plucked somewhat frome him & diminished his powre, wherby he myght haue ruled all thyn∣ges at his owne pleasure both in hys owne coun∣tree, & in other nacions. So that a man may see, it ofte chaunceth yt frendes will geue very seldome condygne rewarde to a mans deseruinges, yea, & eftsones when a greate benefite is bestowed or cō¦ferred vpon theim, thei will like ingrate persons nothyng cōsider it. Of this ye earle of Warwycke was not vnknowing, ye whiche although he loked for better thankes & a more ample benefite at his hādes, yet neuertheles, he thought best to dissēble and cloke y• matter, vntill such oportunitie might be had; wherby he myght, considering the wylful¦nes of the kynge exprobrate vnto hym the plea∣sures yt he had done for him. And it is verye true and euidēt that king Edward dyd make serche in his house for a thing that touched much his hone¦stie, wher the earle in dede was a man that loued women well, and had great fantesie to their com∣pany. But what soeuer it was, ether euell wyll, or desire of the empire that theyr league shuld bee infringed or broken, after that the earle had sure knowledge by the letters of hys frendes that the king had got him a wife priuely and yt al yt he had done with king Lewis in his embassad for the ioy¦ning of this newe affinitee was but frustrate and in vain, he was so ernestly moued with it, that he thought best that the kynge shuld be deposed frō
the crowne, and as one not worthy of such a king¦ly offyce. But to oure purpose. The earle of War¦wyke beyng then sore vexed, and moued wyth the kynge, least yt in this his furoure hys intēt beyng rashely gone aboute, shulde bee broughte to no good ende, he determined so lōge to suffer & beare suche iniuries, vntyll suche tyme that he myghte brynge his matters to passe as he wolde haue thē whiche shortly after came into Englande, and sa∣lutyng the kynge, dyd hys message vnto hym, ma¦kinge hym selfe to bee ignoraunte of that mary∣age. And after that, the earle throughe the licence of the king went into his shyre of Warwike, part¦ly to take his pleasure, and partly for the preserua¦tion of his safetie and helth, whyche was the yere The sixt yere. of oure lorde God a. M .CCCC .lxvii. and the. vi yeare of the reygne of kynge Edwarde. In the whiche yeare, George Neuell brother to the earle was made archebyshoppe of Yorke, after the dys∣cease of Wyllyam late archebyshoppe before him beeynge the .lii. byshoppe that had possessed that rome, and Phylyppe duke of Burgoyne dyed the same yeare, and Charles hys soonne was made duke, a manne bothe for manhode and valyante¦nes in warre moste exellente. Thys Rycharde as we sayde before, was in hys shyre of Warwycke, and there callynge to hym George the archebys∣shope of yorke, and Iohn Montacure Marques hys brethren bothe, and after long communycati¦on had of many thinges, the space of .ii. or .iii. day¦es, at length gettynge meete occasion to speake of the kynge and hys doinges, dyd shewe hys mind to theim, desyrynge theim, by all the wayes that
he coulde possyble, to take kynge Henry hys part and to helpe him to the crowne, saiynge after this wyse and maner. Brethren, it is not of anye lygh∣tenes of mynde, but of playne iudgemente that I am moued to speake of kynge Edward and king Henrye. Thys Henrye is a very godlye manne, and loueth theim that bee hys faythfull subiectes and doth cōsyder also who taketh paynes for him whyche hathe a soonne borne by nature to bee of greate worthynes, prayse and free lyberalitee, by whome euerye manne maye perceaue muche god lynes, whyche helpeth hys father nowe beynge in thraldome and captiuitee as muche as in hym ly¦eth. And as for kynge Edwarde, he is a man full of contumelye, and ingratytude, geuen all to plea¦sure, euell wyllynge to take anye paynes, and pro¦motynge rather theim that come of nought, than noble and auncient men. Wherefore I thyncke it wyll come to passe shortlye, that eyther he wyll de¦stroye all nobilitee, or elles nobilitee destroye him But before al other, we shulde fyrste enterprise to reuenge oure cause whych haue fyrste taken hurt at hys handes. For he (as I am sure you knowe it bothe) after that he was kynge dyd fyrste pryue¦lye gooe aboute to defyle oure dygnitee, and then after dyd openly intende our confusyon and losse of honoure, as thoughe he was not broughte to that dygnitee by vs, and not we by hym, and ther¦fore euen now of late when I went ambassadour to Fraunce I was had in no regard, whereby the estimation whiche all kynges haue conceaued of vs, partely gotten by our auncetours, & partly by our owne trauailes & peines, shal nowe be extyn∣guished
vtterly, & nothinge sette by. And by these {per}suacions he wonne his brother ye archebishoppe his hert, & brought him to be of his minde, but he could not so sone nor easelye persuade the Lorde Marques, for at yt first he would by no meanes be moued to worke treason at any hād against kyng Edward, but at the last whē the earle had promy∣sed him the helpe & powre of many noble prynces he was cōtented to kepe warre. The which Mar∣ques as he was vnwilling to consent to this at yt fyrst, so dyd he at the time of warre holde more of king Edwardes side thē king Henryes, as it shal appere more plain hereafter, the which was both destruccion to him, & his .ii. brethren. After this ye earle of Warwike a man of greate wytte percea∣uing George the duke of Clarēce, brother to kīg Edward, to beare no great good wyl toward his brother yt king, what so euer the matter was, first to proue hym and to knowe his minde, begāne to complain a lytle of the king his doinges, then af∣ter that the duke was in the same tale wyth hym again, & shewed him also what iniuries he had ta¦ken at his brothers hand: he beyng somwhat bol¦der to speake, brake his mynde more at large desi¦ring him to folow his coūcel, & that he should not think this to be done of any rashnes, shewed hym how warely through his pollicie all his matters were wroughte, & desired him, yt he would cast wt him selfe how to bring such a weyghtie matter to passe, wherby al thinges may be prouided before hand, to whom after many great promises, he offe¦red his daughter then of ripe age, to be maried to him, The duke throughe the councell and greate
desieryng of therle of Warwike was contented to dooe all thynges as he would haue hym. After yt therle had this communicacion with the duke, he purposed to goo to Caleis, of the whiche toune he was then chief capitain, and wher his wife and doughters wer then inhabityng, but to thend that this sedicion might bee the soner begonne, where with all Englād was sore troubled a greate tyme, he had apointed that sone after he was gone to Caleis his brother tharchebishop, & the lord mar∣ques should make an insurreccion in Yorke, wher¦by the battaill might bee begonne while he was so farre frome theim. When all these thynges were prepared for, and his counsaill well alowed and taken, he went stre∣ight with yt duke of Clarence to Caleys. And ther after that the duke had promised by an othe that he would euer bee true, he maried lady Isabell the erles eldest doughter, yt whiche whē it was dooen, thei bothe consulted together yt more spedily, for yt yt insurreccion was made in Yorke as it was com∣maunded and appoincted. The whiche cōpaignie begōne first to spoile with out all mercie or respect of any thyng. For ther was at Yorke an old and a riche hospitall of sainct Leonard, where the poore and impotent persones wer harboured, & the sicke menne comforted, and this hous was founde of yt charitee of the coūtree, whiche did geue yerely cer∣tain of wheate, as yt first fruites of all their corne to the sustenaunce and mainteynyng of theim, to the whiche noumbre of grayne certain housband menne of the countree did refuse to gyue any part through the counsaill of therle of Warwikes com¦paignie,
saiyng plainly that the poore and sickely people had it not, but thei that had yt rule and go∣uernaunce of the hous, and after that the procters of the hospitall claimyng it as dewe vnto theim, sought for their right. And for that cause greate tumulte was and muche conspiracie made, so that within fewe dayes, there was gathered aboute a fiftene thousand, whiche compaignie came towar∣des Yorke. But after yt it was knowne in the citee that suche a compaignie of menne had risen, the citizens watchyng euer for feare, was in doubte whether thei should mete theim and trie it in open felde, or tary in the citee and kepe theim frome the walles. But the lord Marques chief of that coūtre did put theim streight out of all feare and doubte, the whiche takyng good deliberacion and aduise∣ment, metre theim cūmyng at the gates of yt citee where after a sharpe cōflicte, he tooke Robert Hul∣derne duke, and by and by chopped of his hedde, the whiche whē he had dooen, he receiued into the citee at ye midde night all his souldiours that wer there. The people beyng nothyng abashed at the death of their capitain, but rather the more eger & fearce, consideryng that thei could not ouercome Yorke, without ordinaunce whiche thei lacked, wēt streight forth to London. And as for that the lord marques putte to death yt duke and capitain of yt cōmons, beyng also one of his cōspiracie, did it for this intent, that either he would not bee aknowen faultie of this cōmocion, or els that he had vtterly determined to holde with kyng Edward, of whom as it dooeth after appere, he did get perfect amitie but after the kyng knewe the mynd and purpose
bothe of therle of Warwike and the duke of Cla∣rence his owne brother, & also certefied by dyuerse mēnes letters that the armie was drawyng nigh to London, he sent by and by Wyllyam Harberte whome he made twoo yeres before duke, with a greate power of Walshe menne, commaundyng hym if he could conueniently, bydde battaill to his enemies. The erle makyng hast towardes Nor∣thampton, hard saie that the Northrenmenne had gotte it, where also he sette his tentes, and the next daye folowyng fought wt theim, in the whiche bat¦taill he was putte to flight in a momēt and cleane discomfited. The Yorkeshire menne beyng glad of this victorie, wer streight couled & went no ferder, but hauyng their handes full of spoyles & prayes went backe ward again, lookyng when the erle of Warwike would come, the whiche shortely after came from Calais with the duke of Clarence his soonne in lawe to the hoost, & commēdyng highly the capitaines, and reioisyng gladly that thei had ye victorie, did spedyly prepare an other armie. Yet kyng Edward beeyng nothyng abashed yt therle of Pēbruch had so eiuill sped, sēt hym forth again with a greater armie, whiche he had readie at all tymes what so euer should chaunce, & he hym self he did folowe with a small cōpaignie, and that he might bee readier for all thynges, in his iourneye did encrease his armie wt many that came to hym of his secte, saiyng that his entent was to destroie yt route of misliuers and flagicious persones, and then therle of Warwike perceauyng that his ad∣uersaries came vpon hym, sent in all the hast to ye duke of Clarence whiche was nigh by hym with
an hoost that he would bryng his armie in all the hast to hym, meanyng yt bataill was at hand. The duke when he hard it, came streight to there. So thei bothe commyng together went to Banberie, where thei perceaued their enemyes tētes wer pit∣ched, & there buckelyng together, tooke the erle o Penbruch prisoner, and killed and discomfited all his menne, and emonges other of his nobles the was killed Rychard the erle of Ryuers the father of Elizabeth the quene, & his soonne Iohn Wod∣uile. And towardes euenyng kyng Edward drewe nigh, and heryng of the death and soden betyng doune of his menne, taried at a toune fiue myle frome that place. Therle of Warwike went to his chief toune with all his hoost, and there within twoo dayes caused therle of Pēbruch with certain other states taken at yt tyme, to bee behedded. In the meane season there begonne awaie to bee foūd for peace, for the whiche, letters wer wrytten too and fro, & herauldes sent from the kyng to therle, and frome the erle to the kyng again, wherby the kyng trustyng verely that all was pacified, was lesse ware of hym self, and feared lesse his aduersa∣ries, the whiche thyng when it was knowen, and shewed to the erle by certain spies: he went furth in a night as priuely as he could with a strong power to the kyng his tentes, & ther killyng theim yt kepte watche, tooke the kyng vnware, & brought hym to Warwike, and to the entent the kyng his frendes might not knowe wher he was, conueigh¦ed hym priuely from thens in the night to a toune in Yorkeshire called Middelame, and there to bee kepte fast in hold. But yet the kyng could bee in
no place nor prisone but that shortely it was kno∣wen, the whiche caused many menne to bee sorie, & lament his chaunce. But he hym self after that he was in prisone, spake faire to the kepers of the ca∣stell, and with muche intreatyng and greate pro∣mises made, did so tempte and corrupt theim, that he was dimissed, althoughe the rumour was that the erle was willyng to it, the whiche might bee of likelyhood, if therle had gyuen ouer fightyng, but suche was yt eiuill fortune of kyng Henry, wherby a manne maye perceiue that he could neuer haue his purpose, seyng mannes strength nor policie is not able to ouercome, for therle with all his frēdes did ventre their bodyes, and spent their substaūce to haue brought Henry to the royall dignitee, for because he knewe suerly, that as long as Edward reigned, neither could he nor yet kyng Hēry beare any rule. And yet neuerthelesse thei lette hym goo when he was in holde, & when kyng Edward was deliuered, he went streight to Yorke, and there be∣yng honorably receiued of his citezens, taried for the space of twoo dayes to gette hym an hoost of menne, but when he could not haue a worthy com¦paignie, consideryng yt he should goo to London emong the middest of his hoost, went frome Yorke to Lancastre, & there found Wyllyam Hastynges lord chamberlain, of whō he hauyng greate helpe came safe to Lōdon. But therle of Warwike and the duke, after thei had perceiued kyng Edward to bee deliuered throughe the meanes of false trai tours, & that all thynges that thei had appoincted was to none effecte, was greately moued with an∣ger and sorowe, and by and by callyng together
all their chief frendes, consulted howe thei might begynne battaill again, the whiche whē the kyng was taken and in hold, was ended and dooen. And thus dooyng, there was certain that for veray an∣gre and for the loue that thei had to warre, offred theim selfes to fight of freshe for nothyng, yt whi∣che moued ye chief capitaines to be ye more earnest. Also kyng Edward was as wyllyng to fight as thei were, wherby he might either bryng theim by force of armes to quietnes & peace, or els destroy and kylle theim euery mother soonne, that the re∣alme might bee in tter state. For thorowe their sedicious rebellyng, the people wer greately impo¦uerished, seyng that the churche and houses of menne were spoiled and obbed, and menne sain in euery place, ye corne & grasse also destroyed that was of the grounde, and many other mischiefes dooen the whiche dooe chaunce eftsons in battaill The consideracion wherof, it pitid many menne to see the cōmen weale in that case, the whiche wēt dayly and hourely aswell to therle as to the kyng for atonemēt, desieryng & counselyng theim bothe that thei would rather kepe peace & haue the loue of all menne for their quiet lyuyng, then to liue in angre and enuie, fightyng one with an other to yt vndooyng of all the realme, wher as it wer a wic∣ked deede to kylle the father, but yet a greate dele more wicked to destroye the whole bodie of the commen weale, whiche is the father of all menne, and by the whiche euery manne is maynteyned & kept. By this greate entreatyng of noble menne therle and the kyng gyuyng feyth one to an other peace was had for a tyme, wherein the erle and
the duke went bothe to London with a small com¦paignie of menne in comparison to the daunger that thei wer in, and at Westminster was with the kyng for the reformacion and stablishyng of all thynges and for peace to bee had, wher the kyng and thei beeyng at greate woordes, nothyng was determyned or ended. Therfore the kyng for the vowe that he had made, departed and said lytle, and the erle with the duke also went to Warwike, and in Lyncolne shire gotte vp a newe hoost, and made sir Robert Welles the soonne of Rychard Welles graūde capitain, a noble manne of warre. These tydynges commyng to London, moued the kyng veray sore, whome he thought would rather haue kepte peace thē warre, but the more yt it was shewed to hym vnlokyng for it, yt battaill was at hande, wt so muche yt sooner & more spede he gathe¦red an armie, & at the same tyme sēt dyuerse messē∣gers and haroldes for Rychard Welles, and the∣same Rychard eeyng often so sent for, made his excuse that he was sicke & diseased, but afterward whē his excuse was not admitted, he thynkyng to purge hymself sufficiētly before the kyng, came to London, bringyng wt hym sir Thomas Democke his brother in lawe, and whē he was there, certain of his frendes certified hym that ye kyng was sore moued with hym, whiche for feare of the kyng did take sentuarie at Westminster & his brother also, mindyng to tary there vnto suche tyme as yt kyng his anger wer couled & apeaced. But kyng Ed∣ward trustyng to pacifie all this tumulte without bloddeshede, promisyng those mēne his feith yt he would not harme thē, caused theim bothe to come
out of sentuarie. Then the kyng callyng Rychard to hym, warned hym to byd his brother Robert that he should leaue of warre, and goo frome the erle, and in the meane season the kyng went fore∣ward wt his hoost against his enemies, bryngyng with hym this foresaid Rychard & Thomas, and beeyng but frome Stamforde wher his enemies did lie the space of twoo dayes iourney, was infor∣med yt Robert kepte yt armie still, nothyng moued with yt letters of his fathers wrytyng, for the whi∣che the kyng beyng sore greued, caused bothe Ry∣chard and Thomas euen there cōtrarie to his pro¦mise, moost shamefully to haue their heddes chop∣ped of. Robert, whē he sawe the kyng drawe nigh, and hard that his father & sir Thomas Democke was put to death, stoode first in a doubte whether he should fight or no, for because it was ieoperde∣ous to ventre vpon suche a greate power before yt erle came, yet at the last for the stoute courage and manly boldenes that was in hym, thei went toge∣ther, and fought sore, long, and many menne killed on bothe sydes, and at the last whē the fore named Robert encouraged his menne that wer ready to geue ouer, was coumpassed about of his enemies & taken, and also sir Thomas Delalāt with many o, the whiche capitaines beyng taken all ye hoost was putte to flight & driuen awaye. The kyng be∣yng glad of this victorie, cōmaunded Robert & sir Thomas Delalant with many other to bee put to death at yt same tyme & place. And in this battaill ther was kylled as mēne reported tenne thousand menne. The erle at this tyme beeyng at his owne toune of Warwike, and commyng shortely to his
armye at Stamforde with his power, was en∣formed that the battayle was foughte quickelyer then he looked for, and that his men had the worse parte, although he might now be discouraged, yet he made as thoughe he passed not and would not beleue, to the entente that he myghte the more enbouldē certaine of his compaigny then despay∣ryng and geuyng theimselfe to flight, beganne to make a newe hoste, and with many faire promyses did wowe his brother in lawe Thomas Stanley, to take his parte, but when yt said Thomas would by no meanes fight or rebell agaynste kyng Ed∣warde, then seeyng it was tyme to gooe one waye, and he mistrustyng that he was not able to resiste the power of hys enemyes, fled wyth the duke of Clarence (his soonne in lawe) to Excetre, and whē he had taried there two or three dayes, seyng that he lacked al thynges necessarye for warre, purpo∣sed to gooe to Lewes the kyng of Fraunce, with whom at his ambassate into Fraunce, was veraye well acquaynted and beloued, trustyng ether to haue some helpe of the kyng, or els to incense hym wholy to fight against hym, and so toke shippe at Dartmouth, both he and the duke with a greate nombre of theyr familie, and sayled with ye wynde to Normandie, where the chiefe lord of that towne entreteyned hym most royally, & in al ye hast certi∣fied yt kyng Lewes of his cōmyng thither. And yt kyng meruailyng greatlye at yt noble actes that yt erle had doen, was mynded thorowly to helpe hym in all yt he could, & when he knewe yt he was lāded in Fraūce, was glad of it, & sent to hym certayn of his nobles, to shewe hym that he did wishe to haue
an occasion, wherby he might helpe hym, & at this time would gladly dooe for him, desieryng hym to come to Ambassy where the kyng laye, which Am∣bassy is a manour place of yt kynges set vpō the ry¦uer syde of Loire, & the duke also his sonne in law and that it should not bee for his losse or harme. This was yt .ix. yere of kyng Edwardes reigne The .ix. yere. when the erle fled to Fraunce, and of our Lorde a M .CCCC. and .lxxx. But this greued kyng Ed∣ward that thei wer fled, for because many of ye peo¦ple and cōmunaltee was desyrous to see hym, and thought that the sonne had been goone from theim and out of this worlde, when he was absent. And in suche estimaciō and honour was he had of the people, yt thei worship∣ped & honoured none but hym, or at the least none more then hym. In so muche yt his only name was euery mannes song & voyce, especially of the cōmē people when they made triumphe abrode in yt stre∣tes. Wherby, the moste parte helde of the earle his syde, and bare hym more fauoure in theyr hartes then kyng Edward. Wherby ye kyng was in feare and daunger both of his owne countremen yt wer in his realme, and of theim that were abrode in Fraunce, but before all other he did prouide for yt erle his cōmyng. And first he sente to Charles the duke of Burgom his brother in law desiryng him yt he would manashe Lewes the kyng, wt whom he had made a league of peace, not to aide the erle of Warkwike or yt duke his sonne in lawe, neither wt mony nor with mē. The which Charles wrote to yt kyng of Fraūce, & thretened hym many thynges, if so that he mainteyned or helped theim. And when the kyng of Fraūce had red his letter, aūswered a∣gain
& saied yt he might lawfully & would sauyng his league & truce, helpe his frēds yt wer valiaūt & noble men as the earle was, and settyng nothyng by all his thretenyng & braggyng wordes, sayd it shoulde bee neither greate peyne nor coste to hym. Whē these tydynges came into England, yt kyng was veraye sorie, & for that cause searched priuely in his realme, who wer frēdes to his enemies. And for feare by yt reason of the examinaciō of theim yt wer prisoners & in his hand, some did take sentua∣rie, and some came to ye kynges side. And emonges theim the lord Marques Montacute offered hym¦self to the kyng again, to helpe hym in his warres, whom the kyng gladly receaued, for because that by him mo would leane to his side. In this meane season ye erle of Warwike & the duke went to Am∣bassy, wher the kyng of Fraūce was, & by the way the people came veraye thicke to see hym, because they harde so muche speakyng of his noblenesse, & when he came there, the kyng receaued hym moste gently, to whō shortly after the erle did breake his mynd, and shewed the cause of his commyng. To whome the kyng promysed all that he coulde dooe for hym to the vttermoste extente of his power. Sone after quene Margarete the wife of Henrye yt .vi. came to theim, with her sōne prince Edward and the earle of Penbruck, and also of Oxēforde the whiche a lytle before sayled ouer to her. After they cōmuned together, as concernyng yt safegard of their bodies, a league was made thorowe the kyng of Fraunce his counsel. And first lady Anne the doughter of the earle was maried and de∣spoused to prynce Edwarde the quenes soonne.
Also the erle and the duke promysed faithfullye yt they woulde not geue ouer, vnto suche tyme that kyng Henrye the .vi. or Edwarde his soonne were proclaymed kyng of Englande, & after kyng Hen¦ry, that the erle and the duke should ouersee and gouerne the realme by the wyll and apoyntmente of the quene Margarete and her sonne prince Ed¦warde, vnto suche tyme that the forenamed prince wer of lawfull age and habilitee, the whiche they promysed faythfully to obserue and dooe as they wer apoynted. And besydes these, many other con∣dicions were made, aswel for that reason did so re∣quire, as the busynes yt was at that tyme. When this league of truth & faithfulnes was thus made the kyng Lewes holpe the erle with mēne, harnes and nauie, that he might the surer go to Englāde. And Rhenate also the father of y• quene Marga∣rete, gaue hym mēne & harnyse to his power. So that he hauyng no small nombre of men, did take shippe at Sayne mouth & ther tariyng, hard word from Englād by letters, that he should come ouer in all the haste, & that there were so many yt would take his parte, yt he shoulde haue no nede to bryng any with hym, for they wer redy in harneyse at the water side, willyng to helpe hym in al yt they could and not they onely, but many noble men & princes would helpe hym both wt mony, men & harneyse, & with all yt they could dooe. When he had receaued these letters, he purposed to go forth, and take the oportunitee of the tyme. And because that ye quene was not redy to set forth, he & the duke of Oxēford and ye duke of Penbruch, went before wt parte of yt hoste & nauye, to trie what chaūce thei shuld haue,
that if all thinges should chaunce well, the quene and the prynce should folowe and come vnto En∣glande. Therfore the Earle and the Duke than∣king the king as highly as they coulde for that he had doone so much for theim, dyd take their leaue and sayled vnto Englande with all their armie. Then the Duke of Burgoyne not contented that the earle shoulde bee holpen of the king of Fraūce agaynst king Edward, prepared a great nauye of shippes aboute the costes of Normandye, that he might take hym cōming towardes Englande, yet neuerthelesse the Earle escaped all daungers, and landed safe he and all his menne at Dartmouth, frome the whiche place he sayled to Fraunce halfe a yere before. After that the Earle came to lande, he made a proclamacion in king Henry the .vi. name, that all they that were of lawfull age shoulde make bat∣tayle agaynst Edwarde duke of Yorke whiche a∣gaynste all ryghte and lawe at that tyme had the crowne. The whiche when it was doon, it cannot be spoken howe soone it went aboute all ye realme that he was come and had made this proclamacy on, at the whiche also is not to be expressed howe many thousandes of menne came to hym. The Earle hauing all this power & greate armie went streyght to London, whome when Edwarde per∣ceyued to drawe nighe, he fledde for the tyme, tru∣styng to haue hym at some vauntage, but at the laste he was dryuen to that ende, that he had no mynde to get any hoste to resyst his enemies, but beyng in greate daunger of his owne lyfe, fled wt the duke of Gloucestre his brother, vnto a towne
night the sea called Lye, and there taking shippe, sayled into Flaunders, to Charles the Duke of Burgoyne with greate daunger and parell of his lyfe by the reason of the boisterouse & cruel winde Elizabeth his wyfe beyng then greate th childe dyd take sentuarye at Westmynster, where she was broughte in bedde with a mn chylde, whose name was Edward. After that the earl newe of the going awaye of kyng Edward, he made haste to London and hearing of the tumulte and busy∣nesse that was in Kente, and that all the villages and suburbes there were spoyled piteously, a lytel before the going awaye of yt kyng, pacified theim and sette all thinges in good ordre agayne: by the doing of the whiche benefyte, he was the more lo∣uingly accepted of theim all, and that doon, came to the towre & there deliuered kyng Henry the .vi. out of prisone, & geuing hym his robe of maiesye broughte hym to Poules, the people reioysing on euery syde, and there thanked God for that it had chaunsed as they wolde, & desired. And this was the yere of our Lorde a. M .iiii. C. foure score and one, that kyng Henry beganne to reigne. So that king Henry so often vanquyshed began to reigne nowe, likely shortely after to faule againe. The which fortune chaunsed to hym by many mennes opinions, because he was a very simple and inno∣cent man, and yt he had rather in godlinesse & ver∣tue excell other, then in honoure and rule, so yt for the loue yt he had to religion, he loked for no digni¦tee or honoure, whiche chaunseth to fewe that wil not seke for it or regard & kepe it when they haue it. But his enemies saide he was a coward, & had
not the herte or manlynesse to bee a kyng or meete for that offyce. So that who soeuer despiseth that the cōmune people alloweth & maruaileth at, is ac¦compted for a mad man, contrariwyse, he yt doeth agree to theim and in their tale, he is a wise man, where in dede suche wisdom (as it is comēly saide) is foolishnesse before God. Also some saide, it was the will of God yt it should so bee, for his graund∣father Henry the fourth gotte it by violencye and force of armes, so yt it coulde not bee longe enioy∣ed of hym, but that faute of the graundesire did re¦dounde on the nephewes. But nowe to yt matter. After this king Henry held his parlyament at Westmynster, the .xxvi. daye of Nouembre, in the whiche Edwarde is declared openly tray toure to his coūtree, bycause he had taken yt crowne to him and all his goodes geuen away, & in like maner al theirs yt did take his parte, and so iudgement was geuen on theim to dye. Furthermore, all yt decrees statutes and actes of yt forenamed Edward were broken & of none effecte. And then yt earle of War∣wike, as a man yt had deserued much of his coūtre was made gouernoure ouer all yt realme, to whō he did take ye duke of Clarence as felowe to hym. So by yt meanes yt realme was brought to a new state, cleane transformed & altered. To this parlia¦ment came the lorde Marques Mountacute, the which excusing his treason yt he did take kyng Ed¦ward his parte, & saing it was for feare of death, had his pardone▪ Truely yf this man had taken kyng Edwardes part, & had stand to his side man¦ly, he had not been so sore an enemie, and hurted so much his frendes, as he was being a false fained
and coloured frende, for those thinges that we be ware of, and knewe before to bee pernicious, dooe lesse hurte vs. But nowe quene Margarete be∣ing in Fraunce prayed euery daye from that time the Earle went into England, for the victorie, the whiche when she knewe was obteined by the king his letters that came to her, shortely after did take shyppe, towardes England, but thorowe yt sharp∣nesse of the wether and greate tempestes she was constrayned to lande, and to differre her iourney to an other tyme. At the same tyme Gaspar the earle of Penbruch went to Wales to his Earle∣dome, where he founde lorde Henry the Earle of Richemonde his brothers sonne, a chylde of ten yere olde, & there kepte prysoner, but lyke a noble man of ye erle willyam Harberte his wyfe, whome we spake of before, that Edwarde had made hym erle, and then after taken in batayl was behedded at the cōmaundement of the earle of Warwike. This is that Henry the whiche when Richard King  y  vii. the thirde brother to Edward was ouercome and vanquished, had the gouernaunce of the realme, of whome this is to bee beleued, that after that he came to his kingdō sent as one by god, to quench and put awaye the greate sedicion and stryfe that was betwixte Henry and Edwarde, seyng that he minded nothyng so muche as that, whome lady Margarete the onely doughter of Iohn the fyrste Duke of Somerset dyd bryng for the beyng but fourtene yeres of age, the whiche althoughe she was maryed after to Henry the duke of Bucking ham his sonne, and after that to the earle of Der∣by, yet she neuer broughte for the chylde after, as
thought she had doone her parte when she hadde borne a manne chylde, and the same a kynge of a realme. Gasper the earle of Penbruch tooke thys chylde Henrye from the earle Harberte hys wife and brought hym soone after to London to king Henry the syxte, whome when the kynge had bee∣holded longe holding hys peace, and maruailing at the goodlye wytte of the chylde, sayde in thys wyse to the nobles that were at that tyme present Loo, thys is he, thys is he I saye, to whome both wee, and oure aduersaries shall geue place to, in The pro∣phecye of Henrye the vi. of kyng Henry the vii. possession. And by thys he prophecied that the self same Henry shuld in tyme to come, as it chaunsed in dede, haue the kyngedome and rule of all the realme. And nowe Edwarde althoughe he was oute of his countree, yet dyd he not dyspayre but that he shulde haue mattre and redy occasion to recouer his kingdome, for the duke of Burgoyne partlye had promised hym both greate ayde and socoure, and partly the priuy frendes that he had in Englande dyd councell hym by letters sente from tyme to time, yt he would hasten his iournay homward, and incontintly after, very many fled to hym oute of Englande, eyther for feare of the lawes, that they had offended, or elles for sorowe that the worlde was so turned, that they could not haue theyr wyll, as they had before, in accomply∣shynge theyr couetouse myndes and desyres, and caused hym to make the more haste homewarde. And kynge Edwarde beynge rauished with their golden promises, thoughte nothyng more payne¦ful or wretched, then to tary one daye lenger, and nothyng more pleasaunt thē to go of his iourney,
and so takynge no moo wyth them then two thou sande harnesed menne, at the sprynge of the yeare sayled into Englande, landynge in the coastes of Yorkeshyre at an hauen towne called Rauinsport And there settynge for the all hys menne, dyd rea¦son wyth hys captaynes and consulte, to what place they shoulde fyrste goo. For it was ieoperdi¦ous consydering the small companie that he had, to take anye waye for the. But after longe dely∣beration, they were all agryed that some certayne knightes and horsemen of that smal compaignie shuld bee sent one to euerie quarter to the townes that wer nyghe, to the intente that they myghte drawe the hartes & myndes of the people to king Edwardes syde. But it is not lykelye that kynge Edwarde beyng a wyse manne durst be bolde, or would in any wyse come into England, with such a small power, excepte he had knowen surely that he should haue had great helpe at hys commyng the whych is a plain token, that the duke of Cla∣rence, and the lorde Marques, had procured hys fauoure, promysinge him all their helpe that they coulde make, for the tryall of the whych, ther was manifest tokens, that dysclosed and bewrayed all their falshed. For they priuilie wēt about to know mennes mindes and to what parte they would de¦clyne and the nexte day after came to kinge Ed∣warde, and shewed him that the common people dyd stande stiflye of kynge Henrye his syde, and woulde defende hys quarell as ryghte and iuste at al times, and that they had nomore nede nowe to make anye tumulte, in so much, that no manne would (althoughe eftsons desired and prayed,) go
to king Edward, yea, and that noman woulde for feare of the earle of Warwike, heare anye thinge spoken of that matter, whose myndes after that kinge Edwarde had throughlye serched and kno¦wen, he chaunged his mynd and purpose, & wher as before he claymed the crowne, then he publyr¦shed abrode that he woulde haue but hys ryghte that was his landes, and heritage of Yorke shyre. And t that worde, it cannot be well spoken, howe redily mē wer willinge to helpe him, consideringe that he claymed nothinge but hys ryghte, in so∣much, y• very pytie dyd moue manye, althoughe they woulde not helpe hym, yet at no hande to re∣syste him. And kynge Edwarde reconsilyng him selfe to the common people by these meanes, toke hys iournye towarde Yorke, and wente to Beuer lay. The earle then beinge at Warwik, after that he knew yt king Edward was landed about York streyght sent a post to his brother lord Mōtacute then liyng that winter at Pomfreit wt a great ar∣my, to shewe him what daunger mighte ensue, yf king Edward got yt towne of york, & bed theim yf his enemies drewe nigh, ether to mete with thē in plain felde, or elles to bete theim from the towne, vnto such tyme, that he came wyth a greater host which he prepared then, in all the hast he coulde. And because he knew not surely which way his e∣nemies wolde come, he fyrst sent to euery towne in york shyre, and to yorke it selfe certayne postes, to bid euery man be in his harnesse ready, and that yt citezins should shut the gates surelye that kynge Edward myght haue no accesse. In the meane ty∣me king Edward came peaceably, and wythoute
the resistaunce of anye man towardes the towne of Yorke, of whose commyng when the citezens were certified, they made sure the gates, and stan¦dynge in harnesse, for the defence of it, dyd sende twoo of the aldermen, to warne the kyng the com¦ming nyghe, that he dooe not enterpryse to farre, or put hym selfe in ieopardie, for they were myn∣ded to dryue him and all hys awaye, wyth all the power they myghte. When Edwarde had heard theyr myndes, he was in so greate feare & agonie that he could not tell what to dooe, for yf he shuld haue goone back, he feared that the common peo¦ple as men gredye of a praye, woulde persue him and yf he should goo forth, he was in daunger of the Yorke shyre men, leaste they shoulde sodenlye faull vpon hym, and take hym: and therefore, see¦yng that he was not able to match them in bat∣tayle, thought to mollyfie theim with fayre wor∣des, and so beganne to entreat after the most low¦lye and gentle maner the messaungers, that they woulde in hys name shewe the cytezyns, that he came not to clayme the crowne, but hys herytage and ryghte of Yorke shyre, and therfore that they woulde helpe theyr lorde and duke of Yorke, and yf that he myghte be receaued through theyr mea¦nes, he wolde requyte theyr kindenes, and remem¦ber theyr benifyte as longe as he lyued. And by suche fayre speaking and flatterie, he dimissed thē and folowed straighte after to the gates with his companie. The citezins beynge somwhat moued wyth thys answer, for that he entended no harme agaynst kyng Henrie, they spake wyth hym from the wall, and badde hym to go frome thence, and
if he would go quickely, he should take no harme. But he speakyng veraye gentely to euerye one of theim, & callyng some by name, moost gentely did desire theim yt he might come into his owne toune And so passyng all the daye in that cōmunicacion, at yt length the citezens partely ouer come wt his moost gētle speakyng, & large promises made, fell to this poincte, yt if Edward would swere to han∣dle his citezens after a gentle sorte, & hereafter bee obedient to kyng Henry his cōmaundement, thei would receiue hym in to yt citee, and helpe hym wt all yt power that thei might. Edward beyng glad to here this, the next daye after early, a masse was said at ye gates, wher he receiuyng the sacrament, promised feithfully vpon his othe yt he would ob∣serue bothe the thyngēs afore named, & so was re∣ceiued in to the citee. Neuerthelesse, it was so ferre vnlike that he would obserue one of theim, that he minded none other thyng then yt he might depriue the kyng of his croune, as here after shall appere more euidēt. So yt oftē tymes we se noble men, as∣well as the laye people thorowe ambicion & filthy couetousnes, thei forgettyng god & all godlynes dooe swere greate othes in promisyng thynges, ye whiche entendyng before thei make their othe, to breake it shortely after. Yet suche persons oftymes haue their rewardes of God at one or other tyme as this Edward had, so that some tyme the punish¦ment falleth on the nephewes, for the offence that the vncle had cōmitted. But of this thyng I will speake more in Rychard the third, in a place wher a manne maye see that ye progenie of Edward wer punished for this offence, when Edward had thus
framed his matters, he forgettyng ye othe yt he had made, did se yt the citee was strōgly kepte, and get∣tyng hym an army together thought he wold not lynger his busines bycause he harde his enemies made no greate preparaūce or haste, but tooke his iourney towarde London, & in his goyng did pur∣posely goo out of his waye yt led hym to Pomfret wher ye lord marques was, & toke on yt right hand within lesse thē .iiii. miles of his enemies. And whē he perceiued yt thei made no skyrmishe nor mocion came in to the right waie again when he was past theim, & wēt to Notynghame. But this greued the Yorke shire mēne that he should deceiue theim so vnhonestly & otherwise then did become a kyng, or noble manne. After that it was knowen that kyng Edward came wt out all daunger of his enemies, to Notyngham, then came there to hym many no∣ble mēne, vpon this consideracion yt the lord Moū¦tacute either would not entre vpō his enemies as though he had agreed with theim, or els durst not come out of his tentes, for that he was not able to matche wt theim. Therfore menne thought better to take Edwardes part, consideryng yt his power was so greate, then to hold with kyng Henry and hee in daunger of their liues, and losse of all their goodes & landes. Edward reioysyng at this, went to Lecestre, & hearyng that therle was at his toune of Warwicke & therle of Oxenford with hym, ha∣uyng a greate armie, and that thei bothe entended to bryng hym to theim, preuentyng their purpose wet awaye wt his hoost, either wyllyng to fight, or els ioyne in frendeship and loue with his brother duke of Clarence, with whome then commyng frō
London wt an hoost of mēne he thought to speake before yt he came to therle & his cōpaignie, fearyng leste yt he would not stand to yt promise yt he made, for yt he was variable & incōstāt. In ye meane tyme therle of Warwike was very heuie & sore moued wt ye lord marques because he would neither kepe the kyng from Yorke as he was bed, nor yet when thei came before his nose, would not proffer theim ones to fight, & therfore cōsideryng yt his enemies multiplied more & more, in his gooyng towardes hym made an hoost, & sent for yt duke of Clarence to come to hym, then hauyng an hoost at London. Whō whē he perceiued to linger, & as a man doub¦tyng whether he should kepe battaill or peace, to haue no mind of settyng forth his mē, mistrusting also yt he was by some traine allured to folowe his brethren and take their partes, tooke his waye to Couētrie, to thende that there he might meete his enemies. Then Edward came to Warwike, and frome thens to the erle, and pitched his tentes by hym, and the next daie after bad battaill to therle, the whiche erle durst not come oute, for feare that the duke of Clarence whome he thought had de∣ceaued hym, which duke in deede came, as it was shewed after with a greate power of menne. The whiche when Edward perceaued, he made towar∣des hym, & that it should not bee thought to bee a made guyle, sette his hoost in araye as though he would fight, and so did the duke. But when thei came in sight, Richard duke of Gloucestre as one that should take vp this matter, firste spake with the duke priuely in his eare, and then came to Ed∣ward and did the same to hym, and at the laste
peace was proclaimed, wherby euery manne put∣tyng doune their weapons, Edward & his brethrē enbraced louyngly one an other. After this Ed∣ward made it bee proclaimed that yt duke with all theim that came with hym, should bee perpetuall frendes, & that thei three should loue like thre bre∣thren as thei wer in brotherly loue for euer. Neuer thelesse God dooeth not seme to haue forgiuē this Edward his offēce of periury, although euē nowe fortune fauored hym, for yer it were long he was again vexed wt werre, beside yt plage & distruciō of his children after his death. When thei wer thus come together, thei minded to proue if yt erle wold come to theim also & hold wt theim, to whō ye duke of Clarēce sēt certain of his frendes, yt whiche first shuld excuse yt he had done, & thē desire hym if yt he would to bee at one with kyng Edward. Whose mynde whē therle heard, he vtterly detested hym, & with muche cursyng cryed oute of hym yt he had contrary to his feith & othe made, fled to kyng Ed¦ward. And to his cōmaūdemēt & biddyng yt he sēt, he made none other aunswer but this that he had rather bee like hym self, thē like a false & periured duke. So yt he appoincted vtterly neuer to leaue battaill, before that either he wer killed and ded or his enemies ouercomed. After this, Edward ha∣uyng suche a strong power of mēne went boldely to London, wher after that it was knowen that the duke of Clarence had taken his parte, and that all the brethren were come in to one knot, the citezens were in suche a feare, that thei could not tell what to dooe, but at the lengthe they were dryuen for feare to take kyng Edward his parte
At thesame tyme there came letters from the earle to kyng Henry, to yt duke of Somerset, to yt arch∣byshop of Yorke, and other of the kyng his coun∣sel, yt they should kepe the citee from their enemies handes for the space of .ij. or .iij. dayes, & he would come streyght with a great armye of mēne. They defended the citee as strongely as they coulde, but it was to no purpose, for the citezens cōsyderyng ye kyng Henry was no greate warryer, and yt he had but small policie in the feates of thesame, and con∣trary wise, that kyng Edwarde was a man that of hym selfe coulde rule a realme maruelous well, and suche a man that woulde not onelye preserue hym selfe and all his, but also defende theim from all maner of iniuryes and harmes that shoulde chaunce, thought best to leane on his syde. And at his commyng to London, the people coulde by no thretenyng or strayt cōmaundement, be otherwyse kepte backe, but that they would mete hym then comyng, & salute hym altogether as kyng & ruler of the realme. At whose commynge in, the duke of Somerset and certayn other fled away, and made the beste shifte euery manne for hym selfe that he could, to escape his hādes, sauyng that kyng Hē∣ry taryed poste alone in the bishoppes paleyce be∣syde Powles, where standynge lyke a desperate manne, and not knowynge what to dooe was ta∣ken of kyng Edward, and cast into pryson agayn in the towre. This Edward came into London the .xi. day of Apryll, halfe a yere after that he hadde sayled into Flaunders, and callyng his councel together, did highly commende the citezens, for yt faythfulnesse
that they bare to hym, and in especiall the Alder∣men, yt they caused the people to do their obeysaūce to hym, & also sharpelye rebuked other of the cytie whom he knewe to haue lent monye to kyng Hen∣ry. And for yt cause woulde haue made theim paye mony to the preparyng of an hoste for hym, but at the last he bad, theim bee without all feare, promy∣syng theim their pardon & safetie of life, thorowe the whiche gentlenesse, he gatte the fauoure of the cōmen people wonderfully. The erle consideryng that battayll should be shortelye, folowed his ene∣myes in great haste, to the entente that yf his ene∣mies had any stoppe or lette by yt waye, he myght fight & buckel with theim, before they came to Lō∣dō. But now after that he had pursued theim long and came a good waye of his iourney, worde was brought yt Edwarde had gottē London & impriso∣ned the kyng. The earle then perceauyng that the victorie & ende of fightyng should be tryed in this one batayle, rested at saynt Albones, partely to re∣freshe his men, and partely to take some counsayl. In this hoste there was the duke of Excester, the earle of Oxenforde, the duke of Somerset and the lorde Mountacute Marques, brother to the earle whom the earle perceaued to bee very vnwyllyng to fight, and that agaynst kyng Edward, and ther¦fore he had no trust to hym, yet the loue yt betwixte brother and brother diminished the suspicion, but whatsoeuer he thought eyther of hym or of other, he hymselfe was euer out of feare and daunger. And so came from saynt Albones, to a toune that is halfe waye betwyxte London and that, aboute a tenne myle frome London, called Barnet, and
this toune standeth on a hyll, where there is a goodlye playne, and here the earle entended to pitche his battayle. And Edward hearyng of this prepared his armye, and adioyned a greate po∣wer of young menne to theim, and so with bowes, bylles, speares and arowes, and all maner instru∣mentes apperteynyng to warre, he had so furnys∣shed his menne, that he thought to make riddaūce of theim at that tyme for all, and fynishe battayle that was so longe holden. And so came with this his armye to mete his enemies, and that he might bee the redier to fight with theim wheresoeuer he mette theim, he had foure wynges, that they could escape hym at no hand. And he brought with hym to battayle also Henry then prisoner, to the entente that his aduersaries might bee the more discoura∣ged at the sight of hym, or els, if fortune fauoured hym not, he might neuerthelesse bee saued by him. After the noone, he pytched his tentes at the fore named Barnet nighe to hys enemyes, but that he myghte not fyghte that daye, he defended hys tentes veraye strongelye, for the longer he tary∣ed the better it was, by reason of the daylye con∣course of noble men and commen people to hym, and the woorse for the earle, for that he was farre from his frendes. There they lodged that night, and by breake of day ye earle of Warwike begā to araye his armye of this sorte. Fyrste the lorde Marques and the earle of Oxenforde was set on the lefte syde wyth certayn horssemen, and he hymselfe with the duke of Exceter on the ryght syde. In the myddeste be∣twixte
theim bothe he setteth the duke of Somer∣set with all the archers. And thus araiyng theim to this battayl, beganne to exhorte theim, that thei would fight lustely and lyke hardye meune, reuen∣gyng the quarell of their countree, for that he had moste falsely possessed yt croune. In like maner did kyng Edward, whiche after that he had set theim in ordre, encouraged theim to fight lykewyse, and to remembre that thei inuaded rebelles, traytours and sedicious persons, whiche entended nothynge but the vtter destruccion and losse of theyr coun∣tree. When daye came, the trompettes beganne to blowe on bothe sydes, as the tokens and lignes of the battayle. And firste the bowe men shot, & then drawynge nere tryed it with sweorde. Edwarde trustyng thorowe the multitude of his mē to haue the better hād did stāde stiffely to theim, enboulde∣nyng his souldiours in all that he coulde. Whose power the erle moste manfully resisted. And so by long cōtinuaunce of battail, many men wer slayne in whose places succeded euer fresher & fresher. At the length the erle perceauyng his mē to bee ouer∣throwen by the kyng his great power, drewe nigh with his foreward, & constreyned the kyng to geue backe a litle. Then Edward seeyng that, brought freshe men to aide ye other, so that thother mē wer beten downe very sore to ye groūde. And Edwarde beeyng werye of this longe fyghtynge (for they fought from mornyng to none) caused theim that wer without the battayl, then standyng for the de∣fēce of Edward, yf such nede should be, to fall vpō their enemies, & beare theim downe wt their great power. The erle then seyng freshe mē to come vpō
theim, was nothing afeard, but trusting & loking surely for the victorye, dyd comforte & encourage his menne then almoste discomfited, moost man∣fully, desiring theim to beare oute this laste brunt lustely, and the victorie should redounde to theim but they being weryed with longe continuaunce, were nothing moued at his wordes. Then he him self moste valiauntly came among the myddest of his enemyes, and there kylled and slewe many of theim, where he hym selfe at the laste was striken downe and his brother lorde Marques then folo¦wing hym, after whose deathe all the other fled, & so were taken moste parte of theim. And this was the ende of the earle, whose stoutenesse of stomack made hym bee in lyke peryll and leopardye at ma¦ny other times at dyuerse and sundrye suche con∣flictes and warres. There was killed of both par¦tes more then ten thousande menne, and so many taken prisoners that they could not be noumbred. The duke of Somerset, and the earle of Oxforde entendyng to take their waye to Scotlande, dyd chaunge their mindes, bicause it was so farre frō theim, and fledde streight to Wales to the earle of Penbrucke, and so euery man to saue their liues, fledde, some one way and some an other. The erle of Exeter skaping very hardely, tooke the sentua∣rye at Westminster, and there remayned. When Edward had gotte this victorye, he went to Lon∣don after the moost triumphyng fassion, hauyng Henry with hym as prisoner. The deed corps also of the earle and the lorde Marques were brought to Poules, and there laye for the space of .ii. dayes that euery manne might see theim to bee deed, and
that no man after fainyng yt he was aliue, myght sowe sedicion againe in reuenging his quarel. Yet the kyng was not so glad at ye death of therle, but he was as sory for the losse & destruccion of yt lord Marques, whome he dyd esteme and take for his great frende. After this, quene Margaret hearing yt Edward was come into Englande, & had done much hurte in yt realme, purposed to come into En¦gland & her soonne also prince Edward wt a great armye of chosen & picked Frenchmen, & so to land at Waimouth. But for yt greate tempest yt was on the see, she could not come so soone as she woulde. But after she had landed, & heard that kyng Ed∣ward had conquered all, & her husband to be takē prisoner as destitute of all his frendes, and that ye erle with his brother lord Marques was slaine in felde, and all their army discomfyted and slayne & putte to fight, she began like a piteful & desperate ladye, to mourne and lament the fate & calamitee of her husband, ye whiche she did nowe see to haue chaūsed, and sowith this great feare & agonie she was in that case that she had rather dye then lyue The quene mighte haue thought yt this euell had chaunsed to her for the putting to death of ye duke of Gloucestre, of whose deathe althoughe perad∣uēture she was not giltie, yet she offended, in that she dyd not saue suche a good man. For yf he had liued and had the dominion of the publike weale, king Henry had neuer been in suche trouble. But nowe (to leaue of this) yt quene despering bothe of her owne life & her sōnes also, went therby to a mo¦nastery of the charterhouse monkes at a place cal¦led Bewe lieu, in englishe called faire place, & ther
taking sentuarie, remained with her soonne. And when it was knowen, that she was there in sentua¦rie, there came to her the duke of Somerset, & his brother the erle of Deuonshire, whiche man euen frome the beginnyng had taken the other parte, whose returning after redounded to his euell and destruccion, also the erle of Penbroke Ihon Wen locke, & Ihon Longstrother Capytaines and ru∣lers of the Rhodes. The quene being in sorowe & miserye, was somwhat comforted at the sighte of her frendes, wt whome she talked and shewed the cause yt she came no rather, desiryng theim to pro∣uyde for the safegard of her soonne & to helpe her nowe, and ye she would if the wether serued goo to Fraunce againe and bryng wt her, god willing at a more better & mature time a greater power of mē The duke began to putte her in good comforte & would in any wise ye she should set her mind whole vpon batail, & nowe to fight against Edward whē he was bothe vnprepared & also not furnyshed of men yt were hable to fight, considering ye great ba∣tell that he had wt therle of Warwike, in yt which his men were sore hurted & weryed all together, & yt it myght be their chaūce now to haue yt better of hym, although he discōfyted therle & his hoste, for because yt victorie turneth oftentymes from one to an other in a momēt & short space. Furthermore he shewed her ye the most part of yt nobilyte bare theyr good mindes & hertes to kyng Henry, & if so bee yt she would bee a capitaine as she had bene in tyme passed, he promised her a great army of his owne costes and charges, and that he woulde make o∣ther noble menne to take her parte, and defende
her at all times. The Quene mistrusting and fea∣ring yet muche of her owne soonne, aunswered & saied that she allowed his counsell well, yf so that she only might bee in daunger, and not her sonne And therfore fearing that when they fought most earnestly for their countree, her soonne might bee destroied or caste awaye, she thought best either to putte of and differre the battayl to an other time, or elles to sende her soonne into Fraunce, & there to bee kepte vnto suche tyme ye they had some bet∣ter successe in their warres. And truely the mother was not withoute a cause so louing to her chylde; for that her owne husbande was a prisoner and a captiue persone, and therfore as one caste awaye, so that nexte after hym, she loued mooste tenderly this her soonne. Also that they might goo yt more wisely aboute their entente, the quene counsayled theim all to laye their heedes together, and caste all the waies howe to conuey their businesse, and then yf they would fight, she promised theim both her helpe, and good councell. Then the Erle saied it was no nede to waste any more wordes, for he & all they woulde fight stoutely agaynste their ene∣mies, and therfore they woulde doo that with all their might and power, that they had determined and apointed vpon. So they all gathered their ar¦mye, euery manne for his parte, oute of his owne countree & shire. The quene brought now in good hope of warre, saied wel be it, & streight went by yt councell of yt duke to Bathe, looking and tarieng there for the armye, but to what place so euer she went, she would be aknowen to none, to thentent yt her aduersaries might not knowe, vnto such time
that she came wher she woulde bee. Edward hea∣ryng that the quene was come, and that the duke of Somerset, had prepared an hoost to ayde her, sente certayne spies to viewe of what number the armye was. And when they had shewed hym the nomber (but yet not knowyng whether they wold goo) the kyng apoynted to mete them before they came to London. And gathering his armie went to Oxforde shyre, and there pytched hys tentes at Abyngton, encreasinge hys nomber and army as much as he could. But perceauyng, that they wer at Bathe, and there taryed purposely to multyply and enlarge their company, came to Malebrydge xv. myles frome Bathe, & so hasted to come to thē before they did go to Wales, as he suspected, whe¦ther in dede thei entended, to the erle of Penbruck hauyng theyr a great bonde of men. From which toune of Bathe the quene fled, and frome thence to Brystowe, and wyllinge to goo by Glouceter, sent spyes before to knowe, yf she myght haue pas∣sage, to whome aunswere was broughte that she coulde not, nor that thei of the towne would by a∣nye meanes geue her place, she hearynge of that went from Bristowe to Teukisbury. And ther the duke pytched hys battayle, agaynst the wyll and aduise of many other captaynes, whych counsay∣led hym to tarye the erle of Penbruches comyng. Where Edwarde dyd take the quene, and kylled or at the least imprysoned euery one almoost that came with her. And of the nobilitee, there was kil¦led the earle of Deuonshyre, Iohn Wenlock cap¦tayn of the Rhodes, and the brother of the duke of Somerset, wyth manye other moo. And taken
prisoners, the quene Margaret, & her sōnne prince Edward, yt duke of Somerset, yt lord of s. Ihons, & more then .xx. knyghtes besyde thē. And all these wer behedded .ii. dayes after in yt selfe same towne sauyng only the quene Margaret and her soonne Edwarde. Shortelye after prynce Edwarde was brought before the kyng, and there asked wherfor he did inuade hys realme, which answered boldly and sayde, to recouer my kyngedome as heritage by my forefathers and progenie dew to me. At the which wordes, Edwarde sayde nothyng, but thru¦styng hym from hys syght wyth hys hande, whō the duke of Clarence and Glouceter, and yt lorde Hastynges dyd kyll mooste cruelly at hys depar∣tyng. Hys mother the quene, was caryed to Lon∣don prysoner, and frō thence raunsomed was had to Fraunce, where she lyued in perpetuall sorowe and care, not so much for her selfe, or her husband as for her onely sonne Edwarde, whome both she and Henry her husband trusted should lyue, and possesse ye croune. When kinge Edward had thus ouercome theim, he went to London, and ther for iii. dayes caused procession to bee through euerye place after the moost solempne and deuoute fassy on. And here was the last ciuile battaile that this king kept, which was the yere of our lord. M .iiii. C .lxxx. and .xi. After that kynge Edwarde was returned backe after the subduynge of hys rebelles, one Fauconbrydge the Earle of Kente hys basterde, a stoute harted manne, beynge admyrall of the sea, that none shoulde passe betwixte Calysse and Do¦uer, to ayde or socoure kynge Edwarde, by the ap¦poyntemente
of the earle of Warwyke, then after dryuen to nede and pouertee, beganne to bee a py¦rate and rouer in the seea. In so much that he had throughe his robberye and shamefull spoylynge gotte vnto hym a greate nauye of shyppes, and at the laste, landed in Kente, and there getting to hym a greate multitude of Kentyshemenne, wyth the assistence of theim and hys ryotouse compaig¦nye of shyppemenne, came to London, and sayde wyth a lowde voyce, they woulde defende kynge Henrye, and restore hym to hys crowne. But the people and cytezyns of London perceauyng that quene Margarete was ouercome in battayle, woulde geue theim no passage, but wyth greate myghte and vyolence enforsed Fawconbrydge to geue backe, and to take shyppe, and kylled and toke prysoners the better parte of his menne. Shortely after, the same Fauconbridge landing vnware at Southampton, was taken and behed¦ded. But to speake of the earle of Penbrucke, whē he had knowne that the quene was taken at Tew¦kesburye, where she had waged battayle, then go∣ynge of hys waye to her, turned backe agayne to Chepstey. And there lamentyng greatly both his owne chaunce, & also the euell fortune yt kinge Hē¦ry had, dyd breath alitle & deliberate wt him selfe, what wer best to be done. In the meane time king Edward sēt one Roger Vaughā to take yt erle by some train or guile. But the erle certified of it, did take y• self same mā & hedded hī, so yt he was killed yt intended to kyll. From that place yt erle went to his toune Pēbrucke, wher he was besiged of Tho¦mas Morgan then sēt frō the king, that he could
get oute by no meanes, but on the eyght daye one Dauid the brother of the forsayde Morgane his moost assured frende conueyed him awaye, which then went to a toune by the sea syde called Tinby and there takynge shyppe into Fraunce wth the lorde Henrye his nephewe, by the earle of Ryche∣monde his brother, by chaunce came to Britaine, and there shewing the duke the cause of hys com¦minge, committed him selfe wholy into his han∣des. The duke entertayned the earle and all his company, after yt most best maner that he could, & made of theim as though they had bene hys bre∣thren, promysing to theim sure passeporte & saue∣conduite, ouer ani place that he had rule or gouer¦naunce of. Nowe kinge Edwarde, after that hys realme was pacified, and these great tumultes a∣peaced, he tooke his iourny into Rence, and there setting his iustices, caused inquisicion and serche to be made of this busines and insurrection, by y• basterd and his adherentes, for the which offence manye were put to death, and suffered execution moost sharply, accordīg to their merites. And not longafter, to thentent yt king Edward myght bee out of al daūgers & assaultes of his enemies Hēry yt was depriued not lōg before of his crowne, was also spoiled of his life, yt is, was killed. And as the report & fame went, the duke of Glouceter was su∣spected to haue done yt dede, which sticked him wt a dagger. And when he was dead, his corps was brought vnreuerētly frō the towre, through yt stre¦tes of yt citee vnto Poules, & ther lay all yt daye & on the morow folowing conueyed & caried to ye ab¦by or blak freres at Chertessey, & ther was buried
And shortely after had to Wīdesore castell, & laied in ye newe chapell of. s. George in a solēpne toumbe This Henry reigned .xxviii. yere, and after he had repossessed his kyngdome, but halfe a yeare. He ly¦ued vnto he was .lii. yeres of age, and had by his wife quene Margaret one soōne called Edward. Nowe to the entent yt Edward the kyng might liue in quiet after this manne his death, he went a boute to serche all the rebelles that thei might bee weeded out of the compaignie of menne as perni∣cious and vnprofitable to the publique weale. At what tyme he tooke tharchebishop of Yorke bro∣ther to therle of Warwike and sent hym prisoner to Guynes, wher he long remained in holde, but after dimissed, dyed shortely for thought and pen∣sifulnes of mynde, also he attached the erle of Ox∣enford the whiche from the ceason of Barnet felde had holden sainct Michaelles Mounte, & by his cōmaundement was had to a castell beyond yt sea called Hant, wher he remained prisoner yt space of xii. yeares. Furthermore vpō cōsideraciō yt no rebel¦les or traitours might haue any refuge to straūge coūtres, he had made a league wt the kyng of scot∣tes of peace & amitee to bee obserued & kepte for yt  of .xx. yeares. Yet he was not out of all feare, for y• e of Pēbruck & of Richemond wer with ye duke of Britain, wher thei had moost honorable intretainmēt, cōsideryng also yt the young erle of Richemōd would clayme ye croune ī tyme to come he was in ye more feare for ye whiche matter, he sent priuie ambassadours to ye duke, promisyng hym yt if he would restore & deliuer vnto their hāde bothe therles he should haue an ample & large porciō of
monye for so dooyng. But yt duke, to make a short tale, would by no meanes deliuer theim out of his handes, but so kepte theim, that thei neuer might bee in any daūger of their enemies through hym. Edward therfore in this his thirtene yere of his reigne, whiche was the yere of our lord a thousand foure hundred three score and thirteen, helde his parlyament at Westminster, wher first he caused all the statutes and actes of his whiche wer abro∣gated by Henry the sixt, to stand and bee of good effecte, then the goodes of these traitours to be be∣stowed & gyuen abrode, also the banished menne yt fled as rebelles and false to their countree, to bee brought in, & that if any grudge or eiuill will wer betwixt any one or other of the nobilite, that ther it should bee forgottē, & turned to loue, & lastly that certain mony should bee payed to the kyng towar¦des yt greate charges of his werre. When he had thus studied & determined to liue quietly & set his realme in good ordre, Charles ye duke of Burgoin sēt for aide to hym against Lewes ye Frēche kyng so yt he could neuer bee at rest, but one thyng or o∣ther shuld disquiet hym, for he could not deny hym helpe consideryng ye benefites yt he had receiued of hym at diuerse & sūdry tymes before yt, & yt he nowe fought against his dedly enemie whiche aided the erle of Warwike bothe wt menne & mony to come against hym. Wherfore he assēblyng his coūsaill together, & shewyng theim the matter, sent woord to the duke yt he would kepe one piece or parte of a battail agaīst ye kyng. For in deede at yt same tyme there was mortall battaill betwixt the duke & Le∣wes yt kyng, & because that the same Lewes was a
very harde manne & churlishe & also hurtefull as∣well to his frēdes as to his foes, many Frēchmen abhorryng his cōdicions, did consent to hold with yt duke. And emong many other, one Lewes of Lu¦cēburge did apoinct wt the duke to dooe mischief to hym one waye or other, so yt the kyng was bothe in daūger of his owne coūtree menne, & also of the duke beyng a straūger. The duke shewed this to kyng Edward, yt he might the soner allue & entise hym to battaill. And vpō this, kyng Edward toke his voiage to Fraūce, takyng besides his tribute yt he had, certain mony of ye lordes & commons of the realme, which thei of their owne gētlenes gaue vn to hym, to ye sustenaūce & maintenyng of his armie And for yt, the kyng called that tribute & leuiyng of mony, beneuolēce, whiche neuerthelesse was giuen wt an eiuill will of many one. But he vsyng suche gētle fassions towardes theim, & praiyng theim so hartely of their assistaunce yt thei could none other wise dooe but geue it hym. Whiche whē he had, he gathered his armie whiche was .xx. M. & went to Caleys ye .iiii. daye of July. Whō Charles yt duke did mett, & reioysyng gretely at his victory did in∣stantly desire hym that he would sticke stoutely to this battaill, yt he might haue of yt Frenche kyng yt he had lost by hym. But when Lewes yt kyng hard that Edward came wt his armie, he encreased the nombre of his people as muche as he could & the more nigher the daunger that he was, the sooner & hastely he came vpon theim. And with this armie he sent foorthe Robert of Stoteuill a noble capi∣tain to the coostes Atrebatium to resyst the power of the Englishe menne. And the kyng hym self ta∣ried
at Siluanect, castyng wt hymself what waye he might make a league of peace betwixt yt duke & yt kyng of England & hym. Heryng therfore that yt king was gone to Atrebates, he sēt ambassodours to hym for peace: whose myndes when yt kyng had knowē, although he had foūd but litle frēdship at his hādes in tymes past, yet consideryng yt all his substaūce & treasure was wasted in ciuile battail, & that he was not hable to maintein a newe hoost if nede shuld be, nor yet vnneth sustein theim whom he had vnder his bāner, thought best euē for pure necessite to leaue to peace & growe to atonemēt wt Lewes yt kyng. The whiche thyng he might dooe also sauing his honour, cōsideryng yt bothe ye duke & Robert of Lucēburge aforenamed had not dooē accordyng to their promise. So yt, at the desire of ye ambassadours he went to speake with the kyng at Pinquinake a toune in Ambiā shire wher noble mēne dooe assēble together, & there found y• kyng. Thē bothe yt kynges after due salutaciō, either to other had long communicaciō, & at the last a peace was cōfirmed & stablished for many yeres, for ye a∣emēt wherof ye Frēche kyng gaue vnto Edward toward his charge & cost .lxcv. M. crounes, & from thēs forth yerely l. M. crounes. After yt truce made & mony paid, kyng Edward wēt to Caleis, & from thēs to Englād. In this battaill none was slain sa¦uyng onely yt duke of Exceter, ye whiche māne was in sētuary before, & cōmaunded to folowe y• kyng was put to death cōtrary to yt promise made. This was the yere of our lord. M .CCCC .lxxv. frome that tyme foorth Lewes yt kyng payed duely his raunsome to Edward, vnto the laste yere before
he dyed, at what tyme he denyed the paymente, as though he knewe before his laste dayes. But the duke of Burgoyne and Roberte of Lucenburgh, after they had knowen that Edwarde had made a league wyth Lewes the kynge, they freted sore with hym, and wrote sharpe letters of thretenyng and tauntyng hym, saiyng: that he was the cause that they reuenged not theimselfes of the kyng. Whose fyrye and thundryng wordes the kyng no more passed vpon, then of the turnyng of his hāde And as for Lucenburgh he was taken prysoner, and for his proude and malicious writyng, behed∣ded at Lutece. Thus kyng Edward beyng in quietnes both in his countre and abrode also, although he mighte wel thynke hymself to lyue so perpetually, for yt he had been so great a conquerour, yet consideryng yt the erle of Richemōde was of nigh affinitee to Hē¦ry the .vi. he was not out of feare & daunger. Ther¦fore he thought ones to attempte the duke of Bri∣tayn agayn, with giftes, promyses & faire wordes that he might haue y• erle, whō he thought to rule as he would, after that his auncestrie was geuen. The ambassadours came to the duke with a great substaunce of mony, & that their request might bee the honestier, they shewed the duke that they came to desire the erle of hym, that he mighte marye the kynges doughter, so that by affinite, al euil wyll & grudge might be forgotten, and sedicion vtterlye reiected, although they entended not so to cause al suche thynges to bee forgotten, but by the death & kyllyng of hym. The duke after longe and muche deniyng theim, at the laste thorowe muche entrea∣tyng,
and also great rewardes that was brought gaue the earle to theim, sendynge a letter to the kynge, in prayse and commendation of hym, not thynkynge that he commytted the lambe to the woulfe, but the soonne to the father. The ambas∣sadours was verye glad, that they had got hym, and sayled into Englande, in all the haste they coulde. But the earle knowynge well that he wēt to hys death, for sorowe and care that he concea∣ued in hys mynde, was caste in an agewe. When he was goone, one Ihon Chenlet, suche a man as could not bee found agayne in al the countre, & in great fauour wt the duke, hearing of yt dede, being very sore moued therwith, wēt to the dukes place & coming before his grace, stode lyke a man stry∣kē with some sodeyn dysease, very pale & holding his head downe, the duke maruayling at hym, en¦quyred what the matter was. To whom he sayde. O moost noble duke, my time is at hande, & thys palenes betokeneth death without remidy. That I would God yt had come before this day, & then it should not haue greued me so much. And thys all cometh to me through a deed yt you haue done of late, which wil ether cause me to lose my life, or els to lyue in moost miserie & wretchednes as one wery of thys present lyfe. The noble actes yt you haue doone, (moost noble prynce) haue enhaunsed your fame & glory to the fardest part of the world but this one thing me thynke (I praye you pardō¦me what I saye) is a great blemyshe to your dyg¦nitee, that forgetting the promyse that you made so faythfully haue geuen the innocēt erle of Rich∣mounte to be destroyed, & pitefully killed emonge
wretched knau es & hangmen. Wherfore, they yt loue you, of whom I am one, cannot but lamente o see you dyshonored by this great fault of periu¦ry. Whē he had sayd, the duke answered, hold thy peace man I praye the, ther is no such harme shal chaunce to him, Edwarde the kinge woulde haue him to mary his daughter. Then sayd Iohn, Be∣leue me (mooste excellente and redoubted prynce) this Henry is nowe almoste famyshed and loste, & yf he once goo out of your countree, he is but cast awaye and paste all recouerye. At these wordes ye duke was persuaded, through the whych he com¦maūded one Peter Lādoson hys receauer, to take the same Henry frō the ambassadours. The sayd receauer pursued the Englyshe ambassadours to Maclonium, and there holdyng theim wyth long cōmunication, made him to be conueyed into a sē¦tuary, whych was then almost ded through that feuer and thought whych he was caste in. And so after that he was emended broughte hym to the duke. The ambassadours then beyng spoiled and deceaued, both of theyr pread and mony that they brought, desyred yt same receauer that they might not goo home in that wyse, whyche receauer pro∣mised, that he woulde eyther kepe hym in sentua∣ry, or eles cause hym to be imprisoned at the duke his place, so that they should neuer neede to feare hym. In all thys tyme Edwarde beynge desyre∣ous to knowe what became of the Earle, was enfourmed, that he was taken prysoner, but af¦ter that escaped theyre handes, where at the kinge was verye angrye: but when he knewe that he
should bee kepte in holde, was well pleased & then dyd take no thought. And liued after, & that most welthy, sparing no expēses nor cost in kepyng his house, neuertheles, he dyd fall into one great of∣fence in this time. For sodēly, he cōmaunded his brother the duke of Clarence to be killed & drow∣ned in an hogshhed of malmesey. And the cause of hys death was, as men report, through a certaine prophecie, which sayd ye after kyng Edwarde, one shuld reigne, whose name begā wyth a. G. which prophecye some sayde, was completed & fulfilled when the duke of Glouceter, ye after hym had the kingdome, dyd reigne. Some holdeth another o∣pinion of this his death, saiyng: yt at what time ye olde malice dyd breke out bewixt thē both, ye duke through his sisters councel, woulde haue maried lady Mary yt duke of Burgoyn his only daugh∣ter, which mariage ye kyng did infringe & stoppe, as one enuiyng of his brothers felicitee, or good chaunce. After that they both beryng in theyr min¦des mortall hatred, one of the sayde duke hys ser∣uauntes, was accused of wichcraft & charming for which offence, he was put to death. The duke g yt, could not but speake & resist againste the g his cōmaundement, and therfore, was com∣ted to prison, & ther beyng was killed, and pro¦clad after as a traytour to the kyng for whose  yt, the king was verye sory, and whan any kneled to hym, and asked pardon der, he would saye. O infortunate bro¦ that noman would aske thy pardon. And this duke had .ii. children, one lady Mar∣garete, that was after maried to Richard Pole, &
an other Edward, whome the kyng made earle of Warwyke, but this childe folowyng the fate and destenie of his father, was after putte in prisone, & there priuely put to death. And these thinges were doone in the yere of oure Lorde a thousand foure The .xix. yere. hundreth and foure score, and the .xix. yere of the reigne of kyng Edward. And two yeres then after folowing, the kyng died, before ye whiche yeres he beganne to bee very harde and couetouse in get∣ting monye, and also very diligent in marking & attaching his lordes that did offend. In this time the kyng of Scottes willed his soōne Iamy to be maried to the kynges doughter lady Cicile, which was the yonger, that should haue been maried to Charles the kyng his soonne of Fraunce. But it chaunced not, thorow Lewes the kyng that brake his promise, bothe in geuing his seruice, and pay∣eng his raunsome the laste yere of his reigne. Likewise the kyng of Scottes seing that Lewes the kyng was false of his promise, he thoughte he might bee so bolde too, and so breaking league of amite, sette vpon the Englishe men. At the which Edward was sore vexed, and entended batayl a∣gainst hym, yet after that he knewe ye it was not by his wyll, but thorowe the councell and euell dis¦posed mindes of his lordes, woulde haue borne it in good worthe, had not kyng Iames owne bro∣ther streight vpon that, prouoked hym to fighte. Furthermore, suche was the nature of the Scot∣tishe kyng that when he had sette his minde vpon a thing, no manne coulde turne hym, and because that no manne mighte reproue hym in any thing, he promoted laye people, & menne of basse bloude
to his counsell, putting to deathe, or banishyng e∣uermore the nobilitee Emong whom this duke of Albanie his brother, consydering the condicyons of the king, fled to ye kyng of Englād at what time he was sent into Fraūce, & ther counsailed ye kyng to fight against hym. The king willing to reuēge his olde iniuries, vpon many consideraciōs gathe¦red, entēded no lesse by ye helpe of the saied duke of Albany, then to kepe open warre. So yt he did send the duke of Gloucestre, ye erle of Northumberlād, syr Thomas Stanley, & this duke of Albany wt a great power of men against ye Scottes. The king knowing of their cōming, went to Barwyke with his army to kepe theim from the borders, but per∣ceiuing that he was not hable so resist their great power, fled backe in ye night to Edinbrough & ther taryed for his enemies. And ye duke of Gloucestre folowing, burned and spoyled all the way, & when he was somewhat nighe his enemies, perceiuing also that none of the Scottishe lordes came to the duke of Albanye, mistrusted that some deceyte or crafte was wrought, & so laboured to haue peace, whiche gotten, he went backe to the castell of Bar¦wike, that sir Thomas Stanley had wonne a ly∣tell before. And the duke of Albany ye authoure of this warre, for yt he had but lytle thankes of En∣gland for his so dooing, fled into Fraunce, & there was kylled running at the tylte in Parys. After this businesse Edward assembled his counsell to∣gether, & willed theim to prepare batayle againste the Frenche kyng, for that he had neyther payde nor woulde paye his raunsome, nor yet geue his soonne in mariage to his doughter (as he promi∣sed)
to the setting forth of ye which batayl, certaine mony was exacted of the prestes & religiouse men to be payde. At the which time ye kyng was sodēly sickened, & shortly after died at Westminster ye .ix. day of April then being .l. yeres of age, & reigning xxiii. after the date of oure Lorde a. M .iiii. C .lxxx. and thre, whose corps was after conueyghed and had with great pompe and solempnitee to Winde sore, and there buried in saint George his chapell Whiche kyng had by his wyfe the quene ten chil∣dren, & of theim lefte aliue behinde hym Edward prince of Wales, and Richard duke of yorke, and one bastarde called Arthure and fyue doughters, Elisabeth, Cicilie, Anne, Catherine, and Brigyde, whiche after were maryed all, sauyng that ladye Brigide was a nonne. This Edward was a good¦ly * Te de∣scripcion of Edward the fourth. man of personage, of stature hyghe, of counte∣naunce and beautee comely, of sight quicke, brode brested, and well sette in euery other parte confor∣mable to his bodye, of a pregnant wytte, stomake stoute, & haulte courage, of perfect memori of such thinges as he conceaued in his braine, diligent in his affaires & weighti busines, in auentures bold and hardy, againe his aduersaries fearce & terry∣ble, to his frendes liberal & bounteous, hauing in all his warres most prosperous & lucky successe, & escheuing all pleasure & sensualitee, to ye which he was by nature most proue vnto, for ye which cause and for the lowlines and humanite yt is in hym in gendred by nature most plētifully, he bare him self honestly amōg his priuate persons, otherwise thē the degre or dignite of his maieste required, wher¦fore the fame ranne, that he was poysened.
A lytell before his death, it was saied that he gaue hym selfe to auarice, whiche before, as you see, v∣sed greate liberalytee. Yet the realme whiche tho∣rowe ciuile sedicyon was greatly impoueryshed, he made ryche and plenteouse at his death daye. Also he gaue spiritual promocions to the moste excellent and famous clerkes, and made theim of his councell, other of the laye sorte, whome he lo∣ued, he did not enriche with possessions but with monye and other lyke goodes, the whiche ma∣ny prynces, hauyng no respecte of the ho∣noure, dooe not alwayes obserue. By the whiche suche giftes & rewar¦des he had so farre wonne the hartes of the peo¦ple, that af∣ter his deathe ma∣ny menne dyd lamente the losse of his grace.
¶ Edward the fyfth. WHEN ALMIGHTIE GOD had called to his mercye the noble prince kyng Edwarde the fourth of that name, Ed∣ward his eldest sonne (prynce of Wales) began his reygne the .ix. daye of Aprill, in yt yere of oure Lorde a. M .CCCC .lxxxiij. and in the .xxij. yere of Lewes the .xi. then Frenche kyng. Whiche younge prince reigned a smal space and lytle season ouer this realme, other in pleasure or libertee, for his vncle Richard duke of Gloceter, within .iij. monethes depriued hym, not only of his croune and regalytie, but also vnnaturally bereft hym his naturall life, and for the declaracion by what craftie engine he first at∣tempted his vngracious purpose, & by what false colourable & vntrue allegaciōs he set forth openly his pretensed enterprise, & fynally by what shame∣full cruell and detestable acte he perfourmed the same: Ye muste fyrst consyder of whom he and his brother descended, there natures condicions & in∣clynacions, and thē you shall easely perceaue, that there could not be a more crueller tyraunt appoyn¦ted to acheue a more abomynable enterpryse. There father was Richard Plantagenet duke of Yorke, whiche began not by warre but by lawe to chalenge the croune of Englande, puttyng his clayme in the parliamēt, holden yt .xxx. yere of kyng
Henry the .vi. where ether for right or for fauoure his cause was so set forthe and auaunced that the bloodde of the sayd kyng Henry, although he had a goodly sonne was clerely abiected, and yt croune of the realme (by autorytee of parliamente) entay∣led to the duke of Yorke and his heyres after the discease of the sayd kyng Henrye the .vi. But the duke not entendyng so long to tary, but myndyng vnder the preterte of discencion growen and ary∣sen within the realme, and of couenauntes made in the parliament, not kepte but broken, to preuēte the tyme and to take vpon hym the gouernaunce in kyng Henryes life, was by to muche hardynes slayne at the battayle of Wakefylde, leuynge be∣hynde hym three sonnes, Edwarde, George & Ri∣chard. Al these three as they wer greate estates of byrth, so were they greate and statelye of stomake, gredy of autoritee and impaciēt parteners of rule and autoritee. This Edward reuēged his fathers death and deposed kyng Henry the .vi. and attey∣ned the croune and sceptre of this realme. George duke of Clarence was a goodlye and well feautu∣red prince, in all thynges fortunate, yf ether his owne ambiciō had not set him against his brother or thenuie of his enemies had not set his brother agaynst hym, for were it by the quene or ye nobles of her bloode, which highly maligned the kynges kynred (as women cōmenlye, not of malyce but of nature, hate suche as theyr husbandes loue) or wer it aproude appetite of the duke hym selfe, enten∣dyng to bee kyng, at the leaste wise heynous trea∣son was layde to his charge, and finally were he in faute or were he fautelesse, attaynted was he by
parliament and iudged to deathe, and thereupon hastely drouned in a butte of malmesey, within ye towre of Londō. Whose death kyng Edward (al∣though he commaunded it) when he wyste it was done, pyteouslye he bewayled and sorowfullye he repented it. Richard duke of Gloucestre the .iij. sonne (of whiche I muste mooste entreate) was in The descri∣pciō of Ri∣charde the thyrde. witte and courage eguall with the other, but in beautee and lyniamentes of nature farre vnder∣neth both, for he was lytle of stature, euill feaute∣red of lymmes, croke backed, the lift shulder much higher then the right, harde fauoured of vysage suche as in estates is called a warlike vysage, and amonge commen persons a crabbed face. He was malycious, wrothfull and enuyous, and as it is re¦ported, his mother the duches had much a dooe in her trauayle, yt she could not be delyuered of hym vncutte, and that he came into the worlde the fete forwarde, as men be borne outwarde, and as the fame ranne, not vntothed, whether that men of ha¦tred reported aboue the truthe, or yt nature chaun∣ged his course in his begynnyng, which in his life many thynges vnnaturally cōmytted, this I leue to Goddes iudgemēt. He was none euell capitayn in warre, as to whiche, his disposicion was more enclyned to then to peace. Sōdry victories he had & some ouerthrowes, but neuer for defaute in his owne person, either for lacke of hardynes or poly∣tike order. Fre he was of his dispences & somwhat aboue his power lyberall, wt large giftes he gatte hym vnstedfast frēdship, for whiche cause he was fayn to borowe, pil & extorte in other places, which gat hym stedfast hatred. He was close & secrete, a
depe dyssymuler, lowly of coūtenaūce, arrogāte of herte, outwardly famylyer, where he inwardly ha∣ted, not lettyng to kysse whome he thought to kyll dispiteous and cruell, not alwaye for eiuyll wyll, but after for ambycion and to serue his purpose, frende & fooe wer all indifferent, where his auaū∣tage grewe, he spared no mānes death whose lyfe withstode his purpose. He slewe in the towre kyng Henry the .vi. (saiyng: nowe is there no heyre male of kyng Edward the thyrde, but we of the house of Yorke) whiche murder was done without kynge Edwardes assent, whiche would haue appoynted that bocherlye office to some other, rather then to his owne brother. Some wise mē also wene, yt hys drift lacked not in helpyng forth his owne brother of Clarence to his death, whiche thyng in all ap∣paraunce he resisted, although he inwardly myn∣ded it. And the cause thereof was, as men notynge his doynges and procedynges did marke (because that he longe in kyng Edwardes tyme thought to opteyne the croune, in case that the kyng his bro∣ther whose life he loked that euyl dyet would sone shorten) should happē to disease (as he did in dede) his chyldrē beyng yoūg. And then yt if duke of Cla¦rence had lyued his pretensed purpose had been farre hyndered. For yf the duke of Clarence had kept hym self true to his nephewe the yong kyng, or would haue takē vpō him to be kyng, euery one of these castes had been a troumpe in the duke of Gloucesters waye: but when he was sure that hys brother of Clarence was dead, then he knewe that he might woorke without ieopardye. But of these poyntes there is certentie, and whosoeuer deuy∣neth
or cōiectureth maye as well shote to ferre as to shorte, but this cōiecture afterward toke place (as fewe dooe) as you shall {per}ceaue here after. But afore I declare to you howe this Rychard duke of Gloucestre began his mischeuous imagened & pretenced enterprise as ap{per}antly shalbe opened. I must a litle putte you in remēbraūce of a louyng and charitable acte no lesse profitable thē amiable to yt whole cōmynaltie (if it had been so inwardely thought as it was outwardly dissimuled) whiche kyng Edward did liyng on his deathe bedde not long before he dyed, for in his life althoughe that the deuision emongest his frendes somewhat gre∣ued & yrked hym, yet in his helth he lesse regarded & tooke hede to it, by reason yt he thought yt he was hable in all thynges to rule bothe {per}ties, were thei neuer so obstinate. But in his last sickenesse (whi∣che cōtinued longer then false & fantasticall tales haue vntruly & falsely surmised as I my self that wrote this pamphlet truly knew) whē he percei∣ued his natural strēgth was gone, & hoped litle of recouery by the artes of al his phicysyans whiche he perceaued onely to prolong his life. Thē he be∣gan to consider the youth of his children, howe be it, he nothyng lesse mistrusted then that that hap∣pened, yet he wisely forseyng and consideryng that many harmes might ensue by yt debate of his no∣bles while ye youth of his children should lacke dis¦crecion and good counsaill of their frendes, for he knew well that euery part would woorke for their owne cōmoditee, and rather by plesaunt aduise to wynne theim selfes fauour, thē by {pro}fitable aduer∣tismēt to do yt childrē good, wherfore, liyng on his
death bed at Westminster he called to hym suche lordes as thē wer aboute hym whō he knewe to be at variaunce in especiall the lord marques Dorset soonne to the quene, & the lord Hastynges against whō ye quene especially grudged for yt fauor yt the kyng bare hym, & also she thought him familier wt the kyng in wāton cōpaignie, hir kynne bare hym sore, aswel for yt ye kyng made hym capitain of Ca∣leys which office ye lord Riuers brother to ye quene claimed of yt kynges former promise, as of diuerse other giftes whiche he receaued yt thei loked for. & when these lordes wt diuerse other of both parties were come vnto yt kynges presens, he caused hym∣self to be raised vp wt pillous, & as I cā gesse saied The ex∣hortacyō  kynge Edward      thus or muche like in sētēce to theim. My lordes & my dere kynsmē & alies, in what plight I nowe lye you se & I {per}fectly fele, by yt whiche I looke yt lesse while to liue wt you, therfore yt more depely I am moued to care in what case I leue you, for suche as I leue you, suche are my children like to fynd you, whiche if thei shuld fynd at variaūce (as god forbid) thei theim felfes might hap to fall at werre or their discresiō wuld serue to set you at peace, you s their youth, of whiche I rekē the onely suerty to rest in your concord. For it suffiseth not all you to loue theim, if eche of you hate other, if thei wer mē your feithfullnes might hap to suffice, but child∣hod must be mainteined by mēnes autorite & slip{per} youth vnderprōpted wt elder coūsaill, whiche thei can neuer haue except you geue it, nor you geue it except you agre, for wher eche laboureth to breake that other maketh, & for hatred eche impugneth o∣thers coūsail: ther must nedes be a lōg tract or any
good cōclusiō can forward. And ferther, while eche {per}tie laboreth to be chief flaterer, adulaciō shall thē haue more place, thē plain & feithful aduise, of whi¦che must nedes ensue yt euill bringyng vp of y• prīce whose mynd ī tēder youth infecte shall redily fall to mischief & riot & drawe doune this noble realme to ruyne. But if grace turne hym to wisdome (whiche god sēd hym) thē thei which by eiuill meanes plea¦sed hym best, shall after fal farthest out of fauour so yt at ye lēgth euell driftes driue to naught, & good plain wayes {pro}sper & florishe. Great variaūce hath euer beē betwene you, not alwais for great causes Some tyme a thyng right wel entēdid & miscōstru¦ed hath been turned to yt woorse, or a smal displea∣sure dooē to you ether by your owne affeciō ether by instigaciō of eiuill toōges hath been sore agra∣uate. But this I wot well, you had neuer so great cause of hatred as you haue of loue, because we be men & yt we be all christē mē. This I will leaue to prechers to tell you, & yet I wot not whether any p̄chers wordes ought more to moue you, thē yt his gooyng by & by to y• place yt thei all preche of. But this shal I desire you to remēbre yt the one part of you beyng of my blod yt other of my alies, & eche of you wt other either of kynred or affinite, whiche is yt very spirituall affinitie & kynred in christ as all {per}takers of yt sacamentes of christes churche. The weight of whiche cōsanguynite if we did beare as would to god we did, then should we more be mo∣ued to spirituall charite then to fleshly cōsangui∣nyte. Our lord forbid yt you loue yt woorse together for y• self same cause yt you ought to loue y• better & yet yt oftē happeneth, for no wher fynd we so dedly
as emōgest theim whiche by nature & lawe moost ought to agre together. Suche a serpent is ambi∣ciō & desire of vanyne glory & souere ingtie, whiche emōgest estates when he is once entered he crepith foorth so ferre, till wt deuision & varyaunce he tur∣neth all to mischief. First longyng to bee next to yt best, afterward egall wt the beest, & at the last chief & aboue yt beest. Of whiche immoderate appetite of woorship & the debate & discencion yt grewe there by, what losse, what sorowe, what trouble hath w∣in these fewe yeres growen with in this realme, I praye God as well to forget as we well remēbre, whiche thyng if I could aswell haue forsene as I haue wt my more pane thē pleasure proued, by god des blessed lady (yt was his commō othe) I would neuer haue wonne the curtesyes of mennes knees with the losse of so many heddes. But sith thynges passed can not be called agayn, muche more ought we to bee ware, by what occasion we haue taken so great hurte before, that we eftsones fall not into yt occasion again. Nowe bee these greues passed and all is quiet thanked bee God, & likely well to pros∣per in welthfull peace, vnder your cousins my chil¦dren, if God send theim life, and you loue and cō∣cord. Of whiche .ii. thynges yt lesse losse wer thei by whō all though God did his pleasure, yet should this realme alwayes fynd kynges, & {per}aduētur as good kynges as thei. But if you emōgest your sel∣fes in a childes reigne fall at debate, many a good manne shall innocently perishe, & happely he & you also, or it is long fynd peace & quiet again, wher∣fore in these last woordes yt euer I looke to speake to you, I exhort and require you all, for the loue
that you haue borne to me, and for yt loue that I haue borne to you & for the loue yt our lord bereth to vs all. Frō this tyme forward all greues forgot¦tē, eche of you loue other, which I verely trust you wyll, yf you any thyng regarde God or your kyn¦ges affinitee or kynred, this realme your owne coū¦tre or your owne suretie & wealthe. And there with al, the kyng for fayntnes no longer endurynge to syt vp, layde hym downe on his right side his face toward theim. And ther was none presente yt could forbeare wepyng, but yt lordes cōfortynge hym wt as good woordes as thei could, & answeryng for yt tyme, as they thought should stande with his plea¦sure. And there in his presence (as by theyr wordes appeared) eche forgaue other, and ioyned theyr hā∣des together, when as it after appeared by theyr dedes there hartes were farre asōder. And so with in a fewe dayes thys noble prynce dysceased at Westmynster the .ix. daye of Apryll, in the yere of our Lorde a. M .CCCC .lxxxiii. after that he had reygned .xxii. yeres one moneth and .viii. dayes, & was wt great funeral pompe conueyed to Wynd∣sore, leuyng behynd hym .ii. soonnes, Edwarde the prynce (of whom this story entreateth) a chylde of xiii. yeres of age, Richarde duke of Yorke .ii. yeres yonger then the prince, and fiue doughters, Eliza∣beth, which by goddes grace was maryed to kyng Henry the .vii. and mother to kyng Hēry ye eyght, Cycile not so fortunate as fayre, fyrst wedded to ye vycoūt Welles, after to one Kyne and lyued not in great wealth, Brydget professed her selfe a close nonne of Syon, Anne was maryed to lorde Tho∣mas Hauwarde after erle of Surrey and duke of
Norffolke, Katheryne yt yōgest doughter was ma∣ryed to lorde Willyā Courtney, sonne to yt earle of Deuōshire, which lōgtyme tossed in other fortune somtyme in welth after in aduersitee, tyl yt benigni¦tee of her nephewe kyng Hērye ye .viii. brought he into a sure estate accordyng to her degre & {pro}geny. This kyng Edward was suche a prince of gouer∣naunce and behaueour in the tyme of peace (for in The de∣scipciō of Edward  fourth. tyme of warre, eche must be others enemye) yt ther was neuer any kyng in this realme, in attaynyng the croune by warre and battayle so hartely belo∣ued with the more substaunce of his people, nor he hym selfe so specially fauoured in any parte of his life, as at yt tyme of his death, whiche fauoure and affeccion yet after his death, by the crueltie, mys∣chiefe & trouble of the tempesteous world that fo∣lowed, highlye towardes hym more encreased. At suche time as he died, the displeasure of those that bare hym grudge for kyng Henry yt .vi. sake (whō he deposed) was wel assuaged & in effect quenched within yt space of .xxii. yeres (which is a great part of a mans life) and some wer reconsiled & growen into his fauour (of y• which he was neuer straūge) when it was with true harte demaunded. He was goodly of personage & princely to beholde, of hert couragious, politike in councell, and in aduersitee nothyng abashed, in prosperitee rather ioyful then proude, in peace iuste & mercyfull, in warre sharpe and fearce, in the felde bold and hardie, & yet neuer thelesse no farther then reason and policie woulde aduenture, whose warres whosoeuer circumspect∣ly  aduisedly considereth, he shal no lesse cōmend his wisdome & policie where he auoyded theim.
then his manhode where he vanquished theim. He was of visage full faced & louelie, of bodie migh∣tie, stronge & cleane made, with ouer lyberall and wātō dyet, he waxed somewhat corpulēt & bourly, but neuerthelesse not vncomely. He was of youth greatly geuen to fleshely wantōnes, from yt which health of bodie in great prosperitee & fortune with out an especiall grace hardlye refrayneth. Thys faulte litle greued his people, for neyther coulde any one mannes pleasure stretche or extende to the displeasure of veraye many, nor a multitude bee greued by a priuate mannes fantesie or volupte∣ousnesse, whē it was doē wtout violēce. And in his latter dayes he left al wild daliaūce & fel to graui∣tee, so yt he brought his realme into a wealthie & {pro}∣sperous estate, al feare of outwarde enemies were clerely extinguished, & no warre was in hande nor none toward, but suche as no mā looked for. The people wer toward their prince not in a cōstrayned feare, but in a true louyng and wylfull obedience emongest theimselfe, and ye commons wer in good peace. The lordes whome he knewe at variaunce, he in his death bed (as he thought) he brought to good concord, loue and amytee. And a lytle before his death, he left gatheryng of mony of his subiec∣tes, whiche is the only thyng that draweth yt hear∣tes of Englyshmē frō their kynges & prynces, nor nothyng he ether entreprysed ndr toke in hād, by yt which he shuld be dryuē thereunto. For his tribute out of Fraūce he had a litle before recouered & ob∣teyned. And yt yere before he dyed he recouered the toune of Berwike against yt kyng of Scottes. And albeit yt all yt tyme of his reigne he was so benigne
courteous and famylyer, that no parte of his ver∣tues was estemed more thē those high humilitees. Yet that condycion in thende of his last dayes de∣cayed not, in the whiche many princes by a longe cōtinued souereingtie, declyne to a proude porte & behaueoure from theyr condicions accustomed at their begynnyng. Yet lowlynes and gentlenes so farre forth in hym encreased that the sōmer before died, he beyng at the haueryng at the bowre, sente for the mayre and aldermenne of London thyther only to hunte and make pastyme, where he made theim not so hartie but so famylyer and frendlye chere, and sent also to theyr wyues suche plentie of venyson, that no one thyng in many dayes before gatte hym eyther mo heartes or more hartie fa∣uoure emongest the commen people, whiche often tymes more esteme and take for greate kyndnes a lytle courtesye, then a greate profyte or benefyte. And so this noble prynce deceassed, as you haue hearde in that tyme when his lyfe was mooste de∣syred, & whē his people moste desyred to kepe hym. Whiche loue of his people & their entiere affecciō towarde hym, had bene to his noble chyldren, (ha∣uyng in theim selfes also as many gyftes of na∣ture, as many princely vertues, as much good to∣wardnesse as their age coulde receaue) a merue∣lous fortresse and a sure armoure, yf the deuysion and dissencion of their frendes had not vnarmed them & left them destitute, & the execrable desyre of souereingtie {pro}uoked him to their destrucciō, which if either kynd or kyndnesse had holdē place muste nedes haue beē their chiese defence. For Richarde duke of Glouceter, by nature their vncle, by office
their protectoure, to their father greatly beholden and to theim by othe and allegeaunce bounden all the bandes broken and violated, that bynde manne and manne together, withoute anye res∣pecte of God or the worlde, vnnaturally contry∣ued to bereaue theim not onely of their dignytee and preheminence, but also of their natural lyues and worldely felicytee. And fyrste to shewe you that by coniecture he pretended this thing in his brothers lyfe, ye shall vnderstande for a trueth that the same nyght that king Edward died, one called Mistelbrooke, long ere the daye sprange came to the house of one Po∣tier dwelling in Redcrosse strete withoute Creple gate of London, and when he was with hastie rap¦ping, quickely let in, y• saied Mistelbrooke shewed vnto Potier that kyng Edward was yt nighte de∣ceased: by my trueth {quod} Potier, then wil my master the duke of Gloucetre be kyng and that I warrāt the. What cause he had so to thinke, harde it is to say, whether he being his seruaūt knewe any such thing prepensed or otherwise had any inklingther of, but of all likelihode he spake it not of naughte. But nowe to retourne to the trewe history, wer it that the duke of Gloucetre had of olde sore prac¦tised this conclusyon, or was before tyme moued therunto and put in hope by the tender age of the young princes his nephewes, as oportunitee and likely of spede putteth a manne in courage of that that he neuer entended. Certen it is, that he being in the Northe partyes for the good gouernaunce of the countrey, being aduertised of his brothers deathe contriued the destruccion of his nephewes
with yt vsurpacion of the roiall dignitee & croune And for asmuche as he well wyste, and had holpe to maynteine, a long continued grudge and harte burnynge betwene the Quenes kynred and the kynges bloodde (either parte enuiyng others au∣thorytee) he nowe thought (as it was in dede) a fer¦therly beginning to the pursute of his entent and a sure grounde & situacion of his vnnaturall buil¦ding, if he might vnder the pretence of remēbring of olde dyspleasures abuse the ignoraunce & an∣gre of the one partie to the destruccion of yt other, and then to wynne to his purpose as many as he coulde, and suche as coulde not bee wonne, might bee loste or they looked therfore. But of one thing he was certaine, that if his intent wer once percea¦ued, he should haue made peace betwene both par¦ties with his owne bloodde, but all his intente he kept secrete tyll he knewe his frendes, of ye whiche Henry the duke of Buckingham was the fyrste yt sent to hym after his brothers deathe a trusty ser∣uaunt of his called Persall to the cytee of Yorke, where the Duke of Gloucetre kepte the kyng his brothers funeralles. This Persall came to Iohn Ward a secrete chaumberer to the duke of Glou∣cetre, desiryng that he in close and couerte manier might speake with the duke his maister: wherupō in the deed of the nyght the duke sente for Persall (all other beyng aduoyded) whiche shewed to the duke of Gloucetre that the duke of Buckingham his maister in this newe worlde would take suche parte as he woulde & woulde farther wayte vpon hym with a. M. good fellowes yf nede were. The duke sent backe yt messanger with great thankes
and diuerse preuey instruccions by mouthe, which Persall did somuche by his trauaile that he came to the duke of Buckyngham his maister into the marches of Wales, & eftsones with newe instruc∣cions met with the duke of Gloucetre at Noting∣ham, whiche was come oute of the Northcoūtrey with many knightes & gentylmenne to the noum¦bre of .vi. C. horse & more, in his iourney towarde London. And after secrete meting and cōmunica∣cion had betwene hym & the duke of Gloucetre he retourned with suche spede yt he brought the duke of Buckingham his master to mete wt the duke of Gloucetre not farre from Northampton with .iii. C. horsses, & so they twoo came together to North¦ampton where they fyrst beganne their vnhappy enterprice, and so the duke of Buckingham conty¦nued stil wt the duke of Gloucetre till he was crou¦ned kyng, as ye shall plainly perceaue hereafter. The younge kyng at the deathe of his father kepte housholde at Ludlowe, for his father had sente hym thyther for Iustice to bee doone in the marches of Wales, to the ende that by the autho¦ritee of his presence, the wylde Welshemenne and euell dysposed personnes shoulde refraine frome their accustomed murthers and outerages. The gouernaunce of this younge Prynce was cōmit∣ted to Lorde Anthony Wooduile, Earle Riuers & Lorde Scales, brother to the Quene, a wise, har¦dye and honourable personage, as valyaunte of hande as pollitick of counsell, and with him were assocyate other of the same partye, and in effecte euery one as he was nere of kinne vnto the quene so was he planted nexte aboute the Prynce.
That dryfte by the Quene semed to bee deuysed, whereby her bloodde myghte of ryghte in tender youth bee so planted in the prynces fauoure, that afterwarde it shoulde hardely bee eradicated oute of the same. The duke of Gloucetre turned all this to their distruccion, and vpon that grounde sette the foun¦dacion of his vnhappy building. For whome soe∣uer he perceaued to bee at varyaunce with theim, or to beare toward hym self any fauoure, he brake vnto theim, some by mouthe, some by writing and secrete messengers, that it was neither reason nor yet to bee suffered that the younge kyng their mai¦ster and kinsmanne should bee in the handes and custody of his mothers kinrede, sequestred in ma∣ner frome their company & attendaunce, of which euery one ought hym as faithfull seruice as they, and many of theim of farre more honorable parte of kynne then his mothers syde, whose bloodde {quod} the Duke of Gloucetre sauyng the Kynges plea∣sure, was farre vnmete to bee matched with his, whiche nowe to bee remoued frome the kyng and the least noble to bee lefte aboute hym is, {quod} he ney¦ther honourable to his maiestie nor to vs, & also to hym lesse suretye, to haue the noblest and migh∣tiest of his frendes frome hym, and to vs all no ly¦tle ieopardye to suffer, and specially oure well pro∣ued euel willers to growe in too too greate autho¦rytee wt the king in youth, namely whiche is light of belefe and soone perswaded. Ye remembre that kyng Edward hym self, albeit he was both of age and discrecion, yet was he ruled in many thinges by yt bende more then stoode either wt his honoure
or oure profyte, or wyth the commoditee of anye manne elles, excepte onely the immoderate aduaū¦cemente of theim selues, whiche whether they thri¦sted sore after theyr owne wele or no, it were harde I thynke to gesse. And yf some folkes frendshype had not holden better place wyth the kynge then anye respecte of kynred, they myghte (paraduen∣ture) easely haue trapped and brought to confusy¦on some of vs or thys, & why not as easly as they haue done some other or thys as nere of the blood royall, but oure lorde hathe wroughte hys wyll, and thanked be hys grace that perell is past, how beit, as greate is growing if we suffer this young kynge in his enemyes handes, whyche wyth∣oute his wyttinge myghte abuse the name of hys commaundemente to any af our vndoing, which thynges God & good prouysion forbyd, of whych good prouysion none of vs hathe any thynge the lesse nede for the late attonemente made, in which the kynges pleasure had more place then the par¦ties heartes or willes, nor none of vs is so vnwise ouersone to truste a newe frende made of an olde fooe, or to thynke that anye onely kyndenes so so¦denly contracted in an houre, contynued scantlye yet a fortnyght, shoulde be deper set in our stoma¦ckes then a longe accustomed malice many yeres rooted. With these perswasions and wrytinges, yt duke of Glouceter set a fyre theim whiche wer easye to kindle, & in especyall twayne, Henry duke of Buc¦kyngham and Wyllyam Lorde Hastynges and Lorde Chamberlayn, both menne of honour and of great power, the one by lōg sucecessiō from his
aunceters, the other by hys offyces and the kyn∣ges fauoure. These two not bearynge eache to o∣ther so muche loue as hatred, both to the quenes bloodde accorded together with the duke of Glou¦ceter that they would remoue frome the kyng all his mothers frēdes, vnder the name of theyr ene∣myes. Wherupon the duke of Glouceter beynge ad¦uertysed that the lordes about the kyng entended to brynge him to London to hys coronation, accō¦panyed wyth such a nomber of theyr frendes that it shoulde be harde for hym to bryng hys purpose to passe wythoute the assemblinge and gathering of people and in maner of open warre, wherof the ende he wyst was doubtefull, and in the whyche, the kynge beynge on the other syde, he shoulde haue the name and face of rebellion. He secretelye therefore by dyuers meanes, cau¦sed the quene to be perswaded that it was nether nede and shoulde also bee ieopardeous the kinge to come vp so stronge, for as nowe, euery lorde lo∣ued other and none other thynge studyed for, but the tryumphe of his coronation and honoure of yt kyng. And the lordes aboute the kyng, should as∣sēble in the kinges name much people, they shuld geue the lordes betwyxte whome and theim there had bene some tyme debate, to feare and suspecte leaste they shoulde gather thys people, not for the kynges sauegarde, whom no man impugned, but for theyr destruccyon, hauynge more regarde to theyr olde varyaunce then to theyr newe attone∣mente, for the whyche cause they on the other part myght assemble men also for theyr defence, whose
powres she wyste well farre stretched, and thus should al the realme fall in a roare, and of the mis¦chiefe that thereof shoulde ensue (whiche was lyk¦ly to be not a lytle) the most harme was lyke to fal where she leaste woulde, and then all the worlde woulde put her and her kynred in the blame, sai∣ynge that they had vnwselye and vntruely bro∣ken the amytie and peace whyche the kynge her husbande had so prudently made betwene her kin¦red & hys, whyche amytee hys kinne had alwaies obserued. The quene beyng thus perswaded sente worde to the kynge and to her brother, that there was no cause ner nede to assemble anye people, and also the duke of Glouceter and other lordes of his bēd wrot vnto the kinge so reuerently and to the que∣nes frendes there so louyngely, that they nothing earthlye mystrustyng, broughte the young kyng toward London wt a sober compaignie in greate hast (but not in good spede) til he came to Northāp¦ton, and frō thēce he remoued to Stony stratford On whyche daye, the two dukes and theyr bende came to Northampton, faynynge that Stonye stratforde coulde not lodge theim all, where they founde the Earle Ryuers, entendynge the nexte moruynge to haue folowed the kynge, and to bee wyth hym earely in the mornyng. So that nyght the dukes made to the earle Riuers frendly chere but assone as they were departed verye famylier wyth greate curtesie in opē syghte and the erle Ri¦uers lodged, the .ii. dukes with a few of theyr pry∣uye frendes fell to councell wherein they spente a greate part of the nyght, and in the dawning of
the daye they sente about pryuely to ther seruaun¦tes in theyr lodgynges to haste to horsebacke for theyr lordes were in maner redy to ryde, wherup∣pon all theyr seruauntes were ready or the Lorde Ryuers seruauntes wer awake. Nowe had the du¦kes taken the keyes of the ynne in to theyr possessi¦on, so that none shoulde yssue oute wythout their concente. And ouer thys in the hygh way toward Stony stratforde they set certaine of theyr folkes that shoulde cause and compell to retourne again all persons that were passinge frome Nōrthamp∣ton to Stony stratforde, sayinge that the dukes theim selfes woulde be the fyrst that should come to the kynge from Northampton, thus they bare folkes in hande. But when the earle Ryuers vn∣derstode the gates closed and the wayes on euery syde beset, nether hys seruauntes, nether hym self suffered to goo oute, perceauinge so great a thing wythoute his knowledge, not begon for noughte, comparyng thys preasent dooynge wyth the laste nyghtes cherein so fewe houres, so great a chaūce marueleously myslyked it. Howbeit, syth, he could not get awaye, he determined not to kepe him self close, leaste he shoulde seme to hyde hym selfe for some secret fear of hys owne faute, wherof he saw no such cause in him selfe, wherfore, on the suretie of hys owne consience he determyned to go to thē and to inquire what thys matter myghte meane. Whome assone as they saw, they beganne to qua¦rell wyth hym, affyrmyng that he pretended to set dystaunce betwene the kyng and theim to bryng theim to confucyon, whyche should not lye in his powre and when he began as he was an el oequēt
manne) in godly wise to excuse hym self thei would not here his aunswer but tooke hym by force and putte hym to ward. And then he mounted on hors¦back and came in Stony stratford wher the kyng was goyng to horsbacke, because he would leaue y• lodgyng for theim, for it was to strayte for bothe the compaignies. And when thei came to his pre∣sence thei alighted and their compaignie aboute theim, and on their knees saluted hym, and he theim gētely receaued, nothyng erthely knowyng ner mistrustyng as yet. The duke of Buckyng¦ham saied aloude, on afore gentlemenne and yo∣menne kepe your roumes, and therwith in yt kyng his presence thei picked a quarell to the lord Ry∣chard Grey the quenes soonne and brother to the lord marques & halfe brother to the kyng, saiyng that he and the marques his brother and the lorde Ryuers his vncle had cōpassed to rule the kyng & the realme and sette varyaūce betwene thestates, and to subdewe and destroye the noble bloodde of the realme. And toward thaccomplishment of the∣same, thei saied y• lord marques had entred into the toure of London, & thence had takē oute treasure and sent mēne to the sea, whiche thynges these du∣kes knewe well were dooen for a good purpose & as very necessary, appoincted by yt whole counsail at Londō, but somewhat thei must haue saied, vn∣to the whiche woordes the kyng aunswered: what my brother Marques hath dooen I cannot saie, but in good faith I dare well aunswer for myne vncle Ryuers and my brother here, that thei bee innocent of suche mattiers, yee my leege {quod} the du∣ke of Buckyngham, thei haue kepte ye dealyng of
these matters farre from the knowledge of your good grace, and foorthwith thei arrested the lord Rychard and sir Thomas Vaugham and sir Ry∣chard Hawte in the kyng his presence & brought the kyng and all to Northāpton, where thei tooke ferther counsaill in their affaires. And there thei sent from the kyng whom it pleased theim, and set aboute hym suche seruauntes as better pleased theim then hym. At whiche dealyng he wept, but it booted not. And at dynner the duke of Glouce∣ster sent a dyshe from his owne table to the lorde Ryuers, praiyng hym to bee of good chere and all should bee well, he thanked hym and prayed the messenger to beare it to his nephiewe the lord Ry∣chard with like woordes, whom he knewe to haue neede of conforte, as one to whom suche aduersite was straunge, but he hym self had been all his dayes ennured therwith and therfore could beare it. But for all this message, the duke of Gloucester sent the lord Ryuers, ye lord Rychard and sir Tho∣mas Vaughm̄ and sir Rychard Hawte into the Northparties into dyuers prisones, but at last all came to Poumfrette where thei all foure were be∣hedded without iudgeet. In this maner as you haue heard, the duke of Gloucester tooke on hym the gouernaunce of the younge kyng, whom with muche reuerence he con¦ueighed towardes London. These tidynges came hastely to the quene before mydnight by a very sore reporte, that the kyng hir soonne was taken and that her brother and her other soonne and other hir frendes were arested and sent, no manne wyst whither. With this heuye tydynges the
quene bewayled her childes ruyn, hir frendes mis∣chaunce and her awne infortune, curssyng the tyme that euer she was perswaded to leaue the ga¦theryng of people to bryng vp the kyng with a greate powre, but that was passed, and therfore nowe she tooke hir younger soonne the duke of Yorke and hir doughters and went oute of the pa∣lais at Westminster into the sanctuary and there lodged in the abbotes place, and she and all her children and compaignie were regystred for sanc∣tuary persones. The same night there came to doc¦ter Rotheram archebysshop of Yorke and lorde chauceloure a messenger from the lorde chambre∣layne to Yorke place besyde Westminster, the messenger was brought to the bysshoppes bed syde and declared to hym that yt dukes were gone backe with the younge kyng to Northamptō, and declared ferther, that the lorde Hastynges his ma∣ster sent hym woord that he should feare nothyng for all should bee well. (Well {quod} the bisshop,) bee it as well as it will, it will neuer bee so well as we haue seen it, and then the messenger depar∣ted. Whereupon the bysshop called vp his ser∣uauntes before daye light, and tooke with hym the greate seale and came before daye to the quene about whom he founde muche heuynesse, rumble, haste, busynesse, conuerghaunce and caryage of hir stuffe into sanctuary, euery manne was busye to carye, beare and conueigh stuffe, chestes and fer¦delles, no manne was vnoccupied, and some ca∣ryed more then thei were commaunded to another place. The quene sat alone belowe on the russhes all desolate and dysmaied, whom the archebisshop
conforted in the best maner that he coulde, shew∣ynge her that the matter was nothynge so sore as she tooke it for, and that he was put in good hope and oute of feare by the message sente to hym frō the lorde Hastinges. A wo worth him {quod} the quene for it is he that goeth aboute to destroye me and my bloodde. Madame {quod} he, be of good comforte and I assure you, yf they crowne anye other king then your soonne whome they nowe haue, we shal on the morowe croune his brother whō you haue here with you. And here is the greate seale, which in lykewise as your noble husbande delyuered it to me, so I deliuer it to you to the vse of your sōne and therewyth delyuered her the greate seale, and departed home in the dawnynge of the daye, and when he opened his windowes and looked on the Themys, he myghte see the riuer ful of boates of the duke of Glouceter hys seruauntes watchyng that no person shoulde goo to sanctuary ner none shoulde passe vnserched. Then was there great rumoure and commocion in the citee and in other places, the people diuers∣ly deuined vpō thys dealyng. And dyuerse lordes knyghtes and gentylmen, ether for fauour of the quene or for feare of them selues, assembled com∣paignies together and went flockyng together in harneyes And many also, for that they recompted thys demeanour attempted, not so especyallye a∣gaynst other lordes as agaynst the kyng him self in the dysturbaunce of hys coronat ion, therefore they assembled by and by together to common of thys matter at London. The archebyshoppe of Yorke fearynge that it woulde be ascrybed (as it
was in dede) to ouermuche lightnes that he so so∣deynly had yelded vp the great seale to the quene, to whome the custodie therof nothyng apperteig∣ned without especiall commaundement of yt kyng secretly sent for the seale agayn & brought it wyth hym after the accustomed maner to mete with the lordes. At this metyng was the lord Hastynges, whose truthe towarde the kyng no manne doubted nor neded not to doubte, perswaded the lordes to be∣leue, that the duke of Glouceter was faythfull & sure towardes his prince, and that yt lord Ryuers, the lorde Richard and other knyghtes apprehen∣ded, wer for matters attempted by theim agaynste the dukes of Gloucetre & Buckyngham put vn∣der arest, for their suretie, and not for the kynges icopardye, and that they were also in sauegarde there to remayne, tyll the matter were (not by the dukes only) but also by all the other lordes of the kynges councell indifferentlye examyned, and by their discrecions ordred and eyther iudged or ap∣pesed. And one thyng he aduysed theim to beware of, that they iudged not the matter to farreforth or they knewe the truthe, nor turnyng theyr pryuate grudges into the commen hurte, irrityng and pro¦uokyng men vnto angre, and disturbyng the kyn∣ges coronacion, toward whiche the dukes wer cō∣myng, for that then might paraduenture bryng yt matter so farre out of ioynte, that it shoulde neuer bee brought in frame agayne, whiche yf it should happe as it were lykely to come to a felde, though all parties were in all other thynges eguall, yet shoulde the autoryte bee on that syde, where the
kynge is hym selfe, with these persuasyons of the lorde Hastynges, whereof parte he hym selfe belc∣ued, and of parte he wyste well the contrarye, these commocyons were somewhat appeased. But in e∣speciall, because the dukes of Buckyngham and Glouceter wer so nere and came on so shortly with the kynge, in none other maner, nor none other voyce or sembleaunce then to his coronacion, cau∣syng the fame to be blowen about that suche per∣sones as were apprehended had contryued the di∣struccion of the dukes of Gloucetre and of Bue∣kyngham and other of the noble bloodde of thys realme, to thentent that thei alone would rule and gouerne the kyng. And for the coloure therof, such of the dukes seruauntes as rode with the cartes of their stuffe which wer taken, amonge the which stuffe no maruayle thoughe some were harneyes whiche at the brekynge vp of suche an housholde muste be brought awaye or caste awaye, they she∣wed to the people, and as they went sayde: lo, here be the barrelles of harneyes that these traytoures hadde preuely conueighed in their caryages to destroye the noble lordes withall. This dyuerse, (although it made the matter to wise menne more vnlykely) well perceauyng that thentendoures of suche a purpose woulde rather haue had theyr harnesse on theyr backes, then to haue bounde theim vp in barrelles, yet muche parte of the com∣men people were therewith ryght well satisfyed. When the kyng approched nere the cytie, Ed∣monde Shawe Goldesmythe then Mayre of the cytie with the aldremenne and shreues in skarlet, and fyue hundreth commoners in murraye recea∣ued
his grace reuerently at Harnesaye parke, and so conueighed hym to the cytee, where he entred the fourthe daye of Maye, in the fyrste and laste yeare of his reigne, and was lodged in the bis∣shoppes palayce, but the duke of Goucetre bare hym in open sight so reuerently, saiyng to all men as he rode, beholde youre prynce and souereygne lorde, and made suche sembleaunce of lowlynes to his prince, that frome the greate obloquy that he was in so late before, he was sodeynly fallen in so greate truste, that at the councell next assembled he was made the onlye chiefe ruler and thoughte mooste mete to bee protectoure of the kynge and his realme, so that, were it desteny or were it folye, the lambe was betaken to the wolfe to kepe. At whiche councell the archebyshoppe of yorke was sore blamed for delyueryng the greate seale to the quene, and the seale taken from hym and delyue∣to docter Iohn Russell byshoppe of Lyncolne, a wyse manne and a good and of muche expery∣ence, and dyuerse lordes and knightes were ap∣poynted to dyuerse roumes, the lorde chamber∣layn and some other kepte the roumes yt they were in before, but not many. Nowe were it so that the protectour (whiche al∣wayes you muste take for the duke of Gloucetre) sore thristed for the acheuyng of his pretensed en∣trepryse and thought euerye daye a yere tyll it were perfourmed, yet durste he no ferther at∣tempte aslong as he hadde but halfe his praye in hys hande, well wyttynge that yf he deposed the one brother, all the realme would fall to the other, yf he remayned in sanctuary or should happely be
shortelie cōueyghed to his farther libertee. Wher∣fore in continēt at the next metyng of the lordes in councell, he purposed to theim that it was an hey∣nous thyng of the quene, & procedyng of great ma lyce toward the kynges councelers yt she shoulde kepe the kynges brother in sanctuarye from hym whose special pleasure & conforte wer to haue his brother wt hym, and that to be done by her to none other intēt but to bryng all ye lordes in an obloquy and murmoure of the people, as though they wer not to be trusted wt the kynges brother, which lor∣des wer by yt whole asst of the nobles of yt realme appoynted as yt kynges nere frendes to ye tuycion of his royall person, the prosperitee wherof ({quod} he) standeth not alonely frō the kepyng of enemyes & euill dyate, but partely also in recreacion & mode∣rate pleasure, whiche he cannot take in his tendre youth in the cōpany of old & auncient persons, but in the famylyer conuersacion of those that be not farre vnder nor farre aboue his age, & neuerthe∣lesse of estate cōueniēt to accompany his maiestie wherfore wt whom rather then with his owne bro∣there and if any man thinke this cōsyderaciō light (I thynke no man so thinketh that loueth ye kyng) let hym cōsyder yt sometyme that wt out smal thyn∣ges, greater cannot stande, and verelye it redoun∣deth greatly to ye dyshonoure of the kynges high∣nes and of all vs that bee about his grace to haue it come in any mannes mouthe, not in this realme onely, but also in other landes (as euell woordes walke farre) yt the kynges brother should be fayne to kepe sāctuary. For euery mā wyl iudge that no man wil so do for nought, & such opiniōs fastened
in mennes hertes be harde to be wrested oute, and many growe to more grefe then any manne here can diuine. Wherfore me thinketh it were not the worste to sende to the quene some honourable and trustye personage, suche as tendereth the kynges weale and the honoure of his counsell, and is al∣so in credite and fauoure with her, for whiche con∣sideracions none semeth more meately to me then the reuerende father my Lorde Cardinall archbi∣shop of Cauntourbury, who maye in this matter doo mooste good of all menne yf it please hym to take the paine, whiche I doubte not of his good∣nesse he wil not refuse for the kynges sake & oures and wealth of the younge duke hym selfe the kyn ges moost honorable brother and for the comforte of my souereigne Lord hym selfe my moost derest Nephiewe, considering that therby shalbe ceassed the sclaunderous rumour & obloquy nowe goyng abroade, and the hurtes auoyded yt therof myght ensue, then must reste and quietnesse growe to all the realme. And if she percase bee obstinate and so precisely sette in her owne wyll and opynion, that neither his wyse and feithfull aduertysement can moue her, nor any mannes reason satisfye her, thē shal we by myne aduice by the kynges authoritee fetche hym oute of that prysone and bring hym to his noble presence, in whose continuall companye he shalbe so well cheryshed and so honorablye in∣treated that all the worlde shall to oure bonoure and her reproche perceaue that it was onely ma∣lyce, frowardnesse & foly, that causeth her to kepe hym there. This is my minde for this tyme, ex∣cepte that any of you my Lordes anye thinge per
ceaue to the contrarye, for neuer shall I by God∣des grace so wedde my selfe vnto myne owne wyll but I shalbe redye to chaunge it vpon youre bet∣ter aduice. When the Protectoure had saied, all the coun cell affirmed that the mocion was good and rea∣sonable, and to the kyng and the duke his brother honorable, and a thing that shoulde ceasse great murmoure in the realme yf the mother myght by good meanes bee induced to deliuer hym, whiche thing the Archbishop of Cauntourburye, whome they all agreed also to bee moost conuenient ther∣vnto, tooke vpon hym to moue her, and therto to dooe his vttermoste endeuoure. How be it yf she coulde in no wise bee intreated with her good wil to delyuer hym, then thought he and suche of the spirytualtye as were presente, that it were not in anye wyse to bee attempted to take hym oute a∣gaynste her wyll, for it woulde bee a thyng that should turne to the grudge of all menne and high displeasure of God, if the pryuiledge of that place should bee broken which had so many yeres been kepte, whiche bothe kynges and bishoppes had graunted and confyrmed, whiche grounde was sanctifyed by sainct Peter hym selfe more then. v hundreth yeres agone, and syth that tyme was neuer so vndeuoute a kynge that euer enterpry∣sed that sacred priuyledge to vyolate, nor so holy a bishoppe that durste presume the churche of the same to consecrate, and therfore {quod} the Archbys∣shoppe, God forbyd that any manne shoulde for any erthely enterpryse breake the immunyte and libertee of that sacred Sanctuary that hath bene
the sauegard of so many a good mannes lyfe, but I truste {quod} he, we shall not nede it, but for any ma¦ner of nede I would we should not doo it, I trust that she with reason shalbe contented & all thyng in good maner obteigned. And yf it hap that I bring it not to passe, yet shal I further it to my best power so that you all shall perceaue my good wyl diligence & indeuoure. But the mothers dreade & womannishe feare shalbe the let yf any bee. Naye womannish, frowardnesse {quod} the duke of Buckingham, for I dare take it on my soule yt she wel knoweth yt she nedeth no suche thyng to feare either for her sonne or for her selfe. For as for her, here is no manne that wyll be at warre with wo∣menne, would God some menne of her kynne wer womenne to, and then should all bee sone in rest. How be it, here is none of her kynne the lesse loued for that they bee of her kynne, but for their owne euell deseruing. And put the case that we nether lo¦ued her nor her kinne, yet there were no cause why we should hate the kinges noble brother to whose grace we oure selues be kynne, whose honoure yf she desyred as oure dyshonoure, and asmuche re∣garde tooke to his wealthe as to her owne wyll, she coulde bee as lothe to suffer hym to be absente from the kyng as any of vs, yf she had any wytte as woulde God she had as good wyll as she hath frowarde wytte. For she thynketh her selfe no wi∣ser then some yt are here, of whose feithful myndes she nothing doubteth, but verely beleueth & know legeth that they woulde bee as sorye of his harme as her owne selfe, and yet they woulde haue hym frome her, yf she abyde there.
And we all I thinke bee content that bothe her children bee with her if she came frome thence and bee in suche place where they maye bee with theyr honoure. Nowe yf she refuse in the deliueraunce of hym to folowe the wisdome of theim, whose wis¦dome she knoweth, whose approbate fidelitee she trusteth: it is easye to perceaue that frowardnesse letteth her, and not feare. But goo to, suppose that she feareth as who maye let her to feare her owne shadowe, the more she feareth to deliuer hym, the more we oughte to feare to leaue hym in her han∣des, for yf she caste suche fonde doubtes that she feare his hurte, then wyll she feare that he shall be fette thence, for she wyll soone thynke that yf menne were sette (whiche God forbydde) on so greate a mischief, the Sanctuarye wyll lytel lette theim whiche sanctuary good menne as me thin∣keth myghte withoute synne: somewhat lesse re∣garde then they dooe. Nowe then yf she doubte leaste he might bee fetched from her, is it not lick∣lye that she will sende hym some where oute of the realme? verely I looke for none other. And I doubte not but she nowe as sore mindeth it, as we mind the let therof. And if she might hap to bring that purpose to passe (as it were no great mastery to doo we letting her alone) all yt world would say that we were a sorte of wyse councelers aboute a king to let his brother to bee cast away vnder our noses. And therfore I ensure you feithfully for my minde, I wyll rather maugre her stomacke fetche hym awaye, then leaue hym there tyll her feare or fonde frowarde feare conuey hym awaye, and yet wyll I breake no sanctuarye, for verely sithe the
priueledge of that place & other of yt sorte haue so long contynued I woulde not go about to breake yt, but yf they were nowe to begynne I would not be he that shoulde make theim, yet wyl not I saye nay, but it is a deede of pitie, that such men as the chaūce of y• sea or theyr euil debters haue brought into pouertee, shoulde haue some place of refuge to kepe in theyr bodies out of the daūger of theyr cruel credytoures. And yf it fortune the croune to come in question as it hath done before thys time whyle eatch parte taketh other for traytoures, I thyncke it necessarye to haue a place of refuge for both. But as for theues and murtherers, whereof these places be full, and whyche neuer falle from theyr crafte after they once fall therunto, yt is py∣tee that euer sanctuarye shoulde saue theim, and in especyall wylfull murtherers, whom God com¦maundeth to be taken from the aulter and to be putte to death. And where it is other wyse then in these cases, there is no nede of sayntuaryes, apoin¦ted by God in the olde law. For yf necessite of his owne defence or mysfortune dryued hym to yt deed then a pardon serueth hym, whyche ether is graū¦ted of course, or the kynge of pytee and compassy∣on geueth. Nowe looke howe fewe sanctuary mē there be whom necessyte or mysfortune compelled together? And then see on the other syde, what a sorte there bee commonlye therin of suche, whom wylfull vnthryftines hathe broughte to naughte what a rable of theues, murtherers and malycy∣ous heynous traytours bee, and that in two pla∣ces specyallye, the one at the elbowe of the cytee, & the other in the very bowels, I dare wel a vowe it
yf you waye the good that they do wyth the hurte that commeth of theim ye shall fynde it much bet¦ter to lese both, then to haue both. And thys I say although they were not abused (as they nowe bee and so longe haue bene) that I feare me euer they wylbe while men be a feard to set to theyr handes to the a mēdement, as though God and saynt Pe¦ter were the patrons of vngratious lyuing. Now vnthryftes riot, and ronne in debte vpon boldnes of these places, yea, and rytch men ronne thyther with poore mens goodes, there they buylde, there they spende and byd theyr creditours go whystel. Mens wyues ronne thether with theyr husbādes plate, & say they dare not abide with theyr husban¦des for beting, theues bring thether stollē goodes & lyue thereon. There deuise they newe robberies nightly & stele out & robbe, reue, & kyl men & come agayne into those places, as though those places gaue thē not only a sauegard for the harme yt thei haue done, but a licēce also to do more myschiefe, howbeit, much of this great abusion, (yf wyse mē woulde set theyr handes thereunto) myghte bee a mended, with great thankes of god and no breche of the priuiledge. The conclusion is, sythe it is so long a go I wote not what pope and what prynce more piteous then polityke, hath graunted it, & o∣ther men sence of a relygious feare haue not bro∣ken yt, let vs take a payne with it, & let it stande a Goddes name in hys force, as ferforth as reason wyl, whyche is not so ferfourth as maye serue to let vs of the fetchynge forth of thys noble manne to hys honoure and welth out of that place in the whyche nether is nether can be a sanctuary or pri¦ueledged
mā. A sanctuarye euer serueth to defend the bodye of that man that standeth in daungers abrode, not of great hurt only, but of lawful hurt. For agaynst vnlawful hurtes & harmes no pope ner kynge entended to priueledge anye one place wherin it is lawful for one man to do another mā wrong. That no man vnlaufully take hurte, that lybertye the kynge, the lawe and verye nature for biddeth in euery place and maketh to that regard for euery man euery place a sanctuarye: but wher a man is by lawful meanes in parel, there nedeth he the tuycion of some specyall priueledge, which is the only ground of al sanctuaries, from which necessitee thys noble prince is farre, whose loue to his kyng, nature and kynred proueth, whose inno¦centie to al the world, hys tender youth affyrmeth & so sāctuary as for him is not necessary ner none he cā haue. Men com not to sāctuary as they com to baptim to require it by his godfathers, he must aske it him self yt must haue it, & reason sith no mā hath cause to haue it, but whose consyence of hys own faut maketh him hauened to require it, what wyl thé hath yōder babe, which if he had discretiō to require it yf nede wer, I dare say wold be right angry wt theim yt kepe him ther. And I wold thīk wtout any scruple of consciēce, wtout any brech of priueledge to be sōwhat more homly wt them yt be ther sāctuary mē in ded yt yf one go to sāctuary wt another mās goodes, why shold not ye king leuīg his body at liberty satisfye y• party of his goodes euē win ye sāctuary, for nether kyng nor pope can geue anye place such a priueledge that it shal dis∣charge a man of his debtes beynge hable to pay.
And with that dyuerse of the clergie that were there p̄sēt, whether thei saied it for his pleasure or as thei thought, agreed plainly by yt lawe of God & of ye churche yt the goodes of a sanctuary manne should bee delyuered in paymēt of his debtes, and stollen goodes to the owner and onely lybertie re∣serued to hym to gette his lyuyng with the labour of his handes. Verely {quod} the duke I thynke ye saie very truth. And what if a mannes wife take sanc∣tuary because she list to ronne from hir husband? I would thinke if she cā alledge none other cause he maye laufully without any dyspleasure dooen to sainct Peter, take hir oute of sainct Peters chur¦che by the arme. And if no bodye maye bee taken oute of sanctuary because he saieth he will abyde there, then if a chylde will take sanctuary because he feareth to goo to schoole, his master must lette hym alone, and as symple as that example is, yet is there lesse reason in oure case then in it, for there though it bee a chyldyshe feare, yet is there at the least some feare, and herein is no feare at all And verely I haue heard of sanctuary menne, but I neuer harde before of sanctuary chyldren, & ther fore as for the conclusiō of my mynde, whoso euer maye deserue to haue nede of it, if thei thinke it for their suretye let theim kepe it, but he can bee no sāc¦tuary manne that hath nother discresion to desire it, ner malice to deserue it, whose life ner lybertie can by no laufull processe stande in ieoperdie, and he that taketh one oute of sanctuarye to dooe hym good, I saye plainlye he breaketh no sanctuarye. When the duke had dooen, the temporall mēne wholy, and the mooste parte of the spirituall mēne
also thynke no hurte earthely mente towarde the baby, condiscended in effecte, that if he were not delyuered he should bee fetched out. Howbeit thei thought it best in aduoydyng of all maner of ru∣moure, that the cardynall should first assaye to gette hym with her good will. And therupon all the counsaill came to the starre chamber at West∣mynster, and the cardinall leauyng the protectour and other lordes in the sterre chaumber departed into the sanctuarie to the quene accompaignied wt certain lordes, were it for yt respecte of his honour or that she should by the personnes of so many per¦ceaue that his arrande was not onely one mānes mynde, or were it for that the protectoure entended not in this matter to trust one manne alone, or els if she finally were determined to kepe hym, some of the compaignie had paraduenture some secrete instrucciō incontinēt maugre her will to take hym and to leaue her no respyte to conueigh hym. When the quene and the lordes were come to∣gether in presence, the Cardynall shewed vnto her that it was thought to the lord protectour and the whole caunsaill yt hir kepyng of yt kynges brother in that place highly soūded, not onely to yt grudge of the people and their obloquy, but also to the un∣portable greefe and displeasure of yt kyng his roy¦all maiestie, to whose grace it were a synguler cō∣forte to haue his naturall brother in compaignie, and it was their bothes dishonoures and theirs & hirs also to suffre hym in sanctuarye, as though the one brother stoode in daungier and perell of the other. And he shewed her ferther that the whole counsaill had sent hym to requyre of her the dely∣uerye
of hym that he might bee brought to yt kyng his presence at his libertie oute of yt place whiche meune reconed as a prisone, & there should he bee demeaned accordyng to his estate and degree, and she in this doyng should bothe dooe greate good to the realme, pleasure to the coūsaill, profite to her self, succoure to her frendes that were in destresse, & ouer yt, whiche he wist well she speciallye tendered, not onelye greate conforte & honoure to the kyng but also to the younge duke hym self, whose bothe greate wealthe it were to bee together, aswell for many greater causes as also for their bothe dys∣porte & recreacyon, whiche thynges the lordes e∣stemed not sleight, though it semed light, well pōde ryng yt their youthe without recreacion and playe cānot endure, ner any estraunger for the conueniē¦cie of bothe their estates so metely in yt poinct for any of theim as the either of theim for theother. My lorde ({quod} the quene,) I saie not naye but that it were very conueniente yt this gentlemanne whom you requyre were in the compaignie of the kyng his brother, and in good faith me thynketh it were as greate commodite to theim bothe, as for yet a while to bee in the custodie of their mother the tendre age consydered of the elder of theim bothe, but in especiall the younger, whiche besydes his infancye that also nedeth good lookyng too, hath awhyle been so sore deseased with syckenesse and is so newlye rather a lytle amended then well recouered, that I dare putte no persone earthely in trust wt his kepyng, but my self onely, consyde∣ryng there is as phisicians saie, and as we also fynde) double yt perell in the resylynacion yt was in
the first syckenesse, with whiche desease nature be∣yng sore laboured, forweried & weaked, waxeth the lesse hable to bear oute a newe surfett And albeit there might bee foūden other that would happely dooe their best vnto hym, yet is there none yt ether knoweth better howe to ordre hym then I yt so lōg haue kepte hym, or is more tendrely like to cherishe hym then his owne mother yt bare hym. No māne denieth good madame ({quod} y• cardinall) but yt your grace of all folke were moost necessarie aboute your chyldrē, & so would all yt coūsaill not only bee content but also glad y• it were if it might stand wt your pleasure to be i suche place as might stāde wt their honour. But if you apoinct your self to tarie here, thē thynke thei it more cōueniēt the Duke of Yorke were with yt kyng honorably at his lybertie to the cōforte of theim bothe, then here as a sanctu¦ary māne to their bothe dishonoure and obloquy, sith there is not alwaie so greate necessite to haue yt childe with the mother, but that occaciō sometyme maye bee suche that it should bee more expediēt to kepe hym els where, whiche in this well apereth, yt at suche tyme yt your moost derest soonne thē prince & nowe kyng should for his honour & good ordre of the countre kepe houshold in Wales farre out of your kepyng, your grace was well cōtent ther∣wt your self. Not very well content ({quod} the quene) & pet the case is not like, for theone was then in helth & theother is nowe sicke, in whiche case I meruell greatly why my lord protectour is so desierous to haue hym in his kepyng, where if the childe in his sickenesse miscaried by nature, yet might he rōne into slaunder and suspicion of fraude. And thei
call it a thyng so sore against my childes honoure and theirs also that he abideth in this place, it is all their honoures there to suffre hym abide wher no manne doubteth he shalbe best kepte, and that is here while I am here, whiche as yet entend not to come foorth and ieopard my selfe after other of my frēdes, whiche would God were rather here in suertie with me, then I were there in ieoperdie wt theim. Why Madame ({quod} ye lord Hawarde) knowe you any thyng why thei should bee in ieopardie? Naye verely ({quod} she,) nor why thei should bee in pri¦sone neither as thei nowe bee, but I trowe, it is no greate maruell though I feare leaste those yt haue not letted to put theim in duraunce wt out coloure, will let as litle to procure their distrucion without cause. The cardinall made a countenaunce to the lord Haward that he should harpe no more vpon yt stryng, and thē saied he to the quene, yt he nothyng doubted but those lordes of her kynne the whiche remeyned vnder a rest should vpon the matter ra¦mined dooe well ynough, and as toward her noble persone, was, neither could bee any maner of ieo∣pardie. Wherby should I truste that ({quod} yt quene) in yt I am guyltlesse, as though thei were guyltie, in yt I am with their enemies better beloued then thei, whē thei hate theim for my sake, in that I am so nere to the kyng, and howe ferre bee thei of that would helpe, as God sēde grace thei hurt not. And therfore as yet I purpose not to departe hence, as for this gentlemanne my soonne, I minde he shall be wher I am till I se further, for I se some mēne so gredy whthout any substanciall cause to haue hym, whiche maketh me muche more afrayd and
scrupulous to delyuer hym. Truly madame ({quod} the cardynall) the more afrayde that ye bee to delyuer hym, the more other menne feareth to suffre you to kepe hym, leaste youre causelesse feare, mighte cause you farther to conueye hym, & many thynke he can here haue no pryuiledge whiche can haue neyther wyll to aske it, nor yet malyce or offence to nede it. And therfore, they recon no priuiledge broken, although they fetche hym out of sanctua∣rye, whiche yf you fynallye refuse to delyuer hym, I thynke verely ye councel wil enfraunchese hym, so muche drede hathe my lorde his vncle, for the tēdre loue he beareth hym, least your grace should sende hym awaye. Ah ({quod} the quene) hath he so ten∣dre a zele to hym that he feareth nothyng, but least he should escape hym? Thynketh he that I would sende hym hence, whiche is neyther in the plight to sende oute? and in what place coulde I recone hym sure, if he bee not sure in sanctuarye? whereof was there neuer tyraunte yet so deuelyshe, that durste attempte to breake the priuiledge, and I truste God is nowe as stronge to wythstande his aduersaries as euer he was. But my soonne can deserue no sanctuarye (you saye) and therfore he cannot haue it, forsothe the lorde protectoure hath sente a goodly glose, by the whiche that place that may defend a these may not saue an innocent: but he is in no ieopardye nor hath no nede thereof, I woulde God he had not. Troweth the protectoure I praye God he maye proue a protectour, rather then a destroyer, whereunto his peynted processe draweth. Is it not honourable that the duke byde here? it were confortable to theim bothe that he
were with his brother, because the kyng lacketh a playe feloe, yea bee you sure, I praye God sende hym better playefelowes then hym that maketh so hyghe a matter vpon suche a tryfleynge pre∣texte, as though there coulde none bee founde to playe with the kynge, but yf his brother whiche hathe no lu to playe for syckenesse, muste come oute of Sanctuarye, oute of his sauegarde to playe with hym, as though that prynces so young as they be, coulde not playe without their peres, or chyldrē coulde not playe without theyr kynred, with whome for the more parte they agree muche woorsse then with straungiers. But the chyld you saye cannot require the priuiledge, who tolde the protectoure so? Aske hym and you shall here hym aske it and so shall he if ye wyll. Howebeit this is a straunge matter, suppose he coulde not aske it and thynke he woulde not aske it, and ymagene he woulde aske to go oute, yf I saye he shall not. Note if I aske the priuiledge, but for my selfe, I saye that he that agaynst my wyll taketh out hym, breaketh Sanctuarye. Serueth thys lyberty for my personne onlye or for my goodes too? you maye not frome hence take my horsse frome me, yf I stale hym not nor owe you nothynge, then fo∣loweth it, that you maye not take my chylde from me, he is also my ward, for as farre as my learned councell sheweth me, he hath nothyng by dyssente holden by knyghtes seruage, but by socage, then the lawe maketh me his garden, then maye no manne lawfully (I suppose) take my warde frome me oute of thys place, wythoute the breche of
Sanctuarye, and yf my pryuyledge coulde not serue hym, nor he aske it for hym selfe, yet sythe the lawe commytteth to me the custodye of hym, I maye requyre it for hym, excepte the lawe geue the infaunte a garden onelye for hys gooddes, dyschargynge hym of the cure and sauekepynge of his bodye, for whiche onely, bothe goodes and landes serue. Wherfore here entende I to kepe hym, sithe mannes lawe serueth the garden to kepe the infaunte, and the lawe of nature wyl∣leth the mother to kepe yt chyld, and Goddes lawe priuiledgeth the Sanctuarye, and the Sanctua∣rye pryuyledgeth my soonne, sythe I feare to putte hym to the protectoures handes, that hathe his brother already, whiche is (yf bothe fayled) in∣heritoure to the croune as heyre male, as he sayth. The cause of my feare no man hath to dooe to ex∣amen, and yet feare I no further then the law fea∣reth, whiche as learned menne tell me, forbyddeth euery manne the custody of theim, by whose death he maye enheryte lesse lande then a kyngdome, I can saye no more, but whosoeuer he bee that brea∣keth this holy sanctuary, I praye God sende hym shortelye nede of Sanctuary, when he maye not come to it, for I woulde not that my mortall ene∣mie should be taken out of Sanctuary. The Cardynal perceaued that the quene euer yt lenger the farther of, and also that she beganne to kyndle and chafe and spake sore bytynge woordes agaynst the protectoure, and suche as he neyther beleued & also was lothe to here, he sayd to her, for a finall conclusion, that he would no more dispute
the matter, and if she were contente to delyuer the duke to hym and to the other lordes there present, he durste laye his owne bodye and soule bothe in pledge, not onlye for his suretie, but also for hys estate, and surely he knewe nor suspected no cause but he might so dooe (but he knewe not all.) And further he saide, if she would geue hym a resolute aunswere to the contrarye he would therewith de∣parte incontinent, and shifte who so woulde wyth this busynesse afterwarde, for he neuer entended further to moue her in the matter, in the whiche he thought that he and all other also, saue her selfe, lacked eyther wytte or truthe. Wytte if they were so dull, if they nothyng coulde perceaue what the protectoure entended, and yf they should procure her soonne to bee delyuered into his handes, in whome they shoulde perceaue towardes the chyld any euell wyll entended, then she myghte thynke all the councell bothe euel aduysed and of lytle fy∣delyte to theyr prince. The quene with these wordes stoode in a great studye, and forasmuche as she sawe the lord Car∣dynall more redyer to departe then the remanaūt, and the protectoure hym selfe redye at hande, so that she verelye thought that she coulde not kepe hym there, but he shoulde bee incontynente taken thence, and to conueye hym elles where, neyther had she tyme to serue her, nor place determyned, nor personnes appoynted to conueygh hym, and so all thyng was vnreadye, when this message came so sodenly on her, nothyng lesse lookyng for then to haue hym out of sanctuarye, whiche she knewe nowe menne to bee set in all places about
that he coulde not bee conueyghed oute vntaken, and partely as she thought, it myghte fortune her feare to bee false: so well she wist it was ether nede lesse or botelesse. Wherfore, yf she should nedes go from hym, she demed best to deliuer hym, & special¦ly of yt Cardinalles faith she nothing doubted nor of some other lordes whome she sawe there, which as she feared least, they might be deceaued, so well was she assured yt they woulde not bee corrupted, then thoughte she that it woulde make theim the more warely to looke to hym, and the more circum spectly to see his surety, yf she with her owne han∣des betooke hym theim by truste, and at the laste she tooke the young duke by the hande and saied vnto the Lordes, my Lorde {quod} she and all my lor∣des, nether am I so vnwise to mistruste youre wit∣tes nor so suspicyous to mistruste your truthes: of which thing I purpose to make such a proofe that yf either of bothe lacked in you, might turne both me to greate sorowe, the realme to muche harme and you to greate reproche. For lo, here is {quod} she this gentilman, whome I doubte not but I could kepe salfe if I would, whatsoeuer any manne saye and I doubte not also but there bee some abrode so deedly enemies vnto my bloodde, that yf they wiste where any of it laye in theyr owne body they woulde lette it oute, we haue also experience that the desyre of a kingdome knoweth no kynred, the brother hath bene the brothers bane, and may the nephewes bee sure of the vncle? eache of these chil¦dren are others defence whyle they bee a sunder, and eache of their liues lyeth in others body, kepe one salfe and bothe bee sure, and nothing to bothe
more perylous, then bothe to bee in one place, for a wise marchaunt neuer auentureth all his good des in one shyp, all this notwithstanding, here I deliuer hym & his brother in hym to kepe, to your handes, of whome I shall aske theim bothe before God and the worlde. Feithfull you bee and that I wot well, and I knowe you be wyse and of power and strength if you list to kepe hym, for you lacke no helpe of your selues, nor nede to lacke no helpe in this case, & yf you cannot elles where, then may you leaue hym here. But onely one thing I besech you, for the trust that his father putte you in euer and for the truste that I put you in nowe, that as farre as you thincke that I feare to muche, ye bee well ware that you feare not to lytle. And ther∣with all she saied to yt childe, fare well myne owne swete soonne, God sende you good kepyng, let me once kysse you or you gooe, for God knoweth whē we shall kisse together againe, & therwith she kys∣sed hym and blessed hym and tourned her backe & wepte, gooing her waye, leauyng the poore inno∣cent chylde wepyng as faste as the mother. When the Cardinall and the other lordes had receaued the younge duke, they brought hym in∣to the starre chaumbre, where yt protectoure tooke hym in his armes and kyssed hym with these wor¦des, nowe welcome my lorde with all my very hert and he saied in yt of likelihode euen as he inward∣ly thought, and therupon, forthwith brought him to the king his brother into the bishoppes palaice at Powles, and from thence thorowe the citee ho∣nourably into the towre, oute of whiche after that daye they neuer came abrode. Whenne the Pro∣tectoure
had bothe the chyldren in his possessy∣on, yee and that they were in a sure place, he then beganne to thryste to see the ende of his enterprise and to auoyde all suspicion, he caused all the Lor∣des whiche he knewe to bee feythfull to the kyng to assemble at Baynardes castell to cōmen of the ordre of the coronacyon whyle he and other of his complyces and of his affinitee at Erosbyes place contriued the contrary & to make the Protectours kyng, to whiche counsel there were adhibite very fewe, and they very secrete. Then beganne here & there some maner of muttering amongest the peo¦ple as though all thing should not longe bee well though they wyste not what they feared nor wher¦fore: were it, that before suche great thinges men∣nes hertes (of a secrete instyncte of nature) misge∣ueth theim, as yt southwinde somtime swelleth of hym selfe before a tempeste, or were it that some one manne happely perceauing, fylled many men with suspicyon, thoughe he shewed fewe menne what he knewe, howbeit, the dealing it selfe made to muche on the matter, thoughe the counsayle were close, for lytle and lytle all folke drewe from the towre where the kyng was, and drewe to Cros byes place, so that the Protectoure had all the re∣sorte, and the kyng in maner desolate, while some made suyte vnto theim that had the doyng, some of theim were by theyr frendes secetely warned, that it myghte happely tourne theim to no good to bee to muche attendaunte on the Kyng with∣oute the Protectoures apoyntmente, whiche re∣moued dyuerse of the kynges olde seruauntes frō hym, and set newe in theyr romes aboute hym.
Thus many thinges comming together, part¦ly by chaunce and partely by purpose, caused at length, not cōmon people onely whiche wauer wt the winde, but wise menne also and some Lordes to marke the matter & muse therupon, in so much as the lorde Stanley whiche afterward was erle of Derby wisely mistrusted it and saied to yt lorde Hastinges, that he muche misiyked these two seue¦ral coūselles, for while we {quod} he talke of one mat∣ter at yt one place, lytle wot we wherof they talke in the other place. Well {quod} the Lorde Hastynges, on my lyfe neuer doubte you, for whyle one man is there whiche is neuer thence, neither can there bee any thing once mynded that shoulde sounde amisse towarde me, but it shoulde bee in mine ea∣res or it were well oute of their mouthes. This ment he by Catesby whiche was nere of his secret councell, and whome he familyerly vsed in his moost weightye matters, putting no manne in so speciall trust as hym, sith he wiste well there was no manne to hym so muche beholdyng as was this Catesbye, whiche was a manne well learned in the lawes of this lande, and by the speciall fa∣uoure of the lorde Hastynges in good authorytee and muche rule bare in the countrees of Leicestre and Northampton where yt lorde Hastinges pow¦er laye. But surely greate pitie was it that he had not had either more trueth or lesse wit, for his dissi¦mulacyon onely, kepte all that myschiefe vp, in whome yf the lorde Hastinges had not put so spe¦cial trust, yt lord Stanley and he wt diuers other lordes had departed into their coūtrees & broken al ye daunce for many euel signes yt he sawe, which
he now construed al for the best, so surely thought he that there coulde be no harme towarde hym in that counsayle entended where Catesbye was. And of truth the protectour and the duke of Buc¦kyngham made very good sembleaunce vnto the lorde Hastynges and kepte hym muche in theyre compaignie. And vndoubtedlie the protectour lo¦ued hym well, and lothe was to haue loste hym sa¦uynge for feare least hys lyfe shoulde haue quay∣led theyr purpose, for the whyche cause he moued Catesby to proue wyth some wordes caste oute a farre of, whether he coulde thyncke it possible to wynne the lorde Hastynges to theyr part. But Ca¦tesby, whether he assayed hym or assayed hym not reported vnto hym that he founde him so fast, and heard him speake so terrible wordes that he durst no farther breake, and of a truth the lorde Hastin¦ges of very truste shewed vnto Catesby the mys∣trust that other began to haue in the matter. And therfor, he fearyng least theyr mocyons myght wt the lorde Hastynges haue mynished his credence, wherunto only al the matter leaned, procured the protectour hastly to ryd hym, & muche the rather, for he trusted by hys death to obtayne much of yt rule whyche the lorde Hastynges bare in hys coū¦tree, the onelye desyre whereof, was the thynge that enduced hym to be procurer & one of the spe∣ciallest contriuers of al thys treason. Wherupon the lorde protectoure caused a counsayle to be set at the towre on the frydaye the .xiii. daye of Iune, were was much commonyng for the honourable solempnytee of the coronation, of the whyche the tyme appoynted aproched so nere that the pageaū¦tes
were a making day & nyght at Westminster & vytayle kylled which afterwarde was cast awaye These lordes thus sittyng commoning of this matter, the protectoure came in emong thē about ix. of the clocke salutynge theim curteously excu∣synge hym selfe that he had bene frome theim so longe, saiynge merely that he had bene a sseper yt daye. And after a lytle talkynge wyth theym he sayd to the bishop of Ely, my lorde you haue very good strawberies in your garden at Holborne, I requyre you let vs haue a messe of theim. Gladly, my lorde {quod} he, I would I had some better thyng as redy to youre pleasure as that, and wyth that he sente his seruaunte in al the haste for a dysh of strawberyes. The protectoure set the lordes faste in commonynge and thereupon prayed theim to spare hym a lytle, and so he departed and came in agayn betwene. x, and .xi. of the clocke into the chā¦ber al chaunged with a sowre angry countenaūce knyttynge the browes, frownynge and frettynge and gnawynge on hys lyppes & so set him downe in hys place. All the lordes were dysmayed & sore marueyled of thys maner and sodayne chaunge and what thynge should hym ayle. When he had sytten a whyle thus he beganne. What were they woorthy to haue that compasse and ymagyne the dystruccyon of me beynge so neare of bloodde to the kynge and protectoure of this hys royal real∣me? At whyche questyon all the lordes sat sore a∣stonned, musynge muche by whom thys questyon shoulde be ment, of whych euery man knewe hym¦selfe clere. Then the lord Hastynges as he that for the fa∣miliaritee
that was betwene them, thoughte he myght be boldest wyth hym, answered & sayd that they were worthye to bee punyshed as heyneous traytours what so euer they were, and all the o∣ther affyrmed the same, that is {quod} he yonder sorce∣ces my brothers wyfe and other wyth her, mea∣nynge the quene, at these wordes manie of the lor¦des were sore abashed whyche fauoured her, but the lorde Hastynges was better contente in hys mynde that it was moued by her then by anye o∣ther that he loued better, albeit hys hearte grud∣ged that he was not afore made of councel in this matter as well as he was of the takynge of her kynred and of theyr puttynge to deathe, whyche were by hys assente before deuised to be behedded at Pomfrete, thys selfe same daye, in the whyche he was not ware ye it was by other deuysed that he hym selfe shoulde the same daye be behedded at London: then sayde the protectoure in what wyse that ye sorceresse and other of hys counsayle, as Shores wyfe wyth her affynitee haue by theyr sorcerye and wychcrafte thys wasted my bodye, and therewyth plucked vp hys doublet cleane to hys elbowe on hys lyfte arme, where he shew∣ed a weryshe wythered arme and small as it was neuer other. And thereupon euery mannes mynd mysgaue theim, well perceauynge that thys mat∣ter was but a quarell, for well they wyste that the quene was boothe to wyse to goo aboute anye suche foly, and yf she woulde, yet woulde she of al folke make Shores wyfe leaste of councel whom of all womenne she most hated as that concubin whom the kyng her husband most loued
Also, there was no manne there but knewe that hys arme was euer such syth the day of hys byrth Neuerthelesse the lorde Hastynges whyche from the death of kyng Edward kept Shores wyfe, on whom he somewhat doted in the kynges, lyfe, sa∣uynge it is sayd that he forbare her for reuerence towarde hys kynge, or elles of a certayne kynd of fydelitee towarde hys frende. Yet nowe his heart somwhat grudged to haue her whom he loued so hyghly accused, and that as he knewe wel vntru¦lye, therefore he aunswered and sayde, certaynlye my lord, yf they haue so doone, they be worthie of heynous ponyshemente, what {quod} the protectoure, thou seruest me I wene wyth yf, and wyth and, I tell the they haue doone it, and that I wyll make good on thy bodye traytoure. And therewith (in a greate anger) he clapped his fyste on the boorde a great rappe, at whych token geuen one cryed trea¦son withoute the chamber, and therewyth a doore claped, and in came rushing men in harneyes as many as the chamber coulde holde. And anone yt protectoure sayd to the lorde Hastynges, I arrest the traytoure, what me lord {quod} he? yea the traitour {quod} the protectour. And one let flye at the lord Stā¦ley, whyche shroncke at the stroake and fell vnder the table, or elles his hed had bene cleft to the teth for as shortly as he shrancke, yet ranne the blood aboute hys eares. Then was the archebyshoppe of Yorke and doctoure Morton byshoppe of Ely and the lorde Stanleye taken and dyuers other whyche were bestowed in dyuers chambers, saue the lorde Hastynges (whome the protectoure com¦maunded to spede and shryue hym apace) for by
saint Poull ({quod} he) I will not dyne till I se thy hed of, it booted hym not to aske why, but heuilie he tooke a preeste at auenture & made a shorte shrift, for a lenger would not bee suffred, the protectoure made so muche haste to his dyner, whiche might not goo to it till this murther were dooen for sa∣uing of his vngracious othe. So was he brought foorth into the grene beside the chapell within the towre, and his hed layde dowe on a logge of tym∣ber that laye there for buyldyng of ye chapell, and there tyrannously stryken of, and after his bodye & hed were enterred at Wyndesore by his mayster kyng Edward the fourth, whose soules Iesu par∣don, Amen. A merueleous case it is to here, either the war∣nynges that he should haue voyded or the tokens of that he could not voyde. For the next nyght be∣fore his deathe, the lorde Stanley sent to hym a trusty messenger at mydnight in all the hast, requi¦ryng hym to ryse and ryde awaye with hym, for he was disposed vtterlye no lenger for to abyde, for he had a fearfull dreame in the whiche he thought that a bore with his tuskes so rased theim bothe by the heddes that the bloodde ranne aboute bothe their shoulders, and for asmuche as the protectour gaue the bore for his cognisaunce, he ymagened that it should bee he. This dreme made suche a fearfull impressiō in his hearte, yt he was through¦ly determined no lēger to tarye but had his horsso readie, if the lord Hastynges would goo with hym So that thei would ryde so ferre that night, that thei should bee oute of daungere by the next daye. A good lord ({quod} the lord Hastynges) to the messen∣ger,
leaneth my lord thy master so muche to suche trifles and hath suche faith in dreames, whiche ei∣ther his awne feare fātesieth, or doo rise in yt nigh∣tes rest by reason of the dayes thought. Tell hym it is plaine witchcraft to beleue in suche dreames, whiche if thei were tokens of thynges to come, why thynketh he not yt we might as likely make theim true by our goyng if we were caught and brought backe (as frendes fayle flyers) for then had the bore a cause lykely to race vs with his tus¦kes, as folkes that fled for some falshed, wherfore either is their perell, nor none there is deede, or if any bee, it is rather in goyng then abydyng. And if we should nedes fall in perell one waye or other yet had I leuer that menne should se it were by other mennes falshed, then thynke it were either our awne faute or faynte and feble heart, and ther¦fore goo to thy master and commende me to hym and I praye hym to bee mery and haue no feare, for I assure hym, I am assured of yt māne he wot∣teth of as I am of myne owne hande. God sende grace ({quod} the messenger,) and so departed. Certen it is also that in rydyng toward the towre thesame mornyng in whiche he was behedded, his horsse that he accustomed to ryde on stombled with hym twise or thrise almost to the fallyng, whiche thyng although it happeneth to theim daylye to whom no myschaunce is towarde, yet hath it been as an olde eiuill token obserued as a gooyng toward myschief. Nowe this yt foloweth was no warnyng but an enuyous scorne, thesame mornyng ere he were vp from his bed where Shores wife laye wt hym all night, there came to hym sir Thomas Ha¦warde
soonne to the lorde Hawarde (the whiche sturryng that mornyng very earlye) as it were of courtesie to accompaignie hym to the counsaill, but forasmuche as the lorde Hastynges was not readye, he taried awhile for hym and hasted hym awaye. This sir Thomas, while the lorde Hast∣ynges stayed awhile commonyng with a preest whom he met in the towre strete, brake the lordes tale, saiyng to hym merely, what my lord I praye you come on, wherfore talke you so long with that preest, you haue no nede of a preest yet, and laugh∣ed vpon hym, as though he would saie, you shall haue nede of one sone. But lytle wist the other what he meant (but or night these woordes were well remembred by theim that heard theim) so the true lorde Hastynges litle mistrusted, and was ne∣uer merier, ner thought his life in more suretye in all his dayes, whiche thyng is often a sygne of chaunge, but I shall rather lette any thyng passe me then the vayne suretye of mannes mynde so nere his deathe: for vpon the towre wharffe, so nere the place where his hedde was of so sone af∣ter, as a manne might well cast a balle, a pursy∣uan̄t of his awne called Hastynges mette wt hym, & of their metyng in ye place he was put in remem∣braūce of another tyme, in whiche it had happened theim to mete before together in ye same place, at whiche tyme ye lord Hastynges had beē accused to kyng Edward by yt lord Ryuers the quenes bro∣ther, in somuche yt he was for awhile which lasted not long highly in yt kynges indignacion & stode in great feare of hymself, & forasmuch as he nowe
met thesame pursyuaunt in thesame place the ieo∣pardy so well passed, it gaue hym greate pleasure to talke with hym therof, wt whō he had talked in thesame place of that matter, and therfore he saied Ah Hastynges, arte thou remembred when I met the here once with an heuy herte? Ye my lord ({quod} he) that I remembre well, and thanked bee God thei gatte no good ner you no harme therby, thou wol¦dest saie so ({quod} he) if thou knewest so muche as I dooe whiche fewe knowe yet, and mo shall shortly, that meant he that the erle Ryuers and yt lord Ri∣chard and sir Thomas Vaughm̄ should yt daye bee behedded at Pomfrette, as thei were in deede, whiche acte he wyst well should bee dooen, but no∣thyng ware that yt axe honge so nere his owne hed. In feith manne ({quod} he) I was neuer so sorye ner neuer stoode in so greate daungier of my life as I did when thou and I mette here, and loe the worlde is turned nowe, nowe stande myne enemi∣es in the daungier as thou mayst happe to heare more hereafter, and I neuer in my life meryer nor neuer in so greate suertie, I praye God it proue so ({quod} Hastynges proue {quod} he? dowtest thou that,) naye naye I warraunt the, and so in maner dys∣pleased he entered into the towre, where he was not long on lyue as you haue hearde. O lord God the blyndenesse of our mortall nature, when he mooste feared, he was in moost suretie, and when he reconed hym self moost surest, he loste his life & yt within .ii. houres after. Thus ended this hono∣rable manne a good knight and a gentle, of great autorite wt his prīce, of liuyng somewhat dissolute plain and open to his enemie, and sure and secrete
to his frende, easye to beguyle, as he that of good herte and courage foresawe no perelles, a louyng manne and passyng welbeloued, verye faythfull & trustie ynough, but trustyng to much was his de∣struccion as you maye perceaue. Nowe flewe the fame of this lordes death tho∣rough the cytie and farther about like a wynde in euery mannes eare, but the protectoure immedia∣tly after dynner (entendynge to set some coloure vpon the matter) sent in all the hast for many sub∣stanciall menne out of the cytie into the towre, and at their commynge, hym selfe wyth the duke of Buckyngham stoode harnessed in olde euell fa∣uoured bryganders▪ suche as no manne woulde wene that they would haue vouchesalued to haue putte on their backes, excepte some sodeyne neces∣sitee had constreigned theim. Then the lorde pro∣tectoure shewed theim, that the lorde Hastynges and other of his conspyracye hadde contryued to haue sodenly destroyed hym and the duke of Buc∣kyngham there thesame daye in councell, & what they entended farther, was as yet not wel knowen of whiche their treason he had neuer knowledge before ten of the clocke thesame fornoone, whiche sodeyne feare draue theim to put on suche harnesse as came nexte to theyr hādes for their defence, & so God holpe theim, that the mischiefe turned vpon theim that would haue done it, and thus he requi∣red theim to reporte. Euerye manne aunswered fayre, as thoughe no manne mystrusted the mat∣ter, whiche of truthe no manne beleued. Yet for the farther appeasyng of the peoples myndes, he sent immedyatlye after dynner an Heralde of armes
with a proclamacion through the citee of London whiche was proclamed in the kynges name, that the lord Hastynges with dyuerse other of his trey∣terous purpose had before cōspired, thesame daye to haue slain the protectoure and the duke of Buc¦kyngham sittyng in counsaill, & after to haue takē vpon theim the rule of the kyng and the realme at their pleasure, and therby to pill and spoyle whom thei list vncomtrolled, and muche matter was de∣uised in thesame proclamacion to the sclaunder of the lord Hastynges, as that he was an eiuill coun∣saillour to the kynges father, entisyng hym to ma∣ny thynges highly redoundyng to the minisshyng of his honoure and to the vniuersall hurt of his realme, by his eiuill compaignie and synister pro∣curyng and vngracious exsample, aswell in many other thynges as in vycious lyuyng and inordy∣nate abusyon of his bodye, bothe with many other and in especiall with Shores wife whiche was one of his secrete counsaill of this heynous trea∣son, with whom he laye nyghtlye, and namely the nyght passed next before his deathe, so that it was the lesse maruell yf vngracyous lyuyng brought hym to an vnhappie ende, whiche he was nowe putte to by the commaundement of the kyng his highnes and of his honourable and faithfull coū∣saill, bothe for his demerytes beyng so openly ta∣ken in his false contriued treason, and also least the delaiyng of his execucion myght haue encora∣ged other myscheuous persones parteners of his conspiracye, to gather and assemble theim selues together in makyng so greate commocyon for his delyucraunce, whose hope nowe beeyng by hys
well deserued deathe pollytickelye repressed, all the realme shall by Goddes grace reste in good quyet and peace. Nowe was this proclamacion made within twoo houres after he was behed∣ded, and it was so curyously endited and so fayre wrytten in parchement in a fayre sette hande, and therwith of it selfe so long aprocesse, that euery chylde myght perceaue that it was prepared and studyed before (and as some menne thought, by Catesby) for all the tyme betwene hys deathe and the proclamacyon proclaymynge, could skante haue suffysed vnto the bare wrytynge alone, albe∣it that it had been in paper and scrybeled foorthe in haste at aduenture. So that vpon the proclay∣mynge therof, one that was schoolemaster at Pau¦les standyng by and comparyng the shortenesse of the tyme wyth the lengthe of the matter sayed to theim that stoode aboute hym, here is gaye goodlye cast, fowle caste awaye for hast. And a∣marchaunte that stoode by hym sayed that it was wrytten by inspyracyon and prophesye. Nowe then by and by as yt were for anger and not for coueteous, the protectoure sent sir Thomas Ha∣warde to the hous of Shores wyfe (for her hus∣bande dwelt not wyth her) whyche spoyled her of all yt euer she had, aboue the valure of twoo or thre thousande markes, and sente her bodye to pryson. And the protectoure had laide to her for the maner sake yt she entended to witche hym, and yt she was a coūsaill wt the lord Hastynges to destroye hym In conclucion, whē no coloure could fasten vpō these matters, the he leyed heinously to her charge that
thyng that she coulde not denye, for all the worlde knewe that it was true, and that not wythstan∣dyng euery manne laughed to here it then so so∣deynly, so highly taken, that she was noughte of her body. And for this cause as a Godly continent prince clene and faultlesse of hym selfe, sent oute of heauen into this vicious worlde, for the amende∣ment of mennes maners, he caused the byshop of London to put her to open penaunce, goynge be∣fore a crosse on sondaye at procession with a taper in her hande. In the which she went in coūtenaūce and pace so womanly, and albeit she was out of al her araye sauyng her kyrtell onelye, yet wente she so fayre and louely, and namelye when the won∣dryng of the people cast a comelye rud in her che∣kes of the whiche she before had moste mysse, that her greate shame wanne her muche prayse amon∣gest theim that were more amorous of her bodye then curyous of her soule, & many good folke that hated her lyuyng and wer glad to see synne correc∣ted, yet petied they more her penaūce then reioysed it, whē they consydred yt the protectour dyd it more of a corrupt mynde then any verteous affeccion. This woman was borne in London, well fren∣ded,  ion h∣s wife. honestly brought vp, and verye well maryed, sauyng somwhat to sone, her husband an honest & a young citezen, godlye & of good substaunce, but forasmuche as they were coupled or she were well rype, she not very feruētly loued for whō she neuer longed, whiche was the thyng (by chaunce) that yt more easely made her to encline to yt kynges appe∣tite, when he requyred her. Howbeit the respect of his royaltee, yt hope of gaye apparel, ease, pleasure
and other wantonne wealthe was hable soone to perce a softe tender harte, but when the kyng had abused her, anone her husbande being an honest manne and one that coulde his good, not presu∣ming to touche a kynges concubyne lefte her vp to hym all together. When the kyng dyed, yt lorde Hastynges tooke her, which in the kynges dayes albeit that he was sore enamoured with her, yet he forbare, either for a pryncelye reuerence or for a certen frendely faythfulnesse. Propre she was & fayre, nothing in her bodye that you coulde haue chaunged, but if you would haue wished her som¦what hygher. This saye they that knewe her in her youthe, some saied and iudged yt she had bene well fauoured, and some iudged the contrarye, whose iudgement semeth lyke as menne gesse the bewtye of one longe before departed, by a scalpe taken oute of a chanell house, & this iudgemente was in the tyme of kyng Henry the eyghte, in the xviii. yere of whose reygne she dyed, when she had nothing but a reueled skynne and bone. Her beau¦tye pleased not menne so muche as her pleasaunt behaueoure, for she had a propre wytte and could bothe reade and wryte, mery in compaignye, redy and quicke of aunswer, nether mute nor full of ba¦ble, sometime taunting withoute displeasure, but not without disporte. Kyng Edward woulde saye that he had thre concubines, which in diuerse pro∣perties diuerslye excelled, one, the meriest, yt other the wiliest, the third the holyest harlot in y• realme as one, whom no man could get oute of y• churche to any place lightlye, but yf it were to his bed, the other two were somwhat greater personages thē
mastres Shore, & neuerthelesse of their humilyte were content to bee namelesse and to forbeare the praise of these properties. But the meryest was Shores wyfe in whome the kyng therfore tooke greate pleasure, for many he had, but her he loued whose fauoure to saye the truthe (for it were synne to lye on the deuel) she neuer abused to any man∣nes hurte but to many mennes comforte & releefe For where the kyng tooke displeasure she would mitigate & apeace his mynde, where menne were oute of fauoure, she woulde bring theim into his grace, for many that had highly offended, she op∣teygned pardone, and of greate forfeatures she gat remissyon, and finally, in many weightye su∣tes she stoode many mēne in greate steade, either for none or for very small rewardes & those rather gaye then ryche, either for that she was contente with the dede well done, or for that she delyghted to be sued vnto, and to shewe what she was hable to doo with the kyng, or for that that wanton we∣menne and welthye bee not alwayes couetous. I doubte not but some manne wyll thynke this wo∣manne to bee to slyghte to bee writen of, amonge graue & weightie matters, whiche they shall spe∣cially thynke yt happely sawe her in her age & ad∣uersite, but me semeth yt chaūce so much more wor¦thy to be remēbred, in howe muche after welth she fll to pouerte, & frō richesse to beggerie, vnfrēded oute of aquayntaunce, after great substaūce after so great fauoure wt her prince, after so great suite and seking to, as many other menne were in their times, whiche be nowe famous onlye by the infa∣mye of theyr euell dedes, her doinges were not
muche lesse remembred because they were not so euell, for none vse to wryte an euell turne in mar∣ble stone, but a good turne they write in the duste, whiche is not worste proued by her, for after her welthe she wente begginge of manye that hadde begged theim selfes yf she had not holpen theim, suche was her chaunce. Nowe was it deuysed by the protectoure and his counsayle, that the same daye that the lorde chaumberlayne was behedded in the towre of Lō¦don and aboute the same houre should be behed∣ded at Poumfret the earle Riuers & the lorde Ri∣chard the quenes soonne, sir Thomas Vaugham and syr Richard Haute, which as you haue harde were taken at Northampton and Stonye Strat¦forde by the consent of the lorde Hastinges, which execucion was done by the ordre & in the presence of sir Richard Ratcliff knight, whose seruice y• pro¦tectoure specially vsed in the councell & in the exe∣cucion of suche lawlesse enterprises, as a manne yt had bene longe secrete wyth hym, hauynge expe∣ryence of the worlde and shrewed wytte, shorte & rude in speche, rough and boysterours of behaue oure, bold in myshiefe, as farre from pitie as from feare of God. Thys knyghte broughte these foure per∣soonnes to the scaffolde at the daye appoynted, and shewed to all the people that they were tray∣toures, notsufferynge the lordes to speake, and to declare theyr innocencye, leaste their wordes myghte haue inclyned menne to pytie theym and to hate the protectour and hys part, and so wyth oute iudgemente and processe of the lawe caused
theim to bee behedded withoute other erthly gylt but onely that they were good menne & true to the kyng and to nye to the quene, insomuche as Syr Thomas Vaughan going to his deathe saied, A wo woorth theim that tooke the prophecie that.  should destroy kyng Edwardes children, mea that by the duke of Clarence lorde George which for that suspicion is nowe dead, but nowe remay∣neth Richard. G. duke of Gloucetre, whiche nowe I see is he that shall & wyll accomplishe the pro∣phecye and destroye kyng Edwardes chyldren & all theyr alyes and frendes, as it appereth by vs this daye, whom I appele to the hygh tribunal of God for his wrongful murder and oure true inno¦cencye, and then Ratclyffe saied, you haue well a∣peled, laye downe your hed, ye {quod} Syr Thomas, I dye in ryght, beware you dye not in wrong, and so that good knight was beheded and yt other .iii. and buried naked in the monastery at Pomfret. When the lorde Hastinges and these other lor¦des and knyghtes were thus behedded & ryd oute of the waye, then the Protectoure caused it to bee proclaimed that the coronacyon for dyuerse great and vrgent causes shoulde be deferred tyll the se∣cond day of Nouembre, for then thought he, that whyle men mused what the matter ment, & whyle the lordes of the realme were aboute hym, oute of their owne strengthes, and while no manne wyste what to thynke nor whome to truste, or euer they should haue tyme and space to digest the matter, and make partes, it were best hastely to pursue his purpose and put hym selfe in possessyon of the croune, or menne coulde haue tyme to deuise any
wyse to resyst. But nowe was all the studye, thys matter beynge of it selfe so heynous myghte bee fyrst broken to the people in such wise as it might be well taken. To thys counsayle they tooke dy∣uerse suche as they thoughte metely to be trusted and lykelye to be enduced to that parte and hable to stande them in stede, ether by powre or by polly¦cy. Amonge whoe, they made a counsayle Ed∣mounde Shaa then mayre of Londō, whych vpō truste of his owne auauncement, wher he was of a proude heart, hyghly desyreous, toke on hym to frame the cyte to theyr appetite. Of spirituall mē they tooke suche as had wyt and were in auctory¦tee emongest the people for opynion of theyr lear¦nynge and hadde no scrupulous conscyence. E∣mongest these, had they tooke Raffe Shaa clerke brother to the Mayre, and Freer Pynkie prouyn¦cyall of the Augustyne Freers, both doctoures in diuinitee, both great preachers, both of more lear¦ning then vertue, of more fame then learnyng, & yet of more lernyng then truthe. For they wer be∣fore greatelye estemed emonge the people, but af∣ter that, neuer none of these two were regarded Shaa made a sermonde in prayse of the protec∣tour before the coronacion, and Pynky made one after the coronation, bothe so full of tedious flat∣terye, that no good mans eares coulde abyde thē Pynkye in hys sermonde so lost hys voyce that he was fayne to leaue of and come downe in the myddest. Doctoure Shaa by hys sermonde loste hys honestye, and soone after hys lyfe, for verye shame of the worlde, into the whyche he durst ne∣uer after much come abrode, but the Freer forced
for no shame, and so yt harmed him the lesse. How beit, some doubte and many thyncke that Pinkey was not of counsayl before the coronation but af∣ter the common maner fell to flattery after, name¦ly, because his sermounde was not incontinente vpon it, but at Saynt Mary Spittle the Eastre after. But certayne it is that Doctoure Shaa was of counsayle in the begynnynge, in so muche that they determyned that he shoulde fyrst breke the matter in a sermōd at Paules crosse, in which he shulde by the authorytee of hys preachyng in∣duce the people to enclyne to the protectoures ghoostly purpose. But nowe was all the laboure and studye in the deuyse of some conuenyent pre∣texte, for whyche the people shoulde be contente to depose the prynce and accepte the protectoure for kyng. In whyche dyuerse thynges they deuy∣sed, but the chiefe thynge and the weyghte of all that inuention rested in thys, that they shoulde alledge bastardy in kynge Edwarde hym selfe, or in his chyldren, or both, so that he should seme dis¦abled to enherite the crowne by the duke of yorke and the prynce by hym. To laye basterdy in king Edward sounded openly to the rebuke of the pro¦tectoures owne mother, which was mother to the bothe. For in that poynte coulde bee none other colour, but to pretend that hys owne mother was an auoutresse, but neuerthelesse he woulde that poynt should be lesse and more fynely and closely handled, not euen fully playne and dyrectlye, but touched a slope craftely, as though menne spared in that poynte to speake all the truthe for feare of his displeasure. But that other poynt concerning
the basterdy that they deuysed to surmise in king Edwardes children, that woulde he shoulde be o∣penly declared and enforced to the vttermost. The coloure and pretexte wherof cannot be wel percea¦ued excepte we report some thynges longe before done aboute kynge Edwardes maryages. After king Edwarde the .iiii. had deposed king Henry the .vi. & was in peasyable possession of the realme, determyning him selfe to mary (as was re¦quisite) both for him self and for the realme, he set the earle of Warwike and diuerse other noble mē in ambassade to the Frenche kynge to entreate a maryage betwene yt kyng and Bona syster to the Frenche kyng. In whych the Earle of Warwike founde the parties so towarde and wyllinge that he spedely wythout anye dyfficultie according to hys instruccyons broughte the matter to a good conclusion. Nowe happened yt in the meane sea∣son, there came to make a sute to the kynge by pe∣tycyon dame Elyzabeth Greye (whyche after was hys quene) then a wyddowe, borne of noble blood specyallye by her mother, whyche was Duchesse of Bedforde, and she was maryed to syr Rychard Wooduyle, Lorde Ryuers her father. Howebeit, thys Elyzabeth beynge in seruyce wyth quene Margarete wyfe to kynge Henrye the syxt, was maryed to one Ihon Greye Esquyre whome kynge Henrye made knyghte at the last hattayle of Saynte Albons, but lytle whyle he enioyed hys knyghtehoode for at that feelde he was slayne. Afterwarde that kynge Edwarde was kynge & the Earle of Warwyke being on his ambassad
this poore ladye made sute to the kyng to be resto¦red to such small landes as her husbande had ge∣uen her in ioyntour, whom when the kyng beheld and heard her speake, as she was bothe fayre and of a good fauoure, moderate of nature, well made and very wyse, he not alonlye pytied her, but also wexed enamored on her, and takynge her secretly a syde beganne to enter into talkynge more famy¦lyerly, whose apetite when she perceaued, she ver¦tuoslye denyed him, but that dyd she so wyselye & that with so good maner & wordes so wel set, that she rather kyndled hys desyre then quenched it. And fynally, after manye a metynge and muche wowynge and manye great promyses she well es∣pyed the kynges affeccyon towarde her so greate¦lye encreased that she durstesomewhat the more boldly say her mynde, as to hym whose hearte she perceaued more feruently set then to fall of for a word. And in cōclusiō she shewed hym playn yt as she wyst her self to sīple to be his wife, so thought she her selfe to good to be hys concubyne. The kyng much maruelyng of her constancy, as he yt had not bene wont elles where so styfly sayd nay, so much estemed her continencye & chastitee, that he set her vertue in stead of possessiō and rychesse. And this taking councel of his owne desyre deter¦myned in hast to mary her. And after that he was thus apoīted & had betwene thē twayn ēsured her thē asked he the coūcel of his secret frēdes, & that in such maner yt they myght easly perseaue yt it bo¦ted not to say nay, Notwythstandīg, the duches of york his mother was so sore moued ther wt yt she di¦swaded yt mariage as much as she possible might
Alledgyng that it was his honour, profite & sure∣tie to marye in some noble progenie oute of the re∣alme, wherupon depended greate strength to his estate by that affinitee and greate possibilite of en∣creace of his dominions. And yt he could not well otherwise dooe, consideryng the erle of Warwike had so ferfoorth entered into the matter all readie, whiche was not like to take it well if all his voy∣age were in suche wise frustrate & his apointment deluded. And she saied ferther that it was not prin¦cely to marye his owne subiect, no greater occaciō ledyng therunto, no possessions nor other commo∣dyte dependyng therupon, but only as a riche mā would mary his maydē onely for a litle wāton do∣tage vpon her persone. In whiche maryage many menne commende more the maydens fortune then the mannes wysedome, and yet she saied that there was more honestye then honoure in this maryage forasmuche as there is not betwene a marchaunt and his mayde so greate a dyfference as betwene a kyng and his subiect, a great prince and a poore wydowe. In whose persone, although there were nothyng to bee mislyked, yet was there saied she, nothyng so excellent but that it might bee founde in dyuerse other that were more metely ({quod} she) for your estate, yee and maydens also, the onely wy∣dowhead of dame Elizabeth Grey (although she were in all other pointes and thynges conuenient for you) should suffise as me thynketh to refrayne you frō her maryage, sith it is an vnsittyng thyng and a greate blemishe to the sacred maiestie of a prince that ought as nere to approche prestehoode in clennesse, as he dooth in dignitee, to bee defiled
wt bigamy ī his first mariage. The kyng made his mother an aūswere parte in earnest & parte in plaie¦merely, as he yt wist hym self oute of rule, & albeit he would gladly yt she should take it well, yet was he at apoynct in his awne mynde, tooke she it well or otherwise. Howbeit, somewhat to satisfie her he saied, yt albeit maryage beyng a spirituall thyng ought rather to bee made for the respecte of God where his grace enclineth the parties to loue toge¦ther (as he trusted it was in his case) rather then for yt regard of any tēporall aduaūtage, yet neuer thelesse hym semed this maryage well consydered not to bee vnprofitable, for he reconed the amytee of no earthely nacion to bee so necessary for hym as yt frendship of his owne, whiche he thought ly∣kely to beare hym somuche yt more hartie fauoure in yt he disdayned not to mary wt one of his awne land, & yet if outward aliaunce were thought so re¦quisite, he would finde ye meanes to enter therunto muche better by other of his kinne where all yt par¦ties could bee contented, then to marye hym selfe wherein he should neuer happely loue, & for ye pos∣sibilite of possessiōs lese yt fruyte & pleasure of this that he had alreadie. For small pleasure taketh a māne of all yt euer he hath besyde, if he bee wiued against his appetite, and I doubte not ({quod} he,) but ther be as you saie other yt bee in euery poinct com∣parable with her, & therfore I let not theim yt like theim to mary theim, no more is it reason yt it mis∣like any manne that I marye where it liketh me. And I am sure that my cousyn of Warwike, nei∣ther loueth me so litle, to grudge at yt that I loue, ner is so vnreasonable to look yt I should in choise
of a wife rather bee ruled by his yie then by myne owne, as though I were a warde yt were boūdē to mary by a garden. I would not bee a kyng with yt cōdicion to forbeare myne owne libertie in choyse of myne awne maryage, as for possibylyte of more inheritaunce by newe affinite in straūge landes, is ofte yt occasiō of more trouble thē proffite. And we haue already title by yt meanes, as lustiseth to get & kepe well in one mannes daye. That she is a wi∣dowe & hath already children. By goddes blessed ladye, I am a bacheler & haue some too, & so eche of vs hath a proofe yt nether of vs is like to be bar¦ren. And therfore madame I praie you bee cōtēt, I trust to God she shall bryng foorth a yoūge prince yt shall please you. And as for the bigamy, let the bisshop hardely laie it to my charge whē I come to take ordres, for I vnderstād it is forbiddē a preest but I neuer wist yt it was forbidden a prince. The duches wt these woordes nothing apeased & seyng yt kyng so set on yt she could not plucke hym backe, so highly she disdeined it, that vnder pretext of her dutye to Godwarde she deuised to dysturbe this maryage, and rather to helpe that he should mary one dame Elizabeth Lucye, whom the kyng not long before had gotten with chylde, wherfore the kyng his mother obiected openlye against this maryage (as it were in dyscharge of her conscy∣ence) that the kyng was sure to dame Elizabeth Lucye and her housbande before God, by rea∣son of whiche woordes suche obstacle was made in that matter, that either the bysshoppe durste not or the kyng woulde not proceade to the so∣lempnisacion of the mariage, till this fame were
clerly purged, and the truth well and openly testi∣fied) wherupon dame Elizabeth Lucye was sent for, and albeit she was by the kynges mother and many other put in good comforte to affirme that she was assured to the kyng, yet when she was so∣lemply sworne to saie the truthe, she confessed that thei were neuer ensured. Howbeit she said his grace spake suche louyng woordes to her, that she verely hoped that he would haue maryed her, and yt if suche kynde woordes had not been, she would neuer haue shewed suche kyndenesse to hym, to let hym so kyndely to gette her with childe. This exa∣mynacion solemply taken, it was clerely proued that there was no impedyment to lette the kyng to marye, wherfore he shortlye after at Grafton beside Stonye stratforde maryed the ladye Eli∣zabeth Grey verey priuelye, whiche was his ene∣myes wife and had prayed hartely for his losse, in the whiche God loued her better then to graunte her bone, for then had she not been his wife. And alter that she was crouned quene, and her fa∣ther was created Erle Riuers and her soonne cre∣ated Marques Dorset. But when the Erle of arwike vnderstoode of this maryage, he tooke it so highly, that therof ensued muche trouble and ate blooddshed as is declared before in the sto∣rye of Edward the fourth. I haue rehersed this mariage somewhat the  at length, because it might therby the better  vpon howe fleight aground the protectoure  coloure, by whiche he pretended kyng ldren to bee bastardes, but the in∣le as it was lyked theim to
whom it suffyseth to haue somwhat to saye, whyle they were sure to bee compelled to no larger proffe then theim selues lyst to make. Nowe to retourne where I lefte, as I beganne to shewe you, it was by the protectoure & his coun¦cell concluded that this doctour Shaa shoulde in a sermond at Paules crosse signifie to the people that neyther kyng Edward hym selfe ner the duke of Clarence were lawfullye begotten, nor were the very children of the duke of Yorke, but begotten vnlawfullye by other personnes by aduoutrye of the duches theyr mother. And dame Elizabeth Lucye was the very wyfe of kyng Edwarde, & so prynce Edward & all the chyldren begotten on the quene were bastardes. And accordyng to this de∣uyce, doctor Shaa ye sōday after at Paules crosse in a greate audience (as alwaye a greate nombre assembled to his preachyng) came into the pulpet takyng for his Theme. Spuria Vitulamina non dabunt radices altos. Sapiencie quarto. that is to saye: Bastarde slyppes shall neuer take depe rootes, whereupon when he had shewed the great grace that God ge∣ueth and secretlye infoundeth in right generacion after the lawes of matrymony: Then declared he that those chyldren commenlye lacked that grace (and for the punyshement of their parentes) were for the moste parte vnhappye whiche were gotten in baste, and speciallye in aduoutrye, of whiche (thoughe some by the ignorauncye of the worlde and the truthe hid from knowledge) haue enhery∣ted for a season other mennes landes, yet God alwaye so prouydeth that it contynueth not in their bloodde longe, but the truthe commyng to
lyght the rightfull enheritoures be restored, and the bastard slyppes plucked vp or it can bee roo∣ted depe. And when he had layd for the proofe and confirmacion of this sentence, examples taken out of the olde testamente and other auncient history∣es, then beganne he to discende to the prayse of lorde Richarde duke of Yorke, callyng hym father of the protectoure: and declared his tytle to the croune by inherytaunce, and also by an entayle autorysed by parliament after the death of kyng Henry the syxte. Then shewed he that the lorde protectoure was onlye the right heire of his body lawfullye begotten, then declared he that kynge Edward was neuer lawfully maryed to the quene but his wife before God was dame Elizabeth Lu¦cye, and so his chyldren were bastardes. And be∣sydes that, that neyther kyng Edwarde hym selfe nor the duke of Clarence (amongest theim yt wer se¦crete in the duke of Yorkes houshold) were neuer reconed surelye to bee the chyldren of the noble duke, as those that by their fauoures more resem∣bled other knowen menne then hym, from whose verteous condicions he sayde also that kyng Ed∣warde was farre of. But the lorde pretectoure ({quod} he) that veray noble prince, the specyall patrone of knightly prowes, aswell in all princely behaueour as in the lyniamentes and fauoure of his vysage representeth the veraye face of the noble duke his father. This is ({quod} he) the fathers owne fy∣gure, this is his owne countenaunce, yt very print of his vysage, the sure vndoubted ymage, yt playn expresse likenesse of yt nobble duke. Now was it be∣fore deuysed yt in the speakyng of these wordes, the
protectour shuld haue come in amongest ye people to the sermond ward, to thende yt these woordes so metyng with his presence, might haue bene taken amongest the herers, as though the holye ghoste had put theim in the preachers mouthe, & shoulde haue moued the people euen there to haue cryed kyng Richard, that it might haue bene after sayde that he was specially chosen by God, and in ma∣ner by myracle, but this deuyce quayled eyther by the protectoures neglygence or the preachers ouer hasty dilygence. For whyle the protectoure founde by the waye tariynge leaste he shoulde haue pre∣uented these woordes, the doctoure fearynge that he shoulde come or his sermon coulde come to those wordes hastyng his matter thereto, he was come to theim & paste theim, and entred into other matters or the protectoure came, whome when he behelde cōmyng, he sodenly left the matter whiche he had in hande, and without any deduccion ther∣unto, out of al ordre and out of all frame beganne to repete those woordes agayne. This is the ve∣ry noble prince, the especyall patrone of knyghtlye prowes, whyche aswell in all pryncely behaueoure as in the lyniamentes and fauoure of his vysage representeth the veraye face of the noble duke of Yorke his father. This is the fathers owne fy∣gure, this is his owne countenaunce, the veraye prynte of his visage, the sure vndoubted ymage, the playne expresse lykenesse of that noble duke, whose remembraunce can neuer dye whyle he ly∣ueth. Whyle these wordes were in speakynge the protectour accompanyed with the duke of Buc∣kyngham, wente throughe the people vp into the
place where the doctors stande and there hearde they out the sermond: but the people were so farre from cryenge kynge Richard that they stoode as they had bene turned into stones for wonder of this shamefull sermond, after whiche once ended the preacher gate him home and neuer after durst looke out, and when he asked any of his olde fren¦des, what the people talked of hym, although that his owne conscience well shewed hym that they talked no good, yet whē the other aunswered hym, that there was in euerye mannes mouthe of hym muche shame spoken, it so strake hym to his heart that in fewe dayes after he wythered awaye. Then on the tuysdaye after nexte folowynge this sermonde, beeynge the. vii. daye of Iune there came to the Guylde hal of London the duke of Buckyngham and dyuerse lordes and knigh∣tes mo then happely knewe the message that they brought. And at the east ende of the hall where the hoystynges be kepte, yt duke and the mayre and ye other lordes sate downe, and the aldermen also, all the commons of the cytee beyng assembled & stan∣dynge before theim. After sylence commaunded vpon a greate payne, in the protectoures name. The duke stoode vp, and as he was well learned and of nature meruel cously well spoken, he sayde The ora¦tion of yt duke of Buckyn¦ghā▪ made o the cy∣ of London. to the people wyth a cleare and a lowede voyce. Frendes, for the zeale and hertie fauoure that we beare you, we be come to breke of a matter ryghte great & weightie, and no lesse weyghtye then plea∣syng to God and profitable to all the realme, nor to no part of ye realme more proffitable thē to you the cytezens of thys noble cytee. For why, the
thinge that you haue longe lacked and as we wel¦knowe sore longed for, that you woulde haue ge∣uen greate good for, that you woulde haue gone farre to fetche, that thyng bee we come hether to bring you, withoute youre laboure, payne, coste, aduentnre or ieopardy. What thing is that? Cer∣tes the suretie of youre owne bodies, the quiet of youre wiues and doughters and the sauegard of your goodes. Of all whiche thinges in times pas¦sed you stoode in doubte, for who was he of you al that coulde recone hym selfe Lorde of his owne good amongest so many gynnes and trappes as were set therfore, amonge so muche pilling & pol∣ling, amongest so many taxes and talliages, of ye which there was neuer ende, and oftimes no nede and yf any were, it grewe either of ryot or of vn∣reasonable waste then any necessarye honourable charge, so that there was daily plucked and pyl∣led from good and honest menne great substaūce of goodes, to be lashed oute amonge vnthryftes, so farforth that fiftenes suffised not nor any vsual termes of knowen taxes, but vnder an easy name of beneuolence and good will, the cōmissioners so muche of euery manne tooke, as no manne would with his goo wyll haue geuen. As though yt name of beneuolence had signifyed, yt euery man should paye, not what he of hym self of his good will lust to graūt, but what yt Kyng of his good wyl lust to take, who neuer asked lytle, but euery thyng was haunsed aboue the measure, amercyamentes tur∣ned into fines, fines into raunsomes, small tres∣paces into misprision, misprision into treasō, wher of I thynke that no manne looketh that we shall
remēbre of examples by name, as though Burder were forgotten that was for a woorde spoken, in hast cruelly behedded by the misconstruing of the lawes of the realme for the princes pleasure, with no lesse honoure to Merkam chiefe Iustice then (whiche loste his office rather then he would assēt to that iudgement) to the dishonestie of those that other for feare or flatterie gaue that iudgemente: what nede I to speake of Thomas Cooke Aldre∣manne & maire of this noble cytee, who is of you ether for negligence that wotteth not, or so forget full that he remēbreth not, or so heard harted that he petieth not that worshipful mannes losse? what speke I of losse, his wounderfull spoile and vnde∣serued distruccion, onely because it happed theim to fauoure hym whome the Prince fauoured not. We nede not reherse of these any mo by name, sith I doubte not yt here bee many presēt that either in theim selfes or their nyghe frendes, aswell their goodes as persones were greatly endaungered o∣ther by fained quarels or smal matters aggreued with heinous names, and also there was no crime so great of which there could lacke a pretexte. For sith the king preuenting ye time of his inheritaūce atteined the croune by battail, it suffised in a riche manne for a pretext of treason, to haue been of kin¦red or aliaunce, nor of familiarite or lenger of ac∣quaintaunce wt any of those, yt wer at any time the kīges enemies, which was at one time or another more then halfe ye realme. Thus were nether your goodes, nether lādes, in suerte, & yet they brought your bodies in ieopardie, beside yt comen aduēture of opē war, which albeit, yt it is euer yt well & occasi¦on
of much mischief, yet is it neuer so mischeuous as where any people fal in deuisiō, & at al distaūce among theim selues, & in no realme erthly so dead¦ly and so pestylēt as when it happeneth amongest vs. And among vs neuer continued so long discē¦cion nor so many batailes in any season, nor so cru¦el nor so deadly foughtē, as wer in yt kinges daies yt dead is, god forgeue it his soule. In whose time and by whose occasiō, what about yt getting of the garland, keping it, lesing & winning again, it hath coste more English blood then hath the twise win∣ning of Fraūce. In which inward war amongest our selues hath bene so great effusion of y• aunciēt noble blood of this realme, yt scacely the halfe re∣maineth, to ye great enfebling of this nobleland, be¦side many a good toune ransaked & spoiled by thē that haue been going to yt feld or retourning from thence, & peace after not much surer then war. So that no tyme was there in the which riche men for theyr money, & great men for their landes or some other, for some feare or for sōe displeasure wer out of perell. For whom mistrusted he yt mistrusted his owne brother? Whom spared he yt killed his owne brother? Could not such maner of folke yt he moste fauoured dooe somwhat (we shall for his honoure spare to speke) howbeit, this ye wote wel all, yt who so was best bare euer the least rule, & more suite in his daies was to Shores wife, a vile & abhomina¦ble strompet then to all the lordes in England, ex∣cepte vnto those that made her their Protectoure, which simple woman was yet wel named & honest tyll the Kynge for his luste and synfull affeceyon berefte her from her husband, a right honest man
and substanciall amongest you. And in that point whiche in good fayth I am sorye to speake of, sa∣uing that it is vayne to kepe in councell yt thyng that all menne knoweth, the kynges gredy appe∣tite was insaciable, and euerye where ouer all the realme intollerable. For no womanne was there any where, younge or olde, poore or ryche, whome he set his iye vpon, whome he any thing liked ey∣ther for persone or beautie, speche, pace or counte∣naunce, but without any feare of God, or respecte of his honoure, murmoure, or grudgyng of the worlde, he would importunately pursue his appe tite & haue her, to the great distruccion of many a good womanne, and greate doloure to theyr hus∣bandes and frendes, whiche being honest people of theim selues, so much regarded the clennesse of their houses, the chastitee of their wiues and chil∣dren, that theim were leuer to loose all yt they haue beside, then to haue suche a vilame done to theim. And albeit that wt this and other importable dea∣ling, ye realme was in euery place anoyed, yet speci¦ally you the citezens of this noble citee, as for yt a∣mongest you is moost plentie of suche thinges as minister matter to suche iniuries, as for yt you wer nerest hand, sith yt nere here about was his moost cōmon abidyng. And yet bee ye people whome he had as synguler a cause well and trewelye to in∣trete, as any parte of his realme, not only for that the Prynce by this noble citee, as of his speciall chaumbre and renoumed citee of this realme, muche honourable fame receaueth amongest all other nacyons, but also for that, you nowe with∣oute youre greate coste and sondrye fauoures
and ieopardyes in al his warres bare euer youre especyall fauoure to hys parte, whych your kynd myndes borne to yt house of Yorke, sith he hath no thīgworthely requited you, ther is of yt house now whyche by Goodes grace shall make you full re∣compence, which thyng to shew you, is the whole somme and effecte of oure errande. It shal not, I wote well nede, that I rehersed vnto you agayne that you all redy haue hearde of him that can bet ter tell it, and of whom I am sure ye wyll better beleue it (and reason it is that it so be) I am not so proude to loke therfore, that you shoulde receaue my wordes of so greate authorytee as the prea∣chers of the worde of God, namely a man so con∣nyng & so wyse, that no man wotteth better what he should do & say, and thereto so good and ver∣tuous that he would not say the thynge, which he wyst he shoulde not saye in the pulpyt, namely, in to the whiche no honeste manne commeth to lye: which honourable preacher ye wel remember, sub¦stancyally declared to you at Poules crosse on sō daye laste past, the ryght and tytle of the most ex∣cellent prynce Rychard Duke of Glouceter nowe protectoure of thys hys realme whych he hath vn to the croune of the kingdome of the same. For ye worshipful man made yt perfytely and groundly open vnto you. The chyldren of kynge Edwarde the .iiii. wer neuer laufully begotten, for as much as the kynge (lyuyng hys very wyfe dame Eliza∣beth Lucy) was neuer laufully maried to ye quene theyr mother, whose blood sauyng he set hys vo∣lupteous pleasure before hys honour, was ful vn metely to be matched with his (the mynglyng of
which two bloodes together hath bene the effusiō of a gret part of ye noble blod of this realme wher by it may well be sene, that mariage was not well made, of which ther is so much myschiefe growen For lacke of which laweful copulatiō & also of o∣ther thinges which ye sayd worshipful doctour, ra¦ther signified thē vtterly explaned, & which thing shall not be spoke for me, as the thing yt euery mā forbeareth to say yt he knoweth, in aduoiding ye dy spleasour yt my noble lorde protectour bearing as nature requireth a filiall reuerence to the duches his mother. For these causes before remembred I say yt for lack of yssue lawfully cōming of ye late noble prince Richard duke of york, to whose roial blod ye crownes of Englād & of Fraūce ar by high aucthoritee of parliament entayled, ye right & ty∣tle of the same is by iuste course of enheritaūce ac¦cording to ye comon law of this land, deuoluted & come vnto the moost excellent prince ye lord protec¦tour, as to the very lawful begotten soonne of the fore remēbred noble duke of yorke, whiche thing wel cōsidered & ye knightly prowesse wt many ver∣tues which in his noble person singulerly do ha∣bound: The nobles & comons of this realme, and specially of yt north partes, not willīg any bastard blood to haue the rule of the lād, nor the abusions in the same before vsed & exercised any lēger to cō¦tinue, haue fully condiscended & vtterly determy¦ned to make hygh peticiō vnto y• puisaunt prince the lord protectour, yt it may lyke his grace at our humble request to take vpō him the guiding & go uernaūce of this realme, to ye welth & increase of ye same according to his very right & iust title, which
thing I wote wel he wylbe loth to take vpon him as he whose wisdome wel perceueth, ye labour & stu¦dy both of mynd & body yt shal come ther wt to hī, whosoeuer shal occupy ye rome. I dare say he wyl yf he take it (for I warrāte you yt that roome is no childes office) & yt the greate wise man wel percea∣ued whē he sayd Ve regno cuius rex puer est, wo to that realme whose king is a chylde wherefore, so much more cause haue we to thank god yt this noble per¦sonage, which is so righteously ētitled therto is of so sad age, & therto of so great wisdome ioyned wt so gret experiēce, which albeit, he wylbe loth to ta¦ke vpon hī, yet shal he to our peticiō in ye behalfe ye more graciously encline, if ye the worshipful cyte∣zins of this cite beyng the chefe cite of the realme ioyne wt vs the nobles in our sayd request, which for your owne weale we doubte not but yt ye wyll. And yet neuerthelesse, we pray you so to do, wher∣by ye shall do great profite to all this his realme. Beside that, in chosinge then so good a kinge, yt shalbe to your selfe a special commodite to whom his maiesty shal euer after, bear so much the more tender fauour, in how much he shal perceaue you the more prone and beneuolentlye mynded tow∣ard his eleccion, wherin dere frendes, what mynd you haue, we require you playnelye to shewe vs? Whē ye duke had said & loked yt the people whom he hoped yt the maire had framed before, should af¦ter this flatering p̄posicion made haue cryed kīg Richard, king Richard, all was styl & mute & not one word answered to: wher wt the duke was mer¦uelously abashed and takyng the Mayre nere to him with other that were about hym preuy to the
matter sayde vnto theim softelye. What meaneth this that the people be so styll? Sir {quod} the Mayre percase they perceaue you not wel, ye shal we amēd {quod} he yf that wyl helpe, & therwith somewhat low∣der rehersed the same matter again, in other ordre & other wordes so well and ordinately, & neuerthe¦lesse so euydently & plain, with voyce gesture and countenaunce so comely & so conuenient, that eue¦ry man muche marueiled yt heard hym, & thought that thei neuer hearde in their liues so euell a tale so well tolde. But wer it for wonder or for other, ye eache loked that other should speake fyrst, not one worde was there aunswered of all the people that stode before, but all were as styll as the midnight not so much as rounyng emong theim, by which they might seme once to commen what was beste to do. When the Mayre sawe this, he with other parteners of ye councel, drewe about the duke and said yt the people had not bene accustomed ther to bee spoken to but by the recorder, whyche is the mouth of the citee, & happly to hym they wyl aun∣swer. With that the recorder called Thomas Fize William a sad man & an honest, whiche was but newly come to the offyce & neuer had spoken to ye people before, & loth was with that matter to be∣gyn, notwithstanding, therunto commaunded by the Mayre, made rehersall to the cōmons of that which the Duke had twyse purposed hys self but the recorder so tempered hys tale, that he shewed euery thyng as the Dukes wordes were, and no parte of his owne, but all this no chaūge made in the people, whych alwaye after one stoode as thei had bene amased. Whereupon the Duke rouned
with the mayre and said, this is a marueleous ob∣stynate scylence, and therwith turned to the people again wt these woordes. Deare frendes, we come to moue you to that thyng whiche paraduenture we so greatly neded not, but that the lordes of this realme and commōs of other parties might haue sufficed sauyng suche loue we beare you, and so muche set by you that we would not gladly dooe with oute you, that thyng in whiche to bee parte∣ners is your weale and honoure whiche as to vs semeth you se not or waye not. Wherfore we re∣quire you to geue vs an aūswer one or other, whe∣ther ye bee mynded as all the nobles of the realme bee, to haue this noble prince nowe protectoure to bee your kyng? And at these woordes the people beganne to whisper emong theim selfes secretlye, that the voyce was nether lowde nor base, but like a swarme of bees, till at the last at the nether ende of the halle a bushement of the dukes seruauntes and one Nashfeelde and other belongyng to the protectoure with some prentices and laddes that thrusted into the halle emongest the preace, began sodenly at mennes backes to crye, kyng Rychard, kyng Rychard, and there threwe vp their cappes in token of ioye, and thei that stoode before caste their heddes maruelyng therat, but nothyng thei saied. And when the duke and the mayre sawe this maner thei wisely turned it to their purpose, and saied it was a goodly crye & a ioifull to here euery manne with one voyce and no māne saiyng naye. Wherfore frendes ({quod} the duke,) sith we perceaue that it is all your whole myndes to haue this no∣ble manne for your kyng, wherof we shall make
his grace effectuall report yt we doubte not but yt it shall redounde to your great wealth & cōmodite. We therfore requier you yt to morowe ye go with vs & we wt you to his noble grace to make hum∣ble peticiō & request to hym in maner before remē∣bred. And therwith the lordes came downe and ye cōpaignie dissolued & departed the more parte all sad, some with glad sembleaunce ye were not verye merie, and some of theim yt came with the duke, not hable to dissemble their sorowe, were faine euen at his backe to turne their face to the wall, while the doloure of their heartes brast oute of their yes. Then on the morowe the mayre & aldremen and chief commoners of ye citee in their best maner ap∣pareled, assēblyng theim together at Paules, re∣sorted to Baynardes castel where ye {pro}tectour laye, to whiche place also accordyng to ye apointement repaired ye duke of Buckynghm̄ & dyuerse nobles wt hym, besydes many knightes & gētlemen. And therupon yt duke sent woord to ye lord protectoure of ye beyng there of a great honourable cōpaignie to moue a great matter to his grace. Wherupon y• protectoure made great difficultie to come downe to theim, excepte he knewe some part of their errād as though he doubted & partly mistrusted the com¦myng of suche a noumbre to hym so sodenly, wtout any warning or knowledge, whether thei came for good or harme Thē when ye duke had shewed this to ye mayre & other, that thei might therby se howe litle the protectoure looked for this matter, thei sēt again by yt messenger suche louyng message, & ther wt so humblie besought hym to vouchesalue yt thei might resorte to his presence to purpose their entēt
of which thei would to none other persone disclose, at the last he came oute of his chaūbre, and yet not downe to theim, but in a galary ouer theim wt a bi¦shop on euery hād of him, where thei beneth might se hym & speake to hym, as though he would not yet come nere theim till he wist what thei meant. And therupō the duke of Buckynghm̄ first made hūble peticiō to him on ye behalfe of theim all, yt his grace would pardone theim & licence theim to pur¦pose vnto his grace thētent of their cōmyng wtout his displeasure, wtout whiche {per}done obteined, thei durst not bee so bold to moue hym of yt matter. In whiche, albeit thei meant asmuche honoure to his grace as wealth to al ye realme beside, yet were thei not sure howe his grace would take it, whom thei would in no wise offende. Then ye protectour, as he was verie gentle of hym self & also lōged sore appa¦raūtly to knowe what thei meāt, gaue him leaue to purpose what hym liked trustyng for ye good mind yt he bare theim all none of theim any thing would entend to hymward wherwt he thought to bee gre¦ued. Whē ye duke had this leaue & pardō to speake thē wexed he bold to shewe hym their entent & pur∣pose, wt all ye causes mouyng theim therto as ye be¦fore haue hearde. And finally to beseche his grace ye it would like him of his accustomed goodnese & ze∣ale vnto ye realme nowe wt his yie of pite to behold ye long cōtinued distresse & decaie of yesame, & to set his gracious hād to redresse & amēdemēt therof by takyng vpō hym ye croune & gouernaunce of ye re∣alme accordyng to his right & title laufully discē∣ded vnto hym, & to ye laude of God, profite & surete of ye lād & vnto his grace so much ye more honour &
lesse pain, in that that neuer prince reigned vpon any people that were so glad to liue vnder his o∣beysaunce as the people of this realme vnder his. When the protectoure had hearde the preposi∣cion, he looked very strangely thereat and made aunswer that albeit he knewe partely the thynges by theim alledged to be true, yet suche entiere loue he bare to kyng Edward and his children, and so muche more regarded his honoure in other real∣mes aboute, then the croune of any one, of whiche he was neuer desyrous, so that he could not fynde in his hearte in this poincte to incline to their de∣syre, for in all other nacions were ye truthe not well knowē, it should paraduenture be thought that it were his owne ambicious mynde and deuice to de¦pose the prince and to take hym self ye croune, with whiche infamye he would in no wise haue his ho∣noure steyned for any croune, in whiche he had ne∣uer perchaunce perceaued muche more laboure & pain then pleasure to hym that so would vse it, as he that would not and were not worthy to haue it. Notwithstandyg, he not only perdoned theim the mocion that thei made hym, but also thāked theim for ye loue and hartie fauoure thei bare hym, prai∣yng theim for his sake to beare the same to ye prince vnder whome he was and would bee contente to liue and with his laboure and coūsaill as ferre as it should like the kyng to vse it, he would dooe his vttermost deuoyre to sette ye realme in good estate whiche was all readye in the tyme of his protec∣tourship (lauded bee God,) well begonne, in that ye malice of suche as were before the occasion of the contrarie and of newe entended to bee, were nowe
partely by good policie, partely more by Goddes specyall prouydence, then mannes prouysion re∣pressed and put vnder. Vpon this aunswer geuen, the duke of Buc∣kyngham by the protectoures licence a lytle roun∣ded, aswell with other noble menne about hym as with the mayre and recorder of Londō. And after that (vpon like perdon desyred & opteyned) he she∣wed alowde vnto the protectour, for a fynall con∣clusion that the realme was apoynted that kyng Edwardes lyne shoulde no lenger reygne vpon theim, bothe that they had so farre gone that it was nowe no suretie to retreate (as for that they thought it for the weale vnyuersall to take that waye, although they had not yet begon it.) Wher∣fore if it woulde like his grace to take the croune vpon hym, they would humbly beseche hym ther∣vnto, and if he woulde geue theim a resolute aun∣swer to the contrarye (whiche they would bee lothe to here) then muste they seke and should not fayle to fynde some other noble man that would. These woordes muche moued the protectoure, whiche as euery manne of small intelligēce maye wyt would neuer haue enclyned thereto, but when he sawe there was none other waye but that he muste take it, or els he and his bothe to go from it, he sayde to the lordes and commōs, sith it is we perceaue well that all the realme is so set (whereof we be very so∣ry) that they wyll not suffre in any wyse kyng Ed∣wardes lyne to gouerne theim, whome no manne earthly can gouerne agaynste their owne wylles: And we also perceaue that no manne is there, to whome the croune can by so iuste tytle apperteyne
as to our selfe, as very right heire lawfully begot∣ten of the body of our moste dread and dere father Rychard late duke of Yorke, to which title is now ioyned your eleccion, the nobles & commōs of the realme, whiche we of all tytles possible take moste effectuall, we be content and agree fauourably to enclyne to your peticion & request, and accordyng to the same, here we take vpon vs the royall estate of prehemynence and kyngdome of the two noble realmes, Englande and Fraunce, the one frō this daye forwarde by vs and oure heyres to rule, go∣uerne and defende, the other by Goddes grace and your good helpe to get agayne, subdewe and esta∣blyshe for euer in due obedience vnto this realme of Englande, thaduauncement wherof we neuer ase of God lenger to lyue then we entende to pro∣cure and set foorth. With this there was a greate crye and showte, criyng kyng Richard, and so the lordes went vp to the kyng, and so he was after ye daye called. But the people departed talkyng dy∣uersly of the matter, euery manne as his fantasie gaue hym, but muche thei merueled of this maner of dealyng, that the matter was on bothe partes made so straunge as thoughe neuer the one parte communed with the other parte therof before, whē they wyst that there was no man so dul that heard theim, but he perceaued well ynoughe that all the matter was made betwene theim: Howbeit, some excused that agayne, saiyng: all thyng muste bee done in good ordre, and men must sometyme for ye maner sake not be acknowē what thei knowe. For at the consecracion of a byshop, euery manne per∣ceaueth by payment of his bulles that he entēdeth
to bee one, yet when he is twise asked whyther he wilbe a byshop, he must saye naye, and at the third tyme take it vpon hym as compelled therto by his owne wyll. And in a stage playe, the people knowe right well that he that playeth the sowdane is per case a sowter, yet yf one of acquayntaunce per∣chaunce of lytle nurture should call hym by his name while he standeth in his maiestie, one of his tourmentours might fortune breake his hed for marryng ye playe. And so they sayde, these matters be kynges games, as it were staige playes, and for the mooste parte played vpon scaffoldes, in which poore men be but lookers on, and they that wise be wyll medle no fer∣ther, for they ye steppe vp wt theim whē they can not playe their partes they disorder the playe and do theim selues no good. ☞
¶ Rychard the third. RYCHARD THE THIRDE of that name, vsurped the croune of England, and opē∣ly tooke vpō hym to be kyng the .xix. daye of Iune, in the yere of our Lord, a thousand foure hundreth and. lxxxiii, & in the .xxv. yere of Lewes the xi. then beyng Frenche kyng, and with greate so∣lempnitee rode to Westmynster, and there sate in the seate royall, and called before hym the iudges of the realme, streyghtly commaundynge theim to execute the lawe without fauoure or delaye, with many good exhortacions (of the which he folowed not one) and then he departed towarde the abbaye and at the churche doore he was met with proces∣sion, and by the abbot to hym was delyuered the sceptre of saint Edward, & so went & offred to sant Edwardes shryne, whyle ye monkes sange Te deum with a faynt courage, and from the churche he re∣tourned to the palayce, where he lodged tyll the coronacion. And to bee sure of all enemyes (as he thought) he sent for .v. thousande menne of ye north against his coronacion, whiche came vp euell ap∣parelled and worsse harneyssed, in rustie harneys, neyther defensable nor scoured to the sale, whiche mustered in fynesoury felde, to the great disdayne of all the lokers on. The fourth daye of Iuly he came to ye towre by
water with his wife, and the fyfte daye he created Thomas Lorde Haward, duke of Norffolke & syr Thomas Haward his soonne he created Earle of Surrey, and Willyam lorde Barkeley was then created erle of Notyngham, and Fraunces lorde Louell was then made Vicount Louell and the kynges chaumberlayne, and the lorde Stanley was deliuered out of warde for feare of his sonne the lorde Straunge, whiche was then in Lancas∣shyre gatheryng menne (as menne saied) and the saied lorde was made Stuard of the kynges hou sholde, like wyse the archbyshoppe of Yorke was deliuered, but Morton bishop of Ely was deliue∣red to the duke of Buckingham to kepe in warde whiche sent hym to his manoure of Brecknoke in Wales, from whence he escaped to kyng Richar∣des confusyon. The same nighte the kyng made .xvii. knightes of the bathe. The nexte day he rode throughe Londō with great pompe, & in especiall the duke of Buckinghā was richely appareled & his horse trapped in blewe veluet enbroudered wt ye naues of cartes burning of golde, whiche trap¦per was borne by footemē frō ye grounde, wt suche asolēpne fassyon yt all menne muche regarded it. On ye morowe being the .vi. day of Iuly ye kyng came toward his coronaciō into Westminster hal where his chapell & all the prelates mytred recea∣ued hym. And so they in ordre of processyon passed forward. After ye procession folowed therle of Nor thumberlād with a pointlesse sweard naked, & the lorde Stanley bare the Mace of ye constableship, The erle of Kent bare the second swerd on ye right hand of the kyng naked. The lord Louell bare an
other swerd on ye lefte hand. Then folowed ye duke of Suffolke with the Sceptre, and therle of Lin∣colne with ye balle and crosse. After theim folowed the newe Erle of. Surrey with the swerd of estate in a riche skabard. On the ryght side of hym went the duke of Norffolke bearing ye croune, then folo¦wed kyng Richard in a Circot and robe of purple veluet vnder a canable borne by the barones of yt fyue portes, going betwene ye bishoppes of Bathe and Duresme. The duke of Buckingham with ye rod of the high stuard of Englande bare the kyn∣ges traine. After hym folowed the erle of Hunting don, bearing the quenes sceptre, and the Vicount Lie, bearing the rod with the doue. And the erle of Wilshere bare the quenes croune. Then folow¦ed quene Anne doughter to Richard erle of War wike in robes lyke to the kyng, betwene two bys∣shoppes, and a canabie ouer her hed, borne by the Barones of the portes. On her hed a rich coronal set with stones and pearle. After her folowed the countesse of Richmond heire to ye duke of Somer∣set, whiche bare vp ye quenes traine. After folowed the duchesse of Suffolke and Norffolke with coū¦tesses baronesses, ladies, & many faire gentilwemē in this ordre they passed thorough the palaice & en¦tred ye abbay at the west end, & so came to their sea¦tes of estate. And after diuerse sōges solply song they both discended to the high altare & were shif∣ted from their robes, & had diuerse places open frō the middle vpward, in whiche places they were a∣nointed. Then both the kyng & the quene chaun∣ged theim into cloth of gold & ascended to their sea¦tes, where the cardinal of Cauntourburie & other
byshoppes theim crouned according to ye custome of the realme, geuing hym ye scepter in the left hād and the balle wt the crosse in the ryght hand, & the quene had ye sceptre in her right hand, & the rod wt the doue in the left hand. On euery side of ye kyng stode a duke, & before hym stode therle of Surrey with the swerd in his handes. And on euery side of the quene stāding a bishop & a ladie kneling. The Cardinal song masse, & after paxe, the kyng & the quene discended, & before the high altare they wer bothe houseled wt one hoste, deuyded betwene thē After masse finished, they bothe offred at saint Ed¦wardes shrine, & there the kyng lefte the croune of saint Edward, and put on his owne crowne. And so in ordre as they came, they departed to westmin¦ster hal, & so to their chambres for a ceasō, duryng which time the duke of Norffolke came into ye hal his horse traped to the ground in cloth of gold as high mershall, and voided the hall. About .iiii. of ye clocke the kyng & quene entred the halle, and the kyng sate in the middle, and the quene on the left hand of the table, & on euery side of her stoode a countesse holding a clothe of plea∣saunce, when she list to drinke. And on ye right hād of the kyng sat the byshop of Cauntourbury, the ladies sat all on one side in the middle of the hall. And at the table againste theim sat the Chauncel∣loure and all the lordes. At the table next the cup∣borde sate the Maire of London. And at the table behinde the lordes, sate the Barones of the portes And at the other bordes sate noble and worshyp∣full personages. When all persones wer sette, the the duke of Norffolke, earle Mershal, the earle of
Surrey constale for that daye, the lorde Stanley lorde Steward, Sir willyam Hopton treasourer, and sir Thomas Percie comptroller came in and serued the kyng solemplye with one dishe of golde and another of syluer. And the quene all in gylte vessell, and the bishop all in siluer. At the seconde course came into yt hall, sir Robert Democke the kynges champion, making a proclamacion, that whosoeuer woulde saye that kyng Richarde was not lawfullye kyng, he woulde fight with hym at the vtteraunce, and threwe downe his gauntlet, & thē all the hall cried kyng Richard. And so he did in thre partes of the halle, and then one broughte hym a cup of wyne couered, & when he had dronke he caste oute the drinke, & departed with the cuppe After that the herauldes cryed alargesse thryse in the halle, & so went vp to their staige. At the ende of diner, the Mayre of London serued the kyng & quene with swete wyne, and had of eche of theim a cuppe of golde with a couer of gold. And by that tyme that all was done, it was darkenight. And so the kyng retourned to his chaumbre, and euery man to his lodging. When this feaste was thus fyneshed, the kyng sente home all the lordes into their countrees that woulde departe, excepte the lorde Stanley, whome he reteyned tyll he hearde what his soonne the lorde straunge wente aboute And to suche as wente home, he gaue streyghte charge and cōmaundement to see their countryes well ordred, and yt no wronge nor extorcion should bee done to his subiectes. And thus he taught o∣ther to execute iustice & equite, the contrary wher∣of he daylye exercysed, he also with greate rewar∣des
geuen to the Northrenmenne whyche he sent for to hys coronation, sente theim home to theyre country wyth greate thanckes. Whereof dyuerse of theim, (as they all be of nature verye gredye of authoryte, and specyally whē they thynke to haue any conforte or fauoure,) tooke on them so hygh∣ly and wroughte such mastreis, that ye kyng was fayne to ryde thether in hys fyrste yere, and to put some in execution, and staye the countrye, or elles no small myschechefe had ensued. Nowe after thys tryumphante coronation, there fell myschiefes thycke & thicke, as the thing euell gotten is neuer well kepte, so through al the tyme of hys vsurped reygne, neuer ceased theyre quel, murder, death & slaughter tyll his owne de¦struccion ended it. But as he fynished wt the best deathe and mooste ryghtwyse, that is to saye hys owne, so beganne he wyth the moost pyteous and wycked, I meane the lamentable murther of his innocente nephewes, the yonge kynge and hys tender brother, whose death and fortune hath ne∣uerthelesse so farre come in questyon that some re¦mayned long in doubte whether they were in his dayes destroyed or not. For yt Parkin Warbek by many folkes malyce, & mo folkes folye so long space abusynge the worlde, was aswell wt prnceis as wt poore people reputed & taken for the youn∣ger of these two. But for that also that all thyn∣ges were so couertly demeaned, one thynge pretē∣ted and another mente, that there was nothynge so playne and openly proued, but that yet for the common custome of close and couert dealyng, mē
had it euer inwardly suspect, as many well coun∣trefet iewelles make the true mistrusted. Howbeit concernyng that opinion menne maye see the con∣ueighaunce therof in the lyfe of the noble prynce kyng Henry the seuēth, in the processe of Parkyn. But in the meane ceason, for this present matter I shall reherse to you the dolorous ende of these two babes, not after euery way that I haue heard but after that waye that I haue so heard by suche menne and suche meanes as me thynketh it to be heard but it should be true. Kyng Rychard after his coranacion, takynge Howe and after what maner the two sōnes of king Ed¦ward were destroyed. his waye to Gloucestre, to visyte in his newe ho∣noure the toune, of whiche he bare the name of olde, deuysed as he roade to fulfyll that thynge which he before had intended. And forasmuche as his mynde gaue hym that his nephewes lyuyng, men woulde not recon that he coulde haue right to the realme, he thought therfore without delaye to ryd theim, as though the kyllyng of his kyns∣men might ende his cause, and make hym kynde∣ly kyng. Wherupon he sent Iohn Grene, whome he specially trusted, to syr Roberte Brakenburye constable of the towre, with a lettre and credence also, that the same Syr Robert in any wise should put the two chyldren to death. This Iohn Grene dyd his errand to Syr Robert Brakenbury kne∣lyng before our ladye in the towre, who playnelye aūswered that he would neuer put theim to death to dye therfore. With the whiche aunswer Grene returned, recountyng the same to kynge Rycharde at Warwike yet on his iourneye, wherewith he toke suche displeasure & thought, yt the same night
he sayed to a secrete page of his. Ah, whome shall a manne truste? they that I haue broughte vp my selfe, they that I went would haue moste surely ser¦ued me, euen those fayle me, and at my cōmaunde¦ment wyll doo nothing for me. Syr {quod} the page, there lyeth one in ye palet chaumbre without, that I dare well saye, to dooe youre grace pleasure, the thing were ryght heard that he would refuse, mea¦ning this by Iames Tirell, whiche was a manne of goodly personage, and for the gyftes of nature worthie to haue serued a muche better prince, if he had well serued God, and by grace obteyned to haue asmuche treweth and good wyll, as he had strengthe and wyll. The manne had an hyghe hearte and sore lon∣ged vpwarde, not risyng yet so faste as he had ho¦ped, beynge hyndred and kepte vnder by syr Ry∣charde Ratcliffe and sir willyam Catesbye, which longing for nō more parteners of the Princes fa∣uoure, namely not for him, whose pride they knew woulde beare no pere, kept hym by secrete driftes oute of all secrete trust, which thing this page had well marked and knowen, wherfore, this occasion offred, of verye speciall frendshippe se his tyme to set hym forwarde, and by suche wyse to dooe hym good, that all the enemies that he had (excepte the deuell) coulde neuer haue dooen hym so muche hurte and shame, for vpon the pages woordes kynge Rycharde aroose, for this communicacy∣on had he sytting on a drafte, a conuenyente car∣pet for suche a counsaile, and came oute into the palette chaumbre, where he dyd fynde in bedde
the sayd Iames Tyrell and syr Thomas Tyrell of persone like and brethren of blood, but nothyng of kynne in condicions. Then sayde ye kyng mere∣ly to theim, what syrs, be you in bed so sone? & cal∣led vp Iames Tyrrell, and brake to hym secretely his mynde in this myscheuous matter, in ye which he foūde hym nothyng straunge. Wherfore on the morowe he sent hym to Brakenburye with a lettre by the whiche he was commaunded to delyuer to the sayde Iames all the keyes of the towre for a night, to thende that he might there accomplyshe the kynges pleasure in suche thynges as he there had geuen hym in commaundement. After which lettre delyuered and the keyes receaued, Iames appoynted the nexte nyght ensuynge to destroye theim, deuysyng before & preparyng the meanes. The prince assone as the protectoure tooke vpō hym to bee kyng, and left the name of protectoure, was therof aduertised and shewed, that he should not reygne but his vncle should haue the croune At whiche woorde the prynce sore abashed be∣ganne to sighe and sayed: Alas I woulde myne vncle woulde lette my haue me lyfe althoughe I lese my kyngdome. Then he that tolde hym the tale vsed hym with good woordes and put hym in the best conforte that he coulde, but foorthwith he and his brother were both shut vp, and all other remoued from theim, one called blacke Wyll, and wyllyam slaughter only excepte, whiche were sette to serue theim, and .iiii. other to see theim sure. Af∣ter whiche tyme, the prince neuer tyed his poyntes nor any thyng rought of hym selfe, but with that young babe his brother lyngered in thought and
heueuysse, till these trayterous death deliuered theim of that wretchednesse. For Iames Tirrell deuised that thei should be murthered in their beddes, and no bloode shed, to thexecuciō wherof he apoincted Myles Forest one of the foure that before kepte theim, a feloe fleshe bred in murther before tyme: and to him he ioyned one Ihon Dighton his awne horskeper, a bygge broade square & strong knaue. Then all the other beyng remoued from theim, this Myles Forest & Ihon Dighton aboute mydnight the children be∣yng in their beddes, came into the chaumbre and The mur¦therynge of kynge Edward his chyl∣dren. sodenly lapped theim vp emongest the clothes & so bewrapped theim and entangled theim, kepyng downe by force the fetherbed and pyllowes heard vnto their mouthes, yt within awhile thei smored and styfled theim, and their brethes faylyng thei gaue vp to God their innocent soules into ye ioyes of heauen, leauyng to the tourmētoures their bo∣dyes dedde in the bed, whiche after ye wretches per¦ceaued, first by yt strugglyng, with ye panges of dea the, & after long liyng still to be throughly dedde, thei laied the bodyes out vpon ye bed, and fetched Iames Tirrell to se theim, whiche when he sawe theim perfightly ded, he caused the murtherers to burie theim at the stayre foote metely depe in the grounde vnder a greate heape of stones. Thē rode Iames Tirrell in great hast to kyng Rychard and shewed hym all the maner of ye mur∣ther, who gaue hym greate thankes, and as mēne saye, there made hym knight, but he alowed not their buriall in so vyle a corner, saiyng yt he would haue theim buryed in a better place, because thei
were a kynges soonnes. Lo the honourable cou∣rage of a kyng, for he would recompence a detesta¦ble murther with a solempne obsequy. Wherupō a preest of sir Robert Brakenburyes tooke theim vp and buried theim in suche a place secretly as by the occasion of his death (whiche was verie short∣lye after) whiche onely knewe it, the very truthe could neuer yet bee very well & perfighly knowen For some saie that kyng Rychard caused yt preest to take theim vp & close theim in lead & put theim in a coffine full of holes hoked at ye endes with .ii. hokes of yron, & so to caste them into a place called ye Blacke depes at ye thamis mouth, so yt thei shuld neuer rise vp nor bee seen again. This was ye very truth vnknowē by reason that ye said preste dyed so shortly & disclosed it neuer to any persone ye would vtter it. And for a truthe, when sir Iames Tirrell was in the towre for treason committed to kyng Hēry the seuenth: bothe he and Dighton were exa¦mined together of this poynte, & bothe thei confes∣sed the murther to bee dooen in thesame maner as you haue hearde, whether ye bodies were remoued thei bothe affirmed thei neuer knewe. And thus as I haue learned of theim yt muche knewe and litle cause had to lye, wer these .ii. noble princes, these in¦nocēt tēdre childrē, borne of ye moste royall blood & brought vp ī great welth, likely lōge to liue, to rei¦gne & rule in yt realme, by treyterous tirāny taken & depriued of their estate, shortly shut vp in prison & priuely slain & murderd by ye cruell ambicion of their vnnaturall vncle & dispiteous tourmētours whiche thynges on euery part well pōdered, God gaue this worlde neuer a more notable exsample,
either ī what vnsurety stādeth this worldes weale or what mischief worketh ye proud entreprise of an high hearte, or finally what wretched ende ensueth suche dispiteous crueltie? For first to begynne wt ye ministres, Miles Forest, at s. Martines le graūd by peace meale miserablye rotted awaye, Ihon Dightō liued at Caleys long after, no lesse disdei∣ned & hated then poynted at, & there dyed in great misery. But sir Iames Tirrell was behedded at the towre hill for treason. And kyng Richard hym¦self was slain in ye feelde hacked and hewed of his enemies handes, haried on a horsbacke naked be∣yng ded, his heare in dispite torne & tugged like a curre dogge. And the mischeif yt he toke wt in lesse then thre yeres, of the mischief yt he did in thre mo∣nethes be not comperable, & yet all ye meane tyme spēt in much trouble & pein outward, & much feare dread & anguish wt in. For I haue heard by credible persons of suche as were secret wt his chaūberers yt after this abhominable dede dooē he neuer was quiet in his minde, he neuer thought hymself sure where he wēt abrode, his bodie preuely feinted, his eyen wherled about, his hand euer on his dagger his countenaunce & maner like alwayes to stryke again, he toke eiuill rest on nightes, laye long wa∣kyng & musyng, forweried with care & watche, ra∣ther slōbred thē slept, troubled wt fearfull dreames sodeinly some tyme stert vp, leapt out of his bed & and looked aboute the chambres, so was his rest∣lesse hearte contynually tossed and toubled with the tedious inpression & stormy remēbraūce of his abhomynable murther and exreable tirannie. And shortely after he was vnquieted by a con∣spiracie,
or rather a confederacie betwene the duke of Buckynghm̄ & many other gentlemen against hym, as ye shall here the next yere. But the occasiō why the duke and the kyng fell oute, is of dyuerse folke dyuerse wyse pretended. This duke as you haue hearde before, assone as the duke of Glouce∣ster after the death of kyng Edward was come to Yorke, & there had solempne funerall seruice dooen for kyng Edward, sent to hym a secrete seruaunt of his called Persall, with suche messages as you haue hearde before. And after ye duke of Buckyng¦ham came with thre hundred horsse to Northamp∣ton and still continued with hym, as partener and chief organe of all his deuices till after his coro∣nacion, thei departed to all semyng verye frendes at Gloucestre. From whence assone as the duke came home, he so highly turned from hym and so highly conspired against hym, that a māne would meruell wherof ye chaūge grewe in so shorte space. Some saie this occasyon was, yt a litle before yt co¦ronacion, ye duke required the kyng emōgest other thrnges to bee restored to the Erle of Herffordes lāoes. And forasmuche as the title whiche he clay∣med by inherytaunce, was somewhat interlaced with the title of Lancaster, whiche house made a title to the croune, and enioyed thesame three dys∣centes, as all menne knewe, till the house of Yorke depryued the third kyng, whiche was Henry the sixte. Kyng Rychard somewhat mistrusted & con∣ceaued suche an indignacion that he reiected the dukes request, with many spitefull and minotary woordes, whiche so wounded the dukes hearte wt hatred and mistrust, that he could neuer after en∣dure
to looke ryght on kyng Rychard, but euer feared his owne lyfe, so farrefoorth that when the protectoure should ryde to his coronacion, feig∣ned hymselfe sycke, because he would dooe hym no honoure. And the other takyng it in euell parte sente hym woorde to ryse and ryde or he would make hym to be caryed. Wherupō gorgeously ap∣parelled and sumpteously trapped with burnyng carte naues of golde embrodered, he roade before the kyng through London with an euell wyll and woorsse heart. And yt notwithstandyng, he roase ye daye of the coronacion from the feaste, feignyng hym selfe sycke, whiche kyng Richarde sayde was dooē in hate and spight of hym. And therfore men sayd that eche of theim euer after lyued cōtynual∣ly in suche hatred and dystrust of other, that the duke looked verelye to haue bene murthered at Gloucestre, frō whiche he in fayre maner departed but surely suche as were right secrete with bothe, affyrme all this to be vntrue, and other wyse mēne thynke it vnlykely, the depe dyssymulyng nature of bothe these menne well consydered. And what nede in that grene world the protectoure hadde of the duke, and in what perell the duke stoode yf he fell once in suspycion of that tyraunte, that other ye protectoure would geue the duke occasyon of dys∣pleasure, or the duke the protectoure occasyon of mystrust. And surely menne thynke, that if kyng Rychard hadde any suche opynyon conceaued in hym, he would neuer haue suffred hym to aduoyd his handes or escape his power, but verye true it is, that the duke of Buckyngham was an high mynded man, & euell could beare the glorye of an∣other,
so that I haue hearde of some that sawe it yt he at suche tyme that the croune was set vpon the protectoures hedde, his yie could neuer abyde the sight therof, but wryed his hed another waye, but men sayde he was not well at ease, and that was both to kyng Richard well knowen and well takē nor any demaunde of the dukes request vncurte∣ously reiected, but gentelye deferred, but bothe he with greate giftes and high behestes in moste lo∣uyng and trustie maner departed from the kyng to Gloucester. But sone after his commyng home to Brecknocke, hauyng there by kyng Richardes commaundemēt doctour Moorton byshop of Ely who before as you haue hearde was taken at the councell at the towre, waxed with hym very famy∣lyer, whose onlye wysedome abused his pryde to his owne delyueraunce & the dukes dystruccion. The byshop was a man of great natural wyt, ve∣rye well learned and of honourable behaueoure, lackyng no wyse wayes to wynne fauour. He was fyrst vpon the parte of kyng Henry, whyle yt parte was in wealth, and neyther left it nor forsoke it in no woo, but fled the realme with the quene and the prince. And while kyng Edward had kyng Henry in pryson, he neuer retourned but to the felde at Barner. After whiche felde loste & vtterly subdued & al parte takynges extynguished, kyng Edward for his fast faythe and wysedome, was not onelye cōtent to receaue hym but also wooed hym to come and had hym frō thensforth both in secrete trust & specyall fauoure, whom he nothyng deceaued. For he beyng after kyng Edwardes death fyrst taken by the tyraunt for his truthe to the kynge, founde
meane to sette the duke in his toppe, and ioyned gentlemen together in ayde of the erle of Riche∣mounde, whiche after was named kyng Henrye the seuenth. Fyrst deuysyng the maryage betwene the ladye Elizabeth daughter to kynge Edwarde the fourthe, by the whiche, his faythfull & true ser∣uyce declared to both his masters at once, was, wt infinite benefite to ye realme, by the coniunccion of the bloddes of Lancastre and Yorke, whose fune∣rall tytles had longe inquyeted the realme. This manne afterwarde escaped from the duke and d the realme, and went to Rome, neuer myndyng to medle with the worlde, tyl kyng henry the seuenth sent for hym, and after made hym archebyshop of Cauntorbury and chauncelour of Englande and after was made cardinall, and lyued well to all mennes iudgementes and dyed well. But to re∣tourne to ye former purpose, he by the long & often alternate proffe, aswel of prosperytee as aduerse of fortune, had gotten by great experience the verey mother & mastresse of wysedome, a depe insight in pollytike worldlye driftes, whereby perceauynge nowe ye duke to cōmen with hym, fed hym wt fayre woordes and many pleasaunt prayses, and percea¦uyng by the grefe of their communicacions the dukes pryde nowe and then to balke oute a lytle brayde of enuye towarde the glorye of the kynge, and thereby feelynge hym easye to fall oute yf the matter were well handled, he craftely soughte the wayes to prycke hym forwarde, takynge alwayes the occasyon of hys commynge, and also keepynge hymselfe cloose wythin hys ban∣des, that he rather semed to folowe hym then to
leade hym. For when the duke beganne fyrste to prayse and boaste the kyng and shewe how muche profite the realme should take by his reigne. By∣shoppe Morton aunswered, surely my lorde, folye it were for me to lye, for I am sure yf I woulde swere the contrarye ye would not once beleue me, but yf the worlde would haue begone as I would haue wyshed, that kyng Henryes soonne had had the croune and not kynge Edwarde, then woulde I haue bene his true and faythfull subiecte, but after that God had ordeyned hym to lose it, and kyng Edwarde to reigne, I was neuer so madde with a dead manne to stryue agaynst the quycke, so was I euer to kynge Edwarde a faythfull and true chapeleyn, and gladde would haue bene that his chyldren shoulde haue succeded hym, howbeit yf the secrete iudgemente of God haue otherwyse prouyded, I purpose not to spurne agaynste the prycke, nor laboure to set vp that God pulleth downe. And as for the late protectoure and nowe kyng, and with that woorde he left, sauynge that he saide that he hadde alreadye medled to muche with the worlde, and would from that daye medle with his booke and bedes, and no ferther. Then longed the duke sore to heare what he woulde haue sayde, because he ended with the kynge, and there so sodeynlye stopped, and exhorted hym fa∣mylyerly, betwene theim bothe to bee bolde and to saye whatsoeuer he thought, whereof he fayth∣fullye promysed there shoulde neuer come hurte, and paraduenture more good then he woulde were. And that he hym selfe entended to vse hys faythfull secrete aduyce and counsayle, which
he sayed was the onlye cause for the whyche he procured of the kynge to haue hym in hys custo∣dye, where he myghte recon hym selfe at home, or elles he hadde bene putte in the handes of theim wyth whome he shoulde not haue founde lyke fauoure. The bishoppe right humblye than∣ked hym and sayed, in good faythe my lorde, I loue not muche to talke of prynces as of a thynge not all oute of perell, althoughe the woorde bee without faute, but as it pleaseth the prince to con¦strue it. And euer I thynke on Isopes tale, that when the Lyon had proclaymed that on payne of deathe there shoulde no horned beastes come into the wood, one beaste that had a bonche of fleshe growing oute of his hedde, fledde a greate pace: ye Foxe that sawe hym flye with all the haste, asked hym whether he fledde? In fayth {quod} he, I neither wote ne recke so I were once hence, because of the proclamacyon made agaynste horned beastes. What foole {quod} the foxe, the Lyon neuer ment it by the, for that whiche thou haste is no horne in thy hedde. No mary {quod} he, I wote that well ynoughe, but yf he saye it is a horne, where am I then? The duke laughed merely at the tale & saied, my lorde I warraunte you, neither the Lyon nor the bore shall pycke any matter at any thyng here spoken, for it shall neuer come nere their cares. In good faythe syr saied the Byshoppe, yf it dyd, the thyng that I was aboute to saye taken aswell as before God I mente, it coulde deserue but thanke, and yet taken as I wene it would, myghte happen to turne me to lytle good and you to lesse. Then longed the duke muche more to were what
it was, wherupon the byshop saied. In good faith my lord, as for the late protectoure, ith he is now kyng in possessyon I purpose not to dispute his ti¦tle, but for the welthe of this realme, whereof his grace hathe nowe the gouernaunce, and wherof I my selfe am a poore membre, I was aboute to wysh that to those good habilitees wherof he hath already righte many, litle nedyng my prayse, yet mighte it haue pleased God for the better store to haue geuen hym some of suche other excellent ver¦tues mete for the rule of the realme, as oure Lord hath planted in the persone of your grace, & there lefte of againe. Of whiche woordes the duke per∣ceauyng that the byshop bare vnto hym his good hearte and fauoure, mystrusted not to entre more plaine cōmunicacion with hym, so farre, that at ye laste the byshoppe declared hym selfe to bee one of theim that would gladly helpe that Richard who then vsurped the croune mighte bee deposed, if he had knowen howe it myghte conuenientely bee broughte to passe ye suche a persone as had true ti∣tle of inheritaunce vnto the same, might bee resto¦red therunto. Vpon this the saied duke, knowing the bishoppe to bee a manne of prudence and fide∣litee opened to hym all his whole hart and entent saying, my lorde I haue deuised ye waye howe the bloodde both of kyng Edward and of kyng Hen∣ry the syxte, that is lefte, beyng coupled by mary∣age and affinitee maye bee restored vnto ye croune being by iuste and true title due vnto theim both, (for kyng Richard he called not ye brother of kyng Edwarde the fourth, but his enemye and mortall fooe). The waye that the Duke had deuysed was
this, that they shoulde with all spede and celery∣tee fynde meanes to sende for Henry earle of Rich mounte (whome the rumoure wente immediatlye vpon knowledge of kynge Edwardes deathe to haue bene deliuered oute of prysone with Fraun∣ces Duke of Brytaine) & the same Henry to helpe with all their power and strength, so that the saied Henry woulde fyrste by his feithfull othe, promise that ymmediatly vpon obteigning the croune, he woulde mary and take to wyfe Elyzabeth the el∣der doughter of Edward the fourth. The byshop of Ely ryghte well alowed bothe the deuyce and purpose of the duke, and also the maner and waye howe the matter shoulde bee broughte to effecte, and founde meanes that Reynold Breye seruaūr with Margarete mother of the saied Henry, then maried to Thomas Stanley, came to the duke in to Wales, and the dukes mynde throughlye per∣ceaued and knowen, with greate spede retourned to the saied Margarete, aduertisyng the same of all thinges which betwene the duke and hym con¦cerning aswell the cōmon weale of the realme, as also the aduauncemente of her and her bloodde had been debated. Nowe it came so to passe that the duke of Buc¦kyngham and the ladye Margaret mother to the saied Henrye, had bene in communicacyon of the same matter before, and that the saied lady Mar∣garete had deuised the same meane and waye for the deposycion of kynge Rycharde and bringyng in of Henry her sonne, the whiche the Duke nowe brake vnto the byshop of Ely, wherupon thee re∣sted no more, forasmuche as she perceaued ye duke
nowe willyng to prosecute and further the sayed deuice, but that she should fynde the meanes that this matter myghte bee broken vnto Quene Eli∣zabeth the wyfe of kyng Edwade the fourthe then beynge in the Sanctuarye. And hereupon she caused one Lewes that was her physicyan in his owne name, and as thoughe it came of hym selfe to breake this matter vnto the quene, saying, that yf she would consent and agree therunto, a meane might bee founde howe to restore agayne ye blood of kyng Edwarde and kyng Henrye the syxte vn∣to the croune, and to bee aduenged of kynge Ry∣charde for the murther of kyng Edwardes chyl∣dren, and then declared that there was beyonde yt see Henry Earle of Richemounte, whiche was of the blood of Henry the sixte, whome yf she woulde be content yt he marye Elizabeth her eldest dough¦ter, there shoulde of his syde bee made righte ma∣ny frendes, and she for her parte myghte helpe in lyke maner, wherby no doubte it shoulde come to passe that he shoulde possesse the croune by moost rightfull inheritaunce. Whiche matter when she heard it, it liked her excedingly well, in so much as she counceled the saied phisicyan to breake ye same vnto his maistresse the ladye Margaret & knowe her mynde therein, promisyng vpon her woorde that she would make all the frendes of kyng Ed∣warde to take parte with the sayed Henrye yf he woulde be sworne that when he came to the pos∣sessyon of the croune, he woulde immediately take in maryage Elyzabeth her eldest doughter, or el∣les yf she lyued not that tyme, that then he would take Cicile her yongest doughter
Whereupon the sayde Lewes retourned vnto the ladye Margarete hys maystresse declarynge vnto her the whole mynd and entent of the quene So that thē it was shortly agreed betwene these two wemen, that wyth al spede thys matter shold be set forwarde, in so much that the lady Marga∣rete brake thys matter vnto Reynolde Bray wyl¦lynge hym to moue and set forwarde the same wt all suche as he shoulde perceaue eyther hable to doo good or wyllynge thereunto. Then had the quene deuysed, that one Chrystopher (whome the foresayde Lewes the Physicyan had promoted into her seruyce) shoulde bee sente into Brytayne to Henrye to geue hym knowledge of theyr myn∣des here, and that he shoulde prepare and apoynt hym selfe redye and to come into Wales, where he shoulde fynde ayde and helpe ynonghe readye to receaue hym. But then shortly after yt came vnto her know¦ledge that the Duke of Buckingham had of him¦selfe afore entended the same matter, whereupon she thoughte yt should be mete to sende some mes¦senger of more reputacyon and credyte then was thys Chrystopher, and so kepte hym at home, and then sente Hughe Conewaye wyth a greate some of monye, wyllynge hym to declare vnto Henrye all thynges, and that he should hast hym to come and to lande in Wales as is aforesayde. And af∣ter hym one Rycharde Guilforde oute of Kente sente one Thomas Ramey wyth the same mes∣sage, the whyche two messengers came in maner bothe at one tyme into Brytayn to the Earle Hen¦rye, and declared vnto hym all theyr commyssiōs
The whiche message when Henry had perceaued and throughly heard, it reioysed his harte, and he gaue thankes vnto God fully purposyng with al conuenyente spede to take his iourney towardes England, desiryng the aide and helpe of the duke of Brytayne, with promise of thanckfull recom∣pence when God should sende hym to come to his ryghte. The duke of Britayne notwithstanding that he had not longe after been required by Tho¦mas Hutton purposely sent to hym from kyng Ri¦chard in message with monye efte sones to impri∣sone the saied Henry erle of Richemoūt, and there continually to kepe and holde the same frome cō∣minge into Englande, yet with all gladnesse and fauoure inclined to the desyre of Henry and aided hym as he might with menne, monye, shypes and other necessaryes. But Henry whyle he might ac∣cordynglye appoynte and furnyshe hym selfe, re∣mayned in Brytayne sendyng afore the foresayde Hughe Coneway and Thomas Ramney, whiche two were to hym very trewe and faithful to beare tidynges into Englande vnto his frendes of his commynge, to the ende that they myghte prouy∣dentlye ordre all thynges aswell for the commo∣dyous receauynge of hym at his comminge, as also foreseynge suche daungers as myghte be∣falle, and aduoydinge suche trappes and snares as by Rycharde the thyrde and hys complyces myght bee sette for hym and for all his other com¦pany that he should bryng with hym. In the meane tyme, the frendes of Henrye with all care, studye, and dilygence wroughte all thynges vnto their purpose belongynge.
And thoughe all this were as secretlye wrought and conueyed as emonge so greate a nombre was possible to be, yet pryuye knowledge therof came to the eares of kyng Rychard, who althoughe he were at the firste hearynge muche abasshed, yet thought best to dyssemble the matter as thoughe he had no knowledge therof, whyle he myghte se∣cretly gather vnto hym power and strengthe, and by secrete spyall emonge the people get more per∣fyght knowledge of the whole matters and chiefe autoures & contryuers of the same. And because he knewe be chiefe & princypal of theim, as vnto whō his owne conscience knewe that he hadde geuen moste iust causes of enemytee, he thought it neces∣sary first of all to dyspatche the same duke oute of the waye. Wherfore, vnto the duke he addressed letters enfarced and replenyshed with all huma∣nytee, frendshippe, famylyaritee and swetenesse of woordes, wyllyng and desyryng the same to come vnto hym with all conuenyent spede. And ferther gaue in commaundemente to the messenger that caryed the letters that he shoulde in his behalfe make many high and gaye promyses vnto ye duke & by all gentle meanes persuade the same to come vnto hym. But ye duke mystrustyng ye fayre woor¦des & promyses so sodenly offred of hym, of whose wylye craftes and meanes he knewe sondrye ex∣samples afore practised, desyred ye kynges perdon, excusyng him self that he was deseased & sicke, and that he might be asserteined ye if it possyble wer for hym to come, he would not absent hym self frō his grace. Thys excuse the kyng would not admitte, but eftsones directed vnto ye duke other letters of
a more roughe sorte, not wythoute manacynge and threatenynge onlesse he woulde accordynge to hys dutye repayer vnto hym at hys callynge whereunto the duke plainely made aunswer that he woulde not come vnto him whom he knewe to be hys enemye. And immedyatelye the duke pre∣pared hym selfe to make warre agaynst hym, and perswaded all hys complyces and partakers of hys intente wyth all possyble expedycion some in one place and some in another to sturre agaynste kynge Rycharde. And by thys meanes in ma∣ner at one tyme and houre, Thomas Marques of Dorcester reysed an armye wythin the country of Yorke, beyng hym selfe late come forthe of sāc∣tuarye and by the meanes and helpe of Thomas Rowell preserued and saued frome perel of death Also in Deuonshyre, Edwarde Courtenay wyth hys brother Peter byshoppe of Excetter reysed in lyke maner an armye, and in Kent Rychard Guyl ford accompanied wyth certayn other gentylmen caysed vp the people as is a foresayde, & all thys was done in maner in one moment. But the king who had in ye meane tyme gathered together gret power & strēgth thynkyng yt not to be best by pur¦suyng euery one of hys enemyes to dysparkle hys cōpaygnie in smal flokes, determyned to let passe all the others, & withal his whole puisaunce to set vpon the chiefe heade, that is to saye the Duke of Buckynghm̄, so takyng his iourneye from Londō he went towardes Salisbury to thentent that he might sette vpon ye said duke in case he might haue perfight knowledge that ye same laye in any felde embatailed. And nowe was the kyng within twoo
dayes iourney of Salisbury when ye duke attemp¦ted to mete hym, beyng accompaignied with great strength of Welshmen, whom he had therunto en forced & coherted, more by lordly commaundement then by lyberall wages and hyre, whiche thyng in deede was ye cause that thei fell from hym and for∣sooke hym. Wherfore beyng sodenly forsaken of his menne, he was of necessite constrained to flee in whiche dooyng, as a manne cast in sodeine, and therfore greate feare, of this the sodeine chaunge of fortune, & by reason of thesame feare, not know∣yng where to become, nor where to hyde his hed nor what in suche case best to dooe, he secretly con∣ueighed hym self into the hous of Homffraye Ba∣nastar, in whom he had conceaued a sure hope and confidence to finde faithfull and trustie vnto hym because thesame had been & thē was his seruaunt, entendyng there to remayne in secrete, vntill he might either reise a newe armie or els by some me∣anes cōueigh hym self into Brytein to Henry erle of Rychemount. But assone as theothers whiche had attempted thesame entrepryse against ye kyng had knowledge that the duke was forsaken of his compaignie and fled and could not bee foūde, thei beyng stryken with sodein feare, made euery māne for hym self suche shift as he might, and beyng in vtter despayre of their health and life, either gotte theim to sāctuaryes or deserte places or els assaied to escape ouer sea, & many of theim in deede arry∣ued sauely in Britain, emong whom were these whose names ensue. Peter Curteney bishop of Exceter with his brother Edward erle of Deuon∣shire, Thomas marques of Dorcestre with his
soonne Thomas beyng a verye yoūg chylde, Ihō Bourshere, Ihon Welshe, Edward Wooduyle a stoute manne of armes and brother to Elizabeth the quene, Robert Willoughby, Gyles Dawbe∣neye, Thomas Harondell, Ihon Cheiny with his twoo brethren, Wyllyam Berkeley, Wyllyam Brandō with Thomas his brother, Rychard Ed∣gecome, and all these for the moste parte knightes Also Ihon Halwell, Edwarde Poyntz an excellēt good capitain & Christopher Vrswicke, but Ihon Moorton bishop of Ely at theself same tyme to∣gether with sondrye of the nobles and gentlemen sailed into Flaundres. But Richard the kyng, who was nowe come to Salisbury and had gotten perfight knowledge that all these parties sought to slie the realme, with all dyligence and hast that might bee, sent to all ye porte tounes theraboute to make sure steye that none of theim might passe vntaken, and made pro¦clamacion yt whosoeuer would bryng hym know∣ledge where the duke of Buckynghm were to bee had, should haue for his rewarde, if he were a bō∣deman, his frebome, and if he were fre, his pardon and besydes that, a thousand pounde of moneye. Furthermore because he vnderstode by Tho∣mas Hutton newely retourned oute of Britein, of whom afore is mencioned, that Fraunces duke of Brytain, would not onelye holde Henry Erle of Rychmount in prisone for his sake, but also was readie to helpe thesame Henry with menne, money and shippes in all that he might against hym, he sette dyuerse and sondry shippes in places conue∣nyent by all the seacostes to Brytain ward, that if
Henry should come that waye, he might either bee taken before his arriuall or els might bee kept frō landyng in any coaste of England. And further∣more in euerie coaste and corner of ye realme, laied wondrefull wayte and watche to take partely any other of his enemies, and specially thesaid duke of Buckynghm̄. Wherupon thesaid Homffrey Ba∣naster (were it for mede or for losyng his life and goodes,) disclosed. hym vnto the kynges inquysy∣ours, who ymediatly tooke hym and foorthwith all, brought hym to Salisbury where kyng Ry∣chard was. The duke beyng dylygently examined vttred without any maner refusall or styckyng all suche thynges as he knewe, trustyng that for his plain confession he should haue lybertee to speake with the kyng, whiche he made moste instaūt and humble peticion that he might dooe. But assone as he had cōfessed his offence towardes kyng Ry∣chard, he was oute of hande behedded. And this death ye duke receaued at the handes of kyng Ry∣chard whom he had before holpen in his affayrs and purposes beyonde all Gods forbode. Whyle these thynges wer in hand in England Henry Erle of Richmount made readye his hoste and strength to the nombre of fiue thousand Bry∣tones and fiftene shippes, ye daye apoynted of his departure beyng nowe come, whiche was ye twelfe daye of the moneth of Octobre in the yere of our lorde God a thousand foure hundred .lxxxiiii. and the seconde yere of ye reigne of kyng Richard and hauyng a fayre wynde, hoysed vp the sayles & setforwarde, but towarde the night came suche a tempest that thei were dispersed one from another
some into Britain and some into Normandy. But the ship in whiche Henry was with one other ship; tossed all the night with the waues of the sea and tempest, when the mornyng came, it waxed some∣what calme and faire weder, and thei were come toward the South parte of England by a hauen or porte called Poole, where thesaid Henry sawe all the shores or bankes sette full of harnessedmen whiche were souldyours apoynted there to wayte, by kyng Rychard as we haue saied before, for the comyng & landyng of the erle. While Henry there abode he gaue commaundement, that no manne should land before yt comyng of the other shippes. And in the meane tyme that he wayted for theim, he sent a litle bote with a fewe in it a lād to knowe what thei were that stoode on the shore, his frēdes or enemies. To whom those souldyours beeyng before taught what thei should saie, aunswered that thei were the frendes of Henry and were ap∣poynted by ye duke of Buckynghm̄ there to abide his commyng and to conducte hym to those castel∣les and holdes where his tentes, pauylyons and arllary for the warre laie, and where remayned for hym a greate power that entended nowe with all spede to set vpon kyng Rychard while he was nowe sle for feare and cleane without prouision, and therfore besought hym to come alande. Henry suspectyng this to bee but fraude, after that he saw none of his shippes apered, hoysed vp the satles, hauyng a meruelous good wynde euen apoynted hym of God to delyuer hym from that great ieopardy, and sayled backe agayn into Nor mandy. And after his landyng there, he and his
compaignie after their laboures, arested theim for the space of .iii. dayes, determynyng to go from thence afoote into Brytayne, & in the meane while sent messengers vnto Charles the Frenche kynge the sonne of Lewes that a lytle before departed, be sechyng hym of lybertee and lycence to passe tho∣rough Normādy into Brytayn. The young kyng Charles beeyng sory for his fortune, was not on∣lye ready and well pleased to graunt his passage, but also sent hym moneye to helpe hym foorthe in his iourneye. But Henry before that he knewe the kynges mynde (not doubtyng of his great huma∣nytee and gentlenes) had sent awaye his shippes towardes Britayne and had set hym selfe forwar∣des in his iourneye, but made no greate haste tyll the messengers retourned, whiche greate gentle∣nes when he receaued from the kyng, reioysed his hearte and with a lustye stomacke and good hope set forwarde into Brytayne, there to take ferther counsayle of his affayres. And when he was in Brytayn, he receaued frō his frendes out of Englande knowledge that the duke of Buckyngham was behedded, and that the Marques of Dorcestre with a greate nombre of ye noble men of Englande had bene there a lytle be∣fore to seke hym, and that they wer now in Veneti a cytie in Brytayne. The whiche thynges beynge knowen to the erle, he on the one parte did greate∣ly lament the death and euel chaunce of his chiefe and princypall frende, but yet on the other parte he greatlye reioysed in that he had so many & no∣ble menne to take his parte in the battayll. And therfore conceauynge a good hope and opinion
that his purpose shoulde well frame and come to passe, determyned with hym selfe with all expedy∣cion to set foorth warde, and therupon wente to a place in Brytayn called Rhedon, and from thence sent to the Marques with all the other noble men that they should come vnto hym. Then when they hearde that Henrye was safe returned into Bry∣tayne reioysed not a lytle, for thei had thought he had landed in Englande, and so fallen into the handes of kyng Richarde, and they made not a lytle haste tyll they wer come vnto hym. The whi∣che when they met, after greatloye and gladnesse aswell of their parte as of his, they began to talke of their prepensed matters, and nowe was Christ∣masse come, on the whiche daye they altogether as∣sembled in the churche and there sware fayth and truthe one to another. And Henry sware first, pro∣mysyng that assone as he should possesse ye croune of England, that he woulde marye Elyzabeth the doughter of Edward the .iiii. and after warde they sware feaultie & homage vnto hym euē as though he had already bene kyng, and so from that tyme foorthe dyd take hym, promysyng hym that thei would spende bothe their lyfes and goodes with hym, & that Richard should no lēger reigne ouer theim. When this was dooen, Henry declared all these thynges to the duke of Britayne, praiynge & desyryng hym nowe of helpe, and that he woulde ayde hym with a greater nombre of menne, & also to lende hym a frendly & honest somme of moneye that he might nowe recouer his right and enheri∣taunce of the croune of England, vnto yt which he was called & desyred by al the lordes & nobilitee of
the realme, & whiche (God wyllyng) he was moste assured to possesse, and after his possessiō he would moste faythfully restore the same again. The duke promysed hym ayde, vpon the truste wherof, he be∣ganne to make redye his shippes that they might with all expedicion bee redy to sayle that no tyme should be loste. In the whiche tyme kyng Richard was agayn retourned to London, & had taken dy∣uerse of theim yt wer of this conspyracy, yt is to say George Browne, Roger Clyfforde, Thomas Se∣lenger, knyghtes. Also Thomas Ramme, Robert Clyfford and dyuerse other whom he caused to be put to death. After this he called a parliament wherin was deereed, that all those that were fled oute of the lande should be reputed and taken as enemyes to the realme, and all their landes and goodes to bee forfayte and confiscate. And not content with that preade which was no smal thyng, he caused also a great taxe and some of monye to be leuyed of the people. For ye large giftes and lyberalytee that he first vsed to buye the fauoures & frendshippes of many, had now brought him in nede. But nothing was more like then yt Thomas Stanley shoulde haue bene reputed & takē for one of those enemies because of the woorkyng of Margarete his wife which was mother vnto Henry erle of Richemoūt the which was noted for ye chiefe hed & worker of this cōspyracy. But for asmuch as it was thought that it was to small purpose that wemen coulde dooe: Thomas beynge nothyng fauty was dely∣ed and cōmaūded that he should not suffre Mar∣garete his wyfe to haue any seruaūtes about her,
neither yt she should not go abroad but be shut vp and yt from thence foorth she should sende no mes∣sage neyther to her soonne nor to any of her other frendes, wherby any hurte mighte be wrought a∣gaynst the kyng, the whiche commaundemēt was accomplyshed. And by the authoryte of the same perliament, a peace was concluded with the Scot¦tes, whiche a lytle before had skyrmyshed with the borderers. Which thyng brought to passe, ye kyng supposed all conspiracye to bee clene auoyded, for asmuche as the duke with other of his compaig∣nie were put to death, and also certen other ban∣nyshed. Yet for all this, kyng Richard was day∣lye vexed and troubled, partelye mystrustynge his owne strength, and partely fearyng the com∣myng of Henrye with his compaignye, so that he lyued but in a myserable case. And because that he would not so continue any lenger, he determyned with hym selfe to put awaye the cause of this his feare and busynesse, either by pollecye or elles by strength. And after that he hadde thus purposed with hym selfe, he thought nothyng better then to tempte the duke of Britayn yet once again eyther with money, prayer or some other speciall rewarde because yt he had in kepyng the erle Henry, & moste chiefly, because he knewe yt it was only he yt might delyuer hym from all his trouble by delyueryng or imprisoning the sayed Henry. Wherfore incon∣tmentlye he sente vnto the duke certein Ambassa∣doures, the whiche should promesse vnto hym be∣syde other greate rewardes that they broughte with theim, to geue hym yerely all the reuenues of all the landes of Henry and of all the other lordes
there beyng with hym, yf he woulde after the re∣ceyte of the ambassadoures put theim in prysone. The Ambassadoures beynge departed and come where the duke laye could not haue communica∣cion with hym, for asmuch as by extreme sicknesse his wyttes were feble and weake. Wherfore one Peter Landose his Treasourer a manne bothe of pregnaunte wytte and of greate authoritee, tooke this matter in hand. For whiche cause he was af∣terwarde hated of all the lordes of Britain. With this Peter the Englishe ambassadoures had com¦municacion, & declaring to hym the kynges mes∣sage desyred hym instantlye, for asmuche as they knewe that he might bring theyr purpose to passe that he woulde graunt vnto kyng Richardes re∣quest, and he shoulde haue the yerely reuenues of all the landes of the sayed lordes. Peter conside∣ring that he was greatly hated of ye lordes of his owne nacion, thoughte that yf he myght bring to passe thoroughe kyng Richarde to haue all these greate possessyons and yerely reuenues, he should then bee hable to matche with theim well ynough and not to care a rushe for theim, whereupon he aunswered the ambassadoures that he would doo that Richard dyd desire, yf he brake not promesse with hym. And this did he not for any hatred that he bare vnto Henry, for he hated hym not, for not longe before he saued his lyfe where the earle Hen¦ry was in greate eoperdye. But suche was the good fortune of Englande, that this craftye com∣pacte tooke no place, for whyle the letters and mes¦sengers ranne betwene Peter and kyng Kichard, Iohn Bishoppe of Ely beinge then in Flaundres
was certifyed by a preest whiche came oute of En¦gland whose name was Christopher Vrswicke of all the whole circumstaunce of this deuyce & pur∣pose. Wherupon with all spede the sayed byshop caused the saied preest the same daye to cary know ledge therof into Britayn to Henry erle of Riche∣mounte willing hym with all the other noble men to dyspatche theim selues wt all possible haste into Fraunce, Henry was then in Veneti whē he heard of this fraud, without tariaunce sent Christopher vnto Charles the Frenche kyng desiring lycence that Henry with the other noble men myght safe∣ly come into Fraunce, the which thing being sone obteigned, the messenger retourned with spede to his lorde and Prince. Then the earle Henry setting all his businesse in as good staye & ordre as he mighte, talked lytle and made fewe a counsail herof, & for the more ex∣pedicyon hereof, he caused therle of Penbrucke se¦cretly to cause all the noble men to take their hor∣ses, dissembling to ride vnto the duke of Bretain, but when they came to the vttermost partes ther∣of, they should forsake the waye that led theim to∣ward the duke, and to make into Fraunce with all that euer they might. Then they dooing in euery thing as they were biddē loste no tyme but so sped theim that shortely they obteygned and gate into the coūtie of Angeou. Henry then within .ii. dayes folowyng, being then styll at Veneti tooke .iiii. or fyue of his seruauntes with hym, and feigned as thoughe he woulde haue ryden therby to visyte a frende of his, and forasmuche as there were many Englishmenne lefte there in the toune, no manne
suspected any thynge, but after that he had kepte the ryghte waye for the space of fyue myles, he forsooke that and turned streyghte into a woode that was thereby, and tooke vpon hym his ser∣uauntes apparell, and putte his apparell vpon hys seruaunte, and so tooke but one of theym with hym, on whome he waited as thoughe he had bene the seruaunte and the other the maister. And with all conuenyente and spedy haste so sette forthe on theyr iourney that no tyme was loste, and made no more tariaunce by the way then one¦lye the baitynge of theyr horses, so that shortly he recouered the coastes of Angeou where all his o∣ther companye was. But within foure dayes after that the Earle was thus escaped. Peter receaued from kyng Ri∣chard the confirmacion of the graunte and promi¦ses made for the betreiyng of Henry and the other nobles. Wherfore the saide Peter sente oute after hym horses and menne with suche expedicion and spede to haue taken hym, that scacely the erle was entred Fraunce one houre but they were at his he¦les. The Englyshe menne then beyng aboue the noumbre of thre hundreth at Veneti, hearing that the Earle and all the nobles were fled so sodeinly and withoute any of their knowledge, were asto∣nyed and in maner despaired of theyr lyues. But it happened contrary to theyr exspectacyon for the duke of Britaine taking the matter so vn∣kyndely that Henry should bee so vsed with hym that for feare he shoulde bee compelled to flee his lande, was not a lytle vexed with Peter, to whom (althoughe that he was ignoraunte of the fraude
and crafte that had been wrought by hym) yet he layed the whole faute in hym, and therfore called vnto hym Edward Poyninges & Edward Wood vile, deliuering vnto theim the foresayde monye ye Henrye before had desyred the Duke to lende hym towarde the charge of his iourney, and commaun¦ded theim to conuey and conducte all the English menne his seruauntes vnto hym paying theyr ex∣penses, and to deliuer the sayde some of monye vn to the earle. When the earle sawe his menne come and hearde this comfortable newes, he not a lytle reioysed, desiring the messengers that returned to shewe vnto the duke, that he trusted ere long time to shewe him selfe not to bee vnthankeful for this greate kyndnesse that he nowe shewed vnto hym. And within fewe dayes after, the earle went vnto Charles the French kyng, to whome after he had rendred thankes for the great benefites and kind nesse that he had receaued of hym, the cause of his comming fyrste declared, then he besought him of his helpe and ayde, whiche shoulde bee an immor tall benefite to hym and his lordes, of whome ge∣nerallye he was called vnto the kyngdome, foras∣much as they so abhorred the tiranny of kyng Ry¦chard. Charles promised hym helpe and bade him to be of good chere & to take no care, for he would gladly declare vnto hym his beneuolence. And the same tyme Charles remoued and tooke with hym Henry and all the other noble menne. Whyle Henry remained there, Iohn Earle of Oxenford (of whome is before spoken) which was put in prisone by Edward the fourth in the castell of Hammes with also Iames Blounte Capteine
of that castell, and Iohn Forskewe knyghte Por∣ter of the towne of Caleies, came vnto hym. But Iames the capitain, because he lefte his wife in ye castell, dyd furnyshe the same with a good gari∣son of men before his departure. Henry when he sawe therle, was out of measure glad ye so noble a man and of greate experience in battayl, and so valiaunt & hardie a knight, whom he thought to bee moste feithfull and sure, for so∣muche as he had in the time of Edward ye fourth, continuall battail with hym in defending of Hen¦ry the syxte, thought that nowe he was so well a∣pointed that he coulde not desire to bee better, and therfore cōmunicated vnto hym all his whole af∣faires, to bee ordred and ruled only by hym. Not longe after Charles the Frenche kyng remoued again to Paris, whome Henry folowed, and there againe moued and besoughte the kyng as he had moste fauourably & kindely entreteigned hym all this time, not only in wordes, but also in dedes yt it would lykewise please hym yet so much further to extend his fauoure & beneuolence vnto hym that nowe he woulde ayde and helpe hym forwarde in his iourney, yt not onely he, but also all the lordes and nobilytee of Englande myghte iustely haue cause to knowlage and confesse that by the meane of his fauoure and goodnesse they were restored againe to the possessyon of their enherytaunces, whiche withoute hym they coulde not well bryng to passe. In the meane while, his fortune was suche, ye many Englyshe menne came ouerdaylye oute of Englande vnto him, and many whiche then were
in Paris, amonge whome were diuerfe studentēs that fell vnto his parte bothe more and lesse, and specially there was one, whose name was Richard Foxe a Preest, beyng a manne of a synguler good wytte and learning, whome Henry streyght waye reteigned and cōmitted all his secretes vnto hym and whome also afterward he promoted to many hyghe promocyons, and at the laste he made hym bishop of Winchester. Richarde then hearyng of all this conspiracye and of the greate ayde that dayly wente ouer vn∣to Henry, thought yet for all this, that if he might bring to passe that Henry should not couple in ma¦ryage with the blood of king Edwarde, that then he shoulde dooe well ynoughe with hym and kept hym from the possessyon of the croune. Then de∣uysed he with hym selfe all the wayes and mea∣nes that myghte bee howe to bryng this to passe. And fyrste he thoughte it to bee beste with fayre woordes & large promesses to attempte the quene whose fauoure obteygned, he doubted not but shortelye to fynde the meanes to haue bothe her doughters oute of her handes into his owne, and then rested nothynge but yf he hym selfe myghte fynde the meanes after warde to marye one of the same doughters, whereby he thought he shoulde make all sure and safe to the vtter disapoyntinge of Henrye. Wherupon he sente vnto the Quene then beynge in the Sanctuarye dyuerse and son∣drye messengers that shoulde excuse and pourge hym of his facte afore dooen towardes her, set∣tynge forthe the matter with plesaunte woordes and hye promyses bothe to her and also her sonne
Thomas lorde Marques of Dorset, of all thyn∣ges that coulde be desyred. These messengers be∣yng men of grauitee, handled the quene so eftly that anone she beganne to bee alured and to her∣ken vnto theim fauourably, so that in conclusion she promysed to be obedient to the kyng in his re∣quest (forgettyng the iniuries he had dooen to her before, and on the other parte not remembryng ye promesse that she made to Maigarete Henryes mother.) And first she delyuered both her dough∣ters into the handes of kyng Rychard, then after she sent preuely for the Lorde Marques her sonne beyng then at Parys wt Henry (as ye haue heard) wyllyng hym to forsake Henrye with whome he was, and spedely to returne into Englande for all thynges was perdoned and forgeuen, & she again in fauoure and frendship of ye kyng, and it should be highly for his aduauncement and honoure. Kyng Richard (whē quene Elizabeth was thus brought into a fooles paradyce) after he had recea¦ued al his brothers doughters from the sanctuary into his palayce, thought there nowe remayned nothyng to be dooen, but only the castyng awaye and destroiyng of his owne wife, whiche thynge he had wholy purposed and decreed within hym selfe. And there was nothyng that feared hym so much from this mooste cruell & detestable murder as the losyng of the good opynion ye he thought the people had conceyued of hym, for as ye haue heard before, he faigned hym selfe to be a good mā and thought the people had estemed hym euen so. Notwithstandyng shortly after, his foresaide vn∣gracious purpose, ouercame al this honest feare.
And first of all, he absteyned from beddyng or ly∣yng with her: and also found him self greued with the barrēnesse of his wife, that she was vnfruteful and brought hym forth no chyldren, complamyng therof very greuously vnto ye nobles of his realme and chieflye aboue other vnto Thomas Rothe∣rame then archebishoppe of Yorke (whome he had delyuered a lytle afore oute of pryson) the whiche byshop did gather of this, that the quene should be rid out of the waye, ere it were long after (suche experience had he of kyng Richardes complexciō who had practised many lyke thynges not longe before) & thesame tyme also he made dyuerse of his secrete frendes preuy of thesame his coniecture. After this, he caused a rumoure to ronne amōg the commen people (but he woulde not haue ye au¦toure knowen) yt the quene was dead, to thentent yt she hearyng this meruelous rumour, should take so greueous a conceyt that anone after she should fall into some great disease, so that he would assay that waye, in case it should chaunce her afterward to be sicke, dead or otherwyse murdred, that then ye people might impute her death vnto ye thought she tooke or els to ye sickenesse. But whē the quene heard of so horryble a rumour of her death sprōge abroade among the commen people, she suspected the matter and supposed the worlde to be at an ende with her, and incontinently, she wente to the kyng with a lamentable countenaunce, and with wepyng teares asked hym, whether she had dooen any thyng whereby he might iudge her worthy to suffer death. The kyng made aunswere with a smi¦lyng and dissimulyng countenaūce and with flat∣teryng
woordes, byddyng her to bee of good com∣forte and to plucke vp her heart for there was no suche thyng toward her that he knewe. But howe so euer it fortuned, either by sorowe or els by poy∣sonyng, within fewe daies after, the quene was dedde and afterwarde was buryed in the abbay of Westminster. This is the same Anne, one of Ry∣chard the earle of Warwikes doughters whiche once was cōtracted to prince Edwarde kyng Hē∣ry the sixt his soonne. The kyng beyng thus delyuered of his wife fantasied a pace ladye Elizabeth his nice, desiryng in any wise to mary with her: but because that all menne, yee and the mayden her self abhorred this vnlawfull desire, as a thyng mooste detestable, he determined with hym self to make no greate hast in the matter, chiefly for that he was in a pecke of troubles, fearyng least yt of the noble menne some would forsake hym & runne vnto Henry his part, the other at the leste would fauoure the secrete con¦spiracy made again hym, so that of his ende there was almoost no doubte. Also the more parte of the commen people were in so greate dispeare, that many of theim had rather to bee accompted in the noumbre of his enemies, then to put theim selfes in ieopardy bothe of losse of body and goodes in takyng of his parte. And emongest those noble menne whom he fea∣red, first was Thomas Standley and Wyllyam his brother, Gylbert Talbote, & of other a greate noūbre, of whose purpose▪ though kyng Rychard was ignoraunt, neuerthelesse he trusted not one of theim, and lest of all Thomas Standley, because
he had maryed Henryesanother, as it maye well appeare by this that fol oweth. For when the sayd Thomas woulde haue departed from the courte vnto his owne mansion for his recreacion (as he saide) but ye truthe was, because he woulde bee in a readynesse to receaue Henry and ayde hym at his commyng into the realme. But the kyng did let hym, and would not suffer hym to departe, vn∣tyll suche tyme he had left in the courte behynde hym George Strange his soonne and heyre for a pledge. And whyle kynge Richarde was thus wrapped in feare and care of ye tumulte that was to come, lo, euen then tydynges came that Hen∣rye was entred into the lande, and that the castell of Hammes was prepared to receiue Henry, by the meanes of the erle of Oxenforde whiche then was fled with Iames Blunte keper of the castell vnto Henry. Then kyng Rychard, thynkyng at the begyn∣nyng to stey all this matter, sent forth with all hast he greater parte that were then at Calyce to re∣couer the said castell again. Those that were in the castell, when thei sawe their aduersaries make towardes theim, spedely thei armed theim selfes to defence and in al hast sent messengers to Hēry, desyryng hym of ayde. Henry forthwith sent the erle of Oxenforde with a chosen sorte of menne to assist theim, and at their first commyng they laid siege not farre from the castell. And whyle kyng Rychardes menne turned backe hauyng an yie towardes theim: Thomas Brandon with thirty valeaunt menne of the otherside gate ouer a wa∣ter in to the castell, to strength theim that were
within. Then thei that were within laid heard to their charge that were without, on ye otherside, the erle of Oxenford so valiantly assayled them of the backeside that thei were glad to make proclama∣ciō to theim that were within, that if thei would be content to geue ouer the castell, thei should haue free liberte to departe with all that euer thei had. The erle of Oxenforde hearyng this, whiche came onely to saue his frendes from hurte, and namely Iames Bluntes wife, was contented with this condicion and departed in saufgarde with all his frendes returning backe to Henry, whiche was at Paris. After this, kyng Rychard was informed yt the Frenche kyng was wery of Henry & his com∣paignie, and would doo nothyng for hym, wherby Henry was nowe not hable in maner to helpe him self, so that it was not possible yt he shuld preuaile or goo forwarde in thenterprise that he thoughte to haue taken in hande agaynst kynge Rycharde. Kynge Rycharde beeyng brought thus into a false paradice, thought hym selfe to bee out of all feare, and that there was no cause why he should beynge so sure, ones to wake oute of hys slepe or trouble hym selfe any furder, and therefore cal∣led backe hys nauye of shyppes that then was redy vpon the sea, whyche was fullye furnyshed to haue scoured the seas. But yet for the more su∣retie least he should bee sodenly oppressed, he gaue commaundemente to the greatte men dwellynge by the sea syde (and specyally the Welshemen) to watche nyghte and daye, leaste his aduersaries shuld haue eny oportunitee to entre into the lande. As the fashyon is in time of warre that those that
dwell by the sees side should make bekyns in the highest places there about, whiche might bee sene afarre of, so that when it should chaunce their ene∣myes to aryue towarde the lande, by and by they should fyre theyr bekyns and rayse the countreye, to thentent that quickely from place to place they might be ascerteyned of all the whole matter and also to arme theim selfes spedelye agaynste theyr enemies. And so to come to our purpose agayn, kyng Ri∣chard thorough the aforesaide tydynges, beganne to bee more carelesse and rechelesse, as who saye, he had no power to withstand the desteny that honge ouer his hedde. Suche is the prouydent iustyce of God, that a manne dooeth leste knowe, prouyde & beware when the vengeaunce of God is euen at hande for his offences. And to go forth, at ye tyme when Henry the earle of Richemounte remayned in Fraunce entretyng and suyng for ayde & helpe of the Frenche men, many of the chiefe noble men, which had the realme in gouernaunce (because of the young age of Charles the kyng) fel somewhat at dissencion, of the whiche variaunce, Lewes the prynce of Orlyaunce was the chiefe and hedde, whiche because he had maryed Iohanne the kyn∣ges syster looked to haue bene chiefe gouernoure of all the realme. By the which meanes it came to passe, that no one man had the princypall gouer∣naunce of the realme. And therefore Henry the erle was constraigned to sue vnto all the nobles seue∣rallye one after another desyrynge and praiynge theim of aide and helpe in his purpose, and thus the matter was prolonged. In the meane tyme
Thomas the Marques of Dorcet (of whome we spake afore) was preuely sent for to come home by his mother, partely mystrustynge that Henrye should not preuayle, and partly for the greate and large promesses that kyng Richard had made to her for hym before. Whiche letters when the sayd Marques had receaued, he beleuyng all thynges that his mother wrote vnto hym, and also thyn∣kyng that Henry should neuer preuayle, and that the Frenchemen did but mocke and daylye with hym: he sodeynly in the night tyme conueyed hym selfe out of Parys and with great spede made to∣wardes Flaūders. The whiche thyng when ye erle and other of the Englishe lordes heard of, thei wer sore astonned & amased, & with all spede purcha∣sed of Charles the kyng a lycence and commaun∣dement that the Marques might by steyed wher∣soeuer he wer found wt in the dominion of Fraūce chiefly for that he was secrete of their councel and knewe all there purpose. The cōmaundemēt was quickly obteyned & postes made forth euery waye, emōgest whom one Humfrey Cheyncy plaiyng ye parte of a good blooddehounde so truely, smelled out and folowed the trace, that by and by he found out and toke the Marques: and so handled & per∣suaded hym with gentle and good woordes, that shortely after he was content to retourne. Then Henry beyng delyuered of this chaunce, thought it best to prolonge the matter no farther least he should loose both the present oportunytee and also wery his frendes that looked for hym in Englande. Wherfore he made haste and set fore∣warde with a small army obteyned of the Frenche
kyng, of whom he also borowed some money, and some of other of his frendes, for the whiche he left the Marques and Ihon Burchere behynde for a pledge. And so setting forward came to Roan, and whyle he taryed there and prepared shippyng at ye hauen of Seyne, tydynges cam to hym ye kyng: Ri∣chardes wyfe was deade, & purposed to mary with the lady Elysabeth, kyng Edwardes eldest dough¦ter being his nice, & that he had maried Cycile her syster to a mannes sonne of the lāde far vnderneth her degre. At the whiche thyng, Henry was sore a∣mased and troubled, thynkyng that by this mea∣nes al his purpose was dashed, for that there was no other waye for hym to come to the kyngdome but only by the maryage of one of kyng Edwar∣des doughters. And by this menes also, he feared least his frendes in Englande would shrynke frō hym for lacke of an honest title. But after thei had consulted vpon the matter, thei thought it best to cary a lytle to proue if they might gette more helpe and make mo frendes. And among all other, they thought it best to adioyne the lord Harbarte vnto theim, whiche was a mā of great power in Wales and yt should be brought to passe by this meanes, for that the lorde Harbarte had a syster maryable, whō Henry would be content to mary, if he would take their part. And to brīg al this matter to passe messengers were sent to Henry the erle of North∣humberlande, whiche had maryed the other syster so that he should bryng this matter about, but the wayes were so beset that the messengers could not come to hym. And in the meane season, came veray good ty∣dynges
from Ihon ap Morgan a temporall law∣yer, whiche signified vnto theim that syr Ryce ap Thomas a noble and valiaunt man and Ihon Sauage, fauoured his parte earnestlye and also syr Reynolde Braye had prepared a greate summe of mony to wage battayl on his parte and to helpe hym, and therfore he woulde they should make hast with all that euer they could, and make towarde Wales. Then Henry spedely prepared hym selfe because he would lynger his frendes no lenger. And after that he had made his prayer vnto almightye God that he might haue good successe in his iourney, only with two thousande menne and a fewe shyp∣pes in the calendes of August he sayled from the hauen of Seyne, and the seuēth daye after whiche was the .xxii. daye of August, he aryued in Wales aboute sonne set & lāded at Wilforde hauen, & in ye parte whiche is called the Dale, where he hearde yt there was dyuerse layde in wayte for hym, to kepe hym backe. From thence, in the mornyng betymes he remoued towarde a towne called Harford with in tēne myle of the Dale, where he was very ioy∣fully receyued. Here he had contrarye tydynges brought to that he hearde in Normādy afore, that syr Ryce ap Thomas and Ihon Sauage wythal that euer they coulde make, were of kyng Richar∣des parte. Notwithstandynge, they had suche tydynges sent theim frō the menne of Pembruche by a vali∣aūt gentlemā, whose name was Arnold Butteler, that it reioysed all their heartes, whiche was, that
yf all former offences might bee remitted, they woold bee in a redynesse to sticke vnto there owne Gespare the erle. Then Henryes company by this meanes beeyng encreased, departed frō Harforde fyue myle towarde Cardygane, and then while he refreshed his menne, sodenly came a rumoure vn∣to hym that the lorde Harbarte whiche dwelled at Carmerdyne was nye at hande with a greate ar∣mye of menne. At the whiche rumoure there was a greate sturre amongeste theim, euerye manne tooke hym selfe to his weapon and made theim selfes redye if nede were, to fight, and a lytle while they were all afrayed, tyl such tyme as Hen∣rye had sent out horsemen to trye ye truthe, whiche when thei came agayn, declared that all thynges was quiet and that ther was no suche thyng. But moste of all master Gryffythes a verye noble man did conforte theim and gladden their heartes, whiche although before he had ioyned hym self to the lorde Harberte, at that very tyme he cleued to Henry with suche companye as he had, although they were but fewe, and thesame tyme came Ihon ap Morgā vnto hym. Henry went styll forward & caried almoste in no place, because he would make suer woorke and the better spede, he inuaded suche places afore that thei were armed against hym, ye whiche places he bette downe wt very litle strēgth But afterward hauyng knowlage by his spyes ye the lorde Harbert & syr Ryce were in a redynes to geue hym battail he determyned to set vpō theim, & either to put theim to flight orels to make theim sweare homage and feaultee vnto hym, & to take theim wt hym in his hoste against kyng Richard.
And because he woulde ascertayne his frendes in Englande howe all the matter went forwad with hym, he sent of his moost trustye frendes to ladye Margarete his mother, to Standely, to Talbot, and to other of his most especial frendes with cer∣tain commaundementes. The effecte of the com∣maundementes were, that he intended with the helpe of hys frendes to passe ouer Seuerne and by Shrewesbury to make toward London. Ther fore he desyred theim with those that were of their councell in tyme & place conuenient to mete hym. So the messaungers going forth with these com∣missyons: Henry went forward toward Shrewes∣bury, and in the waye mette with syr Rice ap Tho¦mas with a great noumber of menne which came vnto hym and was of his parte. For two dayes a∣fore Henry promysed hym to bee chiefe ruler of all Wales as soone as he came to the croune (yf he would come vnto hym) which afterward he gaue to hym in dede. In the meane time the messengers executing the message, diligētly returned back a∣gayne with large rewardes of theim, to whome they were sent and came to Henry the same day he entred into Shrewesburye and shewed howe all his frendes were in a redynesse to dooe the vtter∣moste that laye in theim. This tidynges put Hen¦ry in suche greate hope, that he went forth with a courage and came to the towne of Newporte and there set vp his tentes vpon a lytle hyll, and there laye all night. That night came to hym syr Gyl∣berte Talbot with aboue two hundreth menne. After that they went forthe to Stafforde & whyle they were there, Willyam Standley came to hym
with a fewe after hym, and when he had talked a litle with him, retourned backe again to his hoste whiche he had prepared. From thence he went to Lichfelde, and that nyght laye without the toune, but in ye morning betime he entred into ye citee and was receiued honourably. A daye or .ii. afore, Tho¦mas Standley was there with fyue. M. men ar∣med, whiche when he knewe of Henries cōming, forthwith went afore to a village called Aderstone there to tarye tyll Henrye came. This he dyd to a∣uoide suspicion, beyng afraid least kyng Richard knowing his intent would haue put his soonne to deathe, whiche as I telled you before was lefte wt hym as a pledge for his father. But kynge Ry∣chard in the meane tyme, which then was at Not∣tingham, hearing that Henry with a fewe more of banished men was entred into Wales, so lightly regarded the matter, that he thoughte it was not muche to bee paste vpon, for that he came in with so fewe in noumbre, and that the lorde Harbart & sir Rice, which wer rulers of all Wales, would o∣ther kyll hym, or elles take hym and bring hym a∣liue. But afterward, when he remembred him self that oftentimes a smal matter in batel if it bee not looked vnto betymes, would make at the laste a great sturre: he thought it best to remedy the mat¦ter betimes and commaunded Henrye the earle of Northumberlande with other of the nobles of the realme (whome he thoughte had set more by hym then by their owne goodes) to rayse vp an army & to come to hym with speede. Also he sente dyuers messengers with letters to Robert Brakenburye keper of the Towre of London, commaundynge
hym to come vnto hym in all haste, and to brynge with hym as felowes in battell, Thomas Bur∣schere, Walter Hungerforde and dyuerse other knyghtes, whome he dyd not a litell suspecte. In this tyme it was shewed that Henrye was come to Shrewisburye without any hurte. With the which tidinges, ye kyng beganne to rage and made exclamacion againste theim, that contrary to their faithes they had vtterly deceiued hym, & then he beganne to mistrust all menne, and wiste not whome he mighte truste, so that he thoughte it best to sette forthe hym selfe ageinst his aduer∣saryes. And forthwith he sent out spies to knowe which waye Henry did take. They when they had dooen their diligence retourned backe again and shewed hym howe that Henry was come to Lich∣feld. The which thing after he knew, because now there was a greate noumbre of souldyours come together, by and by his menne set in araye, he com¦maunded theim forwarde, and to gooe foure and foure together, and by that waye which they kept they hearde saye, their enemies were commynge. The suspecte persones he putte in the myddes, he hym selfe with those he trusted came behind, with winges of horsemen running on euery syde. And thus keping their order, aboute sonne sette came vnto Leicestre. When Henrye in the meane season had remo∣ued from Lichefelde vnto the nexte village called Tamworth, in the mydwaye he mette with Wal∣ter Hungerforde, Thomas Burschier and many other more which had promised to aide hym afore And forbecause they perceyued that they were sus¦spected
of Richard, & least they should be brought violentlye vnto hym beyng their enemye they for∣sooke Robert Brakenbury their capitaine, and in the nyghte tyme stale priuely awaye and wente to Henry. Vnto whome there chaunced by the waye that was worthy to bee marked, whiche was that Henry, althoughe he was a manne of noble cou∣rage and also his companye dyd dailye encrease, yet for all that he stoode in great feare because he was vncertayne of Thomas Standly whiche as I telled you before, for the feare of puttynge his soonne to deathe, inclyned as yet vnto no parte, & that the matter was not so slēder of kyng Richard as reporte was made to hym of his frendes. Wherfore, as all afrayde withoute a cause, he tooke onely twenty menne with him, and stey∣ed in his iourney as a manne in dispaire and halfe musynge with hym selfe what was beste to bee dooen, and to aggrauate the matter, tidinges was broughte hym that kyng Richard was comming nere to mete hym with a great and houge hoste of menne. And while he thus lyngered for feare be∣hinde, his hoste came afore to the toune of Tham worth, and because it was then darke night, he lost bothe his company and also his waye, then wan∣dryng frome place to place, at laste came to a lytle village .iii. myle from his hoste being full of feare and leste he should fall into the daunger of scoute watche he durste not aske a questyon of any man, and partly for the feare that was presente, partely for that was to come he laye there that nyght and tooke this for a sygne or a pronosticacyon of some greate plage that was to come, and of the other
parte his hoste was no lesse abashed seyng his ab∣sence for that tyme. When in the morning Henry came to theim in the light of the daye he excused ye matter that he was not absent because he had lost his waye but rather of purpose, because he would commen wt his preuy frendes which would not be sene in the daye. After yt he went priuely to Ader∣stone where Thomas Standley & Willyam his brother dyd dwell. Here Henry, Thomas, & Wil∣lyam mette and tooke other by the hande with lo∣uing salutacions and were glad one of an other. Then after, they counceled together of their me∣tyng with kyng Richard whome they perceyued then not to bee farre from theim. That day when it drewe toward night, in the euening Ihon Sa∣uage Brytanne Sanforde, Simon Digby with many other had forsaken, kyng Richarde & came to Henry wt a great power of men, whiche thyng both with power and strengthe sate Henry alofte again. In the meane season kyng Richard which purposed to go thorow thicke and thinne in this mater came to Bosworthe alitell beyond Leicestre where the place of batell should bee (as a manne would saye the hye iustice of God, whiche coulde not bee auoided hanging ouer his hed, had called hym to a place where he should suffer worthy pu∣nyshemente for his detestable offenees) and there he sette vp his tentes and rested that night. Afore he went to bed he made an oration to his compa∣nye with greate vehemence, perswading & exhor∣ting manfully to fight. And afterward, as it was saied he had a terrible dreame in his slepe seming that he sawe horrible deuilles appere vnto hym &
pulling and haling of hym that he coulde take no rest, which visyon fylled hym full of feare & also of heuy care when he waked. For by and by after, be∣ing sore greued in his minde, he did prognosticate of this dreame the euill luke & heuy chaunce that after came to hym, and he came not with so cher∣ful a countenaunce vnto his company as he was wonte to dooe. Then leest they should thinke that he had this heauinesse for the feare of his enemies he stoode vp & rehersed vnto theim all his dreame. But I thinke that this was not a dreame, but ra∣ther his conscience pricked with the sharpe stynge of his mischeuous offences, which although they dooe not pricke alwaye, yet most cōmenly they wil byte moste towarde the latter daye, representyng vnto vs not onely them selfe, but also the terry∣ble punyshement that is ordeined for the same, as the syghte of the deuill tearyng and haling vs, so that therby (if we haue grace) we may take an oc∣casyon to bee penitēt, or elles for lacke of the same dye in desperacyon. Nowe to come to my purpose again, the nexte daye after, kyng Richard hauing all thynges in a redynesse went for the with the ar∣my oute of his tentes, & beganne to sette his men in araye: fyrst the forward set forth with a merue∣lous lengthe bothe of horsemen and also of foote∣men, a veray terrible companye to theim yt should see theim a farre of: and in the formost parte of all he ordered the bowmen as a stronge fortresse for theim that came after, and ouer this Iohn ye duke of Norffolke was hedde capitaine. After hym fo∣lowed the kyng with a mightye sorte of menne. And in this while, Henry beyng departed from ye
communicacion of his frendes without any tari∣yng pytched his tentes nere his enemies and laye there all nighte and cōmaunded his men to bee in a redinesse, in the morninge he sente also to Tho∣mas Standley being then in the middes, betwixt bothe hostes that he should come nere with his ar¦mye. He sent hym woorde again that he should set his menne in an ordre tyll he came, with the which answer otherwise then he had thought or then the mater dyd require, he was not alitel abashed and stoode as it were in doubte. Yet for all yt he taryed not but with all spede set his menne in an ordre, ye forward was but slender, because his noūber was but fewe, the archers were set in the formost parte Ouer theim Iohn the earle of Oxford was hedde capitain. In the ryght wing he sette Gilbert Tal∣bot. In ye lefte he put Iohn Sauage. And he him selfe with ye helpe of Thomas Standley folowed with one companye of horsemen and a fewe foote∣men, for all his whole company were scāt fyue. M besides ye bothe Stanleys with their company, of the which Willyam Standley had thre. M. The kinges army was double to all this. And so when bothe armyes were all in a redinesse and beganne for to come within the sight of other they bragged forth theim selfes of bothe parties, looking onely for the sygne and token of striking together. Be∣twyxte bothe hostes, there was a marresse whiche Henrye lefte on his ryghte hande purposelye as a defence of his menne, he found the meanes also to haue the bryght sunne on his backe, that it myght dasyll the eyes of his enemyes. But the Kyng when the sawe Henry passe ouer
the marras cōmaunded his men with all violence to set vpon theim. They by and by with a sodein clamour lette arrowes flee at theim. On the o∣ther syde they paied theim home manfully again with the same. But when they came nere together they laied on valeauntly with swerdes. The earle of Oxforde fearing least in the meane time kyng Richardes multytude should haue compassed in his menne whiche wer but a fewe, he cōmaunded theim by fyues they should not moue forwarde paste ten fote the whiche cōmaundement knowen when they knitte theim selfes together and seased not in fyghting: their aduersaries beyng afrayed suspected som crafte or guyle & began to breake of and many of the same parte wer not much greued therwith, because they wer as glad ye king should be loste as saued, & therfore they fought with lesse courage. Then the erle of Oxford with his menne thicke together stroke on more freshlyer. The o∣ther of the other parte dyd likwyse the same. And while the firste wardes of the batell had fought so manfully. Richard perceiued by his spies Henry a farre of with a fewe companye of armed menne. Afterward, cōming nere, Richard knewe hym by sygnes and tokens, then being inflamed with an∣ger, furiouslye stroke the horse with the spurres and ranne out of the one syde of the hoste, and like a Lyon ranne at hym. On the other syde, Henry perceiuing hym commyng, was very desyrouse to mete hym. Richard at the fyrste setting forth, kyl∣led diuers that stode, again he threwe doune Hen∣ry his banner and Willyam Brandon the bearer also, he ranne at Cheyny a manne of great mighte
whiche came for to mete hym, and with greate vi∣olēce ouerthrewe hym to the grounde, and this he made hymself awaie through theim, for to come to Henry. But Henry kept better tacke with hym thē his men would haue thought, whiche thē was all∣moste in despayre of the victory. And euē at ye tyme lo there came Wyllyam Stanley to aide theim wt .iii. M. mēne, and euen at the verie same tyme the residue of kyng Richardes men were put to flight Thē Richard fightyng alone in the middest of all his enemies was ouerthrowne & slain. In ye meane tyme therle of Oxēford in ye foreward after he had fought māfully a litle while, put ye residue to flight of whō he slewe a greate nōbre. But agreate nom∣bre more whiche folowed Richard more for feare then for loue, helde their handes from fightyng & went awaie without hurte, for that thei loked not for his safegard, but rather for his destruccion. There were slain at this conflicte not many more then one thousand, of the whiche these were noble menne. Ihon duke of Norffolke Walter Feris Robert Brachyngbury, Richard Radcliffe and many other more. And within twoo daies after Wyllyam Catisby lawyer with certain other of his felowes was put to death at Leicestre, and e∣monges those ye ranne awaie, was Fraunces Lo∣uell, Humfray Stafford, with Thomas his bro∣ther and other more that ranne into sanctuary at Colchestre in Essex. There was of the captiues a greate nombre, because that when Richard was slain, euery manne cast doune his wepon and yeld hymself to Henry, of ye whiche ye more parte would haue dooen so at the begynnyng, if it had not been
for feare of kyng Richardes spies, whiche thē wā∣dered in euery place. And emongest these the no∣bles, were the erle of Northumberlande the erle of Surrey of the whiche therle of Surrey was put in prisone, this other as a frend was receiued in to fauour. Henry at that felde loste not aboue an hū∣dred menne, emongest whom the chief was Wyl∣lyam Brādone whiche bare Henryes bāner. This battaill was fought in the .xxii. day of the moneth of Auguste, inthe yere of oure Lorde a thousand cccc .lxxxvi. ye conflict indured more then .ii. howres Richard might (as the fame went) asaued hymself if he would afled awaie, for those that were about hym when thei sawe his menne from the begyn∣nyng fight but faintly and that some were ronne awaie vnto the other parte, suspected treason and willed hym to flie and when the mater was mani∣fest that all hope of victory was past, thei brought hym a swite horse. He puttyng a sied all hope and trust that was in fleiyng, made (as it was saied) this aunswere that this daie he would haue ether an ende of battaill orels of his life, suche was his greate audacite and manfulnes whiche because he did se certainly that in this daie he should ob∣ the kyngdome quietely all daies of his life or s lose bothe for euer he entred in emōgest theim as it was declared before intendyng vtterly ether to lose all orels to wynne all. And so the wretehe dyed hauyng the ende that all suche were wont to haue whiche in the stede of lawe, honestie, and all godlynes folowe their owne appetite vyllanye and all wyckednes. And plainly this is an exam∣ple whiche cannot be expressed, to feare theim whi∣che
will not suffer one howre to bee otherwyse spēt then in cruelte mischief and all deuillishe fasshiōs Henry when he had thus obtained the victorye he fell downe on his knees and with many praiers & thankes, referred all to the goodnes of God. Thē after he stode vp beyng wounderfully replenished with ioye, & went vp vpō alitle hill and there gaue two greate comendacions to his souldyours com∣maundyng theim that were hurte to be heled and the dede to bee buryed, afterward he gaue immor∣tall thankes to his noble capitains promisyng theim that he would neuer forgette their benifite The multitude in ye meane tyme with one voyce & one mynd proclaimed hym kyng. Whē Thomas Stanley sawe ye, he toke kyng Richardes croune whiche was founde emongest the spoyle, and by & by putte it vpon his head as though he had been then created kyng by the eleccion of the people as it was wonte to bee in the olde tyme, and this was the first token of his felicite. After this, kyng Hēry with his compaignie and carriage went to Lece∣stre toward night to bed, whether after he had re∣fresshed his compaignie well for the space of twoo daies, that thei might the better goo toward Lon∣don: Kyng Richardes bodye was brought naked ouer a horse backe, the hed and the armes hāgyng on the one side and the legges on ye other, & caried in to the grey freres of Lecester, and surely it was but a myserable sight to loke vpō, yet it was good inough cōsideryng his wretched leuyng, and there without any solempnite was buryed twoo dayes after. He raygned twoo yeres twoo monethes & one daie, he was but of a small stature hauyng
but a deformed bodie, ye one shoulder was higher then the other, he had a shorte face & a cruell looke whiche did betoken malice, guyle and deceite. And while he did muse vpō any thing stāding, he would byte his vnder lippe continually, whereby a māne might perceiue his cruell nature within his wre∣ched bodie striued and chaffed alwaie with in hym self, also the dagger whiche he bare aboute hym, he would alwaies bee choppyng of it in and out he had a sharpe and pregnaunt witt, subtill and to dessimule and fayne verie mete. He had also a proude and cruell mynde, whiche neuer went from him to the houre of his death, whi∣che he had rather suffer by ye cruell sworde, though all his com∣paignie did forsake hym then by shamefull flight he would fauoure his life, whiche after might for∣tune by sickenes or o∣ther condynge ponyshe∣mēt shortely to perishe.
¶ Henry the seuenth. HENRY THE SEVENTH OF that name kyng of England. First after yt he had obtei∣ned his kyngdome and heri∣tage by force of armes, enten∣ded to stablishe all thynges & extynguish sediciō, and before he departed from Leycester, caused ser Robert Willoughby knight to bryng ye yoūg erle of Warwike ye duke of Clarēces soōne before his presence (whom kyng Richard to that tyme had kept at Sheryhuttō in Yorke shire) fea∣ryng muche, least that by this young erle some oc∣casiō might bee taken of renuyng battaill, whiche entended nothyng more then to liue in peace and quietnes. And so this erle was brought to hym, & at his commaundement conueighed to London, and there cast in holde, In the self same place also of Yorke shire, was Ladie Elizabeth eldest doughter to the fornamed kyng Edwarde, whom kyng Rychard her vncle would haue maried sore against the mynde and consent of ye same ladie. In so muche also that the people were sore against it, and accompted it not onely as a reproche & infamie to the kyng hymself, but also to his counsaill ye did agre to his naugh∣tie purpose. Albeit, God of his infinite mercy pre∣serued the ladie, whiche shorte tyme after was brought to London to her mother.
In this time the kyng drawing nighe to London, was there accepted of his citezens streyghte after his cōming moste roially, & of all parties saluted after the moste louing fassion ye they could deuyse geuing thankes to God with solempne procession for yt he had sent theim a king to gouerne ye realme which before was ruled by a cruel & hateful Tirāt After this gratulacion and thank esgeuing, ye kyng at a daye appointed assembled his counsail, to the ende he mighte marie the Ladie Elizabeth, thorowe the which mariage aswell ye nobilitee as cōmunes of ye realme wer brought in good hope yt all thinges should bee redressed, & an end made of all sedicion and strife for euer. And at this Parlia¦ment holden & kept at Westmīster he was created kyng the day of October, in the yere of oure Lorde a. M. foure C .lxxxvi. Whiche kyngdome he enioyed as of god enointed, for as menne doo reporte aboute seuen hundreth foure score and se∣uentene yeres paste Cadwallader laste Kynge of Englande prophecied that his progenye shoulde beare rule and dominion again. So that by this meanes, men did fully perswade theim selfes that he was p̄estinate to it. And ye rather also they did beleue it because that kyng Henry ye sixte did fore∣saye the same, and in like maner prophecy of hym. Therfore he being thus proclaimed as true enhe∣retour of the crowne, and at the same Parliament created kyng, did first cause to bee published, that all suche should bee pardoned that would submit theim selfes to his grace, & as faithful people doo to hym due allegiaunce, other that absented theim selfes, to bee takē as rebelles & traitours. After the
whiche proclamacion hard, many ye were in holde and sanctuaries, came for pardō and safetie of life to him, which persones so submitting theim selfes er pardoned & enhaunced to honoure, euery man after his owne deserte as the kyng & his counsaile thought best. And first considering his chiefe fren¦des and nyghe kinsemen, made Gaspar his vncle Duke of Bedforde, sir Thomas Stanley knight Earle of Derby, Giles Dabeney, sir Robert Wil∣loughby, and Robert Brooke Lordes, & Edward his eldest sonne duke of ,  wholy to all that king Richard had depriued hym of at what tyme he with other wer banished. Also ac∣tes, & statutes stablished & confirmed by Richard as thought expedient and veray necessary at that time for the publike weale, wer by hym aboundo∣ned & infringed euery one. After these thinges do∣en he prouided wt all scelerite and expedicion to re¦deme the Lorde Marques Dorcet, & Iohn Bur∣scher, whome he had lefte at Paris as a pledge & suertie for certaine money yt he had borowed there and Iohn, bishop of Ely for like det out of Flaun¦ders. Furthermore, to the ende ye his realme might bee in a better staye, he cōmaunded that if any mā had iniury shewed at any tyme, the same persone shoulde putte vp his matter to hym, of whome he should both haue and finde redresse. And for these matters and causes to bee hearde, he made of his councell the Erle of Oxford, the duke of Bedford therle of Derby, the Lorde Strange we his sonne and william the lorde his brother chief of the pri∣uie chaumber, the lorde Broke chief steward, and lord graund maister of his house Renould Braye
Iohn Morton Byshoppe of Ely, Richarde Foxe Iohn Dinham, whome after he made treasourer of Englande, Giles Dabeney, Richarde Gilde∣forde, Lorde Cheiny, Richarde Tunstall, Richard Edgecombe, Thomas Louell, Edwarde Ponin∣ges, with other wise men, as Richard ap Thomas a Welsheman, aswell circumspecte as wise, Mor∣gane Kidnel, Lord Gray Marques Dorcet, Lord Talbot, Erle of Shrewesbury, Iohn Risley, lord Thomas Earle of Ormonde, an Irisheman, Hen¦ry Warney, William Say, William Ody, Gil∣bert Talbot, Willyam Vdall, Thomas Troys, Richarde Naufaute Capitaine of Calis, Roberte Point, Iames Hubert, Charles Somerset, Tho∣mas Hawarde Earle of Surrey, a manne of wis∣dome, grauitee, and constantnesse most cōmenda∣ble, The earle of Essex descending of an high and noble parentage, Lorde William Blounte, Iohn Burscher, Iohn Fineux, Peter Edgecombe, Hew Conuey, Thomas Terell, Sir Henry Wiat, Ro∣bert Throgmorton, Thomas Brandon, sir Iohn Winkefelde, sir Edmond Dudley, Edward Bel∣knape, Richarde Hemson. Also bishoppes, Henry Deney bishoppe of Cauntourbury, Oliuer kyng byshoppe of Bathe and Welles, William Barōs bishop of London that dyed shortely after he was bishoppe. Also William that succeded nexte after, Henry Archebyshop of Cauntourbury, Richarde of London, and Richarde Bishop of Norwiche. When the kyng had taken these menne to bee of his councell for ye wealth of his realme, he ma∣ried Ladye Elizabeth doughter to kyng Edward as he had promised for the which, he had the hear∣tes
of many menne. So that afterwarde he had no nede to feare the assaultes of any persones or ye coniuracions of rebelles. Neuerthelesse, conside∣ring the chaunce he had before, and the falshode ye is in many menne from their youth, made yomen of the garde for his bodye, the whiche he firste of all Englyshe Kynges caused to bee, and as it is thought he did take it of the Frenche kyng. Also The garde fyrste ordei¦ned by kīge Henry the vii. after this he caused a parliament to bee had, wher in was made and decreed certayne lawes, actes & statutes for the wealthe of his realme. In this yere a newe sickenesse did reigne, and is so sore and painfull, as neuer was suffered be∣fore, the whiche was called the burning sweate. The swea∣ting sicke∣nesse. And this was so intollerable, that men coulde not kepe their beddes, but as lunatike persons & oute of their wittes ranne about naked, so that none al∣moste escaped ye wer infected therwith. At ye length after the great death of many a thousande menne they learned a presente remedye for the same dys∣ease, that is, yf he were sycke of that sweate in the daye, that he should streyghtelye downe with his clothes and vestures, yf in the nighte, yt he should not rise for the space of .xxiiii. houres, and eate no meate at all, yf he coulde forbeare, and drinke as litle as he mighte. This disease reigned throughout all England wherof also ensued a plague, as a token, and as ye people iudged, a plaine argument that kyng Hen¦rye shoulde neuer bee oute of feare and dreade of some mischaunce, seing that he was in suche great vexacyon at the sedicyous tumulte that was ry∣sen al the claimynge of the crowne.
Whē all thynges wer apeaced in London, and ordered after his owne mynd, he rode Northward in progresse to pacifie all his realme, and especial∣ly those partes where the firste commocion was, and where also wer priuie and cloked frendes of his aduersaries. But because it was nigh Easter, he tooke his waye to Lincolne, and there tariyng was certified that the Lorde Louell and Humfre Stafforde were gone from the sanctuary in Col∣chester, but to what place or whether, no mā could tell, whiche message the kyng litle regardyng, wēt foorth as he apointed to Yorke, and when he came The cōmo∣cion made by the lord Louell and the lorde Stafforde. there, it was shewed hym that the lorde Louell was at hand with a strong power of menne, and woulde inuade the cytie, also that the said lorde Stafforde and his brother wer in Glocestre, and there had made an insurreccion, and set menne on euery parte to defende the gates and walles of the citie. At the first hearyng of this, the kyng was but litle moued, but after that he was certified by the letters of his frendes that it was true, he was in greate feare, for that he had neyther an armye pre∣pared, nor harnyes for theim, but because the mat∣tier required haste, least that by long taryeng, his aduersaries power might bee encreased and mul∣tiplyed, he commaunded the Duke of Bedforde to mete theim with three thousande mēne, whiche were harnysed but barely, for theyr breste plates were for the moste parte lether. And he hym selfe in yt meane tyme would gather vp an hoste, where he might in euery place. The duke hauyng his mē nigh to ye tētes of his enemyes, cōsulted wt certain
of his cōpaignie, by what waye he mighte traine theim to peace, withoute bloodde shedyng. After the whiche deliberation & aduisement had, it was decreed that certaine shoulde proclaime openly, yt all thei should haue their pardonne, that woulde leaue battaile. The whiche proclamation auay∣led muche,, for the Lorde Louell, eyther for some feare, or mystrust that he had in his people,, or fe∣ryng hym selfe of his owne behalfe, fledde pryue∣ly in a night from his compaignie, to Lankeshire & ther remained a space with syr Thomas Brogh¦ton knight. And when hys army had knowledge therof, thei also submittyng theim selfes all to the Duke, asked pardonne for their heinous offence. The Lorde Stafforde also hearyng this, was in a great agony, and for feare dyd take sanctuarye at Colname .ii. miles from Abindon. But because that sanetuary was not a defence for traytours, he was taken from that place and behedded, and his brother was {per}doned because he was thought not to haue done it of his owne will, but thorowe the counsaill and perswasion of his brother. After this businesse was asswaged and Yorke shyre set in peace and quietnes, the Kyng went to London, and shortelye after that to Wynchester, where the Quene his wyfe, was deliuered of a Prynce called Arthure, and from Wynchester he retourned agayne to London. Sone after it chaunsed that one syr Richard Symond preest, borne by nature to be a traytour and sedicious personne, and yet well learned, had a chyld called Lambert Symenel to bee hys scho¦lar, by whome he inuented this crafte and disceat
that he woulde make the chyld kyng of England and hym selfe archebyshoppe, or some hygh potes∣tate in the realme, for he knewe verely, that many menne supposed kyng Edwardes chyldren to bee fled into some straunge place, and that Edwarde the Erle of Warwyke, sonne to the Duke of Cla∣rence ether was or should bee put to death shortly And to the ende he myght ye better bryng hys pur¦pose about, he taught the chyld bothe learnyng & good maners, and also to order hym selfe, as one linially descendyng from a hygh progenie. Sone after the rumoure was, that the younge Earle of Warwyke was dead in prysonne. And when the preest heard of this, he intendyng therby to bring his matters aboute, chaunged the chyldes name and called hym Edwarde, after the younge Earle of Warwyke, the whiche were boothe of one age, and then sayled into Irelande, there opening his mynde to certain of the nobilitee, whome he knew to beare but lytle fauoure to Kyng Henry, where he was promysed ayde of the Lorde Gerardine chauncellour of all that countree, and all that he coulde dooe. Whyche Lorde, fyrst callyng all hys frendes and louers together, desyred their helpe in restoryng the yong Earle to his herytage. And dyd sende certain into Englande to desire theym that were kynge Rychardes frendes to continue in their loue and faythfulnes towardes hym, and helpe hys nephiewes chylde to his ryghte. And that hys power myghte bee the stronger to ouercome hys enemyes, he desyred Lady Mar¦garete syster to kynge Edwarde, and wyfe to the Duke of Burgondy, to further hys purpose with
her helpe, whyche lady beyng then in Flaunders, promised him by the messaungers, that she would not onely maintaine his entente with large mony and substaunce, but with all the laboure and pey∣nes that she myght occasion other, to be of ye same conspiracie. When kynge Henrye was certified of thys, he was sore greued, that by the meanes of suche a myscreaunte personne, so great sedicion should bee, neuerthelesse, the kynge consideringe that it shoulde bee to the destruccion of manye menne, yf that he shoulde fyghte with his enemies in o∣pen feelde, called hys counsayle together at the Charter house besyde Rychemounde, and there consulted to pacifie thys matter wythoute anye more dysturbaunce. Where fyrste it was decreed, that all thei shoulde bee pardoned for their offen∣ces and treasons latelye commytted, whiche hath frome that tyme, borne theim selfes vpryght tow∣ardes their kinge, leaste that syr Thomas Brogh¦ton whyche kepte the Lord Louell from the king a great tyme, wyth other despeyring of theyr par∣don shoulde haue made some sodaine insurrecti∣on agaynst hym. Further more, that men shoulde not thyncke, but that the Duke of Clarence was in Englande, it was appoynted that he shoulde showe hym selfe abrode, wherby the opynion that he was in Ireland myghte bee frustrate, and ac∣compted as a lye. Also it was further determyned that the Ladye Elysabeth wyfe to kyng Edward the .iiii. shoulde lose al her landes, because she had submitted her selfe and her doughters wholye to the handes of kynge Rychard, contrary to the pro¦myse
made to the Lordes and nobles, whyche at her desyre lefte al that they had in Englande and fledde to kynge Henrye in Brytayne, and there dyd sweare hym to marye her eldeste daughter, as she wylled theim to dooe. But her purpose did not frame as (God would) Thys quene buylded a Collage in Cambrydge, and gaue landes to the maynteyning of the same whiche at thys houre is called ye quenes Collage. When thys order and determynacion of the kynge was ended, he wente to London, and the nexte Sondaye folowynge he caused the young Earle to bee broughte out of the Tower through the streetes to Poules. And there to shewe hym selfe to euerye bodye, and taske with the chiefe and noble menne that were thoughte to haue con¦spyred agaynste kynge Henrye, for thys cause that they myghte perceaue the Iryshe menne to moue battayle vnaduysedly, and cause stryfe vp∣pon no iuste occasion, howebeit, all thys nothyng auayled, for the Earle of Lyncolne, the Duke of Suffolkes soonne, and nephewe to kynge Ed∣warde, coulde not suffer kynge Henrye thus to reygne, but as a traytoure sayled into Flaūders to the Ladye Margarete, takynge wyth hym Syr Thomas Broghton, with certayne other, Where also, the Lorde Louell landed twoo or three dayes before. And there they beynge all together, determy∣ned that the Earle of Lyncolne and the Lorde Louell shoulde goo to Irelande, and there attend vpon the counterfeyte Earle, and brynge hym to Englande with all the power they myghte aga∣ynste
kynge Henrye. So that yf their dooynges had good successe that then the foresayde Lambarte (misnamed the Earle) shoulde by the consente of the counsayle be deposed, and the true Earle to bee delyuered oute of pryson and enherite his right, and iuste tytle of his dominion. But the kyng, not mistrusting any man to bee so foolysh hardy as to fyght in such a cause, or anye so vndyscrete (especiallye of hys realme) as to beleue it, dyd onelye mynde the sup∣pressynge of the Iryshe menne, and theyr enter∣pryse to subdue. Yet hearynge that the Earle of Lyncolne with other were fledde, and gooen to hys aduersaries, he caused the borders to bee dilygentlye kepte that none other myghte escape or geue theym socoure, and commynge to the ab∣baye of Sayncte Edmundes Burye, it was cer∣tified that the Lorde Thomas Marques was come to excuse and pourge hym selfe before hym, for certayne thynges that he was suspected, to whome the kynge dyd sende the Earle of Oxford to take him commynge, and conueyghe hym to the Towre of London, for thys cause, that yf he were his frende, as he was in dede, that he should not bee myscontented to suffer a lytle impryson∣mente for the safetie of hys kynge, yf he were not hys frende, there to tarye that he myghte haue no damage or hurte by hym. And so the kynge wente forthe to Norwyche and tariynge there Christemas daye, went after to Walsingham, and from thence to Cambridge and so streyght to London. In this tyme the erle of Lincolne, & the lord Louell had got about two
thousande Germaynes, wyth Martyn Swarte to be theyr captayne, and so saylynge to Ireland came and made the fornamed Lambarte kyng of Englande at Deuelynge. And so wyth the greate multitude of Iryshe menne aswell naked and vn∣armed personnes, as other that the Lorde Gerar∣dyne had vnder hym, they sayled into Englande, and landed for a purpose wythin a lytle of Lan∣castre, trustynge there to bee ayded of Syr Tho∣mas Broghton the chiefe authoure of thys con∣spiracie. The kynge not slepynge hys mattiers, but mystrustynge that such thynges shoulde chaunce sente certayne Knyghtes, throughe all the Easte parties to attende the commynge of hys enemy∣es, and gatherynge all hys hooste together, went hym selfe to Couentree, where he beynge, it was certified hym that the Earle of Lyncolne was landed at Lancastre wyth the newe kynge. Whome the kynge appoynted to meete after the consente and agremente of hys counsayle, and to goo vppon theym wythoute anye farther delaye least that theyr power by long sufferaunce should bee augmented and multiplyed. And so after suche aduisemente taken, he went to Notingham, and there by a lytle woodde cal∣led Boures he pytched hys tentes. To whome shortelye after came the Lorde Talbote Earle of Shrowesburye, the Lorde Straunge, the Lorde Cheiney wyth a greate armye of menne, and ma∣nye other noble menne, whose names here after ensue.
Rauff Longforde Ihon Montigomery Henry Vernone of Pek Rauff Shurley Godfrey Folgehan Thomas Gryfley Edwarde Sutton Humfrey Stanley & an other Humfrey Stāley, Wyllyam Hugton Wyllyam Meryng, Edward Stanope Geruase Clifton Brian Stapulton Henry Wylloughby Wyllyam Perpoyntes Ihon Babyngton Wyllyam Bedyll Robert Brundell Ihon Markham̄ Wyllyam Merbury Edwarde Aborogh Wyllyam Tyrwite Ihon Hussey Robert Shefilde Wyllyam Newporte Roger Ormeston Thomas Tempest Wyllyam Knyuett Henry Wyllaybet Lord Edward Hastyng∣ges. Ihon Dygby Simō Digby Haringtō Richarde Sachenerell Ihon Vyllers Edwarde Fyldyng Thomas Polteney Nicholas Vaux Thomas Gryne Nicolas Griffin Edmund Lucy Edwarde Belknap Robert Throgmarton George Graie of Ruthin Guide Wolstone Thomas Fynderye Dauid Phillips Thomas Cheiney Robert Cotton Ihon Saint Ihon Ihon Mordant Thomas Terell Ihon Raynsford Robert Paynton Robert Danyell Henry Marney Edmunde Aroundell Also there came frō ye fer∣dest partes of his realme other noble men, as these. George Oglye Rauff Neuill Richard Latemere Wyllyam Bulmere Ihon Langforde Wyllyam Norrys
Ihon Neuill of Thortinbridge and Ihon Wyl∣lyams. The erle of Lyncolne in the meane season went forth softely with his compaignie into Yorkeshire without hurte or discommoditie of any māne that dwelt therabout, trustyng partely therby, & {per}tely also bycause he was well knowen and acquainted emong theim, that he should get greate ayde and socour there. But when he perceiued very few or none to folowe hym, and that he could not (seyng his enemies were so nigh hand and he also so far entred) in safegard with his hoste returne bacward yet he thought it best to abyde & taste the chaunce of battaill, and so muche yt rather, because he sawe Henry within twoo yeres before accompaigned but with a fewe and small sorte of souldiers ouer∣come kyng Richard whiche brought with hym a greate hoste of well armed menne. Wherfore he, beeyng now in a greate hope of victory, toke his iorney thens towarde Newarke, there to sette his souldyours in araye and mete the kyng, whom he knew well though not to bee paste .ii. dayes iorney from hym. But before he could come thither, kyng Hēry whiche was surely certified of all thynges yt he did or wēt about, came to Newarke alitle before the euen that thei should fight on yt morowe other wyse then the erle loked for, and there tariyng not long, went forth three myles ferther and sette his tentes and taryed all night. Of whose commyng although therle knewe, yet he went foorth lustely of his tourney and came that night to a village nigh to his enemies, which is called Stooke, and there pitched his tentes.
The next daie, the kyng so sone as he had sette his souldyours in due ordre and araye, went for∣warde wt all spede to the place where the erle with all his laye. To the whiche place, when he was come, & had appointed the felde, which was moste mete for the battaill to bee fought in, by & by gaue place for his enemies to come foorth and prouo∣ked theim to battaill. But as ready as he was to prouoke, so readie wer thei of their owne courage to come foorth: so that of bothe parties thei ranne to battaill and fought moste egerly, in whiche tō∣flicte it did euidently appere that the Germaines whiche were sette in the forewarde, whose capitain was Martine Swarte, were nothyng woorse in manlynesse and cheualry (which thei gotte chiefly by daily and long exercise) then the Englishemen. And the Ireshmen although thei fought verie lu∣stely, yet by the reason that thei ware not harnes (accordyng to their fasshiō and custome) were dis∣comfcited and beate downe bothe more in nōbre, and soner then all the other. Yet was this battaill so earnestlie, & boldly fought for a whyle of bothe parties, that it could not bee wel discerned to whi∣che syde the victorie would incline. But at the last, the kynges forewarde which there abode all ieo∣perdie, so lustely & couragiously ranne vpon their enemies, yt they were none hable to resist or abyde their power: so yt all aswell Germaines as Irish men were there slain orels made to flie, of ye whiche none at all could escape awaie. Whiche battaill, whē it was thus dooen, all mēne might se of what boldnes & audacitie these rebelliōs were. For their capitaines Ihon erle of Lincolne, Frācis Louell
Thomas Broghtō, Martine Swart, & Thomas Gerardine neuer gaue backe one foote but were slaine all in the same place where thei began first to fight. There were kylled at that vattaill with their fiue capitaines spoken of euen now of that partie about foure thousand. Of the kynges part there were not halfe of theim whiche fought in ye forewarde slain. Thē was Lambert, the child whiche was falsly reported to bee the Dukes soonne of Clarēce, and his maister sir Richard Simond preest, both ta∣ken, but neither of theim putte to death, because Lambert was yet but a child and did seme to dooe that, more by compulsion of his maister thē of his owne will, and the other was a preest whiche for his defaulte was cast into perpetuall prisone. But this Lambert was taken into the Kynges kechin and after was made one of the kynges faukeners and is yet a lyue. And thus was all yt Margarete went about at this tyme, turned to naught and to none effecte, whiche thyng whē she heard tell of in Flaūders, she was verie lory at the hearte & made greate mone. And yet could she not bee contēt, but immediately after, inuēted an other thyng to vexe and trouble kyng Henry, as it shalbe shewed here after. Kyng Henry when he had all thynges brought thus to passe, and vtterly vanquisshed these his enemies, thought hymself at one tyme deliuered from twoo eiuils together, that is to saie, from bothe feare that was present, and also that was to come. For it was not to bee thought yt thei whiche were so fewe in nombre durste bee so bold to entre
into the realme and make battaile against ye kyng whom they knewe wel ynough would bryng with hym a great and well armed hooste, but that they had other felowes of the same coniuracion whiche would mete and ayde theim all that they could in tyme and place conuenient. Therefore when the kyng sawe the hoste of his enemies manifestly be∣fore his eyes, he commaunded that no mā shoulde kyll the earle of Lincolne, but that he should bee brought to hym alyue, to the entent that he might shewe and bewraye all the other whiche were of ye conspiracie. But that the sowdyers would not do, least the sauyng of hym, should bee the destrucciō (as it should haue been in dede) of many other. This battayle was fought in the yeare of oure Lorde a thousande foure hundreth, foure score, & the secōde yere of this Hēryes reigne. In ye whiche yere also Thomas Burscher archebyshop of Cā∣terburye died, into whose roume succeded Iohn Morton late bishop of Ely, whome Alexander of that name the sixte bishop of Rome made Cardi∣nall. Now to retourne to my purpose. After this, the kyng, when he had gathered al the prayes and spoyles together, and had buryed theim that there wer slain, went forth to Lincolne and there taryed three dayes, and had euerye daie one procession to thanke God almightie that he had the ouerhande of his enemies. And inconty∣nently sent his banner to Walsyngham to be con¦secrate to our Lady, there to bee kepte for a perpe∣tuall moument of victorie. Then did he execuciō of suche rebellions as were there taken, & shortely after tooke his iorneye foorth to Yorke, and there
likewyse suche as were founde gyltye dyd he pu∣nyshe strayghtlye. When all this was dooen, he wente vnto Newcastle, and frome thence sente into Scotlande Richarde Foxe whiche not longe before was made bishop of Exeter, and Richarde Edgecombe knight as Ambassadoures to kynge Iames for a league of peace. For this Henrye thought it a great pleasure and cōmoditee, to bee in peace and concorde with kinges & gouernours whiche laye aboute this his realme, and specially and before all other with kyng Iames, because yt there no rebellions might trust (whiche otherwise perchaunce woulde haue trusted) to haue ayde or succoure at his hande: so that thereby there durste none againe take weapon against hym. The am∣bassadoures, when they wer come into Scotland to the kyng, were of hym both gently and after the moste louing fashion receiued and heard, and then dyd he plainlye declare and open to theim yt he hym selfe loued kyng Henrye and his, no man : but that yt moste parte of his Scottes and subiectes could in no case agree with the English menne. Wherfore, excepte that he should offend or se theim, he desired ye legates to bee contēt with truce for .vii. yeres in promesse, but in dede, he sayed, that peace betwene theim on his parte shoulde neuer bee broken, and or euer those seuen yeres should bee passed, that he would geue truce for seuen yeres lenger: so that kyng Henry and he would euer bee in peace and moste assured amytie And this did kyng Iames, because he knewe that no facte of his people, shoulde bee alowed. When the Ambassadoures hearde this, they tooke the
yeres that were offered theim, as concernynge peace, and by and by retourned home to kyng Hē∣ry againe, and shewed hym all the mattier in or∣dre. With the whiche tydynges he was veraye well contented. Shortely after, the kyng departed thence to∣warde London, and in the waye at Leicetre mette hym Abassadoures from the Frenche kyng which shewed hym, that their kyng Charles had recoue∣red many tounes and cyties, whiche before were possessed of kyng Maximilian, and that he kepte battayle nowe with Fraunces the duke of Bry∣tayne, because he kepte and socoured in his domi∣nion certaine that were traytours and rebellions against hym, of the whiche the chief was Lewes duke of Orlyance, and therfore he desyred hym of his frendship & familiaritie, that either he would helpe hym orelles medle of neyther partie. But kynge Henrye, althoughe he had founde muche frendship at the Frenche kynges hande, yet for as muche as he spyed whereof this stryfe beganne, with this message was not well contente. For the cause that the Frenchemenne tooke battayle, was because they sawe that the Duke was an olde manne and had neuer a chylde, and thereby that they myghte brynge that Dukedome into their subieccion. When kyng Henrye perceiued this, and also howe louyng the Brytaynes had been euer to Englande, and finally remembred the tendre loue which was betwene the duke and hym, thought it best, if nede wer, to helpe the Britaynes, Yet for as
muche as he had founde the Frenche kyng veray kynde in tymes past, and had partely by his helpe recouered his kyngdome, he was veraye lothe to medle: in so muche that he coulde not well tell what was best in this mattier to bee dooen. But at the laste he fully purposed, if necessitie shoulde require, to helpe the duke in all that he might. Yet, least he should make of his highe frende hys extreme enemie, his aunswere was to the ambas∣sadoures, that he did intende to make their kyng and the duke frendes again. Wherfore assone as the Frenche kynges ambassadoures were dimis∣sed, he sent on message Christopher Vrswycke to Charles the kynge of Fraunce. Firste to certifye hym, that he was veraye glad of the victorye that he had vpon Maximilian, secondarely what tu∣multe and insurreccion was made here in Englād thyrdly and especially to desyre hym to bee at one againe with the Duke of Brytayne. And then he commaunded this Vrswycke, that if the kyng of Fraunce shoulde bee so contente, to go foorthe im∣mediatlye to the Duke, and desyre hym lykewyse of the same. But when the kyng was come againe to Lon∣don, there was ioye and myrthe for the victorye ye he had on euery syde. For not onely the kyng, but also euerye one of his cytezyns reioysed veraye muche. Wherfore the kyng shewed hym selfe both beraye humane and courteous toward all menne, and also rewarded all theim that tooke paynes in that battaile moste bountefully. And not long af∣ter delyuered Lord Thomas Marques out of the oure, and loued hym veraye well.
In the meane season Christofer Vrswicke was come to the frenche kyng, & of hym, after the most louing fassion yt coulde bee, receiued. And as sone as he had shewed his message, ye kyng shewed him selfe to bee there wt veray well pleased. Then went ye ambassadour streight thence, as it was cōmaun¦ded hym, into Britain, and shewed the duke what kyng Henry would haue dooen. But the duke (be∣cause hym self had been sicke a great while, & ther¦by his memory & wit was daied) called to hym to heare the message bothe Lewes the duke of Orle∣aunce and other of his councell, whiche Lewes in no wyse woulde haue any peace to bee made, but saied that it was more mete that kyng Henrye (se∣ing he had founde suche kyndnesse at the Dukes hande, and Britaine was suche a good defence to England) to helpe to kepe battayle all yt he might against the frenchmen. Then retourned this Chri¦stofer againe into Fraunce, & declared to the king Charles what aunswer was made of ye Britains, and shortely after came into Englande againe. But still in the meane time, ye Frenche kyng went aboute busely to ouercome the Brytains, and the more he was nigh of his purpose, so much ye more did he exhorte & desire kyng Henry to make peace betwene theim, wherfore he sēt Bernarde Daube∣ney knighte in all the haste to kyng Henrye to de∣sire hym in any wise to make some ende of this cō∣trauersy. And therupon the kyng being desirous of the same, chose thre oratours, ye Abbot of Abin∣don, Iohn Lilie the bishop of Romes collectoure and Richard Tonshal a knight and a veray wise man, to gooe firste to the Frenche kyng, and then
to the duke to make amitee and frendshyp againe betwene theim. But or euer these ambassadoures proceded on their iourney, Iohn Lilye fell sicke of the goute: therfore for hym was chosen Christofer Vrswycke, and they together wente (as they were cōmaunded) Firste into Fraunce to the kyng, and thence withoute delaye into Britain. But Fraun∣ces the duke in no case would take suche condicy∣ons as wer there offered, wherfore they came back againe into Fraunce without their purpose, and there tarieng, signified to kyng Henry by their let¦ters all that was dooen. But or their letters came to the kynges handes, Edward Woodilile, a bold Champion came to hym & desired veraye earnest∣ly that he myght haue an host of men to helpe the Britains, and leasire it should cause any dissencion betwene the Frenche kyng and hym, he saied that he would gooe priuely and without a pasporte, to thentent it might bee thought that he stole out of the land. But the kyng, for as much as he trusted that peace shoulde bee made, woulde in no wyse graunt his peticion. Wherfore this Edward wēt streight into the ysle Veches, which was in his do¦minacion, & there so sone as he had gathered his menne together about foure. C, sayled ouer to the Britaines, & ioyned hym selfe with theim against the Frenchmē, whiche thing when it was knowen in Fraunce, made ye ambassadours greatly afraid of their liues. But whiles they were in this feare, and the Frēchemen thought it dooen maliciously of Kyng Henry, there came other Ambassadours frome hym to the Frenche kyng, certifieng hym & declaring (by most euident tokēs) that it was no∣thing
in dede as it was thought to haue been. To the which message, albeit ye kyng had lytle credēce yet he made as thoughe he had not bene angry at all. So ye Ambassadours renewed peace betwene their king & hym for .xii. monethes and retourned home again, & shewed the kyng all such thinges yt they had either hearde or sene there, wherof he ga∣thered that ye Frenchmen did nothing lesse entend then to haue peace made. Wherfore without de∣lay he called a parliament & there consulted of the aidyng of the Brytains: then of the exspence that should bee therin made, & after of other mattiers. And assone as the parliament was broken vp, he caused musters to bee taken in euery toune tho¦rowoute his realme. Yet leaste peraduenture he might seme willingly to breake the amitee whiche was betwene the Frenche kyng and hym, he sent Ambassadours into Fraunce to certifye the kyng that of late he had kepte a parliament, and there yt it pleased all the nobles that he should sende helpe to ye Britains, because they at all times had dooen more benefites to Englande then all other naciōs and therfore that he should either leaue of battail orelles that he shoulde not bee greued if he dyd o∣bey ye mindes of his Lordes and prelates, and yet that he woulde promise hym this one thing, yt his should medle wt hym no lēger then he was in Bri¦tain & kepte battaile vpon theim. With these com∣maundementes ye ambassadours went foorth and declared to ye French kyng all the minde and wyll of their kyng which thyng he litle cared for, and thought as it came to passe in dede, that the En∣glishemen there coulde lytle auayle.
In the meane season the Britains fought one felde at a place called sainte Albanes & there sped beray euel. For of theim Lewes duke of Orleaūce with many mo were taken, and Edwarde Wood∣uile, Iames Galeot an Italian and a veray good warryer, with diuers other noble menne slaine. Whiche thing when kyng Henry heard tell of, he thinking it tyme to make haste, sente spedely Ro∣berte Brooke Lorde, Iohn Cheinye, Iohn Mi∣delton, Raufe of Helton, Richarde Corbet, Tho∣mas Leightō, Richard Lacon, & Edmond Corne∣well, all lustye capitaines with .viii. thousand wel armed men to ye Brytains to helpe theim in theyr nede, whiche by reason ye wind serued theim, came thither so sone as they could desire. But when the Frenche menne knewe of their comming (whome they knewe so longe as they were freshe and lusty to bee in a maner inuincible) at ye firste wer blanke all, and durste scarsely looke oute of their tentes, but afterwarde trusting yt they might wery theim they went many of theim together into diuers pla¦ces, and kepte many bikeringes with the English menne, but they theim selfes euer bare the worste away, howsoeuer the Englishmen sped, they sped naught. Whiles they this kynde of warre did ex∣ercise, the Duke Fraunces died, and then was all dasshed. For the chyefe rulers of the Brytains be∣ing some of theim corrupted with money, & some sturred vp with ambicyon, fell into deuisyon a∣monge theim selues, and semed nomore to ende∣uoure to defende their commune weale, but rather to destroy and vtterly extinguishe it Which thing the englishe menne perceiuing, and also suffering
muche colde, were compelled of necessitee within fyue moonethes that their wente thyther, to come backe agayne into Englande. Then Charles the French kyng maried Anne the Dukes doughter, and gat al Britayn by that meanes into hys hādes. But of this it shalbe spo¦ken more here after. It was decreed here in Englande before there were any souldyours sent into Brytayne, that for the expence of that warre, euery man should paye as thei were hable, a tribute, whyche the mooste parte of theim that dwelte in the byshopryke of Durhā and Yorke shyre, dyd vtterly refuse to pay, and complayned of the matter to their Lorde the Earle of Northumberland. And he immediately signified to the kyng by his letters that the peo∣ple dyd greatly lament and was sory saiyng, that thei were neuer put to so muche coast, as thei had been of late dayes, & nowe that ther was so much requyred of theim, that neither thei were hable to pay so great a summe, nor would pay it. Yet for al that the kyng cōmaunded the Erle to get it on thē and make theim pay it whether thei would or not least peraduenture it myght be a cause, that yf at any time a tribute agayne should bee required of thē, to make an insurreccion. Which thyng when the people hearde of, by and by they ranne vnto the earle and as the authoure of the tribute pai∣yng Themurde ryng of the erle of Nor¦thūberland kylled hym out of hande. And when thei had so done, thei chase Ihon Egremonknight a verey dicious personne to bee their captayne, and so ar∣raied them selfes, and went agaynst the kyng, ma¦kyng cries in euery towne, that thei came to fight
for no nother cause but to defēde yt cōmon libertie. But when the mattier shoulde come to blowes thei waxed colde all the sorte of theim, and euerye one wished that this tumulte wer retracted which was nowe alredy begonne, so that at the cōclusiō not one scacely scaped without his great discom∣modite. For the kynge assone as he hearde of this insurreccion, went downe with an hoost to Yorke wherof these slaues and traitours beyng greatly afraied, fledde some hether and some thether and durst not abide and sustaine the power of ye kyn∣ges army. Wherfore thei wer sone taken and pu∣nished greuousely, accordyng to their deseruyng euery one of theim. But Ihon Egremont whiche was their captain fledde into Flanders to Mar∣garete of whome we spake before. And the kyng so sone as this busines was quē∣ched, tooke his iourny back again vnto London and committed the tribute whiche was in Yorke and about Yorke to bee taken vp, holy to Richard Toustal. And this was ye yere of our lord a thou∣sand foure hundred .xc. and the fourth yere of the reigne of this kyng Henry. And in thys yere also the kynge of Scottes . was sore vexed. For his subiectes roase agaynst hym and made his sonne Iames whiche was as yet but a chylde, their capitain. Wherfore, he sent to the kynge of Englande, to the Frenche kyng, and to the byshoppe of Roome Innocentius to desire theim to make some end of thys ciuile bat∣tayle and contencion whiche was betwene hys people and hym. Whiche afterwarde sente theyr ambassadours as they were desired, but all in
vayne. For ye rude sort would nedes fight onlesse The kyng of Scottes slain of his subiectes. he would resygne his crowne, wherfore shortely after, thei fought, and in that battayle kylled the kyng and gaue his sonne Iames whiche was the fourth of that name the crowne. But the byshoppe of Romes legate Hadrian came to late. For whyles he was in Englande wt kyng Henry, worde came that the kyng of Scot∣tes was slayne in battayle and hys soonne made kyng. And therfore, he taried here in England for a space, and was veray muche made of, and hygh¦ly commended to the kyng by Ihon Mortō arch¦byshop of Canterburie. Whereby he came into so high fauour with kyng Henry, that he made him bishoppe of Herforde, and shortly after, that least gaue hym the bishopprike boothe of Welles and Bathe. And not longe after he retourned wt these honours to Roome, and there of Alexander was made Cardinall. There beganne also of freshe, certayne busi∣nesse as concernynge Brytaine before this geare was appeased: whiche was, that Maximilian be∣yng at that tyme without a wyfe, would haue ma¦ried the duke of Briteines doughter, and had one that wowed for hym, which lady promisyng hym fayth & trueth, to the entent that she might not go from her word, he vsed this way wt her, when she went to her bed the night after, as to the bedde of wedlocke, the wower that was hired, putte one of his fete into ye bed to the knee in ye sight & cōpany of many noble matrōs & ladies, for a token & testi¦mony yt the mariage was consūmate, & thei .ii. as mā & wife. But this did nothing auaile, for Char
the Frenche kyng was desireous to marye her & hearyng that Maximiliā was sure to her, dyd the more busely set vpon the Britaynes, to thentent he might both haue the ladye and the countree also at his wyll, for he estemed that mariage to bee of no strength or force. Neuerthelesse, he feared kyng Henry muche, least that he would stoppe his pur∣pose, whiche kyng had made a league, and Ferdi∣nande also the kyng of Spayne, had made ye same with the Britaynes, to assist theim in all their ieo∣perdies and perilles that should chaunce to theim by foren countrees, wherfore he sent in al post hast Francese Lucemburgense, Charles Marignane and Roberte Gaguine, to kyng Henry for a peace to bee confirmed and hadde, desyrynge hym, that their kyng might ordre the mariage of the Ladye Anne as wer thought best without any let or hyn∣deraunce of it by hym, but kyng Henry would not agree to theim, that the lady should bee maried to hym, consyderyng she was made sure to the kyng Maximilian, for that it was against all right and lawe bothe of God and manne. Albeit the kynge would gladly make a peace betwene theim bothe, and so demissyng ye kynges Ambassadoures with a large and ample rewarde, sent Thomas Golde∣stone abbot of Cantorbury and the lord Thomas of Ormondye ambassadours streight after theim. In this meane space, Alexander B. of Rome the sixt of that name after Innocētius sent the bishop of Cōcordiense legate to the Frenche kyng for cer∣tayne mattiers, and emong other for a peace and vnitee to bee confederate betwyxt hym and kyng Henry, the whiche when he had easely obteyned,
he came to Englande and there beyng entretained moste roially of the kyng, had his purpose and de∣sire of hym. The Englishe ambassadours then be∣yng with the Frenche kyng, purposed to haue a peace concluded, whiche first demaunded certain thynges of the kyng ere that it should bee made, albeit the kyng would graūt theim nothyng, and was sore moued with their request & askyng. So ye shortly after, the Frenche kyng sent to the noble menne of Britain greate giftes and rewardes to the entent thei might moue the ladie Anne to giue her troweth to hym, and also sent to herself many princely giftes & tokens, ye she would beare loue to hym. And yt she might not feare but that she might lawfully marie to hym, certified her ye the promise was of none effecte yt she had gyuē to Maximiliā for yt it was geuē & made wtout his cōsent whiche had ye gouernaunce & dominion ouer all ye countre And this was the cause that no concorde or peace could bee kept betwixt theim. And where as that the kyng had taken Maximilians doughter ladie Margaret to bee his wife, he saied that it might bee lawfully dissolued because ye ladie was vnder age, and not ripe to bee maried. This ladie Anne of Britain through the persuasion of many noble menne of that countree, was contented to bee his wife and ladie. And when the kyng was certified of this, he hastened the mariage with all the expe∣dicion and celeritee that he could. So that the Englishe ambassadours returned again to their countree, and nothyng dooen or agreed vpon in their matter. When the kyng was certified of this by his ambassadours, he purposed to make bat∣taill
against hym, and to reuenge the naughtie en∣tent of his, with the swerde, and assemblyng his counsaill together, showed theim the matter, and the iuste cause he had to fight, desteryng theim for the maintenaunce of thesame warres to helpe hym with money, neuerthelesse that menne should not thynke it to bee extorte of theim, he willed euery māne to gyue as muche and as litle as he would, and theim to bee estemed and taken as his moste beste and assured frendes that gaue ye most money When this somme was gatheryng and prepa∣raunce made for battaill, Maximilian the kyng warred sore with the Frenchemen, whiche kyng was taken a litle before at a certain brunt and skir¦mishe made, and cast in prisone, after the whiche tyme kyng Henry sent to hym Giles Dabeney capitain of Calais to aide hym with three thousād harnissed mēne. At ye length Maximilian hauyng the better hand of the Frenchemen, entēded to re∣uenge hymself of the Frēche kyng, for that he had repudiate his doughter ladie Margarete, and ta∣ken to hym as wife quene Anne, but because he was not fully hable of hymself to sustein that bat∣taill, he sent Iames Contialde ambassadour to kyng Henry for helpe, whiche Iames when he had dooen his message, the kyng promised that he would dooe for hym all that he could in main∣teinyng his warres. In this tyme, Charles the Frenche kyng ma∣ried ladye Anne, chalengyng by this mariage the dominion and gouernaunce of ye Brytaines. Ma∣ximilian the kyng beyng certified of this, was greately moued, for that he did not onely forsake
and repudiate his doughter ladye Magarete, but also receiued in mariage ye ladye and quene Anne to his wife, and in this furie he sent to kyng Hēry desieryng hym to prepare an armie, for he would goo vpon the Frenche menne, and kepe open bat∣taill with theim, whiche kyng Henry gathered an hoste of menne, and proclaimed battaill in all his realme, after the whiche proclamacion there came to London an houge armie of menne, with their capitaines, whiche herafter ensewe and folowe. Rycharde Thomas with a greate compaig∣nie of Welshe menne. The erle Thomas of Derbie. George erle of Shrowes¦burie. Thomas erle of Harun∣dell. Edmunde duke of Suffolke. Edwarde erle of Deuen¦shire wt his noble young soone. Thomas erle of Ormō∣dye. George erle of Kent. Lorde Thomas Dorcet Marques. Ihon Cheyney. Gyles Dabeney Richard Gylforde Ihon Raynsforth Iames Terell Ihon Sauage Thomas Baro of Heltō Wyllyam Bulmerey Edwarde Stanley, with other. After that all this armie was araied, the kyng sent sir Christopher Vrswycke, and sir Ihon Ry∣seley knyghtes to the kyng Maximilian, to cer∣tifye hym that thei were all in a redynesse to kepe battaile when he would haue theim. When they had dooen their message thei returned backe a∣gain
to their kyng, certifiyng hym, that Maximi∣liā was so poore and nedye of monye and menne, that he could not be hable to susteyne any battaile neuerthelesse his mynde and will was good, if his power and habilitee had been correspondent to it. The kyng after the receipte of these letters, was displeased muche with hym, albeit consyderyng he had gooen so farre in it, and had suche furnyture of all thynges prepared, least that menne shoulde impute it to hym as cowardnesse to faynt frō bat∣taile, he proceded forth towarde Fraunce, and a∣bout ye .vi. daye of Septēbre he landed at Calise, & there rested his armye. Wher worde was brought to all the hoste (for thei did not knowe of it before) that Maximilian could make no preparaunce for lacke of mony. At ye whiche thei maruailed great∣ly, consideryng that he had suche vilanye shewed hym not longe before at the kynge of Fraunce hand. Yet thei wer neuer discoumfeyted at it, but like stoute and valiaunt warryars had great con∣fidence in their owne power and strengthe, wyth whō the kyng of Fraunce (after yt he perceaued it best for his profite & ease) would gladly haue been reconciled, although he had a ready hoste to fight against theim & withstāde their power. And espe∣cially he desyred peace for this cause, yt he might haue the loue of his neighboures, to the entent his realme might bee in better sauegarde and quiet∣nes, whē he should warre against Ferdinād kyng of Napels, at ye desyre of Ludouike Sfortia duke of Millayn, whiche at that present tyme did inuite hym to it, wherfore he did sende Philip Desquerd chief of Annonye to desyre kyng Henrye of peace,
whiche Philip did send ye letters to hym, before he came into the countre hymself, wherin he signified that he would take suche paines in bryngyng his purpose about, that he would if it should so please his grace, reconcile bothe hym and their kyng to loue eche other as thei haue dooen heretofore, and saied that it should bee for his honour to take thesame condicion, whiche condicion if he would send certain of his capitains to mete with hym in any parte of Fraunce, and there to determine of it he should haue it there promised & hereafter duely to bee performed. The kyng after he had red these letters, did send the bishop of Exceter, and Giles Dabeney to the forenamed Philip for peace to be agreed vpon & concluded, the whiche after a space determyned vpon certain condicions whiche here after shalbee shewed, that peace should bee had on bothe parties. When thei were thus consultyng, ye kyng hauyng his hoste at Caleis, remoued from that place to Bononye, & there pitchyng his tētes beseeged the toune with all the power he might, whiche toune because it was strongely defended & furnished with all thynges necessarye for warre, it could not bee ouercome without greate labour, & before yt he either could or did ouercome any parte of it, woord was brought, that a peace was cōclu∣ded and made, whiche heard, as it was pleasure to the Frenchemen, so it was sorowe to the Englishe men, for thei cried out of the kyng and saied it was not for his honour so to dooe, but the kyng as a wise manne & moste prudent prince, saied it should be the death of many noble & puisaunt capitaines if he should continue thesame battaill, & therefore
it might be to his sore reproche, if it wer in his po∣wer, not to tendre as well the health of his cōmons as his owne, whiche saiyng did somewhat coule & pacifye their grief. And after this dooen, the kyng returned backe to Calise, for because it was enfor∣med hym yt one Richard ye named hym self ye sonne of kyng Edwarde had made an insurreccion in Flaūders, through ye counsaill of lady Margarete ye quene, to fight against hym, which thyng, kyng Henry consyderyng did the more spedely hasten to conclude a peace. And the condicion of this peace to bee made was this, yt the Frenche kyng should paye to kyng Henry, a certain summe of meny, the whiche was leauyed by the ambassadours, for the cost and charges that the kyng was put to in that battayll, and also should yerely for a certain space paye or cause to bee payde to the kyng of Englād for a full recompence. xv. thousand crounes. The whiche Frenche kyng after that beyng in warre with the Italians, payd the said tribute to ye most noble prince and our souereigne lorde kyng Hērye the. v. sonne to Henry the seuenth, for a full recō∣cion and frendship to bee had for euer. This was the yere of our Lorde a thousand foure hun∣dreth foure score and thirtene, and the seuēth yere of his reigne. Also in this inuadyng & besiegyng . of Bonony (whiche we spake of before) there was none killed, sauyng onely syr Ihon Sauage, whi∣che goyng out of his tent wt syr Ihō Riseley, was taken priuely rydyng about the walles of ye toune and there because he would not yelde was slain of the Frenche men, albeit the other syr Ihon Rysely fled and escaped their daunger.
After this the kyng went frō Calis to England again, & yet that he might not be wtout some trou∣ble or busynes, quene Margaret of Spaine (whi∣che euer watched to do hym a displeasure) percea∣uyng yt the erle with his cōpaignie could not haue suche successe in their businesse as she would haue wished theim, she inuēted a new way to worke trea¦son against him. There was a certain yoūg mā of Tornace, very beautiful & faire in coūtenaunce, & of a pregnaunt witte, whiche yoūg mā was called Peter & surnamed Warbecke, & for his coward∣nes nycknamed of the Englishe men & called Per∣kyn, Perkyn warbeck. which yoūg mā trauaylyng many countrees could speake many lāguages & for his basenes of stocke & birth was knowen of none almost. Ther∣fore ye quene thynkyng this yoūg man to bee mete whō she might feigne to be the duke of Yorke, and sōne to her brother kyng Edward, kept hym a cer∣tain tyme wt her priuely, and tellyng hym what he should be, yt he might the rather persuade mē to be the kynges sonne did send hym into Irelāde, after what time she knewe that kyng Henry had apoin∣ted to fight against the Frenche kyng, where he was honorably receaued & taken of euery manne as a prynce, for whose right, they promysed all to fight, and helpe hym in all yt they could. After this it came to ye Frēche kynges eare yt such an one was in Ireland, for whō the kyng did send to see & cau∣sed hym to be brought before him, & when he came into his p̄sence, ye kyng accepted hym gladly, & af∣ter a princely fashiō intreteined hym. But after ye he came in loue wt the kyng of England, the sayd Charles did dimisse ye yoūg mā, & would no lōger
kepe hym, least that some inconueniencie or cause of strife should chaunce thorough it. Wherfore ye young manne went to Flaunders agayne to the quene Magarete, whiche quene did receaue hym with suche gladnesse, that she coulde not well rule her selfe, & for this cause onely she dyd shewe her selfe so ioyfull and merye, that menne mighte per∣swade theim selfe that this was Richard the kyn∣ges soonne, and vpon that cause truely, men did ye more reuerence to the younge manne, and yt more firmely beleue hym to bee the righte heire & sonne to kyng Edwarde. Also after this rumour blased abrode, aswel in England, Fraunce, as Flaundres there beganne great sedicion to spryng, and firste they that were long in sanctuary for the greate of∣fences that they had commytted, and other that wer cast in pouertie, gathered a compaignie of mē and sayled ouer into Flaunders to the counter∣faicte Edwarde, otherwise named Peter, also ma∣ny of the noble men conspired together, and to the entent they might bryng their purpose wel about, they did send certain to the Quene Margarete, to knowe when thesame Edwarde might come con∣ueniently into Englande, ye thei beyng certified of thesame might ye more easely receaue & bryng hym into ye realme. So yt by the consent and agrement of theim all, syr Robert Clyfforde knight & Wyl∣lyam Barley wer sent to shewe all their myndes & aduyce as concernyng the newe founde duke, to the Quene Margarete. Whome the Quene did accepte gladlye, and persuaded theim, that it was true that was publyshed of Rycharde the duke, and streight vpon shewed theim thesame
Peter, whiche was muche lyke Richarde, pray∣syng his vertues and qualitees that he had, won∣derfullye. The said Robert, whē he had seen thesame yoūg manne, beleued surely that he was of the kynges bloode, and wrote to Englande to his coumpaig∣nye and felowes of his conspiracie, that he knewe hym to bee the kynges soonne by his face & euery proporcion of his body. And when these letters came vnto Englande, the chief capitaynes of this businesse did openly diuulgate and publyshe, that it was trewe that was spoken and saied abroad of the Duke, but it was dooen by suche a crafte, that no manne coulde tell who was the authoure of that rumoure. When the kyng perceiued that many men did geue credence to his vaine fable, he thought beste for his owne safegard to prouide a remedy for it, & also mystrusting that some conspiracye had bene made bicause that sir Robert Clifford had fled pri¦uely into Flaundres, commaunded certain knigh∣tes that were chosen and piked menne of warre wt a bonde of menne to kepe the borders surely ye no manne might escape or sayle ouer the sea without a pasporte or licence geuen by hym. Also that men myghte not contynue in the false perswasion and belefe that they had conceyued of the duke, he cau¦sed certain spies to search in all the citees of Bel∣gike, to knowe of what progenie this mysnamed Richarde was, and to geue theim highe rewardes that would shewe the verite and truth of the same matter. So that they sailynge into Fraunce, euerye manne dyd gooe into a contraye quarter,
and enquired diligently for hym, and at ye length, certain of theim came to a towne called Tornace and there were certifyed by the testymonye of ma∣ny honest menne that he came but of a lowe and course parentage, and he was named Peter War becke, whiche thing also the kynges frendes cer∣tified hym by their letters and writynges to hym more plaine and euidentelye. Therfore when the kyng had knowen the matter wholy, aswel by his frendes as by his spies sent foorth purposelye for the same, he caused it to bee proclaimed openly as∣well in other regions & countrees as in England that the disceate and deuelish crafte might appere euident to euery manne. And firste he sent ambas∣sadours to Philyp the chiefe capitaine in Flaun∣dres, and to his councell, because he was but of a younge age, whiche were sir Edward Poninges knight, and sir William Varame preest and law∣yer, that they might shewe euidently howe falsely the younge manne hath vsurped the name of Ri∣charde duke of Yorke whiche was kylled with his brother Edward in the Towre of London, at the cōmaundement and will of kyng Richard his vn¦cle, as euery man coulde testifye and affirme most surely. Also that he was borne of a poore stocke, and an obscure famulie in Tornace, and there named Perkin Warbecke, and therfore that it woulde please hym & his councel not to suffer theim selfes to bee blynded or seduced with suche mere impo∣stures and craftie illusions, nor yet to aide hym at any hande to cause sedicion or strife, consideryng that he had no iuste title to the enheritynge of the
same. And that they would the rather bee his fren¦des nowe, because yt he helped Maximilian theyr kyng the yere before againste the power and vio∣lencye of the Frenche menne, where as he of hym selfe was not hable to refyste theyr myghte and stronge power. When the Ambassadours had dooen their message, they were gentely entretay∣ned of hym, and had their request, that he woulde not (for the loue that he oughte vnto the kynge) no nor any of his counsaile helpe thesame Perkin any thinge at all. Neuerthelesse, yf the quene Margaret would persiste and continewe in her malice towardes the kyng (whome the Ambassadour sir William Va∣rame had reproued and checked sore, for bringing vp of suche monsters and commune plagues, to the publike weale in his oration that he made vn¦to Philippe and his counsayle) it was not in their power to withstande it, for because that she might doo in her owne herytage all thinges at her owne wyll and pleasure. Whiche quene entended fully to arme this Perkin with a stronge compaignye of menne against kyng Henry. After that kynge Henrye dyd heare of this, he purposed to pacyfye all this busynesse that was like to chaunce, by wytte and policye, and streight dyd sende foorthe certaine spies, whiche shoulde fayne theim selfes to haue fledde vnto the Duke, and by that meanes searche foorthe and knowe the whole entente of theyr coniuracion, and after what waye they framed theyr matters. Other also shoulde promyse a pardon and remys∣syon vnto syr Roberte Clyfforde, and Willyam
Barley for their offence cōmitted to the kyng. And when they had so dooen, many of theim retur¦ned to Englande, and broughte the names of cer∣tayne that were chief of the same conspiracye, O∣ther taried vntyll suche tyme that sir Robert Clif∣forde came to Englande agayne. And when the kyng had knowen the chief capitaines of this tu∣multe by his spyes that were there with theim, he caused all them to bee attached & brought to Lon¦don before his presēce, whose names wer sir Iohn Ratclyffe, syr Simon Monforde, syr Thomas Thwarte knightes, William Dabeney, Roberte Ratcliffe, Richard Lesey, wt many other. Also cer∣taine preestes and religious menne, as sir Willi∣am Richeford, and Thomas Poynes bothe mon∣kes of sainct Dominikes order, sir William Sut¦ton, sir William Vrseley Deane of Poules, & Ro¦bert Layborne. Other that were giltie of the same crime, hearing that many of their compaignie wer taken, fledde and did take sanctuarye. And the o∣ther that were taken wer condempned all of trea∣son, of ye whiche there was heded sir Simon Mon¦ford, sir Robert Ratcliffe, and William Dabeney as authours & chiefe capitaines of this busines. The other were pardoned, and the Preestes also for their order that they had taken. Also sir Iohn Ratcliffe was pardoned of his lyfe, but after that he came to Calisse, & there caste in prisone, he was behedded, because he corrupted the kepers wt ma∣ny promises to haue escaped out of the same. Shortly after, sir Robert Clifford trusting to find fauour & grace at the kynges hande, came to En∣gland, of whose cōming when ye kyng was certifi∣ed
he went streight to ye towre of London, & there taryed tyll suche tyme ye syr Robert Clyfford came whiche thyng he vsed vnder this pretence, that yf sir Robert Clifford had accused any man to hym of ye treason, that then euerie suche person mighte bee called thether withoute anye suspectiō of anie euel, and there streight to bee cast in holde, but be¦fore I goo furder, I wyll shewe the opinion that many men conceaued of the knightes goynge to Flaunders. Some men helde this opinion, that kyng Henrye dyd sende hym as a spye to Flaun∣ders, and therfore he came the soner into his fa∣uoure. Neuerthelesse, this is not lyke to bee true by diuerse reasōs. Fyrst that it tourned to ye great infamye and hurt, both of hym selfe and his fren∣des. Secondarly that he was not in so greate fa∣uoure with the kyng, as he had ben in tymes past for because that he was giltie in that part. Ther∣fore the saied sir Robert now comming to the king after his retourne into England, kneled mekelye downe at his feet, and desired pardō of his grace and after that beyng enquired of the coniuration and examined who wer the authours of this mis∣chiefe, he pronounced & saied that William Stā∣ly whome the kynge made Earle, was one of the chief, when he had so saied, the kyng was greatly dismayed & greued, that he should offend, whō he had made chief of his priuie chamber, considering also that he had founde great kindenes hertofore at his hande, and that he dyd ouercome kyng Ry¦chard chiefly by his helpe and meanes. So that the kyng coulde not bee perswaded, that he was any suche offender, had not it bene shewed him af¦ter
by manifest tokens and apparēt argumentes ye it was true as he saied. Whom the king thē cau¦sed to be taken and examined of the matter, after the which examinacion he was proued to be an of¦fender. Then the kynge doubtynge what to dooe with him, dyd consult and breath a lytle with him selfe, for he feared, that his brother lord Thomas by whom he had shewed great kyndnesse woulde take it greuously, also & yf he shoulde remitte that faulte, other would abuse his lemtee, and trespace more highly. Albe it, at the laste he wylled that he shoulde suffer for his offence, and so caused hym to bee behedded. The cause that their loue (as mē reporte) dyd chaunge into hatred was this. The lorde Wylliā consideryng that he saued the kyng and brought hym to this realme to be gouernour thought he could neuer bee recompensed for hys so doyng, and wher as the kyng also remembring this benefyte, dyd make hym his chiefe chamber∣layn, and gaue hym the hyghest promocions that he had, he lytle regarded them and loked for some greater rewarde, wherfore, the king perceauynge that, was sore greued with hym, and so thei bothe dyd fall at debate and hatred eche wyth other. Also at this time the king thought best to vse some asperite in correcting the offēces of his sub∣iectes, because ye some had taken suche heart and audacitee to them, ye thei feared not to speake euel of his maiestie with most spiteful and contumele∣ous wordes, trusting euer that ye fayned Rychard duke of York, now lately rysen from death to lyfe on gods name, should claime the crowne, & enhe∣ret his counterfeted fathers possessions, & when
such persōs had suffered due ponishment for their offences, other learning by their neighbours mis∣chaunce to beware, dyd frome ye tyme beare theim selfes as true & faithfull subiectes, & assysted him with al their power, at what time he required help of thē. After the death of this William Stanley, Giles Dabeney was chosen and made chiefe chā¦berlain. And now ye kyng was in a good staye for his realme, sauyng yt Ireland was not wel weded of the pernicious sede ye was sowed by the young mā Perkin Warbeck and his secte. Wherfore, he sent sir Henry Deny late abbot of Lanktō abbey thither, & made him chauncellour ouer al that Ile and Edward Ponyng to serch all places that the forenamed Perken was in, to punish thē extreme¦ly in the example of other, ye were giltie of yt crime but when thei heard of this, thei fled for the most part into woddes & marysh places for the defence & safgard of them selfes, there consultyng to kepe open warre agaynst hym, whiche Edwarde after that he persued theim many times, and coulde ne¦uer try it wyth them because thei wer so disparsed as foren and wilde people, he returned backe, and suspectinge that the earle of Kyldare was the oc∣casion of this, attached him at the counsayl of the erle his euel willers, and brought him as prisoner to England. Wher when he was arained, and cer¦tain matters of treason laied to his charge, he ad¦uoided thē all, & clerly quite him selfe: whome the kynge dimissed, and sente hym to Irelande there to bee gouernour and captayne ouer theim as he was before. So that now the kyng beeyng oute of all feare of battayle, dyd take hys progresse to
shyre, there to recreate his spirites and solace him selfe with his mother lady Margarete, wyfe and countesse to the Earle of Darby. Yet when ye king was thus delityng hym selfe, Perken Warbecke could not moderate or rule hym selfe, although so manye suffered and were put to execucion for his mischife but to proue again the chaunce of battel gathered a great armye of men aswell prisoners, slaues, sānctuary men as other & came into Kent, because the wind so serued, & ther caused certayne to land, & to enquire yf ye Kentish men would bear with him, with whō the Kentish mē working gui∣les promised ye thei would assist him, yf he & his cō¦panie would land ther. Albeit, the same Perkē fea¦ring ye thei meaned falshode and craft, would not descende him selfe, but caused certain of his soul∣diours to lande, whiche persones beynge a pretye way from their shippes, wer sore beatē and put to flight, and many of theim taken prisoners & after wer condempned to dye. Wherfore Perkē failing of his purpose fled backe to Flaunders, and there consulted with his frendes vntyll suche time he had been better prepared bothe of men and coun∣sayle. The kynge herynge that hys enemyes had made ētraūce into his realme, left of his progresse & purposed to go to London, but beynge certified the next day after, how wel thei had sped, continu∣ed & went forth of his progresse, sendyng to theim Richard Gilford, to geue thankes and promise of a good turne herafter, for ye good seruice that thei had done him in those tumultes and assaultes of his enemies. Also that thei might not haue any ac¦cesse herafter into those parties the king commaū¦ded
ye lordes to bee defēded strōgely wt bulwarkes & other sure munimētes & fortresses, of the whiche this same Perken beyng certified, hastened ye more to renue battaill against the kyng, yt he might not haue longer space, through his delaye, to dooe all these thynges for the defence of his realme and so came to Irelande with all his armie, and there tariyng a space, sailed to Scotlande for ayde and succour of kyng Iames, trustyng to finde grace at his hand, to whom he spake after this maner. I thinke it is not vnknowē to you moste noble kyng in what ruine the stocke of Edwarde the fourth of that name is now of late, whiche if you dooe not know, and it please your grace so to take me I am his soonne, & by the power of God, preserued a liue at this houre from the mightie hand of a tiranne. For my father when he died, apointed his brother Richard duke of Gloucestre to bee our gouernour & {pro}tectour. Albeit he was rather a destroyer of our progenie then a mainteiner of it, for he wyllyng to be kyng hymself, and depriue vs of our right and title, commaunded that we should bothe bee slain, and dispatched out of this worlde. Therfore he ha¦uyng then full power to ordre vs at his will, did cause my brother to bee destroyed, and because yt he might bee without some parte of that offense, and not shewe hymself all a tirāne, he caused me to bee conueighed to some straunge and foren coun∣tree, and there to bee desolate of all comforte and helpe. And so kyng Richard did hold his croūe by dispatchyng away of vs two, so that I could not tell by the reason of my tendre age, what I was, vntill now of late that myne aunte ladie Marga∣rete
beyng in Flaūders did shewe me what I was after she had seen me, and to the entent I might recouer again my fathers possessions, she hath geuen me for her power a bonde of mēne, wyllyng me ye I should desire the helpe of externe nacions and countrees. And so I am come to you for suc∣coure, whō as it is reported will helpe at all tymes euery manne in his right, and in case bee I shall finde you fauorable to me, you shall binde me and all myne, neuer to thynke ourselfes hable to make you amendes. When he had thus saied, the kyng promised hym that it should neuer repente hym of his commyng to hym, and bad him to take a good hearte, & after this the kyng assemblyng his coun∣saill together, asked what thei thought best in that matter, and whether any deliberacion should bee takē of it, or no. To whom some of theim that were wsest, aunswered that it were folishenes to go fur∣ in suche a matter, consideryng that he was but a painted and feigned duke and had no right to England. Other also saied that it was for diuerse causes moste profitable to the cōmen wealth, par∣tely that this Parkyn, if his matters goo well for∣warde, would rewarde theim, as thei would desire and enriche their realme moste plentefully by his liberalite, partely also that Henry the kyng percei∣uyng their kyng to assist hym, would gladly paie tribute to hym for a peace and concord to bee had. When this counsaill was gyuen, the kyng did gladly folowe it, and that his loue might bee more apparent to the people, he caused ladie Katherine doughter to therle of Hūtley, his nigh kinsemā, to be maried to hym. After this was dooen, the kyng
willyng yt this Perkyn should reigne in Englāde, hastened his iourney towarde the borders, & there cōmyng, proclamed openly ye all should bee pardo∣ned ye would beare with the duke of Yorke, & fight in his quarell: and that mēne might for feare sub∣mitte theim selfes, thei burned, spoyled, & killed wt out all mercie as ferre as thei did go, but the kyng perceiuyng yt no Englishemen came to aide this young duke, & that his souldiours wer so loden wt praies & spoiles yt thei would not gladly go further he returned backe to Scotlād cariyng wt hym in∣finite goodes & riches. And when this duke came to Scotlande again, consideryng the greate di∣struccion and losse of the Englishmen, & that none came to aide hym, to the entēt that his iuglyng of his countrefeict dignite might not be perceiued, he saied verie craftely with a loude voice. Oh wretch and stonie hearte, that I am not moued with the losse and death of so many Englishemen of myne, and at that woorde he desired the kyng yt he would not molestate his realme herafter with suche cruel tormentyng, and fieryng. To whom the kyng shaped hym this aunswere right shortely. Truely sir me thynke you take charge and thought of an other mannes realme and not of your owne, because that I coulde se no manne that woulde take your parte, and helpe you with his power, whē you were now last emong theim. And for this cause ye kyng did litle esteme hym after that tyme, countyng hym incōstant, vnstable, and speakyng woordes not agreyng to his promise. When ye En∣glish lordes and captaines hearde of this busines thei wer in greate feare, & fled for safegade of their
lifes euery manne to his castell and holde, and ga∣theryng an axmie to withstand their enemies cer∣tified the kyng in all post haste of the Scottes en∣terprise, whiche hearyng, prepared an armie in all the hast to fight against theim. But the Scottes beyng lodē with their praies and spoiles that thei had, were gone backe to their countre, ere the En∣glishe menne could bee readie. And this was the first commocion & busines of the Scottes against the Englishemen. When the Scottes were thus gone, and the kyng certified of it, he thought not to suffer theim lenger, leste that by long tariyng & deferryng of ye matter, thei should take heart, and so with more fearsenes inuade the realme again. And assemblyng his counsaill together, shewed theim that it was for the proffite of the publique weale to warre against his enemies, to whom thei all agreed right gladly, and for the mainteinyng of this battaill, there was leuyed a certain summe or tribute to be paid on euery mannes hed, whiche paiment although it was but easie and small, yet many of the commen people grudged to paie it. At this parliament also and conuocacion there was certain lawes, actes and statutes confirmed and made, as thought moste expediēt for the pub∣lique weale. And after this was dooen, the kyng prepared to fight in all the haste, and gatheryng an armie, made Giles Dabeney graund capitain ouer theim, and in his goyng to Scotlande, there beganne sodenly ciuile battaill in the realme, whi∣che was for the paiment of this money, for that ye Cornishemen, (whiche made this insurreccion) beeyng but poore, could not well paie this tribute.
And so they gatheryng all together, one Michael Ioseph Smyth and Thomas Flāmoke, did take * The blacke Smyth. vpon theim the gouernaunce of all this compai∣nie. And seyng theim greued sore that they should paye so muche, did more and more incense theyr myndes againste their prynce. Albeit they layde this faulte, and cause of exaction, to Ihon Mor∣tō bishoppe of Cātorbury, and Ruigenald Braye because they were chief of the kynges house. Thus they preparyng theim selues to warre, whē they had aswell sufficiente viandrye as all other thynges ready, they tooke theyr iourney to Wel∣les, and from thence entended to go to London, When the kyng was shewed of this by his audi∣tours, that they wer vp, and that the lorde Twy∣chet, and the lorde Audely with other of the noby∣litee had taken their partes, he thought fyrste to scoure his realme of suche rebelles and traytours ere he would fight against the Scottes. And ther∣fore he caused Giles Dabeney to returne backe agayn then goyng vpon the Scottes, whose ar∣mye he encreased and multiplyed with many pyc∣ked and freshe warryers, that he might the better with lesse laboure ouercome these rebelles. Also least that the Scottes might nowe (hauyng good oportunite) inuade the realme again (in this time of ciuile battyle) he caused lorde Thomas erle of Surrey, a puissaunt and most redoubted warryer whome he had taken prysoner, at the ouerthrowe of kyng Richard, and a litle before that, had set at libertie, and made treasourer of Englāde, after the death of Iohn Dynham, to gather a bond of men at Durham, & there to kepe of ye Scottes, yf they
should chaunce to come, vntyll suche tyme that yt Cornyshe menne beyng pacified and subdued, he might send to theim the forenamed Giles agayne with all his power and armye. When as the no∣bles hearde of this busynes, they came to Lon∣don euery mā, with as many as they could make, to ayde the kyng, yf nede shoulde be. In the which compaignie there was the erle of Essex, the lorde Mongey, the erle of Suffolke, Richard Thomas, William Say, lorde Haward the erle of Surrey his sonne a noble young man & of stoute courage Robert Lytton Thomas Bande Robert Clyfforde, Wyllyam Dauers, George Verye, Thomas Terell, Richard Fizlewes, Ihon Baynsforth Thomas Mōtigomery, Ihon Wyngfilde Roberte Brougthon, Iames Terell, Iames Huberte, Ihon Wyndham, Robert Fenys Wylliam Carye Robert Drurye, Ihon Audely, Robert Wyngfild with his brother Richarde, Robert Brandon, Thomas west de lauare Thomas Fenis Dacres Dauid Owen, Henry Rosse, Ihon Deuenysse, Henry Selenger, Ihon Paulet Ihon Burshere Thomas Woode Mathewe Broune, Thomas Troys, Wylliam Sandes. Edmūde Graye of Wil∣tone, Ihon Verney Thomas Brian Richard Poole, Thomas Harecourte, Ihon Hampden Edward Barkeley Willyā Bolongue with his sonne Thomas. Henry Haydon,
Robert Clarence, Philip Calthorpe, Robert Louell, Ihon Shaye Thomas Frouwike with many other of lower de∣gree that wer moste noble & cunnyng warryers. In this meane space, Charles ye Frenche kyng commyng from the warres that he had at Naples with Ferdinande, sente Ambassadours to the kyng for a peace and league of amitee to bee con∣firmed. When the kyng was enformed of their cō∣myng, and that they were at Caleis, he sente cer∣tayn of his nobilitie to mete theim commyng, and to kepe theim purposely at Douer, vntyll suche tyme that this busynesse were ended, that they might not knowe of it in any wise. And nowe the Cornyshemenne gooynge from Welles (where they had theyr graunde capitayne lorde Audeley) went to Saulisbury and frō thence to Wynchester, and so to Kent, where they looked for helpe, but they were deceaued, for the earle of Kent, and the lorde of Burgone Poole, the lorde Cobham, Thomas Burcher, Edwarde Ponyng, Richard Gilforde, Wyllyam Scotte, Iames Cromer, Ihon Peche, Iohn Darel, Henry Wyat Rychard Haulte, Ihon Fogge, and other were ready to withstande theyr power, and to cause the people to beare trewe heartes to theyr kynge. For the whiche, many of the Cornyshe men fayn∣ted and had lesse mynde to fight, and for feare fled priuely in the nyght from their compaignie. But the captaynes perceauyng they coulde haue no helpe at theyr handes, trusted to theyr owne po∣wer, and brought theim to Blackeheath feld nigh London, and there pytched theyr tentes in the
playn to byd battail to the kyng, if he would mete theim, or els to inuade the cytie, whome the kynge perceauyng to be there readye to fight, he caused Henry Burschere erle of Essex, Edmunde Polam erle of Suffolke and Richard Thomas, three no∣ble warryers to besiege theim on both sydes wyth two wynges, and so came hym self in the myddest sendyng before, Giles Dabeney with a greate power. And after his commyng thus to the felde, bothe the erles and Richard Thomas sette vpon theim violently, and at the first brunt put theim to flight and killed aboute two thousande that res∣sied, and tooke prisoners more then could bee told and emonges theim ye Captaynes which shortely after wer put to death. But this Michael Ioseph was a mā of suche stoute courage & valiaūtnesse, yt he neuer fainted or once gaue backe vntyll such tyme he was stryken downe, and kylled openly. When this battaile was ended the kynge loste but thre hundreth in all his compaignye that wer kylled at that presente. Also the prysoners that were taken he pardoned, sauyng the captaynes and first autours of that mischief, whose quarters he would haue to bee put on stakes and set in dy∣uerse places of Cornewell, that theyr naughtie dooynges and foolishe entrepryses might bee a document for other hereafter to beware: but be∣cause there were many of that coūtree that would gladly haue renewed battaile, yf they might haue had some Capitayn, and yt they wer nothyng aba∣shed for ye ouerthrowe of theyr late insurreccion, he turned his mynd, so yt thei wer not had thither nor their quarters set vpō any stakes there. Whē this
busines was in hād, ye kyng of Scottes being cer¦tified of it by certain spies, thought best to inuade Englande againe, and burned all the waye as he did before, lest that the kyng should prouoke hym to it of force, because he had dooen so muche hurte to it before, and thus came to Durham and there burned all aboute, entending also to wynne Nor∣ham Castle, whiche the Bishoppe had furnished a litle before with menne and vitaile sufficiently, so that he coulde haue none accesse into that castell. And this was the bishop Foxe, that was bishop of Exeter, and for his godlines and verteouse liuing after that, made bishoppe of Welles and Bathe. Whiche bishop nowe being in this businesse, cer∣tified the kyng of it in all the haste, and also therle of Surrey, that was then in Yorke shyre with a greate army of menne. To whome the Erle came shortly after, with his compaignye, and after hym folowed other noble menne of all quarters, euery one bringīg for his habilitee as many as he could to aide the bishop, and fight in the defence & qua∣rell of theyr kyng. And in this compaygnie was there many Lordes therle of Westmerland, Tho∣mas Dacres, George Graunge, Rafe Neuel, Ri∣chard Latimer, George Lumley, Iohn Scroppe, George Oglie, Thomas Baron of Hilton, Hen∣ry Clifford, William Coyners, Thomas Dercy. Also knightes. Sir william Percy, and thre other of yt name as Percy. Bulmery, Gascogne, Penington, Sir Rauffe Bigot, Sir Rauffe Bowes Sir Rauffe Elaker, Sir Thomas Appar, Sir thomas Thwarton
Sir Thomas Stran∣guishe, Sir Ihon Constable Sir Ihon Ratcliffe Sir Ihon Sauell Sir Ihon Gouer Sir Musgraue Sir Iohn Waller Sir Iohn Aloder Sir Iohn Euerinham Sir Brian Stapelton Sir Thomas Vortell Sir Marduke Constable Sir Christopher Pi∣keringe, Sir Christopher ward Sir Walter String∣lande, Sir Roger Bellinghā Sir William Heron Sir Rauffe Graye Sir Nicholas Ridley Sir Walter Griffit Sir Ihon Heron Sir Rauffe feneuike Sir Thomas Graye Sir Christo Curwen Sir Robert Varcoppe Sir Rouland Tempest Sir Iames Medcalfe With many other Capitaynes, althoughe not so noble in degree, yet as valiaunte in martiall fea∣ctes and prowesses of warre. The Scottes hea∣ring of the Earle of Surrey that he was cōming and at hande with a greate power, then beseging this forenamed Castell, whiche they coulde by no meanes ouercome, they fledde streighte backe to Scotlande, whome the Earle folowed as longe as his vyttailles serued, and after that returned backe to Durham, theyr abiding vntyll such time he knewe furder of the kynges pleasure. And in this meane space, one Henrye Hailes was sente Ambassadoure frome Ferdinand vnto the kyng of Scottes for a generall peace to bee had with hym and the Kyng of Englande, for he loued hym well, and kyng Henrye also to whose soonne the younge Prynce Arthure, he woulde haue geuen his doughter Ladye Katheryne in
mariage that by affinytee and kyndered of blood their loue might continue for euer. So this Henrye entreated hartelye the King of Scottes for a peace, and when he had some hope in it, he wrote vnto the kyng of Englande, that it would please hym to sende one of his no∣bles to helpe to conclude this matter with hym and the Scottes. The kyng because he had been in greate trouble and then veraye desierous of peace, he sent the byshoppe of Durham to hym in all the haste. So that this Henrye and the bishop reasoned with the Scottyshe ambassadours as concernyng this peace to be had, albeit thei could not agree, because that kyng Henrye desiered to haue Perkyn Warbecke that was the cause of all this busynes, and had so greatly disquieted his realme, whome the kyng woulde not delyuer, al∣though he might of ryghte, consideryng his false∣hode and deceyte that he had vsed with hym. Therfore, after that they had reasoned much of this matter, & could bring it to no ende, yet a truce was taken for certain yeres of this condicion, that the same Perkin Warbecke should bee conueyg∣hed oute of Scotland, & not to tary there longer. Whyle this was dooinge, kyng Henry caused the Ambassadours of ye Frenche kyng to bee brought to hym, which as it is shewed before, wer stopped at Douer of their iourney, vntill suche tyme yt the insurreccion of the Eornish men was ceassed, and hearing yt they came for a peace and league to bee made, graūted theim it right gladly. So yt nowe beīg reconciled wt .ii. kynges, & thesame his neigh¦bours, he thanked Fernand & his wife Elizabeth
for ye they caused this peace to bee made betwixte hym and the Scottes, and rewarded the Ambas∣sadoure moste worthely after a princely maner. And the tyme that this vnitee and concorde was made, it was the yere of oure Lorde a thousande foure hundreth foure score and eighten, and ye .xii. yere of kyng Henry his reigne. And the kynge of Scottes kepte his promesse The .xii. pere of Hē¦ry the .vii. well ynoughe. For when he perceiued manifestly that he was deluded, he called vnto hym Perkin Warbeck, and first declared his benefites & plea∣sures that he had dooen vnto hym, and then coun¦sailed hym to gette hym vnto some place where he mighte byde in safegarde, and come againe ano∣ther time when he shoulde haue more oportunitee But neuer after to looke for any helpe at his hād, partely because he had made peace with the kyng of Englande, and partely because he sawe that no Englishemen came to take his parte, wherfore he desired hym not to bee misgreued that he did thus leaue hym, & also counsailed hym to goo into some other place or regyon, wherfore this Perkin was veraye sorye & (as the kyng had counsailed hym) departed thence with his wife, and went into Ire¦land, determining with hym selfe if he might haue no helpe of the menne of Cornewale, to retourne thence as faste as myghte bee home to his greate mailres & aunte Margaret into Flaundres. But he was no soner come thither, then he heard by di∣uers messengers yt they of Cornewale were as rea¦dy to fyght against kyng Henry as euer they wer before, of hoope of the whiche he went streyght in to Cornewall & there dyd sturre vp their heartes
with gyftes and promyses, that all immediatelye called him their capitain & saied that thei woulde folow hym and in all thinges obey promptly hys commaundementes. Thē was Perkē in as good hoope as euer he was, and (because he would do nothynge rashelye and withoute aduisemente) he purposed fyrste to ouercome citees and all wel de∣fēded places that lay in his way, and so to get as many as he coulde to folowe hym and to take his part, and incontinently, to buckle with ye kynges host. Whē he had thus deliberate, he wēt streight to Exeter which was the next citee that he coulde come vnto and besieged it, and because he had no gunnes to breake downe the walles, he laboured all that myght bee to breake the gates, but when he saw that thei could not easely be betten downe with any thyng, streight with he set fyre on theim. Whereof, the citezins were veray, sore afraied and priuely in the night let downe diuerse ouer ye walles with ropes to go certifie the kyng of their trouble, and in the meane tyme whē thei saw that their enemies had almost brēt vp the gates of the one side, tooke great blockes and set them on fyre on the other side, for none other cause but that as∣well their enemyes therby might be excluded, as thei them selfes included. And thei not trusting to this only, made also wtin great ditches & other thī∣ges to defend thē from the inuasiō of the rebelles When Perkē saw this, he got ladders, and would by that meanes haue come into the citee, but they came not so sone vp, but thei were beate downe a∣gain, and by this meanes many were there slayne þet would he not thence depart, but trusted surely
at the laste that thei should be glad to yelde theim selfes al that wer within for lack of viandrie. But as sone as the kyng hearde of this, he hasted with his hoost toward Exeter as faste as was possible and sente dyuerse souldiours beefore to certifie all menne of his commyng and preparaunce, for at that tyme there was set forth to helpe theym of Exeter, Thomas Trencherd, William Corteney Walter Cortney, Edmond Carre, Ihon Halemel Peter Eggecomb Thomas Fulford, Ihō Crook William Saintmaur, with a great host whose ca¦pitain was Edward Corteny erle of Denshire, & his sonne William, whiche was a young man of mooste noble courage, whiche thyng when Peter heard tell of, he left besiegyng of Exeter and went to ye nexte towne whiche is called Taūtun & there vieued his hoost and set it in aray redye to fyght, howbeit,, he had but lytle affiaunce in the same, because many of his souldiours were so slenderly harneissed, and no better skylled in warre. When the kyng sawe he was gone to Taūtun he hasted thither after him with all spede. Thether came al∣so Edward ye duke of Buckingham a young mā veray valiaunt and of lustie courage, and hym fo¦lowed a greate compaignye of noble men as Giles Brigge, Alexander Brayhā, Moryshe Bar¦keley, Robert Tame, Ihon Sapcot, Ihon Wad¦hā, Hugh Lutrel, and Nycholas hys sonne, Wil∣liam Sorton, Thomas Lynde, Ihon Semar, Wylliam Norris, Thomas Blunt, Ihon Guyse Roberte poynte, Harry Vernon, Ihon Mortimer Ihon Speke, Rychard Beaucāp, Fraunces Che¦nie, Roger Tokete, Roger Wenburg Henry Ro∣ger,
Edwarde Darell, Ihon Langforde, Richard Lacon, Thomas Tremaile, Edwarde Sutton, Amis Paulet, Ihon Byknell, Wyllyam Sayn∣temaur, Thomas Longe, Nycholas Latimer, Ihon Turbaruyll, Wylliam Martyne Walter Hungorforde, Moryshe Barons, Rycharde Cor∣bet Thomas Cornuall, and many other besydes these. But the king when he came nygh to the towne sente before to begynne battayle, Roberte Broke, Lorde Rycharde Thomas, and Giles Dabeney with a great and stronge hoost, to the entent that he hym selfe with his souldiours myght set vpon them behynd. But this deuise and purpose of the kyng was al superfluous. For Perkin, so sone as he espyed that the kyng was redie to fight, fledde priuely in the nyght into a sanctuary at Bellylo abbey, and there lurked. But whether this Perkē so dyd for feare least his men should forsake hym or for the timeditie of hym selfe, it is as much vn∣certayne, as it is probable and sure that the kyng tooke by hys flyght greate commoditee. For the Corneshe menne were surelye purpo∣sed eyther to wynne and ouercome theyr enemies or elles not one of theim to haue lyued anye daye lenger. When kynge Henrye knewe that Perkin was gone, he sente after hym many horse menne that yf it myghte bee, they shoulde ouertake hym in hys iourney and brynge hym backe. But Perkyn Warbecke made suche spede, that he was not seene before he came into the Sanctuarie, but his petie capitaines coulde not scape so clene. For of theim, the moost part were ta
ken and brought backe againe to the kyng. The residue of the souldiours when thei vnderstode ye Perkyn their chief capitain was fled and ye other taken, gaue vp theim selfes by and by to the king without any more busines, and of hym most gent¦ly wer forgeuen. When all was dooen, the kynge went again to Ereter and there both gaue great thankes to such as wer worthy, and punished the authoures and sturrers vp of this insurrection moost straitlye. And in ye meane tyme many of the souldiours road to s. Mighels mounte & there (as chaunce was) found Katherin Perking wife, and brought her streight like a bond woman and cap∣tiue to the kyng. And the kyng sent her by and by accompanied with a goodly sort of matrons (be∣cause she was so goodly a young woman) to Lon¦don to the quene as a true and sure token of vyc∣torie. And whiles he taried there at Exeter suppo¦syng with him selfe, that he could haue no perfect victory vntyl he had gottē Perkin him self, which was the beginner of all this sedicion and strife, sent forth two companies of menne to besiege the sanctuarye wher Perkin was, that by no meanes he myght scape away, and sent him worde also by certain trustie messengers that yf he would hum∣blie submit him selfe, he should be forgeuen of all that was committed. Wherfore, Perkin now se∣ynge and ponderynge the state of miserie, that he was in, wēt voluntarily out of the sanctuary and commytted hym selfe to the kynges pleasure. Then was the kyng weray glad and toke his iourney immediatly after towarde London, not without the great metyng of people whych came
out of euery quarter to se this feloe as he were a monstre, because he beyng but an aliente durst bee so bold to come in to this so noble a realme to ma∣ke battaill, and delude noble menne after suche a fassion. But whē the kyng was come to London he appointed certain menne to kepe hym bothe night & daie verie vigilantly, to thentent that he might neither conueigh hymself out of the lande, ner goo any whether within this realme to make any like perturbacion and disquietnes. After this the kyng perceiuyng ye there were ma¦ny as well in Somerset as in Deuēshire, whiche were helpers of the rebelles greatly, bothe goyng foorth & commyng homeward, thought it good to punishe theim also, least peraduenture thei might be ye more bold to dooe a like thyng after. And ther¦fore he committed this busines to Amis Paulet knight, and Robert Sherburne deane of Poules to be dooen. Which in serchyng out all suche tho∣roweout bothe the shires, wer verie exacte and dili¦gent, but thei wer fauorable to al such as did it for feare or compulsion. Yet were thei to none so fa∣uorable but thei were thought for their defaultes indifferently to be punished. So that equitie ther∣in was verie well executed. In the same yere of a small matter befell greate strife betwene kyng Henry and Iames kyng of Scotlande, whiche strife beganne of this fassion. Certain younge menne of ye Scottes came armed vnto Duresme castell, & beheld it wonderous cir∣cumspectly as though thei had been desierous to know what was there dooen. But whē the kepers of the castle could not perceaue yt thei went aboute
any hurte or displeasure, & seing theim go awaie of their owne accorde, thei made no woordes but let theim alone. But when thei came again the nexte daie & vieued it likewise, the kepers of ye said castel demaunded of theim what was their intent. Thei aūswered theim (like rude and vnmanerlie ientle∣menne) as frowardly as could bee thought, in so muche yt at the laste through muche altercacion of bothe parties, thei fell together by the eares, and there were some of the Scottes slain & the residue put to flight. Which whē thei came home certified their kyng of thesame. Wherwith he beyng sore moued to angre, sēt woorde to kyng Henry that he would wtout doubt reuenge his querell, wherfore kyng Hēry being verie sorie, not so much forfeare, as for to liue in quietnes & peace in his age, made him aūswere yt it was not doē through his default or coūsaill, but rather by the rashenesse of his sub∣iectes whiche if thei could bee {pro}ued guiltie should be accordyng to the faulte punished. Wherfore he desired him moste louingly to be cōtēted. But this was not hable to mitigate or swage the Scottes angre & outrageousnesse. For the whiche cause Ri¦chard bishop of Duresme whiche was more heuie then all other, because his seruūates were ye begin∣ners of this discord, wrote many letters to kyng Iames to desire hym to kepe peace & bee at quiet. With the whiche letters the kynges rage was so quenched, yt he bothe sent verie kynd letters again to hym, and desired hym hartely to come ouer and talke with hym. Of ye whiche tydynges the bishop was verie glad, and went streight to kyng Henry to shewe hym the matter and had leaue of hym in∣continenly
to go ouer to hym. When he came into Scotlāde, he was receiued as louyngly as coulde bee thought of the kyng hymself, at an abbey called Melrose, and there af∣ter that he had complained muche of the crueltie that was vsed toward his menne here in Englāde he beganne to commen secretly of other matters, and especially of the amitie betwene kyng Henry and hym, the whiche to bee for euer stablished and confirmed, he desired yt kinges doughter Marga∣ret in mariage. Of the whiche thyng albeit the bi∣shop was glad in his heart, yet he would make no perfect aunswere or sheweforth any sure hope of ye same, but saied that when he came home, he would dooe the best in the matter that laie in hym. Wher¦fore the kyng shortly after dimissed hym, and desi∣red hym ernestly to breake ye same matter to kyng Hēry. And whē he was come home, so he did, and ye proffer pleased ye kyng verie well, because he was a manne whiche was alwaies more delited wt peace & quietnes then wt the troublesomnesse, of battaill. And now did approch ye death of Perkin War∣beck, and of Edwarde erle of Warwicke whiche had so long lyen all readie in the tower. But Per∣kē thought that he would saue hymself, and ther∣fore on a tyme he tooke his leggues and ranne a∣waie, but so sone as the kyng harde tell therof, he made menne after hym with all the spede ye might bee, wt whose clamours and shoutes Perkyn was so feared, yt of necessitie he was compelled to go to an abbaie which was called Bethelē, & ther intre∣acted ye abbot of the place to desire the kyng of his pardon that he might not dye. Whiche thyng the
abbot did for hym and obteined it. Wherfore Per∣ken was brought bounde & feitered, to Westmin∣ster and there stoode an whole daie in the sight of all menne to the great shame and reproche of hym self. And after (partely because the kyng had pro∣mised hym his life, and partely because he should no more renne awaie) he was cōmitted to ye towre. Where his wickednes boylong so hote within his breit, would not suffre hym to escape the vēgeaūce & punishemēt of God, but shortly after was moste iustly & worthely put to deathe as herafter shalbe shewed. Then it chaunsed ye a monke whose name was Patricke had a scholer, whome he promised if he would folowe his counsaill, should easely come to the kyngdome of Englande. Whiche scholer when he had ones heard his maisters mynd, was verie instaunte in the matter and desired his mai∣ster, not to forget his purpose, but rather begynne it as sone as was possible. Wherfore, when thei be twene theim selfes had taken deliberacion and counsailled of the thyng how it should be brought to passe, thei went bothe together into Kent. And there beganne this young feloe to tell priuely to many that he was the erle of Warwicke, and had gotte out of the tower by the helpe of this monke. To the whiche, when he perceiued credence geuen he declared it openly, and desyred al men of helpe. But or euer this sedicion beganne to goo fore∣ward, the heddes and principalles of thesame wer taken and casle into prysone. Of whiche the one was condempned to death, and the other condēp∣ned to perpetuall pryson and darkenesse. For at that tyme here in Englande was so muche attry∣buted
to prestes, and al religious mē, that though they had committed felonie, murder, yea or trea∣son, they should not haue bene therfore condemp∣ned to death. Moreouer, whosoeuer could reade, though it wer neuer so lytle, what crime soeuer he had committed (saue treason) should by his booke bee saued, and therfore it was inuented, that if the default wer so great, that another manne shoulde suffer death for thesame, he should onely be burnt in the hande, wherfore he ye had committed thefte, should bee marked in the hand with this letter T. if he had committed murdre, with M. and after that, yf he were deprehended in lyke cryme, then there should no fauour at all, more then to other menne, bee shewed. Whiche acte was made and confyrmed, by this kyng Henry in the second yere of his reigne, and takē of the Frenchemen, whiche are wonte if thei take any suche, to cutte of one of his cares and let hym go. Whiche priuiledges of bookes made thefes both bolde, & plentie thorowe out all the coastes and parties of this his realme of Englande. But nowe to my matier again. Perkyn, of whom we spake muche before, whyles he was in ye towre corrupted many of the kepers, partly with giftes and partely with fayre promyses, so that they were all agreed (saue the leuetenaunt, whome he ful∣ly determined to kyll) that he and the erle of War∣wike should gooe theyr waye out of the toure and afterwarde to make the best shyfte that they could for theim selfes. But this his purpose came not to full effecte. For it was knowne within shorte tyme after, for the whiche he and his felowes all of the
same counsayle were hanged by the neckes. And the earle of Warwike, because he was founde¦gyltie in thesame defaulte, was behedded, whiche was dooen in the yeare of oure Lorde a thousand foure hundreth and .xcix. and in the .xiii. yeare of this kyng Henry his reigne. The nexte yere after, was here in Englande a   a greate plague wherof menne died in many pla∣ces vereye sore, but especiallye and mooste of all in London. For there died in that yere aboue thyrtye thousande. Wherfore the kynge sayled ouer to Caleis and there taryed a greate while. In his beyng there came ouer to hym Philippe Erle of Flaunders, and was receaued of hym as louyngly as could bee thought, and also or euer they departed, the league whiche was made be∣twene theim two not longe before was renewed. Sone after, when the plague was slaked, the kyng returned agayne into Englande, and was no soner come thyther, but there met him one Gas∣per Pons sente from Alexander the byshoppe of of Roome, which brought with hym indulgences and perdoes whereby he made the kyng beleue that he and his should flye streight to heauen, but those could not bee graunted withoute a greate somme of money, the whiche the rather that he might obteyne, he promysed parte of it to the kyng hymselfe, so deceauyng both ye kyng and ye people. In this same yere was burnt a place of ye kynges, whiche he after buylded vp againe and named it Richemount. Aboute this tyme died three bishoppes here in England, Ihon Morton bishop of Cantourbury
Thomas Langton bishop of Wynchester, and Thomas Rotherham bishoppe of Yorke. Also in this yere, there were greate maryages made, for kyng Henry had geuen his doughter la¦dye Margarete to the kyng of Scottes, and his sonne prince Arthur to Ladie Katherine dough∣ter to Ferdinande kyng of Spayne, whiche ma∣riages were made specially for this cause that he might liue in peace with those kynges in his olde age. After this, prynce Arthure that came to Londō purposely to bee maryed, went to Wales agayne with his lady and wife to ouersee all thynges well there, and to the entente he might not miscarye or go out of the waie in rulyng his domimon, he had with hym many noble mē, as first Richard Poole his nighe kynsman which was made chief of his priuie chaumbre, and Dauid Philippe husher of his halle. Also he had of his counsaill certayne knyghtes as Wyllyam Vdall, Richarde Croft, Peter Neuton, Henrye Varnam, Thomas En∣glefelde. And other besides theim, as Ihon Wa∣lestone, Henry Marine, Wyllyam Smyth preest chief of his coūsayle late bishop of Lincolne, & syr Charles Booth a lawer, then byshop of Herforde. A litle before this mariage, Edmūd Poole erle of Suffolke sonne to ladye Elizabeth the sysler of kyng Edward, was accused for killyng of a mā, & although the kyng pardoned hym, whō he might iustely haue condēed for that offence, yet because he was rayned at the barre, whiche he thought a great main and blemishe to his honoure, tooke it heuely, and shortely after fled to Flaunders wtout
any passeporte or licēce of the kyng, to quene Mar¦garete his aunte, but he returned again, & so excu∣sed hymselfe before the kynge, that he was founde fautles in any thyng yt was obiected vnto hym. Al¦so when this mariage was kepte at London, with great pompe & solēnitee, this Edmunde fled again to Flaunders wt his brother Richard, either for yt he had been at great charges at thesame mariage and so farre cast in debte that he was not hable to paye, either because ye quene Margarete his aunte had allured hym, orels for eiuill will & enuie that the kyng should prosper so well. Whē it was kno∣wen yt he was gooen, & the kyng certified there of, he feared yt some busynes should ryse by his mea∣nes & was sory yt he had pardoned hym for his of∣fēce lately cōmitted. But sone after, yt the erle came from Flaunders, syr Robert Cursone knight & ca∣pitaine of Hāmes castel, feignyng hym selfe to bee one of that conspiracye, wente purposely to espye what the quene entended against kyng Henrye, whyche afterwarde for his so doynge was in greate fauoure wyth hym. For the kynge was so vigylaunte and circumspecte in all his mat∣ters, that he dyd knowe theim namelye that ei∣ther bare hym eiuill will, or woorked any in theyr mynde, whom he caused to bee attached and caste in holde. And emong theim Wyllyam the erle of Deuonshyres sonne, whiche maried ladie Cathe∣ryne daughter to kyng Edward was taken, and another Wyllyam brother to Edmonde earle of Souffolke, Iames Tyrell, Ihon Wyndham. But these two wylliams were taken rather of su∣spection then for any offence of gyltines. Where∣fore
Wylliam this Earles sonne of Deuonshyre after the death of kynge Henrye, was deliuered & had in great fauour wyth the kinges sonne Hen∣rye the eyght, but shortly after whan he beganne to exercyse hym selfe agayne in marciall feates of warre, he sickened of a dysease called (Plureses) and died therewith, whyche because it was straunge and vnknowen to the phisiciās, it was incurable. He lefte one sonne behynde hym alyue to vphold the name of that auncetree. The other Wyllyam brother to Edmunde the earle of Suffolke had also greater fauoure showed hym in pryson, then he had before. And as for Iames Terel, and Ihō Wyndham, because they were traytours, and ma¦nifestly accused of the same, wer put to death, and behedded. But when the earle of Suffolke heard of thys, he was in great despayre wyth hym selfe that he should neuer frame hys matters wel, and so wente all aboute Germanye and Fraunce for ayde and socour, prouyng yf he coulde fynde any helpe at their handes, whom when he perceaued to showe no token of loue towardes him in that behalfe, he made hym subiect to yt prynce of Flaū∣ders, but hys brother Rychard beyng an experte man, dyd so wysely order and behaue hym selfe in that businesse, that he was not greatlye founde gyltie in any poynt of that matter. The kyng not yet beyng out of all feare of his enemyes, percea∣uyng that many sanctuary men loked for a fayre daye, desired of Alexander byshop of Roome that all traytours and banished men should not be sa∣ued by any sanctuary, and that such as were ther in holde, should take theim herafter as no refuge
and socoure to them, yf thei once gooe out, whych thyng, after the byshoppe had graunted it, was to the ease and quietnes of al the realme. When the kynge had all hys busines so well ended, and broughte in a good staye. Prynce Ar∣thure dyed halfe a yeare or lesse, after that he had maried ladie Katheryn, for whose death ther was great lamentynge. It is reported also that ladye Katherine feared suche lyke chaunce euermore, for because yt after she had taken her leaue of her parentes, and sayled towardes England, she was tossed lōg in ye sea, wyth the violence of the water & the wynd, ere the shyppe coulde haue any lādyng Not longe after, the quene was broughte ni bedde with a doughter, and died vppon the same, which daughter also taried but for a season after her mother. Ther departed also within short space after, Reynalde Bray, a man for iustice so commē¦dable, that yf any thyng had bene done agaynste good lawe or ryght, he would streyghte reproue ye kyng for it. Of the same vertue was Ihon Mortō bishoppe, & would do in al thinges as he did in re¦prouing the kinge for the reformation of thinges amisse, which bishop died .ii. yeres before. About ye tyme also dyed Henry bishop of Cāterbury whose roome Williā Warrā bishop of Lōdon supplied, and in the byshop of Londons place was elected William Barons, after whose deathe succeded Rychrde Fiziames byshop of Chichester In this yere, which was the .xvi. of hys reygne and of our lorde. M .ccccc. and .ii. yeres, the kynge dyd  kept his parliament, wherin manye thynges were dereed, and made for the publike commody∣tee,
and emong other thynges it was determyned that theues and murderers duly conuicted by the lawe to dye, should be burned in yt hand and quit yf thei could read on the booke any one worde Furdermore, it was decreed yt the people should paye certain mony to the kyng, and that the goo∣des of theim that were banished and fled, should be disparsed and set to sale. Also the preestes were commaunded to pay mony for the maintenaunce and sustentacion of the common weale. And now the kyng drawyng nigh to age, and consideryng the great battayles that he had in ty¦mes past, which (as it was thought) came of ouer muche welthines, prouided a remedy ryght short¦ly for it. And to the entent that menne shoulde not thynck yt he would oppresse them or do thē wrong for of all people he hated oppressours, therfore he deuised with hym selfe, by what honeste meane he might do it, & thus deuising called to minde yt En¦glish mē dyd litle passe vpō the obseruaciō of any lawes yt were made, in so much, ye yf such a thynge should be called to accompte, he thoughte manye men as well lordes, as other of the lay fee, would bee founde fautie. And so searchyng ouer the sta∣tutes that he had made, punished them a lytle by the pursse that had transgressed theim. After that he appoynted two commyssioners to receaue the forfeictes, the one Richarde Hempson, and the o∣ther Edmunde Dudley booth lawers of the tem∣poraltee, whiche personnes for the desire to please their king had no respect how thei got the monye so thei myght haue it ether by ryght or wrong. Al¦beit, ye kyng hauyng pitee of his people, after that
he perceaued they were sore punyshed and polled vnknowyng to hym restored to them their mony, of whom it was exacted vniustlye, and depryued thē of their offyce that had so vniustly executed it. In this yere, dyed quene Elisabeth of Castell wyfe to Ferdinand kyng of Aragone without a∣ny yssue of mā chyld, so that the heritage dyd fall to lady Iohan her eldest daughter, by Ferdinand whiche after was maried to the Earle of Flaun∣ders, thē made by this mariage also chiefe gouer∣noure ouer all that countree. Shortly after about the .xiii. day of Ianuary which was the yere of our lord. M .ccccc. and fyue thys Earle hauyng a nauye prepared sayled out of Flaunders with his wyfe to Spayne, but he had not set forth longe, ere the wether beganne to chaunge, and tempestes to ryse so, that at the last fearsenes of the wynde, dyd dryue them to the coa¦stes and borders of Englande, wher he landed at an hauē or porte called Wynmouth, sore againste the mynd and consent of all his companie, which knewe well that the same landyng should bee the occasion of long tariyng there. When it was kno¦n that he was thus landed, there came agreate nomber of harnissed men to proue yf he were the kynges frende or no, whiche when thei perseaued hym to bee his frende, and entended nothing but loue and frendeshippe, Thomas Trencharde the chiefe of that compaignie went to the kyng, desy∣ring hym (yf it would witesalfe) hym to take a lod¦ging at his house, whiche was euen nigh at hand trusting therby to haue thāke of. ye kynges master whom he certifyed in al the haste of his commyng
Also Iohn Caroe desired hym that he woulde not gooe vntyll suche tyme that he had spoken wt the kyng his louing and feithfull frende, conside∣ringe that he was within two or thre dayes iour∣ney of hym. So that at length although he layde many excuses to haue been gooen and departed, at their instance taried there with theim. And when ye kyng was enfourmed of his cōminge, he reioyced highly and sente certaine of his nobilitee to bring hym where he was. Wherfore this Erle seing no remedy but yt he must nedes tary, he went streight to Windesore where the kyng dyd lye. And short∣lye after folowed his wife quene Iohan. After they two had cōmoned of many thinges together at the laste they beganne to treate of a league and perpetuall amitee to bee had. And firste Kynge Henrye desired to haue Ed∣monde Poole banished man vnder his captiuitee and bondage. To whome the Earle aunswered & saied that it was not in his power to restore hym, yet after muche entreating and praiyng, the kyng graunted at the laste that he shoulde hee sente to hym righte shortly. After thus for prolonginge of time yt he might haue his desyre, he brought Phi∣lyp the Earle to London, and there shewing hym his citie, retourned frome thence with hym. Then Edmonde Poole, seyng that there was no more hope to bee had in foren Princes, and tru¦sting that kyng Henry would put hym at libertee came to Englande willingly to proue his gentle∣nes, that yf vpon this expectacyon and hope, he were deceiued, yet he might at the laste dye and be buryed in his natiue countree.
weare, when he had receyued this garment, he did send Balthesar Castillio a Mantuan borne vnto kyng Henry, whiche receiued of ye knightes a gar¦ter, in token yt he should be a knight of the same or∣dre. When this busines was dooen, Lewes the Frenche kyng mistrustyng that he shoulde neuer haue manchild, maryed his eldest doughter Lady Anne to Frances Valese Dolphine Duke of En∣gosye, which was sure a litle before to Charles the kyng of Castell. And when kyng Henry knewe of this, he thought beste to mary his doughter Lady Mary to this Charles kyng of Castell which ma∣riage was confirmed and made at Calise by ye by∣shop of Winchester & the ambassadours of Flaun¦ders, the Ladye beyng but .x. yeres of age. And now were the thre yeres expired, at whiche tyme kyng Henry thought his fatal daye to draw nyghe. Therfore to the entente that the people myghte wyshe and praye for hym after his deathe for his kindnesse that he shewed to theim, he cau∣sed a generall pardon to bee geuen vnto all offen∣dours, all done. sauinge onely theues and murderers, be∣cause that they dyd not offende hym, but another manne. For this goodnesse shewed to the people, processyon was in euerye place of the Realme for the safegarde of the kyng. Neuerthelesse his time was come, ye God would haue hym, so that he died the .xxi. daye of Apryll, in his palaice of Richemoūde, the whiche was the yere of oure Lorde a thousand fyue hundreth and eyght. His corps was buryed at Westminster in a chappell the whiche he caused to bee buylded. He reigned thre and twentye yeres, and more then
seuē monethes, & liued .lii. Also he had by his wife the quene .viii. children .iiii. menchildren, & .iiii. wo∣men children, of ye whiche .iii. remained aliue, Hēry prince of Wales, ladie Margaret, & ladie Marie. He was a manne of bodie but leane & spare, albeit mightie & strong therwith, of personage & stature some what higher then ye meane sorte of menne be, of a wondrefull beautie and faire complexion, through al his bodie, of a merie & laughyng coun¦tenaunce, especially in his cōmunicaciō, thinne te∣thed, & thinne heared, of witte in all thynges like Salomon, of a princely & redoubted stomake, and in greate affaires and matters of weightie impor¦taunce verie wittie For suche thynges as he went aboute, he did theim warely & not without greate deliberacion & breathyng. Besides this, he was so∣bre, moderate, buxome, & bounteouse, & without all pride & highnes of stomake, in so muche, yt he was hard & rough with theim ye were noted of yt crime for no man had so great autorite with him, yt either durst or could dooe any thyng as his owne fātasie did serue hym, without ye consent & agrement of o∣ther. Yea he kept this point so wel, yt he would not suffre his owne mother to haue her will. For this was his saiyng * yt a kyng was a ruler that should rule & not be ruled. He was also verie iust, & defen¦ded The no∣ble & wise saiyng of Hēry the seuenth. ye matters & causes of many poore people frō the power of greate menne. And so liuyng all his tyme in vertue, renowne, glorie, and valiauntnes of merciall prowesses, gaue vp his ghoste at the laste, whiche vndoubtedly is in that place, where euerlastyng ioye and gladnes remaineth for euer and euer.
¶ Henry the eyght. OVRE MOSTE GRACIOVS souereigne lorde kyng Henry the eyght, the soonne of Henry ye seuenth, beganne his reigne the .xxiiii. daie of Appryll, in ye yere of our Lorde. M .ccccc. ix & was crouned at Westmin∣ster in the feast of the natiuite of sanet Ihon Baptist then nexte folowyng. Aboute the midle of the moneth of Iuyn the nges highnes was maried, and the .xxi. daie of thesame moneth he came frō Grenewiche by land, & so roade through Graschurch strete to the towre with whom came many noblemen and gentlemen well apareled, but specially the duke of Buckyn∣gham̄ whiche roade in a goune of goldsmythes woorke, a thyng of greate richesse, and so the kyng ested there from Thursdaie till Saterdaie, in the whiche season he created certain knightes of the Bathe. And vpon Saturdaie aboute foure of ye clocke at after noone, the kyng came ridyng through cor∣nehill in moste honourable wise, before whom roade thesaid knightes of the Bathe in blewe lōg gounes with hoodes vpō their shoulders, spreade after the maner of masters of arte, and tasselles of white and blewe silke fastened vpon one of their shouldres. The duke of Buckyngham̄ roade next before the kyng, except the mayre of London & certain sergeauntes and herauldes. The whiche
duke roade in a long goune of nedle woorke right costly and riche, & bare a litle white staffe of siluer in his hand in signe and token yt he was high and chief steward of ye feast of coronacion. And thesaid duke had aboute his necke a broade and flat close chein of a newe deuise not before vsed, fret wt pre∣cious great rubies and other stones of greate va∣lue. And ouer the kyng was borne a riche canapie by the foure barones of the foure portes, and there folowed seuen foloers, wherof the first was trap∣ped in the armes of sainct Edwarde, the second in the armes of sainct Edmond, the third in ye armes of. S. George, the fourth in the armes of Englād, the fifth in the armes of Fraūce, the sixth & the. vii in sondry trappors of riche cloth of gold wt costely deuices. After the foloers came a gentlemā ledyng a spare horsse moste richely garnisshed. And after hym sir Thomas Brandon then maister of ye kyn∣ges horsse, right well & goodly apointed and well horssed and richely trapped, the whiche horsse with the apparell was to the kyng belongyng. And when ye cōpaignie was thus wt all honoure passed, ymediatly ensued a goodly compaignie of gentlemen & well apointed. And after theim came the quene sittyng in a horsse litter alone, clothed in a riche mantell of tissue in her heare wt a circulet of silke, golde and perle aboute her head. But whē her grace was a litle passed the signe of the cardi∣nalles hat in cornehill, suche a sodein showre there came, & fell wt suche force & thicknesse, yt the canapy borne ouer her was not sufficient to defend her frō wetyng of her mātell & furre of powderd emines win ye same, but ye she was fain to be cōueighed vn¦der
the houell of the Drapers stalles till ye shower were ouer passed whiche was not long. And then she passed on her waie, whō folowed .vii. chariotes with ladies. In the first was two ladies, & vpon ye chariot waited .vii. gentlewomē ridyng on palfre∣yes, yt is to saie, foure in one suyte & thre in another And vpon ye secōd chariot waited also seuen gentle women. And vpon ye other thre sixe, whiche all wer clothed in silke, and .iiii. of the first chariottes were couered wt cloth of gold, & all ye horsses trapped in sondrie couloured veluettes to ye heard pauement. And after all theforsaid chariottes & gentlewomē, came ridyng vpon a bushement .ccc. of the garde, ye more parte of theim hauyng bowes & arowes and theother hawberdes & other weapōs. And ye shall vnderstand yt all the side of Cornehill, from sainct Mighelles to the stockes was hanged wt gremed clothe of sondrie coloures, as scarlettes, crimosing sanguines, murries, light & browne, & beuties and violetes. And vpon theotherside, all wt riche tapet∣es & clothes of arras. And as for Chepe was gar¦nished with clothes of golde, of veluet & of silke in moste richest wise, wheron was dooen no litle hurte with theforsaid showre. Vpō the morow, beyng Midsomer daie, ye kyng & the quene, about .viii. of ye clocke in the mornyng on foote, came frō their palaies through ye greate hail & the palais courte vnto the churche of West¦minster. In whiche progresse, passed before theim eight and thirty bishopes & abbottes mitered in procession, and so were conueighed to a space be∣twene ye high aulter and the quere, where, by ye Bi∣shop of Cauntourbury, the kyng & the quene were
set in honorable seates vpon a scaffold in the fore∣named place, made of a competent heigth, & there of the archbishop was gloriouslye crouned to the great comforte of all ye lande. And after that longe and honorable solempnizaciō was done, the kyng and quene wer again cōueighed vnto Westmyn∣ster hall, & there set to dynner, where was that daie holden a tryumphant & plenteous feast wt all ho∣norable seruyce to suche a feaste apperteignynge. And for the ordre of ye settyng, the kyng sate in the myddle of the table, & the quene vpon his lift hāde by the space of two yardes length from hym. And vpon the right hand, at ye tables ende sate ye arche∣bishop of Caūtourbury alone, & no mo at ye table. After whiche thre estates thus set, all their .iii. ser∣uyces wer brought together till they came vnto ye steppes of the deyse, where a while rested ye quenes and archebishoppes seruyces, till ye kyng was ser∣ued, and then the quenes and tharchbishoppes set forwarde together, but the quene was first serued and her seruyce set downe before the other. Here I wyll passe ouer the orderyng of the hall with the offyciers & garnyshyng of the side tables with many noble menne & women, & many other ceremonyes executed there that day by lordes and other hed officers, as the lorde stewarde the duke of Buckyngham, the chief buttler the erle of Arū∣dell, the lorde marshall with many other. The ex∣ceadyng rychesse of the cupboorde garnished with weightie & massy flagonnes, pottes and cuppes of golde, syluer & gilte, with the gifte of .ii. cuppes of gold geuē by ye kyng & the quene vnto ye Mayre of Londō, as his accustomed fee at euery coronaciō.
Al ye which actes with many mo I here passe ouer Then vpon the tuesdaye next ensuyng was be∣gonne a merciall iustes, within ye paleys of West∣mynster. Of ye which ye lord Haward & sir Edward his brother, wt sir Richard brother to ye lord Mar∣ques & Gyles Capel & two other wer chalēgours. And syr Ihū Pechy, Master Carre, Master Char¦les Brandō & syr Rowland with other. ii, wer defē∣dours. Vpō the which day, two of ye chief of ye said chalengers enclosed in a moūtayne goodly & curi∣ously garnished, wer by a lyon made of glitteryng golde conueighed out of Westmynster hall into ye paleys, & so led about the tylt, tyll they came right agaīst ye kyng & quenes stāding. And there ye moū∣tain opened, & the said two chief chalēgoures road to the, clene armed vnto ye tiltes ende with ye other foure folowyng theim, wher they houed til the de∣fendours wer fet in. The which sone after came in at the gate by the kynges strete, but syr Ihon Pe∣chy as chiefe defendour, came enclosed in a castell drawen with a lyonesse garnished with glytteryng syluer. And vpō the forpart of this castel was set a pomegranate tree wel & curiously brought, and so cunnyngly yt it semed to ye people to be very pome∣granades that honge on yt tree. And vpon ye toppe of this sayd castell stoode a fane, wt the armes of Saynt George theron paynted. The which castel was so drawen about ye tilt, & whē it came right a∣gain ye kynges tent, it was opened by a vyce, & out roade yt said defēdour, & after his obeysaūce made to the kyng & quene, & in like maner did all his fe∣loes, then he roade vnto yt ende of the tilt nexte the gate wher he entred before, & then ye said syr Ihon
Pechy as chief chalengour receaued a speare, as ye lorde Hawarde before had done, & ranne together v. coursses cōtinually, to ye great prayse & laude of theim both. And then rāne ye other as thei wer cal∣led vpon & assigned sondry tymes by ye kyng, & spe¦cially ye kynges highnes cōmaūded master Gyles Capel to rōne, howbeit his horsse yt daye did hī not moste plesaūt seruice. And thus thei cōtinued their disporte .iiii. houres, to yt greate cōforte of ye behol∣ders & to yt honour of them al. Howbeit, ye most spe¦res wer brokē by ye lord Haward & syr Ihō Pechy. Then vpon ye thursday next foloyng, ye said cha∣lengeours & defendours made a goodly disporte, as first ye said chalengeours cōmyng out of West∣mynster hal, caused to be cōueighed before them a pageaūt like to a forest, pitched full of grene bou∣ghes, within the which sate a virgyn appareled af¦ter the Spanishe guise, & semblaūtes of buckes & dooes aboute her. And whē the said chalengeours wt their said pageaūt came before the kynges stan¦dyng, sodeynly rāne out of ye said forest a pryket, & after him a brase of grehoūdes, ye which courssed ye said pricket & there shortly after slewe it. And after yt a foster blewe a moote for ye death therof, & smote of ye hed quickly & presented it vnto ye quene. And ye done the said chalēgeours passed ouer to thend of the tilt & there houed a while. And then shortly af∣ter ye trōpettes & many of the said gētlemē wel hors¦sed & apointed, yt before had cōueighed into ye place the chalēgours, cōueighed in also ye defēdours, the which comyng in wt a like pageaūt before thē (ex∣cept that the maidē in their forest was atired after thenglish fassiō) & demeaned theim in all thynges
like as before ye chalēgers had done. And whē thei wer come to ye other ende of the tylt, anone was cō∣maūded yt the turney should begynne, whereupon swordes wer brought to either of theim. And then first turneyed yt lorde Haward & master Pechye a good season & after theim yt residue two & two tyll either of theim had furnyshed ye full of .xii. strokes that by sondry tymes ye fyre sprange out of the hel∣mettes. And when thei had finished yt fearte of ar∣mes, not without many sore strokes & often depar¦tyng by the marshalles seruauntes & some of the kynges garde. Thei then wer cōmaūded to ronne together all .xii. & so to Turney til either had smit∣ten a certē nombre of strokes, but then was peces of harneyste hewen into the felde, & swordes brokē and bowed, ye wonderfull it was & fearefull to be∣holde. The which cōtinued wt such egernesse, that their nōbre of strokes passed, & that the power of ye marshals seruaūtes suffisd not to depart thē, til ye kynges highnes called to his gard to helpe to dis∣seuer theim, whiche was not dooen without great pam, & although ye euerie of theim quite theim ful manfully, yet Charles Brandō yt daye was great∣ly auaunced & furthered by his horsse, the whiche yt day faught wt his teth & feete like a serpent, & ther vnto was so pleasaunt & light of head, that he had his aduersarye euer at greate aduauntage, in so muche yt he euer strake .iii. strokes before he recea∣ued one. This day also was shewed diuerse deuy∣ces of armour, as some of white & grene chekered, some of blacke paled with gold, some al red & some all grene. And the harnayes the whiche the sayde Charles Brandon then turnayed in, was all ouer
gylte frome the heade peece to the sabattons. And thus with all honoure and worshyppe to them sel∣ues & great pleasur to the beholders, thei brought thys marciall playe and dysporte to an ende. Shortly after this, was Hempson and Dudley commytted to the towre, and Dudley was arreig∣ned the .xvii. daye of Iulii, in the Guldehall and there before the Mayre, and other the kynges cō∣myssioners, was condempned and iudged to bee drawen, hanged and quartered, and then commaū¦ded agayne to the towre, where he laye longe after And the Myghelmasse folowynge was Hempson conueyghed into Northampton shyre, and there a reigned, and lastly iudged to bee drawne hanged and quartered, and then broughte agayne to the towre, and there remayned tyll such season as shal be shewed here after. In thys yere also, was holdē at Westminster the .xxi. daye of Ianuarii a parlya¦ment, wherin was made dyuerse and sondrie actes and statutes. In the seconde yere of the kynge, and the .xvii. daye of August was Hempson & Dudley brought vnto the scaffolde vppon the towre hyll, and there were behedded. And the fyrst daye of Ianuary fo∣lowinge, Henry the kynges sonne was borne. And vpon a wednisdaye beyng the .xii. daye of Februa∣rii next folowyng was holden atriumphant iustes within the palayes of Westminster. Of the which was chefe chalengeoure the kinges maiestee with iii. other, whose names shalbe mynded in the ende of thys declaracion. And fyrst for a conuenyencie of the shewyng of thys moost excellent feates of armes. Ye shall vn∣vnderstande
that the kynges grace with the other thre chalengeours enclosed in a mountayn whych was passyng connyngly and curiously wroughte with rockes, trees and dere, whereof on ether syde sat a foster clad in grasse grene satin, with eyther a bent bowe in his hande, and abrode arrowe, and a horne aboute eyther of their neckes. And bi the sy∣des of eyther of the sayde fosters, laye certeyn spe∣es. And in the front of the sayde mounte betwene the two corner pyllers sat a fayre vyrgyn, clothed in blewe and lyght tawny satin, makyng of a gar∣lande of rosemary and other herbes. Thys page∣aunt or mount was drawen vpon wheles by a leo∣parde all of beaten gold, and an Antlop of beaten flat siluer, the which two beastes were led with .ii. myghtie and high woodwoses by two strynges of sylke, and so conueyghed out of Westminster hall about the tylt, vntyll such tyme as the same moun¦tayne came ryght agaynst the quenes tent. About the whiche was attendaunte manye gentilmen on foote cladde in coates of whyte and grene satyn. But yf I shoulde here reherse the straunge and costly apparell which the fore ryders were clothed in, with theyr ryche trappers and other deuyses, I shoulde here make a long tariynge. Wherefore to procede as I beganne. When thys mount as is a oue sayde was before the quenes tente, eyther of the fosters blewe a moote, and that doone the kyn∣ges maiestie first issued out of the mount and ano∣ther with hym at one dore, & at another doore rode out the other two chalengeours, all .iiii. hauyng in their handes eyther of theym a small scochion, the whiche thei offered vnto the quenes grace.
and al .iiii. chalengeours had cotes beneth ye wast of blewe sylke garnished with portcolyes of Ve∣nise gold without difference, sauynge the kynges graces coate was of blewe veluet, and the other were of blewe satin. And where the kynges away ters were in coates of whyte and grene, the other wer in iackettes of blewe satyn. And after the cha¦lengeours had thus offered vp their scochiōs and made their obeysaūce vnto the quene. The kinges grace with ye other roade vnto the ende of the tylt ouer agaynst Westmynster hall gate, and there houed tyll ye defēdours were brought into ye place Then the foresayde gentylmen whyche before had brought in the kyng, road for the defendours the whyche anone came in at the weste gate of the palais in sondry pageauntes and goodly deuices whyche here I wyll ouerpasse, for as much as the daye folowyng they ferre exceded, wherof the de∣claration wyll aske a long leysoure. Wherfore to procede further, when the sayd defendours accor∣dyng to the lawe of armes had bene conueighed about the tylte, and were come to their standynge nere vnto the west ende of ye tylte: Anone the kyn∣ges maiestee called for a speare, and so ranne .vi. courses before he lefte, and brake in those .vi. cour¦ses .iiii. speares as well and as valyantly as any man of armes myght breake theim, & such as wer broken vpon hym, he receaued thē as thoughe he had felt no dynt of anye stroke. In so muche, that where at ye beginnyng, in ye felde was many a fear full & timerous heart for him, consideryng his ex¦cellencie and his tendernes of age. After thei had sene the sayde coursses ronne and his manfull de∣liuer
chargynge and dischargynge, he reioysed so the peoples heartes that a man myght haue sene a thousande wepyng iyen for ioye And then suche as were in moost feare sawe by his marcial feates that by the ayde of God, he was in no daunger And whē the other chalēgeours had rōne a few courses, he wēt to it a fresh, & thē ran .x. or xii. cour¦ses instātly or he would ceasse, & brake many spea¦ces, & gaue so many teintes, yt euery man maruay led at his wōderfull feates. For none ye there was chalēgeour or defēdour, might attain to halfe the {pro}wesse yt he accōplished yt daye, so yt the pryce was geuē to him of all mē, aswell of thē yt were deputed iudges of those feates of armes for yt day, as of al other. And whē he had thus passed his time to his great laude & honour, he then at ye request of sōdry lordes, which yt daye gaue their attendaunce vpō his grace, went into a pauilion whiche nere vnto the tiltes ende at yt tyme was prepared for hym, & there taried while the other chalēgeours ranne a certain coursses wt such of the defēdours as had not bene assaied yt day, the which demeaned theim right valiantly & knightly, & made full marciall disport. And whē this had cōtinued vpō an houre or more. The king came then out of his pauiliōry dynge vpon a graye coursser, betrapped wyth a crappoure of clothe of golde, and wroughte wyth goldsmithes woorke, which was litle ouer an hād breadthe, and garnysshed in sondrye places wyth white roses made of fine gold. And vpon the pai∣rell of the horsse breste, stoode a rose of a greate bredth, and another like vpon the crupper behind Which .ii. roses as a goldsmith reported that had
ye ouersight of ye making of ye horsse harneisse, said that theiweied either of thē aboue .l. onces in gold The kynges maiestee was in a streight coate of moste rychest clothe of golde made close vnto his bodye and streighte sleues, after the proportion of his armes, and in two or thre places the saied sle∣ues were cut and fastened together againe with a plunket ryband, thewhiche garment became hym wonderously well. And thus beyng apointed with his legge harneys being styll vpon his legges he rode vnto the tyltes ende, and there houed whyle the Herauldes made their monicion and criyng a still, a lhostill, and conueyghed the defendours oute at the gate whiche they firste came in at. And that dooen, the gentlemen firste setting forwarde next vnto the trompettes, and then knightes, bar∣nes, and Lordes as they wer of degrees folowing in their goodly apparelles: lastly next vnto ye king came the Lord Haward, bearing vpon a tronchi∣on the kynges helmet. After whom the kyng then cōming, tooke vp his horse in so semely and lusty maner, that shortly to conclude, no man could doo better nor sytte more close nor faster, nor yet kepe his stiroppes more surely. For notwithstandinge that the horse was veraye courageous and excel∣lente in leaping and tornyng and excedyngg flin∣ging, he moued no more vpon hym, then if he had helde a plain and softe trot. And thus passyng the compasse of the felde, when he came ouer againste the quenes Tent, he then beganne of newe, & lea∣ped and coursed the horse vp and downe in won∣derful maner. And finally, he turned the feete of ye horse againe the tylt, and caused hym to fling and
beate the boordes with his fete, ye it redounded a∣boute the place as it had been shotte of gunnes. And when he had thus with all cōmendacion and honoure perfourmed this lustye and courageous feacte, he turned hym vnto the quene and made a lowlye obeysaunce, and so passed in a demure ma∣ner into Westminster hall. Vpon the daye nexte foloyng, being thursdaye and the .xiii. daye of February was holden a more excellent iustes, not for the more valiaunt actes yt daye done of armis, but for ye inestimable richesse and costely apparell whiche that daye was worne wherof I entende to touche a parte, for the whole passeth my conning and memory. But for a note after the capacite of my dul witte. Aboute the sea∣son of halfe an houre after one of the clocke, the quenes grace being in her tente. Immediatly issu∣ed oute of Westminster hall the trompettes, and after theim the Herauldes, the Trompettes being ad in red cloth, & the Herauldes in scarlet, all on horsebacke. Nert after theim came riding gentle∣men in right proper and goodly deuises of appa∣rell, and their horses decked with sylke & brode∣ring woorke right costly. Next whome a compaig¦nie of knightes in more costly apparel folowed, a∣monge the whiche sir Edward Gilford then mer∣shal, & hauing the rule of thorderīg of the felde w his manifold tipped staues was bothe those daies right goodlye and richely appareled. And also sir Morice Barkeley & sir Fraunces Cheiney roade those .ii. daies in one liuerey, both of their owne a∣ray & also of their horses, which .ii. knightes vpon the first day road in cotes parted half on crimosin
veluet, and ye other halfe of grene veluet, ye crimo∣sin veluet side being ouerlaid wt flat beaten siluer like vnto flat wire, hanging in length yt the veluet was litle or nothing seen. And ye grene veluet syde was fret wt plates of gold of goldsmithes woorke in righte sumpteous wise. And their horses were garnished in one sute, not withoute clothe of gold and other costly deuices. Vpon the second day, or this thursday, their co∣tes wer halfe clothe of gold, & thother halfe of pur¦ple veluet. The veluet garnished wt skalop shelles and pilgrimes staues of massy golde, & their horse trappours of ye same. Thē came Banerettes, Ba∣rones & Lordes, eache of theim more richely appa¦reled then other. For ye lordes, many of theim road in long gounes of cloth of gold exceding riche of ye newe making, wherin is moste substaunce of gold and litle silke. So ye where of old time they wer v∣sed to buye of ye beste & richest tissue for .v. i. a yard now thei pay .x. . & .xx. marke for ye best. And beside this, their horses, some trapped in cloth of gold to the grounde. Amonge the whiche were specially noted the Lorde of Burgeinie and the Lorde Fiz∣water, whiche were in one suyte of clothe of golde with their trappers lyke, & .ii. large & massy bau∣derikes about their neckes, whiche wer estemed at a. M. marke a pece. There was also sir Henry Bo¦lein & another Baneret, which yt daye road in pur∣ple veluet, veluet, garnyshed with plates of golde of exce¦ding value. And emonge theim roade also sir Ni∣cholas Vaus in a goune of goldesmithes woorke to the knees, and therein a furre of ryght browne and fyne sables of greate value.
Then emong theim that roade nexte to ye kyng came my Lorde Henry of Buckinghm̄ in a goune of nedle werke, which was more costly thē some of clothe of gold & more alowed for the curiositee of ye werke therof. And though here I make no memo∣ry of the lustye leaping, bounsyng, mounting and flinging of the iolye and lusty foreryders, no man thynke the contrarye but there was aswell doyng horse as any might bee, and aswell wer they tasted and proued, to the great comforte of many a noble manne and woman that day. Then when all this lusty compaignie was thus passed by, Immediat∣ly ensued a pauilion or tente of blewe & purple sa∣tine paled, and after that two other of ye same fas∣syon, all thre beyng garnished with letters of bro∣dery werke. And laste of all came in the fourth te made of clothe of golde and purple veluet paled, whereof the panes of veluet were poudered with these two letters H. and K, as H. for Henry, and K for kyng, and the skirtes of the said pauilion was borne vp rounde aboute with .xxxvi. or .xl. gentle∣mē, as esquiers for ye body, all beyng clad in short Iackettes of blewe and purple sylke, the whiche were conueighed aboute the tylte, tyll they came before the quenes tent. Where euery chalengeour according to their roomes rode oute of their ten∣tes, & after obeisaunce made vnto the quene, roade vnto the tiltes ende, and there taried the cōminge of the defendours. Howbeit, the kynges highnesse roade into the pauilyon, where the daye before he chaūged his apparell, and there taried their com∣ming. The whiche shortely after were brought in, but or I procede any ferther, I must of a conueni∣ency
bring in a matter necessary to bee reherced, ye which negligētly I haue ouerpassed, and ye is this. When the kynges pauilion was as is aforsaid come out of the hall, immediately folowed thesaid pauilion nyne folowers or henchemen, all clothed in clothe of golde and purple veluet parted, the veluet side beyng garnisshed with theforsaid let∣ters of golde as the pauilion was. Of the whiche folowers, the first courser was trapped with the armes of Englande, the second with the armes of Fraunce, the third with the armes of Castell, the fourth with a riche trapper poudered with red ro∣ses and white, the fift with cloth of golde furred wt poudered armines, ye sixte with cloth of siluer and purple veluet parted, the seuenth of purple veluet garnished wtth massy plates of gold, a parte wher of was an arme from the elbowe armed with an hearte of golde whiche was of greate weight and value, thewhiche arme and heart were sette vpon either side of the brest of the horsse, and again in ye trapper vpō bothe sides of the crupper. The eight with a trappoure of chaungeable sarcenet after blewe and white full of gold belles. The nthe & last was trapped in cloth of golde and blewe vel∣uet paled. After whiche folowers, ensued the yo∣man of the horsse vpō a faire double horsse ledyng in his hande the self same horsse whiche the kyng roade out of the felde vpō, as before I haue reher∣ced, and then as last and hynmoost came rydyng vpō a lustie courser sir Mathew Baker as master of the kynges henchemenne, right well and sadly apoincted and like a manne of good age and sad∣nes, & thus repaired through the felde with suche
demeanour as before is reherced. Then to retorne vnto the defendoures. Trouth it is that sir Charles Brandō as first came into the felde enclosed in a tower and led by a iaylour hol∣dyng a greate keye in his hande, the whiche page∣aunt when it came ouer against the quenes stan∣dyng, the iaylour with his keye made a counte∣naunce as though he had opened the gate of the tower, oute of the whiche issued a manne on horse∣backe clad in a long course and prisoners weede, with a pylgrymes long staffe in his hande and a pylgremes hat vpon his heed with a long and for∣growen bearde reachyng to his sadell bowe. He also had hangyng vpon the hooke of his staffe a∣payre of bedes of gold, and vpon the top of yt staffe was fasened a lettre, the whiche staffe with the be∣des and letter were sent and deliuered vnto the quenes grace, vpon the whiche when she had a∣while looked, she sent suche aunswer that the priso¦ner cast from hym hastely his clothyng, beard and hat, and shewed hym self in bright harneys, and soorth with smote his horsse with the spurres, and made a lustie pace vnto the tiltes ende, and from thence tooke his course and ranne aboute the tilt all moste lusty wise. And after the said Charles was thus come in, there ensued tenne mo of the said chalengeoures, of the whiche if I should wryte all the apparell and circumstaūce of their cundite vnto their place assigned, it would aske a long tracte of tyme, but shortely to procede to the effect of this matter. So sone as all the defendours were come vnto their place assigned. The kynges grace issued oute of
his pauilion and called for a spere, the whiche whē he had receiued, he ranne and brake right vigo∣rously, & so ranne seuen coursses more or he would stynt, in the whiche at euery coursse he brake a∣speare or gaue a taynt. And one thyng was grea∣tely noted in hym, that at euerie coursse that he ranne he would neuer charge hym with his speare in the rest, till he came nere vnto the copyng. Then by exhortaciō of suche lordes as were aboute hym he rested for a season. And when the other chalen∣geours had disported theim a while with suche de∣fendours as the kyng had not before tasted: The kyng then came foorth agayne and ranne many and sondry coursses, the whiche he performed to his greate laude and honoure. And albeit that the other chalengeours did full knightely and well and likewise the defendours, as the lorde Mar∣ques, sir Charles Brandon and other, yet the fea∣tes of the kyng so ferre excelled theim that none was spoken of but his alone, whiche so continued duryng the tyme of their disporte till foure of the clocke at after none, at whiche season, so sone as the defendours wer cōueighed out of the felde, he called for a speare, the whiche he settyng vpon his thigh, roade wt his hed pece vpon his head roūde aboute the tylt, and at twoo tymes when he came ouer against the quenes stādyng, he made as lowe obeysaunce as his sadle would licence hym, and so roade into his pauilyō & there vnarmed hym. And anone after came out of the same pauilion sittyng vpon the same spare horsse whiche the yoman of yt horsse brought in his hād into ye feld when ye kyng first entred. And then he was chaunged into a de∣my
gowne of clothe of golde furred with sables, the whiche when thei were shewed defaced, so theo∣ther that sir Nicholas Vaus ware, that thei semed matyrns in comparison of the other. Then the gentlemenne sette forward, and after folowed the three chalengours rydyng bare he∣ded, and their three helmettes borne before theim by three lordes, and last of all came the kynges grace, whose helmet was borne by ye lorde of Bur∣geyny. And in like maner as his folowers folo∣wed hym into the feelde, so in like wise thei folo∣wed hym in his gooyng oute, at whiche season as then he stured his horsse nothyng, but suffered hym to goo a softe trot through all the felde. And at the twoo tymes that his grace came before the quene, his grace forgate not his humble obey∣saunce, to the crudicion and learnyng of all well nurtered and gentle wedded menne. And thus wt all honour, ioye and triumphant actes, to the prin∣cipall laude of this our moste excellent and chri∣sten prince, and after to ye worship of all the other, aswell chalengeours as defendoures, and greate comforte of all the beholders, ended these moste excellyng iustes that euer was before that daie seen in Englande, and that for twoo causes speci∣ally, as first ye present deede of the excellencie of the kynges personne, whiche neuer before that daie as I thynke was seen in propre personne. And se∣condarely for the excedyng coste of apparell whi∣che these twoo daies was shewed, with other ma∣nifolde charges of pageauntes and other sumpte∣ous thynges, the whiche by wise mennes estima∣tions coste not so litle by the space of these two da∣yes
as .xx. M. i. Whiche two marciall dayes were accomplyshed by the actes of these foure chalen∣geours, ye is to saye: The moste redoubted prince Henry the eyght of that name, kyng of Englande Fraunce & Irelād. &c. Syr Thomas Kneuet, lord Wyllyā of Deuonshire, and master Edward Ne∣uell. And of the defendours there were .x. in nom∣bre, whose names came not al into my handes and therfore haue I omytted theim. After these royall iustes, was made a solempne and sumpteous banket, the order of whiche I o∣uerpasse because it would bee to long to reherce. The .xxiii. daye of Februarij nexte foloyng dyed at Richemounte Henrye the kynges soonne which was borne there, vpon newe yeres day last past as before is shortelye touched. In the thirde yere of his reigne, aboute the mo∣nethes The .iii. yere. of Iune and Iulij, the Scottes made son∣drie entres vpon the borders of England, and had out certain shippes wel manned and vitayled and kepte with theim the narowe sees, to the great di∣spleasure of the kynges grace and hurte of some of his subiectes, specially of his merchauntes, the whiche rouers were named to be bannyshed men. But the kynges highnes, consyderyng the daylye hurte that thei did vnto his subiectes and frendes as takyng of vitaile at Sandwich & other places vpō the see coastes, and that no remedye was pur∣ueyed by the kyng of Scottes to call theim home. His grace in all goodly haste manned and vitay∣led certain shippes, and vnder the gouernaunce of the lorde Hawarde as hed and chief capitain sente the saide shippes to scoure the see, the whiche in
shorte processe after aboute thende of Iulij mette with the saide Scottes, and gaue vnto theim a sharpe and fearce fight, in so much that in thende thenglyshe menne drowned one of the Scottishe shippes, and tooke two of the chiefest shippes of that lote, and in theim one hundreth and fourtie Scottes with their hedde capitayne named Hob of Barton. The whiche Scottes with theyr sayd capitayne were caste into sondrye prysonnes, and as the fame wente, in the foresayde fighte was slayne as many of the saide Scottes as were ta∣ken prysoners, and of thenglyshe menne fewe or none. And vpon the seconde daye of August wer ye forsayde two Scottishe shippes brought vnto the blacke walle within Thamys. But afterward the saide Scottes were by the kynges commaunde∣ment brought vnto tharchbyshoppes palays be∣syde Westmynster, and there kepte at the kyn∣ges coste. Aboute this season or lytle before, the Frenche kyng that had moste parte of this yere kept warre again Iulius the secound of that name byshop of Rome, forced thesaid bishop to forsake the cytie of Bonony, & to fle for his safegarde toward Rome, not withoute losse of some of his people. This bi∣shoppe had deputed one Iherome Bonuise a Lu∣kener borne, and before tyme had bene a merchaūt and factoure for merchauntes of his nacion in London, the whiche by his insolencie and exercy∣syng of dice wyth lordes and other, he brake and came so behynde the hande that he was compelled to aduoyde the citie & also the realme. In the tyme of whiche absence he purchased suche grace of the
fornamed bishop yt he made hym a lorde, & after sent hym into this lāde as his proctour, hauyng a trayne after hym lyke vnto a byshop: & by the a∣uourable letters whyche the byshoppe wrote for hym vnto the kyng, his grace had hym in good fa¦uoure, and dayly resorted vnto his grace for mat∣tiers touchyng the bishoppe, by meane wherof he had knowledge of the bishops councell and also of the kynges. In this tyme also were here certeyne ambassa∣dours of the Frenche kynges, the whiche lay here a long ceason for matters concernyng their prince to whom this forenamed Iherome, secretly drewe by nyght tyme, and innaturally and falsely dysco∣uered vnto theim all the byshoppes, and kynges councell. For the whiche he was awaited and last¦ly takē in the companie of one of the sayd Ambas∣sadours vpon Londō wall about mydnyght, and so brought vnto the counter of the pultrye, frome whence by the kynges cōmaundement on the mo∣rowe he was remoued vnto the Towre, where he remayned styll as a prysoner. In this time also was wonderfull warre be∣twene the byshop of Rome Iulius the seconde of that name, and the French kyng, in so muche that he wanne from the sayd B. the citee of Bonony, & put the B. to flight, & layed such articles agayne hym yt he entēded to put him downe & make ano∣ther bishop, ye circūstaunce wherof I passe ouer, cō¦syderyng ye manyfolde tales and writynges sente vnto the merchaūt straungers of thesame, in the which letters were variable and diuerse reportes. In the later ende of this yere, the Scottes be∣fore
taken by the knyghtly prowes of the lord Ha∣warde and syr Edward his brother were delyue∣red fre and franke, to whome the kyng of his boū∣teous largesse gaue vnto euery of theim competēt sommes of money, to cōueigh theim home to their owne countrey. In this yere also was holden a parlyament at Westmynster the .iiii. daye of Februari, wherein were made and ordeined dyuerse statutes and or∣dynaunces. Duryng the whiche parlyament a ser¦uaunt of the kynges & yomanne of the croune and one of his garde named Newbolt slewe within yt palayce of Westmynster a seruaunt of one master Willoughby, in the begynnyng of the moneth of Marche. For the which offence, notwithstandyng that the kyng had hym in his synguler fauour for that he was a speciall archer of all other, yet for yt eynous and detestable murder, the kynges grace comaunded a newe payre of galoes to be set vp in thesame place, wher the said seruaunt left his life, and vpon thesame shortlye after was there put to death, and to ye feare of other, suffred hym to hāge there by the space of two dayes & two nightes af∣r for whiche iudgement the kyng wanne greate honoure and fauoure of his commons. By the autoryte of this parlyament was graunted vnto the kyng two fyftenes of the tem∣poraltee, and by the conuocacion holden by the clergye two dismes. Vpō good friday, which this this yere fell vpon the .ix. daye of April was a cru∣ell and sterne battaile betwene the bishoppe of Romes hoste & the Frenche kynges partie, which continued from the saied fridaye by sondry encoū¦tres
and metinges, by occasyon wherof, much peo¦ple on bothe parties wer distressed and taken pri∣soners, and aboue the nombre of thirty. M. slaine. In the .iiii. yere was Edmond de la Poole be∣hedded, The .iiii. yere. and aboute the moneth of Auguste Syr Thomas Kneuet beynge chyefe capytaine of the kynges greate shippe called the regent, and a few shyppes mo, sette vpon a great Caricke and other shippes of the Frenche kyngs, liyng then nere vn¦to a toune of Britaine named Brest, where after a longe and cruell fight, thesaide Caricke & regent being clasped together with hookes and cheynes (as the maner of fyghtinge vpon the see betwene enemies is) sodeynly thesaied shippes with other were set on fyre, and brent so feruently, that before they mighte bee losed or disseuered, ye shippes with the men vpon bothe parties were consumed with violence therof, so that fewe escaped whiche were of the poraill. But thesaide sir Thomas Kneuet with many other gentlemen of this land and also of fraunce were brent, on whose soules Iesu haue mereyt. This yere also after haruest, wheate roase so∣beinly The .v. yere. of pryce, for where for the more parte of the yere it was not solde aboue sixe shillīges .viii. d. a quarter. After haruest for so muche as wheat was so sore blasted and striken, & was of so smal yelde, it was solde for .xii. s. and .xiii. s .iiii. d. a quarter. In the .v. yere the kyng besieged Turwin and discomfited the power of Fraunce at Boemy, and tooke the citees of Turwyn, and Turney. But in the meane season, the kyng of Scottes es∣piyng his tyme, inuaded Englande with an hoste
of an hundred thousande menne, with whome the Earle of Surraye, beynge the Kynges Leuete∣naunte encountred, and by the helpe of the Lorde Hawarde his soonne, slewe the sayde kynge with a leuen Earles, and wanne the felde. For the whiche noble facte, the kynge created hym after∣warde Duke of Norffolke, and his soonne Earle of Surrey. In the .vi. yere a peace was concluded betwene Englande and Fraunce. And on saincte Denis The .vi. yere. daye the Frenche kyng maried the Lady Mary ye kynges sister. And he died on newe yeres daye af∣ter. And therfore the kyng sente for her againe by the duke of Suffolke and other. In this yere, in the moneth of Februarye was . borne Lady Mary ye kynges doughter at Grene∣wiche. In Aprill, the Frenche Quene came in to En∣glande, and was maryed to Lorde Charles duke of Suffolke. This yere Ladye Margarete quene of Scot∣tes and syster to the kynge fledde into Englande, and laye at Harbottell. And she was deliuered of a doughter named Margaret. And came to Lon∣don in Maye, and taried there a hole yere. In this yere was suche a froste, that all menne  myghte passe with cartes betwene Westmynster and Lambeth. This yere on Maye euen was an insurreccy∣on of younge persones against Aliens, of whiche diuers were put to execucion, and ye residue came to Westmynster Halle with halters aboute their neckes, and were pardoned.
And the .xviii. daye of Mayeyquene of Scot∣tes, retourned into her countree againe. This yere in Octobre. the admiral of Fraunce The .lx. yere. came into England, and Tourney was deliuered to the Frenche kyng. In this yere at Frankforde Charles the fyfte The .x. yere. was chosen Emperoure. And the Earle of Surrey was sent to Ireland In this yere, the kyng and the Frenche kynge met at the campe betwene Arde & Guines, where The .xi. yere. were greate triumphes. And after the kynge and the Emperoure mette, and the kyng went to Gra∣ueling with the Emperoure. And the Emperoure came to Caleys with the kyng, & had greate chere and the kyng retourned. This yere the duke of Buckyngham was be∣headed The .xii. yere. at the toure hyll the .xvii. daye of Maye. And in Iune, the Cardinall wēt to Calays to en∣treate a peace betwene themperoure & the French kyng, and aried there to Decembre, without any thinge concluded. This yere the fridaye before Penthecoste, that The .xiii. yere. is to wytt the sixte daye of Iune, Charles the em∣peroure was honourably receiued into the Cytee of London of the Maire, Aldermenne, and comi∣naltye, oure saied soueraigne Lorde accōpaigni∣eng hym. And fro London he went to Windesore and sat in his stall of the Garter. And from thens went to Hampton, and sayled into Spaine. Duringe whiche tyme, the Earle of Surrey Lorde Admirall brent Morleys in Brytaine, and after landed at Caleys, and entred Picardye, and brent tounes and castelles, and besyeged Hesdyn,
but because of wynter he reysed his syege and re∣tourned. This somer, the duke of Albany was entring England with a greate armye, but when he heard that the Earle of Shrewisburye was comminge to fyghte with hym, he tooke a truce for, vi. mo∣nethes. In this .xiiii. yere, Christian Kynge of Den∣marke The .xiiii. yere. came into Englande in Iune. Also the Earle of Surrey brent Iedworth and many other townes in Scotlande. This yere also the Turke besieged the Rhodes and on Christmas daye he tooke it. The Duke of Suffolke wente into Fraunce The .xv. yere. with ten thousand menne, and passed the water of Som̄e withoute battayle, and tooke and destroy∣ed many townes, and in Decembre retourned. The same yere the duke of Albanye besieged ye castell of Warke, and hearing of therle of Sur∣reys comming, with a greate armye he cowardely sledde. In the .xvi. yere, there came oute of Scotlande  the byshop of Dunkell, and other ambassadours vnto yt kynges maiestie. And on saynt Mathews daye was the French kyng taken by themperour. A mutyng in Norffolk and Suffolke for paymēt of mony. A peas concluded betwene Englād and Fraunce. And the French kyng was deliuered in Marche. This yere was the coyne enhaunced. In the .xviii. yeare, the citee of Roome by the viii viceroy of Naples, and the duke of Burbon (the same dake beinge fyrste slaine) was taken and al∣most distroied. And Clemēt the .vii. than byshop
of Rome & diuers Cardinalles there found were taken and broughte in captiuitee, and vnder the rule of Charles the Emperoure. This yere also ye Cardinall went into Fraunce with greate pompe In October the great master of Fraunce came to London with great triumphe. The .xix. yere. In this xix. yere, was the sweatyng sickenesse for ye which cause ther was no watch at midsomer In the .xx. yere, was the Cardinall deposed of ye The .xx. yere chauncellourshyp, and a peace betwene the Em∣perour and the kyng concluded. The .xxi. yere In ye .xxi. yere, was holden a parlyament wher was refourmed diuerse enormitees of the clargye In the .xxii. yere, was a man boyled in Smith The. xxii yere feeld for poysoning. The cardinal dyed on saynct Andrewes euen. The .xxiii. yere In the .xxiii. yere, Gryffeth Rice was behedded for treason. In October the kyng wente ouer the sea, and met the Frenche kyng at Caleis. In the .xxv. yere, in Apryll was a Nonne cal∣led The. xxv yere. the holy mayde of Kent, ii. Monkes and two Freers hanged and behedded for treasō, blasphe∣mye, and ypocrysie. This yere a peace was con∣cluded wyth Scotlande. In this xxvi. yere was holden a Parlyamente at Westminster, wherin emong other moost god∣ly The. xxvi yere. and necessary statutes, it was ther decreed and enacted that the kynges maiestie should be from thensforth accordyng to the lawe of God, taken & reputed as supreme heed of this his realme, nexte and immediatly vnder Chryst. This yere the erle of Kyldare died in the Towre, and his sonne rebel led and slewe the byshop of Dubelyn, wherfore ye
kyng dyd send sir Wylliam Skeuynton thether This yere was graunted to the king the fyrst fru¦tes, and the tenthes of all spirituall possessyons. In Iune was the byshoppe of Rochester and sir Thomas Moore behedded, for deniyng the kyng to be supreme hed of ye church of Englande. This yere, wer .iii. Monkes of the Charterhouse execu∣ted for the same offence. In this .xxvii. yere, in Ianuary dyed lady Ka∣theryn The. xxvii yere. princesse dowager, and is buryed at Peter borowe. This yere, quene Anne was attaynted of treason, and was beheded. And the kynge maried lady Iane Seymer. And in October beganne a fololyshe commocion in Lyncolnshyre, & another in Yorke shyre, by ye meanes of Lord Darey, lord Husey sir Robert Cōstable, & Robert Aske. Which only by the kynges wysedome & his discrete coun¦sayle were appeased withoute bloode shedynge. In this .xxviii. yere, the Thamis was ouer fro¦ in December, wherfore the kyng and the quene rode throwe London with a goodlye companye.  xviii  This yere also, syr Fraunces Bygot, lord Darcy, syr Robert Constable, and other, beganne a newe cospyracie, and thei were attaynted, and putte to death in Iune. In February was Thomas Fytz¦garred, and fyue of his vncles hanged, drawen & quartered. And on saynt Edwardes euen Prynce Edwarde was borne at Hamptō court. The. xxiii daye of October dyed quene Iane, and is buryed at Wyndsore. In this .xxix. yere, in Maye was Frere Foreste hanged and brente in Smithfeelde for treason &  xxix. yere. heresy, with the Image of Daruell Gathern. In
thys yere, all ydolatry was forbyddē. And dyuers ymages that had engynnes to make their eyes, & other lymmes to styre, wyth many other disceates wer destroyed. And all Freers and Monkes chaū¦ged their garmentes. In this .xxx. yere in Decēber was the Marquis of Ereter, the Lord Montacute, and syr Edward Neuell behedded for hygh treasō duly proued. In The. xxx yere. May the cytesyns of Londō mustred al in bright harneisse, with coates of whyte clothe, and whyte sylke, wyth chaynes of golde, in thre great army∣es, to the great wonder of straungers. Nowe for a fynal cōclusiō as touchīg this most noble & exellēt prince and for the closing vp of this presēt werke. If yt his highnes had by al ye space of his reigne heretofore, whiche hath bene .xxxiiii. ye∣res, done no more but only these three thynges (as in dede his grace hath done a great & infinite nō∣bre of moste prudente & beneficial thynges, bothe for the quietnes of his realme & wealth of his sub¦iectes) yt is to saie: the extirpyng & abholyshyng of the vsurped authoritee of the B. of Rome out of all his dominions, and restoring vnto vs the holy & most blessed worde of God ye is to saie the whole scripture in our Englishtongue, to thentent chief∣ly that we mighte knowe oure dutie to almightie God, oure obedyence to our prince and hys succes¦sours kynges of thys realme, & lyue a godlye and Christen life one with another. Secondarely, in takynge a waye all supersticion and ydolatrye whiche was a thyng moost detestain▪ the sight, of God. And thirdlye and laste of all the dissoluynge of cloisters and suppressynge all conterfete and
false religion, which so long as thei cōtinued, wer not only teachers & preachers of false and super∣sticious doctryne, but also wer euer the autours & begynners of all mischiefes & commocions. For reformacion I saye of which thynges, who is ha∣ble to rendre woorthy thankes and prayses to his highnes? And therfore to conclude, infinite than∣kes be geuē to almightie God yt so hath wrought by his speciall grace, in the hearte & mynde of his hihgnes, & let earnest prayers and supplicaciōs incessantly be made of all his faythful subiectes for the preseruacion of his highnes in mooste tri∣umphant honoure and wealth and ouer vs longe to reigne & rule. And that when nature shall geue place to death in his grace, that then thesame giftes of prudence, pollecie, and godly iudgement yt his highnes is so plentifully endewed with, maye yet be planted in ye personne of that goodly ympe and mooste flory shyng braūche prynce Edwarde, that the same maye finishe & mainteine that whiche his noble father and our souereigne lord kyng Henry ye eyght hath moste graciously begōne. To this all true En∣glishe heartes saie Amen. LONDINI. In officina Richardi Graftoni, Cmm priui∣legio ad imprimendum solum per septennium.
