13017 99847824 12885
1 MVltitude of prebendes. 2 Multitude of priestes. 3 Multitude of temples & chapels 4 Multitude of aultars. 5 Diuers oblations and offringes 6 Worldly riches and pryde. 7 Idlenesse and trwandisse of the shauen. 8 Multitude of harlotes. 9 Fained houres and prayers. 10 Detestable hypocrisy. 11 Deuourynge of widowes, orphans, & the poore. 12 Renounsyng and destructyng of the death and passion of Christe. ¶And so consequently of the other, whyche are infinite. TO make short ye errour of the masse is moste deadly & hurtfull, aswell to the goodes as to the persones, in as much as it semeth to haue most signe of holynes and goodnes seinge that it is all execrable or cursed. Truely the ve∣nim wherewith the pestilence is couered anoteth and greueth more greater thā that, that is seene open. Ite missa est. Amen 3. Esdras. 4. chap. ¶Super omnia vincit veritas. Aboue all thyng the truthe ouercometh. MDXLVII. ¶Printed at Wittenberge by Hans Lufte.
A Chrystian, exhortation verye profitable gathered out of the holye scrip∣tures, vnto the great comfort, and vti∣litye, of euery faythfull soule, being in agony of death, vnto whom, it oughte to be rehersed, with lowd voyce, diuers and sundry times, if nede so require vn¦to the which is added, towarde the lat∣ter end a godly praier for the sick draw¦ing to an ende of this life, with a Cate∣chisme, not onely to instruct the sicke, but also to refreshe his memorye, wyth the great mistery of our redemption. Translated out of Frenche into Eng∣lyshe by Robart Heasse Minister at Algate. Imprinted at Lon∣don, by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Pawles Church∣yarde at the signe of the Lucrece. Anno. 1566.
Death is ende, and the beginning of lyfe. Ecclesiastes .xvii. Ante lauguorem adhibe me∣dicinam et ante iudicium in, terroga teipsū, et in conspec∣tu dei inuenies propitiationē Apocalip. iii. Si non vigilaueris veniam ad te tanquam fur et nescis qua hora veniam ad te. Apocalip. xvi. Beatus qui vigilat et custo∣dit vestimenta sua nenudus ambulet et videant turpitu∣dinem eius. Math. 24. Luke. 12. Estote parati quia nescitis qua hora filius hominis ven∣turus est.
Vnto the faithefull Reader, greting, in our Lord Iesus Christ. DEarelye beloued Reader, I pray the take in good parte this present exhor∣taciō, that I haue here translated out of ye French tounge, into thy vulgar tounge with greate thoughte and care vntill I of my part had perfor∣med it, I trust to the gret com∣fort of euerye faithfull person, that feareth God, to vse & prac∣tise, at the time of nede, when as it shall please god to call him out of this mortal and wretched worlde. But be aduertised that thou maiste vse it righte, that these thre letters. B.S.N. The first signifyeth brother, that is when thou speakest vnto a man The seconde signifyeth suster, a woman, and the thirde em∣porteth,
that thou muste name the partye sicke, by his proper name, for he oughte not to be honoured, by names, either, of worldly, honours or worshipes, But rather to resist Satan the enemy of mannes soule, in and throughe the power of our lord and god, ye sicke must be named, by his owne name, that he hath receiued, in the holy sacrament of Baptisme, and in so doinge thou shalt obey the Lord God, whom I beseche of his infinite goodnes and mercye, vouch∣safe to be Good and merci∣full, both vnto thee and me in the last iudge∣ment day. Amen.
A Christen exhor∣tation whiche oughte to be recited wyth lowde voyce, before all faithfull people, beinge in agonye of deathe. ALL that is of God,Ihon, vii. heare the worde of God,Math, vii. and not onelye to heare it, but kepe it,Hebre. i, and put it in execution for all things shall haue an end and waxe olde as dothe a gar∣ment,Esay. 40. but the worde of God en∣dureth for euermore,Rom, v, and seing that it is so, that by one man sinne is entered into the world and by sinne, deathe and conse∣quently all troubles and aduer∣sities folowing, it is by iust oc∣cation that the lyfe of man,Rom, vii. is but a continuall battaile vppon earthe, in suche sorte, that the
fleshe fyghteth against ye spirit and the spirit against the deuill the world, and the fleshe, which are enemies vnto oure soules, but folowing thapostles coun∣sell,i, Peter, v. to obtaine victorye in this spirituall battaile, you must re∣syste constantly through fayth.i, Ihon. v. For the victorye whiche ouer∣cometh the worlde,Hebre. xi, is our faith whyche is a sure and certayne knowledge of the loue of God towarde vs as by his ghospell he declareth him selfe to be our father and sauiour, by the mea∣nes of Iesus Chryst. Hauynge then suche a steadfast faithe for your principal foundation. Ac∣knowledge and confesse vnfai∣nedlye before the maiestye of God that you are a poore and miserable synner,Psal, li, Luke, xvii, conceyued & borne in iniquitye and corrup∣tion, enclined to doe euyll and that of your selfe so vnhable to
doe anye Good by youre often transgresing the commaunde∣mentes of God, in which so do∣inge, you haue deserued by hys iuste Iudgement, deathe and dampnacion vpon you, yet not∣withstandinge you are displea∣sed in your self to haue so often and many times offended hym and therefore you condempne your selfe and your vices wyth perfecte repentance, desiringe that the grace of GOD redres your calamity. Pray then with suche a steadfast faithe.Psal, li, If you cannot with the mouth, saye it with the hart, that God our fa∣ther moste beninge, and full of mercye, doe not enter in iudge∣ment nor to rekening with vs,Psal. 142, but rather vouchsafe to haue pitie vpon you in the name of his sonne Iesus Christ our lord and to wype awaye your offen∣ces and sinnes by the merite of
the deathe and passyon of the same Iesus Christe, in whose name present vnto hym, hys holye Prayer that hee hathe taught vs, saying wyth a good harte. Math. vi,Our father which art in. &c. B.S.N Aknoweledge from the botome of your hearte your vnrighteousnesse, be sorye for your synnes, repent you vnces∣santlye,Math, iii and the kyngedome of God shall drawe nere, acknow∣ledge that their is nether, righ¦teousnesse,Titus, iii, innocencye nor anye good workes in you, nor from you,Ephe, ii, Psal, li, but contrarye wyse, the sonne of wrathe and Childe of perdicion, conceyued and borne in the synne of the olde Adam, you deserue eternall death and dampnation,Rom, viii, yet not withstan∣dinge, let not thys, nor all the sinnes of the world, if you com∣mitted
them, once fryghte you. For Iesus Christe the eternall and true Sonne of God,Rom, i, hathe made him selfe perfect man con¦ceyued of the holy Ghost,Luke, i, borne of the virgin Mary for to sanc∣tifye and clense you,Math, i, he hathe suffred vnder Ponce Pilate,Phllip, 2 di∣uers afflictions, iniuryes, and wronges, yeldinge him selfe as a slaue and Captiue,Actes, 3, for to set you at libertye,Math, 27, Iesus Christe hath bene crucifyed and accur∣sed vpon the tre of the crosse, to deliuer you from the maledicti∣on perpetuall. Iesus Christ,Esay, 53, is deade in sheading, his precious bloude, for to washe you.Apo, i, For to redeeme you,i, Peter, 1. for to deli∣uer you wholy from death and hell fyre, and from the myghte and power of Sathan,Rom. vi, Iesus Christ hath bene buryed in the Sepulchre, for to bury all your synnes, ye whiche he hath borne
on his shoulders and hath wy∣ped them out,Actes, i, Iesus Christe is descended into hell suffring an extreame agonye, for to deliuer you, from al paines and griefes of death. Iesus Christ is rysen from death,i, Cori, rv, Actes, i. Colio. iii. for to make you rise in your proper bodye to a glori∣ous immortality. Iesus Christ is ascended into the Heauens, for to make you ascende after him.i. Ihon, ii, Iesus Christ is set on the right hande of God his father almighty,Hebre, vii, being your aduocate and intercessor towardes hym and the atonement for all your synnes.Math. xv, Pa, i, We looke that he shall come to Iudge the quicke and the dead,Rom, viii, for to render to euery one according to his deds. But to his electe whiche beleue in him, their Synnes shal not be imputed, for he wil iustify them throughe his grace,Math, xxv, and make them to raigne with him in the
heauenly throne, worlde with∣oute ende. B.S.N. Suche is the great mestery of our redemption, the whiche throughe the power of the holye Ghoste, you oughte fermelye to beleue, it to be done for your saluacion. And doubt not,Ephe, i, but that by the merite of Iesus christ chiefe of his church you be a member incorporated vnto the same, thankinge hym with gret humilite, that he hath vouchsafed to geeue you grace to haue beene associated in the felowship and company of hys faithfull,Math, iiii, feeding you with hys holye worde, of his bodye,i, Cor, xi, and of his precious bloude, acknow¦ledginge as fully perswaded, of the great mercye and compassi∣on of God by the remission of all your synnes,Rom, v, the which is done vnto you,i, Cor, xv, by Iesus Christ who will make you rise again in the
laste daye, and their to raigne with hym in the life eternall,Marke, 16, which he hath promysed to all those that beleue in him beyng baptised in his name. B.S.N. Nowe seynge you haue such a faith doubte not to receiue the promesse of faythe. For God is true,Rom, iii, he is not a lier as man is, Heauen and Earthe shall passe,Math, 24, but the worde of god shall last euermore, God is your father and maker,Esay, 40, you are hys creature & worke of his hands he made you not to leese you.Gene, i, For he is the sauiour of all men and willeth not the deathe of a sinner,1, Timo, 2, but rather that he should tourne from his sinne, by faith full repentance and so be saued. Wherefore I heare pronounce vnto you,Ieremy, in the name of God, that by and throughe his great goodnes and mercye:Titus, iii. you haue full forgeeuenes and remission
of all your sinnes,1, Timo, 1, by the onely merite of his dere sonne Iesus Christ our Lord in the sheding of his precious bloud.Actes, 4. For he is the propiciation,Apoca, 1, 1, Ihon. 2. not onelye of all youre synnes but of all the sinnes of the world. B.S.N. Iesus Christ saithe that all thinges are possible to those that beleue.Math, 17, Beleue then withoute doubtinge that Iesus Christ puttinge on our fleeshe, hathe made him selfe perfecte man, dying for you, bearing all your sinnes on his bodie, to a∣bolishe and wype them oute. Offer to god the precious death of his sonne Iesus Christ and by the merite of the same death and passion, demannde of him mercye and forgeuenes, in say∣inge from the botome of youre harte in and with greate humi∣litie and repentaunce.
A Prayer. ALmightie God and hea¦uenly father, shew mer∣cie vnto mee, poore and miserable Synner,Rom, iii, for the loue of thy Sonne Iesus Christe my Lorde and sauiour.Ihon, xiiii, And by the mirite of his death and passiō vouchsafe to receiue my soule whom I commend in to thy handes.Math, 26, Psal, 30,Haue your full confidence in God,Rom, viii, for seing that God is with you, nothinge shall be against you. For Iesus Christ which is the inmaculate lambe hath van¦quished all thinges for you,Esay. 6. he hath offered him selfe once for you, and by the same onelye ob∣lation, hathe wholye ouercome all your synnes he hathe ouer∣cd all your infirmities:Heb. 7, &, 9 vn∣righteousnes, abhomynation and obligaciō. With this good
Lord Iesus Christ God the fa∣ther hath geuen you all thyngs strengthen you in Iesus Christ who hathe called you,Rom, viii. by his Prophetes, Apostles,Esay, 55, and Euangelists to come frely vnto him saying. All yt are thursty come vnto the great fountaine.Math, xi, Come vnto mee all ye that tra¦uayle and are laden, and I will ease you. B.S.N. Beleue steadfastlye that Iesus Christ hath deliue∣red you of all your sinnes,i, Ihon, v, and hathe reconciled you vnto God his Father, vnto whome with great reuerence and harty re∣pentaunce say from the botome of your heart. A Prayer. O Almighty and eternall Lorde God,Rom. iii, Ihon, xiiii, be mercy∣full to me, pore and mi¦serable sinner for thy
sonne Iesus Christes sake, my Lorde and sauiour. And by the merite and worthynes of his death and passion,Mathe, 26, vouchsafe to receiue my soule into thy han∣des.Psal, 3, Amen, B.S.N. Haue hope: for truth it is, yt he will receiue your soule as his owne, for the loue of his Sonne Iesus Christ which is the sauiour and redemer of all those that beleue in him. Marke, 16, Deute, 18, Psal, 11, Esay. 53, Ge, 3, &, 22,Moyses and all the prophetes haue witnessed that al nations shall receiue saluation and be∣nedictiō onely by and through Iesus Christ the Apostles and Euangelists doe testifye that Iesus Christe came not to call the righteous,Mathe, 9, but sinners to repentaunce.Ihon, x, And to geeue his soule for the redemption of ma∣nye.Luke, 21, For he hath shed his precy∣ous bloude, for the remission of sinnes. Beleue then, and doute
not at all,Hebre. i, for Iesus Christ hath made the Purgatyon for all youre sinnes, promising that all those that shall beleeue in him, and in the Father,Ihon, 5, who hath sent him life euerlasting, and shall not come to iudgemēt but shall passe from a short deth to a long life. B.S.N. Take then a good courage in Iesus Christ, for he hath loued you, and washed you from all your sinnes in his pre¦cious bloud,Esay, 53, Apo, i, take holde in thys sure faith, to fight tryumphant∣lye against the aduersary, haue no other shielde to defende you withall thē the precious bloud of Iesus Chryste, who by the power and might of his death and passion,Rom, v, hath recōciled you vnto GOD his Father, vnto whom frō the bottome of your hart, in great humilitie and re¦uerēce say this prayer with me.
O Almighty and euerlastinge Lord God,Rom, iii, Ihon. xiiii, Math, xxvi, Psal, xxx, be merciful vnto me poore miserable sinner, for thy Sonne Iesus Christe his sake: and by the merit and wor¦thines of his death and passiō, vouchesafe to receiue my soule, whiche I commmend into thy handes. B.S.N. Take sure hold tho¦row hope in this faith,Iohn, x that our good god ful of all mercy, will & shall receiue youre soule, as his own, into his hands for Iesus Christes sake: for there is no o∣ther name vnder heauen giuen vnto men,Actes, 4. throughe the whiche we can or may be saued, or loke for saluatiō but in Iesus christ arme then your self well with this our good Lord & master Ie¦sus Christ,Rom, viii, for he hath done all things for you,Rom,  he hath accōplis¦shed ye law for you, he hath ouer cōd al things for you, go to thē.
B.S.N. Reioyce in God,Hebre. xi be euermore stedfast in this liuely faith, follow the trace of the ho¦ly Patriarches, Prophets, and Apostles which are all saued in this faith, the whiche do all as∣sure you that the enemy youre aduersary cannot annoy you at all, for your sute is wonne tho¦rough Iesus Christe whiche is your iudge and aduocate also.Ihon, 5, Ihon, 2, Psal, 23, Wherfore say euermore in this firme beleefe, yea althoughe I walke through the valey of the shadow of death, yet wil I fere none euil, for thou art with me thy rod and thy staffe comforte me. B.S.N. Do neuer wery youre selfe to saye from the botome of your hart in this wise. O Almighty God and heauēly father,Rom, iii Iohn. xiiii, Math, 2. be merciful vnto me pore miserable siner, for Iesus Christs sake my lord & sauiour,
and by the merite and worthi∣nesse of his death and passion, vouchesafe to receiue my soule the whiche I do moste humbly commend into thy holy hands, Amen. A singuler Prayer for a bodye greatly afflicted with sicknes whiche semeth to drawe or ap¦proche more neere to Death, then to life: with a litle Ca∣thechisme expressely made to instruct the sicke person, and to make him behold the great mistery of our redemption. Ecclesiasticus .xviii. GEt thee righteousnesse before thou come to Iudgement, learne be fore thou speake, & vse Phisicke or euer thou be sicke,i. Cor. v examine thy self before thou be
iudged, and in the day of visita¦cion thou shalt finde mercye. The Lord dooth admonishe vs euermore to praye: (speciallye,Mathe, 2, when we are touched with hys rods) wherefore all Parentes, and faithfull freendes, whiche shall, or do visite the sick person ought not onely to visite and so¦licitate the bodye, but also to seeke and demaund the spiritu∣all medecine for the soule which ought to be done by good pray∣ers, confession of sinnes,Mathe, 9. and Christē exhortation, according vnto the word of God, without the which no man can liue:Math, 4, and to thend that all things may be doone in good order, and with good zeale, it shalbe conuenient and necessary to prostrate oure selues before ye maiestie of God and say vnto him: our help and succoure be in the name of God the Father, the Sonne, and of
the holy ghoste so be it, and then say this prayer folowinge, con¦fessing generally all your sins, from the botome of youre hart. Prayer. Math, xviiiO Almighty god and moste merciful Fa∣ther, we beinge as∣sembled in ye name of thy welbeloued Son our Lord & sauiour Iesus Christ, we haue vnder the selfe same Iesus Christ,Iohn. xiiii, presumed to present oure selues before thee: to call on thy holy name, hauīg oure onely refuge in thy soue∣raine bownty, the which we do not onely desire to feele & taste in oure selues,Iames, v but also in this the necessitie of thy poore crea∣ture, being now afflicted with bodely sicknes, and troubled in spirite,1. Cor. xi we know O Lorde that iustlye thou doost punishe it in
chastesing it with thy rods, for to make him vnderstand thy fa∣therly affection,Psal, 78, but thy greate mercies, whiche thou vsedst to∣ward oure Fathers are not va∣nished nor consumed away, for thou art the great and eternall God full of all mercye,Math, 26, who ne∣uer doost chaūge: thy holy word instructeth vs full amply, that al the earth is replenished with thy mercies, whiche do surmoūt far thy iustice, wherefore we be∣seche thee O most mercifull fa∣ther, cease thy wrath and indig¦nation towards this thy pore & wretched creature, haue mercye & compassion of him for Iesus Christes sake: looke not vnto his sinnes and offences, but ra∣ther in the face of thy deare son Iesus Christe, who hath suffi∣cientlye satysfied thee for the same, in offeringe vnto thee the greate Sacrifice of hys bodye
on the crosse, for vs miserable sinners: we therefore beseeche the (O God) that art full of mer¦cye to let him feele thy mercy & grace, whiche thou neuer didst refuse vnto thy beloued ones, and because that thou arte oure heauenly father,Math, vi, which knowst all things necessary for our sal∣uation: we beseeche thee not to prolong his life, neither to shor∣ten it, for we repose oure selues on thy holy will, vnto ye whiche desire onely to accomplishe and fulfill,Rom, xi. thou arte wise without counsaile to dispose with this thy creature, accordinge to thy good will and pleasure, conside∣ring that if it be thy wil O lord to call him, what is he that mai resist it (againe) if thou wilt res¦store him to health,Rom, viii, who is hee that dare reprooue thee, for all things are in thy hands,Ihon, i, and no¦thing is done without thy good
will and prouidence: yet neuer∣theles O Lorde if by thy grace thou doost prolonge his dayes,Psal, 2. this thy rod shalbe vnto him, a chastisinge to amēd his former life: and so bee conuerted vnto thee: and we all with him will yeeld thee thankes for euer: but if thy will bee stayed, to make him passe vnto a better life: we pray thee in the fauoure of thy sonne Iesus Christe to forget & do away all his faults & sinnes the whiche thou haste vouchsa∣fed to be washed in the sheding of his precious bloud:Apoca, 1, Math, 26, vouchsafe O Lord by the merite and wor∣thines of the death and passion of thy dere sonne, to receiue his soule in to thy holy hands,Psal, 30, Psal, 137, whē it shall please thee to call it out of this world: despise not O lord the worke of thy handes: for be∣holde thy poore creature almost ouerwhelmed, yet callinge on
thy name, euen in the midst of all his troubles and sorowes, offring thee a wofull and peni∣tent soule with an hūble hart the whiche we pray thee to ac∣cept, for the loue of thy Sonne Iesus Christes sake our Lorde in whose name thou hast promi¦sed to exalt our prayers, & hum∣ble requestes: wherfore we pray thee, receiue vs in to thy holye tuicion, illuminating our harts and vnderstanding to appeare before thee, and to call on thy holy name as thy beloued Sō Iesus Christe oure Lorde hath taught vs to pray,Math, vi, for al things necessary, saying. OVre Father whiche arte in Heauen, Hallowed by thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy wilbe done in earth, as it is in heauen. Giue vs this day our daily bread. &c.
FInally O eternal god and most mercifull Fa¦ther, we hūbly beseech thee vouchsafe, to strē¦then vs, by thy grace, and pow∣er, so that by and throughe the weaknes of our fleshe, wee fall not, and because that of our sel∣ues wee are so weake that wee can not, nor may not remaine stedfast, nor constant, no not a minut of an hour: vouchsafe we beseeche thee to strengthen vs with thy graces, and heauenly benediction, in suche sorte that we remaine constant vnto the end in the perfecte faith, wtout the whiche it is vnpossible to please thee,Heb, xi confirme this faith in vs euermore, of the whiche we shall make confession with hart and mouth saying. I Beleue in God the Father al mighty maker of Heauen, &c.
THe prayers ended, then may be perceiued howe the sicke and patient dooth: with inquisition of his helth, with godly wordes and christen talke, and if ye sicke person decline from this life, & that no likelyhod be sene in him then may a commodiouse houre be appointed to speake vnto the said sick persō, to know if he be willing to heare speak of gods woorde to his comfort,Iohn. viii, whilest that he is yet in this world and of perfect memorye, and if he be of God, this litle and breef Ca∣thechisme may be recited as fo∣loweth. A breefe Cathechisme, not one∣ly to instruct the sick, but also to refresh his memory, with ye great mistery of our redem¦ption: the which wel to vn∣derstande and remember in
his latter dayes,Eccle, 18, he oughte to make confessiō of his faith before the assistaunce of the faithfull: wherof one of those in the absence of the Minis∣ter oughte to question wyth him as foloweth. The Minister. ANye man that knoweth well him selfe,B.S.N. and doth not omit his condition & qualitie, truly he also ought to acknowledge,Gene, 1, Psal, li, Ephe, 2, notwithstandinge that he was created the Image and likenes of God, that he is cōceiued and borne in the sinne of the olde A¦dam, thorowe the whiche he is become a poore and miserable sinner, ignoraunt, inconstaunt and full of iniquitie, and conse∣quently
subiect to all miseries, afflictions, aduersities, and fi∣nally vnto death it self,Rom. 5 and all this hath sinne caused, yt which god not leauing it vnpunished. he daily afflicteth vs by sundry manner wayes, in this worlde to thend that we should not bee dampned with the world. B.S.N. Haue therfore pati¦ence in your sicknes, and surely in so doing you shall posses your soule in ioyes euerlastinge. Ac∣knowledge your sinne,Psal, 31 and ac∣cuse your self before the maiesti of God, the which you must be∣holde and contemplat throughe faith, making confession of the same, with hart and mouth be∣fore all the assistaunce, for it is written: with the hart man be∣leueth vnto righteousnesse, and with the mouth man confesseth to saluation, harken then vnto these demaunds that shal now
presētlye be asked, and aunswer faithfully according to the intel¦ligence that you haue receiued of the Lorde, and if you cannot by reason of the weakenesse of your sicknesse, I will aunswere for you my selfe, and it shall suf∣fice vs to haue vnderstandinge of your cōstant faith, in ye which we all must die. Q. I demaund. Wherefore, and to what ende haue you beene created in this world.Math, 10 Sicke. For to knowe God.Ge, 2 Minister. Was it not necessarye vnto you to knowe God. Sicke. Yes truly,Psal, 17. for seinge that hee is my soueraygne LORDE,
without the knowledge of him I had bene more miserable thē the brute beastes.Psal, 61, 17 Minister. Seing you knowe GOD, you knowe, that he is my wisdome, and all infinite goodnesse, one onely God in persons three, the Father, the Sonne, and the ho¦ly Ghoste, he is the onely God, that Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cob haue worshipped,Ge, 1, Ihon. i, Luke, i, Gene. 18 in spirite and truthe, he is the onely and eternall God, which hath made the heauen and also the earth, and al things which is in them contayned: the knowledge that you haue of GOD, is it not in this sorte. Sicke. yes. Minister. But may suche a simple know∣ledge, of God, lead you vnto the life euerlasting.
Sick. Very hardelye: for it is life e∣uerlastinge to confesse and ac∣knowledge one onely God,Ihon. xvii. and he whom he hath sent, his eter∣nall sonne our Lorde and sauy∣our Iesus Christ. Minister. Wherefore is it necessary to acknowledge, and confesse the Lorde and Christ. Sicke. Because, that I must recouer in Iesu Christ,Rom. 5 Psal, li, Luke. xxiiii Psal. 2, Rom, xi all that I haue lost in my selfe, by reason of the sinne committed by Adam oure fore father, in the whiche I am conceiued and born: so that now it was necessary for my saluati∣on, that Iesus Christe the sōne of God, both God and man, clo∣thed with our flesh, should geue me through his grace and free mercy, all yt I had lost in Adam Minister
It is very well sayde, that is the cause,Math, 1, why Iesus Christe was cōceiued by the holy ghost and borne of the virgin Mary, for to purge and sanctifye you, for all together contrarye vnto him,Ephe, 2, Rom, viii, are you borne and concei∣ued in sinne, and sinful Parēts wherfore you must confes that without Iesus Christ, you had remained a pore and miserable sinner in euerlasting Death. Sicke. Rom. 5I truly, but I beleue and cō∣fesse, that Iesus Christ hath re¦conciled mee vnto God his Fa∣ther. Minister. How hathe he reconciled you to God his father. Sicke. Math, 26,By his death and passion, & by the shedding of his most pre∣cious blood, for I knowe & am
fullye perswaded, that Iesus Christ hath suffred vnder Pōce Pilate, diuers and many afflic∣tions,Acts, 3. iniuries, and tribulatiōs to deliuer me frō eternall death it is Iesus Christe whiche hath beene crucyfied for mee,Math. 2 and ac∣cursed vpon the tree of the cros, to deliuer me from the maledic∣tion of rhe Deuil, vnto ye which Adam had bound me vnto, Ie∣sus Christe hath bene truly bu∣ried, for to burye all my sinnes, because they may not be impu∣ted vnto me before God: it is mi Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ whiche is descended into Hell, suffring an extreame agony, for to deliuer me from the eternall Pitte. Minister. Is all that you haue confes∣sed of Iesus Christe presentlye sufficient for to saue you. Sick.
Esay. 53, Math, xxvi,No, but that it was requisite that the holy scriptures, mighte in all thinges be accomplished, for what had it profited me, for Iesus Christ to haue ben born crucified, dead, buried, and des∣cended into hell for me onely: wt out the resurrection: wherefore I beleue and confesse that Ie∣sus Christ is risen from ye dead for to make me rise with him as one of his little members, into euerlasting life. Minister. It is consequently writtē, that he is assended in Heauen, and their presently set on the right hande of God his Father, but what auayleth this assencion vnto you. Sicke. My cheef and sauiour Iesus Christe is assended into heauē, for to make me ascēd after him, for where the head is, there the
members be also, and I beleue that he beinge set on the right hande of God his Father,2. Iohn, 2 is my aduocate, intercessors, ond one∣ly mediatour towardes him,Rom, viii, as∣suring me that none can hinder me sith yt Ies{us} Christ is my me¦diatour,Ihon, 5, and my iudge all toge∣ther: wherefore I neede not to feare the day of his coming vn∣to iudgement: when hee shall come to iudge the quick and the dead,Math, 2, for I beleue and also con∣fesse with stedfast faithe, that there is neither iudgement nor condemnation, towardes or for those which be his faythful mē¦bers in Iesus Christ. Ministre. Who hath geuen you grace to knowe and vnderstand al these thinges. Sick. It is throughe the grace of the holy ghoste, one onely God,
with the Father, and the sonne by whose meanes we receiue al good gifts, which are offred vn¦to vs through Iesus Christ. Minister. Seing that you haue alrea∣dy confessed that you be the mē∣ber of Iesus Christ, it also fol∣loweth that you bee incorpora∣ted vnto his Churche, ye whiche you must beleue to be holye, ca∣tholike, and vniuersall. Sick. I beleue stedfastly the holy v∣niuersall churche, washed and purified in the precious blud of Iesus Christe, for the whiche most humbly I thank him, that he hath vouchsafed me to be as one of the litle members of his churche, and being baptised in his name, hath vouchsafed me to liue in the communion,Math, 4. vni∣tie, and charitie of the same, in∣structing me wt his holy worde
and fed with his perfect body, & quenched with his precio{us} blud in hope of euerlasting life. Minister. Now seinge you be grounded on the liuely roke,i. Cor. x whiche is Ie¦sus Christe in knowinge youre selfe, you muste acknowledge & confesse the principall benefit, that you haue receiued of oure Lord and Christ. Sicke. It is reason and very necessa¦ry, for I wil not be vnthankful to acknowledge the gifts and benefites that I haue receaued of God:Psal, li, wherefore I confesse & acknowledg that I pore and mi¦serable sinner, haue offended di¦uers and sundry wayes, ye good∣nes of God, in transgressinge his commaundementes in the whiche so doing, I haue deser∣ued deth & dānatiō euerlasting yet notwtstāding flying vnto ye
mercy of God. I craue and aske mercy beleuing and confessing vndoubtedly, that ful remission of sinnes is graunted me, by the onely death and passion of my Lorde and sauioure Iesus Christe, and in the sheading of his precious bloode,Hebre. i, in whome and throughe whome I assure my selfe to be wholye washed & purged, whiche is the greatest gifte and contentation,Math, x, that e∣uer coulde haue hapened vnto me, and suche is my faith in the which I will liue and dye, mea¦ning ye grace of the holy ghost. Minister. Seing you haue receyued so great gifts of God, by the mea∣nes of his sonne Iesus Christe it is also conuenient and neces¦sary, that you follow the com∣maundemenet, for euen as hee hathe forgeuen you, and made satisfaction for all your sinnes,
so likewise you muste forgeeue from the botome of youre hart vnto all those that haue offen∣ded you, els you walke not ac∣cording to gods lawes. Sick. In this I haue knowen the lawe of Iesus Christe to be the only holy and perfect doctrine commaunding vs to loue oure neighbours, frendes,Math. xix, and ene∣mies, as our selues: wherfore I pray vnto al those that I haue offended by thought, worde, or deede, to forgeue me with as free a will and good hart, as I forgeue all those that haue offē¦ded or trespassed against me, be∣ing desirous to doe thē good as vnto my louers and frendes. Minister. Seing that God hath orday∣ned that all men shall dye,Gene. 3 wee cannot resist his ordinaunce, & therefore we ought to be obedi∣ent
vnto his will, wherefore dere brother you may not think it straunge, though I annouce vnto you the wordes of Esay ye Prophet te that hee declared and spake vnto king Esechias,Esay, 38. saying in the behalfe of God. Thus saith the Lorde, set thy house in an order, for thou must dye, and shalt not liue: this good counsell ought to occasion you, to dispose your selfe spiritually in youre conscience, and first to perswade your self to godwarde and wepe and lament your sin∣nes,Esay, 55, as this good Kinge did, craue his mercy, in asking him forgeuenes, and euermore say∣ing in your harte. O Lorde God thou mercifull and heauēly father, be mer¦cifull vnto me pore and misera∣ble sinner, for Iesus Christes sake my Lorde and sauioure, and then you may not forgette your house & familye, yt whiche
