16665 99854876 20331
Rosalynde. Euphues golden Legacie, found af∣ter his death in his Cellat Sile∣xedra. BEQVEATHED TO PHILAVTVS Sonnes, noursed vp with their Father in England. Fetcht from the Canaries by T. L. Gent. LONDON, Printed by Abelleffes for T.G. and Iohn Bushie. 1592.
To the right Honourable and his most esteened Lord the Lord of Hundon, Lord Chamberlaine cher Maiesties houshold, and Gouernor of her Towne of Barwicke: T. L. G. wisheth increase of all honourable vertues. SVch Romanes (right honorable) as delighted in Mar∣tiall exploites, attempted their actions in the honour of Augustus, because he was a patron of souldiors: and Virgil dignified him with his poems, as a Moecenas of schollers; both ioyntly aduancing his royaltie, as a Prince warlike and learned. Such as sacrifice to Pal∣las, pesent her with bayes as she is wise, and with armour as she is vali∣ant: obseruing heerein that excellent , which dedicateth ho∣nours according to the perfection of the person. When I entred (right honourable) with a deepe insight into the consideration of these premis∣ses seeing your L. to be a Patron of all martiall men, and a Moece∣nas of such as apply themselues to studie: wearing with Pallas both the launce and the bay, and aiming with Augustus at the fauour of all, by the honourable vertues of your minde: beeing my selfe first a Student, and afterwards falling from bookes to armes, euen vowed in all my thoughts dutifully to affect your Lordshippe. Hauing with Cap∣taine Clarke made a voyage to the Ilands of Terceras and the Ca∣aries, to beguile the time with labour, I writ this booke: rough, as hatcht in the stormes of the Ocean, and feathered in the surges of ma∣y perillous seas. But as it is the woorke of a Souldiour and a Scholler, I presumed to shrowd it vnder your Honors patronage, as one that is the faut or and fauourer of all vertuous actions: and whose honorable Loues growne from the generall applause of the whole common-welth
for your higher desertes, may keepe it from the mallice of euery bitter toong. Other reasons more particular (right Honourable) chalenge in me a speciall affection to your Lordshippe, as being a Scholler with your two noble sonnes, Maister Edmund Carew, and M. Robert Carew, (two siens worthy of so honorable a tree, and a tree glorious in such honourable fruite) as also beeing scholler in the Vniuersitie vn∣der that learned and vertuous Knight Sir Edward Hobby, when he was Batcheler in Artes, a man as well lettered as well borne and after the Etymologie of his name soaring as high as the winges of knowledge can mount him, happie euery way, and the more fortunate, as blessed in the honor of so vertuous a Lady. Thus (right Honourable) tie duetie that I owe to the sonnes, chargeth me that all my affection be placed on the father: for where the braunches are so pretious, the tre of force must be most excellent. Commaunded and imboldened thus with the consideration of these forepassed reasons, to present my Booke o your Lordship: I humbly intreate, your Honour will vouch of my labours, and fauour a souldiers and a schollers penne with your gratious accep∣tance, who answeres in affection what he wants in eloquence: sodeuo∣ted to your honour, as his onely desire is, to ende his life vnder he fauour osso martiall and learned a Patorn. Resting thus in hope of your Lordships curtesie, in deyning the Patronage of my worke, I cease: wish∣ing you as many honorable for∣tunes as your L. can desire or I imagine Yours honors souldiour most humbly affectionate: Thomas Lodge.
To the Gentlemen Readers. GEntlemen, looke not heere to finde anie sprigs of Pallas bay tree, nor to heare the humour of any amorous Lawreat, nor the pleasing vaine of any eloquent Orator: Nolo altum sapere, they bee matters aboue my capacitie: the Coblers checke shal ne∣uer light on my heade, Ne sutor vltra crepi∣dam, I vil go no further than the latchet, and then all is wel. Heere you may perhaps finde some leaues of Venus mirtle, but heven down by a souldier with his curtlaxe, not boght with tle allurement of a filed tongue. To bee briefe Gen∣tlemen, roome for a souldier and a sailer, that giues you the fruits of his labors that he wrote in the Ocean, when euerie line was wet with a surge, & euery humorous passion coun∣tercheckt with a storme. If you like it, so: and yet I will bee yours in duetie, if you be mine in fauour. But if Momus or any squinteied asse, that hath mighty eares to conceiue with Midis, and yet little reason to iudge: if he come abord our Barke to find fault with the tackling, when hee knowes not the shrowds, Ile downe into the hold, and fetch out a rustie pollax, that sawe no sunne this seauen yeare, and either well bebast him, or heaue the cockescombe ouer boord to feed cods. But curteous Gentlemen that fauour most, backbite , and pardon what is ouerslipt, let such come and wel∣come, Ile into the Stewards roome, and fetch them a kanne of our best beuradge. Well Gentlemen, you haue Euphues Lgacie. I fetcht it as farre as the Ilands of Terceras, & ther∣fore read it, censure with fauour, and farewell. Yours T. L.
The Scedule annexed to Euphues Testament, the tenour of his Legacie, the tok of his Loue. THe vehemency of my sicknes (Philautus) hath made mee doubtfull of life yet must I die in counsailing thee like Socates, be∣cause I loue thee. Thou hast sos by Ca∣milla, as I heare, who being yong in yeres haue green thoghts: & nobly bon, haue great minds: bend thē in their yoth like the willow, least thou bewayle them in their age fr their wilfulnes. I haue bequeathed them a Golden legacie, because I greatly loue thee. Let them read it as Archelaus did assen∣der, to profit by it: and in reading let them meditate for I haue approued it the best methode. They shall find Loue a∣natomized by Euphues, with as liuely colours as in Apelles table: roses to whip him when he is want ō, reasons to with∣stand him when he is wilie. Here may they read that vertue is the King of labours, opinion the Mistres of fooles: that vnitie is the pride of Nature, & contention the ouerthrow of Families: here is Elleborus bitter in taste, but benefcial in triall. I haue nothing to sende thee and Camilla but this counsel, that in stead of worldly goods, you leaue your sons vertue and glorie: for better were they to bee partaker of your honours then lords of your mannors. I feele death that summoneth me to my graue, and my Soule desirous of his God. Farewell Philautus, and let the tenor of my coun∣saile be applyed to thy childrens comfort. Euphues dying to liue. If any man find this scrowle, send it to Philautus in England.
Rosalynde. THere dwelled adioyning to the Cittie of Bordeaux a Knight of most honourable parentage, whome Fortune had graced with many fauors, and Nature honoured with sundry exquisite qualities, so beauti∣fied with the excellence of both, as it was a question whether Fortune or Nature were more prodigall in deciphering the ri∣ches of their bounties. Wise he was, as holding in his head a su∣preme conceipt of pollicie, reaching with Nestor into the depth of all ciuil gouernement: and to make his wisedome more gratious, he had that salemingenii and pleasant eloquence that was so high∣ly comended in Vlisses: his valour was no lesse then his witte, nor the roke of his launce no lesse forcible, than the sweetnesse of his tonue was perswasiue: for he was for his courage chosen the principll of all the Knights of Malta. This hardy Knight thus enrich with vertue and honour, surnamed Sir Iohn of Burdeux, hauing passed the prime of his youth in sundry battailes against the Tirkes, at last (as the date of time hath his course) grewe a∣ged: his haires were siluer hued, & the map of his age was figured on his forhead: Honour sate in the furrowes of his face and many yeares were pourtrayed in his wrinckled lineaments, that all men might perceiue his glasse was runne, and that Nature of necessi∣tie chalenged her due. Sir Iohn (that with the Phenix knewe the tearme of his life was now expired, and could with the Swan dis∣couer his end by her songs) hauing three sonnes by his wife Lyni∣da, the very pride of all his forepassed yeares, thought now (seeing death by constraint would compel him to leaue them) to bestow vpon them such a Legacie as might bewray his loue, and increase their insuing amitie. Calling therefore these yong Gentlemen be∣fore
him in the presence of all his fellow Knights of Malta, he re∣solued to leaue them a memoril of all his fatherly care, nseting downe a methode of their brotherly dueties. Hauing therefore death in his looes to mooue them to pittie, and teares in his eyes to paint out the depth of his passions, taking his elest sonne by the hand, he began thus. Sir Iohn of Burdeaux Legacie he gaue to is Sonnes. OH my Sons, you see that Fate hath set a period of my years, and Destenies haue determined the final ende of my dayes: the Palme tree waxeth away ward, for hee stoopeth in is height, and my plumes are ful of sicke feathers touched with age, I mus to my graue that dischargeth all cares, and leaue you to the world that increaseth many sorrowes: my siluer haires conteneth great experience, and in the number of my yeares are pende lowne the subtleties of Fortune. Therefore as I leaue you sone fading pelfe to counterchecke pouertie, so I will bequeath yon nfallible precepts that shall lead you vnto vertue. First therefore into thee Saladyne the eldest, and therefore the chiefest piller of m house, wherein should bee ingraued as wel the excellency of thyfathers qualities, as the essentiall forme of his proportion, to the I giue foureteene ploughlands, with all my Mannor houses and richest place. Next vnto Fernandine I bequeath twelue ploughlands. But vnto Rosader the youngest I giue my Horse, my Armour, and my Launce with sixteene ploughlands: for if the inwarde thoughts be discouered by outward shadow Rosader wil exceed you all in bountie and honour. Thus (my Sonnes) haue Ipar∣red in your portions the substāce of my wealth, where in if you be as prodigall to spend, as I haue beene carefull to get, your friendes wil greene to see you more wastfull then I was bountifull, & your foes smile that my fal did begin in your excesse. Let mine honour be the glasse of your actions, & the fame of my vertues the Load∣starre to direct the course of your pilgrimage. Ayme your deedes by my honorable endeuours, and shew your selues fiens worthy of so florishing a tree: least as the birdes Halcyones which exceede
in whitenesse, I hatch yong ones that exceed in blacknes. Climbe not my sonnes, aspiring pride is a vapour that a scendeth hie, but soone turneth to a smoake: they which stare at the starres, stumble vpon the ies; and such as gaze at the Sunne (vnlesse they be Eagle eyed al blinde. Soare not with the Hobbie, least you fal with the ae: nor attempt not with Phaeton, least you drowne with lrs Fortune when shee wils you to flye, tempers your plume witwaxe, and therefore eyther sit stil and make no wing, or else bewae the Sunne, and hold Dedalus axiome authentical (Medium tunere tutissimum.) Low shrubs haue deepe rootes, and poore Cottages great patience. Fortune looks euer vpward, and enuy asireth to nestle with dignitie. Take heed my sonnes, the meane i sweetest melodie, where strings high stretch, eyther soone crack, or quickly grow out of time. Let your Countryes care be yo hearts content, and thinke that you are not borne for your selue, but to leuell your thoughts to beloyal to your prince, careful fothe common-weale, and faythful to your friendes, so shal Frauce say, these men are as excellent in vertues, as they be exquise, in features. Oh my sons, a friend is a pretious Iew∣ell, within hose bosome you may vnload your sorrowes, and vn∣fold youiecrets, and he eyther wil releeue with counsaile, or per∣swade whreason: but take heed in the choyce, the outward them makes it the inwarde man, nor are the dimples in the face the Calends of truth. When the Lyquorice leafe looketh most dry, then it most wet: when the shoares of Lepanthus are most qui∣et, themey forepoint a storme. The Baaran leafe the more fayre it look, the more infectious it is, and in the sweetest wordes is oft hidost trechery. Therefore my sonnes, chuse a friend as the Hiperorei do the mettals, seuer them from the ore with fire, & let the not bide the stampe before they be currant: so trie & then trust, time be the touchstone of friendship, & then frends faith∣ y them vp for iewels. Be valiant my sonnes, for cowardise is the enemy to honour: but not too rash, for that is extreme. For∣titude is the meane, and that is limited within bonds, and prescri∣bed with circumstance. But aboue al, & with that he fetcht a deep sigh, beware of Loue, for it is farre more perillous then pleasant, and yet I tel you it allureth as ill as the Syrens. Oh my sonnes,
fancie is a fickle thing, and beauties paintings are trickt vp with times colours, which being set to drie in the Sune, perish with the same. Venus is a wanton, and though her laes pretend li∣bertie, yet there is nothing but losse and glistering miserie. Cu∣pids wings are plumed with the feathers of vaniti and his ar∣rowes where they pierce, inforce nothing but deadly desires: a womans eye as it is pretious to behold, so is it preiudicial to gaze vpon: for as it affoordeth delight, so it snareth vnteath. Trust not theyr fawning fauours, for their loues are like te breath of a man vppon steele, which no sooner lighteth on but sleapeth off, and their passions are as momentary as the colour of a Polipe, which changeth at the sight of euery obiect. My beath waxeth short, and mine eyes waxeth dimme, the houre is co, & I must away: therefore let this suffice, women are wantons, nd yet men cannot want one: and therefore if you loue, choose r that hath eyes of Adamant, that wil turne onely to one poynt: r heart of a Diamond, that wil receiue but one forme: her tonge of a Se∣thinleafe, that neuer wagges but with a Southeast nde: and yet my sonnes, if she haue all these qualities, to be chal obedient, and silent: yet for that she is a woman, shalt thou find  her suf∣ficient vanities to counteruaile her vertues. Oh now  sonnes, euen now take these my last wordes as my latest Legae, for my threed is spunne, and my foot is in the graue: keepe my recepts as memorials of your fathers counsailes, and let them be lodged in the secrete of your hearts: for wisedome is better thawealth, and a golden sentence worth a world of treasure. In ma see & marke my sonnes the folly of man, that being dust climbth with Biares to reatch at the Heauens, and ready euery minu to dye, yet hopeth for an age of pleasures. Oh mans life is like lihtning that is but a flash, and the longest date of his yeares, buts a a∣uens blaze, Seeing then man is so mortal, be careful that hy life be vertuous, that thy death may bee ful of admirable honors: so shalt thou chalenge fame to be thy fautor, and put obliuion to exile with thine honorable accions. But my Sonnes, least you should forget your Fathers axiomes, take this scroule, wherein reade what your father dying, wils you to execute liuing. At this hee shrunke downe in his bed, and gaue vp the ghost.
Iohn of Bourdeaux being thus dead, was grealy lamented of his sonnes, and bewayled of his friends, especially of his fellow Knights of Malta, who attended on his funerals, which were performed with great solemnitie. His obsequies done, Saladyne caused next his Epitaph the contents of the scroule to bee pour∣trayed out, which were to this effect. The contents of the Scedule which Sir Iohn of Bourdeaux gaue to his Sonnes. MY Sonnes, behold what portion I do giue, I leaue you goods, but they are quickly lost: I leaue aduise, to schoole you how to liue: I leaue you wit, but wonne with little cost: But keepe it well for counsaile still is one, When Father, friends, and worldly goods are gone. In choice of thrift let honour be your gaine, Winne it by vertue and by manly might; In dooing good esteeme thy toyle no paine, Protect the fatherlesse and widowes right: Fight for thy faith, thy Country, and thy King, For why? this thrift wil proue a blessed thing. In choise of wife, preferre the modest chast, Lillies are faire in shew, but foule in smell: The sweetest lookes by age are soone defast: Then choose thy wife by wit and liuing well. Who brings thee wealth and many faults withall, Presents the hony mixt with bitter gall. In choise of friends, beware of light beliefe, A painted tongue may shroud a subtill heart: The Syrens teares doe threaten mickle griefe, Foresee my sonnes, for feare of sodaine smart: Chuse in your wants, and he that friends you then, When richer growne, befriend you him agen.
Learne with the Ant in summer to prouide, Driue with the Bee the Droane from out the hiue: Buyld lyke the Swallow in the summer tyde. Spare not too much (my sonnes) but sparing thriue: Be poore in folly, rich in all but sinne, So by your death your glory shall beginne. Saladyne hauing thus set vp the Scedule, and hangd about his Fathers hearse many passionate Poems, that France might suppose him to be passing sorrowful, hee clad himselfe and his bro∣thers all in black, and in such sable sutes discoursed his griefe: but as the Hiena when she mourns is then most guileful, so Saladine vnder this shewe of griefe, shaddowed a heart ful of contented thoughts. The Tyger though he hide his claws, wil at last disco∣uer his rapine: the Lions looks are not the maps of his meaning, nor a mans phisnomie is not the display of his secrets. Fire cannot be hid in the straw, nor the nature of man so concealed, but at last it wil haue his course: nurture & art may do much, but that Na∣tura natuans which by propagation is ingrafted in the hart, will be at last perforce predominant according to the olde verse. Naturam expellas furca licet, tamen vsque recurret. So fares it with Saladine, for after a months mourning was past, he fel to consideration of his Fathers testament, how hee had bequeathed more to his yoonger brothers than himselfe, that Ro∣sader was his Fathers darling, but now vnder his tuition, that as yet they were not come to yeares, & he being their gardain, might (if not defraud them of their due) yet make such hauocke of theyr legacies & lauds, as they should be a great deal the lighter: wher∣vpon he began thus to meditate with himselfe. Saladynes meditation with himselfe. SAladyne, how art thou disquieted in thy thoughts, & perple∣xed with a world of restlesse passions, hauing thy minde troub∣led with the tenour of thy Fathers testament, & thy heart fiered with the hope of present preferment? By the one thou art coun∣saild to content thee with thy fortunes: by the other, perswaded
to aspire to higher wealth. Riches (Saladyne) is a great royaltie, and there is no sweeter phisick than store. Auicen like a foole for∣got in his Aphorismes to say, that gold was the most pretious re∣storatiue, and that treasure was the most excellent medecine of the minde. Oh Saladyne, what were thy Fathers precepts brea∣thed into the winde? hast thou so soone forgotten his principles? did he not warne thee from coueting without honor, and climing without vertue? did he not forbid thee to ayme at any action that should not bee honourable? and what wil bee more preiudiciall to thy credite, than the carelesse ruine of thy brothers prosperitie; and wilt thou become the subuersion of their fortunes? is there a∣ny sweeter thing than concord, or a more precious Iewel then a∣mitie? are you not sonnes of one father, siens of one tree, birds of one neast? and wilt thou become so vnnaturall as to robbe them, whom thou shouldest relieue? No Salydine, intreat them with fauours, and entertaine them with loue, so shalt thou haue thy conscience cleare and thy renowne excellent. Tush, what wordes are these base foole, farre vnfit (if thou be wise) for thy humour. What though thy father at his death talked of many friuilous matters, as one that doted for age, & raued in his sicknes, shal his words be axioms, and his talke be so authenticall, that thou wilt (to obserue them) preindice thy selfe? No no Saladyne, sicke mens willes that are parole, and haue neither hand nor seale, are like the lawes of a Cittie written in dust, which are broken with the blast of euery winde. What man thy father is dead, and hee can neither helpe thy fortunes, nor measure thy actions: therfore bury his words with his carkasse, and be wise for thy selfe. What, tis not so olde as true: Non sapit, qui sibi non sapit. Thy brother is yoong, keepe him now in awe, make him not checke mate with thy selfe: for Nimia familiaritas contemptum parit.? Let him know litle, so shall he not be able to execute much, sup∣presse his wittes with a base estate, and though hee be a Gentle∣man by nature yet forme him a new, and make him a peasant by nourture: so shalt thou keepe him as a slaue, and raigne thy selfe sole Lord ouer all thy fathers possessions. As for Fernandyne
thy middle brother he is a scholler, and hath no minde but on Ari∣stotle, let him reade on Galen while thou rflest with gode, and pore on his booke til thou doeft purchase landes: witte is great wealth, if he haue learning it is enough, and so let all rest. In this humour was Saladyne making his brother Rosader his foote boy, for the space of two or three yeares, keeping him in such seruile subiection, as if he had been the sonne of any country vassal. The yoong Gentleman bare all with patience, til on a day walkyng in the Garden by himselfe, he began to consider how he was the sonne of Iohn of Bourdeaux, a knight renwmed for many victories, & a gentleman famozed for his vertues, how con∣trarie to the testament of his father, hee was not only kept from his land, and intreated as a seruant, but smothered in such secret slauerie, as hee might not attaine to any honourable actions. As quoth hee to himselfe (nature woorking these effectuall passions) why should I that am a Gentleman borne, passe my time in such vnnatural drudgery? were it not better either in Paris to become a scholler, or in the court a courtier, or in the field a souldier, then to liue a foote boy to my own brother: nature hath lent me wit to conceiue, but my brother denied mee art to contemplate: I haue strength to performe any honorable exployt, but no libertie to ac∣complish my vertuous indeuours: those good partes that God hath bestowed vpon mee, the enuy of my brother doth smother in obscuritie: the harder is my fortune, & the more his frowardnes. With that casting vp his hand he felt haire on his face, and per∣ceiuing his beard to bud, for choler hee began to blush, and swore to himselfe he would be no more subiect to such slauerie. As thus hee was ruminating of his melancholie passions, in came Sala∣dyne with his men, and seeing his brother in a browne study, and to forget his wonted euerence, thought to shake him out of his dumps thus. Sirha (quoth he) what is your heart on your halfe∣peny, or are you saying a Dirge for your fathers soule? what is my dinner readie? At this question Rosader turning his head ascance, and bending his browes as if anger there had ploughed the furrowes of her wrath, with his eyes full of fire, hee made this replie. Doest thou aske mee (Saladyne) for thy Cates? aske some of thy Churles who are fit for suche an office: I am thine
equal by nature, though not by birth, and though thou hast more Cardes in the bunch. I haue as many trumpes in my handes as thy selfe. Let me question with thee, why thou hast few my woods, spoyled my Manner houses, and made hauocke of suche vten∣salles as my father bequeathed vnto mee? I tell thee Saladyne, either answere mee as a brother, or I wil trouble thee as an e∣nemie. At this replie of Rosaders, Saladyne smiled as laughing at his presumption, and frowned as checking his folly: he therfore tooke him vp thus shortly. What sirha, wel I see early pricks the tree that wil prooue a thorne: hath my familiar conuersing with you made you coy, or my good lookes drawne you to be thus con∣temptuous? I can quickly remedie such a fault, and I wil bend the tree while it is a wand: In faith (sir boy) I haue a snaffle for such a headstrong colt. You sirs lay holde on him and binde him, and then I wil giue him a cooling carde for his choller. This made Rosader halfe mad, that stepping to a great rake that stood in the Garden, hee laide such loade vppon his brothers men that hee hurt some of them, and made the rest of them run away. Sa∣ladyne seeing Rosader so resolute, and with his resolution so valiant, thought his heeles his best safetie, & tooke him to a loaft adioyning to the Garden, whether Rosader pursued him hotlie. Saladyne afraide of his brothers furie, cried out to him thus. Ro∣sader be not so rash, I am thy brother & thine elder, and if I haue done thee wrong ile make thee amendes: reuenge not anger in blood, for so shalt thou staine the vertue of old sir Iohn of Bour∣deauz: say wherein thou art discontent and thou shalt bee satis∣fied. Brothers frownes ought not to be periodes of wrath: what man looke not so sowerly, I know we shalbe friendes, and better friends then we haue been. For, Amantium ira amoris redinte∣gratio est. These wordes appeased the choller of Rosader, (for he was of a milde and curteous nature) so that hee layde downe his wea∣pons, and vpon the faith of a Gentleman, assured his brother hee would offer him no preiudice: wherupon Saladyne came down, and after a little paley, they imbraced eache other and became friends, & Saladyne promising Rosader the restitution of all his lands, and what fauour els (quoth he) any waies my ability or the
nature of a brother may performe. Upon these sugred reconcilla∣tions they went into the house arme in arme togither, to the great content of all the old seruants of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux. Thus continued the pad hidden in the strawe, til it chaunced that To∣rismond King of France had appointed for his pleasure a day of Wrastling and of Tournament to busie his Commons heades, least being idle, their thoughts should runne vppon more serious matters, & call to remembrance their old banished King, a Cham∣pion there was to stand against all commers a Norman, a man of tall stature and of great strength: so valiant, that in many such conflicts he alwaies bare away the victorie, not onely ouerthrow∣ing them which hee incountred, but often with the weight of his bodie killing them outright. Saladyne hearing of this, thinking now not to let the ball fal to the ground, but to take apportunitie by the forehead: first by secret meanes conuented with the Nor∣man, and procured him with rich rewards to sweare, that if Ro∣sader came within his clawes hee should neuer more returne to quarrel with Saladyne for his possessions. The Norman desi∣rous of pelfe, as (Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum respuit aurum.) taking great gifts for litle Gods, tooke the crownes of Saladyne to performe the Stratagem. Hauing thus the Champion tied to his vilanous determination by oath, hee prosecuted the intent of his purpose thus. Hee went to yoong Rosader, (who in all his thoughts reacht at honour, and gazed no lower then vertue com∣manded him) and began to tel him of this Tournament & Wrast∣ling, how the King should bee there, and all the chiefe Peeres of France, with all the beautiful damosels of the Countrey now brother (quoth hee) for the honor of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux our renowmed father, to famous that house that neuer hath him found without men approoued in Chiualrie, shewe thy resolution to be peremptorie. For my selfe thou knowest though I am eldest by birth, yet neuer hauing attempted any deedes of Armes, I am yongest to performe any Martial exploytes, knowing better how to suruey my lands, then to charge my Launce: my brother Fer∣nandyne hee is at Paris poring on a fewe papers, hauing more insight into Sophistrie and principles of Philosophie, then anie warlyke indeueurs: but thou Rosader the yoongest in yeares,
but the eldest in valour, art a man of strength and darest doo what honour allowes thee: take thou my fathers Launce, his Sword, and his Horse, and hye thee to the Tournament, and either there valiantly cracke a speare, or trie with the Norman for the palme of actiuitie. The words of Saladyne were but spurres to a free horse, for hee had scarce vttered them, ere Rosader tooke him in his armes, taking his proffer so kindly, that hee promised in what hee might to requite his curtesie. The next morrow was the day of the Tournament, and Rosader was so desirous to shew his he∣roycal thoughts, that he past the night with litle sleep: but assoone as Phoebus had vailed the Curteine of the night, & made Aurora blush with giuing her the bezoles labres in her siluer Couch, he gat him vp, and taking his leaue of his brother, mounted himselfe towardes the place appoynted, thinking euery mile ten leagues til he came there. But leauing him so desirous of the iourney: to Torismond the King of France, who hauing by force banished Gerismond their lawful King that liued as an outlaw in the Fo∣rest of Arden, sought now by all meanes to keep the French bu∣sied with all sports that might breed their content. Amongst the rest he had appointed this solemne Turnament, wherunto hee in most solemne maner resorted, accompanied with the twelue peers of France, who rather for fearthen loue graced him with the shew of their dutiful fauours: to feede their eyes, and to make the be∣holders pleased with the sight of most rare and glistring obiects, he had appoynted his owne daughter Alinda to be there, and the faire Rosalynd daughter vnto Gerismond, with al the the beau∣tifull Dammoselles that were famous for their features in all France. Thus in that place did loue and war triumph in a simpathy: for such as were martial, might vse their Launce to be renowmed for the excellency of their Cheualrie, and suche as were amorous, might glut themselues with gazing on the beauties of most hea∣uenly creatures. As euery mans eye had his seueral suruey, and fancie was partial in their lookes, yet all in general applauded the admirable riches that Nature bestowed on the face of Ro∣salynde: for vppon her cheekes there seemed a battaile be∣tweene the Graces, who should bestow most fauours to make
her excellent. The blush that gloried Luna when shee kist the Shepheard or the hilles of Latmos, was not tainted with such a pleasant dye, as the Uermilion flourishe on the siluer hue of Rosalyndes countenance: her eyes were lyke those Lampes that make the wealthie couert of the Heauens more gorgious, sparkling fauour and disdaine: courteous and yet toye, as if in them Venus had placed all her amorets, and Diana all her cha∣stitie. The tramelles of her hayre, foulded in a call of Golde, so farre surpast the burnishe glister of the mettal, as the Sunne doth the meanest Starre in brightnesse: the tresses that foldes in the browes of Apollo were not halfe so rich to the sight, for in her hayres it seemed loue had laide her selfe in ambush, to intrappe the proudest eye that durst gaze vppon their excellence: what should I neede to decipher her particular beauties, when by the censure of all, shee was the Paragon of all earthly perfection. This Rosalynd sat I say with Alinda as a beholder of these sportes, and made the Caualiers cracke their Lances with more courage: many deedes of Knighthood that day were performed, and many prizes were giuen according to their sueral desertes: at last when the Tournament ceased, the wrastling beganne, and the Norman presented himselfe as a chalenger against all com∣mers, but hee looked lyke Hercules when hee aduaunst him∣selfe agaynst Achelos, so that the furie of his countenaunce amazed all that durst attempt to incounter with him in any deed of actiuitie: til at last a lustie Francklin of the Country came with two tall men that were his sonnes of good lyniaments and comely personage: the eldest of these dooing his obeysance to the King entered the Lyst, and presented himselfe to the Norman, who straight coapt with him, and as a man that would triumph in the glorie of his strength, roused himselfe with such furie, that not onely hee gaue him the fall, but killed him with the weight of of his corpulent personage: which the yoonger brother seeing, lepte presently into the place, and thirstie after the reuenge, assayled the Norman with such valour, that at the first incoun∣ter hee brought him to his knees: which repulst so the Norman, that recouering himselfe, feare of disgrace doubling his strength, hee stept so stearnely to the yoong Francklin, that taking him
vp in his armes hee threw him against the grounde so violently, that hee broake his necke, and so ended his dayes with his bro∣ther. At this vnlookt for massacre, the people murmured, and were all in a deepe passion of pittie, but the Francklin, father vnto these, neuer chaunged his countenance, but as a man of a couragious resolution, tooke vp the bodies of his sonnes with∣out shewe of outward discontent. All this while stood Rosader and sawe this Tragedie: who noting the vndoubted vertue of the Francklins minde, alighted of from his Horse, and presently sat downe on the grasse, and com∣manded his boy to pul off his bootes, making him ready to try the strength of this Champion, being furnished as he would, he clapt the Francklin on the shoulder and said thus. Bold yeoman whose sonnes haue ended the tearme of their yeares with honour, for that I see thou scornest fortune with patience, and twhar test the iniury of fate with content, in brooking the death of thy sonnes stand a while and either see me make a third in their Tragedie, or else reuenge their fal with an honourable triumph, the Francklin seeing so goodly a gentleman to giue him such curteous comfort, gaue him hartie thankes, with promise to pray for his happy suc∣cesse. With that Rosader vailed bonnet to the King, and lightly leapt within the lists, where noting more the companie then the combatant, hee cast his eye vpon the troupe of Ladies that gliste∣red there lyke the starres of heauen, but at last Loue willing to make him as amourous as hee was valiaunt, presented him with the sight of Rosalynd, whose admirable beautie so in∣ueagled the eye of Rosader, that forgetting himselfe, hee stood and fedde his lookes on the fauour of Rosalyndes face, which shee perceiuing, blush: which was such a doubling of her beau∣teous excellence, that the bashful redde of Aurora, at the sight of vnacquainted Phaeton, was not halfe so glorious: The Normane seeing this young Gentleman fettered in the lookes of the Ladyes, draue him out of his memen∣to with a shake by the shoulder: Rosader looking backe with an angrie frowne, as if hee had been wakened from some plea∣saunt dreame, discouered to all by the furye of his counte∣nance that hee was a man of some high thoughts: but when they
all noted his youth, and the sweetnesse of his visage, with a gene∣ral applause of fauours, they grieued that so goodly a yoong man should venture in so base an action: but seeing it were to his dis∣honour to hinder him from his enterprise, they wisht him to bee graced with the palme of victorie. After Rosader was thus cal∣led out of his memento by the Norman, hee roughly clapt to him with so fierce an incounter, that they both fel to the ground, and with the violence of the fal were forced to breathe: in which space the Norman called to minde by all tokens, that this was hee whome Saladyne had appoynted him to kil: which coniecture made him stretch euery limbe, and try euerie sinew, that working his death hee might recouer the golde, which so bountifuly was promised him. On the contrary part, Rosader while he breathed was not idle, but stil cast his eye vpon Rosalynde, who to incou∣rage him with a fauour, lent him such an amorous looke, as might haue made the most coward desperate: which glance of Rosalynd so fiered the passionate desires of Rosader, that turning to the Norman hee ranne vpon him and braued him with a strong en∣counter: the Norman receiued him as valiantly, that there was a sore combat, hard to iudge on whose side fortune would be pro∣digal. At last Rosader calling to minde the beautie of his new Mistresse, the fame of his fathers honours, and the disgrace that should fal to his house by his misortune, rowsed himselfe & threw the Norman against the ground, falling vppon his chest with so willing a weight, that the Norman yelded nature her due, and Rosader the victorie. The death of this Champion, as it highly contented the Francklin, as a man satisfied with reuenge, so it drue the King and all the Peeres into a great admiration, that so yoong yeares and so beautiful a personage, should contin such martiall excellence: but when they knew him to bee the yoongest sonne of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux, the King rose from his seat and imbraced him, and the Peeres intreated him with all fauourable curtesie, commending both his valour and his vertues, wishing him to go forward in such haughtie deeds, that hee might attaine to the glory of his fathers honourable fortunes. As the King and Lordes graced him with embracyng, so the Ladyes fauoured him with theyr lookes, especially Ro∣salynd,
whome the beautie and valour of Rosader had alrea∣dy touched: but she accounted loue a toye, and fancie a momenta∣ry passion, that as it was taken in with a gaze, might be shaken off with a winke: and therefore feared not to daily in the flame, and to make Rosader know she affected him: tooke from her necke a Iewel, and sent it by a Page to the yong gentleman. The Prize that Venus gaue to Paris, was not halfe so pleasing to the Tro∣ian, as this Iemme was to Rosader: for if fortune had sworne to make himself sole Monarke of the world, he would rather haue refused such dignitie, than haue lost the Iewel sent him by Rosa∣lynd. To returne hir with the like he was vnfurnished, & yet that he might more than in his lookes discouer his affection, hee slept into a tent, and taking pen and paper writ this fancie. Two Sunnes at once from one faire heauen there shinde, Ten braunches from two boughes tipt all with roses, Pure lockes more golden than is golde refinde, Two pearled rowes that Natures pride incloses. Two mounts faire marble white, downe-soft and dainty, A snow died orbe: where loue increast by pleasure Full wofull makes my heart and body faintie: Hir faire (my woe) exceeds all thought and measure. In lines confusde by lucklesse harme appeareth, Whom sorrow clowdes, whom pleasant smiling leareth. This sonnet he sent to Rosalynd, which when she read, shee blusht, but with a sweet content in that she perceiued loue had a∣lotted her so amorous a seruant. Leauing her to her new intertai∣ned fancies, againe to Rosader, who triumphing in the glorie of this conquest, accompanyed with a troupe of yoong gentlemen, that were desirous to be his familiars, went home to his brother Saladynes, who was walking before the gates, to heare what successe his brother Rosader should haue, assuring himself of his death, and deuising how with dissimuled sorrowe, to celebrate his funerals: as he was in his thought, he cast vp his eye, and sawe
where Rosader returned with the garland on his head, as hauing won the prize, accompanied with a crue of boon companions: greeued at this, he stepped in and shut the gate. Rosader seeing this, and not looking for such vnkind entertainment, blusht at the disgrace, and yet smothering his griefe with a smile, he turned to the Gentlemen, and desired them to hold his brother excused, for he did not this vpon any militious intent or nigardize, but being brought vp in the country, he absented himselfe, as not finding his nature fit for such youthful company. Thus he sought to shadow abuses proffered him by his brother, but in vaine, for hee could by no meanes be suffered to enter: wherupon he ran his foot against the doore, and brake it open: drawing his sword, and entring bold∣ly into the Hall, where hee found none (for all were fled) but one Adam Spencer an English man, who had beene an old and tru∣stie seruant to Sir Iohn of Bourdeaux: he for the loue hee bare to his deceased Maister, fauored the part of Rosader, & gaue him & his such entertainment as he could, Rosader gaue him thanks, and looking about, seeing the Hall empty, saide: Gentlemen, you are welcome, frolike and be merry, you shall be sure to haue wine enough, whatsoeuer your fare be, I tel you Caualiers, my Bro∣ther hath in his house fiue tunne of wine, and as long as that la∣steth, I beshrew him that spares his lyquor. With that hee burst open the buttery doore, and with the helpe of Adam Spencer co∣uered the Tables, and set downe whatsoeuer he could find in the house, but what they wanted in meat, was supplyed with drinke, yet had they royall cheare, and withal such hartie welcome, as would haue made the coursest meats, seeme delicates. After they had feasted and frolicktit twise or thrise with an vpsey freeze, they all tooke their leaue of Rosader and departed. Assoone as they were gone, Rosader growing impatient of the abuse, drewe his sword, and swore to be reuenged on the discourteous Saladyne: yet by the meanes of Adam Spencer, who sought to continue friendshippe and amity betwixt the brethren, and through the flat∣tering submission of Saladyne, they were once againe reconciled, and put vp all forepassed iniuries with a peaceable agreement, li∣uing together for a good space in such brotherly loue, as did not onely reioice the seruantes, but made all the Gentlemen & borde∣ring
neighbors glad of such friendly concord. Saladine hiding fire in the straw, and concealing a poysoned hate in a peaceable coun∣tenance, yet deferring the intent of his wrath till fitter oportunity he shewed himselfe a great fauorer of his brothers vertuous en∣deuors: where leauing them in this happy league, let vs returne to Rosalynd. Rosalynd returning home from the tryumph, after she waxed solitary, Loue presented her with the Idea of Rosaders perfec∣tion, and taking her at discouert, stroke her so deepe, as she felte her selfe grow passing passionate: shee began to cal to minde the comlinesse of his person, the honor of his parents, and the vertues that excelling both, made him so gratious in the eies of euery one. Sucking in thus the hony of loue, by imprinting in her thoughts his rare qualities, shee began to surfet with the contemplation of his vertuous conditions, but when she cald to remembrance her present estate, and the hardnesse of her fortunes, desire began to shrink, & fancie to vale bonnet, that betweene a Chaos of confused thoughts, she began to debate with her selfe in this maner. Rosalynds passion. INfortunate Rosalynde, whose misfortunes are more than thy yeares, and whose passions are greater then thy patience. The blossoms of thy youth are mixt wich the frosts of enuy, & the hope of thy ensuing fruits perish in the bud. Thy father is by Toris∣mond banisht from the crown, & thou the vnhappy daughter of a King detained captiue, liuing as disquieted in thy thoughts, as thy father discōtented in his exile. Ah Rosalynd, what cares wait vpon a crown? what griefs are incident to dignity? what sorrows haunt royal pallaces? The greatest seas haue the sorest stormes, the highest birth subiect to the most bale, & of al trees the Cedars soonest shake with the wind: smal Currents are euer calme, lowe valleys not scortcht in any lightnings, nor base men tyed to anie baleful preiudice. Fortune flies, & if she touch pouerty, it is with hir heele, rather disdaining their want with a frown, then enuying their welth with disparagement. Oh Rosalynd, hadst thou beene born low, thou hadst not falne so high, & yet beeing great of blood,
thine honour is more, if thou brookest misfortune with patience. Suppose I contrary fortune with content, yet Fates vnwilling to haue me any waies happy, haue forced loue to set my thoughts on fire with fancie. Loue Rosalynd? becommeth it women in di∣stresse to thinke on loue? Tush, desire hath no respect of persons, Cupid is blind and shooteth at random, assoone hitting a ragge, as a robe, and piercing assoone the bosome of a Captiue, as the brest of a Libertine. Thou speakest it poore Rosalynd by experi∣ence, for being euery way distrest, surcharged with cares, and ouer growne with sorrowes, yet amidst the heape of all these mishaps, Loue hath lodged in thy heart the perfection of yong Rosader, a man euery way absolute as wel for his inward life, as for his out ward lyniaments, able to content the eye with beauty, & the eare with the report of his vertue. But consider Rosalynde his for∣tunes, and thy present estate, thou art poore and without patry∣mony, and yet the daughter of a Prince, he a yonger brother, and voyd of such possessions as eyther might maintaine thy dignities or reuenge thy fathers iniuries. And hast thou not learned this of other Ladies, that louers cannot liue by looks: that womens ears are sooner content with a pound of giue me, then a dram of heare me: that gold is sweeter than eloquence: that loue is a fire, and wealth is the fewel: that Venus coffers should be euer ful. Then Rosalynd, seeing Rosader is poore, thinke him lesse beautiful, because hee is in want, and account his vertues but qualities of course, for that he is not indued with wealth. Doth not Horace tell thee what methode is to be vsed in loue: Querenda pecunia primum, post nummos virtus. Tush Rosalynd, be not ouer rash: leape not before thou looke: either loue such a one as may with his landes purchase thy liber∣tie, or els loue not all. Chuse not a faire face with an empty purse, but say as most women vse to say, Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere foras. Why Rosalynd, can such base thoughts harbour in such high beauties? Can the degree of a princesse, the daughter of Geris∣mond harbour such seruile conceites, as to prize gold more than honor, or to measure a Gentleman by his wealth, not by his ver∣tues. No Rosalynd, blush at thy base resolution, and say if thou
louest, eyther Rosader or none: and why? because Rosader is both beautiful and vertuous. Smiling to her selfe to thinke of her new intertained passions, taking vp her Lute that lay by her, she warbled out this dittie. Rosalynds Madrigall. Loue in my bosome like a Bee doth sucke his sweete: Now with his wings the playes with me, now with his feete. Within mine eyes he makes his nest, His bed amidst my tender brest, My kisses are his dayly feast, And yet he robs me of my rest. Ah wanton, will ye? And if I sleepe, then pearcheth he with pretty flight, And makes his pillow of my knee the liuelong night. Strike I my lute, he tunes the string, He musicke playes if so I sing, He lends me euery louely thing: Yet cruell he my heart doth sting: Whist wanton stillye? Else I withroses euery day will whip you hence: And binde you when you long to play, for your offence. Ile shut mine eyes to keepe you in, Ile make you fast it for your sinne, Ile count your power not worth a pinne, Alas what hereby shall I winne, If he gainsay me?
What if I beate the wanton boy with many a rod? He wil rapay me with annoy, because a God. Then sit thou safely on my knee, And let thy bower my bosome be; Lurke in mine eies I like of thee: O Cupid so thou pittie me, Spare not but play thee. Scarce had Rosalynd ended her Madrigale, before Toris∣mond came in with his daughter Alinda, & many of the Peers of France, who were enamoured of her beauty: which Toris∣mond perceiuing, fearing least her perfection might be the be∣ginning of his Preiudice, and the hope of his fruit ende in the be∣ginning of her blossomes, he thought to banish her from the court: for quoth he to himselfe, her face is so ful of fauour, that it pleads pittie in the eye of euery man: her beauty is so heauenly and de∣uine, that she wil proue to me as Helen did to Priam: some one of the Peeres wil ayme at her loue, end the marriage, and then in his wiues right attempt the kingdome. To preuent therefore had I wist in all these actions, shee tarryes not about the Court, but shall (as an exile) eyther wander to her father, or else seeke other fortunes. In this humour, with a sterne countenance ful of wrath, he breathed out this censure vnto her before the Peers, that char∣ged her that that night shee were not seene about the Court: for (quoth he) I haue heard of thy aspiring speeches, and intended treasons. This doome was strange vnto Rosalynd, and present∣ly couered with the shield of her innocence, she boldly brake out in reuerent tearms to haue cleared her self: but Torismond would admit of no reason, nor durst his Lords plead for Rosalynde, al∣though her beauty had made some of them passionate, seeing the figure of wrath pourtrayed in his brow. Standing thus all mute, and Rosalynde amazed, Alinda who loued her more than her self, with griefe in her hart, and teares in her eyes, falling down on her knees began to intreat her father thus.
Alindas oration to her father in defence of Rosalynde. IF (mighty Torismond) I offend in pleading for my friend, let the law of amitie craue pardon for my boldnesse: for where there is depth of affection, there friendship alloweth a priuiledge. Rosalynd and I haue beene fostered vp from our infancies, and noursed vnder the harbour of our conuersing togeather with such priuate familiarities, that custome had wrought an vnyon of our nature, & the sympathie of our affections such a a secret loue, that we haue two bodies, and one soule. Then maruell not (great To∣rismond) if seeing my friend distrest, I finde my selfe perplexed with a thousand sorrowes: for her vertuous and honourable thoughts (which are the glories that maketh women excellent) they he such, as may challenge loue, and race out suspition; her o∣bedience to your Maiestie, I referre to the censure of your owne eye, that since her fathers exile hath smothered al griefs with pa∣tience, and in the absence of nature, hath honored you with all du∣tie, as her owne father by nouriture, not in word vttering any dis∣content, nor in thought (as far as coniecture may reach) hamme∣ring on reuenge: only in all her actions seeking to please you, & to win my fauor. Her wisedome, silence, chastitie, and other such rich qualities, I need not decypher: onely it rests for me to con∣clude in one word, that she is innocent. If then, Fortune who try∣umphs in varietie of miseries, hath presented some enuious per∣son (as minister of her intended stratageme) to taint Rosalynde with any surmise of treason, let him be brought to her face, & con∣firme his accusation by witnesses: which proued, let her die, and Alinda wil execute the massacre. If none can auouch any confir∣med relation of her intent, vse Iustice my Lord, it is the glory of a King, and let her liue in your wonted fauour: for if you bannish her, my selfe as copartner of her harde fortunes, will participate in exile some part of her extremities. Torismond (at this speech of Alinda) couered his face with such a frown, as tyranny seemed to sit triumphant in his forhead, and checkt her vp with such taunts, as made the Lords (that only
were hearers) to tremble. Proud girle (quoth he) hath my looks made thee so light of toong, or my fauours incouraged thee to bee so forward, that thou darest presume to preach after thy Father: Hath not my yeares more experience than thy youth, & the win∣ter of mine age deeper insight into ciuil policie, than the prime of thy florishing dayes? The olde Lion auoides the toyles, where the yoong one leapes into the nette: the care of age is prouident and foresees much: suspition is a vertue, where a man holdes his enemie in his bosome. Thou fond girle, measurest all by present affection, and as thy heart loues, thy thoughts censure: but if thou knowest that in liking Rosalynd thou hat chest vp a bird to pecke out thine owne eyes, thou wouldst intreat as much for hir absence as now thou delightest in her presence. But why doe I alleadge policie to thee? sit you downe huswife and fall to your needle: if idlenes make you so wanton, or libertie so malipert, I can quick∣ly tye you to a sharper taske: and you (mayd) this night be pac∣king, eyther into Arden to your father, or whither best it shal cō∣tent your humour, but in the Court you shall not abide. This ri∣gorous replie of Torismond nothing amazed Alinda, for stil she prosecuted her plea in the defence of Rosalynd, wishing her Fa∣ther (if his censure might not be reuerst) yt he would appoynt her partner of her exile: which if he refused, eyther she would by some secret meanes steale out and followe her, or else ende her dayes with some desperate kind of death. When Torismond heard his daughter so resolute, his heart was so hardened against her, that he set down a definitiue and peremptory sentence, that they should both be banished: which presently was done. The Tyrant rather choosing to hazard the losse of his onely child, than any wayes to put in question the state of his kingdome: so suspitious and fear∣full is the conscience of an vsurper. Wel although his Lords per∣swaded him to retaine his owne Daughter, yet his resolution might not be reuerst, but both of them must away from the Court without eyther more company or delay. In hee went with great melancholy, and left these two Ladyes alone. Rosalynd waxed very sad, and sate downe and wept. Alinda she smiled, and sitting by her friend began thus to comfort her.
Alindas comfort to perplexed Rosalynd. VVHy how now Rosalynd, dismayd with a frowne of con∣trary fortune? Haue I not oft heard thee say, that hygh mindes were discouered in fortunes contempt, and heroycal seene in the depth of extremities? Thou wert wont to tel others that complained of distresse, that the sweetest salue for misery was pa∣tience, and the onely medicine for want, that pretious implaister of content: being such a good Phisition to others, wilt thou not minister receipts to thy selfe? But perchance thou wilt say: Consulenti nunquam caput doluit. Why then, if the Patients that are sicke of this disease ran finde in themselues neither reason to perswade, nor art to cure, yet (Rosalynd) admit of the counsaile of a friend, and applie the salues that may appease thy passions. If thou grieuest that being the daughter of a prince, and enuy thwarteth thee with such hard exigents, thinke that royaltie is a faire marke, that Crowns haue crosses when mirth is in Cottages: that the fairer the Rose is, the sooner it is bitteh with Caterpillers: the more orient ye Pearle is, the more apt to take a blemish: and the greatest birth, as it hath most honour, so it hath much enuy. If then fortune aymeth at the fairest, be patient Rosalynd, for first by thine exile thou goest to thy father, nature is higher prised then wealth, and the loue of ones parents ought to bee more pretious then all dignities: why then doth my Rosalynd grieue at the frowne of Torismond, who by offering her a preiudice, proffers her a greater pleasure? and more (mad lasse) to be melancholy, when thou hast with thee Alinda a friend, who wil be a fathful copartner of al thy misfortunes, who hath left her father to follow thee, and chooseth rather to brooke al extremities then to forsake thy presence. What Rosalynd: Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. Cheerly woman, as wee haue been bed fellowes in royaltie, we wil be felow mates in pouertie: I wil euer be thy Alinda, and thou shalt euer rest to me Rosalynd: so shall the world canonize our friendship, and speake of Rosalynd and Alinda, as they did
of Pilades and Orestes. And if euer fortune smile and we return to our former honour, then olding our selues in the sweete of our friendship, we shal merily say (calling to mind our forepassed mi∣series): Olim haec meminisse iuuabit. At this Rosalynd began to comfort her, and after shee had wept a fewe kinde teares in the bosome of her Alinda, shee gaue her heartie thankes, and then they sat them downe to consult how they should trauel. Alinda grieued at nothing but that they migh haue no man in their company: saying, it would bee their greatest preiudice in that two womē went wandring without either guide or attendant. Tush (quoth Rosalynd) art thou a woman, and has not a sodeine shift to preuent a misfortune? I (thou seest) am of a tall stature, and would very wel become the person and apparrel of a Page, thou shalt bee my mistresse, and I wil play the man so properly, that (trust me) in what company so euer I come I wil not be discouered: I wil buy me a suite, and haue my Rapier ve∣ry handsomly at my side, & if any knaue offer wrong, your Page wil shew him the poynt of his weapon. At this Alinda smiled, and vpon this they agreed, and presently gathered vp al their Iewels, which they trussed vp in a Casket, and Rosalynd in all hast pro∣uided her of robes, and Alinda being called Aliena, and Rosa∣lynd Ganimede: they traueiled along the Uineyardes, and by many by-waies: at last got to the Forrest side, where they trauei∣led by the space of two or three dayes without seeing anye crea∣ture, being often in danger of wilde beasts, and payned with ma∣ny passionate sorrowes. Now the blacke Oxe began to tread on their feet, and Alinda thought of her wonted royaltie: but when she cast her eyes on her Rosalynd, shee thought euery daunger a step to honour. Passing thus on along, about midday they came to a Fountaine, compast with a groaue of Cipresse trees, so cun∣ningly and curiously planted, as if some Goddesse had intreated Nature in that place to make her an Arbour. By this Fountaine sat Aliena and her Ganimede, and forth they pulled such victu∣als as they had, and fedde as merely as if they had been in Paris with all the Kings delicates: Aliena onely grieuing that they could not so much as meete with a shepheard to discourse them
the way to some place where they might make their abode. At last Ganimede casting vp his eye espied where on a tree was ingra∣uen certaine verses: which assoone as he espied, he cryed out, be of good cheare Mistrisse, I spie the figures of men: for heere in these trees bee ingrauen certaine verses of shepheards, or some other swaines that inhabite here about. With that Aliena start vp ioyful to heare these newes, and looked, where they found car∣ued in the barke of a Pine tree this passion. Montanus passion. HAdst thou been borne wheras perpetuall cold Makes Tanais hard, and mountaines siluer old: Had I complainde vnto a marble stone, Or to the flouds bewraide my bitter mone, I then could beare the burthen of my griefe: But euen the pride of Countries at thy birth, Whilste heauens did smile did new aray the earth with flowers chiefe. Yet thou the flower of beautie blessed borne, Hast pretie lookes, but all attirde in scorne. Had I the power to weep sweet Mirrhas teares, Or by my plaints to pearce repining eares: Hadst thou the heart to smile at my complaint, To scorne the woes that doth my hart attaint, I then could beare the burthen of my griefe: But not my teares, but truth with thee preuailes, And seeming sowre my sorowes thee assailes: yet small reliefe. For if thou wilt thou art of marble hard: And if thou please my suite shall soone be heard. No doubt (quoth Aliena) this poesie is the passion of some perplexed shepheard, that beeing enamoured of some faire and beautifull Shepheardesse, suffered some sharpe repulse, and ther∣fore complained of the crueltie of his Mistresse. You may see
(quoth Ginimede) what mad cattel you women be, whose harts sometimes are made of Adamant that wil touch with no impressi∣on, and sometime of wax that is fit for euery forme: they delight to be courted, and then they glory to seeme coy, and when they are most desired then they freese with disdaine: and this fault is so common to the sex, that you see it painted out in the shepheardes passions, who found his Mistres as froward as he was enamou∣red. And I pray you (quoth Aliena) if your robes were off, what mettal are you made of that you are so satyrical against women? Is it not a foule bird defiles the own nest? Beware (Ganimede) that Rosader heare you not, if hee doo, perchance you will make him leape so farre from loue, that he wil anger euery vaine in your heart. Thus (quoth Ganimede) I keepe decorum, I speak now as I am Alienas Page, not as I am Gerismonds daughter: for put mee but into a peticoat, and I wil stand in defiance to the vt∣termost, that women are curteous, constant, vertuous, and what not. Stay there (quoth Aliena) and no more words, for yonder be Caracters grauen vppon the barke of the tall Beech tree: let vs see (quoth Ganimede): and with that they read a fancy written to this effect. First shall the heauens want starry light, The seas be robbed of their waues: The day want sunne, and sunne want bright, The night want shade, the dead mens graues. The April, flowers and leafe and tree, Before I false my faith to thee. First shall the tops of highest hils By humble plaines be ouerpride: And Poets scorne the Muses quils, And fish forsake the water glide. And Iris loose her coloured weed, Before I faile thee at thy need. First direful hate shall turne to peace, And loue relent in deepe disdaine:
And Poets scorne the Muses quils, And fish forsaks the water glide. And Iris loose her coloured weed, Before I faile thee at thy need. First direfull hate shall turn to peace, And loue relent in deep disdain: And death his fatall stroake shall cease, And enuy pitie euery paine. And pleasure mourn, and sorow smile, Before I talke of any guile. First time shall stay his staylesse race, And winter blesse his browes with corne: And snow bemoysten Iulies face, And winter spring, and sommer mourn, Before my pen by helpe of fame, Cease to recite thy sacred name. Montanus. No doubt (quoth Ganimede) this protestation grew from one full of passions. I am of that minde too (quoth Aliena) but see I pray, when poore women seeke to keepe themselues chaste, how men woo them with many fained promises, alluring with sweet words as the Syrens, and after proouing as trothlesse as Acneas. Thus promised Demophoon to his Phillis, but who at last grew more false? The reason was (quoth Ganimede) that they were womens sonnes, and tooke that fault of their mo∣ther, for if man had growne from man, as Adam did from the earth, men had neuer been troubled with inconstancie. Leaue off (quoth Aliena) to taunt thus bitterly, or els ile pull off your pa∣ges apparrell and whip you (as Venus doth her wantons) with nettles. So you will (quoth Ganimede) perswade mee to flat∣tery, and that needs not: but come (seeing we haue found here by his Fount the tract of Shepheardes by their Madrigalles and Roundelaies) let vs forwarde: for either wee shall finde some foldes, sheepcoates, or els some cottages wherin for a day or two
to rest. Content (quoth Aliena) and with that they rose vp, and marched forward till towards the euen: and then comming into a faire valley (compassed with mountaines, whereon grew ma∣ny pleasaunt shrubbes) they might descrie where two flockes of sheepe did feed. Then looking about, they might perceiue where an old shepheard sate (and with him a yoong swaine) vnder a co∣uert most pleasantly scituated. The ground where they sate was diapred with Floras riches, as if she ment to wrap Tellus in the glorie of her vestments: round about in the forme of an Amphi∣theater were most curiously planted Pine trees, interseamed with Lymons and Cytrons, which with the thicknesse of their boughes so shadowed the place, that Phoebus could not prie in∣to the secret of that Arbour, so vnited were the tops with so thick a closure, that Venus might there in her iollitie haue dallied vn∣seene with her deerest paramour. Fast by (to make the place more gorgious) was there a Fount so Christalline & cleere, that it see∣med Diana with her Driades & Hemadriades had that spring, as the secret of all their bathings. In this glorious Arbour satte these two shepheardes (seeing their sheepe feede) playing on their Pipes many pleasant tunes, and from musicke and melodie fal∣ling into much amorous chat: drawing more nigh we might de∣scry the countenance of the one to be full of sorrow, his face to bee the very pourtraiture of discontent, and his eyes full of woes, that liuing hee seemed to dye: we (to heare what these were) stole pri∣uily behinde the thicke, where we ouerheard this discourse. A pleasant Eglog betweene Montanus and Coridon. Coridon. SAy shepheards boy, what makes thee greet so sore? Why leaues thy pipe his pleasure and delight? Yoong are thy yeares, thy cheeks with Roses dight: Then sing for ioy (sweet swain) and sigh no more. This milk-white Poppy and this climbing Pine Both promise shade, then sit thee downe and sing.
And make these woods with pleasant notes to ring, Till Phoebus daine all Westward to decline. Montanus. Ah (Coridon) vnmeet is melody To him whom proud contempt hath ouerborn, Slain are my ioyes by Phoebus bitter scorn, Far hence my weale and nere my ieopardy. Loues burning brand is couched in my brest. Making a Phoenix of my faintfull hart: And though his fury doo inforce my smart, Ay blyth am I to honour his behest. Preparde to woes since so my Phoebe wils, My lookes dismaid since Phoebe will disdain, I banish blisse and welcome home my pain, So stream my tears as showers from Alpine hils In errors maske I blindfold iudgements eye, I fetter reason in the snares of lust, I seeme secure, yet know not how to trust, I liue by that, which makes me liuing dye. Deuoyd of rest, companion of distresse, Plague of my selfe, consumed by my thought, How may my voyce or pipe in tune be brought? Since I am reft of solace and delight. Coridon. Ah Lorrell lad, what makes thee Herry loue? A sugred harme, a poysonfull of pleasure, A painted shrine ful-fild with rotten treasure, A heauen is shew, a hell to them that proue. Againe, in seeming shadowed stil with want, A broken staffe which follie doth vpholde, A flower that fades with euerie frostie colde, An orient Rose sprong from a withred plant.
A minutes ioy to gaine a world of griefe, A subtil net to snare the idle minde, A seeing Scorpion, yet in seeming blinde, A poore reioyce, a plague without reliefe. For thy Montanus follow mine arreede, (Whom age hath taught the traines that fancy vseth) Leaue foolish loue, for beautie wit abuseth, And drownes (by folly) vertues springing seede. Montanus. So blames the childe the flame, because it burnes, And bird the snare, because it doth intrap, And fooles true loue, because of sorry hap, And saylers cursse the ship that ouerturnes. But would the childe forbeare to play with flame, And birds beware to trust the flowlers gin, And fooles foresee before they fall and sin, And maisters guide their ships in better frame. The childe would praise the fire, because it warmes, And birds reioyce, to see the fowler faile, And fooles preuent, before their plagues preuaile, And saylers blesse the barke that saues from harmes. Ah Coridon, though many be thy yeares, And crooked elde hath some experience left, Yet is thy mind of iudgement quite bereft, In view of loue, whose power in me appeares. The ploughman litle wots to turn the pen, Or bookeman skils to guide the ploughmans cart, Nor can the cobler count the tearmes of Art, Nor base men iudge the thoughts of mighty men. Nor withered age (vnmeet for beauties guide, Vncapable of loues impressien)
Discourse of that, whose choyce possession May neuer to so base a man be tied. But I (whom nature makes of tender mold, And youth most pliant yeelds to fancies fire) Do build my hauen and heauen on sweet desire, On sweet desire more deere to me than gold. Thinke I of loue, O how my lines aspire? How hast the Muses to imbrace my browes, And hem my temples in with lawrell bowes, And fill my braines with chast and holy fire? Then leaue my lines their homely equipage, Mounted beyond the circle of the Sunne: Amazd I read the stile when I haue done, And Herry Loue that sent that heauenly rage. Of Phoebe then, of Phoebe then I sing, Drawing the puritie of all the spheares, The pride of earth, or what in heauen appeares, Her honoured face and fame to light to bring. Influent numbers and in pleasant vaines, I robbe both sea and eath of all their state, To praise her parts: I charme both time and fate, To blesse the Nymph that yeelds me loue sicke paines. My sheepe are turnd to thoughts, whom froward will Guydes in the restles Laborynth of Loue, Feare lends them pasture where so ere they moue, And by their death their life renueth still. My sheepehooke is my pen, mine oaten reed, My paper, where my many woes are written: Thus silly swaine (with loue and fancie bitten) I trace the plaines of paine in wofull weed.
Yet are my cares, my broken sleepes, my teares, My dreames, my doubts, for Phoebe sweet to me: Who wayteth heauen in sorrowes vale must be, And glory shines where daunger most appeares. Then Coridon although I blith me not, Blame me not man since sorrow is my sweet: So willeth Loue, and Phoebe thinkes it meet, And kind Montanus liketh well his lot. Coridon. Oh staylesse youth, by errour so misguided, Where will prescribeth lawes to perfect wits, Where reason mournes, and blame in triumph sits, And folly poysoneth all that time prouided. With wilfull blindnesse bleard, prepard to shame, Prone to neglect Occasion when she smiles: Alas that Loue by fond and froward guiles, Should make thee tract the path to endlesse blame. Ah (my Montanus) cursed is the charme, That hath bewitched so thy youthfull eyes: Leaue off in time to like these vanities, Be forward to thy good, and fly thy harme. As many bees as Hibla daily shields, As many frie as fleet on Oceans face, As many heards as on the earth do trace, As many flowers as decke the fragrant fields. As many stars as glorious heauen contains, As many storms as wayward winter weepes, As many plagues as hell inclosed keepes: So many griefs in loue, so many pains. Suspitions, thoughts, desires, opinions, prayers; Mislikes, misdeeds, fondioies, and fained peace,
Illusions, dreames great paines, and small increase, Vowes, hope, acceptance, scorns, and deepe despaires. Truce, warre, and wo do wait at beauties gate: Time lost, laments, reports, and priuy grudge, And last, fierce Loue is but a partiall Iudge, Who yeelds for seruice shame, for friendship hate. Montanus. All adder-like I stop mine eares (fond swaine) So charme no more, for I will neuer change. Call home thy flocks betime that stragling range: For loe, the Sunne declineth hence amaine. Terentius. In amore haec insunt vitia: induciae, inimicitiae, bellum, pax rur∣sum: incerta haec situpostules, ratione certa fieri nihilo plus a∣gas, quam sides operam, vt cum ratione insanias. The shepheards hauing thus ended their Eglogue, Aliena slept with Ganimede from behind the thicket: at whose sodayne sight the shepheards arose, and Aliena saluted them thus: Shep∣heards all haile (for such wee deeme you by your flockes) and Lo∣uers good lucke, (for such you seeme by your passions) our eyes being witnesse of the one, and our eares of the other. Although not by Loue, yet by Fortune, I am a distressed Gentlewoman, as sor∣rowfull as you are passionate, and as full of woes as you of per∣plexed thoughts: wandring this way in a forrest vnknown, onely I & my Page, wearied with trauel would faine haue some place of rest. May you appoint vs any place of quiet harbour (bee it ne∣uer so meane) I shall bee thankfull to you, contented in my selfe, and gratefull to whosoeuer shall be mine Host. Coridon hearing the Gentlewoman speake so courteously returned her mildly and reuerently this answere. Faire Mistresse, wee returne you as hearty a welcome as you gaue vs a courteous salute. A shepheard I am, and this a louer, as watchful to please his wench, as to feed his sheep: ful of fancies, and therefore say I, full of follyes. Exhort him I may, but per∣swade him I cannot: for Loue admits neither of counsaile, nor
reason. But leauing him to his passions, if you be distrest, I am sorrowfull such a faire creature is crost with calamitie: pray for you I may, but releeue you I cannot: marry if you want lodging if you vouch to shrowd your selues in a shepheards cottage, my house for this night shall be your harbour, Alinea thankt Cori∣don greatly, and presently sate her downe and Ganimede by hir. Coridon looking earnestly vpon her, and with a curious suruey viewing all her perfectious, applauded (in his thought) her ex∣cellence, and pitying her distresse, was desirous to heare the cause of her misfortunes, began to question with her thus. If I should not (faire Damosell) occasionate offence, or re∣nue your griefs by rubbing the scar, I would faine craue so much fauour, as to know the cause of your misfortunes: and why, and whither you wander with your page in so dangerous forrest. Ali∣ena (that was as courteous as she was sayre) made this replie: Shepheard, a friendly demaund ought neuer to be offensiue, and question of curtesie carry priuiledged pardons in their forheads. Know therefore, to discouer my fortunes were to renue my sor∣rowes, and I should by discoursing my mishaps, but rake fire out of the cynders. Therefore let this suffice gentle shepheard, my distresse is as great as my trauaile is daungerous, and I wander in this forrest to light on some cotage where I and my page may dwell: for I meane to buy some Farme, and a flocke of sheepe, & so become a shepheardesse, meaning to liue low, and content mee with a country life: for I haue heard the swaines saye, that they drunke without suspition, and slept without care. Marry mistres quoth Coridon, if you meane so you came in good time, for my Landflord intends to sell both the Farme I tyll, and the flocke I keepe, and cheape you may haue them for ready money: and for a shepheards life (oh Mistres) did you but liue a while in their con∣tent, you would say the Court were rather a place of sorrow then of solace. Here mistresse shal not fortune thwart you, but in mean misfortunes, as the losse of a few sheepe, which, as it breedes no beggery, so it can bee no extreame preiudice: the next yeare may mend all with a fresh increase. Enuy stirres not vs, we cauet not to climbe, our desires mount not aboue our degrees, nor our thoughts aboue our fortunes. Care cannot harbour in our cotta∣ges,
nor doe our homely couches know broken slumbers: as wee exceed not ill dyet, so we haue inough to satisfie: and Mistresse, I haue so much Latin, Satis est quod sufficit. By my trueth shepheard (quoth Aliena) thou makest mee in loue with your countrey life, and therfore send for thy Landslord, and I will buy thy Farme and thy slocks, and thou shalt still vn∣der me bee ouerseer of them both: onely for pleasure sake, I and my Page will serue you, lead the flocks to the field, & folde them: Thus will I liue quiet, vnknowne, & contented. This newes so gladded the hart of Coridon, that he should not be put out of his farme yt putting off his shepheards bonnet, he did hir all the reue∣rence that he might. But all this while sate Montanus in a muse thinking of the crueltie of his Phoebe, whom he wooed long, but was in no hope to win. Ganimede who stil had the remembrance of Rosader in his thoughtes, tonke delight to see the poore shep∣heard passionate, laughing at loue, that in all his actions was so imperious. At last when she had noted his teares that stole down his cheeks, and his sighes that broke from the center of his heart, pittying his lament, she demāded of Coridon why the yong shep∣heard looked so sorrowfull? Oh sir (quoth he) the boy is in loue. Why (quoth Ganimede) can shepheards loue? I (quoth Monta∣nus) & ouer-loue, els shouldst not shou see me so pensiue. Loue I tell thee, is as pretious in a shepheards eye, as in the lookes of a King, & we cuntry swains intertaine fancie with as great delight as the proudest Courtier doth affection. Opportunity (that is the sweetest friend to Venus) harboureth in our cottages, and loyal∣tie (the chiefest fealty that Cupid requireth) is found more among shepheardes than higher degrees. Then aske not if suche silly swains can loue? what is the cause then, quoth Ganimede, that Loue being so sweet to thee, thou lookest so sorrowfull? Because quoth Montanus, the party beloued is froward: and hauing cur∣tesie in her lookes, holdeth disdaine in her tongues ende? What hath she then, quoth Aliena, in heart? Desire (I hope Madame) quoth he: or else my hope lost, despaire in Loue were death. As thus they chatted, the Sunne beeing ready to set, and they not ha∣uing folded their sheepe, Coridon requested she would sit there with her Page, till Montanus and hee lodged theyr sheepe for
that night. You shall goe quoth Aliena, but first I will intreate Montanus to sing some amorous Sonnet that hee made when he hath beene deeply passionate. That I will quoth Montanus, and with that he began thus. Montanus Sonnet. Phoebe sate, Sweet she sate, Sweet sate Phoebe when I saw her, White her brow, Coy her eye; Brow end eye how much you please me? Words I spent, Sighes I sen Sight and words could neuer draw hir. Oh my loue, Thou art lost. Since no sight could euer ease thee. Phoebe sat By a fount, Sitting by a fount I spide her: Sweet her touch, Rare hir voyce: Touch & voice what may distain you? As she sung, I did sigh, And by sighs whilst that I tride her, Oh mine eyes You did loose Hir first sight whose want did pain you. Phoebes flockes, White as wooll, Yet were Phoebes locks more whiter. Phoebes eyes.
Douelike mild, Douelike eyes, both mild and cruell: Montan sweares, In your lampes He will die for to delight her. Phoebe yeeld, Or I die: Shall true hearts be fancies fuell? Montanus had no sooner ended his sonnet, but Coridon with alowe curtesie rose vp, & went with his fellow, and shut their sheepe in the folds: and after returning to Aliena & Ganimede, conducted them home weary to his poore cottage. By the waye there was much good chat with Montanus about his loues: hee resoluing Aliena that Phoebe was the fairest Shepherdice in al France, & that in his eye her beautie was equal with ye Nimphs. But quoth he, as of all stones the Diamond is most cleerest, & yet most hard for the Lapidorie to cut, as of all flowres, the Rose is the fairest, and yet guarded with the sharpest prickles: so of al our country lasses Phoebe is the brightest, but the most coy of all to stoope vnto desire. But let her take heed quoth he, I haue heard of Narcissus, who for his high disdain against Loue, perished in the folly of his owne loue. With this they were at Coridons Cot∣tage, where Montanus parted from them, and they went in to rest. Alinda and Ganimede glad of so contented a shelter, made merry with the poore swaine: and though they had but countrey fare and course loging, yet their welcome was so greate, and their cares so little, that they counted their diet delicate, and slept as soundly as if they had beene in the court of Torismond. The next morne they lay long in bed, as wearyed with the toyle of vn∣accustomed trauaile; but assoone as they got vp, Aliena resol∣ued there to set vp her rest, and by the helpe of Coridon swapt a bargaine with his Landslord, and so became mistres of the farme and the flocke: her selfe putting on the attyre of the shepherdesse, and Ganimide of a yong swaine: euerye day leading foorth her flockes, with such delight, that she held her exile happy, & thoght no content to the blisse of a Countrey cottage. Leauing her thus
famous amongst the shepheards of Arden, againe to Saladyne. When Saladyne had a long while concealed a secrete resolu∣tion of reuenge, & could no longer hide fire in the flax, nor oyle in the flame: (for enuy is like lightning, that will appeare in the dar∣kest fog.) It chaunced on a morning very early he cald vp certain of his seruants, and went with them to the chamber of Rosader, which being open, hee entred with his crue, and surprized his bro∣ther when he was a sleepe, and bound him in fetters, & in the midst of his hall chained him to a post. Rosader amazed at this strange chaunce, began to reason with his brother about the cause of this sodaine extremity, wherein he had wrongd, and what fault he had committed worthy so sharpe a penance. Saladyne answered him onely with a look of disdain, and went his way, leauing poore Ro∣sader in a deepe perplexity. Who thus abused, fell into sundry passions, but no means of releefe could be had: wherupon for an∣ger he grew into a discontented melancholy. In which humour he continued two or three daies without meat: insomuch, that see∣ing his brother would giue him no food, he fel into despaire of his life. Which Adam Spencer the old seruant of sir Iohn of Bour∣deaux seeing, touched with the dutie & loue hee ought to his olde maister, felt a remorse in his conscience of his sonnes mishap: and therefore, although Saladine had giuen a generall charge to his seruants, that none of them vpon pain of death should giue either meat or drinke to Rosader, yet Adam Spencer in the night rose secretly, & brought him such victuals as he could prouide, and vn∣lockt him, and set him at liberty. After Rosader had well feasted himselfe, and felt he was loose, straight his thoughts aymed at re∣uenge, and now (all being a sleepe) hee would haue quit Saladyne with the methode of his own mischiefe. But Adam Spencer did perswade him to the contrary with these reasons: Sir quoth hee, he content, for this night go againe into your olde fetters, so shall you trie the faith of friends, and saue the life of an old seruant. To¦morrow hath your brother inuited al your kinred & allyes to a so∣lempne breake fast, onely to see you, telling them all that you are mad, & faine to be tied to a poast. Assoone as they come, complain to them of the abuse proffered you by Saladyne. If they redresse you, why so: but if they passe ouer your playntes, sicco pede,
and hld with the violence of your brother before your innocence, then thus: I will leaue you vnlocke that you may breake out at your pleasure, and at the ende of the hall shall you see stand a cou∣ple of good pollaxes, one for you, and another for mee. When I giue you a wincke, shake off your chaines, and let vs plaie the men, and make hauocke amongst them, driue them out of the house and maintaine possession by force of armes, till the King hath made a redresse of your abuses. These wordes of Adam Spencer so perswaded Rosader, that he went to the place of his punishment, and stood there while the next morning. About the time appointed, came all the guestes bidden by Saladyne, whom hee intreated with curteous and curious entertainment, as they all perceiued their welcome to be great. The tables in the hall where Rosader was tyed, were couered, and Saladyne bringing in his guests togither, shewed them where his brother was bound, and was inchainde as a man lunaticke. Rosader made reply, and with some inuectiues made complaintes of the wrongs proffered him by Saladyne, desiring they would in pitie seeke some meanes for his reliefe. But in vaine, they had stopt their eares with Vlis∣ses, that were his words neuer so forceable, he breathed onely his passions into the winde. They carelesse, sat downe with Saladyne to dinner, beeing very frolicke and pleasant, washing their heades well with wine. At last, when the fume of the grape had entered peale meale into their braines, they began in satyricall speeches to raile against Rosader: which Adam Spencer no longer broo∣king, gaue the signe, and Rosader shaking off his chaines got a pollaxe in his hande, and flew amongst them with such violence and fury, that he hurt many, slew, some, and draue his brother and all the rest quite out of the house. Seeing the coast cleare, he shut the doores, and being sore an hungred, and seeing such good vic∣tuals, he sat him downe with Adam Spencer, and such good fel∣lowes as he knew were honest men, and there feasted themselues with such prouision as Saladyne had prepared for his friendes. After they had taken their repast, Rosader rampierd vp ye house, least vpon a sodeine his brother should raise some crew of his ten∣nants, and surprise them vnawares. But Saladyne tooke a con∣trary course, and went to the Sheriffe of the shire & made com∣plaint
of Rosader, who giuing credite to Saladyne, in a determi∣ned resolution to reuenge the Gentlemans wrongs, tooke with him fiue and twentie tall men, and made a vow, either to breake into the house and take Rosader, or else to coope him in till hee made him yeeld by famine. In this determination, gathering a crue togither, hee went forward to set Saladyne in his former e∣state. Newes of this was brought vnto Rosader, who smiling at the cowardize of his brother, brookt al the iniuries of fortune with patience, expecting the comming of the Sheriffe. As he walke vp∣on the battlements of the house, he descryed where Saladyne and he drew neare, with a troupe of lustie gallants. At this he smilde, and calde vp Adam Spencer, and shewed him the enuious trea∣cherie of his brother, and the folly of the Sheriffe to bee so credu∣lous: now Adam, quoth he, what shall I do? It resls for me, ei∣ther to yeeld vp the house to my brother and seek a reconcilement, or els issue out, and breake through the company with courage, for coopt in like a coward I will not bee. If I submit (ah Adam) I dishonor my selfe, and that is worse then death, for by such open disgraces, the fame of men growes odious: if I issue out amongst them, fortune may fauour mee, and I may escape with life, but suppose the worst: if I be slaine, then my death shall be honorable to me, & so inequall a reuenge in famous to Saladyne. Why then Maister forward and seare not, out amongst them, they bee but faint hearted lozels, and for Adam Spencer, if hee die not at your foote, say hee is a dastard. These words cheered vp so the heart of yong Rosader, that he thought himselfe sufficient for them al, and therefore prepared weapons for him and Adam Spencer, and were readie to entertaine the Sheriffe: for no sooner came Sala∣dyne and he to the gates, but Rosader vnloookt for leapt out and assailed them, wounded many of them, and caused the rest to giue backe, so that Adam and he broke through the prease in despite of them all, and tooke their way towards the forrest of Arden. This repulse so set the Sheriffs hart on fire to reuenge, that he straight raised all the country, and made Hue and Crie after them. But Rosader and Adam knowing full well the secret waies that led through the vineyards, stole away priorily through the prouince of Bourdeaux, and escaped safe to the forrest of Arden. Beeing
come thether, they were glad they had so good a harbor: but for∣tune (who is like the Camelion) variable with euery obiect, and constant in nothing but inconstancie, thought to make them myr∣rours of her mutabilitie, and therefore still croft them thus con∣trarily. Thinking still to passe on by the bywaies to get to Lions, they chanced on a path that led into the thicke of the forrest, where they wandred fiue or sixe dayes without meate, that they were al∣most famished, finding neither shepheard nor cottage to relieue them: and hunger growing on so extreame, Adam Spencer (be∣ing olde) began to faint, and sitting him downe on a hill, and loo∣king about him, espied where Rosader laye as feeble and as ill perplexed: which sight made him shedde teares, and to fall into these bitter tearmes. Adam Spencers speech. OH how the life of man may well bee compared to the state of the Ocean seas, that for euery calme hath a thousand storms, resembling the Rose tree, that for a fewe flowers, hath a multi∣tude of sharpe prickles: all our pleasures ende in paine, and our highest delightes, are crossed with deepest discontents. The ioyes of man, as they are few, so are they momentarie, scarce ripe be∣fore they are rotten: and withering in the blossome, either par∣ched with the heate of enuy, or fortune. Fortune, oh inconstant friend, that in all thy deedes art froward and sickle, delighti g in the pouertie of the lowest, and the ouer throw of the highest, to de∣cypher thy inconstancy. Thou standest vpon a globe, & thy wings are plumed with times feathers, that thou maist euer be restlesse; thou art double faced like Ianus, carrying frownes in the one to threaten, and smiles in the other to betray; thou profferest an Eele, & performest a Scorpion, & wher thy greatest fauours be, there is the feare of the extreamest misfortunes, so variable are all thy ac∣tions. But why Adam doest thou exclaime against Fortune? she laughes at the plaintes of the distressed: and there is nothing more pleasing vnto her, then to heare fooles boast in her fading allurements, or sorrowfull men to discouer the sower of their pas∣sions Elut her not Adam then with content, but thwart her with
brooking all mishappes with patience. For there is no greater check to the pride of fortune, then with a resolute courage to passe ouer her crosses without care. Thou art old Adam, & thy haires waxe white, the Palme tree is alreadie full of bloomes, and in the furrowes of thy face appeares the Kalenders of death? Wert thou blessed by fortune thy yeares could not bee many, nor the date of thy life long: then sith Nature must haue her due, what is it for thee to resigne her debt a little before the day. Ah, it is not this which grieueth mee, nor do I care what mishaps fortune can wage against mee: but the sight of Rosader, that galleth vnto the quicke. When I remember the worships of his house, the ho∣nour of his fathers, and the vertues of himselfe: then doo I say, that fortune and the fates are most iniurious, to censure so hard extreames, against a youth of so great hope. Oh Rosader, thou art in the flower of thine age, and in the pride of thy yeares, bux∣some and full of May. Nature hath prodigally inricht thee with her fauours, and vertue made thee the myrror of her excellence: and now through the decree of the vniust starres, to haue all these good partes nipped in the blade, and blemisht by the inconstan∣cie of fortune. Ah Rosader, could I helpe thee, my griefe were the lesse, and happie should my death be, if it might bee the begin∣ning of thy reliefe: but seeing we perish both in one extreame, it is a double sorrow. What shall I doo? preuent the sight of his further misfortune, with a present dispatch of mine owne life. Ah, despaire is a mercilesse sinne. As he was readie to go forward in his passion, he looked ear∣nestly on Rosader, and seeing him chaunge colour, hee rose vp and went to him, and holding his temples, said, What cheere maister? though all faile, let not the heart faint: the courage of a man is shewed in the resolution of his death. At these wordes Rosader Iifted vp his eye, and looking on Adam Spencer began to weep. Ah Adam quoth he, I sorrow not to dye, but I grieue at the ma∣ner of my death. Might I with my Launce encounter the enemy, and so die in the field, it were honour, and content: might I (A∣dam) combate with some wilde beast, and perish as his praie, I were satisfied: but to die with hunger, O Adam, it is the extrea∣mest of all extreames. Maister (quoth hee) you see me are both in
one predicament, and long I cannot liue without meate, seeing therefore we can finde no foode, let the death of the one, preserue the life of the other. I am old, and ouerworne with age, you are yoong, and are the hope of many honours: let me then dye, I will presently cut my veynes, and maister with the warme blood re∣lieue your fainting spirites: sucke on that till I ende, and you be comforted. With that Adam Spencer was ready to pull out his knife, when Rosader full of courage (though verie faint) rose vp, and wisht A. Spencer to sit there til his returne: for my mind giues me quoth he, I shall bring thee meate. With that, like a mad man he rose vp, and raunged vp and downe the woods, see∣king to encounter some wilde beast with his Rapier, that either he might carry his friend Adam food, or els pledge his life in pawn of his loyaltie. It chaunced that day, that Gerismond the lawfull King of France, banished by Torismond, who with a lustie crue of Outlawes liued in that Forrest, that day in honour of his birth made a feast to all his bolde yeomen, and frolicke it with store of wine and venison, sitting all at a long table vnder the shadow of Lymon trees. To that place by chance Fortune conducted Ro∣sader, who seeing such a crue of braue men hauing store of that, for want of which hee and Adam perished, hee stept boldly to the boords end, and saluted the company thus. Whatsoeuer thou be that art maister of these lustie squiers, I salute thee as graciously, as a man in extreame distresse may: know that I and a fellow friend of mine, are here famished in the Forrest for want of food: perish wee must vnlesse relieued by thy fauours. Therefore if thou be a Gentleman, giue meate to men, and to suche as are euerie way woorthie of life: let the proudest squire that sits at thy table, rise and incounter with mee in any ho∣norable point of actiuitie whatsoeuer, and if hee and thou prooue me not a man, send me away comfortlesse. If thou refuse this, as a niggard of thy cates, I will haue amongst you with my sword: for rather wil I dye valiantly, then perish with so cowardly an ex∣treame. Gerismond looking him earnestly in the face, and seeing so proper a Gentleman in so bitter a passion, was mooued with so great pitie, that rising from the table, he tooke him by the hand and badde him welcome, willing him to sit dowae in his place,
and in his roome not onely to eat his fill, but the Lord of the feast. Gramerry sir (quoth Rosader) but I haue a feeble friend that lyes hereby famished almost for food, aged and therefore lesse able to abide the extremitie of hunger then my selfe, and dishonour it were for me to taste one crumme, before I made him partner of my fortunes: therefore I will runne and fetch him, and then I wil gratefully accept of your proffer. Away hies Rosader to Adam Spencer, and tels him the newes, who was glad of so happie for∣tune, but so feeble he was that he could not go: whereupon Ro∣sader got him vp on his backe, & brought him to the place. Which when Gerismond & his men saw, they greatly applauded their league of friendship: and Rosader hauing Gerismonds place assigned him, would not sit there himselfe, but set downe Adam Spencer. Well to be short, those hungry squires fell to their vic∣tuals, and feasted themselues with good delicates, & great store of wine. Assoone as they had taken their repast, Gerismond (desirous to heare what hard fortune draue them into those bitter extreames) requested Rosader to discourse, (as it were not any way preiudicall vnto him) the cause of his trauell. Rosader (ve∣sirous any way to satisfie the curtesie of his fauourable host, (first beginning his exordium with a volley of sighes, and a fewe luke warme teares) prosecuted his discourse, & told him from point to point all his fortunes, how hee was the yongest sonne of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux, his name Rosader, how his brother sundry times had wronged him, and lastly, how for beating the Sheriffe, and hurting his men, hee fled: and this old man (quoth he) whom I so much loue and honour, is surnamed Adam Spencer, an old ser∣uant of my fathers, and one (that for his loue) neuer fayled me in all my misfortunes. When Gerismond heard this, he fell on the neck of Rosader, and next discoursing vnto him, how he was Ge∣rismond their lawfull King exiled by Torismond, what fami∣liaritie had euer been betwixt his father sir Iohn of Bourdeaux and him, how faithfull a subiect hee liued, and how honourably he dyed: promising (for his sake) to giue both him & his friend such curteous entertainment, as his present estate, could minister: and vpon this made him one of his forresters. Rosadar seeing it was the King, craude pardon for his boldnesse, in that hee did not doo
him due reuerence, and humbly gaue him thankes for his fauou∣rable curtesie. Gerismond not satisfied yet with newes, beganne to enquire if he had been lately in the Court of Torismond, and whether he had seene his daughter Rosalynd, or no? At this, Ro∣sader fetcht a deep sigh, and shedding many teares, could not an∣swere: yet at last, gathering his spirits togither, he reuealed vn∣to the Kyng, how Rosalynde was banished, and how there was such a simpathie of affections betwixt Alinda and her, that shee chose rather to bee partaker of her exile, then to part fellowship: whereupon the vnnaturall King banished them both: and now they are wandred none knowes whither, neither could any learne since their departure, the place of their abode. This newes driue the king into a great melancholy, that presently hee arose from all the company, and went into his priuie chamber, so secrete as the harbour of the woods would allow him. The company was all dasht at these tydings, and Rosader and Adam Spencer hauing such opportunitie, went to take their rest. Where we leaue them, and returne againe to Torismond. The fight of Rosader came to the eares of Torismond, who hearing that Saladyne was sole heire of the landes of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux, desirous to possesse such faire reuenewes, found iust occasion to quarrell with Saladyne, about the wrongs he proffe∣red to his brother: and therefore dispatching a Herehault, he sent for Saladyne in all poast haste. Who marueiling what the mat∣ter should be, began to examine his owne conscience, wherein hee had offended his highnesse: but imboldened with his innocence, he boldly went with the Herehault vnto the Court. Where as∣soone as hee came, hee was not admitted into the presence of the king, but presently sent to prison. This greatly amazed Saladine, chiefly in that the Iayler had a straight charge ouer him, to see that he should be close prisoner. Many passionate thoughts came in his head, till at last he began to fall into consideration of his for∣mer follies, and to medicate with himselfe. Leaning his head on his hand, and his elbow on his knee, full of sorrow, grief and dis∣quieted passions, he resolued into these tearmes.
Saladynes complaint. VNhappie Saladyne, whame folly hath led to these misfor∣tunes, and wanton desires wrapt within the laborinth of these calamities. Are not the heauens doomers of mens deedes? And heldes not God a ballance in his fist, to reward with fauour, and reuenge with iustice? Oh Saladyne, the faults of thy youth, as they were fond, so were they foule: and not onely discouering lit∣tle nourture, but blemishing the excellence of nature. Whelpes of one litter are euer most louing, and brothers that are sonnes of one father, should liue in friendship without iarre. Oh Saladyne, so it should bee: but thou hast with the deere fedde against the winde, with the crabbe stroue against the streame, and sought to peruert nature by vnkindnesse. Rosaders wrongs, the wrongs of Rosader (Saladyne) cryes for reuenge, his youth pleads to God to inflict some penaunce vpon thee, his vertues are pleas that in∣force writtes of displeasure to crosse thee: thou hast highly abu∣sed thy kynde and naturall brother, and the heauens cannot spare to quite thee with punishment. There is no sting to the worme of conscience, no hell to a minde coucht with guilt. Euery wrong I offred him (called now to remembrance) wringeth a drop of blood from my heart, euery bad looke, euery frowne pincheth me at the quicke, and saies Saladyne thou hast sinned against Rosader. Be penitent, and assigne thy selfe some pennance to discouer thy sor∣row, and pacifie his wrath. In the depth of his passion, hee was sent for to the King: who with a looke that threatened death entertained him, and demaun∣ded of him where his brother was? Saladyne made answer, that vpon some ryot made against the Sheriffe of the shire, he was fled from Bourdeaux, but hee knew not whither. Nay villaine (quoth he) I haue heard of the wronges thou hast proffered thy brother since the death of thy father, and by thy means haue I lost a most braue and resolute Cheualier. Therfore, in iustice to punish thee, I spare thy life for thy fathers sake, but banish thee for euer from the court and countrey of France, and see thy departure be with∣in tenne dayes, els trust me thou shalt loose thy head, & with that
the King flew away in a rage, & left poore Saladyne greatly per∣plexed. Who grieuing at his exile, yet determined to beer it with patience, and in penaunce of his former folies to trauaile abroade in euery Coast, till he had found out his brother Rosader. With whom now I beginnne. Rosader beeing thus preferred to the place of a Forrester by Gerismond, rooted out the remembrance of his brothers vnkind¦nes by continuall exercise, trauersing the groues and wilde For∣rests: partly to heare the melody of the sweete birds which recor∣ded, and partly to shew his diligent indeauour in his masters be∣halfe. Yet whatsoeuer he did, or howsoeuer he walked, the liuely image of Rosalynde remained in memorie: on her sweete per∣fections he fed his thoughts, prouing himself like the eagle a true borne bird, since that the one is knowne by beholding the Sunne so was he by regarding excellent beautie. One day amōg the rest finding a fit opportunity and place conuenient, desirous to disco∣uer his woes to the woodes, hee engraued with his knife on the bark of a Mir tre, this pretye estimate of his Mistres perfection, Sonnetto. Of all chast birdes the Phoenix doth excell, Of all strong beastes the Lyon beares the bell, Of all sweet flowers the Rose doth sweetest smel Of all faire maydes my Rosalynd is fairest. Of all pure mettals gold is onely purest, Of all high trees the Pine hath highest crest, Of all soft sweets, I like my mistris brest, Of all chast thoughts my mistris thoughts are rarest. Of all proud birds the Eagle pleaseth Ioue, Of pretie fowles kind Venus likes the Doue, Of trees Minerua doth the Oliue loue, Of all sweet Nimphs I honour Rosalynd. Of all her gifts her wisedome pleaseth most,
Of all her graces vertue she doth boast: For all these gifts my life and ioy is lost, If Rosalynde proue cruell and vnkind. In these and such like passions Rosader did euery day eterni the name of his Rosalynd: and this day especially when Aliena and Ganimede (inforced by the heat of the Sun to seeke for shel∣ter) by good fortune arriued in that place, where this amorus forrester registred his melancholy passions: they saw the sodai change of his looks, his folded armes, his passionate sighes, they heard him often abruptly cal on Rosalynd: who (poore soule) was as hotly burned as himselfe, but that shee shrouded her paines i the cinders of honorable modesty. Whereupon gessing him to b in loue, and according to the nature of their sexe, being pittifull in that behalfe) they sodainly brake off his melancholy by theyr ap∣proach, and Ganimede shooke him out of his dumps thus. What newes Forrester? hast thou wounded some Deere, an lost him in the fall? Care not man for so small a losse, thy fe was but the skinne, the shoulder, and the horns: tis hunters luck to ayme faire and misse: and a woodmans fortune to strike an yet go without the game. Thou art beyond the marke Ganimede (quoth Aliena) his passions are greater, & his sighs discouers more losse: perhaps i trauersing these thickets, he hath seene some beautifull Nimph and is growne amorous. It may be so (quoth Ganimede) for be he hath newly ingrauen some sonnet: come and see the discour of the Forresters poems. Reading the sonnet ouer, & hearing name Rosalynde, Aliena lookt on Ganimede and laught, an Ganimede looking backe on the Forrester, and seeing it wa Rosader, blusht: yet thinking to shrowd all vnder her pages ap∣parell, she boldly returned to Rosader, and began thus. I pray thee thee tell me Forrester, what is this Rosalynd fo whom thou pinest away in such passions: Is shee some Nymph that wayts vpon Dianaes traine, whose chastitie thou hast deci phred in such Epethites? Or is she some shepherdesse that hants these playnes, whose beautie hath so bewitched thy fancie, whos name thou shaddowest in couert vnder the figure of Rosalynd
a Ouid did Iulia vnder the name of Corinna? Or say mee for sooth, is it that Rosalynde, of whom wee shepheards haue heard talke, shee Forrester, that is the daughter of Gerismond, that once was King, and now an Outlawe in this Forrest of Arden. At this Rosader fetcht a deepe sigh, and sayde, It is the O gen∣tle Swayne, it is she, that Saint it is whom I serue, that God∣desse at whose shrine I doe bend all my deuotions: the most fay∣rest of all faires, the Phenix of all that sexe, and the puritie of all earthly perfection And why (gentle Forrester) if shee be so beau∣tifull, and thou so amorous, is there such a disagreement in thy thoughts? Happily she resembleth the Rose, that is sweete, but full of prickles? or the Serpent Regius that hath scales as glo∣ous as the Sunne, and a breath as infectious as the Aconitum is deadly? So thy Rosalynd may bee most amiable, and yet vn∣kind: full of fauour and yet froward: coy without wit, and dis∣dainfull without reason. O shepheard (quoth Rosader) knewest thou her personage graced with the excellence of all perfection, beeing a harbour wherein the Graces shrowd their vertues: thou wouldest not breath out such blasphemy against the beauteous Rosalind. She is a Diamond, bright, but not hard, yet of most chast operation: a pearle so orient, that it can be stained with no blemish: a Rose without prickles, and a Princesse absolute, as well in beauty as in vertue, But I, vnhappy I, haue let mine eye soare with ye Eagle against so bright a Sun, that I am quite blind: I haue with A∣pollo enamoured my selfe of a Daphne, not (as she) disdainful, but farre more chast than Daphne: I haue with Ixion laide my loue on Iuno, and shall (I feare) embrace nought but a clowde. Ah shepheard, I haue reacht at a starre, my desires haue moun∣ted aboue my degree, and my thoughts aboue my fortunes. I be∣ing a peasant, haue ventured to gaze on a Princesse, whose ho∣nors are too high to vouchsafe such base loues. Why Forrester, quoth Ganimede, comfort thy selfe: be blyth and frolike man. Loue sowseth as low as she soareth high: Cu∣pid shootes at a ragge assoone as at a roabe, and Venus eye that was so curious, sparkled fauour on pole-footed Vulcan. Feare not man, womens lookes are not tied to dignities feathers, nor
make they curious esteeme, where the stone is sound, but what is the vertue. Feare not Forrester, faint heart neuer woone fair La∣dye. But where liues Rosalynde now, at the Court? Oh no quoth Rosader, she liues I knowe not where, and tha is my sorrow, banished by Toresmond, and that is my hell: fo might I but finde her sacred personage, and plead before the ba of her pitie, the plaint of my passions, hope telles mee shee woul grace me with some fauour: & that would suffice as a recompenc of all my former miseries. Much haue I heard of thy mistres ex∣cellence, and I know Forrester thou canst describe her at the full as one that hast suruaid all her parts with a curious eye: then d that fauour, to tell me what her perfections be. That I wil quot Rosader, for I glorie to make all eares wonder at my Mistres excellence. And with that he pulde a paper foorth his bosome, wherein he read this. Rosalyndes description. Like to the cleere in highest spheare, Where all imperiall glorie shines, Of selfe same colour is her haire Whether vnfolded or in twines: Heigh ho faire Rosalynde. Her eyes are Saphires set in snow, Refining heauen by euery wincke: The gods do feare when as they glow, And I doo tremble when I thinke. Heigh ho, would she were mine. Her chekes are lyke the blushing clowde That bewtifies Auroraes face, Or lyke the siluer Crimsin shrowde. That Phoebus smiling lookes doth grace: Heigh ho, faire Rosalynd. Her lippes are like tow budded roses, Whome ranckes of lillies neighbour nie, Within which bounds she balme incloses,
Apt iointice a Deitie: Heigh ho, would she were mine. Her necke like to a stately tower, Where Loue himselfe imprisoned lies, To watch for glaunces euery houre, From her deuine and sacred eyes, Heigh ho, faire Rosalynd. Her pappes are centers of delight, Her pappes are orbes of heauenly frame, Where Nature molds the deaw of light, To feed perfection with the same: Heigh ho, would she were mine. With Orient pearle, with Rubie red. With Marble white, with Saphire blew, Her body euery way is fed, Yet soft in touch; and sweet in view: Heigh ho, faire Rosalynde. Nature her selfe her shape admires, The Gods are wounded in her sight, And Loue forsakes his heauenly fires, And at her eyes his brand doth light: Heigh ho, would she ware mine. Then muse not Nymphes thouh I bemone The absence of faire Rosalynde, Since for her faire there is fairer none, Nor for her vertues so deuine. Heigh ho, faire Rosalynde. Heigh ho my heart, would God that she were mine. Periit, quia deperibat. Beleeue me (quoth Ganimede) eyther the Forrester is an ex∣quisite Painter, or Rosalynde farre aboue wonder: so it makes me blush, to heare how women should be so excellent, and pages so vnperfect.
Rosader beholding her earnestly, answered thus. Truly gen∣tle page, thou hast cause to complaine thee, wert thou the sub∣stance: but resembling the shadow, content thy selfe: for it is ex∣cellence inough to be like the excellence of nature. He hath aun∣swered you Ganimede, quoth Aliena, it is enough for pages to wait on beautiful Ladies, and not to be beautiful themselues. Oh Mistres quoth Ganimede, hold you your peace, for you are par∣tiall: Who knowes not, but that all women haue desire to tye so∣ueraintie to their petticotes, and ascribe beauty to themselues, wher if boies might put on their garments, perhaps they would proue as comely, if not as comely, as courteous. But tel me for∣rester, (and with that she turnd to Rosader) vnder whom main∣tainest thou thy walke? Gentle swaine, vnder the King of Out∣lawes, said he, the vnfortunate Gerismond, who hauing lost his kingdome, crowneth his thoughtes with content, accounting it better to gouerne among poore men in peace, than great men in danger. But hast thou not said she, (hauing so melancholy oppor∣tunities as this Forrest affoordeth thee) written more Sonets in commendations of thy Mistris? I haue gentle swaine quoth he, but they be not about me: to morow by dawn of day, if your flocks feed in these pastures, I will bring them you: wherein you shall read my passions, whiles I feele them, iudge my patience when you read it: til when I bid farewel. So giuing both Ganimede and Aliena a gentle good night, he resorted to his lodge, leauing them to their prittle prattle. So Ganimede (said Aliena, the for∣rester being gone) you are mightily beloued, men make ditties in your praise, spend sighs for your sake, make an idoll of your beau∣ty: beleeue me it greeues mee not a little to see the poore man so pensiue, and you so pittilesse. Ah Aliena (quoth she) be not peremptory in your iudgments, I heare Rosalynde praisd as I am Ganimede, but were I Ro∣salynde, I could answere the Forrester: if he mourne for loue, there are medicines for loue: Rosalynde connot be faire and vn∣kind. And so Madame you see it is time to fold our flocks, or else Coridon will frown, and say you will neuer proue good huswife. With that they put their sheepe into the coates, and went home to her friend Coridons Cottage, Aliena as merry as might bee,
that she was thus in the company of her Rosalynde: but shee poore soule, that had Loue her loadstarre, and her thoughtes set on fire with the flame of fancie, could take no rest, but being alone began to consider what passionate pennance poore Rosader was enioyned to by Loue and Fortune: that at last shee fell into this humour with her selfe. Rosalynde passionate alone. AH Rosalynd, how the Fates haue set down in theyr Sindde to make thee vnhappy: for when Fortune hath done hir worst, then Loue comes in to begin a new tragedie: she seeks to lodge her sonne in thyne eyes, and to kindle her fires in thy bosome. Beware fond girle, he is an vnruly guest to harbour: for entring in by intreats, he will not be thrust out by force, and her fires are fed with such fuell, as no water is able to quench. Seest thou not how Venus seekes to wrap thee in her Lahorynth, wherein is pleasure at the entrance, but within, sorrowes, cares, and dis∣content: she is a Syren, stop thine eares at her melodie: she is a a Basiliscke, shutte thine eyes, and gaze not at her seast thou pe∣rish. Thou art now placed in the Countrey content, where are heauenly thoughtes, and meane desires: in those Lawnes where thy flocks feed Diana haunts: be as her Nymphes chast, and e∣nemie to Loue, for there is no greater honour to a mayd, than to account of fancie, as a mortal foe to their sexe. Daphne that bon∣ny wench, was not turned into a Bay tree, as the Poets fain, but for her chastitie her fame was immortall, resembling the Law∣rell that is euer greene. Follow thou her steps Rosalinde, and the rather, for that thou art an exile, and banished from the court: whose distresse, as it is appeased with patience, so it would be re∣newed with amorous passions. Haue minde on thy forepassed fortunes, feare the worst, and intangle not thy selfe with present fancies, least louing in hast, thou repent thee at leisure. Ah but yet Rosalynd, it is Rosader that courts thee: one, who as he is beu∣tifull, so hee is vertuous, and harboureth in his minde as manie good qualities, as his face is shadowed with gratious fauours: and therefore Rosalynde stoope to Loue, least beeing eyther
too coy, or too cruell, Venus waxe wroth, and plague thee with the reward of disdaine. Rosalynde thus passionate, was wakened from her dumpes by Aliena, who sayde it was time to goe to bed. Coridon swore that was true, for Charls Waine was risen in the North. Wher∣vppon each taking leaue of other, went to their rest, all but the poore Rosalynde: who was so full of passions, that she could not possesse any content. Well, leauing her to her broken slumbers, expect what was performed by them the next morning. The Sunne was no sooner stept from the bed of Aurora, but Aliena was wakened by Ganimede: who restlesse all night had tossed in her passions: saying it was then time to go to the field to vnfold their sheepe. Aliena (that spied where the hare was by the hounds, and could see day at a litle hole) thought to be pleasaunt with her Ganimede, & therfore replied thus: What wanton? the Sun is but new vp, & as yet Iris riches lies folded in the bosome of Flora, Phoebus hath not dried vp the pearled dew, and so long Coridon hath taught me it is not fitte to lead the sheepe abroad: least the deaw being vnwholesome, they get the rot: but now see I the old prouerbe true, he is in hast whom the deuill driues, and where loue prickes forward, there is no worse death then delay, Ah my good page, is there fancie in thine eye, and passions in thy heart? What, hast thou wrapt loue in thy looks? and sette all thy thoughts on fire by affection? I tell thee, it is a flame as harde to be quencht as that of Aetna. But nature must haue her course, womens eies haue faculty attractiue like the feat, & retentiue like the diamond: they dally in the delight of faire obiects, til gazing on the Panthers beautiful skin, repenting experience tel them he hath a deuouring paunch. Come on (q. Ganimede) this sermon of yours is but a subtiltie to lie stil a bed, because either you think the morning cold, or els I being gone, you would steale a nappe: this shift carries no paulme, and therefore vp and away. And for Loue, let me alone, ile whip him away with nettles, & set disdaine as a charme to withstand his forces: and therefore loake you to your selfe, be not too bold, for Venus can make you bend: nor to coy, for Cupid hath a piercing dare, that wil make you crie Pec∣caui, And that is it (quoth Aliena) that hath raised you so earlie
this morning. And with that she slipt on her peticoat, and start vp: and assoone as shee had made her ready, and taken her breakfast, away goe these two with their bagge and bottles to the field, in more pleasant content of mynd, then euer they were in the Court of Torismond. They came no sooner nigh the foldes, but they might see where their disconted Forrester was walking in his melancholy. Assoone as Aliena saw him, she smiled, and sayd to Ganymede, wipe your eyes sweeting: for yonder is your sweet heart this morning in deep prayers no doubt to Venus, that she may make you as pitifull as hee is passionate. Come on Gani∣mede, I pray thee lets haue a litle sport with him. Content (quoth Ganimede) and with that to waken him out of his deep memen∣to, he began thus. Forrester, good fortune to thy thoughts, and ease to thy pas∣sions, what makes you so early abroad this morne, in contempla∣tion, no doubt of your Rosalynd. Take heede Forrester, step not too farre, the Foord may be deep, and you slip ouer the shooes: I tell thee, flyes haue their spleen, the antes choster, the least haires shadows, and the smallest loues great desires. Tis good (Forre∣ster) to loue, but not to ouer loue: least in louing her that likes not thee, thou fold thy selfe in an endlesse Laborinth. Rosader seeing the faire shepheardesse and her prettie Swayne, in whose compa∣ny he felt the greatest ease of his care, hee returned them a salute on this maner. Gentle shepheards, all haile, and as healthfull be your flocks, as you happie in content. Loue is restlesse, and my bedde is but the cell of my bane, in that there I finde busie thoughtes and bro∣ken slumbers: heere (although euery where passionate) yet I brooke loue with more patience, in that euerie obiect feedes mine eye with varietie of fancies: when I looke on Floraes beaute∣ous tapestrie, checkered with the pride of all her treasure, I call to minde the faire face of Rosalynd, whose heauenly hue exceeds the Rose and the Lilly in their highest excellence: the brightnesse of Phoebus shine, puts mee in minde to thinke of the sparkeling flames that flew from her eyes, and set my heart first on fire, the sweet harmony of the birds, puts me in remembrance of the rare melody of her voyce, which lyke the Syren enchaunteth the eares
of the hearer. Thus in contemplation I salue my sorrowes, with applying the perfection of euery obiect to the excellencie of her qualities. She is much beholding vnto you (quoth Aliena) and so much, that I haue oft wisht with my selfe, that if I should euer proue as amorous as Oenone, I might finde as faithfull a Paris as your selfe. How say you by this Item Forrester, (quoth Ganimede) the faire shepheardesse fauours you, who is mistresse of so many flockes. Leaue of man the supposition of Rosalynds loue, when as watching at her, you roue beyond the Moone, and cast your lookes vpon my mistresse, who no doubt is as faire though not so royall, one bird in the hand is worth two in the wood: better pos∣sesse the loue of Aliena, then catch frinously at the shadowe of Rosalynd. Ale tel thee boy (quoth Ganimede) so is my fancy fixed on my Rosalynde, that were thy mistresse as faire as Laeda or Danae, whom Ioue courted in transformed shapes, mine eyes would not vouch to entertaine their beauties: and so hath Loue lockt me in her perfections, that I had rather onely contemplate in her beau∣ties, then absolutely possesse the excellence of any other. Venus is too blame (Forrester) if hauing so true a seruant of you, shee re∣ward you not with Rosalynd, if Rosalynd were more fairer then her selfe. But leauing this prattle, now ile put you in mynd of your pro∣mise, about those Sonnets which you sayd were at home in your lodge. I haue them about mee (quoth Rosader) let vs sit downe, and then you shall heare what a Poeticall fury Loue will in fuse into a man: with that they sate downe vpon a greene banke, sha∣dowed with sigge trees, and Rosader, fetching a deep sigh, read them this Sonnet. Rosaders Sonnet. In sorowes cell I layd me downe to sleepe, But waking woes were iealous of mine eyes, They made them watch, and bend themselues to weepe, But weeping teares their want could not suffice: Yet since for her they wept who guides my hart, They weeping smile, and triumph in their smart.
Of these my teares a fountaine fiercely springs, Where Venus baynes her selfe incenst with loue, Where Cupid bow seth his faire feathred wings: But I behold what paines I must approue. Cure drinkes it drie: but when on her I thinke, Loue makes me weepe it full vnto the brinke. Meane while my sighes yeeld truce vnto my teares, By them the windes increast and fiercely blow: Yet when I sigh the flame more plaine appeares, And by their force with greater power doth glow: Amids these paines, all Phoenix like I thriue, Since Loue that yeelds me death, may life reuiue. Rosader en esperance. Now surely Forrester (quoth Aliena) when thou madest this Sonnet, thou wert in some amorous quandarie, neither too fear∣full, as dispairing of thy mistresse fauours: nor too gleesome, as hoping in thy fortunes. I can smile (quoth Ganymede) at the Sonettoes, Canzones, Madrigales, roundes and roundelaies, that these pensiue patients powre out, when their eyes are more full of wantonnesse, then their hearts of passions. Then, as the fi∣shers put the sweetest bayt to the fairest fish: so these Ouidians (holding Amo in their tongues, when their thoughtes come at hap hazard) write that they bee wrapt in an endlesse laborinth of sorrow, when walking in the large leas of libertie, they only haue their humours in their inckpot. It they find women so fond, that they will with such painted lures come to their lust, then they tri∣umph till they bee full gorgde with pleasures: and then flye they away (like ramage kytes ) to their own content, leauing the tame foole their Mistresse full of fancie, yet without euer a feather. If they misse (as dealing with some wary wanton, that wants not such a one as themselues, but spies their subtiltie) they ende their amors with a few fained sighes: and so theyr excuse is, their mi∣stresse is cruell, and they smoother passions with patience. Such
gentle Forrester we may deeme you to be, that rather passe awa the time heere in these woods with wryting amorets, then to be deeply enamoured (as you say) of your Rosalynde. If you be such a one, then I pray God, when you thinke your fortunes the highest, and your desires to bee most excellent, then that yo may with Ixion embrace Iuno in a cloude, and haue nothing b a marble mistresse to release your martyrdome: but if you be tru and trustie, eye-paynd and heart sick, then accursed be Rosalynde if shee prooue cruel: for Forrester (I flatter not) thou art worthi of as faire as shee. Aliena spying the storme by the winde, smile to see how Ganymede flew to the fist without any call: but Ro∣sader who tooke him flat for a shepheards Swayne, made him this answere. Trust mee Swayne (quoth Rosader) but my Canzon wa written in no such humor: for mine eye & my heart are relatiues, the one drawing fancy by sight, the other enterteining her by sorrow. If thou sawest my Rosalynd, with what beauties Natur hath fauoured her, with what perfection the heauens hath graced her, with what qualities the Gods haue endued her; then woul thou say, there is none so fickle that could be fleeting vnto her. I she had been Aeneas Dido, had Venus and Iuno both scolde him from Carthage, yet her excellence despight of them, woul haue detained him at Tyre. If Phillis had been as beauteous or Ariadne as vertuous, or both as honourable and excellent a she; neither had the Philbert tree sorrowed in the death of dispairing Phillis, nor the starres haue been graced with Ariadne but Demophoon and Theseus had been trustie to their Para∣gons, I wil tel thee Swayne, if with a deep insight thou coulds pierce into the secert at my loues, and see what deep impression of her Idea affection hath made in my heart: then wouldst tho confesse I were passing passionate, and no lesse indued with admirable patience. Why (quoth Aliena) needs there patience in loue Or else in nothing (quoth Rosader) for it is a restlesse sore, tha hath no ease, a cankar that still frees, a disease that taketh awa all hope of sleepe. If then so many sorrowes, sodaine ioyes, momentary pleasures, continuall feares, daily griefes, and night woes be founde in loue, then is not hee to bee accounted patien
that smothers all these passions with silence: Thou speakest by experience (quoth Ganimede) and therfore we hold al thy words for Axiomes: but is Loue such a lingring maladie? It is (quoth he) either extreame or meane, according to the minde of the par∣tie that entertaines it: for as the weedes grow longer vntoucht then the prettie floures, and the flint lyes safe in the quarry, when the Emerauld is suffering the Lapidaries toole: so meane men are freed from Venus iniuries, when kings are enuironed with a laborinth of her cares. The whiter the Lawne is, the deeper is the moale, the more purer the Chrysolite the sooner stained: and such as haue their hearts ful of honour, haue their loues ful of the greatest sorowes. But in whomsoeuer (quoth Rosader) hee fix∣eth his dart, hee neuer leaueth to assault him, till either hee hath wonne him to folly or fancy: for as the Moone neuer goes with∣out the starre Lunisequa, so a Louer neuer goeth without the vn∣rest of his thoughts. For proofe you shall heare another fancy of my making. Now doo gentle Forrester (quoth Ganimede) and with that he read ouer this Sonetto. Rosaders second Sonetto. Turne I my lookes vnto the Skies, Loue with his arrows wounds mine eies, If so I gaze vpon the ground, Loue then euery floure is found. Search I the shade to flie my paine, He meets me in the shade againe: Wend I to walke in secret groue, Euen there I meet with sacred Loue. If so I bayne me in the spring, Euen on the brinke I heare him sing: If so I meditate alone, He will be partner of my mone. If so I mourn, he weeps with me, And where I am, there will he be. When as I talke of Rosalynd, The God from coynesse waxeth kind,
And seems in self same flames to fry, Because he loues as wel as I. Sweet Rosalynd for ptity rue, For why, then Loue I am more true: He if he speed will quickly flie, But in thy loue I liue and die. How like you this Sonnet, quoth Rosader? Marry quoth Ganimede, for the pen well, for the passionill: for as I praise the one, I pitie the other, in that thou shouldest hunt after a cloude, and loue either without reward or regard. Tis neither froward∣nesse, quoth Rosader, but my hard fortunes, whose destenies haue crost me with her absence: for did shee feele my loues, she would not let me linger in these sorrowes. Women, as they are faire, so they respect faith, and estimate more (if they be honourable) the wit than the wealth, hauing loyaltie the obiect wherat they ayme their fancies. But leauing off these interparleyes, you shall heare my last Sonnetto, and then you haue heard all my Poetry: and with that he sight out this. Rosaders third Sonnet. Of vertuous Loue my self may boast alone, Since no suspect my seruice may attaint: For perfect faire she is the only one, Whom I esteem for my beloued Saint. Thus for my faith I only beare the bell, And for her faire she only doth excell. Then let fond Petrarch shrowd his Lawraes praise, And Tasso cease to publish his affect, Since mine the faith confirmd at all assaies, And hers the faire, which all men do respect. My lines hir faire, hir faire my faith assures, Thus I by Loue, and Loue by me indures. Thus quoth Rosader, here is an ende of my Poems, but for all this no release of my passions: so that I resemble him, that in
the deapth of his distresse hath none but the Eccho to answere him. Ganimede pitttying her Rosader, thinking to driue him out of his amorous melancholy, said, that now the Sunne was in his Meridionall heat, and that it was high noone, therefore wee shepheards say, tis time to go to dinner: for the Sunne and our stomackes, are Shepheards dials. Therefore Forrester, if thou wilt take such fare as comes out of our homely scrips, welcome shall answere whatsoeuer thou wantst in delicates. Aliena tooke the entertainment by the ende, and tolde Rosader hee should bee her guest. He thankt them heartily, and sat with them downe to dinner: where they had such cates as Countrey state did allow them, sawst with such content, and such sweete prattle, as it see∣med farre more sweet, than all their Courtly iunckets. Assoone as they had taken their repast, Rosader giuing them thankes for his good cheare, would haue been gone: but Gani∣mede, that was loath to let him passe out of her presence, began thus: Nay Forrester quoth he, if thy busines be not the greater, seeing thou saift thou art so deeply in loue, let mee see how thou canst wooe: I will represent Rosalynde, and thou shalt bee as thou art Rosader, see in some amorous Eglogue, how if Rosa∣lynd were present, how thou couldst court her: and while we sing of Loue, Aliena shall tune her pipe, and plaie vs melodie. Con∣tent, quoth Rosader. And Aliena, shee to shew her willingnesse, drew forth a recorder, and began to winde it. Then the louyng Forrester began thus. The wooing Eglogue betwixt Rosa∣lynde and Rosader. Rosader. I pray thee Nymph by all the working words, By all the teares and sighs that Louers know, Or what our thoughts or faltring tongue affords, I craue for mine in ripping vp my woe. Sweet Rosalynd my loue (would God my loue) My life (would God my life) aye pitie me:
Thy lips are kind, and humble like the doue, And but with beautie pitie wil not be. Looks on mine eyes made red with rufull teares, From whence the raine of true remorse descendeth, All pal in lookes, and I though yoong in yeares, And nought but loue or death my dayes befriendeth. Oh let no stormy rigour knit thy browes, Which Loue appointed for his mercy seat: The tallest tree by Boreas breath it bowes, The yron yeels with hammer, and to keat. Oh Rosalynd then be thou pitifull, For Rosalynd is only beautifull. Rosalynde. Loues want ons arme their traitrous sutes with teares, With vows, with oaths, with lookes, with showers of gold: But when the fruit of their affects appeares, The simple heart by subtil sleights is sold. Thus sucks the yeelding eare the poysoned bait, Thus feeds the hart vpon his endles harmes, Thus glut the thoughts themselues on self deceit, Thus blind the eyes their sight by subtil charmes. The louely lookes, the sighs that storme so sore, The deaw of deep dissembled doublenesse: These may attempt, but are of power no more, Where beauty leanes to wit and soothfastnesse. Oh Rosader then be thou wittifull, For Rosalynd scorns foolish pitifull. Rosader. I pray thee Rosalynd by those sweet eyes That stain the Sun in shine, the morn in cleare, By those sweet cheeks where Loue incamped lyes To kisse the Roses of the springing yeare. I tempt thee Rosalynd by ruthfull plaints, Not seasoned with deceipt or fraudfull guile, But firm inpayn, far more than toong depaints, Sweet Nymph be kind, and grace me with a smile. So may the heauens preserue from hurtfull food
Thy harmlesse flockes, so may the Summer yeeld The pride of all her riches and her good, To fat thy sheepe (the Cittizens of field,) Oh leaue to arme thy louely browes with scorne: The birds their beake, the Lyon hath his taile, And Louers nought but sighs and bitter mourne, The spotlesse fort of fancie to assaile. Oh Rosalynde then be thou pittifull: For Rosalynde is onely beautifull. Rosalynde. The hardned steele by fire is brought in frame: Rosader. And Rosalynde my loue that any wooll more softer: And shall not sighes her tender hart inflame? Rosalynde. Were Louers true, maydes would beleeue them ofter. Rosader. Truth and regard, and honour guid my loue. Rosalynde. Paine would I trust, but yet I dare not trie, Rosader. Oh pittie me sweet Nymph, and do but proue. Rosalynde. I would resist, but yet I know not why. Rosader. Oh Rosalynde be kinde, for times will change, Thy lookes ay nill be faire as now they be, Thine age from beautie may thy lookes estrange: Ah yeeld in time sweet Nimph and pittie me. Rosalynde. Oh Rosalynde thou must be pittifull: For Rosader is yong and beautifull. Rosader, Oh gaine more great than kingdomes or a crowne. Rosalynde. Oh trust betraid if Rosader abuse me.
Rosader. First let the heauens conspire to pull me downe, And heauen and earth as abiect quite refuse me: Let sorrowes streame about my hatefull bower, And retchlesse horror hatch within my brest, Let beauties eye afflict me with a lower, Let deepe despaire pursue me without rest: Ere Rosalynde my loyaltie disproue, Ere Rosalynde accuse me for vnkind. Rosalynde. Then Rosalynde will grace thee with her loue, Then Rosalynde will haue thee still in mind. Rosader. Then let me triumph more than Tithons deere, Since Rosalynde will Rosader respect: Then let my face exile his sorry cheere, And frolike in the comfort of affect: And say that Rosalynde is onely pittifull, Since Rosalynde is onely beautifull. When thus they had finished their courting Eglogue in such a familiar clause, Ganimede as Augure of some good fortunes to light vpon their affections, began to be thus pleasant: How now Forrester, haue I not fitted your turne? haue I not playde the woman handsomely, and shewed my selfe as coy in graunts, as courteous in desires, and beene as full of suspicion, as men of flattery? And yet to salue all, iumpe I not all vp with the sweet vnion of loue? Did not Rosalinde content her Rosader? The Forrester at this smiling, shooke his head, and folding his armes made this merrie reply. Truth gentle Swaine, Rosader hath his Rosalynde, but as Ixion had Iuno, who thinking to possesse a goddesse, only imbra∣ced a clowd: in these imaginary fruitions of fancie, I resemble the birds that fed themselues with Zeuxis painted grapes: but they grew so leane with pecking at shadows, that they were glad with Aesops Cocke to scrape for a barley cornell: so fareth it with me, who to feed my self with the hope of my Mistris fauors,
sooth my selfe in thy sutes, and onely in conceipt reape a wished for content: but if my foode bee no better than such amorous dreams, Venus at the yeares end, shal find me but a leane louer. Yet do I take these follyes for high fortunes, and hope these fai∣ned affections do deuine some vnfained ende of ensuing fancies. And thereupon (quoth Aliena) Ile play the priest, from this daye forth Ganimede shall call thee husband, and thou shalt cal Ga∣nimede wife, and so weele haue a marriage. Content quoth Ro∣sader, and laught. Content quoth Ganimede, and chaunged as red as a rose: and so with a smile and a blush, they made vp this iesting match, that after proued to a marriage in earnest; Rosa∣der full little thinking hee had wooed and woonne his Rosa∣lynde. But all was well, hope is a sweet string to harpe on, & therfore let the Forrester a while shape himselfe to his shadow, and tarrie fortunes leysure, till she may make a Metamorphosis fit for his purpose. I digresse, and therefore to Aliena: who saide, the wed∣ding was not worth a pinne, vnlesse there were some cheare, nor that bargaine well made that was not striken vp with a cuppe of wine: and therefore she wild Ganimede to set out such cates as they had, and to draw out her bottle, charging the Forrester as he had imagined his loues, so to conceipt these cates to be a most sumptuous banquet, and to take a Mazer of wine, and to drinke to his Rosalynde, which Rosader did, and so they passed awaye the day in many pleasant deuices. Till at last Aliena perceyued time would tarry no man, and that the Sun waxed very low, rea∣die to set: which made her shorten their amorous prattle, and end the banquet with a fresh Carrowse: which done, they all three a∣rose, and Aliena brake off thus. Now Forrester, Phoebus that all this while hath beene parta∣ker of our sports, seeing euery woodman more fortunate in his loues, than he in his fancies: seeing thou hast woon Rosalynde, when he could not woo Daphne, hides his head for shame, & bids vs adiew in a clowd, our sheepe they poore wantons wander to∣wards their foldes, as caught by Nature their due times of rest, which tels vs forester, we must depart. Marry though there were a mariage, yet I must carry this night the bride with mee, and to∣morrow
morning if you meete vs heere, Ile promise to deuer you her as good a mayd as I find her. Content quoth Rosader, tis enough for me in the night to dreame on loue, that in the day am so fond to doate an loue: and so till to morrowe you to your Folds, and I will to my Lodge: and thus the Forrester and they parted. He was no sooner gone, but Aliena & Ganimede went and folded their flocks, and taking vp their hookes, their bags, & their bottles, hyed homeward. By the way (Aliena to make the time seeme short) began to prattle with Ganimede thus: I haue heard them say, that what the Fates forepoint, that Fortune pric∣keth downe with a Period, that the Starres are sticklers in Ve∣nus Court, and Desire hangs at the heele of Destenie: if it be so, then by all probable coniecures, this match will be a marriage: for if Augurisme be authenticall, or the Deuines doomes princi∣ples, it cannot bee but such a shadow portends the issue of a sub∣stance, for to that ende did the Gods force the conceit of this Eg∣logue, that they might discouer the ensuing consent of your af∣fections: so that ere it bee long, I hope (in earnest) to daunce at your wedding. Tush (quoth Ganimede) all is not malte that is cast on the kill, there goes more words to a bargaine than one, loue feeles no footing in the aire, and fancie holdes it slippery harbour to nestle in the tongue: the match is not yet so surely made, but hee may misse of his market: but if fortune be his friend, I will not be his foe: and so I pray you (gentle Mistresse Aliena) take it. I take all things well (quoth she) that is your content, and am glad Ro∣sader is yours: for now I hope your thoughts will bee at quiet: your eye that euer looked at Loue, will now lende a glaunce on your Lambes, and then they will proue more buxsome, and you more blyth, for the eyes of the Maister feedes the Cattle. As thus they were in chat, they spyed olde Coridon where he came plod∣ding to meet them: who told them supper was ready, which news made them speed them home. Where we will leaue them to the next morrow, and returne to Saladyne. All this while did poore Saladyne (banished from Bourdeux and the Court of France by Torismond) wander vp and downe in the Forrest of Arden, thinking to get to Lyons, and so tra∣uaile
through Germany into Italie: but the Forrest beeing full of by pathes, and he vnskilfull of the country coast, slipt out of the way, and chaunced vp into the Desart, not farre from the place where Gerismond was, & his brother Rosader. Saladyne wea∣rie with wandring vp and downe, and hungry with long fasting, finding a little caue by the side of a thicker, eating such fruite as the Forrest did affoord, and contenting himselfe with such drinke as Nature had prouided, and thirst made delicate, after his repast he fell in a dead sleepe. As thus he lay, a hungry Lyon came hun∣ting downe the edge of the groue for pray, and espying Saladyne began to ceaze vpon him: but seeing he lay still without any mo∣tion, he left to touch him, for that Lyons hate to pray on dead car∣kasses: and yet desirous to haue some foode, the Lion lay downe and watcht to see if he would stirre. While thus Saladyne slept secure, fortune that was careful of her champion, began to smile, and brought it so to passe, that Rosader (hauing striken a Deere that but lightly hurt fled through the thicket) came pacing down by the groue with a Boare speare in his hande in great haste, he spyed where a man lay a sleepe, and a Lyon fast by him: amazed at this sight, as he stoode gazing, his nose on the sodaine bledde, which made him coniecture it was some friend of his. Whereup∣pon drawing more nigh, he might easily discerne his visage, and perceiued by his phisnomie that it was his brother Saladyne: which draue Rosader into a deepe passion, as a man perplexed at the sight of so vnexpected a chance, maruelling what should driue his Brother to trauerse those secrete Desarts without any com∣panie in such distresse and forlorne sorte. But the present time craued no such doubting ambages: for he must eyther resolue to hazard his life for his reliefe, or else steale away, and leaue him to the crueltie of the Lyon. In which doubt hee thus briefly debated with himselfe. Rosaders meditation. NOw Rosader, Fortune that long hath whipt thee with net∣tles, meanes to salue thee with roses, and hauing crost thee with many frownes, now she presents thee with the brightnesse
of her fauors. Thou that didst count thy selfe the most distressed of all men, maiest account thy selfe the most fortunate amongst men: if fortune can make men happy, or sweet reuenge be wrapt in a pleasing content. Thou seest Saladyne thine enemie, the worker of thy misfortunes, and the efficient cause of thine exile, subiect to the crueltie of a mercilesse Lyon: brought into this miserie by the Gods, that they might seeme iust in reuenging his rigour, and thy iniuries. Seest thou not how the Starres are in a fauorable aspect, the planets in some pleasing coniunction, the fates agreeable to thy thoughts, and the destinies performers of thy desires, in that Saladyne shall die, and thou bee free of his bloud: he receiue meed for his amisse, and thou erect his Tombe with innocent handes. Now Rosader shalt thou retourne vnto Bourdeaux, and enioy thy possessions by birth, and his reuenews by inheritaunce: now mayest thou triumph in Loue, and hang fortunes Altars with garlands. For when Rosalynde heares of thy wealth, it will make her loue thee the more willingly: for womens eyes are made of Chrisecoll, that is euer vnperfect vn∣lesse tempred with gold: and Iupiter soonest enioyed Danae, be∣cause hee came to her in so rich a shower. Thus shall this Lyon (Rosader) ende the life of a miserable man, and from distresse raise thee to be most fortunate. And with that casting his Boare speare on his necke away he began to trudge. But hee had not stept backe two or three paces, but a new motion stroke him to the very hart, that resting his Boare speare against his brest, hee fell into this passionate humour. Ah Rosader, wert thou the sonne of Sir Iohn of Bourdeux, whose vertues exceeded his valour, and the most hardiest Knight in all Europe? Should the honour of the Father shine in the ac∣tions of the Sonne? and wilt thou dishonour thy parentage, in forgetting the nature of a Gentleman? Did not thy father at his last gaspe breath out this golden principle: Brothers amitie is like the drops of Balsamum, that salueth the most daungerous sores? Did he make a large exhort vnto concord, and wilt thou shew thy selfe carelesse? Oh Rosader, what though Saladyne hath wronged thee, and made the liue an exile in the Forrest? shall thy Nature bee so cruell, or thy Nurture so crooked, or thy
thoughtes so sauage, as to suffer so dismall a reuenge? what, to let him be deuoured by wilde beastes? Non sapit, qui non sibi sapit is fondly spoken in such bitter extreames. Loose not his life Rosader, to win a world of treasure: for in hauing him thou hast a brothr, and by hazarding for his life, thou gettest a friend, and reconcilest an enemie: and more honour shalt thou purchase by pleasuring a foe, than reuenging a thousand iniuries. With that his Brother began to stirre, and the Lion to rowse himselfe: whereupon Rosader sodainly charged him with the Boare speare, and wounded the Lion very sore at the first stroke. The beast feeling himselfe to haue a mortall hurt, leapt at Ro∣sader, and with his pawes gaue him a sore piuch on the brest, that he had almost faln: yet as a man most valiant, in whom the sparks of Sir Iohn of Burdeaux remained, he recouered himselfe, and in short combat slew the Lion: who at his death roared so lowd, that Saladyne awaked, and starting vp was amazed at the sud∣den sight of so monstrous a beast lying slaine by him, and so sweet a Gentleman wounded. He presently (as hee was of a ripe con∣ceipt) began to coniecture, that the Gentleman had slaine him in his defence. Whereupon (as a man in a traunce) he stood staring on them both a good while, not knowing his Brother beeing in that disguise: at last he burst into these tearmes. Sir, whatsoeuer thou be (as full of honour thou must needes be, by the view of thy present valour) I perceiue thou hast redres∣sed my fortunes by thy courage, and saued my life with thine own losse: which tyes me to be thine in all humble seruice. Thankes thou shalt haue as thy due, and more thou canst not haue: for my abilitie denies me to performe a deeper debt. But if any wayes it please thee to commaund me, vse mee as farre as the power of a poore Gentleman may stretch. Rosader seeing hee was vnknowne to his Brother, woon∣dered to heare such courteous words come from his crabbed na∣ture, but glad of such reformed nurture, he made this answere. I am sir (whatsoeuer thou art) a Forrester and Ranger of these walkes: who following my Deere to the fall, was conducted hi∣ther by some assenting Fate, the I might saue thee, and dispa∣rage my selfe. For comming into this place, I saw thee a sleepe,
and the Lyon watching thy awake, that at thy rising hee might pray vppon thy carkasse. At the first sight I coniectured thee a Gentleman (for all mens thoughts ought to bee fouorable in i∣magination) and I counted it the part of a resolute man to pur∣chase a strangers reliefe, though with the losse of his owne blood: which I haue performed (thou seest) to mine owne preiudice. If therefore thou be a man of such worth as I value thee by thy ex∣teriour liniaments, make discourse vnto me what is the cause of thy present misfortunes. For by the furrowes in thy face thou see∣mest to be crost with her frownes: but whatsoeuer or howsoeuer, lette mee craue that fauour, to heare the tragicke cause of thy e∣state. Saladyne sitting downe, and fetching a deepe sigh, be∣gan thus. Saladynes discourse to Rosader vnknowne. ALthough the discourse of my fortunes, be the renewing of my sorrowes, and the rubbing of the scarre, will open a fresh wound: yet that I may not prooue ingratefull to so courteous a Gentleman, I wil rather sitte downe and sigh out my estate, then giue any offence by smothering my griefe with silence. Knowe therefore (sir) that I am of Bourdeaux, and the sonne and heyre of Sir Iohn of Bourdeaux, a man for his vertues and valour so famous, that I cannot thinke, but the fame of his honours hath reacht further than the knowledge of his personage. The infor∣tunate sonne of so fortunate a Knight am I, my name Saladine: who succeeding my Father in possessions, but not in qualities, hauing two Brethren committed by my Father at his death to my charge, with such golden principles of brotherly concorde, as might haue pierst like the Syrens melodie into any humane eare. But I (with Vlisses became deafe against his Philosophicall harmony, and made more value of profit than of vertue, estee∣ming gold sufficient honour, and wealth the fittest title for a gen∣tlemans dignitie: I sette my middle brother to the Uniuersitie to bee a Scholler, counting it enough if he might pore on a booke while I fed on his reuenewes: and for the yoongest (which was my Fathers ioye) yoong Rosader. And with that, naming of
Rosader, Saladyne sate him downe and wept, Nay forward man (quoth the Forrester) teares are the vn∣fittest salue that any man can apply for to cure sorrows, and there∣fore cease from such feminine follies, as should drop out of a wo∣mans eye to deceiue, not out of a Gentlemans looke to discouer his thoughts, and forward with thy discourse. Oh sir (quoth Saladyne) this Rosader that wrings tears from my eyes, and blood from my heart, was like my father in exteri∣our personage & in inward qualities: for in the prime of his yeres he aymed all his acts at honor, and couered rather to die, than to brooke any iniury vnworthy a Gentlemans credite. I, whom en∣uy had made blinde, and couetousnesse masked with the vayle of selfe-loue, seeing the Palme tree grow straight, thought to sup∣presse it being a twig: but Nature wil haue her course, the Cedar wil be tall, the Diamond bright, the Carbuncle glistering, and vertue wil shine though it be neuer so much obscured. For I kept Rosader as a slaue, and vsed him as one of my seruile hindes, vn∣til age grew on, and a secret insight of my abuse entred into his minde: insomuch, that he could not brooke it, but coueted to haue what his father left him, and to liue of himselfe. To be short sir, I repined at his fortunes, and he countercheckt me not with abi∣litie but valour, vntil at last by my friends and ayde of such as fo∣lowed gold more than right or vertue, I banisht him from Bour∣deaux, and hee poore Gentleman liues no man knowes where in some distressed discontent. The Gods not able to suffer such im∣pietie vnreuenged, so wrought, that the King pickt a causelesse quarrel against me, in hope to haue my lands, & so hath exiled me out of France for euer. Thus, thus sir, am I the most miserable of almen, as hauing a blemish in my thoughts for the wrongs I pro∣fered Rosader, and a touch in my estate to be throwne from my proper possessions by iniustice. Passionat thus with many griefs, in penance of my former follies, I go thus pilgrime like to seeke out my brother, that I may reconcile my self to him in all submis∣sion, and afterward wend to the holy Land, to ende my yeares in as many vertues, as I haue spent my youth in wicked vani∣ties. Rosader hearing the resolution of his brother Saladyne, be∣gan
to compassionate his sorrowes, and not able to smother the sparkes of Nature with fained secretie, he burst into these louing speeches. Then know Saladyne (quoth hee) that thou hast met with Rosader, who grieues as much to see thy distresse, as thy selfe to feele the burthen of thy misery. Saladyne casting vp his eye, and noting well the phisnomy of the Forrester, knew that it was his brother Rosader: which made him so bash and blush at the first meeting, yt Rosader was faine to recomfort him. Which he did in such sort, that hee shewed how highly he held reuenge in scorne. Much a doo there was betweene these two brethren. Sa∣ladyne in crauing pardon, and Rosader in forgiuing and forget∣ting all former iniuries: the one submisse, the other curteous; Sa∣ladyne penitent and passionate, Rosader kynd and louing; that at length Nature working an vnion of their thoughts, they ear∣nestly embraced, and fell from matters of vnkindnesse, to talke of the Country life, which Rosader so highly commended, that his brother began to haue a desire to taste of that homely content. In this humor Rosader conducted him to Gerismonds Lodge, and presented his brother to the King, discoursing the whole matter how all had hapned betwixt them. The King looking vpon Sala∣dyne, found him a man of a most beautifull personage, and sawe in his face sufficient sparkes of ensuing honors, gaue him great entertainment, and glad of their friendly reconcilement, promi∣sed such fauour as the pouertic of his estate might affoord: which Saladyne gratefully accepted. And so Gerismond fell to questi∣on Torismonds life? Saladyne briefly discourst vnto him his iniustice & tyrannies: with such modestie (although hee had wron∣ged him) that Gerismond greatly praised the sparing speech of the yoong Gentleman. Many questions past, but atlast Gerismond began with a deepe sigh, to inquire if there were any newes of the welfare of Alinda or his daughter Rosalynd? None sir quoth Saladyne, for since their departure they were neuer heard of. Iniurious Fortune (quoth the King) that to double the fathers miserie, wrongst the daughter with misfortunes. And with that (surchar∣ged with sorrows) he went into his Cell, and left Saladyne and Rosader, whome Rosader straight conducted to the sight of
Adam Spencer. Who seeing Saladyne in that estate, was in a browne study: but when he heard the whole matter, although hee grieued for the exile of his maister, yet be ioyed that banishment had so reformed him, that from a lasciuious youth he was proued a verteous Gentleman. Looking a longer while, and seeing what familiaritie past betweene them, and what fauours were inter∣changed with brotherly affection, he sayd thus: I marry, thus it should be, this was the concord that old sir Iohn of Bourdeaux wisht betwyxt you. Now fulfil you those precepts hee breathed out at his death, and in obseruing them, looke to liue fortunate, and die honourable. Well sayd Adam Spencer quoth Rosader, but hast any victuals in store for vs? A piece of a red Deer (quoth he) and a bottle of wine. Tis Forresters fare brother, quoth Ro∣sader: and so they sat downe & sel to their cates. Assoone as they had taken their repast, and had wel dined, Rosader tooke his bro∣ther Saladyne by the hand, and shewed him the pleasures of the Forrest, and what content they enioyed in that mean estate. Thus for two or three dayes he walked vp and downe with his brother, to shew him all the commodities that belonged to his walke. In which time hee was mist of his Ganymede, who mused greatly (with Aliena) what shuld become of their forester. Somewhile they thought he had taken some word vnkindly, and had taken the pet: then they imagined some new Loue had withdrawne his fan∣cie, or happely that he was sicke, or detained by some great busi∣nesse of Gerismonds, or that hee had made a reconcilement with his brother, and so returned to Bourdeaux. These coniectures did they cast in their heades, but special∣ly Ganimede: who hauyng Loue in heart prooued restlesse, and halfe without patience, that Rosader wronged her with so long absence: for Loue measures euerie minute, and thinkes houres to bee dayes, and dayes to bee moneths, till they feede theyr eyes with the sight of theyr desired obiect. Thus perplexed li∣ued poore Ganymede: while on a day sitting with Aliena in a great dumpe, she cast vp her eye, and saw where Rosader came pacing towardes them with his Forrest bill on his necke. At that sight her colour changde, and shee said to Aliena, See Mistresse where our iolly Forrester comes. And you are not a little glad
thereof (quoth Aliena) your nose bewrayes what porredge you loue, the winde cannot be tyed within his quarter, the Sun sha∣dowed with a vayle, Oyle hidden in water, nor Loue kept out of of a womans lookes: but no more of that, Lupus est in fabula. Assoone as Rosader was come within the reach of her tongues ende, Aliena began thus: Why how now gentle Forrester, what winde hath kept you from hence? that being so newly marryed, you haue no more care of your Rosalynd, but to absent your self so many dayes? Are these the passions you painted out so in your Sonnets and roundelaies? I see well hote loue is soone cold, and that the fancy of men, is like to a loose feather that wandreth in the ayre with the blast of euery wynd. You are deceiued Mistres quoth Rosader, twas a coppy of vnkindnes that kept me hence, in that I being married, you caried away the Bride: but if I haue giuen any occasion of offence by absenting my selfe these three daies, I humbly sue for pardon: which you must grant of course, in that the fault is so friendly confest with penance. But to tel you the truth (faire Mistresse, and my good Rosalynd) my eldest bro∣ther by the iniury of Torismond is banished from Bourdeaux, and by chance hee and I met in the Forrest. And heere Rosader discourst vnto them what had happened betwixt them: which re∣concilement made them glad, especially Ganimede. But Alie∣na hearing of the tyrannie of her father, grieued inwardly, and yet smothred all things with such secrecy, that the concealing was more sorrow then the conceipt: yet that her estate might bee hyd stil, she made faire weather of it, and so let all passe. Fortune, that sawe how these parties valued not her Deitie, but held her power in scorne, thought to haue about with them, and brought the matter to passe thus. Certaine Rascals that li∣ued by prowling in the Forest, who for feare of the Prouost Mar∣shall had Caues in the groaues and thickets, to shrowde them∣selues from his traines: hearing of the beautie of this faire shep∣heardesse Aliena, thought to steale her away, and to giue her to the King for a present, hoping, because the King was a great lea∣cher, by such a gift to purchase all their pardons: and therefore came to take her and her Page away. Thus resolued, while A∣liena and Ganimede were in sad talke, they came rushing in,
and layd violent hands vpon Aliena and her Page, which made them crye out to Rosader: who hauing the valour of his father stamped in his hart, thought rather to die in defence of his friends, than any way bee toucht with the least blemish of dishonour: and therfore dealt such blowes amongst them with his weapon, as he did witnesse well vpon their carkasses, that hee was no coward. But as Ne Hercules quidem contra duos, so Rosader could not resist a multitude, hauing none to backe him: so that hee was not onely rebatted, but sore wounded, and Aliena and Ganimede had been quite carryed away by these Rascalles, had not Fortune (that ment to turne her frowne into a fauour) brought Saladyne that way by chance, who wandring to find out his brothers walk, encountred this crue: and seeing not onely a shepheardesse and her boy forced, but his brother wounded, he heaued vp a Forrest bill be had on his neck, and the first he stroke had neuer after more need of the Phisition: redoubling his blowes with such courage, that the flaues were amazed at his valour. Rosader espying his brother so fortunately arriued, and see∣ing how valiantly he behaued himselfe, though sore wounded, ru∣shed amongst them, and layd on such loade, that some of the crue were slaine, and the rest fled, leauing Aliena and Ganimede in the possession of Rosader and Saladyne. Aliena after shee had breathed a while and was come to her selfe from this feare, lookt about her, and saw where Ganimede was busie dressyng vp the woundes of the forrester: but shee cast her eye vpon this curteous Champion that had made so hotte a rescue, and that with such affection, that shee began to measure euery part of him with fauour, and in her selfe to commende his personage and his vertue, holding him for a resolute man, that durst assaile such a troupe of vnbrydeled villaines. At last gathe∣ring her spirits together, she returned him these thankes. Gentle sir, whatsoeuer you bee that haue aduentured your flesh to relieue our fortunes, & to haue as many hidden vertues, as you haue manifest resolutions. Wee poore Shepheards haue no wealth but our flocks, and therefore can wee not make requi∣tall with any great treasures: but our recompence is thankes, and our rewards to our friends without faining. For rannsome
therefore of this our rescue, you must content your selfe to take such a kinde gramercy, as a poore shepheardesse and her Page may giue: with promise (in what wee may) neuer to prooue in∣gratefull. For this Gentleman that is hurt, yoong Rosader, hee is our good neighbour and familiar acquaintance, weele pay him with smiles, and feed him with loue-lookes: and though he be ne∣uer the fatter at the yeares ende, yet weele so hamper him that he shall hold himselfe satisfied. Saladyne hearing this shepheardesse speake so wisely, began more narrowly to pry into her perfection, and to suruey all her li∣niaments with a curious insight: so long dallying in the flame of her beautie, that to his cost he found her to be most excellent: for Loue that lucked in all these broyles to haue a blow or two, see∣ing the parties at the gaze, encountred them both with such a ve∣ny, that the stroke pierst to the heart so deep, as it could neuer af∣ter be raced out. At last after hee had looked so long, till Aliena waxt red, he returned her this answere. Faire Shepheardesse, if Fortune graced me with such good hap, as to doo you any fauour, I hold my selfe as contented, as if I had gotten a great conquest: for the reliefe of distressed women is the speciall point, that Gentleman are tyed vnto by honor: see∣ing then my hazard to rescue your harmes, was rather duty than curtesie, thankes is more than belongs to the requitall of such a fauour. But least I might seeme either too coy or too carelesse of a Gentlewomans proffer, I will take your kinde gramercie for a recompence. All this while that he spake, Ganimede lookt ear∣nestly vpon him, and sayd, Truly Rosader, this Gentleman fa∣uours you much in the feature of your face. No maruell (quoth he, gentle Swayne) for tis my eldest brother Saladyne. Your brother quoth Aliena? (and with that she blusht) he is the more welcome, and I hold my self the more his debter: and for that he hath in my behalf done such a piece of seruice, if it please him to do me that honor, I wil cal him seruant, and he shal cal me mistresse. Content sweet mistresse quoth Saladyne, and when I forget to call you so, I wil be vnmindfull of mine owne selfe. Away with these quirkes and quiddities of loue quoth Rosader, and giue me some drinke, for I am passyng thirstie, and then will I home for
my woundes bleed sore, and I will haue them drest. Ganimede had teares in her eyes, and passions in her heart to see her Rosa∣der so payned, and therefore stept hastily to the bottle, and filling out some wine in a Mazer, shee spiced it with such comfortable drugges as she had about her, and gaue it him, which did comfort Rosader: that rysing (with the helpe of his brother) hee tooke his leaue of them, and went to his Lodge. Ganimede assoone as they were out of sight, led his flocks downe to a vale, and there vnder the shadow of a Beech tree sat downe, and began to mourne the misfortunes of her sweet heart. And Aliena (as a woman passyng discontent) seuering her selfe from her Ganimede, sitting vnder a Lymon tree, began to to sigh out the passions of her new Loue, and to meditate with hir selfe on this maner. Alienaes meditation. AYe me, now I see, and sorrowing sigh to see that Dianaes Lawrels are harbours for Venus Doues, that there trace as well through the Lawnes, wantons as chast ones, that Calisto be she neuer so charie, wil cast one amorous eye at courting Ioue: that Diana her selfe will chaunge her shape, but shee will honour Loue in a shaddow: that maydens eyes bee they as hard as Dia∣monds, yet Cupide hath drugs to make them more pliable than waxe. See Alinda, how Fortune and Loue haue interleagued themselues to be thy foes: and to make thee theyr subiect or els an abiect, haue inueigled thy sight with a most beautifull obiect. Alate thou didst hold Venus for a giglot, not a goddesse, and now thou shalt bee forst to sue suppliant to her Deitie. Cupide was a boy and blinde, but alas his eye had ayme inough to pierce thee to the hart. While I liued in the Court, I held Loue in contempt, and in high seats I had small desires. I knew not affection while I liued in dignitie, nor could Venus counterchecke me, as long as my fortune was maiestie, and my thoughtes honour: and shall I now bee high in desires, when I am made lowe by Deste∣nie? I haue heard them say, that Loue lookes not at low cottages,
that Venus iettes in Roabes not in ragges, that Cupide flyes so high, that hee scornes to touch pouertie with his heele. Tush A∣linda, these are but olde wiues tales, and neither authenticall precepts, nor infallible principles: for experience tels thee, that Peasauntes haue theyr passions, as well as Princes, that Swaynes as they haue theyr labours, so they haue theyr a∣moures, and Loue lurkes assoone about a Sheepcoate, as a Pallaice. Ah Alinda, this day in auoyding a preiudice thou art fallen into a deeper mischiefe, being rescued from the robbers, thou art become captiue to Saladyne: and what then? Women must loue, or they must cease to liue: and therefore did Nature frame them faire, that they might be subiect to fancy. But perhaps Saladines eye is leuelde vpon a more seemlier Saint. If it be so, beare thy passions with patience, say Loue hath wrongd thee, that hath not wroong him, and if he be proud in contempt, be thou rich in con∣tent, and rather dye than discouer any desire: for there is nothing more pretious in a woman, than to conceale Loue, and to die mo∣dest. He is the sonne and heire of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux, a youth comely enough: oh Alinda, too comely, els hadst not thou been thus discontent: valiant, and that fettered thine eye: wise, else hadst thou not been now wonne: but for all these vertues, bani∣shed by thy father, and therefore if he know thy parentage, he wil hate the fruit for the tree, and condemne the yoong sien for the old stocke. Well, howsoeuer, I must loue: and whomsoeuer, I will: and whatsoeuer betide, Aliena wil thinke wel of Saladyne: sup∣pose he of me as he please. And with that fetching a deep sigh, she rise vp, and went to Ganimede: who all this while sat in a great dumpe, fearing the imminent danger of her friend Rosader, but now Aliena began to comfort her, her selfe being ouer growne with sorrowes, and to recall her from her melancholy with ma∣ny pleasaunt perswasions. Ganimede tooke all in the best part, and so they went home togither after they had folded their flocks, supping with old Coridon, who had prouided there cates. Hee after supper, to passe away the night while bed time, began a long discourse, how Montanus the yoong shepheard that was in loue with Phoebe, could by no meanes obtaine any fauour at her
hands: but still pained in restlesse passions, remained a hopelesse and perplexed Louer. I would I might (quoth Aliena) once see that Phoebe, is she so faire, that she thinks no shepheard worthy of her beauty? or so froward, that no loue nor loyaltie will con∣tent her, or so coy, that she requires a long time to he wooed, or so foolish that she forgets, that like a fop she must haue a large har∣uest for a little corne? I cannot distinguish (quoth Coridon) of these nice qualities: but one of these dayes Ile bring Montanus and her downe, that you may both see their persons, and note their passions: & then where the blame is, there let it rest. But this I am sure quoth Coridon, if al maidens were of her mind, the world would grow to a mad passe: for there would be great store of wooing and litle wedding, many words and little worship, much folly and no faith. At this sad sentence of Coridon so solempnly brought forth, A∣liena smiled: and because it waxt late, she and her page went to bed, both of them hauing fleas in their eares to keep them awake, Ganimede for the hurt of her Rosader, and Aliena for the af∣fection she bore to Saladyne. In this discontented humour they past away the time, till falling on sleepe, their sences at rest, loue left them to their quiet slumbers: which were not long. For as soone as Phoebus rose from his Aurora, and began to mount him in the Skie, summoning Plough-swaines to their handy la∣bour, Aliena arose, and going to the couch where Ganimede lay, awakened her page, and said the morning was farre spent, the deaw small, and time called them away to their foldes. Ah, ah quoth Ganimede, is the wind in that doore? then in fayth I per∣reiue that there is no Diamond so hard but will yeeld to the file, no Cedar so strong but the wind will shake, nor any mind so chast but Loue will change. Well Aliena, must Saladyne be the man, and will it be a match? Trust me he is faire and valiant, the sonne of a worthy Knight, whome if he imitate in perfection, as he re∣presents him in proportion, he is worthy of no lesse than Aliena. But he is an exile, what then? I hope my Mistresse respectes the vertues not the wealth, and measures the qualities not the sub∣stance. Those Dames that are like Danae, that like Ioue in no shape but in a shower of gold: I wish them husbands with much
wealth and little witte, that the want of the one may blemish the abundance of the other. It should (my Aliena) slayne the honour of a shepheards life to set the end of passions vpon pelfe. Loues eyes looks not so low as golde, there is no fees to be payd in Cu∣pids Courtes: and in elder time (as Coridon hath told me) the Shepheards Loue-gifts were apples and chestnuts, & then their desires were loyall, and their thoughts constant. But now Quaerenda pecunia primum, post nummos virtus. And the time is grown to that which Horace in his Satyres wrote on: omnis enim res Virtus famae decus diuina humanaque pulchris Diuitiis parent: quas qui constrinxerint ille Clarus erit, fortis, iustus, sapiens, etiam & rex Et quicquid volet- But Aliena lette it not be so with thee in thy fancies, but re∣spect his faith, and there an ende. Aliena hearing Ganimede thus forward to further Saladyne in his affections, thought shee kist the child for the nurses sake, and woed for him that she might please Rosader, made this reply. Why Ganimede, whereof growes this perswasion? Hast thou seene Loue in my lookes? or are mine eyes growne so amorous, that they discouer some newe intertayned fancies: If thou measurest my thoughts by my coun∣tenance, thou maiest proue as ill a Phisiognomer as the Lapida∣rie, that aymes at the secrete vertues of the Topare, by the exte∣rior shadow of the stone. The operatiō of the Agate is not known by the strakes, not the Diamond prized by his brightnesse, but by his hardnesse. The Carbuncle that shineth most, is not euer the most pretious: and the Apothecaries choose not flowers for their colours, but for their vertues. Womens faces are not alwayes Calenders of fancie, nor do their thought and their lookes euer a∣gree: for when their eyes are fullest of fauors, then are they oft most emptie of desire: and when they seeme to frowne at disdain, then are they most forward to affection. If I bee melancholie, then Ganimede, tis not a consequence that I am intangled with the perfection of Saladyne. But seeing fire cannot be hid in the
straw, nor Loue kept so couert but it will be spyed, what shoulde friends conceale fancies? Knowe my Ganimede, the beautie and valour, the wit and prowesse of Saladyne hath fettered A∣liena so farre, as there is no obiect pleasing to her eyes, but the sight of Saladine: and if Loue haue done me iustice, to wrap his thoughts in the foldes of my face, and that he be as deeply ena∣moured as I am passionate: I tell thee Ganimede, there shall not be much wooing, for she is already wonne, and what needes a longer battery. I am glad quoth Ganimede, that it shall be thus proportioned, you to match with Saladyne, and I with Ro∣sader: thus haue the Destenies fauoured vs with some pleasing aspect, that haue made vs as priuate in our loues, as familiar in our fortunes. With this Ganimede start vp, made her ready, and went in∣to the fields with Aliena: where vnfolding their flockes, they sate them downe vnder an Oliue tree, both of them amorous, & yet diuersly affected: Aliena ioying in the excellence of Sala∣dyne, and Ganimede sorowing for the wounds of her Rosader, not quiet in thought till shee might heare of his health. As thus both of them sate in their dumpes, they might espie where Cori∣don came running towards them (almost out of breath with his hast) What newes with you (quoth Aliena) that you come in such post? Oh Mistres (quoth Coridon) you haue a long time desired to see Phoebe the faire shepheardesse whom Montanus loues: so now if it please you and Ganimede to walke with mee to yonder thicket, there shall you see Montanus and her sitting by a Fountaine, he courting her with his Countrey ditties, and she as coy as if she held loue in disdaine. The newes were so welcome to the two Louers, that vp they rose, and went with Coridon. Assoone as they drew nigh the thic∣ket, they might espie where Phoebe sate, (the fairest shepherdesse in all Arden, and he the frolickst swaine in the whole forrest) she in a petticote of scarlet, couered with a green mantle, & to shrowd her from the Sunne, a chaplet of roses: from vnder which ap∣peared a face full of Natures excellence, and two such eyes as might haue amated a greater man than Montanus. At gaze vp∣pon this gorgeous Nymph sate the Shepheard, feeding his
eyes with her fauours, wooing with such piteous lookes, & cour∣ting with such deepe strained sighs, as would haue made Diana her selfe to haue beene compassionate, at last fixing his lookes on the riches of her face, his head on his hande, and his elbow on his knee, he sung this mournefull Ditttie. Montanus Sonnet. ATurtle sate vpon a leauelesse tree, Mourning her absent pheare, With sad and sorry cheare: About her wondring stood The Citizens of Wood, And whilest her plumes she rents, And for her loue laments, The stately trees complaine them, The birds with sorrow paine them: Each one that doth her view, Her paine and sorrowes rue, But were the sorrowes knowne, That me hath ouerthrowne, Oh how would Phoebe sigh, if shee did looke on me? The loue sicke Polypheme that could not see, Who on the barraine shore, His fortunes doth deplore, And melteth all in mone, For Galatea gone: And with his piteous cries, Afflicts both earth and skies: And to his woe betooke, Doth breake both pipe and booke: For whom complaines the Morne, For whom the Sea Nymphs mourne, Alas his paine is nought: For were my woe but thought, Oh how would Phoebe sigh, if shee did looke on me?
Beyond compare my paine yet glad am I, If gentle Phoebe daine to see her Montan die. After this Montanus felt his passions so extreame, that he fel into this exclamation against the iniustice of Loue. Helas Tirant plein de rigueur, Modere vn peu ta violence: Que te sert si grande dispense? C'est trop de flammes pour vn cueur. Esparguez en vne estincelle, Puis fay ton effort d'esmoûoir, La fiere qui ne veut point voir, En quel fu je brousle pour elle. Execute Amour ce dessein, Et rabaisse vn peu son audace, Son cuer ne doit estre de glace. Bien que elle ait de Niege le sein. Montanus ended his Sonet with such a volley of sighs, and such a streame of teares, as might haue moued any but Phoebe to haue granted him fauor. But she measuring all his passions with a coy disdaine, and triumphing in the poore shepheards pa∣theticall humors, smiling at his martyrdome, as though loue had beene no maladie, scornfully warbled out this Sonet. Phoebes Sonnet, a replie to Montanus passion. Downe a downe, Thus Phyllis sung by fancie once distressed: Who so by foolish loue are stung, are worthily oppressed. And so sing I. With a downe, downe, &c.
When Loue was first begot, And by the mouers will Did fall to humane lot His solace to fulfill. Deuoid of all deceipt, A chast and holy fire Did quicken mans conceipt, And womens brest inspire, The Gods that saw the good That mortalls did approue, With kind and holy mood, Began to talke of Loue. Downe a downe, Thus Phyllis sung by fancie once distressed, &c. But during this accord, A wonder strange to heare: Whilest Loue in deed and word Most faythfull did appeare. False semblance came in place, By iealousie attended, And with a double face Both loue and fancie blended. Which make the Gods for sake, And men from fancie flie, And maidens scorne a make, For sooth and so will I. Downe a downe. Thas Phyllis sung by fancie once distressed: Who so by foolish loue are stung are worthily oppressed. And so sing I, with downe, a downe, a downe a. Montanus hearing the cruell resolution of Phoebe, was so euergrowne with passions, that from amorous Ditties he fel flat
into these tearmes: Ah Phoebe quoth he, wherof art thou made, that thou regardest not thy maladie? Am I so hatefull an obiect, that thine eyes condemne mee for an obiect? or so base, that thy desires cannot stoope so low as to lend me a gratious looke? My passions are many, my loues more, my thoughts loyaltie, and my fancie faith: al deuoted in humble deuoire to the seruice of Phoe∣be: and shall I reape no reward for such fealties. The Swaines dayly labours is quit with the euenings hire, the Ploughmans toyle is eased with the hope of corne, what the Oxe sweates out at the plough, he farneth at the cribbe: but infortunate Monta∣nus, hath no salue for his sorrowes, nor any hope of recompence for the hazard of his perplexed passions. If Phoebe, time maye plead the proofe of my truth, twise seauen winters haue I loued faire Phoebe: if constancie be a cause to further my sute, Mon∣tanus thoughts haue beene sealed in the sweete of Phoebes ex∣cellence, as far from change as shee from loue: if outward passi∣ons may discouer inward affections, the furrows in my face may discouer the sorrows of my heart, and the mappe of my looks the griefs of my mind. Thou seest (Phoebe) the teares of despayre haue made my cheeks full of wrinckles, and my scalding sighes haue made the ayre Ecchoher pittie conceiued in my plaintes: Philomele hearing my passions, hath left her mournfull tunes to listen to the discourse of my miseries. I haue pourtrayed in e∣uerie tree the beauty of my Mistres, & the despaire of my loues. What is it in the woods cannot witnes my woes? and who is it would not pittie my plaints? Only Phoebe. And why? Because I am Montanus, & she Phoebe: I a worthles Swaine, and she the most excellent of all faires. Beautifull Phoebe, oh might I say pittifull, then happy were I though I tasted but one minute of that good hap. Measure Montanus, not by his fortunes, but by his loues, and ballance not his wealth, but his desires, & lende but one gratious looke to cure a heape of disquieted cares: if not, ah if Phoebe cannot loue, let a storme of frownes end the discon∣tent of my thoughts, and so let me perish in my desires, because they are aboue my deserts: onely at my death this fauour can∣not be denied me, that al shal say Montanus died for loue of hard hearted Phoebe. At these words she fild her face full of frowns,
and made him this short and sharpe reply. Importunate shepheard, whose loues are lawlesse, because restlesse: are thy passions so extreame, that thou canst not con∣ceale them with patience? Or art thou so folly-sicke, that thou must needs be fancie-sicke, & in thy affection tyed to such an exi∣gent, as none serues but Phoebe? Wel sir, if your market can be made no where els, home againe, for your Mart is at the fayrest, Phoebe is no lettice for your lips, and her grapes hangs so high, that gaze at thē you may, but touch them you cannot. Yet Mon∣tanus I speak not this in pride, but in disdaine: not that I scorne thee, but that I hate loue: for I count it as great honor to triumph ouer fancie, as ouer fortune. Rest thee content therfore Monta∣nus, cease from thy loues, and bridle thy lookes, quench the spar∣kles before they grow to a further flame: for in louing mee thou shalt but liue by losse, & what thou vtterest in words are all writ∣ten in the wind. Wert thou (Montanus) as faire as Paris, as hardy as Hector, as constant as Troylus, as louing as Lean∣der, Phoebe could not loue, because she cānot loue at all: & ther∣fore if thou pursue me with Phoebus, I must flie with Daphne. Ganimede ouer-hearing all these passions of Montanus, could not brooke the cruelty of Phoebe, but starting from be∣hind the bush said: And if Damzell you fled from mee, I would transforme you as Daphne to a bay, and then in contempt tram∣ple your branches vnder my feet. Phoebe at this sodaine replye was amazed, especially when shee saw so faire a Swaine as Ga∣nimede, blushing therfore she would haue bene gone: but that he held her by the hand, & prosecuted his reply thus. What shepher∣desse, so faire, and so cruell? Disdaine beseemes not cottages, nor coynesse maids: for either they be condemned to be too proud, or too froward. Take heed faire Nymph, that in despising loue, you be not ouer-reacht with loue, and in shaking off all, shape your selfe to your owne shadow, & so with Narcissus proue passinat and yet vnpitied. Oft haue I heard, and sometime haue I seene, high disdain turnd to hot desires. Because thou art beautifull, be not so coy: as there is nothing more fair, so there is nothing more fading: as momentary as the shaddowes which growes from a clowdy Sunne. Such (my faire Shepheardesse) as disdaine in
youth desire in age, and then are they hated in the winter, that might haue been loued in the prime. A wringled mayd is like to a parched Rose, that is cast vp in Coffers to please the smell, not worne in the hand to content the eye. There is no folly in Loue to had I wist: and therefore bee rulde by mee, Loue while thou art yoong, least thou be disdained when thou art olde. Beautie nor time cannot be recalde, and if thou loue, like of Montanus for as his desires are many, so his deserts are great. Phoebe all this while gazed on the perfection of Ganimede, as deeply enamored on his perfection, as Montanus inueigled with hers: for her eye made suruey of his excellent feature, which she found so rare, that she thought the ghost of Adonis had been leapt from Elizium in the shape of a Swaine. When shee blusht at her owne folly to looke so long on a stranger, she mildely made answere to Ganimede thus I cannot deny sir but I haue heard of Loue, though I neuer felt Loue: and haue read of such a god∣desse as Venus, though I neuer sawe any but her picture: and perhaps, and with that shee waxedred and bashfull, and with all silent: which Ganimede perceiuing, commended in her selfe the bashfulnesse of the mayd, and desired her to go forward. And per∣haps sir (quoth she) mine eye hath been more prodigal to day than euer before: and with that she stayd againe, as one greatly pas∣sionate and perplexed. Aliena seeing the hare through the maze, hade her forward with her prattle: but in vaine, for at this abrupt period she broke off, and with her eyes full of teares, and her face couered with a vermillion die, she sat downe and sighed. Where∣vpon, Aliena and Ganimede seeing the Shepheardesse in such a straunge plight, left Phoebe with her Montanus, wishing hir friendly that she would be more pliant to Loue, least in penance Venus ioyned her to some sharpe repentance. Phoebe made no reply, but fetcht such a sigh, that Eccho made relatiō of hir plaint: giuing Ganimede such an adieu with a piercing glance, that the amorous Girle-boy perceiued Phoebe was pincht by the heele. But leauig Phoebe to the follies of her new fancie, and Montanus to attend vppon her: to Saladyne, who all this last night could not rest for the remembrance of Aliena: insomuch that he framed a sweet conceipted Sonnet to content his humor,
which hee put in his bosome: being requested by his brother Ro∣sader to go to Aliena and Ganymede, to signifie vnto them that his woundes were not dangerous. A more happy message could not happen to Saladyne, that taking his Forrest bill on his neck, hee trudgeth in all haste towardes the plaines, where Alienaes flockes did feede: comming iust to the place when they returned from Montanus and Phoebe. Fortune so conducted this iolly Forrester, that he encountred them and Coridon, whom hee pre∣sently saluted in this maner. Faire Shepheardesse, and too faire, vnlesse your beautie bee tempred with curtesie, and the liniaments of the face graced with the lowlinesse of mynd: as many good fortunes to you and your Page, as your selues can desire, or imagine. My brother Rosa∣der (in the grief of his green wounds) stil myndful of his friends, hath sent me to you with a kynd salute, to shew that he brooks his paines with the more patience, in that he holds the parties preci∣ous in whose defence hee receiued the preiudice. The report of your welfare, will be a great comfort to his distempered body and distressed thoughts, and therefore he sent me with a strickt charge to visite you. And you (quoth Aliena) are the more welcome in that you are messenger from so kynd a Gentleman, whose paines we compassionate with as great sorrow, as he brookes them with griefe: and his wounds breeds in vs as many passions, as in him extremities: so that what disquiet he feeles in bodie, we partake in heart. Wishing (if wee might) that your mishap might salue his malady. But seeing our wils yeelds him litle ease, our orizons are neuer idle to the Gods for his recouery. I pray youth (quoth Ganimede with teares in his eyes) when the Surgion searcht him, held hee his woundes dangerous? Dangerous (quoth Sala∣dyne) but not mortall: and the sooner to be cured, in that his pa∣tient is not impatient of any paines: whervpon my brother hopes within these ten dayes to walke abroad and visite you himselfe. In the meane time (quoth Ganimede) say his Rosalynde com∣mends her to him, and bids him be of good cheare. I knowe not (quoth Saladyne) who that Rosalynde is, but whatsoeuer shee is, her name is neuer out of his mouth: but amidst the deepest of his passions hee vseth Rosalynde as a charme to appease all
sorrowes with patience. Insomuth that I coniecture my bro∣ther is in loue, and shee some Paragon that holdes his heart per∣plexed: whose name he oft records with sighes, sometimes with teares, straight with ioye, then with smiles: as if in one person Loue had lodged a Chaos of confused passions. Wherin I haue noted the variable disposition of fancy, that lyke the Polype in colours, so it changeth into sundry humors, beeing as it should seeme, a combat myxe with disquiet, and a bitter pleasure wrapt in a sweet preiudice, lyke to the Sinople tree, whose blossomes delight the smell, and whose fruit infects the taste. By my fayth (quoth Aliena) sir, you are deep read in loue, or growes your insight into affection by experience? Howsoeuer, you are a great Philosopher in Venus principles, els could you not discour our secret aphorismes. But sir our Countrey amours are not lyke your Courtly fancies, nor is our wooing lyke your suing: for pore shepheards neuer plaine them till Loue paine them, where the Courtiers eyes is full of passions, when his heart is most free from affection: they court to discouer their eloquence, wee wooe to ease our sorrowes, euery faire face with them must haue a new fancy sealed with a fore finger kisse, and a farre fetcht sigh: wee heere loue one, and liue to that one, so long as life can maintaine loue, vsing few ceremonies because we know fewe subtilties, and litle eloquence for that we lightly accompt of flattery: onely faith and troth thats shepheards wooing, and sir how lyke you of this? So (quoth Saladyne) as I could tie my self to such loue, What, and looke so low as a Shepheardesse, being the sonne of sir Iohn of Bourdeaux: such desires were a disgrace to your honors. And with that surueying exquisitely euery part of him, as vttering all these wordes in a deepe passion, she espied the paper in his bosom: whervpon growing iealous that it was some amorous Sonnet, she sodeinly snacht it out of his bosome, and asked if it were anye secret? She was bashfull, and Saladyne blusht: which she per∣ceiuing sayd: Nay then sir, if you waxe redde, my life for yours tis some Loue matter: I will see your Mistresse name, her prai∣ses, and your passions. And wich that she lookt on it: which was written to this effect.
Saladynes Sonnet. If it be true that heauens eternall course With restlesse sway and ceaselesse turning glides, If aire inconstant be, and swelling sourse Turne and returns with many fluent tides, If earth in winter summers pride estrange, And Nature seemeth onely faire in change. If it be true that our immortal spright Deriude from heauenly pure, in wandring still In noueltie and strangenesse doth delight, And by discouerent power discerneth ill, And if the body for to worke his best Doth with the seasons change his place of rest. Whence comes it that (inforst by furious Skies) I change both place and soyle, but not my hart? Yet salue not in this change my maladies? Whence growes it that each obiect workes my smart? Alas I see my faith procures my misse, And change in loue against my nature is. Et florida pungunt. Aliena hauing read ouer his Sonnet, began thus pleasant∣ly to descant vpon it. I see Saladyne (quoth she) that as the Su is no Sun without his brightnesse, nor the Diamond accounted for precious vnlesse it be hard: so men are not men vnlesse they be in loue: and their honors are measured by their amours not their labors, counting it more commendable for a Gentleman to be ful of fancy, than full of vertue. I had thought Otiasi tollus periere Cupidinis arcus, Contemptaeque iacent, & sine luce faces: But I see Ouids axiome is not authenticall, for euen labour hath her loues, and extremitie is no Pumice stone to race out fan∣cy. Your selfe exiled from your wealth, friendes and country by
Torismond, (sorrowes inough to suppresse affections) yet a∣midst the depth of these extremities. Loue will be Lord, and shw his power to bee more predominant than Fortune. But I pray you sir (if without offence I may craue it) are they some newe thoughts, or some olde desires? Saladyne (that now saw oppor∣tunitie pleasant) thought to strike while the yron was hotte, and therefore taking Aliena by the hand sate downe by her: and Ga∣nymede to giue them leaue to their Loues, found her selfe busie about the foldes, whilest Saladyne fell into this prattle with A∣liena. Faire Mistresse, if I be blunt in discouering my affections, and vse little eloquence in leuelling out my loues: I appeale for pardon to your owne principles, that say, shepheards vse few ce∣remonies, for that they acquaint themselues with few subtilties: to frame my selfe therefore to your country fashion with much faith and litle flattery, know bewtifull Shepheardesse, that why∣lest I liued in the Court I knew not Loues comber, but I helde affection as a toy, not as a malady: vsing fancy as the Hiperbo∣rei doo their flowers, which they weare in their bosome all day, and cast them in the fire for fuell at night. I lyked all because I lo∣ued none, and who was most faire, on her I fed mine eye: but as charily as the Bee, that assoone as shee hath suckt honny from the Rose, Flies straight to the next Marigold. Liuing thus at mine owne list, I wondred at such as were in loue, and when I read their passions, I tooke them onely for poemes that flowed from the quicknesse of the wyt, not the sorrowes of the heart. But now (faire Nymph) since I became a Forrester, Loue hath taught me such a lesson that I must confesse his deitie and dignitie, and saie as there is nothing so pretious as beuty, so there is nothing more piercing than fancy. For since first I arriued in this place, and mine eye tooke a curious suruey of your excellence, I haue been so fettered with your beautie and vertue, as sweet (Aliena) Sala∣dyne without further circumstance loues Aliena I could paynt out my desires with long ambages, but seeing in many words lyes mistrust, & that truth is euer naked: let this suffice for a coun∣try wooing, Saladyne loues Aliena, and none but Aliena. Although these wordes were most heauenly harmony in the
eares of the Shepheardesse: yet to seeme coye at the first cour∣ting, and to disdaine Loue howsoeuer she desired Loue, she made this reply. Ah Saladyne, though I seeme simple, yet I am more subtile than to swallow the hooke because it hath a painted bayt: as men are wily so women are wary, especially if they haue that wyt by others harmes to beware. Do we not know Saladyne, that mens toongs are like Mercuries pipe, that can inchant Argus with an hundreth eyes: and their words are preiudiciall as the charmes of Circes, that transforme men into monsters. If such Syrens sing, we poore women had need stoppe our eares, least in hearing wee proue so foolish hardy as to belieue them, and so perish in crusting much, and suspecting litle. Saladine, Piscator ictus sapit, hee that hath been once poisoned, and afterwards fears not to bowse of euery potion, is worthy to suffer double pennance. Eiue mee leaue then to mistrust, though I doo not condemne. Saladyne is now in loue with Aliena, hee a Gentleman of great parentage, shee a Shepheardesse of meane parents: hee honorable, and shee poore? Can Loue consist of contrarieties? Wyll the Fawlcon pearch with the Kistresse, the Lyon harbor with the Woolfe? Wil Venus ioyne roabes and rags togither? Or can there be a sim∣pathie betweene a King and a begger. Then Saladyne how can I belieue thee that loue should vnite our thoughts, when Fortune hath set such a difference betweene our degrees? But suppose thou likest of Alienaes bewtie, men in their fancy resemble the waspe, which scornes that flower from which she hath fetcht her waxe: playing lyke the inhabitants of the Iland Tenerifa, who when they haue gathered the sweet spices, vse the trees for fuell: so men when they haue glutted themselues with the faire of wo∣men faces, holde them for necessary euils: and wearied with that which they seemed so much to loue, cast away fancy as children doo their Rattles: and loathing that which so deeply before they liked, especially such as take loue in a minute, and haue their eyes attractiue lyke ieate, ape to entertaine any obiect, are as readie to let it slip againe. Saladyne hearing how Aliena harpt still vpon on string, which was the doubt of mens constancy, he broke off her sharpe inuectiue thus.
I grant Aliena (quoth hee) many men haue done amisse, in prouing soone ripe and soone rotten, but particular instances in∣ferre no generall conclusions: and therefore I hope what others haue faulted in, shall not preiudice my fauours. I wil not vse so∣phistry to confirme my loue, for that is subtiltie: nor long dis∣courses, least my wordes might be thought more than my fayth: but if this will suffice, that by the honor of a Gentleman I loue Aliena, and wooe Aliena, not to crop the blossomes and reiect the tree, but to consumate my faithfull desires, in the honorable ende of marriage. At this word marriage: Aliena stood in a maze what to an∣swere: fearing that if shee were too coy to driue him away with her disdaine, and if she were too curteous to discouer the heate of her desires. In a dilemma thus what to doo, at last this shee sayd. Saladyne euer since I saw thee, I fauored thee I cannot dissem∣ble my desires, because I see thou doest faithfully manifest thy thoughtes, and in liking thee I loue thee so farre as mine honor holdes fancy still in suspence: but if I knew thee as verteous as thy father, or as well qualified as thy brother Rosader, the doubt should bee quickly decided: but for this time to giue thee an an∣swere, assure thy selfe this, I will either marry with Saladyne, or still liue a virgine: and with this they strained one anothers hand. Which Ganimede espying, thinking hee had had his Mi∣stresse long inough at shrift, sayd: what, a match or no? A match (quoth Aliena) or els it were an ill market. I am glad (quoth Ganimede) I wold Rosader were wel here to make vp a messe. Well remembred (quoth Saladyne) I forgot I left my brother Rosader alone: and therefore least being solitary hee should en∣crease his sorrowes, I wil hast me to him. May it please you then to command mee any seruice to him, I am readie to bee a dutifull messenger. Onely at this time commend me to him (quoth Alie∣na) and tell him, though we cannot pleasure him we pray for him. And forget not (quoth Ganimede) my commendations: but say to him that Rosalynd sheds as many teares from her heart as he drops of blood from his wounds, for the sorow of his misfortunes, feathering all her thoughts with disquiet, till his welfare procure her content: say thus (good Saladyne) and so farwel. He hauing
his message, gaue a courteous adieu to them both, especially to Aliena: and so playing loath to depart, went to his brother. But Aliena, shee perplexed and yet ioyfull, past away the day pleasantly still praising the perfection of Saladyne, not ceasing to chat of her new Loue, till euening drew on, and then they folding their sheep, went home to bed. Where we leaue them and return to Phoebe. Phoebe fiered with the vncouth flame of loue, returned to her fathers house, so gauled with restlesse passions, as now shee began to acknowledge, that as there was no flower so fresh but might be parched with the Suune, no tree so strong but might be shaken with a storme, so there was no thought to chast, but Time armed with Loue could make amorous: for shee that held Diana for the Goddesse of her deuotion, was now fain to flie to the Aul∣ter of Venus, as suppliant now with praiers, as she was froward afore with disdaine. As shee lay in her bed, shee called to mynd the seueral bewties of yoong Ganimede, first his locks, which being amber hued, passeth the wreathe that Phoebus puts on to make his front glorious: his browe of yuorie, was like the seate where Loue and Maiestie sits inthronde to enchaine Fancy: his eyes as bright as the burnishing of the heauen, darting forth frowns with disdaine, and smiles with fauour, lightning such lookes as would enflame desire, were she wrapt in the Circle of the frozen Zoane: in his cheekes the vernullion teinture of the Rose florished vpon naturall Alabaster, the blushe of the Morne and Lunaes siluer showe were so liuely pourtrayed, that the Troyan that filles out wine to Iupiter was not halfe so bewtifull: his face was full of pleasance, and al the rest of his liniaments proportioned with such excellence, as Phoebe was fertred in the sweetnes of his feature. The Idea of these perfections tumbling in her mynde, made the poore Shepheardesse so perplexed, as feeling a pleasure tempred with intollerable paines, and yet a disquiet mixed with a content, shee rather wished to die, than to liue in this amorous anguish. But wishing is litle worth in such extreames, & therfore was she forst to pine in her malady, without any salue for her sorrows. Re∣ueale it she durst not, as daring in such matters to make none her secretarie, and to conceale it, why it doubled her griefe: for as
fire supprest growes to the greater flame, and the Curreut stopt to the more violent streame: so Loue smothered, wrings the hare with the deeper passions. Perplexed thus with sundry agonies, her food began to faile, and the disquiet of her mind began to worke a distemperature of her body, that to be short Phoebe fell extreme sicke, and so sicke as there was almost left no recouery of health. Her father seeing his fair Phoebe thus distrest, sent for his friends, who sought by medecine to cure, and by counsaile to pacifie, but all in vaine: for although her body was feeble through long fasting, yet did shee magis aegrotare animo quàm corpore. Which her friends percey∣ued and sorrowed at, but salue it they could not. The newes of her sicknesse was bruted abroad through all the Forrest: which no sooner came to Montanus eare, but hee like a mad man came to visit Phoebe. Where sitting by her bed side, he began his Exordium with so many teares and sighes, that she perceiuing the extremitie of his sorrows, began now as a Louer to pittie them, although Ganimede helde her from redressing them. Montanus craued to know the cause of her sicknesse, tem∣pred with secret plaints: but she answered him (as the rest) with silence, hauing still the forme of Ganimede in her mind, and con∣iecturing how she might reueale her loues. To vtter it in wordes she found her selfe too bashfull, to discourse by any friend shee would not trust any in her amours, to remain thus perplexed still and conceale all, it was a double death. Whereupon for her last refuge she resolued to write vnto Ganimede: and therfore dest∣red Montanus to absent himselfe a while, but not to depart: for she would see if she could steale a nappe. Hee was no sooner gone out of the chamber, but reaching to her standish, shee tooke penne and paper, and wrote a letter to this effect. Phoebe to Ganimede wisheth what she wants her selfe. FAire Shepheard (and therefore is Phoebe infortunate, be∣cause thou art so faire) although hitherto mine eyes were ada∣mants to resist Loue, yet I no sooner saw thy face, but they be∣came amorous to intertaine Loue: more deuoted to fancie, than before they were repugnant to affection, addicted to the one by
nature, and drawne to the other by beauty: which being rare, and made the more excellent by many vertues, hath so snared the freedome of Phoebe, as shee restes at thy mercie, either to bee made the most fortunate of all maydens, or the most miserable of all women. Measure not Ganimede my loues by my wealth, nor my desires by my degrees: but thinke my thoughtes as full of faith, as thy face of amiable fauors. Then as thou knowst thy self most beautifull, suppose me most constant. If thou deemest mee hard harted because I hated Montanus, thinke I was forst to it by fate: if thou saist I am kind hearted, because so lightly I loued thee at the first looke, thinke I was driuen to it by desteny, whose influence as it is mighty, so is it not to be resisted. If my fortunes were any thing but infortunate loue, I would striue with fortune: but he that wrests against the will of Venus, seeks to quench fire with oyle, & to thrust out one thorn by putting in another. If then Ganimede, loue enters at the eye, harbours in the heart, and wil neither be driuen out with phisicke nor reason: pittie mee, as one whose malady hath no salue but from thy sweet self, whose griefe hath no ease but through thy grant, and think I am a Uirgin, who is deeply wrongd, when I am forst to woo, and couiecture loue to be strong, that is more forceable then nature. Thus distressed vnlesse by thee eased, I expect either to lyue fortunate by thy fauour, or die miserable by thy denyall. Liuing in hope. Farewell. She that must be thine, or not be at all Phoebe. To this letter she annexed this Sonnet. Sonnetto. My boate dothpasse the straights of seas incenst with fire, Filde with forgetfulnesse: amidst the winters night, A blind and carelesse boy (brought vp by fond desire) Doth guide me in the sea of sorrow and despight.
For euery oare, he sets a ranke of foolish thoughts, And cuts (instead of waue) a hope without distresse: The winds of my deepe sighes (that thunder still for noughts) Haue split my sayles with feare, with care and heauinesse. A mightie storme of teares, A blacke and hideous cloude, A thousand fierce disdaines doe slacke the haleyards oft: Till ignorance doe pull, and errour hale the shrowds, No starre for safetie shines, no Phoebe from aloft. Time hath subdued art, and ioy is slaue to woe: Alas (Loues guid) be kind, what shall I perish so? This Letter and the Sonnet being ended, she could find no fit messenger to send it by, and therefore she called in Montanus, & intreated him to carry it to Ganimede. Although poore Mon∣tanus saw day at a little hole, and did perceiue what passion pin∣ched her: yet (that he might seeme dutifull to his Mistresse in all seruice) he dissembled the matter, and became a willing Messen∣ger of his owne Martyrdome. And so (taking the Letter) went the next morne very earlie to the plaines where Aliena fedde hir flocks, and there he found Ganimede sitting vnder a Pomegra∣nade tree sorrowing for the hard fortunes of her Rosader. Mon∣tanus saluted him, and according to his charge deliuered Gani∣mede the letters, which (he said) came from Phoebe. At this the wanton blusht, as being abashe to thinke what news should come from an vnknowne Shepheardesse, but taking the letters, vn∣ript the seales, and read ouer the discourse of Phoebes fancies. When she had read and ouer-read them, Ganimede beganne to smile, and looking on Montanus, fell into a great laughter: and with that called Aliena, to whome shee shewed the writinges.
Who hauing perused them, conceipted them very pleasantly, and smiled to see how Loue had yokt her, who before would not stoop to the lure, Aliena whispering Ganimede in the eare, and say∣ing: Knew Phoebe what want there were in thee to performe her will, and how vnfit thy kind is to be kind to her, she would be more wise, and lesse enamoured: But leauing that, I pray thee let vs sport with this Swaine. At that word Ganimede turning to Montanus, began to glaunce at him thus. I pray thee tell me Shepheard, by those sweet thoughts and pleasing sighes that grow from my Mistresse fauours, art thou in loue with Phoebe? Oh my youth, quoth Montanus, were Phoebe so farre in loue with me, my flocks would be more fatte and their Maister more quiet: for through the sorrows of my dis∣content growes the leannesse of my sheepe. Alas poore Swaine quoth Ganimede, are thy passions so extreame, or thy fancie so resolute, that no reason wil blemish the pride of thy affection, and race out that which thou striuest for without hope? Nothing can make me forget Phoebe, while Montanus forget himselfe: for those characters which true loue hath stamped, neither the enuie of time nor fortune can wipe away. Why but Montanus quoth Ganimede, enter with a deep insight into the despaire of thy fan∣cies, and thou shalt see the depth of thine owne follies: for (poore man) thy progresse in loue is a regresse to losse, swimming again the streame with the Crab, and flying with Apis Indica against wind and weather. Thou seekest with Phoebus to win Daph∣ne, and shee flies faster than thou canst follow: thy desires soare with the Hobbie, but her disdain reacheth higher than thou canst make wing. I tell thee Montanus, in courting Phoebe, thou barkest with the Wolues of Syria against the Moone, and roa∣uest at such a marke with thy thoughts, as is beyond the pitch of thy bow, praying to loue, when loue is pittilesse, and thy maladie remedilesse. For proofe Montanus, read these letters, wherein thou shalt see thy great follyes and little hope. With that Montanus tooke them and perused them, but with such sorrow in his lookes, as they bewrayed a sourse of confused passions in his heart, at euery line his colour changed, and euery sentence was ended with a period of sighes.
At last noting Phoebes extreame desire toward Ganimede, and her disdaine towards him, giuing Ganimede the letter, the Shepheard stood as though he had neyther won nor lost. Which Ganimede perceiuing, wakened him out of his dreame thus: Now Montanus, doest thou see thou vowest great seruice, and obtainest but litle reward: but in lieu of thy loyaltie, she maketh thee as Bellephoron carry thine owne bane. Then drinke not willingly of that potion wherein thou knowest is poyson, creepe not to her that cares not for thee. What Montanus, there are many as faire as Phoebe, but most of all more courteous than Phoebe. I tell thee Shepheard, fauour is Loues fu∣ell: then since thou canst not get that, lette the flame vanish into smoake, and rather sorrowe for a while, then repent thee for euer. I tell thee Ganimede (quoth Montanus) as they which are stung with the Scorpion, cannot be recouered but by the Scor∣pion, nor he that was wounded with Achilles lance bee cured but with the same truncheon: so Apollo was faine to cry out, that loue was onely eased with loue, & fancy healed by no medicine but fauour. Phoebus had hearbs to heale all hurts but this passion, Cyrces had charms for all chances but for affection, & Mercurie subtill reasons to refell all griefs but loue. Perswasions are boot∣les, reason lends no remedy, counsell no comfort, to such whome fancie hath made resolute: & therefore though Phoebe loues Ganimede, yet Montanus must honor none but Phoebe. Then quoth Ganimede, may I rightly tearme thee a despai∣ring louer, that liuest without ioy, and louest without hope: but what shal I do Montanus to pleasure thee? shal I despise Phoe∣be as she disdaines thee? Oh (quoth Montanus) that were to re∣new my griefs, and double my sorrows: for the sight of her dis∣content were the censure of my death. Alas Ganimede, though I perish in my thoughts, let not her die in her desires. Of all passi∣ons, loue is most impatient: then lette not so faire a creature as Phoebe sinke vnder the burden of so deepe distresse. Being loue sicke, she is proued hart sicke, & all for the beautie of Ganimede. Thy proportion hath intangled her affections, and shee is snared in the beauty of thy excellence. Then sith she loues thee so deare, mislike not her deadly. Be thou paramour to such a paragon: she hath beauty to please thine eye, and flockes to enrich thy store.
Thou canst not wish for more than thou shalt win by her: for she is beautifull, vertuous and wealthy, three deepe perswasions to make loue frolicke. A liena seeing Montanus cut it against the haire, and pleade that Ganimede ought to loue Phoebe, when his onely life was the loue of Phoebe, answered him thus. Why Montanus dost thou further this motion? seeing if Ganimede marry Phoebe thy market is cleane mard. Ah Mistres (q. he) so hath loue taught me to honour Phoebe, that I would preiudice my life to pleasure her, and die in despaire rather than shee should perish for want. It shall suffice me to see her contented, and to feed mine eye on her fauour. If she marry though it bee my martyr∣dome: yet if she be pleased I wil brooke it with patience, & try∣umph in mine owne stars to see her desires satisfied. Therefore if Ganimede be as courteous as he is beautifull, let him shew his vertues in redressing Phoebes miseries. And this Montanus pronounst with such an assured countenance, that it amazed both Aliena and Ganimede to see the resolution of his loues: so that they pitied his passions, & commended his patience, deuising how they might by any subtiltie get Montanus the fauor of Phoebe. Straight (as womens heads are full of wiles) Ganimede had a fetch to force Phoebe to fancie the shepheard, malgrado the re∣solution of her mind he prosecuted his policie thus. Montanus quoth he, seeing Phoebe is so forlorne, least I might be counted vnkind in not saluing so faire a creature, I will goe with thee to Phoebe, and there heare her selfe in word vtter that which shee hath discourst with her pen, and then as Loue wils mee. I will set downe my censure. I will home by our house, and send Coridon to accompany Aliena. Montanus seemed glad of his determi∣nation, and away they goe towards the house of Phoebe. When they drew nigh to the cottage, Montanus ran afore, and went in and told Phoebe, that Ganimede was at the doore. This word Ganimede sounding in the eares of Phoebe, draue hir into such an extasie for ioy, that rising vp in her bed, she was halfe reuined, & her wan colour began to waxe red: and with that came Gani∣mede in, who saluted Phoebe with such a courteous looke, that it was half a salue to her sorows: sitting him down by hir bed side, he questioned about hir disease, and where the paine chiefly helde hit? Phoebe looking as louely as Venus in her night gear, tain∣ting
her face with as ruddy a blush, as Clitia did when shee be∣wrayed her loues to Phoebus: taking Ganimede by the hande began thus. Faire shepheard, if loue were not more strong than nature, or fancie the sharpest extreame, my immodesty were the more, & my vertues the les: for nature hath framed womens eyes bashfull, their harts ful of feare, & theyr tongs ful of silence: But loue, that imperious loue, where his power is predominant, then he peruerts all, & wrests the wealth of nature to his owne wil: an instance in my selfe fayre Ganimede, for such a fire hath he kin∣deled in my thoughts, that to finde ease for the flame, I was for∣ced to passe the bounds of modesty, & seek a salue at thy hands for my harms: blame me not if I be ouer beld for it is thy beauty, & if I bee too forward it is fancie, & the deepe insight into thy ver∣tues that makes me thus fond. For let me say in a word what may be contained in a volume, Phoebe loue Ganimede: at this shee held downe her head and wept, and Ganimede rose as one that would suffer no fish to hang on his fingers, made this reply. Wa∣ter not thy plants Phoebe, for I dopity thy plaints, nor seek not to discouer thy loues in teares: for I coniecture thy truth by thy passions: sorrow is no salue for loues, nor sighs no remedy for af∣fection. Therfore frolick Phoebe, for if Ganimede can cure thee, doubt not of recouery. Yet this let me say without offence, that it greeues mee to thwart Montanus in his fancies, seeing his de∣sires haue been so resolute, & his thoughts so loyall: but thou al∣ledgest that thou art forst from him by fate: so I tell thee Phoe∣be, either some starre, or else some destenie, fittes my mind rather with Adonis to die in chase, than be counted a wanton in Venus knee. Although I pitie thy martyrdome, yet I can grant no mar∣riage; for though I held thee fair, yet mine eie is not fettred, loue grows not like the hearb Spattanna to his perfectiō in one night but creeps with the snaile, & yet at last attaines to the top Festi∣na Lenter especially in loue: for momentary fancies are often times the fruits of follies: If Phoebe I should like thee as the Hiperborei do theyr dates, which banket with them in the mor∣ning, & throw them away at night, my folly should be great, & thy repentance more. Therfore I wil haue time to turn my thoghts, and my Loues shall growe vp as the water Cresses, slowly, but with a deepe roote. Thus Phoebe thou maist see I disdaine not
though I desire not, remaining indifferent til time & loue makes me resolute. Therefore Phoebe seek not to suppresse affection, and with the loue of Montanus quench the remembraunce of Ganimede, striue thou to hate mee as I seeke to like of thee, and euer haue the duties of Montanus in thy minde, for I promise thee thou mayest haue one more wealthy, but not more loyall. These wordes were corasiues to the perplexed Phoebe, that sobbing out sighes, and straining out teares, shee blubbered out these words. And shall I then haue no salue of Ganimede but suspence, no hope but a doubtfull hazard, no comfort, but bee posted off to the will of time: iustly haue the Gods ballanst my fortunes, who bee∣ing cruel to Montanus, found Ganimede as vnkind to my selfe: so in forcing him perish for loue, I shall die my selfe with ouer∣much loue. I am glad quoth Ganimede, you look into your own faults, and see where your shoo wrings you, measuring now the pains of Montanus by your owne passions. Truth q. Phoebe, and so deeply I repent me of my frowardnesse towards the shep∣heard, that could I cease to loue Ganimede, I would resolue to like Montanus. What if I can with reason perswade Phoebe to mislike of Ganimede, wil she then fauour Montanus? When reason (quoth she) doth quench that loue that I owe to thee, then will I fancie him: conditionally, that if my loue can bee supprest with no reason, as being without reason, Ganimede will onely wed himselfe to Phoebe. I graunt it faire Shepherdesse quoth he: and to feed thee with the sweetnesse of hope, this resolue on: I wil neuer marry my selfe to woman but vnto thy selfe: & with that Ganimede gaue Phoebe a fruitlesse kisse, and such wordes of comfort, that before Ganimede departed shee arose out of her bed, & made him and Montanus such cheare, as could bee founde in such a country cottage. Ganimede in the midst of their banket rehearsing the promises of either in Montanus fauour, which highly pleased the Shepheard. Thus all three content, and soo∣thed vp in hope, Ganimede tooke his leaue of Phoebe & depar∣ted, leauing her a contented woman, & Montanus highly plea∣sed. But poore Ganimede, who had her thoughtes on her Rosa∣der, when she cald to remembrance his wounds, fild her eies full of teares, and her heart full of sorrowes, plodded to finde Aliena
at the Folds, thinking with her presence to driue away her passi∣ons. As she came on the plaines, shee might espy where Rosader and Saladyne sat with Aliena vnder the shade: which sight was a salue to her griefe, and such a cordiall vnto her heart, that shee tript alongst the Lawnes full of ioy. At last Coridon who was with them spied Ganimede, and with that the Clown rose, & running to meet him cried, Oh sirha, a match, a match, our Mistres shalbe maried on sunday. Thus the poore peasant frolicke it before Ganimede, who comming to the crue saluted them all, and especially Rosader, saying that he was glad to see him so wel recouered of his wounds. I had not gone a∣broad so soone quoth Rosader, but that I am bidden to a marri∣age, which on Sunday next must bee solempnized betweene my brother and Aliena. I see well where Loue leads delay is loath∣some, and that small wooing serues, where both the parties are willing. Truth quoth Ganimede: but a happy day should it be, if Rosader that day might be married to Rosalynd. Ah good Ga∣nimede (quoth he) by naming Rosalynd renue not my sorrowes: for the thought of her perfections, is the thrall of my miseries. Tush, bee of good cheare man quoth Ganimede, I haue a friend that is deeply experienst in Negromancy and Magicke, what art can do shall be acted for thine aduantage: I wil cause him to bring in Rosalynde, if either France or any bordring Nation harbour her: and vpon that take the faith of a yoong shepheard. Aliena smilde to see how Rosader frownd, thinking that Ganimede had iested with him. But breaking off from those matters, the Page (somewhat pleasant) began to discourse vnto them what had past between him and Phoebe: which as they laught, so they wondred at, all confessyng, that there is none so chast but Loue wil change. Thus they past away the day in chat, and when the Sun began to set, they tooke their leaues and departed: Aliena prouiding for their marriage day such solemne cheare and handsome roabes as fitted their country estate, & yet somewhat the better, in that Ro∣sader had promised to bring Gerismond thither as a guest. Ga∣nimede (who then ment to discouer her self before her father, had made her a gowne of green, and a kirtle of the finest sendal, in such sort that she seemed some heauenly Nymph harboured in Coun∣try attire.
Saladine was not behind in care to set out the nuptials, nor Ro∣sader vnmindfull to bid guests, who inuited Gerismond and all his folowers to the feast: who willingly granted, so that there was nothing but the day wanting to his marriage. In the mean while, Phoebe being a biddē guest, made her self as gorgious as might be to please the eye of Ganimede: and Montanus suted himself with the cost of many of his flocks to be gallant against that day: for then was Ganimed to giue Phoebe an answer of her loues, and Montanus either to heare the doome of his miserie, or the censure of his happinesse. But while this geare was a brewing. Phoebe past not one day without visiting her Ganimede, so far was she wrapt in the beauties of this louely swaine. Much prat∣tle they had, and the discourse of many passions, Phoebe wishing for the day (as she thought) of her welfare, & Ganimede smiling to thinke what vnexpected euentes would fall out at the wedding. In these humors the weeke went away, that at last sunday came. No sooner did Phoebus Hench-man appeare in the skie, to giue warning that his maisters horses should be crapt in his glori∣ous couch, but Coridon in his holiday sute maruellous seemely, in a russet iatket welted with the same, & faced with red worsted, hauing a paire of blew chamblet sleeues, bound at the wrests with foure yeolow laces, closed afore very richly with a dosen of pew∣ter buttons: his hose was of gray karsie, with a large sloppe bard ouer thwart the pocket holes with three faire gards, stitcht of ei∣ther side with red threed, his stock was of the owne sewed close to his breech, and for to bewtifie his hose, he had trust himselfe round with a dosen of new thredden points of medley colour: his bon∣net was greene wheron stood a copper brooch with the picture of Saint Denis: and to want nothing that might make him amo∣rous in his old dayes, hee had a faire shyrt band of fine lockeram, whipt ouer with Couentry blew of no small cost. Thus attired, Coridon bestird himselfe as chiefe stickler in these actions, and had strowed al the house with flowers, that it seemed rather some of Floraes choyce howers, than any country cottage. Thether repaired Phoebe with all the maides of the Forrest, to set out the bride in the most seemliest sort that might bee: but howsoeuer shee helpt to prancke out Aliena, yet her eye was still on Ganimede, who was so neat in a sute of gray, that he seemed
Endymion when he won Luna with his lookes, or Paris when he playd the swain to get the bewtie of the Nymph Oenone. Ga∣nimede like a prettie Page waited on his mistresse Aliena, and ouerlookt that all was in a readines against the bridegroom shuld come. Who attired in a Forresters sute came accompanied with Gerismond & his brother Rosader early in ye morning, where ar∣riued, they were solemnly entertained by Aliena & the rest of the country swains, Gerismond very highly commending the fortu∣nate choice of Saladyne, in yt he had chosen a shepheardesse, whose vertues appeared in her outward bewties, being no lesse fair than seeming modest. Ganimede comming in and seeing her father began to blush. Nature woorking affects by her secred effectes: fearce could she abstain from teares to see her father in so low for∣tunes: he that was wont to sit in his royal Pallaice: attended on by twelue noble Peeres, now to be contented with a simple Cot∣tage, and a troupe of reuelling woodmen for his traine. The con∣sideration of his fall, made Ganimede full of sorrowes: yet that she might triumph ouer Fortune with patience, and not any way dash that merry day with her dumps, she smothered her melancho∣ly with a shadow of mirth: and verie reuerently welcommed the king, not according to his former degree, but to his present estate, with such diligence, as Gerismond began to commend the page for his exquisit person, and excellent qualities. As thus the King with his Forresters frolickt it among the shepheards, Coridon came in with a faire mazer full of Sidar, and presented it to Gerismond with such a clownish salute, that he began to smile, & tooke it of the old shepheard very kindly, drin∣king to Aliena and the rest of her faire maydes, amongst whome Phoebe was the formost. Aliena pledged the King, & drunke to Rosader: so the carrowse went rounde from him to Phoebe, &c. As they were thus drinking and ready to goe to Church, came in Montanus apparelled all in tawny, to signifie that he was forsa∣ken: on his head hee wore a garland of willow, his bottle hanged by his side whereon was painted dispaire, and on his sheephooke hung two Sonnets as labels of his loues and fortunes. Thus attired came Montanus in, with his face as full of griefe, as his heart was of sorowes, shewing in his countenance the map of extremities. Assoone as the Shepheards sawe him,
they did him all the honor they could, as being the flower of al the swaines in Arden: for a bonnier boy was there not seen since the wanton wag of Troy that kept sheep in Ida. He seeing the King, & gessyng it to be Gerismond, did him all the reuerence his coun∣try curtesie could afford. Insomuch that the king wondring at his attire, began to question what he was. Montanus ouerhearing him made this reply. I am sir quoth he loues swaine, as ful of in∣ward discontents as I seeme fraught with outward follies. Mine eyes like bees delight in sweet flowers, but sucking their fill on the faire of beauty, they carry home to the Hiue of my heart farre more gaul than hony, and for one drop of pure deaw, at tun full of deadly Aconiton, I hunt with the Fly to pursue the Eagle, that flying too nigh the Sun, I perish with the Sun: my thoughts are aboue my reach, and my desires more than my fortunes: yet nei∣ther greater than my loues. But daring with Phaetō, I fal with Irarus, and seeking to passe the mean, I die for being so mean, my night fleeps are waking slombers, as full of sorrowes as they be far from rest, & my dayes labors are fruitlesse amors, staring at a star & stombling at a straw, leauing reason to follow after repen∣tance: yet euery passion is a pleasure thogh it pinch, because loue hides his wormeseed in figs, his poysons in sweet potions, & sha∣dows preiudize with the maske of pleasure. The wisest counsel∣lers are my deep discontents, and I hate that which should salue my harm, like the patient which stung with the Tarantula loaths musick, and yet the disease incurable but by melody. Thus (Sir) restlesse I hold my selfe remediles, as louing without either re∣ward or regard, and yet louing, bicause there is none worthy to be loued, but the mistresse of my thoughts. And that I am as full of passions as I haue discourst in my plaintes, Sir if you please see my Sonnets, and by them censure of my sorrowes. These wordes of Montanus brought the king into a great wonder, amazed as much at his wit was as his attire: insomuch that he tooke the papers off his hooke, and read them to this effect. Montanus first Sonnet. Alas how wander I amidst these woods, Whereas no day bright shine doth finde accesse: But where the melancholy fleeting floods
(Darke as the night) my night of woes expresse, Disarmde of reason, spoilde of natures goods, Without redresse to salue my heauinesse I walke, whilest thought (too cruell to my harmes) With endles grief my heedles iudgement charmes. My silent tongue assailde by secret feare, My traitrous eyes imprisoned their ioy, My fatall peace deuourd in fained cheare, My heart inforst to harbour in annoy, My reason robde of power by yeelding eare, My fond opinions slaue to euery toy. Oh Loue thou guide in my vncertaine way, Woe to thy bow, thy fire, the cause of my decay. Et florida pungunt. When the King had read this Sonnet, he highly commended the deuice of the shepheard, that could so wittily wrap his passi∣ons in a shaddow, and so couertly conceale that which bred his chiefest discontent: affirming, that as the least shrubs haue their tops, the smallest haires their shadowes: so the meanest swaines had their fancies, and in their kynde were as charie of Loue as a King. Whelted on with this deuice, he tooke the second and read it: the effects were these. Montanus second Sonnet. When the Dog Full of rage, With his irefull eyes Frownes amidst the skies The Shepheard to asswage The fury of the heat, Himselfe doth safely seat By a fount Full of faire, Where a gentle breath (Mounting from beneath) Tempreth the aire. There his flocks Drinke their fill,
And with ease repose Whilest sweet sleep doth close Eyes from toylsome ill. But I burne Without rest, No defensiue power Shields from Phoebes lower: Sorrow is my best. Gentle Loue Lowre no more, If thou wilt inuade, In the secret shade, Labour not so sore. I my selfe And my flock They their loue to please, I my selfe to ease, Both leaue the shadie oakes: Content to burne in fire Saith Loue doth so desire. Et florida pungunt. Gerismond seeing the pithy vaine of those Sonets, began to make further enquiry what hee was? Whereupon Rosader dis∣courst vnto him the loue of Montanus to Phoebe, his great loi∣alite & her deep crueltie: and how in reuenge the Gods had made the curious Nymph amorous of yoong Ganimede. Upon this discourse, ye king was desirous to see Phoebe: who being broght before Gerismond by Rosador, shadowed the beauty of her face with such a vermilion teinture, that the Kings eyes began to da∣zle at the puritie of her excellence. After Gerismond had fed his lookes a while vpon her faire, he questioned with her, why she re∣warded Montanus loue with so little regard, seeing his desertes were many, and his passions extreame. Phoebe to make reply to the Kings demaund, answered thus: Loue (sir) is charitie in his lawes, and whatsoeuer hee sets downe for iustire (bee it neuer so vniust) the sentence cannot be reuerst: womens fancies lende fa∣uours not euer by desert, but as they are inforst by their desires for fancy is tied to the wings of Fate, & what the starres decree,
stands for an infallible doome. I know Montanus is wise, & wo∣mens ears are greatly delighted with wit, as hardly escaping the charme of a pleasant toong, as Vlisses the melody of the Syrens. Montanus is bewtifull, and womens eyes are snared in the ex∣cellence of obiects, as desirous to feede their lookes with a faire face, as the Bee to suck on a sweet floure. Montanus is welthy, & an ounce of giue me perswades a woman more than a pound of heare me. Danae was won with a goldon shower, when she could not be gotten with all the intreaties of Iupiter: I tell you sir, the string of a womans heart reacheth to the pulse of her hand, and let a man rub that with gold, & tis hard but she wil prooue his hearts gold. Montanus is yoong, a great clause in fancies court: Mon∣tanus is vertuous, the richest argument that Loue yeelds: & yet knowing all these perfections I praise them, and wonder at them, louing the qualities, but not affecting the person, because the De∣stenies haue set downe a contrary censure. Yet Venus to ad re∣uenge, hath giuē me wine of ye same grape, a sip of the same sauce, & string me with the like passiō, hath crost me with as il a penance: for I am in loue with a shepheards swaine, as coy to mee as I am cruel to Montanus, as peremptory in disdain as I was peruerse in desire, & that is (quoth she) Alienaes page, yong Ganimede. Gerismond desirous to prosecute the ende of these passions, called in Ganimede: who knowing the case, came in graced with such a blush, as beautified the Christall of his face with a ruddie brightnesse. The King noting well the phisnomy of Ganimede, began by his fauours to cal to mind the face of his Rosalynd, and with that fetcht a deepe sigh. Rosader that was passing familiar with Gerismond, demanded to him why he sighed so sore? Be∣cause Rosader (quoth hee) the fauour of Ganimede puts mee in minde of Rosalynde. At this word, Rosader sight so deepely as though his heart would haue burst. And whats the matter (quoth Gerismond) that you quite mee with such a sigh? Pardon mee sir (quoth Rosader) because I loue none but Rosalynd. And vp∣on that condition (quoth Gerismond) that Rosalynd were here, I would this day make vp a marriage betwixt her and thee. At this Aliena turnd her head and smilde vpon Ganimede, and shee could scarce keep countenance. Yet shee salued all with secrecie, an Gerismond to driue away such dumpes, questioned with
Ganimede, what the reason was he regarded not Phoebes loue, seeing she was as faire as the wantō that brought Troy to ruine. Ganimede mildly answered, If I shuld affect the fair Phoebe, I should offer poore Montanus great wrong to winne that from him in a moment, that hee hath labored for so many monthes. Yet haue I promised to the bewtiful shepheardesse, to wed my self ne∣uer to woman except vnto her: but with this promise, yt if I can by reason suppresse Phoebes loue towards me, she shall like of none but of Montanus. To ye q. Phoebe I stand, for my loue is so far beyond reason, as it wil admit no persuasion of reason. For iustice q. he, I appeale to Gerismond: and to his censure wil I stand q. Phoebe. And in your victory q. Montanus stands the hazard of my fortunes: for if Ganymede go away with conquest, Monta∣nus is in conceit loues Monarch, if Phoebe winne, then am I in effect most miserable. We wil see this controuersie q. Gerismōd, & then we will to church: therefore Ganimede let vs heare your argument. Nay, pardon my absence a while (quoth shee) and you shall see one in store. In went Ganimede and drest her self in wo∣mans attire, hauing on a gowne of greene, with kirtle of rich san∣dall, so quaint, that she seemed Diana triumphing in the Forrest: vpon her head she wore a chaplet of Roses, which gaue her such a grace, yt she looked like Flora pearkt in the pride of all hir floures. Thus attired came Rosalind in, & presented her self at hir fathers feete, with her eyes full of tears, crauing his blessing, & discour∣sing vnto him all her fortunes, how shee was banished by Tris∣mond, and how euer since she liued in that country disguised. Gerismond seeing his daughter, rose from his seat & sel vpon her necke, vttering the passions of his ioy in warry plaints driuen into such an extasie of content, that hee could not vtter one word. At this sight, if Rosader was both amazed & ioyfull, I refer my selfe to the iudgement of such as haue experience in loue, seeing his Rosalynd before his face whom so long and deeply he had af∣fected. At last Gerismond recouered hi spirites, and in most fa∣therly tearmes entertained his daughter Rosalynd, after many questions demanding of her what had past betweene her and Ro∣sader. So much sir (quoth she) as there wants nothing but your Grace to make vp the mariage. Why then (quoth Gerismond) Rosader take her, shee is thine, and let this day solemnize
both thy brothers and thy nuptials, Rosader beyond measure co∣tent, humbly thauked the king, & imbraced his Rosalynde, who turning to Phoebe, demanded if she had shewen sufficient reason to suppresse the force of her loues. Yea quoth Phoebe; & so a perswasiue, that if it please you Madame, and Aliena to giue vs leaue, Montanus and I will make this day the thirde couple in marriage. She had no sooner spake this word, but Montanus threw away his garland of willow, his bottle, where was pain∣ted dispaire, & cast his sonnets in the fire, shewing himselfe as fro∣licke as Paris when he hanseled his loue with Helena. At this Gerismond and the rest smiled, and concluder that Montanus and Phoebe should keepe their wedding with the two brethren. Aliena seeing Saladyne stand in a dumpe, to wake him from his dreame began thus. Why how now my Saladyne, all a mort, what melancholy man at the day of marriage? perchaunce thou art sorrowfull to thinke on thy brothers high fortunes, and thyne owne base desires to chuse so meane a shepheardize. Cheare vp thy hartman, for this day thou shalt bee married to the daughter of a King: for know Saladyne, I am not Aliena, but Alinda the daughter of thy mortal enemie Torismond. At this all the com∣pany was amazed, especially Gerismond, who rising vp, tooke Alinda in his armes, and said to Rosalynd: is this that faire A∣linda famous for so many vertues, that forsoke her fathers court to liue with thee exilde in the country? The same q. Rosalynde. Then quoth Gerismond, turning to Saladine, iolly Forrester be frolick, for thy fortunes are great, & thy desires excellent, thou hast got a princesse as famous for her perfection, as exceeding in pro∣portion. And she hath with her beauty won (quoth Saladyne) an humble seruant, as full of faith, as she of amiable fauour. While euery one was amazed with these Comicall euentes, Coridon came skipping in, & told them that the Priest was at Church and tarried for their comming. With that Gerismond led the way, & the rest followed, where to the admiration of all the countrey swains in Arden, their mariages were solemnly solemnized. As soone as the Priest had finished, home they went with Alinda, where Coridon had made all things in readines. Dinner was prouided, & the tables being spread, and the Brides set downe by Gerismond, Rosader, Saladyne, & Montanus that day were
seruitors: homely cheare they had, such as their country could af∣foord: but to mend their fare they had mickle good chat, and ma∣ny discourses of their loues and fortunes. About mid dinner, to make them mery Coridon came in with an old crowd, and plaid them a fit of mirth, to which he sung this pleasant song. Coridons Song. A blyth and bonny country Lasse, heigh ho the bonny Lasse: Sate sighing an the tender grasse, and weeping said, will none come woo mee? A smicker boy, a lyther Swaine, heigh ho a smicker Swaine: That in his Loue was want on faine, with smiling looks straight came vnto her. When as the wanton wench espide, heigh ho when she espide The meanes to make herselfe a bride, she simpred smooth like bonny bell: The Swaine that saw her squint eied kind heigh ho squint eyed kind, His armes about her body twind, and faire Lasse, how fare ye, well? The country kit said well sorsooth, heigh ho well forsooth, But that I haue alonging tooth, a longing tooth that makes me crie: Alas said he what garres thy griefe? heigh ho what garres thy griefe? A wound quoth she without reliefe, I feare a maid that I shall die. If that be all the shepheard said, heigh ho the shepheard said, He make thee wine it gentle mayd, and so recure thy maladie. Hereon they kist with many a oath, heigh ho with many a oath, And fore God Pan did plight their troath, and to the Church they hied them fast.
And God send euery pretie peate, heigh ho the prety peate: That feares to die of this conceate, so kind a friend to helpe at last. Coridon hauing thus made them merry, as they were in the midst of their iollitie, word was brought in to Saladyne & Rosader that a brother of theirs, one Fernandine was ariued, and desired to speake with them. Gerismond ouerhearing this newes, demaun∣ded who it was? It is sir (q. Rosader) our middle brother, that liues a scholler in Paris: but what fortune hath driuen him to seek vs out I know not. With that Saladine went and met his brother, whom he welcommed with all curtesie, & Rosader gaue him no lesse frend∣ly entertainment: brought he was by his two brothers into the par∣lour where they all sate at dinner. Fernandine as one that knew as many maners, as he could points of sophistry, & was aswel brought vp as well lettered, saluted them all. But when he espied Geris∣mond, kneeling on his knee, he did him what reuerence belonged to his estate: and with that burst forth into these speaches. Although (right mighty Prince) this day of my brothers marriage be a daye of mirth, yet time craues another course: and therfore from daintie cates rise to sharpe weapons. And you the sonnes of Sir Iohn of Bourdeux, leaue off your amors, & fal to arms, change your loues into lances, and now this day shew your selues valiant, as hitherto you haue been passionate. For know Gerismond, that harde by at the edge of this forrest the twelue peeres of France are vp in arms to recouer thy right: and Torismond troupt with a crue of despe∣rate runnagates is ready to bid them battaile. The armies are rea∣dy to ioyne: therefore shewe thy selfe in the field to incourage thy subiects: & you Saladine and Rosader mount you, and shew your selues as hardy soldiers as you haue been harty louers: so shal you for the benefit of your Country, discouer the Idea of your Fathers vertues to be stamped in your thoughts, and proue children worthy of so honorable a parent. At this alarum giuen him by Fernandine Gerismond leapt from the boord, & Saladyne and Rosader be∣tooke themselues to their weapons. Nay (q. Gerismond) go with me, I haue horse and armor for vs all, & then being well mounted let vs shew that we carry reuenge & honor at our fanchons points. Thus they leaue the Brides full of sorrow, especially Alinda, who
desired Gerismond to be good to her Father: hee not returning a word because his hast was great hied him home to his lodge, wher he deliuered Saladyne & Rosador horse and armour, and himselfe armed royally led the y: not hauing ridden two leagues before they discouered  a valley both the battailes were ioyned Gerismond seeing the wing wherein the Peeres fought, thrust in there, and cryed S. Denis, laying on such load vpon his enemies, that he shewed how highly he did estimate of a crowne. When the Pers perceiued that their lawful king was there, they grew more eager: and Saladine & Rosader so behaued themselues, that none durst stand in their way nor abide the furie of their weapons. To be short, the Peers were conquerors, Torismonds army put to flight and himself slain in battaile. The Peers then gathered themselues together, and saluted their king, conducted him royally into Paris, where he has receiued with great ioy of all the citizens. Assoone as all was quiet & he had receiued againe the crowne, he sent for A∣linda & Rosalynd to the court, Alinda being very passionat for the death of her father: yet brooking it with the more patience, in that she was contented with the welfare of her Saladyne. Wel, assoone as they were come to Paris, Gerismond made a royal feast for the Peers and Lords of his Land, which continued thirtie dayes, in which time summoning a parliament, by the consent of his nobles, he created Rosader heire apparant to the kingdome, hee restored Saladyne to all his fathers Land, and gaue him the Dukedome of Namours, he made Fernandine principall secretarie to himselfe: and that Fortune might euery way seeme frolicke, he made Mon∣tanus Lord ouer all the Forrest of Arden, Adam Spencer Cap∣taine of the Kings Gard, and Coridon, Maister of Alindas flocks. HEere Gentlemen may you see in Euphues golden Legacie, that such as neglect their fathers precepts, incur much preiudice, that diuision in nature as it is a blemish in nurture, so tis a breach of good fortunes, that vertue is not measured by birth but by action, that yon∣ger brethren though inferiour in yeares, yet may bee superiour to ho∣nors: that concord is the sweetest conclusion, and amity betwixt bro∣thers more forceable than fortune. If you gather any fruits by this Le∣gacie speake wel of Euphues for writing it, and me for fetching it. If you grace me with that fauor you incorage me to be more froward & assoon as I haue ouerlookt my labors, expect the Sailers Kalender. FINIS.
