16799 S109639 99845286 10177
A PLEASANT COMMODIE, CALLED Looke about you. As it was lately played by the right honoura∣ble the Lord High Admirall his seruaunts LONDON, Printed for William Ferbrand, and are to be solde at his shop at the signe of the Crowne neere Guild-hall gate. 1600.
A pleasaunt Commodye called Looke about you. Enter Robert Hood a young Noble-man, a seruant with him, with ryding wandes in theyr handes, as if they had beene new lighted. Robert. GOe, walke the horses, wayte me on the hill, This is the Hermits Cell, goe out of sight: My busines with him must not be reueal'd, To any mortall creature but himselfe. Seru. Ile waite your honour in the crosse high-way. Exit. Rob. Doe so: Hermit deuout and reuerend, If drousie age keepe not thy stiffened ioyntes, On thy vnrestfull bed, or if the houres Of holy Orizons detayne thee not, Come foorth. Enter Skinke like an Hermit. Skin. Good morrow son, good morrow, & God blesse thee Huntington, A brighter Gleame of true Nobility Shines not in any youth more then in thee. Thou shalt be rich in honour, full of speed, Thou shalt win foes by feare, and friend, by meede. Rob. Father, I come not now to know my fate, Important busines vrgeth Princely Richard, Deliuer letters. In these termes to salute thy reuerent age. Read and be briefe, I know some cause of trust, Made him imploy me for his messenger. Skin. A cause of trust indeed true honoured youth, Princes had need in matters of import,
To make nice choyse faire Earle, if I not erre, Thou art the Princes ward. Ro. Father I am his ward, his Chamberlaine & bed-fellow. Skin. Faire fall thee honourable Robert Hood, Wend to Prince Richard, say though I am loath, To vse my skill in Coniuration: Yet Skinke that poysoned red cheekt Rosamond, Shall make appearaunce at the Parlament, He shall be there by noone assure his Grace. Rob. Good morrow Father, see you faile him not, For though the villaine did a horrible deed, Yet hath the young King Richard, and Earle Iohn, Sworne to defend him from his greatest foes. Skin. Gods benizon be with thee noble Earle. Rob. A dew good father, holla there, my horse? Exit. Skin. Vp, spur the kicking Iade, while I make speede To Consure Sknke out of his Hermits weede; Lye there religion keep thy M. graue, And on the faire trust of these Princes word To Court againe Skinke: but before I goe, Let mischiefe take aduise of villany, Why to the Hermit letters should be sent, To poast Skinke to the Court incontinent: Is there no tricke in this? ha let me see? Or doe they know already I am he? If they doe so, faith westward then with Skinke: But what an asse am I to be thus fond, Heere lyes the Hermit whom I dying found Some two monthes since, when I was howerly charg'd With Hugh the Cryer and with Constables, I saw him in the ready way to heauen, I helpt him forward, t'was a holy deed; And there he lyes some sixe foote in the ground, Since when, and since, I kept me in his weedes. O what a world of fooles haue fill'd my Cell; For Fortunes, run-awaies, stolne goods; lost cattle, Among the number, all the faction That take the young Kings part against the olde;
Come to my selfe to harken for my selfe, So did the aduerse party make enquire, But eyther fall full of contrary desire: The olde Kings part would kill me being stain'd, The young Kings keep me from their violence. So then thou needst not feare, goe boldly on, Braue Hall, Prince Dicke, and my spruce hot spur John, Heer's their safe conduct: O but for Rosamond! A fig for Rosamond, to this hope Ile leane: At a Queenes bidding I did kill a queane. Sound Trumpets, enter with a Harrald on the one side, Henry the second Crowned, after him Lancaster, Chester, Sir Richard Faukenbridge: on the other part, K. Henry the Sonne crowned, Herrald after him: after him Prince Rich. Iohn, Leyster, being set, enters santasticall Robert of Gloster in a gowne girt: walkes vp and downe. Old. K. Why doth not Gloster take his honoured seate? Glo. In faith my Liege Gloster is in a land Where neyther suerty is to sit or stand. I onely doe appeare as I am summoned, And will awaite without till I am call'd. Yon. K. Why heare you Gloster? Glo. Henry I doe heare you. Yon. K. And why not King? Glo. What's he that sits so neere you? Rich. King too. Glo. Two Kings? ha ha. Ol. K. Gloster sit we charge thee. Glo. I will obey your charge, I will sit downe, But in this house, on no seate but the ground. Iohn. The seat's too good. Glo. I know it brother Iohn. Jo. Thy brother? Ol. K. Silence there. Yon. K. Passe to the billes Sir Richard Faukenbridge. Fau. My Lieges both, olde Faukenbridge is proude Of your right honour'd charge. He that worst may Will straine his olde eyes, God send peace this day.
A bill for the releasement of the Queene prefer'd, By Henry the young King, Rich. the Prince, John Earle Of Murton, Bohmine Earle of Leister and the cōmons: Old K. Did you preferre this byll? All. We did. Chest. Lac. Yee did not well. Glo. Why this is good, now shall we haue the hell. 3. Bro Chester and Lanchaster you wrong the King. Chest. La. Our King we doe not. Yn. K. Doe not you seeme crown'd? Lac. But whilst he liues we to none else are bound. Ley. Is it not wrong thinke you, when all the world Troubled with rumour of a captiue Queene, Imprisoned by her husband in a Realme, Where her owne sonne doth weare a Diademe? Is like an head of people mutinous. Still murmuring at the se done her and vs? Is't not more wrong when her mother zeale Sounded through Europe. Affricke, Assia, Tels in the hollow of newes thirsting eares, Queene Elinor liues in a dungion, For pitty and affection to  sonne: But when the true cause, Cliffords daughters death Shall be exposed to stranger nations: What vollumes will be writ. what lybels spred? And in each lyne our state dishonoured. Fauk. My Lord speakes to the purpose, mary it may bee so, Pray God it prooue not so. Ley. Heare me conclude, and there withall conclude, It is an heynous and vnheard of sinne: Queene Elinor daughter to Kingly Fraunce, King Henries wife and royall Henries mother, Is kept close prisoner for an acte of Iustice, Committed on an odious Concubine, Kin. Thou wrongst her Leister. Le. Leachers euer praise the cause of their confusion, she was vile Fa. She was ill spoken of it's true, true. Glosr. Yonder sits one would doe as much for you
Olde foole, young Richard hath a gift I know it, And on your wife my sister would bestow it. Heer's a good world men hate adulterous sin, Count it a gulfe, and yet they needs will in. Lei. What answere for the Queene? Lan. The King replyes your words are foule slaunderous forgeryes John. His highnes sayes not so. Ln. His highnes doth, Tels you its a shame for such wilde youth, To smother any impiety, With shew to chastice loose adulterie. Say Rosamond was Henries Concubine, Had neuer King a Concubine but he? Did Rosamond begin the fires in Fraunce? Made she the Northerne borders reeke with flames? Vnpeopled she the townes of Picardy? Left she the wiues of England husbandles? O no: she sinn'd I graunt, so doe we all, She fell her selfe, desiring none should fall; But Elinor whom you so much commend, Hath been the bellowes of seditious fire, Eyther through Iealious rage or mad desire; Ist not a shame to thinke that she hath arm'd Foure Sonnes right hands, against their fathers head, And not the children of a low-priz'd wretch, But one whom God on earth hath deified? See where he sits with sorrow in his eyes, Three of his Sonnes and hers tutor'd by her, Smiles whilst he weeps, and with a proude disdaine, Imbrace blith mirth, while his sad heart complaine. Fau. Ha laugh they? nay by the rood that is not wel, Now fie young Princes fie. Hen. Peace doting foole. Iohn. Be silent asse. Fau. With all my heart my Lords, my humble leaue my Lords Gods mother asse and foole for speaking truth, Tis terrible, but fare yee well my Lords. Rich. Nay stay good Faukenbridge, impute it rage,
That thus abuses your right reuerend age, My brothers are too hot. Fau. Too hot indeed, foole, asse, for speaking truth? it's more than need. Rich. Nay good Sir Richard at my kinde intreate For all the loue I beare your noble house, Let not your absence kindle further wrath, Each side's at counsell now sit downe I pray, Ile quite it with the kindest loue I may. Glo. I to his wife. Fau. Prince Richard Ile sit downe, But by the faith I owe fayre Englands Crowne, Had you not been I would haue left the place, My seruice merits not so much disgrace. Ric. Good Faukenbridge I thanke thee. Go to their places. Glo. And you'l thinke of him, if you can step into his bower at Stepney. Fau. Prince Richard's very kinde, I know his kindenes, He loues me, but he loues my Lady better, No more, Ile watch him, Ile preuent his game, Young Lad, it's ill to halt before the lame. They breake asunder. Papers this while being offred and subscribed betweene eyther. Hen. Ile not subscribe to this indignity, Ile not be call'd a King but be a King; Allow me halfe the Realme, giue me the North, The Prouinces that lye beyond the Seas, Wales and the Isles that compasse in the mayne. Glo. Nay giue him all and he will scant be pleas'd. Rich. Brother you aske too much. Iohn. To much, too little, hee shall haue that and more, I sweare he shall. I will haue Nottingham and Salisbury, Stafford and Darby, and some other Earledome, Or by S. Iohn (whose blessed name I beare) Ile make these places like a wildernes. Ist not a plague, an horrible abuse, A King, a King of England should be Father To foure such proper youths, as Hall, and Dicke,
My brother Geffrey and my proper selfe, And yet not giue his sonnes such maintenaunce, As he consumes among his minions. Rich. Be more respectiue Iohn. Io. Respectiue Richard, are you turn'd pure? a changing wether-cocke? I say it's reason Henry should be King, Thou Prince, I Duke, as Ieffry is a Duke. Lan. What shall your Father doe? Jo. Liue at his prayers, haue a sufficient pention by the yere, Repent his sinnes because his end is neere. Glo. A gratious sonne, a very gratious sonne. Kin. Will this content you? I that haue sat still, Amaz'd to see my sonnes deuoyde of shame; To heare my subiects with rebellious tongues, Wound the kinde bosome of their Soueraigne, Can no more beare, but from a bleeding hart Deliuer all my loue, for all your hate: Will this content thee cruell Elinor? Your sauage mother, my vnciuill Queene; The Tygresse that hath drunke the purple bloud, Of three times twenty thousand valiant men; Washing her red chaps, in the weeping teares, Of widdows, virgins, nurses, sucking babes. And lastly sorted with her damn'd consorts, Entred alaborinth to murther loue. Will this content you? she shall be releast, That she may next seaze me she most enuyes. Hen. Our mothers liberty is some content. Kin. What else would Henry haue? Hen. The Kingdome. Kin. Peruse this byll, draw neere let vs conferre. Joh. Hall be not answered but with Soueraignty, For glorious is the sway of Maiesty. Kin. What would content you John? Joh. Fiue Earledomes Sir. Kin. What you sonne Richard? Ric. Pardon gratious father, & th'furtheraunce for my vow of penance For I haue sworne to God and all his Saints, These armes erected in rebellious brawles, Against my Father and my Soueraigne,
Shall fight the battles of the Lord of hoasts, In wrong'd Iudea and Palestina, That shall be Richards pennance for his pride, His bloud a satisfaction for his sinne, His patrimony men, munition, And meanes to waft them into Siria. Kin. Thou shalt haue thy desire Heroyicke Sonne, As soone as other home-bred brawles are done. Lan. Why weepes olde Faukenbridge? Fau. I am almost blind, to heare sons cruell, and the fathers kinde, Now well a neere that ere I liu'd to see, Such patience and so much impiety. Glo. Brother content thee this is but the first, Worse is a brewing, and yet not the worst. Le. You shall not stand to this. Hen. And why my Lord? Ley. The lands of Moorton doth belong to Iohn. Hen. What's that to me, by Acte of Parlament, If they be mine confirm'd, he must be pleas'd. Ioh. Be pleas'd King puppet? haue I stood for thee, Euen in the mouth of death? open'd my armes To sercle in seditious vgly shape? Shooke hands with duety, bad adew to vertue, Prophan'd all Maiesty in heauen and earth; Writ in blacke Carracters on my white brow, The name of rebell Iohn against his Father: For thee, for thee, thou Otimie of honour, Thou worme of Maiesty thou froth, thou puble. And must I now be pleas'd in pease to stand, While statutes make thee owner of my land? Glo. Good pastime good, now will the theeues fall out? Joh O if I doe, let me be neuer held Royall King Henryes sonne pardon me father, Pull downe this rebell that hath done thee wrong. Dicke, come and leaue his side, assayle him Lords, Let's haue no parly but with billes and swoordes. Ki. Peace Iohn, lay downe thy armes, heare Henry speake, He mindes thee no such wrong. Io. He were not best.
Hen. Why hayre-brain'd brother can yee brooke no iest? I doe confirme you Earle of Nottingham. Io. And Moorton too? Hen. I and Moorton too. Io. Why so, now once more Ile sit downe by you. Glo. Blow winde, the youngest of King Henries stocke, Would fitly serue to make a weather-cocke. Io. Gape earth, challenge thine owne as Gloster lyes, Pitty such mucke is couer'd with the skies. Fau. Be quiet good my Lords, the Kings commaund You should be quiet, and tis very meere, It's most conuenient, how say you Prince Richard? Rich. It is indeed. Fa. Why that is wisely said, you are a very kinde indifferent man, Mary a God and by my hollidame, Were not I had a feeling in my head, Of some suspition twixt my wife and him, I should affect him more then all the world. Glo. Take heede olde Richard, keep thee there mad lad, My Sister's faire, and beauty may turne bad. Enter Robert Hood a paper in his hand. Officer. Roome there, make roome for young Huntington. Fau. A gallant youth, a proper Gentleman. Hen. Richard I haue had wrong about his wardship. Ric. You cannot right your selfe. Jo. He can and shall. Ric. Not with your help but honourable youth Haue yee perform'd the busines I enioyn'd? Rob. I haue, and Skinke is come, heere is his bill, Hen. No matter for his bill let him come in. Kin. Let him not enter, his infectious breath Will poyson the assembly. Gl. Neuer doubt, ther's more infectious breaths about your Throne, Leyster is there, your enuious Sonnes is there; If them you can endure, no poyson feare. Kin Content thee Gloster. Glo. I must be content, when you that should mend all are patient, Hen. Welcome good Skinke thou iustly dost complaine, Thou standst in dread of death for Rosamond,
Whom thou didst poyson at our dread commaund, And the appointment of our gratious Mother; See heere my Fathers hand vnto thy pardon. Skin. I receiue it gratiously, wishing his soule sweet peace, in heauen for so meritorious a worke, for I feare me I haue not his heart though his hand. Kin. Be sure thou hast not, murderous bloud-sucker, To iealious enuy executioner. Hen. Besides thou suest to haue some maintenaunce, We haue bethought vs how wee will reward thee, Thou shalt haue Rowden Lordship. Glost. Shal he so? will you reward your murtherers with my lands Hen. Your lands? it is our gift and he shall haue it. Glo. Ile giue him seasure first with this and this. Strike him. John. Lay holde on Gloster. Kin. Holde that murtherous Skinke. Glo. Villaines hands off, I am a Prince, a Peere, And I haue borne disgrace while I can beare. Fau Knaues leaue your rudenes, how now brother Gloster? nay be appeas'd, be patient brother. Rich. Shift for thy selfe good Skinke, ther's golde, away: Heere will be parts. Skin. Swonds Ile make one and stay. Joh. I prethee be gone since thus it faileth out, Take water, hence, away, thy life I doubt. Ski. Well, farewell, get I once out of doore, Skinke neuer will put trust in warrants more. Exit. Kin. Will Gloster not be bridled? Glo. Yes my Liege and sadled too, and ryd, and spur'd, & rayn'd, Such misery (in your Raigne) falles your friends, Let goe my armes, you dunghyls let me speake. Kin. Wher's that knaue Skinke? I charge you see him stayd. Fauk. The swift heel'd knaue is fled, body a me heer's rule, Heer's worke indeed. Kin. Follow that Skinke, let priuy search be made, Let not one passe except he be well knowne, Let poastes be euery way sent speedily, For ten miles compasse round about the Citty.
Hen. Take Gloster to you Liefetenant of the Tower, Keep him aside till we conferre a while, Father you must subscribe to his committing. Lan. Why must he Henry? Ley. Mary for this cause, he hath broke peace and violated lawes. Glo. So haue you all done, rebels as you be. Fau. Good words good brother, heare me gratious Lords, Hen. I prethee Faukenbridge be patient, Gloster must of force answere this contempt. Kin. I will not yeeld he shall vnto the Tower, Warden of th'Fleete take you the charge of Gloster. Hen. Why be it so, yet stay with him a while, Till we take order for the company That shall attend him, and resort to him. Glo. Warden of the Fleete I see I am your charge, Be friend me thus, least by theyr commaund, I be preuented of what I intend. Keep. Commaund me any seruice in my power. Glo. I pray you call some nimble footed fellow, To doe a message for me to my sister. Keep. Call in Redcap, he waiteth with a Tipstaffe, Exit one for him. He stammers, but he's swift and trusly Sir. Enter Redcap. Glo. No matter for his stammering, is this he? Red. I Iam am Re Redcap s s sir. Glo. Run Redcap to Stepney. Red. Ile be at Stepney p p presently. Glo. Nay stay, goe to the Lady Faukenbridge my sister. Red. The La La Lady Fau Fau Faukenbreech, I r r run sir. Glo. But take thy errand, tell her I am prisoner, Committed to the Fleete. Red. I am g g glad of th th that, my fa fa father the p p por∣ter sha shall ge ge get a f f fee by you. Still runnes. Glo. Stand still a while, desire her to make meanes Vnto Prince Richard for my liberty, At thy returne (make speed) I will reward thee. Red. I am g g gone si sir. Rich. Commend me to her gentle Huntington,
Tell her in these affayres Ile stand her friend, Her brother shall not long be prisoner: Say I will visit her immediatlie. Be gone sweete boy to Marian Faukenbridge, Thou lookest like loue perswade her to be louing. Ro. So farre as honour will I will perswade, Ile lay loues battery to her modest eares, Second my milde assault, you may chaunce win, Fare parley at the least, may hap passe in. Exit. Hen Heere take your charge, let no man speake with him, Except our selfe, our brethren, or Earle Leicester. Fau. Not I my Lord, may not I speake with him? Hen. Yes Faukenbridge thou shalt. Jo. And why? he is his wiues brother. Fau. Earle Iohn, although I be, I am true vnto the State, & so is he. Glo. What, shal I haue no seruant of my owne? Hen. No but the housholde seruants of the Fleete. Glo. I thanke you kinsman King, your father knowes, Gloster may boldelie giue a base slaue blowes. Fau. O but not heere, it was not well done heere. Kin. Farewell good Gloster, you shall heare from vs. Glo. Euen what your Sonnes will suffer you to send; Ist not a miserie to see you stand, That some time was, the Monarch of this land, Intreating traytors for a subiects freedome? Lei. Let him not speake, away with him to prison. Glo. Heer's like to be a well stayd common wealth, Where in proude Leister, and licentious Iohn, Are pillers for the King to leane vpon. Io. Wee'll heare your rayling Lecture in the Fleete. Hen. On our displeasure see he speake no more. Glo. On thy displeasure, well yee haue me heere; O that I were within my Fort of Bungye Whose walles are washt with the cleare streames of Aueney Then would not Gloster passe a halfe-penny, For all these rebels, and their poore King too. Laughst thou King Henry? thou knows my words are true, God help thee good olde man, adew adew.
Io. That Castle shal be mine, where stands it Faukenbridge Fau. Far from your reach sure, vnder Feckhill ridge, Fiue hundred men (England hath few such wight) Keeps it for Glosters vse both day and night: But you may easily winne it, wantons words Quickly can master men, tongues out brawle swords. Io. Yee are an Idyot. Rich. I prethee Iohn forbeare. Joh. What shall olde winter with his frosty iestes, Crosse flowry pleasure? Fau. I and nip you too, God mary mother I would tickle you Were there no more in place but I and you. Kin. Sease these contentions, forward to the Tower, Release Queene Elinor, and leaue me there Your prisoner I am sure, if yee had power, Ther's nothing lets you but the Commons feare: Keep your State Lords, we will by water goe, Making the fresh Thames, salt with teares of woe. Hen. And wee'll by land through the Citty ride, Making the people tremble at our pride. Exeunt with Trum∣pets two waies. Enter Skinkesolus Skin. Blacke Heath quoth he, and I were King of all Kent, I would giue it for a commodity of Apron-strings, to Be in my cottage agen. Princes warrants, mary Skinke Findes them as sure as an obligation seal'd with butter. At Kings Bridge I durst not enter a boate, through London the stones were fiery, I haue had a good Coole way through the fieldes, and in the high way To Ratcliffe stands a heater: Mile-end's couered with Who goes there. Tis for me sure; O Kent, O Kent, I would giue my part of all Christendome to feele Thee as I see thee. If I goe forward I am stayed, If I goe backward, ther's a roge in a red cap, he's run From S. Iohnes after me: I were best stay heere, Least if he come with hue and cry, he stop me yonder, I would slip the coller for feare of the halter; But heere comes my runner, and if he run for me, His race dyes, he is as sure dead, as if a Parlament
Of Deuils had decreed it. Enter Redcap. Red. Ste Ste Stepney chi church yonder, but I haue forgot The La La Lady Fau Fau Fau plague on her, I mu must b backe to the Fle Fle Fleete to kn kn know it. The la the la la Lady Fau, plague on't; G Gloster Will gone neere to st stab me, fo for forgetting My errand, he is such a ma ma mad Lord, the La Lady Fau Fau Fau. Skin. Help me deuise, vpon my life this foole is sent From Gloster to his sister Marian. Redc. Im must nee needs goe backe, the La Lady Fau Fau Fau. Skin. God speed good fellow. Red. Go go god sp sp speed you sir. Skin. Why run'st thou from me? Red. Ma mary sir, I haue lo lost a La Ladyes name, and I am running ba backe to se se seeke it. Skin. What Lady? I prethee stay. Red. Why the la Lady Fau Fau Fau. Skin. Faukenbridge? Red. I the s s same, f f farewell, I th th thanke you ha hartily Skin. If thou wouldst speake with her she is in Kent, I serue her, what's thy busines with my Lady? Red. I sh sh should doe an errand to her f f from my Lord Of Gloster, but a a and she be in k Kent, Ile s send it by you. Skin. Where is my Lord? Red. Mary p p prisoner in the Fl Fleete, a a and w would haue her speake to P Prince R Richard for his re re re∣lease. Skin. I haue much busines, hold ther's thy fare by water, my Lady lyes this night. Red. Wh wh where I pray? Skin. At Grauesend at the Angell. Red. Tis deuillish co co colde going by water. Skin. Why there's my cloake and hat to keep thee warme, Thy cap and Ierkin will serue me to ride in By the way, thou hast winde and ty de, take Oares.
My Lady will reward thee royally. Red G God a mercy, f fa faith and euerth thou co co come to the Fl Fl Fleete, Ile giue the tu tu turning of the ke key f for n no nothing. Skin. Hye thee, to morrow morning at Graues-end Ile wash thy stammering throate with a mug of ale merrily. Red. God be w with you till s soo soone; what call you the Lady? O now I re remember the La Lady Fa Faukenbridge at what s signe? Skin. At the Angell. Red. A Angell, the la la Lady fa fa Fau kenbridge, Fa Fau Faukenbridge. Skin. Farewell and bee hang'd good stammering ninny, I thinke I haue set your Redcaps heeles a running, wold your Pyanet chattering humour could as sa safely se set mee fr from the searchers walkes. Yonder comes some one, hem: Skink to your trickes this tytty tytty, a the tongue I beleeue will faile mee. Enter Constable and Watch. Con. Come make vp to this fellow, let th'other go, he seems a gentleman, what are you sir? Skin. Would I had kept my owne sute, if the countenaunce carry it away. Con. Stand sirra, what are you? Skin. The po po Porters Sonne of the FFl Fleete, going to Stepney about businesse to the La La Lady Fa Fa Fauken∣bridge. Con. Well bring him thether, some two or three of yee ho∣nest neyghbors, and so backe to the Fleete, we'll shew our selues dilligent aboue other Officers. Skin. Wh wh why le le let me run I am Re Redcap. Con. Well, sure you shall now run no faster then I lead you, heare yee neighbor Simmes, I leaue my staffe with yee, bee vigilent I pray you, search the suspitious houses at the townes end, this Skink's a trouncer; come, will you be gone sir? Skin. Yes sir, and the deuill goe with you and them, Well, yet haue hope mad ha hart, co co come your way. Exeunt.
Enters Robin hood and Blocke. Blo. Sweet nobilitie in reuersion, Blocke by the commission of his head, Coniures you and withall bindes you, by all the tricks that pages passe in time of Parlament, as swearing to the pantable, crowning with Custords, paper whiffes to the sleepers noses, cutting of tagges, stealing of torches, cum mul∣tis aliis tell Blocke, what Blocke you haue cast in the way of my Ladies content. Ro. Block by the antiqiuity of your ancestrie, I haue giuen your Lady not so much as the least cause of dislike, if she be despleased at any newes I bring, it's more then I must blab. Blo. Zounds these pages be so proude, they care not for an olde Seruingman, you are a ward and so, an Earle, and no more: you disquiet our house that's the most: and I may be euen with thee that's the least. Enter the Ladie Faukenbridge. La. What Blocke, what Blocke I say what doe you there? Bloc. Making the young Lord merry Maddame, La. Go attend ye gate, see if you can let in more greife therat, Blo Zounds and greife come in there, and I see him once Ile Coniure his gaberdine. La. will you be gone sir? Blo. Hem, these women, these women, and she bee not in loue eyther with Prince Richard or this lad, let blocks head be made a chopping blocke. Exit Blocke. Rob. Faire Madam, what replye you to my sute, The prince excepts smiles, welcomes, louing lookes, La. The Prince, if he giue heed to Marrians sute, Must heare heart-sigh's, see sorrow in my eyes, And finde cold welcome to calamities, Rob. And why for gods sake? La. Euen for Glosters sake, Rob. why by mine honnor, and Prince Richards faith, Your brother Gloster shall haue liberty, Vppon condition you release a prisoner That you haue longe held in captiuitye. La. I haue no prisoner, Ro. Yes a world of eies, your beuty in a willing bondage ties La. Go to, you are dispos'd to iest my Lord,
Rob. In earnest I must be an earnest suter To you for loue, yet you must be my tuter. La. Are you in loue? Rob. I dearely loue Prince Richard. La. Then doe you loue the loueliest man aliue. The Princeliest person of King Henries sonnes, Rob. I like this well. La. he is vertuous in his minde his body faire, His deeds are Iust, his speaches debonaire, Rob. Better and better still. La. In deed he is what no body can denye. All louely, beautie all, all Maiestie. Rob. Ile tell his excelence what you reporte, No doubt he will be very thankfull, for't, La. Nay heare you young Lord? Gods pitty staye. Rob. What haue you more in Richards praise to say? La. I haue said to much if you misconster me. Dutie bids praise him, not vnchastitie. Rob. Vnchastitie holy heauens forfend it, That he or I, or you should once intend it, Enter Blocke and Richard. Blo. They are there sir, close at it, I leaue you sir, the more Roome the lesse company. Ric Drinke that, farwell, Blo. If that sir Richard comes, this ties, this bindes, O golde, thy power conuerteth seruants mindes. Exit. Rich. How now faire Maddam who hath angred you? La. Greife at my brothers duraunce angers me. Rich. I had thought my Ward young Huntington had vext you La. who he? alas good Gentleman he wrong'd me not. No matter for all this, Ile tell your tale. A noyse within, Enter Skinke, Blocke, Constable. Bls. Sir there comes no more of you in with him then the Constable. Zounds heares a beadroll of Billes at the gate in∣deed, back ye base La. Now sirra whats the matter? Blo. Marry heares a stammerer taken clipping the Kings English, and the Constable and his watch hath brought him to you to be examin'd.
Consta. No Madam wee are commaunded by the King to watch, and meeting this fellow at Mile-end, he tels vs, he is the Porters sonne of the Fleete, that the Earle of Gloster sent him to you. Skin. Iff forsooth h he desire you to speake to the p Prince for him. La. O I conceaue thee, bid him blithly fare, Beare him this Ring in token of my care. Skin. If I be rid of this euill Angell that haunts mee, many rings, much Fleete will Skinke come vnto. Con. Madam, if you know this fellow we'll discharge him. Bloc. Madam, and you be wise, trust your honest neighbors heere, let them bring this ca ca ca ca to the Fleete, and s see your ring deliuered. Skin. A plague vpon you for a damned roge, The Porter of the Fleete will surely know me. La. Good neighbours bring this honest fellow thether, Ther's for his paines a crowne if he say true, And for your labour ther's as much for you. Skin. Why Ma Ma Madam, I am Re Re Redcap the Por∣ters sonne. La. Thou hast no wrong in this, farewell good fellow. Skin. Best speaking to Prince Richard? no Ile try And face out Redcap if the slaue were by. La. Make them drinke Blocke. Blo. Come to the Buttery bar, stitty stitty stammerer, come honest Constable, hey the watch of our towne, we'll drinke trylill I saith. As they goe out, enters Sir Richard Faukenbridge stealing forward, Prince and Lady talking. Rob. Lupus in fabula my Noble Lord, See the olde foxe Sir Richard Faukenbridge. Rich. We'll fit him well enough, second vs Robin. La. Ile fit you well enough for all your hope, Fau. beckens to Blocke. Fau. Leaue quaffing sirra, listen to their talke. Bloc. O while you liue beware, two are sooner seene then one: besides, beare a braine Master, if Block should be now spide, my Madam would not trust this sconce neither in
time nor tyde. Fau. Well leaue me, now it buds; see see, they kisse. Bloc. Adew good olde sinner, you may recouer it with a fallet of parsly, and the hearbe patience, if not sir you knowe the worst, it's but euen this. Rich. Madam, what you desire I not deny, But promise Glosters life and liberty, I beg but loue. Fau. When doth she giue her almes? La. Faire honourable Prince. Fau. Nay then they speed. La. My soule hath your deserts in good esteeme. Fau. Witnesse these goodly times that grace my head. La. But were you the sole Monarch of the earth, Your power were insufficient to inuade, My neuer yeelding heart of chastity. Fauk. Sayst thou so Mall, I promise thee for this, Ile owe thy cherry lips an olde mans kisse; Looke how my Cockerill droopes, tis no matter, I like it best when women will not flatter. Rich. Nay but sweet Lady. Rob. Nay but gracious Lord, doe not so much forget your Princely worth, As to attempt vertue to vnchastity. Fau. O noble youth! Rob. Let not the Ladyes dead griefe for her brother, Giue life to shamelesse and detested sinne. Fau. Sweet childe. Ro. Consider that she is of high decent. Fau. Most vertuous Earle. Rob. Wife to the noblest Knight that euer breath'd. Fau. Now blessing on thee blessed Huntington. Rob. And would you then first staine your Princely stocke, Wrong beauty, vertue, honor, chastitye, And blemmish Faukenbridges vntaynted armes? Fau. By adding hornes vnto our Falcones head, Well thought on noble youth, twas well put in. La. Besides my gratious Lord.
Fa. Tickle him Mall, plague him on that side for his hot desire. La. howeuer secretly great Princes sin, Fau. Oh now the spring she'll doe it sercretly. La. The King of all harts will haue all syns knowne. Fa. Ah then she yeilds not. Ric. Lady heer's my hand, I did but try your honorable faith Fau. He did but trie her, would she haue bin tride It had grone hard on this and on this side. Rich. And since I see your vertue so confirm'd, as vice can haue no entraunce in your heart, I vow in sight of heauen neuer againe, To mooue like question but for loue, Fau. My hart is eased, holde Blocke take vp my cloake. Blo. And your cap to sir. Ric. Sir Richard? Fau. What sweet Prince welcome yfaith, I see youth quickly get's the starte of age; But welcome welcome and young Huntington. Sweet Robyn hude, honors best flowring bloome, Welcome to Faukenbridge with all my hearte, How cheares my loue, how fares my Marrian, ha? Be merry chucke, and Prince Richard welcome, Let it goe Mall I knowe thy greuances. Away away, tut let it passe sweet girle, Wee needs must haue his helpe about the Earle. La. Let it not be delayd deere Faukenbridge. Rich. Sir Richard, first make sute vnto my father, Ile follow you to Courte and second you, Fau. Follow to Court, ha? then I smell a rat, Its probable he'll haue about agayne, Long seige makes entraunce to the strongest fort, It must not be I must not leaue him heere, Prince Richard, if you loue my brothers good, Lets ride back to the Courte, Ile wayte on you, Rich. He's Ielious, but I must obserue the tyme, We'll ride vnto the Court, Ile leaue my boy Till we returne, are you agreed to this?
Fau. Oh I hee is an honourable youth, Vertuuos and modest, Huntingtons right heyre, His father Gilbert was the smoothst fac't Lord That ere bare Armes in England or in Fraunce, Rich. Solicitie Robin, Lady giue good eare, And of your brothers freedome neuer feare, Fau. Marrian farwell, wheres Blocke? open the gate, Come Prince God send vs to proue fortunate? Exeunt. La. why doe you stay sir? Rob. Madam as a Lidger to solicite for your absent loue La. Walk in the Garden I will follow you. I faith I faith you are a noble wagge. Rob. An honorable wag, and wagish Earle. Euen what you will sweet Lady I must beare, Hoping of patience, profit will ensue. That you will beare the Prince as I beare you. La. Well said well said, Ile haue these toyes amended, Goe, will you walke into the Garden sir, Rob. But will you promise me to bring no maides, To set vppon my litle manship there? You threatned whipping, and I am in feare, La. Vppon my word Ile bring none but my selfe, Rob. You see I am weapned, doe not I beseech you, Ile stab them come there twenty ere they breech mee. Exit. La. This youth and Richard, think me easily wonne, But Marrian rather will embrace, The bony carcasse of dismaying death, Than proue vnchast to Noble Faukenbridge, Richard's king Henries sonne, is light, Wanton and loues not humble modestie, Which makes me (much contrary to my thoughts) Flatter his humor for my brothers safetye, But I protest Ile dwel among the dead, Ere I pollute my sacred nuptiall bed. Exit. Enter Gloster in his gowne, calling Glo. Porter what Porter wher's this drowsie asse? Enter Porter, Por. Who calles? my Lord of Gloster all alone?
Glo. Alone and haue your wisdomes companie, Pray wher's the stammering chatterer your sonne? He's euer running but he makes small haste, Ile bring his lyther legges in better frame, And if he serue me thus a nother time. Knocke within. Harke sir your clients knocke, and't be your pye, Let him vouchsafe to chatter vs some newes. Tell him we daunce attendance in our chamber. Exit porter. This Iohn and Henry are so full of hate, That they will haue my head by some deuice, Gloster hath plotted meanes for an escape, And if it fadge, why so; if not, then well, The way to heauen is death, this life's a hell. Enter Porter and Skink. Port. Why should the Watchmen come along with thee? Skin. Ther's such a que question for yon s same r rogue Skink p plague keepe farre enough from him, that a an ho∣nest f fellow ca cannot w w walke the streetes. Port. Well sir dispatch your busines with the Earle, He's angry at your stay I tell ye that. Exit. Skin. Sbloud what a frowne this Gloster castes at me, I hope he meanes to lend me no more cuffes, Such as he paide me at the Parlament. Glo. What mutter you, what tydings from my sister? Ski. Co commendations and s she hath s sent ye this r ring. Glo. Hold ther's two Angels, shut the chamber doore, You must about some busines for me strayght; Come nearer man, Skin. I feare I am to neare, Glo. Hast thou no tydings for my liberty? Skin. No b but ye sh shall he heare f from her p p presently. Glo. And p presently sir off with your coate. Nay quicke, vncase, I am bold to borrow it, Ile leaue my gowne, change is no robbery. Stutterer it's so, neare flinch, ye cannot passe, Cry, and by heauen Ile cut thy cowards throate, Quickly cashyre your selfe, you see me staye, Skin. N n nay, b b but wh wh what m meane ye?
Glo. To scape I hope, sir with your priuiledge, How now, who's this, my fine familliar Skinke? Queene Beldams minnion, Skin. Zounds you see ti's I. Glo. Tyme sortes not now to know these misteries. How thou camst by this ring, or stol'st this coate, They are mine now in possession, for which kindenes If I escape Ile get thee Libertie, Or fire the fleete about the Wardens eares, Mum budgit not a word as thou louest thy life, Skin. I mum mum faire, pray God may chaunce it, My Lord, but that my state is desperate, Ide see your eyes out eare I would be cheated. Glo. Walke like an Earle villaine some are comming. Enter John and Porter. Io. Where is this Gloster? Glo. Y y yonder he walks. Fa fa father, I let me out. Port. Why whether must you now? Glo. To Ie Iericho I th thinke, tis such a h h humorous Earle. Port. Well sir wilt please you hasten home againe. Glo. I Ile be h heare in a trice; b but p praye haue ca care of th this madcap, if he g giue vs the s s slip, s s some of vs a are like to m make a sl sl slyppery occupation on't. This while John walkes and stalkes by Skinke, neuer a word betwene them. Port. Looke to your busines sir let me alone. Glo. Alone? neuer trust me if I trouble thee. Io. Mad Gloster mute, all mirth turn'd to dispaire? Why now you see what tis to crosse a King, Deale against Princes of the Royall blood, Youle snarle and rayle, but now your toung is bedry'd, Come caper hay, set all at six and seauen, What musest thou with thought of hell or heauen? Skin. Of neither Iohn I muse at my disgrace, That I am thus kept prisoner in this place. Io. O sir, a number are here prisoners, My Cousen Moorton whome I came to visite, But he good man is at his morrow masse,
But I that neither care to say nor sing, Come to seeke that preaching hate and prayer, And while they mumble vp their Orisons, We'll play a game at bowles, what saist thou Gloster? Skin. I care not if I doe, Joh. You doe not care, Let olde men care for graues, we for our sportes, Off with your gowne, there hes my hatt and Cloake, The bowles there quickly, hee? Skin. No my gowne stirres not, it keeps sorrowe warme, And she, and I am not to be deuorced, Enter Porter with bowles. Jo. Yes ther's an axe must part your head and you, And with your head, sorrowe will leaue your heart. But come shall I begin? a pound a game, Skin. More pounds and we thus heauy? well begin. Ioh. Rub rub rub rub. Skin. Amen God send it short enough, and mee A safe running with them clothes from thee. Ioh. Play Robin, run run run. Skin. Far enough and well, flye one foote more, Would I were halfe so far without the doore. Enter Porter. Ioh. Now Porter whats the newes? Por. Your Coossen Moorton humbly craues, Leauing your game, you would come visit him, Io. Bowle Gloster Ile come presently. So neere mad Robin? then haue after you, Skin. Would I were gone, make after as you may, Io. Well sir tis yours, one all, throw but the Iacke While I goe talke with Moorton: Ile not stay, Keepe Cloake and hat in pawne Ile hould out play, Skin. I would be sory Iohn but you should stay, Vntill my bias run another way, Now passe, and hey passe, Skink vnto your tricks, Tis but a chaunce at hazard: there lyes Gloster, and heare stands Skinke, now Iohn play thou thy part, And if I scape Ile loue thee with my heart. So porter let me foorth. Enter Porter.
Po. God blesse your grace, ye spoke with the L. Moorton. Skin. I haue and must about his busines to the Courte. It greeues me to break my sporte with Gloster, The melancholy Earle is comfortlesse, Po. I wold your grace would comfort him from hence, The Fleet is weary of his company, Redcap knocks. Skin. Drink that, some knockes, I prethee let me cut, His head shall off ere long, neuer make doubt. Exeunt. Enter Iohn at the other doore. Jo. Now madcap thou winstall; wher art thou Robyn? Vncased: nay then he meanes to play in earnest. But whers my Cloake, my rapier, and my hatt? I holde my birth-right to a beggers scrip, The basterd is escaped in my cloathes. Tis well, he left me his to walke the streets, Ile fire the Citty but Ile finde him out, Perchaunce he hides himselfe to try my spleene, Ile to his chamber, Gloster? hallo Gloster? Ex Enter Porter and Redcap. Por. I wonder how thou camst so strangly chang'd? Tis not an hower since thou wents from hence, Red. By my Ch Ch Christendome I ha haue not b b been h heere this three nights, a p p plage of him, that made me such a ch chaunting, and s sent me such a Ia Ia Iaunt, blud I was st stayd for Skinke, that ill fa fa fac'd rogue. Port. I pray God there be no practise in this change. Now I remember these are Skinkes cloathes, That he wore last day, at the Parlament, Knocke, Enter at another doore, John in Glosters gowne. Io. Porter? you Porter? Por. Doe you not heare them knock, you must stay sir, Io. Bloud I could eate these rogues. Red. Wh wh what raw, tis a very hash mo morsell, Ne next your he heart Io. A plague vpon your Iaunts, what porter slaue? Red. I haue been at g grauesend sir. Ioh. What's that to me? Red. And at Ca Ca Canterbury.
Io. And at the gallows: zounds this frets my soule. Red. But I c could not f finde your s s sister the La Lady Fau Faukenbridge. Jo. You stammering slaue hence, chat among your Dawes, Come ye to mad me? while the rogue your father. Enter Porter. Red. My f fa father. Io. Porter? you damned slaue. Port. Ist Midsomer doe you begin to raue? Ioh. Harke how the traytor flouts me to my teeth. I would intreat your knaueship let me forth, For feare I dash your branes out with the keyes, What is become of Gloster and my garments? Por. Alas in your apparrell Glosters gone, I let him out, euen now I am vndone, Joh. It was your practise, and to keepe me backe You sent Iacke Daw your sonne with ca ca ca, To tell a sleueles tale: lay hould on him, To Newgate with him and you tut atut, Run red cap and trudge about, Or bid your fathers portership farwell. Exeunt with Porter. Red. He heares a go good Ie Ie Iest by the L Lord to mo mocke an ape withall: my fa fa father has brought his ho ho hoges to a fa fa faire m m mket. Po po porter quoth you? p po porter that will for me, and I po po porter it, let them po po post me to heauen in this qua quarter. But I must s s seeke this Gl Gl Gloster and Sk Sk Skinke that co cony catching ra ra rascall, a pa pa plauge co co confound him, Re re redcap must ru run he cannot tell whe whether. Exit Sound Trumpets, Enter Henry the younger, one one hand of him Queene Elinor, on the other Leycester. Hen. Mother and ycester adde not oyle to fire. Wrath's kindled with a word, and cannot heare The number lesse perswasions you infort, Quce. O but my sonne thy father fauours him. Richard that vile abortiue changling brat, And Faukenbridge, are fallen at Henries feete.
They wooe for him, but intreat my sonne Gloster may dye for this that he hath done, Leic. If Gloster liue thou wilt be ouerthrowne, Quee. If Gloster liue thy mother dies in moane, Ley. If Gloster liue Leyster will flie the realme, Quee. If Gloster liue thy kingdome's but a dreame, Hen. Haue I not sworne by that eternall arme That puts iust vengance sword in Monarcks hands, Gloster shall die for his presumption? What needs more coniuration gratious Mother? And honorable Leyster marke my words. I haue a Bedrole of some threescore Lords, Of Glosters faction, Quee. Nay of Henries faction. Of thy false fathers faction, speake the truth, He is the head of factions; were he downe: Peace, plenty, glory will impale thy crowne. Ley. I ther's the But; whose hart-white if we hit, The game is our's. Well we may rage and roue, At Gloster, Lancaster, Chester, Faukenbridge, But he is the vpshot. Quee Yet begin with Gloster. Hen. The destenies run to the booke of Fates, And read in neuer-changing Characters Robert of Glosters end he dies to day, So fate, so heauen, so doth King Henry say. Quee. Emperially resoul'd. Trumpets far off, Lec. The olde King comes, Quee. Then comes Luxurious lust, The King of Concubines, the King that scornes The vndefiled, chast and numptiall bed, The King that hath his Queene Imprisoned. For my sake scorne him, sonne call him not father, Giue him the stile of a competitor, Hen. Pride seaze vppon my heart, wrath fill myne eyes, Sit lawfull maiestie vppon my front Dutie flie from me, pitty bee exild, Sences forget that I am Henries child,
Quee I kisse thee, and I blesse thee, for this thought. Enter King, Lancaster, Richard, Faukenbridge. Kin. O Lancaster bid Henry yeeld some reason Why he desires so much the death of Gloster, Hen. I heare thee Henry, and I thus reply. I doe desire the death of Basterd Gloster. For that he spends the Treasure of the Crowne. I doe desire the death of basterd Gloster, For that he doth desire to pull me downe. Or were this false (I purpose to be plaine) He loues thee, and for that I him disdaine. Hen. Therin thou shewest a hate corrupted mynde, To him the more vniust, to me vnkynd, Quee He loues you as his father lou'd his mother. Kin. Fie, fie vpon thee hatefull Elinor. I thought thou hadst been long since scarlet dyde, Hen. She is and therfore cannot change her colour. Rich. You are to strickt, Earle Glosters fault Merrits not death, Fau. By th'rood the Prince saies true. Heere is a statute from the Confessor, Hen. The Confessor was but a simple foole. Away with bookes my word shall be a lawe, England her breath shall from this bosome drawe, Gloster shall die, Ley. Let Gloster dye the death. Lan. Leyster he shall not, he shall haue lawe, dispight of him and thee. Hen. What law, will you be Traitors? whats the lawe? Ric. His right handes losse, and that is such a losse, As England may lament, all Christians weepe. That hand hath bin aduanst against the Moores, Driuen out the Sarasins from Gads and Cicile, Fought fifteene Battels vnder Christs red crosse, And is it not (thinke you) a greeuious losse, That for a slaue (and for no other harme) It should be sundred from his Princely Arme? Fau. More for example Noble Lancaster, but tis great pitty, To to great a pittie.
He. Ile haue his hand & head. Ri. Thou shalt haue mine thē. Que. Wel sayd stubberne Dicke, Iack wold not serue me so, Were the boy heere: Ric. Both Iohn and I haue seru'd your will too long; Mother repent your cruelty and wrong: Gloster you know is ful of mirth and glee, And neuer else did your grace iniury. Q. Gloster shal dye. He. Fetch him heere Ile see him dead. Ric. He that sturs for him shall lay downe his head. Fau. O quiet good my Lords, patience I pray, I thinke he comes vnsent for by my fay. Enter Iohn in Glosters gowne. Ric. What meanst thou Gloster? He. Who brought Gloster hyther? Io. Let Gloster hang and them that There lyes his case, a mischiefe on his carkasse. Qu. My deare sonne Jacke? Jo. Your deere son Iack an apes, your mōkey, your babone, your asse, your gull. Ley. What ayles Earle Iohn? Jo. Hence further frō my sight, My fiery thoughts and wrath haue worke in hand; Le curse ye blacker then the Leuarnian Lake, If you stand wondring at my sorrow thus; I am with childe, big, hugely swolne with rage, Who'll play the Midwife, and my throbs aswage? Kin I will my Sonne. Hen. I will high harted brother. Io. You will, and you, tut, tut all you are nothing, Twill out, twill out, my selfe my selfe can ease: You chafe, you swell, ye are commaunding King, My father is your footestoole when he please, Your word's a law, these Lordes dare neuer speake, Gloster must dye, your enemies must fall. Hen. What meanes our brother? Ioh. He meanes that thou art mad she franticke, Leyster foolish I the babe, these grinde vs, bite vs, vexe vs, charge, And discharge, Gloster, O Gloster! Que. Where is Gloster sonne? Hen. Where is Glo. brother? Kin. I hope he be escaped. Io. O I could teare my hayre, & falling thus vpon the Solide earth, dig into Glosters graue, so he were dead And gone into the depth of vnder worlds.
Or get seditiou hundreth thousand hands, And like Briareus, battle with the Starres, To pull him downe from heauen if he were there, Fau. Looke to Earle Iohn the Gentleman is mad. I. O who would not be mad at this disgrace? Gloster the fox is fled, there lies his case, He cousned me of myne, the porter helpt him, Hen. The porter shall be hangd let's part and seeke him, Gloster shall dye all Europe shall not saue him. Jo. He is wise, too wise for vs, yet Ile goe with you, To get more fooles into my company. Quee. This is your fathers plot, reuenge it sonne. Hen. Father by heauen if this were your aduice, Your head or heart shall pay the bitter price, Come mother, Brother, Leyster, lets away, Jo. I, Ile be one, in hope to meete the basterd, And then no more my selfe will be his headsman. Exeunt. Kin. Richard and Faukenbridge follow the search, You may preuent mischaunce by meeting Gloster, If ye finde Skinke see that you apprehend him, I heare there is a wizard at blacke heath, Let some enquire of him where Skinke remaynes, Although I trust not to those fallacies, Yet now and then such men prooue Soothsayers. Will you be gone? Fau. Withall my heart, withall my heart my Lord, Come Princly Richard, we are ever yoak'd. Pray God there be no mistery in this, Rich. Be not suspitious where there is no cause, Fau. Nay nothing, nothing, I am but in iest. Exeunt. Kin. Call in a Purseuant. Lan. Heares one my Leidge, Kin. There is a Porter likely to be hangd, For letting Gloster scape, sirra attend, You shall haue a repreiue to bring him vs, These boys are to to stubborne Lancaster, But tis theyr mothers fault, if thus she moue me, Ile haue her head though all the world reproue me. Exeuntt.
Enter Robin Hood and Lady Fankenbridge. La. Doe not deny me gentle Huntington. Rob. My Lord will misse me. La. Tut let me excuse thee. Rob. Turne woman, O it is intollerable! Except you promise me to play the Page: Doe that, try one night, and you'l laugh for euer, To heare the Orizons that Louers vse; Their ceremonious sighes, their idle oathes, To heare how you are prais'd and pray'd vnto. For you are Richards Saint, they talke of Mary The blessed Virgin, but vpon his beades He onely prayes to Marian Faukenbridge. La. The more his error, but will you agree To be the Lady Faukenbridge one day? Rob. When ist? La. On Munday. Rob. Wherefore ist? La. Nay then you doe me wrong with inquisition. And yet I care not greatly if I tell thee. Thou seest my husband full of iealousie; Prince Richard in his sute importunate, My brother Gloster threatned by young Henry; To cleare these doubtes, I will in some disguise, Goe to blacke Heath vnto the holy Hermit, Whose wisedome in fore-telling things to come, Will let me see the issue of my cares. If destinyes ordaine me happines, Ile chase these mistes of sorrow from my heart, With the bright Sunne of mirth: if fate agree, It, and my frends, must suffer misery, Yet Ile be merry too, till mischeefe come. onely I long to knowe the worst of ill. Rob. Ile once put on a scarlet countenaunce. La. Be wary least ye be discouered Robyn. Rob. Best paint me then, be sure I shall not blush. Enter Block bleeding, Gloster with him. Blo. Beate an Officer, Red cap Ile haue ye talkt withall,
Beate Sir Richards Porter? help Madam, help, Glo. Peace you damned rogue. La. Brother I pray you forbeare. Glo. Zwonds a hundreth at my heales almost, And yet the villaine stands on complaiment. Bloc. Abots one you, ist you? Glo. Will you to the doore you foole? and bar the gate, Holde ther's an angell for your broaken pate; If any knocke let them not in in haste. Bloc. Well Ile doe as I see cause, blood thou art deare to me, but heere's a soueraigne plaister for the sore: golde hea∣leth wounds, golde easeth heartes: what can a man haue more? Exit. La. Deare brother, tell vs how you made escape? Glo. You see I am heare, but if you would knowe how: I cannot scape and tell the manner too, By this I knowe your howse is compassed With hel-hound search. La. Brother Ile furnish you with beard & hayre, and Garments like my husband, how like you that? Exit. Lady Glo. Well, when I haue them: quickly then dispatchs blood turne gray beard and hayre? Robyn conceale, this dyeteth my minde, Myrth is the obiect of my humorous spleane, Thou high commaunding furie! further deuice, Iests are conceated, I long to see their birth, What come ye sister? Robyn a theeues hand, But prethee where hadst thou this beard and haire? La. Prince Richard wore them hether in a maske, Glo. Saist thou me so, faith loue the Princely youth, Tut you must tast stolne pleasure now and than, Rob. But if she steale and Ielious eyes espie: She will be sure condemnd of Burglary, Glo. Ha crake? can your low stumps venter so deep Into affections streame? go to you wanton. What want we now? my nightcap, O tis heare, So now no Gloster, but olde Faukenbridge,
Harke, the search knockes, ile let them in my selfe; Welcome good fellowe; ha, what ist you lacke? Enter Redcap with another. Red. Ma master Co constable, se se search you th that way, a and you ho honest man th that way. Ile ru run th this way m my owne se selfe. They dispearse themselues. Glo. What search you for? what is it you would haue? Enter Blocke. Blo. Madam, what shall I doe to these browne-bill fel∣lowes? some runne into the wine seller, some heere, some there. Glo. Let them alone, let them search their filles. Block. Ile looke to their fingers for all that. Glo. Doe so good Blocke, be carefull honest Blocke. B. Sir stammerer & your wa watch, y'are pa past ifaith. Exit Gl. Will you not speake knaues, tel me who you seeke? Red. Ma mary sit we s seeke a va va vacabond, a fu fugatiue, my La Ladies owne b brother; but and hee were the po po Popes owne b brother, I would ssearch f f for him; for I haue a p poore fatherr ready to be ha ha hang'd f f for him. Glo. O tis for Gloster! mary search a gods name, Seeke peace, will he breake prison too? It's pitty he should liue, nay I defye him. Come looke about, search euery little corner, My selfe will lead the way, pray you come, Seeke, seeke, and spare not, though it be labour lost: He comes not vnder my roofe, heare ye wife, He comes not hyther, take it for a warning. Red. You sp sp speake like an honest ge ge Gentleman, re re rest you me me mery, co co come my f f friends, I be beleeue h h he r ran by the g g garden w wall toward the wa water side. Exeunt running. Glo. This fellow is of the humour I would chuse my wife, Few words and many paces, a word and a way, and so Must I: Sister adieu, pray you for me, Ile do the like for you. Robin farewell, commend me to the Prince. La. Can ye not stay heere safe?
Glo. No, Ile not trust the changing humours of olde Faukenbridge, Adieu yong Earle, Sister lets kisse and part; Tush, neere mourne, I haue a merry hart. Exit. La. Farewell all comfort. Ro. What weeping Lady? Then I perceiue you haue forgot Blacke-heath. La. No, there Ile learne both of his life and death. Ro. Till Munday Madam I must take my leaue. La. You will not misse then: Rob. Nay, if Robin faile yee, let him haue neuer fauour of faire Lady. La. Meane while Ile spend my time in prayers & teares, That Gloster may escape these threatned feares. Exit. Enter Skinke like Prince John. Skin. Thus iets my noble Skinke along the streetes, To whom each bonnet vailes, and all knees bend; And yet my noble humour is too light, By the sixe shillings▪ heere are two crackt groates To helter skelter, at some vawting house. But who comes yonder? ha, olde Faukenbridge? Hath a braue-chaine, were Iohn and he good friends, That chaine were mine, and should vnto Black-heath Ile venture, it's but tryal, lucke may fall. Good morrow good sir Richard Faukenbridge. Fau. Good morrow my sweet Prince, harty good morrow, This greeting wel becomes vs, marry does it; Better iwis then strife and Iangling. Now can I loue ye, wil ye to the Shiriffes? Your brother Richard hath beene there this houre. Skin. Yes I am plodding forward as you doe; What cost your chaine? it's passing strongly wrought, I would my Golde-smith had a patterne of it. Fau. Tis at your graces seruice, shew it him. Skin. Then dare ye trust me? Fau. Who the Princely Iohn? My Soueraignes sonne, why what a question's that? Ile leaue you, yee may know I dare trust you.
Ski Ile bring't ye to the Shiriffes, excuse my absence. Fau. I wil my noble Lord, adieu sweet Prince. Exit. Skin. Why so, this breakfast was wel fed vpon, When Skinkes deuises on Blacke heath doo faile, This and such cheates, would set me vnder saile. Ile to the water side, would it were later, For stil I am afraide to meete Prince Iohn. Enter Gloster like Fauken bridge. But what a mischiefe meant Faukenbridge To come againe so soone? that way he went, And now comes peaking; vpon my life The buzzard hath me in suspitition, But whatsoeuer chaunce, Ile filch a share. Glo. Yonder's Prince Iohn I hope he cannot know me, Ther's naught but Gloster Gloster in their mouthes; I am halfe strangled with the Garlicke breath, Of rascals that exclaimes as I passe by, Gloster is fled, once taken he must dye. But Ile to Iohn, how does my gratious Lord? What tattles rumour now? what newes of Gloster? Skin. What newes could I heare since you left me last? Were you not heere euen now? lent me your chaine, I thinke you dote. Glo. Sweet Prince, age, age forgets, my brothers chaine? a pretty accident, Ile haue't and be but in the spight of Iohn▪ Skin. Ther's more, and more, Ile geld it eare it go. He breaks the chaine. This same shal keep me in some sauerne merry, Til nights blacke hand curtaine this to cleare sky. Fau. My sweet Prince, I haue some cause to vse my chaine, Another time (when ere your Lordship please) Tis at your seruice, ô mary God it is. Skin. Heere palsie, take your chaine, stoop and be hang'd, Yet the fish nibled, when she might not swallow; Gout I haue curtall'd what I could not borrow. Exit. Glo. He's gone away in frets, would he might meete My brother Faukenbridge in this mad moode, There would be rare adoe; Why this fits me, My braine flowes with fresh wit and pollicy.
But Gloster looke about, who haue we yonder? Another Iohn Prince, Richard and the Shiriffe? Vpon my life, the slaue that had the chaine, Was Skinke, escapt the Fleete by some mad sleight, Wel, farewel he, better and better still, These seeke forme, yet I wil haue my will. Jo. Shiriffe, in any case be diligent. Whose yonder, Faukenbridge? Glo. How now sweet chucke, how fares my louely Prince? Io. What carest thou? or wel, or ill, we craue no help of thee. Glo. Gods mother doe you scorne me? Io. Gout, what then? Rich. Fye, leaue these idle braules, I prethee Iohn Lets follow that we are inioyn'd vnto. Glo. I mary Prince, if now you slip the time, Gloster wil slip away; tut though he hate me I haue done seruice, I haue found him out. Ric. A shame confound thee for thy treachery, Inconstant dotard, tymerous olde asse, That shakes with cowardise not with yeares. Glo. Goe, I haue found him, I haue winded him. Io. O let me hug thee gentle Faukenbridge, Forgiue my oft ill vsing of thine age, Ile call thee Father, ile be penitent, Bring me where Gloster is Ile be thy slaue, All that is mine, thou in reward shalt haue. Glo. Soft, not too hasty, I would not be seene in't, Mary a god my wife would chide me dead, If Gloster by my meanes should loose his head. Princely Richard at this corner make your stand: And for I know you loue my sister well, Know I am Gloster and not Faukenbridge. Ric. Heauen prosper thee sweet Prince in thy escape. Glo. Shiriffe, make this your quarter, make good guard. Iohn, stay you heere, this way he meanes to turne, By Thomas I lacke a swoord, body a me. Io. What wouldst thou with a swoord olde Faukenbridge? Glo. O sir to make shew in his defence,
For I haue left him yonder at a house A friends of mine, an honest Cittizen. Io. Wee'll fetch him thence. Glo. Nay then you iniure me, stay till he come; he's in a russet cloake And must attend me like a Seruingman. Io Holde ther's my swoord, and with my swoord my heart, Bring him for Godsake, and for thy desert, My brother King and mother Queene shall loue thee. Glo. Marke me good Prince, yonder away we come, I goe afore and Gloster followes me; Let not the Shiriffe nor Richard meddle with vs, Begin you first, seaze Gloster and arrest him; Ile draw and lay about me heere and heere, Be heedfull that your watchmen hurt me not, Io Ile hang him that doth hurt thee, prethee away, I loue thee, but thou kilst me with delay. Glo. Wel keep close watch, ile bring him presently. Io. Away then quickly. Gl. Gloster, close master Shiriffe, Prince Richard, Ri. Gloste radieu. Glo. I trust you. Rich. By my Knight-hood Ile prooue true. Exit Gloster. Ioh. Reuenge, Ile build a Temple to your name; And the first offring shal be Glosters head, Thy Alters shal be sprinkled with the bloud, Whose wanton current his mad humour fed; He was a rymer and a Ridler, A scoffer at my mother, prays'd my father, Ile fit him now foral, escape and all. Ric. Take heede spight burst not in his proper gall. Enter Faukenbridge and Blocke. Jo. How now, what way tooke Faukenbridge I wonder? That is not Gloster sure that attends on him. Fau He came not at the Shiriffes by the morrow masse, I sought the Goldsmithes rowe and found him not; Sirra, y'are sure he sent not home my chaine? Blo. Who should send your chaine sir? Fau. The Prince, Prince Iohn I lent it him to day. Io. What's this they talke?
Blo. By my truth Sir, and ye lent it him, I thinke you may goe look it: for one of the Drawers of the Salutation tolde me euen now, that he had tooke vp a chamber there till e∣uening, and then he will away to Kent. Fau. Body of me, he meanes to spend my chaine, Come Blocke Ile to him. Iob. Heare you Faukenbridge? Fau. Why what a knaue art thou? younders Prince Iohn. Bl. Then the Drawer's a knaue, he told me Prince Iohn was at the Salutation. Jo. Wheres Gloster Faukenbridge? Fau. Sweet Prince I knowe not. Joh. Come, iest not with me, tell me where he is? Fau I neuer saw him since the Parlament. Io. Impudent lyar, didst thou not euen now Say thou woldst fetch him? hadst thou not my sword? Fau. Wert thou a King, I will not beare the lye, Thy sword? no boy, thou seest this sword is myne. Blo. My Master a lyer? Zounds wert thou a potentate, Fau. I scorne to weare thy armes vntutred childe, I fetch thee Gloster? shamelesse did I see thee Since as I went this morning to the Siriffes, Thou borrowedst my gold chaine? Io. Thy chaine? Fau. I hope thou wilt not cheate me princkocks Iohn. Io. Ile cheat thee of thy life if thou charge me With any chaine. Fau. Come, let him come I pray, Ile whip yee boy, Ile teach you to out face. Blo. Come, come, come, but one at once, ye dasterds come Rich. Keepe the Kings peace, I see you are both deceau'd, He that was last heare, was not Faukenbridge. Fau. They slaunder me, who sayes that I was heare? Ric. Wee doe beleeue ye sir; nor doe you thinke My brother Iohn deceiu'd you of a chayne. Fau. He did, I did deliuer it with this hand. Joh. Ile dye vpon the slanderer, Fau. Let the boy come.
Blo. I, let him come, let him come. Ric. Fellow, thou spakst euen now, as if prince Iohn Had byn at some olde Tauerne in the towne. Blo. I sir, I came vp now, but from the Salutation, And a drawer that doth not vse to lye, tolde me Prince Iohn hath byn there all this after noone. Ioh. The Deuill in my likenesse then is there. Fau. The Deuill in thy likenesse or thy selfe, Had my gold chaine. Ioh. Thou art the Deuill, for thou Hadst my good sword, all these can witnesse it. Fau. Gods Mother thou bely'st mee. Jo. Giue me the lye? Rich. Nay calme this fury, lets downe to the Tauerne, Or one, or both, these counterfeites are there. Fau. I know him well enough that had my chaine, And there be two Iohns, if I finde one there, Ber Lady, I will lay him fast. Rich. It is this Skinke that mockes vs I beleeue. Joh. Alas poore Skink it is the Deuill Gloster; Who if I be so happy once to finde, Ile giue contentment, to his troubled minde. Rcih. I hope he's far enough, and free enough: Yet these conseytes I know delight his soule. Fau. Followe me Blocke, follow me honest Blocke. Blo. Much follow you, I haue another peece of worke in hand; I heare say Redcaps father shall bee hanged this after noone, Ile see him slip a string though I giue my seruice the slip; beside my Lady bad me heare his examination at his death: Ile get a good place, and pen it word for word, and as I like it, set out a moornefull Dittie to the tune of Laban∣dalashot, or rowe wel ye Marriners, or somwhat as my muse shall me inuoke. Exit. Enter Gloster like Faukenbridge with a Purseuant, Gloster hauing a paper in his hand, the Purseuant bare. Glo. A charytable deed, God blesse the King, He shall be then repreeued. Pur. I sir, some day or two, till the young King and Prince
Iohn chaunge it, especially if the good Earle bee not found which God forbid. Glo. What house is this that wee are stept into to read this warrant in? Pur. A Tauerne sir, the Salutation, Glo. A Tauerne? then I will turne prodigall, Call for a pint of Sacke good fellow. Pur. Drawer? Dra. Anan sir. Glo. A pint of thy best Sacke my pretty youth. Dra. God blesse your worship sir, ye shal haue the best in London sir. Gl. What knowst thou me? knowst thou old Faukenbridge? I am no Tauerne hunter I can tell thee. Draw. But my Master hath taken many a faire pound of your man Blocke; he was heere to day sir, and fild two bot∣tles of nippitate sacke. Glo. Well, fill vs of your nippitate sir. This is well chaunest, but heere ye boy? Bring Suger in white paper, not in browne; For in white paper I haue heere a tricke, Shall make the Purseuant first swound, then sicke. Thou honest fellow what's thy name? Pur. My name is Winterborne sir. Glo. What countryman I prethee? Pur. Barkeshire and please ye. Gl. How long hast thou bin sworne a messenger? Pur. But yesterday and please your worship, This is the First imployment I haue had. Enter Drawer with wine and Suger. Glo. A good beginning, heere haue too thee fellow; Thou art my fellow now thou seruest the King, Nay take Suger too, Gods Lady deere, I put it in my pocket, but it's heere: Drinke a good draught I prethee Winterborne. He drinkes and falles ouer the stoole. Dra. O Lord Sir Richard, the man, the man. Glo. What a forgetfull beast am I? peace boy,
It is his fashion euer when he drinkes. Fellow he hath the falling sickenes, Run fetch two cushions to rayse vp his head, And bring a little Key to ope his teeth. Exit Drawer. Purseuant, your warrant and your boxe, These must with me, the shape of Faukenbridge Will holde no longer water heere about. Gloster wil be a proteus euery houre, That Elinor and Leyster, Henry, Iohn, And all that rabble of hate louing curres, May minister me more mirth to play vpon. Enter Drawer. Dra. Heer's a key sir, and one of our folke to help. Glo. No matter for a key, help him but in, And lay him by the fire a little while, He'll wake immediatly, but be hart sicke, Ther's money for a candle and thy wine, Ile goe but vp vnto your Aldermans, And come downe presently to comfort him. Exeunt Within Ski. Drawer? what Drawer? with a vengeance Dra. Within Dra, Speake in the Crowne there. Enter Skinke like Prince John. Skin. They be come, the deuill crowne yee one by one, Skinke tho' art betraide, that master Faukenbridge Missing some of his chaine, hath got thee dog'd. Drawer? what Drawer? Dra. Anan, anan sir. Ski. Was not sir Richard Faukenbridge below? Dra. Yes and please yee. Skin. It does not please me wel, knowes he that I am heer? Dra. No I protest. Ski. Come hether sirra, I haue little money, But ther's some few linkes of a chayne of golde: Vpon your honesty knowes not sir Richard, That I am heere? Dra. No by my holydam. Skin. Who's that was with him? Dra. Why a Purseuant.
Skin. Where is sir Richard? Dra. At the Aldermans. Skin. A Purseuant and at the Aldermans. What Pyg, or Goose, or Capon haue you kill'd, Withing your Kitchin new? Dra. A pyg new stickt. Skin. Fetch me a sawcer of the bloud, quicke run; Exit. Ile sit the Purseuant, and Alderman, And Faukenbridge, if Skinke haue any wit. Well Gloster, I did neuer loue thee yet, But th'art the maddest Lord that ere I met, If I scape this, and meete thee once againe, Cursse Skinke, if he dye penny in thy det. Enter Drawer. Dra. O my Lord the house is full of holberts, and a great many Gentlemen aske for the roome where Prince Iohn is? Skin. Lend me thy Aprone, runne and fetch a pot from the next roome. Betray'd, swounds betray'd, by gout, by palsie, by dropsie; O braue boy, excellent bloud: vp, take my cloake And my hat to thy share, when I come from Kent, ile pay Thee like a King. Dra. I thanke you my Lord. Exit. Enter John, Richard. Faukenbridge, Shiriffes and Officers. Ski. Now fortune help or neuer: they come, and yee were a Prince as yee say ye are, yee would bee ashamed to abuse a poore seruant thus, but and if you were not of the bloud Royall, Ide breake the necke of yee downe the stayres, so would I, Ide teach you to hurt prentises. Ri. Who hurt thee fellow? Skin. Prince deuill or his dam, Prince Iohn they call him. Joh. Gloster I hope. Ri. I doubt not but it's Skinke. Io. Where is he? Skin. Vp them stayres, take heede of him. He's in the Crowne. Fau. Alas poore fellow, he hath crown'd thee shrewdly. Jo. In recompence, if it be him I seeke,
Ile giue thee his whole head to tread vpon. Follow me brother, come olde Faukenbridge, Keep the stayres Shiriffes, you see it waxeth darke, Take heede he slip not by you. Exeunt Ski. Hange your selues, this darkenes shal conuay me out, of doors Ile swim the Thames, but Ile attaine Black-heath, London farewell, curse Iohn, raue Faukenbridge, Skinke scapes you all by twy lights priuyledge. Within. Where is he? lights, bring lights, drag out that boy. Enter all with the boy. Io. This is my cloke, my hat, my rapier, And eyther it was Skinke or Gloster. Dra. I know not who twas sir, he said he was Prince Iohn, he tooke away my aprone and a pottle pot with him, and al to bloudied his head and face. Fau. We met him, by S. Anthony, we met him. Io. The fire of S. Anthony confound This changing counterfeit whatsoeuer he be. Rich. It makes me laugh at enuious greedines, Who feedes vpon her owne harts bitternes. Ioh. Sirra you that were borne to cry anan, What other copesmates haue you in the house? Draw. Sir, my Maisters gesse be none of my copesmates, Jo. Well your gesse, can ye gesse who they be? Draw. Marry heere's a purseuant, that this Gentleman sir Richard Faukenbridge left sick euen now. Fau. Marry of God dyd I, thou lying knaue? Dra. I am a poore boy sir, your worship may say your plea∣sure, our maides haue had a foule hand with him, you said he would be sicke: so he is with a witnesse. Ioh. Looke about Faukenbridge, heere's worke for you, You haue some euill Angell in your shape, Goe sirra, bring vs foorth that Purseuant? Enter two leading the Purseuant sicke. Rich. Gloster, thou wilt be too too venterous, Thou doost delight in those odde humours so, That much I feare they'll be thy ouerthrowe. aside. Pur. O O O not too fast; O I am sicke, O very sicke.
Io. What picture of the pestilence is this? Purs. A poore man sir, a poore man sir: downe I pray yee, I pray let me sit downe. A sir Richard, sir Richard, a good sir Richard: what haue I deseru'd to be thus dealt with all at your worships hands? a ha, ah, ah. Fau. At my hands knaue? at my hands paltry knaue? Dra. And I should be brought to my booke oath sir: Within. What Ieffrey? Dra. Anan, anan. Ioh. A plague vpon your Ieffring, is your name Ieffrey? Dra. I and't please you sir. Rich. Why gentle Ieffrey then stay you awhile, What can you say, if you come to your booke? Dra. If I bee pos'd vpon a booke sir, though I bee a poore prentise, I must speake the truth, & nothing but the truth sir. Jo. And what's your truth sir? Pur. O, O my heart. Dra. Mary sir this Knight, this man of worship. Fau. Well, what of me? what did my worship doe? Dra. Mary ye came into the Bel, our roome next the Barre, with this honest man as I take it. Fau. As thou tak'st it? Pur. O sir tis too true, too true, too true O Lord. Dra. And there he call'd for a pint of Sacke, as good Sacke (Ile bee pos'd vpon all the bookes that euer opened and shut) as any is in all Christendome. Fau. Body of me, I come and call for Sacke? Pur. O ye did, ye did, ye did, O O. Ioh. Well forward sirra. Ric. Gloster hath done this iest. Dra. And you call'd then for Suger sir, as good Suger and as wholsome, as euer came in any cup of Sacke: you drunke to this man, and you doe well God be thanked, but hee no sooner drunke: Pur. But I, but I, but I, O my head, O my heart. Rich. I cannot chuse but smile at these conseites. Io. I am mad, and yet I must laugh at Faukenbridge: Brother, looke how sir Richard actes his rage?
Fau. I came? I call? the man is like to dye, Practise by th'emafse, practise by the marry God, Iohn loues me not, Prince Richard loues my wife, I shall be charg'd heere, for a poysned knaue. Practise by th'Lord, practise I see it cleare. Pur. And more Sir Richard, O Lord O Sir Richard, Fa. What more? what hast thou more? what practise more? Pur. O my box, my box, with the Kings armes, O my box, O my box, it cost me, O Lord euery penny O, my box, Rcih. And what of your box sir. Dra. Mary sir it's lost, & tis wel knowne my Master keeps no theeues in his house, O there was none but you and he. Fau. O then belike thou thinkest I had his box, Pur. O sir Richard I will not, O Lord I will not charge you for all the world, but, but, but for the warrant the olde King signd to repreeue the Porter of the fleet, O God, O God! Ioh. The Porter of the Fleet, the olde king signd, Pur. I my good Lord, oh, oh, Io. Is he repreiued then? Pur. No my Lord, O sir Richard tooke it from me with his owne hand, O. Fau. Heeres a deuice to bring me in contempt With the olde King, that I euer lou'd, Princes and Shiriffe, you can witnesse with me, That I haue bin with you, this after noone, Onely with you, with no body but you, And now a fellow whome the King would saue, By a repreiue, this fellow sayes is hang'd, Io. If thou hadst done it, Ide haue iustified it, But Richard I conceipt this iest already, This mad mate Skinke, this honest merry knaue, Meeting this Purseuant, and hearing tell He had a warrant to repreeue a slaue, Whome we would hang: stole it away from him. This is sure the Iest, vpon my life it is, Pur. O but my warrant, how shall I doe? O, Ric. But looke about you, hot braind brother Iohn, And I beleeue you'l finde it otherwise,
Gloster hath got the warrant in disguise, And sau'd the fellow you so faine would hang. Io. No, no, how say you M. Shiriffe, is he not hang'd? Shi. My Lord, the gibbet was set vp by noone In the olde Bayly, and I charg'd my men, If I returne not, though it were by Toarch light, To see him executed ere they come. Jo. I am greedy to heare newes. Fau. Rob'd of my chaine, out-fac'd I had a swoord, Accus'd of poysoning, cousonage, seeking bloud? Not to be borne: it is vntollerable. Rich. Sir Richard, I prethee haue some patience. Fau. Ile to Blacke-heath, talke not of patience, It is intollerable, not to be borne. Io. It is intollerable not to be borne, A warrant brother, Faukenbridge a warrant? Fau. I saw no warrant, I defie you all. Jo. A slaue, a Purseuant, one winter borne. Fau. I care not for thee that winter borne. Pur. O it is I sir, that's my warrant. Io. Ist you? you rogue, you drunkerd; yeare cheated, And we are cheated of the prisoner, Out dog, dog. Pur. O ô ô ô my Lord. Exit and Drawer. Shi. Haue patience and we wil haue a priuy search. Ioh. Goe hang ye block-heads, get ye from my sight, O would I were a Basiliske, to kill These gleare ey'd villaines. Shir. Come away let's leaue him, Exeunt Shiriffes and Officers. We haue a warrant let him doe his worst. Fau. Ile to Blacke-heath, Ile to the holy Hermit, There shall I knowe not onely these deceiuers, But how my wife playes fast and loose with Richard. Ha, I shall fit them, Ile tickle them, Ile doo't, Ile hence, Ile to the Heath amaine, Exit. Ioh. There shall I know, where this damned Gloster is, Ile haue the Deuils rous'd to finde that Deuill, Or else Ile coniure the olde Coniurer.
Ile to Blacke-heath, and there with friends conspire, But Ile haue Glosters head my hearts desire. Rich. Would mad Earle Robyn saw these humouristes. Twol'd feed him fat with Laughter; O twold sit him, Where euer he is, I knowe the bate consaite Is better to him than his daintiest foode, Well, and it fits mee well, now I haue time, To coort my Lady Faukenbridge at leysure, Loue I emplore thy aide faire Cipria, Thou sea-borne mother at affections ring, Shine brightly in thy sphere, that at my starre, My plannet thou of all lights most beautious, Be thou to my desires Auspitious. Exit. Enter Robin Hood in the Lady Faukenbridges gowne, night attire on his head. Rob. O for this Lady, was neuer poore Gentleman troubled with Gentlewoman as I am with my selfe, my Lady Fauken∣bridge hath fitted me a turne, heere I am visited with sleeue∣lesse errands and with asking for this thing Madam and that thing Madam, that they make me almost mad in earnest, whoop heer's another Client. Enter a Seruingman. Ser. Heer's my Lady Rawfords Page attends to speake with your Ladyship. Rob. I pray ye bid her Lordships Page come into my Ladyship: well Robin Hood, part with these pettycoates, And cast these loose deuices from thy backe, Ile nere goe more vntrust, neuer bee kercheft. Neuer haue this adoe, with what doe you lacke? Enter Page. Pag. Madam my Lady greets your honour kindely, And sends you the first grapes of her young vine. Rob I am much indepted to her honour, thers an angel for you to drinke; set them vp till after supper. Humphery, pray looke about for Blocke. Humphery? trust mee I thinke the foole be lost. Pa. No forsooth, Madam hee's vpon the greene Iesting with a stammerer, one Redcap.
Rob. It is a lewd fellowe, pray bid him come in youth, Ile giue him his welcome at the doore: commend me to your Lady, I pray ye hartily. Exit Page Humphrey, I maruell where sir Richard is so late? truely, truely hee does not as beseemes a gentleman of his calling, pray let some goe foorth to meete him on the greene, and send in that blockehead Blocke. Exit Humphrey. Enter Redcap and Blocke after him. Bloc. Wil ye tel tales ye asse, will ye? Red. Ile te te tell your La La Lady or I would to g God we were ha hang'd else, as my fa father should haue bin. Rob. Now what's the matter there I pray you? what com∣pany haue you there a gods name? where spend you the day I pray? Bloc. Why where you gaue me leaue, at the gallows I was, no farther. Red. A a and you be his La Lady, you are the La Lady Fau Faukenbridge, the Earle of glo Glosters sister. Rob. I am so fellow. Red. Y y your man b b Blocke heere, does no nothing but f f floute m me, a and cr cries r run Re Redcap ad s s see your f f father ha ha hang'd. I sh shal g go neere to m make m mur∣der and he v vse it. Rob. Wel firra, leaue your mocking you were best, Ile bob your beetle head and if you mocke him. Blo. He's run Redcap. Red. La la law ma Madam. Rob. Away ye saucy foole, goe waite within. Blo. Run Redcap, run Redcap. Exit. Rob. Art thou the Porters sonne, that was condemned a∣bout my brother Gloster? Red. I g g God be with ye, I am the p p Porters son, I m must r run to s s seeke your b br brother. Rob. Wel, drinke that fellow, if thou finde my brother bee not too violent, and Ile reward thee. Red. I th th thanke ye h hartily, and I had not bin cousoned with Sk Skinke, I had no nee need of these ia iaunts, for Gl Gloster was s safe enough.
Enter Blocke and the Porter with his cloake muffled. Blo. Ah farewel Redcap. Red, Fa fare we wel and be ha hang. Exit. Rob. You'll neuer leaue your knauery, whose there more? Blo. One Madam that hath commendations to you from your brother. Rob. Commest thou from Gloster? thou art welcome friend Blo. O it's one of the kindest Ladies (though she wil now & then haue about with Block) that euer breath'd and she had been in her mood now, Redcap would haue made her such sp sp sport as't a pa pa past. Rob. Wil you make sport and see who knockes againe? Bl. Our gates are like an Anuile, from foure to ten, nothing but knicke a knocke vpon't. Exit. Rob. Wil you be gone sir? honest friend I am glad My brother Gloster got thy liberty, Whose flight was cause of thy captiuity: Nor shal there be in vs such negligence, Though thou haue lost thy Office and thy house, But we wil see thee better farre prouided, Than when thou wert porter in the Fleete. Enter Blocke. Blo. Madam your olde friend Prince Richard, All alone, making mone, fetching many a greeuous grone. Rob. Prince Richard come so late? lights to his chamber, Sirra, in any case say I am sicke. Blo. Very sicke, sicke and like to dye: Ile sing it and you wil. Ro. Away ye knaue, tel him, in the morning Ile humbly waite vpon his excellence. Blo. That's all his desire to haue ye lowly and humble, and tis a courteous thing in a Lady. Exit. Ro. Hence, or else ile set you hence: goe in good friend. Come Lady Faukenbridge, it's time to come, Robin can holde out no longer I see, Hot wooers will be tempters presently. Exit Enter Skinke like a Hermit. Ski. Now holy Skinke in thy religious weed, Looke out for purchase, or thy wonted clyants:
Warrents quoth you, I was fairely warrented, Young Robin Hood the Earle of Huntington, Shall neuer fetch me more vnto his Prince. Enter Ladie Faukenbridge in Merchants wiues attyre. But pauca verba Skinke, a prize, a prize, By th'mas a pretty girle, close Hermit close, Ore-heare if thou canst, what she desires, For so my cunning and my credit spreads. La. See how affection armes my feeble strength, To this so desperate iourneying all alone, While Robin Hood young Earle of Huntington, Playes Lady Faukenbridge for me at home. Ski. What mistery is this? the Lady Faukenbridge, It's she, sweet fortune thou hast sent her wel, I will intice this morcell to my Cell: Her husband's iealious, I will giue him cause, As he beleeues, I hope it shall succeed; Nay swounds it shal, she's mine in scorne of speed. La. By this broad beaten path, it should appeare, The holy Hermits Caue cannot be farre, And if I erre not, this is he himselfe. Ski. What honour'd tongue enquereth for the Hermit? La. What honour'd tongue? Ski. I Lady Faukenbridge, I know ye, and I know for what you come. For Gloster and your husbands iealousie. La. O thou, whose eye of contemplation, Lookes through the windows of the highest heauens, Resolue thy Hand-maide, where Earle Gloster liues: And whether he shal liue, and scape the hate, Of proude young Henry and his brother Iohn? Ski. Ile haue you first in, Ile tel you more anone. Madam, they say bushes haue eares and eyes, And these are matters of great secrecy: And you'll vouchsafe enter my holy Cell, There what you long to know, ile quickely tell. Enter Iohn and Faukenbridge. La. Stay heere are strangers.
Ski. A plague vpon them, come they in the nicke, To hinder Raynald of his Foxes tricke? Jo. Good day olde Hermit. Fau. So to you faire Dame. Io. By Elinors gray eye she's faire indeed; Sweet heart come ye for holy benizons? Hermit hast thou good custome with such Cliants? I cannot blame your feates, your iugling trickes, Plague iuggle you. La. Why cursse ye sacred worth? Fau. Ill done in sooth my Lord, very ill done, Wrong holines: a very pretty woman. Mocke grauity; by the masse a cherry lippe, A it's not wel done, deride a holy Hermit? Ioh. I haue it in my purse shall make amends. Ski. His purse and yours, shall make me some amends, For hindring me this morning from the Lady; For scaring me at Tauerne yesternight, For hauing backe your chaine, Ile fit you both. Io. Hermit, a word. Fau. A word with you faire mistresse. Io. Where lye your deuils that tel all your newes? Would you would trouble them for halfe an houre, To know what's become of traytor Gloster, That in my cloathes brake prison in the Fleete? Ski. No, it was Skinke. Jo. Come olde foole yee dote. Ski. But heare me. Fau. Heare him Prince. Io. Swounds who heares you? Ile make your Lady graft ye for this worke: but to your tale sir. Ski. Knowe thrise honour'd Prince, that Skinke did cousen Redcap of his cloathes. Gloster did couzen Skinke, and so escapt. Jo. Well done Faukenbridge? Fau. My Lord, he tels you true. Jo. You finde it on her lippes: but forward sir. Ski. Twas Skinke in Glosters gowne, whome you did visit,
That playd at bowles and after stole your cloths, While you went into the Lord Moortons chamber. Io. This sauors of some truth, Fau. Tis very like, Joh. Well Faukenbridge by heauen Ile tell your wife, Fau. She'l much beleeue you: you will come? Tell me of my wife: this euening faile me not. My wife quoth you: Ile send my wife from home, Do, tell my wife prince Iohn, by my deare mother, I loue her too too well to like another. La. It seemes so fox, O what a world is this, There most sinne raynes where least suspition is, Fau. You'l come. La. I will not faile, I warrant you, Jo. Hermit is all this true, Ski. Himselfe deliuer not so much before ye sleepe, Roote me from out the borders of this Realme. Jo. Well by your leaue sir Richard Faukenbridge, Hence free from feare, you'l melt you'l melt olde man, Fau. Nay take her to you, she is a shrow I warrant, Ile to the holy Hermit, and inquire, About my chaine your sword, the Purseuant And other matters that I haue to aske. Ski. Your welcome good sir Richard, Io. Nay doe not stand on tearmes, I am fire, all life, Nor neuer tell me that I haue a wife. I doe not meane to marry, ye think so, But to be merry, you the manner knowe. And you will haue me, haue me, poynt a meeting, Ile be your true loue, you shall be my sweeting, If you deny to promise, this is plaine Ile haue my will eare you get home againe. La. most gratious Lord. Io. Tut tell not me of grace I like no goodnes but a beautious face. Be therefore breefe, giue me your hand & sweare, Or Ile away with you into the heath, Neither shall Faukenbridge nor Hermit helpe,
And what I doe Ile answer well enough. La. Why, then my Lord. Jo. Nay do not stand on then, But tell me when my Lord shall haue you Lady, Its presently, ile venter for a baby. La. This night at stepney by my summer house, There is a tauerne which I sometime vse, When we from London come a gossoping, It is the Hinde, Io. Giue me thy pretty hand. Thou'lt meet me at the Hinde, Ile by thy Roe, La. One word's enough, Ioh. Suffice then be it so, La. Ile fit my olde adulterer and your grace, Ile send the Princesse thether in my place. Fa. Prince Iohn, Prince Iohn the Hermit teles me wonders. He sayes it was Skinke that scapt vs at the Tauerne, Sk nke had my chaine: nay sure that Skinke did all. Skin. I say goe but to yonder corner, And ere the Sun be halfe an hower higher, Ther will the theefe attempt a robery, Io. Who Skinke? Fau. Will Skinke? Ski. I Skinke vpon my word. Fau. Shal we goe seaze vpon him good Prince Iohn? Io. Nay we will haue him that's no question. And yet not hurte the honest rogue. he'll helpe vs well in quest of changeing Gloster, Hermit farwell, Lady keepe your houre. Fau. Adeiu olde Hermit: soone in th'euening Lasse, La. Ile meet you both, and meet with both of you. Father what answere doe you giue to me? Ski. Lady start downe I must into my cell, Where I am curing of a man late hurt, He drest, I must vnto my Orizons, In halfe an houre al wil be dispatcht, And then I will attend your Ladyship. La. At your best leasure father, O the life
That this thrise reuerend Hermit leadeth heere. How farre remote from mortall vanities, Baites to the soule, enticements to the eye? How farre is he vnlike my lustfull Lord? Who being giuen himselfe to be vnchaste, Thinke all men like himselfe, in their effects, And iniures me, that neuer had a thought, To wrong the sacred rytes of spotlesse faith. Enter Skinke with a patch on his face, and a Faulconers lure in his hand. Ski. Hermit farewel, ile pay ye or speake with ye next time I see yee. Sweete mouse the Hermit bids you stay heere, he'll visit you anon. Now Iohn and Faukenbridge, Ile match yee, and I doe not say Skinke's a wretch, a wren, a worme, when I haue trickt them, Madam I will trimme you. Com∣modity is to be prefer'd before pleasure. About profit Skink, for crownes for crownes, that make the kingly thoughts. La. I am assur'd that man's some murderer, Exit. Good Father Hermit speake and comfort me, Are ye at prayers good olde man? I pray ye speake, What's heere a beard? a counterfeited hayre? The Hermits portes? garments and his beades? Iesus defend me I will fly this denne, It's some theeues caue, no haunt for holy men. What if the murderer, (as I ges him one) Set on my husband, tush Prince Iohn and hee Are able to defend them noble selues, How eare, I will not tarry, Ile away, Least vnto theft and rape, I prooue apray. Exit. Enter Skinke Solus. Skin. Younder they are Ile fit them, heer's my ground: Wa ha how, wa ha how, wa ha how? Enters Faukenbridge. Fau. I warrant ye my Lord some man's distrest. Ioh. Why man tis a Faulconer.
Fa. Mary of me good fellow, I did think thou hadst bin robd. Ski. Rob'd, sir no, he that comes to rob me shal haue a hard match on't, yet two good fellows had like to bin rob'd by one tall theefe, had not I stept in: abots on him, I lost a hauke by him, & yet I car'd not to send another after him, so I could find the theefe; and here about he is. I know he is squatted. Fau. Sayst thou me so? we'l finde him by S. Mary. An honest fellow, a good common wealths man. Io. There are caues heereabout good fellow, are there not? Ski. Yes sir, tread the ground sir, & you shal heare their hollownes, this way sir this way. Io. Help Faukenbridge. Fau. O help me good prince Iohn. Skin. Ile helpe you both, deliuer sir deliuer, Swounds lin∣ger not: Prince Iohn put vp your pursse, or ile throw pon∣niards downe vpon your pate. Quickely, when? I am Skink that scapt ye yesternight, and fled the Fleete in your cloake, carrying mee cleane out of winde and raine. I broke the bonds and linkes that fettered your chaine amity, this cheate is mine: Farewel I cannot stay, sweet Prince, olde Knight, I thanke ye for this pray. Fau. Gods mary mother, heer's a iest indeed, We came to take, a theefe takes vs: Where are ye good my Lord? Jo. No matter where, I thinke I was fore-spoken at ye teate, This damn'd rogue seru'd me thus? Gloster and he Vpon my life conclude in villany. He was not wont to plot these stratagems, Lend me your hand a little, come away, Let's to the Cell againe, perchaunce the Hermit Is Skinke, and theefe, and Hermit al in one. Fau. Mary a God then ten to one its so, Wel thought on Princely Iohn, He had my chayne, no doubt he had your swoord. Ioh. If there be now no Hermit at the Cel, Ile sweare by al the Saints its none but he. Exeunt. Enter Gloster in the Hermits gowne, putting on the beard.
Glo. This accident hath hit thy humour Gloster, From purseuant ile turne a Hermit now. Sure he that keeps this Cell is a counterfeit, Else what does he heere with false hayre and beard? Well how so eare it be, Ile seeme to be The holy Hermit: for such fame there is, Of one accounted reuerend on this heath. Enter Skinke. Ski. Ile faine vnto my cell, to my faire Lady, But Iohn and Faukenbridge are at my heeles. And some od mate is got into my gowne, And walks deuoutly like my counterfeite, I cannot stay to question with you now, I haue another gowne, and all things fit, These guests once rid, new mate? Ile bum, Ile marke you. Gl. What's he a gods name? he is quickly gone, I am for him, were he Robin-good fellow, Whose yonder the Prince Iohn and Faukenbridge? I thinke they haunt me like my genii, One good the other ill, by th'mas they prye And looke vppon me but suspitiously. Io. This is not Skinke, the Hermit is not Skinke: He is a learned reuerend holy man. Fau. He is he is a very godly man. I warrant ye, he's at his booke at's prayers, Wee should haue tooke you, by my hollydam Euen for a very theefe. Glo. Now God forfend such noblemen as you should gesse me so, I neuer gaue such cause for ought I knowe. Ioh. Yet thou didst tell vs Skinke should doe a roberye, Appoynted vs the place, and there we found him, Fau. And he felt vs, for he hath rob'd vs both. Glo. He's a lewd fellow, but he shall be taken. Io. I had rather heere of Gloster then of him. Glo Gloster did cheat him, of the same golde chaine, That deceiu'd Sir Richard Faukenbridge. He got your sword Prince Iohn: twa's he that saude The porter, and beguil'd the Purseuant,
Ioh. A vengaunce on him. Glo. Doo not cursse good Prince, he's bad enough, twere better pray for him. Jo. Ile kill thee, and thou bid me pray for him. Ile fell woods, and ring thee round with fire, Make thee an offring vnto fierce reuenge, If thou haue but a thought to pray for him. Glo. I am bound to pray for all men, chefely christians. Ioh. Ha ha, for christians, thinkst thou he is one? For men: hast thou opinion he is a man? He that changes himselfe to sundry shapes, Is he a christian? can he be a man? O, Irreligious thoughts, Glo. Why worthy Prince I saw him christened, dept into the font Io. Then nyne times like the northen laplanders, He backward circled the sacred Font, And nyne times backward sayd his Orisons, As often curst the glorious hoast of heauen, As many times inuocke the fiends of hell, And so turn'd witch, for Gloster is a witch. Glo. Haue patient Gentle Prince, he shall appeare, Before your Kingly father speedily. Io. Shall he indeed? sweet comfort kisse thy cheeke, Peace circle in thy aged honoured head, When he is taken: Hermit I protest Ile build thee vp a chappell and a shrine: Ile haue thee worshipt, as a man deuine, Assure he shall come, and Skinke shall come. Glo. I that same Skinke, I prethee send that Skinke, Joh. Send both, and both as prisoners crimminate Shall forfeite their last liues to Englands state, Which way will Faukenbridge? Fau. Ouer the water, and so with al speed I may to Stepney Io. I must to Stepney too, and reuile, and be blith, Olde winke at my mirth, t'may make amends, So thou, and I, and our friends, may be friends, Fau. Withall my heart, withall my heart Prince, Olde Faukenbridge will waite vppon your grace,
Be good to Gloster for my Marrians sake, And me and myne you shall your seruants make, Glo. Of that anon my pleasure being seru'd, Gloster shall haue what Gloster hath deseru'd. Fau. Why, that's well said, adew good honest Hermit, Exit. Io. Hermit farwell, if I had my desire, Ile make the world thy wonderous deeds admire, Exit. Glo. Still good, still passing good, Gloster is still Henryes true hate, foe to Iohns froward will. No more of that for them in better tyme, If this same Hermit be an honest man, He will protect me by this simple life, If not I care not, Ile be euer Gloster, Make him my foot stole if he be a slaue, For Basenesse ouer worth can haue no power. Robin be thinke thee, thou art come from Kings. Then scorne to be slaue to vnderlings, Looke well about thee Lad and thou shalt see, Them burst in enuy that would iniure thee. Hermit Ile meet you in your Hermits gowne, Honest, Ile loue you: worse, Ile knocke you downe. Exit. Enter Prince Richard with musicke. Kinde friends, wee haue troubled Lady Faukenbridge, And eyther she's not willing to be seene, Or els not well: or with our boldnesse greeu'd, To ease these I haue brought you to this window, Knowing your are in musicke excellent, I haue pend a ditty heere: and I desire You would sing it for her loue and my content, Musi. With all my heart my Lord. Enter Robin Hood like the Lady. Rob. Your excellence forgets your Princely worth, If I may humbly craue it at your hands, Let me desire this musicke be dismist. Ric. For beare I pray and with draw your selues. Be not offended gratious Marrian, Exeunt Musicke. Vnder the vpper heauen, nine goodly spheres,
Turne with a motion euer musicall, In Pallaces of Kings, meliodious sound Offer pleasures to ther soueraignes eares. In Temples, milke white clothed queristors, Sing sacred Anthemes bowing to the shrine, And in the feelds whole quires of winged clarkes, Salutes the morning bright and Christaline, Then blame not me, you are my heauen, my Queene, My saint, my comfort, brighter then the morne, To you all musicke, and all praise is due. For your delight you for delight was borne, The world wold haue no mirth, no ioy, no day, If from the world your beautie were away. Rob. Fie on loues blasphemie and forgery, To call that in, thats onely misery, I that am wedded to suspitious age, Solicited by your lasciuious youth, I that haue one poore comforte liuing, Gloster my brother, my hie harted brother, He flies for feare, least he should faint and fall Into the hands of hate tirannicall. Ric. What would you I should doe? Rob. I would full faine, my brother Gloster had his peace againe. Ric. Shall loue be my reward if I doe bring A certaine token of his good estate. And after pacyfie my brothers wrath? Say you'l loue, we'l be fortunate, Rob. I will. Rich. No more, I vow to dye vnblest If I performe not this inposed quest, But one word Madam pray can you tell, Where Huntington my ward is? Rob. I was bold to send yong Robin Hood your noble ward Vpon some busines of import for me. Ri. I am glad he is imployde in your affayres, Farewell kinde faire, let one cloudy frowne Shaddow the bright sunne of thy beauties light.
Be confident in this, ile finde thy brother, Rayse power but we'l haue peace, onely performe Your gratious promise at my backe returne. Rob. Wel, heer's my hand, Prince Richard that same night Which secondeth the day of your returne, Ile be your bedfellow, and from that houre Forsweare the loathed bed of Faukenbridge: Be speedy therefore, as you hope to speed. Ric. O that I were as large wing'd as the winde, Then should you see my expeditious will: My most desire, adew, guesse by my haste, Of your sweet promise the delicious taste. Exit. Rob. Why so: I am rid of him by this deuise, He would else haue tyred me with his sighes and songs, Enter Blocke. But now I shall haue ease, heere comes the Saint, To whom such sute was made. Bl. My Lady Gentlewoman is euen heere in her priuitye walke, Madam heer's the Marchants wife was heere yester∣day would speake with yee; O I was somewhat bolde to bring her in. Ro. Wel leaue vs sir; y'are welcome gentlewoman. Blo. These women haue no liberality in the world in them, I neuer let in man to my Lady, but I am rewarded. Rob. Please ye to walke sir? wherfore mumble ye? La. Robin what newes? how hast thou done this night? Ro. My Ladiship hath done my part, my taske, Lyne all alone for lacke of company, I might haue had Prince Richard, La. Was he heere? Rob. He went away but now; I haue bin lou'd & wood too simply, God rid me of the woman once againe, Ile not be tempted so for all the world, Come, wil you to your chamber and vncase? La. Nay keep my habit yet a little while, Olde Faukenbridge is almost at the gate, I met him at Black heath iust at the Hermits, And taking me to be a Merchants wife,
Fell mightily in loue, gaue me his ring, Made me protest that I would meete him heere. I tolde him of his Lady, O tut quoth he, Ile shake her vp, ile packe her out of sight, He comes kinde Robin Hood, holde vp the iest. Enter Sir Rich. Faukenbridge and Blocke. Fau. Gods mary knaue, how long hath she bin heere? Blo. Sir she came but euen in afore you. Fa. A cunning queane, a very cunning queane, Go to your busines Block, ile meete with her. Blo. Ah old Muttonmounger I beleeue heer's worke towards. Exit. Fau. Doe not beleeue her Mall, doe not beleeue her: I onely spake a word or two in iest, But would not for the world haue bin so mad, Doe not beleeue her Mall, doe not beleeue her: Rob. What should I not beleeue? what doe you meane? La. Why good Sir Richard, let me speake with you, Alas wil you vndoe me? wil you shame me? Is this your promise? came I heere for this? To be a laughing stocke vnto your Lady Rob. How now Sir Richard, what's the matter there? Fa. Ile talke with you anon, come hyther woman? Didst not tel my wife what match we made:? La. I tel your wife? thinke ye I am such a beast? Now God forgiue ye, I am quite vndone. Fau. Peace duck, peace ducke, I warrant al is wel. Rob. What's the matter? I pray ye sir Richard tell me? Fau. Mary Mall thus, about some twelue monthes since, Your brother Gloster, that mad prodigall, Caus'd me to passe my word vnto her husband, For some two thousand pound: or more perchaunce, No matter what it is, you shall not know, Nay ye shal neuer aske to know. Rob. And what of this? Fau. Mary the man's decayde, And I beleeue a little thing would please her; A very little thing, a thing of nothing. Goe in good Mall, and leaue vs two alone,
Ile deale with ye as simply as I can. La. Fox looke about ye, ye are caught yfaith. Rob. Deale with her simply, ô ho; what kinde of dealing? Can ye not deale with her and I be by? Fau. Mary a God, what are ye iealous? Ye teach me what to doe: in, get you in. O I haue heard Prince Richard was your guest, How dealt you than? In get you in I say, Must I take care about your brothers debts, And you stand crossing me, in, or ile send you in. Exit Robin. Ha sirra, you'l be master, you'l weare the yellow, You'l be an ouer-seer: mary shal yee. La. Ye are too curst (me thinkes sir) to your Lady; Fau. Ah wench content thee, I must beare her hard, Else she'l be prining into my dalliances: I am an olde man sweet girle I must be merry, All steele, al spright, keep in health by change, Men may be wanton, wowen must not range. La. You haue giuen good counsel sir, ile repent me, Heer's your ring, ile onely loue my husband. Fau. I meane not so, I thinke to day thou toldes me Thy husband was an vnthrift, and a bankrout, And he be so, tut thou hast fauour store, Let the knaue beg, beauty cannot be poore. La Indeed my husband is a bankrout, Of faith, of loue, of shame, of chastity, Dotes vpon other women more then me. Fau. Ha doe he so? then giue him tit for tat, Haue one so young and faire, and loues another, He's worthy to be coockolded by the masse. What is he olde or young? La. About your age. Fa. An old knaue and cannot be content with such a peate, Come to my closet girle, make much of me, We'll appoint a meeting place some twise a weake, And ile maintaine thee like a Lady, ha? La. O but you'll forget me presently, When you looke well vpon your Ladies beauty.
Fau. Who vpon her? why she is a very dowdy, A dishclout, a foule Iipsie vnto thee, Come to my closset lasse, there take thy earnest Of loue, of pleasure and good maintenaunce. La. I am very fearefull. Fau. Come foole neuer feare I am Lord heate, who shall disturb as then? Nay come, or by the rood Ile make you come, La. Help Madam Faukenbridge for gods sake. Enter Robin Hood and Blocke. Fau. How now, what meanst? La. Help Gentle Madam help, Rob. How now what aylst thou? Bloc. Nay and't be a woman, nere feare my master Madam La. Why speakst thou not, what aylst thou? Fau. Why nothing, by the rood nothing she ayls. La. O Madam this vile man would haue abused me, And forcst me to his closset, Rob, Ah olde cole, now looke about, you are catcht, La. Call in your fellowes blocke, Fa. Doe not thou knaue, La, Doe or Ile cracke your crowne, Blo. Nay Ile doo't, I knowe she meanes to shame you. Exit. Fau. Why Mall wilt thou beleeue this paultrie woman? Huswife Ile haue you whipt for slaundring me. Ro. What Leacher, no she is an honest woman, Her husband's well knowne, all the houshold knowes. Blo. Heer's some now, to tell all the towne your mynd, La. Before ye all I must sure complaine, You see this wicked man, and ye all knowe How oft he hath byn Iealous of my life, Suspecting falshood being false himselfe; Blo. O maister, O maister, Fau. She slaunders me, she is a cousoning queane, Fetch me the Constable, Ile haue her punisht, La. The Constable for me fie, fie vpon ye. Madam do you know this ring? Rob. It is sir Richards.
Blo. O I, that's my masters too sure. Fau. I mary, I did lend it to the false drab To fetch some money for that bankrout knaue Her husband, that lyes prisoner in the Fleete. La. My husband bankrout? my husband in the Fleete prisoner? No, no, he is as good a man as you. Rob. I that he is, and can spend pound for pound With thee yfaith, wert richer then thou art, I know the gentleman. La. Nay Madam he is hard by, there must be Reuelles at the Hinde to night; Your copesmate there, Prince Iohn. Rob. Ther's a hot youth. Bl. O, afierce Gentleman. La. He was fierce as you, but I haue matcht him, The Princesse shall be there in my attyre. Fau. A plaguy crafty queane, mary a God I see Prince Iohn, coorted as well as I, And since he shal be mockt as well as I, Its some contentment. Bl. Masse he droopes, fellow Humphrey, he is almost taken, Looke about ye old Richard? Fau. Hence knaues, get in a little, prethee Mall Let thou and I and she, shut vp this matter. Rob. Away sirs, get in. Bl. Come, come let's goe, he wil be baited now, farewel old Richard. Exit Rob. Now sir, what say you now? Fa. Mary sweet Mall I say I met this woman, likt her, lou'd her, For she is worthy loue I promise thee; I say I coorted her: tut make no braule Twixt thou and I, we'l haue amends for all. Ro. Had I done such a tricke, what then? what then? Fau. Ah prethee Mall, tut beare with men. Rob. I, we must beare with you; you'l be excus'd, When women vndeserued are abus'd. Fau. Nay doe not weep, pardon me gentle Lady, I know thee vertuous, and I doo protest, Neuer to haue an euill thought of thee.
Rob. I, I, ye sweare, who's that that will beleeue ye? Fau. Now by my holy dam and honest faith, This Gentlewoman shall witnes what I swea e. Sweet Ducke a little help me? La. Trust him Madam. Fau. I will be kinde, credulous, constant euer, Doe what thou wilt, ile be suspitious neuer. Ro. For which I thanke noble Faukenbridge. Fau. Body of me who's this? yong Huntington? La. And I your Lady whome you coorted last, Ye lookt about you ill, foxe we haue caught ye, I met ye at Blacke heath, and ye were hot. Fau. I knew thee Mall, now by my swoord I knew thee, I winkt at all, I laught at euery iest. Rob. I, he did winke, the blinde man had an eye. Fa. Peace Robin, thou't once be a man as I. La. Well, I must beare it all. Fa. Come, & ye beare, its but your office, come forget sweet Mall. La. I doe forgiue it and forget it sir. Fa. Why that's well said, that's done like a good girle: Ha sirra, ha you matcht me pretty Earle? Rob. I haue, ye see sir I must vnto Blacke heath, In quest of Richard, whom I sent to seeke Earle Gloster out, I know he's at the Hermits; Lend me your Coach; Ile shift me as I ride, Farewell sir Richard. Exit. Fau. Farewell Englands pride, by the mattins Mall it is a pretty childe; Shall we goe meete Iohn? shall we goe mocke the Prince? La. We will. Fa. O then we shall haue sport anon, Neuer weare yellow Mall, twas but a tricke, Olde Faukenbridge wil stil be a mad Dicke. Exeunt. Enter Redcap and Gloster. Red. Doe ye s s say fa fa father Hermit, th that Gl Gloster is about this Heath? Glo. He is vpon this Heath Sonne looke about it, Run but the compasse, thou shalt finde him out,
Red. R r run? ile r run the co compasse of all k Kent but Ile f finde him out, my f f father (where ere hee layes his head) dare ne neuer co come home I know, t t till hee bee fo fo found. Gl. Wel thou shalt find him, knowst thou who's a hunting? Red. M m mary tis the Earles of La La Lancaster and Le Leyster. Fa fa farewell f father, and I finde Skink or Glo Glo∣ster, Ile g g giue thee the pr prise of a penny p p pudding for thy p paines. Glo. Adew good friend: this is sure the fellow I sent on message from the Parlament. The Porters sonne, he's still in quest of me, And Skinke that cousoned him of his red cap. Enter Richard like a Seruing man. But looke about thee Gloster, who comes yonder? O a plaine seruingman, & yet perhaps his bags are lyn'd, And my pursse now growes thin: if he haue any I must share with him. Enter Skinke like a Hermit. And who's on yond side? O it is my Hermit, Hath got his other sute since I went foorth. Ski. Sbloud yonder's company, ile backe againe, Else I would be with you counterfeite, Ile leaue the rogue till opportunity, But neuer eate till I haue quit my wrong. Exit Ric. I saw two men attend like holy Hermits, One's slipt away, the other at his beades, Now Richard for the loue of Marian, Make thy inquiry where mad Gloster liues. If England or the verge of Scotland holde him, Ile seeke him thus disguis'd: if he be past To any forraigne part; ile follow him. Loue thou art Lord of hearts, thy lawes are sweet, In euery troubled way, thou guidst our feete. Louers inioyn'd to passe the daungerous Sea Of big swolne sorrow, in the Barke affection; The windes and waues of woe need neuer feare, While Loue, the helme doth like a Pylate steare. Glo. Heer's some louer come, a mischiefe on him,
I know not how to answere these mad fooles, But ile be briefe, ile marre the Hermits tale; Off gowne, holde Buckler, slice it bilbowe blade. Ric. What's this? what should this meane? old man, good friend Glo. Young foole deliuer else see your end. Ric. I thought thou hadst been holy and a Hermit. Glo. What ere you thought, your pursse? come quickly sir? Cast that vpon the ground, and then conferre. Ric. There it is. Glo. Falles it so heauy? then my heart is light. Ric. Thou't haue a heauy heart before thou touch it, Theft shrinde in holy weedes? stand to't y'are best. Glo. And if I doe not, seeing such a pray, Let this be to me a disaster day. Ric. Art thou content to breath? Fight & part once or twise Glo. With al my heart, take halfe thy money & we'l friendly part. Ric. I will not cherish theft. Glo. Then I defye thee. Fight againe and breath, Ric. Alas for pitty, that so stout a man, So reuerend in aspect, should take this course. Glo. This is no common man with whom I fight, And if he be, he is of wondrours spright, Shall we part stakes? Ric. Fellow take the pursse vpon condition thou wilt follow me▪ Glo. What waite on you? weare a turn'd Liuery? Whose man's your master? If I be your man, My mans mans office will be excellent: There lyes your pursse againe, win it and weare it. Fight. Enter Robin Hood, they breath, offer againe. Rob. Clashing of weapons at my welcome hyther? Bickring vpon Blacke-heath, well said olde man, Ile take thy side, the yonger hath the oddes. Stay, end your quarrell, or I promise ye Ile take the olde mans part. Ric. You were not wont yong Huntington, stil on Richards side Rob. Pardon gratious Prince I knew ye not. Gl. Prince Richard: then lye enuy at his foote, Pardon thy cousen Gloster, valiant Lord,
I knew no common force confronted myne, O heauen I had the like conseite of thine. Ric. I tell thee Robin Gloster thou art met, Bringing such comfort vnto Richards heart. As in the foyle of warre when dust and sweat, The thirst of weake, and the Sunnes fiery heate, Haue seazd vppon the soule of valiaunce, And he must faint except he be refresht. To me thou comst as if to him should come, A perry from the North, whose frostie breath Might fan him coolnesse in that doubt of death. With me then meets, as he a spring might meet, Cooling the earth vnder his toyle partcht feet, Whose christall moysture in his Helmit taine, Comforts his spyrits, makes him strong againe. Glo. Prince, in short termes if you haue brought me comfort Know if I had my pardon in this hand That smit base Skinke in open Parlament, I would not come to Court, till the high feast Of your proud brothers birth day be expyred, For as the oe King as he made a vow At his vnluckie Coronation, Must waite vpon the boy and fill his cuppe, And all the Pieres must kneele while Henry kneeles Vnto his cradle; he shall hang me vp, Eare I commit that vile Idolatrie. But when the feast is past if you'll befrend me, Ile come and braue my proud foes to their teeth, Ric. Come Robin, and if my brothers grace denye, Ile take thy parte, them and their threates defye, Glo. Gramercy Princly Dicke, Rob. I haue some power, I can rayse two thousand Soldiers in an hower, Glo. Gramercy Robin, gramercy little wag, Prince Richard, pray let Huntington Carry my sister Faukenbridge this ring, Ric. Ile carry it my selfe, but I had rather Had thy kinde company, thou mightst haue mou'd
Thy Sister, whome I long haue vainely lou'd, Glo. I like her that she shunes temptation Prince Richard, but I beare with doting louers, I should not take it well, that you vrge me To such an office: but I beare with you, Loue's blind and mad, hie to her boldly, try her; But if I know she yeeld, faith Ile defie her. Ric. I like thy honorable resolution, Gloster I pray thee pardon my intreate, Glo. its mens custome; part part Gentle Prince, Farwell good Robin this gold I will borrow, Meet you at stepney pay you all to morrow, Rob. A dew Gloster, Gl. Farwell, be short; you gone, I hope to haue a little sport Ric: Take heed mad Cuz. Exeunt. Glo. Tut tell not me of heed, He that's too wray neuer hath good speed. Hollowing within, Enter Lanc. with a broken staffe in his hand. Whose this old Lancaster my honoured frend? Lan. These knaues haue seru'd me well, left me alone, I haue hunted fairely, lost my purse, my chaine, My Iewels, and bin bangd by a bold knaue, Clad in a Hermits gowne like an olde man, O what a world is this? Glo. Its ill my Lord. Lan. Hee's come againe, O knaue tis the worse for thee, Keepe from me, be content with that thou hast, And see thou flie this heath, for if I take thee, Ile make thee to all theeues aspectacle, Had my staffe held, thou hadst not scaped me so, But come not neare me, follow not thou art best, Holla, Earle Leyster, holla Huntsman hoe? Glo. Vppon my life, old Lancaster a Hunting, Hath met my fellow Hermit, could I meet him, Ide play rob theefe, at least part stakes with him. Skin. Zounds he is yonder alone, Enter Redcap with a cudgell. Skinke now reuenge thy selfe on yonder slaue. Znayles still preuented? this same Redcap rogue
Runs like hob-goblin vp and downe the heath. Red. Wh wh wh whope He Hermit, ye ha ha ma ma made Re Redcap run a fine co co compasse, ha haue you not? Ski. I made thee run? Glo. Younders my euill Angell, were redcap gone, Gloster would coniure him. Red. Ie Ie Iesus bl blesse me, whop to to two Hermits? Ile ca ca caperclaw to to tone of yee, for mo mo mocking me, and I d d doo not ha ha hang me: wh wh which is the fa fa false k k k knaue? for I am s s sure the olde He He Hermit wo would neuer mo mocke an honest man. Glo. he is the counterfet he mockt thee fellow. I did not see thee in my life before, He weares my garments, and has coussoned me, Red. Haue you co co cousoned the he Hermit and m made Redcap run to no pu pu purpose? Ski. No he's counterfet I will tell no lyes, As sure as Skinke deceiu'd thee of thy clothes, Sent thee to Kent, gaue thee thy fare by water, So sure hee's false, and I the perfet Hermit, Glo. This villaine is a coniurer I doubt, Were he the deuill yet I would not budge, Red. Si si sirra, you are the co countefeite, O this is the tr tr true He Hermit, sta sta stand still g good man at that, ile bu bumbast you yfaith, ile make you g giue the olde m m man his gowne. Offers to strike, Gloster trippes vp his heeles, shifts Skinke into his place. G g gods lid are ye go good at that? ile cu cudgell yee f f for this tr tr tricke. Ski. It was not I twas he that cast thee downe, Red. You li li li lye you ra ra rascall you, I le left ye st stan∣ding he heare. Ski. Zounds hold you stammerer, or Ile cut your stumps. Gl. He's for me he's weapon'd, I like that. Red. O heer's a ro ro rogue in ca ca carnat, help, mu murder murder. Enter Lancaster & Huntsmen at one doore, Leyster & Huntsmen at another.
Lan. Lay holde vpon that theeuish counterfeit, Ley. Why heares another Hermit Lancaster: Glo. I am the Hermit sir, that wretched man Doth many a robberie in my disguise: Skin. Its he that robs, he slaunders me, he lies. Lan. Which set on thee? Red. Th this f f fellow has a s s sword and a buckler. Lan. Search him; this is the theefe, o heares my purse, My chaine, my Iewels: oh thou wicked wretch, How darst thou vnder show of holines, Commit such actions of impietie? Bind him, Ile haue him made a publicke scorne. Ski. Lay holde vpon that other hermit. He is a counterfeit as well as I, He stole those clothes from me, for I am Skinke, Search him, I know him not, he is some slaue. Glo. Thou lyest base varlet. Re. O g God he has a sword too, S Skink are you ca catcht? Lan. Villaine thou shalt with me vnto the Court. Ley. And this with me, this is the traytor Gloster. Glo. Thou lyest proud Leyster I am no traytor. Re. G gloster? O b braue, now m my father sh shal be f free Lan. Earle Gloster I am sorry thou art taken. Glo. I am not taken yet, nor will I yeild To any heare but noble Lancaster, Let Skinke be Leysters prisoner Ile be thine. Ley, Thou shalt be mine. Gl. First through a crimson sluce, Ile send thy hated soule to those blacke fiendes That long haue houered gaping for their parte, When tyrant life should leaue thy traytor heart. Come Lancaster keep Skinke ile goe with thee, Let loose the mad knaue, for I prayse his shifts, He shall not starte away, ile be his guide, And with proude looks outface young Henries pride. Ley. Looke to them Lancaster vpon thy life. Red. Well ile r r run and get a p pardon of the K K KKing, Gl Gloster and Skinke ta ta taken? O b b braue, r r r run re
Re Red ca cap a and ca ca cary the first n n newes to co co court. Ley. Lancaster ile helpe to guarde them to the Court. Lan. Doe as you please. Glo. Leyster doe not come neare me, for if thou doe, thou shalt buy it dearely. Ley. Ile haue thy hand for this. Glo. Not for thy heart. Ski. Braue Earle, had Skinke knowne thou hadst been the Noble Gloster (whose mad trickes haue made mee loue thee) I would haue dy'd Blacke heath red with the bloud of millions, ere we would haue been taken; but what reme∣dy, we are fast & must answere it like Gentlemen, like Soul∣diers, like resolutes. Gl. I ye are a gallant, come olde Lancaster, For thy sake will I goe; or else by heauen Ide send some dozen of these slaues to hel. Exeunt. Enter Prince Richard, Robert Hoode & Lady Faukenbridge. La, Your trauaile and your comfortable newes, This Ring, the certaine signe you met with him, Bindes me in duetyous loue vnto your grace: But on my knees I fall, and humbly craue, Importune that no more, you nere can haue. Ric. Nay then ye wrong me Lady Faukenbridge, Did you not ioyne your faire white hand? Swore that ye would forsweare your husbands bed, If I could but finde out Gloster? La. I sweare so? Ric. By heauen Rob. Take heed, its a high oath my Lord. Ric. What meanst thou Huntington? Ro. To saue your soule, I doe not loue to haue my friends forsworne, She neuer promist that you vrge her with. Ric. Goe to, prouoke me not. Rob. I tell you true, twas I in her attyre that promist you, She was gone vnto the wizard at Blacke heath, And there had suters more then a good many. Ric. Was I deluded then?
La. No not deluded, but hindred from desire vnchast and rude: O let me wooe yee with the tongue of ruth, Dewing your Princely hand with pitties teares, That you would leaue this most vnlawful sute, If ere we liue till Faukenbridge be dead, (As God defend his death I should desire) Then if your highnes daine so base a match, And holy lawes admit a mariage, Considering our affinity in bloud, I will become your Handmayde not your harlot. That shame shall neuer dwell vpon my brow. Rob. I faith my Lord she's honorably resolu'd, For shame no more, importune her no more. Ri. Marian I see thy vertue, and commend it, I know my error seeking thy dishonor, But the respectlesse, reasonles commaund Of my inflamed loue, bids me still try, And trample vnder foote all pietye. Yet for I will not seeme too impyous, Too inconsiderate of thy seeming griefe, Vouchsafe to be my Mistris: vse me kindely, And I protest ile striue with all my power, That lust himselfe may in his heate deuour. La. You are my seruant then. Ric. Thankes sacred Mistresse. Ro. What am I? La. You are my fellow Robert. Enter Faukenbridge in his hose and dublet. Fau. What Prince Richard? noble Huntington? Welcome, yfaith welcome, by the morrow Masse You are come as fitly as my heart can wish: Prince Iohn this night will be a Reueller, He hath inuited me and Marian. Gods mary mother goe along with vs, Its but hard by, close by, at our towne Tauerne. Ric. Your Tauerne? Fau. O I I I tis his owne made match, Ile make you laugh, ile make you laugh yfaith;
Come, come, he's ready, O come, come away. La. But wher's the Princesse? Fa. He's ready too, Block Bl. my man, must be her waiting man, Nay wil ye goe? for gods sake let vs goe. Ri. Is the iest so? nay then let vs away. Rob. O twill allay his heate, make dead his fire. Fau. Ye bob'd me first, ye first gaue me my hyre, But come a gods name, Prince Iohn stayes for vs. Exeunt. Rob. This is the word, euer at spend-thriftes feastes, They are guld themselues, and scoft at by their guests. Exit. Enter John. Ioh. Buffild and scoft, Skinke, Gloster, women, fooles, and boyes abuse me? Ile be reueng'd, Ric. Reueng'd, and why good childe? Olde Faukenbridge hath had a worser basting. Fa. I, they haue banded from chase to chase; I haue been their tennis ball, since I did coort, Ric. Come Iohn, take hand with vertuous Isabell, And lets vnto the Court like louing friends, Our Kingly brothers birth daies feastiuall, Is foorthwith to be kept, thether we'l hye, And grace with pompe that great solemnity. Jo. Whether ye wil, I care not where I goe: If griefe wil grace it, ile adorne the shew. Fa. Come Madam, we must thither we are bound. La. I am loath to see the Court, Gloster being from thence, Or kneele to him that gaue vs this offence. Fa. Body of me peace woman. I prethee peace. Enter Redcap. Red. Go go god ye, go god s speed ye, Ioh. Whether run you sir knaue? Red. R r run ye sir knaue? why I r run to my La Lady Fa Fau∣kenbridge, to te te tell her Sk Skinke and Gl Gloster is t ta∣ken, and are gg one to the CC Court with L Lord Leyster, and L Lord la la Lancaster. Io. Is Gloster taken? thether will I flye Vpon wraths wings, not quiet til he dye. Exit with Princesse
Rich. Is Gloster taken? Red: I he is ta taken I wa warrant ye with a wi witnes, Ric. Then will I to Court, & eyther set him free, or dye the death, Follow me Faukenbridge, feare not faire Madam: You said you had the Porter in your house, Some of your seruants bring him, on my life One hayre shal not be taken from his head, Nor he, nor you, nor Gloster iniured. Fa. Come Mall, and Richard say the word nere feare. Ro. Madam, we haue twenty thousand at our call, The most, young Henry dares, is but to braule. La: Pray God it prooue so. Ric: Follow Huntington: sir Rich. doe not faile to send the Porter. Fa: Blocke, bring the Porter of the Fleete to Court. Bl. I wil sir. Red: The p p Porter of the fl fl Fleete to Court? what p p porter of the fl fl Fleete? Blo. What Redcap, run redcap, wilt thou see thy father? Red. My fa father? I that I w wold s see my f father, & there be a p porter in your ho house, its my f far. Bl. Follow me Redcap then. Exit. Red. And you were two to twenty b Blockes, ide f f follow ye s so I would, and r run to the co co court too, and k kneele before the k k King f f for his pa pardon. Block within. Come away Redcap, run Redcap. Red. I I I r r run as f f fast as I I ca ca can run I wa warrant yee. Enter a Sinet, first two Herraldos, after them Leyster with a Scepter, Lancaster with a Crowne Imperiall on a cushion: After them Henry the elder bareheaded, bearing a swoord and a Globe: after him young Henry Crowned: Elinor the mother Queene Crowned: young Queene Crowned. Henry the elder places his Sonne, the two Queenes on eyther hand, himselfe at his feete, Leyster and Lancaster below him. Hen. Herrald, fetch Lancaster and Leyster Coronets, Suffer no Marquesse, Earle, nor Countesse enter,
Except their temples circled are in golde, He deliuers Coronets to Leyster and Lancaster. Shew them our vize-roys: by our will controld As at a cornation, euery Peere Appeares in all his pompe, so at this feast Held for our birth-right, let them be adorn'd. Let Gloster be brought in, crown'd like an Earle, Exit This day we'll haue no parley of his death, But talke of Iouisanes and gleefull mirth. Let Skinke come in, giue him a Barons seat, High is his spirrit, his deserts are greate. Kin. You wrong the honour of Nobilitie, To place a robber in a Barons stead, Quee. Its well ye tearme him not a murtherer. Kin. Had I mistearmed him? Quee. I that had you Henry. He did a peece of Iustice at my Bidding. Kin. Who made you a Iustice? Hen. I that had the power. Kin. You had none then. Enter Gloster and Skinke. Ley. Yes he was crownd before. Hen. Why does not Gloster weare a Coronet? Glo. Because his Soueraigne doth not weare a Crowne. Hen. By heauen put on thy Coronet, or that heauen Which now with a clear, lends vs this light, Shall not be courtain'd with the vaile of night, Eare on thy head I clap a burning Crowne, Of red hot Yron that shall seare thy braines. Ri. Good Gloster Crowne thee with thy Coronet. Lan. Doo gentle Earle. Skin. Swounds doo, would I had one. Qu. Doo not I prethee keepe thy proud heart still. Glo. Ile weare it but to crosse thy froward will. Hen. Sit downe and take thy place. Glo. Its the low earth. To her I must, from her I had my breath. Hen. We are pleas'd thou shalt sit there, Skinke take thy place among my nobles.
Enter Iohn and Jsabell with Coronets. Ski. Thankes to King Henries grace. Io. Iohn Earle of Morton and of Notingham, With Isabell his Countesse, bow themselues Before their brother Henries Royall Throane. Hen. Assend your seats liue in our daily loue. Enter Richard, and Robert with Coronts. Ric. Richard the Prince of England, with his Ward The noble Robert Hood, Earle Huntington, Present their seruice to your Maiestie. Hen. Y'are welcome too, though little be your loue. Enter Faukenbridge with his Lady, she a Coronet Fa. Olde Richard Faukenbridge, Knight of the crosse, Lord of the Cinque ports, with his noble wife Dame Marrian Countesse of west Hereford, Offer their duties at this Royall meeting. Hen. Sit downe, thou art a newter, she a foe, Thy loue we doubt her hart too well we know. What sutors are without, let them come in. Glo. And haue no Iustice where contempt is King. Hen. Mad man I giue no eare to thy loose words. Jo. O sir y'are welcome, you haue your old seat. Glo. Though thou sit hier yet my heart's as great. Que. Great heart wee'll make you lesser by the head. Glo. Ill comes not euer to the threatned. Enter Blocke and Redcap. Hen. What are you two? Red. M ma mary and't please you I am re re Redcap. Hen. And what's your mate? Blo. A poore Porter sir. Ioh. The Porter of the fleet that was condemned. Blo. No truely sir I was Porter last, when I left The doore open at the Tauerne. Io. O ist you sir? Ley. And what would you two haue? Red. I co co come to re re re qui quier the young K K King of his go goo goodnes, since Glo Gloster is t taken, that he wo wo would let my fa fa father haue his pa pa pardon.
Hen. Sirra your father has his pardon sign'd, Go to the office it shall be deliuered. Red. And shall he be p p Porter a ga gaine? Hen. I that he shall, but let him be aduis'd Heareafter, how lets out prisoners, Red. I wa warrant ye my Lord. Hen. What hast thou more to say? Red. Marry I wo would haue Skinke pu punisht for co co Cunnicatching me. Ley, Is that your busines? Red. I by my t t troth is it. Hen. Then get away. Glo. Against Skinke (poore knaue) Thou gets no right this day. Blo. O but run backe Redcap for the Purseuant. Red. O I Lord s sir, I haue another s sute for the p p Purse∣uant, that has l l lost his b b box, and his wa wa warrant. Hen. What meanes the fellow? Red. Why the pu pu Purseuant sir and the po po Porter. Glo. The box that I had from him, there it is. Fau. Mary a me, and I was chargd with it. Had you it brother Gloster? Gods good mercy, Hen. And what haue you to say? Bl. Nothing sir but God blesse you, you are a goodly com∣pany, except sir William or my Lady wil command me any more seruice. Fau. A way you prating knaue, hence varlet, hence. Exit. Ley. Put forth them fellowes there. Red. A f fo fore I go goe I b b be s s seech you let Sk Skinke and gl Gloster be lo lo looked too, for they haue p p playd the k k knaues to to to b b bad. Hen. Take hence that stuttering fellow, shut them forth. Red. Nay Ile ru ru run, faith you shall not n n need to b b b bid him ta ta take m me away, for re re Redcap will r ru run rarely. Exit. Hen. The sundrie misdemeanors late committed, As theftes and shifts in other mens disguise, We now must (knaue Skinke) freely tell thy faults.
Skin. Sweet King by these two terrors to myne enemies, that lend light to my bodies darknes: Cauilero Skinke being beleagerd with an hoste of leaden heeles, arm'd in ring Irish: cheated my hammerer of his Red cap and Coate; was surprised, brought to the fleet as a person suspected, past currant, till Gloster stript me from my counterfet, clad my backe in silke and my hart in sorrow, and so left me to the mercy of my mother witt: how Prince Iohn releast me, he knowes: howe I got Faukenbridges chaine, I know: but how he will get it againe, I know not. Fau. Where is it sirra, tell me where it is? Glo. I got it from him, and I got Iohns sword, Joh. I would twere to the hilts vp in thy harte. Ric. O be more charitable brother Iohn. Ley. My Leidge, you need not by perticulars Examine what the world knows too plaine, If you will pardon Skinke, his life is sau'd, If not, he is conuicted by the Law. For Gloster: as you worthyly resoul'd, First take his hand, and afterward his head. Hen. Skinke thou hast life, our pardon and our loue. Ski. And your forgiuenesse for my robbery? Io. Tut neuer trouble me with such a toy. Thou hindrest me from hearing of my ioye. Hen. Bring forth a blocke, wine, water and towell, Kniues, and a Surgion to binde vp the vaines, Of Glosters arme: when his right hand is off, His hand that strooke Skinke at the Parlament: Sk. I shall beare his blowes to my graue my Lord. Kin. Sonne Henry see thy fathers palzie hands, Ioyn'd like two supplyants, pressing to thy throwne? Looke how the furrowes of his aged cheeke, Fild with the reuolets of wet eyde mone, Begs mercy for Earle Gloster? weigh his gilt, Why for a slaue, should Royall blood be spilt? Ski. You wrong myne honour: Skink may be reueng'd, Hen. Father I doe commend your humble course.
But quite dislike the proiect of your sute, Good words in an ill cause makes the fact worse, Of blood or Basenes, Iustice will dispute, The greater man the greater his transgression, Where strength wrongs weaknes, it is meare oppression, La. O but King Henry heare a sister speake, Gloster was wrong'd, his lands were giuen away, They are not Iustly said. Iust lawes to break, That keep their owne right, with what power they may, Thinke then thy Royall selfe began the wrong, In giuing Skinke what did to him belong. Quee. Heare me Sonne Henry, while thou art a King, Giue, take, pryson, thy subiects are thy slaues, Life, need, thrones proud hearts in dungions fling. Grace men to day, to morrowe giue them graues. A King must be like Fortune; euer turning, The world his football, all her glory spurning. Glo. Still your olde counsaile Beldam pollicie, You'r a fit Tutresse in a Monarchy. Rich. Mother you are vniust, sauage, too cruell, Vnlike a woman: gentlenes guides their sexe, But you to furyes fire ad more fewell, The vexed spirit, will you delight to vex? O God when I consaite what you haue done, I am a sham'd to be estem'd your sonne. Jo. Base Richard I disdaine to call thee brother, Takest thou a traytors part in our disgrace? For Gloster, wilt thou wrong our sacred mother? I scorne thee and defie thee to thy face. O that we were in field, then shouldst thou trie, Rob. How fast Earle Iohn would from Prince Richard flye Thou meet a Lyon in feeld? poore mouse, All thy Carreers are in a Brothell house. Ioh. Zounds boy. Ric. Now man: Ley. Richard you wrong Prince Iohn. Ric. Leyster tweare Good you proou'd his Champion.
Jo. Hasten the execution Royall Lord, Let deeds make answer for their worthlesse wordes. Glo. I know if I respected hand or head, I am encompassed with a world of frends, And could from fury bee deliuered. But then my freedom hazards many liues. Henry performe the vtmost of thy hate, Let thy hard harted mother haue her wil, Giue Franticke Iohn no longer cause to prate, I am prepared for the worst of ill, You see my knees kisse the could pauements face, They are not bent to Henry nor his frends, But to all you whose bloud fled to your hearts, Shewes your true sorrowe in your ashye cheekes: To you I bend my knees, you I intreat, To smile on Glosters Resolution. Who euer loues me will not shed a teare, Nor breath a sigh, nor show a cloudy frowne, Looke Henry, heares my hand, I lay it downe, And sweare as I haue Knighthood heer't shall lye, Till thou haue vsed all thy tyranny. La. Has no man heart to speake? Glo. Let all that loue me keepe silence, or by heauen Ile hate them dying. Quee. Harry off with his hand, then with his head. Fau. By the red rood I cannot chuse but weepe. Come loue or hate my teares I cannot keepe. Que. When comes this lingring executioner? Joh. An executioner: an executioner: Hen. Call none till we haue drunke: father fill wine, To day your Office is to beare our cupp. Ric. Ile fill it Henry. K. kneele downe. He. Dick you are too meane, so bow vnto your soueraigne, Gl. Kneele to his childe? O hell! O tortor! (Gloster learne: Who would loue life, to see this huge dishonor? Hen. Saturne kneel'd to his Sonne the God was faine To call young Ioue his ages Soveraigne.
Take now your seate againe and weare your Crowne; Now shineth Henry like the Middayes Sonne, Through his Horizon, darting all his beames, Blinding with his bright splendor euery eye, That stares against his face of Maiesty. The Commets, whose malicious gleames Threatned the ruyne of our Royalty, Stands at our mercy, yet our wrath denyes All fauour, but extreame extreamityes. Gloster, haue to thy sorrow chafe thy arme That I may see thy bloud (I long'd for oft) Gush from thy vaines, and staine this Pallace roofe. Io. Twould exceed gilding. Quee. I as golde doth Oaker. Glo. Its wel ye count my bloud so precious. Hen. Leyster reach Gloster wine. Ley. I reach it him? Hen. Proude Earle ile spurne thee, quickely go & beare it Glo. Ile count it poyson if his hand come neere it. Hen. Giue it him Leyster vpon our displeasure. Glo. Thus Gloster takes it, thus againe he flings it, In scorne of him that sent it, and of him that brought it. Ski. O braue spirit▪ La. Brauely resolu'd brother, I honour thee. Quee. Harke how his sister ioyes in his abuse? Wilt thou indure it Hall? Fau. Peace good Marian. Hen. Auoyde there euery vnder Officer. Leaue but vs, our Pieres and Ladyes heere. Richard you loue Earle Gloster looke about If you can spye one in this company, That hath not done as great a sinne as Gloster; Chuse him, let him be the executioner. Ric. Thou hast done worse then, like rebellie us head, Hast arm'd ten thousand hands against his life That lou'd thee so, as thou wert made a King, Being his childe, now he's thy vnderling.
I haue done worse: thrise I drew my swoord, In three set battles for thy false defence. Iohn hath done worse, he still hath tooke thy part, All of vs three haue smitte our fathers heart; Which made proude Leyster bolde to strike his face, To his eternall shame, and our disgrace. Hen. Silence, I see thou leanst to finde none fit. I am sure, nor Lancaster nor Huntington, Nor Faukenbridge, will lay a hand on him. Mother, wife, brother, lets descend the Throane Where Henry is the Monarch of the West, Hath set amongst his Princes dignified. Father take you the place, see Iustice. Kin. Its iniust Iustice I must tell thee Sonne. Hen. Mother holde you the Bason, you the Towell, I know your French hearts thirst for English bloud; Iohn, take the Mallet, I will holde the knife, And when I bid thee smite, strike for thy life: Make a marke Surgion, Gloster now prepare thee. Glo. Tut, I am ready, to thy worst I dare thee. Hen. Then haue I done my worst, thrise honoured Earle, I doe imbrace thee in affections armes. Quee. What meanes thou Henry? O what meanes my Son? Hen. I meane no longer to be lullaby'd, In your seditious armes. Hen. wife. Mordieu Henry. Hen: Mordieu nor deuill, little tit of Fraunce, I know your hart leapes, at our hearts mischaunce, Jo. Swounds Henry thou art mad: Hen. I haue bin mad; what stampst thou Iohn? knowst thou not who I am? Come stamp the deuill out, suckt from thy Dam. Que. Ile cursse thee Henry. Hen. Your best be quiet, least where we finde you, to the Tower we beare you, For being abroad, England hath cause to feare yee. Kin. I am strucke dombe with wonder.
Glo. I amaz'd, imagine that I see a vizion. Hen. Gloster, I giue thee first this Skinke, this slaue, Its in thy power, his life to spill or saue, Skin. He's a noble gentleman, I doe not doubt his vsage. Hen. Stand not thus wondring, Princes kneele all downe, And cast your Coronets before his Crowne. Downe stubborne Queene, kneele to your wronged King, Downe Mammet; Leyster ile cut of thy legs, If thou delay thy duety: when proude Iohn? Io. Nay if all kneele, of force I must be one. Fau. Now by my holydom a vertuous deed. Hen. Father you see your most rebellious sonne, Stricken with horror of his horred guilt, Requesting sentence fitting his desart, O treade vpon his head, that trode your heart. I doe deliuer vp all dignity, Crowne, Scepter, swoord vnto your Maiesty. Kin. My heart surfets with ioy in hearing this. And deare Sonne ile blesse thee with a kisse. Hen. I will not rise, I will not leaue this ground, Till all these voyces ioyned in one sound: Cry, God saue Henry second of that name, Let his friends liue, his foes see death with shame. All. God saue Henry second of that name, Let his friends liue, his foes see death with shame. Hen. Amen, Amen, Amen. Joh. Harke mother harke? My brother is already turned Clarke. Quee. He is a recreant, I am mad with rage. Hen. Be angry at your enuy gracious mother, Learne patience and true humility Of your worst tuter'd Sonne, for I am he. Send hence that Frenchwoman, giue her her dowry, Let her not speake, to trouble my milde soule, Which of this world hath taken her last leaue: And by her power, will my proude flesh controule. Off with these silkes, my garments shall be gray,
My shirt hard hayre, my bed the ashey dust, My pillow but a lumpe of hardned clay: For clay I am, and vnto clay I must, O I beseech ye let me goe alone, To liue, where my loose life I may bemone. Kin. Sonne? Quee. Sonne? Ric. Brother? Io. Brother? Hen. Let none call me their Sonne, I am no mans brother, My kindred is in heauen, I know no other, Farewell, farewell, the world is yours, pray take it, Ile leaue vexation, and with ioy forsake it. Exit. La. Wondrous conuersion. Fau. Admirable good: now by my holydam Mall passing good. Ric. H'ath sir'd my soule I will to Palestine, And pay my vowes before the Sepulcher, Among the multitude of misbeliefe. Ile shew my selfe the Souldier of Christ, Spend bloud, sweat teares, for satisfaction Of many many sinnes which I lament: And neuer thinke to haue them pardoned, Till I haue part of Sirria conquered. Glo. He makes me wonder, and inflames my spirits, With an exceeding zeale to Portingale, Which Kingdome the vnchristned Sarisons, The blacke fac'd Affricans, and tawny Moores, Haue got vniustly in possession: Whence I will fire them with the help of heauen. Ski. Skinke will scotrch them braue Gloster Make Carbonadoes of their Bacon fletches; Deserue to be counted valiant by his valour, And Ryuo will he cry, and Castile too, And wonders in the land of Ciuile doo. Rob. O that I were a man to see these fights, To spend my bloud amongst these worthy Knights. Fa. Mary aye me, were I a boy againe,
Ide either to Ierusalem or Spaine. Ioh. Faith Ile keepe England, mother you and I Will liue, for all this fight and foolery. Kin. Peace to vs all, let's all for peace giue prayse, Vnlookt for peace, vnlookt for happy dayes. Loue Henries birth day, he hath bin new borne, I am new crowned, new settled in my seate. Lets' all to the Chappell, there giue thankes and praise, Beseeching grace from Heauens eternal Throne, That England neuer know more Prince then one. Exeunt FJNIS. NOLI ALTVM SAPERE
