17206.5 20240813 23893
A TRVE PERPETVALL PROGNOSTICATION for the Yeare 1632. Being Leape yeare, and for all yeares to come. Declaring what shall fall out in time comming, with a rule to teach every one the airt of memorie. Everie yeare is like to bee Leape yeare, if Divrs and Bankcrupts, may haue money on band or trust. By Allan Makcouldy lover of the Mathematicks. Tempore patet occulta veritas. In time appeareth hidden truth. DVBLINE Printed for my comerauds. 1632.
To the Printer. GOOD PRINTER, I haue taken oc∣casion to set foorth the Treatise fol∣lowing, vnder the title of a perpetual Prognostication; I haue offered the same to you to bee put to the Presse, and thereafter publish it to all such as will desire the same for money, if thy benefite bee great, it shall breed mee much contentment: Take paines that the faults therein bee corrected, and the same rightly printed: so shall you enable me to endeavour my selfe to put a more profitable worke in thine hands, I rest. Allan Makcouldy.
A briefe computation of such things as are past and what would bee prevented this yeare 1632. and all yeares heere∣after. EVerie one may know their owne age by the Ministers record who baptized them, ex∣cept there bee no register thereof. Howsoever everie one may know their owne offences both against God and thy neighbour. Repent and turne, thou knowest not if you shall liue an houre which is lesse then a yeare. Remember thy mortalitie. Remember Christs death. Remember the deceitfulnesse of the world. Remember the joyes of Heaven. Remember the paines of Hell. Flie vyce, inquyre for peace, and follow after it, without the which, none can please God. The mooveable Feasts. EVerie mooveable Feast is when each neighbour dynes and suppes with others in their houses,
THis double heart which to our view appeare, Intends to practise mischiefe all this yeare One thing to thinke and yet to doe another, For worldly gaine to murther friend or brother: God knowes thy thoughts, and will thy deeds resent, Hels be thy portion, except thou soone repent. Nimis delicatus es frater, si vis gaudere cum mundo, & laetari cum Christo, Yee are nyce brother if yee looke to enjoy Christ and the World. The yeare hath foure Quarters. Of Winter. THis Quarter beginneth at the accustomed time, & endeth when the Spring beginneth. This season is cold, and moe will resort to Taverns, and Wine sellers, to enjoy the juce of the Wine, Beire, and spirit of Malt: then to seeke salt Peter for the resisting of the enemie: It may fall out that such as bee hote blooded and young, may assay their skill to bee minders in these sellers, but if the toole bee blunt and faile them, their labour will bee nought, and such Powder will giue no fire. This season, old men shall be vnable of the joynts, and shall bee more fit to be in the court of Bacchus,
then Venus: Aries is likelie to governe their heads, specially of such as haue young wiues: Most men shal marrie wiues to bee their helpers, but their wives shall over-rule them, and rather become their hal∣ters to lead them to doe what they please: And hee that wants a good wife may bee monstrous angrie, and availe himselfe nothing at all. Young women and such as are of a mid age, shall bee desirous to bee governed by Scorpio, in the court of Sagitarius: For the helpe of all men to make them the more able to pleasure the wiues: let them eate good meat, and drinke stronge drinke: and to intertaine chastitie, let the wiues eat barley bread and drinke water. Of the Spring. THE Spring beginneth when the Musitian tun∣eth his instruments and beginneth to play, and endeth when they are wearie and receaues their wages: This season will be windy, specially at the sounding of bagepipes, whistles, and Trumpets. Skippers and mariners will doe well not to procrastinate their home comming if occasion serue them, but to louse their ankers, and taikels, and heife their sailes, otherwise it may fall out that if their wiues bee frustrat of their company they will
contention of the people; they shall be counted most happie that can eshew both and liue in peace, and who delytes to doe in the contrare, shall bee so troubled in their mind, that they shall thinke that all things seemes to their vntemperat braine, like the noyse of many waters. Aquae multae, tribulationes multa, Many waters, many troubles. Curtizens, punckes, and panders shall abound, and to cover their evill deeds, they shall take other names and surnames to them, and deny their true names, and so imitate the Witchest they that are in∣tised with them are like them, and shall be partakers of their punishments, they shall bring a man to a morsell of bread saith Salomon: I thinke they shall forsake such trade of life, when Taylors, Websters, and Millers become leil and steales none. Some men for worldly gaine, shall not bee asha∣med to know that their wiues doeth make them Cuckolds, and shall consent thereto, but honest peo∣ple shall say to them, woe bee to you Cuckolds that ever you were borne, your wiues hath made you monsters, and makes you beare Hornes. They shall reply, That is no great matter, what am I the worse: She makes me live a gentleman, and puts money in my purse. Omnes leges bonae definitionis, verae penitentiae. In this age young men shall become as monster & capped, & shall cover their heads with that which
men vsed to weare vpon their feet. Sturdie Beggars, and Tiuklers, bands and pro∣mises, may be as well trusted as the Popes pardons. Papists, Iesiuts, and Masse-Priests may abound in all vyces, because the Pope will giue them as many pardons for every sinne as may bee packed in a pare of Muck-creils: Ille de Creatore desperat quiru crea∣turam spem ponit, Hee dispares of the Creator that puts his trust in a creature. Of Harvest. IT is the best Harvest for theeues, when they cut many purses, Mutton is in greater request with them then Beefe, because they can steale 40. sheepe out of a fold, before they can steale an ox out of a stall Mirmidonum, Dolopumve aut duri miles Ʋlissis Temperet a lachrymis.— Who can pitie or pōder those things but with tears Witches and Sorcerers shall abound this season, for gaine many shall favour them, these Witches by spels and charmes, will vse many cures prejudiciall to Physitians, but more prejudicall to their patients who beleeues in them for prevēting of such wicked∣nesse: Iudges should obey Gods word, not to suffer a Witch to liue, and but respect of persons, should try all suspect Witches, and who are found guiltie should be delivered to the executioners to be bound vp to the Kings peace in a Sanct Iohnstoun ribband, and thereafter to bee purged by the element of fire coales and tarbarels.
and to saue thy money better in time comming, if thou bee wise. If thy horse want meat in thy default, when thou rydes a journey, his weaknesse, and sweatnesse, and hinderance of thy journey, will put thee in remem∣brance to feed him better in time comming or else resolue to goe on thy foote in tyme comming. If the season bee cold it will remember thee to put on moe cloaths, provyding thou haue them. Hee that remembers not to bee thy friend in thy just adoes, neither for prayer, blood, alyance, or o∣thers obligations of loue; giue him gold or silver & that will make him remember thee. A man that will not cherish his wife, and keepe at home with her but forgets these dueties, it may be shee can make moyen for her selfe, to supplie thy neglects, while thou remember to doe these things thy selfe. Hee or shee that lends their cloaths, money, or houshold stuffe to their neighbour, and hath not the like themselves to put on or vse, necessitie shall remember them to seeke backe their owne and hap∣pily cannot haue it. Let Gods benefits in this life, and the joyes of Heaven in the life to come, make thee repent thee of thy sinfull life: flee sinne in time comming, re∣sist the Devill, feare GOD, and keepe his comman∣dements: So shall thy life bee happie, thy death more happie, and thy peace in heaven happiest of all. FINIS.
