1725 99845982 10916
learne to do well. Seke iudgement healpe the poore oppressed be fauou¦rable to the fatherles, defende the wydowe, and than come & reproue me, sayth the Lord. If your synnes be as redde as scarlet, yet shall they be made as whyt as snow, & if they be lyke purple, yet shal they be made lyke whyte wolle. Yf that ye wyll be contented & heare me, ye shal eat the good frutes of ye earth. Yf yt ye wyl not but {pro}uoke me vnto angre, the swerde shal deuoureyu, for the mouth of the lorde hath spoken it Iere. vii. ¶Put your burnte offerynges to your sacrifices and eate the fleshe. For whan I brought your fathers out of the lande of egipte, I  not one worde to them of  ∣ferynges and sacrifices, . xi. cōmaunded them, sayen  to your my voyce, & I shalbe yo  thē out shal be my people, & wa
wayes that I haue cōmaūded you that ye may prosper. Amos. v. ¶ I hate & vtterlye defye your holy dayes & where as ye sense me whō ye come togyther, I wyl not accept it. And though ye ffer me brēt offe¦rynges, yet wyl not I receyue your gyftes. Away frō me wyth ye noyse of thy sōges, for I cā not abyde the hearynge of thy playeng at the orgā¦nes. Prouide ye equite may flow as the water, and ryghteousnes as a myghty streame. For in these thyn∣ges haue I delight & pleasure sayth the Lorde. iii. Reg. xviii. How longe wyl ye halte on both partes? Yf the Lord be God follow hym? Yf Baal be God, follow him Math. xv. ¶ This people draweth nygh vnto wt theyr mouthe, & honoureth me yr lyppes, but theyr hart is  o me, verely they worshype  ayne, teachyng doctrine, euē
woulde not obey theyr Lodre God. Psal. lxxviii. Let them put theyr hope in God, & not forget the workes of the Lorde but seke after his cōmādemētes. Let them not be lyke theyr forfathers which were a frowarde & a spiteful nacyō, a naciō yt wold neuer be true harted nor beare an vpryght mynde towarde God. Psal cxv. Be not hard harted as your fore¦fathers were, which chode & rebelled agaynste me. Psal. cvi We haue sinned wt our forfathers we haue done vniustly and cōmitted iniquite. Psal xlvi. Trust not in rulars, no he sons of mē, in whō is no he For  theyr eth goeth awai, thei returne vnto theyr erth in ye day shal al their thoughtes, coūcels, deuyses & imagy naciōs cōe to nought. Hiere. xi. I haue alwaye sayd vnto your forfathers syns I brought thē out
of ye londe of Egipt euen vnto thys daye, hear my voyce, but they wold not heare, nor once bow theyr eare vnto it, but euerye one of them is gone a stray in the frowardnes o his wycked hart. Yea the people of Iuda and the men of Ierusalem are also fallē vnto the wyckednesse of theyr forefathers, which woulde not heare my wordes, in somuche yt they are all redy gone awaye after straūge goddes and serue thē. The house of Israel & the house of Iuda haue broken the couenaūte whiche I made with theyr fathers. Ther∣fore thus sayth the lorde. Beholde I wyll brynge in extreme punyshe∣mentes vpon them so that they shal not escape frome them. They shall  vnto me, but I wyll not heare the  cityes of Iuda & the inha∣byte of Ierusalem shall go & crye vnto thē to whō they offred Sacry¦fice, & yet hal they not saue thē in ye
tyme of theyr trouble. According to ye nōber of thy cities were thy god∣des O Iuda, & after ye nōber of thy wayes o Ierusalē, hast ye set vp al∣tares of abhominacion to do sacry∣fice vnto Baalim. Hiere. xvi. Your forefathers haue forsake me, sayth the Lorde, & they are gone away after strange Goddes & haue serued thē and worshypped thē, yea they haue vtterly gyuē me ouer and haue not kept my lawe. But you haue wrought more abhominacyon then al your forefathers haue done For behold euery one of you walke after ye lewdenes of his owne wyc¦ked harte, & wyl not heare me. Ezechi. ii. Theyrfore fathers haue broken my couenaūt euen vnto this daye, & they to whō I send yt are childrē  out al shame & of such an hart. not be reclamed. Ezechi. x.
¶Walke not in the cōmaundemē∣tes of youre forefathers, nor kepe not theyr ordinances ther pollute your selfes with they ydols. For I am the Lorde your God. Therfore walke in my preceptes and kepe my iudgementes and do them. Daniel. ix. ¶ Confusion of face & vtter shame be vnto vs, vnto oure kynges, vnto ours rulers, and to oure forfathers, whyche haue synned. zacha. i. Be not lyke youre forefathers, vnto whome the Prophettes in ty∣mes past cryed, sayeng. Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes. Turne frome your euyl wayes and frō your abho¦minable thoughtes, but they woulde not harkē nor gyue any attendance vnto me sayth the Lorde. ii. Paral. xix.
Oure forefathers haue synned & haue done euyll in the syghte of the same day, & saye, because of yt why∣che the lorde dyd for me, whan I de¦parted out of Egipte. Therfore shal it be a signe vnto the in rhyn hāde, & a token of remēbraūce before thyne eyes, yt the lawe of the lord may be in thy mouth, how yt ye lord brought yt out of Egipt wt a myghty hand Numer. xv. ¶ Speake to the chyldrē of Israel & saye vnto thē, that they make thē gardes vpon the quarters of theyr garmētes amōg al your posterities & put yellowe rybādes vpō the gar∣des in the quarters. And the gardes shal serue you, that ye may loke  on thē & remēber al the cōmaūdē¦tes of the Lorde & do thē, that or¦der not youre selues after t ea∣nynge of your owne hart go a whorīg after your own es Ther∣fore shal ye reme  al my com∣maūdementes &  vnto God. t. iiii.
Take hede to thy selfe nowe & kepe wel thy soule, that ye forget not the thynges whych thyn eyes haue sene & that they departe not out of thy harte all the dayes of thy lyfe. And thou shalte teache them thy chyldrē and thy chylders chyldren. Deut. vi. ¶ Here O Israel ye Lord our god is one Lord only. And yu shalte loue the Lord thy god wt al thy harte, wt all thy soule, & wyth al thy myght. And these wordes, whych I cōmaū¦de the this daie, shalt yu take to hart and shalt reherse thē vnto thy chyl∣mes, & shalt talke of them, whan yu sst in thyne house, & whan thou wr est by the way, whā thou lyest doabl and whan thou rylest vp. And ark shalte bynde them for a sygne be sn thyne hande, and they  be a to of remēbraūce before  es fore shalt writ thē vpon y• haue  of thy house & vpō thy gates
