1741 99845322 10215
¶ The Phy∣syke of the soule, wherein thou shalt finde many Godly emplastures & confortable salues agaynst al spiritual diseases very neces∣sary to be red of the true chri¦stians in these last and perilous dayes. Set forth by Thomas Becon. Math. xi. Come vnto me all ye that are sycke & dys∣eased, and I shal release you of your paynes. Imprinted at london the tenth day of Iulii. nno Domini. M.D.xlix. And are to be solde by William hill remainig at the Sygne of the Hyll in Paules Churche Yarde. Benedic Anima mea Domino.
The Physyke Of the soule. The diseases whe wt out bodyes are troubled, & ye death which oure b∣dyes ilyke maner must of necessite suffer, do ve¦ry greatelye vexe & disquiete oure mindes, yea and that with no smal feare and trembling: insomuche yt many tymes, euen at the namīge of thēor whē any menciō of thm is made a all, we shake and tremble for fare. Certes, the nature of mā, whych had rather not to be, thē to be euel at ease or dysquyeted, when these euylles are at hand, can noue otherwise, then waxe pale and be so¦rowful, but yet can ther not chaūce to man a more fearse or more horri¦ble, or cruel misfortune, thē ye dys∣ease of ye soule & ye death of y• same.
But for asmuche as euery man doth drede and fle with all haste pssyble the punishementes troubles dysea∣ses, sicknesses, and thys death of the body: verely we ought muche more to auoyd and eschue the causes of these euelles: I meane, sinne and vngodli∣nes, and to feare the heauy dysplea∣sure of God whych throw oure innu¦merable offences we prooke so ma¦ny tymes agaynst vs. When we be diseased n our body, we rūne streght ways vnto a Phisycian, wee spare no cost in thys behalfe. Nothyng is to deare for the health of our lyfe. We lashe out oure monie plenteous¦ly in biynge remedyes & salues, that thys earthly vessel and sheal, which notwithstanding, shal shortlye after decaye, may be recouered and amen∣ded. Why do we not lykewyse wyth a muche study and care, couete and seeke after remedyes against the dis¦eases
of the Soule? seing they bee muche more greuous, and beyond al measure more peryllous. What should it profyt a man, yf he had all the riches of the world, lyued an whole thousand yeares, and en∣ioyed also al the most denty and fine Pelasures of thys Lyfe, and were troubled wyth no paynes of syknes dysease or any other myserye, yf yet for al yt hys soul in the meane season were infecte wyth the dāpnable wyc∣kednes and poyson of synne, and be¦inge opprssed with the tyranny of sa¦thā had the displeasure of God, & af∣ter the departure of thys lyfe be dāp¦ned for euer?Math. x therfore Chryst moni∣sheth vs saiyng, watch, for ye know not the daye nor the houre, whan the Sonne of Man wyll come. And becaue we shoulde not follow lyght Tryflynge and Vyle thynges: and despyce thynges whyche are muche
the most nigh, certen and suer waye to cōe vnto teue felicitee▪Math. vi. welth ioye or pleasure, whē he saieth: seek▪ first the kingdome of god and ye ryght∣teousnes of it ād al thinges shal be ast to you. We take thought & turmoyle oure¦selues daye and nyghte to gett vs a liuing, & to make suer our ritches and suche other vayne and transy∣tory thinges, whiche lytyl helpe vs yea, whiche many tymes also are y• cause of most greuous miseries, and horrible sines: but in sekyng ād▪ pro¦uidīg for heuenly goodes? how slug¦gysh are we? how negligēt? how vn¦circūspect? how dastardelyke what more horryble blindnes ād madnes can ther be / I beseche you? whyl we lyu wealthly & make frolycke chere we neuer remember the lyfe that is to come, nor yet the deathe that we
we  & red to dye, and whā we should go to y• battel and fight valiauntly, then a the last we bgynne to thinke of get¦tyng arours and wepons agaīst Satan and of amendyng our life. Thes tinges shew euidētly, yt we be very weake and slender in fayth, & but a litel exercised in the christen warefare. God haue marcy on vs. AMEN. And although it be so ye euery age is apt to repent ād a∣mēd & yt no repentance is to late so that it be done before the departure of this lyfe, yet I counsel & monysh al men euen from the verye harte, yt no man do prolonge and differ the act of repentance vnto this last ād most bytter agony. For they also do very ardly sonde and remayne▪ which al the tyme of ther lyfe / enioy¦yng prosperous health, haue enr∣med ād Prepared theym selues vn∣to
this howr of departure, and yet defend them selfes with great labor and Busynes from the Assaultes, graftes, gulles ād subtltes of that most cruel and crafti enemy. What shal become than of them, whiche without al feare of God haue ledde a stinckyng, dissolut ād vnthryfty lyfe, yea and that wythout any repē¦taunce? how, I pray you shall they striue? hou shal the resyste? ut seynge ther is in euery place a gret multytude of men, & for asmuche as the ministers of y• Gos¦pell are not alwaye in presence, ne∣ther can they geue ther dyligence to al menne at al tymes: I being grea¦tely desyrous to help al menne, haue wrytten this maner, way & forme of confortyng, oderyng ād monyshīg ye sycke, gathered out of gods word especyally for them, whiche as yet are rude and not perfectly instruc∣ted wyth the sentences of the holy
Scripture vnto suche chaunces, y• they either redyng thes thinges▪ or hearyng thes thinges redde before them, maye conceaue hope and sure and true comforte, that they dispay¦re not and peryshe in that most byt∣ter agony and conflicte of deathe. A man therfore liyng on his bedde thorowe the greuous disease wh wyth he is vexd, and beyng iioperdye of his Lyfe, is assayled and ouerwhelmed with dyuers and greuous temtacions, wherwith he must fyght valeauntly. But aboue all, this is the most bytter and most greuous tentacyon / whan ye moste heauy, displeasaunt & lothesō Ima¦ge of deathe is prese t before owre eyes, and whan we see or consyder the most cherful lyght of this lyfe, & al ower kynnesfolkes or frendes, howe we muste forsake theym and go awaye from theym, yea, and not
in this worlde, which be most dere ād pleasaunt to vs. Besydes this the synnes also which we haue cō∣mitted agaīst y• wil of god & his cō¦mūdement, cōe streight wayes in¦to our minde, & brasting in wt gret vyolēce, are renewed & waxe fresh, and seme manymo, yea & more hey∣nous & abominable, thē they euer appeted before▪ & do by thys mea∣nes tormēt, vexe trouble & disquie the conscience wōderflly. For af∣ter y• consideratyō of the hīges a¦fore sayd, death, ye iudgmēt of god hel, dāpnaciō, feare & remblīg, cō¦lockīg together as it wt a swarm of bees, and vexe our olde man wt most violent & toublous stormes of most greuous sorowes & feates and wt most sharp and bitter engy¦nes of sorow & heuynes hey shake and assayle our breastes.
In thes agonies except our breast be strengthened and made sure wt greate and constāt faith, it shalbe eopard{us}, lest we beīg made wery & dashed out of coūtenaūce thorow thes greuous and myghty tētacy∣ons / do fall vnto desperacyō. For those thīges whych com vnto our remēbraūce when we be sicke, seme vnto vs most horryble and moste haynous, yea and that for none o∣ther cause, than that oure fayth is weake and slēder, and not as yet growen vnto such perfection, that trustīg ō gods word, is able to lay hande on those exceadīg and īsty∣mable treasures and ryches of the sonnes of god, I meane / remyssyō of al our sinnes thorow christ, the resurrectiō of our flesh, yt felouship of al ye elec, so gretely to be desired & lōged for: to conclude, euerlastīg life, and yt al these thīges are frely
for christes sake. In these articles of our faith should we exercyse our selues dayly & after that we haue dyligently weied thē & earnestly pondred them, repose thē ī our minde. We ought also often ty∣mes to come vnto the cōmuniō ād that holy table of the Lord, yet so ye we fyrste proue and Examine oure selues dyligētly, lest we vneuerētly handle so holy a thing: ād though it be cōueniēt at al other tymes to eatè y• supper of ye lord, for our cōfort: yet is it now moste necessarye & we haue in the tyme of our sykenes an vrgēt cause to do it. Truly, it is a pytyfull thing and a thinge worthy to be la∣mented / that now many yeres thys sacrament of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ hath ben both vnwor∣thely ād vnreuerntly handled, yea of very many most extremely despited How horrible and haynous a synne
punished now adayes do abūdātly testify: and S. Paule spake of it be∣fore. i Cor. xi. God haue mercy on vs and lightē the ies of our mind that we leauing so ā vnsemely & horrible errour, may ones repent and aend We shal therfor ofē times come vn¦to this table with high study of god¦lynes and deuocyō, that our mindes beyng recreated, chered & cōforted wt that heuēly mate of ye soule, faith & charite maie be ncreased and made strōg in vs. Moreouer we ought al¦waie dilygentlye to remēbre all the articles f our atholyke faith, but in the agonies of death foure are ne∣rest of al, with greate iligence to be weied & pōdred of vs, yt is to saye, y• articles of ye church or congregatiō of sayntes of remyssyon of sines by christes bloud, of the resurrecciō of ye flesh, and of euerlasting lyfe.
Fyrst / as death is the payne of sine, so lykewyse are diseases many tymes sent vs of God for oure syn¦nes,Ioan. v. Pa vxx v iii Deu. xx viiiii. Re. xxiiii. as it is manyfest in dyuers pla¦ces of the scrypture. we ar punysh∣ed also oftentymes to proue and try oure fayth / for then is it prcaued, how derely we loue god how great¦ly we trust vnto hym, whē we be op¦pressed & troubled wyth any heauy crosse. Therfor loke yt here before al thynges, thou turest al thyne hert al thy mynd / and al thy sences vnto God, ād that thou doest truly repēt and that thou doest lament and con∣fesse thy synnes before God, for the whych al we haue deserued, euen ye most rightuous wrath of God and most greuous pyne. Notwithsta∣dyng, the most plēteous comfort or absolucion, as they cal it, or remyssi¦on of synnes, whych chryst ordeined in the church, thou shal require of ye
Gospel of Iohn.Ion. xx. Thys exceadynge greate treasure is dayly opened ād offred to thee. Take ye, saith Christ the holy goost. Whose sinnes ye fo¦geue, ar forgeuen them, and whose synnes ye retayne, are retayned. Note, after that we haue prayed ād obteyned the forgeuenes of synnes, wythout doubte the payne & disease & the trouble that is layd vpon vs, shall ceasse and leaue vs, or els ac∣cordyng to the syngular good wyll of God, it shall turne vnto the salua¦cyon of the diseased. For beleue this for an vndoubted trueth, that theyr payne or cross (seme it neuer so gre¦uous a yoke ād burhē to the flesh) is a very faherly rodde or chastise∣ment, wherwith god calleth thee, be¦ing hys sonne vnto hym, and with∣drawethe and allureth thee awaye from synninge. Certes, God loueth vs most tenderly. He fauoureth vs,
euen from the very hare, & he doth all thynges for thys purpose euen that he maye amende vs and do vs good. For whome he loueth, he cor∣ecteth ād chasteneth and seourgeth hym in thys vale, that he maye not be tormented after thys lyfe wyth ye euerlasting punishement of hel fire. Neyther shalt thou doubt, but most certenly persuade thy self, that Gd is thy most louyng father, and mt entierly desyreth thee / althoughe he pretendeth neuer so greatly to be ā¦gry wyth thee▪ Thys is not ye anger of a Tiraunt, nor of a butcher, but of a father that most deelye louethe vs, which would not that we should be destroyed, but that we should cor¦recte our maners, amēd and obtine health and Saluacion. Thys is as sure as God is in heauen / if we had fayth to beleue it. Therfore fyrst of al, aske forgeuenes & remission of all
thy synnes, But in Chrstis name: But wyth an harte that truly repen¦teth / that thou mayst be at a poynt with God, ād that thou mayst haue hym good, fauourable and mercy∣ful to thee. After yt also mayst yu de∣sire god, that he wil deliuer ther frō the affliccion & disease / that is layd vpon thee. So teacheth vs Iesus y• Sonne of Sach, Sonne, saith he espyse not thy selfe in thy sykenes But praye vnto the Lorde and he shal heale thee. Eccl: xxxviiSo praieth Dauid lykewyse:Psal, lxxi. rember not our old wic¦kednesses: but let thy mercies soone ouertake vs. helpe vs O God ower Sauiour O yu lord god of pours turne vs. how long wil thou be an∣gry▪ Shw vs thy countenaūce, & we shall be safe. First he desireth re∣missiō of sinnes, y• he mae be iustyfi¦d by ye grace of god: afterward he praieth god, to turne awy his wrath And whē yu praiest to be deliuered &
eased of the crosse whiche do burden thee, thou shalt alway adde this vn¦to it: let thy most holye & good wyll be don▪ O heuenly father, for we shal not better prouide for oure sel∣fes thē that moste trusty father wyl do which is of infinyt power,  ysoō & vnmesurable goodnes, which ī no place turneth away his eyes frō vs which taketh great care for vs / whi¦che hathe the heares of ower heade numbred, which maketh alyue, quic¦keneth, norisheth, couerethe, cheris¦heth, saueth and defendeth al thin∣ges which aforeseeth ād prouideth for al thinges moch more & better / then the creatures can wysh. There are thre thynges, whych in the agony of deathe do most gre¦uously dysquiet vs ād trouble our myndes with greate feare that is to saye Synne, Death hel or Damp¦natiō. Synne The synnes wherin we haue
pent oure lyfe, wherwithe also we haue moste greuously offended both God and our neighbour, when we remember them lyeng vpon our bed sycke, we are stricken with a wonderful feare and sorowe as Paule sayth, indig∣nacion & wrathafflyction,Rom. ii. & grefe of mynde, s against euery soule of man that doth euell. Death. Oure olde man and flesh are verye loth to dye. Therfor when death is at hand, the hart of man is troubled disquieted, & in a mane ouerthro∣wen wyth such sorowes & thought akynge, as no tunge can expresse. For fearfull nature, and our natu∣ral man feareth beyond al measure lest y• whē he is ones dead & layd in hys graue, he should neuer returne and lyue agayne: yea he thyncketh that he is past all hope and cōforte. Hell and dampnacion.
When these thinges come into his mynd, mā is streight wayes afraid lest he should vtterly be cast awaie from y• face of god, and seeth none other thing then euerlasting death. Here ought he to be on a good on∣fort: here ought he to take hart vn∣to him, that by no meanes he be fai herted and so fal into desperacion. O most merciful god, O most fauo¦rable father,A godly prayer graunte I besech thee and helpe, that while we are yet in good health ād lusty, we maie lerne to feare thee, we maye regarde and loue thy worde, we maie set thee al∣waye before vs to be that scope and pricke, wher vnto we maie direct al our dedes / & that we always remē∣brīg thys most bitter agony ād gre¦uous cōflicte, maye arme and make our selues strong against it, that we geuing our selues to godlynes and to the true feare of thee, maye ap∣pointe all that euer we do vnto thy
glory and enioye euerlastinge lyfe. AMEN When thy synnes do disquyet & trouble thy conscience, thē cal to re¦membraunce, at the Sonne of God came doune from heauen into this world, and that he being made man layed vpon him al thy synnes & the synnes of al the worlde: and y• for thē he willyngly suffered death on the crosse, and made satisfaction for theim all, yea and for our sakes sustained most greuous paynes, to bring vs out of deth. This most pre¦cious bloud of Christ was shed al∣so for thy saluacion. Of this death also art yu partaker if yu dost beleue y• christ dyed as wel for thee as for Peter & Paule. Neither oughtest yu to doubte, but y• he dyed as wel for thy sake, as for Paules. For yu arte baptised into ye death of christ. This ought to cōfort the: this ought to lif vp & stablish thy mind. For seyng yu
art baptised  y• death o christ, Rom. vi. the death of christ shal bring thee help & saluatiō, by y• death of christ y• shalt dye to synne, by y• deathe of christe yu shalt receaue perfect & ful remissiō of al thy sines: to cōclude by ye deth of Christ yu shalt rise againe into a∣new & euerlastīg lyfe. For baptisme is a bargain couenaune & signe of gods grace & fauour in which yu art recōciled to god, y• throw it yu mayst haue a mery ād quyett cōscience for yere missiō of thy sinnes thorowe y• resurrectiō of christ.he upper  the lorde. Christ also spe¦keth vnto thee wtout doubt ī the in¦stituciō of his supper, wher he pro∣fesseth & euidētly declareth,ath. xxvi. that his bloud was shed for the remissyō of sinnes. Now therfore, althoughe yu hast lyued a lyfe neuer so sinful and vnpure yet is ther no cause y• yu shul¦est despere, but rather yt wtout any taraūce yu shuldest wtout cesing cal vpō the name of ye lord ye yu maiest be
saued, & pray after this maner. O moost mercyfull God,Rom.  A pray O father of all mercye the father of our Lord Iesus Chryst, be mercyfull to me a synner, haue pytie on me, ād quickly helpe me poore wretche for the most bytter, but yet the most precious pas¦sion and death of Iesus Chryst thy onelye begotten sonne, and our only redeme and sauioure. AMEN. Entre not into iudgemente wyth thy seruaunte, O Lord. Handle me not accordynge to my desertes and Merites, neyther rewarde me after mine iniquite, but for thyne infinite and vnmeasurable bountie and exce¦ding great mercy, receaue me. I my¦serable & weake creature am in thy hande / I am thy boundseruaunt ād thy debtout. O most gentle god, O moste fauourable father, forsake me not▪ cast me not away pore wretch yt. I am. I am thine wt al yt euer I cā make. No man is able to cōfort me,
no man is able to deliuer me, no mā is able to helpe me, but thou alone. Thou arte the true helper in adu∣sitie, thou arte the moost sure & e∣sent cōforte in all necessitie, yu alone arte oure helpe, our bulworcke, oure fortresse and our most mightie and strongly defenced towre. Thou, O God, art oure refuge / thou art oure strenght, yu art our helpe in all our ribulacions. In thee, O Lorde / do I truste let me not be confounded. Let me neuer be put to shame, let me not be disceaued of my hope, but pre¦serue me for thyne owne ryghtuous¦nes sake. Bow downe thine eare vn¦to me / make haste to delyuer me. Be my defender, O God, and my strong holde that thou mayest saue me. For yu art my strength & my refuge, yea yu art my God, ād my destenyes are in thy handes. Lyghtē thy coūteūce vpon thy seruaunte, saue me for thy mercyes sake, O Lorde. &c. Finis
